

»el» UNiv
THE MELBOURNE
MEDICAL STUDENTS
1863-1942
BRYAN CANOEVIA
Published by
r
THE MELBOURNE MEDICAL STUDENTS’ SOCIETY




THE MELBOURNE MEDICAL STUDENTS




MCLS UMtW
THE MELBOURNE
MEDICAL STUDENTS
18624942
Being a Review of their Numerous Activities, with a Summary
of the History of the Medical School and a List of Office-bearers
in the M.S.S.
By
BRYAN GANDEVIA
Published by
THE MELBOURNE MEDICAL STUDENTS’ SOCIETY
1948
Registered at the G.P.O. Melbourne for transmission through the post as a book.


First Published February, 1948


The Medical Students' Insignia. This device was constructed for the M.S.S.
in 1886 (v. Ch. IV). It is thought that the “piratical emblem” was
originally adopted because it “was supposed to typify the Medical Students'
powers in the way of destruction of life.” (From a line drawing illustrating
the article from which the quotation is taken — J. Steele Robertson, Cen-
tennial Mag. 1888-89).




PREFACE
My own interest in the history of the Melbourne Medical School
led to the writing of an article for Speculum on the early days of the
Medical Students’ Society. For various reasons, supported by the
Medical Students’ Society Committee, an attempt has been made to
extend this to review in a general and somewhat rambling way the
activities, social and otherwise, of the Medical Students and the Medical
Students’ Society.
It is hoped that the attempt will be justified by serving a two-
fold purpose: firstly, some conception of the great tradition established
over many years prior to the War may stimulate present- members to
take an active interest in the future of their Society, and secondly,
present students may obtain some knowledge of the Faculty’s develop-
ment and leaders. Regrettably, such historical material is not readily
available today, and, especially as regards student affairs, is scattered
through many and varied sources.
Limitation of time has necessarily forced the careful selection of
subject matter. For this reason, many facts, possibly important in
the interests of historical accuracy, have been omitted in favour of
topics of more general interest. For example, even major changes in
the Constitution and Rules of the Society have frequently been dealt
with quite briefly. No apology is offered for the preponderance of
material concerning the activities of the last century, with which the
original article largely dealt.
Some effort has been made to reduce errors and inaccuracies to a
minimum, but former students may well help by correcting any which
may have occurred and by filling in the many apparent gaps. The
early Minutes, the original Flag, the mounted Skull and Crossbones
may yet reappear!
B.G.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My thanks and those of the M.S.S. are due to many more than it
is possible to name individually. However, I would especially mention
—Professor P. MacCallum for his interest and encouragement, and the
provision of secretarial assistance, without which extension of the origi-
nal article could never have been undertaken; Professor W. A. Osborne;
the late Mr. Basil Kilvington; Miss E. Allen; Lady M. Barrett;
Dr. H. D. Stephens; Dr. R. Strong; Dr. J. Sanderson Yule; Dr. C.
H. Mollison; Mr. C. Craig; Dr. J. Matthews; Dr. L. Latham; Dr. K.
M. Bowden; Mr. L. Scott, Mr. A. L. G. McDonald and Miss J. Raff
of the University Library; Dr. Lan Pender; Dr. A. P. Derham; Dr.
Guy Springthorpe; Dr. C. H. Pitts. Apologies are extended to all
Old Boys, who, having since attained eminence in their profession,
find themselves referred to herein as students often without even the
title of "Mister.” It is hoped that historical licence and the interests
of brevity and clarity will sufficiently justify this omission.


REFERENCES
University of Melbourne Medical School Jubilee, 1914 —“A
History of the Medical School” by Sir Harry Allen, to which
I am particularly indebted; also other chapters,
Ernest Scott: “A History of the University of Melbourne”
Melbourne University Press, 193 6
J. Steele Robertson: Centennial Magazine, Volume 1, No. 3,
1888.
Centennial Magazine, Volume 11, No. 3,
1889-1890.
B. T. Zwar: Royal Melbourne Hospital Clinical Reports, 1946.
“The Royal Melbourne Hospital: Some Milestones
In Its Development”
Speculum .
Alma Mater.
Melbourne University Review.
Australian Medical Journal.
Council and Professorial Board Minutes were kindly made
available by the Registrar (Mr. F. H. Johnston) .
Medical Students’ Society Committee Minutes, 1904-1947.
Earlier volumes, though apparently extant until fairly recent
years, have been lost.
Women Medical Students’ Society Committee Minutes 1902-
1937.


"Give a Dog a Bad Name and Hang Him” Old Proverb
I looked with tears through the mist of years and saw how our name
had grown.
Besmirched with blood and stained with mud, which the hands of the
crowd had thrown;
And my heart was sad at the fame we had for doing the things we
should not —
Which was equalled, I own, by our leaving alone the deeds which we
ought to have wrought.
From "The Wicked Medical Student,"
"Barrabool," Speculum, 1894,
We are poor hard-working Meds., who’re mostly skin and bone,
We’ve a hide like elephants, and need a head like stone,
We have toiled until we’ve got no soul to call our own,
But we’ve got the good old Med’s Society.
Chorus —
Hurrah! Hurrah! we Meds. are on the spree,
Hurrah! Hurrah! we’ll make the pace go free;
Ready for a song or toast, or nurse’s morning tea,
Busters of the good old Med.’s Society.
The Medical Students’ Society —Its Song.
Theatre Night, October, 20th 1908.
Tune: : — Marching Through Georgia


CONTENTS
I The History of the Medical School .... 13
II Early Student Activity 20
111 The Foundation of the M.S.S 2 5
IV Social Activities •••• 2^
V Regalia and Relics; The Medical Anthem 36
VI "Speculum” 39
VII Special Clubs and Societies 44
VIII "The Lady Medicals" 46
IX M.S.S. Activity in General Matters 50
Appendix I The Deputation 55
Appendix II List of Office-bearers 59




CHAPTER I
THE HISTORY OF THE MEDICAL
SCHOOL
Development and Personnel —The Curriculum —The Medical School
Buildings —Sir Harry Allen.
tnevitably the Medical School itself must form the background of
1 any picture of Medical Student activity. The paragraphs which
follow will, it is hoped, provide some such background of necessity
it is given in barest outline. ■ , ,
The University opened with Mr. Justice (later Sir) Redmond
Barry as Chancellor in May, 1855, sixteen students matriculating.
Almost immediately Dr. Anthony Colling Brownless, later to become
Chancellor, began making plans for a Medical School, which, chiefly
for financial reasons, was not established until 1862. Then, at Brown-
less’ suggestion, several lecturers in Law and Civil Engineering ' cheer-
fully acquiesced” in the reduction of their salaries. Dr. John Macadam
began lecturing in March, 1862, in Chemistry and Practical Chemistry,
in his own laboratory (he was Public Analyst) close to the Public
Library. The other subjects of the first year were Greek and Latin.
On the advice of Sir James Paget and Sir Richard Owen, George
Britton Halford, Anatomy Lecturer in the Grosvenor Place School
of Medicine, London, (noted for his work on cardiac physiology, and
a former demonstrator of Paget s) was appointed by the Counci
as Professor of Anatomy, Physiology and Pathology. His Inaugural
Lecture was delivered on May Ist, 1863. Other Lecturers were ap-
pointed as need arose. Second Year subjects were Botany, Compara-
tive Anatomy and Zoology, Materia Medica and Therapeutics, Anatomy
including Dissection (the first dissecting class being held in a shed
in Professor Halford’s yard): Third Year—Anatomy, Physiology,
Pathology, Surgery, Surgical Hospital Practice and Practical Pharmacy.
Fourth Year—Anatomy, Physiology and Pathology, Medicine, Obstret-
rics and Gynaecology, Clinical Surgery, Medical Practice and Practical
Midwifery: Fifth Year-r-Medicine and Surgery and Forensic Medi-
cine. This was an extremely exacting course for the times, more so
than any course in England until the mid 1890 s.
The Melbourne Hospital reluctantly admitted the third year
students in 1864, by May of which year the Medical School buildings
were completed. Graduates received the Degree of Bachelor of
Medicine until 1879 when the Degree of Bachelor of Surgery was also
granted. A few years prior to this the Melbourne Hospital Committee
decided that a Melbourne M.B. was ineligible to become a Resident
Page Thirteen


because, it seems, of apparent lack of Surgical qualifications. However,
at the next election of the Committee the retiring members were not
re-elected, chiefly because of graduate and undergraduate activity, and
the subsequent Medical Officers were nearly all Melbourne graduates.
Most Hospitals did not appoint their Residents according to the quali-
fication lists until after 1906. The Alfred Hospital, opened in 1870,
was recognized by the University as a teaching school in 1880, St. Vin-
cent’s Hospital (1896) in 1909. Incidentally, it was not until 1881
that clinical ward teaching, as we know it, was introduced at the
Melbourne Hospital by Dr. John Williams, a former Resident (1875).
The Faculty of Medicine was formed in 1876; Professor Halford was
the first Dean. Previously a Demonstrator, Dr. Harry Brookes Allen
(later Sir Harry Allen) M.B. (1876) and M.D. (1878), of Mel-
bourne, was appointed Professor of Anatomy and Pathology in 1882.
He succeeded Halford as Dean in 1886. In 1870 jars were borrowed
from the University and the nucleus of the present Pathology
Museum was begun in the Melbourne Hospital Post-Mortem Room.
This was later extended by Dr. Allen, until, as Professor, he insti-
gated its transfer to the University in 1883. By doing so he lost his
Melbourne Hospital salary as Curator, a loss which the University
Council refused to make good in full. The Museum continued to
expand, however, numbering 3000 specimens in 1886. In 1890,
Professor Allen, in England, was successful in obtaining recognition
of the Melbourne degrees and he became 'the first person registered in
the United Kingdom in respect of a qualification wholly derived
from a British Colony.”
Professor Halford retired in 1896 at the age of 72 and was
succeeded by C. J. Martin, as Lecturer in Physiology, later acting
Professor, then by W. A. Osborne (1903-1939) and R. D. Wright
(1939- ). A separate Chair of Anatomy, considered necessary for
over a quarter of a century, was not established until 1906, its first
occupant being R. J. A. Berry, formerly Lecturer in Anatomy at the
Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. F. Wood Jones, Professor
of Physical Anthropology at Hawaii, previously Professor of Anatomy
at Adelaide, was appointed in 1929, and was succeeded by one of his
former pupils, Sydney Sunderland, in 1940.
Peter MacCallum, Lecturer in Pathology, Royal College of Physi-
cians and Surgeons, Edinburgh, was yet another distinguished associate
of the Edinburgh School to come to Melbourne, succeeding Professor
Allen in 1924. •
K. Marshall Allan, an Australian who graduated in Medicine at
Edinburgh, was appointed Director of Obstetrical Research in Mel-
bourne in 1925, and five years later became the first Professor of
Obstetrics.
In 1919, Dr. W. J. Young, later to become Professor, suc-
ceeded Dr. A. C. H. Rothera (1906-1915) as Lecturer in Biochemistry.
On Professor Young’s death, the following notice was published in
Speculum, September 1942, opposite his portrait—"To Professor
Page Fourteen


William John Young, D.Sc., this edition of Speculum is dedicated
in gratitude for his services to the Melbourne Medical Students
Society and as an expression of the profound regard in which his
students held him.” Professor V. M. Trikojus was appointed in
1943.
1900 saw the establishment of Bacteriology as a separate depart-
ment under Dr. Cherry as Lecturer and on Dr. Cherry’s resignation in
1905 his Demonstrator since 1887, Dr. R. J. Bull, was appointed.
His successor, in 1928, was H. A. Woodruff, previously Professor
of Veterinary Science, who became the first Professor of Bacteriology
in 1934. Sydney Dattilo-Rubbo, a recent graduate of the School, was
appointed in 1944.
THE CURRICULUM.
It is interesting to follow the changes in the curriculum especi-
ally over the first fifty years of the School’s existence. The period
was one of tremendous change in Medicine and Science- Professor
Allen, looking back, said, "All opinion has been in a state of flux,
and the task of teachers and taught has been correspondingly difficult."
The Classics were not removed from first year until 1887, although
in 1874 Natural Philosophy was made alternative to Greek and Latin.
Some Classical education remained a prerequisite, the standard being
steadily lowered over the years. Physiological Chemistry and Histology
became subjects of second year in 1882, when separate lectures in
Anatomy were provided for second and third year students (previously
the same course was attended twice). Oral examinations were intro-
duced in 1887. Some of the changes in this year were severely
criticised by the students but after adjustment of one or two anomalies
were accepted as satisfactory. Practical classes in Pathological His-
tology and Bacteriology were begun in 1892 under Dr. T. Cherry,
who had studied in England and Europe. Practical work in Biology
had already begun in 1889, but a separate Biology course for Medical
Students was not provided for another twenty years.
The next major revision of the curriculum took place in 1900.
In order to find sufficient time for practical work at the hospitals,
considerable reductions were made in the numerous courses of lectures.
The third course of dissection in the fourth year was abolished. Some
hospital work in Surgery was still prescribed in second year. Attend-
ance at two "specials" (previously optional, and available only
through the action of the Medical Students’ Society and the generosity
of the Honoraries concerned) was demanded —either eye, skin, chil-
dren’s, or mental diseases. Such special departments were not yet
all available at the teaching hospitals, although their formation had
been urged years earlier. The first step had been the formation of a
Skin Department at the Melbourne Hospital in 1885 following repeated
requests by the Medical Students Society.
In 1906 the was divided into three divisions. Division I
included a term’s work in Organic Chemistry and Histology. Division
Page Fifteen


II began in second year and concluded with examinations in third
year in Anatomy, Physiology and Histology (Histology was trans-
ferred to the Anatomy Department in 1909), and Materia Medica and
Pharmacy. Some Pathological Histology and hospital practice were
included in third year. Division 111 included Pathology, Bacteriology,
Therapeutics, Dietetics and Hygiene in fourth year, while Final
examinations were conducted in Medicine, Surgery and Special
Pathology.
The two major anomalies of this curriculum were the subject
of a Medical Students Society petition in 1909, and were removed
in 1911, when the course came to resemble very closely that of
today. These anomalies were firstly, hospital work before the scientific
part of the course was completed, and secondly, the Special Pathology
examination.
Following a reduction of the length of the course during the
1914-18 War, it was lengthened to five years and two terms in 1922,
and was a full six year course by 1934. Many modifications and
alterations since that date have not greatly altered the character of
the course.
The Medical Students’ Society played a considerable part in the
development of the present curriculum. It undertook many responsi-
bilities which should have been those of the University or the teaching
hospitals: it organised numerous lectures and courses of instruction
on more specialised subjects—notably at the Children’s and Eye and
Ear Hospitals many years before these became compulsory or were
adequately provided for. Nowhere is this better illustrated than in
the history of clinical teaching, a subject on which the Government,
the University, the Hospitals, and the Faculty could rarely agree.
Clinical teaching was apparently more or less unorganised and hap-
hazard until the mid-1880’s, although in 1875 the Melbourne Hos-
pital Committee had decreed that each Honorary should clinic to
those students attending him whenever he visited the Hospital, and
should deliver at least one clinical lecture during his receiving week.
The effect of an earlier recommendation (1870), passed on the
motion of Dr. Robert Knaggs, that it was highly desirable that
members of the Honorary Medical Staff should deliver clinical
lectures, is not known. However, for various reasons, and in spite of
one or two ineffectual measures, the position became so bad, and
apparently so hopeless, that in 1886 a deputation was sent by the
Medical Students’ Society to the Premier of Victoria. The petition*
set out the existing state of affairs and requested Government inter-
vention for the sake of the status of the School. The move met with
some success but the problem was to recur again and again in later
years. Actually, it was only in 1887 that the University began to take
any particular interest in what was taught at the Hospitals, culminating
in 1906 with the direction that the Hospitals submit yearly their pro-
* See Appendix L
Page Sixteen


posed course in clinical work. The only major advance since that
date has been the appointment in 1947 of University "Clinical Super-
visors” at each Hospital, by which move the University at last has
accepted some responsibility for clinical teaching.
MEDICAL SCHOOL BUILDINGS.
The "Old” Medical School, as it was called in later years, was
completed in May, 1864, although the Anatomy Theatre was used for
the Commencement gathering on April 2nd, 1864. It contained the
Chemistry Department as well as the original Dissecting-room, but
the Chemistry Department was extended by a new wing on the
northern side in 1877. Part of this building remains as the University
workshops, the adjoining part of the Physiology School, and part of
the Entrance Hall (if it may be exalted by that term). In the latter
may be seen the tablet erected by the Medical Students to the memory
of Professor J. D. Kirkland bearing the inscription "Homo erat
et fidus arnicas.” The front part of the building was pulled down in
1912, much to Professor Allen’s disgust, to allow various extensions
and alterations to the Chemistry, Physiology and Biochemistry Depart-
ments, and was replaced eventually by the present ugly structure with
its two cowering Guardian Monsters.
The "New” Medical School (part of the present Pathology School,
then only one storey) was built in 1883, and the old Dissecting-room
allocated to Physiology. The present Medical Library became the
Dissecting-room, with injecting and coffin rooms behind it —beneath
the former was a cellar, where many of the Library’s older books are
now stored. The Pathology Museum reached its present home in this
building at the same time.
1900 saw the erection of the two lecture theatres on Swanston
Street (only one of which was fitted up for lectures, the other being
used as a Students’ Common Room for many years). The older
portion of the Bacteriology School was built, and a second storey
added to the Physiology Department (i.e. to the old Medical School).
The red-brick buildings which at present constitute the re-
mainder of the Physiology School were completed in 1906, the
ground floor being used for Pathological Histology until the next
year, and the upper floor chiefly for Biochemistry.
In 1907 the New Medical School was brought to its present state
by the addition of another storey. The Museum already had its gallery
floor, which until recently had been used for Pathology classes.
The Dissecting-room migrated again—this time upstairs to the present
Biochemistry Laboratory. A Museum of Anatomy formed by the
energetic Professor Berry took its place downstairs—it contained
Halford’s collection of aboriginal skulls, soon supplemented by Berry,
and Berry’s frozen sections of the human body (present students may
have seen his admirably produced "Clinical Atlas of Sectional and
Topographical Anatomy”).
Page Seventeen


The old Medical Students’ Society Club Room* became part of
the Library in 1910, while the Common Room was fitted up as a Lec-
ture Theatre. In 1911, following the formation of the Students’ Rep-
resentative Council (1909) the Medicals were granted the use of the
S.R.C. rooms. Later, in 1912, apparently as a token of appreciation,
the Medical Students’ Society presented the Union with a billiard
table, suitably inscribed. The table, as many will know, is still doing
yeoman service.
This was the collection of buildings which prompted Professor
Berry to remark during the Jubilee Celebrations in 1914 that they
The Anatomy Class Lecture, given by Sir Harry Allen, c. 1890. The
Lecture Theatre is now part of the Physiology Dept. (From the Brownless
Memorial Supplement to Alma Mater, 1896).
consisted of "Gothic architecture in stone and teratological deformi-
ties in cement.’’ However, Professor Berry was largely responsible
for planning the Anatomy School which could scarcely be described
as architecturally or aesthetically satisfying. This was opened with
all due ceremony on Monday, 12th November, 1923, by Sir William
Macewen, the event being suitably commemorated by a Memorial
Tablet in the main corridor. The housing of the various departments
* The Medical Students’ Room
The Royal Commission did visit;
This they cried with a grin is a sardine tin,
Or what in the devil is it?
Anthem Verse, Speculum. 1903
Page Eighteen


$ '9 9 9
then approximated that of today, being eventually completed when
the present Chemistry building was finished.
There was originally no intention of digressing to refer in any
detail to any of the noted personalities of the Medical School, but the
name of Sir Harry Brookes Allen recurs so frequently that a few
words addressed to modern students will not be out of place. To him
the Medical School owes more than to any other one man. The
Medical Students owe him a more personal debt: —Firstly, because
he was a great and inspiring teacher (his first lecture was on "Errors
in Gray"!) ; and secondly, because he took a keen and active interest
in the Medical Students’ Society from its inception, contributing very
largely to its success. He took great pride in his association with
the Society, especially during the years of his Presidency.
One anecdote, told in the words of his daughter, Miss Edith
Allen, is worth recounting. "Discussion arose over a coveted medical
post that was open for appointment. My father said 'I hope one of
my boys gets it.’ To which a surprised visitor, a stranger to Mel-
bourne, said rather coldly, 'Well, I suppose all fathers with doctor
sons are wishing that.’ My father laughed and answered, 'I have
three daughters, no sons. I was thinking of my students.’ ’’ The Secre-
tary of the Medical Students’ Society did not exaggerate when he
wrote to Lady Allen: "We realise that most of the benefits we enjoy
under the existing medical curriculum were due to his foresight, energy
and ability.’’ Professor Allen’s memorial is the Pathology Museum,
which he was continually extending with characteristic care and keen-
ness —the manner in which the skeleton of the little hydrocephalic,
familiar to every student, was obtained is said to be highly reminiscent
of John Hunter’s acquisition of the Irish Giant.
Page Nineteen


CHAPTER II
EARLY STUDENT ACTIVITY
The First Students —Various Student Requests —The Atticus Affair.
The first year students in 1862 were William Carey Rees, Patrick
Moloney and Alexander Mackie, all three gaining Honours in
their first year. On May Ist, 1863, Halford’s first lecture, delivered
to the Vice-Chancellor, the Staff and Students, was probably rather
inspiring, coming as it did from one whose reputation had preceded
him to the tiny colony and who had come to further an enterprise
which had already met with some criticism. "Examine the architecture
and marvellous mechanism of the limbs, or if you will, mark them,
before all this, stretched out in glassy cartilage, and see like stars at
stated times the points of bone appear till all is formed, and tell me
what study can be nobler than our own."
Halford was a competent, and at times stimulating teacher, al-
though in his later years his lectures tended to consist in part of long
passages rendered from Kirkes’ Physiology together with an occasional
rather risque story. Nevertheless, after one course of dissection,
Mackie’s request to the Professorial Board to become "a student not
attending lectures" was granted: he became a Presbyterian Minister.
Years later (1886) he returned to the Medical Course but died before
completing it.
Rees and Moloney both graduated with distinction in April,
1867, the Degrees being conferred at the Annual Commencement,
which was held for the first time in the Medical School Quadrangle
fitted with a floor and canvas roof for the occasion. Rees obtained
his M.D. in 1872 (in a prior attempt in 1869 he had protested to the
Council after Professor Halford had failed him in the Physiology of
the Nervous System). He was on the Staff of the Melbourne and
later the Alfred Hospitals. He died in 1879 of diphtheria contracted
from a young girl whose life he is said to have saved. Popular and
witty Dr. Moloney, later a Physician to the Melbourne Hospital, was
always in demand at M.S.S. functions —at a dinner in 1891 he
remarked that the greatest advance in the course since his time was
the admission of female students. He retired, in 1898 to live in
England, and died in 1904.
Corporate activity on the part of the students was soon forth-
coming, for in 1864 the three senior students claimed that the
Anatomy Lectures of 2nd and 3rd years should be considered as one
course, and therefore only one fee should be required. Needless to
say, the Professorial Board ruled that the Anatomy Lectures constituted
two courses. In June, 1864, the Professorial Board resolved that it
Page Twenty


was too late in the year to consider the students’ recent petition for
a two weeks vacation or "rest from their studies” betwen Easter and
December. The following year, after the request had been repeated to
the Council, the Board granted them the first fortnight in September.
Also in 1865, the Medical Students, numbering less than ten, re-
quested the Board to use its influence to ensure that clinicians were
present at the Hospital at convenient times. A recommendation to
this effect was sent to the Council and thence to the Medical School
Committee, but, on Professor Halford’s motion, the Board itself later
sent a letter to the Melbourne Hospital Staff. This asked that the
Staff define their hours of attendance, and the times of "consultations,
operations and post-mortem examinations.” The Staff replied that
this was already done to some extent, but conditions would be im-
proved. This was the earliest of many moves made by the students to
improve the standard of Hospital teaching. However, the Board re-
ceived further complaints of lack of correlation of Hospital and
University time-tables in 1870.
Late in March, 1865, the Council received a letter from the
Medical Students in which they requested the Council to take "such
steps that the Degrees of M.8., M.D., and M.S., granted by this
University, might be recognized by the various Medical Examining
Boards in Great Britain and Ireland.” A sub-committee consisting of
the Chancellor and Medical members of the Council was appointed to
report, and it drafted a letter giving a glowing account of the Mel-
bourne course and asking recognition of the Degrees. This letter was
approved and sent to the various United Kingdom Colleges, and
later to the General Council of Medical Education and Registration.
Thus commenced a complicated chain of events culminating in 1890
with the required recognition. Actually, certificates for lectures and
practical work here were accepted long before 1890 in many Univer-
sities, notably Edinburgh.
Other lesser requests from the student body were presented to
the Council at intervals, and occasionally met with some success. Their
outstanding failure was a petition —which, curiously enough, coin-
cided with a similar notice of motion by the Vice-Chancellor—in
August, 1867, "praying the Council to consent to the erection of a
Hospital on the ground adjoining the Medical School and facing
Madeline (Swanston) Street” and which was to be a "University
Hospital.” Despite Brownless’ support the motion was defeated by
eight votes to three. Brownless had supported a similar move in
1864.
In 1875, following a letter to Professor Halford from the Medical
Students, the Professorial Board recommended to the Council that the
Saturday afternoon Lectures in Descriptive and Surgical Anatomy be
abolished. The Council replied asking the Board "to have the good-
ness to report on the question as it related to the general body of
students.” The Board said it thought that Saturday should be a
holiday (the terms being correspondingly lengthened), but that the
Page Twenty-one


resolution sent previously should be acted on "independently of the
general question." The offending lectures of the Medical Course were
abolished, although a petition from all University students for the
general abolition of Saturday lectures was refused —and refused again
four years later.
Presumably the Medical Students combined with students of
the "Other Side" in successfully petitioning for the erection of a
lavatory. The "Other Side", of course, referred to the Lake as a
fixed point, the Medical School having been separated from the
main part of the University because, it is understood, the Council
considered its dignity would be offended' by the undue proximity of a
Dissecting-room. The Lake probably played a leading part in the lighter
side of under-graduate life, despite the fact that Council Minutes show
a request from the Head Gardener strongly advocating its drainage
because of the foul odour.
About 1876, a Law Student lampooned the Medical Students as a
whole in a morning daily, the article being frankly insulting. The
student was caught, taken to the Dissecting-room and tried, J. W.
Springthorpe being one of the judiciary. The student "pleaded
guilty" and was given the alternative of walking through the Lake
in a North-South direction (being twice as long as East-West), or
being handed over to the Professorial Board. He chose the former
course and was escorted to the Lake. He was allowed, remarks Dr.
Felix Meyer in telling the story, "his pants and vest as the morning
was somewhat chilly." It is said that several of the ring-leaders were
rusticated for a year but no reference was found to the episode in
Council or Professorial Board records. Springthorpe was "the life
and soul of every movement’ just prior to the formation of the
Medical Students’ Society. On one occasion he was observed removing
camellias from the Quadrangle, explaining in his defence to Professor
McCoy that he wanted to study the colour scheme. In paying his
fine of two guineas he recorded strong disapproval of this regrettable
rebuff to original research.
The Medical Library had always been a source of dissatisfaction
and it was decided that either a Librarian must be appointed or the
books must be moved to the General Library. Books had been lost
or damaged, and in 1877 one student (later to become a leading figure
in the Medical School) very nearly lost his annual examination because
he had removed a book for the whole of the examination period. In
July, 1878, Professor Halford supported a petition by the students
"praying that the books be not removed from the Medical School"
and offering to appoint a committee to control and guard the Library.
After reference to the Medical Faculty, the Council, in 1880, finally
approved the appointment of Mr. James Booth, a Medical Student,
as Assistant Librarian at a salary of 10 guineas per term. However,
the Medical Library long remained "the ugly duckling"; in 1886 the
copy of Gray’s Anatomy was 20 years old! A yearly grant was received
in 1887, and old books were sold to finance replacements, so that the
Page Twenty-two


Library at last began to make some progress. In 1907 Professor Allen
was able to say that "the Library is now one of the finest south of
the equator."
Apart from a charge, which was not sustained, of intoxication
when lecturing, brought against a member of the profession by several
of the students, the above constitute practically the only references
to the Medical Students in Council minutes up to 1883.
Dr. Macadam (Lecturer in Chemistry and Public Analyst) died
in 1865 en route to New Zealand to give evidence in a case of
murder by poisoning, an analysis of the victim’s stomach contents
having Been done by Macadam, his assistant (J. D. Kirkland), and
the first three medical students. Kirkland, then also a Medical
'Student, gave evidence instead and the accused was convicted.
On his return Kirkland was appointed Lecturer in Chemistry, and
Professor of Chemistry from among several applicants in 1872, in
which year he graduated M.B. Incidentally, Macadam’s body was
brought back to Victoria and accorded a University funeral, the
Medical Students, in academic dress, marching ahead of the hearse to
the cemetery.
There are, perhaps, two other isolated items worthy of mention
derived from the Australian Medical Journal. The first is a letter in
1866 from a Medical Student protesting that the total fees of 55
guineas for Hospital Instruction over three years were excessive, and
much greater than comparable amounts charged in the Old Country.
The second, in 1873, is a discussion of Professor Halford’s request to
the Benevolent Society to provide bodies for dissection. None, he
said, was as yet available for that year, which was a serious matter in
view of the fact that dissection could only be done in Winter.
(("Pickling" was not introduced until the late 1880’s). This created
extreme public interest when it reached the newspapers —especially at
the Benelovent Home. The subject shortage continued for many years,
being so bad in 1887 that the students complained because "double-
banking" was necessary!
The Medical Students received unexpected publicity following
a paragraph in a topical column —"Under the Verandah", by a
gentleman calling himself "Atticus"—in the "Leader" of May Ist,
1881. "Atticus" wished to know why the Medical Students, "brain-
less boys, too big to be flogged and too little to be reasoned with,"
inevitably "cultivate the grosser forms of sport," becoming as low as
some of the "Pothouses" they frequent. Hearing that an indignation
meeting was to be held to consider these statements, "Atticus" gave the
"Age" a preview of his next week’s "Leader" article, the preview
appearing on the morning of the proposed meeting, (May 12th).
Herein he narrowed his charges down to a few individuals, and was
glad to see that the majority had sufficient sense of honour to gather
together to consider the charges—which latter part was a neat per-
version of the truth, as one imagines he well knew. About 150,
including several students from other Faculties, attended at the
Page Twenty-three


Melbourne Town Hall, and Professor Elkington, first Melbourne
University graduate to become a Melbourne University Professor, was
elected to the Chair. Three motions were proposed, to the effect that
the accusations were unfair, untrue and libellous, that the later para-
graph aggravated the offence rather than apologised for it, and that the
Editor should withdraw the paragraphs and publish an apology; all
three were carried unanimously and with acclamation. Bage, Anderson,
Loughrey, Woinarski, T. Ryan and Fred Bird were the students who
proposed and seconded the motions. Among those present who
strongly supported them were the Chairman, Drs. Neild, Kirkland,.
Allen, Williams, Mdnerney and Mr. Girdlestone, all of whom were
engaged in student teaching either at the Melbourne Hospital or at
the University, and an Arts Student, Mr. Pritchard. A full report of
the meeting was printed in the "Leader” of May 14th; there was also
a telling reply from "Atticus,” withdrawing nothing. He brought more
specific charges—of ill-treatment of a "quiet gentlemanly student,'"
ducked because of his reflections on the behaviour of his contem-
poraries; of stealing books, caps and gowns from the Library and
the students’ lockers, necessitating the engagement of a detective. As
regards the Lecturers’ support of the students’ meeting, he remarked
"I pity where I do not blame.”
The matter received editorial mention in the Australian Medical
Journal of May 15th which at that time was edited by Harry Allen.
The "large and influential” indignation meeting was commended for
its support of the students, and a tribute was paid to their general good
conduct. It seemed to the writer that the charges rested on repeated
raids on the "students’ robing room” (and from one of which the
offender was lucky to escape) and on exaggeration of the usual student
procedures (including their "irregular modes of bringing offenders
to justice”).
The following week, "Atticus” claimed that the "eloquent silence”
of the students so clearly demonstrated his victory that he could
afford to be magnanimous, and not multiply the charges. To show
that this would not be over-difficult, he instanced the fact that on the
previous Saturday morning, May 14th, one of the ringleaders at the
meeting of protest was finedi five shillings for being drunk and dis-
orderly in the streets the previous evening! So far as we know, there
the matter was allowed to rest.
Page Twenty-four


CHAPTER 111
THE FOUNDATION OF THE MEDICAL
STUDENTS’ SOCIETY
Foundation of the Medical Students' Society —Inaugural Meeting —
Early Ordinary and Annual Meetings.
Prior to the formation of the Medical Students’ Society small meet-
ings of groups of students took place in the rooms of Dr.
Angus Munro who was a Resident at the Melbourne Hospital. Papers
were read by the students and literary and medical subjects discussed.
The last of these was held in 1878, the concluding paper being one
on "Mesmerism.”
At the Society’s Jubilee Dinner in 1930 Dr. Meyer referred to
the reasons for the Society’s formation. The Medical School in his
time was tribal, consisting of five tribes, and there was a great lack of
cordiality between the various years: —"If a Second Year man dared
to ask a Fifth for a match he was severely sat upon.” Felix Meyer
conceived the idea of a Medical Students’ Society in the earlier years
of his course, and in his fifth year with T. R. H. Willis "gestation
appeared to be favourable.” At the same dinner Dr. Willis recalled
that the idea originated in a "back upstairs bedroom in a boarding
house in Drummond Street, Carlton, with a beautiful vista of dirty
back yards—but why spoil a beautiful picture with too much detail?”
At a meeting of sixteen Medical Students, led by Felix Meyer and
T. R. H. Willis, on June 4th, 1880, it was formally decided to form
a Medical Students’ Society. At a subsequent meeting a set of Rules
was adopted, the objects of the Society being set forth as "(A) To
foster a more cordial understanding and a closer relationship between
the Medical Students than has hitherto existed and to further their
interests generally (B) to advance the knowledge of the Students in
Medical and kindred sciences.” J. W. Barrett (later Sir James) was
elected Secretary, and Middlewood Treasurer. Vice-Presidents were
Drs. S. D. Bird, J. E. Neild (both leading figures of the day) and
Drs. Patrick Moloney and J. Kirkland. At the Inaugural Meeting on
July Ist the President, Dr. James Jamieson, Lecturer on Obstetrics and
Diseases of Women and Children, delivered an address before "a
large crowd” (there were at this stage 137 students enrolled). He
deplored the neglect that the governing body of the University had
shown for the Medical School, considering that the latter constituted
more than half the total number of students at the University. Although
he had failed to secure various reforms, he felt gratified that one of
Page Twenty-Rve


his suggestions, namely the formation of the Medical Students
Society, had come to fruition.
The Australian Medical Journal, August 15th, 1880, then edited
by Drs. Allen, Moloney and Williams, published a sub-leader com-
mending the Medical Students for the formation of their Society by
which "original observation and thought will be encouraged and a
readiness in debate will be acquired." The Journal wished the new
Society every success. Even the Lancet later in the year referred to
the infant Society in commendatory terms.
At first, Ordinary Meetings were held in the Melbourne Hospital
Operating Theatre, a member of the Honorary Staff acting as Chair-
man. According to Rule XIX (1886) the special business of such
meetings was to be "the reading and discussion of papers, reports of
cases, exhibition of chemical, microscopical, physiological, or patho-
logical specimens; or a discussion on subjects under the approval of
the Committee may be instituted." These were continued with much
success until 1891 when it was found difficult to obtain speakers, and
it was suggested that more daytime meetings be held. Nevertheless,
evening meetings continued to be held for many years. Two of the
most popular, held annually, were lectures given by leading Honoraries.
at the Melbourne Hospital on "Splints" and "Instruments."
The first Ordinary Meeting took place in July with Dr. Neild in
the Chair, twenty-two members being present to hear Rupert Willis
read a paper on "The Application of Electricity to Medicine." Fifty
members assembled the following month to hear James Barrett on
"The Microscope —Its History, Use and Construction." By August,.
1881, fifteen such "fortnightly" meetings had been held, including one
"microscopical evening." All had been well attended, but the six-
teenth meeting in September lapsed for want of a quorum. In the
Australian Medical Journal (June, 1881, p. 275) there is a summary
of an address, "Medical Education," given by Charles Bage, then in
his final year, at the eighth of these meetings. A similar account,
together with certain points arising from the subsequent discussion,,
was sent to the Medical Staff of the Melbourne Hospital, requesting
its advice and assistance. Bage was appreciative of the amount of
practical work available to the students, but urged the desirability of
forming Special Departments in Eye, E.N.T. and Skin Diseases for the
benefit of both patients and students. He favoured the division of
the students into groups, each group to receive systematic instruction
in the various branches of Medicine and Surgery —e.g., bone, genito-
urinary diseases, specials —preferably by men who were more particu-
larly interested in them. In this way the prevailing haphazard man-
ner of gaining experience would be eliminated. It was to be many
years before this ideal was attained, and then the pendulum began
to swing the other way. Following Bage’s address, the meeting listened
to G. A. Syme on "The Laryngoscope."
Among the original members whose names are not mentioned
above or in the List of Officebearers were F. D. Bird, W. Moore, and
Page Twentysix


i -' j L L
xja 8?
Ky ”
C. H. Mollison. The subscription at first was 5/- per annum but this
was later increased to 7/6 per annum.
Annual Meetings were held in the evening at the Hospital early
each year for many years and were well attended. The first of these
was on April 28th, 1881, Dr. Coutie, a Resident at the Melbourne
Hospital, being chairman on this occasion. Professor Halford was
elected President for 1882. Part of the business transacted almost
every year was the sending of two letters to the Melbourne Hospital
Committee—one requesting improvement in the shockingly small and
ill-furnished Students’ Room ("which would suffer in comparison
with a cell in the Melbourne Gaol"), and one requesting the numerous
medicos on the floor at operations to give the students an occasional
look. Incidentally, it is amusing to find it recorded in some of
the early Annual Reports that "the Committee desire to thank the
Secretary of the Melbourne Hospital for placing the Operating Theatre
at the disposal of the Society for their meetings."
Page Twenty-seven


CHAPTER IV
SOCIAL ACTIVITIES
Annual Lecture —Socials and Dinners—Medical Medleys —Theatre
Nights —Sporting Events—Sundry Other Public Performances — Mel-
bourne Hospital Elections.
An Annual Lecture under the auspices of the Society was held and
was open to the public. In 1890 and succeeding years it was
frequently given by Mr. C. S. (Charlie) Ryan, who delivered a "bright
and witty speech" entitled "Reminiscences of the Russo-Turkish War,"
in which he served as a Surgeon. Professor Halford, now no longer
young, would introduce the speaker each year and would then proceed,
it is alleged, to slumber peacefully until wakened to propose a vote
of thanks.
The Annual Lecture lapsed in 1910 and in the war years, and had
a relatively short post-war existence. Among those who have given
it are: —Professors Allen, Stuart Anderson and Tucker, Drs. Stawell,
Bird and Rothwell Adam. Incidentally, the Inaugural Lectures of some
of the Lecturers in Medicine and Surgery, delivered at the Melbourne
Hospital, and open to undergraduates and graduates, were of an
extremely high standard, illustrating the breadth of knowledge and
versatility of the lecturers of the day. There have been several pleas
in Speculum for their revival.
The first Social Evening and Smoke Night ever held by any
group of University Students in Australia was sponsored by the
Medical Students’ Society in 1883. The Chairman was the former
Secretary, then a recently graduated Resident Medical Officer, Dr. A. S-
Aitchison. The venue was Gunsler’s Cafe, later to become the Aus-
tralia Hotel, but for many years the scene of Medical Students’ Society
functions. Despite the bill of only 1/6 per head, it is reported that
headaches were plentiful next day. A copy of the programme was
entrusted to the Medical Students’ Society by G. T. Howard (Treasurer,
1885-86) in 1920 but has suffered the fate of most Medical Students’
Society historical records. Fortunately it was printed in Speculu?7i of
that year; apart from the fact that it lists some twenty-nine items,
many original, and most to be performed by students, it is interesting
to note that the piece de resistance seems to have been "Presentation
of Banner.’’ McLean, who drew the design for the flag referred to T
rendered a recitation. Two original songs were sung by A. W.
("Cooley") Rinder, the first and most original of the Medical School
poets (as Howard describes him). Rinder is one of the greatest per-
sonalities in the history of the Medical Students’ Society—at a Social
Page Twenty-eight


tended to him by the Society in 1886 he was described as a man to
whom the Medical Students owe more than to their Professors.’
In 1884, it was decided that the final Ordinary Meeting for the
year should take the form of a Smoke Night at Gunsler s, Dr. Felix
Meyer acting as Chairman. This proved so successful in promoting
"social prosperity" that one was held at the end of each term in 1885
and this practice continued with unabated popularity for many years.
Sometimes they were ostensibly held to do honour to a person or an
occasion—such as that to Professor Allen on his return from Europe
in 1891, or that of March 23rd, 1887, held to celebrate the School’s
25th birthday. This last was a brilliant affair (at Gunsler’s, of course),
the Dean, Professor Allen, occupying the Chair, with the Vice-Chan-
cellor (Dr. Brownless), Professor Halford, and Drs. Williams and
Moloney also present among other graduates. The toast of the
Medical School was proposed by Dr. Neild, who was the only sur-
vivor of the original small band of Lecturers.
In later years Rubira’s Cafe, the Port Phillip Club Hotel, and
Parer’s Cafe (still to be seen opposite the Tivoli Theatre), were popu-
lar and provided cover for these festive occasions. They must have
been festive for they provoked many a student to break into poetry in
Speculum : —
"Come, Comrades, let us all be gay,
Pass we in song the night away: —
Let the amber nectar pouring,
Loosen spirits, that upsoaring,
Taste awhile the joys that come >
From that heaven which is their home,
Down to mortals when they hear
The gurgle of the yellow beer."
By "Popelet”— lßß9-
"Bright glow the lights, but night soon passes;
Merry the laughter on my ear;
Round us the clink of brimming glasses;
Pity the end is drawing near."
—1902
These eventually died a natural death owing to a benign hyper-
trophy of costs and malignant degeneration of the liquor laws.
The first Ordinary Dinner was also held in 1884, being held in
the evening after the last Medical School Sports. It appears to have
been a great success, but although it was hoped that it would
inaugurate a series of Annual Dinners, this did not transpire im-
mediately. The Medical School Glee Club provided part of the enter-
tainment on this occasion. Incidentally this Club was revived by Giblin
in 1909. In later years the Hare and Hounds Run preceded the
Dinner, an arrangement which was physiologically admirable. On
one occasion (1922) a Medical School Band provided musical fare.
Page Twenty-nine


On Friday, 13th September, 1930, the Jubilee of the Society
was appropriately celebrated by a Dinner at the Oriental Hotel,
Collins Street. Dr, Felix Meyer took the Chair. Over 100 graduates
and more than 50 students were present. Speculum concludes its report
of the Dinner —"Thus ended, quite decorously too, as becomes these
more serious commercial days, a very pleasant and successful function,
and we now settle down to another half century’s work for the
Centenary."
Despite financial embarrassment on several occasions Medical
Students’ Society Dinners have continued up to present times. After
one such financial failure an irate letter was published in Speculum
in which the writer stated that the Dinner was supposed to be a func-
tion at which students could meet Senior Members of the Noble Pro-
fession on an equal footing. This, he said, was a lie. He considered it
quite unfair to meet Honoraries on an equal footing as he could give
most of them three bottles in and still drink them under the table.
Professor W. A. Osborne remarks "It took a little courage to
attend a Medical Students’ Society Dinner, not that anything personal
was said or done to which any member of the teaching staff could
take the slightest exception, but things often got lively. One of the
routine events was to engage a professional entertainer; no longer
young, and fill the poor fellow up with liquor until he hardly knew
where he was. His pathetic efforts at comic recitation or acting evoked
the highest hilarity. I followed a general rule when the fruit salad
began to assume parabolic flights through the dining-room to slip
away quietly, stepping over somnolent and sometimes stertorous forms
on the stairs. When I look on some of these men as they are now,
models of professional dignity and decorum, I feel that these
'youthful sallies,’ as Gibbon called them in his autobiography, did
not do any harm—possibly a lot of good."
The admission of female Medical Students to the course in
1887 was responsible, apparently, for a Fancy Dress Ball, held on
July 15th. Although Speculums detailed description indicates that it
was nothing short of a magnificent success it was never repeated. In
1923 and for a few years after a Jazz Rattle was held in the Union, the
first of which was a Fancy Dress affair. About this time the Medical
Students’ Ball was also instituted.
The Medical Medleys began in 1920 when a company was formed
to take part in the University Carnival in aid of the Women’s Hostel.
By the end of 1921 it had staged excellent performances in aid
aid of various charities, notably at the Melba Hall, the Play House,
and the Princess Theatre. It received official support in 1921, and
in 1922 came under the direct supervision of the Medical Students’
Society Committee. Over a time regular performances were held in
conjunction with Commencement Celebrations, but in 1932 it was
decided that the Medical Medleys should be combined with the
Annual Ball, in the form of a Cabaret Ball. This is the present
arrangement.
Page Thirty


Probably the most entertaining innovation of the Medical
Students’ Society was that of Student Theatre Nights. The first of these
was held in August, 1884, in honour of Miss Genevieve Ward’s ap-
pearance at the old Theatre Royal (in Bourke Street, opposite the
Tivoli) as Lady Macbeth. W. Mullen conceived the idea, and he was
ably supported by Kinder, Miller, Merrillees and Adams. The front
seats of the gallery were reserved by the management and about a hun-
dred Medical Students attended —"The Skeleton Army according to
a wit in the audience. Hanging over the gallery were the Medical
Students’ Society Banner and another twelve feet by two, with The
Medicals Greet Genevieve’’ on it —"the lady s Christian name alone
appearing to make the greeting more cordial,’’ to quote the Speculum
report. A programme of songs was run through before the curtain
went up and several medicos in the audience below suitably received.
The play was heard with due respect, excepting such medical references
as "Throw physic to the dogs’’; "the insane root that holds the reason
prisoner,’’ etc.
Miss Ward was flattered by the Medical Students’ Society
patronage and asked for the banner as a memento. The Society was
loath to part with its new flag, but presented her with a pretty silk
bannerette,’’ with a gold fringe: in the centre was a replica of the
Medical Students’ flag, surrounded by a wreath of wild flowers.
Above it was printed "The Medicals Greet Genevieve" and the date;
below it was printed — De Mortuis Nil Nisi Bonum From the Dead
(We Take) Nothing But their Bones!”
Miss Ward replied, "Your very pretty present has just reached me.
Permit me to thank you and the gentlemen you represent a thousand
times for the charming souvenir of the eventful evening when the
Medicals of Melbourne for the first time assembled in a body to do
honour to an artiste. When I expressed a desire to have the banner
used on that occasion I did not suppose that your courtesy would have
taken so elaborate a form as its reproduction. I shall always preserve
it as one of the most cherished recollections of my artistic career. Pray
convey my greetings to all the gentlemen concerned.
Perhaps it was because of this friendly relationship that we find
Miss Ward as a leading donor to the fund for the rebuilding of the
Lying-In Hospital in 1887 —renamed at that time the Women’s Hos-
pital.
This Students’ Night proved so popular —although the "Age"
and the "Sydney Morning Herald” considered it somewhat improper—
that a second was arranged in September of the same year, but this
was more of a University evening than a Medical one. It was re-
called that such Theatre Nights were the vogue in England not so many
years earlier, and they became an essential part of Melbourne under-
graduate life. Two of the most successful were evenings at charity
bazaars at the Exhibition: at one of these (1886) trenchers, femora
and even hospital bandages were cheerfully raffled, the students leaving
io the tune of "Tramp, Tramp, Tramp, the Boys are Marching!" At
Page Thirty-one


PRINCESS Under the Patronage
THEATRE, of the
, AUSTRALASIAN
° ct - - oth ’ xl . JBpnBI r\ medical
1908. /W W CONGRESS.
MEDICAL STUDENTS' THEATRE NIOHT.
Students* Programme.
the other (1892) H. Murray conducted with a femur about four
hundred students, mostly Medicals, in songs and solos, an articulated,
skeleton being ingeniously and humourously manipulated as a mime.
Inevitably, there are less pleasant incidents to recall. In 1887 the
hooliganism of some students and outsiders greatly upset a per-
formance at the Alexandra in aid of the Eye and Ear Hospital, An
unofficial and self constituted Committee organised a Students’ Night
at the Exhibition in 1888, "freshers and articled clerks” forming the
majority of the procession which made its way from the University
to the Exhibition. An imitation of the Medical Students’ Society
banner was well, to the fore, the use of the original flag having been
refused. Conduct was disorderly and lacking in humour, and the
party was eventually dispersed by the Police—apparently much to the
amusement of the local youths, and the discomfiture of the students.
After another University Theatre Night in 1889, to see Mr. C. Miln
as "Hamlet,” two students, apparently Medical, became involved in
a disturbance of the peace and were rescued from "the Law” only
Heading to the printed song sheet for a notable Theatre Night. The pro-
gramme from which this reproduction was taken belonged to Sir Harry
Allen, President of the 1908 Congress. Through the courtesy of Miss E.
Allen, it is now displayed in one of the cases in the Pathology School .
by the intervention of Mr. Miln himself. Medical Students’ Society
delegates conferred with delegates representing the Union and the
Law Students with regard to the best means of expressing their appreci-
ation of Mr. Miln’s action, but unfortunately it is not known what
form this appreciation took.
Another Theatre Night which will be well remembered by
former graduates was that held at the Princess Theatre on October
20th, 1908, to commemorate the meeting of the Australasian Medical
Congress in Melbourne. The programme of the Students’ songs has
been given to the writer by Miss E. Allen and was the property of
Sir Harry Allen. It includes a special verse of the Anthem "to be sung
in the erect form’’ in honour of the patronage of the members of
the Congress.
Page Thirty-two


''And now God Bless our land,
And give the Congress prudence
And bless His noblest work on earth,
The Melbourne Medical Students!”
Students’ Nights continued to be popular until not so long ago;
there are numerous graduates who remember when "the gods” of a
city theatre were hired, from which, as the curtains went up, the
students let down long sheets, thereby efficiently obscuring the view
of the Dress Circle customers below.
In earlier years sporting activities were a feature of the Society’s
programme, the Football and Rowing Clubs being particularly
well patronised. The Annual Football Match against the Epilep-
tic Colony, umpired by Dr. Springthorpe, will be recalled by
many graduates. Medical School Sports were held from very early days
and continued annually until succeeded by the first University Sports in
1885.
One of the less serious but very well-known sporting events
was the Hare and Hounds Run. This originated probably in the mid-
1870’s as G. A. Syme and J. W. Springthorpe were among the first
competitors. For many years Dr. Springthorpe presided at the Dinner
which followed the Run, and annually donated a Medal to the winner.
A second prize was given by Denyer Brothers and was made a regular
Annual gift from 1895 onwards. After the 1914-18 War, during which
it lapsed, the Hare and Hounds Race was revived and has continued
sporadically ever since. In 1925 it was organised as a race between
teams representing the various branches of the Society. Denyer
Brothers presented a Cup for annual competition for this event, a
Cup which is still in the possession of the Society. After a brief lapse
it was last revived in 1938. It is a function which might well form
part of the Society’s activities in the future.
A Tourist Club was formed within the Medical Students’ Society
in 1887, its first outing being by train to Camberwell and thence x on
foot to Murrumbeena. In the same year Melbourne University Review
suggested that this Club and the Hare and Hounds Run should be
reconstituted as University affairs, a suggestion which met with little
approval in the Medical Faculty. The Tourist Club had a modern
counterpart three years ago —the Hiking Club, which had a brief
but highly colourful existence.
In the earliest years of the Society the Annual Billiard Tourna-
ment created much interest.
One group formed in the early 1880’s worthy of mention was
the Medical School Octette. This performed very creditably in aid
of several charities, and on one occasion gave a performance in
aid of the South Yarra Lawn Tennis Club.
Other public and not so public functions attended by the
Medical Students varied from Commencement to Chinese Exhumations.
The Medical Students, whether justifiably or not, always got the blame
Page Thirty-three


for the almost annual Commencement disturbances; since 1908, follow-
ing several noisy years, students have technically not been allowed to*
attend.
As regards the Chinese Exhumations the following verses are
sufficiently descriptive:
With scientific zeal we burn,
The havoc of the grave to learn,
On human form divine—a;
The lifted lid discloses all
The remnants of the flesh are small—
The bones are going to China.
'Cui Bono” said the Almond-Eyed,
Who through the empty form descried,
The blinding superstition;
And as among the bones he fished,
He (sad to tell) devoutly wished,
His Uncle to perdition.
Little information is available about the processions and Block
parades —except that they are prohibited now.
The Melbourne Hospital Elections also afforded favourable oppor-
tunities for student participation —partly in earnest, and partly in jest..
These elections, held to elect Physicians and Surgeons to the Hospital
for the ensuing four years, were public affairs, any subscriber of One
Guinea to the Hospital being entitled to a vote —elections thus became
costly to certain less scrupulous candidates. In 1891, after waiting
outside the voting centre, the Athenaeum, till 12.15 a.m. to hear the
results, a body of students then sought out the various successful
candidates and serenaded them. In every case, except one, they
were "all taken in and regaled with the best of everything.” One
finds it difficult to visualise similar scenes occurring in these enlightened
days.
The Students occasionally publicly supported the candidates that
they favoured, and for many claimed that the hospital fees they
paid should entitle them to vote. This request was never acceded to,
however.
For the benefit of the graduates we may briefly review the present
social activities of the Medical Students’ Society. The Annual Meeting
is held at lunch-time early in the year, and Ordinary Meetings are held'
as arranged at varying intervals. At these, the meeting is either ad-
dressed by a prominent member of the profession on a medical subject
of fairly general interest or medical films aret shown. A Dance is
usually held during the year, and if finances and support permit a
Dinner is also given. The Medical Medleys and Annual Ball are-
combined and held in November. Owing to the increasing numbers
within the Society the gap between clinical and pre-clinical years is
unfortunately widening, for inevitably many social activities are takem
Page Thirty-four


-over by the Students’ Clubs of the three teaching hospitals. This is a
matter for regret and it is to be hoped that a far-sighted Medical
Students’ Society Committee with adequate and enthusiastic represen-
tation from the higher years will take steps "to foster a more cordial
understanding and a closer relationship" between the years.
Part of the M.S.S. Display in the Procession during University Jubilee
Celebrations. (From Speculum, 1906).
Page Thirty-five


CHAPTER V
REGALIA AND RELICS: THE MEDICAL
ANTHEM
The reason for the adoption of the crossed femora surmounted by
a skull as the emblem of the Society is unknown. Such a motif is,
however, recognisable in some of the earliest (c. 1870-75) Fifth
Year photographs, where several of the men are holding these bones
in the appropriate relationship to one another.
The Medical Students’ Society Flag had its first public outing at
the Theatre Royal in 1884, although it will be remembered that a
feature of the Society’s first Social seems to have been its official
presentation. The first official reference to it is in the Annual Report
for 1885 —"a handsome banner with a device of a skull and cross-
bones is now the property of the Society, and has already appeared
with the Medical Students on several public occasions”. Miss McLean
and other lady friends of the Society had worked the device in white
satin on a black background to the design of W. McLean. It had "dis-
appeared” by 1906, a new banner being made by members of the
Women Medical Students’ Society in view of the approaching Univer-
sity Jubilee Celebrations. Characteristically, the women noted in their
Annual Report that it occupied a prominent position. It must be
recorded that since then it has been replaced several times.
In 1886, the Committee, in order "to obtain some distinctive
Medical School insignia,” had a skull and two crossed femora mounted
on a miniature black coffin about two feet long. Candles could be
placed in the ends of the femora {Frontispiece) . This striking device
occupied the central position on the official table at many subsequent
Medical Students’ Society functions. To defray the cost of its produc-
tion, photographs were taken and sold; unfortunately neither the insig-
nia nor even one of the photographs has remained in the Society’s pos-
session. The Chairman’s hammer in those days was an astragalus fitted
with an iron handle.
At an Ordinary Meeting in 1885 suggestions were invited for
a crest and motto, with what result is not now known. This request
for the design of a crest seems to have been repeated, and it is pos-
sible that there was an earlier Badge before those which were struck
in 1917. These were circular and consisted of a gold skull and cross-
bones on a dark blue background. One of these is reproduced else-
where, but I have not found one of the Badges designed for the
Women Medical Students’ Society by Miss Jameson in 1905. The
present Badge is silver, in the shape of a skull and crossbones, with
black painted orbits and a black scroll inferiororly on which is written
Page Thirty-six


''Medical Students’ Society”. These were probably first issued about
1936. A Medical badge for the new University hatbands was avail-
able in 1899, but none has been preserved.
In 1889 Professor Halford presented some historical relics of
the early Medical School to the Medical Students’ Society and these
were lodged in the Students’ Room. It is believed that these now
form part of the photographic collection in the corridors of the
Pathology School.
Perhaps it is not generally known that these photgraphs are the
property of the Medical Students Society. Even before the Society
was founded it had become the custom to obtain a photograph of the
Final Year and these were preserved in the Students’ Room. In the
years 1912-1913 R. O. Douglas (then Secretary), Professor Berry
(who started a fund among members of the Melbourne Medical
Association to provide cabinets) and Professor Allen (who secured
several photographs to complete the collection) were responsible for
displaying this unique collection as it is now. In view of the great
interest shown in them by Old Boys and present students, it is to be
hoped that this custom will be speedily revived (there is only one rela-
tively recent photograph present).
The old brass-rimmed table in the Students Room at the Melbourne
Hospital was an historical relic even fifty years ago. It replaced a
much-battered and carved table in 1889, but its defilement began
on its first day, and by 1890 "Speculum” reported that there was little
room left. Since then, at odd intervals, former students reminiscing in
"Speculum” have referred to "the old chipped table” in quite nos-
talgic terms. Recently, acting partly on the suggestion of Sir Alan
Newton, the table has been brought to the Royal Melbourne Hospital
where it is preserved in the Students’ Hall. Unfortunately it has
not as many famous names engraved on it as might be wished, but
lest this be thought to be due to an aversion to name-carving on the
part of more successful students, one has only to look at some of the
desks in the old Melbourne Hospital Lecture Room.
The Medical Anthem began as about six verses, but by 1890
consisted of more than forty verses, about twenty students having
contributed. Originally, it is said to have been an old French Drinking
Song, with the same chorus. It migrated thence to Trinity College,
Dublin, and from there to Melbourne. In the Melbourne University
Review for September, 1884, it is stated that one of the most popular
songs at a recent Theatre Night was topical and original, concluding
with the "very modest assertion that the finest work of creation was
the 'Melbourne Medical Student’ ”. This would date the origin of
the most familiar verse —
"Bless His noblest work on Earth
The Melbourne Medical Students”.
Since we are assured by Dr. G. T. Howard that Cooley Rinder
was responsible for the verse beginning —
Page Thirty-seven


"We’re Medical Students all
Prof. Halford is our Father ...”
it would seem probable that Kinder, the leading "poet” of the
day, wrote most of the original six verses, and quite possibly selected
the tune.
A new and revised" version is said to have been sung at
Commencement in 1887, the first Commencement at which student
participation —vocally, that is—had been encouraged officially. It was
adopted as the University Anthem with the change of the first line—
We’re Medical Students all" to "Varsity students’ etc.
Most of the verses which can be found in early numbers of the
Speculum or elsewhere are too topical to be worth repeating. How-
ever, there is one verse of 1908 vintage which history’s traditional
tendency to repetition might have popularised again:—
"When the Yankee fleet was in
The girls deserted us, sir,
So now we miss the Sunday kiss,
And life’s as sweet as pus, sir.”
There were many other student songs, but parodies, as such, took
second place to highly topical verses —often highly personal—written
as need arose. Unfortunately, few of these have been preserved. Such
songs were features of Medical Students’ Society Socials and Theatre
Nights.
MSS. Badge, 1917
Page Thirty-eight


CHAPTER VI
SPECULUM
A PROPOSAL in 1882 to publish a Journal was not carried, but
H. R. Salmon successfully moved early in 1884 ' that a Journal
be published under the auspices of the Society.” Salmon became the
first Editor, with A. W. Kinder, W. L. Mullen, B.A. (Sub-Editors),
C P. W. Dyring, 8.A., (who succeeded Mullen before publication of
the first issue) and G. T. Howard, B.A. constituting a special
Speculum Committee.
One of the most entertaining stories in the history of the Medical
Students’ Society is told concerning the birth of Speculum in an
article entitled "The History of the Speculum Motto” by C. Craig m
the issue of October, 1922. With the author’s permission, the fol-
lowing paragraphs are almost directly quoted from this delightful
essay. His information was derived from 'Cooley Kinder.
Since the earliest days of the University, students from the
Other Side, known as the Intellectuals , had over-awed the Medical
Students by the very weight of their ponderous classical tradition.
Unable to discipline certain revolutionary spirits who refused to ac-
cept this tradition —namely A. W. Kinder, J. M, Pardey and H. R.
McLean —the "Intellectuals” started a crusade to have the B.A. pre-
scribed as a pre-requisite for Medicine. When this move met with
derision it was decided to start The Melbourne University Review
which by sheer literary erudition would crush this rising intolerable
spirit of independence.
The Medicals’ reply to this was the hurried formation of a Com-
mittee to run Speculum. Speculum, as the name, was hit on by
chance by Kinder and was accepted without question —although one
student later on strongly objected because he could not lay a Journal
of that name on his sister’s table. However, his scruples were over-
come.
The caustic and derisive abilities of Kinder were well-known,
and the "Intellectuals” were very nervous of a severe blow to their
dignity. To their amazement when they bought one, there were none
of the deadly thrusts expected —but lo! the Medicals had had the im-
pertinence to place a Latin quotation on the outside. The fntellec
tuals” were sure that this played right into their hands; they would
smite these yokels hip and thigh. However, as time passed without
reply it eventually dawned on the Intellectuals that not one of them
knew from whence it came. They searched every volume and authority
in all the libraries without avail; even thus was the spell of the
"Classicals”, superiority broken forever by one tremendous blow!
Page Thirty-nine


Kinder having decided on Speculum as the name had then set
out to hnd a classical quotation to fit it. After five hours incarceration
in the library he produced the following from Terence, "The Brothers”
Act 3, Scene 4. Demeae is talking about his son to Syrus.
Inspice} e, tanquam in speculum, in vitas omnium
]uheo, atque ex aliis sumere exemplum situ."
Patrick translates thus:
In a word I tell you to look into the lives of all men
as into a glass (mirror) and thence to take example.”
The motto Si Speculum Placet, Ins pice is a play on these words.
Many difficulties were overcome before the first number, con-
structed in Carl Dyring s house in Parkville during the summer
vacation, appeared in July, 1884.
Speculum was chosen as the name, according to the first Editorial,
(by Salmon) because its aim was to reflect the ideas of the students
and to throw a little light on Medical Student affairs for the benefit of
the general public. Single copies could be obtained from booksellers
for 1/6, although members of the Medical Students’ Society paid
1/6 as a full year s subscription (three issues).
The first number of the Melbourne University Review appeared
just two days after Speculum—t he latter mentioned that a journal from
the Other Side was forthcoming and therefore would leave general
University topics to its mercies. There followed in the second number
of the Review, m August, a rather patronising review of Speculum.
m which it was inferred that the Medical Students’ Society had shown
a rather unseemly haste in getting out a journal before first number
of Review. Incidentally, the Medical Students’ tendency to isolate
themselves was also criticised. The reviewer suggested that an adver-
tisement in Speculum —"Student’s Half-sets of Bones in Boxes”—
explained the final disappearance of youths after two or three attempts
at First Year Medicine. However, in September, the Review expressed
regret that these remarks had been taken rather too seriously and
paid a tribute to the "esprit de corps of the Medical School, so often
Jacking in other schools.” This came at a time when valiant efforts
were being made to make a success of the Union (formed in 1884)
which the Medical Students, having an active Society of their own
were slow to join, probably because the subscription was 14/- p.a.
The second number of Speculum was highly praised.
Several efforts, extending over several years (notably 1885), were
made to affiliate the Medical Students’ Society with the Union, the
ormer to retain only its function of organising technical lectures
Ihese moves for amalgamation, or at least affiliation, received only
slight support, and were largely ignored by Speculum. They culminated
m a suggestion from the Review that Speculum should be published
as a supplement of the Review. The last word came from Speculum
of July, 1892, which gave its blessing to the new Union publication
Page Forty


Quadrangle , the Review having previously gone out of business
through lack of support. Speculum expressed great pleasure at having
decided not to accept the Review’s magnaminous offer to appear as
a supplement. The general tendency to apathy among students of the
'Other Side” caused some jealousy and seems to have motivated the
attempts to amalgamate —but, as Speculum said, the "convivial Medical
Student and the sober Union Member are different beings and will not
mix.” The occasional joint Socials that had been held were almost
entirely Medical Student affairs.
Reference has been made in a previous chapter to suggestions
that other Medical Students’ Society activities should be shared with
the Union members.
Two issues of Speculum were produced in 1884, two in 1885,
and four in 1887, but in 1892 the Editor was forced to reduce the
number pel year to three because of lack of copy and of student
contributors. Hard times were experienced financially between 1890
and 1893, when more advertising was obtained to defray expenses;
it was during this period that Speculum became the officially accredited
organ of the Society. Speculum again became financially independent
of the Medical Students’ Society in 1930 when that body became
affiliated with the Students’ Representative Council. By 1900, forty-
eight issues had appeared and "late” in 1946 the one hundred and
fiftieth number was produced. It had been found necessary to reduce
the output to two per year in 1921, but of recent years the journal
has become a mere annual affair. With the post-war revival of
student interest it is hoped to produce two issues in 1948 —it should
certainly not be beyond the capacity of a Society with a membership
of over 600 to perform this feat.
Several differences may be noted between the old and the modern
Speculum. The former measured 8 inches x 5j inches, contained be-
tween thirty and sixty pages, and had a well-known light-blue cover on
which the index was printed. The advertisements were of the same
character, but many sound strange today. For example, the Melbourne
Athletic Club was "Strictly Select,” and had "all the most modern
appliances including Bath;” Microscopes £7.6.0; Skeletons, fully arti-
culated, £lO, and half sets of bones, £3. The articles, too, were of
similar nature, but there were many more of wider and more topical
interest, many more written by students. Current comments, difficulties
with the Curriculum, and Medical Students’ Society activities (reports
of meetings, addresses and social functions were printed and provided
much material for the present work) occupied much of the editorial
space. Speculum columns were opened to graduates in 1887; in later
years many Old Boys offered prizes for contributions and answers to
Commentaries. Letters to the Editor were a very interesting feature—
both graduates and under-graduates joined in a prolonged argument
as to whether "Recipe . . . aquae ad uncias” or "Recipe . . . aquam ad
uncias” was the correct Latin in writing a prescription. The final
Page Forty-one


result was a living journal which portrayed admirably both student
life and medical practice of the day. Of recent years, the tendency
has been to emphasise the technical side, and most of the contributors
have been graduates—if this be a fault, then it lies not with the
Editorial Staff, but with the student body as a whole.
However, in some respects Speculum (to quote Professor Os-
borne) "remains true to type though Editors come and go, and
Professorial Boards vary in severity of criticism. The curve of naughti-
ness of the Speculum shows that oscillatory equilibrium designated
hunting by engineers; the curve would go slowly up and up and then
there would be an explosion of disciplinary activity in the Professorial
Board and this would produce a steep descent; but sure enough, the
upward trend would become more and more manifest and the cycle
would be repeated." The element to which Professor Osborne refers
is largely a twentieth century development, for it was in 1901 that
it was first noted that the Spicula were becoming a little too
"pointed." Major "disciplinary explosions" occured in 1911, 1912,
1921 (when a whole issue was recalled), and 1933, and there were
other minor ones. Following the 1911 outcry the Professorial Board
required the Editor to sign the following declaration—"l hereby
promise that during my term of office ... the paper shall be kept
within the bounds of common decency and good taste and that it
shall so far as is in my power be conducted with regard t6 the best
interests and good name of the Medical Students’ Society." The
subsequent incidents led to various attempts to supervise the contents
of the journal on the part of the University authorities, while at
times it seemed that Speculum might even be threatened with extinc-
tion. No useful purpose would be served by considering these
"affairs" in any more detail, but the subject might be fittingly closed
with a further anecdote told by Professor Osborne: "Once when I was
defending Speculum I brought to the Professorial Board a copy of a
journal, unlike the Speculum sold and exposed for public sale, which
had jests and pictures of a riskier nature than any the Speculum had
ever dared to publish. It was handed round the Board and disappeared
... I never got it back!"
Professor Allen took a great interest in Speculum and on many
occasions contributed both prose and verse. In 1914, he exhorted
the Society never for one year to change the title, size or appearance
of the journal.. However, it was seven years later that Speculum assumed
its present page size, with a highly original cover design. In succeeding
years the cover design was frequently changed, perhaps one of the
best being that for July, 1926. Satan, complete with stethescope,
headlamp and pitchfork, is depicted depressing the mandible of a
skeleton, a recent arrival in Hades. A many-headed monster, numer-
ous tortured souls, gaunt rocks beside the Styx, and "Abandon Hope
all Ye who Enter Here" help to complete the picture. Beneath it
is the caption "Recommend 5.1.P." The present cover was adopted
in September, 1933.
Page Forty -two


Over the years Speculum has been of very great service to the
Medical Students’ Society. It has been invaluable in the preparation
of this History, and will be equally invaluable when the History of
the Medical School is written. A high standard has been set for the
future to maintain —as judged, in part at least, by the fact that one
of our Lady Graduate members requested us to refrain from sending
any further issues to her. ’ (Annual Report 1919-1920).
Page Forty-three-


CHAPTER VII
SPECIAL CLUBS AND SOCIETIES
Only brief mention will be made of these Societies, since they are
incidental to the theme, and information in the main is diffi-
cult to obtain.
At the instigation of Professor R. Berry, the Anatomical and
Anthropological Society was formed in 1907. Several meetings a year
were held until 1913 when under the new Curriculum it was found
difficult to continue. At one outstanding meeting in 1912 a lecture was
given by Professor Berry on the Connection Between the Size of the
Head and Intelligence, as Illustrated by 355 Melbourne Criminals."
This, said Speculum "proved of great interest to the meeting, especially
when it was discovered that the Melbourne Medical Students appeared
to be no better than wife-beaters and Anatomists headed the list." One
of the daily newspapers "had the temerity to display an irreverent and
frivolous spirit —such as could come only from profound ignorance—
concerning these deliberations."
Its successor in later years was the Anatomical Society, its first
meeting being held in July, 1932. Professor Wood Jones, Professor
Marshall Allan and Dr. Kent Hughes were present when the meeting
was opened by the President, Mr. N. V. Youngman, a Prosector. The
first paper was read by Mr. S. Sunderland on "The Brain of the
•Chiromys (madagascariensis).’’ The lecturer, "with a few dextrous
manipulations of supra-sylvian and pseudo-sylvian sulci, convinced us
that despite its retrogression Chiromys must be given a place with
the lemurs."
At the suggestion of Dr. Kent Hughes the Royal Melbourne Hos-
pital Students’ Clinical Society was formed in February, 1921, Geoffrey
A. Penington being the first Secretary. The President was the Super-
intendent, Dr. M. Stewart. Among the original Vice-Presidents was
Mr. C. H. C. Searby, who in later years rendered very valuable service
to the Students’ Club of that Hospital.
The Alfred Hospital Students’ Club appears to have been in
existence prior to the formation of a Students’ Clinical Society in
November, 1921. Their first meeting, to which students of all hos-
pitals were invited, was addressed by Dr. Fay Maclure.
The date of the formation of a similar Society at St. Vincent’s
Hospital is uncertain.
The constitutional position of these Societies in relation to the
Medical Students’ Society has varied through the years. In 1922 the
Medical Students’ Society announced that since one of the Society’s
•objects was the holding of Clinical Meetings, the Students’ Clinical
Societies at the various hospitals could not be allowed to collect extra
Page Forty-four


8§ § $
subscriptions from members for this purpose. They were taken under
the wing of the Medical Students’ Society and drew their funds
therefrom. At present, however, they are entirely independent. The
Royal Melbourne Hospital Students’ Club, to illustrate the activities of
these bodies, holds several evening meetings during the year when
speakers are invited to lecture, usually on non-medical subjects.
Lunch-time meetings are also addressed by leading graduates or visitors.
A Library containing most of the standard textbooks and reference
works and receiving current Journals is maintained. (In 191.1 the
M.S.S. established technical libraries at each of the teaching hospitals,
but this was eventually found financially impracticable). It is part of
the long range plan of the present Committee that the Presidential
Address each year shall be open to graduates and that this may in
part, at least, take the plage of the once popular inaugural Clinical
Lecture. The Club, as at present constituted, was formed in 1932, at
a period of much unrest and uncertainty in the Medical Students’
Society (Chapter IX).
Page Forty-five-


CHAPTER VIII.
THE LADY MEDICALS
Male Student Opinion —The Women Medical Students' Society.
The admission of women to Medicine is dealt with quite fully
in Scott’s History of the University. Prior to the admission of
women to the University (1881) there was very considerable argu-
ment as to the propriety of such a measure, in Parliament, in the
University Council, in the newspapers, and probably among the
students. Eight female students were permitted to commence medical
studies in 1887, after some preliminary bickering concerning separate
lectures in subjects "in which it is undesirable on grounds of common
decency" that both sexes should attend. The Medical Faculty, opposed
to such segregation, finally compromised by providing a separate Dis-
secting-room and separate Hospital instruction. After highly com-
mendable academic careers, Clara Stone and Margaret Whyte in 1891
became the first of the School’s women graduates. In the following
paragraphs we shall confine ourselves, not to cold historical records,,
but to an attempt to divine what effect these "blue-stockings," "man-
hunters,” or "job-stealers" (each point of view had its supporters)
had on Medical Student life.
The first Speculum for 1887, in February, dealt with the question
of the Fady Medicals from a practical rather than an ethical point of
view. It declared that separate instruction was impossible for financial
reasons, and because the Women’s and the Melbourne Hospitals were
already grossly overcrowded. No reason could be seen why lectures
should not be mixed. Early in the year a Rule admitting the ladies
to the Society was passed unanimously, which, said the Annual Report,
"can only be productive of good in every way." The July issue of
Speculum contains only a passing reference to the girl doing first year
who fainted when the Dissecting-room door was left open, and who,,
it is said, lodged a formal protest to the Faculty!
In the sub-leader in October Speculum expressed regret at the
unnecessary publicity, amounting to taunts of lack of maidenly
modesty, levelled at the women students. The writer claimed that
the women students, although agreeing with the principle of mixed
classes, were forced in self-defence to sue for separate instruction. The
proposal to limit the Alfred Hospital to women students was not
favoured because the Melbourne Hospital monopoly of student teach-
ing would be virtually re-established only twelve months after it
had been lost (with the recognition of the Alfred Hospital). With
all this, however, Speculum did not wish to be regarded as "express-
ing in any way approval of the principle that women are fitted
Page Forty-six


for the practice of such a profession as ours.’’ A delightfully written
.article by R. R. S. (R. R. Stawell, later Sir Richard Stawell) appeared
in the same issue. He pointed out that the ladies would certainly be
specialists, chiefly in Obstetrics and Gynaecology, and thus would not
usurp the place of men. "Those who urge the objection
•of the unfitness of women for the Medical profession do so from a
certain feeling of chivalry: they know how laborious, disgusting and
offensive a great part of their studies and practice must necessarily
■be. All that men loved and looked for in women, all that was associ-
ated with their nearest and dearest seemed to be so widely separated
from a doctor’s work!’’ However, knowledge of Anatomy and Disease,
as is found, for example, in nurses and mothers, does not "tend to
unsex a woman, or make her less pure.’’ He recommended that
separate instruction be cut to an absolute minimum, to be provided
at the discretion of the Lecturer or the ladies. Separate Hospital prac-
tice was especially condemned. R. R. S. concluded with the hope that
the "entrance of women to the profession will be looked back to with
respect and gratification." This was a generous tribute, as it is
probable that many of the students resented their presence, just as
some of the outside public regarded them as distinctly immoral. It
contrasts, for instance, with an article in 1892, stating quite definitely
that women should concentrate on propagating the race.
The women students had their own Dissecting-room until 1895,
when Professor Allen, regarding the matter as one of "privilege rather
than propriety," relagated them to the main room. It would appear
from an undated letter (probably 1905) to the Women Medical
Students’ Society Committee from Dr. Clara Stone that Professor Allen
tried to achieve this earlier, in 1890, but "we all objected so strongly
that the question was not mooted again." Objections again proved
sufficiently strong in 1895, and even a third attempt in 1905 was
shelved pending the arrival of Professor Berry. Professor Berry
immediately succeeded where Professor Allen had failed, however.
All the women students attended the Alfred Hospital, together
with a few of the men, but, again to quote Dr. Stone, the teaching
"was so inefficient that we were glad in our fourth year to join the
'men students." This move created sufficient feeling to provoke an
editorial rebuke and much correspondence in Speculum. The Editor
was unable to understand why the ladies should leave the Alfred
for the already overcrowded Melbourne Hospital: furthermore, they
tended to monopolise the floor at operations and to disconcert the
surgeons. One correspondent was highly indignant —the women were
unblushingly forward at certain operations at which even the nursing
staff retired into the background, their conduct being so unseemly and
lacking in decorum that some males were forced to retire feeling un-
comfortable. This was the most serious of several charges. Others
took a more lenient view of their presence, provided that all the
"little points of politeness" of social intercourse were not expected in
the wards.
Page Forty-seven


The next issue of Speculum brought a further crop of letters.
'Aesculapius” considered that if three not-so-tall women could dis-
perse over one hundred men, then the men did not deserve to see an
operation. One of the accused wrote a wise and well-reasoned letter
explaining the loss of time and trouble involved in attending inferior
demonstrations (due in part to the paucity of students) at the
Alfred Hospital; stating that they did absent themselves from ''in-
delicate” operations, but that the previous correspondents clearly re-
garded it as indelicate to attend any; and explaining that they occupied
the front seats only because these were courteously left vacant for
several days in succession on their first arrival. She deprecated the
abusive tone of one of the letters to Speculum, and-concluded with a
neat thrust—regretting, "for the sake of that manliness which is so
prominent a characteristic of most of our fellow-students, that such
a letter should have received publication in Speculum." The Editor
hastily added a note that correspondence was not withheld unless very
objectionable.
Apart from one or two minor matters —such as whether or not
the lady students should be included in the annual Fifth Year photo-
graph, a point which was settled when the said ladies had their own
photograph taken—the earliest graduates completed their course in
relative peace. It was noted in 1892 that Dr. M. Whyte was "wise
in her generation” to become a Resident at the Women’s Hospital, and
not continue attempts to enter the Melbourne. It is, however, pleasing
to record that both graduates soon announced their engagements, one
at least being to a Medical contemporary.
The Women Medical Students’ Society was formed in April,
1902, the Committee first meeting on April 17th to draw up a set
of rules in accordance with motions passed at a previous meeting of
all women students. The first Committee consisted of Misses Hart
(Chairwoman), Griffiths (Treasurer), Baldwin (Secretary), Bevan
and Edelsten. The Vice-Presidents were Drs. Helen Sexton and Con-
stance Ellis and the President Professor Allen.
The wisdom of this move was shown by the fact that women
were refused admittance as Medical Students’ Society members in
1903 and again in 1908, so that women were permitted to attend
meetings only by invitation of the M.S.S. Committee. They were
sallowed to attend the Annual Meeting in 1911 when the Women
Medical Students’ Society affiliated with the Men’s Society, which was,
as the Annual Report stated, "a cause for rejoicing.” Incidentally in
this year the Stawell prize for the best scientific paper was first opened
to women and was won by Miss Sweet for a paper on "Pulses and
Polygraphs.”
The Society’s first public meeting took place in 1904 when Pro-
fessor Allen spoke on "Tumours.” An Annual Dinner was inaugurated
in 1926. At Ordinary Meetings papers were often read by members.
The Society received considerable support from the Victorian Women’s
Medical Association whose meetings it was often invited to attend.
Page Forty-eight


i 9 9 $
In other spheres, the Society’s activities were notably directed
towards the conditions of appointment of women as Resident Medical
Officers, every effort being made, assisted by the Medical Students’
Society Committee, to prevent preference being given to men. The
first women graduates to become Resident Medical Officers were Drs.
F. Gamble and J. L. Greig who were appointed to the Melbourne
Hospital in 1896. Although they were congratulated on their work at
the conclusion of their term of office, an effective precedent was not
established and injustices continued well into the present century.
The affiliation of the Medical Students’ Society with the Students’
Representative Council in 1930 did not affect the women very much,
although "it does seem a shame that the old Society should sink into
oblivion” (Annual Report). It did not do so immediately. The last
entry in the Minutes is for the Annual General Meeting of 1937.
Without Comment:—
Advt.) MATRIMONY
Two young professional ladies (medical students) desirous of
meeting two well educated young gentlemen, soldiers preferred, view
to above. — Chloro., Argus.
—Argus 18.11.1916 —
Forty-nine


CHAPTER IX
MEDICAL STUDENTS’ SOCIETY
ACTIVITY IN GENERAL MATTERS
Teaching Resident Medical Officers Appointments —Examination
Papers —The War Service Controversy — Students’ Representative Coun-
cil Affiliation— The Fee Strike—Graduate Support for the Society.
Neither time nor space permit any sort of detailed consideration
of the activity of the Medical Students Society in more serious-
spheres, for such would involve us in the history of the Faculty itself,
in curricular changes, in general Hospital and University affairs. An
outline is given, however, in order to place the preceding chapters in
-something approaching proper perspective, and to demonstrate the far
from unimportant part that the Society played in the development of
the Medical School.
Both conditions and teaching were improved in the Melbourne
and Women’s Hospitals in the Society’s early years. Until quite recent
times there were repeated serious differences with the Women’s Hospi-
tal concerning teaching and living conditions, both of which were
frequently unsatisfactory. Generally speaking these arguments resulted
in improvement.* Repeated pleas for the establishment of special
departments at General Hospitals met with some success, the earliest
step being the formation of a Skin Department at the Melbourne in
1885. Optional teaching at the Eye and Ear Hospital was obtained,
and Children’s Hospital work made more satisfactory. Undoubtedly,
the Society’s greatest efforts were put into the establishment of
clinical teaching, efforts which, as described in Chapter I, culminated
in a petition to the State Premier. This document, signed by C. P. W.
Dyring (Honorary Secretary), is printed in r ' Speculum”, August,
1886, and, because of its unique nature, is reprinted here as Appendix U
Other major matters which engaged the Society s attention were:
More adequate medical representation in the University Senate, an
* Two Anthem Verses from a 1902 Smoke Night:—
Old ladies to manage affairs
Were never a great success, Sir;
A certain Committee’s the talk of the City
For getting affairs in a mess, Sir.
'Tis not of arms we sing
Such trifles are not worth a ditty,
We sing of a war which is waged with the jaw
By the W.H. Committee.
fifty


august controlling body mainly composed of Arts and Law graduates;
the appointment of recent graduates as Resident Medical Officers in
Victorian Hospitals, the conditions of such appointments, and later,
the recommendation of suitable candidates; the problem of men doing
single subjects here and then proceeding to complete their course
abroad; and, finally, various curricular changes, real and proposed.
The cause of the Resident Medical Officers has been repeatedly cham-
pioned, and in recent years, the Medical Students’ Society has been
largely responsible for an increase in their salary.
The examination papers were sometimes much criticized, and in
some instances they certainly did show a tendency towards ambiguity,
complexity and excessive length, as claimed. On the other hand, many
questions bear a remarkable resemblance to those of modern papers.
To quote a few random examples: —"Trace the course of the con-
stituents of a meal of bread and butter through the body." "Write
an 'lndex Expurgatorius’ of Dyspepsia" —this from the Therapeutics,
Dietetics and Hygiene Honours paper of 1890 evoked much strong
comment. From a Physiology paper —"What is'known of the fer-
tilisation of the human ovum? What is meant by the following state-
ments: — (a) the individual recapitulates the history of its kind, (b)
that the past lives in the present, (c) that we individually retread
puths made by our ancestors."
Probably the most acrimonious discussions in the history of the
Society occurred between 1914 and 1919 in connection with the ques-
tion of prohibiting membership to those students who, without reason-
able excuse, failed to volunteer for service in the 1914-18 War. How-
ever, in common with the Fee Strike and the remuneration of
Resident Medical Officers arguments of several years ago, it is too
recent a question for a full discussion. Further, on some points the
Minutes are not explicit. It must be remembered that in the early
years of the 1914-18 War there was no restriction on Medical Students
enlisting, while in the latter years, there was a much higher proportion
of returned men doing the course than was the case during the recent
War.
The earliest sign of dissent was apparent in 1916, when supported
by Messrs. McCallum, Fitchett and Green, a motion was passed ex-
pressing disapproval of eligible men commencing the Medical Course.
A similar motion, but also involving students of later years, was
passed by the Committee in 1917. At the Annual Meeting early in
1918, Mr. A. W. Shugg and Capt. A. P. Derham M.C. moved and
seconded a comprehensive motion to the effect that no Medical Student
during the War years be accepted as a member of the Medical
Students’ Society unless he could justify his position to an independent
tribunal. Several amendments were added. Much somewhat heated
discussion followed, but the motion was carried on a division
(Professor Allen, who supported the proposal, overruling the request
for a Secret Ballot) by more than the requisite two-thirds majority.
Despite further protests, a circular in the form of a questionnaire was
Fifty-one


sent to all affected by the motion, and a tribunal of independent citi-
zens appointed.
An obstructive element in the Society managed to delay proceed-
ings for a time, but at the end of 1918 the tribunal, consisting of Dr.
Hamilton Russell, Mr. J. Lang and Mr. W. J. Roberts, was able to
report that 320 replies had been received. It was estimated that only
about 100 male students failed to reply. With the end of the War,
the investigation was* allowed to lapse, a review of the affair in
Speculum for September, 1918, being the last notable reference.
In its Jubilee Year, 1930, the Medical Students’ Society radi-
cally altered its Constitution and decided to seek affiliation with the
Students’ Representative Council. The earliest attempts to amal-
gamate the Medical Students’ Society with the Union were made in
1885, but for half a century the Society had preserved its independence.
Now it was felt that the financial security of a regular grant, associated
with the removal of the necessity to collect subscriptions (membership
would become free) warranted affiliation. Speculum, since the Students
Representative Council did not wish to undertake the responsibility
for its publication, became a separate entity once more. The move-
ment for affiliation was led by G. M. Oser, J. H. Gowland, S. W.
Williams, N. Cust and J. G. Bonnin, and the necessary motions, after
much discussion, were carried at the Annual Meetings in 1929 and
1930.
At the Annual Meeting in 1932, dissatisfaction was expressed
with the state of the Society, for both financially (especially in regard
to Speculum) and socially it had found itself in difficulties in the
preceding year. H. Smith was supported by all speakers in advo-
cating de-affiliation from the Students’ Representative Council, a
decision which was unanimously ratified at a Special General Meeting
later in the year. The experiment was immediately successful, the
activities of the ensuing year arousing much greater enthusiasm.
Success was short-lived, however, and the report for the succeeding
year showed a disappointing apathy on the part of the general student
body, and a distastrous Balance Sheet owing to a considerable loss on
the newly-revived Annual Ball. Hubert Smith, in proposing the motion
for re-affiliation, stated that the financial position necessitated the
change, and suggested that the Medical Students’ Society should become
a figure-head, acting as a central body for the various branches (i.e.
Hospital Societies). The motion was supported by S. Sunderland, and
J. M. Agar, the latter, however, disagreeing with the second part of
Mr. Smith’s statement. After a somewhat stormy discussion the
motion was carried.
Although the above paints rather a gloomy picture, it should be
noted that the issues of Speculum were extremely good during the
1930’5, while the Medical Medleys reached perhaps their highest
standard. Certain lectures and other functions were well attended.
Affiliation with the Students’ Representative Council has, however,
been maintained.
Fifty-two


§§ 9 9
In July, 1942, the University demand for certain fees to be paid
before examination numbers would be issued to Third and Fourth
Years gave rise to much heated discussion. Representations to the
University to abolish these fees having failed, the senior years resolved
to refuse to pay. The Vice-Chancellor (Mr. J. D. G. Medley)
addressed a Special General Meeting of the Society, but no solution
was forthcoming. The matter was not finally settled until October,,
when Government subsidisation of students was announced, a move
which prompted the Medical Students to rescind their former motions.
Perhaps it is appropriate to conclude this chapter by reference to-
the great aid and encouragement which the Society received in the
past from former members. Many of these have been mentioned
already, and a complete list would be far too long. Nevertheless, it is
pleasing to record as examples the Stawell Prize for the best scientific
essay, the Bird Prize for Speculum contributions, the Strong Prize for
Athletics, the Springthorpe Prize for the best worker for the Medical
Students’ Society, and the prizes offered by many graduates for the
best solutions to Commentaries published in Speculum. Except among
those connected with the University, graduate interest in the Society
has decreased. This may have been partly the fault of the Society,
but it would be a stimulating gesture if former members began
to regard the Medical Students’ Society as in part their own, and
to support its activities. The anthem had a verse for it once:—
Oh, lots of prizes now
From the HonTaries come sailing;
And next we’ll hear at the end of the year
That there’s a prize for failing.
Speculum, 1906
Fifty-three




APPENDIX I
From Speculum, August, 1886.
THE LATE DEPUTATION
As many of our readers are doubtless interested in the action of
the Society regarding clinical teaching, we publish in full the contents
of the protest read to the Honourable the Premier;: —
THE HONOURABLE THE PREMIER.—Sir, I am instructed
by the Committee of the Medical Students’ Society to bring under
your notice the following facts: —
1. Clinical teaching, that is instruction in cases under treatment
at the Hospital, is the essential part of our education, as it alone deals
with the practical side of medical science.
2. Every medical school in Great Britain and the Continent
provides for the teaching of Practical Medicine and Surgery, and every
examining body of standing insists on the production of certificates
of attendance on such lectures.
3. We are required by our University authorities to produce cer-
tificates of attendance on clinical lectures or special instruction at the
bedside, which certificates are perfectly distinct from those of attend-
ance on the ordinary practice of the wards.
4. The rules of the Melbourne Hospital (18 and 19) provide
that the ‘ physicians and surgeons shall at their ordinary visits give
clinical instruction to the pupils in attendance upon them, but, re-
cognising the necessity for supplementing this ordinary instruction,
they also provide for the appointment of special clinical lecturers by the
Council of the University from among the members of the medical
and surgical staff.
5. The Faculty of Medicine, which is appointed by University
statute to advise the Council upon all matters relating to lectures and
examinations in medicine, has long been aware of the absolute necessity
for appointing special instructors in practical medicine and practical
surgery; thus in a printed report to the Council dated 29th September,
1881, the following statement occurs (page 5):- —"The absence of
any adequate provision for the regular instruction of students in
clinical medicine and clinical surgery constitutes the worst feature of
the present curriculum of medical study. The Faculty would urge
that lectureships should be established in these subjects as soon as
possible." In a subsequent printed report dated 20th December,
1884 (page 9), it is stated that "the Faculty remains convinced that
if effective clinical lectures and bedside instruction are to be secured
the lecturers must be definitely appointed by the University with
Fifty-five-


adequate salaries, and with recognised status as members of the
Faculty.”
6. In previous years the Council showed that it was alive to the
same necessity. On the 11th June, 1883, a deputation from the
Council waited upon the Treasurer of the Colony and applied for an
increased endowment of the University, specifying among the im-
mediate requirements "two clinical lecturers, medicine and surgery
£SOO. (Vide daily press, June 12th 1883.) In consequence of this
representation and others Parliament voted an increase of the Univer-
sity grant by £2,000. In the annual report of the University for
1883- (vide Calendar for 1884-85, page 279, sect, xviii) the follow-
ing sentence occurs:—"The Council having represented to the Govern-
ment the necessity for clinical teaching, the Government voted the
sum of £SOO as a salary for a lecturer on clinical medicine and a
lecturer on clinical surgery.” There is distinct evidence, therefore, that
the Council then recognised that the sum of £SOO was voted specifically
for the payment of clinical lecturers. Early in 1884 a lecturer on
clinical medicine and a lecturer on clinical surgery were appointed
by the Council. The students found the special teaching so provided of
great value. In the following year, 1885, the Council, against the
advice of the Medical Faculty, and against the petition of the Medical
Students’ Society, departed from the system of special clinical instruc-
tion so adopted, but, nevertheless, the Council appointed gentlemen to
deliver lectures in clinical medicine and surgery, and devoted the sum
of £SOO above mentioned, with the students’ fees, to their remunera-
tion. In the annual report of the proceedings of the University for
1884- the Council expressed its hopes that by the end of the year
(1885) it would "be in a position to place the teaching of clinical
medicine and surgery on a permanent and satisfactory basis.”
7. In spite of these official reports no clinical lecturers were
appointed by the Council for the current year. The Faculty of
Medicine drew the attenion of the Council to this neglect. The result
was that on July sth, 1886, the Council resolved not to appoint any
lecturers on clinical medicine or clinical surgery, the Chancellor re-
marking that neither the sum of £SOO nor any other sum was expressly
granted for the purpose of clinical teaching, {vide reports of
University Council in daily press, July 6th.)
8. The Faculty at once forwarded the following protest:
T That the Faculty of Medicine records its dissent from the action of
the Council in resolving that it is not desirable that the University
should appoint clinical lecturers. The Faculty must repeat its opinion
already expressed that the training of the students in practical medicine
and practical surgery, will not be satisfactorily carried out until the
Council appoints clinical lecturers with status as members of the
faculty and with adequate remuneration. The Faculty regrets the
action of the Council the more, inasmuch as the rules of the Melbourne
Hospital distinctly provide for the appointment by the Council, of
clinical lecturers from amongst the medical and surgical staff. The
Fifty-six


Council has thus refused to meet the advances of the Melbourne
Hospital and has thereby lost for the present the opportunity of
developing those close relations between the Medical School and the
Hospital which are essential to a perfect system of Medical Education.”
9. By such resolution of the Council the University has relin-
(pushed all control over the practical training of students in medicine
and surgery. It has left to students to gather what teaching they can
during the ordinary visits of the members of the medical staff at the
Melbourne Hospital and though several members of the staff have
shown much kind attention to the students in this respect, we submit
that such unsystematic training will never thoroughly fit us for the
practice of our profession and that when the absence of definite clinical
lectures becomes known in Great Britain, the recognition hitherto
accorded to our courses of instruction will be discontinued, and the
piestige of our medical school irremediably injured.
10. Evidence has just arrived proving that the danger just men-
tioned is a real and imminent one. Mr. Griffiths who is now a doctor
of science of the London University spent two years in the Melbourne
Medical School. He attended the Melbourne Hospital during these
years and then proceeded to London to complete his medical course.
He writes to the secretary of the Melbourne Hospital under date May
27th inst., that though he obtained certificates of hospital attendance,
dressership and clinical clerkship he requires additional certificates
for "two years clinical lectures on surgery and medicine.” He states
that the London College "requires clinical lectures' ’ and that "the
whole course of my hospital work at Melbourne will be useless unless
I get this certificate signed up.” A letter of similar purport has been
received under date May 19th, from another student who went from
Melbourne to the Royal College of Edinburgh.
11. After the action of the Council we were compelled to appeal
to the Government for we felt that in this way only would justice
be done to us, the status of our school be maintained and our practical
education properly and systematically carried out.
12. Erom careful calculation based upon all the information
which we can command including the financial statement in the last
calendar of the University we believe that, while almost half the fees
received from students are paid from the Medical School, only one-
ninth of the Government grant is devoted to the purposes of that
school.
13. If the Government should simply withhold the sum of
£SOO which has thus been withdrawn from the purposes for which
it was admittedly voted, no relief will be afforded to the injury which
has been inflicted on us and the Medical School.
14. We therefore petition that the Government may insist that
the sum of £SOO at least be devoted to the provision by the University
of that practical training in medicine and in surgery which is essen-
tial to our own education and to the welfare of the Medical School
and which consists in the delivery of a regular and systematic course
Fifty-seven


Si S 8
of clinical lectures in medicine and surgery by members of the hos-
pital staff appointed by and responsible to the Council of the Mel-
bourne University.
I have the honor to be yours very respectfully,
CARL P. W. DYKING, B. A.,
Hon. Sec. Medical Students’ Society.
Note : Excerpts from the Editorial of the same issue:—". . . on
no occasion has the influence of a united front been of greater service
to the Medical School . . . never, even by the Council, has such a high
handed and flagrant attempt been made to hamper its advance and
depreciate its value in the eyes of the well-established schools of
Great Britain . . .” In the column "In the Students’ Room,” a feature
of those days, it was noted that "the Premier evidently appreciated
the gravity of the situation, for he assured us of his sympathy, and
promised to interest himself personally in the matter.” Subsequently,
the Annual Report stated that such an extreme measure as appealing
to the Premier had been taken with regret; the move had been success-
ful, but further trouble was anticipated —a forboding which proved to
be justified.
Fifty-eight


Year
President
Secretary
T reasurer
1 880
Dr. J. Jamieson
J. W. Barrett
Middlewood
1881
Prof. G. B. Halford
9 9
E. Anderson
1882
f f
G. Palmer
1883
f 9
A. S. Aitchison
1884
Dr. J. Neild
McGibbon
G. T. Howard
1885
Prof. Halford
A. J. Wood
♦ 9
1886
C. P. Dyring
1887
Prof. H. B. Allen
C. E. Goodall
J. F. Bartley
1888
f 9
E. Mackey
F. H. Langlands
1889
f 9
T. Cherry
W. I. Boyes
1890
, ,
T. H. Boyd
1891
9 9
J. K. Freyer
E. R. Shuter
1892
f ,
B. Lougbrey
W. E. Davies
1893-
■4
9 9
1895
f
T. Anderson
H. R. Letcher
1896
C. G. Crowley
W. Parsons
1897
9 f
G V. Taylor
J. A. Bissett
1898
J. H. Nattrass
G. V. Fletcher
1899
y y
J. S. Yule
T. R. Inglis
1900-
3
9 9
1904
9 f
J. T. Matthews
S. Patterson
1905
A. W. Bowman
R. D. O'Leary
1906
y y
H B. Devine
J. Opie
1907
9 9
W. L. Potter
A. Nankivell
1908
R. A. Robertson
J. Adamson
1909
# y
Isaac Jones
G. A. Wickens"
1910
9 *
A. S. Tymms
P. A. Parer
1911
9 9
R. O. Douglas
F. J. Burns
1912
9 9
H. Collins
S. P. Lyttle
1913
y y
H. F. Wickens
R. Webster
1914
9 9
T. A. Wright
W. Hogg
1915
9 9
N. T. Bull
L. S. Germon
H. C. Disher
1916
F. G. Middleton
R. L. Park
E. Gandevia
1917
F. G. Middleton
C. Macdonald
1918
9 9
L. W. Craig
C. Macdonald
1919
y y
H. W. Harbison
1920
f ,
9 f
C. H. C. Searby
1921
y y
R. D. McKellar Hall
G. Simpson
1922
y y
J. Ainslie
Charlton
1923
99
J. J. Searby
J. M. Buchanan
1924
y y
D. O. Brown
ft
1925
Prof. R. J. Berry
L. J. Westacott
H. M. Burns
1926
f f
H. A. Body
A. R. Buchanan
APPENDIX II
OFFICE-BEARERS OF THE M.S.S.
The following list has been compiled from the Minutes and from
Speculum and is moderately complete so far as these records allow.
Apologies are offered for the omissions and inaccuracies which have
inevitably occurred. Unfortunately, for various reasons, it was found
impossible to list the Editors of Speculum, to whom the Society owes,
much.
Fifty-nine


Year
President
Secretary
T reasurer
1927
Prof.
W. A. Osborne
N.
S. Williams
J.
Farran
1928
Prof.
R. J. Berry
S.
W. Williams
G.
M. Oxer
1929
Prof.
W. A. Osborne
J.
H. Gowland
J.
G. Bonin
1930
9
R.
Warden
T.
E. Lowe
1931
9 f
A.
M. McGregor
R.
Rome
1932
Prof.
F. Wood Jones
A.
Penington
H.
Hayden
1933
f 9
S.
Sunderland
ff
1934
Prof.
R. Marshall Allan
J.
M. Agar
Knight
1935
> f
9 9
R.
Wall
1936
f f
S.
Preston
9 9
1937
9 9
1938
Prof.
W. A. Osborne
J.
A. Buchanan
H.
W. Ireland
1939
Prof.
W. J. Young
A.
S. Ferguson
99
1940
Prof.
P. MacCallum
H.
Mark
A.
Keech
1941
ff
R.
Smythe
1942
Prof.
R. Marshall Allan
P.
Jones
D.
Cossar
1943
Prof.
P. Woodruff
B.
Hudson
G.
Cooper
1944
Prof.
R. D. Wright
S.
H. Watson
G.
Deravin
1945
9 »
E.
Wells
N.
Orton
1946
'
P.
T uckfield
P.
Colville
Vice-Presidents
Dr. A. V. M. Anderson
Sir James Barrett
Mr. F. D. Bird
Dr. S. D. Bird
Mr. J. Buchanan
Mr. A. E. Coates
Dr. E. Cooper
Sir Hugh Devine
Mr. L. Doyle
Mr. T. Girdlestone
Mr. J. Gordon
Dr. J. W. Grieve
Mr. W. A. Hailes
Mr. V. Hurley
Dr. E. S. J. King
Prof. J. Kirkland
Dr. Blois Lawton
Dr. J. Mackeddie
Mr. F. Maclure
Dr. J. Major
Sir Henry Maudsley
Dr. Ivan Maxwell
Dr. Felix Meyer
Dr. P. Moloney
Dr. R. H. Morrison
Mr. M. Morton
Or. J. E. Neild
Dr. R. O’Sullivan
Mr. Balcombe Quick
Acting-Professor A. Rowlands
Professor S. D. Rubbo
Mr. Hamilton Russell
Mr. C. H. C. Searby
Sir Sidney Sewell
Mr. Gordon Shaw
Dr. Beattie Smith
Dr. J. W. Springthorpe
Sir Richard Stawell
Prof. S. Sunderland
Prof. V. M. Trikojus
Dr. Wilkinson
Dr. A. M. Wilson
Mr. B. T. Zwar
Members of Committee
-Adam, 1931-34
Aitchison D., 1916-18
Allen W., 1929-32
Allestair E. M.. 1895-97
Anderson D. C., 1913-14
Anderson E., 1885
Anderson T. L., 1892-93
Angwin D. L., 1891-93
Ashworth L. N., 1892-93
Atkinson G., 1909-10
Aitchison A. S., 1882-3
Bagc C., 1 881 -*B3
Bailhache E., 1922-23
Baldwin R., 1938-39
Bean R., 1941-43
Bennett D., 1907-8
Bennie A., 1888-90
Sixty


Best C, 1924-25
Best A, L., 1905-6
Bird D., 1907-8
Birnie N., 1917-19
Birrell W. A., 1910-13
Bissett A., 1896-97
Blaubaum R., 1929-30
Bond, 1,885-88
Booth, 1944-45
Botterill 8., 1938-39
Bowman A. W,, 1904-5
Bowman V. L., 1906-7
Bourke E. P., 1922-23
Bonin J. G. 1929-31
Boynton F. A. H., 1913-14
Boyd T. H., 1889-90
Brodie R., 1920-21
Brown D. 0., 1923-24
Browning R., 1910-11
Buchanan D., 1905-7
Buckle D., 1930-34
Buckley W., 1 897-1 900
Bull N. T., 1914-15
Buntine M., 1916-17
Burns H., 1923-24
Burns F. J., 1908-1 1
Bush S. A., 1884
Byrne G., 1916-18
Brodie, 1882
Barrett J. W., 1880-82
Campbell A. 8., 1898-1900
Campbell C., 1 895-96
Campbell J., 1907-10
Carroll A., 1932-33
Casey, 1923-24
Catford H. R., 1899-1900
Cawker, 1 899-1900
Champion E., 1888-92
Charlton H., 1921-22
Chenell A. W., 1891-93
Chennell A. N., 1 895-96
Chenoweth E., 1917-20
Cherry T.,1888-89
Clarke L., 1905-6
Clarke P. G., 1896-97
Collins W. H., 1911-14
Colville, 1935-36
Connelly A. E. W.. 1891-93
Corbett A. G., 1913-14
Courtney C. W., 1922-23
Cowling R. H., 1938-39
Craig C, 1920-24
Craig L., 1916-18
Crawford F. 8., 1912-13
Crisp R., 1915-16
Crook A., 1907-8
Crookston R. M., 1911-12
Crowley E. G., 1895-96
Cust A. D., 1917-19
Gust N., 1929-31
Cooper G., 1945-46
Daish W. C. 1885
Dallimore G., 1921-25
Darby L. V., 1919-21
Davies E., 1916-17
Davies L., 1887-90
Dawes T. P., 1923-25
Davis J. L., 1910-13
Deane E. W., 1895-96
De Crespigny F., 1915-16
DeLacey 0., 1912-16
Devine H. 8., 1904-6
Dickson C., 1923-24
Disher H. C., 1915-16
Dodds N., 1921-23
Douglas R. 0., 1910-11
Doyle G. V., 1914-15
Dunlop D. P., 1916-17
Dunlop E. E., 1931-34
Dyring C. P. W., 1884-5
De Ravin, 1919-20
Dyring C., 1 925-26
Eccles J. C, 1924-25
Edgar A., 1916-17
Eggleston Miss J., 1943-46
Elkington J. S. E., 1892-93
Elliott G. S., 1911-12
Evans EL, 1912-13
Farmer A.. 1915-16
Ferguson A. S., 1938-1943
Firebrace W. E., ???
Florence P., 1907-8
Foley Miss, 193 6-3 7
Ford, 1930-31
Forster D., 1942-43
Fortune C., 1 930-32
Fox, 1 926-27
Freemantle L., 1918-23
Freemantle N., 1923-24
Frew J., 1934-35
Furnell H., 1917G9
Galbally R. 8., 1943-44
Gandevia E., 1914-17
Germon S. L., 1914-15
Giblin A. R., 1909-11
Giblin E. L., 1908-1 1
Glassford E. G., 1913-14
Godfrey E. P., 1889-90
Gordon J., 1891-92
Gordon W., 1942-43
Goodall C, 1 8 84-88
Sixty-one-


Green A., 1918-19
Green J. S., 1916-17
Grove, 1927-28
Grove 8., 1937-38
Gollan. 1896-97
Hallam K. H., 1920-21
Hallows W. J., 1 889-90
Harbison H., 1918-19
Hardy K.. 1942-43
Hare W., 1942-46
Harlin T., 1893-96
Hart A. W., 1 899-1900
Hartkopf A. E. U., 1911-12
Hawkins H. R., 1921-22
Hayes W. f 1916-18
Henderson A., 1923-26
Henderson N. R., 1910-11
Henderson J. M., 1916-17
Hill Miss Jean. 1 938-39
Hoban H., 1 936-39
Hopkins W. F., 1891-92
Hudson 8., 1944-45
Hughston R. H., 1888-89
Hylton R. f 1920-22
Ick E. T., 1887-88
Inglis T. R., 1896-99
Jackson, 1936-37
Jacobs N., 1905-7
Johnson. 1934-36
Johnstone, 1885
Jones 1., 1907-9
Jones M., 1920-22
Jones P,, 1943-45
Keene E. H., 1898-99
Kelly G., 1891-92
Kelly J., 1888-89
Kent-Hughes M. 0., 1929-31
Keogh. 1926-27
Kerr E„ 1918-20
Kidd L. S., 1904-6
Knight, 1935-37
Langlands F. H., 1887-iBB
Langley F., 1 896-98
Latham L. S., 1904-7
Laurence R., 1915-16
Law C. D., 1895-97
Leary H., 1910-12
Ledgett, 1926-27
Lemmon, R. D., 1909-10
Levy E. 8., 1892-93
Lewers R. W., 1887-89
Lidwill M., 1899-1900
Lind L„ 1909-13
Lindon G. L, 1938-39
Little P., 1911-12
Lobb Miss N., 1924-25
Longmuir, 1931-34
Love A. A., 1895-97
Lorimer N., 1909-1 1
Looney L. H., 1906-7
Loughnan F. S., 1922-23
Loughnan J.- R.. 1895-96
Loughrey 8., 1891-92
McAllister J„ 1885
Macarthur A. W., 1889-90
McClelland W. C., 1904-5
McConchie I. H., 193<8-39
McCracken R., 1912-13
MacGillicuddy R., 1912-13
McGowan. 1897-98
McGregor, 1930-33
Mackay A., 1918-20
Mackay E. R., 1912-13
Mackay J., 1914-15
Mackie Miss, 1934-35
McKellar Hall R. D., 1919-21
Macknight C. 1887-88
Macknight Miss E., 1926-28
McLean J., 1899-1900
McLean T. A., 1898-1900
McMillan. 1926-27
MacNamara. 1927-28
Mcßae, S. C, 1920-22
Macumsky P., 1917-18
Malcolm R., 1910-11
Maling H., 1921-23
Manson. 1932-33
Maunder H., 1923-25
Melville C. 8., 1922-26
Merry J., 1935-36
M3chic J., 1887-90
Middleton L. G., 1915-16
Miller J., 1887-88
Mitchell H. G., 1922-23
Mollison C. H., 1880
Morgan L., 1915-16
Morton R. L., 1907-8
Mowlam Miss J., 1942-43
Muir J. C. 1898-99
Nankivell A. L., 1904-9
Nattrass J, H., 1897-9'B
Newton W. S., 1913-15
Nixon C. F.. 1914-15
O’Brien J. A., 1908-9
O’Donnell N. M., 1884
O’Donoghue J., 1929-31
Officer R., 1929-30
O’Hara. 1 899-1900
Sixty-two


'Oldham E. P., 1906-7
O’Leary R. D.. 1904-5
•Oliphant T. G., 1913-14
Opie A. J., 1905-6
Owen F., 1882
Oxer G. M„ 1927-30
Pacey F. J., 1884-85
Pardey J. M., 1884
Parer P. A., 1908-10
Park C. L., 1907-8
Park R. L.. 1914-16
Parnell J. W., 1884
Parry J., 1 934-3 6
Perry C., 1896-97
Phillpot A., 1923-24
Potter L., 1906-7
Praagst G., 1 895-99
Pritchard N. L., 1913-15
Reed A. J. C., 1926-27
Reid Miss L., 1942-45
Richmond, 1926-27
Ridley S. F., 1904-5
Rinder A. W., 1 883-5
Robertson R. A., 1907-8
Robertson W. L.. 1912-13
Robinson G. S., 1913-15
Roche H., 1914-16
Rock W., 1891-92
Rodda K., 1925-26
Rome R., 1932-33
Rosenthal W., 1937-39
Ross F. 1921-24
Rowan P., 1904-6
Rumbold, 1937-38
Russell N., 1917-18
‘Saxton W.,‘ 1923-24
Savige H. 1918-19
Seal E., 1942-44
Searby C. H. C., 1919-20
Shackell P., 189.8-1 900
Shaw J. H., 1918-20
Shelton G., 1906-8
Shields C. J., 1905-6
Shields. 1597-98
Shugg A. W., 1917-19
Simpson G., 1920-21
Smith H., 1930-34
Smith A. T., 1937-39
Snowball, 1919-20
Spiers N. L., 1908-9
Springthorpe G., 1919-20
Smythe R. K., 1942-43
Stanton M. L., 1916-17
Stephens F., 1923-24
Strachan E., 1 888-90
Sturtridge, 1930-3 1
Summons H., 1 936-38
Sunderland S., 1934-35
Sutton C. S., 1 884-85
Sutton G., 1 899-1900
Sweeting J., 1930-32
Taylor G. U., 1 896-97
Tait J. T., 1911-12
Taylor J., 1 933-34
Thwaites J. L., 1922-23
Tonkin C. J., 1914
Tregonning R. C., 1913-14
Troup Miss, 1931-34
Troup G., 1920-22
Tymms A. S. M., 1 907-10
Vickery J. S., 1914-15
Wadleton H. G.. 1905-6
Wall R., 1 937-3*B
Wallace C. D., 1932-33
Wallace C. D., 1 895-96
Walsh A. E.. 1891-93
Watt Miss J., 1925-26
Webb A. R., 1 889-90
White N. 8., 1925-26
White E. R. f 1906-7
Wickens J. El., 1908-13
Willis J. R.. 1911-12
Willis T. R. H.. 1880-81
Wilson, EBB 5
Wilson A. M., 1910-11
Wilson E. W.,- 1943-45
Wilson T. A.. 1 892-93
Wright T. A., 1913-14
Wood A. J.. 1884-85
Wood I. 1923-27
Worch D. C., 1916-17
White 1 897-99
Yelland A. C. W., 1891-92
Yule J. S. 1 898-99
Zichy-Woinarski V.. 1 887-90
Sixty-three




I Hi
n . p. NATIONAL
JUatC L/UC LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
i 2 5 DEC 2013
,
t i
1 . I
——
!
-
1
r^zzzmiizzz^z
.
♦ I
I
' I n
3 1508 00208828 9
I—it


W. A. HAMER Pty. Ltd., Printers, 205-217 Peel Street, North Melbourne, N.l.
