

THE
CONSTABLE'S GUIDE
TO HIS
CIVIL POWERS AND DUTIES.
COMPILED BY
DAVID DUFF, ESQ.,
RESIDENT MAGISTRATE.
SECOND EDITION
DUBLIN:
HODGES AND SMITH, GRAFTON-STREET.
1846.


From the Steam Press of Alexander Thom, 87, Abbey-street, Dublin.


TO
RICHAED NUN, ESQ., Q.C.,
ASSISTANT BARRISTER FOR THE COUNTY OF TYRONE.
Sir,
A large edition of the following compilation having
been exhausted, a second is now required, and I heg
respectfully to dedicate it to you.
The chief value of the work is, I believe, derived
from its accuracy ; and I am well aware that this accu-
racy is chiefly owing to the care with which I endea-
voured to follow, as far as my limits would admit, the
clear and simple language of “ The Irish Justice of the
Peace.”
Your valuable work is, I presume, in the hands of
every Magistrate—at least, it ought to be so; but its
pages were within the reach of few of those by whom
I rejoice to believe, that the present compilation has
been found useful.
I have made several improvements in this edition,
and the most valuable will probably be found to con-
sist in the reference to the pages of “ The Irish Justice
of the Peace,” enabling those who have the oppor-
tunity, to consult that work, and there learn the full
details of the law on each important point, from an
author so competent to afford instruction. The other
changes will speak for themselves.
I beg to convey my thanks for your kindness in per-
mitting me to draw so freely from your learned and
able work, and also in consenting to receive this com-
pilation under your protection, and to subscribe myself,
Your obedient humble servant,
D. DUFF.




PREFACE.
As the Legal Powers and Duties of the Constabulary
Force, amounting now to 9,000 men, are scattered over
the pages of innumerable Statutes, to which the sub-
ordinate members have neither time nor opportunity to
refer, it becomes of the utmost importance that each
member of it should have clearly and concisely laid
down for his guidance “ the Power” with which he is
by Law invested as a Constable or Peace Officer, and that
“the Duty” which he is sworn to perform, and held
responsible for, not only by his own superiors, but by
the Law of the land, should be clearly defined, so as to
leave no excuse for ignorance or neglect.
Having observed, in the discharge of my Magisterial
functions, many instances of a want of the necessary
knowledge on behalf of the men, and hoping that a
selection from the Law authorities would not be unac-
ceptable, I have compiled the following work. I pre-
tend to no merit as an author; nor have I ventured to
lay down legal propositions in my own words. I con-
sulted Hayes’ valuable work on the Criminal Law; and


the larger work of “ Hawkins on Pleas of the Grown
but found most of what was useful in them admirably
condensed in Nun and Walsh’s “Irish Justice of the
Peace I thought it better to adopt the phraseology of
those experienced lawyers in compiling the following
manual, than to hazard inaccuracy by translating their
language.
I hare arranged the duty of a Constable, or Sub-
Constable, under the following heads :
His power to arrest without a Warrant, and in what
cases.
His power to arrest under a Warrant.
His power under a Search Warrant.
His power of enfjy by force, when acting with or
without a Warrant.
His power in cases of flight and resistance.
Also a catalogue, showing the several indictable
offences, whether Felonies or Misdemeanors—it being
useless for a Constable to know he has the power of
arresting without a Warrant in a case of Felony, unless
he is at the same time aware of what constitutes that
offence.
To the Magistrate the catalogue will also be found
useful, as by it he can at once ascertain what amounts
to an indictable offence; and for his further informa-
tion, I have added some remarks with reference to the
execution of that responsible portion of Magisterial


power given under “ The Riot Act ” —in the performance
Of which, a thorough knowledge of his own and the
Constable’s duties, will aid him in the former, and better
enable him to instruct the latter.
Being anxious that these selections, and the observa-
tions of my own, resulting from a long Constabulary and
Magisterial experience, should have the sanction of the
legal profession, as a guarantee for the correctness of the
work, I submitted it to an Assistant Barrister of long
standing, who has most kindly examined and corrected
it; and I cannot but feel highly gratified at the favour-
able opinion he has been pleased to pronounce on its
accuracy and usefulness.
The situation of Constable or Sub-Constable, is one
of great responsibility, his every movement closely
watched by a discerning public; one, in which if he
outsteps his power, his situation is not alone the forfeit,
but he may be placed at the Bar of Justice on trial for
Life or Liberty.* Unless, then, his authority be clearly
defined, how is it possible to expect he can arrive at a
perfect knowledge of it, or have that confidence in his
own acts which is so essential 2
The efficiency of the Force, so far as relates to the
execution of their Civil duty, must in a great measure
depend upon a thorough knowledge of that important
branch of it. The Peace of the Country must be bene-
* See Note, p. 13.


fited, whilst the Liberty of the Subject will be protected
from unnecessary restraint or confinement; caused in
many cases by an oyer-zeal to do what the men conceive
right, but for which the want of knowledge of their
duties will seldom be taken as a sufficient excuse by the
party aggrieved.
The chief ingredients to constitute a good Policeman
of any rank, are zeal, intelligence, and discretion, blended
with good temper and humane feeling —a kind and con-
ciliatory manner towards all classes in the discharge of
their many arduous and unpleasant duties, which never
fails to command respect. The Police should bear in
mind, that no man is to be considered guilty until de-
clared so by a Jury; and that although their duty is
the suppression of crime, and detection of offenders, still
a paramount one must never be forgotten, namely, to
hold the shield of protection over the innocent in any
attempt to implicate them by deep and designing indi-
viduals. This will not only increase a good feeling
towards the Constabulary as a body, but give confidence
to all, in the due and impartial administration of justice.
D. D.
Roscommon, February, 1846.


THE CONSTABLE’S GUIDE
TO HIS
CIVIL POWERS AND DUTY.
CHAPTER I.
OF ARREST WITHOUT A WARRANT.
The authority to arrest without Warrant, in
Criminal cases, is subject to different rules;—l.
In ordinary cases of Felony or Misdemeanor, in
which, however, it is materially affected by the
degree of the offence, and 2. In the class of offences
of whatever degree, termed Breaches of the Peace,
it is, therefore, best to consider these separately;
and in pursuing this arrangement, as the duty of
making the arrest chiefly concerns the Constable,-
to examine first his powers in this respect.
With respect to the Duty of the Constable, it is
to be premised, that although it is much better for
him, in cases not requiring immediate interference,
to procure a Magistrate’s Warrant if possible, yet
wherever a Constable, who is the ordinary conser-
vator of the peace, is permitted to make an arrest,
he is in general required to do so, and is punishable
for refusal or neglect.
:,Tui>, 103-108 •
Best for Constable
to have a War-
rant, but he must
arrest when neces-
sary without one.
* In case of reference from this work, see Second Edition of the
“ Irish Justice of the Peace/’ where the several authorities are
given.
B


Felony committ-
ed within the view
of a Constable.
When a Felony is committed within the view of
a Constable, it is his duty forthwith to arrest the
party who has committed it, without waiting for a
Warrant, and to use his utmost exertions for this
purpose, and he is punishable by Fine and Impri-
sonment if he neglect to do so.
A Constable is also authorized to arrest for
Felony upon the positive charge of another, and it is
his duty to do so, or even upon the charge of another,
grounded upon the suspicion of the person making
the charge, if reasonable grounds for such suspicion
be laid before him ; but in this case, the Constable
should be acquainted, by the person making the
charge, with the circumstances of such suspicion,
and a discretion is therefore left to him to withhold
his interference if there be no sufficient grounds
laid before him to warrant it. If, however, the
suspicion be reasonable and probable, the Constable
will be justified in making the arrest, though it
afterwards appear that no Felony had, in fact, been
committed, or though the party suspected be inno-
cent, and the person making the unfounded charge
will alone be responsible. But when a Constable
is thus required to arrest upon the charge of an-
other, the person making the charge is bound to
accompany him.
When the Constable acts upon his own suspicion,
it was formerly held, that he would be obliged to
prove, in his justification, both the commission of
the crime, and the reasonableness of his suspicion
that the party arrested was guilty. But the prin-
ciple seems established by more recent authorities,
that the rule is the same in this and the last men-
Arrest upon
charge of another.
Constable not re-
sponsible if there
be probable
grounds for sus-
picion.
Arrest by Con-
stable on his own
suspicion.


tioned class of cases, viz. :—‘That the Constable
will be justified in making the arrest, though it
afterwards appear that no felony has been com*
mittcd, provided he had reasonable grounds to
suspect the party apprehended.
It seems, also, to have been always held, that in
the case of persons met going about at night, whom
there is reasonable ground to suspect of Felony, the
Constable is justified in arresting them upon his
own suspicion, in order that they may be detained
till morning, for examination, though it should
afterwards appear that no Felony had been com-
mitted, provided there be a reasonable and proba-
ble ground for the arrest, and that it be not a mere
causeless suspicion.
The causes of suspicion which are generally al-
lowed to justify an arrest have been laid down to
be ; common fame of the country,
if it have s<m.e probaMe ground; being found in
such circumstances as to induce a strong suspicion of
guilt, as coming with a bloody knife from a house
where murder has been committed : or being found
in possession of part of goods stolen, and unable to
give a probable account of them; behaving so as to
betray a consciousness of guilt, as absconding;
being in company with a known offender at the
time of the offence, or generally at other times;
keeping company with persons of scandalous repu-
tation ; living an idle, vagrant, and disorderly life,
without visible means of support ; being pursued by
hue and cry, &c.
As the Law authorizes an arrest without War-
rant, in order to prevent a Breach of the Peace,
b 2
Arrest by night
on suspicion of
Felony*
Wl.at a reason-*
able ground of
suspicion.
Arrest in order to
prevent tho com-
mission of a
Felony.


In other eases to
prevent the com-
mission of a
crime.
In case of a dan-
gerous wound
given.
so the Officer is empowered to interpose without
Warrant, in order to prevent the commission of
a Treason or Felony; where he sees any person
on the point of committing either, or of doing any
act which would manifestly endanger the life of
another; or even in case of threats of violence, as
if a man in a passion threatens the life of another,
the Constable may arrest him, and bring him before
a Magistrate to be bound in surety of the peace ;
and he may arrest also upon complaint of the per-
son threatened, if it be made to him forthwith ; So
although the mischief immediately apprehended
may not amount to Felony, such interference is
authorized under particular circumstances, as in
the instance of a lunatic or person disordered in
his mind, who seems disposed to do mischief to
himself or any other person; and in these cases,
where the arrest is made in order to prevent the
commission of a Felony or Crime, the Constable
may confine the party in some secure place until
the heat of his passion subsides, or until he can be
conveniently brought before a magistrate.
So, also, the Constable is authorized to arrest
without Warrant in case of a dangerous wound
given, because, where there is danger of death en-
suing, the act may become Felony, and, therefore,
in this case, the Officer may arrest the Offender, not
merely where the act has been done in his presence,
as in the case of a common assault or affray, but
also as in the case of a Felony actually committed,
upon the charge of the party wounded, or upon that
of any person present at the fact, in order that the
accused may be taken before a Magistrate. There


are cases in which the mere act of giving the wound
amounts to Felony, and in these the Constable has
the same power to arrest as in other cases of
Felony.*
ARREST FOR MISDEMEANOR.
Where the offence amounts only to a Misdemean-
or, the general rule is, that the Constable cannot
arrest without the Warrant of a Justice, unless it
be accompanied by a Breach of the Peace com-
mitted in the presence of the Constable.
It has, however, been held, that where the of-
fence is of a character publicly scandalous, and
prejudicial to public morals, though but a Misde-
meanor, an arrest without a Warrant may be jus-
tifiable.
There are also several exceptions to this rule,
created by Statutes authorizing the arrest of
offenders without a Warrant, for offences below the
degree of Felony.
Thus, by Statute 3 and 4 Will. IV., c. 53, s. 53,
persons making signals to smuggling vessels, at *
the time therein named in said Act.
So by the Act for preventing Illicit Distillation, !
1 and 2 Will. IV., c. 55, s. 30, persons making or ‘
assisting in making a signal to, or warning any
person engaged in malting or distilling, may be
arrested by Officer of Excise, or any other person,
and brought before Justice of the Peace.
Generally there
can be no arrest
without a War-
rant for a Misde-
meanor.
Nun, 108-113.
Exceptions
created by
Statute.
Persons making
signals to
smuggling
vessels.
Or giving warn-
ing of the
approach of
Excise Officers.
* For what are Felonies and Misdemeanors, see page 40 of
Classification.


Desertion.
Offenders may be
arrested under
the Malicious
Trespass Acts.
9 Geo, IV., c. 56,
s. 35.
Under the Lar-
ceny Consolida-
tion Act.
9 Geo. IV., c. 55,
s. 56.
Goods offered
for sale under
suspicious cir-
cumstances.
Under Pawn-
brokers’ Act.
26 Geo. 111, c. 43,
8.11,
The Animal Mutiny Acts also expressly autho-
rize all Constables, within their respective districts,
to arrest any person who may reasonably be sus-
pected to have Deserted.
By the Act for Prevention of Malicious Injuries,
any person found committing any offence against
this Act, whether the same be punishable upon
indictment or upon summary conviction, may be
immediately apprehended without a Warrant by
any Peace Officer, or the owner of the property
injured, or his servant, or any person authorized
by him, and forthwith taken before a Justice of the
Peace, to be dealt with according to Law. For
Offences, see p. 65.
By the Larceny Act, any person found committing
any offence punishable either upon indictment or
summary conviction thereunder, may be immer
diately apprehended without a Warrant by any
Peace Officer, or by the owner of the property, or
his servant, and such offenders shall and may he
forthwith taken before some Justice of the Peace,
to be dealt with according to law. For Offences,
see p. 66.
And any person to whom property is offered to
be sold, pawned, or delivered, if he has reasonable
cause to suspect that any such offence had been
committed, on or with respect to such property, is
thereby authorized, and if in his power required, to
apprehend and forthwith carry before a Justice of
the Peace the party offering the same, together with
such property, to be dealt with according to Law.
So also by the Pawnbrokers’ Act, persons offering
goods for sale or pawn who cannot give a satisfac


tory account of themselves, or where there shall
be reason to suspect such goods to have been stolen,
may be seized by the'person to whom the goods
shall be so offered, and committed to the charge of
a Constable, who is required forthwith to convey
the person so committed to him, and the goods,
to a Justice of the Peace, to be dealt with according
to Law.
To justify an apprehension under the provisions
of the Malicious Injuries or Larceny Act, it has
been decided that the offenders must he found in
the actual commission of the offence, or.be taken
“in quick pursuit ,” and must be brought directly
to a Justice of the Peace, otherwise the party
making the arrest loses the protection of the Sta-
tute, But this, of course, applies only to offences
which are hut Misdemeanors or punishable sum-
marily under them ; for if the offence be a Felony
under either Statute, the arrest may be made under
any of the circumstances before-mentioned, which
authorize an arrest for Felony.
Many of the Statutes investing Magistrates with i
power of Summary Conviction, also authorize the !
arrest, without Warrant, of offenders under them, '
as per margin; the offences under each will be
found in p. 31.
It will he observed that some of the offences, }
included in the Statutes enumerated, are Felonies,
in which, therefore, the Constable, independently of
their provision, has the same power to arrest as in
other cases of Felony.
On the other hand, some are punishable on Sum- (
mary Conviction, but in these the Statute makes a <
Offenders must
be actually com-
mitting the
offences, and
taken directly
before a Justice
of the Peace-
Offenders against
Spirit Licence
Act, Cruelty Act,
Grand Jury Act.
Where Offence
is Felony;
Or punishable
on Summary
Conviction.


most important alteration in the authority of Officers,
for in this class of cases an offender is not in gene-
ral liable to arrest, the usual course is to require
his appearance hy Summons at Petty Sessions.
What is an
Affray.
Nun, 122-130-
What is a Riot,
What a Rout.
What an unlaw-
ful assembly.
Any person
taking part in a
Riot is a Rioter.
BREACHES OF THE PEACE.
Two or more persons fighting in some public
place, without premeditation, such as from sudden
impulse at a Fair, to the terror of the Queen’s
subjects,
A Biot is said to be a tumultuous disturbance of
the peace by three persons or more assembling to-
gether of their own authority, with an intent to
assist each other against any one who will oppose
them in the execution of some enterprize of a
private nature, and afterwards executing the same
in a violent and turbulent manner, to the terror of
the people, whether the act intended were of itself
lawful or unlawful.
A Rout is a disturbance of the peace by persons
assembling together with an intention to do a thing,
which if it be executed will make them Rioters,
and actually making a motion towards the execu-
tion of their purpose.
A disturbance of the peace by persons barely
assembling to do a thing, which, if executed, would
make them Rioters.
It has also been laid down, that if any person
encourages or promotes, or takes part in a Riot,
whether by word, sign, or gesture, or by wearing
the badge and ensign of the Rioters, he is to be con-
sidered a Rioter, for in this case all are principals.


A Constable is not only authorized to interpose
without the Warrant of a Magistrate, Where an
actual breach of the peace is committed in his pre-
sence, whether it he by Assault, Affray, or Riot,
but he is also hound, at his peril, to use his utmost
exertions to suppress it, and to apprehend those
who have committed it; and he may either keep
them in custody till the affair is over, or carry
them immediately before a Justice.
In the ordinary acceptation of the term, and as
here used, Assault appears synonymous with what
the law technically terms a Battery; but these
offences are, in strictness, distinct. An Assault is
an attempt or offer with force and violence to do a
corporal hurt to another, though without touching
the person ; as if one lifts up his cane or his fist
in a threatening manner at another, who is near
enough at the time to be struck, or strikes at but
misses him, if is properly an Assault; and so of
the doing any other similar act accompanied with
such circumstances as denote at the time an inten-
tion, coupled with a present ability, of using actual
violence against the person of another. Where the
injury is actually inflicted it amounts to a Battery
(which includes an Assault), and this, however
small it may be, as by spitting in a man’s face, or
in any way touching him in anger without a lawful
occasion; for the Law cannot draw the line between
different degrees of violence, and therefore totally
prohibits the first and lowest stage of it.
A Constable is authorized to arrest where he
sees persons are armed, and provided with weapons
to fight; also where he sees a person in a fury about
b 3
Power of Con-
stable to inter-
pose.
Distinction
between Assault
and Battery.
To prevent *
Breach of the
Peace.


Constable may
interpose upon
complaint of
another, to pre-
vent violence.
Not to arrest fur
more angry
■words.
Or after the
affray i» ended.
to commit an Assault, or even in case of threats
of violence ; so he may take into custody a person
in a Public-house, who is making disturbance and
alarm in the neighbourhood, if he does so in view
of the Constable.
A Constable may arrest upon complaint of ano-
ther, as where the life or personal safety of any
one is threatened, and carry the party before a
Justice to be bound to the Peace. The question in
such cases is simply whether a breach of the peace
is likely to ensue.
But the power of a Constable to arrest docs not
extend to cases of a mere disturbance by scolding
or angry words (whether addressed to himself or
any other); all he can do is, command the persons,
under pain of imprisonment, to avoid fighting, and
summon the parties. Nor will a mere threat of
doing injury to property, as to break a window of a
house if a light should be seen at them, he sufficient
to j ustify an arrest.
So in cases of mere affray or assault, he cannot
arrest, as he may in cases of Felony, without War-
rant, upon the charge of another, after the affray is
ended and peace restored.
ARMED PARTIES.
Where parties of numbers of persons assemble in
arms, under circumstances calculated to excite
terror, not only Magistrates but, also, Constables are
bound to use their utmost exertions to disperse and
apprehend such persons, and although no aet of
60 Geo. 111.
Nun, 152.
2d Hale, 85.


violence be committed by those assembled, yet, froln
the danger to he feared, where they assume such a
menacing attitude, every Constable is authorized
and required to act for their suppression, and if
upon, being required to surrender themselves the
parties will not yield, the Constable is empowered
to use such force as may be necessary, and will not
be held responsible for any fatal consequence,
caused by their resistance; this duty is more in-
cumbent upon him when such assemblage takes
place at night.
But in this, or in all cases where the Constable is
empowered to proceed to extremities, great caution
and forbearance is called for, and he will not be just i-
fied in so acting, unless in the last necessity. The
demand to surrender should ho in an audible voice
and in the name of the Queen.
Caution.
SUPPRESSION OF RIOT BY CONSTABLE.
Cases may occur of sudden and dangerous Riots,
■where the presence of a Magistrate cannot be had,
and in which serious consequences are likely to
ensue if the Constable neglect to, forthwith, inter-
fere, and is, therefore, armed with full authority to
suppress the Riot, and apprehend the Rioters; and
when the Riot is accompanied with great danger
and violence, he will be justified in proceeding to
the last extremity, provided the violence and danger
be such as to render it unavoidable, either for its
suppression or his protection, or his assistants, in
the discharge of their duty.
Power of Con-
stable for sup-
pression of Kiots
Nun, 134.
1 Hawk. c. 65.


The utmost cau-
tion necessary.
Nun, 135.
Whiteboy
offences.
15 & 16 Geo. 111.,
c. 21.
Persons armed,
or appearing as
herein described, ;
may be appre-
hended without
Warrant.
1 & 2 Wm. IV.,
c. 44.
This severity, however, can be justified alone by
an absolute necessity, and, therefore, the utmost
coolness and discretion are required on the part of
the Constable, who, clearly, will not be warranted
in coming to extremities upon “ a slight resistance ,”
or in using a degree of violence, in any instance,
beyond the necessity of the case.
WHITEBOY ACT.
The offences are described by the Act called the
Whiteboy Act, which states, that it has frequently
happened, that several persons calling themselves
Whiteboys and others, as well by night as by day,
have in a riotous, and disorderly, and tumultuous
manner, assembled together, and have abused and
injured the persons, habitations, and properties of
her Majesty’s subjects, and have taken and carried
away horses and arms, and have compelled them to
surrender up, quit, and leave their habitations,
farms, or places of abode, and with threats and
violence impose oaths or declarations contrary to
Law, and have also sent threatening Letters, and
have taken upon themselves to obstruct the im-
portation of corn, flour, <fec.
And if any person or persons, being armed with
any fire arms, or offensive weapons, whatsoever,
or having their faces blackened, bodies disfigured,
or wearing any particular badge, dress, or uniform,
or assuming any particular name not usually assu-
med—shall rise, assemble, or appear by day or by
night, to the terror of her Majesty’s subjects, shall
be guilty of a high Misdemeanor, and so the Ma


gistrates aud all Constables are empowered to
apprehend such persons, and to command the
assistance of all her Majesty’s subjects; and they
and such assisting are indemnified, if, in using
the necessary means for this purpose, the offender
happens to be killed, maimed, or hurt in the ap-
prehending or dispersing them, (but in this case,
the utmost caution, coolness , and discretion must he
observed.) The following are offences under this
Act, and#punishable with Transportation; —
Person or persons armed with fire arms or offen-
sive weapons, who rise, assemble, or appear by
day or mght, to the terror of her Majesty's sub-
jects.
By force or menace tendering oaths.
Persons assembling as above, by threats compel-
ling persons to quit their habitation, farm,
place, or service.
Maliciously assaulting any dwelling.
Breaking into any dwelling or out-house.
Causing any door to be opened by threats.
Carrying away any horse, mare, or mule.
Carrying away any gun, sword, or other wea-
pon; money, chattels, or goods, without
the owner’s consent, or by threats causing
such to be delivered.
Maliciously to dig up,* level, or otherwise injure
* I may here properly allude to a very important Trial
of a Constable and his party, five men, of this district, which took
place at the last Summer Assizes of Roscommon, arising out of
an arrest under the above Act, to the particulars of which I have
to request attention.
This country was much disturbed from large parties turning
out by day and night, digging up the land to compel the owner to
set it out in Con-Acre—The Constable, a very steady man, was


the land, or crops growing, or severed, walls
or fences, cattle or goods of any other per*
son.
Printing, posting, circulating, or sending or de-
livering any notice, letter, or message, to excite
Riot or tumultuous meeting, or threatening
informed by the herd of the property near his station, that the
Mayuiras" were to assemble and turn it up. The Constable,
accordingly, had his party on the look-out, and came up with a
number of men in the act of digging it up—Prisoners were made
and rescued, and on being retaken a scuffle ensued—Vac Police
tired, when, unfortunately, one man was shot dead. The Coro-
ner's Jury did not agree to any Verdict, and were discharged, but
bills of indictment were sent up for Murder against the entire
partv, and those for manslaughter found, on they were
tried.
On the trial the herd stated, that at the time the Police went
on the lands (I think only two days from his telling the Constable)
it was actually set to the parties, which placed the Police in the
position of Trespassers, having nothing, in fact, either to show or
to prove on what grounds they went. However, on the cross ex-
amination of the evidence favourable points turned up, and they
were acquitted. Immediately after the trial was over, the learned
Judge sent for me, and directed me to caution the Police to be
careful how they interfered in future—that it would be advisable
to have the information, on oath, of the owner or herd of the
land, as to their belief Jf the intention of parties turning up the
land, and praying protection ; and that if time did not permit such
being done, either the herd or master should acco//t]xiny the Police;
but if there was not an information, the safest course would be to
take down the names of the parties, and identify; in line, that in
the event of anything unforeseen happening, the Police should
have a legal support to fall back upon in a Court of Justice, in
the case alluded to, the Constable, from the disturbed state of the
country, thought the herd’s word sufficient, without bringing him
before a Magistrate, but it is to be hoped, others will gam infor-
mation from the case now stated.
Where a Constable receives proper authority to protect land,
under the circumstances stated, he should he particular in having
the Held pointed out to him, or even the part of it } which the
owner states in his information he is determined not to set, and
lor which he prays the protection, it having come under the com-
piler’s observation, where a party of men were acquitted that were
taken in the act of turning up land. The herd refused to appear
on the trial, and the Police were, of course, unable to prove
whether that part of the Held was set or not. For the safety of
the men, it is absolutely necessary that the bounds to be protec-
ted should be dearly defined and pointed out to the Constable,


violence, injury, or damage to person or pro-
perty, or demanding any money, arms, or
other thing, or requiring persons to do or not
to do any act. or to quit any employment, or
to set or give up any land.
To assist, abet, or succour in committing, any of
the above offences, or solicit, encourage, ask,
compel, or induce persons to join in commit-
ting such, subject to the same punishment as
for. the last mentioned offence.
With respect to the conduct to be observed by a
A * ;
Constable interposing to prevent or suppress a'
breach of the peace, it is always expedient that he
should apprise the parties, or give them notice of
the intent with which he does so, although in gene-
ral the same express notification is not necessary,
as in the instance of private persons interposing;
for where the Constable acts within his proper dis-
trict, and is generally acknowledged to bear the
office he assumes, or where he is distinguished by
his dress or any known ensign of authority, the Law
will generally presume that the party had due notice
of his intention, especially if it be in the day time.
It is well, however, that he should at all times ap-
prise the parties by informing them that he is a
Constable, or commanding the peace, or using
words of the like import, any of which will be suf-
ficient; and when his ensigns of authority cannot
be distinguished, as in the night, such express
notification of his business and office is necessary.
The Constable should be careful to keep strictly
within the line of his duty, in thus interposing:
between different parties engaged in an affray, and
Caution to Con-
stables inter-
posing.
Giving notice*
Should teojr
strictly
his duty*


Nun, 155.
Felonies.
Breaches of the
Peace.
Indictable Mis-
demeanors.
Offences punish-
able by Summary
Conviction at
Petty Sessions.
especially to avoid all appearance of partizanship,
else he will forfeit the protection which the Law
otherwise affords him.
RECAPITULATION.
The subject of arrest without a Warrant being
now concluded, the Constable’s attention is called
to the distinction which the Law recognises in re-
gulating the exercise of this power. Thus it has
been seen that the powers of the Constable are most
extensive —
I. —ln the class of offences termed Felonies,
whether the offender be arrested in the actual com-
mission of it, or on the charge of another, or on
the Constable’s suspicion, or to prevent the com-
mission of the offence, or where it is likely to be
committed.
11. —ln the cases of Breaches of the Peace, the
same power exists for their suppression when
committed in view of the Constable, or for their
prevention, but not generally after the offence is
over, except where it has been raised to the degree
of Felony.
111. —lndictable Misdemeanors, in which, for the
most part, an arrest without Warrant cannot be
made, unless under the special provision of Statutes,
of which several have been passed permitting it.
IV. —The power to arrest is most limited, in the
class of minor offences, punishable by Summary
Conviction, and, in them, only extends to a few
cases, and where the parties are known, summons
is the most convenient course.


CHAPTER II.
OF “ARREST AND EXECUTION OF THE WARRANT."
Having treated of the instances in which an
arrest may be made, in Criminal cases, without a
Warrant of a Magistrate, it is proposed to consider
the proceedings under Warrant.
It is the duty of the Constable to whom the
Warrant is directed, if time permit, to have it in-
dorsed by his Sub-Inspector, and to execute it
without delay, according to the necessity of the
case, and strictly according to its direction.
If the Warrant be directed to the Constables of
the County, generally, it may be executed by any
Constable of the County, or if to several, by name,
by any one of those named.
If the Constable does not know the party named,
he should make himself acquainted with his per-
sonal appearance, or have some one on whom he
can rely to point him out, as he is hound, at his
peril, to arrest the proper person; or if a Search
Warrant, by taking goods or searching places not
specified therein, he will he answerable to the party
in an action for the injury.
EXECUTION OF THE WARRANT.
The Constable should, in all cases, acquaint the
party with the substance of the Warrant or cause
of arrest.
To remove all excuse for resistance, the Warrant
should be produced to the party, if demanded; but
Arrest under
Warrant.
Constable bound
to execute
Warrant.
Nun, 199-201.
Warrant, joint
or several.
Precaution to as-
certain persons to
be apprehended.
Notice to the
party.
Production of
Warrant.


What constitutes
an arrest.
Arrest may be on
any day, and on
any person.
By day or night.
Limits of juris-
diction.
Where a War-
rant must be
indorsed.
Duration of
Warrant.
Nun, 203-211.
in no case is the Constable required to part with it
out of his possession ; and if the party get it, and
refuse to return it, he has a right to take it from
him, and even to coerce his person to regain it, pro-
vided he uses no unnecessary violence in doing so.
The party should be actually touched by the
Constable, when possible.
It may be made on Sunday, as well as any other
day, when charged with the commission of a crime,
and neither Peer, Member of Parliament, Clergy-
man, married woman, or persons under age, are
exempt from it, in cases of Felony or Breach of the
Peace.
The arrest may also in all cases be made by night
as well as by day.
The Warrant cannot be executed out of the
County or jurisdiction of the Magistrates granting
it.
When the offender is in another County, it should
be backed by a Justice of that County.
A Warrant remains in force, (unless made re-
turnable at a particular time, which is objectionable
and very unusual,) during the life of the Justice who
granted it, and may be executed whenever oppor-
tunity offers.
BREAKING OPEN OUTER DOORS WITHOUT
WARRANT.
This power is one of equal delicacy and impor-
tance, as it concerns the peace and security of
private dwellings; and as the legality of the mode of
proceeding by the Constable often becomes a ma-
terial consideration, in cases of Homicide, it is of the


utmost importance that he should know, precisely,
the limits of his authority in this respect; and it is
necessary the'Law upon the subject, with regard to
Criminal cases, should he laid down, to show in
what instances the Constable is justified in thus
proceeding; first, when he acts without a Wan'ant,
and second, when acting under one.
It may he premised, that in all cases whatever,
in which doors may he broken open, there should
be a previous notification of the business, accom-
panied with a demand to enter on the one hand,
and a refusal on the other, before the Officer pro-
ceeds to such extremity ; hut no precise form of
words is required to be used in giving notice; it is
sufficient if the party be acquainted by the Con-
stable with his business and authority, and apprised
that he comes, not as a mere trespasser, but claim-
ing to act under a proper authority.
The authority of the Constable to break open
outer doors, where he acts without Warrant, may
be considered, as it applies to the case, Ist, of actual
Breach of the Peace; and 2ndly, of Felony.
In some cases of actual Breach of the Peace,
committed in his presence, the Officer is justified in
proceeding to this extremity, even where he acts
without Warrant, as on his immediate pursuit of
affrayers, where the affray has been made within
his view, especially if there has been any extra-
ordinary circumstances of violence attending it,
and in such Breaches of the Peace as amount to
Riot.
So where an affray takes place in a house, with-
in the view or hearing of the Constable, whereby
Previous notifi-
’ cation, demand,
[ and refusal of
admission.
I Without War-
rant, in •what
r cases doors may
. be broken open.
For Breach of
the Peace, by
Affray or Biot.


Not for a mere
Assault or other
Misdemeanor.
For Felony, or a
dangerous wound
given.
Nun. 208.
it is likely that Manslaughter or bloodshed will
ensue, the necessity of the case authorizes this pro-
ceeding on the part of the Constable, during the
Alfray, in order to suppress it, and to prevent fur-
ther violence; and it is said, that the Constable
has the like power if there be disorderly drinking,
or any unwarrantable disturbance at an unseason-
able time of night, especially in ale-houses, or the
like places of public resort, which are under the
peculiar superintendence of the police. But this
power, the Constable should exercise with caution ■
and it has been observed, that even in the pursuit
of Affrayers, when the Affray is not actually going
on in the house, but where the parties have taken
refuge in a house after the Affray is ended, the
Constable will act prudently in not proceeding to
this extremity without Warrant, unless there has
been some extraordinary circumstances of violence
in the Affray; when, therefore, the offence is a
mere Assault, not committed within his view, and
followed in fresh pursuit, or other Misdemeanor, the
Officer should procure the Warrant of a Magistrate,
authorizing him to arrest the party for such offence,
before he proceeds to this extremity.
If either are committed in the Constable’s presence,
he may without Warrant break open outer doors in
fresh pursuit, after demand, notification, and refusal;
also, where a Felony is likely to be committed, as
on hearing a violent cry of Murder in a house.
BREAKING OPEN OUTER DOORS, WHEN ACTING UNDER
WARRANT.
When the Constable acts under Warrant, he


is authorized to break open outer doors, in order
to effect the arrest, if the party is either in his
house or takes refuge in a house, in all cases where
the Warrant has been granted for Treason, Felony,
or suspicion of Felony, after the usual notification,
demand, and refusal of admittance; and in such
cases the Warrant is a complete justification to the
Constable or person to whom it is directed, acting
duly under it.
So outer doors may be broken open, in execu-
tion of a Warrant, for a Breach of the Peace, or of
a Warrant to compel a man to find sureties for the
Peace, or good behaviour.
After indictment found (Bench Warrant), outer
doors may he broken open, in order to arrest the
party.
Under a Magistrate’s Warrant for levying a
penalty upon a conviction, which, under any Sta-
tute, gives any part of such penalty to the Queen,
doors may be broken.
Section 23 of the Arms Act empowers any Sub-
Inspector or Head Constable, with any men of such
force, under Warrant of two Magistrates, to enter
any house by force, within a reasonable time after
demand of admission.
It will be seen that in the execution of Warrants
granted to search for stolen goods, and of Search
Warrants granted under the provisions of several
Statutes in other instances, this power to break
open outer doors is also given to the Constable. So
also, some of the Revenue Acts in various instances
allow doors to be broken open by the authority
and in presence of a Constable.
Under Warrant
for Felony, or
suspicion of
Felony.
For Breach of
the Peace.
Misdemeanor.
Under Levy
Warrant for
Penalty.
Under Arms
Act.
6 & 7 Vic.,c. 74.
In execution of
Search Warrant.
Under Revenue
Acta.


The power of the Constable to break open door£
is an exception to the legal maxim, “ every man’s
house is his castle,” and ought never to be resorted
to unless the arrest cannot he otherwise effected,
and the precautions above stated have been pre-
viously taken. It is, however, in many instances,
absolutely necessary to prevent the ends of justice
from being frustrated ; and it has been observed,
. that the above maxim, though founded in the
anxiety of the law for the peace and security of
domestic habitations, has been carried as far as the
true principles of political justice will warrant, and
that, as it encroaches in some degree upon public
justice, it will not admit of any extension. Accord-
ingly, the privilege from arrest afforded by a house
is to be understood as existing only subject to the
following restrictions :
1. This privilege, wherever it exists, is confined
to arrests in ike first indance. For if a man, being
legally arrested for any cause or offence, escape
from the Constable, and shelter himself in a house,
whether his own or that of a stranger, the Con-
stable may, upon fresh suit, break open the outer
door of the house in order to retake him, having
first given due notice of his business, and demanded
admission, and been refused. If it be not, how-
ever, upon fresh pursuit, it seems that the Constable
should have a Warrant from a Magistrate.
2. This protection is confined to outer doors and
windows only, such as are intended for the security
of the house against persons from without endea-
vouring to break in. For if the Constable find the
outer door open, or if it be opened to him from
In what cases a
house affords pro-
tection from
arrest.
Applies only to
arrests in the first
instance.
To breach of
outer doors.


within, and he enter that way, he may then break
open an inner door, if he find that necessary in
order to effect the arrest, and this even where he
would not have been warranted in breaking open
the outer door. So also, the rule extends to the
dwelling~house only, and a barn or out-house not
connected with the dwelling-house may be broken
open.
3. This personal privilege of an individual, in
respect to his outer door or window, wherever it
exists, is confined also to cases where the Breach
of the Peace is made in order to arrest the occupier
or any of his family, whose ordinary residence, or,
as it is termed, domicile, is there; for if a stranger,
whose ordinary residence is elsewhere, upon pur-
suit, take refuge in the house of another, such
house is not what the Law terms the castle' of the
stranger, and therefore he cannot claim the benefit
of sanctuary in it. But although the house of a
stranger is not to he suffered to shelter a party
under any circumstances, yet, where it is thus
broken open, upon the supposition of the person
sought being there, it is at the peril of proving
that the party is actually in the house at the time.
Lastly, it is to be observed, that in all cases if
the Constable, or his assistants, having entered a;
house in the execution of their duty, be locked in,
they may justify breaking open the doors to regain
their liberty.
DUTY OF POLICE AFTER ARREST.
If arrested with or without Warrant, to be as :
’ . ’
soon as possible brought before Magistrate for dis- ;
posal.
Extends only to
a dwelling-
house.
To arrest of
occupier or any
of his family.
Breaking open
the house of a
stranger justi-
fiable in eveniu .
Constable may
in all cases break
doors to regain
his liberty.
Prisoner to be
taken before J. P.
Nun, 222.


of forco
<>r restraint to
ho u*o<l.
Priorich to sie
Jcqrt separate.
Detaining Pri-
soners in case of
a Breach of the
Peace,
Searching the
Prisoner.
The Constable should impose no more force or
restraint than may be necessary to prevent escape— ■
the state of the country, magnitude of offence, age,
character, and probability of rescue, or escape, aro
matters for his consideration ; and, although he is
bound to treat the prisoner with both kindness and
humanity, and is not warranted in any harsh or un-
necessary constraint, yet it is his duty to use such
reasonable precaution as the case may require, to
prevent escape, especially in arrest for serious
offences; and with proper precaution, an attempt
at rescue or escape will rarely happen.
If parties arc arrested for the same offence, and
that it be a serious one, in order to prevent a con-
certed plan of defence, they should be kept sepa-
rate from each other, and not permitted to have any
communication, written or otherwise, before their
being brought before the Magistrate for exami-
nation.
In case of Affray or Assault committed in heat
of passion, the Constable is empowered to detain a
prisoner for a few hours, until his passion subsides,
and may secure him in a house, barrack, or bride-
well, and may discharge him when he knows the
party, to be of good character, and may afterwards
summon him to Petty Sessions ; this arrest applies
to an arrest without a Warrant.
It is a common practice for Police Constables,
immediately after an arrest, to search the prisoner,
and take from him every thing found upon his per-
son, but it is improper to deprive him of his money,
unless it is in some way connected with the charge
against him, as he is thereby deprived of the means
of making his defence.


POWERS IN CASE OF FLIGHT, PURSUIT, AND
RESISTANCE.
The powers? committed to the Constables, in order
to affect the arrest, in case of the flight or resistance
of the party, call for most serious consideration, and
in their exercise, the utmost coolness, caution , and
discretion are required, in order that, on the one
hand, justice shall not be defeated, and on the other,
that life shall not be endangered, unless where the
safety of the Constable or the heniousness of the
offence, and circumstances of resistance and violence,
render it absolutely necessary.
The first duty of the Constable is to take care
that the arrest shall be made effectually, and with
as little injury to the individual and to the public
as may be.
Whenever the Constable is authorized to arrest
for felony, or a dangerous wound given, or when he
acts for the purpose of suppressing an affray, or
apprehending affrayers, he is also empowered to
command the assistance of all persons within his
reach, and the persons so required, are punisliable
if they refuse to render it, as they are entitled to
the same protection with the Constable while
engaged in bis assistance. This power the Consta-
ble has, in these instances, whether he proceed to
arrest under the warrant of a Magistrate, or by
virtue of his original authority, without a warrant.
The degree of force the Constable is authorized ]
to use, in case of flight, depends upon the degree of <
the offence for which the party is arrested. Where
the offender is taken without a Warrant for Felony
or dangerous wound given, in the instance before
c
Nun, 213,'
Arrest
Assistance.
Power of Con*
, stable in case
of flight.


in cases of Aftray
or other Migdc*
meaner.
Power of Con-
stable upon
re.sistance.
AVlint neces-
sary to justify
Constable in
using extreme
measures.
stated, or ■where in such cases the Constable is
acting under a Warrant; if the party fly to avoid
the arrest when about to be made, of break away
after being made, and happen to be wounded or
killed by the Constable in endeavouring to prevent
his escape, when without such force he could not
be taken, the Constable will not be responsible.
But in case of Affray, Assault, or other Misde-
meanor, where the party does not resist, but merely
flies to avoid the arrest, if the officer kill him in
the pursuit, the Law will not protect him, even
although it appear that the party would otherwise
have escaped, and whether the Constable act under
the Warrant of a Magistrate or not, though under
certain circumstances the offence may be reduced
to Manslaughter, if it appear that death was not
intended —so even after arrest, in such cases where
the party effects his escape without violence, if the
Constable kill him in pursuit, he would be held
guilty of Murder or Manslaughter, for in offences
of this description, where no violence is offered, the
Law wisely prefers the risk of escape, than that Life
should he the forfeit.
The Constable is bound to use the utmost caution
and forbearance, in case of re.sistance or rescue,
yet the Law authorizes him to use force, if requisite,
to overcome resistance.
The Constable must, in the first instance, be
acting strictly within his duty, and he should, in all
of pursuit, give notice to the party, and reason
of pursuit; and the exercise of severity, where
resistance cannot otherwise be overcome, or where
the safety of himself or assistants is endangered,


will not be warranted upon slight resistance; severity
can rarely be called for, where the offence is not
one of a very serious nature, nor is the Constable
justified in using force or violence, in any instance,
exceeding the necessity of the case, and if he proceeds
after the resistance is over, it will be Murder, or
Manslaughter, at least ; but in all such cases too
much caution cannot be used.
Where Police are kept together, when on escort
duty, escape or resistance are of rare occurrence.
EXECUTION OF SEARCH WARRANT.
In executing the Warrant, the Constable must
be careful strictly to pursue its directions ; it should
be executed in the day time, if, as is usual, it be
so directed, and even if not so directed. It has
been observed, that occasions rarely occur, which
will justify the risk incurred in executing such
process at night; if there be time it should be in-
dorsed by the Sub-Inspector, in the same manner
as a Warrant of Arrest.
As the Warrant should distinctly specify the 1
goods to be seized, the Constable ought not to take
any goods but those specified; when the Constable
having a Warrant to search for specific articles,
alleged to have been stolen, found and took away
these and certain others supposed to be also stolen,
but not mentioned in the Warrant, and not likely
to be of use in substantiating the charge of stealing
the goods that were specified, it was held that the
Constable was a trespasser. Great caution on the
part of the Constable is necessary, and to avoid
mistakes the person who lost the goods should
accompany him and point them out.
c 2
Execution of
Warrant to be
bv day.
Nun, 256.
Goods specified
only to be seized.


I’liifc* specified
onl\ to bo
The houses and places to be searched must be
specified with sufficient certainty, and a Warrant
directing a search in a particular house, will not
justify a search in another. If admission be refused
after the usual demand and notification of his busi-
ness by the Constable, or person executing the
Warrant, the outer door of the house maybe broken
open, and so may boxes after the keys have been
demanded and refused; and though the goods
sought be not found there, the Constable will not
be responsible if he has acted duly in obedience to
the Warrant.
A sufficient force should be in attendance to
watch the doors and windows, in order that nothing
shall be thrown into yards or passages, nor persons
allowed to carry off things without a strict search,
more especially if the parties are had characters ;
the floors should bo closely examined, walls and
partitions, chests, trunks, box, closet; and if for
arms, search the thatch and scraws, beds, backs of
dressers, false bottoms to tables, large beams which
support the lofting, and in which hollow places are
cut regularly out for their reception; this came
under the compiler’s own view in a search about a
month back.
Outside the house, search corn stacks, thatch,
stables, and under where the hay is placed for
horses and cows, pig-house, turf, heaps of stones,
and dry garden ditches, a mall place, will hold a
pistol, and not unfrequently they are found thrown
into milk or other vessels.
No search can be effectual without a supply of
candles, and the men should take their time.
Breaking open
doors.
Precaution to be
observed in
executing a
Warrant of
Searoh.
Search for arms.


The Constable is to take the goods, when found,
and the person in whose custody found, either
before the Justice of Peace who has granted the
Warrant, if so directed by him, or before some
Justice of Peace of the neighbourhood.
To he deposited with the Police, in order that
they may be produced at trial, properly marked
for identification.
To be sent to liyery, or by order of the Magis-
trate delivered to owner, on binding him to prose-
cute, and giving security for their forthcoming when
required.
EXECUTION OF DISTRESS WARRANT.
In executing a Magistrate’s Warrant of Distress,
every thing that is chattels, excepting the Defen- ■
dant’s necessary wearing apparel, may be seized, ’
such as furniture, corn, cattle, shop goods, &c.
If the offender be a married woman (who is sub- i
ject to summary conviction), and the Statute autho- (
rizes the recovery of the penalty by distress and
sale of the offender's goods, the goods of the hus-
band are not generally liable to he distrained for
the penalty of the wife.
The Constable is justified in breaking open outer i
doors in execution of the Warrant, under the cir- 1
cumstance stated in page 21.
If the Constable seize for the whole penalty, hut s
mistake the value, he may complete the execution
by making a further seizure before the return of
the Warrant.
The Constable ought to sell for ready money, c
and it seems, if he sells on credit, it is on his own
risk, and he will be liable for the produce.
Goods and party
to be brought
before J. P.
Goods how dis-
posed of.
If stolen cattle.
What may be
seized under a
Justice’s War-
rant.
Nun, 615.
Husband’s poods
when wife is
convicted.
Breaking
Nun, 210.
Second seizure.
Giving credit.


A ppcaT.
Where the statute gives the right of appeal, the
Warrantshouldbe stayed until the appeal is decided,
the facts then should be laid before the Magistrate
who granted the Warrant, who, it seems, may issue
his Warrant without a fresh demand.
The Constable is bound to make a return to the
Justice of what he has done under the Warrant,
hut he is not obliged to return the Warrant itself,
which may be necessary for his own justification.
Return.
CONSTABLE’S POWER UNDER THE FOLLOWING
ACTS.
ARMS ACT.
6 & 7 Wm. IV.,
0.74.
Section 15 empowers head or other Constables
to examine any arms that may be found with per-
sons carrying them, so as to ascertain the number
and letters marked thereon; and if the person re-
fuse to allow such arms to be examined, or refuse
to tell his Christian or Surname, or place of abode,
he may he arrested by any Constable, or by any
person acting by his order, and in his aid, and
Note.—A most important capture was made, a sliort time
since, by the Athleague Police, near Roscommon, who took up five
harvest men when returning from England, having concealed
amongst them one gun, complete, one pistol, two gun barrels,
two locks, and four pounds of gunpowder—it may be of service
mentioning how they were concealed so as to escape the Police
for a distance of near ninety miles, they having landed in Dublin.
The pistol, powder, and locks were found in their bundles, the
stock and barrel so artfully concealed, as to require a most
vigilant eye to discover them; the stock was inside the coat, up
the back, the butt resting in a small pocket made for the purpose,
one barrel tied with a hay rope round a scythe blade, and slung
carelessly across the back, and the other most ingeniously placed
in the bark of a sally stick, the barrel done over with pitch, and
the bark fitted so close, that even in the hand, except from the
weight, it would not be known from a stick, the breech taken
out and replaced by a cork, and the bark brought over it.
Though the Police cannot legally detain such persons to search
them, still their attention is directed with a view of detection.


within twelve hours be conveyed before a Magis-
trate, who may require him to give security to
appear at next Petty Sessions.
This is the only clause in the Act giving a Con-
stable power to act of himself without Warrant,
EXTRACTS FROM ACT RELATING TO PUBLIC-
HOUSES.
On Sunday, not before two o’clock in the day,
and to close at nine at night, and not to open be-'
fore nine on the following morning, Monday,
On Good Friday, Christmas day, or any day of
fast or public thanksgiving, same as Sunday, but
closing at eleven o’clock at night.
To be closed at eleven o’clock each night, and 1
not to be opened on Monday before nine in the
morning, but except Monday to open at seven.*
A Sub-Inspector is empowered to enter and re- :
move persons without authority of Justice of the i
Peace, but a Constable cannot do so; the general I
practice is, for Magistrates at Petty Sessions to give
a General Power under hand and seal, to a certain
number of the men, to enter and examine the
Public-houses after tho hours prohibited, and it is
necessary that the name of each man be inserted
in it.
Licensed Booths or Tents prohibited from selling :
spirits, or being open for sale, before nine in the
morning, and after six in the evening, from Ist
April to Ist October, or between three, p.m,, and
nine in the morning, from Ist October to Ist April.
Prohibited hours
for Public-houses
being open.
3&4 Wm. IV,
and
,6*7 Wm. IV.
Days of fast.
Other days.
Power to enter
and put out per-
sons tippling or
gambling at pro-
hibited hours.
Booths and Tents.
* Sale of spirits is however permitted to travellers in those
hours.


Constables must recollect that they have no
power to take down the Tents; tlfe proper course
is to give timely notice to the owner, which seldom
fails in commanding obedience, but if it does, the
owner should be summoned to Petty Sessions.
Licensed Booth or Tents permitted to remain up
on Sundays (during a Eace Meeting) are prohibited
from having them open at any hour during that
day for the sale of Spirits, nor on Good Friday,
Christmas-day, or any day of public fast or thanks-
giving, which sale applies to travellers as well as all
other persons.
Constable empowered to arrest all persons found
drunk in any street, square, lane, road-way, or
other public thoroughfare, and bring them before a
Magistrate.
s Persons selling, or licensed to sell spirits, <fec.,
in whose house or place any person shall be found
to be, or to have been recently drinking, tippling,
or gaming, at any hour or time at which the sale
of spirits or beer is prohibited by this Act, shall,
upon conviction, forfeit any sum not exceeding 10s.
Two Justices in or out of Petty Sessions may, by
examination on oath of a credible witness, having
reasonable ground for suspecting that spirits are
• sold or kept for sale in an unlicensed house,
grant a Warrant under hand and seal empowering
one of such Justices ; or any Sub-Inspector, with
his assistants, in his presence, to enter such house
or place at all times in the day between sunrise and
sun set, and to search for spirits, and if such be found
without a permit or legal authority, to seize the
same and deliver it over to the next Eevenue Officer.
Not to open on
Sunday.
Persona found
drunk in street or
highway.
Penalty if persons
found tippling or
gaming at pro-
hibited hours.
On oath of sus-
picion that spirits
are sold without
a licence, War-
rant may be
granted as herein.
2 & 3 Vie., c. 79.


Such Warrant to remain in force for seven days.
If any Officer or Constable shall make oath in
writing that he has good reason to believe that
spirits are sold without a licence, or kept for sale
in any house or place where no sign or notice is
posted or written importing that the owner or
occupier thereof is licensed to sell spirits, a Magis-
trate may issue his Warrant, to Sub-Inspector of
Police, to enter, and if any person shall be found
to be, or have been recently drinking, he or they
shall be brought before a Magistrate, and upon
conviction of his being so found in such unlicensed
house or place, shallforfeit any sum not exceeding 55.,
and in default of payment, to be committed for
any term not exceeding twenty-four hours.
OBSERVANCE OP SUNDAY.
No person or persons shall play, use, or exercise
any hurling, commoning, foot-ball playing, cudgels,
wrestling, or any other game, pastime, or sport on
the Lord’s day, persons so offending to be sum-
moned to Petty Sessions, which must be done in
Seven days; no drover or carrier to travel on
Sunday.
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
Persons subject to fine of £5 who shall'keep
any house, ground, or pit for the purpose of bait-
ing or fighting bull, bear, badger, dog, or other
animal, or for cock fighting, or who shall assist in
such baiting or fighting.
If any person shall wantonly and cruelly beat,
1)1 treat, abuse, or torture any horse, mare, gelding,
c 3
In force for w'vrn
days.
Warrant by J. P.
to enter unlicen-
sed prcmiiH'S
without a sign or
notice posted
thereon.
2 & 3 Vie., and
7 & 8 Vie., e, 32.
Persons found
there may be
apprehended.
7 Wm. 111, c, 17.
Drover or carrier.
Cock-pit.
5 & 6 Wm. IV*,,
c. 59.
Abusing ani-
mals.


Power of Con-
stable.
Constable may
stop and bring
b.'fovc J. P.
persons guilty of
those offences.
»; & 7 Win. IV.,
o. 116.
To proceed by
.Summons for all
the other offences.
Boasts wandering.
Burning Bricks,
Lime.
Laying dirt,
(iung, &c.
Cart without
horse.
Winnowing corn,
bull, ox, heifer, calf, mule, ass, sheep, lamb, dog, or
any cattle or domestic animal, or if any person who
shall drive any cattle or other animal, shall by
negligence or ill usage in the driving thereof, he
the means whereby any mischief, damage, or injury
shall he done by any such cattle or animal, every
offender shall pay (over and above the amount of
such damage or injury) a sum not exceeding 405.,
nor less than ss.
A Constable can, on view, or on the information
of another person, giving his name and place of
abode, apprehend offenders, without Warrant, and
bring them before a Magistrate.
EXTRACTS FROM THE GRAND JURY OR ROAD ACT.
Drivers to keep left hand side of the road, name
and surname and residence of owners to be painted
in white Roman letters, one inch long, at least, on
carts and cars; carts or cars drawn by one horse,
to have a double rein, in default, penalty ss.
No house to he built nearer than 30 feet of
centre of road, no lime-kiln nearer than 100 feet
of centre, penalty £lO, and a further penalty of
£1 for every week after such conviction.
Swine or beasts found wandering, penalty 2s.
Burning bricks, lime, steeping flax within 30
feet of the centre, penalty not exceeding £l.
Laying dirt, dung, scouring of ditches or drains,
within 30 feet of the centre, penalty £l.
Leaving cart, car, or carriage without the horse
being harnessed thereto, penalty £l.
Winnowing corn, or thrashing it, within 30 feet
of the centre, penalty £l.


Leaving any dead, beast within 30 feet of the
centre, penalty £l.
Keeping cur dog, hull dog, or mastiff, without
5 pound log, within 50 yards of a public road,
penalty £l.
Timber, boards, or iron projecting beyond two
feet over the wheels, penalty £l.
Drawing timber or stones along a road with-
out the support of wheels, penalty £l.
Cutting any turf on the side of a road, penalty £l. '
Taking any clay, stones, or gravel therefrom,
penalty £l.
Scouring ditches, deepening or widening drains
on side of the road, penalty £l.
Surveyors or Contractors who shall lay, or cause
to be laid, any heap of stones, gravel, rubbish, or ■
other matter whatsoever upon any public road, and
allow such to remain there at night, to the danger
or personal damage of persons passing thereon, all
due and reasonable precaution not being taken by
the said Surveyor or Contractor, penalty 40s.*
Dead beast.
Dogs.
Timber project-
ing.
Drawing timber.
Cutting turf.
Semiring ditches.
Surveyors or
Contractors
leaving gravel on
roadduringnighi.
THE FISHERY AMENDED ACT.
As each Station is already supplied with a copy
of this Act, 5 and 6 Yic., and 7 and 8, c. 103, with
full and explicit instructions from the Inspector-
* Magistrates have power to mitigate all penalties under
this Act. Nor does this Act with reference to Swine or beasts
as above, which imposes a fine of 25., repeal the 4 & 5 Wm. IV.,
c. 50, which empowers Magistrates to fine any sum not exceeding
Is., without Costs, in case any horse, ass, pig, cow, or other beast
be found wandering. Where the owner is not known, the animal
may be impounded, but where owner is known, he or she may be
summoned.


Additional pow-
ers to enforce
observance of the
weekly and other
close times.
8 & 9 Vic., c. IDS.
General, dated 24th October, 1844, it becomes only
necessary to add some extracts of amendment by
the 8 and 9 Vic., c. 108, passed within the last
Session.
Cap. X. — Be it enacted, That it shall and may he
lawful for all Officers and men of the Navy, Coast
Guard, and of the Constabulary, and for any person
appointed by, or acting under the authority of the
said Commissioners, when and as often as they or
any of them shall, in any fishing weir, net, or
contrivance, during the weekly or other close time
or season, (as fixed under the provision of the said
first recited Act,) find any passage shut, closed, or
obstructed, or during such close time, in any place
find any net, or other contrivance, placed or used
where the same are now by Law or may hereafter be
prohibited by the said Commissioners, in pursuance
of the powers in them vested, or shall at any time
find any obstruction in the Queen’s share, or free
gap, through or over any fishing or other weir, or
in the sluice passage appurtenant to any mill or
factory, at any time when the sluice gate of same
shall be open; then and so often to open such
passages, and remove all such obstructions, doing
no unnecessary damage, and to seize and remove all
nets, or parts of nets, which may be found, so as
aforesaid placed or used, contrary to the provisions
of the said first recited Act, or this Act; provided,
always, that nothing herein contained or done in
pursuance of the same, shall exempt any person from
the penalties and forfeitures, in and by the said
first recited Act prescribed, in respect to any of the


matters aforesaid, and provided also, that none of
the parties or persons hereby authorized to open
such passages, or remove such nets or obstructions,
shall be liable for any damage caused by the open-
ing of such passages, or removal of such nets or
obstructions, unless the same shall be unnecessarily,
wantonly, or maliciously done.
Section 11 of the 8 and 9 Yic. repeals Section
66 of the 5 and 6, page 61, as to the size of meshes
of nets.
Be it enacted, That being found that the size of
the meshes of nets (not made of wood, iron, or
other rigid materials) for the taking of salmon
and trout in the sea, estuaries, or tideways, or for
the taking of any fish in the inland and fresh, water
portions of rivers and lakes, shall be used with a
mesh of less size than one and three quarter inches
from knot to knot, to be measured along the side of
the square, or seven inches, to be measured all
round each such mesh, such measurements being
taken in the clear when the net is wet, and that if
any person shall use any net contrary to this pro-
vision, such person shall bo liable and subject to
the penalties and forfeitures by said first recited
Act mentioned and prescribed; in cases of any
person using any nets with meshes of less size than
the size in the said Act prescribed and limited.
Size of the
meshes of the
nets.


Pay and allow-
ances.
8 & 9 Vic. c. 46.
Power and
authority.
APPOINTMENT OF HEAD AND OTHER
CONSTABLES, FOR RAILWAYS AND
PUBLIC WORKS.
Head and other Constables appointed under
this Act shall have the same amount of pay
and allowances, same rights and privileges, power
and authorities, and subject to the same provisions,
enactments, rules, regulations, and orders, and he,
in all respects, in the same situation in the county
in which they shall be stationed, as far as the cir-
cumstances of the case will admit, as if appointed
and formed part of the Constabulary Poroe of such
county.
Enacts, that any Special Constable, duly ap-
pointed, and all such persons as he may call to his
assistance, may seize and detain any Engine-Driver,
Waggon-Driver, Guard, Porter, Servant employed
by the said or by any other Railway Company, or
person conducting traffic upon the Railway belong-
ing to the said Company, or in repairing or main-
taining the works of the said Railway, who shall
be found drunk while so employed upon the said
Railway, who shall commit any olfence against any
of the Bye-Laws, Rules, or Regulations of the
said Company, or who shall wilfully, maliciously,
or negligently do or omit to do any act whereby the
life or limb of any person passing along, or being
upon such Railway, or the works thereof, shall be,
or might be injured or endangered, or whereby the
passage of any engines, carriage, or trains shall be,
or might bo obstructed or impeded, and to convey


such Engine-Driver, Guard, Porter, Servant, or
other person so offending, or any person counselling,
aiding, or assisting in such offence, with all con-
venient despatch, before some Justice of Peace for
the place within which such offence shall be com-
mitted, without any other Warrant or authority
than this Act.
Penalty on conviction, any sum not exceeding
£lO, or Imprisonment, with or without hard labour,
for any period not exceeding Two Calendar Months.
There is a Special Act for the Dublin and Kings-
town Railway, 6 & 7 Wm. IV., c. 132.
SPECIAL CONSTABLES.
THEIR POWERS.
Section 5 enacts, that all Special Constables ap-
pointed under this Act, shall have all powers,
authorities, rights, privileges, advantages, and be
liable to all such duties and responsibilities as any
Constable appointed by virtue of Common Law, or
any Statute Law.
Section 11 enacts, that any person assaulting or
resisting a Special Constable, or who shall encou-
rage others to do so, shall, on conviction before two
Justices of the Peace, forfeit any sum not exceeding
£2O, or liable to such other punishment on any
indictment or information for such offence, as any
persons are by Law, liable for assaulting any Con-
stable in the execution of his duty.
Power and
authority.
2 & 3 Wm. IV.,
c. 103.
Assaulting Con*
stable.


Nun, from Payc
722 to 769.
Warrant should
state if Felony or
Misdemeanor,
Abduction.
10 Geo, IV., c. 34,
8. 22.
Abortion.
1 Wm.IV., and
1 Vic., c. 85, ss.
6, 8.
CATALOGUE OF INDICTABLE OFFENCES.
DEFINITION OF FELONY AND MISDEMEANOR.
A Felony is described to be sucb a crime as,
independently of other punishments, occasioned at
Common Law a total forfeiture of land or goods,
or both; and a Misdemeanor such a crime as does
not amount to Felony, but is the subject of indict-
ment. And, as has been remarked in the preface, it
is useless a Constable knowing he has power to
arrest for felony without a warrant, unless ho is
clearly informed what constitutes the offence.
The catalogue of offences will be found equally
useful to the Magistrate and his clerk, and the
present is taken as a favourable opportunity of
mentioning the necessity there exists of having the
class of offence stated in the warrant.
It is of the utmost importance that the Magis-
trate should in the warrant state if the offence is
Felony or Misdemeanor, and care should be taken
that the warrant shall not impart to be granted for
Felony, where the first charge does not amount to
this offence, as consequences the most serious may
arise to the Police in the execution of it, from an
error of this kind, in case of flight or escape.
“WHAT ARE FELONIES.”
To take or carry away any woman or girl
against her consent, with intent to marry or defile
her.
With intent to procure the miscarriage of any
woman, any person who shall administer to her
any poison or other noxious thing.


Accessories to any Felony punishable by Com-
mon Law or under Statute Law.
Endeavouring to seduce any person serving in
Her Majesty’s forces, by sea or laud, from his duty.
Making or assisting in making any pike, dirk,
dagger, or spear, without licence.
Resisting or escaping from arrest, wounding
others to prevent arrest.
The wilful and malicious burning the house of
another.
Assault with intent to rob, or assault with intent
to maim or murder.
Unlawfully to break down or cut down any sea
bank or sea wall, or the bank or wall of any river,
canal, or marsh, or to undermine, throw down,
level, or otherwise destroy any lock, sluice, weir,
tunnel, floodgate, aqueduct, cut, dam, drain, water-
course, or other work on any navigable river or
canal.
Wilfully and maliciously to cut, break down,
destroy, or damage any bank, dam, tunnel, sluice,
engine, building, or any other work, made for the
purpose, under said Act, to promote the drainage
of lands.
If any person being married shall marry any
other person, during the life of the former husband >
or wife.
To pull down, or in way destroy any public
bridge, or to do any injury, so as to render it, or
any part thereof, dangerous or impassible.
Committed with mankind, or with any animal.
To set fire to any dwelling-house, any person
being therein.
Accessories.
Com. Law, Stat. 9.
Geo. IV., c. 54.
Allegiance.
37Ge0.111., c. 40.
Arms.
47 Geo. 111.,5. 2,
c. 54.
Arrest.
Arson.
Com. Law.
Assault.
7 Wm. IV., and
1 Vic., s. C-10.
Banks, Locks,
&c.
9 Geo. IV., c. 56.
s. 12-34.
Under Drainage.
5 & 6 Vic., c. 89,
s. 33.
Bigamy.
10 Geo. IV.j c. 34.
s. 26.
Bridge.
9 Geo. IV., c. 56.
s. 14-34.
Buggart.
10 Geo. 1V.,c.34.
s. 18.
Burning
Houses.
7 Wra. IV., and
1 Vic,, e. 89, s. 2.


Burning.
Churches.
7 Wm, IV., and
1 Vic. c. 89.
Other Buildings.
Ib.
Coal mine.
Ib.
Stacks of corn.
lb.
Crops.
9 Geo. IV,, c. 66,
a. 18-34.
Riotous burning.
Carnal Know,
ledge.
10 Geo. IV., c. 34,
e. 20.
Cattle.
Maiming.
9 Goo. IV., c. 58,
s. 17.
Stealing.
9 Geo. IV., o. 55.
Amended 2 & 3
Wm. IV., c, f. 2 ;
and 7 Wm. IV.,
and I Vic., c. 90,
s. 1.
Child.
Stealing.
10 Geo. IV., c. 34,
». 25.
Churches and
Chapels.
9 Geo. IV., c. 65,
s. 10.
Clerks and
Servants.
Thefts by.
9 Geo. IV., 88.
39-44.
Embezzlement.
Ib., as. 40-4.
To set fire to any church, chapel, or any chapel
for the religious worship of dissenters.
Or to any house, stable, court-house, out-house,
warehouse, office, shop, mill, malt-house, barn, or
granary.
To set fire to any mine of coal.
To set fire to any stack of corn, grain, straw,
hay, turf, peat, furze, heath, coke, charcoal, or wood.
To set fire to any crop of com, standing or cut
down, or to any part of a wood or coppice, or plan-
tation of trees.
Riotously setting fire to stores, provisions, en-
gines, ships, buildings, &c.
Unlawfully and carnally to know and abuse a
girl under the age of 10 years.
To kill, maim, or wound any cattle.
To steal any horse, mare, gelding, colt, or filly,
or any bull, cow, ox, steer, bullock, heifer, calf,
ram, ewe, sheep, or lamb, or to kill any of such
cattle, with intent to steal the carcase or skin, or
any part of the cattle so killed.
Maliciously, by fraud or force, to lead, decoy, or
entice away, or detain any child under 10 years
of age, with intent to deprive the parents of such
child, or with intent to steal any article upon or
about the person of such child.
To break and enter any church, meeting-house,
chapel, or other place of divine worship, and steal
therein or therefrom any chattel.
Any Clerk or Servant stealing any chattel,*
money, or valuable security belonging to, or in the
possession or power of his master or employer.
Any Clerk or Servant who fraudulently era


bezzles any chattels, money, or valuable security
from master or employer.
To falsely make or counterfeit any coin resem-
bling, or intended to resemble, or pass for the
King’s current gold or silver coin.
To gild or silver, or with wash or materials
capable of producing the colour of gold or silver,
or to gild, or case over any piece of silver or
copper, or case gold or silver coin, or metal, or
mixture of metals, of.a fit size and figure to be
coined, with intent that the same shall be coined
into false or counterfeit coin, resembling, or appa-
rently intended to resemble or pass for any of the
current gold or silver coin, or to file, or to gild, or
in any manner alter any of such current coin, or
of any current copper coin, with intent to make
the same resemble or pass for any of the current
gold or silver coin.
To impair, diminish, or lighten any gold or silver
coin.
To buy, sell, receive, pay, import, or put off or
to offer to buy any false or counterfeit gold or silver
coin.
To have in possession or custody any puncheon,
matrix, stamp, die, pattern, or mould, for making
any gold or silver counterfeit coin, or any instru-
ment for marking same round the edge of such.
To make or counterfeit, or having tools, or buy-
ing, selling, or putting off counterfeit copper coin.
See Murder—Riots.
Persons violently, riotously, or outrageously dis-
turbingthe court at Elections, or wilfully destroying
the whole or part of poll book of Returning Officer.
Coin.
Counterfeiting
gold or silver.
2 Wm. IV., c. 34,
s. 3-19.
Colouring, filing,
or altering gold or
silver.
2 Wm. IV., c. 34.
s. 4.
Sweating gold or
silver coin.
Jb., ss. 6, 19.
r Buying, selling,
or importing
" same.
Ib., 8. C.
, Tools for coining
gold or silver.
J Ib., 8. 10.
, Similar offbnro*,
respecting copper
coin.
Ib.y as. 12, 19.
Conspiracy.
Elections.
35 Geo. 111., c.
? 29, ss. 12-78.


Embezzlement.
By public officer.
2 Wm. IV., c. 4,
a. 1.
By Bank of
Ireland dorks
and servants.
21 & 22 Geo. 111.,
c. 16, s. 16, and
5 Vic., c. 2, sa.
4, 99.
Escape.
Com. Law.
Escapes suffered
by others.
Ib.
Excise and
Customs.
4 0 Geo. 111., o.
106.
Fixtures.
9 Geo. IV., c. 55,
a. 37.
Forcible entry
and Detainer.
26 Geo. 111., c.
24, 8. »;4.
Forgery.
Rills, Notes,
HeceipU l . &c.
Persons in the public service of Her Majesty
embezzling chattels, money, or valuable security
entrusted to them, and applying any part of same
to their own use.
Officers or Servants of the Bank of Ireland who
shall secrete, embezzle, or run away with, note-
hill, dividend warrant-bond, or deed, entrusted to
them.
Escape is, where one who is arrested gains his
liberty before delivered by due course of Law.
If a Constable suffers a prisoner charged with
Felony to escape, the Constable having connived
at it, to save the prisoner, the Constable is guilty
of Felony.
Shooting at Officer of Excise or Assistant, in
execution of their duty, is a capital Felony.
To steal, rip, cut, or break, with intent to steal,
any glass or wood work belonging to any building
whatsoever, or any lead, copper, brass, or other
metal or material, fixed in or to any building, or
any thing made of metal fixed in any land, being
private property, or for a fence to any dwelling-
house, garden, or area, or in any square, street, or
place dedicated to public use or ornament, punished
as larceny.
Persons in numbers and strongly armed, forcibly
taking the possession of any house, land, or tene-
ment, and who forcibly hold such, or who shall
forcibly resist the execution of any power of the
Law for giving the quiet and peaceable possession
of such house, land, or tenement.
Falsely to make, alter, forge, or counterfeit, or
to cause or assist in the false making of any pro


niissory note, bill of exchange or acceptance, or
any assignment of a note or bill, or any receipt or
acquittance, or discharge for rent, or other consi-
deration ; or draft, warrant, or order for payment
of money, or order for delivery of goods, or for
procuring or giving credit, or knowingly to utter
any of the above so forged or altered.
Forging, or uttering when forged, with intent
to defraud, any deed, will, bond, writing obligatory,
or note or receipt to’ the value of £5.
To forge government debenture words or num-
bers thereof, or letters of attorney for transferring
share in stock, or receiving dividends or interest,
or forging names of proprietors.
To forge or alter any Bank of Ireland note, bill,
acceptance, or indorsement thereon, or the number,
sura, or any part thereof.
Having any frame, mould, or instrument for
making paper, with device peculiar to Bank of
Ireland paper, or knowingly possess without law-
ful excuse, any plate, stamp, or instrument for
impressing devices or words used in Bank of Ireland
notes.
To purchase, or receive knowingly, any forged
note or bill of Bank of Ireland, or knowingly have
same in possession.
Forging name of Officer of Excise, or to have in |
possession any mould or instrument for making 1
excise paper, or paper like that used for permits.
Counterfeiting the dies or stamp of the Stamp
Office, or uttering,’'or knowingly having in pos- •
session, with intent to utter, forged stamps.
Forging marks or stamps for gold and silver
• Fobgebt.
39 Geo. 111.,
t 63, s. 1.
Deeds, wills.
3 Geo. II.; 17
) Geo. II.; 34 Geo.
111., c. 22.
- Dividends or
stock,
f 37Geo. 111.,c.54.
j
On Bank of
* Ireland.
, 21 & 22 Geo. 111.,
38 Geo- 111.,c.53,
a. 2.
• Having instni*
, ments for forging.
: 38 Geo. HI., 0.63,
a. 3-4.
Purchasing
forged notes.
40Ge0.111.,c. 13,
s. 2.
Excise or
Customs.
7 & 8 Geo. IV.,
c. 63.
Stamps.
56 Geo. 111., c. 56.
s. 37.
Gold and silver
plate.


Foboeet,
9 Goo. IV., c. 18,
s. 35.
Forgery of army
pay and pensions.
47Ge0.111.,c.26,
os. 2,7, 8.
Navy Pay.
11 Geo. IV., and
1 Wm. IV.,c. 20,
ss. 83-87.
Garden.
Stealing or
damaging with
intent to steal.
9 Geo. IV., c. 55*
8. 35.
Houses.
Burglary.
Com. Law.
9 Goo. IV., c. 55,
8. 11.
Burglary with
wounding.
7 Wra. IV., and
] Vio., c. 86, a. 2.
Stealing and
putting inmates
in fear.
Ih. t ss. 6-7.
Stealing in out-
house.
9 Goo. IV., o. 65,
a. 14.
Robbery in shop,
9 Goo. lV.> o, 65,
s. IS.
plate, making, stamping, or transposing same, or
’ knowingly having in possession such counterfeit
marks or stamps.
Personating any person entitled to receive army
, pay or pension, or forging name or hand-writing,
or forging name of Justice of the Peace to pen-
sioner’s document.
Same applies to navy pay pensioner or prize
money.
To steal, or destroy, or damage, with intent to
steal, any plant, root, fruit, or vegetable production
growing in garden, orchard, nursery, hot house,
green house, or conservatory, first offence punish-
able summarily; and if any one so convicted
shall again commit any of the said offences, it is a
Felony, and punishable as Simple Larceny.
Breaking and entering the mansion-house of
another in the night, with intent to commit some
Felony within the same. The breaking may be
either actual, for which even raising a window or
opening the fastening of a door is sufficient.
To break and enter, as above, and assault with
intent to murder any person being therein, or stab,
cut, wound, beat, or strike any such person, pun-
ishment, death.
To steal any property in any dwelling-house,
and by menace or threat put any one therein in
bodily fear.
To break and enter any building, and steal there-
from chattels, money, or valuable security, such
building being within the curtilage of a dwelling-
house and occupied therewith, but not part thereof.
To break, and enter any shop, warehouse, or


counting-house, and steal therein chattels, money,
or valuable security.
With fire arms, swords, bludgeons, sticks, stones,
or other offensive weapons, to assault, or with force
or violence obstruct any Officer of Excise, or person 1
acting in his aid, in searching for, seizing, securing,
or in destroying any spirits, or any thing belonging
to a still, or to rescue, or attempt to rescue any
such seizure, or prisoner made by such Officer of
Excise or his assistants.
Is the wrongful taking and carrying away of
the personal goods of another with a felonious in-
tent, without the consent of the owner ; the taking .
may be either actual, when the goods are taken j
out of the owner’s possession against his will, or s
constructive, when the owner delivers the goods,
but either does not thereby divest himself of the
legal possession, or the possession of the goods has
been obtained from him by fraud, with a previous
intent to steal them. If a man find an article,
and that he either knows the owner, or the pro-
perty is so marked that it may be traced, the
conversion of such property is a Felony.
Larceny is either compound, that is, accompanied i
by aggravating circumstances, as of taking from '
the house or person ; or simple, that is, unaccom-
panied by such aggravating circumstances.
To shoot at any person, or by drawing a trigger,
or in any other manner to attempt to discharge I
any kind of loaded arms at any person, or to stab, ’
cut, or wound any person, with intent to maim, a
disfigure, or disable, or to do some other grievous
bodily harm, or with intent to resist or prevent the
lawful apprehension of any person.
Robbery in Shop.
Illicit Distil-
lation.
J & 2 Wm. IV.,
c. 65, s. 29.
’ Lartceni.
For Constable’s
power under
Larceny Act,
see page 6.
Com. Law.
9 Geo. IV., c. 65,
s. 3.
Simple or
compound.
Maiming.
Attempt to maim
or resist arrest.
7 Wm.IV., amt
1 Vic. c 83,
s. 4, 8.


Maiming.
By explosive
substances.
7 Wm. IV., and
1 Vic., o 85,
s. 6, 6.
To send or deliver, or cause to be taken or
received by any person, any explosive substance,
or other dangerous or noxious thing, or to cast or
throw upon any person any corrosive fluid, with
intent to burn, maim, disfigure, or disable such
person.
To destroy, or damage with intent to destroy,
any plant, root, &c. in any garden, &c.; first
offence, punishment, summarily; second offence
after conviction, Felony.
The killing of a man by another where the
malice aforethought, express or implied, necessary
to constitute the crime of murder is wanting.
Where an Officer of Justice, or one acting in his
aid, in the legal exercise of a particular duty, kills
any person preventing or resisting him ; and when
the homicide is committed in preventing a crime,
as one attempting to rob or murder another, be
killed in tbe attempt.
, Unlawfully to cut, break, damage, or destroy, or
to render useless, any goods or articles of silk,
, woollen, or cotton, or like articles, being in loom,
or frame, or on any machine, engine, rack, or ten-
ters ; or by force to enter into any house, shop,
building, or place, with intent to commit any of
said offences.
To cut, break, or destroy, or damage with intent
to destroy or render useless, any threshing machine,
or any other machine or engine, or any tool or
implement, fixed or moveable, prepared for, or em-
ployed in any manufacture.
To steal to the value of ss. any linen, hempen,
or cotton yarn, or any goods of silk, woollen, or cot-
’’ ton, from any building or field of a manufactory.
Malicious In.
juries.
9 Geo. IV., c. 56.
Manslaughter.
Cora. Law.
Homicides
justifiable or
excusable.
Manufactures.
Injuring goods or
machines.
9 Goo. IV., o. 66,
s*. 3, 34.
Destroyirg
threshing or other
machinery.
/*., s. 4.
Stealing goods in
process of
manufacture.
9 Geo. IV., c. 65,
as. 10, 4.


If any degraded clergyman, or layman pretend-
ing to be a clergyman of the Church of Ireland,
celebrate any marriage between two Protestants,
or between a Protestant and a Roman Catholic.
Stealing any ore or metal from any mine or bed.
Maliciously to destroy, damage, or drown any
mine or bed.
Murder is when a person of sound memory and
mind unlawfully kills another with malice afore- '
thought.
To conspire, confederate, and agree to murder'
any person ] punishment, death. i
To solicit, encourage, persuade, or endeavour to .
persuade, or to propose to any person to murder '
any other person •, punishment, death.
To administer, or cause to be taken, any poison, :
or to stab, cut, or wound any person with intent, i
in any of the cases aforesaid, to commit murder; j
punishment, death.
To attempt to administer poison, or to shoot at.
11* • • 1
any person, or by drawing a trigger, or in any
other manner to attempt to discharge any kind of
loaded arms at any person, or to attempt to drown,
suffocate, or strangle any person with intent, in any
of the cases aforesaid, to commit murder, though
no bodily injury is effected.
To administer, tender, or cause to be adminis-
tered, or by threat, promise, persuasion, or other un- j
due means, upon a book or otherwise, any oath or i
engagement, by any person not lawfully authorized
to tender same.
If any person take any such oath, importing to
bind him, (it also a Felony.)
z>
Marriage.
By degraded
clergymen.
12Geo*l.c. 3, s.l*
5 Vic. s. 2.
Mime.
Stealing from.
Injuring.
9 Geo. IV. c. 65,
s. SO.
Murder.
Com. Law.
Conspiring to
murder.
10 Geo. IV. o. 34,
s. 8.
Soliciting to
murder.
Ib., 0. 9.
Poisoning or
wounding, with
intent to murder.
7 Wm. IV., and
1 Vic. o. 86,0> 2.
Attempt to
murder.
lb., ss. 3, 8.
Oaths.
Administering
unlawful oaths.
60 Geo. 111. o.
102, 99. 1,2, 3.
Taking «ame.


Oaths.
Compulsion.
Aiding and abet*
ting.
Otste&s.
Stealing.
See also Misde-
meanor, under
same head.
6 & 6 Vic. c. 106,
s. It.
Plate.
Altering names <
or crests.
28 Geo. 111. c, 49,
s. 7.
Post-office.
Stealing letters.
7 Wm. IV., and
1 Vic. o. 36.
Stealing from
letter.
Stealing letter
bags or stopping
mail.
Ib., ss. 28, 41,42.
Receivers of
above.
Ib., ss. 30,41, 42.
By inevitable necessity to excuse offender in
taking such, but not unless they give full informa-
tion, on oath before a Justice of Peace, of the cir-
cumstances, within ten days, or if prevented by
force or sickness, within seven days after recovery.
All persons present aiding and assisting, or
earning such oath to be administered, though not
present, are to be deemed as principals.
To steal any oysters or oyster brood from any
bed or laying, being the exclusive property of any
other person, and sufficiently marked out and known
as such, he is guilty of, and punishable as for lar-
ceny, provided this shall not extend to cases where
the party acts under a fair and reasonable supposi-
tion that either himself or any other person in
whose right or authority he acted, or the public at
large, have a right to take the oysters and convert
them to their use.
By the Pawnbrokers’ Act, no person shall alter
or deface name or crest on watches, or on any
article or piece of family plate, without consent of
the owner, in writing, or some person duly autho-
rized to sell the same or give such consent.
If any person employed under the Post-office
shall steal, embezzle, secrete, or destroy a postletter.
To steal from or out of a post letter, any
chattel, money, or valuable security.
To steal a post letter-bag, or a post letter from
such bag, or from an Officer of the Post-office, or
from a mail, or to stop a mail with intent to rob
or search the same.
Persons receiving any of the above, knowing
the same to have been so feloniously stolen, pun-
ishable in like manner.


Where a party effects Lis own escape by force,
the offence is prison breaking; and the forcible
freeing another from imprisonment, is properly
called rescue.
If any persons unlawfully, riotously, and tumul-
tuously assembled, pull down, demolish, set fire to,
or destroy, or begin to do so, to any store-house,
mill, granary, corn stack, or other place where
corn,grain, meal,flour, orpotatoesare usuallystored,
or kept for exportation or sale, or who shall enter
and break into such, or attempt to do so, or take,
carry away, throw abroad, or spoil, or attempt by
force to take any of the above, or who shall, in
manner described, enter any ship, vessel, or boat
so laden, and take, carry away, cast overboard,
destroy, or damage any of such articles, or cut, in-
jure, spoil, or take away such ship, vessel, or boat,
or injure or carry away the rigging or tackle of
same, or prevent or endeavour to obstruct the
lading thereof, or to prevent, or endeavour to pre-
vent her, when so laden, from sailing, or unlaw-
fully, wilfully, knowingly, and by force, stop, seize,
detain, take, or drive away any horse, car, cart, or
boat so laden, on the way to or from any mill,
store, market, seaport, or place of shipping, with a
view or intent to prevent the corn, grain, &c. etc.
from being taken to the place or person whither it
was intended to be carried, or willfully kill or
maim any horse or beast laden therewith, or cut,
break, or destroy any sack, and scatter any of said
articles wherewith such car, beast, or boat is laden,
or to take away, or distribute, or compel owner or
conductor thereof to distribute, sell, or otherwise
» 2
Prison Break.
ING.
Com. Law.
Provisions.
Riotously pre-
venting export of,
or destroying.
23 & 24 Geo. 111.
c. 20, s. 1 ; and
9 Geo. IV. o. 66,
s. 31 ; 6 Vic. c.
28, as. 2,5, 19.
Cutting sack*.


Provisions.
Rape.
Com. Law.
10 Geo. IV. c. 34,
8. 19,
Receivers of
Stolen Goods,
9 Oeo. IV. c. 35,
47, 4,
Rescue.
Com. Law.
1 & 2 Geo. IV.
c. 88.1.
ItlOT.
27 Geo. 111.
•JO Goo.'lll. c. 06.
b Vio. c. 28, s. 2.
Hindering pro*
oiamation.
It*
dispose of such articles, or any part thereof, or to
destroy weir, sluice, mill dam, drain, or outwork
of any mill, or aid in committing or attempting
any such matter.
Rape is carnally knowing a woman by force,
and against her will.
Any person who receives stolen property the
stealing or taking whereof would amount to a
Felony, such person knowing the same to have
been feloniously stolen or taken, is guilty of Felony.
Rescue is the forcibly freeing another from arrest
or imprisonment, and whether it be Felony or not
depends upon the nature of the offence for which
the party rescued was in custody. If the original
offence be a Felony the rescue is also one, though
not punishable as a Felony at Common Law till
conviction of original offender.
But now, by 1 and 2 Geo. IV., c. 88, s. 1, if
any person shall rescue, or aid or assist in rescuing
from the lawful custody of Constable, Officer, or
other person whatever, any person charged with,
or suspected of, or committed for Felony, or sus-
picion thereof; then if the offender shall be con-
victed of Felony, not capital, and liable to be
imprisoned for one year, he is punishable, as dis-
cretionary with the court, for seven years’ trans-
portation, or imprisoned from one to three years.
For what amounts to riot, see page 8,
Twelve or more riotously remaining together
| one hour after proclamation or Riot Act being read.
With threats, messages, or force to hinder the
proclamation, or to continue together to the num-
ber of twelve or more one hour after such hindrance.


- To demolish, pull down, or begin to demolish
any church or chapel, or any building used for
religious worship, or to set fire, or burn same, or
to maliciously fasten- up any such, or by threats
or force prevent any clergyman from celebrating
divine service therein, or maim or hurt any such
clergyman in performing or about to perform divine
service.
To dig, erect, provide or procjire to be dug, &c., :
any grave, gallows, or gibbet, or any instrument i
for inflicting bodily pain or punishment, in order
to deter or prevent any person from giving evi-
dence in any suit or prosecution, civil or criminal,
or to prevent the collection of any lawful rates or
taxes, or to make use of any force, or inflict, or
threaten to inflict, any bodily pain or punishment,
or destroy, or threaten to destroy, the property of
any person, in order to induce or compel any per-
son to enter into, support, or assist in any com-
bination or conspiracy, or prevent the collection
of any such rates or taxes ; or to deter or prevent
any person from giving evidence in any suit or
prosecution, or on account of any person having
declined or refused to enter into any such unlaw-
ful combination or agreement, or having given
evidence in any action or prosecution, or to aid,
abet, or assist in such offences.
To print, write, post, publish, or knowingly -
circulate or deliver, cause or procure to be printed,,
or deliver any notice, message, exciting or tending :
to excite any riot, tumultuous meeting, or unlawful
combination or confederacy.
Any person not lawfully authorized, who shall ;
Riot.
Demolishing
churches, assault-
ing clergymen.
27 Geo. 111. c. 15,
s. 5.
Intimidation.
27 Geo. 111. o. 15,
s. 8.
Circulating
writings to excite
riot.
27Geo. 111. c. 15,
s. 9 ; 5 Vic. c. 28.
Seizing arms, or
supplying arms.


Biot.
27 Geo. 111. o. 15,
s, 10 1 5 Vic. c.
28, m. 8-19./
Prosecution to be
in one year.
Ib. a. 12.
Robbery.
Com. Law.
With wounding.
7 Wm. IV.; and
1 Vio. e. 87, s. 2.
By armed persons
or numbers.
3*lo.
Stealing from
the person.
lb., S 3. 5-10.
Assault with in*
tent to rob.
Ib., ea. 6*lo.
Demanding with
force or menace.
2b., €B. 7-10.
forcibly seize any arms or ammunition, belonging
to any person, or forcibly by menace or intimida-
tion exact or levy from any person unwillingly, to
deliver any arms, or ammunition, or to send suck
arms, ammunition, money, or goods, to any person or
place, or knowingly and voluntarily supply horses,
arms, or ammunition to any persons in the execu-
tion of any of the offences in this Act mentioned.
No person is liable to prosecution under this
Statute, 27 Geo. 111. c. 15, unless prosecuted within
a year after the offence.
Robbery is the felonious and violent taking from
the person of another, goods or money to any
value, putting him in fear.
To rob any person, and at the time, or imme-
diately before or after such robbery, stab, cut, or
wound any person ; punishment, death.
Being armed with any offensive weapon or in-
strument to rob, or assault with intent to rob, or
together with one or more persons to rob, or assault
with intent to rob any person, and at the time of
or immediately before or after such robbery, heat,
strike, or use any other personal violence to any
person.
To rob any person, or steal any property from
the person of another.
To assault any person with intent to rob, punish-
ment (where greater is not provided) imprison-
ment, not exceeding three years, hard labour and
solitary confinement.
With menace, or by force to demand any pro-
perty from any person with intent to steal the
same, punishment same as last offence.


“ Property” in this Act denotes every thing in-
cluded under chattel, “ money,” or valuable se-
curity.
Unlawfully and maliciously to damage, or other-
wise than by fire, any ship or vessel, whether
complete or in an unfinished state, with intent to
destroy the same or render it useless.
Unlawfully to set fire to, cast away, or in any-
wise destroy any ship or vessel, either with intent
to murder any person, or whereby the life of any
person shall be endangered; punishment, death.
To exhibit any false light or signal, with intent
to bring any ship or vessel into danger, or to do
any thing tending to the immediate loss or destruc-
tion of any ship or vessel in distress; punishment,
death.
To set fire to or in any way destroy any ship
or vessel, or cast away, with intent to prejudice
any owner, or part owner, of any goods on board,
or any person that hath underwritten or shall
underwrite any policy of insurance upon such ship
or vessel, or on any freight or goods on board the
same.
To prevent or impede any person endeavouring
to save his life from any ship or vessel in distress,
or wrecked, stranded, or cast ashore, whether he
be on board or have quitted the same.
To destroy any part of any ship or vessel in
distress, stranded, or cast on shore, or any goods,
merchandize, or articles of any kind belonging to
such ship or vessel.
Captain, master, mariner, or other officer belong-
ing to any ship or vessel, wilfully to cast away,
sink, burn, or destroy the ship of which he is owner.
Robbery.
Meaning of
property.
Ships.
Damaging ships.
9 Geo. IV. c. 53,
ss. 10-34.
Destroying, with
danger of life.
7Wm.IV. ; and
1 Vic. c. 89, a. 4.
Wrecking.
Ib., s. 5.
Burning or des-
troying, to injure
owners.
Ib., ss.6-12.
Opposing ship*
wrecked persons.
Ib., ss. 7-12.
Injuring rossela
in distress.
Ib., ss. 8-12.
Owners, masters,
destroying.
11 Geo 11. c. 9,
s. 2; 5 Vic. a. 2,
8. 28, as. 2-19.


Ships.
Plundering ships
In distrees.
7 Wm. IV.*, and
I Vic. c. 87, s. 8.
Shooting at.
Smuggling.
B*4 Wm. IV.
e. 63, 0. 68.
Being in com-
pany with other
armed or dis-
guised, with for-
feited goods.
8 & 4 Wm. IV*
c. 63, s. CO.
Stealing.
Stolen goods
Tenants and
Lodgers.
Stealing.
9 Geo, IV. c. 65,
a. 38.
Theft.
To plunder or steal any part of any ship or
vessel which is in distress, or wrecked, stranded
or cast on shore, or any goods or articles belong-
ing to same.
See Murder, Maim, Smuggling, and Illicit Distil-
lation.
If three or more persons armed with fire arms,
or other offensive weapons, shall be assembled in
order to be aiding and assisting in the illegal land-
ing, running, or carrying away of any prohibited
goods, or to rescue such, after seizure, from the
officer of customs or other officer authorized to
seize the same, or from any person employed in
assisting such officer, or in rescuing any person
who shall have been apprehended for any offence
made Felony by any Act relating to the customs, or
in preventing the apprehension of any such person.
If any person being in company with more than
four other persons be found with goods liable to
forfeiture under this Act or any other Act relating
to the Revenue of Customs or Excise, or in com-
pany with one other person within five miles of the
sea coast, or of any navigable river leading there-
from, with such goods, and carrying offensive arms
or weapons, or disguised in any way.
Stealing, see Larceny.
See Receivers,
If any person shall steal any chattel, or fixture,
let to be used by him or her, in or with any house
or lodging, whether the contract is entered into
by him or her, or by her husband, or by any per-
son on behalf of him or her or her husband, it is
Felony, and punishable as Simple Larceny.
See Larceny.


Any person who shall knowingly send or deliver
any letter or writing demanding of any person,
with menaces, and without reasonable or probable
cause, chattel, money, or valuable security, or with
a view or intent, or unlawfully gain any of such,
or knowingly send or deliver, or directly or in-
directly cause to be received, any letter or writing
accusing or threatening to accuse any person of
any crime, punishable with death or transporta-
tion ; or of assault with intent to, or any attempt
to commit a rape, or of any infamous crime.
Any person sentenced, or ordered to be trans-
ported, who shall afterwards be found at large
without some lawful cause before the expiration i
of his term of transportation.
Unlawfully and maliciously, between sunset and
sunrise , to cut, break, bark, root up, or otherwise 1
destroy or damage the whole or any part of any !
tree, sapling, or shrub, or any underwood, or be-
tween sunrise and sunset, in case the amount of the
injury done exceed £5.
To steal, or cut, break, root up, or otherwise ■
destroy or damage, with intent to steal, the whole, ‘
or any part of any tree, sapling, or shrub, or any J
underwood growing in any park, pleasure ground,
garden, orchard, or avenue, or in any ground adjoin-
ing or belonging to any dwelling-house, in case
the value of the articles stolen, or the amount of
the injury done, exceeds £l, or the whole or any
part of any tree growing elsewhere, in case the
value of the article or articles stolen, or amount of
the injury done, exceeds £5. Punishable as Sim-
ple Larceny.
d 3
Threat.
Accusation to
extort money.
9 Geo. IV. c. 55,
88. 6, 4.
Transport a-
tion, Return.
ING FROM.
9 Geo. IV. o. 64,
s. 16; 6 Vio. a. 2.
Trees.
Injuring.
9 Geo. IV. c. 56,
s. 19, 31.
Stealing, or
damaging with
intent to steal.
Ib., c. 66,8. 31.


Trees.
If after Sum-
mary Conviction.
9 Geo. IV. c, 56,
s. 32.
Wounding,
To steal, or cut, and with intent to steal the
whole or any part of any tree, and wherever grow-
ing when the stealing or injury amounts to one
shilling, first and second offences punishable sum-
marily, and if any person so twice convicted, shall
afterwards commit any of said offences, it is Felony,
and punishable as Simple Larceny.
Wounding, see Murder; to maim, prevent arrest,
&c., see Maim.
Abduction.
Of an heiress.
10 Geo. IV. c. 34.
f. 23.
Of any girl.
Ib,, s. 24.
Affray,
Arks.
47 Geo. 111. c. 64,
ss. 2, 12 ; con-
tinued by 4 & 5
Vic., c. 25.
Arrest,
10 Geo. IV, c, 34,
9. 27.
Neglecting to
make an amst.
WHAT ARE MISDEMEANORS.
To fraudulently allure, take or carry away (any
unmarried girl under eighteen years of age, who
has any interest, legal or equitable, in any real or
personal estate, or is an heiress), against the will
of parents or other person having lawful care or
charge of her.
To take, or cause to be taken, any unmarried
girl under the age of sixteen years, against the
will of her parents, or any other person having
lawful charge of her.
For Affray, see page 8.
Having pikes, pike-heads, daggers, or dirks, un-
lawfully in possession, custody, or keeping; first
offence, twelve months’ confinement; second offence.
Felony.
To arrest any Clergyman upon any civil process
while he is performing Divine service, or is with
knowledge of the offender going to or returning
from the performance thereof.
A Constable neglecting to make an arrest when it
is his duty, is guilty of a Misdemeanor; and even


any private person of full age present when a Felony
is committed, and who neglects to use his best endea-
vours to apprehend the Felon ; and so every private
person is hound to assist any Constable demanding
his assistance for taking a Felon, or suppressing a
Breach of the Peace, whether by affray, unlawful
assembly, or riot, is guilty of a Misdemeanor if he
neglect to do so; and so it is to resist or obstruct the
making a legal arrest.
For common assault and battery see page 9.
To assault, beat, or wound any person, so as there-
by to endanger life, or to inflict upon such person
any grievous bodily harm.
To assault, strike, or wound any magistrate,
officer, or other person authorized, in execution of
his duty concerning the preservation of any vessel
in distress, wrecked, or stranded.
Persons convicted of any assault to commit
Felony, assault upon any peace or revenue officer
in execution of his duty, or upon any person
acting in his aid, assault with intent to resist or
prevent the apprehension or detainer of the person
so assaulting, or for any other person for any
offence for which he or they may be liable by law
to be apprehended or detained.
Unlawfully to assault and beat or wound any
person with a stone or brickbat, or any heavy or \
dangerous missile (whether held or swung by the '
hand, or flung at such person), or with a stick or
whip loaded with iron or other metal, or with any
heavy instrument so loaded.
Every attempt to commit a Felony or Misde-
meanor, whether it be an offence by Statute or'
f Abrebt.
or refusing
* assistance.
Com. Law.
Assault and
Battebt.
Violent assaults.
10 Geo. IV. c. 29.
On officer saving
wrecks.
Ib., a. 30.
Assault to com-
mit Felouy on
Officer.
lb. s. 31.
Battery with
loaded weapons.
2 & 3 Vic. c. 77,
8. 6.
Attempt.
Com. Law.


Attempt.
Common Law, is a Misdemeanor; and some, as
attempt to Murder, Maim, &c., are Felonies.
Keeping a bawdy house is a Misdemeanor.
Blasphemy against God or Jesus Christ, pro-
fane scoffing at Holy Scriptures, <fec. &c.
Any person concerned in the administration of
justice taking any undue reward to influence his
behaviour in his office; and also to those who offer
the bribe, whether taken or not.
Obstructing ministers in the discharge of their
duty at Burial Service.
To bury a body of one who has died a violent
death, without sending for Coroner, or before he
has sat upon it.
To take up and remove a dead body, also the
taking a dead body to dispose of it for gain.
Unlawfully and carnally to know and abuse any
girl above the age of ten years and under the age
of twelve years.
Challenging to duel, or provoking another to
send a challenge.
Any person who shall, by any false pretence,
obtain from any other person any chattel, money,
or other property, with intent to cheat or defraud.
Any person delivering themselves up and mak-
ing a fraudulent confession of desertion, or recruits
making any false representation of any particular
in the oaths or certificates before the attesting
Justice of the Peace, and obtaining enlisting money
or bounty, are punishable as for obtaining money
under false pretences.
Abandoning an infant of tender years, so as to
expose it to danger, is an offence in the nature of
Bawdy House.
Com. Law.
Blasphemy.
Ib.
Bribery.
Ib.
Burial.
Ib.
Burying without
inquest.
Ib.
Removing or
selling dead
bodies.
lb.
Carnal Know-
ledge.
10 Sc 12 Geo. IV.
o. 34, 8, 20.
Challenging.
Com. Law.
False Pee-
tences.
9 Geo. IV. c. 65,
s. 46-4.
Under Mutiny
Act.
See last Act, es.
23-38.
Children.
Abandoning.
Com. Law.


an assault, and punishable as Misdemeanor; but
this offence is only committed when the child is
exposed to personal danger. The abandonment of
an infant by a person having the care of it, with
intent to make it chargeable to the parish, or even,
it seems, to a particular individual, is, however, a
Misdemeanor, though there be no personal danger
to the child.
Disturbing the public worship of any congrega-
tion assembled according to Law. ]
To take and carry away any cattle or goods,
under colour of a decree obtained on any civil bill, j
between sunset and sunrise; punishment, imprison-
ment, whipping, at discretion.
To tender, utter, or put off, or counterfeit coin,
knowing same to be false or counterfeit, to resemble .
or pass for gold or silver current coin; and if the ;
offender shall at the time of such tendering have
in his possession one or more pieces of counterfeit
coin beside that tendered, or shall on the day of
such tendering, <tc., or within ten dags next ensu-
ing repeat the offence; punishment, imprisonment;
second offence, Felony.
To have in custody or possession three or more i
pieces of such counterfeit coin, knowing the same .
to be such, and with intent to utter or pass the
same; second offence, Felony.
To tender, utter, or put off any counterfeit J
copper coin, or to have in possession three or more 1
pieces, knowing the same to be false or counterfeit, ■
and with intent to utter or put off the same.
Compounding is taking a reward for forbearing
to prosecute a Felony or Misdemeanor, or even an ,
Children.
Church.
Disturbing,
Com. Law,
6 Geo. I. c. 6.
Civil Bill,
31 Goo. HI. c. 81,
s. 4.
Coin.
Uttering gold
and silver.
2 Wm. IV, o. 34,
ss. 7-19.
Having in pos-
session.
/£>., ss. 8,19,
Copper coin,
uttering or '
haring in pos-
session.
12, 19,
Compounding
Offences,
Com. L*w*


Compounding
Offences.
Concealing
Birth of Child.
10 Geo. IV. c. 34.
a. 17.
Conspiracies.
Deeds.
9 Geo. IV. c. 55,
s. 23.
Disorderly
Houses.
Com. Law.
Escape.
Ib.
Excise.
Assault on
officer.
7 & 8 Geo. IV.
c. 53, s. 43.
Fish and Mill
Ponds.
Injuring,
9 Geo. IV. c. 56,
as, '6-34.
Forcible
Entry.
Com. Law, and
5Rich.11.c.7-15.
Indecency.
Com. Law.
Just.
Ib.
information on a penal statute, is a Misdemeanor;
and compounding offences against the Larceny Act
is now a Felony.
Any woman delivered of a child, and by secret
burying or otherwise disposing of the dead body.
See Murder, Riot.
To steal any paper or parchment, written or
printed, or partly written or printed, being or con-
taining evidence of title to any real estate.
All disorderly inns or ale-houses, play-houses,
improperly conducted, and the like, are public
nuisances, and so is an inn refusing to entertain a
traveller, without sufficient cause, keeping a dis-
orderly house.
See under list of Felonies.
Violent assault on, or resistance to excise officers.
See also illicit distillation and smuggling.
Maliciously to break down or otherwise destroy
the dam of any fish pond, or of any water which
is private jiroperty, with intent to take or destroy
any of the fish in such pond or water, or to put
any lime or other noxious materials to destroy any
of the fish therein, or to break down or otherwise
destroy the dam of any mill pond.
Forcible entry, or detainer of lands and tene-
ments.
Publishing or exhibiting indecent pictures, or
any scandalous indecency exhibited in the face of
the public, or indecent exposure of the person. It
is also a Misdemeanor for a man to undress on the
beach and bathe in the sea near inhabited houses,
from which he may he distinctly seen.
Attempting to influence a Jury corruptly to one


side by promises, persuasion, entreaties, money, or
entertainments,
To set or place, or cause to be set, &c., any
spring gun, man trap, or other engine calculated
to destroy human life, or may inflict grievous
bodily barm upon a trespasser or other person
coming in contact therewith; not to extend to any
engine set from sunset to sunrise in a dwelling-
house, for the protection thereof.
That which creates disturbance or danger to the
neighbourhood, or making great noises in the night
with a speaking trumpet, or exposing in a public
thoroughfare a person infected with a contagious
disease ; the use or sale of fireworks, keeping fero-
cious animals without proper controul, or a fierce
bull in a field through which there is a footway, or
a ferocious dog unmuzzled, bawdy and gaming
houses.
See Road Act, page 34. i
If any person unlawfully and wilfully uses any
drudge or any net, instrument, or engine whatever,
within the limits of any oyster bed or laying, being
the exclusive property of any other person or per-
sons, and sufficiently marked out and known as such,
for the purpose of taking oyster, or oyster brood,
atlbougb none shall he actually taken ; or with any
net, instrument, or engine dredger, upon the ground
or soil of any such fishery; punishment, fine, not
exceeding £lO, or imprisonment, not exceeding
three calendar months, or both. Proviso, that this
shall not extend to cases where the party trespass-
ing acted under a fair and reasonable supposition
that he or any other person, in whose right, or by
Jdbt.
Man Trap.
Setting.
7 & B Geo. IV.
c. l*, SB. 1, 3.
Nuisance.
Acts productive
of disturbance
or danger.
Com. Law.
See Highways.
Otstebb,
6 A: 6 Vic-,c. KW,
b. 12.


Oysters.
Peace.
Com. Law.
Perjury.
Com. Law, and
3 Geo. 111. c. 4;
17 & 18 Geo. HI.
o. 36.
Post-office.
7 Wm. IV ; and
1 Vic. c. 36, ss.
25, 42.
Railways.
Receivers.
9 Geo. IV. o. 55,
s. 48.
Rescue.
Cattle and inju*
ring pounds.
9 Geo. IV. c. 43,
s. 2.
Soliciting.
Turnpike
Gates.
9 Geo. IV. c. 56,
8.15.
whose authority he acted, or the public at large,
had a right to do so, or shall prevent persons from
catching or fishing for any floating fish within the
limits of any oyster fishery, with any net, instru-
ment, or engine, adapted for taking floating fish
only. (See also Felonies, page 50.)
Not assisting in preserving the peace.
Any person who being lawfully required to de-
pose to the truth in any judicial proceeding, .and
who swear absolutely in a manner material to the
point in question.
Persons employed in it who shall open, or pro-
cure to be opened, a post letter, or wilfully detain
or delay same.
See Constable’s power and offences, page 38.
Any person who shall, knowing same to be stolen
or taken, receive any chattel, money, or other pro-
perty.
To rescue any cattle lawfully seized for the pur-
pose of being impounded, or break down, injure,
or destroy any pound legally constituted, whether
cattle are impounded in it or not, or commit any
pound breach whereby any cattle of any descrip-
tion shall escape or be enlarged; rescue of distress
for rent, is also a misdemeanor.
Soliciting or inciting another to commit a Felony.
And it would seem that soliciting another to com-
mit any indictable offence, though not amounting
to Felony, would be a Misdemeanor.
Maliciously to throw down or level, destroy, or
otherwise injure, in whole or part, any turnpike
gate, wall, chain, rail, post, bar, or other fence
belonging to any such gate.


Assemblies for training to the use of arms, and
every person who is present at, or attending for
the purpose of training and drilling any other *
person to the use of arms or the practice of military !
evolutions, or who aids, assists, or attends, such
meetings for such purpose.
Tor Constable’s power and offences, see page 12.
The several offences under the Whiteboy Act.
are transportable misdemeanors.
The following offences are enumerated under
the Malicious Injury Act, as also under the Larceny
Act, in both of which Acts special provisions are
made that offenders may be apprehended without
Warrant, as already stated, page 6; and though most
of them are indictable offences, and will be found
in the lists of such, still, in order that they should
at once come under the eye of the Constable, they
are inserted under their respective Acts, marked
thus: —F. are Felonies, M. Misdemeanor, and S. C.
Punishable by Summary Conviction :
MALICIOUS INJURIES.
Setting fire to a house, F.
Setting fire to corn or hay, F.
Setting fire to crops or plantations, . . F.
Obstructing navigation of canal or rivers, . F.
Injuring public bridges, . . . . F.
Killing or maiming cattle, . . . F.
Demolishing houses, . . F.
Destroying or damaging trees by night, . F.
Ditto by day, if the value exceed £5, . P.
Destroying turnpike gates, M.
Breaking down mill-dams or fishery dams, M.
Unlawful
Assemblies.
Training to arms.
60 Geo. 111. ; and
1 Geo. IV. c. 1,
s. 1.
Whiteboy Act.
15 & 16 Geo. 111.
c. 21.
9 Geo. IV. c. 55.


9 Geo. IV. c. 56.
Destroying or damaging trees between sun-
rise and sunset, . . . . S. C.
Destroying any fruit or vegetable in gardens, S. C.
Destroying or damaging trees or shrubs of
any value under £5, . . . . S. C.
Destroying vegetable production not in
garden, . . . . . . S. C.
Destroying any fence, wall, stile, or gate, . S. C.
LARCENY ACT.
Robbery from the person, . . . . P.
Stealing from the person, or assaulting with
intent to roh, ..... F.
Stealing in, or from a church, chapel, or
meeting-house, . . . . . F.
Stealing horses, cows, or sheep, . . F.
Stealing from a shop, . . . . M.
Stealing public or private securities, . F.
Entering a dwelling-house forcibly, and
stealing, ...... F.
Robbery in a shop, ..... M.
Stealing trees or shrubs from park or garden,
of £1 va1ue,..;... M.
Or elsewhere, of £5 value, . . . F.
Stealing glass or wood works from buildings, P.
Servants or clerks stealing master’s property, M.
Stealing deer, . . . . . S. C.
Stealing dogs or birds, . . . S. 0.
Stealing or cutting, breaking or rooting up
timber, . . . . . . S. C.
Stealing live or dead fences, stile, or gate, . S. C.
Stealing fruit or vegetables from garden, . S. 0.
Stealing vegetable production not in garden, S. C.


Haying compiled, from the Law authorities, the
foregoing guide to the Constable, as to his Civil
Duties, to which the work is strictly confined, I am
induced to make the following observations, solely
with a view of aiding him in the strict performance
of the same, and without venturing to arrogate
to myself any power of conveying orders to the
Constabulary force, which I by no means possess,
and I know they are furnished with a well framed
Code of Regulations, as to discipline; but, at the
same time, from long experience and numerous op-
portunities I have had of judging, I trust it will not
be considered out of place if I add the following
remarks for the perusal of those who may find this
work worthy of attention, with a hope that they
may be found useful. I can only say, I have found
them so.
The great point towards efficiency is, that every
man should hnow his duty and do it, and should have
a thorough and perfect knowledge of the neigh-
bourhood of his station; the men should make them-
selves not only acquainted with roads and passes,
but the characters of all, which, with a little
trouble, could be easily accomplished. A Police-
CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.


man cannot be considered perfect in hia civil duty
as a Constable, who could not, when required,
inarch direct to any house at night. Inquiring
from civilians as to “where does mch a man live?”
is a bad practice, and many failures in arrest are
the consequence.
No disturbance can be met as it should be, with-
out a proper system of patrolling; the following I
brought out in Tipperary a few years since, and it
is now, with the approval of the Lord Lieutenant
and Inspector-General, in force in the County of
Leitrim and its borders, as also in this County.
MEMORANDUM.
Roscommon, 1 Qth February, 1844.
From the disturbed state of this district, I feel
it necessary, as the Resident Magistrate, to call
the attention of the Constabulary to the necessity
of increased vigilance in their patrols, and in order
that such should be carried on with system, the
following will be observed:—
Ist. Independent of regular night patrols, whose
hours should vary, men should by day take post
on hills commanding the houses of persons having
registered arms, or supposed to be obnoxious. The
men so posted will, if possible, be within view
of other parties, so as to co-operate in pursuit of
offenders.
2nd. The day system of patrol can be greatly
assisted, by the Police when conveying reports,
visiting outrages, attending Petty Sessions, taking
their course across the fields, and avoiding the
roads as much as possible.
Disturbed
districts.
Patrols,


3rd. No parade of night patrol should he made ;
the Sergeant of the station should name a rallying
point to assemble at, and allow the men to drop out
singly, as silent as possible; in fact, road patrols
in disturbed districts are worse than useless, as they
only tend to apprise the ill-disposed of the move-
ments of the Police, except during assizes and ses-
sions, when a regular chain should he kept up, to
protect prosecutors and witnesses.
4th. Patrols hanging about ditches, plantations,
and above all, visiting the houses of suspicious cha-
racters, are most essential.
sth. Mounted patrols should vary their hours
every day; some at six in the morning, others not
until three, P.M., so that their hours could never he
calculated on.
6th. Every man at out stations should make
himself well acquainted with the characters, the
dwellings, roads, and passes in his district; and
nothing is of more importance than on hearing of
outrage, that the houses of the bad characters
should he at once visited.
7th. The telescope to be taken always on day
patrol, and rockets and blue lights used, as pointed
out in the confidential memorandum.
Bth. A continuation of outrage must and will
raise a stigma in the minds of the public on every
member of the Police, from the Resident Magistrate
down to the Sub-Constable. The strenuous ex-
ertions of all must he combined, and brought to
hear in at once suppressing it, which can be done,
no matter what state of disturbance a county is in,
provided the system now laid down is actively en-


Map of district.
Local knowledge.
Communication
from station to
station.
Information of
outrage.
Enquiry at the
scene of outrage.
Secrecy.
forced; and the Resident Magistrate has only to
add, that every act of zeal and success on the part
of both Officers and men, shall be promptly brought
under the notice of the Lord Lieutenant and the
Inspector-General.
{Signed,) D. Duff.
A Constable should be able to take a map of his
district, and he should see that each of his party
understands it, so as to act in his absence.
Local knowledge is of more real benefit than per-
sonal exertion, and materially so where Police act
with military.
In a disturbed district it is of the utmost impor-
tance that intelligence of outrage should rapidly
spread from station to station, to put all hands on
the alert, so that each party knowing the bad and
suspicious characters in their neighbourhood should
at once look to them.
On any information as to an intended outrage,
it is a good plan to make the Police from distant
stations take the duty, and to let the party near
the scene remain quiet, as there are invariably
watches placed on the barracks nearest the point.
A searching and patient enquiry should be made
by the Constable, when visiting a scene of outrage.
The entire chance of success as to evidence, depends
upon the prompt steps taken on this most import-
ant duty; and those assisting him should be men
of experience and intelligence. A hurried enquiry
cannot possibly be a successful one.
The more strictly observed the more certain of
success, and the shorter the notice given to the


men the better, as it is a slight preparation that
will raise suspicion with those residing near a bar-
rack. If a Constable in charge do not keep his own
secret, he cannot blame others in case of failure.
Too much caution cannot be observed against:
the practice of asking prisoners questions as to
their guilt or innocence. It is not only illegal but
highly improper. If a prisoner begins a conver-
sation on the subject of his charge, the Constable is
bound to at once caution him not to say any thing,
in his (the Constable’s) presence that may criminate
himself, as he will have to prove to such acknow-
ledgment or confession on his trial, and if, after this
caution, the prisoner persists, the Constable should
commit to paper his exact words, and acquaint his
Officer and the Magistrate—no promise or threats
to he held out.
A Constable’s evidence (as the Code properly ]
states) should be manly and straightforward, telling 4
the simple facts, and not endeavouring to conceal
any thing on the trial which has come to the Con-
stable’s knowledge, that may he of service to the
prisoner; his answers should be short and to the
point, given with great respect and good temper;
the manner and deportment of a witness are not
without consideration from a jury, and carry their
weight accordingly.
In order to sustain a prosecution for offences
committed under the “ Whiteboy Act,” the Crown
must prove the district where such have taken
place, to be in a disturbed state ; and as the Police
of the locality are generally brought up as evi-
dence to prove this fact, it is of the utmost import-
ance that the Constables in charge of stations
Prisoners.
Evidence on
trial.
W HITEBOY
Offences.


WIIITEBOY
Offences.
Identification.
Time.
should at assizes be prepared with a memorandum
of the outrages committed within their districts,
and the date of each; I have frequently witness-
ed great inconvenience from their not being so
prepared.
It may be necessary to add, that unless the
memorandum is in the hand-writing of the witness,
he will not be permitted to refer to it when under
examination.
As to persons taken up under Warrant or on
suspicion from description given, care should be
taken that the person to identify does not see the
accused until he is mixed up with four or five other
men, nor should any hint be given as to dress or
appearance, if asked for by the accuser. An iden-
tification in the above form is but justice to the
prisoner, while it, on the other hand, strengthens
the evidence on the trial.
The Constable, on arrest, should, if possible, note
the exact hour when made; I have often witnessed
the entire point of a case turn upon it, and as the
punishments for many offences vary, as to whether
committed by day or by night, it is, therefore, of the
utmost importance to be accurate as to the hour.
To constitute Burglary, night commences at nine
o’clock in the evening of each day, and concludes
at six the following morning.
A Policeman’s motto should be firmness, forbear-
ance, and humanity, rendering impartial justice to
all, bearing in mind that kindness and persuasion
will often accomplish what force might fail in, and
never forgetting the words of his oath, to be
“without favour, without affection, without malice,
and without ill-will .”


THE
POWERS AND DUTIES OE MAGISTRATES,
IN CASES OF
RIOT AND TUMULTUOUS ASSEMBLIES.
It having been suggested to the Compiler, by
several Magistrates, the great advantage and con-
venience that would arise, if the "chapter given in
“ The Irish Justice of the Peace,” as to their power
and duty when called upon to act with Military
and Police for the suppression of riot and tumul-
tuous assemblies, were attached to the “ Guide,” —
the following, as laid down in the above invalu-
able work, is therefore given for the Magistrate’s
guidance, in support of that most important and
responsible duty.
Under the Act quoted, entitled, “An Act for
indemnifying all such persons as shall be aiding \
in the dispersing of riots, and apprehending the ■
rioters,” and which recites that it is the duty of j
Justices of the Peace, Sheriff, and Under Sheriff of
the county where any unlawful riot or tumultuous
assembly shall be, taking with them, if need be,
the power of the county, to arrest the offenders, so
as to bring them to justice ; and in doing so, are
empowered to command all Her Majesty’s subjects
of age and ability, to assist in seizing and appre-
£
Magistrates re-
quired to disperse
all unlawful and
riotous assem-
blies.
. Nun, 140.
3 Geo. 111., c. 19.


Magistrate and
others indemnifi-
ed, if any of the
rioters happen to
he killed.
27Geo. 111., c. 15.
Twelve persons or
more, unlawfully-
assembled, and
not dispersing
after Riot Act
being read, guilty
of capital felony.
How the Procla-
mation shall be
made.
bending the offenders ; and if the prisoners, so
unlawfully, riotously, and tumultuously assembled,
or any of them, shall happen to be killed, maimed,
or hurt, in the dispersing, seizing, or apprehending
them, then every such Justice of the Peace, Peace
Officer, and all persons aiding and assisting, shall
be freed, discharged, and indemnified.
Enacts, that if persons, to the number of twelve,
or more, being unlawfully, riotously, and tumul-
tuously assembled, to the disturbance of the public
peace, and being required in the King’s name, by
any one or more Justice of the Peace, or by the
Sheriff of the County, or his Under Sheriff, or by
the Mayor, Sheriff, Bailiff, or other head officer,
or Justice of the Peace of any city or town corpo-
rate, where any such rising or assembly shall be,
by proclamation to be made in the King’s name,
in the form hereinafter directed, to disperse them-
selves and depart to their habitations, shall, to the
number of twelve , or more, notwithstanding such
proclamation made, unlawfully, riotously, and tu-
multuously remain or continue together as afore-
said for the space of “one hour’’ after such pro-
clamation so made, shall be felony without benefit
of clergy.
The Justice, or other person authorized by this
Act to make the proclamation, shall, amongst the
said rioters, or as near to them as he can safely
come, with a loud voice, command or cause to be
commanded silence to be kept while so making it;
and after that, shall openly and with a lond voice,
make or cause to be made Proclamation in these
words, or like in effect: —-


OUR Sovereign Lady the Queen,
chargeth and commandeth all Persons
being assembled, immediately to dis-
perse themselves, and peaceably to de-
part to their habitations, or to their
lawful business, upon the pains contain-
ed in the Act made in the 27th Year
of King George the Third, to prevent
tumultuous risings and assemblies.
Magistrates aforesaid are authorized, empower-
ed, and required, on notice or knowledge of any ,
unlawful, riotous, and tumultuous rising or assem-
bly, to resort to the place to be held, and there to
make or cause to be made Proclamation as afore-
said.
Section 3 enacts that any person or persons who '
shall by threats, messages, or with force, wilfully or .
knowingly oppose, obstruct, let, or hinder any per- '
son or persons who shall begin to proclaim, or go
to proclaim such proclamation, whereby such pro-
clamation shall not be made, then every such
threatening, opposing, or hurting any such person
so beginning, or going to make such proclamation,
shall be felony without benefit of clergy.
Person or persons unlawfully, riotously, or tu- 1
multuously assembled, to the number of twelve or i
more, to whom proclamation should or ought to i
have made, if the same had not been so hindered,!
shall continue together, and not disperse them-
selves within one hour after such let or hindrance,
PROCLAMATION.
Magistrates re-
quired to execute
this Act.
Opposing the
making of such
Proclamation a
capital felony.
Persons as-
sembled not dis-
persing within
one hour after the
hindrance of such
proclamation,
capital felony,


Persons so as-
sembled, if not
dispersing within
one hour, to be
arrested, and
carried before a
Justice.
And if any killed,
and upon resist-
ance, Justice
indemnified.
having knowledge of such let or hindrance, be
adjudged guilty of felony without benefit of clergy.
Section 4 enacts, that if such persons, so unlaw-
fully, riotously, and tumultuously assembled, or
twelve or more of them, shall continue together,
and not disperse themselves within “ one hour ”
after proclamation made, or after such let or hind-
rance as aforesaid, then it shall be lawful for every
such Justice of the Peace, Sheriff or Under Sheriff
of the county where such rising or assembly shall
be, and also for every High or Petty Constable, or
other Peace Officer within such county, and. also
every Mayor, Justice of the Peace, Sheriff-Bailiff,
or other head officer, High or Petty Constable, or
other Peace Officer of any city or town corporate,
where such rising or assembly shall be, and for
such other persons as shall he required to he assist-
ing unto such Justice, Sheriff, or Under-Sheriff,
Mayor, Bailiff, or other head officer aforesaid, (who
are hereby authorized and empowered to command
all His Majesty’s subjects of age and ability to be
assisting to them therein,) to seize and apprehcnd ;
and they are hereby required to seize and appre-
hend such persons, so unlawfully, riotously, and
tumultuously continuing together after proclama-
tion so made, or after such let or hindrance, and
forthwith to carry them before a Justice of the
Peace of the county or place where such persons
shall be so apprehended, in order to their being
proceeded against for such their offence according
to law.
If any person or persons assembled as before-
mentioned, shall be killed, maimed, or hurt, in the


dispersing, seizing, or apprehending, or in the
endeavour to do so, or by reason of resisting the
persons so dispersing or apprehending, both Jus-
tices and Police, and all persons aiding and assist-
ing, shall he free, discharged, and indemnified.
The following observations of a learned Judge are
peculiarly applicable to this subject. “I take this
opportunity of mentioning a fatal mistake into which
many persons have fallen. It has been imagined
that because the law allows an hour for the disper-
sion of a mob to whom the Riot Act has been read
by the Magistrate, the better to support the civil
authority, that during that time the civil power and
the magistracy are disarmed, and the King's sub-
jects, whose duty it is at all times to suppress riot,
are to remain quiet and passive. No such meaning
was in view of the legislature, nor does the operation
of the Act warrant any such effect. The Civil
Magistrates are left in possession of those powers
which the law had given them before. If the mob
collectively, or any part of it, or any individual,
within or before the expiration of the hour, attempts?
or begins to perpetrate an outrage amounting to a
felony, to pull down a house, or by any other act to
violate the law, it is the duly of all present, of what-
ever description they may be, to endeavour to stop the
mischief, and to apprehend the offender."*
Although the actual execution of some delibe-
rate purpose is generally essential to constitute the ;
olfence of riot in its strict sense, yet it may he in-
ferred from the terms of statute 27 Geo. 111., c. 15,
« By Lord Loughborough, 5 C. and P. 261, in note quoted by
Richards 8., in his charge at Ennis summer assizes, 1642.
E 2
Interference
before the expira-
tion of the hour
after Proclama-
tion made.
Nun, 146,
Actual execution
of riotous pur-
pose unnecessary.


that it is not necessary, in order to authorize pro-
ceedings under it, that a riot should have been
actually committed. If the assembly be such as
would constitute a riot if their purpose were car-
ried into execution, it is sufficient.
Where the proclamation has hern read several
times, the how is to he computed from the first read-
ing; hut great care shoidd he taken to read it cor-
rectly, and if the Magistrate omit part of it, it seems
that persons remaining an hour together after such
a defective reading, cannot he capitally convicted.*
Provides that it shall be lawful for any one Jus-
tice acting for any county, city, or place, where any
riot or tumult shall happen, or for two or more
Justices, when any riot or tumult shall he appre-
hended and expected to take place, to order or di-
rect the owners of public houses in or near where
such riot or tumult shall happen, or be expected to
take place, to close his house or place at any time,
and for such length of time, as such Justice or Jus-
tices shall order or direct.
, Any person who shall keep his house open, in
i. violation, shall forfeit the sum of £2.
For offences connected with the plunder or de-
struction of provisions, see page 51.
Note.— The first step a Magistrate should take,
if time permit, either before proceeding to the
scene of riot, or on his arrival at the nearest Police
Hour, how com-
puted.
Reading the
Proclamation.
3 & 4 Wm. IV.,
c. 68, s. 21.
Closing public
houses.
23 &24 Geo. 111.,
c. 20, s. 1, saved
in force by 9 Geo.
IV., c. 56, s. 31;
5 Vic. s., 2, o. 28,
ss. 5, 19.
Riots connected
with Provisions.
* Rex v. Child, 4C. and P. 442, The words omitted in this
case were “ God save the King,” which conclude the proclama-
tion in England, but are not found in the form prescribed by the
Irish Act.


station, is Ixis taking a sworn information, which
can be made by some of the Police, as to what he,
the Policeman, heard and believes with reference
to the anticipated riot or tumultuous assembly;
and it would expedite the matter, the Constable in
charge having the Police or other persons who
could support such information, ready for examina-
tion on the arrival of the Magistrate.
There is one thing quite certain, that the Magis-
trates do not require information on oath in near
as many cases as is necessary either for our own
protection, or that of those acting under our orders.
D. D.


INDEX.
Page
Arrest without Warrant:
For Felony.
Best for Constable to have Warrant, . . I
Felony committed within Constable’s view, . . 2
Arrest upon charge of another, . . . ib.
Constable not responsible if there be probable grounds
of suspicion, . • . . . ib.
Arrest on Constable’s own suspicion, . . ib.
Arrest by night on suspicion of Felony, . . 3
What a reasonable ground of suspicion, . . ib.
Arrest to prevent the commission of a Felony, . ib.
In case of a dangerous wound given, . . .4
For Misdemeanor.
Exceptions created by Statute, . . .5
Persons making signals to smuggling vessels, . ib.
Giving warning of approach of Excise Officers, . ib.
Arrest of Deserters, . . . . .6
Arrest under Malicious Injury Act, . . . ib.
Arrest under Larceny Act, . . . . ib.
Goods offered for sale under suspicious circumstances, ib.
Under Pawnbrokers’ Act, . . . . ib.
Offenders to be actually committing offence under
Malicious Injury and Larceny Acts, . . 7
Other Statutes empowering arrest without Warrant, ib.
Where offence is Felony, . . . . ib.
Or punishable on summary conviction, . . ib.
For Breach of the Peace,
What is an affray, . . . . .8
What a riot, . . . . . . ib.
What a rout, . . . . . . ib.
What an unlawful assembly, . . . . ib.


Pago
Arrest without Warrant :
For Breach of the Peace.
Any person taking part in a riot is a rioter, . . 9
Power of Constable to interpose, . . . ib.
What an assault, . . . . . ib.
To prevent a breach of the peace, . . . ib.
Constable may interpose on complaint of another, . 10
Hot to arrest for angry words, . . . ib.
Or after the aifray is over, . ■ . . ib.
Armed parties, . . . . . ib.
Constable’s power for suppression of riots, . .11
’ Caution to be observed, . . . .12
Power under Whiteboy Act and oifences, . . ib.
Note on trial of a party of Police, . . .13
Caution to Constable interposing to prevent or sup-
press breach of the peace, . . . .13
Constable should keep strictly within his duty, . ib.
Recapitulation, . . . . .1(1
Arrest by Warrant :
Arrest under Warrant, . . . .17
Constable bound to execute Warrant, . . ib.
Warrant joint or several, . . . . ib.
Constable to know person to be apprehended, . ib.
Execution of the Warrant;
Notice to the party, . . . . . ih.
Production of Warrant, . . . . ib.
What constitutes an arrest, . . . .18
Arrest may be by day or night, or on any person, . ib.
Limits of jurisdiction, . . . . ib.
Where a Warrant must be indorsed, . . . ib.
Duration of Warrant, . . . . . ib.
Breaking open outer door without Warrant :
Previous notification, demand, and refusal necessary, 19
Without Warrant, in what cases doors may be broken, ib.
For breach of the peace by aifray or riot, . . ib.
Not for mere assault or other Misdemeanor, . . 20
For Felony or a dangerous wound given, . . ib.


Page
When acting under Warrant :
Under Warrant for Felony or suspicion of Felony, . 21
For Breach of the Peace, . . . . ib.
Warrant for Misdemeanor or for Bench Warrant, . ib.
Under Levy Warrant, . . . . ib.
Under Arms Act, . . • . . ib.
Under Search Warrant, . . . . ib.
Under Revenue Acts, . . . . . ib.
In what cases a house affords protection from arrest, 22
Applies only to arrest in first instance, . . ib.
To the breach of outer door, . . . . ib.
Extends only to a dwelling-house, . . .23
To arrest of occupier or any of his family, . . ib.
Breaking open the house of a stranger, . . ib.
Constable in all cases to regain his liberty, . . ib.
Duty op Police after Arrest :
Prisoner to be taken before Justice of the Peace, . ib.
Degree of force or restraint, . . . .24
Prisoners to be kept separate, . . . ib.
Detaining prisoner for Breach of the Peace, . . ib.
Searching the prisoner, . . . . ib.
Flight, Pursuit, and Resistance :
Constable to make arrest effectual, . . .25
Empowered to command assistance, . . . ib.
Constable’s power in case of flight, . . . ib.
Power in case of affray or other Misdemeanor, . 26
Constable’s power upon resistance, . . . ib.
What necessary to justify Constable in using extreme
measure, . . . . . . ib.
Execution of Search Warrant :
Warrant to be executed by day, . . .27
Goods specified only to be seized, . . . ib.
Places specified only to be searched, . . .28
Breaking open doors and boxes, . . . ib.
Precaution necessary in executing Search Warrant, ib.
Searching for arms, . . . . . ib.
Goods and party to be brought before Justice of the
Peace, . . . . . .29


Page
Execution of Search Warrant :
Goods how disposed of, ... 29
If stolen cattle, how disposed of, . . ib.
Execution of Distress Warrant ;
What may he seized under a Justice’s Warrant, . ib.
Husband’s goods not to be seized if wife is convicted, ib.
Breaking open doors, . . . . . ib.
Second seizure, . . . . . ib.
Constable not to give credit, . . . . ib.
In case of appeal being lodged, . . .30
Eeturn to Warrant, . . . . . ib.
Constable’s power under the following Acts ;
Power under Arms Act, . . . . ib.
Power under Spirit Licence Act, and regulation of
Public-houses, . . . . .31
Sabbath Act, . . . . . .33
Cruelty Act, . . . . . . ib.
Constable’s Power under Road Act, . . .34
Late Fishery Amended Act, . . . .35
Power under Railway Acts, . . . .38
Power of Special Constables, . . .39
Catalogue of what crimes are Felony, . . 40
Catalogue of what are Misdemeanors, . , 58
Offences under Malicious Injuries Act, . . 65
Offences under Larceny Act, . . . .66
Concluding Observations :
Disturbed Districts, . . . . .68
Patrols, . . . . . . ib.
Map of District, . . . . .70
Local knowledge, . . . . . ib.
Information of Outrage, . . . . ib.
Secrecy, . . . . . . ib.
Caution relative to Prisoners, . . .71
Evidence on Trial, . . . . . ib.
Identification, . . . . . .72
Time, . . . . . . . ib.


POWERS AND DUTIES OE MAGISTRATES.
Page.
Riots and Tumultuous Assemblies :
Magistrates required to disperse all unlawful and riot-
ous assemblies, . . . . .73
Magistrate and others indemnified, if any of the
rioters happen to be killed, . . .74
Twelve persons or more, unlawfully assembled, and
not dispersing after Riot Act being read, . . ib.
How the Proclamation shall be made, . . ib.
Proclamation, . . . . . .75
Magistrates required to execute this Act, . . ib.
Opposing the making of such Proclamation, . . ib.
Persons assembled not dispersing within one hour
after the hindrance of such proclamation, . . ib.
Persons so assembled, if not dispersing within one
hour, to be arrested, and carried before a Justice, . 76
If any killed, and upon resistance, Justices indemni-
fied, . . . . . . . ib.
Interference before the expiration of the hour after
Proclamation made, . . , . .77
Actual execution of riotous purpose unnecessary, . ib.
Hour, how computed, . . . . .78
Reading the Proclamation, . . . . ib.
Closing Public houses, . . . . ib.
Riots connected with Provisions, . . . ib.
From the Steam Press of Alexander Thom* 87, Abbey-street, Dublin.
