





Loss of th e Anson, frigate, off cornwall .
Pub by th os Tegg. III Cheapside . Aug. 1808.




THE
LOSS
OF HIS MAJESTY'S FRIGATE
ANSON,
Which was Wrecked
WITHIN THREE MILES OF HELSTON.
DECEMBER 28, 1807,
AND ABOUT
FIFTY PERSONS LOST.
ALSO AN
AUTHENTIC NARRATIVE OF THE LOSS
OF
The Sidney,
WHICH RAN UPON A DANGEROUS ROCK OR SHOAL,
MAY 20, 1808,
AND ONLY A FEW OF THE CREW PRESERVED;
TOGETHER WITH
Several genuine Anecdotes,
AND ACCOUNTS OF
DREADFUL FAMINES AT SEA.
LONDON:
Printed for THOMAS TEGG, 111, CHEAPSIDE.
PRICE ONLY SIXPENCE.
1808




LOSS
OF HIS
MAJESTY’S FRIGATE
ANSON,
Which was wrecked near HELSTON,
DECEMBER 29, 1807.
The following account of the urtfortunale loss of his
Majesty’s frigate Anson, and of the much lamented
death of Captain Lydiard, is communicated by the cap-
tain’s steward, who was continually about his person, and
on whose veracity our readers may depend.
“On the 27th of December, 1807, cruizing off the
Black Rocks, and perceiving the approach of a gale, kept
a look out for the commodore in the Dragon. The next
morning (Monday) the gale increasing from the S.W. and
not perceiving the Dragon in any direction,at nine O’clock,
shaped our course for the Lizard, with a view of getting
into Falmouth.
, “At twelve o’clock all hands upon deck, the sea run-
ning very high; two bowsprits on the starboard-side
washed away by the violence of the, sea; also a port
abreast the main-mast, by which means she shipped
great deal of water. -
a 2


« The captain sent for the master at the time, to deter-
mine the situation of the ship; and at half-past twelve
o’clock, or thereabout, land was seen about two miles dis-
tant, but from the extreme thickness of the weather, we
could not ascertain what part. Captain Lydiard ordered
the ship to be w ore to the S. E. not thinking it safe to
stand in any nearer under such circumstances of weather.
Soon after ten o’clock the master wished them to run in
again, and make the land, which was supposed to be the
Lizard ; and that if we could make it out, we should get
into Falmouth ; Captain Lydiard asked if he thought it
could be done without risk? he (the master) said, he
thought it could.
“ The ship was then wore, but the weather still conti-
nuing thick, We had a cast of the lead, and having 27
fathom, we were convinced w»e must he to the westward of
the Lizard, and immediately wore ship again, and made
all sail.
“ Soon after three o’clock, as the captain was going to
dinner, he looked out of the quarter gallery, from whence
he saw the breakers close to us, and the land along dis-
tance ahead. The,ship wore instantly, and Captain Lj-
diard’s mind made up to come to an anchor, for had we
kept under weigh the ship must have struck upon the
rocks in a few hours. The top-gallant masts were got
upon deck, and she rode very well until lour o clock on
Tuesday morning, when the cable parted. The other
anchor immediately let go, and the lower yards and top-
masts struck. At day-light the other cable parted, and we
were then so close to the land that we had no alternative
hut to go ori shore, when Captain Lydiard desired the
master to run the ship into the best situation for saving
the lives of the people, and fortunately a, fine beach pre-
sented, upon which the ship was run. Shortly after she
struck the mainmast went, but hurt no one.
“ Captains Lydiard and Sullivan, with the first lieute-
nant, were resolved to remain with the ship as long as pos-
sible! many people were killed on board; the first lieute-
nant, and a number of others, washed overboard. It was
the captain’s great wish to save the lives ot the ship s com


pany, and he was employed irt directing them the whole
of the time. He had placed himself by the wheel, hold-
ing by the spokes, where he was exposed to the violence
of the sea, which broke tremendously over him, and from
continuing in this situation too long, waiting to see the
people out of the ship, he became so weak that upon at-
tempting to leave the ship himself, and being impeded
by a boy who was in the way, and whom he endeavoured
to assist, he was washed away and drowned.”
Such is the steward’s account of this melancholy acci-
dent. Another correspondent furnishes us with the follow-
ing particulars.
“ His Majesty’s Frigate Anson, of 40 guns, after com-
pleting her stores of all kinds, for a four-months cruise,
sailed°from Falmouth on the‘24th of December, 180?, to
to resume her station off Brest. As it blew very hard
from the S. W. S. we were never able to get so far to the
westward : however, Captain Lydiard persevered in his
endeavours until the 28th.
“ On the morning of that day we made the Isle of
Bas, bn the French coast, which they had seen the pre-
ceding evening. There being now every appearance: of
bad weather, Captain Lydiard determined to return to
port, and accordingly shaped a course for the Lizard, the
gale still increasing, and it coming on very heavy. About
three o’clock P. M. the land was seen about five miles
west of the Lizard, but at the time not exactly known,
as many opinions were expressed, as to what land was
then in sight; the ship was wore to stand of at sea, but
had not long been on that tack before the land was again
descried right a-head.
* c It was now quite certain that the ship was embayed,
and every exertion was made to work her oft’ the shote;
but finding she lost ground every tack, she was brought
to an anchor in 25 fathoms, at five P. M. with the best
bower anchor veered away to two cables length. By their
anchor, the ship rode in a most tremendous sea, and as
heavy a gale as was ever experienced, until 4 A. M. of
the 29th, when the cable parted. The small bower an-
A 3


char was then let go, ami veered away to two cable's
length, which held her until 8 A. M. when that also
parted ; and as the last resource, in order to preserve the
lives of as many as possible, the foretop sail was cut, and
the ship run on shore, on the sand which forms the bar
between the Loe Pool (about three miles from Helston)
and the sea. The tide had ebbed about an hour when
she struck ; on taking the ground, she broached to with
her broadside to the beach, and most happily heeled into
the shore; had she, on the contrary, heeled off, not a
soul could have escaped alive.
“ Now commenced a most heart-rending scene to some
hundreds of spectators who had been in anxious sus-
pence, and who exerted themselves to the utmost, at the
imminent risk of their lives, to save those of their drown-
ing fellow-men. Many of those who were most forward
in quitting the ship, lost their lives, being swept away by
the tremendous sea, which entirely went over the wreck.
The main-mast formed a floating raft from the ship to
the shore, and the greater part of those who escaped
passed by this medium.”
Some of the officers who were fortunately saved have
given us the following further particulars of this unfortu-
nate event.
“ The Anson sailed from Falmouth on Christrnas-eve,
on her station off the Black-rocks, as one of the look-out
frigates of the Channel fleet. In the violent storm of
Monday, blowing about W. to S. W. she stood across the
entrance of the channel, towards Stilly, made the Land’s
End, which they mistook for the Lizard, and bore up,
as they thought, for Falmouth. Still doubtful, however,
in the evening of Monday, Captain Lydiard stood off
again to the southward ; when a consultation being held,
it was once more retched to bear up for Falmouth. Run-
ning eastward and northward, still under the fatal persua-
sion, that the Lizard was on the north-west of them, they
did not discover their mistake till the man on the look-
out a-head, called out “breakers!” The ship was in-
stantaneously broaehed-to, and the best bower let go,
which happily brought her up; but the rapidity with


which the cable had veered out, made it impossible to
serve it, and it soon parted in the hawse-hole. The sheet
anchor was then let go, which also brought up the ship;
but after riding end-on for a short time, this cable parted
from the same cause, about eight in the morning, and the
ship went plump on shore, upon the ridge of sand which
separates the Loe Pool from the bay. Never did the sea
run more tremendously high. It broke over the ship’s
masts, which soon went by the board; the main-mast
forming a boating raft from the ship to the shore; and the
greater part of those who escaped, passed by this medium.
One of the men saved,reports, that Captain Lydiard was
near him on the main-mast; but he seemed to have lost
the use of his faculties, with horror of the scene, and
soon disappeared.”
We have not language to convey an adequate picture
of the terrific view which presented itself; but justice de-
mands that we notice the conduct of a worthy member
of a sect but too much vilified.
At a time when no one appeared on the ship’s deck,
and it was supposed that the work of death had ceased, a
methodist preacher, venturing his life through the surf,
got on board over the wreck of the main-mast, to see
if any more remained; some honest hearts followed him.
They found several persons still below, who could not get
up; among whom were two women and two children.
The worthy preacher and his party saved the two women,
and some of the men, but the children were lost. About
two P. M. the ship went to pieces; when a few more
men, who, for some crime, had been confined in irons
below, emerged from the wreck. One of these was
saved. By three o’clock, no appearance of the vessel re-
mained. She was an old ship —(a 64, we believe, cut
down) —which accounts for her beating to pieces so soon
on a sandy bottom.
The men who survived, were conveyed to Helston,
about two miles distant; where they were taken care of
by the magistrates, and afterwards sent to Falmouth, in
charge of the Regulating Captain at that port. General
report has stated the number drowned to be greater than


it really is ; but of the missing, we understand many are
deserters, who scampered <-ff as soon as they readied the
shore. Among the officers saved, are the following Ca-
ptain Sullivan, a passenger; Messrs. Hill and Brailey, mid-
shipmen ; Mr. Ross, assistant surgeon, and some others.
We regret to say that about fifty of our countrymen are
missing; amongst these unfortunate men is Captain
Charles Lydiard j also, the first lieutenant, a very valua-
ble officer; also the doctor, a very worthy man, and his
son ; besides some midshipman, and petty officers. The
principal things saved from the wreck are a few casks,
containing spirits, butter, &c. Captain Lydiard was
nearly half-way to the beach, when a most dreadful sea
overwhelmed him, so that he was seen no more!
The body of Captain Lydiard was found, and interred
with military honours. Several officers, both naval and mili-
tary, attended the funeral, together with the mayor, &c. of
Helston. The body was afterwards conveyed to his
family vault in Haslimere, Surrey. This worthy and dis-
tinguished officer was married to an amiable woman, by
whom he had five children. He was highly esteemed as a
gentleman; and as an officer, he was of sterling merit.
His conduct in attacking the Fourdroyant, (Admiral
Williametz), under the Spanish batteries, near the Ha-
vannah ;in the capture of the Spanish frigate Pomona,
under the batteries of Mure Castle; and at the capture of
Curacoa, obtained him a name for skill and bravery, that
will “ live after him,”
We are happy to hear that the inhabitants of Helston,
and its neighbourhood, have, in this instance, as well as
the late one of a transport, which was also wrecked, res-
cued their character from those odious epithets of savage
and barbarian, which have heretofore been thrown upon
them ; forby their unexampled and hazardous activity, all
the crew that remained on board,ami escaped a watery grave
by not being precipitate in getting on shore, were landed
by eleven o’clock ; and too much praise cannot be given,
that Mr. Tobias Roberts, shopkeeper, of Helston, does
not deserve, for the imminent and perilous danger he ran
by remaining close to the Anson, (w’hile the sea, in all its


rage broke over her mast high), lifting the benumbed crew
from impending ruin.
On the 31st of December, Mr. Rogers, the Coroner, took
an inquest on the bodies of Mr. Robert Smith, the Surgeon,
and Mr. Richard Leach, one of the midshipmen, belonging
to the Anson, in the church-yard, at Helston. Dead bodies
were continually washing on ashore in great numbers along
the coast, and most of them very much mangled and dis-
figured.
During the interval of the Anson being on the beach, the
situation of our brave seamen was perilous beyond descrip-
tion : the sea gunning mountains high, so that it was quite
impossible for any boat to live on the water; and the only
method which remained for the crew to land was, by ropes
from the masts to the beach (as fortunately she was thrown
with her masts towards the land), and through the assistance
of which, by the aid and blessing of a merciful and kind
providence, about two hundred and fifty were saved ftom
destruction.
We cannot help here recording, as an illustration of the
naval character, a most heroic and benevolent act of one of
these seamen in the hour of danger, 'i his brave fellow was
supporting himself in the water on a plank, expecting every
moment a watery grave. At this critical time, he per-
ceived one of his companions, who had been swimming for
about an hour in the vain hope of reaching land, in such
an exhausted state, that he could no longer persevere in his
exertions. Our hero magnanimously threw him the plank,
with which he had so long defended himself, desiring him
to take that, the only assistance he could at present give
him, while he would see how far he himselt could swim.
Having thus parted with his staff, he swam for about twenty
minutes, and fortunately met with another piece of the
wreck, by which he was enabled to prolong his worthy
existence, till a boat came to his relief. Mo sinceicly tuist
that the valour and commiseration of this noble tar may be
properly rewarded, whose merit is certainly uoithy of a
more exalted station.


Another anecdote of a more entertaining though, perhaps
less interesting nature, but equally authentic, has happily
reached us in time for insertion, J
One of the poor fellows, who narrowly escaped drowning
took refuge in the first cottage he could find. In this cot-
tage there happened to live an old lady and her niece, who re-
ceived the distressed mariner in the most kind and com-
passionate manner. As, however, they were provided with
no male apparel, and it was necessary that their guest should
have some comfortable cloathing, till his own was perfectly
dry, the niece supplied him with a change of her own; and
Jack having plenty of flannel soon recovered
his strength and spirits. Though plenty did not adorn their
board, yet a sufficiency was provided, and the hospitality
with which it was given, rendered it more delicious; suffice
it to say, tha.t the sailor passed a very comfortable night
here, and owing to a pressing invitation from the niece, who
thought it would be dangerous for him to stir out too soon
for fear of catching a cold that might be fatal, he also spent
two or three comfortable day. It was not, however the ap-
prehensions of catching cold, a phrase unknown to mariners
that induced Jack to make a longer stay; the fact was, he
became delighted with the conversation and manners of his
younger hostess, and as every hour of his stay tended to
to augment that delight, he at last declared to the old
woman his passion for the niece. This information was
by no means disagreeable to the latter, and the end of the
matter was, that our hero found a wife in 1 lelston ; he does
not therefore repent his being shipwrecked, but humorously
remarks, “ It is an ill wind that blows nobody good/’
The philanthropy of the inhabitants of Helston, in en-
deavouring to save their fellow creatures from perishing
by shipwreck, reminds us of another similar instance of
feeling and humanity, which was also united with courage;
and which we think, may, with great propriety be in-
troduced here, as a further stimulus to the people of sea
coasts to use, at all times on these occasions, their utmost
exertions in favor of distressed mariners.
A ship having been wrecked at the cape of Good Hope,


a guard was sent from Horse Island, consisting of thirty
men and a lieutenant, to the place where the ship lay, in
order to keep a strict look-out, and to prevent any of the
cargo being stolen. A gibbet was erected, and at the same
time an edict was issued, importing, that whoever should
come near that spot should be hanged immediately, with-
out trial, or sentence of judgment passed on him. From
this cause the compassionate inhabitants, who had gone
out on horseback to afford the wretched sufferers in the
ship some assistance, were obliged to return back without
being able to do them any set vice ; but, on the contrary,
were occular witnesses of the brutality and want of feeling
shewn by some persons on this occasion, who did not be-
stow a thought of affording their fellow-creatures, that sat
on the wreck perishing with cold, hunger, and thirst, and
were almost in the arms of death, the least assistance or
relief.
An old man of the name of Woltemad, by birth an Eu-
ropean, had a son in the citadel, who was a corporal, and
and among the first who had been ordered out, to Horse-
Island, where the guard was to be set for the preservation
of the shipwrecked goods. 'I his worthy veteran borrowed
a horse, and rode out in the morning, with a bottle of wine
and a loat of bread for his sons breakfast. This happened
so early that the gibbet had not been erected, nor the
edict posted up, to point out to the traveller the nearest
load to eternity. 1 his hoary sire had no sooner delivered
bis son’s breakfast, than he heard the lamentations of the
distressed crevwfrom the wreck, when he resolved to ride
his horse, which was a good swimmer, to the wreck, with
a view to save some of them. He repeated this dangerous
trip six times more, bringing each time two men alive on
shore, and thus saved in all fourteen persons.
The horse was by this time so much fatigued, that he did
not think it prudent to venture out again; but the cries and
entreaties of the poor wretches on the wreck increasing, he
ventured once more, which proved so unfortunate, that he
lost his own life, as on this occasion too many rushed upon
him at once, some of them catching hold of the horse’s tail,
and others of the bridle, by which means the horse, both


wearied out and now too heavy laden, turned head over
heels, and all were drowned together. When the storm
and waves had subsided, the ship w as found to lie at so small
a distance from the land, that a person might have almost
leaped from it on shore.
The East India Directors in Holland, on receiving this
intelligence, ordered one of their ships to be called after the
name of Woltemad, and the story of his humanity to be
painted on her stern ; they further enjoined the regency at
the Cape to provide for his descendants.
Unfortunately in the southern hemisphere they had not
the same sentiments of gratitude. The young corporal,
Woltemad, who had been an unavailing witness of his
father’s having sacrificed himself in the service of the com-
pany and of mankind, wished in vain to be gratified with
his father’s place, humble as it was, (keeper of the beasts in
the menagerie.) Stung with the disappointment, he had
left that ungrateful country, and was gone to Batavia, where
he died, before the news of so great and unexpected a recom-
mendation could reach him.


LOSS
OF THE
SIDNEY,
BOUND TO BENGAL,
Which ran upon a dangerous rock, May 20, 1806.
In the “Asiatic Mirror, (an Indian newspaper,) the
commander of the Sidney gives an account of her loss,
and the subsequent preservation of the greaterpart of the
crew, in a letter, which for the satisfaction of our readers,
is here copied verbatum.
SIR, Calcutta, October 14, 1806.
“The Sidney left Port Jackson on the 12th of April,
1806, bound to Bengal. Intending to proceed through
Dampier’s Straits, her course was directed as nearly as
possible in the track of Captain Hogan, of the Cornwallis,
which, as laid down in the charts, appears a clear safe pas-
sage. On the 20th of may, at one A.M. in lat. 3° 20'
south, long. 146° 50' east, we ran upon a most dangerous
rock or shoal; and as this reef is not noticed in any
map or chart, it appears that we were its unfortunate dis-
co vere r.
“On Sunday, over the taffrall, we found 25 fathoms
water; over the larboard gangway six fathoms; on the
starboard side only nine feet; and over the bows twelve
feet. One of the boats was immediately got out, with a
bower anchor; but on sounding ten fathoms distance
from the ship, found no ground at sixty fathoms.
“It must have been high water when we struck;
£


for at that time there was no appearance of any reef or
breaker; but as the water subsided, the shoal began to
shew itself with a number of small black rocks. The
ship had been striking very hard, and began to sue for-
ward. At three A.M. there were six feet water in the
hold, and increasing rapidly; at five o’clock the ship
was setting aft, and her top sides parting from the floor-
heads.
“ Upon consultation with my officers, it was the una-
nimous opinion, that the ship was irrecoverably gone, and
that no exertions could avail for her safety. We there-
fore employed all hands in getting the boats ready to
receive the crew, 108 in number. Eight bags of rice, six
casks of water, and a small quantity of salted beef and
pork, were put in the long-boat, as provisions for the
whole. We were prevented taking a large stock, as,
from the number of people, the three boats were barely
sufficient to receive the whole with safety.
“Weremained with the Sidney till five P.M. on the
21st of May, when there were three feet water on the or-
lop detk; we now thought it full time to leave the ship
to her fate, and to seek our safety in the boats. Accor-
dingly I embarked in the long-boat, with Mr. Trounce,
second officer, and 74 Lascars; Mr. iiobson, first officer,
and Stalkart, third, with l 6 Lascars, were in the cutter;
and the jolly boat was allotted to 15 Dutch Malays and
one Sepoy.
“Beingdesirous to ascertain the position of the reef,
by making the Admiralty islands, shaped our course ac-
cordingly, steering IS. by E. half E. During the night
it blew fresh, and the long-boat making much water, we
were obliged to lighten her, by throwing overboard a
great deal of lumber, and two casks of water. The three
boats kept close in company, the long-boat having the
jolly boat in tow. Finding at day-light that the cutter
sailed considerably better, I directed Mr. Kobson totake
the jolly-boat in tow. The wind increased as the morn-
ing advanced, and a heavy swell rising, at 10 A.M. the
jolly-boat sunk, while in tow by the cutter, and all on
board, to the number of 16, unfortunately perished,. It


was lamentable to witness the fate of these unhappy
men, and the more so, as it was not in our power to ren-
der them the smallest assistance.
“At noon on the 22d we saw the Admiralty islands,
bearing N.N.E. distant three or four leagues, and as we
had run about 58 miles in the boats, upon a N. by E.
half E. course, the situation of the shoal, on which the
Sidney struck, was accurately ascertained, and will be
found as above laid down.
“ From the Admiralty islands we continued standing to
the westward ; and on the 25th made a small island : we
stood towards it, and Irom its appearance I was induced to
land, in the hope of obtaining a supply of water. Mr.
Robson, myself, and 20 of the best of our hands, armed
with heavy clubs, brought from New Caledonia, our fire
arms being rendered useless from exposure to heavy rains,
approached in the cutter, and landed through a heavy surf,
to the utmost astonishment of the inhabitants, who, as far
as we could judge from appearance, had certainly never be-
fore seen people of our complexion. The men were tall
and well made, wearing their hair plaited and raised above
the head—they had no appearance of Malays, nor of
caffrees; and, excepting their colour, which was of a light
copper, they had the form and features of the natives of
Europe; they were entirely naked. We saw a number of
women, who were well formed, with mild pleasing fea-
tures.
“We were received on the beach by about 20 or 30 of
the natives, who immediately supplied each of us with a
cocoa nut. We then succeeded in making them under-
stand that we wanted water, upon which they made signs
for us to accompany them towards the interior of the
island:—we did so; but after walking above a mile, they
conducted us into a thiclf jungle, and as their number was
quickly increasing, 1 judged it imprudent to proceed fur-
ther, and returned to the beach, where I was alarmed to
find the natives had assembled to the number of 150 or up-
wards, armed with spears, eight or ten feet long. One of
them, an old man, of venerable appearance, and who seemed
b 2


to be their Chief, approached, and threw his spear at my
feet, expressive, as I understood it, that we should part
with our clubs in like manner. Perceiving at this time
a crowd of women to have got hold of the sternfast of the
cutter, and endeavouring to haul her on shore, from the
grapnoll with which w*e had come to, we hastily endeavour-
ed to gain the boat; the natives followed us closely, some
of them pointed their spears at us, as we retreated to the
boat, and some were thrown, though happily without
effect; and to us they appeared to be very inexpert in the
management of their weapons. On my getting into the
water, three or four of the natives followed me, threatening
to throw their spears, and when I was in reach of the boat,
one of them made a thrust, which was prevented taking
effect by the interference of Mr. Robson, who warded off
the weapon. When we had got into the boat, and were
putting off, they threw at least 200 spears, none of which
took effect, excepting one, which gave a severe wound to
my cook, entering immediately above the jaw, and passing
through the mouth.
“ Having thus escaped from this perilous adventure, we
pursued our course, and got as far as Dam pier’s Straits, as
favourably as our situation could well admit. Being now
within reach of land, the Lascars became impatient to be
put on shore. It was in vain that I endeavoured to
persuade them to persevere; they would not listen to argu-
ment, and expressed their wish, rather to meet with
immediate death on shore, than to be starved to death hi
the boats. Yielding to their opportunity, Jat length deter-
mined to land them on the N. W. extremity of the island
of Ceram, from whence they might travel to Amboyna in
two or three days. On the 9th of June, being off that part
of the island, Mr. Robson volunteered to land a part of the
people in the cutter, to return to the long-boat, and the
cutter to be then given to such farther part of the crew as
chose to join the party first landed, Mr. Robson accor-
dingly went on shore with the cutter ; but to my great mor-
tification, after waiting two days, there was no appearance
of his return or the cutter.
“ We concluded that the people had been detained either


by the Dutch or the natives; yet as the remaining part
of the Lascars were desirous to be landed, we stood in
with the long-boat, and put them on shore near the point
where we supposed the cutter to have landed her
people,
“ Our number in the long-boat was now reduced to
seventeen, viz. myself, Mr. Trounce, Mr. Stalkart, four-
teen Lascars, and others. Our stock of provisions con-
sisted of two bags of rice, and one gang cask of water;
with this stock we conceived we might hold out till we
reached Bencoolen, for which port we determined to
make the best of our way. —We fixed the allowance of
provisions to each man at one tea-cup full of rice and a
pint of water per diem ; but we soon found it necessary to
make a considerable reduction in this allowance.
“We proceeded on through the Straits of Bantam,
meeting in our course several Malay prows, none of which
took notice of us, excepting one, which gave chase for a
day, and would have come up with us, had we not got oft
under cover of a very dark night. Continuing our course,
we passed through the Straits of Sapay, where we caugh,
a large shark. Our spirits were much ehated by this va-
luable prize, which we lost no time in getting on board,
and, having kindled a tire in the bottom of the boat, he
was roasted with all expedition; and such was the
keenness and extent of our appetite, that although the
shark must have weighed 150 or ifiolbs. not a vestige of
it remained at the close of the day. We suffered most
severely from our indulgence ; on the following day we
were all afflicted with the most violent complaint of the
stomach and bowels, which reduced us exceedingly, and
left us spiritless and languid, insomuch that we now se-
riously despaired of our safety.
“On the 2d of July, I lost an old and faithful servant,
who died from want of sustenance. On the 4th we made
Java Head; and at the same time caught two large
boobies, which afforded all hands a most precious and re-
freshing meal. On the 9th, at midnight, came-to off
Pulo Penang, on the west coast of Sumatra. At day-
light we endeavoured to weigh our anchor, and to run
close in shore j but we were so much exhausted that our
b 3


united strength was insufficient to get up the anchor.
We made a signal of distress, on which a sandpan, with
two Malays, came off. As I was the only person in the
long-boat who had sufficient strength to move, I went on
shore with the. Malays. On landing, I found myself so
weak, that I fell upon the ground, and was obliged to be
carried to an adjoining house. Such refreshments as
the place afforded were immediately sent off to the
long-boat; and we recruited so quickly, that in two
days we found ourselves in a condition to proceed on our
voyage. On the 12th of July we weighed, and on the
Iffth anchored off Rat island, at Bencoolen.
** Here I met with an old friend, Captain Chauvet,
of the Perseverance, and whose kindness and humanity
I shall ever remember, and gratefully acknowledge. On
the day following my arrival, I waited on the resi-
dent, Mr. Farr, from whom I received every kindness
and attention.
“ I left Bencoolen on the 17th of August, in the Per-
severance, for Penang, where I arrived on the 2?th, and
where I was most agreeably surprised to meet with
my late chief mate, Mr. Robson, who, with the Lascars,
landed on Ceram, and had safely reached Amboyna,
where they were received by Mr. Cranstoun, the Dutch
governor, with a humanity and benevolence that re-
flect honour on his character. The governor supplied
them with whatever their wants required; he accommo-
dated Mr. Robson at his own table, and on his leaving
Amboyna, furnished him with money for himself and
and his people, refusing to take any acknowledgement
or receipt for the amount. He also gave M. Robson
letters to the governor-general of Batavia, recommending
him to his kind offices. Such honourable conduct from
the governor of a foreign country, and with which we
were at war, cannot be too wide!} 7 promulgated.
“From Amboyna, Mr Robson embarked in the
Dutch trigate Pallas, for Batavia, and on their passage
thither, teil in with and was captured by his Majesty’s
ships drey hound and Harrier, and brought to Prince of
Wales’s island.


“ From Penang I went to Bengal, with the Varuna,
Captain Dennison, and arrived safely in Calcutta a few
days ago.”
All the other accounts which we have seen, relative to
the calamitous loss of this vessel, are mere repetitions
of the captain's letter. In one, however, it is stated, that
the resistance which they met with from the natives,
originated entirely with the women; who, notwith-
standing their seeming mildness, were the first transgres-
sors. They intended to make themselves mistresses of
the cutter; and by their wanton proceedings, the men
were stimulated to hostilities. These people, like all
those whom nature has left in a wild state, evidently de-
lighted in plunder.
When Mr. Robson landed on Ceram, it was his inten-
tion to return to the long-boat, with all possible speed,
but he was detained on shore by the Lascars, who in-
sisted on his accompanying them to Amboyna. The
remaining part of the Lascars, who were afterwards lan-
ded, overtook the first party ; and from these Mr. Robson
learned that the long-boat bad declined waiting for him
any longer, and was now proceeding on through the straits
of Bantam. Indeed this gentleman did not suppose
that Capt. Forrest would wait for him so long as he did,
or he would certaiiNy have watched an opportunity of
escaping from the Lascars, and returning to him. He
now made up his mind of prosecuting his journey to
Amboyna, where he met with the kind reception that has
been already stated, and which far exceeded his ex-
pectations.
Except the crew of the jolly boat, who were all lost, the
rest were happily, and indeed we may add, most wonder-
fully preserved.


DREADFUL
FAMINES AT SEA,
AND THEIR
Melancholy Consequences.
Letters received from St. Helena, in 1802, give z
most singular and affecting narrative respecting six deserters
from the artillery of the island. Their extraordinary ad-
ventures produced a course of inquiry on the 12th of De-
cember last, when John Brown, one of the survivors, de-
livered the following account upon oath, before Captain
Desfontaine, president, Lieutenant B. Hodson, and Ensign
Young.
«In June, 1799, I belonged to the first company of ar-
tillery, in the service of this garrison, and on the 10th of
that month, about half an hour before parade time,
M’Kinnon, gunner, and orderly of the 2d company, asked
me if 1 was willing to go with him on board an American
ship, called the Columbia, Captain Henry Lelar, the only
skip then in the Roads. After some conversation, I agreed,
and met him about seven o’clock at the play-house, where I
found one M'Quinn, of Major Searle’s Company, another
man called Brighouse, another called Parr, and the sixth,
Matthew Convay.
“ Parr was a good seaman, and said he would take us to
the island of Ascension, or lay off the harbour till the Co-
lumbia could weigh anchor and come out. We went down
about eight o’clock to the West Rocks, where the American
boat was waiting for us, manned with three American sea


men, which took us alongside the Columbia. We went on
board. Parr went down into the cabin; and we changed
our clothes after having been on board half an hour.
“ Brighousc and Conway proposed to cut out a whale-boat
from out of the harbour, to prevent the Columbia from
being suspected; which they effected, having therein a coil
of rope and five oars, with a large stone she was moored by.
This happened about eleven o’clock at night.
“ We observed lanterns passing on the line towards the
Sea-gate, and hearing a great noise, thought we were missed,
and searched for. We immediately embarked in the whale-
boat, with twenty-five pounds of bread in a bag, and a small
keg of water, supposed to contain about thirteen gallons,
one compass, and one quadrant, given to us by the com-
manding officer of the Columbia; but in our great hurry
the quadrant was either left behind or dropped over-
board,
“ We then left the ship, pulling with two oars only, to get
a-head of her. The boat was half full of water, and no-
thing to bale her out. In this condition we rowed out to
sea, and lay off the island a great distance, expecting the
American ship hourly.
“ About twelve o’clock the second day, no ship appear-
ing, by Parr s advice, we bore away, steering N. by W. and
and then N. N. W. for the island of Ascension, using our
handkerchiefs as substitutes for sails. We met with a gale
of wind, which continued two days. The weather then
became very fine, and we supposed we had run ten miles an
hour. M’Kinnon kept a reckoning, with pen, ink, and
paper, supplied by the Columbia, as also charts and
maps.
“ We continued our course till about the 18th in the
morning, when we saw a number of birds, but no land.
About twelve that day Parr said he was sure we must be
past the island, accounting it to be eight hundred miles
from St. Helena. We then each of us took our shirt, and
with them made a small sprit-sail, and laced our jackets and


trowsers together at the waistband, to keep us warm; and
then altered our course to VV. by N. thinking to make Rio
de Janeiro, on the American coast. Provisions running
very short, we allowanced ourselves only one ounce of bread
for twenty-four hours, and two mouthfuls of water.
" We continued until the 20th, when all our provisions
were expended. On the 27th, M‘Quinn took a . piece of
bamboo in his mouth to chew, and we all followed his
example. On that night, it being my turn to steer the
boat, and remembering to have read of persons eating their
shoes, I cut a piece off one of mine; but it being soaked
with salt water, I was obliged to spit it out, and take the
inside sole, which I ate part of, and distributed to the rest,
but found no benefit from it.
" On the Ist of July, Parr caught a dolphin with a graff,
that had been left in the boat. We all fell on our knees,
and thanked God for his goodness to us. We tore up the
fish, and hung it to dry: about four we ate part of it,
which agreed with us pretty well. On this fish we sub-
sisted till the 4th, about eleven o’clock, when, finding the
whole expended, bones and all, Parr, myself, Brighouse,
and Conway, proposed to scuttle the boat, and let her go
down, to put us out of our misery. The other two object-
ed, observing, that God who had made mail, always found
him something to eat.
“ On the sth, about eleven, M‘Kinnon proposed, that it
would be better to cast lots for one of us to die, in order to
save the rest; to which we consented. William Parr, being
sick two days before with the spotted fever, was excluded.
He wrote the numbers out, and put them in a hat, which
we drew out blindfolded, and put them in our pockets.
Parr then asked whose lot it was to die—none of us know-
ing what numbers we had in our pockets —each one praying
to God that it might be his lot. It was agreed that No. 5
should die, and the lots being unfolded, M‘Kinnon’s was
No. 5.
u We had agreed, that he whose lot it was should bleed
himself to death ; for which purpose we had provided our-
selves with nails sharpened, which we got from the boat.


M‘Kinnon with one of them cut himself in three places, in
his hand foot, and wrist, and praying God to forgive him,
died in about a quarter of an hour.
“ Before he was quite cold, Brighouse, with one of those
nails, cut a piece of flesh off his thigh, and hunor it up
leaving the body in the boat. About three hours after we
ate of it—only a very small bit. This piece lasted us until
the 7th. We dipped the body every two hours into the sea,
to preserve it. Parr having found a piece of slate in the
bottom of the boat, he sharpened it on the other large stone
and with it cut another piece of the thigh, which lasted us
until the Bth ; when, it being my watch, and observing the
water about break of day to change colour, I called* the
rest, thinking we were near shore; but saw no land, it not
being quite day-light.
As soon as day appeared, we discovered land right a-head,
and steered towards it. About eight in the morning we
were close to the shore. There being a very heavy surf, we
endeavoured to turn the boat's head to it: but being very
weak, we were unable. Soon alter the boat upset! Myself,
Conway, and Parr, got on shore, M'Quinn and Brighouse
weie drowned.
“ We discovered a small hut on the beach, in which were
an Indian and his mother, who spoke Portuguese; and I un-
derstanding that language, learnt that there was a village
about three miles distant, called Belmont. This Indian
went to the village, and gave information that the French
had landed, and in about two hours the governor of the
village, (a clergyman), with several armed men, took Con-
way and Parr prisoners, tying them by their hands and
feet, and slinging them on a bamboo stick ; and in this man-
ner took them to the village. I being very weak, remained
in the hut some time, but was afterwards taken.
“ On our telling them we were English, we were imme-
diately released, and three hammocks provided. We were
taken in them to the governor’s house, who let us lie on his
own bed, and gave us milk and rice; butnot having eaten any
thing for a considerable time, we were lock-jawed, and coil


tinued so till the 23d, during which time the governor wrote
to the governor of St. Salvador, who sent a small schooner
to a place called Porto Seguro, to take us to St. Salvador.
We were then conducted to Porto Seguro on horseback,
passing through Santa Croix, where we remained about ten
days. Afterwards wc embarked ; and, on our arrival at St.
Salvador, Parr, on being questioned by the governor, answer-
ed, “ that our ship had foundered at sea, and we had saved
ourselves in the boat; that the ship's name was the Sally, of
Liverpool, and belonged to his father, and was last from
Cape Coast Castle, on the coast of Africa, to touch at the
Ascension for turtle, and then bound for Jamaica.” Parr
said he was the captain.
“ We continued at St. Salvador about 13 days, during
which time the inhabitants made up a subscription of
2001. each man. We then embarked in the Marla, a
Portuguese ship, for Lisbon ; Parr as mate, Conway
boatswain’s-raate, myself being sickly as passenger. In
thirteen days we arrived at Hio de Janeiro. Parr and
Conway sailed for Lisbon, and 1 was left in the hospital.
In about three months Captain Blphinstone, of the Dio-
mede, pressed me into his majesty’s service, giving me
the choice of remaining on that station or to proceed to
the admiral at the Cape. I chose the latter, and was put,
with seven suspected deserters, on board the Ann, a Bo-
tany Bay ship, in irons, with the convicts. When I ar-
rived at .the Cape I was put on board the Lancaster, of
64 guns. I never entered. lat length received my dis-
charge ; since which I engaged in the Duke of Clarence
as a seaman. I was determined to give myself up the
first opportunity, in order to relate ray sufferings to the
men at this garrison, to deter them from attempting so
mad a scheme again.
“ Tn attending to the above narrative, as simple as it is
affecting, we cannot help noticing the justice of Provi-
dence, so strikingly exemplified in the melancholy fate
of M’Kinnon, the deluder of these unhappy men, and
the victim of his own illegal and disgraceful scheme.
May his fate prove a memento to soldiers and sailors,
and a useful though awful lesson to the encouragers and
abettors of desertion.”


THE following is an account of another famine, given
by Captain Bradshaw,commander of the Andalusia, in
a letter, dated Halifax, April 30, 175£>.
On the 27th day of February, about two o’clock in the
afternoon, we saw a vessel without masts, about three
miles to leeward of vs; and immediately bore down to
see what she was: I found it to be the Dolphin sloop.
Captain Baron, from the Canaries, bound to New York ;
they had been from the Canaries ever since September
11th, 165 days; 115 of which they had nothing to eat,
I sent my boat on board to see what condition they were
in ; ray people called to me and told me they were help-"
less and starving, and desired to know whether I would
take them on board.—l ordered my people to put them in
the boat, and bring them on board, which accordingly
they did. When they came alongside our ship we were
obliged to haul them in with ropes, they were so very
weak : there were the captain and seven others; but
such poor miserable creatures sure never were seen: had
it been a week longer they must all have died. When I
came to examine the captain and the people, they told
nie, that they had not any provisions for upwards of three
months before they saw me; they had eaten their dog,
their cats, and all their shoes, and in short, every thing
that was eatable on board. On the 10th of January they
all agreed to cast lots fur their lives, which accordingly they
did ; the shortest lot was to die; the next shortest to be
the executioner. The lot fell upon Anthony Gallitia, a '
Spanish Gentleman, a passenger; they shot him through
the head, which they cut off and threw overboard ; they
then took out his bowels and ate them, and afterwards
ate all the remaining part of the body, which lasted but a
very short time. The captain told me, they w'ere about
to cast lots a second time, but it happened very luckily
that he bethought himself of a pair of breeches, which he
had lined with leather; he soon found them, took out
the lining, and cut off for each man’s share a piece of
about an inch and a half square, for the day’s allowance;
that, with the grass that grew upon deck, was all the sup-
port they had for about twenty days before I met with
them: the grass was in some places four or live inches
high. The captain brought on board the remaining part
c


of the leather lining, which I have got, and a piece of
the same that was the allowance of one man for the day.
No words in my power to express, are sufficientto describe
the truly deplorable and wretched condition these poor
unfortunate sufferers were in when I met with them.
During Lord Anson’s voyage round the world, the
Spaniards fitted out a squadron of ships (to traverse the
views and, enterprizes of the English vessels),, one of
which, the Admiral’s ship, named the Asia, of 66 guns,
when off Cape Morn, was reduced to such infinite dis-
tress, that after every bind of sustenance failed, the
sailors gave four dollars a piece for every rat that could,
lie caught ; and some little time previous to this, a sai- f
lor who died on board, had his death concealed by his
brother, who, during that time, lay in the same ham-
mock with the corpse, only to receive the dead man’s al-
lowance of provisions. In, this shocking situation, they
were alarmed (.if their honors were capable of augmen-
tation) by the discovery of a conspiracy among the
marines, which was to* massacre the officers and the crew
of the ship, that they might satisfy their hunger by eat-
ing their bodies. But their designs were discovered,
when just upon the point of execution, by means of one
of the- conspirators, and three ofithe ringleaders were put
to death. At length, though the conspiracy was sup-
pressed, yet by the complicated misfortunes of sickness,,
fetigue, and hunger, which could not be alleviated until
tioo late, the greatest part of the ship’s company died a
lingering and painful death ; so that when the ship ar-
rived. at the River de la Plate, out of nearly seven-
htnudredimen, only about fifty were remaining alive, and
scarcely able to. crawl for want of nourishment.
We have also* the following account of forty-two per-*
sons who perished by famine and shipwreck, near Spits-
bergen, in the year 1746.
John Cornelius, of Munifeeuy being ordered to Spitz-
berg.cn, to catch whales, he set sail in aigalliot, on the 6th
at .\3ay, 1746,. and arrived on, the 3d of June following
near Spitsbergen,.with, an intention to anchor in the buy,.


but was by the vast floods of ice-shoals forced to keep out
at sea. After having in vain cruised up and down among
the ice-shoals, they got into the bay, but perceiving-two
whales farther at sea, they sent out their sloop in pursuit
of them.
Whilst they were rowing up and down, to watch die
motions of these creatures, they discovered at a distance
a great ice-shoal, with something white upon it, which at
fi-rst sight they imagined to be bears (they being generally
white there;) but one Ellert Johnson, who was in the
sloop to manage the harpoon, judging by the motion that
it was something else, persuaded them to row that way,
which being done accordingly; they not long afterwards
perceived the same to be a piece of a rope belonging to'
the sails of a ship, which was held up by a man as a sig-
nal of the utmost distress; so they rowed up to it with all
the oars they had, and coming near; found, to their great
surprise, four living men, and one dead one, all English-
men, upon the ice-shoal, who, upon their bended knees,
expressed their joy and thankfulness for so unexpected a
deliverance from the jaws of death. They were taken
into the sloop, and curried to the bay aboard the ship.
These unfortunate men had cut a large hole, in the
nature of a subterraneous cave, into the ice, and round
the entrance thereof had placed the pieces of ice that
were cut out of the concavity, to defend themselves against
the violence of the winds and waves. In this hole they
had spent fourteen days, it being so long since they had
lost their ship. At first there were in all forty-two of
them, and they had saved some victuals and tools, with
their sloop. The commander, however, perceiving, after
a little while, that it was impossible for them to hold ©ut
long on the ice-shoal, resolved to go ashore in the sloop,
with seventeen of his men, and afterwards to send word
back how matters stood there. This was done accord-
ingly, but it blowing very hard, and they not having
heard the least tidings of them since, they were afraid
that they w ere drowned before they reached the shore.
There were twenty-four left upon the ice-shoal, but the
want of provisions increasing daily amongst them, and


they being reduced to a starving condition, and expecting
nothing but present death, resolved to divide themselves,
and to get upon' several other ice-shoals, in hopes, by
some chance or other, to come near the shore; but whe-
ther some of them got ashore, or were taken up by some
ships, or swallowed up by the waves, they were not able
to tell.
Certain it is, that four of them, the miserable remnants
of forty-two, were found sitting together upon this ice-
shoal, overwhelmed with affliction, without any hopes of
being saved from the last extremity, which they were re-
duced to by frost and hunger, before the Dutch ship
came in sight of them, having had nothing to feed upon
for some time but a leathern belt, which they had divided
and eaten, share and share alike, till it w r as all consumed.
After they were brought to the Dutch ship, the surgeon
took all imaginable care for their recovery, notwithstand-
ing which, three of them died in a few days after; so that
of forty-two, wherewith this ship was manned, no more
than one escaped with life, who arriving in September,
in the galliot, the Delft, upon the Meuse; from
thence he returned to England, his native country.
Plummer, Printer, Seethin^-lane,




