

e-ru
*\S3
C('U <
LAND REFOEM LEAGUE.
Tract No. 1.
Cjje fdg[rt to % Use i\t dsartfj.
HEEBEET SPEITCEE.
u On the Land Question I am of opinion that the
u State should he the sole landlord, and that it is con-
u trary to the soundest economic , social , and political
u principles for the State to alienate the land. Ido not
u see any subject of political activity equal to this for
u thoroughly meeting the ?condition of the people 1 question ,
u and aiding to solve the problem of vjhat will enable the
11 State to contribute its share towards helping 1 the poor
u 1 who are getting poorer ,? not by degrading eleemosynary
?gifts, but by offering to earnest and willing humanity
u the most favorable possible surroundings for its sphere
11 of labor and utility ?Electoral Address, Argus,
January 3rd, 1868.
3SBlhram:
ROBERT BELL, PRINTER, LITTLE COLLINS ST. EAST.
1870.
FOR GRATUITOUS DISTRIBUTION.


I
V
>?


INTRODUCTORY.
? Educate your party,? formulates most appropriately the
duty nearest at hand of earnest, thoughtful, and humane politi-
cians in these times.
Desirous of contributing 1 my mite towards the general ame-
lioration, T invite the attention of the electors of the colony to
the following extract from the writings of Herbert Spencer?
(? Social Statics,? Chap, IX.) With the electors of the colony
rests the settlement of the Land Question. With but little ex-
ception, there seems to be no appreciation amongst our quasi-
legislators, of the immense interests involved in the alienation of
the public domain. The selection of the present remarks from
Spencer is not made because they best explain the subject, but
because the tendency of the argument has appeared suitable to
meet candid minds desirous of the truth, but which have not
hitherto had opportunities of examining the subject. It is proposed
to follow up this initiatory effort by pamphlets from time to time
with the hope that some stand may be taken to prevent the abject
and servile imitation of old country legislation ; at least in those
particulars where the whole weight of the conclusions of modern
political economists demonstrates past and existing legislation to
be barbarous and unjust.
The recent ventilation of the Land Question in the Imperial
Parliament has produced in the journals and periodicals such a
searching criticism of the basis of the tenure of land generally, as
appears to warrant the conclusion that further and fundamental
changes are imminent. Manhood suffrage, combined with educa-
tion, will culminate in the ? lower orders? asserting their true
position in the scale of humanity. Of what avail to preach tem-
perance, frugality, and habits of accumulation to the millions, who
have not distributed to them by the te rent, wages, and labor?
theory enough to sustain life healthily ? There can hardly be any
mockery more bitter than that proffered by the self-complacent
moralists, who commend to the public, as the cure for pauperism,
the cultivation of habits of thrift and self-denying exertion
amongst the ? masses.? Fancy the possibility of |d. or Id. for
shirt making to half-starved seamstresses, or 6s. or 7s. per week


to Dorset laborers, being economised so that a more ind" indent
spirit would be cultivated.
The whole matter hinges on the ? distribution of wealth,? and,
as hereafter I may have the opportunity to demonstrate, it is a
question of legislation pure and simple. lam happy in the con-
viction that there are some in our midst who thoroughly under-
stand the relationship of the u theory of rent? to that of the
welfare of the people, hut who, unfortunately, succumb to an
ignoble despair of the possibility of stemming the current of tra-
ditional legislation, before which we are drifting into the same
pauperisation that is the curse of all so-called civilised countries.
With our present system, the reproduction of the squa l or, dis-
tress, anguish, and despair, that are the concomitants of existing
land legislation all over the world, is a mere question of time
and increase of population. That u wealth increases poverty,
? and that the richer a country becomes the greater is the number
? of its poor and the more deplorable is their distress, are positive
u truths.? ?? Wealth contributes to pauperism,? when the law of
the land encourages and fosters the aggregation of enormous
foi tunes in a few hands, by allowing such accumulations to he
made by the robbery of the natural ? commercial values? of the
people, hence rendering poverty inevitable with the many, who
by the jugglery of law are doomed to live really if not nominally
the slaves of the landed aristocracy.
My earnest appeal to the electors of the Colony is, return Repre-
sentatives to Parliament who will cause the instant and peremp-
tory cessation of the sale of the Crown Lands. Then the State
should lease the public domain for thirty years, with security of
tenure to the lessees, subject to revisal of the rent on the expiry of
the lease.
Where would our land-rackets, dummy-selectors, and back-stairs
influence be if, instead of the enormous influences, political, social,
and moral, which inhere in the present system, the real use of
the soil were all that the State alienated ? The formation of a
Land Reform League to carry out the propositions advocated in
this pamphlet, it is to be hoped, will be at once inaugurated.
W. H. GRESHAM.
46 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne,
26th October, 1870.


Site 'iliglit to the disc of the C-oetli.
1. Given a race of beings having like claims to
pursue the objects of their desires ?given a world
adapted to the gratification of those desires?a world
into which such beings are similarly born, and it
unavoidably follows that they have equal rights to the
use of this world. For if each of them u has freedom
? to do all that he wills provided he infringes not the
? equal freedom of ang other then each of them is
free to use the earth for the satisfaction of his wants,
provided he allows all others the same liberty. And
conversely, it is manifest that no one, or part of them,
may use the earth in such a way as to prevent the
rest from similarly using it; seeing that to do this is
to assume greater freedom than the rest, and conse-
quently to break the law.
2. Equity, therefore, does not permit property in
land. For if one portion of the earth?s surface may
justly become the possession of an individual, and
may be held by him for his sole use and benefit, as a
thing to which he has an exclusive right, then other
portions of the earth?s surface may be so held; and
eventually the whole of the earth?s surface may bo so
held ; and our planet may thus lapse altogether into
private hands. Observe now the dilemma to which
this leads. Supposing the entire habitable globe to be
so enclosed, it follows that if the landowners have a
valid right to its surface, all who are not landowners,
have no right at all to its surface. Hence, such can
exist on the earth by sufferance only. They are all
trespassers. Save by the permission of the lords of
? Every man lias freedom to do all that he wills, provided he infringes not
the equal freedom of any other man.? ?(Proved in Chap. 6).


the soil, they can have no room for the soles of their
feet. Nay, should the others think fit to deny them
a resting place, these landless men might equitably be
expelled from the earth altogether. If then the
assumption that land can be held as property, involves
that the whole globe may become the private domain
of a part of its inhabitants ; and if, by consequence,
the rest of its inhabitants can then exercise their
faculties ?can then exist even ?only by consent of
the landowners; it is manifest, that an exclusive pos-
session of the soil necessitates an infringement of the
law of equal freedom. For, men who cannot ? live
? and move and have their being? without the leave
of others, cannot be equally free with those others.
3. Passing from the consideration of the possible,
to that of the actual, we find yet further reason to
deny the rectitude of property in land. It can never
be pretended that the existing titles to such property
are legitimate ; should any one think so, let him look
in the chronicles. Yiolence, fraud, the prerogative of
force, the claims of superior cunning?these are the
sources to which those titles may be traced. The
original deeds were written with the sword, rather
than with the pen: not lawyers, but soldiers, were
the conveyancers ; blows were the current coin given
in payment ; and for seals, blood was used in prefer-
ence to wax. Could valid claims be thus constituted ?
Hardly. And if not, what becomes of the pretenssion
of all subsequent holders of estates so obtained ?
Does sale or bequest generate a right where it did
not previously exist ? Would the original claimants
be uon-suited at the bar of reason, because the thing
stolen from them had changed hands ? Certainly not;
and if one act of transfer can give no title, can many ?
No : though nothing be multiplied for ever, it will
not produce one. Even the law recognises this prin-
ciple. An existing holder must, if called upon,
substantiate the claims of those from whom he
purchased or inherited his property ; and any flaw


in the original parchment, even though the property
should have had a score intermediate owners, quashes
his right.
u But time,? say some, ?is a great legalise!*.
Immemorial possession must be taken to constitute a
legitimate claim. That which has been held from age
to age as private property, and has been bought and
sold as such, must now be considered as irrevocably
belonging to individuals.? To which proposition a
willing assent shall be given when its propounders
can assign it a definite meaning. To do this,
however, they must find satisfactory answers to such
questions as ?How long does it take for what was
originally a wrong to grow into a right? At what
rate per annum do invalid claims become valid ? If
a title gets perfect in a thousand years, how much
more than perfect will it be in two thousand years ?
?and so forth. For the solution of which they will
require a new calculus.
Whether it may be expedient to admit claims of a
certain standing, is not the point. We have here
nothing to do with considerations of conventional
privilege or legislative convenience. We have simply
to enquire what is the verdict given by pure equity
in the matter. And this verdict enjoins a protest
against every existing pretension to the individual
possession of the soil; and dictates the assertion, that
the right of mankind at large to the earth?s surface
is still valid; all deeds, customs, and laws, notwith-
standing.
4. Hot only have present land tenures an inde-
fensible origin, but it is impossible to discover any
mode in which land can become private property.
Cultivation is commonly considered to give a legiti-
mate title. He who has reclaimed a tract of ground
from its primitive wildness, is supposed to have
thereby made it his own. But if his right is disputed,
by what system of logic can he vindicate it ? Let us
listen a moment to his pleadings.


? Hallo, you sir I? cries the cosmopolite to some
backwoodsman, smoking at the door of his shanty,
? by what authority do you take possession of these
? acres that you have cleared ; round which you have
? put up a snake fence, and on which you have built
? this log house P ?
?By what authority ? I squatted here because
? there was no one to say nay?because I was as much
?at liberty to do so as any other man. Besides, now
? that I have cut down the wood, and ploughed and
? cropped the ground, this farm is more mine than
? yours, or anybody?s ; and I mean to keep it,?
?Ay, so you all say. But Ido not yet see how
? you have substantiated your claim. When you came
? here you found the land producing trees?sugar-
? maples, perhaps; or may be it was covered with
? prairie-grass and wild strawberries. Well, instead of
u these, you made it yield wheat, or maize, or
? tobacco. Now, I want to understand how, by
? exterminating one set of plants, and making the soil
? bear another set in their place, you have constituted
? yourself lord of this soil for all succeeding time.?
? Oh, those natural products which I destroyed
? were of little or no use ; whereas I caused the earth
?to bring _ forth things good for food?things that
? help to give life and happiness.?
? Still you have not shewn why such a process
? makes the portion of earth you have so modified
? yours. What is it that you have done ? You have
? turned over the soil to a few inches in depth with a
? spade or a plough; you have scattered over this
? prepared surface a few seeds; and you have gathered
? the fruits which the sun, rain, and air, helped the
? soil to produce, Just tell me, if you please, by what
? magic have these acts made you sole owner of that
? vast ma�rof matter, having for its base the surface
?of your estate, and for its apex the centre of the
a globe ? all of which it appears you would mono-
polise to yourself and your descendants for ever.?
?Well, if it is not mine, whose is it? I have


u dispossessed nobody. When I crossed the Missis-
? sippi yonder, I found nothing but the silent woods.
u If some one else had settled here, and made this
u clearing, he would have had as good a right to the
? location as I have. I have done nothing but what
? any other person was at liberty to do, had he come
? before me. Whilst they were unreclaimed, these
u lands belonged to all men ?as much to one as to
? another?and they are now mine simply because I
? was the first to discover and improve them. ??
? You say truly, when you say that 1 whilst they
? ? were unreclaimed these lands belonged to all men.?
(l And it is my duty to tell you that they belong to
u all men still; and that your improvements, as you
? call them, cannot vitiate the claim of all men. You
u may plough and harrow, and sow and reap ; you
? may turn over the soil as often as you like ; but all
? your manipulations will fail to make that soil yours,
u which was not yours to begin with. Let me put a
? case. Suppose now that in the course of your
u wanderings you come upon an empty house, which
u in spite of its dilapidated state takes your fancy;
? suppose that with the intention of making it your
u abode, you expend much time and trouble in
? repairing it?that you paint, and paper, and white-
t( wash, and at considerable cost bring it into a
? habitable state. Suppose farther, that on some fatal
u day a stranger is announced, who turns out to be
? the heir to whom this house has been bequeathed;
? and that this professed heir is prepared with all the
? necessary proofs of his identity: what becomes of
u your improvements ? Do they give you a valid title
u to the house ? Do they quash the title of the
? original claimant ??
? No. ?
u Neither, then, do your pioneering operations give
u you a valid title to this land. Neither do they
? quash the title of its original claimants?the human
u race. The world is God?s bequest to mankind. All
? men are joint heirs to it; you amongst the number.


? excepts,? are their delight. They have so great a
faith in the u the judicious mean? that they would
scarcely believe an oracle, if it uttered a full length
principle. Were you to enquire of them whether the
earth turns on its axis from east to west, or from west
to east, you might almost expect the reply: u A little
?of both,? or ? not exactly either.? It is doubtful
whether they would assent to the axiom that the whole
is greater than its part, without making some qualifi-
cation. They have a passion for compromises. To
meet their taste, Truth must always bo spiced with a
little Error. They cannot conceive of a pure, defi-
nite, entire, and unlimited law. And hence, in discus-
sions like the present, they are constantly petitioning
for limitations : always wishing to abate, and modify,
and moderate : ever protesting against doctrines being
pursued to their ultimate consequences.
But it behoves such to recollect that ethical truth
is as exact and as peremptory as physical truth ; and
that in this matter of land tenure, the verdict of
morality must be distinctly yea or nay. Either men
have a right to make the soil private property or they
have not. There is no medium. We must choose one
of the two positions. There can be no half-and-half
opinion. In the nature of things the fact must be
either one way or the other.
If men have not such a right, we are at once deli-
vered from the several predicaments already pointed
out. If they have such a right, then is that right
absolute, sacred, nut on any pretence to be violated.
If they have such a right, then is his Grace of Leeds
justified in warning off tourists from Ben MacDhui, the
Duke of Atholl in closing Glen Tilt, the Duke of
Buccleugh in denying sites to the Free Church, and
the Duke of Sutherland in banishing the High-
landers to make room for sheep-walks. If they have
such a right, then it would be proper for the sole pro-
prietor of any kingdom?a Jersey or Guernsey,, for
example?to impose just what regulations he might
choose on its inhabitants: to tell them that they should


not live on his property, unless they professed a cer-
tain religion, spoke a particular language, paid him a
specified reverence, adopted an authorised dress, and
conformed to all other conditions he might see fit to
make. If they have such a right, then is there truth
in that truth of the ultra-Tory school, that the land-
owners are the only legitimate rulers of a country ?
that the people at large remain in it only by the land-
owner?s permission, and ought, consequently, to sub-
mit to the landowner?s rule, and respect whatever
institutions the landowners set up. There is no escape
from these inferences. They are necessary corollaries
to the theory that the earth can become individual
property ; and they can only bo repudiated by deny-
ing that theory.
7. After all, nobody does implicitly believe in land-
lordism. We hear of estates being held under the
King (that is, the State), or of their being kept in
trust for the public benefit, and not that they are in-
alienable possessions of their nominal owners. More-
over, we daily deny landlordism by our legislation.
Is a canal, a railway, or a turnpike-road to be made ?
We do not scruple to seize just as many acres as may
be requisite, allowing the holders compensation for the
capital invested. We do not wait for consent. An
Act of Parliament supersedes the authority of title
deeds,'and serves proprietors with notices to quit,
whether they will or not. Either this is equitable or
it is not. Either the public are free to resume as
much of the earth?s surface as they think fit, or the
titles of the landowners must be considered absolute,
and all national works must be postponed until lords
and squires please to part with the requisite slices of
their estates. If we decide that the claims of indi-
vidual ownership must give way, then we imply the
right of the nation at large to the soil is supreme ?
that the right of private possession only exists by gene-
ral consent ?that general consent being withdrawn it
(?.eases, or, in other words, that it is no right at all.


B.' ?But to what does this doctrine, that men are
u .equally entitled to the use of the earth lead? Must
u we return to the times of unenclosed wilds, and sub-
? sist on roots, berries, and game? Or are we to be
u left to the management of Messrs. Fourier, Owen,
? Louis Blanc, and Co. ??
Neither. Such a doctrine is consistent with the
highest state of civilisation ; may be carried out with-
out involving a community of goods ; and need cause
no very serious revolution in existing arrangements.
The change required would simply be a change of
landlords. Separate ownerships would merge into
the joint-stock ownership of the public. Instead of
being in the possession of individuals, the country
would be held by the great corporate body?Society.
Instead of leasing his acres from an isolated pro-
prietor, the farmer would lease them from the nation.
Instead of paying his rent to the agent of Sir John
or his Grace, he would pay it to an agent or deputy
agent of the community. Stewards would be public
officials instead of private ones ; and tenancy the
only land tenure.
A state of things so ordered would be in perfect
harmony with the moral law. Under it all men
would be equally landlords ; all men would be alike
free to become tenants. A, B, C, and the rest,
might compete for a vacant farm as now, and one of
them might take that farm, without in any way vio-
lating the principles of pure equity. All wo.uld be
equally free to bid ; all would be equally free to
refrain. And when the farm had been let to A, B,
or C, all parties would have done that which they
willed: the one in choosing to pay a given sum to
his fellowmen for the use of certain lands, the others
in refusing to pay that sum. Clearly, therefore, on
such a system, the earth might be enclosed, occupied,
and cultivated, in entire subordination to the law of
equal freedom.
0. No doubt great difficulties must attend the


resumption, by mankind at large, of their rights to
the soil. The question of compensation to existing
proprietors is a complicated one?one that perhaps
cannot be settled in a strictly equitable manner. Had
we to deal with the parties who originally robbed the
human race of its heritage, we might make short
work of the matter. But, unfortunately, most of our
present landholders are men who have, either medi-
ately or immediately?either by their own acts, or by
the acts of their ancestors?-given for their estates
, _ o
equivalents of honestly earned wealth, believing that
they were investing their savings in a legitimate
manner. To justly estimate and liquidate the claims
of such, is one of the most intricate problems society
will one day have to solve. But with this perplexity
and our extrication from it, abstract morality has no
concern. Men having got themselves into the dilemma
by disobedience to the law, must get out of it as well
as they can ; and with as little injury to the landed
class as may be.
Meanwhile, we shall do well to recollect, that
there are others beside the landed class to be consi-
dered. In our tender regard for the vested interests
of the few, let us not forget that the rights of the
many are in abeyance ; and must remain so, as long
as the earth is monopolised by individuals. Let us
remember, too, that the injustice thus inflicted on the
mass of mankind, is an injustice of the gravest nature.
The fact that it is not so regarded proves nothing. In
early phases of civilisation even homicide is thought
lightly of. The suttees of India, together with the
practice elsewhere followed of sacrificing a hecatomb
of human victims at the.burial of a chief, show this ;
and probably cannibals consider the slaughter of those
whom u the fortune of war? lias made their prisoners,
perfectly justifiable. It was once also universally
supposed that slavery was a natural and quite legiti-
mate institution?a condition into which some were
born, and to which they plight to submit as to a
Divine ordination ; nay, indeed, a great proportion of


mankind hold this opinion still. A higher social
development, however, has generated in ns a better
faith, and we now, to a considerable extent, recognise
the claims of humanity. Bnt our civilisation is only
partial. It may by and bye be perceived, that
Equity utters dictates to which we have not yet
listened ; and men may then learn, that to deprive
them of their rights to the use of the earthy is to
commit a crime inferior only in wickedness to the
crime of taking away their lives or personal liberties.
10. Briefly reviewing the argument, we see that
the right of each man to the use of the earth,
limited only by the like rights of his fellowmen, is
immediately deducible from the law of equal freedom.
We see that the maintenance of this right necessarily
forbids private property in land. On examination, all
existing titles to such property turn out to be in-
valid ; those founded on reclamation inclusive. It
appears that not even an equal apportionment of the
earth amongst its inhabitants could generate a legi-
timate proprietorship. We find that if pushed to
its ultimate consequences, a claim to exclusive pos-
session of the soil involves a landowning despotism.
We farther find that such a claim is constantly denied
by the enactments of our legislature. And we rind
lastly, that the theory of the co-heirship of all men to
the soil, is consistent with the highest civilisation;
and that, however difficult it may be to embody that
theory in fact, Equity sternly commands it to be done.
?? Social Statics ,? hy Herbert Spencer , Chap. TX.
B. Bell, Printer, 97 Little Collins Street East, Melbourne.
