

SHEFFIELD MEETING, 1898.
THE AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM,
S. SINCLAIR,
Secretary to the Trustees.
WM. lIODGE & CO., Glasgow and Edinburgh.
IQOQ.
‘~v :
' , ■f\'S7Zg' '
i
A 1
f $cS; ' - /'
' | : .ay /, ■ • 1 :
MUSEUMS ASSOCIATION
OF THE UNITED KINGDOM.




THE AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM
Sinclair, Secretary to the Trustees.
\Reprinted from the Report of the Museums Association for iBqB.}
THE Australian Museum was founded in the year
1836. It was originally connected with the Botanic
Gardens, and was located in a room in Macquarie Street
It was soon afterwards removed to the Surveyor-General’s
office in Bridge Street, where it remained till 1849, in which
year it was again removed to its present site at the corner
of William Street and College Street The building at that
time consisted of one room with a gallery, which still exists
as a portion of the present Museum. In 1869, a plan for a
handsome structure to contain the Museum and kindred
institutions was prepared, and partly carried out, additions
having been made from time to time in accordance with it.
The interior now consists of the ground floor, with exten-
sions from the terminal halls at each end, and of an
upper floor, which is reached by a broad staircase, with an
extension into an adjoining gallery.
The collections are displayed to the best advantage in
these halls, and the systematic arrangement is as complete
as the unfinished state of the building will permit. The
exhibits, which in 1837 numbered about 800, may now be
counted by hundreds of thousands, and require for their
display far more space than is at the disposal of the
T rustees.
Ft 5 7^
<23, 1.


1891,
-
91,91°
349
40,935
961
ON
00
hH
-
94,43 8
357
36,263
712
*1893,
-
81,551
311
30,776
58i
1894,
-
86,246
33°
34,324
660
*1895,
-
86,353
325
32,226
632
*1896,
-
83,35!
3 l6
34,494
663
1897*
-
89,907
34i
32,987
634
The affairs of the Museum continued to be managed by
a committee until 1853, when it was incorporated by Act
of Parliament under a Board of Trustees composed of
twelve official trustees—one trustee named by the Governor
and called the Crown trustee, and twelve elective trustees.
The present president of the board is Dr. James C. Cox.
Under the Trustees, the curator (Mr. Robert Etheridge,
jun., formerly of the British Museum) has charge of the
administration and the control of the staff.
The Museum is open to visitors on week days (Mondays
excepted) from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., and on Sundays from
2to 5 p.m. On Monday afternoons the collections are
accessible to students and schools for teaching purposes,
on application being made to the curator. The total
number of visitors recorded during the last seven years
was—
Average Average
Week days, per day. Sundays. per day.
* Partially closed for repairs dnring these years
The Museum collections are obtained by gift, purchase,
exchange with other institutions, and by collection. The
most valuable acquisitions recently received are:—A fine
collection of mounted sheep, goats, and dogs from the
Museum at Florence, in exchange; one of Captain Cook’s
original MS. Journals, or Log of H.M.S. Endeavour , which
was kept by him in triplicate, presented by F. H. Dangar,
Esq. ; a collection of “ Cook Relics,” purchased by the


Agent-General, and deposited in the care of the Trustees
by the Government of New South Wales; a valuable
collection of opalised reptilian remains from White Cliffs,
New South Wales, by purchase ; a fine collection of Marbles
of the Bathurst District, New South Wales, prepared by
Mr. W. Roberts, and presented by the New South Wales
Government; the well-known “ Dobroyde ” collection of
Australian birds, formed by Messrs. Ramsay, and pur-
chased from them by the Government of New South
Wales; the “Nocoleche” meteorite, a mass of meteoric
iron weighing 44 lbs., presented by Mr. George J. Raffel,
who discovered it on the Western Plains of New South
Wales; the “Mount Stirling” meteorite, a mass of
meteoric iron weighing over 200 lbs., found in Western
Australia, and purchased by the Trustees ; collections of
coins and medals from the British Government, and of
coins from the Imperial German, the Austro-Hungarian,
the Hawaiian, the Belgian, the Ceylon, and the Indian
Governments.
During the year 1897 there were received in all—by
donation, 7379; by exchange, 1455; by purchase, 277;
by collection, 1,888 —total, 11,099 specimens.
At the suggestion of the local committee, the Trustees
of the Australian Museum appointed one of their officers,
Mr. Charles Hedley, to accompany the “ Funafuti Coral
Reef Boring Expedition,” under the command of Professor
W. J. Sollas, LL.D., F.R.S. He succeeded in amassing an
interesting collection, which is now in process of descrip-
tion by the scientific staff of the Museum, and shortly to be
published as one of the Museum “ Memoirs.” The Trustees
have also appointed another of their officers, Mr. Edgar R.
Waite, to accompany a Deep-Sea Trawling Expedition
which has been fitted out by the Government for experi-
mental fishing off the coasts of New South Wales. A large


amount of valuable material and many new specimens are
thus being accumulated.
The Museum collections are classified and arranged in
the following main departments, each under the charge of
a scientific officer :
Zoology— Mammals, Reptiles, and Fishes.
Birds.
Mollusca.
Insects.
Lower Invertebrata.
Anthropology and Ethnology.
Palaeontology.
Geology and Mineralogy.
The library contains about 8000 volumes, consisting
principally of Proceedings of Scientific Societies, and of
books required for reference in connection with the work
of the Museum. It is intended, in the first place, for the
staff of the Museum, but is available, under regulations, for
consultation by students. Books are not lent.
The Trustees publish from time to time books and papers
relating to the work carried on in the institution. These
consist of—the “Annual Report” of the Trustees, which
contains summaries of the work done, and gives necessary
lists and schedules; the “Records,” which contain papers
by the staff describing specimens and giving reports of
scientific expeditions; “Catalogues” of collections as
opportunity offers ; and “ Memoirs,” on special subjects.
The Museum is supported partly by an endowment
provided under the Act of Incorporation, and partly by
funds voted annually by Parliament. The total expendi-
ture in 1897 amounted to £6460. The financial and
commercial branches are managed by the Secretary
to the Trustees, who is assisted by and controls the
clerical staff.


The staff of the Museum is as follows :
Robert Etheridge, jun.,
Sutherland Sinclair, -
Edward P. Ramsay, LL.D.,
F.L.S.,
Thomas Whitelegge, F.R.M.S., -
Alfred J. North, C.M.Z.S.,
Thomas Cooksey, Ph.D., B.Sc.,
Edgar R. Waite, F.L.S., -
Charles Hedley, F.L.S.,
W. J. Rainbow,
F. T. Clark,
and Fishes).
Conchologist.
Entomologist.
Clerical Assistant.
Curator (also Palaeontologist).
Secretary and Librarian.
Consulting Ornithologist, &c.
Articulators, Taxidermists, Carpenters, Attendants, and
Messengers.
Zoologist (Marine Invertebrata).
Ornithologist and Ethnologist.
Geologist and Mineralogist.
Zoologist (Mammals, Reptiles,


TAft
&1&L 10
fIS 7<s€


3 1508
02231306 3


