

THE BRITISH COLONIES
IN 1949
BRITISH INFORMATION SERVICES
AN AGENCY OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT
REFERENCE DIVISION
I.D. 963, JANUARY, 1950
CONTENTS
Page
THE COLONIAL OFFICE AND THE COLONIAL SERVICE .. 5
POLITICAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL PROGRESS .. .. .. 7
FINANCE .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. 13
PRODUCTION .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. 17
SOCIAL SERVICES .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 29
SCIENCE AND RESEARCH .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
INTERNATIONAL COLONIAL COOPERATION .. .... .. 45
APPENDICES
I. Important Cotonial Debates .. .. .. .. .. 51
II. Important Government Publications .. .. ..52
30 ROCKEFELLER PLAZA, NEW YORK 20, N.Y.
901/905 NATIONAL PRESS BUILDINGS, WASHINGTON 5, D.G.
30 SOUTH LA SALLE STREET, CHICAGO 3
310 SANSOME STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 4


This is not intended to be a comprehensive survey , but is a selection of some of the
important developments about which information has been received in IQ4Q. While
every care has been taken to insure accuracy , unofficial as well as official sources have
been used in compiling this paper.
The British Colonial Empire in 1949 included the following territories:
EAST AND CENTRAL
AFRICA
Kenya
Northern Rhodesia
Nyasaland
Somaliland Protectorate
Tanganyika {Trust Territory )
Uganda
Zanzibar
WEST AFRICA
Gameroons {Trust Territory )
Gambia
Gold Coast
Nigeria
Sierra Leone
Togoland {Trust Territory )
St. Helena (with Ascension
and Tristan da Cunha)
SOUTH AFRICAN
HIGH COMMISSION
TERRITORIES
Basutoland
Bechuanaland Protectorate
Swaziland
EASTERN
Hong Kong
Brunei
Federation of Malaya
(includes Penang and Malacca,
formerly part of the Straits
Settlements, and the former
Federated and Unfederated
Malay States)
North Borneo
Sarawak
Singapore
INDIAN OCEAN
Aden
Mauritius
Seychelles
MEDITERRANEAN
Cyprus
Gibraltar
Malta
WEST INDIES AND
THE AMERICAS
Barbados
British Guiana
British Honduras
Jamaica
Leeward Islands
(Antigua, St. Kitts-Nevis,
Virgin Islands, Montserrat)
Trinidad and Tobago
Windward Islands
(St. Lucia, St. Vincent,
Dominica, Grenada)
Bahamas
Bermuda
Falkland Islands
WESTERN PACIFIC
Fiji
Gilbert and Ellice Islands
Pitcairn Island
British Solomon Islands
Tonga
CONDOMINIUMS
Canton and Enderbury
Islands (Britain and U.S.A.)
New Hebrides (Britain and
France)
This material is filed with the Department of Justice, where the required registration statement of
8.1.5. under 56 Stat. 248-258 as an agency of the British Government is available for inspection.
Registration does not imply approval or disapproval of this material by the United States Government.


INTRODUCTION
The main purpose of British Colonial policy is “to guide the Colonial
territories to responsible self-government within the Commonwealth in
conditions that insure to the people concerned both a fair standard
of living and freedom from oppression.” This aim, in the words of the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, can be achieved “only in so far as it
evokes the response, understanding and the confidence of Colonial peoples
themselves.” Most Colonial territories, Mr. Creech Jones reminded his
audience during the Colonial Estimates Debate on July 20, are going
through a stage of transition in regard to political, economic and social
changes, and it cannot be expected that these will be carried through
without some difficulty or disturbance. The United Kingdom’s efforts
are directed toward reducing the internal strains as far as possible so as
to create conditions for orderly development, and toward securing the
full cooperation of Colonial peoples in this work. Some of the ways in
which this partnership developed in 1949 are recorded in the following
account.
Note.—Figures in this paper are given in sterling. The present rate of exchange is $2.80 to fi.




THE
BRITISH COLONIES IN 1949
THE COLONIAL OFFICE AND THE COLONIAL
SERVICE
In the last few years an increasing amount of responsibility for the
management of their own affairs has been handed to the local Colonial
governments, and, broadly speaking, while the Secretary of State for the
Colonies is constitutionally responsible to Parliament for the good
government of Colonial territories, his responsibility, and the function
of the Colonial Office, is to see that the objects of British Colonial policy
are carried out, and to organize the help the Colonies need.
Through Parliament the British people have a great responsibility for
the government of the Colonies, and in 1949 the Colonial Office organized
in London a Colonial Month designed to cater for existing interest in the
Colonies, and to stimulate among the British public a far more widespread
knowledge of Colonial problems and progress. His Majesty the King
formally inaugurated Colonial Month on June 21, and some measure of
its success can be gauged from the fact that over half a million people,
or one in every hundred of the population, visited the official exhibition
Focus on Colonial Progress , which was the central feature of the Month ,
and which gave a vivid impression of the diversity of Colonial peoples
and the lands they live in, and a record of some of the work being done
to overcome the obstacles to progress.
There has also been a very marked demand for reports and publications
about the Colonies. In addition to the annual report on the Colonies
published during the year, the Colonial Office has issued the first of a
new series of regional reports — British Dependencies in the Far East —
and published a series of regional maps. Annual reports on specific
Colonies have also continued to appear. At the Colonial Exhibition
alone over £I,OOO worth of publications on the Colonies were sold.
Within the Colonial Office itself there have been no great changes
during 1949. To meet the continued expansion of work on Colonial
development, and the implications of EGA Aid for Colonial economic
affairs, the Economic Division was strengthened, and an Economic
Relations Department and a Statistical Department have been formed.
A new post of Police Adviser to the Secretary of State has also been
created.
In his speech inaugurating Colonial Month , His Majesty the King paid
a special tribute to the Colonial Service and its work. Although over
5,000 men and women have been recruited to the administrative and
technical branches of the Service since 1945, and the Crown Agents have
recruited some 3,500, shortage of qualified candidates is still a grave
handicap to the progress of many development schemes, and in October
1949 there were no fewer than 1,168 vacancies in the administrative and
technical branches, and in July, 163 medical, 159 agricultural, 160 teach-
ing and 170 engineering posts remained unfilled. To deal with this
situation conditions of service have been improved, and every effort is
being made to encourage recruiting in the United Kingdom, and in other


Commonwealth countries where Liaison Officers and Selection Com-
mittees are on the spot to consider candidates. These measures have
helped to increase the rate of recruitment in 1949 to 25 per cent above the
1948 rate. In addition, arrangements are being worked out with educa-
tional, medical, probation, and other services in the United Kingdom for
periods of secondment to the Colonies without loss of seniority, pension
or salary rights.
Side by side with the recruitment of qualified staff in the United
Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries goes the process of speeding
up the training of Colonial men and women so that increasingly they may
become qualified to fill senior posts in the Colonial Service. The Secretary
of State for the Colonies has approved 102 awards under the £1 million
scholarship scheme, and in the Colonies themselves, facilities for training
Colonial peoples are being expanded. In Nigeria, for example, the
Agriculture, Forestry, Public Works and Medical Departments all
provide facilities for training Nigerians, and the estimated cost of depart-
mental training schemes in 1949-50 is £145,000.
In addition, Colonial-born members of the Colonial Service, like other
members, are benefiting from the increasing number of training courses
being made available in the United Kingdom. During 1949, officers on
leave could attend training courses provided by the Ministries of Civil
Aviation and Labor, the Board of Customs and Excise, the Department
of Scientific and Industrial Research, the Prison Commission, and the
Home Office. Courses in agriculture, education, fisheries, forestry and
veterinary work were also available; arrangements for refresher courses
in nursing were made; a new training course at the Police College was
instituted; and Colonial-born officers were among those taking a special
course at the Cooperative College, Loughborough, Leicestershire.
Locally recruited members of the Colonial Service were also among
the 100 or so officers who attended the third African Summer Conference
held at Cambridge in August to examine the problems of agricultural
development in the African Colonies. At this Conference, as at those
in 1947 and 1948, it was reaffirmed that the task of the Colonial Service
today is to associate Colonial peoples with every phase in the development
of their countries, and to find and free the springs of initiative in every
province, town and village.
To provide a forum for the exchange of opinion and ideas on all
aspects of Colonial administration between officers serving in the Colonies
and between them and the Colonial Office, a new monthly journal—
Corona —the Journal of His Majesty’s Colonial Service, was launched
by H.M.S.O. early in the year.


POLITICAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL PROGRESS
Emphasis on the development of local government has been particularly
evident during 1949, for, as the Minister of State for Colonial Affairs,
Lord Listowel, explained during a debate in the House of Lords on
April 13, “People must be taught to govern themselves, and the best
teaching is practical experience in conditions where the task is not too
large and the result of mistakes is not too serious.”
Conditions in the Colonies vary so widely that it is impossible to lay
down a single policy of local government applicable in all territories, but
the importance attached to the subject is evident in the appointment of
specialist officers in some territories to deal with local administration;
the study of local government by Colonial Service cadets; the increasing
call made by Colonial territories on local government experience in the
United Kingdom; and the issue in 1949 of a new quarterly Journal of
African Administration. In the Colonies themselves, particularly the
African Colonies, the aim is to adapt the old policy of indirect rule to
modern conceptions by evolving more flexible forms of native adminis-
tration which give scope for the progressive elements of Colonial societies
to play their part. By means of tribal federation, and by creating regional
bodies, the growth of more broadly based local units is encouraged, and
these are providing the experience and opportunity which will fit Colonial
peoples to work central government bodies. The more outstanding
developments in this field during 1949, together with an account of
important constitutional changes, are outlined below.
West Africa
In West Africa during 1949, proposals for changes in the constitutions
of the Gold Coast, Nigeria and Sierra Leone have been discussed in
relation to plans for more representative local government, and are being
based largely on the wishes of Africans.
The outstanding recommendations for constitutional reform have come
from the Gold Coast. There, the all-African Coussey Committee, under
the chairmanship of an African judge, has made proposals, accepted by
the Secretary of State for the Colonies, which will give the Gold Coast an
Executive Council, whose members will be responsible to the legislature
in the performance of their departmental functions, which will have a
majority of African members drawn from the legislature, and which will
be responsible for formulating policy. Under the proposed new consti-
tution Africans will therefore formulate their own policy though ultimate
responsibility still remains with the Governor. The other chief provisions
of the new constitution will be an enlarged single-chamber Legislature
composed mainly of members elected directly or indirectly by popular
vote, and the retention by the Governor of certain reserve powers of
which the power of certification is subject to the prior approval of the
Executive Council or the Secretary of State. The Committee also made
a number of important recommendations for reorganizing local govern-
ment, and these are to be further examined in the Gold Coast.
In Nigeria, a Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly, consisting
mostly of Africans, has reported on methods of reviewing the constitution.
The Committee was briefed to produce proposals which would insure
that all sections of the community understood the issues involved and
had opportunity to express their views; it made recommendations which,


broadly speaking, will mean that proposals for a new constitution are
based on the views of all—from peasant to Legislative Council member—
and throughout the year, in different parts of Nigeria, Africans have
been formulating their ideas which, after debate, will be the basis of
the final proposals submitted to the Secretary of State. During the year,
also, the Governor of Nigeria acted upon a proposal made by the unofficial
members of the Legislative Council for strengthening African representa-
tion on the Executive Council, and took the opportunity to appoint
four Africans to it after the terms of office of the two previous African
members had expired.
Proposals for a substantial measure of decentralization are involved
in the recommendations for the development of local government in
Sierra Leone, which form part of constitutional changes put forward for
discussion during the year. It is now proposed that the creation of an
unofficial majority on the Legislative Council be accompanied by a
reorganization of the Executive Council which, the Governor has
suggested, should include four officials, and four unofficial members
appointed from the unofficial members of the Legislative Council, and
would become responsible for advising on all major policy matters.
All these proposals are to be examined by a local representative committee.
Efforts to stimulate community initiative have been the chief feature
of political progress in the Gambia in 1949. Experimental schemes
whereby Native Authorities put forward plans for such things as new
bridges and land reclamation, and carry out the work with the aid of
skilled help supplied by the Government, have shown considerable
success, and £5,000 has already been voted toward assisting in this
practical form of community development.
East Africa
An important event in the history of local government development
in East Africa was the raising of a loan on the open market by the Nairobi
Municipal Council in June. Nairobi is the first Colonial town to be given
powers to raise such a loan on the strength of its own assets and respon-
sibility, and the town’s successful growth has been further recognized by
the decision to raise it to City status in 1950, thus conferring on Nairobi
the distinction of becoming the first Colonial City.
Other developments in giving East Africans increased responsibility
for the management of local affairs have included the creation of
Dar-es-Salaam as Tanganyika’s first municipality, and the raising of
Kampala, in Uganda, to municipal status. In Tanganyika also, the first
Provincial Council has been created, for the Lake Province, and contains
representatives of all races.
The constitutions of the individual East African territories have re-
mained unchanged during the year, but the report of the East Africa High
Commission on its first year of existence proves its worth as regional
machinery for strengthening interterritorial cooperation. Outstanding
work in the Commission’s inaugural year has included the decision to
raise a loan of £23 million on behalf of the Railways and Harbors
Administration, and the organization of the East African Posts and
Telegraphs Department as the first Colonial department of its kind to be
a self-contained service.
Towards the end of 1949, the Governor of Uganda announced that
important constitutional changes, including greater African representa-
tion, would be introduced early in 1950.


In the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, where the first meeting of the new
Legislative Assembly took place in December 1948, important recom-
mendations for advances in local government comparable to those
achieved in central government in 1948 have been made. At the invitation
of the Sudan Government, the City Treasurer of Coventry paid a six-
month visit to the Sudan, and has made proposals, accepted by the
Sudan Legislative Assembly, for the setting up of a department of local
government; the creation of autonomous local government bodies; and
representation of local government bodies on large-scale agricultural
schemes.
Central Africa
Changes in the constitutions of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland
came into effect in 1949. In Northern Rhodesia the door has been
opened for the appointment of Africans to the Executive Council, when
they are ready for this, by including five unofficials in the Executive
Council of whom one is a member of the Legislative Council nominated
to represent African interests, the remaining four being appointed from
among the elected members of the Legislative Council. Two of the five
unofficial members, without becoming officials, are now responsible for
groups of departments, and under the new arrangement the views of the
unofficial members carry the same weight in the Executive Council as they
do in the Legislative Council, subject to the Governor’s reserve powers.
In Nyasaland three non-Europeans have for the first time been
appointed to the Legislative Council, and with this innovation there is
now African representation on the Legislatures of all the British territories
in Africa for which the Colonial Office is responsible, with the exception
of the Somaliland Protectorate.
A reallocation of revenues between central and local authorities in
Northern Rhodesia is now being considered following the publication
of a report on the problem of financial relations between the Central
Government and the African Local Authorities, and elected Management
Boards have been proposed for the copperbelt towns.
In the field of regional cooperation in Central Africa, the chief event
in 1949 was the unofficial conference held at Victoria Falls in February
to discuss the possibility of forming a Central African Federation. The
members of the Conference were official delegates from Southern
Rhodesia, and unofficial representatives from Northern Rhodesia and
Nyasaland, and they unanimously passed a resolution advocating the
federation of the three territories under a federal constitution. Discussions
on this resolution have been held with the United Kingdom Government.
In a statement made in the House of Commons on December 15, the
United Kingdom Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations,
Mr. Philip Noel-Baker, said that His Majesty’s Government believed that
there was a wide field of Government activity in which closer cooperation
between the Central African territories was required, and that the
methods available for closer economic cooperation should be further
examined. In regard to political federation, said Mr. Noel-Baker, His
Majesty’s Government were bound to take into account the inherent
difficulties—such as the obligations of the United Kingdom Government
to the Africans in Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, and the differing
constitutional status of the three territories—and it had been suggested
to the Southern Rhodesian Government that they re-examine the
situation in relation to such problems.


The Situation in the Far East
Political and constitutional developments in the Far East during 1949
have to some extent been overshadowed by operations against the
terrorists, and by external repercussions of the advance of Chinese
Communist forces in China. Nevertheless significant progress in local
government has been reported from various territories—such as the
creation of nine new Local Authorities in Sarawak which brings 64,500
people under the jurisdiction of local authorities, in addition to the
53,500 people covered by municipal authorities, out of a total population
of just over 546,000; and the holding of the first municipal elections under
the new constitution in Singapore at which 70 per cent of the electorate
went to the polls. In the Federation of Malaya, the Communities Liaison
Committee, an unofficial body representing the principal communities in
the country, has issued a statement on political development declaring
that the aim of the Federation should be the attainment of self-government
with sovereign status and the creation of Malayan nationality.
On April 13, 1949, the United Kingdom Prime Minister, Mr. Attlee, in
a statement in the House of Commons, announced that His Majesty’s
Government had no intention of relinquishing their responsibility in
Malaya until the Federation and Singapore had achieved responsible
self-government within the Commonwealth, and that there was no
intention of jeopardizing the security, well-being and liberty of their
inhabitants by a premature withdrawal.
Far from losing ground during the year, British and Malayan troops
and police have cooperated in breaking up the bandit forces. The chief
events in the situation during 1949 have been the repatriation of alien
squatters; the increasing cooperation with the authorities by the local
Chinese communities; the offer of surrender terms to bandit collaborators;
and the re-education of those who have been led to help the bandits.
In November, the Federal High Commissioner reported that the bandit
gangs had been cleared out of large parts of the inhabited areas, and there
has been active support of all races in Malaya for the measures to restore
law and order. In November, it was announced that the United Kingdom
would contribute £3 million to the defense and security of the Federation
for the next year.
Speaking in relation to Hong Kong, the United Kingdom Minister of
Defense stated during the year that His Majesty’s Government’s intention
was to retain the friendliest possible relations with whatever Government
was in power in China, taking into account local obligations. To meet
these obligations, if necessary, the Colony has been strongly reinforced.
The West Indies
At the time of writing it was expected that before the end of 1949,
proposals for a federation of the West Indies would be put forward by
the Standing Closer Association Committee, and would be published for
consideration by the West Indian legislatures. This Committee, which
consists of delegates appointed by the West Indian Legislatures, has met
twice during the year; in preparation for its plans, West Indians have
already formed a Caribbean Shipping Committee, and a Federation of
Primary Producers —both of which have an important part to play in
the economic aspects of federation. During the year, also, local Com-
missions under chairmen appointed from the United Kingdom have been
examining the related questions of unification of the Public Services in
the area, and the possibilities of a Customs Union.


Federation was among the subjects discussed at a conference of
Governors of the British Caribbean Colonies in November. This
Conference, which was presided over by the Minister of State for Colonial
Affairs, Lord Listowel, also discussed economic matters, including
emigration and population; administrative affairs, such as conditions of
service in the West Indies and civil aviation; and subjects of regional
concern including defense, constitutional developments, and the Develop-
ment and Welfare Organization.
The chief political development in the West Indies during 1949 has
been the new constitution proposed for Trinidad and Tobago. When
brought into operation, this constitution will give Trinidad a clear
majority of elected members in the Executive Council, the principal
instrument of policy, and nine more elected members to add to the existing
unofficial majority on the Legislative Council. In the meantime a
Commission from the United Kingdom is examining the financial
aspects of the relationship between the Trinidad Government and the
municipalities. A report recommending complete reorganization of the
local government system in Barbados has been approved by the Governor
of Barbados in Executive Committee.
Colonial Defense
An important step in enabling Colonial peoples to take a due part in
the defense of their own territories was the passing of a Colonial Naval
Defense Bill during the year. This Act enables regional groups including
Colonies, Protectorates, and Trust Territories to combine in the raising
of joint naval forces, and simplifies the legislative procedure for bringing
such forces into existence. It has already been followed by arrangements
for raising a regular full-time Naval Defense Force in East Africa and
similar forces in the Far East.
A conference on financial and administrative questions relating to the
Colonial forces in Africa was held at the Colonial Office in November.




FINANCE
Although finance is not at present the major factor limiting development
schemes in the Colonies, His Majesty’s Government have been concerned
to insure that in the prosecution of their development plans Colonial
Governments will have sufficient financial facilities to carry through the
projects which increasing supplies are making it possible to undertake.
This has been insured partly by an increase in the annual expenditure
on development schemes financed under the Colonial Development and
Welfare Acts and partly by facilitating the raising of external loans for
Colonial development, both on the London market and through the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. In addition,
the Colonies have been enabled to benefit both directly and indirectly
under EGA.
The total sum given or promised to the Colonies on behalf of the
British taxpayer since January i, 1944, amounted to some £160,500,000
by July 1949. Of this sum, £l2O million is the sum made available
under the Colonial Development and Welfare Acts; over £ls million
is made up of grants-in-aid of administration; over £l3 million is for
claims waived by His Majesty’s Government —chiefly in the Far East;
over £8 million is for defense and reconstruction in the Far East; and
over £2 million for subsidies to Malta and certain West Indian Colonies.
The Colonial Development and Welfare Act 1949
Progress in putting into effect schemes financed under the Colonial
Development and Welfare Acts has been held up by shortages of raw
materials, capital goods and skilled staff; and materials and equipment
cost more than they did when the Colonial Ten-Year Plans were framed.
This means that certain schemes must be recast, and also that the second
half of the ten-year period covered by the 1945 Colonial Development and
Welfare Act will involve expenditure at an increased rate —for, out of the
total sum of over £63 million approved as grants and loans between
1940 and March 31, 1949, only £25 million was actually issued.
To deal with this situation a new Colonial Development and Welfare
Act was passed in 1949 which raises the total sum that may be spent
in any one year on schemes financed under the Colonial Development
and Welfare Acts from £l7-! million to £2O million. This new Act
also increases the maximum sum that may be spent on research schemes
in any one year from £1 million to million. These changes do not
involve any increase in the total sum of £l2O million provided under the
previous Colonial Development and Welfare Acts.
Expenditure under the G.D. and W. Acts
In the twelve months ended March 31, 1949, 257 schemes of develop-
ment and welfare, and 123 research projects were approved for grants and
loans under the Colonial Development and Welfare Acts. Their total
cost is £12,279,678; and this sum, together with the grants and loans
approved since 1940, brought the total amount approved for Colonial
development under the Colonial Development and Welfare Acts to over
£63,170,000 by April 1949.
These figures were revealed in the annual report on the return of
schemes made under the Acts. The report also showed that of the


£63,17°3 00 ° approved up to April 1949, £37 million was for expenditure
in the African dependencies, £15.5 million for the West Indies, some
£3 million for the Mediterranean and Middle East, £1.75 million for the
Far East dependencies, and the remainder for the Western Pacific and
other island Colonies, and for schemes of general benefit.
During 1948-49, the Ten-Year Plans of British Guiana, St. Lucia,
Grenada and North Borneo were approved, bringing the number of Ten-
Year Plans approved by March 31, 1949, to twenty-one. The total cost
of these is some £2OO million, of which £64 million will come from
contributions under the Colonial Development and Welfare Acts,
£7l million from Colonial revenues, and £64 million from Colonial loans.
Loans on the London Market
Under the Colonial Stock Acts, Colonial territories can raise public
loans on the London market, and during 1949 several Colonies took
advantage of this facility. A number of loans were raised, the greater
part in each case being publicly raised in the United Kingdom. In May,
the Federation of Malaya floated a loan of £8,050,000; the Nairobi
Municipal Council raised a loan of £1,500,000 in June; the Northern
Rhodesian Government raised a loan of £3,540,000 in July; the Govern-
ment of St. Lucia floated a loan of £408,000 in October; and in the
same month the Jamaica House of Representatives passed a Bill enabling
the Government of Jamaica to raise in London a loan of £3,250,000.
Loans from the International Bank
To enable Colonial Governments to receive loans from the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, a Colonial Loans Act,
authorizing the Treasury to guarantee such loans, was passed during 1949.
A similar Act —the Overseas Resources Development Act, 1949 —
to enable the Treasury to guarantee loans from the Bank to the Colonial
Development and Overseas Food Corporations also received the Royal
Assent during the year.
The Colonies and EGA
Under the United States Foreign Assistance Act of 1948, of which the
Economic Cooperation Act, covering aid to Europe, forms a major part,
United States financial help for the Colonies has been made possible as
part of the plan for European recovery. The contribution the Colonies
can make to that recovery through increased production which also
benefits themselves was outlined in the Long-Term Program of the
United Kingdom and the 1949-50 Program, and during 1949 EGA,
which approves schemes for dollar aid, authorized several loans of
Marshall Aid dollars for projects which indirectly and directly will benefit
the Colonies and contribute to European prosperity.
At the beginning of 1949 formal approval was given to a scheme for
American assistance in completing geological and topographical surveys
in British dependencies, and for two or three years 25 American geologists
and some 30 geodetic engineers are to work with the Colonial Geological
Survey and the Directorate of Colonial Surveys.
In July, a team of American agricultural experts left for a survey of
East, West and Central Africa, and in September a party of mining
engineers began a reconnaissance of African mineral resources. American


consulting engineers have also helped in the survey of a projected railway
line to connect the Rhodesia and Tanganyika systems, and American
scientists are now cooperating with British scientists in Africa to overcome
some of the insect-borne diseases that afflict men, cattle and crops.
In British Guiana two American agricultural experts have been advising
on measures to increase rice production.
EGA aid to increase existing production of certain Colonial minerals
has also been forthcoming in 1949. To enable the Rhokana Corporation
of Northern Rhodesia to buy in the United States the plant necessary
for increasing cobalt production, the United Kingdom has been granted
$550,000, and Kenya kyanite production will be increased by an
allocation of $72,000 to buy mining machinery in the United States.
Rehabilitation Grants and Loans
A War Damage Compensation Scheme covering North Borneo,
Sarawak and Brunei was announced in December 1948 with particulars
of financial settlements between the United Kingdom Government and
the three territories.
In May 1949, details of further financial assistance for Malaya were
released. In view of the increased burdens the Federation has had to
carry since 1948, the United Kingdom Government has now offered
a free grant of £2O million towards the Malayan War Damage Compen-
sation Scheme, and in addition is making available an interest-free loan
up to a maximum of £18.5 million.
Hong Kong, which benefits from the £lO million cost of military
administration in Malaya, Hong Kong and Borneo now being borne by
His Majesty’s Government, was made a free grant of £250,000 in April
for the rehabilitation of its University.
During the summer of 1949, a Malta Government delegation came to
London to try to obtain prolongation of United Kingdom contributions
toward food subsidies, the maintenance of high levels of employment by
United Kingdom Service Departments, and more direct participation in
benefits accruing to the United Kingdom under ERP. A review of the
conversations held on these subjects was published as a White Paper in
December.
The Colonial Development and Overseas Food Corporations
The first annual reports and statements of accounts of both the Colonial
Development Corporation and the Overseas Food Corporation were
published in 1949.
The report of the Colonial Development Corporation shows that in
the year ended December 31, 1948, the Corporation had put nine
schemes into operation for which the total capital commitment amounts
to £3,034,000. In addition, it had 57 projects under active consideration
in respect of which capital commitment amounts to nearly £25 million.
The report of the Overseas Food Corporation, which covers its operations
up to March 31, 1949, shows that this Corporation’s liabilities, excluding
those for the Queensland Scheme, amount to over £23 million.




PRODUCTION
The trends of Colonial development in 1949 have shown a considerable
emphasis on economic progress. In part, this is due to the putting into
operation of many plans drawn up during the past few years; in part it
represents an essential stage in the growth of the Colonies —for in the long
run the living standards of the Colonial territories will be those they can
afford.
The essential condition of economic development schemes in the
Colonies is that they should benefit Colonial peoples. At the same time
they can benefit the United Kingdom and the rest of the sterling area, for
while such schemes are dependent on the United Kingdom providing
finance, capital, consumer goods and skilled personnel, their results
provide substantial quantities of basic raw materials and food needed
by the United Kingdom. This, in turn, lessens the sterling area’s dollar
requirements, and, in some cases, earns dollars. Unless the sterling area
as a whole succeeds in restoring the balance of its external payments, the
United Kingdom will be unable to provide the capital investment the
Colonies need to accelerate their economic growth; it is therefore in the
Colonies’ own interests that many schemes are for increasing production
of commodities related to the dollar position of the sterling area, as well
as likely to continue in demand.
All Departments of His Majesty’s Government recognize the need to
help the Colonies as much as possible in getting the imports they need
both for development and for current production. In June, a Conference
of Colonial Supplies Officers —the first of its kind—was held in London to
discuss availability of supplies to the Colonies, and the 40 representatives
of Colonial Governments who attended had the opportunity of discussing
supply problems both with Government officials and industrial
representatives.
Supplies of capital and consumer goods from the United Kingdom to
the Colonies have increased considerably. All told, the volume of United
Kingdom exports to the Colonies has risen to 75 per cent above the
1938 figure; and it was anticipated that in 1949 the Colonies would
get some 80,000 to 100,000 tons more steel than in 1948; double the 1947
quantity of cement; and some 800 million square yards of cotton piece
goods compared with 600 million in 1947.
This increasing rate of exports of capital equipment and consumer goods
has been reflected in increased Colonial production. The index of Colonial
exports (based on exports of a number of the principal agricultural,
animal, forest and mineral products) was 15 1 in 1948-49 compared with
118 in 1936, and the Colonial territories contributed 9.7 per cent by
value of the total of the United Kingdom’s imports, compared with
5.3 per cent in 1938-39, thereby enabling a substantial saving in dollars
to be made.
Prospects and Targets for Colonial Products
Detailed reports on the production prospects for Colonial minerals and
a number of other products were published during the year. The report
on minerals, prepared by the Metals and Minerals Panel of the Colonial
Primary Products Committee, reviewed Colonial resources and production
of important minerals other than gold, tin, oil and radioactive minerals.
The report on primary products, prepared by the Primary Products


Committee, covered vegetable oils and oilseeds, starch, essential oils,
timber, paper pulp, tanning materials and tobacco.
The Colonial Primary Products Committee was set up in 1947 to
review the possibility of increasing Colonial production in relation to the
interests of the Colonies, the needs of the world, and the desirability of
increasing foreign exchange resources. Its conclusions on the products it
examined are designed to guide Colonial Governments and people in
selecting for development the products most likely to find good markets,
and among those recommended in 1949 for development are a number of
vegetable oils and oilseeds, arrowroot, several essential oils, wattle and
tobacco. In October, the Colonial Development Corporation announced
that it proposed to establish wattle plantations in Tanganyika for the
production of tanning extract. The possibility of increasing Colonial
tobacco production, particularly in East and Central Africa, was also the
subject of a separate report published during the year.
A survey of Colonial fishery resources has been made by the Fisheries
Adviser to the Secretary of State and was published early in 1949. It is
thought that there is scope for increasing Colonial fish production,
but that an increase is largely dependent on the application of
mechanized methods and will be almost wholly absorbed by the Colonies
themselves.
The targets for Colonial production set out in the United Kingdom
Long-Term Program prepared for OEEC were amended during the
year. Their relation to the whole program of economic reconstruction,
and to the production and exports of the overseas territories of Belgium,
France, the Netherlands and Portugal, is shown in a report published by
the Overseas Territories Committee of the Organization for European
Economic Cooperation. This report shows that in 1952-53 it is anticipated
that the export of groundnuts from the British Colonial territories will
have risen to 274,000 metric tons compared with 142,000 in 1946; that
raw cane sugar exports will have risen to 1,402,000 metric tons compared
with 901,000 in 1946; that rice exports will increase from 23,000 metric
tons in 1946 to 76,000, and that bauxite exports will have risen to
t,950,000 metric tons compared with 173,000 pre-war.
Communications
Economic development is dependent on the expansion of communica-
tions, for increased production is valueless without the means to move the
products.
As the result of an analysis of the pattern of investment in the Colonies
it was discovered in 1948 that about one-quarter of all Colonial investment
is devoted to the maintenance and development of transport facilities,
railways alone absorbing over half of this. In addition, the total provision
for communications in the 21 Ten-Year Development Plans so far
approved amounts to over £34 million.
The development of communications in Africa has been particularly
marked in 1949. Early in the year a Conference on transport problems
in East Africa was held at the Colonial Office, and considered future
railway developments in the region, and the means of increasing the
capacity of the port at Dar-es-Salaam. It is hoped to raise a loan of about
£23 million, mainly for railway developments in Tanganyika, and surveys


are now being made into the possibilities of linking the East African and
Rhodesian systems. Dar-es-Salaam now has to handle monthly imports
of some 27,000 tons from ocean-going ships, and to increase the port’s
cargo-handling capacity its quay has been extended; its lighter fleet
increased; and more barges, cranes and rolling stock have been brought
into operation.
These transport extensions were also discussed at an International
Conference in Lisbon during May, which examined the transport
systems of Southern Africa, and was attended by delegates from the
United Kingdom, France, Belgium and South Africa, as well as repre-
sentatives of the African Colonial Governments concerned. The import-
ance of Dar-es-Salaam’s port as part of a projected East-West route
across Africa was brought into prominence here, for the Belgian Congo,
in its Ten-Year Plan, provides for the construction of a new railway line
which would link Dar-es-Salaam with Matadi on the West coast of
Africa at the mouth of the Congo River, or with Lobito Bay in Portuguese
West Africa.
In West Africa during 1949, the emphasis has been on port development.
A contract for one of the largest harbor development works so far under-
taken in the Colonies was announced in July for expanding the Gold
Coast’s main port at Takoradi at a cost of some million. The four
chief construction jobs involved are expected to be completed in 1952;
they will provide extra berthing facilities, increased capacity for handling
timber exports, a quicker turn-round and a new railway maintenance
center. From Sierra Leone comes news that land reclamation for
Freetown’s 1,200-foot-long deep-water quay at Fourah Bay is well
advanced, and that work may be completed by 1951.
In the sphere of road communications a landmark in the development
of Southern African communications was reached in September with the
opening of a road bridge over the Kafue River in Northern Rhodesia.
This bridge, which has a length of 420 feet, is the first permanent road
bridge over the lower reaches of the Kafue River and forms an important
link in the Great North Road.
Another important piece of road construction work was finished
during 1949 with the opening of a new suspension bridge over the Lower
Belize River in British Honduras which completes the all-weather road
running from Belize, the capital, to the interior of the Colony and on to
Benque Viejo on the Guatemalan frontier.
In air communications Cyprus has assumed a new importance with the
opening of permanent terminal buildings at Nicosia airport. This
Colony has become one of the main aerial crossroads in the Middle
East, and the new terminal buildings provide the opportunity to deal with
a large amount of traffic and to handle 150 passengers an hour, and are
capable of further extensions.
Other communication developments in 1949 have included the
building of one of the largest bauxite transfer ports in the world at
Carenage, Trinidad; proposals made by the Vice-Chairman of the Port of
London Authority for a deep-water harbor at the port of Bridgetown,
Barbados; the handing back by the United States of their air bases in
British Guiana, St. Lucia and Antigua; the re-equipping of Nigeria’s
railway; the expansion of Port Swettenham which, as the ocean port for
central Malaya, handles large rubber tonnages, and the approval by the


Secretary of State for the Colonies of the establishment of a Colonial
Civil Aviation Service.
Agricultural Production
In a review of developments in Commonwealth trade within the sterling
area, the President of the United Kingdom Board of Trade, in October,
gave some figures of the Colonies’ contribution to the sterling area’s
needs for raw materials. These showed that supplies of hardwood from
the African Colonies to the United Kingdom had increased from 1.6
million cubic feet before 1939 to 7.5 million cubic feet in 1949; that in 1949
West Africa had appeared for the first time as a supplier of plywood and
up to the end of August had sent the United Kingdom 8 million square
feet; that the Colonies now supply 5 per cent of the United Kingdom’s
cotton imports compared with 2 per cent before the war; that East
African sisal production, which rose from 125,000 tons pre-war to 150,000
tons in 1948, met all the United Kingdom’s requirements and allowed for
dollar-earning exports; and that in fifteen years time the tung oil industry
now being developed in Nyasaland will probably meet all the United
Kingdom’s requirements for tung oil.
The achievements and plans that lie at the back of these figures are
the result of schemes, large and small, in operation, or projected, through-
out the Colonies, and similar schemes and plans exist for a number of
other products. Several schemes are the work of the Colonial Develop-
ment Corporation; in its first Annual Report, issued in July, the
Corporation was able to state that during its first year of existence it had
put nine schemes into operation —four in the West Indies, one in the
Falkland Islands, two in Central Africa, one in West Africa, and one
in the Far East. Four of these schemes are to increase agricultural and
forestry production since they are concerned with timber production in
British Guiana, the operation of a large farm for poultry and egg produc-
tion in the Gambia, tung-growing in Nyasaland, and hemp production
in North Borneo. One is concerned with sealing in the Falkland Islands,
one with fisheries in Nyasaland, and the rest with mineral production.
When its Report was issued the Corporation stated that its Agricultural
Division was regarded as covering potentially the largest sphere of
operations, and that schemes under investigation were for increased
production of oilseeds, cereals, fruit, and fibers, and expansion of peasant
production.
Progress in the largest agricultural scheme in Africa —the East African
Groundnuts Scheme—was described in the first Annual Report of the
Overseas Food Corporation published in November. In spite of difficulties
in land clearance, and the drought which afflicted Tanganyika in 1949,
a total of over 46,000 acres was planted at Kongwa by March 1949;
the land under crops at Urambo consisted of 487 acres under groundnuts,
2,052 acres under sunflowers and 250 acres under maize; and communi-
cations were being built up in the Southern Province with the construction
of a temporary lighterage port and a new railway line. It was planned to
clear a total of 100,000 acres at Kongwa, 20,000 at Urambo, and 2,000
in the Southern Province by 1950. An important feature of the Scheme
is the training and welfare it provides for Africans. Through participation
in the Scheme, Africans are gaining experience of Works Committees;
are being trained in social service and as civil engineering artisans,
mechanical engineering artisans, clerks, etc.; and are benefiting from
other educational facilities and health services made available by the
Corporation.


Some examples of other developments in major Colonial crops in 1949
are given below.
Groundnuts
West Africa continues to be the principal source of groundnuts.
Purchases for export from the 1948-49 crops amounted to 328,000
tons from Nigeria, and 60,000 tons from the Gambia. In Nigeria,
efforts to expand the carrying capacity of the railway resulted in an
increase of the monthly railings of groundnuts from some 23,000
tons in April 1949 to about 40,000 tons in October, and left-overs
from previous crops are expected to be dispersed in 1950.
Sugar
Sugar is one of the products purchased by the United Kingdom
under a long-term contract. A number of record sugar crops were
reported in 1949, including one of 159,032 tons in Trinidad —37 per
cent more than in 1948; one of 237,743 tons in Jamaica, compared
with 192,853 tons in 1948; and one of 395,067 tons in Mauritius,
compared with the pre-war average of 247,000 tons in 1933-37.
Reports on the economics of the sugar industry in Trinidad, and
the organization of the sugar industry in Antigua, St. Kitts, and
British Guiana were published during the year. Discussions on the
possibilities of extending U.K. contracts with the sugar-producing
Colonies were held in London at the end of 1949.
Cocoa
In the Gold Coast, swollen shoot disease has continued to threaten
the existence of the cocoa industry, and following scientific advice
that cutting out infected trees is the only way of bringing the disease
under control the Gold Coast Government is waging a strenuous
cutting-out campaign, combined with a rehabilitation scheme under
which grants are paid to farmers. By the middle of the summer
6 million trees had been cut out and a further 350,000 are being dealt
with each month. Farmers in the Gold Coast are cooperating
actively, and to deal with their requests for cutting out, supervisors
for the campaign are being recruited and assistants being trained.
The Legislative Council has voted an additional £500,000 for the
campaign in 1949-50.
Notwithstanding disease the cocoa crop has been a good one, and
in the first nine months of 1949 the United Kingdom imported
2,671,624 cwt. of raw cocoa from the West African Colonies compared
with 1,822,456 cwt. in the same period of 1948.
Rice
In Malaya, drainage and irrigation of existing rice-lands and of
new areas are being pushed ahead. Production increased from 256,000
tons in 1946-47 to 343,000 tons by the end of 1948. In British
Guiana, two United States agricultural experts, made available
through EGA, have been reporting on methods of increasing produc-
tion; the present plans of the British Guiana Government call for
the irrigation of over 82,000 acres along the coast.
The Report of the Mission which visited East and Central Africa
in 1948 to advise on rice production was published at the end of the


year, and recommends the setting up of a Central Rice Research
Station in Tanganyika. Proposals for developing a large number of
particular areas are included; the Report and its recommendations
were considered at a meeting of representatives of the territories
concerned in October, and, since it was written, the Colonial
Development Corporation has embarked on a rice-production
scheme in Nyasaland; rice mechanization experiments in Tanganyika
have been intensified; and hydrological data is being collected by a
survey team in Northern Rhodesia.
Cotton
A meeting of considerable importance to cotton-producing
Colonies and to the United Kingdom was held at Manchester in
September under the auspices of the Empire Cotton Growing
Corporation when discussion centered chiefly on the steps necessary
to insure that Colonial cottons should meet spinners’ requirements.
Cotton-producing Colonies are being encouraged to increase
production, and in Uganda, the chief Colonial producer, output has
risen from 168,000 bales in 1947-48 to 340,000 bales in 1948-49,
in spite of bad weather.
Rubber
The greatest single dollar-earning commodity produced by the
Colonies is rubber, and output in 1948 reached the record amount of
768,000 tons. Of this output, 696,978 tons came from Malaya where
the Communist bandits have had little success in slowing down
production. In the first nine months of 1949, production amounted
to 437,844 tons, reflecting a slightly lower rate of production com-
pared with 1948, and due chiefly to a smaller yield per tree. The
Federation’s Legislative Council has agreed to provide the Malayan
Rubber Fund with a financial guarantee toward a five-year program
of research and development costing nearly £3 million.
The rubber industry in Malaya can be expected to benefit from
the results of the Tripartite Economic discussions held in September
between the United Kingdom, the United States and Canada, at
which the U.S. announced that it was prepared to open to natural
rubber a substantial additional area of competition. The United
States has also agreed to review its stockpiling program, with
particular reference to rubber among other commodities, and
Canada has agreed to increase her reserve stocks of rubber.
Livestock
During the year it was decided to make a survey of the potentialities
of the British African territories as exporters of beef, pigmeat and
feedingstuffs in order to build up livestock production for consump-
tion in Africa and the United Kingdom. With certain safeguards the
United Kingdom Ministry of Agriculture is now prepared to import
carcass beef from Africa and this should pave the way for expanding
the meat export trade. Proposals for a ranch in Fiji, and a freezing
plant to utilize surplus carcasses of mutton in the Falkland Islands,
have been considered by the Colonial Development Corporation;
and a hides and skins mission reported on East Africa during the year.


Timber
Increased hardwood exports from the Colonies are helping to
replace supplies from hard currency areas. The chief Colonial
territories producing hardwood for export are Nigeria, the Gold
Coast, British Guiana, British Honduras, North Borneo, the Federa-
tion of Malaya, and Sarawak. Total exports in 1948 amounted to
over 24 million cubic feet compared with 21 million in 1947. Soft-
woods, which provide the wood pulp for paper manufacture, exist in
very few Colonies apart from British Honduras, but softwood
development schemes for Kenya, Tanganyika and Nyasaland are
under consideration, and the Colonial Development Corporation is
preparing to plant 100,000 acres of land in Swaziland with fast-
growing conifers.
In all schemes for increasing agricultural production the greatest
attention is paid to soil conservation, and to teaching the Colonial pro-
ducer modern agricultural methods. The good farmer is the best exponent
of sound agricultural techniques, and the ways of teaching rural peoples
to become good farmers—i.e., agricultural extension work—were discussed
in a report published in June. In a foreword to this report the late
Deputy Chairman of the Colonial Development Corporation pointed
out that increased productivity depended mainly on improving efficiency,
and that this could not be achieved without agricultural extension work
as the bridge between scientist and producer.
The application of science to Colonial agricultural problems is evident
in such examples, selected from a multitude, as the report on the water
resources of East and Central Africa published in January; the construc-
tion of small water reservoirs to assist cultivation in the Sudan; swamp
reclamation and tractor ploughing trials in Sierra Leone; and the success
of anti-soil erosion methods such as composting, strip cropping, grazing
control and afforestation in Uganda.
Mineral Production
One of the main difficulties in the way of increasing Colonial mineral
production is the lack of basic geological maps. It is hoped that maps of
this kind for all the Colonies will be complete by 1956, and that by 1952
there will be some 170 geologists in the Colonial Geological Survey
Service compared with about 50 before 1939. This work is, however,
dependent on more qualified men coming forward for recruitment; in the
meantime, some surveying and prospecting continues to be done by
private individuals.
To advise on geological survey matters and the investigation of Colonial
mineral resources, the Secretary of State for the Colonies appointed an
Advisory Committee in October. A Colonial Development and Welfare
grant of £67,600 was made during the year to finance five years of
geological survey work in Northern Rhodesia, and British Guiana has
received a grant of £ 125,000 to finance the first five years of an eight-year
geological survey.
During the year several figures showing increased production of various
minerals were published. Tin from Malaya and copper from Northern
Rhodesia are both important dollar-earners. Production of tin in Malaya
during 1948 rose to 44,815 tons compared with 27,026 tons in 19475
and in the first nine months of 1949 output amounted to 40,476 tons.
Tin is also produced in appreciable quantities in Nigeria where production


was 9,234 tons in 1948. In Northern Rhodesia, copper production
reached 213,616 tons in 1948 compared with some 192,000 tons in 1947,
and production in the first nine months of 1949 was 194,904 tons compared
with 159,641 tons in the same period of 1948. Oil, an important dollar
saver, is being produced in increasing quantities in Brunei—now the chief
Colonial producer; there, in 1948, production soared to some 2,850,000
tons, or 50 per cent more than in 1947, and production is now running
at the rate of million tons a year.
The report on Colonial mineral resources and potentialities published
during 1949 showed that Nigeria is the world’s leading producer of
columbite, and Kenya of kyanite. A development scheme for gold
in British Guiana has been put into operation by the Colonial Develop-
ment Corporation, and other mineral resources are also being developed.
In Tanganyika, for example, the value of diamond exports in 1948
reached £1 million for the first time, and in the first six months of 1949
were valued at £830,000. Gold, mica, salt and tin-ore are also being
worked in this territory; preparations are being made to work the lead
deposits at Mpanda; and the Colonial Development Corporation has
announced that it will undertake the investigation and development of
Tanganyika’s coalfields.
Other mineral developments about which news has been received in
1949 include preparations for bauxite mining in Jamaica; proposals for
the British South Africa Company to transfer its mineral rights to the
Northern Rhodesia Government in 1986; and an offer by the United
Kingdom Ministry of Supply to buy all uranium ores and concentrates,
containing a minimum amount of uranium oxide, produced in the
Colonies within the next 10 years.
The Provision of Power
The development of cheap and abundant sources of power is one of the
essentials to any substantial economic progress in the Colonies, and the
investigation of sources of hydroelectric power and plans for its provision
are getting well under way.
By the end of 1949, there were several major schemes for hydroelectric
development under consideration.
In Uganda, some preparatory work has been undertaken for the Owen
Falls (Nile) Scheme which is intended to provide cheap electricity for
Uganda, and long-term storage of Nile waters sufficient to meet Egypt’s
irrigation requirements for many years to come.
In the Gold Coast a survey of the industrial and transport potentialities
of the Volta River is being made with a view to the river’s development
as a source for irrigation and navigation, as well as for hydroelectric
power.
Hydroelectric developments in Central Africa may result from the
investigations now being made on the Kafue River in Northern Rhodesia,
and at Kariba Gorge on the Zambezi between Northern and Southern
Rhodesia.
In the Federation of Malaya, a hydroelectric scheme in the Cameron
Highlands is being discussed and the Colonial Development Corporation
has already agreed to invest over £3 million in it. Electric power plans
in Malaya envisage creating a grid system and enabling a reduction in
electricity charges.


In the West Indies the possibilities of power from the Kaiteur and other
Falls in British Guiana are being tested, and over £15,000 has been
allocated for this work.
A hydroelectric project in Fiji designed to remedy the shortage of
electric power in the main island of Viti Levu is also under consideration,
and the Colonial Development Corporation is forming a public utility
company to generate and distribute electricity.
Secondary Industries
Colonial economic development schemes have brought increasing
demands for cement supplies, and have led to projects for cement
production in several Colonies. In Jamaica, the Caribbean Cement
Company is preparing to manufacture 80,000 tons of cement a year; in
Northern Rhodesia, a Government factory which will produce 50,000 tons
a year is being built; in the Federation of Malaya, a scheme for the
production of 100,000 tons a year is being considered; and cement
works in Malta are also proposed.
The expansion of secondary industries is provided for in a number of
Colonial Ten-Year Plans, and part of the present program of economic
development has the same purpose. In Nigeria, for example, the develop-
ment of local industries and internal trade is the concern of a separate
Department of Commerce and Industries. This Department maintains
the textile centers being built throughout the country, and fosters
numerous small enterprises such as a fruit juice industry, and brick and
tile manufacture. In Malaya, a large factory is being built for the
manufacture of soap, margarine, edible oils and fats, and one important
secondary industry—the production of canned pineapples—is now
supplying some 145,000 cases a year. In Hong Kong there has been a
considerable expansion of secondary industries, especially in textile
production.
Industrial diversification is particularly necessary in the West Indies,
and during 1949 a Bill to attract new industries to Jamaica was passed,
and similar legislation is being introduced into other West Indian Colonies.
In Jamaica the past year has also seen preparations for a new textile
industry and a film industry, and the steady expansion of the existing
knitting and footwear manufacturing industries. Cottage industries in
this Colony are also developing well and are making a small but significant
contribution to the island’s exports.
In East Africa, industrial licensing on an interterritorial basis is now
the responsibility of an East African Industrial Council. Established
secondary industries include the processing for export of such raw materials
as pyrethrum, cotton and meat, and the manufacture of shoes, soap and
sacks, etc., and new industries now being developed include the extraction
of chemical products from sisal waste in Kenya, and the manufacture of
tin containers and boxes in Tanganyika.
An increasingly important feature in the development of Colonial
secondary industries is the processing of hardwood timbers in the country
of origin. In the Gold Coast, for instance, where the local timber industry
is developing rapidly, pit-props, tool handles, railway sleepers and
furniture are among the products now manufactured, and in Nigeria
facilities for the production of veneers and plywood have been extended.
In the West Indies proposals for the manufacture of plywood and veneers
are included in the development plans of the British Guiana and British


Honduras Settlement Commission. To encourage the working of timber
on the spot the United Kingdom Government have informed all Colonies
that, subject to price and quality, the United Kingdom will continue to
buy all the sawn timber the Colonies can produce.
Cooperatives
In the Colonial Estimates Debates on July 20, the Secretary of State for
the Colonies, Mr. Creech Jones, spoke of the intention to give all possible
encouragement to the small producer, the peasant and the farm-worker
in the Colonies, and referred to the importance of building up cooperative
societies in this work.
The responsibility for guiding the cooperative movement in the
Colonies falls upon the local Registrars and their staffs. By the summer
of 1949 there were Registrars of Cooperative Societies in 18 territories,
and an increasing number of locally appointed staff were attending
courses and visiting cooperative organizations both in the United Kingdom
and in other parts of the Commonwealth such as Ceylon and Cyprus
where the cooperative movement is well established. The locally
appointed officials of the Cooperative Departments in the Gold Coast,
Nigeria, Cyprus, Uganda and Malaya who attended a special course at
the Cooperative College, Loughborough, Leicestershire, in April had
the added advantage of a three-week tour of cooperative institutions in
France. In July, a Colonial Cooperative Summer School was held at
Oxford in conjunction with the Agricultural Cooperative Association
Limited, and the Agricultural Economics Research Institute, Oxford.
Cooperative Officers from n Colonial territories attended this School
which was under the general direction of the Adviser on Cooperation to
the Secretary of State.
News of the development of cooperative societies in territories large
and small has come in during the year. In Sarawak, a Department of
Cooperation was set up early in the year and a Sarawak Oversea-Chinese
Planters Mutual Aid Society has already been formed on a cooperative
basis. In Mauritius, the Registrar of Cooperative Societies has been
able to report that 1947-48 was a period of remarkable development
in cooperation, and that between 1946 and 1948 the number of societies
increased from 79 to 109, and membership rose from under 5,000 to
nearly 8,000. In Fiji, where the first cooperative society was registered
in March 1948, there were 25 societies with a membership of nearly
1,500 by December 1948. In Jamaica, a cooperative society of peasant
farmers now includes 37 families working 870-odd acres. From Africa
it is reported that the Gold Coast Cooperative Federation is now the third
largest cocoa-buying agency and handled £3,500,000 worth of cocoa in
1948, and that this territory’s first Central Consumer Cooperative Store
has been opened in Accra. In Tanganyika cooperative societies numbered
77 by the end of 1948 and had handled some £990,000 worth of crops
within a year. In Kenya, there were 111 Cooperative Societies by 1949,
of which 92 were African, 11 were Asian and 8 were European.
The Marketing of Colonial Products
The marketing of Colonial products in a way that will insure a steady
market and fair prices for the Colonial producer has received particular
attention. Bulk purchase by the United Kingdom Ministries, and long-
term contracts, have become an important factor in economic relations,
and, by July 1949, the Colonial-produced foods being marketed under


long-term contracts with the United Kingdom Ministry of Food were oils
and fats, sugar, coffee, bananas and concentrated orange juice, while
bulk purchase agreements covered a number of other commodities such
as certain hides, timber, tin and copper. On November 15, tin came on
the free market with the reopening of the London Metal Exchange.
Marketing organizations within the Colonies are also important in
protecting the producer and encouraging a high standard of production.
The West African Produce Control Board, which marketed cocoa,
groundnuts and palm produce in the West African Colonies, was wound
up during the year and a number of separate Boards are taking over its
functions. In Nigeria, for instance, three Marketing Boards—for ground-
nuts and oilseeds, oilpalm produce, and cotton —were established in
April, their job being to buy from local producers, sell to overseas markets
at world prices and use any profits for the benefit of the industry and the
producer. Similar Boards exist or are being formed in the other West
African Colonies. Their advantages are evident in the activities of the
Gold Coast Cocoa Marketing Board which in 1948 had £36 million in
hand and was able to allocate over £8 million for the rehabilitation of
cocoa areas, over £112,000 for a soil survey, and £750,000 to the
Agricultural Bank which gives financial assistance to the peasant farmer.
In addition, these Boards can protect the producer against falls in price:
the Nigerian Cocoa Marketing Board, for example, drew on its funds
during the year to pay the cocoa producers a considerably higher price
for their product than the one for which it could be sold, and also
guaranteed a price for the next two marketing seasons.




SOCIAL SERVICES
Education
The chief objectives of British Colonial education policy are to extend
the opportunities for education as widely as possible so as to give Colonial
peoples both the desire and the capacity for progress; to train as many
Colonial peoples as possible as leaders in their own affairs; and to
strengthen and develop the cultural and other links between western
civilization and the dependent territories.
Educational progress cannot be measured only in terms of new schools,
increased school attendance figures, and the numbers who pass exami-
nations; the quality of the education given is equally important, and
evidence of this must necessarily go unrecorded in a factual account since
quality shows itself largely in contact with the people produced by an
educational system. At the same time much is being done in the Colonies
to train more teachers, build more schools, improve supplies of textbooks
and equipment, and better the health of the pupils.
Higher Education
A considerable and increasing number of Colonial students now have
facilities for higher education in their own regions, and there were also
some 3,500 of them in the United Kingdom in 1949, and a number at
Universities in other parts of the Commonwealth and in the United
States. Institutions of higher education now exist in each of the major
Colonial regions and in 1949 there were over 2,300 Colonial men and
women taking higher education courses in their own territories.
In October, the Inter-University Council for Higher Education in the
Colonies published its second report, and recorded that the years 1947-49
had seen extraordinarily rapid developments in Colonial higher education.
Within that time a new University had been established and three
University Colleges, which were only in the planning stage two years
ago, had come into existence and have completed a full teaching session.
The Inter-University Council’s part in developing Colonial Universities
and Colleges is evident in the help it has given in recruiting staff; between
1947 and 1949 it arranged for the recruitment of nearly 200 people.
It has also been concerned to develop increasingly close cooperation
between United Kingdom Universities and Colonial Colleges, and in the
last two years has fostered contacts by the visits of its members and
representatives to the West Indies University College, the Gordon
Memorial College in the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, Makerere College in
Uganda, the two University Colleges in West Africa, and the Royal
University of Malta.
News of the growth of institutions of higher education in the Colonies
has come in from all regions during the year. In the Far East, the
University of Malaya, the newest University in the Commonwealth, was
formally founded in October. In West Africa, the Gold Coast University
College has completed its first year and there are courses in arts, science
and economics for its 100 students. In Nigeria, the University College
at Ibadan is providing courses in arts, science and medicine, and its
student body of nearly 300 is expected to increase to 600 when the
building program is complete. In East Africa, Makerere College,
Uganda, which is working towards University College status, and


had 220 students in 1949, has now been provided with its own College
Council largely responsible for administration. The University College
of the West Indies has been granted a Royal Charter, and its Institute
of Economic and Social Research has come into existence; similar
Institutes are being formed at the University College, Ibadan, and at
Makerere College.
Extramural studies, which can be described as “carrying the university
to the people,” are important functions of the new institutions, and
Departments of Extramural Studies have already been established at
the two University Colleges in West Africa, and at the University College
of the West Indies which has resident tutors in each of the Colonies or
groups the College serves. One result of extramural work carried out
in the Gold Coast by the University of Oxford Extramural Delegacy
has been the creation of a People’s Educational Association akin to the
Workers’ Educational Association in Britain.
Technical Education
As the Secretary of State for the Colonies pointed out in the Colonial
Estimates Debate, the provision of technicians, and of institutions for
technical and trade training, is one of the essentials in economic develop-
ment. The various Departments in the Colonies have always trained
people for jobs in the Departments, but these facilities are obviously
inadequate for the needs of Colonial territories at the present time.
A systematic working out of plans for technical education is now going
on in all Colonies, and technical and trade instruction is being expanded.
In Nigeria, for example, Yaba College has been reorganized into a
technical institute with boarding accommodations for 250 boys, and
facilities for some 1,500 other students. A trade school is to operate in
conjunction with the institute, and other trade centers have already been
provided at Enugu and Kaduna. In Kenya, plans for a technical and
commercial institute for all races have been approved. In Gibraltar, a
new technical dockyard school has been opened. British Honduras is
building a technical high school which will prepare boys for the building
and engineering trades, and will also give a general education up to
matriculation standard. Similar developments are taking place in many
other Colonies, and in West Africa plans are in hand to establish three
Regional Colleges which will provide teacher training and refresher
courses of various kinds, as well as technical training.
Secondary and Primary Education
Recent developments in Colonial primary and secondary education
have been devoted more to increasing the number of children at school
than to introducing educational experiments. Progress, therefore, can
be recorded here only in terms of new schools, increased enrollments, and
plans to increase both.
Colonial Education Department reports indicate that the total number
of children at school in the Colonies is growing rapidly. In Jamaica, for
instance, nearly 3,000 new places were provided in 1948 when 22 Govern-
ment elementary schools were built and another 12 begun. In the same
year 12 new denominational elementary schools were also built, and
50 new school canteens installed. In Singapore, where estimated enroll-
ment of pupils in registered schools was 71,000 in 1941, over 101,000 were
enrolled in 1948. In Sarawak, the number of schools had risen from 279


in 1946 to 364 in 1948, and the number of pupils had increased by over
6,000. By the summer of 1949, the estimated number of schoolchildren
in Hong Kong had risen to 130,000, the highest figure ever recorded in
the Colony. In the Gold Coast no fewer than 162 additional primary
schools have received Government assistance since 1942.
Plans for expanding educational facilities include an ambitious scheme
for the Northern Provinces of Nigeria, drawn up to meet the enthusiastic
popular demand for more education. There, over £500,000 is to be
spent over the next five years, beginning with £150,000 in 1948-49, and
the aim is to double the primary school intake, and to build five Elemen-
tary Training and two Higher Elementary Training Centers for men, and
three Elementary Training Centers for women. In the Gold Coast, a
fact-finding inquiry into the sources of finance for education has been
held so that plans may be drawn up on a sound financial basis. In the
Federation of Malaya, a central Advisory Committee on Education,
representative of all races, has been set up to advise the Government on
policy and principles to be followed in education.
General Education
The means of attaining the objectives of Colonial education policy are
not only the classroom and the textbook. The stimulation of community
effort, broadcasting, films and contact with other peoples are all important
in education in its widest sense, and some developments in these in 1949
are outlined below.
Community development, or mass education, is essentially the stimu-
lation of initiative, and it aims at all forms of betterment—in agriculture,
and in the sphere of health, as well as in education. Experiments in
movements toward community betterment have in the past been mainly
confined to the African territories and to the West Indies. A recent
development in the Gold Coast, for example, was the decision, in 1949,
to train eight mass education teams to stimulate villagers to carry out
village improvements, to become literate, and to learn elementary
hygiene and homecrafts. During the year, however, it was decided to
operate a community development scheme in the Pacific. As part of a
project planned by the South Pacific Research Council of the South
Pacific Commission, the Government of Fiji is to conduct a community
betterment scheme in the Fijian island of Moturiki, aimed at raising
living standards by economic development schemes as well as by the
provision of new social services.
Until recently there has been no satisfactory means of pooling infor-
mation on community development schemes. To keep workers all
over the Commonwealth informed of what is happening elsewhere, the
Colonial Office Mass Education Committee and the Colonial Department
of the University of London Institute of Education have set up a Mass
Education Clearing House in the Institute similar to that established by
UNESCO —with which it will work closely—and in December 1949, the
House published the first issue of the Mass Education Bulletin which will
carry accounts of mass education work going on in the Colonies and in
other parts of the world.
There has been a steady growth in broadcasting services in the Colonies
and £1 million has been allocated for their development from Colonial
Development and Welfare funds. During the year a complete survey of
the broadcasting needs of the West African Colonies was completed, and


in Hong Kong a wire rediffusion service to serve over 10,000 houses
was opened. In Singapore the BBC is to construct a permanent broad-
casting station at a capital cost of some £630,000. Radio manufacturers
have been particularly encouraged to produce low-priced receivers
suitable for Colonial conditions, and towards the end of the year came
the encouraging news that a low-priced type of set, “the saucepan radio,”
was now being produced for sale in Northern Rhodesia at a cost of £5,
plus £1 for a battery designed to last some six months.
The vital contribution the film can make to the education of Colonial
peoples is fully recognized. Films for African audiences in Central Africa
are made by a Central African Film Unit, and in East Africa by teams
from the Colonial Film Unit which make educational films in the
Colonies and during the year received a Colonial Development and
Welfare grant of £133,000. In West Africa, films are made with the
aid of the Colonial Film Unit, and the Gold Coast has its own Film
Unit as part of the Public Relations Department. African technicians
work in the Gold Coast Film Unit, which has already completed its first
film, and they were among the students who attended a School of
Instruction in the Film set up at Accra by the Colonial Film Unit to
instruct Africans in film-making.
The supply of good quality reading material for those who are, and who
become, literate presents a considerable problem. In East Africa an East
African Literature Bureau has been established to stimulate both the
production and distribution of literature for Africans. The Bureau
is concerned with encouraging African authors, and with distributing
textbooks and general literature. It is already preparing several books
by Africans for the press; has compiled a Writer’s Handbook; and is
working on a program of simple technical books in English and Swahili.
The standards of accuracy and reporting of certain Colonial newspapers
can be expected to benefit as the result of a full-time one-year course in
journalism inaugurated at the Regent Street Polytechnic, London, in
September. Among the first students attending this course are nine
Colonial journalists from newspapers published in each of the major
Colonial regions.
Educationists from eight Colonial territories were among the Common-
wealth members of an educational conference held in New York in August.
The Conference, which considered the educational problems of special
culture groups, was held under the auspices of the Teachers’ College,
Columbia University, and the Colonial Department of the University of
London Institute of Education. Another form of educational contact
between U.K., American and Colonial peoples is resulting from the
Fulbright Agreement to which all Colonies have acceded. This Agreement
makes it possible for American students to study in United Kingdom and
Colonial institutions of higher education, and for Colonial and United
Kingdom students to attend American institutions.
Health and Nutrition
Developments in the conquest of malaria and leprosy—two of the
worst scourges that afflict tropical Colonies—are among the outstanding
events of 1949 in the battle to improve the health of Colonial peoples.
In Cyprus, where a malaria eradication scheme was begun in 1946, no
malaria-carrying mosquitoes were found between January and April 1949,
and in March, the Island’s Director of Medical Services announced that


the Colony was now free of the malaria-carrying mosquito. In British
Guiana, where D.D.T. spraying has been used to eradicate the malaria
vector, over 90 per cent of the population is now reported to be protected
from malaria, and the resulting change in the health of the Colony is
reflected in the higher birth rates which have increased the Colony’s
population to over 400,000 for the first time in history. In Mauritius,
where malaria has been the principal cause of death and ill health, an
eradication campaign using D.D.T. and Benzine Hexachloride launched
at the end of 1948 is still in progress; already in one area where there
were 1,090 anopheles to every 100 houses before treatment none are now
found.
Leprosy, which is a grave problem particularly in the West African
Colonies, is being tackled vigorously through organizations which work
on a Colony-wide basis. In Nigeria, for instance, the most populous
of Colonial territories, it is estimated that there are some 400,000 leprosy
sufferers among the total population of 25 million, but even in this vast
country, some 37,000 cases are already receiving regular treatment, and
leprosy control work has been strengthened by the appointment of a
Senior Leprosy Officer to coordinate work. In the Gold Coast, a full-time
leprosy officer and 10 assistants have been appointed, and it is intended
to set up three leprosaria with accommodations for 2,000 patients each,
in addition to the five existing leper refuges.
Promising results from the treatment of leprosy patients with sulphone
drugs have already been reported from British Guiana, and during the
year similar news was received from the Federation of Malaya. There, at
the model leper settlement some 15 miles from the capital, the trial use of
two sulphone drugs made by British firms resulted in 253 cases out of 305
treated showing improvement. Sulphone drugs are also being used in
Cyprus; 65 per cent of one group of patients treated were rendered free
of the clinical signs of leprosy, and in 48 per cent the bacteriological
examinations after treatment gave negative results. In March, the
Secretary of State for the Colonies said that since December 1947, three
million 0.5 gram tablets of the sulphone drug powder had been supplied
to the Colonies for leprosy treatment, and that a further 1,695,000 tablets
and 25,000 grams of powder were in the course of supply.
An account of recent work in the fight against tuberculosis in the
Colonies was given by the Secretary of State for the Colonies at the
Commonwealth and Empire Health and Tuberculosis Conference held in
London in July. It was pointed out that tuberculosis had its roots in bad
social conditions—in poor housing, deficient diet and ignorance of
hygiene. In the Colonies these evils are being tackled by housing schemes
for rural areas, and for large towns such as Lagos, Nairobi, Kingston
and Hong Kong, by organizations for nutrition research and the applica-
tion of such research, for instance the Field Working Party in the Gambia;
and by community development schemes which encourage Colonial
peoples to better their own living conditions.
The difficulties of recruiting specialist staff to deal with the curative
problems of tuberculosis still continue, but expert advice has been given
by specialists who have visited the Colonies. Under a scheme financed
by the Nuffield Foundation an expert has paid West Africa a two-month
visit; surveys of tuberculosis in the West Indies and in Uganda have been
made; an extensive survey has recently been carried out in Malaya, and
Dr. Holm, who is in charge of the Bacille Calmette Guerin campaign
being undertaken in Eastern Europe, has held discussions with Medical


Departments in the Far East territories. Tuberculosis in the Federation
of Malaya has increased alarmingly as the result of Japanese occupation,
and in addition to appointing specialist staff and providing extra hospital
beds, the question of using B.G.G. vaccine both there and in Hong Kong
is being examined. In Kenya, a thorough attack on tuberculosis can now
be planned on the basis of a Colony-wide survey made by a Medical
Officer; in Aden, there are now too beds for tuberculosis patients com-
pared with 10 in 1945; in Fiji, where tuberculosis is probably one of the
greatest dangers to health, preliminary B.G.G. vaccinations have already
been carried out and the people of Fiji have raised £50,000 for a War
Memorial Anti-Tuberculosis fund.
The program of Colonial nutrition work consists of teaching and
the application of existing knowledge on the one hand, and research by
field investigations and experiments on the other. In February, a month’s
Nutrition School was held in Uganda, East Africa, to train interdepart-
mental teams from Kenya, Northern Rhodesia, and Tanganyika, and
individual officers from neighboring territories, in working out ways of
determining and solving their territories’ particular nutrition problems.
A striking example of the application of scientific knowledge to nutrition
has come from Aden in 1949. There, an agricultural and irrigation
scheme in the Western Protectorate, in addition to banishing the threat
of famine in that area, is teaching Arab farmers modern methods of
cultivation, and is making possible improved living standards. This
scheme, the Abyan Scheme, was expected to produce 3,000 tons of food
in 1949 from land that was formerly desert; by 1951 it is anticipated
that food production will amount to 10,000 tons, and that cotton to the
value of £257,000 will be grown. A similar scheme for the Eastern
Protectorate is under consideration.
In the sphere of nutritional research the Field Working Party in the
Gambia has made surveys which have yielded valuable information, and
by cultivating new areas of land in cooperation with the villagers is
helping to meet the chronic food shortage in the area, and is raising the
output of crops. The experience gained here is, of course, designed to
provide information for improving nutrition in other villages. A sub-
stantial contribution to the protein content of Colonial diets can be made
by increasing fish supplies, and one of the functions of the Fisheries
Research Station that is to be built at Penang will be to train instructors in
the technique of rearing fish in ponds with a view to increasing fish
supplies throughout the Colonies.
Other developments in 1949 in the battle for health have included
an announcement that the risk of scrub typhus in Malaya is now trivial,
thanks to the research carried out by British and American scientists with
the new drug Chloromycetin; the opening of a new school of nursing and
midwifery in Uganda; and the sending of a team to investigate loiasis
(a worm infection) in the British Gameroons.
The success of this combination of preventive and curative measures
in tackling Colonial health problems is reflected in falling death and
infant mortality rates. In Cyprus, for example, the death rate of 8.5 per
1,000 of the population is one of the lowest in the world, and while the
deaths of children under one year were still at the relatively high figure
of 69.6 per 1,000 live births in 1948, this should be compared with the rate
of 130.9 in 1938. In Singapore, the infant mortality rate dropped to
80.79 in 1948, the lowest figure recorded, compared with 191.30 in 1931,
and in Hong Kong to 104.7 compared with 327 in 1940.


Social Welfare
In the past year social welfare work in the Colonies has been particularly
directed towards the development of social work connected with probation
systems and juvenile delinquents, the improvement of prisons, and the
building up of welfare organizations; attention has also been paid to
organizing community centers, to rural welfare, to youth work, and to
the recruitment and training of staff.
Social welfare services in the Colonies are systematically planned.
Before large-scale operations are launched, needs are surveyed, and
pilot experiments are made; this stage is followed by the introduction of
necessary legislation and the framing of plans; finally, personnel are
organized to carry out the statutory requirements of the legislation, and
constructive work begins. In Nigeria, for example, where expenditure
on social welfare services amounts to £IOO,OOO a year, constructive work
in 1948 included assisting 25 boys’ clubs, training men and women for
youth work, running play centers and youth hostels, boarding out mother-
less children, organizing community centers and women’s organizations,
providing remand homes and assisting in the work of juvenile courts, and
fostering self-help in rural areas through a village betterment scheme.
It is recognized that existing voluntary social welfare organizations in
the Colonies make valuable contributions to welfare work, and, in 1948,
the Nigerian Government granted £5,000 to the Boy Scouts’ Association,
£I,OOO to the Girl Guides’ Association, £BOO to the Y.W.C.A. and £7OO
to the Boys’ Brigade, in addition to the funds provided for official social
welfare work.
The provision and extension of probation services have received
particular attention in the Colonies; there are now comparatively few
which do not provide at least an embryo probation system, and in several
the system is being extended by training local staff both in the Colonies
and in the United Kingdom. Fully trained officers have been appointed
to a number of Colonies and work closely with the juvenile courts which
exist in several territories.
In the Far East, comprehensive social welfare programs have evolved
out of the relief work necessitated by Japanese occupation. In Malaya,
where social services have long been an outstanding feature of British
administration, post-war problems brought an expansion of Government
social welfare activities. A Department of Social Welfare has been
established and a social welfare officer has been posted to each State and
Settlement. Voluntary welfare work is coordinated by a Central Welfare
Council, and, in 1949, funds collected by the Council were devoted to the
campaign against tuberculosis and to the welfare of the blind, as well as to
general welfare. The Social Welfare Department trains people to work
for their living and is active in the protection of young people. It has also
done much to provide a cheap meal service for the poorer sections of the
community, and in 1948 served over 18,300,000 meals at its public
restaurants. To increase the funds available for social welfare work in
the Federation, the Legislative Council agreed, during 1949, to organize
public lotteries, the proceeds of which will be spent on social welfare.
In Singapore, a social welfare plan has been drawn up following a
detailed social survey of the Colony’s municipal areas. The plan provides
for an expenditure of £1,825,000 over a period of five years, and is
designed to meet those social needs of the community not met by educa-
tion or medical schemes. The subjects already dealt with by Singapore’s


Social Welfare Department are evident in its organization which includes
Food, Settlements, Relief, Youth Welfare, and Women’s and Girls’ Sec-
tions, and has a Social Research Station. In Hong Kong, where a Social
Welfare Officer coordinates the welfare activities of both Government
Departments and voluntary organizations there are plans for stimulating
broom-making and clothing cooperatives.
The wide variety of activities involved in social welfare work in the
Colonies can be gauged from the following examples of events in 1948
and 1949. Over 70 Colonial students were studying social and domestic
science in the United Kingdom, and social welfare training courses were
held in the West Indies and in West Africa. In Sierra Leone, the Social
Welfare Adviser to the Secretary of State for the Colonies has advised
on social welfare programs. In the Gold Coast, where nine assistant
welfare officers are now at work, a second Approved School has been
completed, a Borstal institution has been opened, and a third remand
home is to be built. In East Africa, prison camps are being increasingly
used for first offenders. In Northern Rhodesia, the Legislative Council
has debated a Bill to provide for the setting up of a juvenile court. In
Mauritius, the foundation stone of the Colony’s fourth social welfare
center has been laid.
Housing
Some of the obstacles to providing new, well-planned houses in Colonial
territories have been the shortages of skilled staff, steel, cement and
softwood, and the difficulties of transporting bulky building materials.
The results of United Kingdom experiments in the use of new building
materials and techniques, and advice on specific problems, are made
available to Colonial Governments through the Colonial Liaison Officer
attached to the United Kingdom Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research. Experiments in using local materials for housing are given
every encouragement and are being carried on in a number of Colonies.
One of the outstanding developments in 1949 has been in Jamaica, where
the processing of local gypsum deposits has provided the Colony with a
new industry, the products of which are being ordered for building
purposes in South American and other countries. In the Gold Coast,
where experiments with cement stabilization of laterite and lateritic
soils have been in progress since 1944, a housing estate and community
center built with lateritic soil and cement blocks have successfully stood
up to the climate. Similar experiments are being made by the Cameroons
Development Corporation, and a Colonial Development and Welfare
grant of £7,035 has been made towards the establishment of a West
African Building Research Organization in the Gold Coast which will
work on improving the uses of local materials for building.
Progress in providing new houses has ranged from rehousing a Garib
community of 900 people in St. Vincent to preparing for a new “town”
of 2,500 Africans near Kampala in Uganda. In the case of St. Vincent,
the villagers who were being rehoused were provided free of charge with
freehold lots, certain building materials, and services such as a piped
water supply. In Uganda, houses of different types are being built with
the idea of developing self-contained villages, of about 100 people each,
which will ultimately make up a town with a population of 2,500. One
village has already been occupied, and the community life it affords
has given satisfactory results in breaking down tribal barriers and in
building up a feeling of group social responsibility. Other developments


have included the construction of 466 permanent African houses in
Northern Rhodesia in a period of 18 months, work began on a further
4,050, and all told, the letting out of contracts for 8,732 houses for Africans.
Slum clearance schemes are in operation in a number of Colonies.
In Singapore, for example, where the population has increased by nearly
half a million in 16 years, it has been planned to rehouse some 36,000
people between 1948 and 1949, and in the year ended October 1949,
376 apartments, 440 houses for artisans, 163 tenement houses and 91 shops
were completed by the Singapore Improvement Trust, and a considerable
number were under construction. In Trinidad, over 400 new apartments
have replaced slums in Port of Spain and San Fernando. In Jamaica,
at Trench Town in Kingston, a new township with its own school and
playing field is already providing decent housing for 4,000 people and will
ultimately rehouse 20,000.
In the sphere of town planning, Castries, the capital of St. Lucia in the
Windward Islands, is being rebuilt on properly planned lines, following
the disastrous fire which wiped out four-fifths of the town in 1948. A
town plan, which provides for the zoning of industries, the maximum
amount of open space where it can be enjoyed by the greatest number of
people and for orderly development, is now being put into operation under
the supervision of the Colonial Development Corporation, and, using
local labor to the full, new houses are now going up. Sir Patrick
Abercrombie’s Preliminary Town Planning Report on Hong Kong was
published in September. This, also, envisages the zoning of industrial
areas, and recommends that major urban activities should be confined
to Hong Kong Island.
Labor Organization
As one of the measures designed to meet the Colonial Governments’
needs for experienced labor staff during and after World War 11, an
experiment in employing trade unionists as Colonial labor officers was
started in 1942. In 1949, trade unionist labor officers were working in
11 Colonial territories, and officers from Colonial Labor Departments
were able to attend three-month training courses in the United Kingdom.
In cooperation with the Ministry of Labor two such courses are now
held annually; the first began in April 1949 and the second in September.
The work of Colonial Labor Departments is reflected in the improve-
ment and supervision of labor conditions and the progress of industrial
relations. Labor legislation on such matters as wages and hours of work,
contracts and the employment of juveniles has been strengthened in a
number of territories, and all territories except Tonga now have some
sort of trade union legislation, and in Tonga both custom and legislation
guarantee the rights of the individual. In addition, there is some form of
wage-fixing machinery in all territories except Bermuda and Tonga.
Colonial Labor Departments have had considerably increased func-
tions since 1945, including the resettlement of ex-servicemen, and trade-
testing. In Nigeria, for instance, there is a Resettlement Branch in the
Labor Department which, by March 1949, had found employment for
37,880 demobilized men. The Department also contains a Trade-Testing
Section which has classified over 2,500 candidates in two years and has
therefore been able to offer labor with known standards of ability to
employers. The wide range of duties carried out by Colonial Labor
Departments is indicated by the activities of the staff in the Singapore
Labor Department which include advising the Government on labor


matters, acting as conciliators in labor disputes, inspecting factories,
examining engineers for competency certificates, settling claims for
Workmen’s Compensation, inquiring into the financial position and
experience of certain contractors, and supervising the organization of
industrial canteens.
Improvement of the efficiency of African labor is an important need
if economic and social development schemes are to prosper. It has been
recognized that this problem demands expert investigation, since it
involves sociological and economic factors, and during 1949 the publica-
tion of an African Labor Efficiency Survey illustrated the active attention
being given to the problem. The Survey was carried out among some
6,000 African employees of the Kenya and Uganda Railways living in
Nairobi, and involved an examination of wages, labor turnover, training,
housing, the medical aspects of African efficiency and nutrition.
During the year African Labor Officers from the West African territories
held a three-day Conference in Sierra Leone. The Conference was
attended by the Chief Labor Adviser to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, who toured the West African Colonies at the beginning of
the year, and discussed 1.L.0. Conventions, trade unions, employment
exchanges and factory inspection.
In Malaya, the trade union movement is adjusting itself to the condi-
tions resulting from the emergency. Delegates from 83 unions attended a
conference at Kuala Lumpur in February and emphasized the significance
of the meeting which, in spite of the emergency, could be convened and
could freely discuss common problems. The latest figures available show
that by August 1949 there were 160 registered trade unions with a
membership of over 40,000 in the Federation, and 96 in Singapore with
a paid-up membership of over 49,000.
The most serious labor dispute of 1949 broke out in Nigeria, in
November, at the Enugu colliery, and was followed by rioting at a
number of places. A Commission of Inquiry was investigating the
disorders at the end of the year.


SCIENCE AND RESEARCH
Since 1940 some £6 million has been allocated under the Colonial
Development and Welfare Acts for research schemes. Over £i| million
of this sum was allocated between April 1948 and March 1949 in which
period 79 new, and 74 supplementary, schemes were approved, bringing
the total number approved since 1940 to well over 300.
These figures were disclosed in the comprehensive report on Colonial
Research 1948-49 which was published in July. This report also showed
that the sum actually paid out in 1948-49 was more than four times the
total paid out in 1946-47 —evidence of an increasing tempo in research
as shortages of scientific experts, building materials and equipment
are slowly overcome. To insure that there are sufficient funds to keep
up with the new situation the Colonial Development and Welfare Act
of 1949 has increased the maximum sum that may be spent on research
in any one year from £1 million to £2| million.
East Africa
Some 37 per cent of the funds allocated for research under the Colonial
Development and Welfare Acts since 1940 has been for schemes to benefit
the East African territories. Regional grants for East Africa as a whole
have totaled over £1,730,000; in addition, Kenya has received £123,000,
Uganda over £244,000, Tanganyika over £77,000, and Zanzibar more
than £70,000.
Research work now in progress in East Africa reflects the mainly
agricultural and stockbreeding economy of the region. In 1948-49,
no less than £325,000 out of a total of some £490,000 allocated to research
schemes in all parts of the region was made up of a single grant toward
capital expenditure on East African regional research organizations
for agriculture and forestry, and for veterinary science. Research policy
on these subjects is kept under review by an East African Advisory
Council which includes official and unofficial representatives from all the
East African territories, and held its first meeting in January 1949. The
East African Agriculture and Forestry Research Organization is to be
set up near Nairobi on a site of 1,000 acres —500 of which have already
been cleared —and will share the operation of an Animal Husbandry
Section with the East African Veterinary Research Organization which is
taking over the old Kenya Veterinary Research establishment near
Nairobi.
A Colonial Development and Welfare research grant of £15,800 has
been made to East Africa to finance three years’ research into the effects
of Antrycide injections on cattle. This drug, the discovery of which was
announced in December 1948, has proved successful in treating
trypanosomiasis in cattle, and constitutes an important new factor in the
battle against tsetse-carried disease. In East Africa, research into the
problems of tsetse control has also included experiments with the applica-
tion of insecticides both from the ground and from aircraft.
In the sphere of medical research, East Africa has been granted
£14,600 for the establishment of an East African Bureau of Medicine and
Hygiene, and £46,680 for a medical survey on which work has already
begun from temporary headquarters. The purpose of the survey is to
collect the vital statistics of an African village population on the basis
of which a practical public health organization can be planned. Other


medical research in this region has included a study of the epidemiology
of yellow fever, physiological research, and field studies on the effect
of the drug Hetrazan on filariasis.
Social science research in East Africa in 1948-49 has included a survey
of the research needs of Uganda and Tanganyika, made by the Director
of the Institute of Social and Economic Research at Makerere College;
anthropological studies of the Kisii people and the Turkana tribe, both
in Kenya; and the collection of data on East African music, which is
yielding material likely to be of practical value for linguistic studies.
West Africa
Out of the total sum of about £i| million allocated for research in
1948-49 some £325,000 was for schemes in West Africa, and since 1940
over 18 per cent of all Colonial research projects approved has been for
schemes benefiting the West African territories.
Twenty-five research schemes in West Africa were approved during
the year, thirteen of which were for West Africa as a whole. A number
of major schemes approved are for the initial research required in
improving both the quality and production of food supplies and cash
crops. The largest grant of the year, for example, was one of £148,000
towards the establishment of a West African Fisheries Research Institute;
another grant, of £43,000, is for a Rice Research Station in Sierra Leone,
and the West African Regional organizations for agricultural, forestry
and veterinary research that are to be established in Nigeria received
grants totaling £40,000. A central organization for research into the
problems of human sleeping sickness and animal trypanosomiasis in
West Africa is already being built up in Nigeria, and tests with Antrycide,
carried out at Vom, have given encouraging results.
Work on cocoa research, by the West African Cacao Research Institute
at Tafo, in the Gold Coast, has been chiefly concerned with the problem
of swollen shoot disease. A grant of £4,700 was made to cover the visit
of the U.N. scientific mission which reported on the problem at the end
of 1948, and at the end of 1949 the Institute invited Pest Control Limited,
a British firm, to send a team to investigate methods of dealing with the
disease. Cocoa research in West Africa has also benefited from grants
made by the West African Produce Control Board which was wound up
during the year, and by grants made by the territorial Boards which have
taken over its functions; the Gold Coast Marketing Board, for example,
has allocated £690,000 towards the 20-year research program of the West
African Cacao Research Institute.
Nine medical research schemes in West Africa were approved during
the year, the largest being for a malaria service in Nigeria, towards
which a grant of £31,850 was made. Research in progress included yellow
fever research, hot climate physiology research and studies of the epidemio-
logy of yellow fever; work on the clinical aspects of the nutrition surveys
made by the Human Nutrition Research Unit in the Gambia has also
been carried out.
In the sphere of sociology, a scheme for psychological aptitude testing
in Nigeria has been carried out, anthropological research into the Mendi
people of Sierra Leone has been undertaken; and a socio-economic study
of the Krobo people in the Gold Coast has been made. A study of the
history of British relations with the Gold Coast is now in progress.


The Far East
Most of the total sum of £404,540 allocated for Far East research
schemes in 1948-49 was made up of two grants —totaling £387,000 —
towards the establishment of Fisheries Research Stations in the Federation
of Malaya and in Hong Kong. The Far East territories as a whole benefit
from about 8.5 per cent of the total funds allocated for research since
1940, and since that date they have been allocated over £558,000 for
research schemes.
Hong Kong and Malaya already have thriving fishing industries, and
have therefore been chosen as centers for further basic research intended
to increase the fish supplies in all Colonies. The Fisheries Research
Station at Penang in Malaya will serve as a training institute in fish
culture for all Colonial territories, as well as undertaking research into
methods of artificial fish rearing. The Research Station at Hong Kong
will also undertake fundamental research and assist in developing the
Colony’s fishing industry. Experiments in improving fishing techniques
in the fishing grounds of Sarawak and North Borneo have already been
made, and in the case of Sarawak have led to larger catches.
Research on health problems in the Far East has had one particularly
notable success. Experiments with the drug Chloromycetin have proved
its remarkable curative properties in respect of scrub-typhus, and this
disease, previously a major cause of death in the Far East, now carries no
more than a trivial risk. Anti-malaria work is in progress in North
Borneo and in Malaya; in North Borneo laboratories have been completed
for the team of experts carrying out a three-year malaria survey of the
territory, and in Malaya, where control measures evolved from earlier
research have been most effectively applied, experiments are now being
carried out with D.D.T., 8.H.C., and Paludrine to determine their
different effects on the incidence of malaria.
Grants towards sociological research in the Far East during the year
amounted to more than £16,000. In Sarawak, four anthropological
research projects concerned with the Chinese, Malay, Land Dyak and
Iban communities are under way, while in Singapore, anthropological
studies of the Chinese and Malay family structures have been begun in
cooperation with the Singapore Social Welfare Department. The
Department has already made a noteworthy contribution to the study
of Colonial urban communities by carrying out a social survey of Singa-
pore. A sociological survey of peasant conditions in the Federation of
Malaya was also published during the year, together with recommenda-
tions for the organization of further research.
The West Indies
Research in the British West Indies is financed from two outside
sources. Like other Colonies, the West Indies benefit from research
schemes financed under the Colonial Development and Welfare Act
and have received 14.5 per cent of the funds allocated for research since
1940. They also have the added benefit of research sponsored by the
Caribbean Commission.
During 1948-49, twelve research schemes in the West Indies were
approved for grants under the Colonial Development and Welfare Act.
Their total cost is some £ 158,000, the largest grant being one of £ 116,900
for the Colonial Microbiological Research Institute in Trinidad which was
formally opened in 1948. The Institute is now at work on research


programs covering the disposal of rum distillery waste liquors, cocoa
fermentation problems, and the isolating of antibiotics from tropical
soil organisms.
In the West Indies, as in other Colonial regions, attention is being given
to the possibilities of increasing fish production. Recommendations have
been made for the establishment of a marine fisheries research station
in Trinidad to serve the Eastern Caribbean, and for the West Indies
University College to undertake research into the fishery resources of
the sea in the Western Caribbean. Other research activities of importance
to the economy of the West Indies have included studies of the chemistry
of sugar with a view to increasing its industrial uses, and experiments to
control froghoppers —small insects which are a serious menace to sugar
cane crops.
Social science research activities in the West Indies during the year
have included investigations of the mental ability of West Indian children,
a study of Friendly Societies, and the continuation of a social survey
of Jamaica.
Research institutions, schemes in progress, and research workers in the
West Indies, and working for the West Indies, are listed in the compre-
hensive Tear Book of Caribbean Research published by the Caribbean
Commission in 1949. This Year Book is a survey of practically all the
research work being carried out in or on behalf of the Caribbean area,
and its publication will make possible the cooperative planning of
research schemes in relation to the situation throughout the region.
Survey Work
An essential prelude to the development of a country is an accurate
topographical survey. Irrigation schemes, the construction of new
roads and railways, town planning, and agricultural expansion are only
some of the things dependent on accurate mapping, and in 1946 a Central
Organization for Geodetic and Topographical Surveys was set up to map
the Colonies, using radar-controlled air photography, as well as ground
surveying.
The air photography is carried out by a specially equipped squadron
of the R.A.F. which has surveyed some 400,000 square miles since the
Directorate started operations. During 1948-49, a total of 217,200 square
miles was photographed from the air—about 195,600 square miles in
East, West and Central Africa and the South African High Commission
Territories, and about 21,600 square miles in Malaya, North Borneo and
Sarawak. The use of air photography does not eliminate the need for
ground surveys, though it greatly facilitates such work, and “control
surveys” are made from the ground to fix the position of a number of
points which can be identified on the photographs. Parties have been at
work on these control surveys in Kenya, Uganda, Tanganyika and
Northern Rhodesia, while a start has also been made in Nyasaland and
Swaziland.
The process of map-making with the use of air photographs is carried
out at the Directorate’s headquarters in England. Mapping has con-
tinued steadily in 1948-49 and over 100 map sheets covering some 20,000
square miles have now been published, while work on a further 150,000
square miles is in hand. The principal demand has been for quick delivery
of maps of areas scheduled for immediate development work, and every
effort has been made to meet such demands, though this involves a delay


in the preparation of standard topographical series on which the Direc-
torate is also working. Special maps prepared for development work in
1948-49 included six prepared for British Guiana, covering agriculture,
livestock, drainage, etc., and one map and three graphs prepared for
British Honduras to illustrate soil conditions.
During the year, arrangements were made for the aerial photographing
of 4,000 square miles in the Bartica and Potaro area of British Guiana.
This mapping represents a practical effort to put into operation recom-
mendations made by the British Guiana and British Honduras Settlement
Commission in 1948, since development of the interior of British Guiana
must be based on topographic data which has so far been lacking.
In the Falkland Islands Dependencies, ground surveying to supplement
the work undertaken by previous expeditions has been carried out by
the Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey, while for the cartographic
work the resources of the Directorate of Colonial Surveys have been made
available. A series of 15 sheets of Graham Land and the Islands covering
nearly 500,000 square miles at a scale of 1 : 500,000 has been compiled,
and a single sheet map covering the whole of the Dependencies at 1 : 6
million has been published.




INTERNATIONAL COLONIAL COOPERATION
In the sphere of international relations, World War II brought great
changes to many Colonial territories. In the West Indies, for example,
cooperation between the United Kingdom and United States Govern-
ments on defense matters led to the establishment of the Anglo-American
Caribbean Commission to consider the wider aspects of Caribbean
economic and social problems, and the expansion of this Commission into
the Caribbean Commission in 1945 to include the other Colonial Powers
with territories in the area. In Africa, wartime security and economic
needs led to Anglo-French collaboration, and after the close of the war in
Europe the British Government took steps to resume and extend this
cooperation on technical matters of common concern, and to include
other European countries with Colonial responsibilities in Africa. In 1946,
joint action on common problems in Africa was discussed with Belgian
officials, and these various bilateral conversations culminated in the
tripartite Anglo-French-Belgian talks held in Paris in 1947, at which a
program of joint technical conferences was drawn up. In 1947, also,
discussions were held with representatives of the Portuguese Colonial
Office; and Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the United
States, France and the Netherlands set up in the Pacific a South Pacific
Commission with functions similar to the Caribbean Commission.
In addition to these examples of international regional cooperation,
recent developments in which are outlined below, other measures for
international cooperation for the benefit of Colonial peoples have recently
been initiated. In January 1949, the President of the United States
proposed that America should provide technical assistance for under-
developed areas as part of a program for freedom and peace; from this
“fourth point” of President Truman’s address a plan for an international
program of technical assistance for the economic development of under-
developed territories through the United Nations and its specialized
agencies has evolved, and has been approved by the United Nations
Economic and Social Council in August and by the General Assembly in
November. The United Kingdom has expressed support of the proposal.
Speaking at the Council’s discussion on the subject in August, the United
Kingdom delegate promised that his Government would give the plan all
possible aid; while Britain had long furthered economic development and
provided technical assistance in a systematic way to British dependencies,
the proposal that the more advanced countries should get together to give
technical assistance to the less developed countries of the world—whether
they were politically responsible for them or not —was something new in
international cooperation.
The Colonies and the United Nations
Before the conclusion of the war the United Kingdom had already
played a large part in drawing up Chapters XI, XII and XIII of the
United Nations Charter. Chapter XI is, in effect, a summary of the
principles of Colonial administration, and gives expression in an inter-
national document to what have long been the aims of British Colonial
policy. Chapter XII established the international trusteeship system, and
Chapter XIII set out the composition and functions of the Trusteeship
Council which is responsible for supervising the administration of Trust
Territories. Under Article 73(e) of Chapter XI, His Majesty’s Government


and the other signatories agreed to provide the Secretary-General
of the United Nations with certain statistical and technical information on
economic, social and educational conditions in the non-self-governing
territories not under trusteeship; this data to be provided solely for
information purposes.
In a debate in the House of Lords in November, the United Kingdom
Minister of State for the Colonies, Lord Listowel, emphasized that under
the terms of its Charter the United Nations’ role in relation to Trust
Territories was “to watch, to criticize, to admonish on occasions if
necessary, and to supervise generally the conduct of the administering
authority; it is not,” he said, “to take any part in the actual process of
administration.” He pointed out that the sole responsibility for formu-
lating the policy pursued in Trust Territories, and for choosing the
method of putting it into effect, lay with the United Kingdom, and that
while advice given by the Trusteeship Council and the General Assembly
on the government of these territories would always be carefully con-
sidered, it was our duty, in judging policy, “to consider first the welfare of
the indigenous inhabitants and to reject the counsel of the United Nations
Assembly when in our opinion it conflicts with their interests.” For these
reasons British representatives opposed several resolutions accepted by
the General Assembly in 1949. These resolutions include a proposal to
locate the administrative headquarters of Trust Territories inside these
Territories.
Britain’s attitude to the supply of information under Article 73(e) of the
Charter was also dealt with by Lord Listowel in the debate, and by the
United Kingdom Minister of State, Mr. Hector McNeil, at a Plenary
Session of the United Nations General Assembly on December 1. Lord
Listowel stated that there had been a tendency to use this Article as a
means of encroaching upon the United Kingdom’s unqualified responsi-
bility for her dependencies, and to try to establish a counterpart of the
Trusteeship Council which would subject Colonies to the same scrutiny
and criticism as Trust Territories. This tendency, as the Minister of State
pointed out to the General Assembly, is a tendency to read into the
Charter obligations and functions which are not there. Mr. McNeil also
explained that the responsibility for administering non-self-governing
territories is being rapidly devolved on the people of the territories
themselves, and that the United Kingdom is not prepared to commit
those peoples to policies in the formulation of which they have no say.
For these reasons the United Kingdom has rejected resolutions accepted
by the General Assembly which call upon Colonial Powers to provide
information on the political and constitutional development of their
Colonies, and which have resulted in the appointment of a Committee
whose powers include inquiring into the question of whether any territory
is, or is not, self-governing.
Three United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization Conferences
were held in Singapore during 1949 to discuss various aspects of food
and agricultural production in Southeast Asia. In March, the Indo-
Pacific Fisheries Council met for its inaugural session and discussed
methods of increasing fish production in Southeast Asia. In April, a
Phyto-Sanitary Conference reviewed the whole field of plant protection
legislation in Southeast Asia with a view to making proposals for some
uniformity in the legislation of the separate territories. In September,
an Asian Regional Conference of FAO considered food production in the
region as a whole.


International allocation of rice by FAO terminated at the end of the
year, and since the distribution of rice supplies was the chief subject for
consideration at the monthly meetings of Liaison Officers of the Govern-
ments of countries in Southeast Asia, initiated by the UK, these meetings,
also, came to an end with the twenty-ninth at Singapore in November.
Cooperation in Africa
One of the most important international regional conferences held in
Africa during 1949 was the African Regional Scientific Conference held
at Johannesburg in October. The delegations to this Conference, which
was convened by the Government of South Africa, represented the
United Kingdom, the Union of South Africa, Southern Rhodesia, and
the British, French, Portuguese and Belgian dependencies in Africa.
Observers from the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization,
UNESCO, the World Health Organization, the United States National
Research Council, and the Australian Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research were also present. As the result of discussions on papers dealing
with specific aspects of research in almost every branch of science,
the delegates unanimously concluded that the time had come for a broader
cooperative approach to the problems of Africa south of the Sahara.
They have therefore recommended to their respective governments
proposals for the establishment of a consultative and advisory Scientific
Council for Africa south of the Sahara.
An international African nutrition conference, arranged by the French
Government, was held at Dchang, in the French Cameroons, in October,
and was attended by representatives of the British, South African, Belgian
and Portuguese Governments and of FAO. The main purpose of the
Conference was to discuss research into nutritional problems, and some of
its findings were further considered at the international Indigenous Rural
Economy Conference held at Jos, Nigeria, in November and attended by
representatives of the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Portugal, the
Union of South Africa, and Southern Rhodesia. Prior to the holding of
the Indigenous Rural Economy Conference, representatives from the
British African territories held a Land Utilization Conference at Jos and
made a number of important recommendations relating to land utilization
by Africans. Earlier in the year, representatives of the United Kingdom,
France and Belgium met in Paris to discuss educational questions of
common interest, including the training of teachers and various proposals
on education in Africa made by the United Nations Trusteeship Council
and UNESCO.
An International Congress of African Tourism was held at Nairobi,
Kenya, in October. Delegates from the British, French, Portuguese and
Belgian territories in Africa, and from the Union of South Africa, Southern
Rhodesia, Belgium, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan,
Liberia and Portugal were invited by the Alliance Internationale de
Tourisme which convened the Congress, and subjects for discussion
included communications, frontier formalities, tourist accommodations
and national parks, game reserves, and archaeological and historical sites.
The Anglo-French Standing Consultative Commission for Togoland,
which makes recommendations to reduce difficulties caused to the
inhabitants of British and French Togoland by the existence of the
frontier, met in April and October, and a Working Party has been set up
by the British and French Governments to investigate the practicability
of establishing a Conventional zone for the two Trust Territories, so as to


remove disabilities resulting from the customs frontier. Four experimental
joint courses in mass education have now been held in Togoland and
measures to follow up these courses were among the subjects discussed by
the Commission.
A Convention establishing the International Red Locust Service bn a
formal basis was signed in February by representatives of the United
Kingdom, Belgium, the Union of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia.
Under the terms of the Convention, an International Council for the
Control of the Red Locust is to be established, and its headquarters and
laboratories at Abercorn in Northern Rhodesia were opened in September.
Cooperation in the Caribbean
Social and economic development in the Caribbean area is promoted
on an international basis by the Caribbean Commission which was
formally established in 1946, and which is an advisory body financed by
the Governments of the United Kingdom, the United States, France and
the Netherlands. Regular means of consultation with and between
delegates of the dependent territories in the Caribbean on social and
economic matters of common interest are provided by the West Indian
Conference, which is an auxiliary body of the Commission, and another
auxiliary body—the Caribbean Research Council—advises on and
initiates scientific, technological, social and economic research which will
benefit the Caribbean territories of the member Governments.
During 1949, the Commission and the Caribbean Research Council
have been particularly active in advising on measures to stimulate
industrial development and economic productivity in the area. Under the
auspices of the Commission, over forty Economic Information leaflets have
been issued dealing with such subjects as E.C.A., and the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in relation to the Caribbean,
and with trade in the various commodities of the region. The Com-
mission has also completed plans to issue a bi-annual Caribbean Economic
Review , in addition to the existing Monthly Information Bulletin , and has
continued to publish detailed studies of trade in the Caribbean; those in
1949 covered the meat, dairy products and tobacco trades. Crop inquiry
investigations have also continued, and sugar, vegetables and grasses are
among the crops already dealt with.
During the year Trinidad was selected as the temporary headquarters
of the Caribbean Interim Tourism Committee, which held its first meeting
in August. This Committee has been formed by the Caribbean Com-
mission following recommendations made by the West Indian Conference
at its meeting in December 1948. Together with the Caribbean Tourist
Development Association the Committee will help the individual terri-
tories and islands in the Caribbean to develop larger tourist industries,
and will coordinate individual efforts in this direction for the benefit of the
area as a whole.
Dr. Eric Williams, a Trinidadian by birth, who is Professor of Social
and Political Science, Howard University, Washington, D.C., was
appointed Deputy Chairman of the Caribbean Research Council in June,
and has become head of the Research Branch of the Central Secretariat
of the Commission. The Research Council held a meeting in May and
discussed proposals for future research work in the area, and one of its
Research Committees is now preparing for a conference on Livestock in
the Caribbean to be held in 1950. On the recommendation of the West
Indian Conference, a Year Book of Caribbean Research was published


during the year; it is the first publication of its kind, and surveys research
schemes, workers and institutions in all the Caribbean territories.
Following recommendations made by the Caribbean Commission, an
informal meeting of meteorological and telecommunications experts was
held at Barbados in August under the auspices of Regional Commission
IV of the International Meteorological Organization. The experts
considered methods of improving and coordinating the hurricane
warning system in the Eastern Caribbean area.
The Secretary of State for the Colonies appointed in March an elected
member of the Legislative Council of St. Lucia, and an elected member
of the British Honduras Legislative Council, as members of the British
Section of the Caribbean Commission. Both are also members of the
Executive Councils of their respective Colonies. The Commission held
its eighth meeting at Trinidad, in June, and its ninth in the United States
Virgin Islands in December.
During the year the Governors of British Guiana, and Surinam (Dutch
Guiana), and the Prefect of French Guiana agreed on methods of
increasing cooperation between their territories. At a three-day con-
ference in Georgetown, capital of British Guiana, it was decided to
interchange scientific, technical and economic information on such
subjects as agriculture, health, mining and communications, and,
wherever possible, to make specialist officers from one country available
to the others for consultation on specific problems.
Cooperation in the South Pacific
International colonial cooperation in the South Pacific is being
encouraged by the South Pacific Commission which was established in
1947. The Commission, the organization of which is similar to the
Caribbean Commission, has been set up by the Governments of Australia,
New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the United States, France and the
Netherlands; it is an advisory and consultative body set up for the welfare
of the non-self-governing territories administered by the participating
governments and, like the Caribbean Commission, has two auxiliary
bodies, in this case the South Pacific Research Council and the South
Pacific Conference.
The Commission’s permanent headquarters are at Noumea in New
Caledonia and representatives of the participating governments met there
in May for the Commission’s third session, and in October for the fourth
session. Some 28 research projects submitted by the Commission’s
Research Council have been approved, and about £35,000 is expected
to be allocated to research in the 1950 budget. In the Fijian island of
Moturiki, one project planned by the Council is shortly to be carried out
in cooperation with the Government of Fiji. It consists of an experiment
in community development and is intended to encourage and help the
islanders to raise their living standards. Other schemes relate to nutrition
problems, tuberculosis, improving and broadening the agricultural
economy of the Pacific islands, studying methods of literacy training, and
anthropological and linguistic research. By the end of the year it was
hoped to have established in Fiji an epidemiological and quarantine
information center to serve the South Pacific region.
At its fourth session, the Commission made arrangements for the first
session of the South Pacific Conference which, it is expected, will take
place in Fiji in April 1950.




APPENDIX I
IMPORTANT DEBATES* IN 1949 RELATING TO
COLONIAL AFFAIRS
SUBJECT DATE COLUMN
Colonies General
Colonial Naval Defence BUI (and Reading) .. .. Feb. 2, 1949 1711-1744
Lords
Feb. 1, 1949 455-456
Defense March 3, 1949 541-666
Timber .. .. April 4, 1949 1808-1831
Policy and Administration .. .. .. .. herds
April 13, 1949 1169-1262
Livestock Production .. .. .. .. .. April 13, 1949 2805-2814
Housing April 14, 1949 S^S-SH B
Colonial Development & Welfare Bill (2nd Reading) May 27, 1949 1603-1680
Lards
July 19, 1949 125-127
Overseas Resources Development Bill (2nd Reading) July 15, 1949 918-927
Lords
Oct. 27, 1949 1315-1322
Colonial Loans Bill (2nd Reading) .. .. .. Lords
July 19, 1949 137-142
(2nd Reading in House of Commons, Nov. 19, 1948
Column 749-793)
Estimates July 20, 1949 1398-1571
Administration .. .. .. .. .. . • Lords
Nov. 30, 1949 1056-1122
Africa
Soil Erosion in Africa .. .. .. .. .. Feb. 17, 1949 1468-1479
Development in the Gambia .. .. .. .. Feb. 24, 1949 2166-2174
Groundnuts Scheme March 14, 1949 i753~ 18 73
July 27, 1949 2495-2548
Lords
Dec. 14, 1949 1522-1614
The West African Colonies .. .. .. .. Lords
March 17, 1949 506-539
Tanganyika: UN Commission’s Report .. .. Lords
May 11, 1949 546-588
Tuberculosis in Africa .. .. .. .. .. July 1, 1949 1757-1764
Africa July 29, 1949 2481-2930
Gold Coast Cocoa Industry Nov. 10, 1949 t 543 _1 552
Far East
Hong Kong Defense Lords
Feb. 3, 1949 541-556
North Borneo and Sarawak .. .. .. .. Feb. 14, 1949 906-920
Malaya: Terrorist Activities .. .. .. .. Lords
Feb. 23, 1949 1120-1138
Mediterranean
Malta Nov. 8, 1949 n 77-1194
West Indies
Development in Jamaica .. .. .. .. Feb. 4, 1949 2019-2080
Indian Ocean
Seychelles Administration .. .. .. .. June 3, 1949 2466-2485
* These debates took place in the House of Commons unless otherwise stated.


APPENDIX II
IMPORTANT GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS IN 1949
RELATING TO COLONIAL AFFAIRS
These documents may be purchased from the Sales Section, 8.1.5.,
New York, at the prices quoted.
Amani: East African Agricultural Research Institute
Report for 1947 Col. No. 235 January
15c.
Report on the Water Resources of the Bechuanaland
Protectorate, Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland,
Tanganyika, Kenya and Uganda Colonial January
Research
Publications No. 2
$2.40
Swollen Shoot Disease of Cacao in the Gold Coast.
Report of the Commission of Inquiry .. .. Col. No. 236 January
lOC.
African Labor Efficiency Survey, 1947 .. .. Colonial March
Research
Publications No. 3
s°c.
Colonial Primary Products Committee, 2nd Report Col, No. 238 March
30c.
Production of Fish in the Colonial Empire .. .. Col. No. 237 March
10c.
Labor and Trade Union Organization in the Federa-
tion of Malaya, and Singapore Col. No. 234 April
$1.25
Colonial Territories, 1948-49 Cmd. 7715 June
65c.
Agricultural Extension and Advisory Work with
Special Reference to the Colonies .. .. .. Col. No. 241 June
s°c.
British Dependencies in the Far East, 1945-49 .. Cmd. 7709 June
50c.
Report on Tobacco with Particular Reference to the
Prospects of Increased Production in Central and
East Africa .. .. .. .. .. .. Colonial June
Research
Publications No. 4
50c.
Report on the Administration of Togoland under
U.K. Trusteeship, 1948 .. .. .. ~ Col. No. 243 June
$1.50
Colonial Development Corporation: Annual Report
and Statement of Accounts for 1948 .. .. H. of C. 188 July
30c.
Colonial Development and Welfare Acts: Return of
Schemes, 1948-49 H. of G. 211 July
30c.
Colonial Research, 1948-49 .. .. .. .. Cmd. 7739 July
65c.
Colonial Office List, 1949 .. .. .. Col. No. 240 July
$3-5°
East Africa High Commission: Annual Report for
1948 Col. No. 245 July
25c.
Tanganyika: Report on the Administration for 1948 Col. No. 242 July
$1.70


Camcroons: Report on the Administration for 1948 Col. No. 244 August
$l.BO
Metals and Minerals Panel: Report of the Colonial
Primary Products Committee Col. No. 247 August
25c.
Locusts: International Convention for the Permanent
Control of Outbreak Areas for the Red Locusts .. Gmd. 7783 September
lOC.
Higher Education in the Colonies: Inter-University
Council, 2nd Report 1947-49 Gmd. 7801 October
15c.
Gold Coast: Report to His Excellency the Governor
by the Committee on Constitutional Reform .. Col. No. 248 October
50c.
Gold Coast; Statement by HMG. on the Report of the
Committee on Constitutional Reform, 1949 .. Col. No. 250 October
lOC.
British West Africa: Overseas Economic Survey .. 54-1027-7 October
35c.
Overseas Food Corporation Report and Accounts,
1948-49 .. .. .. .. .. .. H. of G. 252 November
90c.
Report on the Administration: Finance and Con-
ditions of the Sudan in 1947 .. .. .. Cmd. 7835 December
$l.OO
Sugar Industry of British Guiana .. .. .. Col. No. 249 December
$l.OO
Malta: Recent Requests for Financial and Economic
Assistance Col. No. 253 December
lOC.
East African Rice Mission Report, 1948 .. .. Col. No. 246 December
$1.50
A number of Colonial Annual Reports dealing with the affairs of separate Colonies
in 1947 and 1948 were published during the year, and are obtainable from H.M.S.O.
Those dealing with Colonies in 1948 are listed below.
Bahamas (1947 and 1948) Mauritius
British Guiana New Hebrides
British Honduras (Anglo-French Condominium)
British Solomon Islands Nyasaland
Brunei Sarawak
Cyprus Seychelles
Dominica Sierra Leone
Gambia Singapore
Gibraltar Somaliland Protectorate
Gilbert & Ellice Islands St. Helena
Hong Kong Tonga
Malaya Zanzibar




BRITISH INFORMATION SERVICES
PICTORIAL MATERIAL ON THE
COLONIES
The following FILMS may be rented or purchased :
ACHIMOTA ig minutes
One of the many colleges which have sprung up throughout the Colonial territories.
CYPRUS IS AN ISLAND 34 m i m tes
A picture of past and present life on the island of Cyprus.
DAYBREAK IN UDI 45 m i m tes
A unique tale of the community development through the initiative and efforts of
the Nigerian natives.
THE FALKLAND ISLANDS IO minutes
A survey of the work being done by the British in Antarctica.
FATHER AND SON H minutes
In the face of opposition, the educated younger people of the villages of Africa are
succeeding in introducing modern ideas.
FIGHT FOR LIFE I? minutes
A Government project is teaching the Northern Gold Coast people how to farm
their barren land scientifically.
HAUSA VILLAGE 22 minutes
The daily lives and customs of the Mohammedans who inhabit a Hausa village
in Northern Nigeria.
HERE IS THE GOLD COAST 35 minutes
With will and ability, West Africans are energetically meeting the challenge to
catch up with the modern world.
A MAMPRUSI VILLAGE 20 minutes
The Mamprusi people of Togoland have already achieved a measure of self-
government.
PARTNERS ... *7 minutes
In partnership with the white man, the native African is learning to improve his
backward country.
VOICES OF MALAYA 35 minutes
Post-war life in Malaya shows the four races working toward peace and prosperity.
The following FILM STRIPS, each accompanied by lecture notes ,
may be purchased for %i.oo:
ACHIMOTA COLLEGE
AFRICAN DOCTORS IN TRAINING
BRITAIN FIGHTS LOCUSTS
BRITAIN FIGHTS SLEEPING SICKNESS
THE COLONIES FIGHT LEPROSY
DISTRICT COMMISSIONER
MALARIA
TEA FROM NYASALAND
COLONIAL EMPIRE SERIES:
BATTLE AGAINST DISEASE
BATTLE AGAINST POVERTY
COLONIAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
INTRODUCING THE COLONIES
INTRODUCING EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA
INTRODUCING THE PACIFIC ISLANDS
INTRODUCING WEST AFRICA


Three catalogs are available free of charge from
BRITISH INFORMATION SERVICES
30 Rockefeller Plaza, New York 20, N.Y.
publications gatalog— lllustrated booklets, information papers,
and mimeographed releases.
films from Britain: —An alphabetical listing of current 16mm
sound films, with classified index and conditions of loan.
Film Strips and other pictorial material alphabetically listed
with sale prices.
BRITISH INFORMATION SERVICES
•] Answers inquiries concerning British affairs.
1 Maintains a library of 10,000 books, together with periodicals and official
documents, available on interlibrary loan.
H Is official sales agent for British Government documents.
1 Maintains services to supply the special needs of the press and radio with
information, feature articles and photographs.
1! Distributes a wide range of free publications.
1 Sells and rents 35mm and 16mm sound films.
H Provides speakers on British affairs.
Printed in Great Britain by Trade Union Labor
