

THE
MELBOURNE
ZOO
IN STORY AND PICTURES




THE
In Picture and Story
COPYRIGHT
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
BROWN, PRIOR & CO. PTY. LTD.
Printcraft House
430 LITTLE BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE, C.i
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF
THE ROYAL ZOOLOGICAL AND ACCLIMATISATION
SOCIETY OF VICTORIA


The Royal Zoological and Acclimatisation
Society of Victoria
Patron: His Excellency the State Governor.
President: Ambrose Pratt, Esq.
Vice-Presidents: Professor Sir W. Colin MacKenzie, K. 8., M.D.
Hon. J. G. Membrey.
Hon. Treasurer: Hon. J. Hume-Cook, J.P.
Council:
Elected Members:
Hon. J. Hume-Cook, J.P. C. W. Maclean, Esq.
Dr. Paul G. Dane Dr. Brooke Nicholls
Dr. W. T. Kendall Ambrose Pratt, Esq
Louis J. Levy, Esq. Major-General J. Stanley, C.M.G.
Professor Sir W. Colin Mackenzie, K. 8., M.D.
Government Members:
F. Lewis, Esq. Hon. J. G. Membrey
Hon. G. M. Prendergast, M.L.A.
Committees:
Works—The President, Dr. Paul G. Dane, Dr. W. T. Kendall,
Dr. Brooke Nicholls, C. W. Maclean, Esq.
Major-General J. Stanley, C.M.G,
Finance The President, Hon. J. Hume-Cook, Dr. W. T. Kendall,
Hon. J. G. Membrey.
Director: Andrew Wilkie.
Secretary: Hugh G. Turner, Chartered Accountant (Aust.).
Hon. Veterinary Surgeons:
Dr. W. T. Kendall, M.R.C.V.S. Hector Kendall, Esq. B.V.Sc.
Hon. Architect: H. J. Wagstaff, Esq., C.E.
Overseer: A. H. Hardbottle.
Offices of the Society:
Director’s—ZOOLOGlCAL GARDENS, MELBOURNE.
(Tel. F 1479)
Secretary’s >BO SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE.
(Tel. Cent. 9290)


INTRODUCTION
By
A. WILKIE
HF all the places of interest and amusement in a great
city such as Melbourne, the Zoo has ever been
unique. Strangely enough, it has the same fascina-
tion for both young and old. To people of all ages
and classes the Zoo is a source of never-ending
pleasure, interest and practical education.
This, after all, is not surprising. To how few of us, unfor-
tunately, comes the opportunity of travel and sight-seeing in
foreign lands. And supposing this chance were ours, imagine
the time and expense that would be involved in studying even
half of the animals in their native haunts that we see collectively
at the Zoo.
That the Zoo maintains its popularity, even in difficult
times such as these, is strikingly evidenced by the attendances
during the last twelve months, when the total number of paying
visitors reached 328,796. This number excludes thousands of
children from State and Primary Schools, who are admitted
free each year.
Children have every facility afforded them of enjoying
themselves and of being entertained and educated. Free access
to the lawns for picnics and games is much appreciated, and no
irksome restrictions interfere with the day’s enjoyment.
It is natural, then, that the Zoo should rank high in public
patronage and popularity. Thousands of families who visit the
Gardens periodically are evidence of a never-fading interest and
a keen enjoyment of all that the Zoo has to offer.
It is with the object of fostering this appreciation on the
part of the public that this little book is published each month.
The Zoo authorities are pleased to present you with this
copy as a Souvenir of your visit to the Melbourne Zoo.


TO
DATE
INCLUSIVE
Mt. Buffalo National Park ,
8-day tours, every
COST
£6 15
0
0
Inverloch . . . .
Friday evening.
October 10-17
£6
0
Gippsland Lakes . .
December 5-12
October 17-24
£7
0
7
Grampians ....
November 14-21
November 7-14
October 3-10
£8
£5
0
g
Lome (via Birregurra) ..
5
17
Lome (via Geelong) ....
Nov. 28-Dec. 5
£5
12
Wilson's Promontory
Sept. 26-Oct. 3
£6
10
0
Cowes (Phillip Island) . . . .
October 24-31
November 21-28
£5
5
0
‘WHERE'LL
WE GO.. ?’
\\I HEN that eternal
* * “Where’ll -we-go ?”
query crops up at the next
discussion about holidays,
you’ll find your answer in
the list of escorted tours
arranged by the Govern-
ment Tourist Bureau.
These tours combine the
maximum of holiday en-
joyment with the minimum
of cost.
Party of escorted tourists at Lorne.
FORTHCOMING TOURS:
(These charges cover accommodation, travel and all incidental costs.)
Book now at Government Tourist Bureau, Queen’s Walk, Melbourne.


His Majesty,
The King of
Beasts
AFRICAN LION
(Felis leo)
NATURAL history makes the Lion the most picturesque of all living
animals. Although he has his critics, the “King of Beasts”
deserves his title. There is something distinctly regal in his
make-up and appearance —a certain nobility that is entirely absent in
the tiger, for instance. This is well illustrated in the lion s sense of
fair play when he misjudges his spring at an intended victim. In this
case he will not attempt a second spring, apparently deciding that his
mark is entitled to its freedom because of his own miserable failure, and
after watching the fortunate animal for some time in deep chagrin, he
stalks off to try his luck on another victim.
This remarkable trait of the lion is vouched for by Livingstone, the
famous explorer, and in his opinion is sufficient justification in itself
for the kingly title, apart from other qualifications which the lion
undoubtedly has.
Since historical times the lion has roamed over Europe, and now
still exists in Africa and India. In preference to heavy-forested coun-
try, the lion likes the grassy, semi-desert country which is the home of
his’prey, the zebra, antelope and buffalo. Although there is only one
species, there are several slight colour variations in the lion family, due
to different geographical locations.
Lions reared in captivity are often larger than those living in the
wild state. It is fortunate that they thrive so well in captivity, as the
species is fast vanishing in its native countries, and there is in time a
possibility of its extinction.
Some years ago a cub was born at the gardens, and was reared on
the bottle just as a baby would be, by one of the keepers. The experi-
ment was an unqualified success, and the cub grew to be a fine lioness.


Always Insist on Having
Hkornies]
for Breakfast
7 ousted, golden brown , wheat flakes
—simply add milk and sugar
KIDDIES LOVE THEM!
WARD BROS. Pty. Ltd.
Cutlery Repairs
Scissors Resharpened from - - yd. pair
Carvers Reground ----- eac h
Keen Values in all Razors
and Scissors
High-Class Scissors from- - - 1/9 each
Gillette Type lO for - 1/-
SPECIAL SHOW DISPLAY!
144 SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE, C.i


From the
Depths of
the Jungle
BENGAL TIGER (Felts tigris )
TIE Tiger! At
once the name con-
jures up visions of
man-eating and all that
is savage and ferocious.
Picturesque and majes-
tic, the tiger in captivity
has an awesome fascina-
tion for all of us. Of
the several species of tigers, the Bengal native -is the most vividly
coloured and by far the most dangerous. His cunning and relentless
ness are proverbial, and in India alone tigers and leopards take between
two and three thousand lives annually. Like the
Indian leopard, the tiger is a jungle lover, and lives
close enough to native villages to be able to maraud
indiscriminately among the herds and natives.
Even the lion takes second place when it comes
to sheer ferocity and the propensity for taking life
of both man and beast. .
The tiger is protectively coloured by reason of its
vertical stripes, alternating black and yellow, which
correspond closely in light and shade to the pat
terns of vegetation in which it roams. Long cap-
tivity often reconciles them to their fate, and in
some cases they may be stroked and petted without
undue danger to those who know them. For the
most part, however, they cannot be trusted, and no
one admires a tiger that is not safely imprisoned
behind iron bars. .
Once it acquires a taste for human flesh the tiger
prefers it to that of animals, and will go out of its
way to satisfy that taste. The Bengal tiger
at present in the Zoo is credited with having
killed fourteen natives before its capture


Jjzt the Kiddies learn
healthy teeth habits
by painting the
charming scenes
in
61 BBS
NEWEST
fifA FAIRY „_ A ~
y&ix book
zTl&Ks\
€4r
u
Wessons are enchantingly taught
m The Gibbs Ivory Castle Rhyme and Painting Book”
)ust published. There are many pretty pictures to paint
and catchy rhymes to read that stick in the memory,
these bewitch youthful readers into keeping their teeth
clean and wholesome with Gibbs Dentifrice, for the
sheer fun of the thing.
You should use Gibbs Dentifrice three times a day
after breakfast. . . after lunch ... and at night.
Your teeth are Ivory Castles—defend them with
NOW MADE IN AUSTRALIA
Reduced Prices!
Obtainable in neat aluminium
cases as follows :
POPULAR SIZE, 1/.
LARGE SIZE, 1/6
DE LUXE SIZE, 2/6
Refills for Large and 1/Q
De Luxe Sizes
DENTAL CREAM
(IN TUBES)
SMALL SIZE, 1/-
LARGE SIZE, 1/6
emfrge NC y coupon
S u - of ® tock of the « Gibbs Ivory
Rhyme and Paint Book” and Samnles send
fee sc
To W. fl. BLAKE Pty. Ltd.,
252 City Road,
SOOTH MELBOURNE, 5.C.5,
Name
Address
(PLEASE USE BLOCK LETTERS.) 2°0~9


Hoofs
AND
Horns
THE Sable Antelope is the most
handsome species of the African
Antelopes. Both male and
female have long ringed horns, which
extend back in a beautiful arc, en-
hancing its naturally proud carriage.
Both sexes, when adult, are generally a
dark brownish colour, contrasting
sharply with pure white under parts.
The Sable inhabits the country from the north-east district of the
r pj*£ifisvaal to old German East Africa. Unfortunately, howevei, the
Sable Antelope is so rare at the present day that it can no longer be
hunted in Africa, and when taken is exported only for public exhibition,
with the object of propagating the species.
The two fine specimens that are
at present in the Gardens were im-
ported from South Africa, and it is
doubtful if there are any others in the
Commonwealth,
The Indian Antelope or Black Buck
(Antipole cervicapra), pictured here,
inhabits the plains-country of Hindu-
stan. In the thickly populated agricul-
tural regions between the rivers Ganges
and Jumna, great herds of these ani-
mals destroy many crops. At maturity
the back and lower neck are of a rich
brown-black colour, the adult males
having long ringed horns extending in
a “V” shape to a length of twenty-six
to thirty-six inches. In appearance
they are the most handsome of all
small antelopes.
The Nilghai
This is the largest antelope found
in Asia. The Hindoos regard it as a
sacred animal and place it on a level
with the bovine race. The name means
Blue Bull. The male is much more
imposing than the female, his colour
being a bluish-grey, while’the female
is a more subdued brown. The male
alone possesses short straight horns
and can occasionally show a very sav-
age temper. The Nilghai is a vege-
tarian whose diet consists of grass and
leaves.


All
“little monkeys”
aren’t
in the Zoo...!
Children get into more mischief
than monkeys sometimes, especially
when “cranky” moods come over
them. And you can’t put them in
cages, so the only thing is to cure
the moods, which, luckily, is easy.
“Cranny'’ moods temper, tears,
tantrums, sulks, disobedience—are
caused by a widespread disordered
condition of the stomach, liver,
kidneys and bowels.
But Laxettes, by virtue of their
special ingredients, their gentle
action, and their effectiveness in
purifying ALL the organs of diges-
tion and elimination, cure the
moods rapidly and with certainty.
Remember, crankiness ruins cha-
racter—Laxettes cure crankiness.
At the first symptom, give Lax-
ettes, and continue till the mood
has passed. For the full story of
childhood crankiness, its causes
and cure, free Laxettes sample, and
vital information about intestinal
worms, write to Dept. Z, Laxette
Co., Melbourne, C.l.
N&WS dhout the Gnus (please pronounce “news”)]
After temporary separation, which the jealous temper of Mr. Gnu
necessitated, Piet has been bound over to keep the peace and the
couple have once more set up house-keeping. Even now, it needs but
one glance of interest from the bright eyes of “Kolbe” the male Zebra
bestowed upon the indifferent Lady Gnu, to sent Piet into a perfect
irenzy of jealousy, m which he charges, like a battering-ram, the fence
dividing the Zebra domicile from that of the Gnus. Piet was once a
handsome fellow, with beautiful, up-curved horns, but the frantic
frenzies m which he indulges have reduced these to mere stumps, and
he now looks a perfect larrikin (if such a type exists). When the Gnus
separated, the mother was given the custody of their twelve-months-old
son but, unfortunately, he died just as the Auckland Zoo folk had de-
cided to add him to their collection.
(The Gnu is a mixture of odds and ends of animality—he might
pass for a high-class cow or for a mongrel horse.)
Old man to his wife: “Come along, mother, we must see this new
animal (pointing to notice, “To the Kiosk”). Approaching a keeper
he asks, Can you direct me to the ‘kosk’?” The harassed keeper
scratches Ins head and racks his brain, and then light dawns—he points
to the tea-house. Oh—er—yes—er—come along, mother, we will have
a cup of tea.


Monkeys
Great and
Small
THE monkey pavilion at the
Zoo is a centre of incessant
activity on the part of the
monkeys and a never-failing attrac-
tion to visitors. Family troubles
are rife and squabbles are con-
tinuous, so that things are never dull dur-
ing the monkey’s waking hours.
The Rhesus monkey is found in most
parts of India, and prefers to live in
bamboo groves bordering the edge of the
water, in which they are quite at home,
as they are great swimmers.
“Brok,” the pig-tailed macaque, is so
named because of his short, curly tail.
He is an intelligent little fellow, hailing
from the Malay Archipelago. He is of
great help to the natives in gathering ripe
coconuts, and when properly trained the
“Brok” will ascend a tree and obey the
orders given by a native below.
The Slow Loris Monkey, from Bor-
neo, is a lemur or half-ape. Its peculiar
appearance—grey-brown fur, large eyes,
absence of any tail—and slow movements
have endowed it with magical powers in
the eyes of the natives of Borneo. A
popular legend concerning it is that its
liver when dried and powdered if given
to a woman to eat will cause her to fall
desperately in love with the giver.
The Entellus Monkey is not found in
a wild state outside of India, where it is
accorded reverence and worship by the
natives, as a sacred creature. This mon-
key is remarkably agile, and will leap
from branch to branch, covering twenty
to thirty feet at a bound. In colour the
Entellus monkey is
grey and nut
brown, and its diet
is strictly vege-
tarian.


You Will Save At Least 20%
in comparison with prices quoted by any other reputable firm
in Victoria, by purchasing from the Direct Supply Jewellery
Company. This Company Imports Direct, Manufactures Direct,
and Sells Direct to the Public from upstairs showrooms, thereby
eliminating such overhead expenses as heavy
ground floor shop rents and middlemen’s
profits. A written guarantee of quality—and value—is
given ; the money refunded if a customer is not satisfied
or can buy cheaper elsewhere.
Buy from the D.S.J. Company and he certain
of “Quality with Economy.”
DIAMOND RING!
£lO
Fancy Diamon
Ring. Others £ 1
to £2O.
£l2/10/-
Leaf Shoulders
Others £lO/10/
to £25.
£l6/10/-
Step
Others £l5 t
£2O.
£l7/10/
Seven Diamonds J
Others £ 12/10/J
to £25.
£22/10/-
A New Design
Others £2O tq
£3O.
£22/10/
Seven Diamonds
Others £ 10/10/
to £4O.
£5O
Pure Platinunl
Ring (Carved)
Others £l5 t<)
£lOO.
NEXT TO “THE
AGE” OFFICE
mm
Visitors are spe
cially invited to
call and inspect
our showrooms
A visit does not
entail any obliga-
tion to buy.
A New and Exceedingly Dainty Design.
9 ct. Gold Engraved Case on a strong Gold
Expanding Bracelet. The special 15
Jewelled Swiss Lever Movement is Guaran-
teed for Five Years. Our Price . . OA
(Other Shapes, £2/10/- to £6/10/-)
Strong 9 ct. Gold
Sleeve Links.
15/- per pair.
Other shapes, 8/6
to 25/-.
15 ct. Gold from
22/6. Initials en-
graved free.
9
ini
/
1
This dainty 9 ct. Gold Watch on a Moire
Wristlet, is one of the latest models. The
high-grade, 15 Jewelled Swiss Lever Move-
ment is Guaranteed for Five Years.
The same design with a special
“D.S.J.” Movement, £4.)
£2/10/-
Gent.’s Solid Silver, 15
J ewelled Swiss Lever
Watch, with a Luminous
Dial. Five Years qA /
Guarantee .. .. Ox)/ m
(In 10-year warranted
Gold Filled Case, 30/-.)
i n ef. OI S, M £2/10/-
If you cannot call, write for our Free 111,-Page Catalogue.
THE DIRECT SUPPLY
JEWELLERY CO. ir«,
Telephones F 3222, F 6259. (A. COHEN, Manager.)
2nd FLOOR, ARLINGTON CHAMBERS
229 COLLINS STREET
MELBOURNE, C.l


“Fifty Miles
an Hour”
EMU
(Dromaius novce-hollandia )
r I T HE Emu roams over the
mainland of Australia,
and in addition to its
fleetness of foot has remarkable
powers of endurance. In place
of a nest the emu scratches a
shallow hollow in the sand, and
it is said that incubation is per-
formed by the male, which is
smaller than the female. Like
the ostrich, the wings of an emu
are of no assistance, even in run-
ning. The body feathers are
alike, differing only in size, the
colour presenting a harmonising
effect throughout.
Lizzie the Emu, who showed a marked partiality for the office
soap, even thrusting her head inside the door, when unobserved, and
stealing it from the charwoman’s bucket, has been shipped oversea to
the Sourabaya Zoo, where she will have fresh scope for her taking
propensities. With her going, the authorities heaved a sigh of relief,
for Lizzie had an undesirable habit of removing blazing paper from the
incinerator and strewing it on the grass, thus creating a possibility of
fire.
The South African Ostrich, like the emu, is noted for its astonish-
ing swiftness on foot, and running at top speed often approaches
a speed of 50 miles an hour! The South African specimen is the com-
monest of five racial forms found in Africa and Arabia, -The ostrich
when grown to maturity reaches a height of from six to eight feet, and
is thus the largest existing bird. The males have a distinguishing black
plumage with white wings, whereas the female and immature birds are
of a dirty grey colour. ....
Although a native of hot, semi-desert country, the ostrich is a
hardy bird/and can stand the exposure of all seasons in much colder
climates. The female lays about sixty eggs in a season, the weight of
each egg equalling that of twenty hen’s eggs.
In attack and defence the ostrich is particularly courageous, and
its strong legs and heavy nails render it a formidable foe.


GOOD DIGESTION MEANS
GOOD HEALTH
Lift SAV
9 N
'it 4
9r/k
Sometimes one cats too much -
Quite often, in fact —and indi-
gestion follows. Avoid it with
IIFE SAVERs
THE CANDY MINT WITH THE H©LE
The wholesome peppermint settles the stomach
and relieves the over-fed feeling.
You’ll find plenty of pep in —
d
Made in Australia by
LIFE SAVER A/ASIA LTD
FITZROY. VICTORIA.


“Percy”
the
Platypus
Courtesy “The Argus”
had enjoyed an unusually
long period of unique popu-
larity in his particular cor-
ner of the Zoo. Upon his
arrival the various types of
bird life, with which he had
to share his new quarters, received him with apparent unconcern, with
the exception of “Theodore,” the pert Thrush, who seemed to resent
the intrusion. Theo. would follow Percy as the latter leisurely swam
the length of the tiny stream and back, hurling from the bank a per-
fect tirade of impertinence. Baffled by the imperturbable platypus, he
would dance about in a frenzy, his remarks becoming more and more
personal. However, after a time Theo., too, allowed Percy to go his
way unnoticed. Things went “swimmingly” for Percy for three
glorious months. He was photographed for various leading dailies
numerous flattering paragraphs appeared about his unique personal
appearance and his ever-increasing popularity. Then a whisper reached
him that “Pauline,” another member of the remarkable Ormthorhynchus
family, would shortly reach the Zoo to share the honours with him.
This did not suit the vanity of Percy, so one dark night, when the
jungle folk were astir, he cleverly manoeuvred his way out of the
enclosure, and nothing has been seen or heard of him since not even
a message for his favourite keeper, cancelling the daily meat supply.
“Jimmy,” the Albino ,
who formerly lived at Carboor East, with his ingratiating ways, so
worked upon the good nature of his keeper, that he was permitted to
accompany the provision cart on its daily round, until one moi ning the
watched-for opportunity came. While the keeper’s back was turned,
Jimmy espied a bucket of luscious tit-bits, left for a moment on the
ground, and, thinking the inside of that pail w r as worth investigating, he
clambered up the side as fast as his fat body would allow. Just as he
was about to close his teeth on a toothsome morsel, the catastrophe
happened. Overbalancing, the greedy Jim fell headfirst into the bucket,
where he remained with his head wedged until a mighty heave upset
the bucket, and over and over it rolled. Eventually the keeper went to
the rescue of a “sadder but wiser” little Wombat.


for
See Our Windows OPTICIANS
337-339 BOURKE STREET
DIAMOND RINGS
- WATCHMAKERS - GOLDSMITHS Repairs a Specialty
OPPOSITE POST OFFICE
EXIT FOR
RAILWAY AND
TRAM
n
□
TT L
LAWN
CKA
/\Np
RR
OPEN
PADDOCK
» /
L A WN
L AWN
NEWS
\ \
Rfowu rs'\
Lavs
i \
/
ffORREYS
1 RAF EE • I PELTED
lions and tigers


KANGAROOS
DEER
j A- ; N
LAWN I \w/LD P/GSI ]SII )
'J O/f
\>C455/r
/"O' 'O \ '
*>HEASANTS\ \ '
EAGLES.RAVENS (£, oyVj
4 y\ VO , .
000000 \?'| r'V
Off.?
wallab
ORANGXSVTAM
ZEBRA
g//o
KANG A RO OS
“ — *— 1 ' ' r \ \
c:zr.zzzzoczrrrz~o czzz~zzzzziczzzzzzrrs.zz> /;(■;)/
OFFICE.
shelter
OSTRICHES
EMUS
COC/jA TOPS,
/VrfA/
LAVS
* :
LAWN
Af^N^TS
EACOCK.
'PPOPOT
2/4/ff
04
WEf
NK
LA WN
•Qe
J L
3 V
1 r^'
k/05Al
LAWN )
! A y_y}
J i-
PHEASANTS
CD
o//;
CRANES
ENTRANCE FROM SYDNEY ROAD
VISITORS’ GUIDE and DIRECTORY PLAN
OF
ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS, MELBOURNE
Zoo Hours: 9.15 to 5.15 Week Days; 1.30 to 5.15 Sundays Feeding Time: 3.30 Every Day


Never-failing Attractions
Courtesy “The Argus”
Although she is not the oldest inhabitant at the Zoo, “Queeme is
certainly the best known and best liked.
The fact that 56,527 children and adults went for a ride on hei
broad back last year is a striking tribute to the novelty of elephant
riding Despite her great bulk, “Queeme” is very gentle and docile and
shows’a marked affection for her keeper. Indeed, she is never happier
than when they are together, and even sacrifices any leisure time to be
with him whenever possible. , * A
Elephants have been known to live for more than one hundred
vears in captivity, and in a wild state they may attain an even greater
age to that. “Queenie” is merely a youngster, as elephants go, being
only thirty years old—the last twenty-six of which have been spent at
’ Other attractions for children include a miniature railway, donkey
carriages, and a recently installed Merry-Go-Round These also are
popular diversions, as the railway carried 109,000 last year and the
donkev carriages 76,220.


“Queenie’s” Mailbag
24 Kangaroo Road,
South Oakleigh, 5.E.12,
17/7/31.
Dear Queenie,
I hope very much that your foot is better hy the time-1 get to the
Zoo. lam sick in bed with the ’flu. I have never had a ride on you
before, so it ought to be lovelv. I am only nine years old this year.
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX There are sixteen kisses for you,
Queenie.
From
(Sgd.) SHEILA WRIGHT.
“St. Ninian’s”,
Station Street,
Chelsea,
6th July, 1931.
Dear Queenie,
I thought I would like to write a letter to you. I have been sick
and on my back for over four months now so I cannot come and see
you and have a ride until I can sit up. I used to love to sit next your
head, give you a tap and when your trunk came up put a nut in. Never
mind, when I can get better enough to come up I will come to you for
a ride and not the merry-go-round. In the picture you did not really
look very sad. My poor old dog died yesterday and he always came
for a walk with my pram. So now we want a little fox terrier pup to
take care of me. Ido hope we can get one.
With love from
(Sgd.) MARGARET BRUCE.
“Queenie" Demonstrates the Story of the Bad
"Little Boys and the Elephant
A number of schoolboys were having, what they called, great fun
one day, offering Queenie tit-bits and withdrawing them just as she was
about to seize them. At last Queenie turned her back on her tormentors
and sauntered indifferently over to her water-tank, where she filled her
trunk to its full capacity (approximately four gallons). Ambling
back to the crowd, she unconcernedly moved up and down until she
had the boys just where she wanted them, all in a heap, then, swish!
swish! they received the trunkful of icy water in their faces and down
their necks. The result was most amusing—for Queenie, at least —boys
screaming in fright, boys tumbling down in all directions and boys
ruefully wringing moist garments. They got what they richly deserved.


A Native Australian
I § Teat G re y Kangaroo and the great Red Kangaroo are the
.1 largest marsupials. A full grown “old man” of either kind
may measure five feet from the tip of its nose to the base of
its tail, which extends for a similar distance, and such an animal will
turn the scales at somewhere in the vicinity of two hundred pounds or
more.
The fossilatecl remains of kangaroos,
much larger than the present specimens,
have been found in various parts of Aus-
tralia.
Some years ago a kangaroo drive was
made in the Western District for the pur-
pose of replenishing the Gardens stock.
It was- considered that a nine feet netting
fence would be sufficient to hold the ani-
mals, some fifty or sixty of which were
driven in through a race. As soon as they
had completed a tour of the enclosure and
discovered that they were trapped, one of
their number took off at the fence, which
he cleared like a swallow. The remainder
followed his example, but not all with the
same success, as many did not clear the
fence and were killed.
The leaping powers of the kangaroo
are phenomenal, as a full grown “old
man” can cover up to thirty feet in a
bound. It gets assistance from its tail
in running, and the regular thumps upon
the ground can be heard for some dis-
tance.
These animals are easily tamed, and it
is not an unusual sight in the country to
see one following the farmer’s wife
around. With training they
become extremely adept
boxers, and woe betide the
novice who considers him-
self capable of sparring
with one.


“Grave-yard
Poachers”
STRIPED HYAENA
(Hyaena striata)
THE Hyaena is a uni-
versally unpopular
animal. He has a
most offensive smell, and
this combined with his
ghoulish practice of robbing
newly-made graves is re-
sponsible for his unenviable
reputation. The experience
of African natives leaves no
doubt that he is a grave
robber. Watching the na-
tive funeral rites from a safe distance, the hyaena will wait patiently
until the relatives of the deceased native return to their homes. When
he is sure that none of the living are in the vicinity he will dig away
the earth from the shallow grave and devour the corpse.. Small wonder
that he is loathed by the natives!
Although the hyaena prowls about villages and native camps by
night, he is not much feared, and consequently seldom hunted by the
natives. '
In justice to the hyaena, however, it must be given credit for its
great usefulness in combating the menace of dead animals, which in
course of time would contaminate the waterholes and rivers, to the
danger of native inhabitants.
Moreover, when tamed the hyaena will often take the place (of a
good watch-dog, and is capable of sincere and lasting affection for his
owner.
“Pride Goes Before a Fall”
Flossie the Fox, proud in the possession of a magnificent tail,
lived next door to the Jackals’ flat. Jessie the Jackal, who had tem-
porarily lost the pristine beauty of her tail, could only boast a mangy,
stumpy appendage, through which she had lost considerable prestige
in the eyes of her lord and master, Jake. Knowing this, the wily Flossie
set herself out to captivate the vacillating affections of the latter.
Bounding on the rockery in her enclosure, which overlooked the Jackals’
menage, she would, by her bold behaviour, attract the attention of Jake
the Jackal and thus incite Jessie to a state of mad jealousy, in which
the latter would dash at the dividing bars with murder in her eyes. This


PETERS
ICE CREAM
“ The Health Food of a Nation ”
Buy it in Bulk Peters Ice Cream
or in its famous is sold exclusively
Packet form ... at the ... .
Manufactured by
PETERS AMERICAN DELICACY CO.
(VICTORIA) LTD.
12 Meyers Lane Melbourne, C.r
went on for some time, until, in an unwary moment, the Fox laid her-
self to sleep too near the bars for safety. Jessie the Jackal prompt to
« 3
state. ,,nf ° r " ,nate Fox S remainder of
Llama)! 6 SCh °° lboy t 0 another: “ That is the baby alarmer” (baby
you trcatlJ” 8 * bad Snake ’ bite you had here the other day. How did
“Oh. just tied a ‘literature’ round it and ‘sacrificed’ it pretty deep.”
A Crocodile Egg Comes to Life
Some Crocodile’s eggs sent down for the office collection were
so°fi than a , Wec t m transit< U P° n arrival one seemed unusually heavy
so t was placed in the warm sun and events watched with 'interest’
IT 1 ! happened for a day and a half and then, suddenly, from the
hell emerged a Crocodile, whose first act was to snap viciously with
its small jaws at those near it. It lived for one dav. }


The Life of
a “Hippo”
THE HIPPOPOTAMUS
(Hippopotamus amphibius)
THE life of a Hippopota-
mus is a happy one,
judging by the serene
and contented existence of
William and Rosamond
otherwise Mr. and Mrs.
Hippo. These two amphi-
bious animals are as gentle as
they are big —and that is say-
ing a lot. There is no doubt,
however, o f their marked
popularity with visitors, and
no one considers a visit to the Gardens complete until they have looked
once into those great cavernous mouths —the portals of death!
Six baby hippos have been born at the Zoo, and of these four
have been reared successfully. Strangely enough, the first-born was
killed by the father soon after birth. The youngest of the six is at
present in the Zoo, and there is no anxiety concerning his welfare, as
he gives every indication of reaching a healthy maturity and attaining
a ripe old age.
These creatures must necessarily be captured when they are very
young. They are hunted on the rivers of Central Africa, where hunters
lie in wait until they see a mother swimming along the stream with a
calf on her back. The procedure then is to shoot the mother and carry
off the calf.
Despite its great bulk, the hippopotamus is a remarkable swimmer,
and can remain submerged for a surprising length of time, occasionally
raising its head to the surface only, and barely exposing its nostrils for
another supply of air.
In its native Hate the hippo is strictly herbivorous, feeding upon
aquatic vegetation. Each of the hippos at the Zoo gets the same
rations —half a hundredweight of hay mixed with one hundred pounds
of chaff and twenty pounds of bran. To Mr. Hippo this is just an
ordinary meal, and on it he manages to keep alive from day to day!
Many people will be surprised to know that it cost £l,OOO to pur-
chase the pair now at the Zoo. Raising hippos, therefore, is not the
least expensive hobby in the world.
Fossil remains of Hippopotami are found in Europe and Asia,
and even in Britain, but existing species are confined to Africa, along
the Nile and the Uganda Lakes. The Pigmy Hippopotamus, an interest-
ing smaller variety, has been recently secured in Liberia.


l iii I ii IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII|
[PATON]
A A
A
a
&
lhe Sturdy /iltle lytrriofS
or yotir children. X
JUST a little care now with the food
J you give them, and you will be re-
paid a hundredfold in the years to come,
Xhe Doctor will tell you of many that
are quite safe and nourishing; for
example, COLUMBIA MAIZENA, This
nutritious food, refined, purified from
our country’s Golden Maize is chock full of the
valuable vitamines so essential to kiddies’ bodily
welfare. You can make a host of tasty dishes
with it and by the way, it’s just as nourishing for
invalids, to. Made by - - , .
MAIZE PRODUCTS PTY. LTD.
FOOT S CRAY
VICTORIA
I COLUMBIA
I MAI UNA
Fniiiimimiiominßiiiiiiiiomiiiiiiiiiiiiii l || llllllllllliaa ‘
IOIOWfBfIIIMIIBIIIIIHIIIBBIIIIBaOOaI


The Story
of Three
Bears
RUSSIAN BROWN BEAR
(Ursus arctos)
THERE are several
species of Bear at
the Zoo. The fine
fellow pictured here is
the Russian brown bear.
Ranging from Spain to
Northern Siberia and
across the European con-
tinent into Asia, this
bear has survived the
ravages of man better
than any other large
animal.
The GRIZZLY BEAR
(Ursus horribilis). The
Grizzly is America’s largest game animal, and of all bears the silver-
tipped Grizzly is the most savage and dangerous. When cornered he
immediately assumes the aggressive, and his great courage renders him
a particularly dangerous antagonist.
“Skipper” ( the Cinnamon *Bear) Earns His 7\[ame
Captured in Canada by the captain of a lumber boat, little Bruin
was placed on board in charge of the captain’s wife, who was the only
one inclined to handle him. “Skipper” grew into a fine animal, and
when about twelve months old became a perfect nuisance on board,
poking into every corner and chasing with wicked delight any of the
crew who came near. Captain and crew alike were afraid of him. At
length it was decided that Bruin must be “paid off.” Consequently
upon arrival in Melbourne the local Zoo folk were asked to take him
in hand. Two of the staff were sent down to take delivery of the bear —
easier said than done! When they reached the wharf Bruin was entirely
in command of the ship. After the captain’s wife had gone ashore,
Bruin had somehow released himself, and after driving captain and crew
from the ship remained completely master of the situation. In despera-
tion, the captain sent into the city for his wife, who soon appeared upon
the scene, and, simply taking the unresisting Bruin by one ear, hustled
him ashore and into the box ready to receive him. Then, turning to the
sheepish-looking crowd, she remarked, “Well, you are a fine lot of
men.”


Paul Bram— seiis u for Less
Come to his First Floor Showrooms and inspect the Quality and Low
Prices, without obligation to buy, and at the same time see the wonderful
selection of all kinds of Jewellery, Plate, Crystal Ware, Watches and Clocks.
£4/10/-
Fine Diamonds.
Platinum Setting.
18 ct. Gold Ring.
Others from £4.
£6/10/-
Fine Diamonds.
Platinum Setting.
18 ct. Gold Ring.
Others from £5.
r
Q m m
DG
cm
SOLID GOLD WRISTLET. PO/10/
A magnificent 15-Jewelled «'“/Ao/”
High-Grade Swiss Lever. Guaranteed for
5 years, and complete with Gold Expansion
Bracelet. Others, £2/2/-, £3/3/-, £4/10/-.
OLD JEWELLERY RE-MODELLED
TO LATEST DESIGNS.
WATCH AND CLOCK REPAIRS
DONE QUICKLY AT LOW COST.
Fine Diamonds.
Pure Platinum
Setting.
18 ct. Gold Ring.
Others from £6.
£lO/10/-
Fine Diamonds.
Pure Platinum
Setting.
18 ct. Gold Ring.
Others from £7.
*4
GJ
G 5 CO
SOLID GOLD 00/
WRISTLET .. .. 001-
A very nice 15-Jewelled,
Swiss Lever. Guaranteed for
5 years. Others from 35/-
to £4.
STRONG
K( Mi
BfcUlo/6
LEVER.
WORKMAN’S
LEVER
10/6
Good Strong Nickel Lever,
with Luminous Dial—good
timekeeper. Others from 8/6.
400-DAY CLOCK.
Will go for 1 year
without winding.
657-
Others from 55/-.
BRING THIS CUT-
TING AND GET
10% DISCOUNT.
427-
SOLID GOLD
WRISTLET . .
A Beautiful 15-Jewelled,
High-Grade Swiss Lever.
Guaranteed for 5 years.
Others, 38/- to £5/5/-.
12/6
for these 9 ct. Gold
Sleeve Links.
Others, 10/6 to 30/-.
9 ct. Gold 9 ct. Gold
Signet. Signet.
7/6 12/-
PAUL BRAM—FOR HIGH QUALITY AND LOW PRICES
PHONE F 5909 OPEN TILL 9 ON FRIDAY NIGHT
288 LITTLE COLLINS ST.— Ist FLOOR—Methodist Book Building


“Everybody’s
Favourite”
—JIMMY
THE ORANG-UTAN
(Pongo pygmaeus )
JIMMY, the Orang - utan
(an aristocrat, as his
hyphened name denotes),
is usually the centre of attrac-
tion amongst Zoo patrons. He
has, however, a marked anti-
pathy for coloured races. On
one occasion some Japanese
sailors came along just after
Jim had been given a bag of
dates. The stones were piled
up in a corner of the cage, and these he promptly picked up and hurled
at the sailors, his aim being a most accurate one. .
On another occasion a British planter from Borneo visited the Zoo
with his native servant, and knowing the Orang s inherent dislike of
the Malayan races, told his “boy” to speak to Jim in his native tongue,
on hearing which the animal came near the bars, scrutinised the speaker,
and promptly spat in his face. ,
People often remark that Jim can do everything but talk. He did
once attempt to express himself through the medium of letter-writing.
Having been given a lead pencil, he at once chewed it up and extracted
the lead, which he sharpened with his teeth. Looking round his cage,
he spied a piece of newspaper, on the blank margin of which he com-
menced to scribble gleefully. Next day he was given another pencil
and a clean sheet of notepaper. Taking a slab of cement, he rested the
paper on it, and, with a serious expression, covered the page with mean-
ingless scrawl, just as a child would. A bystander remarked that the
pencil was in Jim’s left hand, and immediately it was transferred to the
right. The “letter” finished, it was folded in two and handed to some-
one in the crowd.
In the cold weather Jim’s cousins of the Entellus and Rhesus
families huddle together in their respective domiciles. Jim, although
he too. hies from a warmer clime, shows his weak-spirited relatives
how to face the chill of winter. Every morning he rolls several of his
bags into a tight ball, and then goes to work in a truly scientific manner,
punching the ball here and there about his cage, and side-stepping in a
most approved “Jack Dempsey” style, the ball for the moment being,
to his mind, one of his natural jungle enemies, which he punishes with
unmistakable satisfaction.


Drink
LIPTON’S
PURE CEYLON
TEA.
Your Grocer Stocks It!
Fathers a Family of Kittens
A cat took her family of five into Jim’s cage one day. The mother
was promptly ejected but he retained possession of the kittens, in which
he displayed the greatest interest, holding them up in many positions to
see where the purr came from and stroking their faces in spite of
vigorous scratchmgs, of which he took no notice whatever. The kittens
were a source of great delight to Jim for about a week, when some
kind keeper thought it was the mother’s turn and rescued them from
Jims gentle hands.
Jim has not a partiality for snakes. In his native country Boa
Constrictors are one of his family’s greatest enemies and although Tim
was only two months old when he came to the Zoo, he had evidently
heard from his mother this fact, for he brought the Orang’s inherent
fear of reptiles with him. One morning, being confronted with a large
Carpet Snake (to see the effect), he became at once an object of abject
terror. He kept his eyes on the snake, backing determinedly towards
his den and when the reptile raised its head inside the bars, his retreat
became a rout. Dashing frantically into the den, he slammed the door
keeping just a tiny crack open, through which he could see if his enemy
had followed him. Next day he was tried with a perfectly-shed snake
skin, but was not deceived.


Feathered
Friends
SARUS CRANE
( Antigone-antigone)
THE Sams Crane is at
home anywhere in the
eastern hemisphere but is
found in the greatest numbers
along the plains and sand bars
of Northern India. The plu-
mage of the birds in different
localities does not differ to any
extent. The head is invariably
naked, and with the exception
of the wing and tail feathers, which are somewhat darker, the body
plumage is a brownish grey colour.
Although the Sarus Crane is adored and worshipped by the natives
of India, even to the extent of figuring in their tapestries and works of
art, they are very quarrelsome among themselves. Their food consists
of fish, worms, insects and grain, the gathering of which provides their
most strenuous activity. This pursuit occupies the morning, after which
they retire for the rest of the day.
“ Old Jacob,” the Patriarch Macaw,
who has probably seen more changes in his forty years’ residence there
than most of the inmates of the Zoo, is a bird of many roles. Some
years ago the gate-keeper, who was also a local preacher, received
frequent visits from an old crony of his, a Baptist preacher and an
inveterate tobacco chewer. The two would stand near Jacob’s cage
earnestly debating on matters theological. One would lay down the law,
waggling his finger to emphasise his point, then the other would deliver
his little homily. The discussion would pass from the serious to more
general topics and presently you would hear the squeaky he! he! of
one set off by the hearty haw! haw! of his co-religionist. Later, when
all was quiet and no one apparently in sight, Jacob would rehearse the
entire rigmarole. Starting off, his voice an exact replica of the gate-
keeper’s, he would call “Hullo! Hullo!” “Good morning!” (in imagina-
tion greeted the Baptist gentleman) and then would follow a highly
entertaining drama as he most aptly re-enacted the whole scene, speak-
ing now low and indistinctly and then dogmatically and decidedly,
standing on one leg the while and waggling the other in the air to give
weight to his utterance. Imitating, too, the squeaky he! he! of the
gate-keeper and the gruff haw! haw! of the preacher, even mimicking


the latter s habit of ejecting the tobacco over his shoulder. Although
this first took place over twenty-five years ago, Jacob still goes through
his mimicry, not forgetting one point.
On occasions, seeing visitors take the wrong turn, he promptly
directs them, “The other way out! The other way out!”
The Australian
Wedge-tailed Eagle
1 he Australian Wedge-tailed Eagle is
the largest eagle in the world—measuring
a few inches more from tip to tip than the
American specimen. The largest bird of
the species which has been exhibited in
the Gardens measured seven feet three
inches, but others caught have measured
between eight and nine feet.
They are best suited by a hot sunny
climate, and have probably been the most
miserable birds at Royal Park during the
last five or six months of rain and cold.
I he V ulture is a good deal larger than
the eagle but it is a carrion bird and does
not as a rule kill its prey. In Africa it
follows the beasts of prey and feeds on
the remains of their victims. Its main
characteristic is its extraordinary sight.
As the vulture may be watching a dying
animal and when it sees that the end is
near it will rise into the air and circle
around the victim. For as far as twenty
miles around other vultures will observe
it and set off in its direction. The move-
ment of these birds will be observed by
others, and an ever-widening circle will
set off to join in the feast.
By the time the animal is dead the first
vulture will find itself only one of a crowd
and within a very short time only a few
well-picked bones will remain as
evidence of a vultures’ picnic.


Have a Luncheon at the
ZOO TEA HOUSE
(Near Sydney Road Entrance)
Luncheons (Grills, etc.) Afternoon Teas. Children’s Parties specially Catered
for. Large Hall available for Bridge Parties, etc. Fresh Fruit. Fresh
Roasted Peanuts. Soda Fountain Drinks. Ice Cream. All kinds of Confectionery
Phone F 3812
Smokes —all kinds
The Llama
THE Llama (Llama llama). There are four varieties of this animal
in its native land of South America. These are the Llama, the
Alpaca, the Guanaco, and the Vicuna. The llama varies con-
siderably in colour —some are all white, others all brown, whilst many
are half brown and half white.
The llama has a disagreeable habit of spitting into the faces of
those who annoy him —as many people have found to their cost! It
emits a shower of evil-smelling, greenish, semi-solid saliva, which some-
times is enough to cause temporary blindness.
Some years ago it was deemed advisable to warn visitors against
this danger, and accordingly a notice was affixed to the llama s fence,
“Beware of this animal; it spits.” This had just the opposite to the
desired effect. Curious people would not be satisfied until they had
witnessed this promised exhibition, and would tease the llama until he
would comply with their wishes. Unfortunately for many, he would do
so! And one lesson was always enough —one too many in fact! Many
a visitor has had to leave for home much earlier than he had intended
because of his innate curiosity.


The Missing
Pythons
Courtesy “Australian Traveller”
ONE afternoon a pair of
large Indian Pythons,
consigned to the Perth
Zoo, were placed on board an in-
terstate vessel scheduled to leave
Melbourne the following morn-
ing. Departure having been de-
layed for another day, the rep-
tiles were brought back to the
Zoo, where they remained boxed
up until it was once more time
to ship them. The men taking de-
livery at Fremantle thought the
box remarkably light. Upon
examination the fact was re-
vealed that it was empty. Fol-
lowed a frantic search of the
ship from stem to stern and
frenzied telegraphing to Mel-
bourne—without result. Upon
arrival at Fremantle the box was
securely fastened, and the only
visible means of exit for the
several yards of python was a
small crack, which they could not
possibly be credited with having slipped through. The mystery
remained unsolved until eighteen months later. One" of the staff in the
Melbourne Zoo, raking over a pile of dead leaves in an old stable with
double walls, at the rear of the grounds, saw a long object suddenly
shoot past his shoulder. One glance was sufficient. With eyes starting
and mouth agape he sought the Director, and excitedly told his tale
He was pi omptly asked what he had been drinking. However seeing
was believing, and after considerable difficulty several of the staff suc-
ceeded in capturing the python. Shortly afterwards another of the
staff had a somewhat similar experience, and narrowly escaped bein°-
strangled by the second python, f his time his tale was credited, and
the second escapee was secured. The pair had spent the period of
freedom, apparently, safely hidden between the lining boards of the
stable.
When Pythons kill their victims by crushing them to death thev
proceed to swallow them whole. This was the awful fate of a jewellery
salesman in Calcutta recently. His companion, who later shot the
python dead, opened it up and found the dead man inside. He had
been swallowed feet first.




