

lopl immttj af (laamama
The Speech of the Tasmanian
Aborigines.
HERMANN B. RITZ, M.A.
(Read 14th June , igog.)
Hobart :
Printed at “ The Examiner ” and “Weekly Courier” Offices,
73-75 Patterson Street, Launceston.


#
■
V. .


THE SPEECH OF THE TASMANIAN
ABORIGINES.
Hermann B. Ritz, M.A.
(Read 14th June, 1909.)
I.—INTRODUCTORY remarks.
The reconstruction of the speech of the extinct las
manian Aborigines seems at first almost impossible,
owing to the paucity and dubiousness of the records we
possess ; but after careful research we find that, though
the records are scanty, yet they are fairly amp e, con-
sidering the comparatively small number of the con-
stituent parts of the language, and a reasonable degree
of probability can be attained by a patient study ot the
material available.
As we proceed in our investigation, we find that the
subject opens up most interesting avenues of thought,
and promises to lead to important results m the domains
of philology, ethnology, and anthropology. To exhaust
it would require the labour of years; but it is possible
and expedient to formulate a working theory and su -
nlit it to competent criticism, and this is what I
venture to do.
Before entering upon this working theory, it will be
advisable to define the scope of the present investiga-
tion. .
As a trained philologist, 1 am well aware of the
classification of the languages of mankmd and have a
working knowledge of a certain number of them but
1 find the characteristics of the Tasmanian speech so
primitive and unstable, that T cannot see my way to enrol
it in any of the classes given by the text-books.
It might be called a root-isolating language akin to
the Chinese, but for the fact that its are liable to
variation, within certain limits, not merely m the speech
of different tribes or families, but even 111 the usage of


any individual speaker. Moreover, a root may have a
•certain meaning in one family and apparently a quite
•different meaning in the other, and phonetic changes
seem to have been subject to accident rather than to
phonetic laws. Of course, we are not bound to admit
the existence of accidents, and we may reasonably as-
. sume that a law may be found, if we only will or can
go deep enough to find it.
To find the law underlying the phenomena of the
Tasmanian speech is the object of the present investiga-
tion.
Again, it has been suggested that this speech is akin
to that of the Australian Continent or some parts of it,
■or to that of the South Sea Islands, or to that of the
Andaman Islands, and on these assumptions, theories of
•ethnological affinity have been based.
Now, a scientific opinion on this must be founded on
the knowledge of all the speeches in question, and is not
within the scope of our present study, not only from
want of sufficient knowledge, but also because of its
•extent and practical uncertainty. The similarity of
speech between two distant races or tribes does not
justify even a presumption of ethnological affinity, ex-
cept in so far as we may assume the essential uniformity
of psychological and physiological processes in all
human beings. Still, on the latter assumption we may
establish analogies, provided we can find the speakers
of the different languages to be at the same stage of
mental development.
Finally, the anthropological aspect of our subject
•claims our attention, because the evidence of the avail-
able records of the Tasmanian speech seems to show
that those that used it represented the primitive, or at
least very early, stage of human thought and speech.
Moreover, it shows that however primitive their thought
and speech were, they were of the same kind as those
of all other races of which, we have any knowledge.
It seems clear, then, that we must restrict our pre-
sent researches to the Tasmanian speech; and even here
we find a larger field than at first we should expect, and
are therefore compelled to subdivide it, in order to for-
mulate a reasonably complete statement of each, part.


Practically all the available material is contained
in H. Ling Roth's work, “ The Aborigines of Tas-
mania ” (Halifax, 1899), supplemented by H. De
Charency’s " Recherches sur les Dialectes Tasmaniens "
(Alentjon, 1880). A comparison of H. Ling Roth's work
with the sources of his information proves that his work
may safely be taken as a reliable standard of reference,
as far as the main facts are concerned; the misprints
and errors of transcription are comparatively few in
number and easily corrected. We shall therefore be
able to quote chiefly from that book.
De Charency simply gives a list of words taken
chiefly from French authors.
Latham (1) and Muller (2) have dealt with the Tas-
manian speech, but I purposely postpone the study of
their theories until 1 have completed the elaboration of
my own. I am familiar with, the usual views on the
subject of their works, and, on the other hand, do not
wish to run the risk of unconscious bias in favour of any
particular view until I have thoroughly investigated the
original sources of information.
Taking, then, H. Ling Roth's book as our guide, we
find that there are certainly several dialects of the Tas-
manian language, and that these dialects are assignable
to fairly definite geographical regions. The number of
these dialects is difficult to ascertain; but on broad lines
we can easily distinguish two, spoken in regions which
are separated by mountains and other obstacles, viz., the
Western and North-Western speech on the one hand,
and the Eastern and Southern on the other. The re-
cords of the former are much scantier than those of the
latter, and of these, more material is definitely assigned
to the East Coast than to the region of the River
Derwent.
We shall therefore begin our scrutiny with the
records of the Eastern speech, then take those of the
Southern, and finally those of the Western and North-
Western dialects.
(1) G. R. Latham, Elements of Comparative Philology,
(London, 1862).
(2) Fried. Miiller, Grundriss der Sprachwissenschaft,
(Vienna, 1876).


First, however, we must briefly refer to the charac-
teristics of the records themselves. It is evident that
the original writers of these records had no special
training for this work. Many of them were men of con-
siderable scientific attainments, but there was no spe-
cialist in philology among them, and even if there had
been, the science of Phonology, indeed that of Com-
parative Philology itself, had not in their time emerged
from mere empiricism to the rudiments of strictly logical
treatment.
Again, some of the recorders were French, one was
a Scandinavian, others were natives of different parts
of the United Kingdom, and each of these recorded what
he thought he heard and according to the way he tried
to imitate the Tasmanian words. When we add to these
causes of uncertainty the circumstances that ortho-
graphy was not always a point of excellence in those
days, we realise some of the difficulties attending our
examination of the records. Still, some of these difficul-
ties are not as great as one would expect. After all, the
spelling was to a certain extent phonetic, and by pro-
nouncing the Tasmanian words as if they were English,
and comparing them with similar words of kindred
meaning, we soon learn to fix the actual sounds with
some certainty.
There is yet another difficulty with those records.
When vocabularies and lists of phrases were beginning
to be compiled, the influence of the white invaders of
Tasmania had been active for about thirty years, and
had almost completely destroyed the original conditions
of the life of the Aborigines. The survivors had been
collected, and their various dialects had been mutilated,
and amalgamated into a sort of “ lingua franca ’’ made
up of convenient native words and colloquial and tech-
nical English terms. Still, it is possible to pick out words
characteristic of certain dialects, just as we could deter-
mine the Attic, lonic, Doric, and Aeolian forms from
a piece of Greek composition done hy an ambitious
schoolboy. Nor is the admixture of English words of
serious consequence; the words are chiefly the names
of things unconnected with the life of the Aborigines,
and, fortunately for our purpose, the native syntax was
not interfered with to any noticeable extent, owing to a
very interesting circumstance. For it is peculiar ta


English-speaking travellers that they endeavour to im-
press their meaning on the “ foreign ” natives by speak-
ing" very loudly and distinctly, and by using what has
been called “ jingalese ” syntax, after the style of Mr.
Alfred Jingle, which consists in uttering a series of
names of things and actions without-any attempt at con-
necting them.
Now, this is precisely the style of the Aboriginal
speech, and the similarity of the two styles on the one
hand confirms the conjecture that the Aboriginal style
was a primitive, infantile method of conveying thought,
and, on the other hand, it helps to explain the fact that
English in its “ pidgin or “ business form is so easily
acquired by foreigners.
In my interpretation of the Popela Song (Papers of
the Royal Society of Tasmania, 1908), I had occasion to
give some examples of this style of speaking, and we
shall consider some further illustrations in due course.
For the present, we shall discuss only one point
more, namely, the intonation of the Aboriginal speech,
as regards word accent and phrase modulation. The
records do not always indicate the word-accent, and
when they do, they often vary. Two methods of indi-
cating the accented syllable are used, viz., that of doub-
ling the consonant after the accented vowel, and that of
putting a small horizontal stroke over that vowel; and
these methods are employed with sufficient frequency
to allow of definite conclusions on the matter.
As an interesting illustration we may take the word
for “ bullock ” or “ beef," quoted by H. Ling Roth from
Jorgensen’s vocabulary (p. 182). Jorgensen says, inter
alia, that buckelow or bacala, “ bullock, is from the
English, probably because there were no native bul-
locks. The English word " bullock ” would be changed
by metathesis into " buckle.” and lengthened by the
usual epithetic vowel into ” buckla, or something like
it. It is evident that the word accent rests on the first
syllable. But Norman in his vocabulary (L.R., p. 1)
gives the word as parkallar. Now, in this vocabulary,
we must eliminate the majority of the r s, as merely
phonetic devices; thus we get pakalla, where the accent
is not only marked by the stroke above the second a,
but also by the doubling of the 1 following it.


Aow, the Tasmanian word-accent was quite fre-
quently on the third syllable from the end—the ante-
penult, so that the change in the present case cannot be
(due to a linguistic habit of placing the accent on the
penult. I here are at least two obvious explanations of
this matter. The unstable character of the Aboriginal
speech may have extended the word-accent, and left
each speaker or family of speakers free to accentuate a
word at random or at will. Indeed, we find strong evi-
dence of such a state of things. Tor instance, H. Ling
Roth quotes for foot or “ leg the following words
—languna (p. ii.), lagarra (p. xi.), langna (p. xiii.), which
seems identical with langana (p. xi.) with the accent on
the first syllable, luggana (p. xxvi.), leunia (p. xxx.),
langeneh (p. ].).
Again, the word buckelow may not be of English
origin at all. This seems the more plausible view, for
we find cognate words in the undoubtedly Aboriginal
vocabulary, e.g., wakella—mussel (p. iv.), wakellina—
sun or moon (p. v.), wakella—calf of leg (p. i.), all of
which denote something “ round."
Ihe modulation of the voice in speaking is of the
same kind as that found in European languages, for in-
stance in English as spoken by a North' Briton, a
Welshman, or an Irishman. We find it most clearly-
expressed in song - and in the love of singing, and the
Tasmanian Aborigines afford good examples of it. H.
Ling Roth (pp. 134 ff.) gives a good account of the
music of the Aborigines; but a better idea of it can be
gathered from hearing the songs themselves. This is
possible to us, owing to that wonderful device called
the gramophone. Mr. Horace Watson, of Sandy Bay,
an ardent and sympathetic student of Aboriginal life’
had shown much kindness to Mrs. Fanny Cochrane
Smith, one of the descendants of the Aboriginal Tas-
manians, and, on one occasion she was delighted to
please him by singing- two native songs into a phono-
graph. The circumstances thus render the sincerity of
her performance unquestionable. The records are in
perfect order, and Mr. Watson, to help me in my study
of the 1 asma.nian speech, most generously gave me a
copy of each. 1 hope to have an opportunity to trans-
late and explain these records to the Royal Society; for
the present I would only point out that the first song is


distinguished for the precision of its rhythm and the
second is perhaps an imitation, not of a Highland bag-
pipe, as Bonwick opined, but of the melody of a native
magpie which most unmelodiously the zoologists call a
piping crow.
1 j PHOXOLOGY AND SEMASIOLOGY.
H. Lino- Roth, in his " Aborigines of Tasmania
tabulates some 3,000 words of their language. As
have stated before, his lists are fairly accurate copies of
the original sources of his information, and may safe!)
be used as a basis for our detailed investigation. e
shall take our examples chiefly from the Appendix ihe
original recorders endeavoured to write phonetically.
Thus we find on the one hand a considerable variety 111
the spelling of the same Aboriginal words and, on the
other hand, this variety itself enables us to fix the actual
sound, because there is in most cases only one group ot
sounds than can be phonetically-represented by all the
varieties of the spelling.
But here we meet with a phenomenon which seems
to present an insuperable obstacle, and yet contains t re
key to a plausible solution of the whole question ; tor we
find in words of the same dialect such similarity as
argues an identity of meaning, and such differences as
are in other languages found as distinguishing charac-
teristics of different dialects. We may assume words
to be of the same dialect, if they appear in the vocabulary
of a recorder who did not meet with more than one
tribe of Aborigines, or who had sufficient knowledge o
different tribes to be able to assign each word to its
proper origin. Among the former are chiefly the navi-
gators eg., Cook, Peron, and La Billardiere; among
the latter we may mention Norman, Jorgensen, and
Milligan.
Now, these quasi-identical words might have come
from different tribes, and thus have formed a composite
vocabulary, especially as we find, on compaung . w
various dialects, that they evidently are species ot t
same generic language. But we read in H. Ling Roth s


work (p. 166) that Mr, Robert Clark, catechist, states
that on his arrival at the Flinders Settlement, in 1834,
eight or ten different languages or dialects were spoken
among the 200 natives then at the establishment, and
that the blacks were instructing each other to speak
their respective tongues. This would not have been
necessary if there had been a common vocabulary, such
as we find in the various dialects of English, French,
German, etc.
Again, Milligan wrote (L. Roth, p. 180): —“ The cir-
cumstance of the Aboriginal inhabitants of Van Die-
men’s Land being divided into many tribes and sub-
tribes, in a state of perpetual antagonism and open
hostility to each other, materially added to the number
of the elements and agents of mutation ordinarily
operating on the language of an unlettered people. To
this was superadded the effect of certain superstitious
customs everywhere prevalent, which led from time to
time to the absolute rejection and disuse of words pre-
viously employed to express objects familiar and indis-
pensable to all, thus tending arbitrarily to diversify the
dialects of several tribes. The habit of gesticulation and
the use of signs to eke 'out the meaning of monosyllabic
expressions, and to give force, precision, and character
to vocal sounds, exerted a further modifying effect, pro-
ducing, as it did, carelessness and laxity of articulation
and in the application and pronunciation of words. The
last-named irregularity, namely, the distinctly different
pronunciation of a word by the same person on different
occasions, to convey the same idea, is very perplexing
until the radical or essential part of the word, apart from
prefixes and suffixes, is caught hold of."
Dr. Milligan’s opinion is of great weight, as he made
special efforts to obtain reliable information, and had
special facilities for investigation. It is his last-quoted
sentence that indicates the starting point of our present
researches.
When we examine the syllables of the Aboriginal
words, we notice that they are few in number and simple
in structure. This is due to the paucity of consonants
and vowels, and even these may be reduced, owing to
the peculiarity that they can be arranged in groups, the
members of which are interchangeable.


zki I" w. *- * <■>»-
flounced as in German hochachten).
Now, it will be shown that, very probably, these
may be reduced to the following groups—b pw,d t, g
k ch gh, 1 mn r ng.
d is apparently characteristic of the Western dialect;
H. Ling Roth does not include it m his list; ng, belong-
ing to most dialects, is also omitted.
Again, we find 1, m, n, r. ng as alternatives ot t, p,
t. k respectively; ng may also stand for n. sometimes
for nap- Thus we have practically only four con
sonants corresponding to the labial dental, guttural
an( l liquid sounds; the liquid sounds themselves are
often assignable to other groups.
The vowels, again, are liable to be changed at will
within certain limits. For instance, we have the same
meig expressed by pana, pena. piena, poma. puna;
(v. infra).
It should be stated that in this essay the vowels of
Tasmanian words are to be read as lf t he y were Itaham
This is probably not quite accurate, but sufficiently so
for our purpose, especially in view of the instability ot
the Aboriginal speech-sounds.
Thus the number of possible syllables was very-
small • but we shall see that, though small it was suffi-
cient for the needs of the speakers, fhe long woids of
our vocabularies can be cut up into syllables which are
the real words of the language.
In my essay on the Evolution of Words, part of
which 1 read before this Society in September, 19°5; 1
endeavoured to connect the original speech sounds with
definite psychic states and processes, and the principles
then enunciated seem to be strikingly illustrated in the
ckTrlv primSve speech of Tasmania. I shall have occa-
sion to refer to them incidentally later on; ten the pre
sent, one example will suffice. On page /• ■
inter alia—“ Terms of endearment are ■essentially of an
objective character, and require sounds of high pitch.


TO THE SPEECH OF THE TASMANIAN ABORIGINES.
I he thin, bright sounds, t, 1, i, n, s, are typical of diminu-
tives, not only in nouns, but also in adjectives, and even
in verbs." Now, in Tasmania, we find ina, enna, itia as
suffixes indicating diminutives, analogous with the
German ing, the English kin, the French il, in, et, the
Italian illo, ino, etto.
I he T asmanian diphthongs may be divided into two
groups. H. Ling Roth gives au. oi, and on, but omits
ie, ia, as he takes the i of the latter group to be a con-
sonantal i. The group au, oi, ou, to which we may add
oa, simply represent an unstable a or o, whereas ia, ie,
ea, are developments of i or e, indicating a lengthening
in time or space, as expressed by delay, interval, or a
curve; wina is a straight stick, wiena a bent or broken
■one.
Of the consonants, the liquids alone are capable of
continuance; they therefore fitly represent motion. We
find, accordingly, that lia (also in the forms of lena, liena,
lila) means missile, leg, water, bush fire, iguana, kan-
garoo, cat, gun, crow, movable shelter, nest, stone (mis-
sile or cutting tool); ria (also rene, riawe, riena, rina)
means toe, hand, finger, to polish, water, dance, kan-
garoo, rat, to run; ni, (also nina, nile, none, noana, nuna,
nuena), means you (i.e., away from me), no, hand, take
away, fire, flea, stone implement; mina (also mena,
manga, mana, meuna), means I, mine (i.e., towards me),
lips, beak, sick (restless), tongue, bird.
The labial consonants represent a sudden puff, a
sending forth of energy, and are therefore very appro-
priate for expressing action and purpose. Thus we find
pa (also ba, wa, ma) as the general suffix of verbs; as
suffix, prefix, or infix, it expresses power, emphasis,
magnitude. Mana, mena, mina, meaning “ I,” may well
indicate, besides “ motion towards me,” the prime im-
portance men attribute to their own persons. It is in-
teresting to note that most European languages use me
or mi as the pronoun of the first person. We find,
further, that pena (also pana, penina, pina, poine, puna)
means lance, oar, laugh, fish, pointed, sharp, bird.
The dental consonants, pronounced by practically
shutting the teeth, indicate inclusion and exclusion, and
by their sound, a sudden stop or thud. Here, again,


nina, nara, besides meaning “ motion away
mav indicate the non-ego, the outer world, i.e., you, he,
she they, that thing: m or noi, similarly, may mea
negation, as well as “ apart from. Tana (a sc, tawe. tia,
tiena, tienbug, tona, tom), means was (at a time ,
depart, heap, mound, to add, vanish, ,f lnk - P alk ’
(to a distance). Na, as that thing, is _, ,
suffix for nouns and adjectives, sometimes replaced by
ra or lia.
The guttural consonants may express disgust (as m
the sound of retching), or something connected with the
dropping of the chin. For the former meaning we have
the common suffix ak or ik expressing dislike un-
pleasantness, also negation. For the lattci uc
Una (also kami, kaiena. kuna), meaning mouth, teeth,
jaw, cheek, to speak, to sing, to reject.
It will be observed that in the examples given, only
the first consonant, with the following vowel 01 diph-
thong, enters into the argument.
The sounds r and 1 have other functions besides
that of indicating motion; they also denote emphasis
especially the r. Of course, a moving thing hasi more
energy than a stationary one. In a orman s vocabula ,
the letter r is very conspicuous; m most instances it is
merely a phonetic device to assure a correct pronuncia-
tion. but in others it probably indicates the thioao
bass-voices of the Aboriginal speakers.
This is practically the whole material of the speech
of the Tasmanian Aborigines. All things weie distin-
guished according to two ideas, namely, rest anc mo»
The liquid consonants expressed motion a
others rest. This is the explanation of the frequent
interchange of sounds within two groups. By adeve op-
ment of psychic activity, it came to pass that the dental
sounds signified rest simply, the labials, rest attained
after motion, the gutturals, motion after rest, and tin,
liquids simple motion. From these four groups, piac
ica 1 represented bv four simple syllables, the whole
speech «as formed, as will appear plausible from ,n,r
further demonstration.
There were so few things of interest to the Abo-
rigines, that they could easily express them by a small


number of words. Of course, any particular thing could
not be denoted by their words except by the aid of
gestures and convention, as in the names of persons and
places. And this explains why the dialects were appa-
rently foreign to each other. What would in one tribe
be named after its speed, would in another take its name
from its habit or size. Indeed, I am inclined to hold,
against the current theory that the Tasmanians had no
generic names, that they had no specific words, even
the proper nouns being made up of generic constituents.
In the examples given so far, we observed chiefly
the first consonant, with the following vowel which
made it audible, and took no heed of anything that came
after these.
The vowels were, as has already been pointed out,
so unstable as to be of no importance for our demon-
stration.
We will now proceed a step further, by adding*
another consonant to the syllable, with or without
another vowel, as may be found convenient.
From the four primitive words we derive twelve
secondary terms, three from each. It is evident, from
what has been shown, that if the second consonant is
of the same class as the first, the result is merely a
strengthening of the first, by repetition. For instance,,
lala, ant, is the swift runner; lane, to strike, flog, look,
is repeated or forcible motion towards some object;
mamana, tongue, is the repeatedly moving pointed
member; nala, manana, earth, the movable part of the
surface of the ground; nama, white man, the rover who
has no tribe to stay with; nami, a stone than can be
rolled or carried or thrown; ralla, frog, the swimming
and hopping thing, also energetic, full of movement;
rene, run; rilia, fingers, movable limbs.
The first syllables uttered by an infant are naturally
pa, ba, ma, and later, na, etc. Hence we have in most
languages words like baby, mama, papa, nana. In Tas-
manian, too, we have pawe, pawawe, little child; nina
mina, (my) mother, father.
We must be careful to avoid mistaking the n of the
nominal suffix na for the final consonant of the previous
syllable, or vice versa.


We shall have therefore the following twelve com-
binations —liquid+labial, liquid+dental, liquid+guttural,
labial+dental, labial+guttural, labial+liquid, dental
o-uttural, dental+liquid, dental+labial, gutturaH liquid,
euttural+labial, guttural+dental. 1 bese may be illus-
trated as follows ;
(1) Liquid+labial—motion+purpose: lapa, wing;
lapri, see, leipa, lopa, fire; lepena, eye: lepina, lepera,
neck; lewana, wind; lube, sheoak tree (the best fire-
wood) ; lupari, free.
Mapa, black, the darkness moving over the sky and
earth, (we have also lewara, night): mebia, moving away.
Newina, eat; newitie, kangaroo: niparana, face;
nubra, nupre, eye; nubena, crayfish (motion and purpose
are shown in the claws).
Rabalga, hand (the member which takes); roba, to
rush; ruwa, sand-lark ; roba and ruwa are perhaps simply
ro+pa, i.e., moving quickly or energetically.
(2) Liquid+dental—motion+rest; lotta, tree (that
crows and then remains at rest); lutana, moon (whence
comes the light that rests on the earth), hence light, as
in ludo-wine, white man.
Mata, round like a ball (whirling and then fixed);
mata, dead, to die (moving and then still); meta, rope or
sinew (used for fastening movable things); mutta, bird
(from its plumpness; the mutton-bird is probably the
mutta-bird).
Nata, earth, soil (remaining still after being moved):
nutiak, to retch (the suffix ak denoting the unpleasant
feeling and the peculiar sound).
Retena, heart (with its intermittent motion): natta,
tree (like lotta); rudana, lazy (when in motion, longing
for rest); rutta, hard, dry (dried fluid, e.g., mud or
blood).
(3) Liquid+guttural —motion+rejection ; lagana, foot
(put on the ground and lifted up again); laguana, to
burn oneself (withdrawing from une, the fire); legana,
lugana, water (moving away in stream and ebb); legara
to run away; legunia, dress or covering (removable and
warm —une); logune, to cut (making one shrink owing


to the burning sensation, v. laguana) ; loigana, snake, the
fiery serpent.
Magra, megra, day, grass (i.e., that which passes
away); mengana, to pull, get (move away from its
place); miengpa, to abstain, reject; moga, moka, water;
monga, a fly (which is ever ready to go away);
mugra, to hide oneself; mukra, spaniel (the swimming
beast); mungena, ear (projecting from the head, and ori-
ginally movable).
Nangumora, (very) far; nenga, canoe (for leaving
the land); noki, give me (you give away something);
nugara, to drink; nugrina, to vomit (both involving
motion of the gullet).
Raka, spear (sent forth); ragi or ragina, white man
(the hostile, repulsive moving thing). We find this in-
terpretation confirmed by the word ragi-rappa, a demon
who attacks people, a devil; we remember the Chinese
denotation of white men as “ foreign devils ”; rugara,
ear (compare mungena); rurga, seaweed used for food
(compare nugara, nugrina).
(4) Labial+dental —projection+rest: patina, egg;
patrolla, spark, fire (projected, resting); rolla, energetic;
there may also be a connection with “ crackling ”;
piterina, sun (as to its rays); poiete, head (projecting
from the body, but stationary); potta malitie, freestone
(white stone that can be thrown —malitie, white).
(5) Labial+guttural—projection+rejection : pagra,
alas! (an utterance of pain); pakara, to fling at (mo-
tion and dislike); pakaria, shooting-star ; pakaritia, ignis
fatuus; panga, leech (an attacking, repulsive thing);
pangana, mud (clinging and disagreeable); pegara, to
throw; pegi, teeth (acting against each other); pugana,
black man, good at attack and defence, hence strong,
stout; pugana, five (the “ bunch of fives ”); pugara, to
swim.
(6) Labial+liquid —projection+motion: palla, round,
ball, energetic, large, stout, sun; palina, egg (small and
round); palana, stars, little sun; pallawa, man, warrior
(with wa as suffix of emphasis); penna, spear, man,
facetious ; piena, leech; poiinta, poienna, point of spear;


parawe, to throw, put, go away; parapa or paraba, whale,
porpoise (large, moving); perena (spear); poirina, por-
poise ; pora, heavy rain ; proie, leaf; pruana, smoke.
{7) Dental+guttural —rest+rejection; takani. tagaia,
to go away (to lift up the foot from its resting position);
dogna ( tagana), foot; takira, root, foot of tree , tanga,
limpet; tegana, heart (its beating being like rhythmic
footsteps); togane, paw, foot; tokana, heel; tugra,
thigh; tugana, swift (of foot); tuganik, asleep (the pejo-
rative’, ik. implying negation; tugana, to eat (passing
from rest to the motion of the gullet).
(8) Dental+liquid—rest+motion; tale, toad, frog
(alternately resting and moving); talma, the back (un-
changing, but moving as part of the body); talpe, to
come start off: tile, basket (an inanimate thing meant
to be carried) : toline, bark of a tree (grown fast to the
trunk, but liable to peel off): toluna, shoulder (compare
talina): tula, thigh, tongue (fixed, but movable).
Tema, hut (movable resting place); time, never (reallv
"always,” ‘‘resting or moving ”; compare the French
jamais, which also means “always” (from the Latin
jam, magis, i.e., now and evermore, and is used tor
“ never ”j; tome, to fall.
Tana, was (looking back from the present moment);
tanate, mischief (pretending to be resting, and yet mov-
ing to do some harm): tene, rib (compare talina); tena*
tree-fern (stationary, but growing); toni, tenme, nails on
fingers and toes (compare tena) ; tina, stomach (compare
tula): tona, spark; tone, to dive, fall; toni, , to call (to-
cause to move): tuna, winter, really " snow (the solid,
falling thing) ; tunapi, to know (to have the skill to act).
Tara, to weep, really “ to sit down and sway the body
in token of grief”; tara, tree (compare tena): tara, wal-
laby (compare tale); teri, basket (compare tile); terana
terina, bones of skeleton (compare tene). The bones of
the body are stationary, but growing. In the skeleton
they are chiefly noticeable for being hard and 1 his
meaning is transferred to ternna, tro-watta, flint imple-
ment; torona, tree, is a form of tra-na: tru, fist is so
called from its bony hardness; tura, winter; turana,
snow; turela, hail, are forms of tuna.


(9) Dental+labial—rest+projection : tapa, ham ; tab-
rina (= tapa-rina), the back, a prolongation of the ham;
tepara, come; tipla, eyebrow; tapleti, tabelti, to travel;
this word is supposed to be an imitation of the English
equivalent, but it is not probable that that word was
used so frequently as equivalent of “to walk,” that
practically all the tribes incorporated it in their vocabu-
lary. According to our theory, tapleti is simply tap-
let-i, i.e., the hams alternately moving forward and
resting; takleti would refer to the same action of the
legs or the feet; but we find numerous instances of the
group pi, and very few of the group Id; the latter seems
to have been difficult or disagreeable to the Tasmanians;
tapleti would make an excellent substitute for the ob-
jectionable takleti. The probability of the exchange is
confirmed by the alternative form kableti for tableti.
(10) Guttural+liquid—rejection+motion: kole, to
twitch, snatch away: koliena, orphan,.whose parents
have been taken away. In further confirmation of our
remark regarding the group Id, we find that these two
words are practically alone in beginning with the syllable
kal, kel, kol, etc.
Kami, mouth, teeth, tongue, probably owes its k to
the movement of the chin (v. supra); we find many
words belonging to this meaning of km, but very few
signifying rejection. Of the latter, however, we have a
characteristic one; komptena, a spirit of evil, objection-
ably moving near to human beings, tena being akin to
tanate, mischief (v. supra).
Kana, voice, noise, song, speech, evidently belongs
to the “ chin ” group of k sounds. EL Ling Roth's lists
give no kan words of the other: indeed, the number of
words beginning with k is comparatively small; the
sound of rejection is usually found at the end of a word.
Krakne, krakena, to rest, sit down, is made up of
kara and the negation k and the suffix ne or ena, which
properly belongs to nouns; kara-k would then mean
“disagreeable motion? No!" We find kroti (quick
motion), kronie (to climb), both implying exertions
which the Aborigines disliked.
(11) Guttural+labial—rejection+projection; kupa,
good (to give or take). We find kapugi-lia, mouth, and


kepegine, to eat, but these are evidently composed of
ka, jaw, and pegi, teeth.
(12) Guttural+dental —rejection+rest: kate, kaita, bad
(i.e., do not like it, leave it alone); katala, snake, the bad
moving thing; katela or katila, seal, and katina, cow,
would also be so called if the Aborigines were at first
afraid of them; kote, quick, is akin to kroti (v. supra),
but there is a curious development of the idea in koti,
little, kaita, dog (small beast), the idea of quickness and
smallness being easily associated, and from the idea of
“ small ” we readily pass to that of “ pet." Compare also
“ cat ” and kitten.” Again, there is a connection between
koti and kate (v. supra); as the Aborigines called a good
or great man pallawa or pugana, they would naturally
call a little thing, kate, bad. Kotube, to tug at a rope,
is expressive of the resistance of an inert mass to the
action of pulling ( be or pe).
'The examples here given will suffice for the purpose
of illustrating the principle; their number might easily
have been augmented. In some cases the same word
was made to serve in two places. This was done because
there was a plausible alternative, and because it is quite
possible that different speakers named the same thing
on slightly different principles. The orthography is that
of H. Ling Roth’s lists; phonetic, not always consistent,
but sufficiently accurate for our present purpose.
It will have been noticed that the interchange of
kindred sounds is not detrimental to the clearness of the
meaning of words, and that the vowels are remarkably
variable.
Before we proceed to the illustration of our theory
in the case of longer words, it will be necessary to draw
special attention to the variation of speech sounds.
Here it is difficult to decide in each case whether the
variation is due to the general instability of the
Aboriginal orthoepy, or to the difference of dialects, 01
to the insincerity of the Aborigines, who would prob-
ably not be eager to deprive themselves of the means
of secret communication with each other, or to de-
fective perceptivity of the recorders, or to their linguistic
idiosyncrasies, or to careless writing or transcription of
the original records, or to the printer or his reader.


Still, in most instances, the differences and analogies,
taken together, are sufficiently consistent to allow us
to formulate some general rules.
We must remember, also, that the language did not
spring into existence in the form recorded, though it
did, no doubt, begin in a form completely satisfying
all the requirements at that time. If my theory is cor-
rect, the four words on which all the rest are built show
an absolutely primitive form of human speech ; -previous
to it there can have been no linguistic thought, and
the utterance must have been confined to inarticulate
animal cries. The subsequent word-formation was a
subconscious operation, based on heredity, environment,
and habit turned to instinct.
The primitive state in which the Tasmanian Abo-
rigines were found by the Europeans, argues that their
logical skill had been confined to the immediate needs
of their bodies, and that their language was in a simi-
larly primitive state. The four words still sufficed to
express their thoughts, and thus their recorded speech
carries us back to the beginning of human society.
Thus, the four syllables form the permanent skeleton
of the Tasmanian language, and their combinations and
variations are the body, which is specifically- different
in each individual, though generically it is the same in
all.
We may now state some general principles of varia-
tion :
(i) Medial and initial g is often elided, replaced by w
or y, or represented by o or u.
This phenomenon is observed in several European
languages, ranging from Greek to English. In Tas-
manian we have, e.g., proguna and pruana, smoke;
pruga, paruga, bosom; perenna, spear; and proina,
proigh, proingha, broii, proibi, big; ganna and yanna,
teeth; ngune, une, wane, fire; kana, wana, ona, to speak.
(2) The places of the vowels are chosen arbitrarily.
We may have prosthetic vowels, as in ali, good,
which seems identical with li, moving, alive, useful;
anamana, hand, from namana, strong; enganema, eagle
hawk, from ngonina, bird, which is in itself derived from
naganina or laganina, the small, flapping thing.


Again, we have regularly an epithetic vowel, a, e, or
i; every word is an example of this.
Within the word, the vowels found places where they
could. We have treinia, terinia, taranienna, triunia for
“hard-beaked bird,” e.g., owl, crow; ria, rilia, riena,
raiana, for hand; raumpta and raumata, for wombat;
pengana, panugana, pugrena, pugerinna, for dirt; lan-
gana, languna, lugana, langna, clogna, lagerra, for foot;
lowanna, nowana, lowa, loanna, loa, loalla, lowla, for
woman; leni, loa, liena, lia, lina, for water.
(3) Within their respective groups, the consonants
may be freely interchanged. This has already been
touched upon, and will be further illustrated in the
secjuel.
lII.—ETYMOLOGY.
It is beyond the scope of our present research to
examine all the words recorded by H. Ling Roth, whose
list, as has already been stated, may be considered as
practically complete. It will be sufficient to deal with
such a number of them as will enable a critic to test our
theory.
We shall take Norman’s list for the Eastern speech,
and Milligan’s for the Southern, Eastern, and North-
Western and Western words. Unfortunately Milligan
did not discriminate between the last two dialects, but
this is not of great importance, as they have much in
common with each other.
We shall find some instances of onomatopoetic
words, such as pratteratta, hail, from which we get
paratta, ice, frost ; but we need not do more than
acknowledge the existence of such words, as their con-
nection with our theory is remote, and possibly merely
accidental.
Nor need we take notice of evidently inter]ectional
words, for we are not now concerned with the origin of
language generally, but with the elements and develop-
ment of the speech of the Tasmanian Aborigines.
I have dissected some 1,200 Tasmanian words, but
shall confine my present discussion to a much smaller
number of characteristic specimens, taking, them, gene-
rally, in alphabetical order.


THE EASTERN SPEECH.
Bungana, chief—same as pugana.
Bairkutana, horse—par, big; kut, quick; na, nominal
suffix.
Kumienna, weak—kami, voice; ienna, diminutive
suffix.
Karana, quiet—ka, not; ra, moving.
Kukanna, noise, much talk —kana, voice; ku, redu-
plication for emphasis.
Krawala, cold—kra, stiff; wala—palla, very much.
Kanara, little (child), magpie—kan, voice; ra, con-
tinuous.
Kanaliria, conversation—kan, voice; li, quick; ri,
continuous.
Kamina, chin—ka, jaw; mina=pena, projection.
Kuegi, head—ka ka, mouth, jaw, cheeks; the whole
face; round; spherical.
Kanawelegana, sing—kan, voice; we, active; leg,
rhythmical.
Komtina, dog—ka(m), teeth ; tin, projecting.
Kaitagunamena, friend—ka, tongue; tag, foot;
namana, hand (in my service).
Kulugana, claw, talon; ka, tooth, (of the) lug, foot.
Kawurrina, bush fire—ka, eating up; win-—pur,
solid, ground.
Kotruolutie, baby—kot, little; ruo—nug, drink,
suck; hit, white; ie, diminutive. Query: Were the young
babies of paler complexion than the adults? It is the
case elsewhere.
Koti malitie, young boy or girl—koti, young; ma.—
pa, very; lit, bright, fair; ie, diminutive.
Lia litea, ocean —li, water; lit, bright, sparkling
ripples; ia, diminutive. This appears also in the form
of lieltia, rollers on the beach (with white crests).
Liopakanapuna, salt—lia, sea; pug, solid; peun,
sharp, burning.
Lagapak, fiddle—lag, leg, stick, bow; pa, moving;
k, not getting away; or simply pa ka, moving forward
and backward,


Liawe, open —li, move; we, let, make.
Leiemtoniak, ashamed—len, look; ton. downwards;
k, bad. , , ,
Lackaniampaoik, bandy-legged—lag, leg; ma, bent,
pe, stick; k, bad.
Leiriak, bitter—li, water; n, restless (ot the sea), k,
bad.
Leware, night —lug, He ; war, ground.
Lalina, day—lin, see; 1, reduplicated, plenty.
Lila, gun, waddy —li H, very swift, fl\i,ng.
Lowanakana, circle—low, woman; kan, sing; the
singing women standing or sitting m a circle.
Langta, long, far—len, move on; t stop; a distant
point.
Luga perenna, survivor—lug, walk away; pe, veiy ,
ren, quickly.
Lugana, foot, oyster—the oyster lies flat like the
sole of the foot.
Lowa, woman—lug, foot; wa, active; the woman had
to do all the work of the tribe except hunting and fight
ing. • ,
‘ Lingena, languna, loangare, Hkangana, hkura—wind,
to blow ; len, continuous motion.
Lietinna, cold water —li, water; tuna, cold.
Liena peuniak, scalding water—H, water; pe, very;
vm, fire ; k, bad.
Lenigugana, stars —len, see ; kuka. round things.
Miengpa, abstain —mien—wicn, bend, turn away
from, not; pa, doing.
Mianabere, kneel —mien, bend: pore, leg.
Mealle, kneel—mial, bend; leg, leg.
Mealli tonerragetta, inactive —mealli, knee; to(ka),
heel; narra, very; kita, small, useless.
Mikrakaniak, sick—mie, not; kraka, rest, sleep; k,
bad. . ,
Miengkommenechana, anger—mien, distorted, pro-
jecting; kamina, chin; kana, speak.
Munnagana, ankle—mien, bend; leg, foot.
Malitie, white—ma=pa, very; lut, shining.
Mientonka, tumble—mien, bend, knee; ton, fall; k,


Mienintiak, tremble —mien, bend ; inti=inni, a little ;
k, bad.
Marana, battle (few killed) —pa, hit; ren, run.
Monna perenna, ' sulky, pouting —muna, lips;
perenna, projecting.
Manina langatik, steal —ma=imie, not; nina, yours ;
langt (take) far away; k, bad.
Malangena, child —Ma=unie, not ; lag, foot, move,
walk; in, dimin.
Manugana, spawn of frog=perhaps the same as
malangena, with a possible change from ina (dear little
one), to kana, croaker.
Miamengana, battle —mien mien, knee to knee; kana,
yell.
Mienemiento, kill —mien, mien, battle; t, stop, strike
down.
Mungwenia, grub—mien, bend ; wen—pen, stick ;
i, small.
Mungena, ear mung = mien = pen, projecting,
round.
Mongana, blowfly—Mung, round.
Mungunna, fish —mung-winna, round and long.
Mungienna, porcupine—mung-ienna, round and
Mingawina, porpoise—v. mungunna.
Mugana, shag (bird) —mung, round, plump; it may
also be a doublet of nagana, lagana, flapping thing, bird.
Mana. a fly —man-a, round, or a contraction of mon-
gana.
Makana, star-fish —mag=mung, round. The transi-
tion from man to mang and then to mag is quite natural.
Ni, there, behold! with emphatic k—neka, niga,
there; with emphatic r —nara, very, he, she, they, self.
Nune, take —ni, ni, there!
Numbe, here—ni, ni, pe, here indeed; lumbe is a
doublet of this.
Nunamara, deduct —Nune, take; mare, one.
Nentega meniawa, yesterday —ni ni, not at all; teg,
sleep ; mi, I; ni, you ; wa, do—when last we were awake-
Naniakana, growl—kana, saying; ni ni, no! no!


Nietta mina, little brother —ni, you; etta, little; mina,
my own, my own little one.
Nianti mina, little sister —nia nitia mina, the same.
Nunalmina, father —ni, you; al, good; mina, my
own!
Nienna, mother —ni, you; enna, dear little mother.
Neingmina, mother —nienna mina, my own little
mother. The addition of the endearing term mina to
these words shows again the affectionate, childlike dis-
position of the Aborigines.
Nelumie, help —ni, you ; lumbc—numbe, here.
Nuna mina, good—ni ni, these things; mina, for me!
Noile, bad —no ali, not good.
Nierina, hawk —nie=mie, in a circle; rin, flying.
Narra muna, yes —narra, that; muna, projecting,
evident.
Nebele, music—ne—le, lively ; pe, make; leg, feet.
Oana, tell, speak—probably from kana; wana would
be better spelling; there are so few words in o that they
are probably misprints.
Punie, finger nail —doublet of toni (supra).
Plegana, leg —pa, strong; leg, leg.
Pugali, swim—puga, man; li, water.
Poingana, hair —pen, spear, stick; hair dressed in
form of sticks.
Puganina, husband—puga, man; nina, that—that
man, “ he.”
Patrollana, musket—patrol, fire; len, flying.
Poiniakana, laugh, facetious —pe, sharp; ia, little;
kan, sounds-
Pugoneori, smile—pe, sharp; kan, voice; ali, kind,
good.
Rinneaguanettia, dispute —rin, quick; ia, short; kan,
words; ettia, trifling things. The form guan for kan sup-
plies the missing link of the series kan, guan, wan, oan.
Riawieak, full (after a meal) —ria, feet; pe, active;
ak, with difficulty.
Rinieta, chase —rin, run; ia, hither and thither; t,
stop —run till you have it.
Riakuna, dance and song—ria, foot; kana, voice; an
Aboriginal ballad.


Tonna, fire, literally, spark—compare with tuna,
snow. These contraries have parallels in European lan-
guages, e.g., French frire, German frieren, Italian caldo,
English cold. It is interesting to find the phenomenon
in Tasmanian. Originally tonna, a contraction of tonina,
would be a “ small, falling thing, and in this respect
woudl coincide with tuna, snow.
Tonipeprinna, spark—toni, fire; pe, prinna, fly.
Tentia, red, topaz—ton, fire; itia, dimin.—somewhat
like fire.
Tugana, eat —toka, footstep, periodic downward mo-
tion. It is possible that tonna, fire, is a contraction of
this, as it ‘ eats up ” everything.
Tone, dive—simply " falling,” or else “going down
with jerky motions.”
Tughenapuniak, lean —tug, eat; pun, full: ak, no use.
Weba, weipa, wigetina, wina, winalia, wieta, wita
sun, moon; weiba, wiba, wibia, wieba, man; wia, wiena,
wigena, wina, wiwina, winanana, wood, twig. The com-
mon root is pe—strong, moving, projecting.
Wuga, wutta, wughta, earth; pug, solid; ta, sta-
tionary.
Warra-na, bark of tree, shell, anything curved, blue
sky, vault, cloud shape, ghost; pura, pulla, round.
THE SOUTHERN SPEECH.
The words bear the same general character as those
of the Eastern speech. The separate list is given be-
cause Milligan and Norman based the distinction on the
domicile of the Aborigines they examined, and because
slight differences of pronunciation may thus be dis-
cerned. It is now impossible to assign shades of mean-
ing to particular tribes; but this is immaterial, as the
meaning of speech sounds varied in every individual,
within definite limits, of course.
Koka, ruddy cheeks, blood, red. 1 his is a redupli-
cated ka, chin: it would refer to the strikingly red colour
of the gums, tongue, etc., and thus assume the general
meaning of “ red.” We have seen kuegi, head, from
the same kaka, as the sum of these parts; but its mean-
ing was there referred to shape and position, not to
colour.


Kokata, moan, howl—kan, voice, repeated, with tto
express the sobs.
Kawuta, evening-—ka, red; wutta, earth, at the
horizon.
Kraka wugbata, stand up —kraka, rest, stand . wug-
ha—pug, firm; ta, stationary. In the East, we find
wuga, wughta, for “ earth.”
Krugana wughata, aloft —wughata, ground; krugana
appears also as kroana, to climb, soar; the phrase means
“to climb from the ground," In the Eastern speech
we find kronie; this might argue that the more primi-
tive forms were characteristic of the South, but the evi-
dence on this point is conflicting; for instance, we have
.a Southern tannatea (crazy) to compare with the
Eastern tagantienna.
Lia m-ena, lake—lia, water; mien, round, enclosed.
Legara, run —compare legana (supra); the suffix ra
often takes the place of na in the South.
Line, house, hut, nest, place —some movable shelter.
Line rotali, encampment —line, abode; rot. dry; ali,
suitable.
Loini, liena. bush fire —moving slowly (note the
diphthongs).
Lugga kanna, step —lug, foot; kan, sound.
Luggara, fun, sport, dance —lug, foot.
Lunghana, strike, flog, beat—as the ground is struck
with the foot.
Lungana, kill —the result of the stroke.
Longhana, longana, sleep —like death.
Lungana, swift —of foot.
Lughra, heat —from running; compare Eastern
magra, day.
Lughrata, hot—lugra, heat: t, stationary, permanent.
Lughoratah, summer —doublet of lughrata.
Leghro-mena, perspire —Legro, heat; pen, projec-
ting, exuding.
Mattawebe, firewood —matta, dead; weba, stick.
Mungara, flint —pug, solid. This word also appears
as mughra and mora.
Mughra malli, topaz —pug, solid; pa-lut, very bright.
Mora trona, flint —png, solid; tro, hard.


Mabbile, altogether, quite, many —pa pel, very round,
strong, numerous ; compare English “ roundly,” “ round
number.”
Moi, mie, mungie, dead—Eastern mien, bent, round,,
return, not, heap, sick, feeble.
Moimabbile, battle—Moi, dead; mabbile, many.
Moimutte, skirmish—moi, dead; mutt, heap, i.e.,
few; if there were many, they could not be seen at once,
as if in a heap.
Matta, mutta, moatta, round, heap, spherical, pigeon,-
plump—pug, solid; t, stationary; compare wugata. The
series is pugata, wugata, mugata, moata, muta, mata; as-
variant, munga.
Munghe mabbleli, a load —mungie, heap; mabbile,
big.
Mie luggrata, fever—mie, sick; luggra, hot; ta, lie
down.
Mene ruggera, acrid —me, I; ne, not; nugara, drink
compare Eastern tugana.
Moie, muie, muggena, lips, nose —compare the
Eastern muna, lips. The two liquids, if they were cer-
tain to belong to the root, would well represent the
movable parts of the face; we have the Eastern mua-
genna (ear) and mongtena (eye) to confirm this con-
jecture. Then, again, we have the Eastern mokena,
water, which might refer us to the moist parts of the
head. Finally, we have mien, curved, which might refer
to the curved outlines of lips, nose, ears, etc.
Nun oine, a greeting —mine, there; wi~-pe, active;
ne, you.
Xire, good —nara, the very thing (needed), whence
also—to heal.
Nirabe, correct —nara, that; pa, indeed; that is it!
Xarrawa, yes —doublet of nirabe.
Xeka, there —ne, that; ka, yonder.
Xeggana, another—neka, that; na, that thing.
X'aba, other —na, yonder thing: pa, indeed.
Xubre, eye—doublet of lebrena, leprena, a missile;
the power of vision sent forth like a lance; compare
“ shooting glances.”
Xarramoiewa, enough—Narra, that; moi, to me; wa,
will do.


Oghnemipe, answer—o, prosthetic; kan, speak ; mi,
to me; pe, do.
In the Vocabulary, p. xx., we find oghnamilce, ask,
which H. Ling Roth endeavours to improve to ogna-
milii (p. Ixix.). The true solution is on p. xx., where we
find oghnemipe, answer. The oghnamilce is thus evi-
dently a badly transcribed ognamibe. An interesting
variant of the word is oangana, inform, tell, evidently a
form of kan-kan-a, speak with emphasis.
Pakara, fling—pa, forcibly; kara, throw away.
Papalawe, swallow (bird) —pe pe, very much; li,
moving; we, active.
Papla, big—pa pal, very round, stout, strong.
Panubre, sun —pa, big, powerful; nubre, eye.
Pallanubrana, sun —pa, big; la, round, moving;;
nubra, eye.
Papatongune, thunderstorm —pa pat, loud crash,
(onomatopoetic), ngune, fire; or else —pa pa, very big;
ton, falling.
Poimatelina, lightning—pe, strike ; mate, dead; lina,
like a spear.
Pawe, small, rascal —pe pe, mere dot, small; com-
pare German knabe, boy, and English knave, of no ac-
count.
Pawawe, small boy—pe pe pe, just a series of dots..
We may also refer these two words to the “ baby ” group-
(v. supra).
Panubratone, dusk —panubra, sun; tone, set.
Panga, pinga, leech, small caterpillar—pena, lance
shape.
Putia, none—paw, little; itia, dimin.; less than little,
infinitely small, practically nothing. Here we have a
curious possibility of the instinctive perception of the
mathematical theory of limits. “ Nothing,” being an ab-
stract idea, was beyond the grasp of the Aboriginal
mind.
Puda, smoke—putia, unsubstantial.
Patingunabe, extinguish—pat, stamp ; onomatopetic,
though it fits in with our “ projection+rest ”; ngune,
fire; be, do.
Poina, hair (dressed in sticks)), fragrance (issuing
forth), entrails (in long strings), pettish (ready to take


28 THE SPEECH OP THE TASMANIAN ABORIGINES.
the offensive), facetious (compare “ shafts of wit ),
pune, bird (shooting through the air), pena, lance.
Poenghana, laugh —pen, facetious; kan, voice.
Pallakanna, shout—mighty voice.
Poiete, head—pena, erect figure; ita, stop, end,
diminished.
Poetarunna, skull —poet, head; ren, running,
smooth.
Poetakannapawenea, whisper—poet, bead; kan,
voice; paw, small: ne, away, towards someone.
Poieta kannabe, talk —poet, head: kan, voice; be,
active. . ,
dC LIVC. . -
Poira kunnabea, talk—a doublet of the same : instead
of ita we have the rarer diminutive ira; ma is more
common; bea, like nea in the previous word, has an
epithetic a.
Rialanna, air, breeze—ri, moving; len, along.
Rallana proiena, gale —rallana—rialanna; proiena,
big. Rallana may also have affinity with ralla, strong.
Rotnli. long, tall —rot, dry, hard; li, long; grass. We
may also refer it to rot, dry grass, ali, good.
Raima murina, inactive —ren, move; mur, heavy; in,
somewhat: somewhat heavy or slow in moving.
Ranga. knee —ren, flexible joint. _
Raggamutta, lame —ranga, knee; mutta, thick, stiff.
Roatta, hurt, injured—from raga wutta- raga mutta.
Ruete, lazy —doublet of roatta.
Riatta, gum tree —motionless thing, standing stiff-
kneed.
Retakunna, creak (of limbs of trees)—riatta, tree;
kan, voice, sound.
Tramutta, pebble— tra. hard ; mutta, thick, round.
Trowatta, pebble— doublet of tramutta.
Tawe, tape, takawbi, go —taka, heel; pe, active.
Tikotte, hunger—tug, eat; kote, quickly, eagerly
Turra, winter, snow —doublet of Eastern tuna.
Toina, hawk, pelican ; tanna, owl; tene, rib—doublets
of pene, lance.
TJratte, frost, hoar-frost —doublet of waratte, paratte
(Eastern).


Una, fire —doublet of wina, stick, firewood; or of
ngrme, from nagana, the “ eater up, ’ or even from
ngonina, nagana, the flickerer, flapper.
Ughana kanna nire, true —oana, speak: kan, word;
nire, good.
Warra, bark of tree —palla, round,.shell, “pallium."
Warrane, blue sky—warra, vault.
Warrena, warrentinna, cloud in sky—warra, rounded
mass; tin, extensive.
Waratte, hoar-frost. There seems to be an interest-
ing interchange of meanings. Paratta, waratta are
onomatopoetic, from the prattling noise of hail or the
crackling of icicles; but the ice forms a covering, like
bark, and so we have the warra family of words, in touch
with palla, parra, round.
Warrawa, spirit of the dead —warra, cloud, appari-
tion ; wa, active.
Wina, fuel, stick, taste, feel, try, wake —pena, stretch
out, active.
Wia lutta, red charcoal —wia, wood; hit, bright,
shining.
THE, WESTERN AND NORTH-WESTERN
SPEECH.
Here we have some striking characteristics, different
from those of the Eastern and Southern words; but,
when allowance has been made for these, the words are
found to be essentially the same.
We notice at once a softer pronunciation of the con-
sonants, b, d, g, for the Eeastern p, t, k. We also have
the nominal suffix, lea, to take the place of the Eastern
na. As a specimen of the extraordinary spelling occa-
sionally used by the recorders, we may note i-aynghlalea
(bad), which seems to stand for the Eastern wiena-na
(crooked). Such spelling might make the whole of the
record doubtful but for the fact that there is a certain
consistency underlying the spelling, which enables us to
establish fairly reliable conclusions. W e must bear in
mind that the climate and physiographical features of the
West and North-West are singularly like those of the
West of Scotland, Wales, and Ireland, and we need not
be surprised if the intonation and articulation of the


speech of Western Tasmania bears some analogy to
that of the Gaelic, Welsh, and Erse. The following-
words are assigned to the North-West:
Eribba, cockatoo —e, prosthetic; li, flying; pa, active.
Kocha, swan —ka ka, repeated cries ; or like Southern
kuegi, round.
Karkuka, parrot—ka ka ka, the same; the cries
would prevail in this case.
Kaumilea, evening—compare Southern kawuta, red
ground.
Kunrare, much talk —kan, voice, jaw; re re, con
tinually moving.
Kunmunera, much talk —kan, noise; mun, mouth,
ra, continuous.
Talba, devil; Eastern palla wa— strong, active, man,
fighter.
Terriga, walk—toka, foot, with r as infix of motion.
Loyoranna, wind —li, swift: ren. moving.
Murdunna. star—par, pal, sun; tinna, diminutive.
Loina, sun —len, radiator, eye.
Longa, ground—lug, resting place.
From the Western \ ocabulary we take:
Benkclo, bullock —This form of pakalla, with the
native infix n, seems strong evidence against the deriva-
tion from “bullock.
Belanilea, shadow —pal, solid; ni, not; lea, suffix.
Boabennitia, grin, make faces —pa, make; pen,
laugh; itia, playfully.
Gannemerara, come here —kan, call; me, I, ran, run.
Gdulla, acid, sour—kot, little; ali, good.
Gnimuckle, aged— kan, teeth; mu, lips; k, bad; le,
suffix.
llletiape, rouse him —i, prosthetic; le, quick; tape,
come.
Marama, star—pal, sun; inna, little.
Lulla, foot —lug, foot; lea, suffix.
Lugh, foot—lug, without suffix.
Lola, gun —le-na, spear, striking at a distance.


Lullabi, loallibe, ship—lulla, foot, oar-beat;; pe,
active. . . , T
Lugra nire, right foot —lug-na, foot; Hire, good, rt
is significant that a distinction of usefulness was
made between the right foot and the left, in Milu-
o-an’s list, we find in the Eastern Vocabulary—luggana
elibana, right foot; lug, foot; ali, good, pa, strong,
luaggan aoota, left foot; lug, foot; wutta, heavy, in
the' Southern —lugga worina, right loot; lug, toot;
war —pal, strong; lugga oangta, lug, foot, wang=pen,
stick, stiff; ta", stop, not elastic, iTi the Western
and North-Western —malleare, right foot; pal, strong;
lea, suffix; re, moving, foot; oolatyneeale; left
foot; pug, foot; lea, suffix; ta, not elastic; no, not;
ali, good. We note also the shortening of the syllables
in the Western words.
Lialarragonna, sneeze —lia, quick: lanna, shaip,
kana, sound.
Lanne, strike—len, swift motion.
GENERAL A' OCABI ’ LARY.
The NUMERALS are given by H. Ling Roth thus
(p- >33) : —
ONE—marawah, mara, marrawan, borar, parmere,
pain mere, marai, par-me-ry.
TWO—piawah, poi-erinna, pyanerbanvar, calaba-
wah, boulah, katabouve, bura, cal-a-ba-wa.
THREE—luwah, wyandirwar, aliri, cardia.
FOUR—pagunta, wullyawah, cardia.
FIVE —puggana, marah, karde, kardia.
TEN —karde-karde.
According to my theory of the Tasmanian speech,
these words are far less perplexing than they appear
here, and would show that the Aboriginals had no con-
ception of abstract numbers, but merely of such notions
as big, little, arm, hand.
Anything noticed individually or rather, pointed
at," was pa, in some form or other, with emphatic repe-
tition and nominal suffix ra or na.


In the case of the hand or fist, a collection of five-
fingers which could be displayed or hidden, puga-na
(solid, strong) would be the natural expression, while
" four would be a hand with the thumb invisible, that
is stopping short of completeness, expressed bv pugan-
ta, fist cut short.
Mara, “ one ” or “ five,” is also “ the complete
thing, one fist made up of five fingers,” therefore palla,
round, strong.
The number three would be expressed by the word
for " arm,” the limb with three parts, two for the arm
and one for the hand; lu-pa, li-pa, strong limb, and the
reduplicated a-li-ri, limb with hand, are words for
“ arm ” and for “ three.”
The number two was also beyond the grasp of the
Aboriginals. They could see a thing divided into two
or more parts which were smaller than the whole had
been. Now, “ small ” was expressed, as we have seen,
by pawe and by koti or kata, and we find these words,
in some form, in all the numbers after unity. As an
alternative, we find for “ two ” boulah or bura: these
are forms of pala (big), and express the duad as an in-
crease in bulk, not as a cutting up into smaller parts..
Wullyawah (four) is another form of this, with the
magnifying or perhaps duplicating pa as suffix.
The diphthong in piawe, which we see again in;
poierinna, pyanerbarwar, wyandirwar, may well indicate
a splitting.up of a whole by the change from the single
vowel sound to a composite one.
Calabawah is probably a misprint for katabawa,
which is simply kata + pawe; we note the form kata-
bouve in confirmation of this conjecture.
Karde, or its diminutive form kardia, is simply kate
(small); the more parts there are the smaller will be
their size.
Using uniform orthography, we get, therefore, the-
numerals in these forms:—
ONE—pala-pa, pala, palapa, pala, pa-pala, papala,.
pala, papala.


TWO —piawe, piawe-r-inna (with euphonic infix r
and diminutive suffix), pia-na-pawe, kata pawe, pala,
kata pawe, pala, kata, pawe.
We note the frequency of the duplication of the
whole word, most appropriate in this case, and not
found in an}' other number but ten, which means
“ two fives.”
THREE —ri-pa, pia-na-pa, li-ri, katia
FOUR —pagan-ta, pal-ia-pa, katia.
FIVE; —pugan-a, pala, kata, katia.
TEN—kata-kata.
The PERSONAL PRONOUNS recorded by H.
Ling Roth (p. 184) may also be simplified.
Mina, I, me, mine, has been accounted for.
Ni-na, na-ra (nard is evidently a misprint for naia),
neka, mean the “ non ego, " that thing, thou, he, she,
it, you, they.”
Warrandur is given for "we;" but it is doubtful
whether the Aborigines could grasp a collective notion,
e.g., they had no plural, and no word for forest, tribe,
family. PI. Ling Roth quotes from La Billardiere and
Peron —tagari-lia, ray family ; but their informants had
spoken of squalling babies ; tagara means to weep,
and tagara-na, weepers.
A more plausible explanation is that warrandci (as
Norman wrote it) is a form of warrane, which means
anything curved; and its application to “we was per-
haps due to the circumstance that Norman,_ addressing
one or more Aborigines, pointed to each in turn, be-
o-inning or finishing with himself, to indicate the present
company (the we), and the latter only noticed ■ the
circular" motion of his finger, and told him this was
warrane (a circle), whereupon he put down warrane as
the equivalent of “ we.”
Thus, on considering the numerals and the personal
pronouns, we again find the lowest possible stage of
human thought, and that the four words again sufficed
to express all that was required.


IV.—SYNTAX.
H. Ling Roth, in his discussion of the I asmaniaiT
language (pp. 178 ff.), bases his remarks on the syntax
chiefly on Fr. Muller’s Grundriss der Sprachwissen-
schaft. As has been stated in the introduction, the pre-
sent investigation is confined to the original records,
but it may be pointed out, that from our dissection of
the words it seems that these words themselves were
phrases, and that there is no trace of systematic acci-
dence or syntax.
In my Introduction to the study of the Aboriginal
Speech of Tasmania, read on the 16th November, 1908,
before this Society, I translated a song which has fortu-
nately been preserved in three versions. For the sake
of completeness and brevity, I repeat one of the ver-
sions. The literal translation was;—“ Mighty, run, fire,
heel, my, speedy, foot, my, speedy, thou, come, run,
bird, thou, very, great-man, man, very, great-man, hero.
This was rendered in plain English thus: —" V ith might
runs the bush fire; my heel, too, is speedy, and my foot
is swift. Come thou, and run with the speed of a bird!
Thou art a real warrior, a man indeed, a warrior, a
hero!”
In the records we have some phrases translated. I
will briefly refer to them.
Wilkinson’s translation of a portion of Genesis is.
very short, and mixed with English words. We take
the' first four verses as specimens;—Trota, Godna po-
male heavena coantana. Lewara crackne. Godna came,
tretetea, tretetea crackne. Godna capra tretetea lewarra.
Godna and heavena are evidently English words.
Capra is probably a misprint for lapra (see). Trota is
a curious word. The mental development of the Abo-
rigines had not advanced to abstract ideas: so the)'
could not tell Mr. Wilkinson the word for “ beginning.”
Then he probably laid a row of stones on the ground,
pointed to the first one, and asked what that was. He
would expect the equivalent of “beginning,” and the
Aborigines told him it was trota or trowatta, a round
stone or pebble! We let it pass as meaning begin-
ning,” and retranslate literally thus“ Beginning God
make heaven earth. Dark rest. God speak light, light
rest. God see light dark.”


Milligan’s sentences (pp. xli.-xliii.) give ns little
further light; their general characteristics are the same
as we have already discussed, with the possible excep-
tion of ta being used as a postposition, as in mito (to
me), neeto (to thee), nangato (to the father); its literal
meaning is “ stop there.” It is even possible that this,
shows that postpositions were earlier than prepositions;
but the basis of such a contention is as yet very frail.
Indeed, in Milligan’s sentences we meet with indubit-
able datives without ta, e.g., Teeanymiape tuggane,
Meeongyneeome —Give me some b r ead to eat, I am
hungry. We dissect the phrase thus; —tiana, heap,
give; mia, me; pe, do; tugana, eat; mie, not; nagana,.
eat; me, me.
In a previous sentence, Milligan had Loina tyenna-
beah mito —Give me a stone. We dissect —lena, stone ;
tiana, give; pe, do; mi, me ; to, stop.
Fenton, in his History of Tasmania, has a very in-
teresting extract from a sermon delivered by G. A.
Robinson to the Aborigines, with an interlineated trans-
lation. This document must have escaped H. Ling
Roth’s notice. Robinson’s intimate acquaintance with
the Aborigines makes this record very valuable.
Matty nyrae Parlerdee. Matty nyrae Parlerdee.
One good God. One good God.
Parleeva nyrae, parleeva loggernu, taggerar
native good, native dead, go
lowway waeranggelly. Parlerdee lowway
up sky. God up.
Kyrat raegee merrdy, nueberrae Parlerdee
Good white-man sick, looks God
waeranggelly, Kannernu Parlerdee. Nyrae
skv speaks (prays) God. Good.
Parlerdee neuberrac nyrae raegee timene
God sees good white-man no
merrydy. Xo-ailly parleeva loggernu, tageera
sick. Bad native dead. goes
toogunner, raegorroper, uenee maggerer
down evil-spirit fire stops.
Parleeva tyrer, tyrer, tyrer. Nyra parleeva
Native, cry, cry, cry. Good native


maggerer Parlerdee waeranggelly, timene
stops God sky, no
merrydy, timene taggathe.
sick no hungering.
The spelling is peculiar, but the words can easily be
identified. The phraseology is that of a man who had
learnt to adapt his thoughts to those of his hearers. The
translation is so far inaccurate as it implies accidence
in the Tasmanian words, e.g., in speaks, sees. We note
that his word for God is Pallerdee, that is palla ritia,
powerful white-man! The first word (matty, one),
is not in H. Ling Roth's list; it is evidently the same
as matta round like a ball, a pebble. If Robinson tried
to get the native word for " one," he would probably
take up a pebble to illustrate his meaning, and duty re-
ceive the information that it was matta, a pebble, which
he then would remember as the numeral “ one,” not
realising that the Aborigines had no proper numerals
at all.
In Appendix D. H. Ling Roth gives some “ Phrases
and Songs after Braim. ’ There is an English version
for the phrases, but it is not accurate; there is none for
the songs, i will take phrase 5 as a specimen. Adopting
the uniform spelling and interlineating my own version,
based on H- Ling Roth’s lists, we get:—'
Malangtena mena take mulaga. Puti nara
child stop me go hunt. Not there
pamere lugana lika lugana krakane
one kangaroo like kangaroo exist
kate kate, ludawine pallawana nara
many, White-man warrior there
mokera nara mena lugana. Ritia teratittia
dog there me kangaroo. Man white
tape tialena nara lowe, relbia mena
go come there down violent act me
malitiena mabile. Warrawe poietanate.
white many. Spirit distracted.
H. Ling Roth quotes as the English version:—When
I returned to my country, I went hunting, but did not
kill one head of game. The white men make their dogs
wander and kill all the game, and they only want the
skins.


A free but essentially more accurate version would
be:—When I go hunting in my native place, I find not
one kangaroo where there were wont to be many. The
white warrior is there; his dogs are where my kangaroos
were. The white man goes and comes there and lies
down to sleep. The white man has done many acts of
violence to me; my heart is broken.
In Braim's songs, a characteristic phenomenon is the
presence of a multiplicity of hyphens. These indicate
the rhythmical tune and drum-beat to which the words
were sung; as we have observed in Mrs. Fanny Smith’s
song. Two songs will suffice for the present, to which
I will add my version. The first is: —
A re-na-too
Ket-a-ta-e-vepa
Mel-re-pa-too
A re-na-too.
In our spelling, we get
A rena to
Keta taipewa
Mebrepa to (Mel is an error)
A rena to.
This means: O, run hither (to me) Little one, do.
come ! Fly to me ! O, run to me !
The second is :
N e-par-me-ry-wa
Ne-cat-a-ba-wa
N e-par-me-ry-wa
Ne-cat-a-ba-wa.
This is characteristic of the child-like mind of the
Aborigines. The words are merely:—Ne pamerewa, ne
katapawe, twice over, and their meaning is;—“ Here is,
one, look ! here are two!”
CONCLUSION.
It would be easy to add further examples in illustra-
tion of my theory, for the material available is surpris-
ingly ample; and my notes are copious; but it does not
seem necessary to do so.


THE SPEECH OF THE TASMANIAN ABORIGINES.
Throughout this demonstration, the arguments have
been based on general principles which apply to all lan-
guages. It would have been feasible and interesting to
trace analogies between the Tasmanian speech and
other languages, but it was necessary to confine our
attention within narrower limits.
A reader acquainted with the Greek dialects will no
doubt recall many instances of interchange of conso-
nant, of infixes, and of instability of vowels ; and similar
phenomena can be discerned in other languages. Indeed,
some of the roots seem to be of almost universal
occurrence.
What I have endeavoured to do is to find the prin-
ciples by which the speech of tire primitive race of the
Tasmanians was governed. It seems that the languages
of the Australian continent are far more developed;
however, this is a subject for further research.
It is curious to note the absence of spirant and
sibilant sounds from the 1 asmanian speech, and also
from that of the Maori of New Zealand. The latter
language is of very elaborate structure, and has been
said to be akin to the Japanese. I do not possess suffi-
cient information to be able to discuss this point, but
it would certainly be interesting to discover, in case of
such affinity being proved, how the Maori came to be
without spirants or sibilants in their speech, while the
Japanese still have at least some of them.
The study of the Tasmanian language is hardly
begun; but, if that language really represents the verv
beginning of human speech, its investigation cannot fad
to "excite" great interest among the scholars of the world.
It seemS at least probable that, as the individual and
social life of the Tasmanian Aborigines was demon-
strably at the lowest stage of human activity, their lan-
guage, too, would be almost primitive and but one step
removed from the inarticulate cry of an infant, ilus
consideration has incited me to endeavour to recon-
struct the ancient speech of Tasmania.


■


a ■
•%
■ .
«
*
/
, • _ /
*
(
■
'
■
