

The INDOOROOPILLY
TOLL
BRIDGE
A souvenir of
THE OFFICIAL OPENING DAY




HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR SIR LESLIE ORME WILSON
P.C„ G.C.S.I., G.C.I.E, C.M.G., D. S.O., L.L.D.
Photo by Poulsen


The Bridge at a Glance
This is the largest Suspension Bridge in Australia and stands second in single Span
to the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
The extent of the work from the Indooroopilly Anchorage to th£ Chelmer Approach
is 1,305 feet, to which must be added the new road formation at Indooroopilly railway
station 307 feet long, making the total 1,612 feet—of this there is the single span over the
river of 600 feet.
The extreme breadth of the Bridge is 35 feet, providing a roadway of 26 feet and a
footpath of 5 feet 6 ins. The full height of the Indooroopilly Pylon, above the founda-
tions, is 87 feet. The Chelmer Pylon, from the extreme depth of the pile foundations to
the full height is 187 feet.
The concrete and steel for the Indooroopilly Anchorage has been placed 50 feet
below the surface.
The weight including Concrete, Steel, Timber and earth works makes up a grand
total of 29,300 tons. '
Opening Ceremony
AT THE INDOOROOPILLY END OF THE STRUCTURE
On Friday, February 14th, 1936
At 2.30 p.m.
The Chairman of Directors of the Company, W. H. GREEN, Esq., will preside
Addresses will be given by
His Excellency, The Governor, Sir LESLIE ORME WILSON,
P.C., G.C.5.1., G.C.1.E., C.M.G., D. 5.0., L.L.D.
The Deputy Premier of Queensland, Hon. P. PEASE.
The Lord Mayor of Brisbane, Hon. A. J. JONES.
Hon. A. E. MOORE, J. F. MAXWELL, Esq., M.L.A., T. NIMMO, Esq., M.L.A., and
W. TAYLOR, Esq.
At 3.15 His Excellency. The Governor, will unveil the Bronze Tablet after which
be will sever the Ribbon and declare the Bridge open. A procession led by His Excellency’s
car will then proceed over the Bridge to Chelmer.


Looking Back for Half a Century
/T 1 HE completion of the Indooroopilly-
Chelmer Suspension Bridge is an epochal
event of historic and economic importance
to Queensland, and more particularly to the Greater
Brisbane area.
Historic interest is disclosed in a glance back at
the men who first fostered the bridge idea.
The need was felt fifty years ago when an
influential deputation waited upon the Minister for
Works to ask that the Government subsidise an
undertaking to construct a bridge at Indooroopilly,
or failing that, to ask permission to levy tolls and
other such privileges for a number of years. The
deputation was introduced by Mr. Simon Fraser,
M.L.A., and consisted of Messrs. S. Grimes, M.L.A.,
Merry. Potts, O’Reilly. Luya, W. A. and W. H.
Wilson, G. W. Flower, W. T. Blakeney (Registrar-
General), and Simpkins (Engineer of the proposed
bridge).
Mr. Miles in reply to their request, said it was
a matter for the consideration of the Government.
Nothing was done as a result of the deputation, and
two years later another deputation waited upon
Mr. C. B. Dutton, who was then Minister for
Works. That deputation presented a petition
signed by 225 residents of the district praying for
the construction of “an under or over bridge on the
existing cylinders of the Railway Bridge or by the
placement of another row of cylinders, or the build-
ing of another bridge.” The deputation was
reminded of the fact that the matter was one for
the surrounding local authorities. Following on the
formation of a Progress Association at Sherwood, a
Progress Association was formed at Graceville in
the early part of 1924, through the enterprise of
Mr. E. L. Jerrems, Mr. W. Taylor, being elected as
its first President.
The need for a Bridge from Chelmer to
Indooroopilly was discussed from time to time, and
Mr. W. Taylor prepared a design and estimate for
a re-inforced concrete structure.
It was considered a fitting Centenary Memorial
of the visit of Lieutenant Oxley to Brisbane. A
meeting of representatives of Municipalities, Pro-
gress Associations, and other bodies interested in the
construction of the bridge was held.
Representatives were present from the Ipswich
Town Council, Ipswich Chamber of Commerce,
Taringa Shire Council and the Chelmer, Indooroo-
pilly, Graceville, St. Lucia, Ebbw Vale, Riverview
and Darra Progress Associations. Plans of the pro-
posed bridge were submitted to the meeting and it
was unanimously agreed that the meeting should
form itself into a League with a distinctive name,
say the Indooroopilly-Chelmer Centenary Memorial
Bridge League.
The League was formed without delay, which
resulted in a good deal of propaganda and represen-
tation to the interested authorities.
On May 20th, 1925, a Commission consisting
of Mr. R. W. H. Hawkens, 8.A., M.E., M.lnst.,
C.E.M.1.E., Aust., Chairman: Mr. W. M. Nelson,
M.1.E.E., M.1.E., Aust., A.M.1.C.E.; and R. Martin
Wilson, M.E., A.M.1.E., Aust., was honoured with
instructions from the Brisbane City Council “to
investigate what further facilities for crossing the
Brisbane River, either by bridges, tubes or other
means are necessary, and also as to the best steps for
making such bridges, tubes, or other means which
are now necessary or which may be necessary for the
further development of the Greater City of Bris-
bane."
The claims of the Indooroopilly-Chelmer
Memorial Bridge League were set forth in a letter
dated April 18th, 1925, and reported upon by Mr.
L. A. Mclnnes, at the request of the Executive Com-
mittee of the Town Planning Association of Queens-
land. A statement was made by Mr. R. B. Jef-
feries, Hon. Secretary of the Centenary Memorial
Bridge League. The Shire Clerk set forth his
claims on behalf of the Sherwood Shire Council in
a letter dated May 17th. This was followed by a
further letter on June 18th. The Taringa Shire
Council supported the claims of the Memorial
Bridge League on July Ist. Mr. A. J. Robinson
in a letter dated August 31st also made some strong
claims in favour of bridge construction.
Mr. W. Taylor of Graceville gave evidence be-
fore the Commission on September 10th, 1925. A
proposal was made by Mr. J. H. Burgess, 8.E.,
A.M.1.E., Aust., Engineer, in the services of the
Queensland Government Railway on October sth,


that in the event of the Railway Department build-
ing a new railway bridge at Indooroopilly, the pre-
sent railway bridge could be adapted for road traffic
purposes. This commended itself to the Commis-
sion as a very economical and suitable arrangement
if the bridge could be acquired at a cost of
£ 100,000.
A deputation waited upon the Commissioner for
Railways at a later date placing this scheme before
him at a much lower figure. This, however, did
not appeal to the Commissioner.
The Progress Associations of the district made
another move on the 26th June, 1929, by holding
a combined meeting in the Cqrinda Hall. Dr.
Croll was appointed chairman.
At this meeting a deputation was appointed to
interview The Mayor of the Greater Brisbane Coun-
cil, Alderman W. A. Jolly, consisting of Mr. T.
Nimmo, M.L.A.. Aid. Stimpson, Mr. J. F. Max-
well, M.L.A., Mr. J. S. Kerr. M.L.A., Aid. E. Lan-
ham. Aid. A. Watson, and five members of the
Associations interested.
It was moved by Mr. W. H. Jones and seconded
by Mr. A. Robinson: “That five members be elected
to form a committee to go into the bridge question.”
Mr. E. L. Jerrems being nominated as Secretary and
Convenor. The following five members were elect-
ed:—Mr. E. L. Jerrems, Mr. T. F. Barker, Mr. W.
Taylor, Mr. J. C. Trotter and Mr. D. McKee.
No decisive action was taken, however, by the
Government or the Greater Brisbane Council as a
result of this meeting.
Construction Authority Obtained
While it was necessary to have a definite scheme
and visualize the Suspension Bridge erected from
Indooroopilly to Chelmer, work could not be com-
menced until a Franchise had been obtained to con-
struct and take tolls to cover constructional costs,
management and interest on capital outlay. The
approaches had to link up with the roads of the
Greater Brisbane Council, so Mr. Taylor decided
in the first place to get the scheme approved by the
Council prior to making an application to the
Government for the Franchise. The scheme that
met with the most favourable consideration was that
of handing over to the public the bridge in good
condition after the capital cost had been recovered
plus 10 per cent, per annum and working expenses.
Mr. Taylor submitted to the Premier, The Hon.
A. E. Moore, M.L.A., on June 15th, 1931, Blue
Prints setting forth the proposed design of the Sus-
pension Bridge from Indooroopilly to Chelmer. This
was followed by an interview with Mr. J. R. Kemp,
the Main Roads Commissioner, and on the Ist July,
1931, steps were taken to draw up an agreement.
At this period consideration was also being given
to the Kangaroo Point Bridge—the viaduct from
Sandgate to Woody Point, Redcliffe, and a bridge
at Lota. The Moore Government introduced a
measure known as “Tolls on Privately Constructed
Road Traffic Facilities Bill,’' which passed the third
reading on September 22nd, 1931.
Steps were then taken to draw up the Franchise
which was Gazetted on November 14th, 1931, for
the construction of “a road Suspension Bridge across
the Brisbane River on or about the site of the pre-
sent vehicular ferry above the Albert Railway
Bridge.”
Messrs. Morris, Fletcher and Cross, Solicitors,
acted in conjunction with Mr. W. Taylor in arriv-
ing at a working basis.


The formation of a Company and raising the necessary capital during the financial depression was
no mean task.
This was. however, undertaken as soon as the Franchise was obtained and the nominal capital fixed
at £ 75.000 divided into 7,500 shares of £lO each.
The first Directors are still acting:—
W. H. GREEN, Esq., Chairman; H. J. FOOTE, Esq., Deputy Chairman; WALTER TAYLOR.
Esq., and Mr. W. T. SMILLIE, J.P.
SOLICITORS: Messrs. MORRIS FLETCHER 8 CROSS, Adelaide St., Brisbane.
BANKERS: THE ENGLISH SCOTTISH 8 AUSTRALIAN BANK LTD., Queen St., Brisbane.
AUDITORS: Messrs. CAMPBELL 8 FIELDING, Griffiths House, Brisbane.
Mr. W. Taylor was appointed Acting Secretary after the decease of Mr. H. B. White, the late
Secretary. ;
W. H. GREEN, Esq.
W. TAYLOR, Esq.
H. J. FOOTE, Esq.
W. T. SMILLIE, Esq.


When the Company had sufficient funds in hand to construct the Indooroopilly Pylon, it was
decided to go ahead with the work, and continue steadily on as the funds became available.
WALTER TAYLOR,
Promotor, Constructor and Engineer for
the Company.
Several technical engineers were consulted and re-
ports obtained on different aspects of the work, and the
information furnished with the plans to the Main Roads
Commission.
It can be truthfully said that the breadth of vision
displayed by the Commissioner, combined with his wide
experience and technical knowledge in every case brought
about a mutual agreement on matters of design which
some might have considered experimental.
While there are many suspension bridges in various
parts of the world this is certainly the only one of its
kind.
Mr. W. Taylor was duly appointed the Company’s
Engineer with authority to consult with any engineer
regarding any technical matters that might be considered
necessary to bring about the completion of the under-
taking in the most efficient manner possible.
Every effort had to be made to keep down costs in
order to make the proposition a financial success.
It was therefore necessary that the plans submitted
in detail for the approval of the Main Roads Commis-
sioner, Mr. J. R. Kemp, should be so prepared as to get
the maximum amount of efficiency with the minimum
amount of expenditure. Mr. J. R. Kemp, had to con-
sider the ultimate requirements of the Government in
securing a first-class structure at the termination of the
franchise period. Mr. W. Taylor was faced with the
problem of building to the satisfaction of all parties con-
cerned—by no means an easy task.
Mr. J. R. KEMP,
Main Roads Commissioner.


Our Cable Connection with the Sydney Harbour bridge
It was on the 7th March, 1931, Mr. W. Taylor communicated with Messrs. Dorman Long 8 Co.
Ltd., Sydney, as to whether it was possible to purchase some of the Cables used in the erection of the
Sydney Harbour Bridge. A prompt
reply was received with a specification of
the Cables in question, and Blue Prints
of the Anchorage Assembly. The price
of the material had been fixed by March
17th. Mr. Taylor at once set to work
to design the Bridge with the intention
of using two groups of 12 Cables, and
visited Messrs. Dorman Long Co. when
the whole scheme was discussed and the
cables and other suitable material inspect-
ed.
A sample of used Bridge Cable with a socket attached was sent to Bullivant’s Australian Co. Ltd.
for Test House Report. In commenting on this the Works Manager stated: “The inside of the cable
was in excellent condition, all the wires
well lubricated and there was no indica-
tion of nicking.”
We have here a photo of the cables on
the wharf ready for shipment with the
Sydney Harbour Bridge in the back-
ground. Each cable is comprised of 217
separate wires, the centre wire forming
the core.
The wire is No. 8 guage, equivalent to
.160 inches diameter. The layers of
wires are laid in alternate direction—that
is to say “Cable laid”—the method of
weaving being to prevent the cables from
twisting.
The wire is drawn from steel having
a tensile strength of approximately 88 to
92 tons per square inch. Total breaking
strain per cable, 350 tons. The 24 cables
will be called upon to take a maximum
stress of 84 tons each.
The cable is 83 inches in circumference,
and length of each cable used on the
Bridge is 1060 feet. The weight is 15 lbs.
per foot.
The above photo shows the cables be-
ing landed on Burke’s Wharf, South Bris-
bane.
The one below, the cables adjacent to
the site of the Bridge at Indooroopilly.


Work Commenced at Indooroopilly
It was early in the year 1932 that the first resumption of land took place at Indooroopilly, the
piece of ground at the junction of Ferry Road and Riverview Terrace for the purpose of securing the cable
anchorages.
This was followed by building workshops and sinking test holes fifty feet deep through Brisbane
Schist formation.
While putting down the first test hole at a depth of 48 feet gold ore was struck and some free gold
discovered.
Various assays were made which proved that the stone contained gold from 8 dwt. to 2 ozs. 1 dwt.
per ton.
A considerable quantity of this stone had to be removed and was used in the foundation work of
the Indooroopilly Pylon. While in order to protect the site from outside interference by mining rights,
Mr. Taylor secured a Mining License for eight acres adjacent to the Bridge.
The excavations were proceeded with for the Indooroopilly Pylon, and the foundation for same
was passed by the Main Roads Commissioner early in November. 1932. and concrete work commenced.
A considerable amount of reinforcing
steel was used in the Pylon and especially
in the Saddle Walls of the foundations as
will be seen by the accompanying photo.
The footings of the saddle walls are
seven feet wide.
The adjoining picture gives one an
idea of the extent of the concrete floor
on the west side of the Pylon at the road
level and how the re-inforcing steel is
laced throughout.


The Paint Material used on the Indooroopilly Toll
Bridge was supplied by the
STERLING VARNISH CO.,
Huntley Street, Alexandria, N.S.W.
Follow the wise choice of the Indooroopilly Toll
Bridge and insist upon Sterling Paint Products for
your next job.
Sterling Home Paint
Rex Household Paint
Sterling One Hour Speed Enamel
Sterling Art-a-fec Varnish Stains
Sterling Silverglos
Sterling Household Enamel
White Lead White Zinc
STERLING STAINERS IN OIL , Etc.
AT ALL STORES.
QUEENSLAND DISTRIBUTORS:
A. C. BAKER & CO. PTY. LTD.
104 Mary Street, Brisbane
Phone No. B 3306 G.P.O. Box 515 H, Brisbane.


The concrete gantry and scaffolding were soon in evidence, and the pylon rose majestically above
the road.
While the work was proceeding on the Indooroopilly Pylon the foundation work was commenced
on the Chelmer side of the river, by the driving of 168 iron bark piles. Some of these piles were driven to
a depth of 61 feet into hard formation. The average depth of piles being 48 feet.
The following photo shows the pre-
paration being made for the concrete slab
and the punt which has just arrived with
gravel dredged from the river about a mile
from the Bridge for the concrete aggre-
gate.
The accompanying photo shows the
piles driven and the work proceeding with
steel sheet piling forming a protection
around the pile nest against marine
attack.


Pdrlidmenldry dnd Ciuic Represenldliues Closely Associdled
with the bridge building Enterprise
T. Nimmo. m.L A.
Representative Oxley Electorate
Alderman J. E. LANE
Oxley
J. F. MAXWELL, m.L.A.
Representative Toowong Electorate
Alderman H. MASSEIY
Toowong


This little picture shows the steel in
position and the concrete being conveyed
by shute.
There are two foundation slabs, 42ft.
x 25ft. x 4ft. thick, tied together by a
concrete beam. The heads of the 168
piles and the steel sheet piling are embed-
ded 6 inches in concrete.
The Chelmer Pylon is seen in this pic-
ture taking definite shape by the form-
work of the first arch and the steel on
either side. The Indooroopilly Pylon has
reached its full height of 87 feet above
the foundations, while the Railway
Bridge is seen to the right.
Progress on the Chelmcr Pylon soon
necessitated an early start on the approach
Piers, and the anchorage for the 24 cables.
A strip of land had been purchased by
the company from the Railway Commis-
sioner for this purpose. Some years ago
the Ferry House had been built on this
site. This was removed by the Brisbane
Council to make room for the approach
of the new bridge.


The sand and clay formation on the
bank at Chelmer made it very unreliable
for taking the cable strain. It was, there-
fore. decided to make the anchorage cap-
able of doing this by reason of its own
weight and at the same time form part of
the road construction.
This is 122 feet long and from 40 to 46 feet wide, with an extreme depth of 37 feet. It is sub-
divided into nine compartments which have been filled for the most part with rock.
The foundation slab has a thickness varying from two to seven feet and the walls from one foot
six inches to twelve feet six inches.
We have here an illustration of the
concrete road slab being moulded in posi-
tion over the anchorage and steel girders
from the Chelmer approach to the Pylon,
a distance of 242 feet. It will be noted
that this is heavily re-inforced.
This anchorage contains 5,462 tons of
concrete, 78 tons of re-inforcing and gril-
lage steel, and 5,460 tons of rock filling.
This photograph shows the placing of
concrete in the anchorage foundations.


The Pylon on the bank of the river at
Chclmer rises to a total height of 126
feet above the pile heads. It is unique in
design with massive arches and converg-
ing lines. It contains nine large rooms
which can be sub-divided for residential
or other purposes, a large kiosk and boat
house which will meet the requirements
of the many day trippers to the Chelmer
sands during the summer months. This
Pylon contains two main walls from 3
feet to 5 feet 6 inches thick heavily re-
inforced to support the saddles and cables
of the Suspension Span.
This snapshot was taken from the road
leading down to vehicular Ferry, giving
a side view of the completed anchorage,
the approach piers and the large steel
plate girders. The cables are shown
passing down the tunnels to the anchor-
age assembly.
Some idea can be obtained of the gigantic proportions of the structure from the amount of material
used, for it contains no less than 4,487 tons of concrete and 62 tons of re-inforcing steel.
At a level of 117 feet above high
water mark the bed plates are secured to
support the two Cable Saddles.
Each Saddle complete weighs eleven tons and is constructed of mild steel, the moving part is
mounted on twenty 6 inches Dia steel rollers, 40 inches long, which are connected by link plates and move
in guides attached to the saddle and the bed plates. A grease box has been constructed round the saddle
and thick grease inserted in all the interspaces surrounding the rollers. The above snap shows the saddle
lifted up for the grease packing.


From the first test holes which were sunk on the Indooroopilly side of the river to a depth of 48
feet through the Brisbane schist there was every indication that the cable anchorage on the North side of the
river would not be a very gigantic undertaking.
The full size excavations however revealed a formation of clay seams both vertical and horizontal
in the schist which made it very unreliable for taking the required strain, especially during wet weather.
Owing to the net work of re-inforcing and grillage steel that bad to be placed in position, difficulty
was experienced in adequately snoring up the excavation walls. This had to be done by concrete in certain
places, and it was found necessary to make an open cut over a considerable portion and afterwards fill in with
granite and concrete.
This being a very important part of the undertaking it was eventually decided to excavate another
chamber at the rear of the main one and connect both by means of a tunnel. This opened up into very hard
formation which was cut out by means of pneumatic paving breakers.
Ends cut away from the main cables were secured round the anchorage assembly of the main cables
and carried back through the tunnel to the rear chamber and concreted in position. The following material
was used in both anchorages; —1,772 tons of concrete and 58 tons of steel.
The “Telegraph” newspaper published a flashlight photo-
graph of cutting out rock with pneumatic tools well below the
surface.
We have here a sketch showing how the excavations are
filled with concrete and the relative position of the 4 steel pins
eleven inches in diameter and six feet long. These are set in
the concrete at the rear of the steel grillage, and were used on the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Only 26 inches are
exposed in the tunnel to receive three cables abreast. The cable ends are spread out in cast steel sockets. Of
the 21 7 wires to each cable the ends of eighty are bent over and after being drawn into the socket secured
by white metal. The cables shown in this sketch are the additional cables used to tie back the grillage steel
to the rear portion of the anchorage.


It will be seen from this photograph
that the first cable has been successfully
hauled across the river from Indooroopilly
and has been securely anchored on the top
of the saddle at Chelmer, while the con-
nection is being made at the anchorage.
The cable was carefully measured, and
when placed in position had the calculated
sag at 70" Fah. It was discovered by care-
ful tests that a variation of sag took place
at extreme temperatures of 2 inches.
After the first 12 cables were hauled over the river and anchored in position, a travelling platform
was loaded with the centre suspension plates and set out on its journey over the river, being controlled by
means of a crab winch. The accompanying picture shows the engineers going out to bolt the first set to the
centre of the cable group.
By means of two travelling platforms,
working out from the centre, the plates
and temporary suspension rods for the
false bridge were soon placed in position.
In the meantime the second group was
being placed in position and the travelling
platforms were used again for the same
purpose.


By the courtesy of “The Telegraph"
we are able to show the last cable being
placed in position down the Indooroopilly
anchorage. Note the steel socket at the end.
The entire steel frabrication of the main span is suspended from the cables with the exception of the
end posts of the truss fabrication which rests on phosphor bronze plates secured to the concrete. These lower
chords are provided with pin connections and move freely on mild steel saddles between guides and holding
down plates. Ample provision is, therefore, made for lateral and deflection movements due to temperature
and variable loads.
The cable connections for the entire steel fabrication have come in for a considerable amount of
careful investigation and experimental tests. The adaptation of cables for the bridge design, which were
made for the temporary work of holding up the steel fabrication of the Sydney Harbour Bridge until the
centre chord was placed in position, called for special consideration. The type of truss construction known
as the Florianopolis Type in which the quarter points (in this case points 150 feet out from the centre of
each pylon) had to be designed for exceptionally high stresses.
The design had to provide for freedom of access to the cables for examination and painting and at
the same time grip each cable sufficiently to meet any contingency of unequal loading. By reason of the cable
group forming the top chord of the truss for the central 300 feet, it was necessary to have large plates to
receive the diagonal bracing. This naturally provided at each joint of four plates a large gripping area and
by reason of Hin. studs and nuts in contact with the outside plates, all the necessary tentional grip was
obtained. These were so arranged as to provide 1 /in. spacing between the cables.
In order to ascertain the cor-
rect number of bolts required
for each set of plates, a clamp-
ing device was constructed to
grip six cable ends and tested
at the Queensland University
with highly satisfactory results.
The method is illustrated in the
accompanying photo.
The top chords from the pylons to the quarter points are constructed of 15 x 4 channels (heavy
section) and from these 7 x | flat suspenders with 9 x f plates bolted to the cables with 1/in. bolts. These
are also provided with adjustable connections.
The whole of the steel span is supported by 1.310 Hin. diameter bolts and 672 bolts of 1/in.
diameter. All of these fit the holes with a clearance not exceeding 1/32nd of an inch.


B.
H
R
STEEL FOR BRIDGE BUILDING
*
■iiii
m
JWM# t ""
W* %■
juiiYW
-
JL
tOA
* 'o^B*
Mg'
» »«
*w
AERIAL VIEW OF THE STEELWORKS, NEWCASTLE, N.S.W.
Where nearly 1000 tons of STEEL SECTIONS were Rolled for
THE INDOOROOPILLY TOLL BRIDGE
The Broken Hill Proprietary Coy. Ltd.


THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY COY. LTD
Mine Owners, Ship Owners,
Steel Manufacturers and Colliery Proprietors
LIST OF PRODUCTS
TEE RAILS .. .
BRIDGE RAILS
BRIDGE AND SLEEPER PLATES
BEAMS
PLATES
CLUTCH BAR
CHANNELS
GIRDER PLATES
ANGLES
TEES
ROUNDS
SQUARES
FLATS
OCTAGONS
ALLOY STEELS .. .
SPRING STEELS
PIG IRON
INGOTS
BLOOMS AND BILLETS ~
REINFORCING BARS .
WIRE RODS
TAR
CRUSHED SLAG
SOLVENT NAPHTHA .. .
SUBLIMED NAPHTHALENE
TOLUOL
SULPHATE OF AMMONIA .
BENZOL
FOUNDRY COKE.
141bs. to UOlbs. (With Fishplates)
181 b., 251 b.
For Railway Permanent Way Work.
3in. x 2 21/64in. to 24in. x 7pn.
Up to 78in. wide x to 2in. thick.
For use in conjunction with Beams as
Sheet Piling.
3in. x IJin. to 15in. x 4in.
14in., 16in., 18in.
Equal—lin. to 6in., also Sin.
Unequal—2|in. x 2in. to 6|in. x 4Jin.
Bedstead—l|in. and IJin, x |in.
lin. x lin. and x Ijin.
iin. to diam.
iin. to 3in.
fin. to 12in., also Special Shoeing Sizes,
fin. to l^in.
For high duty machine parts.
Various Grades.
Machine Cast —Specially Graded.
Acid and Basic—For Heavy Forgings.
Re-rolling, Forging, etc.
{in, and upwards.
Various Gauges.
Best Quality.
For first-class Roads.
Highly efficient Rubber Solvent.
For Preservation of Furs, etc.
For high lacquer finish.
Excellent Soil Nourisher.
XYLOL
BUNKER
B.H.P. BLOWFLY OIL
COAL HOUSEHOLD COAL.
BRANCH OFFICES:
SYDNEY : 28 O’Connell Street ADELAIDE : 28 Franklin Street
PERTH : William Street LONDON : 3 Great Winchester Street.
HEAD OFFICE :
422 LITTLE COLLINS STREET : MELBOURNE,
Cables and Telegrams ; “HEMATITE,” MELBOURNE.
COAL.
C.l.


A temporary bridge was first erected over the river by means of 1 j in. diameter steel suspenders
attached to the cables at 12 feet centres supporting hardwood cross bearers at a level to allow four inches
of clearance under the finished steel work. Work-
ing out from one to the other with decking and
truck travelling along a centre track from each pylon
a platform was soon erected across the river upon
which could be fabricated the whole of the steel
work.
The above illustration explains the method.
Again the work commenced at each pylon.
Cross girders and lower chord members were packed up upon the false work until bolted in posi-
tion, and connected with the permanent suspenders. The steel fabrication thus provided a substantial deck
for all operations.
The centre track was extended as the work progressed. Upon this a small truck travelled to and
fro with a turn-table attachment to take out the cross girders, chord plates, and other parts.
The plated cross girders, 24 x 1\ x 175 lbs. to the foot, were run out to the last girder placed, turned
round and lowered in position by means of blocks and tackle secured to the main cables.
The bottom chords, 30 inches deep and 36
feet long, were handled in a similar manner. The
twelve rows of 12 x 5 R.S.J, stringers were bolted
and rivetted in position at the same time, and the
gap between Cbelmer and Indooroopilly was soon
reduced and the connection made as will be seen by
the accompanying “snap.”
The centre of the span had to be load-
ed by steel stringers in groups round the
temporary suspenders to keep down the
deck camber until the load of steel be-
came evenly distributed over the cables,
as will be seen by the adjoining picture.


After the steel work had been bolted together and a large proportion finally rivetted the accompany-
ing photograph was taken from the balcony of theCbelmer Pylon. This is a bird’s-eye-view of deck steel
ready for the 9x4 iron-bark deck planks and the bituminous road surface.
The Works Manager for the Bridge was Mr. Gordon Major,
who has been in the employ of Mr. W. Taylor for 14 years and
has been foreman over many large constructional undertakings.
There is perhaps no constructional work so exacting as that of
Bridge Building.
The work presents fresh problems every day and carries with
it so much risk.
The handling of the cables and erecting the false bridge pre-
sented the greatest difficulties, but with a willing staff of strong and
fearless men (some of whom had been working for the firm for a
number of years) the work proceeded as fast as safety would permit.
The whole of the work was carried out without the use of
river plant. There has not been any loss of life, and not a single
man has had to call for a “Life Saver.”
The question has been asked by many visitors to the Bridge
site as to where the steel work was being prepared for fabrication —
they have simply been told to look around.
On the east side of the Indooroopilly Pylon there is a small
shop—3o feet long and 13 feet 6 inches wide. This was the
engineer’s shop, for small parts and making templets for the steel
Note the top chord members going out
to meet the cables, a distance of 150 feet
from the centre of the pylon. All these
cable plate connections met at the points
set out on the cables before being hauled
over the river, when an allowance had to
be made for dead load sag at a tempera-
ture of 70° Fah.
Mr. GORDON MAJOR.
work. At the front of the Pylon and fifteen feet wide under the road arch an extension was built with a
floor area not exceeding 800 square feet —these constituted the covered workshop, with three radial drilling
machines, one small drilling machine, two hacksaw frames, emery wheels and sundries.
A travelling crane was erected in front of the Pylon with a lifting capacity of six tons. Pneumatic
tools were used for rivetting and grinding and all these machines and tools were purchased for the work and
yet by efficient management and skilful tradesmen thousands of pounds worth of steel was prepared for the
cross river span.
All the steel sections were purchased by Mr. W. Taylor from the Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd., New-
castle.
The cross girders and heavy bottom chord plates were delivered to the works of Messrs. G. and J.
Dowrie, South Brisbane. This firm rivetted the plates to the cross girders, also the angles and gussetts pre-
pared on the Bridge site for these sections.


The total expenditure for work done by engineering firms away from the Bridge site did not exceed
£1,250.
The major portion of the rivets (of which there are approximately 80,000) have been made by Messrs.
McKenzie and Holland, Northgate, while the high tension bolts for clamping the plates to the cables were
made by Commonwealth Steel Products, Waratah, N.S.W.
As far as possible Queensland material has been used and Queensland labour employed, and quite a
considerable sum of money has been distributed in wages.
The setting out of the steel work was left entirely in the hands of Mr. J. Martin, who was for 28 years
engaged by Messrs. Harvey and Son, Engineers, Brisbane, before they retired from business.
The fact that all the steel work came together without having to reamer any of the thousands of holes
for the rivets, speaks volumes for the accuracy of the work.
The very fact that the steel members were so carefully measured and cut to size, make fabrication com-
paratively easy.
The Main Roads Commissioner, Mr. J. R. Kemp, stated that the work was a credit to all who had
been engaged upon it.
The 9x4 hardwood planks having
been placed in position, the roadway over
the bridge became trafficable. On Satur-
day, January 4th, at 8.50 a.m., Mr. W.
Taylor drove over from Chelmer to
Indooroopilly and back in his Buick car.
The next event was that of the Commis-
sioner of Main Roads and Staff being
driven over on Wednesday, January Bth.
This was followed by the Directors of
the Company and Works Manager driving
over in their cars on Saturday, January
11th. The adjoining photo shows the
procession.
The accompanying photograph taken
from the balcony of the Indooroopilly
Pylon, shows the deck wearing surface
being placed in position. The total
weight of the material is 220 tons, and
constitutes the final contribution to the
total dead load of 960 tons, the whole of
which had to swing upon the cables
before the diagonal braces could be finally
rivetted to the cable clamping plates.


The diagonal bracing of the side trusses consists of lOin. x 3 fin. and 9in. x 3in. channel sections
rivetted to either side of the bottom chord gussets and the outside clamping plates to the cables. These are
strapped at four feet centres by 9in. x fin. batten plates, electrically welded. The diagonal members were
rivetted at the lower ends and allowed freedom at the top until the whole of the deck had been placed in
position completing the dead load sag. The top ends were then rivetted during a temperature range of 70
to 85 degrees Fah.
The bridge fabrication is of an exceptionally rigid type and arrangements have been made for de-
flection tests by the use of four twelve ton steam rollers —the reports of which will not be completed in
time for this publication.
THE CLEANING AND PAINTING OF THE CABLES was a very tedious job, for 25,400 lineal
feet had to be cleaned and the bituminous paint removed by solvent Naphtha. They were then painted
twice with red lead and had two coats of red oxide. All the steel work has been first coated with red lead
and finished with red oxide, except the large plate girders of the Chelmer approach, which have been finish-
ed in cement colour to harmonise with the concrete work.
THE LIGHTING ARRANGEMENTS ARE UNIQUE.
In addition to the lighting of the pylons and the Chelmer approach by means of numerous bracket
lamps, the whole of the river span is illuminated by means of two kilo-watt search lights. One on the top
of each pylon focussed to the centre of the Bridge. This gives a subdued light when driving over, and brings
out the cables and truss members in strong relief.
Special precautions have been taken against erosion around the Chelmer Anchorage by driving steel
sheet piling 14 feet away from the western side of the anchorage and 22 feet from the front to a depth of
22 feet.
At least £ 15,000 of extra capital has been expended on foundations and extra anchorage to
ensure the stability of the structure against all possibility of contingencies over and above what was at first
considered adequate.
Owing to the fact that there are a number of items of expenditure which cannot at this stage be
finalised, the total cost of the undertaking, including resumptions and approaches, cannot be given at pre-
sent.
It can, however, be stated that the cost of the work done on the Bridge itself from anchorage to
anchorage will not exceed the sum of £85,000.
The carrying capacity has been considerably increased above that which at first was contemplated
would meet the requirements of the Government for a bridge outside the city area.
The bridge will meet a long felt want. The route is not only picturesque, but lends itself to com-
fortable and speedy driving, being entirely free front tram stops and traffic congestion. The bridge is
already responsible for aggressive development in the Western Suburbs and will make its presence felt
between Brisbane and Ipswich in a remarkable manner in the near future.


The Foundation of another Fine Construction
J
il
m
¥
THE INDOOROOPILLY TOLL BRIDGE
in which were used 1,675 Tons, or the Equivalent of 40,200 Multi-Wall Paper Bags of
ACE BRAND CEMENT
For many years a bridge, providing quick and easy travel between Chelmer and the Brisbane
City area, has been urgently needed, and now, with the opening of the Indooroopilly Toll
Bridge, foot and road traffic should be particularly well catered for.
Spanning the Brisbane River at a picturesque spot, the bridge will also be a permanent tribute
to the excellent quality and permanency of “ACE” brand Cement. Just as “ACE” brand
Cement is chosen for all important governmental, municipal and commercial works, so it is
also the popular building material about the home. Concrete improvements, such as Paths,
Steps, Fences, Floors, etc., are not difficult to make and are very reasonable in cost consider-
ing their long service, cleanliness and low maintenance cost.
Full particulars regarding any concrete construction work will be gladly supplied on application
WRITE OR CALL FOR FREE BOOKLET “ CEMENT AND HOW TO USE IT.
QUEENSLAND CEMENT AND LIME COMPANY LIMITED
WORKS: DARRA OFFICES: CREEK STREET, BRISBANE


ROBERTS & RUSSELL. LTD.
Printers
lie Qeorge Street, Brisbane.
