

9A-m
IMPORTANT NOTICE.
EMIGRANTS AND SEAMEN who require Very durable and
warm Clothing made from REAL WEST OF ENGLAND IRISH
and SCOTCH TWEEDS. All Wool fast color Blue Serges, &c.,
will save at least 25 per cent, at
CHAS. BAKER & Co.’s STORES
HEAD DEPOT- 271, & 272, HIGH HOLBORN, LONDON.
New Departments now open for Hosiery, Shirts, Hats, Boots, of Superior
Quality at Trade Price.
Price List Post Free. S EE BACK cover.
THE
ADSTR1LI1IHIBRIII:
BEING A VALUABLE
DESCRIPTIVE GUIDE
TO .THOSE ABOUT TO EMIGRATE TO
New South Wales
Queensland
South Australia
Western Austral’a
Tasmania
Victoria
Also a Graphic Description of the Best Line of Steamers by
which to reach the various Colonies.
PRICE TWOPENCE.
PUBLISHED AT 14, FETTER LANE, LONDON, E.C.
1 88 3.


STEAMSHIPS.
TONS.
NOM. H.P.
CAPTAINS.
AUSTRAL
... 5588 ...
1100
... H. Y. Header,
CHIMBORAZO
.... 3847 . ..
..... 550
... J. F. Ruthven.
COTOPAXI
.... 4028 ...
600
... li. Studdert.
CUZCO
.... 3849 ...
550
... J. K. Bidder.
GARONNE
.... 3876 ....
550
,... A. Tillett.
JOHN ELDER
.... 4152 ....
550
... A.J. Coopek.
IBERID
.... 4671 ...
750
LIGURIA
.... 4666 ...,
750
... Gr. N. CONLAN.
LUSITANIA
.... 3825 ...
550
A. Charlton.
ORIENT
.... 5386 ....
1000
W. F. Bewison.
POTOSI
.... 4219
600
... B. Morgan.
SORATA
4014 ....
600
... Gr. F. Dixon,
AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND
ORIENT LINE.
DIRECT SERVICE BETWEEN LONDON AND AUSTRALIA
IN FORTY DAYS.
The magnificent full-powered Steamships belonging to the Orient Steam
Navigation Company, Limited, and the Pacific Steam Navigation Company,
leave London every fortnight for Adelaide. Melbourne and Sydney, and take
Passengers for all ports in Australia, Tasmania and New Zealand, and also for
Naples or Cape Town, according to route.
• ■‘■'V
vessels are specially constructed for long ocean voyages, and are fitted
with every convenience for the comfort of Passengers.
PARES. — First Class, 50 Guineas and upwards; Second Class, 35 Guineas
and upwards; Third Class, closed cabins, with Two Berths, 22 Guineas each ;
Third Class, closed cabins, with Four Berths, 20 Guineas each; Steerage, open
berths for Men only, 16 Guineas each.
Managers —p, GREEN & Co., 13, Fenchurch Avenue, and ANDERSON
ANDERSON & 00., >. Fenchurch Avenue, Loudon, B.C. For Particulars
apply to the latter firm
COLONIAL AGENTS:—
ADELAIDE, Joseph n: ling & Co. ; MELBOURNE, Gibus, Bright & Co.;
8 i UNIY, G. Skelton Yuill


THE
IDSTRIIIIR EIIBRIIT
BEIE& A VALUABLE
DESCRIPTIVE GUIDE
TO THOSE ABOUT TO EMIGRATE TO
New South Wales
Queensland
South Australia
Western Australia
Victoria
Tasmania
Also a Graphic Description of the Best Line of Steamers by
which to 7'each the various Colonies.
GEOBG-B IPOTTIEIR,.
v .*
■X 1” Tt 1 I'M'*
«*■, ! 1" lllL.l. >
PUBLISHED AT 14, FETTER LANE, LONDON, E.C.
1 8 8 3.


QUEENSLAND FOR THE INDUSTRIOUS.
The Queensland Government are now offering Free Passages to
Female Domestic Servants 't ~
Housekeepers, v _ Irom
Dressmakers. ) 17 to 30
And to Farm Labourers and Ploughmen—married and single.
Assisted passages to—Farmers, Carpenters, Blacksmiths, Engineers, Masons, Wheelwrights,
Shipbuilders, Sawyers, Railway Carriage Builders, Miners, Quarrvmen, Road Makers, and the
like.
Applicants have to pay 10s. Cd . or tl each for ship kit, and their fare to reach ship at Plymouth,
Shipboard they are found in good provisions and skilful medical attendance, free of cost. They
are temporarily boarded and lodged in Government Depot on arrival. Library on shipboard.
Single women under care of matron. Privilege of Free Railway Tickets into the Country
fourteen days after arrival. Depots in various parts to facilitate immediate employment. All
are at perfect liberty to engage themselves to employers and make their own bargains for wages.
Appy to the
AGENT-GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND,
1, Westminster Chambers, London, S.W.
EMIGRATION TO
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The New South Wales Government will provide Passages to Sydney (bv first-class Ships) upon
payment of the undermentioned rates, to persons approved by the Agent-General. To consist of
Married Couples not exceeding 35 years, with or without Children, and Single persons not
exceeding 30 years of age.
Rate per each Adult £5, except Single Females, who will be taken at a Kc<lncc<l rate of
Xt cadi. Children of three and under 14 years, £‘i l« s . each. Under three years free.
Farmers, Agricultural, and other Labourers, Vine Dressers, Mechanics, and Female Domestics,
are required. ’
Further information may be obtained from The Emigration Department, New South Wales
Government Offices, 5, Westminster Chambers, London, S.W.
SAUL SAMUEL,
Agent-General for New South Wales.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
M7 h £ Emigration to South Australia is now resumed, and perfectly free passages
will be given to female domestic servants of good character and to children under 12 years of
age, and girls accompanying their parents. J
assiste(i nates lm k ers > Navvies, Agricultural Labourers, and Copper Miners are eligible at the
. _ ; - r- „ r
. J’ 1 , reference to the assisted passages now being granted to persons emigrating to South
Australia it .should be known that such persons not exceeding 45 years of age, who have paid the
assisted rates in England, can, within 30 days of their arrival in South Australia, give notice of
to , pa /' I P the balance of their passage-money within 12 months, such passage-
-200 y i •1. £ fixed A }- 4 1 ? per adldt ' ; lnd thereupon they will receive a land order of the value of
£2O, which is immediately available in the purchase of Crown lands. For example, an approved
emigrant, under 40 years of age, pays £4 for his assisted passage in England, on arrival in the
colony and on paying £ll there, he gets his land order of the value of £2O.
Pamphlets and further particulars on application, personally or by letter.
To the
AGENT-GENERAL AND EMIGRATION AGENT FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
8, Victoria Chambers, Westminster, London, S.W.
February, 1883.


THE AUSTRALIAN EMIGRANT.
INTRODUCTION.
That the intending* emigrant cannot gain too much information
regarding the country in which he has decided to adopt as his
future home, is a fact which no one will deny, and this little work
is published in the hope that its circulation may be of some service
do those who are about to leave the shores of Old England with the
■expectancy that a brighter future may dawn upon them than they can
hope to look for in their mother country. The information which is
herein contained is of a thoroughly reliable nature, and if acted upon,
will in many cases save much trouble, anxiety, and expense.
It is not so much our province here to extol Australia as a field for
■emigrants, as we might then be justly accused of taking a biassed
view of all matters connected with that country; but rather to give
our readers a faithful account of its climate, produce, progress, etc.,
so that they may be the more able to form a satisfactory opinion as to
whether their prospect of success will be greater there than elsewhere,
■and also to give them reliable information as to the best means to
reach any of the colonies, and all other matters which it is absolutely
necessary for the emigrant to know.
We, therefore, begin b}'- giving a description of Australia, which is
■divided into six different colonies, viz : —Hew South Wales, Victoria,
South Australia, Queensland, Tasmania, and Western Australia.
The climate all over the various colonies may be said to be very
healthy, either more or less resembling that of England, as regards
the temperature throughout the year, but having, at all times, a much
clearer and purer atmosphere than England enjoys, in fact the
fogs which so much afflict us in the Old Country, are rarely, if ever
met with there. This, of itself, is a strong recommendation in favour
■of Australia, for, after all, what does it matter to Avhat prosperity a
man may attain if he suffers in health in attaining that prosperity.
The writer has often heard it remarked by men who have spent years
■in Austi’alia, that they did not know what it was to enjoy real good
health until they had been there for some time, so invigorating is the
.atmosphere that the body becomes strengthened, the appetite more
keen, and an unusual enjoyment of even the mest common-place
food takes the place of that lassitude which so many suffered from in.
England, crippling their energies, both mental and physical.
That this is a point which must not be lost sight by the thoughtful
•emigrant will be patent to all, for what can be a greater pleasure to
a family-man than to see his children growing up around him in
perfect health and feeling assured that as they arrive at manhood
they will be able to battle through life with vigourous constitutions,


and with all their faculties in the state which nature intended that
they should possess.
There is no doubt that the terror of a sea voyage deters many people
from leaving England, and rather than run the risk of a voyage to
Australia they are content to remain at home in the greatest misery T
struggling on year by year to gain a livelihood and rearing children
in some degree of respectability, whereas if the same energy which is
displayed at home were displayed in anyone of our Australian colonies
a certain independence would be the result, their children would be
well fed, well educated, and that harassing canker care which
paralyses both the physical and mental energies of men and women
would no longer oppress them.
A sea voyage on board one of the splendid Steamers of the
Orient Line is not the dreadful undertaking which many people
suppose, every possible comfort is obtained by the passengers on
board these magnificent vessels, the sea is robbed of its terrors
and there are many who have left the comfortable quarters on
board the Orient Line of Steamers with a sigh of regret and a feeling
that they have spent on board some of the happiest days of their life.
This is no fiction, for the convenience of every passenger on board is
studied to the utmost, whilst the diet is good, wholesome, and plentiful,,
even to the extent of fresh meat being supplied throughout the voyage-
which is usually made in about 40 days.
The names and tonnage of the vessels forming the Orient Line
will be found on reference to our Advertisements, but we should advise
those who are about to proceed to Australia to place themselves in
direct communication with the Managers whose addresses will be
found in the Advertisement.
It is quite within our province here to warn intending emigrants
against communicating with those agents who pretend to convey
passengers at reduced fares, which, in the long run cost them much
more than by applying to a first-class firm, and it is not only that the
cost is much greater, but great suffering has been undergone by
adopting - this course, to those who are in the habit of perusing the
daily papers, we need say no more, the heartless manner in which
some of the poor creatures who have trusted these unscrupulous men,
is most heartrending, and ought to be a sufficient warning to all.
Those who put themselves in communication with the Orient Line
need have no tear of any such consequences, if they act in accord-
ance with the instructions given and follow the rules laid down for
the management of the vessels, will experience nothing - but courtesy
from one and all connected -with this famous line of steamers.
It is not a question merely of the quality of the hull of a particular
vessel which an Agent may put forward, but of the organization and
appliances on board for securing the health and well being of the
passengers and in that respect the Orient Line is at present without
a rival in the Australian trade. Most of the so-called “ lines ” are
simply a succession of Cargo Steamers chartered from various owners
at the cheapest rates at w r hich they can be got by the firms carrying
on the “ Line,” and only temporarily fitted for the passenger trade.


It is only fair tliat we should mentiont hat there are Shipping
Agents to whom emigrants may apply with perfect confidence, such
■as Messrs. Skvvell & Growthe a, 18, Cockspur Street, London, S.W.
This firm cary on a most extensive business, and will reply to any
inquirer regarding’ any of the fields of emigration, giving all infor-
mation about the fares, dates of sailing, and all the particulars which
is necessary. The firm has long been established, and has been con-
nected with the great lines for many years, which Ought to be a
sufficient guarantee to all who put themselves in communication
with them.
Another firm among others may be mentioned, viz ; —Messi’s.
Wixcott, Cooper & Co., 3, Brabant Court, Philpot Lane, London,
who afford every opportunity to passengers, and intending emigrants will
•do -well to apply to them, whose long experience in Shipping Agency,
and whose extensive business transactions with the leading Lines,
■eminently qualifies them for making a good selection for emigrants,
securing for them every advantage.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
This was the first colony established in Australia, and in January,
1882, contained a population of 758,000. A good idea may be formed
■of the extent of this colony when we state that it has an area
estimated to be nearly three times the size of Great Britain and
Ireland combined. Its chief production for exportation are tallow',
wool, and various kinds of minerals. Since the year 1861, the popu-
lation has increased over 450,000, and this population consists of a
thoroughly energetic, contented, and thriving people.
The revenue of New South Wales amounted in 1881 to nearly
£5,000,000, and the total value of the trade to over £25,050,775 ; and
some idea of the energy which has been displayed in this colony may
be conceived when we state that 2,092 miles of railway have been laid,
and likewise 21,112 miles of telegraph have been constructed.
Shipping is carried on to a considerable extent, and the splendid
harbours, which are very numerous, offer safe access to vessels of any
size. On the shores of Port Jackson, where Sydney has been built,
especially and likewise that of Newcastle, at the mouth of the Hudson
river is also well known like that of its namesake on the Tyne by
reason of its trade in coal. Shipbuilding is carried on to a considerable
extent at the mouth of some of the rivers, and this industry is spread-
ing rapidly.
New South Wales is much indebted to its climate for its progress
which is peculiarly suited for the production of fine w'ool, which
has hitherto contributed largely to its manufacture, and which has
gradually become softer, whilst the length has increased, although it
has somewhat diminished in density, the w'eight remaining much the
same. Vegetable products are cultivated to a great extent, wdieat,
maize, flour, maisena, arrowroot, and also wine, sugar, oranges, and
preserved fruits of various kinds. The climate is such that there


are few localities where it is found necessary that live stock should
be housed, or indeed, any special arrangements are required for their
support during- the winter months.
Until some years ago, the settlers in New South Wales found some
difficulty in transporting their produce, but this has been greatly
overcome by the rapidity with which the railways have sprung up
over those districts, which are most suitable for the growth of cereals,
giving an additional impulse to the cultivation of the soil. About 20
bushels of wheat to the acre, may be said to be the averag-e pro-
duction, Avhilst that of maize may be taken as 30 bushels, with about
62 to 66 lbs. per bushel may be taken as the average weight.
It is expected that the manufacture of wine will be one of the great
and profitable industries in a few years, as there is scarcely a
district in which the grape vine does not flourish, and the cultivation
of the orange is carried on to a considerable extent; the exports for
this fruit alone amounting to no less than £50,000 per annum. Silk
is also being-, to a small extent, as yet introduced as one of the in-
dustries, many varieties of the silkworm having been acclimatised, this
also is likely to become a very considerable feature in the products of
£sew South IV ales, the climate being also favourable for its future
development.
Mining is carried on to a considerable extent, the area of the coal
strata being estimated at 23,950 square miles ; the principal coal
beds existing along- the coast to the north and south of Sydney, and
in the vicinity of Newcastle. In some parts the coal lies near the
surface, the greatest depth to which any of the shafts have been sunk
have not exceeded 500 feet. The estimated value of the gold obtained
up till three or four years ago amounted to about £32,500,000 and
with few exceptions, the quartz veins have not been worked to any
gieat depth. r lhe auriferous resources of the colony have hardly
been touched as yet, there is doubtless an immense field for this in-
austry, as the estimated area of gold having- formations is 35,000<
square miles.
It was not till 1871 that tin whs worked to any appreciable-
extent, but like all other industries it has progressed steadily,
extensive deposits of ore have been found in the northern part of this
colony, and the export value of this mineral in 1881 was estimated to
approach £600,000, and this large sum will no doubt be found much
gieater at the present time, as it is found to be very profitable. The
export of copper also amounted in 1881 to about £300,000, numerous
quar z mills for the extraction of gold, and smelting and blast furnaces,
are at work.
The manufactures of all kinds are rapidly on the increase, and as
budding progresses, so no doubt will manufactures still further
increase, there is a steady demand for labour, and as this demand is
supplied, so will all kinds of industries rapidly develop,
0t ew ® outh Wales* Sydney, has a population of
and is rapidly increasing, it is excellently situated, and the
development of trade has been here most rapid, and, indeed, has in-
creased in a greater ratio than that of the population. The revenue of


this colony is about £6,000,000 and the estimate of the taxation is about
£2 ss. per head, the principal part of the revenue being derived from
the Custom’s interest on land, salt, rent, railways, and postal receipts.
Land may be purchased at or under 20s. an acre, and is generally
sold by auction, the sum mentioned being the upset price, if, however, it
should not be sold, it can bo bought afterwards at the upset price.
Again, land may be purchased by what is called “ conditional sale,”
enabling anyone to make a written application to purchase not less
than 40 acres, nor more than 340 ; a deposit of ss. per acre must be
sent with the application ; of course the ground selected must be
within some distance from a town or suburbs, say from two to ten
miles, according to the number of the inhabitants of the nearest
village or town; at the end of three years and three months the
purchaser may pay off the whole sum due upon the ground, or he
can defer the payment as long as he choses by paying 5 per cent,
upon the money due. He is bound to make certain improvements
upon the land within a given time, that is to say he cannot purchase
the land and allow it to remain totally uncultivated. Leases of pasture
land may be had in the settled districts at £2 per square mile. The
land under cultivation is about 636,000 acres, about 20,000 acres
being devoted to gardens and orchards.
Clothing and house rent is somewhat dearer than in England , but
great facilities are offered to steady men for acquiring houses of their
own; single men can board respectably at a pound a week. The
Agent-General of Hew South Wales, 3, Westminster Chambers,
London, S.W., will give all information regarding assisted passages.
The following are the rates of wages prevailing in Sydney and
the cost of provisions :
The average rate of wages for carpenters, smiths, wheelwrights,
bricklayers, and masons was from 9s. to to 11s. per diem without
board or lodging, and from £BO to £126 per annum with board
and lodging. Farm labourers and shepherds received from £35 to
£45 per annum with board and lodging. Female domestic servants from
£2O to £3O, and good cooks from £35 to £52, with board and lodging.
PRICES OF PROYISIOHS.
Bacon, 7d. to lOd.
Bread, 3d. to 4d. (2 lb. loaf).
Butter, fresh, 9d. lb.
Butter, salt, 6d. lb.
Candles, sd. to 6d. lb.
Cheese, Is. to Is. 9d. lb.
Cheese, colonial, sd. to lOd. lb.
Coffee, Is. 4d. to Is. 6d. lb.
Eggs, Is. 6d. doz.
Flour, Ist, £1 ss. per 100 lb.
Flour, 2nd, 14s. per 100 lb.
Milk, 4d. to 6d. quart.
Beef, fresh, 4d. to 7d. lb.
Beef, salt, 3d. to 4|d. lb.
Pork, sd. to Bd. lb.
Veal, 6d. to Bd. lb.
Sugar, to 4|d. lb.
Tea, Is. 4d. to 2s. 6d. lb.
Tobacco, Is. 6d. to 4s. 6d. lb.
Honey, 6d. lb.
Soap, £1 6s. cwt.
Apples, 6d. to Is. doz.
Strawberries, 6d. to Is. quart.
Turnips, 2s. to 3s. dozen bunches.
Onions, 2d. lb.
Parsnips, 2s. to 3s. doz. bunches.
French beans, Is. to Is. 6d. peck.
Coal, £1 to £1 ss. ton.
Wood, 16s. ton.
Pineapples, 12s. to 15s. doz.
Bananas, 6d. to Is. doz.
Oranges, Is. to Is. 6d. doz.
Cabbages, 2s. 6d. to ss. doz.
Peas, 2s. to 2s. 6d. peck.


QUEENSLAND.
Queensland contains an area of 700,000 square miles, and a popula-
tion of about 300,000, and here is a splendid field for the capitalist, and
also a field for the poorer labourer, who, if steady and willing to
work hard, making himself useful, may soon place himself in a posi-
tion of comfort, with a bright prospect before him, indeed every in-
ducement to both is offered.
Queensland is rapidly advancing, cotton, corn, and maize, are now
very profitably grown, and other tropical and semi-tropical produce,
whilst its pastoral capabilities are admirably adapted for the rearing
of cattle, as also is sheep on the more elevated parts of the colony.
Recent discoveries have proved that the mineral resources of this
colony are very great, and they will no doubt be fully developed in
course of time, a large portion of the country as yet being unexplored.
The Palmer gold field is at present the great attraction, and of course, a
large number of the population has been attracted there.
The climate in Queensland is somewhat different from some of the
other colonies, the heat in summer being great, although the evenings
are cool comparatively, the colony does not suffer from the hot
winds which for two months of the year is felt in the neighbouring
colonies, although the heat at anytime is much more endurable than the
cold of Canada or the United States.
It is to be borne well in mind, however, that the climate of a great
part of this colony is tropical or sub-tropical and is not suited for
white labour. Emigrants thinking of going to Queensland ought
therefore to inform themselves carefully as to the climate and condi-
tions of the particular part of that colony in which they have been
recommended to settle.
The emigrant will find that in Queensland the laws which govern
the colony are much the same as in the Mother Country; life and
property are equally as safe, whilst similar institutions as those which
exist in England are plentiful; free hospitals and benevolent institu-
tions of various kinds are well supported, also friendly and building
societies. Newspapers are plentiful, the people being great sup-
porters of the press, also magazines of various kinds are liberally
patronised, and indeed a high state of civilisation exists in Queensland.
Every man who is permanently settled in the colony has a vote, the
Government consisting of an Upper and a Lower House, and all reli-
gious denominations are placed upon the same footing, the revenue
°f the colony amounting to £1,150,000. Churches of all denominations
arc fairly represented here, and are well supported, Avhilst a system of
free education lias been adopted, every child may obtain a g’ood educa-
tion, and higher schools for those who have a desire for a higher class of
instruction, the higher class schools being entirely assisted by the
State, whilst free libraries, mechanics institutes, and other institutions
of a like kind are plentiful.
The railways, of which there are some 800 miles laid, are the property
v ei ?“ ent > &nd their object is to open up the country, and
afford all facilities to the settler for sending his goods to the market;


a few years will increase the extent of ground covered by the railway
in an appreciable degree.
Agriculture has been up to the present time mainly confined to
the East Coast and Darling Downs ; corn, cotton, and maize forming
the principal excellent crops, which have been obtained, and are
found to be profitable. Cereals, however, have not been cultivated
to any great extent. The vine and fruit trees, such as those in
southern Europe, have been successfully introduced.
Wheat-growing laud maybe had at 15s. an acre, payable at the rate
of Is. 6d. per acre per annum. Cotton and maize being largely cul-
tivated by the smaller farmers on account of their requiring less
capital and less skill to produce. Silk is also being introduced, as
the climate is peculiarly adapted for the rearing of the silkworm;
indeed, it is considered to vie with Italy in this respect.
Agricultural land may be had here very cheap, and the mode of
purchase is also very simple, in all cases, purchases extend over from
five to ten years. Twenty-five miles of run can be leased from the
Government for twenty-one years at ss. per square mile for the first seven
years, 10s. for the second, and 15s. for the third seven years. A lessee
is entitled to purchase 2,560 acres in one entire block at 10s. per acre.
Various companies have been formed for Avorking the various gold
districts Avhich abound, but a miner here by paying a license of 10s.
per annum, this is a miner’s right, entitles him to hold an alluvial
claim of 50 feet by 50 feet. Copper mining is also being fast de-
veloped in the colony, and is looked forward as likely to "be one of
the main features of industry in the colony, a miner’s wages averages
about three guineas per Aveek. Diamonds, sapphires, and other precious
stones have been found in Queensland.
Coalmining has not yet reached apy importance in the colony,
although it is estimated that the coal area measures about 24,000 square
miles, and the coal measures may be purchased from the Government
in not less quantities than 320 acres, or on purchase for 30s. an acre,
or leases will be granted of the same for ninty-nine years at the
yearly rent of ss. per annum. Information regarding assisted passages
can be obtained from the Agent-General for Queensland, 6, West-
minster Chambers, London.
The following may be taken as the average rate of wages, provisions,
and home rent in Queensland :
PRICES OF PROVISIONS.
Beef, 3d. lb.
Sugar, 3d. lb.
Tea, 2s. 6d. lb.
Mutton, 2d. to 3d. lb.
Salt Beef, 2d. lb.
Flour, 15s. cAA't.
Potatoes, 6s. CAvt.
Butter, Is. 4d. lb.
Bacon, Is. 2d. to 2s. lb.
Soap, sd. lb.
House Rent. —Workmen’s cottages can be rented in and around the
towns at from Bs. to 12s. per Aveek.
Farm Labourers, married, £45 to £SO per annum Avith rations,
ditto, single, £35 to £4O. Bookbinders, 10s. per day without
rations. Bakers, £SO to £6O per annum Avith rations. Bricklayers,
and Blacksmiths, 10s. to 12s. per day Avithout rations (in demand).


Carpenters and Joiners, 12s. to 14s. (in demand). Compositors,.
Is. 6d. per 1,000. Plasterers, Painters, and Glaziers, 10s. to 12s. per
day without rations. Shoemakers, 9s. to 10s. (in demand). Shepherds,.
£45 to £SO per annum with rations (in demand). Tailors, 9s. to 10s.
per day without rations (in demand). Wheelwrights, 10s. to 12s. per-
day without rations (in demand). Cooks, £3O to £SO per annum with*
rations (in demand). Housemaids, £25 to £3O per annum with
rations (in demand). Needlewomen, 2s. 6d. to 4s. per day, without
rations (in demand). Washerwomen, 3s. to 3s. 6d. per day, without
rations (in demand). Butchers, £1 10s. to £1 15s. per week with ra-
tions. Engineers, £l4 to £ls per month. General Servants, 12s.
to 15s. per week with rations.
TASMANIA
Tasmania may be said to be the most healthy and salubrious of all the
colonies. The air is so pure and the temperature so general that the
death rate is very low and will bear favourable comparison with that
of any island in the known world. The death rate of children here
being remarkably small, only sin 1,000. Here nearly all the native
shrubs and trees are evergreen and many of the shrubs bear beautiful
flowers. Many scenes here also will delight the emigrant s eye, the
snug comfortable farm houses, and neat cottages, the large mansions
surrounded by highly cultivated fields, reminds him of the home he
has left behind.
Covering nearly 17,000,000 acres this colony offers great inducement
to the settler, over four millions of acres having been already sold to
settlers. The population numbers about 120,000, the aboriginal popu-
lation being entirely extinct. The number of houses built is about
23,000, and there are 316 churches and chapels throughout the colony
consisting of all denominations of the Christian church.
The capital of Tasmania is Hobart where is also the seat of Govern-
ment, it has a population of about 22,000, and is situated on the River
Derwent which is navigable ; next in importance to Hobart is that of
Launceston, which is situated on the south side of the island, on the
River Lomar, it has a population of about 13,000. There are nu-
merous villages and seaports in Tasmania, though of minor import-
ance, but which are rapidly extending.
Communication by telegraph has been in progress from Hobart to
nearly all the villages of any importance; a cable has also been laid
which enables the inhabitants to communicate with Victoria, and
hence by land to the other colonies.
A regular system of postage exists in Tasmania, the charge being
for letters one penny in the towns and twopence for country letters
throughout the colonies. Letters to England cost for postage
sixpence.
There is also a weekly mail service from England, via Melbourne.
A line of railway has been laid connecting the town of Hobart
with that of Launceston, the distance being 133 miles, beside some 45


miles of railway running through a rich agricultural country to a.
place called Doleraine.
The members of Parliament which consists of a Lower and Upper
House, having respectively sixteen, and thirty-two members are elected
by the holders of property and occupiers.
The lowest price for Crown lands in Tasmania is £1 an acre, and
for pastoral lands not less than ss. per acre, but credit may be had if
the purchase is beyond fifteen pounds. Licenses is granted to dig for
gold and to cut timber on Crown lands.
Tasmania offers an excellent field for capitalists, agricultural
labourers, and such like, shopkeepers, dressmakers, &c., will probably
meet with disappointment. The cost of provisions vary but very
slightly from that of New South Wales which we have already quoted.
The rates of wages in Tasmania are as follow :
Carpenters, Bs. to 9s. per day. Smiths, Bs. to 10s. per day. Household
Servants, £2O to £3O per annum. Plumbers, 6s. 6d. to 9s. per day.
Farm labourers, 10s. to 15s. per week, with a cottage, firing and rations.
Free or assisted passages are not granted to Tasmania, but persons-
paying their own passages are entitled, under certain conditions, to-
grants of land varying from ten to thirty acres, according to the age-
of the emigrant and the amount paid for his passage. Land-order
warrants and general information about the Colony can be obtained
on application to the Emigrant and Colonist Aid Corporation, 25,
Queen Anne’s-gate, Westminster, London, S.W., who are the Agents
for the Tasmanian Government in this country.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
We now shall look at South Australia which fifty years ago was in
its Earliest infancy, and the results which have acrued since the-
formation of this colony are truly marvellous, the annual value of its-
trade having risen to over £11,000,000 with a population, not including
the native tribes, of nearly 280,000 and showing the last ten years the-
increase of 94,000, or an annual increase to the population during the-
last ten years of nearly 10,000.
In 1880 the births in South Australia were 10,262, whilst the deaths-
were only 3,912, so that if this increase goes on a great and mighty
future may be confidently predicted for this enterprising colony. It
is advantageously situated, has many excellent harbours which give it
greater facilities for its shipping than some of the other colonies.
The area of land sold and selected up to December 30th, 1881, was
9,300,000 acres proximately, this being exclusive of selections not
then “ cancelled.” This gives a little over 3,359 acres per head of the
population as the average quantity of land alienated from the Crown.
In the northern territory the alienated land amounts to 270,000 acres.
In South Australia proper, the total quantity of land cropped with
wheat alone was 1,733,542 acres, and the total yield of wheat
amounted to 8,606,510 bushels —a very low ratio, occasioned by an
exceptionally bad season. In addition to this nearly a million of
acres was under other crops than wheat.


The quantity of Flour exported in 1880 was 78,000 tons, whilst in
1871 there was but 46,842 tons, and all bread stuffs have had an
approximate increase. And it will easily be conceived with what rapid
strides this colony must have progressed when we consider the
short space of time in which those marvellous results have been
attained, and the indomitable energy which must have been displayed
by the settlers‘there to obtain such results.
The value of bacon and hams exported during 1880 was £l6O, as
compared with £64 in 1871; bread and biscuits £2,403, as compared
with £357 ; butter £3,700, as compared with £1,204; jam £5,459,
as compared with £3,727 ; fruit £7,616, as compared with £2,292 ;
hay £3,826, as compared with £BB7 ; and gum £5,003, as compared
with £591.
The wines produced by this colony are of a very high class, and it
is confidently expected that when greater experience has been gained
in the vineyard they will be second to none. They are considerably
used in the colony.
The number of factories in the colony amounts in all to some 791.
The number of hands employed being 10,058, out of that total 1,109
being females. The exports haying risen from £5,000 in 1838 to
£5,574,505 in 1880.
It is known that gold, silver, copper, iron, 'and lead abound in this
colony, and a few years, it is expected, will develop this trade to a large
extent. A bonus of £lO,OOO has been offered for the discovery of a
good coal field.
The Government of South Australia grant, what is known as the
“assisted passage ” system in operation, under which residents in
the colony and persons just arrived, can obtain, on application at the
Crown Lands and Immigration Office in Adelaide, assisted passages
for their relations and friends, if eligible, by contributing a small
proportion of the passage-money. The advantage of the system is
that persons nominated have, on their arrival in the colony, someone
to take an interest in them, and, consequently, they do not feel the
strangeness and difficulty in finding employment that new-comers
sometimes complain of. At the present time agricultural and pick-
and-shovel labourers, artisans, , navvies, and domestic servants are
eligible for assisted passages at the following rates : —males or females,
under 12 years of age, £3 ; males or females, over 12 years and under
40 years, £4 ; over 40 and under 50 years, £8 ; with infants under one
year, land order system, free.
Of course, Agriculturalists, Farmers, and Labourers are mostly in
demand here, but Artisans and Mechanics will find employment ready'
at remunerative rates. The rates of wages and provisions are as
follows :
Bakers, ss. 6d. per day with Board and Lodging. Blacksmiths,
■Bs. 6d. per day. Boundary riders, married, with double rations, £52
per annum. Bricklayers, 9s. to 10s. per day'. Brickmakers, per 1,000,
12s. Bullock-drivers, £52 per annum with Rations. Bush car-
penters, £52. Butchers, ss. per day', with Board and Lodging.
Cabinet makei’s, 9s. 6d. per day. Carpenters and Carriage-builders,


to 10s. per day. Coopers, 9s. Farm servants, man and wife,
£SB per annum with Rations; single men, £4B. Jewellers, 10s. per
day. Labourers, Os. bd. to Bs. Masons, 9s. 6d. Miners, 9s. Painters
and Glaziers, 9s. to 10s. Plasterers, 10s. Shoemakers, 7s. 6d. Tailors,
per hour, Is. Tanners, Bs. 6d. per day. Upholsterers, 10s. Wheel-
wrights, Bs. 6d. to 9s. Barmaids, 15s. to £1 per week, with Board
and Lodging. Barmen, 15s. to 28s. per week. Compositors, £2 15s.
to £3 per week ; News Is. Id. per 1,000. Cooks, female, 16s. per
week, with Board and Lodgings ; male, 20s. to 30s. General servants,
female, £26 per annum, Avith Board and Lodgings; male, £46. Milk-
men, 18s. 6d. per AA'eek, Avith Board and Lodgings. Wool-pressers, 335.
PRICES OF PROVISIONS.
Bread, 3d. to 4d. (2 lb. loaf).
Flour, Ihl. to 2d. lb.
Bacon, 6d. to lOd. lb.
Butter, fresh, Bd. to 9d. lb.
Cheese, 4d. to Is. 4d. lb.
Pork, sd. to Bd. lb.
Ducks, 4s. to ss. pair
Eggs, Bd. to 9d. doz.,
Foavls, 2s. 6d. to 4s. pair
Geese, 4s. to ss. each
Hams, lOd. to Is. Id. lb.
Turkeys, 3s. to 6s. each
Beef, 2|d. to 7d. lb.
Beef, salt, 2d. to 4d.
Mutton, fore-quarter, 2|d. to 3d lb.
House-rent is dearer than in the
down from £2 to £2 10s. per month
Clothing is not much, if anything,
Mutton, hind-quarters, 3hi. to 4d. lb*
Coffee, Is. 6d. lb.
Rice, 3d. to sd. Ib.
Salt. Id. lb.
Soap, 3d. to 4d. lb.
Sugar, 3d. to 4|d. lb.
Tea, Is. 3d. lb. to 2s. 6d. lb.
Tobacco, 4s. to 4s. 6d. lb.
Honey, 41. to 6d. lb.
Lard, Bd. to 9d. 11).
Colonial jam, 6d. to Bd. lb.
Raisins, 7d. lb.
Lambs, forequarter, 2s. to 2s. 6d. Ib,
„ hind-quarters, 2s. 6d. to 3s.
Sausages, 4d. to 6d. lb.
mother-country, and can be set
, according to size and character,
dearer than at home.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Formerly termed the Swan River Settlement includes all that
portion of Australia situated to the westward of 129° of east longitude,
its length and breath is from north to south 1,280 miles, and 800 miles
from east to AA'est ; it embraces an area of 975,824 square miles.
The colony was first settled in 1829, and it will be seen that, not-
withstanding the many adA r antages which it affords to settlers, it has
not progressed so rapidly as its neighbours, although its crops will vie
Avith any of them. The capital of the colony is Perth, which has a
population of some 7,000. It has some eighty miles of railway opened
U P- . .
The population of this colony numbers about 30,000. The climate
is exceedingly healthy, although vary considerably from its northern
to its southern! extremity; this northern portion of the colony being at
times very hot, but is tempered with cool and refreshing Avinds.
There is steam communication with England every three or four
weeks, also ample steam communication betAveen this and the other
Australian parts. The colony is diAdded into 18 counties. Here have


Ibeen established homes for the poor, Workmen’s Clubs, Hospitals for
the sick, and other charitable institutions.
The exports of the island are wool, flour, grain, finest preserves,
hops, horses, sperm oil, vegetables, tanning work, and timber.
The island contains about 15| million acres of land, and the islands
connected with it (55 in number) contain millions, nearly one-third
of which has been either sold or granted to settlers, leaving the Crown
lands about 12,000,000 acres, a portion of which is leased for sheep’s
runs and other purposes.
This colony may be said to be in a high state of civilization, it
possesses an efficient staff of police, has its municipal councils, its main
roads are kept in excellent order, railways are making rapid progress,
and a spirit of enterprise seems to pervade the settlers here which
speaks well for the future prosperity of the colony. The lowest upset
mice of Crown land fit for agriculture is fixed by Act of Parliament
at £1 an acre, and the lowest upset price of pastoral lands at a sum
equal to 12 years’rental, but not less than ss. an acre. Emigrants
who have been selected as eligible persons by the appointed Agents in
England, are allowed plots of land on very advantageous terms,
inasmuch as if he pays the full cost of his family’s passage out, a
warrant, which will entitle the holder to receive from the Immigration
Agent in Tasmania an order for Crown land to the value of £lB for
■each member of the family above 15 years of age, and £9 for each
niember above 12 months and under 15 years old; and these land-
orders will be received by the Government as payment for any Crown
lands that the emigrant may buy after his arrival. The Act also
empowers the Immigration Board to permit any persons from Europe
to India, who has paid his own and family’s passage-money, to demand,
within a year after his arrival in the colony, a certificate to select 30
acres of land for himself, 20 for his wife (providing he has one), and
10 for each child.
The rates of wages are : —labourers, from £lB to £5O per annum ;
, carpenters, 7s. to 10s. per day; masous, 75.; printers, 6s. to Bs. ; boat-
builders, Bs. to 10s.; brewers, 6s. to Bs.; coach-builders, 7s. to 10s.;
navvies, 75.; and painters, 7s. to 10s. Tailors and shoemakers are
■paid by the piece.
The average prices of provisions are :
Wheaten flour, £1 15s. bag 200 lb.
Wheat, 6s. 6d. imperial bushel.
Wheaten bread, 2d. lb.
Horned cattle, 3d. lb.
Swine, 6d. lb.
Horses, £5 to £25 each.
Sheep, 13s. each.
Goats, £1 each.
Milk, 2s. gallon.
Butter, fresh, 2s. lb.
Butter, salt, Is. Bd. lb,
Cheese, Is. 6d. lb.
Beef, 6d. lb.
Mutton. sd. lb.
Pork, lOd. lb.
Bice, 3d. lb.
Coffee. Is. 6d. lb.
Tea, 2s. 11).
Sugar, 6d. lb.
Tobacco, 4s. lb.
The class of persons mostly wanted in this colony are Agricultural
labourers, Shepherds, Woodcutters, Millers, Gardeners, Farriers,
Teamsters, Ploughmen, and Female Domestic Servants.


VICTORIA.
This colony is smaller than any of the other colonies of Australia,
:and it originally formed part of New South Wales hut was separated
in 1851 when gold was first worked to any extent.
The area of this colony is somewhat less than that of Great Britain
;and Wales, its population numbers some 859,000. Since 1875 there
has been gold raised to the extent of nearly .£200,000,000, and to this
has Victoria been indebted for its rapid rise, which has placed it
-amongst the most important in point of wealth, population, and
commerce.
The climate is excellent, for although in summer the winds are at
times dry and hot the evenings are cool and pleasant, indeed there is
little to complain of in point of temperature throughout the year,
being much more healthy and invigorating than that of England.
At the end of 1881 there were 2000 miles of railway laid and more
were being constructed, the cost of the whole being nearly £20,000,000,
. and the construction of new lines is rapidly progressing. This will
give the reader some idea of the wealth and enterprise of
this important colony. The whole of the railways are in the possession
•and are worked by the Colonial Government.
The principal cereals cultivated are wheat and oats, there being in
1881 nearly 1,000,000 acres under wheat and 144,000 under oats, the
wheat raised in Victoria is celebrated for its superior quality.
There are 33,247 factory hands employed in 2,339 factories of all
kinds, of which 877 employ steam power, whilst the capital invested is
• computed to be something like £7,000,000.
The land in Victoria is obtained at £i per acre, which may be paid*
by instalments, or if bought by auction at or under the upset price of
£1 per acre must be paid for in cash. A license also may be obtained
for land not exceeding 320 acres before it has been surveyed, and
obtain occupation for three years at a rental of 2s. per acre. The
occupier must fence the land, reside upon it for two and a half
years, and cultivate one out of every ten acres of the land, and at the
end of that time has the option of purchasing at 14s. an acre.
Should land which has been put up by auction for sale at the
upset price of £1 per aci'e not be sold, it can be bought at the
highest price bid for it. All lands near the villages or towns must
be sold by auction.
Crown lands, to an extent not exceeding 200,000 acres a year, are
. also disposed of at auction at an upset price of not less than 20s. an
acre. Lands exposed to auction and not sold, may afterwards be
purchased at the upset price, or at the highest price bid at the sale.
All town and village lands must be sold at auction. Leases of Crown
lands for 21 years, at a rent of not less than £5 a year, and for
quantities not exceeding three acres, may be obtained for the sites of
inns, stores, smithies, and other similar buildings, in thinly-people
districts ; also for bathing-places, bridges, ferries, and other purposes
■ of public utility.
Miner’s rights are obtainable at the rate of ss. a year which entitle


them to take for mining purposes and for residence so much of the-
Crown lands as may be allowed by local mining board of the district
within which such Crown lands are situated.
Clothing and house-rent are very high in and around Melbourne,
the capital of Victoria, but provisions on the other hand will be found
very low as the following list will prove.
The wages and prices of provisions, &c., in Victoria, are as follows : —•
Farm Labourers, 20s. to 255. per week, with rations. Ploughmen,
20s. to 255. Reapers, 12s. to 15s. per acre. Mowers, 3s. to ss.
Shepherds, £35 to £52 per annum. Stock-keepers, £6O to £BO.
Married Couples, £6O to £BO. Gardeners, 20s. to 40s. per week, with
rations. Grooms, 17s. 6d, to 255. Female Domestic Servants, £2O
to £6O.
Masons, Carpenters, Blacksmiths, Tailors, Shoemakers, and all
included in the Mechanic and Artisan classes, get from 10s. to 15s. per
diem without rations.
Board and Lodgings for single working men can be obtained at
from 15s. to 225. per week.
Beef, 2|d. to 7d. lb.
Mutton, 2|d. to 3d. lb.
Pork, sd. to Bd. 11).
Bacon, 6d. to lOd. lb.
Butter, Bd. to 9d. lb.
Flour, Hd. to 2|d. lb.
Bread, 3d. to 4d. (2 lb. loaf).
Fowls, 2s. 6d. to 4s. pair.
PRICES OF PROVISIONS.
Ducks, 4s. to ss. pair.
Geese, 4s. to ss. each.
Eggs, Bd. to 9d. per doz
Coffee, Is. 6d. lb.
Tea, Is. 3d. to 2s. 6d. lb.
Sugar, 3d. to 4|d. lb.
Potatoes, ss. to 12s. per cwt.
“I WOULD WOT GO*A VOYAGE WITHOUT IT.”
The Great Remedy for Sea Sickness, Headache, Biliousness, and Fevers.-
Drs. Trout, Morgan, Turley, Gibbon, Sparks, Dowsing, Stevens, and many other Medical Men
have given unqualified testimony to the importance of the discovery and the great worth of
LAMPLQUGH’S PYRETIC SALINE
As possessing most valuable elements calculated to restore and maintain Health with
perfect vigour of Body and Mind.
It is Effervescing and Tasteless, forming a most Invigorating, Vitalising, and Refreshing Beverage,
Gives instant relief in Headache, Sea or Billons Sickness, Constipation, Indigestion
Lassitude, Heartburn, and Feverish Colds ; prevents and quickly cures the worst form of
Typhus, Scarlet, and other Fevers, Smallpox, Measles, and Eruptive or Skin
Complaints, and various other altered conditions of the blood.
Mr. D. Harris writes :—“ Three years ago I crossed the Atlantic, and during that and other
voyages I found Pyretic Saline the only thing that had any good effect in sea sickness. My saloon
berth was often visited by applicants for supplies from my few bottles, and I became quite-
popular in consequence.”
“ A passenger to Lima complained to me of nausea. I offered a dose of Pyretic Saline which
he accepted. I lent him the bottle. He now came to tell mo I had made him a different man.”
—From “ To Jamaica and Back,” by Sir Sibbald W. Scott, Bart.
A sufferer from sea sickness writes :—“ After using Pyretic Saline, the effect was wonder-
ful ;my appetite returned, and I again felt myself. I would not go a voyage without it."
Dr. Turley. —“ I found it act as a specific in my experience and family in the worst form of
Scarlet Fever, no other medicine being required.”
CAUTION. —Beware of Spurious Salines and Effervescing Salts containing injurious elements.
In Patent Glass Stoppered Bottles, 2s. Gd., is. 6 d., 11s., and 21s. each.
To be obtained of any Chemist or Patent Medicine Dealer, and of
H. LAMor OTJGH, 113, Holborn. London. F. O.


EMIGRANTS AND COLONIALS.
<3-IR, IB .A, T CAUTION
Should be observed before securing Passage, and those who are
intending to leave for the Colonies should make application to
SEWELL 8c OROWTHER,
WEST END PASSENGER AND
EMIGRATION OFFICES,
18, COCKSPUR STREET,
CHARING CROSS,
LONDON, S.W.,
Who have for many years acted as Passengers’ Agents, and in
no case have they failed to secure the accommodation required at
the lowest rates combined with comfort and personal attention
to those who apply to them.
SAILERS AND STEAMERS WEEKLY.
BAGGAGE RECEIVED, COLLECTED, SHIPPED AND INSURED.
Pl!«M< K RECEIVED FOR DISPOSAL, AMI ORDERS. «V<‘. EXECUTED.
AGENTS IN ALL PARTS OF COLONIES.
APPLY FOR MONTHLY SHIPPING LIST.
AGENTS TOE
Allan’s, American, Anchor, Dominion, Guion, and other Lines
to America, Canada, Australia, Cape, India, &c.
SPECIAL APPOINTED AGENTS TO QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT FOR PASSENGERS.
ALL INFORMATION AND AGENCY GRATIS.


CHAS. BAKER i Crs S
for CLOTHING- at TRADE PRICE.
TWEED SUITS. OVERCOATS. LAD ES JACKETS FROC;< COATS . MORNING COAT
Ready Made. Ready Made, SUITS.
18/11, 24/6, 29/6, 89/6 29/6, 69/6, 49/0. »/U. 20/6, 29/6, 69 '6
To Order. 24/6,29/6,39/6, LADIES’ U LSTERS To Order, 'Vo Order,
39/0, 44/6, 49/6. Also to Order. At same Prices. 39/6, 49/6, 09/6. 42/6, 47/6,04/6.
COUNTRY
XV /''V'N Tor > PARCELS
not approved I a/L
/\ |lm JET? 4 V /j '/ / are sent Carriage
are exchanged, rvy / d I ’ |a\ Tt <■/ / till I Util if i m
/ A ’S ,<''\=Jw ri f n/i IrL « Paid to any
or the money / A -|S I.} M(; I I 1/ JI I fa 'tt
I f 4■ / n I I'TfuJIL./' V 1 I ItA 3 Station in
returned, | I .Iff /If • ! T/~! 'ill \I I s
I 'r Jxi3 ( v ' I I 3 T I England,
whichever the WlLlfW L-- , IffTm \\LLl_dJ U
r'rr*N. lis |( / I V/Jr ’ 0 I i 1 (A fl| ( M 1 Ireland, or
Customer mvK? a (/ I(J If I A ll 1 jf* \1 |
I li/U J J I (I I 111 1 ll* ll I m Scotland.
prefers Vk. lj ,1 I /.J I VJ L?J* tb» .
1 rfn I I ri I- n hosiery,
COMPLETE \| | \1 TflT d j Id ’\J|e )rf JJf / AjAm SHIRTS, HATS,
PRICE LISTS &c; are now
with self- BOY’S BOY’S BOY’S MAN-0’- BOY’S BOY’S supplied
measurement KILT SULTAN n c v A F p R E WAR NORFOLK OVER- at
Forms, &c., SUIT. SUIT. COAT. SUIT. SUIT, COATS. civil
5/1 6/11, 2/11, 3/11, 6/11, 8/11, 9/11, 12/11, 8/11, 10/9, 4/11, 6/11 SFRVICF
POST FREE. 8/11,10/9, 4/11,6/11, 10/9, 18/11, 12/11, 8,11, 10 0.
12/11. 8/11, 12/11. 12/11, 16/11. Complete. 14/11, 16/11. 14/11, 19/11 STORE PRICES
CHAS. BAKER Si Co., w £„ SJEST
CHAS. BAKER A Co. HAVE NO OTHER SI'PITV STORES.
