

J2 7* <f Civi J AflCt-Sbyi
* ■_ >'
",
' ' ‘
t
. / •
■9* '
fa
* . i
.*\


{The (Shoot’s %tmons
We are continually finding new occasion to increase our
admiration of Mr. Robertson, who presents himself to our
mind as the noblest and most self-sacrifising man that was
ever forced by his goodness of heart to endure the burdens
of public distinction. Last Thursday evening that audacious
legislator, Mr. Lucas, submitted a motion to the Legislative
Assembly declaring that the House ought to be dissolved
and a new Parliament summoned without delay. Many a
time, when on the Opposition benches, Mr. Robertson had
talked himself hoarse in favour of an immediate dissolu-
tion. The House was unfit to transact public business
when it supported his Opponents in office. Nobody can
doubt Mr. Robertson’s conscientious convictions on that
point. But this great statesman is governed by considera-
tions of a tine heroic disinterestedness which constrain the
admiration of the dullest observer. No wonder that the
brilliant imaginative intellect of Hurley is taken captive
by the magical powers of bis master-mind' No wonc- ;
'6 10 b u
before the people, though convinced by his sense of un-
equalled service that an appeal to the electors would won-
derfully increase his strength, was nevertheless guided by
his single regard for the public convenience. Of course, a
general election would benefit him and his colleagues, but
it was no part of their duty to consider their own benefit.
Everybody knew that it was at an immense sacrifice to him-
self that he had consented to govern the Colony. All that
he and his friends had to do, was to consider the public
interests, and the public interests did not require a dissolu-
tion now he and his friends were in office, though the public
interests did require a dissolution a year ago, when he and
his friends were on the Opposition benches. Mr. Lucas
was a well-meaning man, no doubt, but he was greatly
mistaken in his motion.
We were struck speechless with the intensity of our ad-
miration. We had often reeled before the dazzling splen-
dours of Mr. Robertson’s genius. His amazing powers of
invention in a difficulty; his endless resources when ex-
perience, and knowledge, and truth were failing. What
would bring any other man to a stand was no obstacle to
him. His utterances not less than his actions had filled us
with astonishment. But on Thursday night we were per-
mitted to sound the depths of Mr, Robertson’s purity.
What a sight for gods and men was there! —the Great Minister
disdaining to consult the interests of his Government, push-
ing away from him the chance, nay, the certainty of con-
solidating his political strength, and concentrating all his
thoughts on his suffering Country! Oh, Sir James Martin!
what a lesson for men like you.
That illustrious member of Parliament Mr. Cummings,
whose services to the Church and the cause of spiritual
progress have laid the Colony under eternal obligations,
had a claim before the Assembly on Tuesday last, which
ought to have been settled, as Mr. Cummings, no doubt,
hoped it would be, with great interest. In the early days
of the Gold Discovery, Mr. Cummings held under annual
lease, a block of Crown land as a sheep run in the Western
district, on which a gold field was suddenly discovered.
The diggers wanted mutton, and Mr. Cummings in the
generosity of his heart met their demand by selling them
his sheep. It is supposed that in this proceeding he acted
like a philanthropist, and thought little about price so long
as he could supply the wants of the poor diggers. We have
it on unanswerable testimony that Mr. Cummings received
only twenty shillings a carcase for his sheep. But when
his flocks were all sold, and his run was turned topsy-turvy
by the search for gold, Mr. Cummings very naturally turned
to the Government for compensation. It is true he only
held his run from year to year, but then, had he not parted
with his sheep to satisfy the hunger of the diggers? Surely
a case, where the owner of mutton had acted with so much
t, ought to be considered at the expense of the
N.fter many vexatious difficulties, such as are ever thrown
in the way of public benefactors, Mr. Cummings got his
claim submitted to the Legislative Assembly by that dis-
tinguished economist, Mr. Cunneen ; but the Assembly,
insensible of its duty, met the claim with a flat negative.
A few months later, another distinguished economist,
Mr. Driver, re-submitted Mr. Cummings’s claim, and the
ungrateful Assembly again refused it. On Tuesday, Mr.
Cunneen, in a spirit of devotion which is truly edifying,
brought forward the claim of Mr. Cummings for the third
time. It is popularly said that the third time pays for all,
but we are sorry to say Mr. Cuaiaiings is not yet paid. On
this occasion that pure-minded man, Mr. Forster, supported
the claim of Cummings, though he had opposed it formerly;
the Premier himself supported the claim of Cummings,
though as Minister for Lands he had decided against it
formerly; and, to crown all, Mr. Cuaimings also supported
the claim of Cuaiaiings. In addition to this powerful
array of support, those two lofty-minded Shepherd Kings,
Mr. Macleay and Mr. Phelps, who had formerly opposed
the benevolent Cumaiings, now pronounced in favour of the
claim of Cuaimings. An ordinary mind would have con-
sidered that the interests of Mr. Cuaimings were safe under
the protection of these eminent characters. But the blind-
ness and the contumacy of some members have no
limit. Men like Piddington, John Steavart, Parnell and
Burns, are incapable of appreciating the fine sensibilities
and the generous attributes of a Cuaiaiings. Even Sir
James Martin seemed utterly unable to comprehend the
true merits of the case. The result was, that this most
righteous claim was again, at least for a time, defeated by
the childish expedient of a count-out.


In the course of the debate, some reckless members like
Mb. Piddington actually had the audacity to hint that the
Government supported the claim of Cummings as a means
of rewarding a valuable supporter. But will anyone whose
perceptions of right and wrong are not blunted by bad com-
pany believe such a thing for a moment. The countenance
of Mu. Macleay alone would be a sufficient guarantee for
the purity of Mb. Cummings. The amount sought by Mb.
Cummings is in itself a mere trifle, some £4OOO, and it
would be absurd to consider it either as an inducement to
this upright man to waver in the path of rectitude or as a
reward for his preeminent services.
It was a novel sight to see Mb. Cummings himself in his
honoured place in the House castigating, as he only can
castigate, his assailants. How Mb. Piddington must have
winced when the venerable Cummings denounced his “ nar-
row-minded and unjust attempted accusiations.” It is a
happy idea, such as could only dawn upon a great mind,
for a member of the House, who prefers a pecuniary claim
against the Government, to prosecute it in person. Who
else can be so well acquainted with its merits ? Is it pos-
sible that a person like Mb. Piddington, who never saw
Mb. Cummings’s run, and who therefore can have no inter-
est in the matter, should be in as good a position as Mb.
Cummings himself to estimate the amount of good which
Mb. Cummings did by selling his sheep to the diggers.
MY JOHNNY WAS A LAW-MAKER.
AIB —“ MY JOHNNY WAS A SHOEMAKEB.”
Beware !—“ The Government will undertake no legislation.”
Vide Mr. Robertson’s Speech.
My Johnny was a law-maker,
And but one law made he.
My Johnny was a law-maker,
But now he’s all at sea.
With red, red tape are tied his hands,
So no more laws makes he.
Oh! My Johnny was a law-maker.
His beard it was a good foot long,
And frizzled was his hair.
His beard it was a good foot long, .
He stroked and pulled it rare.
He stroked and pulled and raved and swore,
Until across the House got he.
My Johnny was a law-maker.
A Premier he will be by-and-bye.
With a sword and a cocked bat too.
A Premier he is now —my eye!
And commands a precious crew.
He’s on the Right side, so makes no more laws,
But soon upon the Left he’ll be.
My Johnny was a law-maker.
When in his right place on the left,
We’ll sing the whole day long.
When he’s placed rightly on the left,
Oh, this shall be our song:
“ May traitors meet such fate alway,
When their native land they’d sell.”
Oh ! My Johnny was a law-maker.
THE GHOST,
THE COLLAPSE OF THE WINDBAG.
THE PATRIOT’S SOLILOQUY.
What is this life, if we must sink at last,
When first I play’d the demagogue at Scone,
And deem’d the plaudits from a dozen throats
More worth than now I deem a dozen votes, —•
Little I thought the day would come, d’ ye see,
When Jack the Premier of the laud would be!
But let that pass ! the day is come /—Macleay
Is come to sit behind me with the day!
Draw me a picture of the Future more
Improbable than that ten years before!
What may not be ?—keep Progress on the wing-
Elective gov’rnor or elective king?
The Doctor’s right! —“a good substantial cry,’’
And still the people’s Honest Jack am I!
Let Piddington and Stewart rave their fill,
And taunt us with our broken pledges still,
What do we care for all their angry barks,
Or for the censures of Sir James or Parkes?
No matter, though the faith of some has died,
And former principles are now denied, —
No matter, though our dupes their rage declare,
And Free Selectors grovel in dispair,
While justice to the Squatters is avow’d, —
“ A good substantial cry ” will take the crowd!
I fail?—No, by friend Eobsteb’s crabby mug,
No, by his famous battle with the bug,
No, by my cherub Dan, by Saue and Josh !
I cannot fail, I will not fail! - ’ Tis bosh !
The bargain is struck. Windbag of stump renown and
Shepherd King of small, or properly speaking of no
renown, have entered into alliance offensive and defensive.
Shepherd King as befits exalijed rank formerly leagued
himself with Respectability, but Respectability not being
sufficiently respectful to Bucolic Majesty, said Majesty has
sent Respectability to the right about and taken Windbag
into Royal favor. Oh, heavens! What a fall for Windbag!
what a blow to freedom, to enlightenment, to universal
suffrage, to vote by ballot, to vote by mob, to vote by
pot-house, to vote by rascaldom, to vote by the inanities,
to vote by the immensities. Windbag, friend of humanity,
benefactor of mankind, sold to mud-demons, jokuls,
phantasms!—sight altogether the unloveablest to be seen
in these times. Landale the oatmeal-distended; Lloyd of
the savoury leek; Lord of the corn-cob; Quaking Phelps;
Gordon of Glenlivet; Dangar of the Hareem; Cooper of
the Boomerang;—have put a ring into the nose of the Lion
of Juda, and they lead him forth whersoever they list.
With pared claws, broken teeth, draggled mane, and tail
between his legs, he does their bidding. Oh, my Windbag !
have the unveracities, the insincerities, the immensities
brought thee to this. Alliance offensive and defensive as
above set forth, what fact does it illustrate? Notablest of
compacts in these latter days, we shall in good time see
what comes of it.—T.C.
lyithout the Statesman’s crown won from the past?
Have I not Sacrificed my fortune’s ends,
To serve my country and oblige my friends?
But who has ever felt the patriot’s fire
And in the glorious cause could ever tire?
Who would not fling away both life and light,
To lead Joe Eckford and Bill Cummings right?
What were all other joys of humankind
Compared to moulding these to Jack’s own mind?
Little I thought, in days for ever gone,
-
\


JACK AND THE SQUATTERS.
Maclkay : ’Tis true, for ten long years I held him base,
A loon to be despised and spat upon,
An object for a true-bred Squatter’s jibes I
’Tis not less true, I hold the same opinion
Of Jack to-day ; but we have ends to answer;
We hoped for agencies respectable
To serve these ends, but in this hope we’ve failed;
And others must be found to do the work, —
Who better can be found than braggart Jack ?
Landale: I own 1 can’t well stomach this proposal;
A moral ague seems to strike my bones
In the bare thought of sitting at his back.
Dan gar: We were deceived by Martin awfully,
We all flock’d down to stand by his new Bill,
When to our horror, as the ghostly thing
In printed foolscap met our sicken’d eyes,
We found our friend was not our friend. If I
Had been the owner of a hundred votes,
Ay, would I not have given all the hundred
That night, to put him out who took us in ?
As for old Jack, of course I’ll stand by Jack.
Phelps: The thing is not what honest men would chose.
But what the choice must be, in our hard case,
And Jack, if Jack it must be, is not Jack
As Jack was once; his democratic views
Sit lightly on him now, while he can wear
The democrat’s fierce words and gestures still,
To gull the empty crowd; he’ll do our work
More -■ dVdv and ■ ~ ful for all
Morhicb : 1 always saw he was the safest man ;
I always saw ’twas best to play the lib’ral,
And say whatever people liked to hear;
Those that are pleased with what is said can’t follow
To see what’s done. Macleay is now come round
To my opinion. Men grow wise with age.
Lloyd : I don’t quite see, except that I can see
There is a something which is nothing still,
And that’s what I desire to have explained,
Ido maintain —I hold—l ever shall
Dispute the fact, or facts, whate’er they be, —•
I wish to state in clear and simple terms,
There is no other man, —I do maintain,
Like Mr. .Robertson. He’s our best friend.
Coopeh: D — n such a friend. The words sound hollow,
false,
“Jack’s our best friend,” and “I believe in Jack!”
Macleay: None asks you to believe; I’ve told you all
I don’t believe in Jack or like him more
Than I have done at any time before
These last ten years. But men may use a dish
Without believing it is made of gold,
Or caring much whose food it has contained,
Who made or who may break it. In this light
I want you all to look at Honest Jack.
Gordon: Macleay speaks sensibly. This is the point,
The real business that we have in hand.
Cummings: That is the business—relative to this
Great principle that looms above the high
And fanciful ideas—that’s the question,
Whether it shall be as our friend has said;
And relative to this great question, we
Have got the power—our friend Macleay and me.
Macleay: Well, seeing that our interests are one,
I think we ought to have with us the rest,
Suttor, and Mate, and Lord. I take it that
We’re all agreed who’re here. What say youfriends ?
Bell; I say, by all means, Suttor, Mate and Lord.
Macleay: But ate we all agreed to follow Jack?'
Cooper: Not far, I hope, or few will follow us.
Gordon: We’ll follow just as far as our ends lead.
All: Agreed, agreed, agreed, agreed, agreed. /Jp/
REVIEW.
The Law op Evidence. —By Joshua Frey Josephson, Solictor
General, of N.S. W.
We have had much pleasure in receiving a presentation
copy of this work. Its legal erudition is only equalled by
the Parliamentary abilities of the author.
The writer has elaborated an argument delivered before
Mr. Justice Cheeke, at the Criminal Court in a capital case in
which, as Solicitor General, he proved the incontestable
right of the Crown to call the wife as a witness against
the husband in all cases. His illustrations of the absurd
necessity of proving the corpus delicti or of calling any
corroborative evidence, though disclosed in the depositions,
drawn from the same case are happy and instructive. We
commend a study of the new practice introduced by Mr.
Josephson to all interested in the administration of criminal
justice.
IS SAUL ALSO AMONG THE PROPHETS?
Saul’s in his proper place. Your hat, sir, doff it,
And hail, with awe, the “Tea and Sugar” Prophet.
TOPS AND BOTTOMS.
The Height of Impudence. —Doubting the veracity of the
Honorable Jack.
The Depth op Modesty. —Pretending inability to under-
stand the logic of the Secretary for Lands.
The Height op Credulity. —Believing that the Treasurer
will make the two ends meet.
The Depth op Scepticism. —Questioning the transcendent
ability of the Secretary for Works.
The Height of Wisdom. —Acting on a legal opinion of the
Solici tor- General.
The Depth op Folly. —Hesitating to declare the Post-
master-General a man of letters.
The Height op Renown. —Being in a position to show up
the Robertson Ministry.
The Depth of Degradation. —Being an M.P. and having
to vote under orders.
Even in the Lowest Depths a Lower Still —And being
praised afterwards by the Empire and by Punch.
NURSERY SONG.
Heigh, diddle, diddle,
The Fox and the Fiddle ;
The Parliament met in the moon !
The Doctor laugh’d
To see such craft,
While Jack ran away with the spoon.
Heigh, diddle, diddle,
The Fox and the Fiddle;
The Speaker grew sick in the moon !
The people stared
But no one dared
Stop Jack running off with the spoon.




THK GHOST.
Forster : He must confess that he was in some sense afraid to
have anything to do with the Hon. Gentleman (Mr. Robertson).
Considering him to be something like those disagreeable insects
occasionally found in bed chambers, which, if pinched according
to their deserts, emitted a most unpleasant odour. Unless, there-
fore, he could, figurately speaking, lay hold of the Hon. member
with a pair of tongs, and carry him outside, without the risk of
contact with what was so extremely offensive, be should not, if
he consulted his own feelings, have anything to say to him.
THE “BUG” OF YESTERDAY THE


“HUMBUG” OF TO-DAY.
r. Forster: My Hon. friend at the head of the Government (Mr.
Robertson).
r. Robertson : My Hon. friend and colleague (Mr. Forster).
J. A. Engel, Printer, Sydney.




SCIENTIFIC.
CIMICIDiE.
Cimex Kobektsoniensis. Macleay. Cimex Robertsoniensis fcetida.
Forsterius. Cimex Robertsoniensis Parliament!. Bennett,
Labrum short. Proboscis long. Foetida.
Much interest lias lately been excited in scientific cir-
cles by the addition made to the Australian Museum
of a choice specimen of the Cimex Robertsoniensis or
what is commonly known as the Robertson Bug. We are
informed that a full meeting of the Trustees of the Museum
was held last week for the purpose of receiving this in-
teresting addition to our natural curiosities from the hands
of the donor, who, at the same time read a scientific des-
cription of the insect to that learned body.
It is now clearly established that the distinguished ento-
mologist who has the unique honor of introducing this new
species of the family to the notice of the sci-
entific public is Mr. William Macleay, whose persevering
efforts in bringing the curious specimen of natural his-
tory into notice cannot be too highly appreciated- It is
only owing to the deep love of truth characteristic of the
man of science that the world has become acquainted with
this interesting member of the vermin creation, as many of
the habits and peculiarities of the creature are so disgust-
ing to the senses that few men could be found equal to the
task of studying it with the requisite minuteness without
being overcome by a feeling of nausea. But the same
philosophic regard for truth whicJi distinguished Mr. Mac-
leay in the Treason and Conspiracy
same educated power of discrimina
and facts which led him as a man Of. i; -
acquit Mr. Parkes of stating as a fact what he, Mr. Macleay,
often pointed out to the Committee, Mr. Parkes bad only
stated as an opinion, has carried him through the difficult
but congenial task of describing this member of the hemip-
terous family of insects. We have, no doubt, that the
same discriminating verdict passed by the Legislative
Assembly and the public upon Mr. Macleay’s generous,
self-denying labours in endeavouring to establish Mr.
Parkes’ character before the public will reward his efforts
in the cause of science.
For the Latin, however, of the paper containing the
description of the Cimex Robertsoniensis and enrolled
amongst the transactions of the Museum, Mr. Macleay has
desired us to inform the public he is not responsible. With
the ingenuousness of all great characters, he informs us that
the Latin has been supplied by an amiable friend of classi-
cal and scientific tastes engaged in tuition.
Some doubts appear to have been expressed by the pub-
lic whether our distinguished entomologist really was
entitled to the credit of describing and naming the Cimex
Robertsoniensis. These doubts appear to have arisen from
the fact, that a paper has lately been discovered amongst
the transactions of the Royal Society holding its meetings
in Macquarie-street, in which, many years ago, an acute
observer of nature, one Forsterius, appears to have des-
cribed an insect in many respects minutely corresponding to
the Cimex Robertsoniensis. Many peculiarities described
by that entomologist as attaching to the creature named by
him Cimex Robertsoniensis fcetida are certainly identical
with those of the Cimex Robertsoniensis, and the language
used by this old writer, though not scientific in its ter-
minology, describes in the vulgar but vigorous English
of the period, a species of vermin so remarkably like the
Cimex Robertsoniensis that a careless observer might
mistake them as identical. An attempt has indeed been
made to disparage the scientific accuracy of this old oh-
THE GHOST
SONGS OF THE IGNORAIVII.
Joserhson’s Song-.
A fig for all your legal lore!
A fig for classic learning !
Experience ever was a bore;
A fool has no discerning..
What though the thief escapes the dock,
And Outrage stalks in daylight;
I’ll heap me up my banker’s stock,
Let Martin rave till daylight.
server, founded upon the fact, that in later papers by the
same writer, also preserved amongst the Royal Society’s
transactions, he appears to have given a different descrip-
tion of the same insect. No weight however is attached
to these apparent discrepancies, as the accuracy of his first
description is attested by fragmentary passages from the
writings of other old naturalists.
The distinguishing peculiarity dwelt upon by Forsterius
in his graphic description of the vermin is its repulsive-
ness to the senses. Indeed, that quaint writer describes
with great force the efforts made by him to overcome his
disgust before he could enter upon a close inspection of the
creature, as it, like the Skunk (mustela pxjtorius) and
cimex lectularius (the common house bug), emits on con-
tact a most repulsive odour. He describes the process
however, by which with the aid of a pair of forceps he was
able to make the necessary examination of the Cimex
Robertsoniensis Fcetida. Our more truth-loving Macleay,
however, though in various passages of his elegant Latinity
he alludes to the repulsiveness of the Cimex Robert-
soniensis, has become so enamoured with the creature which
has made him conspicuous in the scientific world that he
has actually been heard to speak of the vermin in terms of
friendly endearment. It is indeed reported that a photo-
graphic picture of the Cimex Robertsoniensis has been
seen hanging in his study at Elizabeth Bay, where a
spirited Chromo-lithograph of the Cumminia intoxicata,
transfixed by a corkscrew to the only copy extant of the
Treason and Consniraev Ronor- «.f \ r ■ M i
inspected hv those c urious in such ma ters.
aONUfiNSi® 01 Macleay closely agrees with that oi the Cimex
Robertsiensis fcetida of Forsterius. Generally found in
low and noisome places, surrounded by corruption and the
exuviae of dead insects swept from old entomological
cabinets, it is always to be discovered by its odour. On
detection it rapidly crawls away and takes refuge in the
nearest filth, the nastiness of which seems to become intensi-
fied by its presence. It is reported that the naturalist
Macleay, by habitual contact with the creature has lost his
sense of smell, but this we believe is denied by his friends,
who say that the faculty is simply suspended. One quaint
naturalist writing under the signature R.M.1., once sug-
gested that the creature which at times makes a grating,
buzzing noise might be designated the Hum Bug. This
idea has, however, been abandoned as the name might
cause confusion between the Cimex Robertsoniensis and
other CiMiciDiE of similar characteristics preserved in the
same Cabinet with the Cimex Robertsoniensis.
Unless absolutely necessary for the purpose of removing
offensive matter, we would advise the unscientific public to
avoid all contact with the Cimex Robertsoniensis, if not
prepared to expose themselves to its offensive and disgust-
ing peculiarities.


Place and pay are all in all,
The country ’ll ne’er discover,
How oft in court I get a fall
From every legal brother.
For still with slow and solemn speech,
I through a case can stammer.
Of common sense let Martin preach,
Law’s nothing, ’tis the manner.
The Judge may smile and mock me,
Detectives look derision,
The felon may escape me,
It hurts not the division.
’Tis true the lawyers twig me,
And count me for an ass,
But whilst these fools support me,
They ’ll let my ignorance pass.
Why have the electors of the Wollombi thrown most light
on the proceedings of Parliament?—Because they have
supplied the Assembly with the light of Barren Joey.
Who are most answerable for the short-comings of the
Legislative Assembly ? —The electors of East Macquarie.
Why is the representation of Shoalhaven like a penny-a-
liner of Grub-street?—Because it exists in a Garrett.
Why was the Order of St. Michael and St. George the most
appropriate decoration to bestow on “ Slippery Charley”?—
Because it was an Order of Greece. J
JACK’S MUSTER ROLL.
The Ghost, having a vivid recollection of Mr. Robertson’s
former acquaintances, was very much surprised when he
first saw the motley collection of strange creatures sitting
on the ministerial benches of the Legislative Assembly.
Could it be possible that that grotesquely-grim little figure
with compressed lips and a harlequin leer wrinkling his
comical old countenance, sitting in such close proximity to
the Premier, was a disciple of Progress—a follower of the
flaming democrat of Scone ? Yes, he was the great poli-
tical luminary of the Western Interior, and withal a pleni-
potentiary of the ecclesiastical Powers. And then, that
burly figure with lowering brows and flushed cheeks—a
kind of foppish Falstaff— sitting on the corner of the back
bench—could he also be a follower of the Spouting Jack
we knew at Scone? Yes, the Ghost was told he was
another of the democratic band of Young Australia—one
of the latest converts to the doctrines of Robertson, Gar-
rett and Driver; and he too held some secret ambassa-
donial office from the ecclesiastical Powers. And he, that
wondering monkey-faced old man resting his ruffled chin
on his folded hands on the back of the ministerial seat —
was he a flaming democrat—a worshipper of Tom Garrett
aud Dick Driver ? Yes, he was the inheritor of Jack’s own
mantle of the Upper Hunter—a full-fledged fire-eater.
But a new presence confronted the Ghost—a shadow of
the place more knowing than the rest. Mister Ghost! ”
quoth he: “if your errand is to learn the truth about our
men, you’ll not get much from any of these blind lookers-
on. They don’t see behind the curtain, and know nothing
of the springs that I see at work in the Clubs and in the
Church. Young Australia, bosh! Our men are practical
men, —all except the boobies, who are used to a practical
purpose. Very few of them care a brass farthing—to use
Jacks own figure of speech—about Jack or Democracy.
Put the Macleays and the Lloyds do care about their runs;
the Hurleys and the Harts do care about their priests; tlm
Campbells and the Burdekins do care about the gratifica-
tion of their dislikes; and some others, not now to be
named, do care about getting billets. And so, when they’re
wanted, they all stick together. Here is a classification of
these voters for—it is not correct to call them supporters
of—the Great Jack, which I picked up at the Victoria.
You know the hand-writing?”
And the list was laid before the Ghost, and the Ghost
lays it before the electors of the Colony.
CLASSIFICATION OF VOTES.
Representatives of the Roman Catholic Church:
Phillip Dignam, Esq ,
William Cummings, Esq.,
John Hurley, Esq.,
James Augustine Cunueen. Esq.,
James Hart, Esq.
Note. Safe for all occasions.— John It.
The Great Squatters ;
William Macleay, Esq.,
Hugh Gordon. Esq.,
Eobert Laudale, Esq.,
Joseph James Phelps, Esq.,
Theophilus Cooper. Esq.,
Thomas Gordon Gibbons Dangar, Esq.,
John Charles Lloyd, Esq.,
John Morrice, Esq.,
Archibald Bell, Esq.
Note. —Safe for the present. — John R.
The Native Aristocracy :
Thomas Ware Smart, Esq.,
William Eobert Campbell, Esq.,
Samuel Henry Terry, Esq.,
Marshall Burdekin, Esq.
Note. —Tolerably safe. — John E.
Followers of John Robertson :
Thomas Garrett, Esq.,
Stephen Campbell Brown, Esq.,
Richard Driver, Esq.,
Joseph Eckford, Esq.,
James Henry Neale, Esq.,
Walter Church, Esq.
Note.— All firm, except, perhaps, Neale. — John E.
Follower of Forster:
James Hoskins, Esq.
Note.— Very shaky.— John E.
Follower of Samuel:
Maurice Alexander, Esq.
Note.- -Right, wish we had more.—- John R.
Follower of Sutherland:
The Rev. John Dunmore Lang, D.D.
Note. —Right, so long as we have a majority. — John R.
A BUNCH OF SWEET WILLIAMS.
Sweet William the pride of the Hastings,
Sweet William the pride of the Wharf,
Sweet William the Fenian giant,
Sweet William the Fenian dwarf.


THE GHOST’S VISIT.
By W Lti m M cl—■—y.
Lately on a midnight stormy, with my glass of grog before me,
Sitting in my study scheming plans of vengeance by the
score,
Schemes to Parkes by no means flattering, suddenly there
came a pattering,
As of some one softly clattering, clattering at my chamber
door;
“’Tis the rain.” I muttered growling, “beating on my cham-
ber door,”
“ Only this, and nothing more,”
But the clattering grew more furious, and I said: “it’s
rather curious,
Surely never hail or rain drops fell so heavily before ;”
Wroth was I, for I was planning, for friend Parkes so sound
a tanning,
As should make him howl for mercy sinking on the Assem-
bly floor,
And I cursed the interruption, sat and cursed it o’er and o’er,
For a most confounded bore.
But the clamour, never heeding, with no sense of proper
breeding,
Grew more threatening, ceased a little, then rose louder
than before,
With a vigour so surprising, that, from out my chair up-
Then his right hand slowly raising, the grim figure, wildly
gazing,
And his eyes with fury blazing, spoke in accents deep
and stern:
“Base, presumptions, daring mortal, who hath striven to
ope the portal
Of the world of shadows whither men their steps may
never turn,
Foolish mortal, list to me! and all my errand you shall
learn.
All my errand quickly learn.
I’m the Ghost that haunts the city, and for which your
brave Committee,
In their philanthrophic ardour long and vainly search have
made ;
I’m the Ghost of Fenian treason, come in this tempestuous
season,
All the way from Styx to haunt you as your own familiar
shade,
And to thank your sir, in person, for your glorious crusade,
Your late praise-worthy crusade.
Think you that investigation has increased your reputa-
tion ?
Think you that the country ever thought your sham devo-
tion, real ?
You! the aristocratic bragger! with your highbred sneer
and swagger,
You! the Parliamentary bravo! you know aught of honest
zeal!
™ ir m ..... _ . ~ , , T , When have you done deed or action tending to the country’s
——hnhmdia T ornaapfl 4, ,„ f . - - - P ■ L


MUCKLAY’S MANAGERIE.
T*n Ti/r . /■* T'i o
JACK’S MUSTER ROLL.
THE HON. JOHN SUTHERLAND
Is the Minister for Public Works. He was born in the
same part of Scotland as Mr. Macleay. We believe, but
we do not assert as a fact, that he can read and write, but
his spelling is supposed to be a little eccentric and irregu-
lar. He is the moat popular member of the Administration.
Formerly a carpenter and builder, he ten or twelve years
ago did certain work for the Government which for some
reason or other he failed to demand payment for until more
t than six years had elapsed. He at last sent in his account,
amounting to upwards of £3OOO, which the late adminis-
tration refused to pay, but they gave him permission to sue
for it. He did so sue and (the Government not having
pleaded the Statute of Limitations) he succeeded in obtain-
ing a verdict. When the motion was made in Committee
of Supply to vote the money to meet the verdict, Mr.
Robertson, Mr. Sutherland’s present Colleague and Chief,
denounced the Government for not pleading the Statute of
Limitation, and more than insinuated that the claim was
not an honest one. Within twelve months Mr. Robertson
made Mr. Sutherland Secretary for Public Works. Admira-
ration of Mr. Sutherland’s successful achievement in
obtaining payment of so large and so stale a demand pro-
bably led to his promotion by the present Colonial Secre-
tary, and a little admiration coupled with national partiality,
and possibly some simlarity of tastes have made Mr. Mac-
leay one of Mr. Sutherland’s supporters.
The Ghost, having a vivid recollection of Mr. Robertson’s
former acquaintances, was very much surprised when he
first saw the motley collection of strange creatures sitting
on the ministerial benches of the Legislative Assembly.
Could it be possible that that grotesquely-grim little figure
with compressed lips and a harlequin leer wrinkling his
comical old countenance, sitting in such close proximity to
the Premier, was a disciple of Progress—a follower of the
flaming democrat of Scone? Yes, he was the great poli-
tical luminary of the Western Interior, and withal a pleni-
potentiary of the ecclesiastical Powers. And then, that
burly figure with lowering brows and flushed edieeks —a
kind of foppish Falstaff—sitting on the corner of the back
bench—could he also be a follower of the Spouting Jack
we knew at Scone? Yes, the Ghost was told he was
another of the democratic band of Young Australia—one
of the latest converts to the doctrines of Robertson, Gar-
rett and Driver; and he too held some secret ambassa-
donial office from the ecclesiastical Powers. And he, that
wondering monkey-faced old man resting his ruffled chin
on his folded hands on the back of the ministerial seat—
was he a flaming democrat—a worshipper of Tom Garrett
aud Dick Driver ? Yes, he was the inheritor of Jack’s own
mantle of the Upper Hunter—a full-fledged fire-eater.
But a new presence confronted the Ghost—a shadow of
the place more knowing than the rest. “ Mister Ghost! ”
quoth he; “if your errand is to learn the truth about our
men, you’ll not get much from any of these blind lookers-
on. They don’t see behind the curtain, and know nothing
of the springs that I see at work in the Clubs and in the
Church. Young Australia, bosh ! Our men are practical
m en, —all except the boobies, who are used to a practical
purpose. Very few of them care a brass farthing—to use
Jacks own figure of speech—about Jack or Democracy.
F. LASSETER AM 0 CO,,
421, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
BEG to call attention to the fact that the large and varied assort-
ment, necessarily kept for their wholesale trade, enables them
to offer to
RETAIL PURCHASERS,
not merely unlimited choice, but a scale of prices which only a large
business would render remunerative. The departments of each class
of goods, which embrace a wider range than can be found in any other
Hardware House in the Colonies, are kept constantly filled up with
Fresh Stock, and purchasers of however small an amount, may
rely upon reaping an advantage upon their visit.
FURNISHING IRONMONGERY,
consists of every article for domestic use.
English, Scotch, French and American cooking ranges
Wrought iron ovens
Stewpaus, boilers, and kitchen utensils of every kind
Best Sheffield cutlery for table use
Nickle silver and electro plate spoons and forks, cruets, dish covers, &c.
Bedroom furniture, bedsteads, children’s cots, crios, mattresses, pal-
liasses, bolsters, and pillows
Baths of all shapes, toilet sets, &c.
Handsome drawing-room ornamental articles
Ladies would do well to inspect this portion of the stock for their
household requirements.
TOOLS,
Comprise implements for farm, garden, vineyard and dairy use
Tools for carpenters and joiners, saws, chisels, planes of Sorby’s,
Mosely’s, Hill’s, and other first-class manufacturers
Tools for smiths, bellows of “Onions’ ’’ make
Warranted anvils and vyces
Files of “Wing’s” and “Stubbs’” make
Note. — Safe for the present. — John R.
The Native Aristocracy :
Thomas Ware Smart, Esq.,
William Robert Campbell, Esq.,
Samuel Henry Terry, Esq.,
Marshall Burdekin, Esq.
Note. — Tolerably safe. — John R.
Followers of John Robertson :
Thomas Garrett, Esq.,
Stephen Campbell Brown, Esq.,
Richard Driver, Esq.,
Joseph Eckford, Esq.,
James Henry Neale, Esq.,
Walter Church, Esq.
Note.—All firm, except, perhaps, Neale. — John R.
Follower of Forster:
James Hoskins, Esq.
Note. —Very shaky. — John R.
Follower of Samuel:
Maurice Alexander, Esq.
Note.- -Right, wish we had more.—John R.
Follower of Sutherland:
The Rev. John Dun more Lang, D.D.
Note. —Right, so long as we have a majority. — John R.
A BUNCH OF SWEET WILLIAMS.
Sweet William the pride of the Hastings,
Sweet William the pride of the Wharf,
Sweet William the Fenian giant,
Sweet William the Fenian dwarf.
