

H" 1 "
The Imperial Tangle
The League of Nations
and
The Way Out.
Address delivered
BY
LIEUT.-COLONEL SIR JAMES BARRETT
K.8.E., C. 8.. C.M.G., M.D.
at the Town Hall, Melbourne, to the Members
[ of the Royal Colonial Institute, Victorian Branch
i yy
J. C. Stephens Pty. Ltd., Printers, .Melbourne.
51— - 15


The Imperial Tangle, the League
of Nations, and the Way Out.
By Lt.-Col Sir James W. Barrett, K.8.G., C. 8., C.M.G.,
MJD.
First Citizen. —Come, come, we fear the worst; all will
he well.
Third 'Citizen —When clouds are seen wise men put on
their cloaks;
When great leaves fall, then Winter is at
hand;
When the sun sets, who doth not look for
night ?
Untimely storms make men expect a
dearth.
All may be well; but, if God sort it so,
’Tis more than we deserve, or I expect.
Recently some Australians have been inclined to favour
the appointment of Commonwealth Representatives in
Foreign countries.


The object of the appointment is said to be the desir-
ability of obtaining information. Nothing could be more
welcome if the functions of the representatives were so
defined.
The danger of the step is, however, obscured by failure
to distinguish between Business Representatives and Pleni-
potentaries.
To What Extent has the War Affected Australia?
The attitude appears to me as another of the evidences
of the manner in which much of Australia has been un-
affected by the war. The war has swept by and apparently
left it much as it was, plus a load of debt, and also very just
pride in the work of Australian soldiers. There has been no
serious attempt at re-construction in Australia since the war,
notwithstanding the magnificent example of Great Britain.
Furthermore, the tremendous efforts made by Great Britain
to set her house in order have received very little notice in
Australia. During the war some 8,000,000 voters were
added to the register in Great Britain, and their addition
was immediately followed by, what is known in educational
circles, as the Fisher Revolution, by which compulsory
education is provided for all males, between 14 and
18 years of age, and females for a somewhat lesser period.
This Bill was passed through both Houses of Parliament
without any serious difficulty, though the practical
introduction of the machinery may take some years.
The British Government has just presented to the Uni-
versity of London eleven of the most valuable acres in
London, in Bloomsbury, as a site for a National Univer-
sity. Attempts have been made to meet the industrial
difficulties by establishing the Whitley Councils and, as in
the case of the railway strike, fighting the strikers, if jus-
tice demands it. Great Britain has further taxed herself
to her utmost limits to repay her debts and to restore sol-
vency. Again Great Britain has established an Institute


of International Affairs, and has made the most earnest
efforts to develop the League of Nations. Not only does
one see few of these things attempted in Australia, but very
little attention is given to them.
Independent Status of the Dominions.
At the Peace Conference the Dominions entered upon the
status of Independent Nations, and are not now controlled
in any way theoretically by Great Britain, except in so far
as the Sovereign may or may not give assent through his
representatives to legislative measures adopted by the
Dominion Parliaments. There is now no effective organisa-
tion of the Empire in foreign affairs or in defence. It is
true that the Dominions have so far taken very little
practical action, so far as foreign affairs are concerned,
but the danger is, in my judgment, considerable. No
machinery has been devised by which the Empire shall speak
with one voice in foreign affairs and in defence. An able
friend of mine some time since wrote an essay entitled
“Government by Phrase,” and just now we are hypnotised
by the expression, “A Nation within an Empire.” We
are simply drifting, and, assuming that our Empire can
hold together without legal ties, and without business ar-
rangements. I propose, therefore, briefly to review the
position in the form of a sketch, to indicate the various
dangers, and to try and show the only way security can be
obtained.
Altered Military Position op the British Empire.
As a result of the Peace Treaty, the military position
of the British Empire has completely altered, and obliga-
tions of the most extensive and dangerous character have
been undertaken. Before the war we had no exposed land
frontier, except in the case of Canada and the United
States. India was protected on the North-West by the


Himalayas, and on the East by the presence of a non-
warlike population. Our Empire now extends far from
India, on the Tigris and the Euphrates, the right
flank of that extension abuts on Persia and Kurdistan, and
the front abuts on other remnants of the Turkish Empire, so
now there is a huge land frontier with no natural boundary,
which might become the seat of a colossal invasion. It is
considerations of military prudence that probably suggest
the withdrawal from Mesopotamia, though these counsels
do not appear on the surface. In Palestine we abut, on
the one hand, on the Arab Empire, which is not a very
serious matter. We have also a land frontier coterminous
with the French, which is not likely to involve us in any
difficulty in the near future, but the fact remains that we
have now many miles of land frontier without any
natural barrier, whereas formerly we had none. There
are, furthermore, at the outside, 64,000,000 of white in-
habitants in the Empire on whom the protection of its
enormous territory largely depends.
The Constitutional Position.
As a result of the Peace Treaty, the Empire now con-
sists of a number of independent nations, who are assumed
to be linked together for common purposes. There is, how-
ever, no machinery whatsoever so far devised for common
action, and the following quotations from the utterances
of statesmen in the various parts of the Empire will show
how different are the interpretations given in different
portions of the Empire of the meaning of precisely the
same facts and the same set of sentences.
Australian statesmen differ from the others in that they
have not expressed any opinions at all on this subject, as
reported in the proceedings of the Legislature.


CANADA.
The Prime Minister, the Right Hon. Sir Robert Barden,
on September 2nd, 3919, said that “the future relationship
of the Empire must be determined in accordance with the
will of the Mother Country and of each Dominion in a
constitutional conference to be summoned in the not dis-
tant future. Undoubtedly it will be based upon a equality
of nationhood. Each nation must preserve unimpaired its
absolute automony, but it must likewise have its voice as
to those external relations which involve the issue of peace
or war. So that the Britannic Commonwealth is in it-
self a community or league of nations which may serve as
an exemplar to that world-wide League of Nations which
was founded in Paris on the 28th of last June. . . The
same indomitable spirit which made Canada capable of that
effort and sacrifice (during the war) made her equally in-
capable of accepting at the Peace Conference, in the League
of Nations, or elsewhere, a status inferior to that accorded
to nations less advanced in their development, less amply
endowed in wealth, resources and population, no more
complete in their sovereignty and far less conspicuous in
their sacrifices. ’ ’
Mr. D. D. McKenzie, Acting Leader of the Opposition,
replied as follows:—“He gathered, however, that it was
the intention of the Treaty and of the signatories who
represented Canada when the Treaty was signed, that hence-
forth the Canadian people should act, not of their own
free will, but in compliance with the terms of the Treaty,
which were to be interpreted from time to time by a
Council sitting at Geneva, on which there was no certainty
of the Dominions having representatives. He did not agree
with the idea of Canada signing the Treaty as a separate
and distinct nation, because Canada was not a nation in
the true sense of the term, but a part of the groat British
Empire. According to the framers of the British North


America Act, Treaties should be made between the Empire
and foreign nations in respect of which certain duties
would fall upon them, not as a separate part, but as an
integral part of the body politic of the Empire. He sub-
mitted that to profess to make a Treaty and call them-
selves a nation, and as a nation to become a member of
the League of Nations, was absolutely impossible, and
could not be carried out, and in attempting to do so Par-
liament and Government had undertaken responsibilities
which they were not in a position to carry out.
The League of Nations.
Mr. D. D. McKenzie, Acting-Leader of the Op
position, Sept., 2nd, 1919 :—Article VIII. of the League
involved the maintenance by Canada of a standing army.
Article X. might involve her’entry into any petty quarrel be-
tween small nations, while, constitutionally, Canada was onlv
bound by what she agreed to do by virtue of the machinery
provided by and for the British Empire, of which she
was a component part. In Article XVI. they said that
they would refuse to have any intercourse with any member
of the League that went to war without the consent of the
whole League. Their plenipotentiaries undertook to say
that Canada had signed the Covenant apart from Great
Britain, and Canada might possibly put herself in the
position of being in arms against the Mother Country.”
The Hon. Harvie S. Beland, Liberal, Quebec, said that
if they were considered a separate entity in the League,
then the consequences of Article XVI. would be that they
would have to redeem their obligations and side with other
members of the League against Great Britain, and thereby
cease to remain in the Empire, or else they would have
to disregard their pledges and take sides with Great
Britain.


Article X.
The Hon. N. W. Rowell, (President of the Council,
said, referring to the League of Nations, that
under Article X. the power of the . Council was
only advisory. If they advised that Canada should take
action, that action, if it required legislative sanction, would
have to be taken by the Parliament of Canada. She
would not be compelled to take action unless she agreed
to it.
Separate Recognition,
The Hon. W. S. Fielding, Liberal, said that by their
demand for separate recognition they were beginning—
though they may not have meant it so —-to break up the
Empire. They had in the representatives of the British
Government in London statesmen who would take due
account of the interests of the Empire at large. Upon
any point where Canadian interests were particularly af-
fected it was desirable that they should have special re-
presentation, but when there was no Canadian business
before them, when no Canadian interests were affected, it
was not wise for them to insist upon having representa-
tion of Canada when there was nothing of importance from
a Canadian point of view for their representatives to con-
sider.
United Empire: One Signature.
In a later debate on 12th January, 1920, Mr. D. D.
McKenzie, Liberal Leader of the Opposition, said. —“We
are a component part of the British Empire. We enjoy
the protection of the great Empire to which we belong;
we are subject to its laws, and we take advantage of every
privilege that that great combination of nations or do-
minions brings to us as citizens of that great Empire; and
if the King and those representing him sign this docu-
ment, I submit it is binding on the whole Empire. .. .


There should be one united body, one united council for
the whole of the Empire, with Canada fully represented;
there should one conclusion, one Treaty, one signature . . .
The more united we are and the better we understand one
another in connection with Empire matters and Dominion
matters, particularly when we are facing a foreign foe or
foreign complications, and the closer we keep to the states-
men of Great Britain in responsibilities for the whole of
the Empire, the better it will be. ’ ’
From the foregoing it will be seen what remarkable di-
vergencies of view and of interpretation existed in the Legis-
lature of Canada. When we read what has been said in
other Dominions the tangle is still more remarkable.
NEW ZEALAND.
Mr. Downie Stewart, Eeform Party, Dunedin West, on
17th October, 1919, said: —“By signing the Peace Treaty,
New Zealand, might have created for herself a new status
altogether in the world of foreign affairs, and instead of
being an act, as popularly supposed, to bring together
more closely the component parts of the Empire, it might
be that it was really the first and most serious step
towards obtaining their independence and treating them-
selves as a sovereign Power. Assuming that, in reference
to Samoa, they got into conflict with some Eastern Power,
and that their view did not coincide with that of South
Africa, or Canada, or even that of the Imperial Govern-
ment, did it mean that by the act of signing the Peace
Treaty they had assumed to themselves sovereign Power
to make peace or war? Before any such act as the sign-
ing of the Peace Treaty by the Dominions took place,
there should have been an organic change in the constitu-
tion of the British Empire. No doubt. New Zealand would
accept the task in regard to Samoa; and it would be one
that would react for good on the people of New Zealand,


fitting them for further tasks, and showing that in a
proper spirit she. could carry out the best British tradi-
tions; but he thought some opportunity should be afforded
for the discussion of the implications involved, in the sign-
ing of the Peace Treaty and the taking up of the man-
date. ’ ’
The Constitutional Question.
To which the Eight Hon. W. F. Massey, Prime Minister,
replied:—“We signed it, not as independent nations in the
ordinary sense of the term. We signed it as the represen-
tatives of self-governing nations within the Empire. We
signed it as partners in the Empire—partners, with every-
thing that the name implies. He differed from the hon.
gentleman, who seemed to think that the great change
which took place in the British Constitution dated from
the signing of the Treaty. The change (and iit was a most
important change, not only for the Dominions but for other
countries that formed part of the Empire) dated, in his
opinion, from the date that the representatives of the
Dominions were called to the Councils of Empire, from the
setting up of the first Imperial War Cabinet, when the
Dominions were asked to send representatives to take part
in the discussion and consideration of the questions arising
out of the War. There was a great deal more to be done,
and there was an understanding between the statesmen
of the British Empire that, when matters settled down
to normal again, an important Imperial Conference would
be called and an endeavour made to provide a constitution
suitable to the changing circumstances and conditions of
the Empire. But no Dominion had power to make cither
peace or war. (The italics are mine.) If it became neces-
sary for Britain to make war, and he hoped it never
would, she would do so wholly as an Empire, not as the
United Kingdom or as England, and would make peace
as an Empire; and in making war or peace the British


Dominions would have a full say. There was no such thing
now as a tendency to break way on the part of the
British Dominions, and all that had taken place meant
that they had been brought much closer together than ever
before. ’ ’
The Attorney-General (Hon. Sir Francis Bell), later
said: —"They did not intend to act without the considera-
tion and approval of the luperial authorities. At present
Samoa was territory to be administered by them, but
after a time, according to the terms of the Treaty, a vote
would be taken, and if the vote were favourable, Samoa
would become an integral part of the Dominion of New
Zealand. ’ ’
Readers will note the confusion indicated in the minds
of the speakers between what is legally possible and what
is desired.
SOUTH AFRICA.
Lieut.-General the Right Hon. J. C. Smuts, on
6th September, 1919, said: —'‘Undoubtedly, there were
Dominions important enough in the near future to secure
a seat on the Inner Council. While the Dominions were
determined to see that, if there was to be a League of
Nations with equal representation of the nations, the
League should include the Dominions, they were equally
anxious that the ties of Empire should not be loosened.
We wanted to remain the British League of Nations —
which has worked with such enormous success in the past.
Fears had been expressed in South Africa and elsewhere
that the ultimate tendency of the League would be to
break up the Empire. That was entirely misleading. He
could well imagine great Dominions arising which might
become as important as Britain in the world, and then,
if the Inner League of Empire had not been secured, there
would have been a danger of the Empire breaking up.


There had also been misgivings that South Africa might
be drawn into the great vortex of European politics.
Frankly, the new status must inevitably bring responsi-
bilities, but you cannot ask for recognition and admission
among the nations of the world, and still think you can
sit on your ant heap in South Africa. He hoped they
would be ready to bear responsibilities as willingly and
whole-heartedly as they had borne them in the smaller
League of Empire. Nevertheless, in the League of Nations
nothing affecting South Africa could be done without her
consent. Any nation affected must be a consenting party.
The safeguards were most ample.”
iTVTr. Tielmann Boos, Nationalist, Lichtenburg, Trans.,
denied that Generals Botha and Smuts were at the Peace
Conference as plenipotentiaries. The League of Nations
was built on a foundation of pillage and hypocrisy. Deal-
ing at length with the status of the Union, he argued that
the Dominions were not free States, because Imperial
statutes would be binding upon them. If the Union were
a sovereign state in the same sense as the United King-
dom, then the Union was answerable only to the League
of Nations, which meant that the British Empire was to
a very large extent dissolved. Moreover, the Union Par-
liament was not able to pass laws repugnant to Imperial
statutes. He strongly condemned the action to be taken
under the Treaty in regard to German missions and mis-
sionaries.
Later the Prime Minister replied as follows: ‘ The doc-
trine that the British Parliament was the sovereign legisla-
tive power no longer held good. Without their consent, it
could not pass any law binding South Africa without a re-
volution. In future the Dominions would, as regards
foreign affairs, deal through their own representatives,
hence all parts of the Empire would be consulted in matters
of peace and war. ’ ’


Later General Smuts was reported as follows: —
General Smuts said that South African action would be
taken by the King on the advice of his South African
Ministers only, but definitely stated that South Africa
cannot secede without dishonouring a solemn treaty.
If that principle be applied all round we shall have a
remarkable development in extenso of the fatal principle
of dualism, which wrecked the Austrian Empire, as any-
one who reads 'Count Gzernin’s work will readily under-
stand. Without the Dual Authority, Austria might have
been saved. Gzernin did his best, and was checkmated
time and again.
If the statesmen of the Empire express such hopelessly
divergent views of the position of the Empire, and of the
League of Nations, what can be expected from the ordi-
nary citizen? Is the American attitude remarkable?
Americans appear to be desirous, and justly desirous, of
understanding what they are committed to if they sign.
The British position requires clarification by Imperial Con-
ference.
The real truth is, of course, that the Dominions though inde-
pendent in name, are utterly unable to stand alone by reason
of their scanty population and scattered distribution.
I do not think any of the Dominions really wish to, or
think for a moment of leaving the British Empire, but most
of the Dominion citizens have no adequate conception of the
position into which they have drifted or the danger of steps
they may possibly be induced ’to take under short-sighted
direction.
The Imperial Impasse.
The truth is that the British Empire has practically
ceased to exist. It may be continued in its present form
by good sense and by a set of temporary devices, but it


can only be placed on a secure foundation by some business
agreement between the several Dominions of the Empire
on certain specific matters, viz., Foreign Policy and De-
fence.
TJie chief difficulty which lies in the way is the general
aversion to any such arrangement on the part of the Do-
minions, but not in (Great Britain, due, as Keith puts it,
to "the proud self-consciousness of National Destiny, or a
narrow and short-sighted parochialism, or, as is more just,
a blend of both. ’ ’ The danger of the present position
may be easily illustrated. Let us suppose, for example,
that each of the Dominions in "the proud self-conscious-
ness of National Destiny" appointed ambassadors to
foreign countries. We should then have the spectacle in
some foreign country of a plenipotentiary representing Aus-
tralia, another New Zealand, a third Canada, a fourth South
Africa, and a fifth Great Britain. They would communi-
cate directly with their own Governments, and, sooner or
later, some business arrangement would be made between,
say, his Power and Australia. On the observances of that
arrangement, peace or war might ultimately depend, but
if the issue became serious the four remaining Dominions
in any particular case might say, "We were not consulted
when this arrangement was made, we do not agree with
it, and, consequently, we are not able to support you."
In other words, the usual difficulty would arise which has
arisen in history between people conducting businesses
by alliances, of failure to make provision for definite action
when the contracting partners fail to agree. It was pre-
cisely this issue which nearly wrecked the United States
originally, and it was this issue which was fought out by
Lincoln in the American Civil War. We should be warned
by what has occurred, and see that suitable arrangements
are made in good time.


The League of Nations.
Australians do not seem to realise the extreme danger of
trusting entirely to an undeveloped League for their own
safety, much as the League of Nations’ ideal should be
encouraged.
On the other hand, they do not seem to realise
extensive obligations they have undertaken as members
of the League.
Two clauses are to the point: —
Article X.
The members of the League undertake to respect and
preserve as against external aggression the territorial in-
tegrity and existing political independence of all members
of" the League. In ease of any such aggression, or in
case of any threat or danger of such aggression, the
Council shall advise upon the means -by which this obliga-
tion shall be fulfilled.
Article XVI.
Should any member of the League resort to war in dis-
regard of its covenants under Acts 12, 13, 15, it shall
ipso facto be deemed to have committed an act of war
against all other members of the League, which hereby
undertake immediately to subject it to the severance of
all trade or financial relations, the prohibition of all inter-
course between their nationals and the nationals of the
covenant-breaking state, and the prevention of all financial,
commercial, or personal intercourse between the nationals
of any other State, whether member of the League or not.
It shall be the duty of the Council in such a case to
recommend to the several Governments concerned what
effective military, naval, air force the members of the
League shall severally contribute to the armed forces to
be used to protect the covenants of the League.


The members of the League agree, further, that they
will mutually support one another in the financial and
economic measures which are taken under this Article, in
order to minimise the loss and inconvenience resulting from
the above measures, and that they will mutually support
one another in resisting any special measures aimed-at one
of their number by the covenant-breaking State, and that
they will take the necessary steps to afford passage
through their territory to the forces of any of the mem-
bers of the League which are co-operating to protect the
covenants of the League.
On page 541 of the “Round Table,” June, 1920, the
American appreciation of the difficulty is clearly put:—
‘ ‘ Article X. has been, and always will be, the stumbling
block. Patient and learned friends may explain until the
end of time that a Treaty of Peace ratified by the
Senate becomes a part of the Legislation of Congress,
and, therefore, subject and subordinate to the provisions
of the Constitution. Their patience, their learning, and
their ultimate exasperation cannot shake the conviction of
a majority of the people that an American representative
on the League of Nations’ Council would have power to
take the United States into a war for the enforcement
of the guarantee provided by Article X. until a reserva-
tion is effected which gives clear notice to the world that
no action can constitutionally be taken by the United
States under this Article except by Congress, the covenant
of the League of Nations will remain unacceptable.”
The Case of Poland.
Recently Poland has been in difficulties, and has called
on the League of Nations for help. If the Council of that
League were to call on the signatories to go to the help
of Poland, it would practically mean war with Russia. In
such an event, would Australia honour or dishonour the


bond? If she proposes to honour it, would she continue
to honour it if the other Dominions dishonoured it? It
is this very practical difficulty which prevented the Ameri-
can ratification of the Peace. The Americans played party
politics to the full, but, notwithstanding this, my opinion
is that the Treaty would have been ratified but for Article
X. in the League of Nations, and the foregoing extract
from the “Bound Table” shows what the solid and sen-
sible American opinion really is. I do not think it at all
likely that Australia would mobilise men to go to the help
of Poland —it is improbable that she will be asked to do so —■
but if she were called on under Article X,, and did not,
then Australia would only be doing what Germany did
in the case of Belgium—failing to fulfil a solemn under-
taking, and regarding her obligation as a scrap of paper.
The Federal Ideal.
The following extract from a work on the Swiss Con-
stitution by Bonjour is apropos of the Imperial difficulty.
Switzerland contains three diverse peoples—German, French
and Italian —who are distributed in a large number of
Cantons, and who have managed, nevertheless, to evolve
a satisfactory Federal Government.
“National tradition is, and remains, the most active
source of creative power. Our ideal for humanity is federa-
tive, not cosmopolitan. And as the International Com-
monwealth of the future will never imply the abandonment
of national tradition by the different peoples, it will
strengthen and deepen, rather than weaken the citizen’s
feeling of duty towards his own State. We should strenu-
ously reject as the worst of sophistries any attempt by a
Swiss soldier to obtain exemption from his military obliga-
tions on the score of the hoped-for union of peoples. So
long as our country is exposed to the danger of war, it
is the sacred duty of all her sons to hold themselves in


readiness to give both life and property in defence of her
freedom and independence; he who is incapable of fulfilling
his duty to his own country cannot be a useful member
of the International Commonwealth.”
That same observation applies with still greater force
to ourselves. Before there can be a leally effective League
of Nations there must be a properly organised British Em-
pire. If similar peoples cannot combine for purposes of
safety and for the preservation of civilisation, are dis-
similar peoples likely to succeed!
The Remedies.
What, then, can be proposed in the way of remedy?
Most men take refuge in the Imperial Conference, which
is to be summoned next year to consider the relationship
of the several parts of the Empire. This will be valu-
able and, indeed, critical, but there is a very practical
step, which can, and should, be taken at once, i.e., the ap-
pointment to. London of a Cabinet Minister, the very best
Australia can produce, who should be more or less constantly
resident in London, and should keep Australia fully in-
formed on foreign affairs.
I find it impossible to believe that Australians would
fail to respond if the facts were presented to them by in-
formed and responsible statesmen. There are plenty
of sober-minded people in Australia who would be quick
to appreciate the position if so presented—people who
do not admire the ”Policy of the Ostrich.”


The practical and urgent necessities of the case are, in my
opinion—
(1) The setting aside in each Dominion of capable states-
men, who shall devote themselves entirely to foreign affairs
and defence, and be responsible to Parliament.
(2) That such men shall take no part in local politics.
(3) That they shall frequently visit London, and that a
Secretariat shall be established permanently in that city.
(4) That they shall, in a proper and responsible manner,
keep the people of the Dominions fully informed respecting
these two functions of Government.
(5) That in no circumstances should Australia or any
Dominion act in external affairs except after adequate con-
sultation with Great Britain and the other Dominions.
It is quite true that the Imperial Conference ind the
appointment of Ministers in London are not in themselves
solutions. They are, however, the necessary steps which
can, and should, be taken leading to a fuller knowledge
and better understanding of the best means of organising
the safety and the development of the British Empire—the
greatest and most important task ever set before mankind.
I believe that the practical genius of the race will find a
solution, and though the issue be clouded here and there
by local limitations, that the same spirit which caused
men from all parts of the globe to lay down their lives
for a great ideal, will cause sanity of thought and action
to emerge from the present welter.
The Empire has never been as great as in its distress.
It evidences more ability than ever heretofore, and I
shall be the last to believe that it cannot find a satisfac-
tory solution of a problem of the greatest gravity and
urgency.


The vision of an Empire containing vast numbers of
people of different races, religions, and countries, who
cling to a central ideal of liberty, justice, and responsi-
bility, is no mere dream. Indeed, the consummation of
such an ideal has become a very real and practical neces-
sity.
The road to its attainment may be long and wearisome,
the obstacles stupendous, but the immediate task of those
who hope for a better world is to keep their eyes fixed on
the light, and refuse to be blinded by difficulties, or
diverted from this very practical objective.
Such an objective represents, to me, the greatest of
prctical possibilities, since we may, by some Imperial
organisation, get much nearer to the elimination of the
gospel of organised force than by any other means in
sight. The idealism involved coincides with, and is, in
no way antagonistic to the conception of the League of
Nations, to the development of which every sensible
human being should devote his very best.


S' jc 5TfmcropvQ3>\
f PMirtRi
\ rdBOWVf j
tm 5
1300-9/20-3338 |
