

s pry iy rSR i /aV i i *
Bit I*mm V | I I —v T I Lhm # \ I I
\ \ # \ / / I LonaJ III ■ - —. r , -I I > .„ J t I II I I I I J I | T-,-'
\ J \ / I | I I II III | I
IJwv (/ I
Mf \) \v (i
I Vjm\l/I J w/ f 1
|. I I


■ .
.
■
,


'
... . v . ...
■
■ >


A ,U3r
■


The Great White Chief


••




Wr£ki — JSl^P
iE V _ ' V>1|
. *
■’ , |
it 762
THE CHIEF TRIES TO BRING HIS SPECIAL TRICK INTO PLAY


The
Great White Chief
A Story of Adventure in Unknown
New Guinea
ROBERT M. MACDONALD
ILLUSTRATED BY IV. RAINEY, R.I.
BLACKIE AND SON, LIMITED
LONDON GLASGOW DUBLIN BOMBAY
1908


Copyrighted in the United States, America
by Blackie 6° Son, Limited


TO
v 10
ADMIRAL MORESBY
ONE WHO HAS FOLLOWED IN HIS FOOTSTEPS
7


/


ILLUSTRATIONS
The Chief tries to bring his Special Trick into
Play Frontispiece 279
Harry saves Coolgardie Bill 75
“ His Hands rudely fastened around the Mamoose’s
Throat”
“A Black Wall shot from Overhead and fell
AROUND THEM”
Doc and Harry in the Tapu House 196
“No one heeded the Shot, and the Battle pro-
ceeded ” yj
“To his Surprise he went flying halfway across
the Apartment ”
On the Great Balance of Life and Death .. . 306
Map of Part of British New Guinea ..... 88


/
I


PROLOGUE
The Mad Mamoose
In a valley among the towering mountain ranges
which form part of the boundary between British and
German New Guinea lay a large village, and in it
something unusual was about to take place. All morn-
ing the people had been assembling round the tapu
doubo, or sacred house, and as the sun was now
approaching the meridian, they were becoming im-
patient. To-day a direct appeal to their gods was to
be made in the form of a trial by combat to determine
who was to be the future fighting mamoose, or warrior
Chief, of the tribe, and that all might witness this, the
tapu mamoose, or spiritual chief, had proclaimed a
holiday.
The people would abide by the decision, for it was
one of the first laws in their history as a people that
their fighting mamoose held his position only so long
as his strength of arm could defend it, and although the
present holder of the title had not been challenged, cir-
cumstances had arisen that compelled him to fight for it.
At least so the tapu mamoose, who was really the head
of the people, had decreed ; for there could not be two
warrior chiefs among the mountain dwellers, and such a
state of affairs now existed.
And it had come about this way. Some months
(B T62) i ii


before, a band of white people had come over the moun-
tains from the great world beyond into their valley, but
proving to have no evil intent other than to dig out
strange earths from the hill-slopes, the valley inhabi-
tants had extended their hospitality to them, for there
was much in the manner of their strange white visitors
that they admired.
The tapu mamoose, however, seeing his influence
was suffering considerably by their presence, had sud-
denly discovered that the white people never gave of
their number to the tribal sacrifices, and even possessed
a chief of their own who totally ignored the tapu
mamoose and his commands. Consequently he had
decided that the two peoples must come under one
head, and that his own. He therefore ordered his
warrior mamoose to challenge the white chief to
the trial by combat according to the traditions of
the tribe. The winner would be mamoose, while the
adherents of the loser would also come under his
sway, and as he had no doubt of the result of the
fight—he was not going to fight himself!—he looked
forward with pleasurable anticipation to the time when
he would be able to offer a white sacrifice to the
gods.
The white men had accepted the challenge—they
saw that they would have to do battle or be murdered
if they refused—and their chief thought it better that
he should pit his trained strength against that of the
mamoose than risk a general fight.
The day of the trial had arrived, and the hour was
at hand. The war-drums sounded out a tattoo, and the
people gathered round in a circle, into which stepped
the tapu mamoose, with Begalonai the fighting mamoose,
and Kalamo his leading warrior. At the same instant
the circle opened at the other end, and a dozen fully


armed white men, stalwart, bronzed, yet youthful in
appearance, took up their position inside the ring
amidst a sullen silence. One was stripped for battle,
as was the mamoose on the other side, for it was
to be a sheer trial of strength aided only by natural
cunning. His companions stood round, quiet and
grim.
“Tom,” said one to their chief, “there is still time
to change our plans. Let us fight them straight out
and take all consequences.”
“ No, Edward,” came the answer; “we have no
quarrel with the people. It is only that old fraud the
tapu mamoose who is our enemy. I should like very
much if he were my opponent instead of his satellite
Begalonai.”
“ Let me meet the nigger instead o’ you,” cried one
of the comrades, a powerfully built Scot. “ I am as
tough as a rifle-barrel, and there’s no a man in all
New Guinea can stand mair knocking about than I
i>
can.
“We know that, Mac,” returned the chief, smiling;
“but I fancy I am pretty tough myself, and it is my
duty to represent you all. Besides, I am a trained
wrestler, you know, and if only I can get the grip I
want of the mamoose, the rest is easy.”
“But I can also wrestle a bit, Tom,” cried Edward.
“You know there are few men stronger than I ”
“No use, old fellow. This funeral is mine. But
they are waiting. If the worst comes to the worst,
boys, make Edward your chief and clear out.”
“ Not while we live,” spoke a slimly built young man
with delicately cut features. “ Tom, your mates will
never leave this country without you, and if you become
mamoose we’ll stay with you until we can all get safely
and honourably away.”


“ Remember that under-grip we’ve been practising,
chief,” said Edward. “ Press forward heavily until he
thinks he has you, and then throw all your strength
into that twist ”
“ The great white chief is afraid,” suddenly cried
the tapu mamoose in the native tongue. “See how
slow he is to come forward to receive what the gods
have in store for him.”
“You are an ugly old liar!” roared Bob Wilson
from the group of white men. “I only wish your
position was open to challenge ; if it were, I’d
reckon you’d have eleven fights on in a couple o’
shakes.”
“ Well, boys, good-bye,” said the chief. “ I’d better
get the thing through at once. Edward, you know all
that is necessary about me should anything happen.
Make things right with my old mother at home, look
after my sister, and keep a friendly eye on my young
brother.”
“Don’t speak of that, Tom,” interrupted Edward,
brokenly. “ Begalonai can’t stand against you, and
you’ll be mamoose of this tribe. We can then work
these mineral deposits in peace, and all get home
together very soon. Join hands, lads, and swear with
me that we’ll never leave our chief here, no matter
what happens. If he becomes mamoose we’ll stay with
him, and ”
“ We’ll die with him, I reckon, if he doesn’t become
mamoose,” finished Coolgardie Bill, examining his
revolver. His words expressed the thoughts of all, and
they joined hands all round in a final grip.
The tapu mamoose had again started to point out
how paltry the white chief was, and what glory awaited
their fighting mamoose by being the means of giving
their gods a white sacrifice. Their mamoose did not


quite see matters in the same light, however, and would
willingly have given up his prospects of glory to his
energetic second, Kalamo; but that was not in his
hands, and just then the white champion stepped forth,
and a hush fell over the assembly.
The two men who now confronted each other were
splendid specimens of physical development. Both
stood fully six feet in height, and both had muscles like
iron bands. The white chief had certainly greater
breadth of shoulder than the mamoose, but that pro-
bably was because of the difference in build between
the Anglo-Saxon and the Papuan races. They stood
still for a moment, then at a signal from the tapu
mamoose, closed with each other and swayed in deadly
embrace. The onlookers were silent. The combatants
strained and twisted, and their muscles stood out like
knotted ropes. Slowly the white chief seemed to be
pulled forward off his balance, but he still retained his
grip. The black men marvelled that any white man
should be able to stand up before their mighty warrior
mamoose for even a minute, but the white men
knew that whoever came out of that deadly grip was
the future mamoose. Next moment the end came ; the
white chief when, apparently, just about to be thrown,
recovered himself suddenly, and with a peculiar jerk and
a mighty effort of strength, pitched the mamoose over
his head. The warrior fell heavily to the ground
and lay still, and the white men set up a shout of
joy. But the natives did not seem to realize what
had happened ; they could not believe that it was their
famous mamoose who lay before them so quiet and
motionless.
The tapu mamoose, however, was frantic ; he had
not allowed for the defeat of his subordinate, and, seizing
a huge spiked club from Kalamo’s hands, he rushed on


the victor shouting in the native tongue, “It was
sorcery ! The white devils have used their magic to kill
the mamoose ! The gods will be avenged ! ”
“Look out, Tom ! ” cried Doc, springing forward.
“I am afraid the poor beggar has broken his
neck, Doc,” said the chief sadly, bending over Bega-
lonai. “ I am sorry, but there was no help for it,
and that grip of ours is deadly. What’s the shouting
about ?”
Doc did not answer, his face was white, and he
evidently had no intention of rendering service to the
fallen man. “ Quick ! ” he cried, catching his chief by
the arm and pulling him aside, and almost at that
second the tapu mamoose’s blow fell; but the chief was
not under it, and the club came down with mighty
force on Begalonai’s head-.
The white men now rushed forward to protect their
chief, but stopped suddenly with a groan. They were
too late. The tapu mamoose had again raised his club
and, ere Doc or the chief could turn round, had struck
the chief to the ground with a fearful blow, and his
blood gushed forth over the ground. Instantly ten
rifles covered the teacherous mamoose’s heart, but they
were not fired. Like a flash the chief had sprung to his
feet, and catching the tapu mamoose in his arms as he
was about to address the astonished people, he bent his
body over until his bones cracked ; then he flung him
headlong against the carved wooden crocodile which
guarded the entrance of the tapu doubo. The mamoose
struck the symbolical monstrosity with his head, and
the shriek on his lips died abruptly, and he too lay
still. Doc turned to dress the chiefs ugly wound.
He was now blinded with blood; but throwing his
comrade off he shouted in the native tongue, “ Tapu!
tapu ! lam your tapu chief. Kill all the white devils 1


Obey me, or I will call the curse of the gods upon
you ! ”
“ Take care, Tom,” cried Doc; “ these people will
do as you say. You are their mamoose now, re-
member.”
“Yes, I am mamoose,” cried the chief, his eyes roll-
ing wildly. “To the death with them, my people!
Give them to the water spirits ! They are not of us,
and are come to rob us ”
“ Catch him, boys,” cried Doc, springing out of his
comrade’s clutches ; “ he is mad.”
Mac and Bob rushed in and closed with their chief,
but with frenzied strength he threw them from him,
and shouting to the warriors, rushed at his comrades
with the tapu chief’s discarded bloodstained club.
With an answering shout which meant “ Hail to our
chief. He is mightier than the world! ” the people
followed him, and the white men stood helpless in
amazement.
“ Run, boys,” cried some one ; “ let us get to camp.”
And breaking through the warriors near them the white
men ran towards their camping ground, followed by a
howling mob of suddenly aroused fanatics, led by their
old chief
Reaching their camp on the mountain slopes they
entrenched themselves behind some boulders, and waited
with levelled rifles for the natives. But they did not
come, and the sun went down on the men still lying
behind the rocks.
After dusk, Doc and Mac set out cautiously for
the village to see how matters were there, hoping
that some lucky chance might enable them to carry off
their comrade. In a very short space of time they
returned.
“Let us get away, boys, at once,” cried Doc.


“ Kalamo has proclaimed Tom both tapu mamoose
and fighting mamoose, and they are coming to-night
to surround us, and give us as sacrifices to the
gods.”
“ Well, let them come,” growled Coolgardie Bill.
“ They’ll find us at home.”
“ No,” said Edward, whom the others now looked
upon as leader; “we can’t stay here if they are coming
prepared to attack us. If we do we shall be compelled
to fight, and Tom may be injured ; and if we don’t fight
we’ll be captured, and he will have our blood on his
hands. No, boys, we must not allow that; rather let us
get away to a place of safety until we can devise some
plan.”
“ Well, what are our orders now ? ” asked Canadian
Pete, who had been reconnoitring and had just returned.
“ I am sure I hear the niggers coming,”
“ Crawl up the hillside until out of the moonlight
patch, and then run for the pass on top and get down
to the big river which flows on the other side. There,
we shall be comparatively safe ”
“ Here they come,” cried Doc; “ seize all the ammuni-
tion you can, boys, and run.”
Silently the men vacated their position, and made
their way up the hillside into the darkness, and a horde
of yelling demons burst into the deserted camp. Next
instant their shouts of baffled rage showed that they had
become aware of their intended victims’ escape, but their
cries grew fainter and fainter until no longer heard. All
night long the eleven men struggled up the slopes and
over the pass on top, and when morning came they found
themselves on the other side of the range which encircled
the village.
“We can halt here, boys,” said Edward, wearily.
“ Let us get something to eat, and then we’ll think ”


A spear struck him on the chest as he spoke, and next
moment an army of painted savages burst out in front
of them.
“ What have we struck, boys ? ” roared Bob Wilson.
“ How have they got here before us ? ”
A big native with brandished club jumped up beside
him ere the words had left his mouth, and Bob sent a
revolver-ball into the upraised arm ; but the shot seemed
to have no effect, and before he could pull trigger again
the club came down, and Bob’s interest in affairs ceased
for the time.
“ Get under cover, boys,” cried Doc, dropping behind
a rock, and firing rapidly.
“ There ain’t no cover,” cried Coolgardie Bill ; “ the
natives are behind every rock in the place. Take that,
ye painted scarecrow ! ” he roared, striking a warrior to
the ground with his rifle-barrel. Meanwhile, Mac had
accounted for several of his assailants, and no native
stood long in his vicinity.
But nothing could withstand that savage rush for any
length of time, and one by one the comrades went down.
Those remaining fought until their rifle-barrels were
too hot to hold. But they had no hope. They were
fighting not fanatical natives, but an army of warriurs
controlled and guided by the skilful genius of their own
mad chief.
Only the slim youth, Mac, Doc, and another, an
Irishman, were now standing ; they had discarded their
rifles, and were shooting with their revolvers at any
natives who showed themselves. Then suddenly a native
sprang up behind Mac, and clubbed him on the head.
Mac reeled under the blow, but with a last effort of his
great strength he seized his rifle and broke its stock
over the head of his opponent; then he, too, glided into
forgetfulness. The slim youth next dropped behind


the rocks sheltering him, faint from loss of blood, and
a moment after the Irishman took careful aim at one
of the warrior leaders, pulled the trigger, and then lay
down.
The sun crawled up the heavens, and the warriors
departed ; then the Irishman rose and looked around.


CHAPTER I
The Accident at Tilbury Docks
The magnificent Orient Liner Ophir was slowly receding
down the Thames, and already most of the people who
had come down to Tilbury Docks to see their friends off
had made their way back to the special train waiting to
convey them to the city. A few still remained, however,
to catch the last glimpse of the noble steamer, and to
wave a final farewell to friends and relations whom they
might never see again ; and among those who still stood
was Harry Thorne, who, strangely enough, had no more
than a passing interest in any one on board. He was
a youth of about seventeen years, but from the thought-
ful expression on his handsome face an onlooker would
have imagined him to be somewhat older. And there
were onlookers, for Mr. Blackwood of the great trading
firm bearing his name, and in whose offices young Harry
was fast rising to importance as foreign clerk, was stand-
ing with his daughter Cathie just a few feet behind
Harry.
“You seem to know that young gentleman, father?”
cried Cathie, noting the frequent glances Mr. Blackwood
cast in Harry’s direction.
“Yes,” answered her father, slowly, surveying the
young gentleman in question ; “if I mistake not, he


will be, in time, a partner in the firm of Blackwood
& Co.”
“ Oh, how nice! But why does he seem so
sad ? ”
“ Probably some friend of his is on board the Ophir
bound for India, China, or Australia, to fill some more
lucrative position than he could ever hope to acquire at
home. I suppose I’ll have to keep an eye on Harry
after this, or some enterprising Colonial firm will snap
him up.”
“ Why have you never asked him home with you,
father ? lam sure he ”
“ He is yet, you must remember, but a servant of the
company, the same as a score of others. It would never
do for me to allow him to think I thought him worthy of
special encouragement —at least, until he has proved him-
self a little more. Although he is clever, his private
life is not known to me. His upbringing may not have
been all that could be desired, and, in fact, most clever
men of the present time have been a bit unstable at
his age.”
“ Nonsense, father ; your business principles outweigh
your sense of justice. Just look at his face now, and say
if you think he could be other than he looks—a quiet,
determined, self-reliant, high-principled young man. But
there is some one talking to him now. Let us go, or we
shall miss the first train.”
They turned and began to walk slowly along the
dock sides towards the station, Mr. Blackwood laugh-
ing heartily at Cathie’s enthusiastic defence of young
Thorne.
About a minute before the object of their conversa-
tion had taken his eyes away from the now fast-dis-
appearing steamer, and was likewise preparing to depart.
“ Ah, well,” he muttered resignedly ; “ there go another


five hundred or so to battle for fortune under a kindlier
sky. I wonder how long I shall be able to resist the
spirit of adventure that is in my blood as strong as ever
it was in my brother’s. It would kill my mother, though,”
he continued musingly, “ if I were to leave this country.
It was just such a day as this six years ago that Tom
sailed away, and he has never been heard of since
I beg your pardon.”
The last remark was addressed to a young man of
rather peculiar appearance whom he had stumbled
against heavily.
“ Don’t worry,” cried the individual addressed, in the
cheeriest voice imaginable. “ My! ye looks as miserable
as a bandicoot.” There was honest sympathy expressed
all over the speaker’s face, and although the few words
he had said did not mean much, Harry looked at him
for a moment, and then somehow felt as if he had known
him for quite a long time. The stranger was only a
boy, but the lines underneath the eyes, across the fore-
head, and down the cheeks, gave him an appearance
of age which seemed strangely incongruous. He was
tall but very slender for his height, and his face was
bronzed to the colour almost of a burnished penny.
His clothes were all that could be desired as regards
material and style, but they did not fit him, or rather,
he did not fit them, for he seemed to be all points
upon which his garments loosely hung. He was now
smiling in Harry’s face in a manner that invited
confidence.
“ A bandicoot ? ” repeated Harry, also smiling, as
with one accord they walked stationwards. “ What is a
bandicoot, and why is it miserable ? And do I really
look so hopelessly wretched, in any case ? ”
“ A bandicoot is a sort of cross between a kangaroo
and a rat—my ! many a time I’ve chased them in good


old New South—an’ it’s miserable ’cos it ain’t such a
curious sort o’ thing as a platypus, at least I reckon
that’s the reason. Hallo! What’s wrong ahead of
us ? ’’
A series of shouts and screams had suddenly broken
out from a crowd of people in front, and from the com-
motion which arose it was evident that some accident
had occurred.
“ It’s a woman in the water,” cried Harry’s companion ;
“she’ll be dragged among that tug’s paddles.” He
sprang from the high wharf sides as he spoke into the
swirling water, but Harry had anticipated him by a
second, and, being an exceptionally powerful swimmer,
reached the person in the water before any one on shore
fully realized that the chief danger lay in her being
drawn into the paddle-blades of a tug just entering the
docks with a gigantic P. &O. liner in tow. But the
rescue was still far from being effected, for although
several swimmers had now come up, and the tug’s
engines were stopped, the unwieldy craft behind, now
helpless in the narrow passage, swung round and
threatened to crush all between its iron hull and the
dock sides. Seeing this impending disaster first, and
entirely powerless to avert it, the people on shore became
frantic; but their shouts of warning only tended to con-
fuse those in the water. Harry, however, never relin-
quished his hold of his burden, and dimly realizing the
state of affairs swam steadily towards some landing-steps,
his late bronzed-faced companion assisting him in no
small degree. Meanwhile the other would-be rescuers
succeeded in getting aboard the tug, and one of them
with more presence of mind than the others shouted
as he clambered on deck, “ Start the engines again!
They are out of danger from the paddles now! Quick !
Pull up the slack behind or they’ll be crushed by the


liner.” In a moment the skipper understood, and
leaving it to Harry and his companion to keep clear
of paddles and propellers, he signalled “ Full steam
ahead,” and in response the tug shot out across the
dock, the line between it and the big ship became
taut, the tug heeled over with the strain until her
keel was visible, and one paddle revolved entirely in
the air. For a moment it seemed as if nothing
could check the ponderous side movement of the
liner, and the little tug was drawn back in spite of all
her efforts. The passengers on the steamer were now
as excited as those on shore, for it looked as if certain
destruction must overtake the trio in the water. Harry
was now within a few feet of the steps, and to his
surprise he saw his employer, Mr. Blackwood, standing
with ashen face waist-deep in the water. . “ Save your-
self,” gasped Harry to his helper; “ I’ll hold on to
her ”
“Does ye think Fm a Chinaman?” retorted his
friend ; “ Fm an Australian ”
A wild prolonged cheering from above interrupted
the Colonial’s speech, and next instant the pair threw
their unconscious burden into Mr. Blackwood’s arms,
and many ready hands dragged them on to the steps—
and safety.
“That war a kind of close business,” drawled the
Australian to Harry, a moment after, as they stood and
talked and shook themselves. “It kind of calls to mind
a circus we had in South Africa when the Boers cut
us up. I happened to be standing sideways, and the
bullets all missed me; but if I had been face on I
reckon Fd have been punctured past mending.” He
paused abstractedly for a moment, and then turned
away.
Meanwhile the liner was safely approaching the berth


intended for her, and a hysterical crowd of men and
women told Harry how, just when the hull was grazing
them, the tug had overcome the drifting momentum and
got the vessel in tow again. Just then Harry re-
membered that he had seen Mr. Blackwood on the
steps, and wondering what had brought him there, and
why he of all men appeared so excited when it was a
common saying in the office that his presence would
turn any room into a refrigerator, he was looking to see
if he were still among the crowd, when that gentle-
man himself stepped up behind him and grasped his
hand.
“ Harry, my boy,” he said brokenly, “ I can never
repay you for what you have done to-day ; but if there is
anything that wealth or influence can do for you, just tell
me and it shall be done.”
“Why, Mr. Blackwood,” cried Harry, “how strangely
you talk. I have done nothing more than several others
who also jumped into the water. We all got wet, only
I—thanks to that young Australian—why, where has he
gone ? —was fortunate enough to retain my hold of the
lady.”
“Yes, Harry, and if you had not held on, what would
have become of me ? ”
“Of you, sir ? Surely you are joking. What should
it matter to you although a serious accident had occurred ?
Oh, I beg pardon, sir; perhaps the lady is a friend of
yours.”
“ She is my daughter, Harry.”
“ What, sir ? ” cried Harry, astounded. He had never
known that Mr. Blackwood had a daughter, for there
being nothing in common, outside office affairs, between
Mr. Blackwood and his staff, they knew little of his
home life, and as he never mentioned any one other
than those with whom he had business relations, they


had gradually come to the conclusion that he had no
family.
“Yes, Harry,” Mr. Blackwood continued slowly,
“she is my daughter, the only being left to me on
earth, and if she had gone just now, I would have
followed her. I did not realize at first that it was she
who had slipped on that soapy substance over there,
and when it dawned on me, you were already beside
her. lam not a swimmer myself, and I knew that had
I jumped into the water it would only mean dividing
the attention of the dozen brave rescuers, and thus
impairing her chances. So I stood, and watched, and
waited, while that big steamer closed in on you. Oh,
it was horrible, Harry, to stand there helpless, and see
you and the others struggling—struggling against death
in two forms. You could have saved yourselves too,
up to the very last, but you, true heroes as you were,
never thought of such a thing, or my daughter would
now be with her mother in heaven.”
Mr. Blackwood paused, but Harry did not reply. He
was not accustomed to being made a hero, and did not
know what to say under the circumstances. The crowd
had now melted away, and a cab had already departed
for the Tilbury Hotel with Miss Blackwood and a
doctor, the latter calling out in passing that the lady
had completely recovered from all bad effects. The
big liner which had almost brought about disaster
was now disgorging her passengers, and seeing that
a great number of them were rushing through the
customs department to give him another ovation, Harry
said hurriedly, “ I am very glad indeed, sir, that
I was able to be of some slight assistance to Miss
Blackwood, but it is that young Australian who really
deserves most of the credit. He seems to have
gone away; but excuse me sir, I came down here
CB 7623 C


to see the purser of the Ophir about that consign-
ment to Singapore. I must be back in the office this
afternoon.”
“ No, no ; come over to the hotel with me. Get your
friend and bring him too. I will wire up for a change
of clothing for you. Besides, Cathie will want to thank
you herself.”
“ And I am sure, sir, that she will not feel very much
like receiving visitors to-day. There is a train coming
in now; I will be in the city in no time, and I must get
to the office.” The disembarked passengers were now
running round one of the barriers, and Harry was frantic
to get away before they arrived, so leaving his employer
abruptly with the words, “ I hope Miss Blackwood will
be all right again very soon,” he rushed towards the
station.
On the platform he ran into his Australian acquaint-
ance. “ Come in here,” Harry cried, opening the door
of an empty compartment.
“ I haven’t a ticket,” answered the Australian, whist-
ling.
“ Never mind ; we can pay at the other end.”
The Australian seemed to hesitate, but as the
train was just starting and there was no time for cere-
mony, Harry pushed him somewhat roughly into the
carriage.
“ Say, isn’t this a bit sudden on your part ? ” spoke
he of the lanky frame as the train cleared the platform.
“ I don’t know you from Moses, and ”
“ I apologize for my rudeness ” began Harry, but
he was interrupted.
“It ain’t that,” said the Australian; “ but how
do you know I was going to London ? an’, anyhow,
I don’t reckon you have any right to run me into
debt.”


“ What do you mean ? Aren’t you going to the
city ? What debt am I running you into ? ”
“ The price of my ticket, for I haven’t got a
rust.”
“ Oh, I am sorry. Are you out of employ-
ment ? ”
“ Well, I reckon you could put it that way. There
ain’t anything for me to do in this England of yours.
You see, I came over here to have a look at the place
after the war, and now I can’t raise enough dollars to git
away, but that doesn’t worry me. I’ll git back to see
the sun again somehow.”
“ Were you through the war ? ”
“Well, I reckon so, an’ if being in sixteen fights
counts for that, then you can bet on it.”
“ But how old are you ? ”
“ Now, mate, don’t start that racket. That’s what
old Major Baum said to me in Sydney when I sailed
into him to join the Imperial Bushmen of New South
Wales, an’ I told him I could ride anything on feet, an’
shoot straighter than lightnin’. Of course I was only
seventeen then, or sixteen an’ a half, but I didn’t tell
him that, an’ as I was ugly enough for a man twice my
age, I passed my tests easily an’ But say, mate, you
don’t happen to know of any one who wants somebody
to break in wild horses or lions or whales or anything,
do ye ? ’Cos I is the boss tamer of the Barcoo, an’ I
reckon my old captain—l wish I could find him—would
tell you I could break in a rainbow an’ ride it if it was
greased.”
Harry was puzzled. His companion was certainly
strange. “ I believe I can get you something to
do in our firm,” he said at length ; “but I don’t
think there are any horses or other animals to be
broken in. That was the daughter of our principal


whom you and I pulled out of the water an hour
_ })
ago.
“Was it now? Well, I reckon you is a lucky sort
of fellow. The last woman I hauled outen the
water was Biddy Malone of Wilcannia in New South
Wales, an’ as soon as I got her clear she turned an*
nearly shook the bones outen me. She said I
wanted to drink it all myself. That was in the Darling
River ”
“ The Darling River ? Why, that is the backbone of
the Australasian continent, and one of the largest rivers
in the world.”
“ That may be, when there’s any water in it; any-
how, Biddy thought she could drink it up herself
without me.”
This was too much for Harry’s gravity, and he
laughed outright.
“ I don’t see where the fun comes in,” said his friend
aggrievedly.
“ Why, how could a woman drink up a river ? ”
“Well, your edication has been pretty crook, an’ I
is sorry for ye,” sympathized the Colonial. “Doesn’t
ye know that sometimes the Darling is so big when
the rains are up in Queensland that it reaches across
from Cobar to White Cliffs, an’ the people of Bourke,
where I come from, keep boats for riding round
their paddocks, an’ then maybe, next year if the
drought is on, there won’t be enough water in the
whole stretch between Bourke and Wilcannia to drown
a mosquito.”
The tone of the speaker’s voice was plainly that
of pity for Harry’s ignorance ; but the latter allowed
him to run on, and received, before they arrived
at Fenchurch Street station, some very strange
pieces of information indeed. Incidentally at one of


the stops, while the Colonial was in the middle
of a narrative dealing with the aborigines of Aus-
tralia, Harry paid the collector the price of the ticket
from Tilbury, and shortly afterwards they reached the
city.
“Well, my name is Harry Thorne/' said Harry, as
they stepped into the street.
“ An’ mine is Bill White, but the boys all call me
Darling Bill,” replied his friend. “ But say, no one asked
me for a ticket.”
“Well, never mind; that is the railway company’s
look-out.”
“ But
“ Come home and dine with me, and get into dry
clothing. Where do you stay ? ”
“ I don’t stay anywhere just now. I am on the
wallaby.”
“ What is that ? ”
“Well, you are green. It means I am a sun
downer.”
“ And what is a sundowner ? ’
“ Great mulga! lam sorry for ye ; a sundowner is
a man that camps where night finds him, and moves on
again at sunrise.”
“Oh, I understand. But you can’t do that in
Britain.”
“Can’t I? That shows what you know. True,
it was only yesterday that my money fizzled out,
but last night I slept like a ’possum up a telegraph
pole.”
“ But it rained all night, and how could you hold on ? ”
“ What does rain matter to me ? An’ have I not
slept hundreds of times on a five-wire fence ? ”
“ Well, I’ll tell you what, Bill ; you come home and
camp with me. To-morrow is Saturday, and on Monday


I am sure you can get a start with Messrs. Blackwood
& Co.”
“ What would I have to do ? Break horses ? ”
“ No, break boxes, most likely, or rather open them.”
“ Huh ! A black boy could do that. That ain’t no
job for a white man. Hasn’t ye got no niggers in this
country ? ”
“ No, they don’t grow here; but I thought that
Australia would not allow coloured labour ? ”
“ Not for white men’s work ; but breaking boxes ain’t
no white man’s work. Now, if it was breaking heads, or
bullock driving, or opal mining, or even fossicking or
noodling, I wouldn’t mind having a try.”
“ What is fossicking and noodling ? ”
“ See here, mate.” Bill turned in righteous indigna-
tion. “Do ye mean to tell me ye doesn’t even know
that, or are ye only pullin’ my leg ? ” He stopped in the
street awaiting an answer.
“I am very sorry, Bill,” said Harry, contritely, “but
I am really very ignorant, and I would like very much
to know what fossicking and noodling is.”
“Well, I’ll tell you,” said Bill, mollified by Harry’s
words. “ Fossicking is looking round old abandoned
mines for the mineral that isn’t there, if the first owners
did their work right ; and noodling is picking gold slugs,
or maybe opal or other gems from the mullock dump
after every other man has given it best. Now do you
catch on ? ”
“ I think I understand,” answered Harry, vaguely.
“ But here is a tube station ; we’ll be home very soon
now.”
“ Are you going down there ? ” Bill came to a halt
at the entrance.
“ Yes, the tube is the fastest way out west, and it’s
time we had our clothes changed.”


“ Well, good luck to ye, Harry.”
“ But you are coming with me ? ”
“To be laughed at by your people ? Not
much.”
“ But you must come, Bill; my mother and sister
are the only people I have, and I am sure we all want
to know something of Australia. I had a brother who
went out there.”
“ Had you ? Now that I come to think of it, I know
a fellow like you, but it couldn’t be him, ’cos he’s a
proper out an’ outer.”
“ What is that ? ”
“Oh, I’m tired telling ye what everything is ; there
war’ no corks hangin’ on his hat.”
“ lam as mystified as ever,” said Harry. “ What had
corks hanging on his hat to do with him ? ”
“Oh, you are the freshest of all new chums ever I
met. It means he was all there. He could ride, and
shoot, and fight, boss the niggers—yes, an’ white men
too. Hullo ! look what I has noodled.” Bill stooped and
picked up a sovereign lying at his feet. “ Now, who in
thunder goes round dropping sovereigns like that ? ” he
continued.
“ That’s mine,” said a stranger, passing ; “ I dropped
that.” He clutched at the coin as he spoke, but Bill’s
hand closed a fraction of a second in time.
“ Oh, it’s yours, is it ? ” said Bill; “ I reckon you are
just the man that is wanted then for circulating bad
money. Here, Mr. Policeman ” but the
stranger had disappeared.
“Is it a bad one ? ” asked Harry, as Bill uncon-
sciously followed him to the train.
“ No, but I reckon every man in London will have
lost a sov. if we tell them we found one.”
Harry noticed that when Bill began talking he


became so absorbed in his subject that he did not
notice what was passing immediately around him, so
getting him started on the claims of Sydney to great-
ness over every other city, he kept him engaged until
they left the train and had arrived at Harry’s mother’s
house.
It was now too late to retreat, so Bill put on his best
behaviour and took greater care with his language, and
when Harry had explained to his mother and sister,
while Bill was trying on some of Harry’s garments,
the part Bill had played in the rescue of Mr. Black-
wood’s daughter, and of his intention to get him
some sort of a position on the Monday following,
the old lady’s heart went out to the poor wandering
Australian,
“Perhaps even now,” she said, “your brother Tom
may be a homeless wanderer in some foreign city. We
will make the poor boy feel as much at home as possible
for his sake ; who knows, some one may be doing the
same for poor Tom.”
Bill speedily became a great favourite with the
entire family, and while he regaled the ladies with his
most chosen tales of that great land of the Southern
Cross, Harry slipped out, and went down to Messrs.
Blackwood’s offices in the city. He soon attended to all
his duties there, and getting leave from the head clerk,
he returned home early without having informed any
one in the office of his adventure at Tilbury that day.
Next day was Saturday, and Bill accompanied Harry
to the office. He left him there and went off to have
a look round the gem-dealers’ shops in Hatton Garden,
arranging to meet Harry again at one o’clock to go
home with him.
Mr. Blackwood did not put in an appearance that
day, but about noon a message arrived from him


requesting Harry’s presence at his house that evening
if convenient, and also desiring him to bring his
Australian friend. To his surprise Bill was not at the
meeting-place arranged when Harry left the office, but
thinking they had made some mistake between them,
after waiting an hour, he went home, fully expecting to
find Bill there. But Bill was not there, and Harry was
just on the point of setting out to look for him when
the afternoon post handed in a letter and a parcel
addressed in a strange handwriting. Hastily opening
it, he read :
“Dear Mate,
“ I have fallen across a good thing to-day. I
went into a shop in Hatton Garden to see if some opals
I had were worth anything, and after a deal of barrack-
ing the old Jew gave me five sovs. each for them, and
asked for more, I know where there are lots of the
same kind, in the rough, of course, and am now making
tracks for Queensland. If you will be my mate, come
out after me. I will leave my address at the Hotel
Metropole, Sydney, and I send you half of the plunder
I got to-day, now, I have another plan on, too, but I
can’t talk of it yet. Please give the opal lam sending
in another parcel to your sister, and tell her that Darling
Bill is on the track.
“ Your mate,
“Darling Bill,
“ Of New South Wales,
Harry found enclosed four ten-pound notes. He
gazed at them mechanically for a few seconds, then
re-read the letter. Still in a fit of abstraction, he
opened the little parcel, and disclosed a splendid
polished opal at the “pin-fire ” variety. “ Here, Mary,”


he cried to his sister, “this is for you.” He handed
her both letter and opal. She took them with shaking
hands, and when she read the last line of the letter,
to his unbounded astonishment, she uttered a cry and
fainted.


CHAPTER II
The Mysterious Opals
Harry’s sister was several years older than himself.
She had been a girl of sixteen years when her brother
Tom, who was eight years older than she was, had left
home to seek his fortune in a foreign land. A year
after he had sailed she received a letter from him
posted at some far inland Australian township, telling
her that he had found an opal deposit, which, if the
gems had any value, would make him a rich man.
“ There was no market for them in Australia,” he said,
as the stones were of a peculiar dark tint, and nothing
like them had ever been found before, but as he was
sending a parcel of them home to some gem merchants
in London, he would know in time. He also sent her an
exquisite, cut opal, which he said was the first stone taken
from his claim, and drew her attention to the manner
in which it differed from all other varieties of opal in its
dark translucent flashes of vari-coloured fire. Evidently,
however, the stones had no special value, for she did not
hear from him again, although she wrote many times to
the peculiarly named township whence his letter had
come. Another year passed away, and then Tom’s old
comrade came to her and said that he too was tired of
the dull monotony of life in London, where a man would
have to grow old tied down to a desk before he could


reasonably hope to have a chance of seeing what the world
was like, and by that time other responsibilities would
prevent him from travelling, or he would have lost the
inclination. She gave Edward the name of the town-
ship in Australia from which Tom had written ; she had
since determined that it was on the borders of Queens-
land and New South Wales, and was near some gold
mines ; and with these vague directions Tom’s friend had
set out to find him. About six months afterwards she
received a letter from Edward, which said, among other
things, that he had located the township of Tipooburra,
and had even found Tom’s opal claim. Tom, however,
had gone farther north with some old prospectors, but
already he was on his track. He also sent another piece
of opal which he had dug out of Tom’s abandoned mine,
and on getting it cut it was the exact counterpart of
the stone Tom had sent her. She had heard nothing
from either Tom or Edward since that time, but the
belief that both were alive and well was always strong
within her.
Something of this history had been told to Bill after
Harry had gone out to the office the preceding day, and
Bill had listened with the greatest attention, and even
asked some questions, so that when Miss Thorne saw
another opal identical with the two she already possessed,
and read again almost the same words as Edward had
written to her, it seemed to her as if fate were playing
some trick on her, and she fainted. Mrs. Thorne and
Harry soon brought her round, and she then explained
matters as far as lay in her power. Some time after
Harry donned his overcoat, for it was a chilly October
night, and went out to call on Mr. Blackwood and his
daughter.
That evening was a remarkable one for Harry in
several ways. He was so unaccustomed to the society


of ladies other than his mother and sister that he felt
like a bashful schoolboy in the presence of Miss Black-
wood, who was about a year younger than himself, and
actually blushed when that sweet-faced girl addressed
him. During dinner any one unacquainted with Harry
would have been justified in putting him down as a
clownish sort of youth unused to good society, for his
monosyllabic answers were just what might be expected
of one awed by the presence of his superiors. But with
true womanly intuition Miss Blackwood perceived the
real reason of Harry’s backwardness, and at once set
about drawing him out of himself.
“Do you collect picture postcards, Mr. Thorne?”
she inquired by way of beginning, after they had
adjourned to the drawing-room.
“ No, I have no time.”
“ What a pity. I think it delightful to have pictures
of all the wonderful places in the world. It is the next
best thing to seeing them one’s self. Come, I will take
you round the world in my album.” Rising, she picked
up a large volume which proved to contain her collection.
“ Now,” she said, reseating herself by his side, “ I have
arranged all my cards according to the trade routes of
the world. You see, I have my father’s commercial
instinct.”
“ Do you know the trade routes of the world ? ” asked
Harry.
“ Don’t I? ” she laughed. While Mr. Blackwood
added, “She knows them better than I do, Harry,
and I believe could give you some points as to
the best routes to Central Asia and other inaccessible
parts.”
“ Come round the world with me per P. & 0., Mr.
Thorne,” Cathie cried. “On postcards, of course,” she
added, as Harry blushed furiously ; “ but if you are very


nice you may imagine it real, and fancy these are deck-
chairs we are sitting on.”
“ May I come too ? ” said Mr. Blackwood. “It is a
long time since I had a holiday, and an ocean trip would
do me good.”
“ Then draw up your deck-chair, and don’t say smart
things to break the spell. Now, then, we are going to
travel on board the India right out to Sydney in Australia,
and there we can tranship for other parts if we choose.”
Miss Cathie opened her album, and assumed a serious
aspect. “ The first card is the steamship India itself
lying out in the Thames off Tilbury Docks,” she said.
“Now, take a good look at her, for we are just about to
embark, and we have a long journey to go before we
reach Sydney.” She shuddered as she spoke, and Mr.
Blackwood and Harry both felt that they would have
preferred not to have seen the India , for she was in the
position off Tilbury whence the Ophir had departed, and
the scene of the accident the day before was in the fore-
ground of the picture. Miss Cathie turned the page
hurriedly. “We are all on board now ; all friends are
left on shore,” she said, “and we are sailing down
the river. See, that is the Medway over there, and
there are barges coming up with the tide ; and look,
there is an Allan liner—you know her by her funnel —
coming in from the Argentine with frozen mutton.
Now, you can listen to the beat of the engines until
we turn the page to the next card, which you see is
Dover ”
“ I’ve caught you,” cried Harry. “ The P. &O.
steamers pass Dover after dark ”
“By moonlight,” continued Cathie, showing the
picture ; and Harry felt himself a bigger fool than
ever.
“ This card is supposed to show Ushant lighthouse,


but it doesn’t, because we are too far out to sea, and this
card is supposed to depict life on board in the Bay of
Biscay.”
“ But there is no one on deck at all,” said Mr.
Blackwood.
“ Certainly not. This is an actual photograph ; every
one is below, sick. But see, we are now off the Portu-
guese coast; there is Lisbon in the distance behind
those rocks, and here is our first glimpse of Gibraltar—
Gib. we passengers call it. Now, Mr. Thorne, you will
have to take me ashore to see the sights in town. See,
that is the great fortress straight ahead. Ah, our anchor
is down now, and there come the bum-boats with tobacco,
silks, fruit, and all sorts of things. Now, we are in the
main street. Look at the lazy Spaniards with their
eternal cigarette; you see, tobacco is duty free in Gib-
raltar. But we only wait a few hours here; let us get
back to the ship. See all those military men walking
along; I suppose they are all field-marshals or privates
or something like that. This is our last view of Gib-
raltar. Look back at all those warships. I suppose,
father, that fleet can fight any other possible combina-
tion in the Mediterranean ? ”
“ Well, they would make a good try, my dear; but
the combined French and Italian fleets would be very
formidable.”
“Well, we can have a look at the French squadron
later. Marseilles is our next port, and all these cards
deal with that town. See, there is the Chateau dTf—
Monte Christo’s castle. This is the Palais de Long-
champs ; that is a general view of the town. See how
crowded it is. Oh, you can buy me some silks here,
father, and you, Mr. Thorne, may buy me some flowers
in the market there.”
“ You can join the steamer here by leaving London


five days later than the steamer itself and travelling
overland,” ventured Harry.
“Yes ; how nice that must be. We could see Paris
on the way,” said Cathie, turning her large brown eyes
on Harry. “ Please remember to send me some
post-card views of Paris, Mr. Thorne, when you go
there.”
Harry felt that he had received a commission equal
to any that his Sovereign could give him, and promised
fervently that he would send her hundreds if ever he
should be in Paris.
“ But we are behind time, Cathie,” interrupted
Mr. Blackwood. “We ought to be nearing Naples
now.”
“ Father, I am surprised at you,” said Cathie, serenely.
“ Can’t you remember that we are on a P. & O. boat.
The Orient Line go to Naples, but we go straight to
Port Said, and here we are at the entrance to the Suez
Canal already.”
“ We have had a record passage down the Mediter-
ranean,” said Harry, entering into the spirit of the
voyage. “ Will you come ashore with me, Miss Black-
wood ? ”
“ Oh, not at Port Said, Mr. Thorne ; it is a very
wicked place—worse even than London. I never go
ashore there ; we can see all the town from the steamer.
There are coal barges coming out with all those black
men to give us coal; how funny they look running up
and down the gangways in this picture. That big build-
ing is the Canal Company’s offices, and there are a lot
of curio-sellers and conjurors sitting near us. But I
don’t like Port Said ; let us get away down the canal to
Suez.”
Harry smiled.
“Do please tell me what you are laughing at,


Mr. Thorne,” said Cathie, sweetly. “ Have I said any
thing wrong ? ”
“ No, not exactly,” answered Harry, now completely
at ease with his charming companion. “ Only we’ll have
to put wheels on the India if we want her to take us to
Suez.”
“ Ha, ha! ” laughed Mr. Blackwood. “ You’re caught
this time, Cathie. Suez is not on the canal at all ;
Port Taufik is the name of the little town at the other
end.”
“ Oh, I am sorry,” began Cathie, “ really I
thought ”
“ It’s not your fault; Suez ought to have been there,”
broke in Harry, gallantly. “You can’t help it if the men
who dug the canal made a mistake.”
“ Hardly a mistake, Harry,” said Mr. Blackwood —“ a
correction, rather.”
“ I don’t know, I have never seen the Suez Canal ;
but I say it ought to be wherever Miss Blackwood likes
to put it.”
“Thankyou, Mr. Thorne,” smiled Cathie, happy now
that she had succeeded in making Harry feel at home ;
“you may take me ashore at Colombo for saying that.
But we are in the Red Sea now; that is Mount Sinai
over there behind those other peaks ; this is Perim
island, one of Britain’s outposts; and here we are at
Aden.”
“ Don’t stop too long, then,” put in Mr. Blackwood.
“Remember that we only wait here long enough to
tranship Bombay passengers and mails.”
“ Well, just look at those boys diving from the mast,
and we’ll go full steam ahead for Colombo. It’s much
too hot to wait in Aden.”
“ It is only a black, burnt rocky waste, anyhow,”
said Harry, “in which we keep soldiers so as to be
CB 762) D


ready to go anywhere at a moment’s notice —but what
is that ? ”
“ That is the island of Socotra ; it has never been
explored, and after we leave its shelter we shall be right
into the teeth of the Monsoon—that’s the proper expres-
sion, isn’t it, father ? ”
“ I am not a sailor myself,” answered Mr. Black-
wood, “ but we’ll let it pass this time. What is
next ?”
“ Colombo, the parting of the ways, the changing
place for south and east. But you promised to take me
ashore here, Mr. Thorne.” She glanced mischievously
at Harry.
“It will give me the greatest pleasure,” said Harry ;
“ but as I have never been here before, perhaps you will
not laugh more than you can help at my ignorance of
things.”
“ Oh dear, no, but watch those gem merchants coming
on board do not swindle you, and don’t give the man in
that boat what he asks for taking us ashore.”
“ Then come along. Hullo! what sort of craft is
this ? It looks like a long log with an outrigger.”
“ That is a catamaran. They can travel very quickly
through the water, and the natives can go quite far out
to sea in them.”
“ Ah, then, this I believe is the main street in
Colombo : that seems to be a large temple over there,
G.O.H. it is named. I suppose that is some Bhuddist
god ? ”
“ Oh, you foolish boy,” cried Cathie, taking the book
from him. “ That is the Grand Oriental Hotel.”
“ And what picture is that underneath ? ”
“Why, don’t you recognize our fellow-passengers
on the India going out on rickshaws to Mount
Lavinia ? ”


“ Oh, those spidery wheeled things with a man pulling
them are rickshaws ? ”
“ Yes, of course ; what else could they be ?”
Harry didn’t know, but then there were lots of things
he didn’t know. “ Well, at least come and have afternoon
tea with me at one of these cool-shaded tables. Tea
should be good in Ceylon.”
“ Oh, what fun! Do you know how to count their
money ? It’s rupees, you know.”
“ Oh, when it comes to money I’m all right,” laughed
Harry. “A rupee is at present worth one shilling and
fourpence.”
“But listen, you young people,” interposed Mr.
Blackwood ; “ you’re leaving me out of the tea-party
altogether. Now, I think, seeing that the P. & O.
Company allows us to break our journey, we should
stay at Colombo for a time, and resume our voyage
the first night Harry will pay us another visit. Let us
have some music now.”
“Oh yes ; I forgot, father, that it wasn’t real. We’ll
go on to Sydney next ship, Mr, Thorne.”
“ I could go on now,” said Harry, “with a great deal
of pleasure.”
Somehow it had all been very pleasant for him, and
in fancy he pictured himself flying around the globe from
port to port and from people to people, and yet he felt
the picture was not complete, nor could he at the time
determine what was lacking - .
o
But Cathie had moved over to the piano, and strains
of an old English melody were now filling the room. The
music was to Harry enchanting, and under its spell he
seemed to pass into a kind of hypnotic trance, in which he
was one minute fighting his way through hostile natives,
and the next climbing some fire-belching peak. Then
the vision would change, and the dense tropical forest,


with its luxuriant and gorgeous vegetation, would give
place to a moonlight scene or some swiftly rushing
river on which he seemed to be floating with dozens of
crocodiles snapping at him from all points. Something
seemed always to save him, however, and an exquisite
voice was for ever singing in his ears, and he was con-
scious of gaining steadily upon some desired object when
he was aroused by the voice of his dreams sounding
much nearer than hitherto, saying, “ Do you sing, Mr.
Thorne ? ”
He roused himself by an effort of will, knowing
now whose the voice of his vision was, and also feeling
as if he were a great animal, for had he not slept while
Miss Cathie was singing ?
“ I have not much of a voice,” he answered modestly,
“but if you will play anything for me I think I might
manage through.” But Harry really had a very fine
voice, and even Mr. Blackwood was forced to remark
after he had sung one or two familiar airs—
“You might do worse, Harry, than adopt singing
as a profession, should your other ships not get home.
Have you any brothers or sisters ? ” inquired Mr.
Blackwood, during a pause occasioned by Cathie
leaving the room to give some necessary order to the
servants. Harry had just explained in answer to Mr.
Blackwood’s inquiry that his Australian friend had left
suddenly that day, when the second question followed.
By this time, however, Harry had come to look upon his
employer not so much as a purely business machine
with no thought of his employees’ affairs, but rather as
a kindly old gentleman with whom he was on especially
good terms, so he answered at once, without showing the
surprise he would have felt at being asked about his
people but the day before —
“ I have one sister, sir. She and my mother are all


I have in this world ; I had a brother, but he went
abroad six years ago, and has not been heard of these
last five years.”
“ Oh, have you a lost brother, Mr. Thorne ? ” cried
Cathie, overhearing his words as she re-entered the
room. “ I have a cousin somewhere, no one knows where ;
but I feel sure he is alive and well.”
“He will come back some day, Cathie,” said Mr.
Blackwood, gently. “I have agents looking for him all
over the world.”
“ Then you know now, father, that he had nothing
to do with those dreadful papers or whatever it was ? ”
Cathie’s voice was eager.
“ Oh, I never really suspected him of that. —You must
have heard the story, Harry, though it happened before
your time in the office. Some irregularities occurred,
and things looked very black indeed against Edward,
my nephew, who was in charge of the particular depart-
ment involved. I asked him for an explanation, never
doubting but that one would be forthcoming, but to my
surprise—l might almost say horror —he would give
none, and persisted in saying he knew nothing about
the affair. This I could not believe, and after a stormy
scene, in which my temper got the better of me, I told
him that henceforth I would manage my business without
his assistance. He took me at my word and walked out
of the office, and I never saw him again. That was five
years ago. My cashier was imprisoned for his share of
the work, and, when too late, he confessed that he alone
was guilty and had tried to implicate my nephew to
avert suspicion from himself. Since then I have caused
a search to be made almost everywhere for him, but with
little result.”
Mr. Blackwood rose and left the room, and Cathie
turned to Harry. “ I don’t know what he was supposed


to have done,” she said. “ But I know he could do
nothing unworthy of a gentleman, and he was so
nice and big and handsome too, and always so good
to me.”
“ I am very sorry for you,” said Harry, marvelling at
the resemblance to his own brother’s disappearance.
“ The story that is common in the office is that some
money was stolen ; and a lot of scrip, that is shares, in
a very valuable trading concern, was also removed from
your father’s safe. Some of the scrip was found in your
cousin’s desk, I believe, but the bulk was never recovered,
and apparently he never entered the office again. The
cashier was trapped soon after, and some other missing
property was found upon his person, and seeing the
hopelessness of his position he confessed that he alone
was guilty of everything, and that Mr. Edward really
knew nothing. That is all I have ever heard of the
affair, for it was before my time ; but Mr. Edward was a
great favourite with every one, and there is not one in
the office but would like to see him back again.”
“ Oh, if I could only tell him that I never believed
what the nasty people said about him! ” cried Cathie.
“ I wish I were a man so that I could go and look for
him.”
“ I will be going to look for my brother some day ;
will you commission me to look for him too ? ”
“ Oh, Harry—l mean Mr. Thorne —if between us we
could only find him, I would make you, after him, my
hero. But there, lam forgetting ; father says you will rise
to a high position in the mercantile world, and that, of
course, will prevent you from ever leaving the beaten
track.”
“ I am grateful for your father’s kind words, Miss
Blackwood, but notwithstanding, as soon as I can con-
vince my mother that I am quite able to look after


myself anywhere, I am going out to Australia to look
for my brother Tom. He was last heard of there at
some opal mines.”
“ I do hope you will find him, Harry, and get him to
come home with you. I must call on your sister ; how
she must grieve over him, for I know how I feel myself
about my cousin. But you mentioned an opal mine. Do
you know I have, or rather had, up to yesterday, a
necklet of opals like no other opals known. My father
bought the stones somewhere to match one sent me by
Edward from Australia some time after he left, and
got them set as a birthday present for me three years
ago, and I believe they are of enormous value.”
“ Opals ! That is strange. Since yesterday I have
been hearing of opals everywhere, and always of a
different kind from that already known. My sister has
three very pretty stones, but I believe they have not
much value.”
“ Don’t you believe that, my boy,” said Mr. Black-
wood, standing in the doorway, where he had been
watching the pair for about a minute. “ Opals are all
valuable, and the more they are different from the usual
variety the greater that value increases. Why, I am
offering a very large reward indeed for the recovery of
Cathie’s necklet, hoping that the amount will tempt the
thief to return the stones.”
“ The thief, papa ? Do you think they were
stolen ? ”
“My dear little girl, lam sure of it. Some scoundrel
took them from your neck yesterday in the water. You
remember you insisted on wearing your necklet when
we went down to see the Ophir away, and it has not
been seen since—since the accident.”
Mr. Blackwood spoke disjointedly. He wished to
think of that dreadful half-hour the day before as little


as possible, and anything that tended to remind him
caused him painful emotion. Cathie herself had already
forgotten it, and only shivered when she thought of her
sensations when the cold water closed over her. Harry,
however, seemed to be the most affected of the three,
but his emotion did not altogether arise from his recol-
lections of the accident. He was thinking hard, trying
to piece together several facts. Why were opals haunt-
ing him now? His sister had three stones, one of which
she received only that day —Bill the Australian sent it
to her ; it, too, was a peculiar opal, as were those com-
posing Miss Blackwood’s necklet. How did Bill come
to have such rare gems ? And, Great Powers! he had
not had enough money to pay his train fare from Tilbury
only the day before, and he had never even mentioned
opals ! Where did he get the gems ? Could there be
any possible connection between his obtaining possession
and Miss Blackwood losing them ? No, how could there
be ? Ah ! Bill had been in the water too, and had assisted
in rescuing Miss Cathie ; could he have taken the opals
then ? No, he would not believe that of his Australian
friend. Bill was as straight as a die
“ What are you dreaming about, Mr. Thorne ? ” The
speaker was Cathie.
“ Oh —I have been wondering how your opals got
lost, and ”
“ That postcard trip has just given me an idea,
Harry,” remarked Mr. Blackwood, who had not been
paying much attention to the conversation for some time.
“ You do know the world fairly well.”
“Only what I have learned, sir, as foreign clerk in
your office.”
“ Ah, well, the fact remains that your knowledge of
geography is extensive, and I know you have the
wanderer’s blood in your veins.”


“ I think I must have, sir ; I often feel 1 would like
to go away to some land where no one has been
before ”
“ And open up trade, I suppose ? ”
“To be honest, sir, I can’t say I ever thought of
that; but it doesn’t matter, one in a family is enough to
be lost in the wilds and ” He stopped ;he did not
like to say that he would leave Mr. Blackwood’s service
for foreign parts whenever an opportunity offered.
“Well, Harry, here is a proposal. I spend a great
deal of money employing agents to look for my nephew,
as I think I mentioned to-night already. Now, I heard
only yesterday that he had been traced to New Guinea.
Would you take in hand to go and look for him and
bring him home ? ”
“ I am afraid, sir, you overrate my powers.”
“Oh no, I don’t. You, of course, could not go into
that fearful country, but you could make inquiries at
all the ports and instruct all Government officials and
missionaries to look for him. If you found he had gone
elsewhere—to Australia, for instance —you could follow
and institute inquiries throughout the whole country on
my behalf.”
“ But there are people better fitted to do that kind of
work than I,” said Harry, restraining the fierce excitement
which had seized him.
“ That may be, but somehow I have got the idea that
you will be successful, and that is more than all the
people I have employed have been. Will you go ? ”
For a moment the blood rushed madly through
Harry’s veins. Here was the chance to gratify the
ambition of his life. His eyes fell on Miss Cathie, She
was looking at him with her wonderful large eyes as if
his decision meant everything to her.
“You can look for your own brother at the same


time,” she faltered, fearing Harry was about to
refuse.
“ Mr. Blackwood,” said Harry, “ I will gladly take the
task in hand if you really wish me to do so. When
shall I start ? ”
“ Whenever you wish, my boy. You know all the
routes better than I do. I shall place money to your
credit in Sydney or Singapore, whichever port you
determine to make your centre,”
Harry began to think. Already he was wondering
how he could catch Darling Bill. He could join forces
with him, and his services would be invaluable. But
then, how did he obtain his opals ? The thought worried
Harry.
“Of what are you thinking, Mr. Thorne ? ” said
Cathie. “ Are you already roaming through trackless
forests ? ”
“ I was thinking of your opals,” answered Harry,
abstractedly.
“ Bother the opals! Father can buy me some
more.”
Mr. Blackwood laughed. “ I am not the Bank of
England, Cathie,” he said ; “ but come and have a bit of
supper now ; it is getting late.”
About an hour afterwards Harry prepared to take
his departure.
“ Come and cheer us up again, Harry, whenever you
find time,” said Mr. Blackwood, as with his daughter he
accompanied H any to the hall.
“ Yes, remember we have to complete our voyage to
Sydney,” added Cathie.
“ I shall be only too glad to come, Miss Blackwood,
and go anywhere with you on picture postcards, or ”
He stopped suddenly. His eyes were fixed on his coat
hanging where the servant had placed it.


“ Why, what is the matter, Harry ? ” asked Mr.
Blackwood.
“ I—l don’t know. What is that —who put that
there ? ” He walked forward as he spoke and caught
hold of a tiny chain which projected from one of his coat
pockets ; it came away in his hand, and he held a scintil-
lating mass of vari-coloured gemstones.
“My necklet!” cried Cathie, rushing up. “Oh,
Harry, how did you get it ? ”
“ Hullo ! ” remarked Mr. Blackwood. “ This is strange.
You never mentioned having the opals, Harry?”
“ What a pity, father ! The chain is broken and quite
a number of the stones are missing,” pouted Cathie, as
Harry silently, but with face as hot as fire, passed them
into her hands.
“ How did you get them, my boy ? ” spoke Mr.
Blackwood.
“ I—don’t know,” stammered Harry. “ They were not
there when I came here; some one must have placed
them in my pocket. Then as he thought Mr. Blackwood’s
face became stern at this lame explanation, and realized
his awful position, he became desperate.
“ I never saw them before,” he cried wildly, but even
as he spoke he noted their resemblance to the stones his
sister had in her possession, and he flushed again. He
glanced at Cathie. She was staring at him with wide-
open eyes —eyes more brilliant than the sparkling gems
in her hand.
“ Some one has done this to ruin me,” he cried.
“Nonsense, Harry,” said Mr. Blackwood ;“you surely
do not imagine that I would believe you knew anything
about this ? ”
“ Some one must have put them in his pocket since
he came here,” cried Cathie. “ Who could it be ? ”
An idea flashed across Harry’s brain. The Australian


must have been the thief. “ I can’t explain how these
stones came into my possession,” he said, forcing him-
self to become cool by an effort of will, “ because I
don’t know. I have an idea, however. You were good
enough, sir, to ask me to go abroad. Does that offer
still stand ? ”
“ Certainly, Harry, and we need no explanation.
You do not know ? That is sufficient. I have gained
experience since I drove my poor nephew away because
he could not explain.”
“ Then, sir, if it is all the same to you I will start
to-night.”
“ What! ” cried Mr. Blackwood ; and Cathie gazed at
him in wonderment.
“ The express from Charing Cross to-night connects
with the North German Lloyd at Naples. If I miss it
I can’t leave until the P. & O. connection goes next
week, and I have an idea that much depends on my
immediate action.”
“ But, Harry, I cannot allow you to go away without
being fully equipped.”
“ I have two hours, sir, and have everything I require
until I reach Sydney.”
“ But why this abruptness ? We want you with us
for a little while.”
Harry was thinking rapidly. “Because,” he said,
“ the place where these mysterious opals came from
originally holds the secret of both my brother’s and your
nephew’s fate. Darling Bill must know the place, for
I will not believe that he stole the opal he gave my
sister to-day, and it is the same as those in that chain.”
“ No, no, Harry. Forget about the opals. You can’t
run away like that.”
“ But I must go, sir. He left for Australia to-day,
and 1 must catch him.”


Mr. Blackwood was about to protest again, but the
look of determination on the boy’s face stopped him, and
he began to think that the person who could leave for
the other end of the world on so short a notice was
the one most likely to find his nephew. “ Very well,
Harry,” he said after a moment’s thought. “We will
be at the station to see you away, if you can catch the
train. I will bring enough gold with me to see you
through.”
Harry turned and ran from the room. His brain was
on fire with crowding thoughts.


CHAPTER 111
A World Wanderer
The cool night air came as a great relief to Harry, and
soon he had controlled himself sufficiently to enable him
to think clearly. The confused ideas surging through his
brain then became merged into one that stood out clear
and distinct, and as calmly and dispassionately as his
strength of will would permit, he proceeded to reason it
out. Opals had been haunting him all night, and
always of the same particularly rare variety. His
sister had received hers from her brother Tom, Miss
Cathie had also received some from her cousin which
must have come from the same place. Then Darling
Bill had given a stone of exactly the same variety to his
sister that day. Clearly he must have taken it from
Cathie in the water or else have found it where the others
originated. No, he would not believe Bill had stolen
the opals ; he would be loyal to his strange comrade.
Mr. Blackwood had not doubted him, although the stones
had been found in his pocket. Why, therefore, should
he allow circumstantial evidence to weigh against Bill ?
Surely he could be as charitable as Mr. Blackwood, the
stern City merchant.
Musing in this manner he ran on, and suddenly, in
a dark part of the deserted street, collided with some one
who at once flung a pair of enormously strong arms


around him, and despite his struggles carried him to
the nearest lamp. “ Yours is surely a new method,”
said the stranger, depositing Harry on his feet under
the light, but retaining a grip on his arm. “ I thought
I knew every variation of the game, but your style
beats me.”
“ Let me go. Ido not know what you mean. lam
in a great hurry,” cried Harry, still struggling to free
himself.
“No doubt. Enlighten me as to where your comrades
come in in this little game, and how your system works
when you single out a man in the dark who, for all you
know, might be able to eat you all, and I may let you
go.” He looked closely into Harry’s face as he spoke,
and started slightly, as if surprised.
“ I told you already I don’t know what you mean,”
cried Harry. “ I was only running down the street when
we collided, and it seems to me you were at fault as
much as I was.”
“ Oh, then you are not a member of a gang of night
prowlers ? ”
“ Certainly not. My name is Harry ” He
paused. What right had this man to know his
name ?
“ Never mind telling me who you are, my boy,” said
the stranger in a kindlier tone of voice. “ But you must
not run as you were doing through the streets of London,
even although they are deserted in this quarter at this
hour, or the police will assuredly stop you and make you
explain matters.” He slackened his grip on Harry s
arm.
“ But I have done nothing,” said Harry.
“ Then why run away ? ”
“ Because But what is it to you, and who said
I was running away ? ”


“ Oh, no one. I perceive now that you were merely
taking a form of exercise ; rather unusual time, is it not ?
But you are excited over something, my boy. Go home.
In the morning you’ll probably find your troubles are not
so bad as you think. Good night.”
“ Good night,” responded Harry, “ and thank you.”
He continued his journey, but no longer in an excited
manner, although the mystery of the opals being found
in his possession puzzled him sorely.
When he reached home he told his mother and
sister everything in a brief and concise manner, and con-
cluded with the startling statement that the Continental
express left in an hour’s time, and that he must be a
passenger.
Naturally, they raised objections at once, but when
Harry pointed out that he was not fleeing from justice,
but actually commissioned by Mr. Blackwood, and that
on his catching the German steamer at Naples on
Monday rested a chance of his being able not only
to trace Mr. Blackwood’s nephew, but to find out
something of his own brother as well, they modified
them.
“Very well, then, Harry,” Mrs. Thorne said at last;
“ I could never have consented to let you go were it not
that I have a presentiment that Tom needs you in some
way. I dreamt of him last night, and it seemed as if he
were in some strange place he could not leave until you
arrived. Promise me that you will not stay away after
your work is finished ; and so strong is my feeling that
you will find Tom, and be of service to him, that I will
allow you to go.”
Harry gave the required promise, and soon after,
accompanied by his mother and sister, he was in a cab
speeding towards Charing Cross.
Mr. Blackwood and Cathie met them at the station


laden with a great number of articles likely to benefit
Harry on his long journey, and while Mr. Blackwood
took Harry aside to give him some parting instructions
and advice, the ladies became great friends. In some
mysterious manner the idea had grown upon them
all that Harry would be successful in his mission,
and be the means of restoring to them their lost
dear ones.
“You have a free hand, Harry,” Mr. Blackwood said
as the train was about to depart, “ and you needn’t worry
about home matters. I will look after your mother and
sister,”
“ And we will all go with you in my postcard
album,” cried Cathie.
Then the train dashed out over the points into the
night.
Forty-eight hours later Harry stood on the deck of
the magnificent liner Barbarossa watching the twinkling
lights of beautiful Naples fade away. Overhead grim
Vesuvius glowed spasmodically, suggestive of a sleeping
giant just about to awaken from his slumbers. Around
him were men and women of all nationalities, and their
voices as they conversed with each other reminded Harry
of the sounds he had once heard in a saw-sharpening
factory. Each, apparently, had some one to whom he
could talk, and all were bound for somewhere “ East of
Suez.” Harry felt very lonely, and now that the excite-
ment of his rapid railway rush across Europe had died
away a most disconsolate feeling had set in as a
reaction.
A few days before Harry’s dreams had been all about
his sailing away some day to lands of brighter skies, but
now that he was actually leaving Europe behind he found
—as many people have discovered and many more will
still—that realization never comes up to anticipation.
(B 762) e


How long he stood pondering over the incidents which
led to his being on board the Barbarossa he did
not know. The suddenness of everything had rendered
him incapable of logical reasoning, but it was with a
sense of pleasure that he allowed his mind to linger on
the fore part of that evening spent with Cathie and her
postcard album. Then, with a start, he remembered that
such a voyage as they had gone together he was now
embarked upon alone. Was there any significance in
the fact that she had anticipated his voyage ? True, she
had pictured a P. & O. liner, and he was on board a
German steamer, but all the ports onward would be the
same, and the Barbarossa would probably arrive at Port
Said, Suez, Colombo, Fremantle, Adelaide, Melbourne,
and Sydney, at or about the same time as the present
outward-bound P. & O.
“ Hullo, Harry ! "
Harry sprang round quickly, and saw a bronzed but
pleasant-faced young man standing beside him. “You
know me ? ” he inquired.
“ Well, I think I can fairly claim to have met you
before,” laughed the stranger. “ But how did you manage
to engineer the railway connections to catch this boat ?
It took me all my time, I can tell you, and I am by no
means a new chum.”
“ Oh, I am well acquainted with most of the trans-
continental routes,” replied Harry. “But I fear you are
making a mistake ; nevertheless, I am very glad to find I
have a countryman on board.”
“ Countryman ? Why, you have dozens of them on
board. All those people forward there are Britons from
some part of this little planet, and there are at least three
parties of Colonials returning to New Zealand and
Australia down in the saloon, and a host of English tea-
planters going back to their estates in Ceylon. But


allow me to introduce myself. My name is down on
the passenger list as Edward Spencer, and I also am
returning east.”
“My name is Harry Thorne, but I don’t think I
have ever met you before, Mr. Spencer.”
Mr. Spencer laughed. “ Your memory is bad, Harry,
my boy ; why, you nearly knocked me half way down
a street last Saturday night. You mentioned at the
time that your name was Harry, but you did not then
care to enlighten me further. You may put me down
as a friend if you are short of such commodities, but
if you are already overstocked, of course it does not
matter.”
The stranger had an easy, pleasant manner which
appealed to Harry greatly ; he seemed a man of the
world in every way, yet one born to command. “ Where
are you going ? ” he continued, after a moment’s
pause.
“Australia, in the first place, but probably I
shall have to go elsewhere afterwards,” answered
Harry.
“If you want to make a fortune, my boy, you must
stay in one place, although, speaking candidly, selling tea
and sugar makes more fortunes now than ever did the
goldfields of Australia.”
“ I am not trying to make a fortune, sir. I
am looking for some people I expect to hear of in
Australia.”
“Ah, well, the world is really small. Perhaps I may
be able to help you in some way when we reach the land
of the sunny south.”
Harry thanked his friend, and together they went
down to dinner.
That night the liner raced down the Italian coast, and
towards morning passed Stromboli, that wonderful


volcano that lights up the Mediterranean. Then they
headed direct for Port Said, and for the next three days
Harry dwelt in a perpetual state of wonderment, as
islands, homeward-bound liners, and the many sights
of the sea, were passed in rapid succession. Then
the precipitous shores of Crete rose through the
haze, and Harry’s thoughts wandered back into history
as he gazed through his friend’s binoculars at the
deep gloomy ravines which penetrated the mountain
sides.
“ They are only dark and dismal at this season,”
explained Mr. Spencer, who apparently knew everything,
“ The sun, as it travels north again, will shine straight
into those gullies and transform them into smiling, fertile
valleys through which will roam the sheep and goats
with their shepherds as of old.”
“How picturesque,” cried Harry, “and this island
is so near to the over-populated cities of Europe,
too! I have often dreamt of those classical shepherds
playing their lutes and leading their sheep. Kind-
hearted and gentle they were, with every simple
virtue and ”
“ Put on the brakes, young man,” interrupted Mr.
Spencer. “ A high regard for the truth compels me to
destroy that pleasant fancy of yours. I have been on
that island, and I found that the classical shepherds you
mention were a set of skulking ruffians who would stick
a knife into you, if there was no danger to themselves,
for the clothes you were wearing. As for the lute, I
question very much if any of them knows what that
is. They don’t know the use of soap, or if they
do, they think it superfluous—but then, I am talking
as a man of the world, Harry ; I will not further dispel
those happy illusions of your youth concerning the
Orient.”


Life at sea was a pleasant novelty to Harry, but
what surprised him most in Port Said, the canal, Aden
and Colombo, was the familiarity he seemed to have
acquired with these places, and it was not until he began
to inquire within himself what the one thing was that
seemed always wanting to complete the pictures, that
he realized that his postcard voyage had made all those
ports known to him, and that Miss Cathie was the
magician whom he now missed.
By the time they had reached Colombo, Harry had
made several friends on board, among them being a
young German mineralogist, only a year older than
himself, who was going out to fill some appointment in
an assayer’s office on the goldfields of Western Australia.
Harry liked him very much. He had large blue eyes,
was always smiling, and spoke a quaint English that
amused Harry greatly. He had no friends anywhere, he
told Harry, and as he spoke most languages, all the world
was the same to him. But high above all ordinary
friendships had grown that between Mr. Spencer and
Harry. The former never talked of himself directly,
but Harry knew that in most of the incidents he
related he had played no inconsiderable part himself. He
was fascinated by the tales his friend sometimes told
him of lands where nature still reigned supreme in wild
and solitary grandeur, of rushing mountain torrents the
sands of which were golden, of trackless forests ablaze,
overhead and underfoot, with foliage more brilliant than
any artist could paint, and of the peoples who dwelt in
the heart of those dense forests, and by the banks of
the swollen rivers.
“ I suppose you are going back to such a country
as you have just been describing,” said Harry one even-
ing, after they had left Colombo, and were running
down to Fremantle in Western Australia. Harry long


remembered that evening, and stored its impressions in
his inner mind as treasures he would never lose. The
moon was shining over the slightly rippling ocean, and a
balmy breeze from some islands near kept the air in
pleasant motion on deck. The ship was illuminated,
for a fancy dress ball was in progress, and as the dancers
waltzed slowly to the enchanting music of the ship’s
band, it was as if a spell had fallen over all, and even
the rythmic beat of the engines tuned itself into harmony
and ticked out minutes of delightful dreamland time.
Meanwhile the ship was flying through the phosphores-
cent waters of the Indian Ocean, and each beat of the
propeller shafts against the engine thrust-blocks meant
another twenty-seven feet nearer to the great southern
continent. But on deck time had apparently ceased to
exist, and distance had no meaning—all were happy,
pleased with the world, their environment and them-
selves. Seated on deck-chairs drawn close up to the
rail were Mr. Spencer, Harry, and Carl Schwartz, the
young German. They had been watching the dancers
for some time, and chatting occasionally. Mr. Spencer
lay back in his chair and smoked a cigar while Harry
and Carl sipped iced lemonade through long straws.
Mr, Spencer looked up as Harry spoke. Evidently his
thoughts had been roaming in parts where fancy dress
balls found no place. “ Well, yes, Harry. I sail north
from Sydney to Samarai via Cooktown by the first
available steamer.”
“ Samarai ? That is the chief trading port in New
Guinea,” said Harry, with sudden interest.
“It is, although Port Moresby, called after Admiral
Moresby its founder, is the capital, if such can be said
of the little hamlet where the laws of Queensland are
administered to tribes of people who know little and
care less about them.”


“ But why will you go to that lawless country ? ”
inquired Harry, eagerly.
“ Because it is lawless, and therefore a freer, and
better, and fitter home for men like me than countries
wherein to walk on God’s green grass is a crime, and to
climb the mountains to breathe the free air of heaven,
an interdictable offence ; where man lives by preying
on his fellow-man, and where the possession of gold
means more than the possession of a soul. No, I
am a Londoner myself by birth, and I’ll give my life
for my country if need be ; but, boys, England is but
a large prison, where in time even the sunlight will
be taxed or doled out through a penny-in-the-slot
machine.”
“ But, Mr. Spencer,” said Harry, “ how can you talk
like that? You are not an old man, indeed lam sure
you are not thirty, yet you somehow give the impression
that all the joys in life are dead to you. You have seen
the world and its peoples, and your great experience
ought to make you sympathize with your less fortunate
fellows who cannot travel, and I feel confident, too, that
there is nothing in this life but what, if you desire, you
could speedily obtain.”
Spencer laughed lightly, and an amused expression
remained on his face.
“ Dat vas von very good talk of yours,” said
Carl. “I, too, think Chermany mooch older dan vas
goot for we younger peoples, so I come away to
see the world. Some day when 1 make lots of money
I vil come back. You get more for it in the fater-
land.”
“ I think you misunderstood me, boys,” said Spencer,
“if you thought I was complaining about my fellows, or
if you gather that the pleasures of life are not for me. I
enjoy myself very much, and it is only talking generally


I am when I say that if you don’t kick the world it will
kick you. I like my fellow-men, but Ido not choose to
take them all into my confidence. I have some comrades,
however, who share my thoughts and everything I have,
as I share their possessions. In them and in our joint
doings I find my chief pleasure, whether it be fighting
hostile natives, scaling steep fire-vomiting peaks, or
swallowing quinine in some deadly fever swamp. With
these men lam supremely happy. Ours is a common
lot; we all have a past, and we all endeavour to forget
it, and we stand shoulder to shoulder through dangers
and through prosperity.”
He paused, and for a minute there was silence ; then
Harry spoke. “You know New Guinea well, Mr.
Spencer,” he said.
“Well, I ought to, Harry; I have crossed it and
recrossed it, climbed its highest mountains, dined with
its leading tribes, lost many comrades there, and have
left my dearest friend a madman in its solitudes. Why
do you ask ? ”
“ Because I am in search of a gentleman who was
last heard of in New Guinea. I wonder if by any
chance you know him ? ”
“ His name ? ”
“ Edward Blackwood.”
Mr. Spencer’s face changed slightly, and he gazed
out to sea. “Yes, I know him,” he said, “as well, I
suppose, as any one.”
“You do! Oh, tell me where he is! I came from
Britain to find him.”
“ Find him! What on earth do you want with
that person ? He is not a relation of yours, is
he?”
“ No; but I promised to find him and deliver a
message. I am also looking for my brother who has


been lost for six years, and 1 think that when I find one
I shall not be far from the other.”
Mr. Spencer seemed greatly affected. “Well,
Harry,” he said, “ I can take you to where Edward
Blackwood was last known, and I do hope most
sincerely that when you find him your brother will
be near.”
“ I feel sure of it,” said Harry.
“Oh ! Then come with our fellows and live the life
of the free,” cried Mr. Spencer, enthusiastically. “From
the utmost ends of the earth my comrades are converg-
ing on Sydney now for our next great trip. Some may
fall. It is well. We shall all pass away when our work
is done. He that leaves us then has merely gone ahead
to pioneer that shadowy land beyond our mortal
ken. He knows neither latitude nor longitude of the
realm to which he goes, nor has he a sextant nor
compass to guide him. Yet we know that he will
get there, and stake off claims for his comrades, if
such is allowed in the great Beyond. So we place his
rifle by his side, and pass on But, dear me, I
am surely getting a touch of malaria when I talk in
this strain to boys! Come, let us join the dancers
and- ”
“We are not boys in anything more than years,”
interrupted Harry, quietly. “ I think I understand you
now, Mr. Spencer. My brother, who must be about
your age, and like you in many ways, I imagine, would
speak something like you. Oh, how I wish I could join
such a party of men as your comrades must be ! Theirs
must be the ideal life. Free as the wind, careless,
and independent, and true as steel to those around
them.” Harry’s eyes shone, and even Carl’s blinked
enthusiastically.
“You think you would like to come with me, then,


Harry ? ” asked Mr. Spencer, slowly. He appeared to
think he had used undue persuasion.
“ I would sacrifice anything to do that,” answered
Harry.
“ But the danger ? ”
“ Well, what of that ? I do not fear danger, and
to participate in any great enterprise with you and
your comrades would well recompense me for any
risks run ; and I am going to New Guinea now in any
case.”
“ Then, my dear boy, consider the matter arranged,”
said Spencer, grasping Harry’s hand. “ I wanted you
with me for reasons you may understand later, and I
promise to take you to Edward Blackwood at least.
No, don’t talk of money; I am very wealthy. All
my comrades are, and you shall be also in time.
We scorn wealth, and consequently we stumble across
it wherever we go. That is one of nature’s ways of
revenging herself upon those who sell their souls for
gold.”
Harry could not speak, and the tears slowly welled
to his eyes despite his efforts to restrain them. Several
times he made an effort to say what he felt, but his
voice was broken, and would not utter a sound. Suddenly
Spencer perceived his position, and allowed him time to
recover by calling a steward and giving him an order
for some refreshments. Meanwhile the band played on,
the dancers still gyrated round the deck, the moon shone
over the now placid waters, and the Barbarossa was
nearer Australia by about twenty miles. Mr. Spencer
smoked silently; Harry sat thinking of his dream in
Mr. Blackwood’s house, and the wonderful prospect of
its fulfilment now opening before him ; and Carl gazed
moodily at some point out at sea.
When they reached Sydney, Harry found that in


some mysterious manner Darling Bill had beaten him
by a day, and had already departed for the interior. He
did not now care, however, for was he not one of a band
of men to whom the entire world was but a playground,
and had he not their chiefs assurance that he would
find Edward Blackwood ?


CHAPTER IV
In the Heart of the Unknown
The night was dark, and but for the occasional cry of
some prowling night-bird and the hoarse bark of the
amphibious denizens of the deep pools in the river,
silent. Round a camp fire, their tanned faces lit up by
the flickering fire flashes, sat eight men, while grouped
about another fire a little distance off squatted another
dozen, whose faces were black, and their garments
scanty, but whose carefully bunched-up hair and orna-
mental nose-pegs indicated that they belonged to a
tribe of half-civilized coastal Papuans. These were the
“ boys,” or carriers of the first party, and were as ugly a
lot of human beings as could be seen anywhere on this
earth’s surface.
The party of eight white men were known respec-
tively as the Chief, Doc, the Boy, Fat Jack, Coolgardie
Bill, Silent Ted, Kaiser, and Mac. The Chief we have
met before under the name of Edward Spencer. Doc
was a young man who at one time had been a credit to
Dublin University ; he had been the Chief’s comrade
for some years past, was a dead shot, an inveterate
smoker, and possessed nerves which Mac said had “steel
girders behind to brace them up.” In the Boy no one
would have recognized the Harry Thorne who eight
months before left England’s shores in a greater hurry


than most people would have deemed comfortable. He
was now bronzed like the others, and in his garb of
soft shirt, trousers held together by a belt from which
hung his knife and in which was a revolver, leggings
and a broad-brimmed hat with the edges turned down,
he looked as fit for New Guinean prospecting life as
any man in the party. His chest had now filled out,
his muscles were well developed, and with his Win-
chester rifle he could, shoot a hole in the bottom of a
one pound jam tin at three hundred yards. Fat Jack was
an Englishman who has had many strange adventures.
He was another old comrade of the Chiefs, and was
reported to be the best cook in the country, which was
no mean recommendation. Coolgardie Bill and Silent
Ted were typical Australians. They had roughed it
on every goldfield south of the line, and were as strong
and hardy and active a couple of men as could be found
anywhere. They, likewise, were old friends of the Chief
and Doc. Their faces were wrinkled from exposure to
all climates until, as Mac said, they resembled nothing
so much as “a sheet of corrugated iron.” Silent Ted
never spoke unless under pressure of great excitement;
but his comrade, Mac, who was a keen observer, said
he spoke too much.
Kaiser needs no description. His name in civilized
society was Carl Schwartz ; but no one in New Guinea
could have lived with that name, so his comrades
promptly dubbed him Kaiser. Mac was certainly not
the least important member of the party. He had
been with the Chief from the first of the latter’s wan-
derings, and exercised a paternal care over the party,
although he was by no means an old man himself. He
came from Dundee, as he proudly told every one who
would listen to him, could shoot well, eat well, fight
well, sleep well, and deliver a more or less scientific


address in a manner which might be qualified by the
same adjective.
The party above introduced were seated at supper,
which, thanks to Doc’s rifle that afternoon, was more
sumptuous than usual, consisting as it did of wild
turkey roasted on hot ashes, wild pig cooked in similar
fashion, and yams, sweet potatoes, damper, and tea, as
extras.
“ Well, boys,” the Chief said, as he brushed a huge
tarantula from his boots into the fire, “we have only
been four months on New Guinea soil, and deducting
the time lost in Samarai preparing and completing
our outfit, and the time taken to reach the upper
Kumusi waters in the whale-boats, we have just
spent three months in actual prospecting. How do
we stand ? ”
“We have stores and ammunition to last us, with
what the natives can supply us, for another four
months,” answered Doc, lighting a cigar.
“ I reckon the stores are all right for that time, but I
won’t say the ammunition will hold out if we happen to
run against any hunting Tugeris,” put in Coolgardie
Bill. “Those niggers have no sense of what is proper,
and would as soon eat Mac there who is all bone as
Kaiser who is all beef.”
“ Dinna you be frichtened, Bill, ma man,” spoke the
Scot. “If it should come to pass that these ungodly
and unwashed heathen folk should ever hae a banquet
wi’ us on their menu, you’ll no be left out; a man o’
your build would go weel stuffed wi’ yams.”
“ I think you vas must mean me my appetite to not
have,” said Kaiser, laying down his enamelled cup and
attacking another slice of damper. He was certainly
growing rotund in figure.
“At any rate,” said Harry, with a laugh, examining


a notebook by the light of a burning brand, “ since I
became responsible treasurer of this expedition, I find
our assets have amounted to eighty ounces of gold,
three of platinum, and a pound weight of what Kaiser
says is osmiridium. Then we have also those supposed
diamonds, or white sapphires, we found down in the
foothills on the Mambare headwaters; so from one
point of view at least we have been successful so far,
and our luck may continue.”
Fat Jack was now engaged hanging the remnant of
their supper to a tree so that it might provide their
breakfast next morning, and so had no time to talk,
and, of course, Silent Ted never spoke.
“ I reckon there’s a storm working up from the
coast,” remarked Coolgardie Bill, a few minutes later.
“Look at the amount o’ insects about.” He poised a
long, thin wriggling snake on the end of a stick as he
spoke, and threw it over his head.
“Do you call that an insect, Bill ? ” inquired
Harry, slapping viciously at his face. “I wonder
what you would class these mosquitoes that torment
me r
“ Oh, they’re only tax-gatherers,” grinned Bill.
“You see, they know that you and Kaiser is new to the
country, and your blood is good, so they sail into ye for
the custom’s dues. I reckon it war a very good thing
for this crowd to have two youngsters along with us. It
keeps the ’skeeters from us, and prevents the kids from
having too much sass. Of course, it’s Kaiser I’m refer-
ring to, Boy, not you.”
Harry laughed. He was a great friend of the
weather-beaten, sun-baked Australian, as, indeed, he
and Kaiser were of every member of the party. Kaiser
meanwhile had fallen asleep. The Chief, Doc, and
Mac were talking together in low tones, evidently


discussing future plans, so the others gathered round the
sleeping German, and Bill and Jack vied with each
other in endeavouring to astound Harry w th tales of
the Australian Bunyip, and the New Guinean water
spirits. Just as Fat Jack reached the climax of an
adventure as weird as it was thrilling, Bill broke in
innocently with “ Lor, boys, I believe there’s a suicide
club among them insects to-night. There’s that same
old wriggler back again. I know it’s the same one by
the colour of his whiskers and the waggle of his
tail.”
“Shut up, ye furrow-faced aboriginal,” roared Jack.
“ I’ve lost the place I was at now.”
“The Bunyip had just appeared, and you were
describing it,” reminded Harry.
“ I remember now ; well, it was round an’ ”
“You had better kill that poor snake, Boy, for it
will die of poison, anyhow, if it bites Fat Jack.” Again
the interruption came from Bill.
“Where is it?” asked Harry, while Jack looked
round for something to throw at Bill.
“ Crawling up his leg ; an’ lor’ there’s another trying
to get into your trouser pockets.”
“ One would think you had never seen a snake
before,” growled Jack, shaking the reptile from him.
“ Well, the Bunyip ”
“ What am I to do with my fellow ? ” inquired Harry,
as coolly as he could. He was fast catching the spirit
of absolute fearlessness of his comrades, but he had
not yet become accustomed to having snakes in his
pockets.
“ Give it to Kaiser,” suggested Bill; “ it’s nice an’
fat like himself.” Then he cried, " It’s a black one.
“ Don’t move, Boy.” Bill rose and reached over his
hand to grasp it, but before he could do so another hand


seized the inquisitive intruder by the tail, and with a
practised jerk, pulled it, coiling and twisting, from its
position. Next moment Silent Ted, for he it was who
had done it, dropped it into the fire, and Bill remarked,
as if speaking on behalf of his comrade, “It are a
pity, but we have to kill them or they would go
for us. Nature is cruel herself, anyhow, an’ I reckon
that ”
“There’s a big centipede making for you,” sang out
Jack.
“ I’ve got an eye on him,” replied Bill. “ Now, I
remember when the Kalgoorlie rush broke out ”
“Ach! Vat vas dat dat crossed my face?” cried
Kaiser, starting up from his slumbers.
“Only a little fat sausage-like thing with feet,”
answered Harry. “ I’ve been watching him for some
time. See! there he goes into the fire of his own
accord.”
“Just like men,” philosophized Mac, coming forward
from the other party. “ I hae been watching twa or three
tragedies the nicht, an’ they all ended in the fire. Noo,
a man will just shut his eyes an’ run into danger the
same way.”
“ Oh, dry up, Mac,” cried Doc ; “we can at least feel
confident that we’ll not be cremated while anywhere
near the Tugeri people.”
“I dinna ken aboot that, Doc,” returned Mac. “My
experience o’ that vera misguided lot o’ humanity all
goes to mak’ me believe that they overcook their
dinners, an’ ”
Here a piece of damper flung with considerable skill
by Fat Jack struck Mac in the stomach, and he sat
down with a groan.
“ I’ve often suspected that your cooking was vera
far frae being right,” he said, addressing Jack, with a
CB 762) JT


reproachful look, “but I never thocht that a bit o’ ane
o’ your dampers wad knock me doom” He shook
his head sadly at the thought, and became lost in
meditation.
“ Well, boys,” said the Chief, “ I suppose we all know
the object, or at least one of the chief objects, of this
expedition ? Away behind those mountain ranges
which we cannot see just now lies a country that has
not yet received much attention from any one. It
lies so high that though so near the Equator, the
climate is almost perfect, and the scorching heat of
the sun is there tempered down to almost that
of an English summer day. A river flows through
that plateau, and cuts its way to the sea somewhere
through the German territory. The Germans have
seldom, if ever, followed the river to their own boundary,
and certainly never over the British side, so nothing is
known about its source, except to some of the present
company, and perhaps one or two other wandering pro-
spectors from the Yodda valley goldfields. Now, this
stretch of elevated country is surrounded by a wall of
the highest peaks in New Guinea, and in the valley
thus formed are rich deposits of osmiridium, platinum,
gold, and other valuable minerals, while as most of you
know there have been diamonds and other gemstones
bartered by the Angerita, Seizureta, and Papangai tribes,
who said they came originally from the country beyond
the mountains. Of course the region is inhabited, but
our object is to get into that country, in the first place,
and then let fate determine the rest. It is not an easy
task we have before us, for though hitherto most of the
native tribes and villages have been friendly, we are
now passing out of the zone half civilized by prospectors,
and missionaries, and are entering the domain of the
fiercest tribes in New Guinea. There is another


purpose in hand, which some of you know, and the rest
will know in good time. Meanwhile it is late, and lam
going to turn in.”
The Chief vaulted into his hammock which was
swung near, and soon the others followed his example.
The long hours of tropical night dragged on, all
but Harry sleeping soundly, and he dreaming con-
fusedly of magic cities, lost brothers, stolen opals, and
Cathie. The night was oppressively hot, and myriads of
insect pests made life almost unbearable. About mid-
night Harry sat up, no longer able to endure the afflic-
tions. Mosquitoes were around him in swarms, their
buzzing like unto a hundred violins all playing different
tunes in different keys. He reached down his hand for
a twig to drive them away, or at least to make their
number less, and then uttered a cry of horror. His
hand had closed on a coiling scaly thing, and he knew
he had grasped some kind of reptile.
“ What’s the matter, Boy ? ” inquired Coolgardie
Bill, turning over in his sleep.
“ I caught a snake.”
“Is that all ? They seem to be out in force to-night.
I reckon that means a storm before long. Phew ! ain’t
the ’skeeters bad ? ”
“What! are they biting you too ?” Harry laughed
in sheer enjoyment. No one need now pity him because
he was a new chum and couldn’t stand the pests when
even Coolgardie Bill admitted they were bad,
“I’ll shift ’em, Boy. You watch me,” muttered Bill,
sliding from his hammock, with the intention of getting
a firebrand to kindle some sandal-wood leaves, and thus
produce smoke. “ They don’t like this sort o’ thing,” he
continued ; then he muttered something under his breath
and held the firebrand close to the ground. Next
moment there was a yell which awakened every one.


“ What’s wrong ? ” cried the Chief, sitting up.
“Is it niggers already?” queried Fat Jack, turning
over and going to sleep again.
“ Poor Bill’s got moonstruck,” commiserated Mac,
“ an’ wi’ that wee bit o’ a crescent moon just rising tae.
A always told ye, Bill, to keep your heid covered
Michty me! ” The ejaculation was occasioned by
something Bill had thrown at him, and Mac hastily
sprang from his hammock, for the something was a large
healthy snake.
“ The ground is alive with fellows like that, Mac,”
Bill cried. “ Come out an’ get moonstruck too.”
And Bill was right. He had now stirred the embers
of the camp fire into a blaze, and in the firelit circle,
wriggling, twisting, coiling, and gliding, were hundreds of
snakes of many varieties.
“ Great Powers ! ” muttered Doc, “ what have we
struck ? ”
“ I reckon we are camped on their corroborree
ground,” laughed Bill, who seemed to be enjoying him-
self. He was throwing the reptiles away with a long
stick.
“ Get into your hammock. We dare not move till
daylight,” cried the Chief, but just then Silent Ted
leaped to the ground, and, rushing to the fire, picked up
a couple of tins of compressed meat which had been
left there, and threw them into his hammock. He and
Bill then lashed about them with sticks until, suddenly,
every snake seemed to have disappeared. Every one
looked to Ted for some explanation, but he only nudged
Bill, who at once began Ted’s story, as if he were Ted
himself.
“It were the bully beef tins that did it,” he ex-
plained. “ The fire warmed them, and then Mr. Snake
smelt them and come along to investigate. The whole


menagerie o’ the country is out to-night, anyhow,” he
added, “ an’ there’s a boncer o’ a storm working
up.”
“Yes, it is fairly evident we are going to have a
storm,” agreed the Chief, “ but it won’t come for two or
three nights yet, and perhaps before that time we may
strike a good camp in which to shelter.”
“Come awa’ back to your beds, ye twa sinners,”
growled Mac. “ I want to sleep, and ye might even
waken the carrier - boys if ye mak’ much more
noise.”
Neither Bill nor Ted made any response. They
knew it was useless talking to Mac, and in a few minutes
the camp was again wrapt in slumber, and this time
Harry slept too. And now all forms of insect and
animal life became hushed. Not a breath stirred the
foliage overhead, and not a rustle the vegetation under-
foot. In the east a star shone out brilliantly, and the
last pointer of the great Southern Cross had just dis-
appeared behind the Owen Stanley ranges. Slowly a
warm glow seemed to creep over the eastern sky, then
a tinge of colour painted the horizon above the distant
ranges. A faint breeze suddenly sprang into being.
The eastern sky became illuminated with flashes of
crimson, and the bright star dissolved from view. A
thousand parrots burst into discordant chatter. The
leaves shook for a moment, and then became still again.
The glow of light now reached halfway up the heavens.
All nature sprang into life, and the sun shot up, as if
from a cannon, behind mount Albert Edward. Another
day had dawned in New Guinea.
An hour after, the party had breakfasted on the
remnants of last night’s supper, the cooking utensils
were packed away, and the “ boys ” had sorted out their
loads, and the expedition was thus ready to start again.


They now left the river they had been following for
some time, and struck inland towards the north. Soon
the dense nature of the forest vegetation compelled
them to cut their passage, for a network of wild vine
and other creepers interspersed with flowers of gorgeous
hues completely blocked their way. At length they
emerged on a well-beaten pad which ran only a few
degrees off their course, and as progress on it would be
much faster, even although they might be a point or so
out at the end of the day, they resolved to make use of
it until it diverged too much.
“ I wonder what village this pad leads to ? ” Doc said
to the Chief. “ I don’t remember any village near here,
and it must be a very large one to be able to resist the
fighting Tugeris.”
“ It might be one o’ the Tugeri villages,” suggested
Mac ; but the Chief shook his head.
“ They wouldn’t build any village here,” he said ;
“we are still within striking distance of the Warden at
Yodda Valley camp. At any rate, look out for
traps.”
“ Here's one,” cried Coolgardie Bill, from the front,
going into the forest entanglement again.
“It is a clumsy one too,” commented Fat Jack, as
he came up ; “ any man could see that with his eyes
shut.” A tree had fallen across the track, and the usual
collection of leaves and debris lay on the other side, as
if sheltered from the influence of the wind.
“ See, Boy, and Kaiser, come up here an’ git some
pints in your eddication,” cried Bill, reappearing on the
pad on the other side of the tree.
“ Oh, we’ve seen those traps several times,” answered
Harry ; “ people coming along here are supposed to climb
over the tree, and then their next step will throw them
down through these leaves into a hole in which are fixed


spear points. But no one should be caught by that;
why not always walk round when you see a tree lying
in front of you ? ”
“ Because, my boy,” said Doc, “ you would be walk-
ing round trees all day if you adopted that principle, for
often during the storms that frequently visit this district
hundreds of trees are blown down, and it is only on
clear spaces or pads that they can fall, the clinging
vegetation which interlaces them keeping them up in
the heart of the forest until they rot. Now, we
wouldn’t trouble to cut our way around that tree,
and might therefore be caught but for one thing ; do
you notice it ? ”
Harry looked carefully at the supposed trap, but saw
nothing to indicate that it was anything else but what
it looked, and Kaiser also intimated that he did not
believe it was a trap. “ I see nothing to show that it is
a trap,” Harry said at length, “except that it looks
exactly like others we have already seen several times.
Ah ! wait. I have it! The wind, such as there is, has
been blowing in our faces, and already we have had one
or two willy-willys 1 which would not allow any leaves
to rest naturally on that side of the tree ; they should
be on this side.”
“ Boy, I is proud o’ ye,” spoke Bill, feelingly, “ an’ if
ye just follow my teaching ye’ll soon be the boncer
bushman o’ this country.”
They passed on round the tree, and Harry felt
pleased with himself at earning the approval of Cool-
gardie Bill. It was now approaching noon, and the
sun’s rays were vertical. Birds of paradise with gay
plumage flitted about everywhere, and beautiful orchids
could be seen high on the trees wherever one looked.
Animals of many kinds and not a few reptiles drew
1 Circular wind-storms very common on the Australian desert.


into the dense scrub that flanked their path as they
approached, and native bees followed them in
myriads.
“ We’ll camp for lunch at the first water,” announced
the Chief. “ Hullo ! our boys are falling behind. Hurry
up, King George ; look lively, Tom Cat ; and you, Sleep-
ing Beauty, hustle along,”
“Hims no like go see bad Tugeri,” replied King
George, who was the chief carrier. “ Hims no good
mens. Kill hims, eat hims.”
“But we are not going to see the Tugeris, King
George. Their country is far away.”
“ Hims smell Tugeri. Hims no want die feed
Tugeri ”
“ Come here, ma puir wee man,” spoke Mac, falling
back beside the chief carrier, “ an’ I’ll endeavour to make
things clear to you. Do ye ken what this is ? ” He
patted his Winchester fondly. The natives grinned at
the sight of the weapon, but made no response to Mac’s
words.
“Try him with Gaelic, Mac,” advised the Chief,
laughing. “ I fear he has not yet mastered the Scottish
dialect.”
“ Has he no ? What do ye think o’ this, then, King
George ? ”
The native’s face brightened. “We big chiefs.
Tugeri all die frae overdose o’ pop-pop. Hims under-
stand ? ”
“Hims knows. Pop-pop kill hims all,” cried the
warrior, gleefully.
“Ay, pop-pop will kill hims all right,” said Mac,
grimly.
“ Kill him all, one, two ”
“Kill hims, pop —pop —pop.” He repeated “pop”
for every cartridge his weapon carried, and then


started over again, and continued until he became
tired.
“ King George no ’fraid then. Hims good missionary
tribe. Think Tugeri make good eat with rice.”
“ Na, na, ye heathen ; ye’ll no’ eat the Tugeri folk wi’
rice or onything else, but hustle along they boys o’
yours, or ye’ll maybe no even get the rice.”
King George evidently understood sufficiently well
the purport of Mac’s words, for he instantly turned on
his companions and poured forth a torrent of sounds
which reminded Harry of several steam syrens blowing
at once. It had the desired effect, however, and the
carriers closed up the space between them and their
masters with alacrity.
Harry was now leading, and eager to show that he
had all his wits about him even though he was the
youngest of the party, he kept a careful lookout for
further traps. At length they came to a clearing through
which flowed a small river, in all likelihood a tributary
of the one they had left that morning. There was a
crude bridge of trees laid across it, for seemingly the
pad was a main track between two villages. He was
just about to cross when the thought struck him that
here might be some cunningly contrived trap of a variety
he had not yet seen. But they had to get across in
some manner, and Harry scrambled over the network
of tree-roots along the treacherous banks to see if there
were any other method. Suddenly he found he was on
a pad again, and calling out to his comrades to wait
while he investigated, he ran on, noting, at the same
time with some degree of alarm, the number of croco-
diles that scurried out from under the roots at his
approach. Soon he saw that the stream was narrowing
considerably, and that the trees bending overhead from
the banks formed a complete archway, and then a


dangling fibrous ladder caught his eye. He stopped and
gazed curiously at the half-natural, half-artificial rope-
way ; it hung from a limb far up among the dense
branches, and circled the graceful stem of a palm tree
several times before it ended about four or five feet from
the ground. In a moment the meaning flashed upon
him, and, shouting to his comrades, he rushed back to
tell them of his discovery.
“ Ach, dere he vas,” cried Kaiser, as he broke through
on to the old road. “ Vere vas you be ? ”
“ Don’t cross by that bridge,” cried Harry, excitedly ;
“ it is a trap.”
“ I believe you are right, Harry,” said the Chief,
“ but you should not have run away as you did. We
did not know whether you had gone over that thing or
not until Silent Ted picked up your tracks going up
the stream.”
“ It are as good a trick as I have seen, this affair,”
commented Coolgardie Bill, walking gingerly out on the
bridge. “ I don’t quite see where the fun comes in yet,
but I s’pose I won’t be long. Howling dingoes ”
Bill had just found out where the fun came in, and was now
floundering in the water. The bridge was composed of
solid trees for the first few yards, but near the middle
the centre of each tree had been carefully removed, and
only a rotten bark was left.
“ They niggers are clever duels,” spoke Mac, admir-
ingly, as Ted rushed to help his comrade, and also fell
in. “ Better come oot the water, ye twa originals, or —
hullo ! ” Mac’s rifle spoke, then Doc’s, then, while the
entire party blazed away, Mac ran out on the solid part
of the bridge, and clubbing his rifle, dealt blows right
and left on the dozens of long snouts that had risen
above the water from under the sham bridge. In a
moment the water was a swirling mass of saurians’ tails,


** *** v - /' J^f
b762
HARRY SAVES COOLGARDIE BILL


N


mud, and dead vegetation, and amidst it all Bill and
Ted swam coolly for the opposite bank.
“Good-bye, mates; one has me,” called out Bill,
while they were yet some feet from safety, and a huge
bloody-eyed monster made a charge at him with open
mouth.
“ Not yet, Bill,” cried Harry, taking swift but careful
aim with his rifle at his shoulder. All held their breath ;
their comrade’s life depended on Boy’s shot, and that
shot, if it did not pierce the crocodile’s brain, would
assuredly hit Bill. But Harry’s rifle-barrel was as steady
as a rock, and before either Mac, Doc, or the Chief, who
were dead shots, could move, and in considerably less
time than it takes to tell, the shot was fired ; the saurian
rolled over and disappeared in the depths, and a dark
reddish tinge marked the spot where it had sunk. Bill
scrambled out and shook himself. “ That was a mighty
good shot, Boy,” he said, “ but it’s lost me my bet, for I
had one on with Silent Ted that Coolgardie Bill wouldn’t
attend tea to-night.”
“ There is still time to win your bet before night,”
said the Chief, and from the tone of his voice it appeared
that he thought there really was danger ahead. “ You
have done well, Boy,” he said, turning to Harry, while
Doc, Mac, Fat Jack, and Kaiser complimented him on
his shooting. “ That shot was one that the best marks-
man in the world might have bungled. As it is, we have
now to find a way to get across ourselves.”
“ I have found that, sir.”
“ What! ” cried all.
“About one hundred yards up-stream there is a
natural ladder, which apparently leads up the tree it
clings to into the foliage overhead. I could not see
properly, but as the palms bend right over the river
until they meet those of the opposite bank, I presume


there is a passage that way, and another ladder down on
the other side.”
“You are a credit to the camp, laddie,” said Mac,
when Harry had finished.
“You have certainly developed a remarkable know-
ledge of things,” added Doc. “You are just such
another as your ”
“ Don’t spoil him, Doc,” interrupted the Chief hastily,
and Harry saw the look which passed between them, and
wondered what it meant. But Fat Jack had now found
the tree round which the ladder clung.
“ I’ll go first,” he cried, running up like a squirrel.
“It may be another trap; and, anyhow, if it carries
me, it will carry all you featherweights.”
“Jack is not more than a featherweight himself,”
laughed the Chief, watching his passage through the
branches overhead.
A minute more and Jack stood on the other side.
“ There is a regular road up there,” he cried ; “ the
branches are bound together by the creepers all round,
and you would think you were walking through a
tunnel.”
And so it proved, and in half an hour the carriers
and stores were all safely on the other side.
“ That is the most business-like man-catcher I have
seen in New Guinea,” said Fat Jack, looking back at
the crocodile pool and broken bridge, when, after lunch,
they prepared to move on again.
“Yes,” admitted the Chief; “we are coming among
natives of a superior cunning, and we must be extremely
careful now.”
But nothing further interrupted them for more than
a few minutes at a time until, while crossing a shallow
swamp, Fat Jack uttered a yell of pain, and almost
simultaneously the others felt a sensation as if a number


of burning brands had been placed against their
skin.
“ Oh! ” groaned Bill, dismally, performing what
looked like a war-dance in the middle of the swamp.
“ I’ll never see the bootiful Australian gum trees again.
What is ye laughin’ at, ye apology for a freak ? ” The
latter remark was addressed to Mac, who had not yet
entered the bog.
“ Ma man,” began Mac, with great composure, “ when
ye are old enough tae hae some sense ye’ll ken that
there are leeches in a’ the swamps in this country, and
maybe ye’ll also aloo, when that time comes, that there
are mair ways than ane o’ gettin’ across.” Saying which
he called one of the carriers to his side, and, after using
some persuasive eloquence, jumped upon his back and
was carried across.
“ How vas it I did not tink of dat ? ” said Kaiser, rue-
fully, rubbing the parts of his anatomy that had been
submerged. “ Mine body undt leeches do not have love
for each other.”
“Ye’ll learn tae some day, Kaiser, ma man,” replied
Mac, chuckling to himself, as the others sat down to rid
themselves of their attachments. “ The niggers dinna
feel the bites o’ leeches, ye ken,” he added, watching the
boys walking across the morass without showing the
slightest inconvenience.
“You’ll fall in some day, ye—ye beauty,” roared
Bill, who had to pause to find a fitting epithet to
apply to the Scot. The Chief and Doc laughed ;
they knew Mac always contrived to score ; but Harry
felt the effects of the leeches’ attentions too much to
allow himself to smile. Then they resumed their way
again.
Late in the afternoon they came upon a deserted
native garden, in which were growing yams, sweet


potatoes, bananas, grenadillos, water-melons, and other
varieties of tropical fruits and vegetables.
“ I think we had better camp here to-night,” said the
Chief, surveying the garden. “ There are signs that this
garden has not been long deserted, and why that field of
rice was left standing, and all those fruits allowed to go
to ruin, requires some explanation, and —why ! there’s a
patch of coffee shrubs with the berries ripe. The people
of the village to whom this garden belongs must be half
civilized.”
“ Probably some of the missionaries have got up here
at some time,” suggested Doc. “At any rate, I should
also advise camping here until daylight, for we don’t
know what lies ahead, and this deserted garden is
suspicious.”
“ Camp! King George,” the Chief called out to the
head carrier, and moving about a hundred yards off the
pad which led past the edge of the bamboo-protected,
cultivated area, they loosened the packs and made prepara-
tions for the night, Doc and Harry meanwhile wander-
ing into the forest to see if they could find anything to
replenish their larder. They were successful in getting
a couple of young wild pigs, and while Fat Jack dressed
them and Kaiser prepared the hot ashes for cooking
them, Ted and Bill explored the garden and brought
in a load of fruit and vegetables which, greatly to every
one’s surprise, included mandarins, guavas, lettuce, cab-
bage, and onions.
“ I reckon we’ll have a good feed to-night, boys,”
remarked Bill, as he began to assist Jack, “and gosh!
I is hungry, too.”
“Ye’re aye that,” said Mac, looking up from a book
he was reading; “ ye’d be far healthier if ye wad eat
less and study more. Noo, I call this a real guid place
for study; there’s naething to worry you but some


cannibals, and crocodiles, and snakes, and spiders,
and mosquitoes, and fevers, and ”
“ Hold on, Mac,” cried Doc ; “if you mean to mention
them all you’ll have to start with daylight.”
“There’s one we must not forget,” said Bill, “an’
that is a big, no good, played-out, double-barrelled,
chump-headed fellow called Mac from Scotland, though
I is blowed if I knows where that is,”
“I forgive ye, Bill. Ye dinna ken ony better,”
returned the Scot, “an’ it’s no your fault, for bein’ an’
Australian, ye havena had the benefit o’ a first-class
education, Noo, just for argument’s sake, for I alloo
nae insinuations against my country that’s no fair,
what would you or the world dae if there was nae
Scotland ? What would take the place o’ London,
Edinburra, Glesca’, Dundee, Dublin, Liverpool, Man-
chester, New York, and Berlin, tae say naething o’ Paris,
an’ Auchtermuchty ? ”
Bill looked bewildered.
“But all those towns are not ” began Harry ; but
Mac interrupted him with—“ vera famous, of course no,
I didna say they were. I merely quoted them as
examples,” Here Fat Jack and Doc burst out laughing,
and as it slowly dawned on Kaiser that Mac had
audaciously claimed most of the chief cities of the
world for Scotland, he laughed too.
“Well, I’ll be blowed!” muttered Bill. “Mac, I
’pologize. I never knowed that Scotland was so big.”
He went on with his work, pondering deeply over the
vastness of Caledonia, and Mac smiled genially all
round.
“Tucker’s ready, roll up!” at length Jack shouted,
and without more ado they cleared away all reptiles
from the ground and squatted down. And while they
were still engaged in satisfying their healthy hunger


the sun went down and an intense darkness came over
the land.
“ I reckon the storm is a day nearer now," remarked
Fat Jack, as he kicked the fire into a blaze, and pre-
pared fresh tea in a huge billy.
“An’ that means the pests will give us what for
to-night," said Bill.
“ Listen ! " cried the Chief. “ What is that ? "
“It sounds like a tom-tom beating," said Doc,
pausing in the act of lighting his cigar. A distant
sound as of a drum beating could now be heard distinctly,
and immediately after a medley of sounds reached their
ears. Evidently there was a village not many miles
distant
“ I reckon there is going to be a big corroborree in
town to-night,” said Bill. “ I moves we go in and get
front seats."
“And you would never move out again if you did,"
replied the Chief.
“That noise is not part of any ceremony that I
know," said Doc, after listening a few minutes, again
applying a match to his cigar.
“Hims tink bad Tugeri come kill kill, eat eat, big
feast; that what noise mean," interrupted King George,
who had joined the party.
“ Not much doubt about the Tugeri killing,
eating, and having a big feast when they get the
chance," said the Chief. “But this is not Tugeri
country."
“ Hims tink white fellows should get pop-pop
ready."
“Is it as bad as that, King George ? ” asked the
Chief; but King George did not fully understand the
Chiefs words, so he grinned and showed his pearly
white teeth.


“We’ll have to keep watch to-night, boys,” continued
the Chief, “and in the morning ”
“ Ye is surely not goin’ to run away ’cos some niggers
has a circus,” remonstrated Bill.
“ On the contrary, we are going to pay them a visit,”
answered the Chief. “ I greatly desire some information
which the people of these parts ought to be able to give,
and if I had known their village lay so near we might
have pushed on to it to-night. This must be their
garden.”
“ There ain’t much doubt about that,” said Coolgardie
Bill. “ What I want to know is what sort of corroborree
they play to that tune we heard ? ”
“There isn’t any corroborrees in New Guinea,” put in
Fat Jack, beginning to clear away the dishes. “We are
out of Australia now, Bill.”
“Ye can call it by any name ye like,” retorted Bill,
“but when niggers kick up any decent sort of row I
call it a corroborree.”
“Well, well see in the morning,” said the Chief.
“The noise is dying away now, and it may be just as
well that we did not go on to-night. One never knows
what strange customs obtain in these parts.”
The party retired early that night, for they were very
tired, Boy and Mac keeping first watch, and the Chief
and Doc relieving them at midnight, as that was when
danger might be expected if the natives were hostile
and knew of their presence. But nothing happened,
and after an early breakfast next morning the party
moved on towards the village, every rifle and revolver
in good working order.
One hour’s journey brought them to a standstill, for
straight in front of them rose a high stockade built of
smooth, unscaleable bamboo. The stockade apparently
surrounded the village on three sides, a river forming
CB 762) q


the protection on the fourth side. It was also evident
that the village was a fairly large one from the length
of the sides of the stockade ; but not a sound could be
heard within to indicate that it was not deserted like the
garden.
“ How on earth do we get in here ? ” inquired Harry,
when he saw the obstruction did not surprise any one
but Kaiser and himself.
“ Are ye good at fleein’, Boy ? ” Mac asked.
“ No, not much —that is, I have never tried,” began
Harry, doubtfully, for he did not fully grasp Mac’s
Scotch at times ; but suddenly catching the idea that
Mac was questioning his powers of flight he laughed and
said, “ I believe I could get over if Fat Jack were to
stand on your shoulders, and you allowed me to climb
over you both.”
“ Come here, Boy,” said Coolgardie Bill, “ and I will
show you how to get in and out this place. Do you see
that tree ? ”
“ Why, yes, and there is another fibre ladder
hanging from one of its branches.”
“ There is, you can bet, and up above there is a
branch that reaches over the stockade, and another
ladder hanging down from it inside. These ladders are
supposed to be coiled up when every one’s at home, so
either the people of this village have had visitors lately
who forgot to leave things as they found them, or else
some of the warriors are out on a hunting trip.”
“ Everything is all right I suppose ? ” inquired the
Chief, looking round ; then seeing that every one was
ready he sprang up the ladder, and cried, “ Leave the
carriers to the last, and follow me.”
“Let me gang first,” cried Mac, trying to pass the
Chief. “ My heid is harder than yours if there should be
some niggers wi’ clubs on the other side.”


“ No, no, Mac ; your life is as valuable as mine,”
replied the Chief, dropping down on the inside. “ But
there is no one here,” he added ; and ten minutes later
the entire party, carriers and all, stood within the
stockade gazing at the village.


CHAPTER V
A Strange Feast
It was a much larger village than any they had passed
through, and was composed of the usual pouri-doubo,
or sacred house, a fantastically adorned erection which
rose high above the other ground houses; about
fifty or sixty ordinary doubos built on piles along the
river-bank ; and about a hundred tree dwellings. The
elevated houses at once attracted the attention of Harry
and Kaiser, for although they had seen them in every
village, those they were now looking at differed in
several respects.
“ I perceive the natives of these parts are partial to
tree dwellings,” said Harry.
“Ay, they’re like monkeys,” grunted Mac, gazing
straight ahead anxiously.
“ These people live in houses skilfully built among
the branches of these tall palm trees for various
reasons,” spoke the Chief, turning to the two boys.
“ They get up and down, as you have seen several
times this last twenty-four hours, by means of long
ladders which they coil up when at home and not
receiving any visitors. You notice that each tree is
isolated from its fellows, and that all ordinary trees not
carrying houses have been cut down ? ”
“ Yes, why is that ? ” asked Harry.


“ So that no raiding tribe can get at the inhabitants
from the branches of other trees.”
“ But could they not cut or burn down the trees on
which the houses are if they desired ? ”
“Not very well. You see, the people up above can
use the blow-pipe very effectively, and some tribes even
use the bow and arrow. At any rate, the enemy who
came near the base of any of these tree dwellings would
get more poisoned arrows and darts into his body than
he could safely carry away. Another object of the tree
dwellers, of course, is to be secure from wild animals.
But we’ll move on and interview the mamoose, or
chief.”
Here one of the carrier-boys spoke something into
King George’s ear, and the latter at once assumed a
terror-stricken countenance, and called out, “ Hims be
all deaded ! Tugeri come kill, eat, sleep. Waken soon,
kill, eat, feast again. Pop-pops no ’nuff. Hims sing
tapu song.”
“ If you open your ugly old mug to sing a word I’ll
pop-pop you,” roared Mac. “ What dae we care for the
Tugeris sleeping and eating ? We dae that oorselves.
Besides, I see the carvings on that pouri-pouri doubo, and
they are not Tugeri.”
“You Scotch fellow big fool,” retorted King
George. “ Him should sing dead song too. Hims
git ”
King George was not strong in his grammar, and
knowing nothing about first or second personal pronouns,
he used the form of the third to indicate the whole three.
He meant to tell Mac that he (Mac) should get ready to
sing his death chant too; but there was no doubt as to
“ hims git,” for King George sprang up the ladder as he
spoke and disappeared on the safe side of the stockade.
Ihe other “ boys ” made a rush to follow, but Fat Jack


threw the bottom end of the ladder up among the
branches, and thus prevented their intentions being
carried into effect.
Strangely enough, there were yet no signs of life
anywhere throughout the village, and as the party
moved on towards the largest and most imposing
piled erection, presumably the chiefs house, they
could not help noting many signs of recent bustle and
activity. “It looks as if the place were deserted,”
commented the Chief, coming to a halt in front of the
long gabled structure on which were mounted many
exquisitely carved and burnt-out images of reptiles and
birds.
“ I hardly think so,” said Doc ; " they may be
watching us now; and what about the noises last
night?”
“ Shall we send in our visiting cards ? ” asked Fat
Jack, climbing up over the piles to what looked like a
doorway.
At that moment Kaiser’s voice was heard raised in
expostulation. He, being of an inquisitive disposition,
had walked round the dwelling to the river-bank, but
seemingly was now coming back hurriedly.
“ Keep your eyes on these carriers, Mac and Jack,”
called out the Chief; “they are just on the point of
breaking away.” The Chief and Doc ran round to meet
Kaiser, and Mac spoke a few words of choicest Scotch
to the poor “ boys ” who stood by with teeth chattering
and unfeigned terror in their eyes. What he said to
them no one knew, though Harry said he thought it
sounded like the charge of the Light Brigade ; but the
carriers ceased looking towards the stockade, and,
although they still shivered, appeared to have resigned
themselves to their fate.
Just then Kaiser’s somewhat bulky form appeared,


and after him came a dozen women —at least, Coolgardie
Bill said they were females.
“ Ah! go away, I do not wish you with me,” the
German was saying; but they merely laughed, and
crowded round him. “ Take them off,” appealed Kaiser,
when he saw the Chief and Doc coming to his rescue ;
but the sight of the dusky damsels with Kaiser as
unwilling hero was too much for them, and they were
compelled to laugh. “I do not see vere de laugh comes
in,” cried the unfortunately placed Teuton. “Ach!”
With a bound he had reached his two would-be rescuers,
and the trio retreated to the main body, followed by a
fast-increasing number of Papuan beauties.
“ What! is it a town of women we has struck ? ”
gasped Bill, grounding his rifle in astonishment, and
grasping his revolver. “Speak to the ladies, Kaiser,”
he continued. “No man of our party should turn his
back on a woman.”
Kaiser turned to his persecutors. “Go away,” he
said, “ and 1 will gif you —ach ! no, not that, if you
touch that it will pop-pop, an’ you vas be dead. Donner
und blitzen !” Here Kaiser broke into his mother
tongue, and for a full minute the air resounded with
strange sounds hurled with such force at the poor females
that they retreated from Kaiser in alarm, and transferred
their attentions to Harry and Mac.
“ Me like you,” suddenly spoke one persistent charmer
to Harry, in unmistakable English. “Me no belong
here, me come mission station down sea. Me chief’s
best wife. Me run away with you ”
“ I would much rather decline the honour,” said
Harry. “ Try Ted, here.” The chief’s best wife turned
to the silent one, who uttered one word which cannot
be repeated, and Bill, coming to his comrade’s aid as
usual, said, “Ye see, mistress, me and my mate are


already engaged, or we would run away with you now
like a crowd in Sydney, when the collection comes
round.”
“Me no understand. You give me pop-pop ?” She
touched Bill’s rifle, and at this his anger burst out. “ I
reckon I’ll give you what’s in the pop-pop if ye doesn’t
clear out mighty quick, ye bandicoot-faced gin,” he
roared. The lady cleared out as ordered, and joined
those round Mac.
“Ma guid woman,” the Scot said a minute after,
“ dae ye no ken it’s wrang o’ ye to mak’ yersel’s so
cheap ? Noo, run awa’ like guid lassies, an’ mak’
something for us to eat.”
“ What you give me ? ” sang out the chief’s best
wife from among the others.
Mac looked at her. “ Weel, a piece of soap would
be maist serviceable,” he said ; “ but I think a handker-
chief is what ye are maist needin’ ”
But they had all disappeared before he had finished,
and thinking it was due to his style of eloquence he
turned round to address his comrades, and found the
mamoose, or chief of the tribe, standing in the doorway
with Fat Jack, Doc, and the Chief.
Fat Jack had just been on the point of pushing aside
the hanging matting that served as a door, and entering,
when the screen parted from within and the person
picturesquely garbed in what was once a white shirt and
a lady’s underskirt, confronted them.
“ Goo’ mornin’,” he said, without showing any
surprise at seeing his village invaded by white
men.
“Good morning,” responded Jack. “I called to see
if you were keeping in good health.”
“ What's your name ? ” asked the mamoose, for he it
was, abruptly, fondling the large ring in his nose.


'


I48 °
.0 1/ X
XX'? The City of/ / \
Mountains f ;
J' Priests Passage I
Station ' ; ’4'vT \\
V Vi.
■-.. Tugeri Waterfall .4AATA. I'm irX A
8 / "‘ X A\v\ German Bounefary
A* vA \
\ "'i"4. Find /. vA ,
V A Camp 1°" ») j
% «Great Scotts Village /? ! Gold *5* *
A% <f%.. {I x /v Fieid £Mx
(C Af, U X #4* /Yodda A<V
\|L Snake J^^ al T
1 'Xs» / Mt T %J%
A|lm. 1 owew 8WNLe0%!%£$ p f lk% *»,
1K3 * % IL
m XxPx % Ik
o° Am X^AU —-■
1
< ’' I %
\ ill
V . '%%„ L. %•,!
//'t
lEv X i^l
10° F -
c^°
147° ~ I48 j


j —
Part of BRITISH NEW GUINEA
to illustrate
“the GREAT WHITE chief’.’
" 8°
Kr ro W
/
T 49 150 3 * 15T




“ Oh, I’m not particular with friends—Jack will do.
This is the Chief ”
The Chief and Doc came up. “ Chief, this is Mamoose
Biled Shirt and Petticoat, and he hopes you are keeping
well.”
“ How do you do, mamoose ?” said the Chief. “We
were passing your way and thought we would give you
a friendly call.”
“ Um, my name not billy shirt and pocket cat. My
name Sartor Resartus.”
“ Who gave you that name ? ” inquired Doc ; “ and
where did you pick up your English ? ”
“My name great name,” replied the mamoose,
proudly. “ Big mamoose Tamata town gave it me, and
tapu mamoose at mission station throw water over me
to make it stick when I become Christian.”
“ That means,” explained Mac to Harry, as they
stood beneath, “that the Warden of Tamata goldfields
named him first —probably he ought to have hanged him
instead—and that the bishop, or some one down at the
mission station on the coast, baptized him when he
repented of his cannibalistic ways and became a Christian.
I have met the beggar somewhere before though, and
I’m thinkin’ that the warden wad hang him noo if he
could get his hands on him.”
“We are glad you are a Christian, mamoose,” said
the Chief, extending his hand, “because we can now
trust you, and get you to help us,”
“ Greet jumping centipedes ! ” gasped Bill. “ Listen
to the Chief tellin’ old petticoats he will trust
him.”
“ Haud yer tongue, man,” said Mac. “ Dae ye
think the Chief wad tell him to his face he needed
hanging ? ”
“ But I say, Mac, I reckon I’ve seen the old


cut-throat somewhere before. Ain’t there something
familiar about him ? ”
“ I’ve been thinkin’ that mysel’, Bill ; but then a’
n 'gg ers are alike, except that some wear a peg through
their nose as an ornament, and some hae a taste for
rings.”
“Me like you trust me,” began the mamoose, as
the entire party assembled on his verandah. “Me
good Christian. Me sing you, ‘ There is a happy
land ’ ”
“ Some other day,” interrupted Doc, hurriedly.
“ What people are you ? ”
“Oh, my people anything. Not much good. Too
much fight. Papangi come along. Some day Sisureta ”
The mamoose stopped, and his eyes roamed anxiously
around his village.
“ What the mischief is the ugly beggar trying to
say ? ” grunted Bill.
“ He’s probably lying,” said Harry, “ and doesn’t want
to say what tribe his people belong to.”
“You dine with Sartor Resartus an’ stay long time
with him,” continued the mamoose, apparently forgetting
what he had been talking about.
“With pleasure, as far as the dining is concerned,
mamoose,” answered the Chief; “ but I fear we cannot
stay more than two days with you. Where are your
warriors ? ”
“ Warriors come bymbye. Out hunt for big feast;
come soon.”
“ Oh, then I suppose that would be them we heard
going out last night ? ”
The mamoose appeared ill at ease. “Urn!” he
said, “where did you camp last night ? ”
“ Some miles back,” answered Doc, yawning. “ But
you should ask us inside, Mr. Resartus.”


“ Which way you come ? ” persisted the mamoose,
ignoring Doc’s remark.
“That way,” put in Fat Jack, before the Chief or Doc
could reply, indicating a course at right angles to the
actual one.
“ Um ! which way you go ? ”
“That way,” again answered Fat Jack, pointing
a course in continuation of his first one. The
mamoose looked closely at Doc, and the Chief, doubt-
less surprised that they had not answered—but their
faces were expressionless —and without another word
he signed to them to follow him, and descended to
the ground.
“It are a blamed good thing that we had one
liar in the party,” commented Bill, as they fell in
behind the mamoose, the Chief, and Doc. “Fat Jack
ain’t no fool.”
“ But why did he need to lie ? ” asked Harry. “ Why
couldn’t he tell the truth in a simple manner like that;
and won’t the mamoose find it out by our tracks, in any
case ? ”
“Because Fat Jack knows niggers as well as Mac
and me,” responded Bill; “ and by the time old petticoats
finds out the way we have come and gone, we will be
far enough away to be ready for him. What do you
say, Mac ? ”
Mac said nothing. He was thinking deeply.
The mamoose led the way to another structure
somewhat similar in size and appearance to the one
they had just left, only it was surmounted by a huge
crocodile carved out of, and burnt into, the central roof
ridge which rose some feet above the thatch. “ White
Christian brothers camp here,” remarked the mamoose,
as they clambered over the high piles that supported
the house. “ Christian brothers welcome to stay with


Sartor Resartus for long time. He no carry club or
spear, he trust brothers. He no like they no trust him.
Big feast ready soon.” He departed with an air of
great dignity, attended to the doorway with much
ceremony by the Chief and Doc, and mimicked by Bill
and Jack until he was well clear of the house, and
watched all the time by Mac, Ted, Kaiser, and Harry
until out of sight.
When sure that he had gone Doc threw himself
down on the matted floor, and laughed. “Well, what
do you make of Sartor Resartus, Esq. ? ” he said
to the Chief, whose face gave no sign that he felt
amused.
“ I don’t know. Candidly I have no confidence in
any native who has acquired a knowledge of English.
They get to know much that is not good for natives to
know, and are altogether too dangerous, for they are as
cunning as they are treacherous.”
“ Well, we have the freedom of the city, at all
events.”
“So long as we leave our guns at home,” added the
Chief, significantly.
Meanwhile, Harry and Kaiser had gone on a tour of
exploration, and after Mac and Silent Ted had seen that
their carrier-boys were housed beside them, they too
departed to explore the village, having first laid their
weapons aside as had also done the two boys. There
were signs everywhere that a great exodus had taken place
the night before, and Harry wondered what would have
been the result had the hunters without the restraining
influence of their highly civilized Christian chief struck
their camp. The village was well and systematically laid
out. One long row of houses fronted the river, being
built over the water, and supported by high piles. They
were all built on wooden frames and thatched with palm


leaves and a peculiar kind of grass over which grew a
creeper Harry had noticed several times during their
journey; but here and there some enterprising and
enlightened native had covered his thatch with ant-
beds, and thus ensured a perfectly dry and cool dwell-
ing. The trees were not very plentiful inside the village,
but those that did grow were all of a certain variety
of palm, whose long, straight trunks towered high
overhead and then broke into branches, among which
were built houses, and whence hung a long fibre ladder
similar to those the boys had already seen. Harry
noticed that the women were running about all over
the place, and rapidly clearing away all traces of dis-
order, “The people of this village must be a very
superior lot, Kaiser,” he said to his companion, as they
came to some highly finished canoes drawn up on
the river’s bank. “ See how well these boats are built
and finished.”
“Yes, they know how to build things of wood,” agreed
the German ; “ but ach ! here come more women without
having any clothes on. Let us run.”
“No,” said Harry ; “we’ll have the whole population
after us if we do that. I’ll tell you what to do, Kaiser;
take out your pocket mirror and show them their own
reflections. If that doesn’t frighten them away, nothing
will.”
“ Mine Gott! vas you tink dat people who can talk
English and build houses and boats like these do not
know what a looking-glass vas ? ”
“Well, sing to them, Kaiser, or you are done. It
is you they are after ; I see it in their eyes.”
Without another word Kaiser flourished his pocket
mirror and raised his voice in song. The ladies
stopped Kaiser’s voice was not unmusical then
slowly they advanced ; they were charmed, apparently,


with his vocal efforts. One grinning fairy came right
up to Kaiser, but he at once held his mirror to
her face, and with a yell of “ Tapu, tapu,” she darted
away. The rest took up the chorus and fled too,
leaving Kaiser still awakening the echoes with his
song.
“ That will do, Kaiser ; they couldn’t stand it, and
have cleared,” spoke Harry, and with a sigh of relief
the German saw that they had indeed departed.
“ It does seem strange that singing should frighten
such people,” said Kaiser, after a bit. “ They haf goot
voices, und surely sing themselves at times.” Harry did
not reply. He marvelled at the women being frightened
at their own image. “They are not so highly civilized,
after all,” he remarked. “ But hullo! Here is the
mamoose himself. Good morning, sir.”
“ Go’ mornin’ ; you like me ? ” said the mamoose,
coming forward from behind an erection.
“ Oh, very much indeed.”
“You got shoot gun ? ”
“ Not here ; we left them behind to show we trusted
you.”
“Mine Gott! ” muttered Kaiser —“trusted him; I
would sooner trust the devil.” Neither he nor Harry
thought it worth mentioning that they had not discarded
their revolvers.
“Me like you. Sartor Resartus big mamoose. Lot
wives. Give you some.”
“ Thank you, sir ; why do you like us ? ”
“ Oh, me like all white men. White men Christian
brothers.”
“ I am very glad we like each other,” said the
diplomatic Harry.
“ How you like white men ? ” grinned Kaiser, to
show that he, too, enjoyed the mamoose’s company. Ihe


mamoose looked critically at the German’s fat figure,
and smiled sweetly.
“ Oh, me like white men, anyway, but like young fat
ones best, well roasted.”
The German shuddered, and gripped his revolver in
his trouser pocket.
“ Are there no men in your village, mamoose ? ” asked
Harry, endeavouring to change the conversation to some
less personal subject.
“ No,” answered the mamoose, promptly ; “ all out
big hunt.”
“ How is it that a civilized chief like you allows
a pouri-pouri house in your village ? ” The mamoose
looked at the strangely shaped house which Harry
indicated a little way off. It was made entirely of
wood, and was carved grotesquely, and painted in
alternate stripes of bright red and glaring yellow, thus
giving the carved and burnt-out animals represented
a very incongruous appearance. “ Oh, pouri-pouri
house church now,” the mamoose answered at length;
“ keeps hims for hold mission books an’—an’ ”
What other objects the wizard’s house held was never
stated ; for at that moment a hideous face, surmounted
by a mop of hair standing straight up for about a
foot, showed itself through a hole which served as
a window in the doubo in question, and, uttering a
yell which might have done credit to a locomotive, the
mamoose hurled his spear at it, and bounded towards
the door.
“ I think we had better return to our comrades,” said
Harry, when the mamoose had disappeared inside.
“ That was a man’s face we saw, and, despite the
mamoose s assurance, I shouldn’t wonder if that house
were filled with them.”
“Dere vas something dat vas not just right about


this village,” said Kaiser, as they retraced their steps,
“ and I hope we vas not going to stay too much
time. Ah ! dere vas another face. Look up in that
tree. Mine Gott! it is von white face. It vas —it
vas Mac ! ”
“You are richt again, Kaiser,” cried the owner of
the face described as white, although it was more of
a brown colour. “ Hoo are you laddies enjoying
yoursel’s ? ”
“ What are you doing up there, Mac ? ” cried Harry,
amazed at seeing his comrade calmly looking out from
a tree-house and smoking serenely.
“Gettin’ fresh air. Ted is up the next tree. Man,
ye hae nae idea hoo grand it feels to be in a ceevilized
dwelling again. If there was a piano aboot I would gie
ye a tune, but I canna find the drawing-room here. Are
ye not cornin’ to pay me a veesit ? ”
“ Not to-day, Mac ; it is nearly dinner-time, you know,
and Mr. Resartus has promised a great feast.”
“ Weel, then, I’ll just come wi’ you,” said Mac.
swinging out on the ladder and descending rapidly.
“ Come, Ted,” he shouted, “ the police are coming, an’
ye ken ye’ve nae richt to break into another man’s
hoose as ye have done.” Mac walked to the nearest
tree and gave the ladder a shake, but no answer came,
nor was there any sign of Ted. “ Come doon, ye streak
o’ human misery,” again roared Mac, but still without
response.
“ I’ll go up for him,” said Harry, swinging on to the
ladder.
“ You just come back, Boy,” said Mac. “ Maybe Ted
has gone home, for I’ll admit I was reading the medita-
tions o’ Marcus Aurelius an’ might no’ have heard him ;
but onyway, if he is still up there he has some reason
for it, and we’d best let him wait. 1 ken Ted gey weel


by this time.” So saying, Mac turned and led the way
back to their own doubo on the river, where they found
their comrades the centre of an inquisitive throng of old
men and women. The Chief looked up as they entered,
and caught Mac’s eye. “ Well, boys,” he cried gaily,
“ what do you think of the village ? ”
“It is a wonderful place to be so far away from
civilizing influences,” replied Harry; “but we met the
mamoose, and I suspect ”
“There’s a wee poem o’ Longfellow’s,” broke in Mac,
irrelevantly, “ an’ a bit o’ it appeals to me the noo
greatly. It’s the last line o’ the first verse o’ the ‘ Psalm
of Life.’ ”
Harry started; the line to which Mac referred read,
“ Things are not what they seem.” The Chief and
Doc smiled. “We agree with you, Mac,” they said ;
then Harry understood, for among the onlookers he
recognized the lady who had styled herself “ Chief’s best
wife,” and doubtless there were also several others who
understood English.
“ Where is Ted ? ” inquired Doc.
“Prospecting around,” replied Mac. “Don’t worry
about him.”
“ Here comes the mamoose,” cried Harry, who
had been gazing over the heads of the assembled
natives.
“ Ah, then the big feast is prepared,” remarked the
Chief; and so it proved. The mamoose had merely come
round to announce the fact, and to lead the white men
to where it was laid out on a level space in the middle
of the village.
“ All white Christian friends here ? ” asked the
mamoose, suddenly turning and surveying the party
after they had left the house.
“All but two, mamoose,” answered the Chief.
(B 762)


“ They are somewhere in the village, and will join us
later.”
“ Then I go back and see no one steal your pop-pops,”
continued the mamoose ; and Harry noticed the strange
glint in his eyes. To his surprise, his comrades did not
seem to grasp that the intention of the mamoose was
to obtain possession of their rifles, and thus leave them
helpless.
“ I’ll go back and watch them,” he cried. “ Und me
too,” added Kaiser, who had not forgotten the mamoose’s
critical inspection of his person that morning.
“ No, boys,” said the Chief. “ I want you to dine
with the mamoose. It is a great honour he is doing us,
and he could never call himself a Christian again if he
allowed our pop-pops to be stolen. Nor can we allow
you to leave us, mamoose,” he continued. “ Your old
men can watch the pop-pops, for we must have the
pleasure of your company.”
The mamoose hesitated for a moment; evidently he
did not put much faith in the honesty of his old men.
“ All right,” he said finally, with a sigh. “ Ole men can
watch ; but you no blame me ? ”
“ Certainly not,” said the Chief; and Harry wondered
where his usual acumen had gone. Nothing more was
said, and Mac began whistling cheerfully the “ Bonnie
Banks o’ Loch Lomond,” which he kept up until the
banqueting ground was reached. Here, with much
ceremony, the mamoose arranged the party on mats
on the ground, and then uttering what was doubtless
intended for grace, he squatted down, and the others
did likewise, the entire village gathering round to
watch their white friends enjoying the big feast they
had prepared.
And it was a feast. The variety of dishes was end-
less, only there were no dishes. Wild turkey, pig, duck,


parrot, fish, lizard, and numerous other birds and animals
which none of the party knew, and were careful not to
inquire about, roasted in their skins, feathers, and scales,
amidst heaps of hot wood ashes, comprised the dinner,
and whatever any one fancied was hauled from the ashes
at the order of the mamoose and handed to him. There
were neither knives nor forks, so each acted according to
his skill and his knowledge of anatomy in manipulating
the bones. Nevertheless, all made good progress, and
certainly Harry enjoyed the setting of the picnic greatly.
For drinks there were spiced cocoanut milk, and a fluid
extracted from the betel-nut, and some concoctions pre-
pared from the juice of some roots. These were passed
round in exquisitely carved cocoanut bowls, and were
much appreciated, for the day was hot and the drinks
refreshingly cool and palatable.
“ Try this fellow roast,” said the mamoose to Mac,
as the banquet proceeded.
“ What is it ? ” inquired the cautious Scot, dubiously,
eyeing the fragrantly smelling substance in question.
“ Oh, it good,” said the mamoose, looking round
the assembled crowd hesitatingly. “ Mamoose s fat
wife ”
“ What! ye ungodly cannibal,” roared Mac, springing
to his feet. “ Hae we been dining wi’ cannibals, after
all ? Oh, lord, to think what I hae been eating! ”
“ Ha, ha! ” laughed the mamoose, as he saw signs of
a general storm bursting about his ears. “Me tell lie.
That pig.”
“ Pig! Ye murderin’ villain. Whaever saw a pig
wi’ bones like that ? ”
“Mac, remember your manners,” spoke the Chief,
reprovingly, and glancing over at him, Mac became
silent, and sat down sullenly. ‘‘Ye shouldna tell lees
like that,” he said with forced jocularity a minute or so


after. “ Christians don’t, and ye vera near made me lose
ma appetite.”
The mamoose did not answer. His face wore a
troubled expression, and he kept looking anxiously down
the village. “ Why your fellow.s no’ come along ? ” he
said suddenly to the Chief.
“ I don’t know,” he was answered. “ Ah, here comes
one now. Hullo, Ted, where have you been ? 1 Sit down
and have something to eat.”
Ted sat down. “ Git! ” he ejaculated with great
emphasis as he did so.
“ What that you say,” cried the mamoose.
“ It’s hot,” answered Ted, shortly, helping himself to
the edibles.
“Boy and Kaiser, go and look for Fat Jack,” com-
manded the Chief. “ Tell him that I desire him at
once, and don’t come back without him. What can
he be thinking of not to come to the feast in our
honour ? ”
“ All right, sir,” responded the two boys, rising.
“ Here, Boy, tell me what you think of that first ? ”
cried Doc, throwing Harry a sketch he had hastily
drawn on a leaf from his notebook, depicting the
feast.
Harry took the sketch in amazement; surely his
comrades were going mad ? He looked at the sketch,
and then sent his teeth right through his lips to prevent
his face showing any expression, for pencilled under-
neath the sketch, as if it were the title, were the words,
“ Jack is ferrying our carriers and rifles across the river.
Join him, and when all is ready whistle loudly and wait
on us.”
“ It is rather good,” Harry remarked, handing back
the sketch. “ Especially the mamoose.”
“ What that ? ” demanded the latter, hearing his


name mentioned ; and Doc handed the sketch to him.
“ Pass it round, mamoose, when you have done,”
he said.
The picture evidently tickled the mamoose, for he
laughed long and heartily. “ You much clever fellow,” he
said to Doc smilingly, and Doc wondered if after all
he had been able to read the writing. The sketch was
passed round, and each made some comment upon it
until it reached Silent Ted, who sat next to Doc. Doc
at the moment had a pencil in his hand, and without a
word Ted seized it and, as naturally as if he were filling
in some details missed out, scrawled underneath Doc’s
lines, “ The place is choke-full of warriors. I’ve sent all
the canoes adrift down the river.” Then he handed it
back to Doc, who glanced at it, smiled, and handed it
to the Chief.
“ Now that we have shared the mamoose’s kind
hospitality,” the Chief said, rising, as if to make an after-
dinner speech, “we must each make him some little
present in return. Go therefore, all of you, and bring
him whatever you care to give. I will wait and talk to
him until you come back.”
“ No, no,” cried the mamoose, excitedly ; “ ole men
watch rifles all right. Get present bymbye.”
“ But I insist,” said the Chief; “we must give
you something now.” He signed to his comrades
to go.
“ I’ll wait and keep the mamoose company until the
boys come back, instead o’ you,” put in Mac, with a
suspicious quietness of manner that told all plainly that
he was holding himself under a powerful restraint. “ Bill
can bring him ma wee clock wi’ the loud tick.”
The mamoose’s eyes glistened. “Me like tick-tick,”
he said ; “me long time ago got tick-tick from white
fellow like —like ” Here he gazed round the party


as if trying to single out some one, but evidently not
succeeding, he continued, “ But hims no tick-tick now,
and mamoose like another tick-tick.” He was not a
thought reader or he would have known that Mac’s sole
purpose in desiring to stay behind was that he might
put a sudden stop to the mamoose’s life. But all the
party were desirous of that honour, and all knew that no
time could be lost.
“ I say, Chief,” Bill began, “ I reckon that the
mamoose and me ”
“ Shut up, Bill,” interrupted Doc. “ Suppose the
mamoose comes with us, then we can all have the
honour of his company ? ” The mamoose was flattered.
He did not quite understand the meaning of all the
ceremony, but as he calculated that the rifles were now
in safe hands, and his warriors only awaiting his signal,
he was not disposed to show his hand yet, so when the
Chief said in a very quiet tone of voice, “ Comrades, go
for your presents, and leave me with the mamoose,”
and they at once rose and walked off, he did not
object, but merely made a sign to some one behind him,
who at once departed, doubtless to carry some pre-
arranged message to the warriors. But the Chief now
turned to him. “ Tell me, Mamoose, how it comes that
this is an Angerita village and you are not one of that
tribe ? ”
“ Oh, me kill Angerita mamoose,” answered the other,
flippantly.
“ I understand. Have you ever fought any of the
Mad Wizard’s tribe ? ”
“ What you know of him ? ” The mamoose’s face
showed consternation. “ Mad Wizard’s people fight only
old men and women. He soon be tucker for big
Mamoose Sartor Resartus. Why your fellows no come
back yet ? ”


B 762
“HIS HANDS RUDELY FASTENED AROUND THE MAMOOSE’s THROAT”


i
I


“ Why are you lying to me, mamoose ? ” said the
Chief, ignoring the last remark. “You are a Tugeri.
You are the half-educated native who led the Tugeris
against the miners down at Yodda, and who, when they
were about to hang you after the fight, was saved by the
intervention of a missionary, whom, as soon as you were
left alone with him, you murdered and robbed, and then
cleared out.”
“Why you tell this me ? Yes, me Tugeri. Me an’
warriors come here last night. Angerita all run away.
Kill all that stay. Kill you too now. Big feast to-
night. See, warriors come ! You white Christian friends
fools.”
“ Not so much as you fancy, mamoose,” said the Chief,
grimly, noting at the same time the appearance of a
number of stalwart warriors, apparently issuing from the
pouri house. As he spoke his hands rudely fastened
around the mamoose’s throat, and the native was thrown
back on the grass. His eyes bulged, his tongue pro-
truded, and he uttered some gurgling sounds. A moment
later the Chief threw the body from him limp and
apparently lifeless, and started to run towards the river.
It had all been done so quickly and without any angry
talk that the onlookers thought the rough handling was
part of some strange trick the white chief was teaching
their mamoose. But when they saw the mamoose flung
like a bag of sand on the ground, and heard the sicken-
ing thud as his head struck some logs, they realized that
all was not right, and with a yell closed in on the Chief.
But he had had a good start, and before the old men
could stop him, or the warriors who had rushed from the
pouri-pouri house where they had been concealed all day,
could get within spear-throw, he had jumped into a war
canoe waiting and manned by his comrades. Next
moment Mac pushed it off, and leaped in as it cleared


the sand. A shower of spears fell about them, but Bill
and Ted emptied their revolvers among the bloodthirsty
warriors, which had the effect of checking their advance.
In a few minutes the canoe reached the opposite shore
where Jack was waiting with the carriers and rifles.
“ That was rather close, wasn’t it ? ” said Doc, lighting
a cigar as they landed. “ A second more would have
lost us the trick.”
“ But I found out what I wanted, Doc,” said the
Chief. “ The Mad Wizard’s tribe have lost their reputa-
tion for fighting, but he is still alive.”
“ Hear how the beggars are howling now,” laughed
Jack. “They have just found their boats aren’t there.
Lor’, I almost died laughing when I saw Ted send their
canoes down the river.”
“ But why did we not leave when we suspected danger
first ? ” inquired Harry.
“ Because we should have been chased just the same,”
answered the Chief, “ and we did not all know what was
wrong until Ted came along at the conclusion of the
feast, although we had seen, of course, that the mamoose
wished to separate us from our rifles, and Jack acted
accordingly.”
“And lost my dinner over it too,” said Fat Jack,
dolefully.
“Na, na, ma man,” cried Mac, opening a flour
sack he carried in his hand. “Ye havena lost that.
Here is a turkey and a pig I took the liberty o’
takin’ awa’ wi’ me when naebody was lookin’. Stick
in noo.”
“ And hurry up,” advised Doc, “ for the warriors will
be over the river as soon as they can find the means of
getting across. They will endeavour to head us off, and
I only hope they will take the direction Jack said we
were going.”


“ They are coming now,” cried Harry, who was watch-
ing the other shore intently. “ They are pushing a big
sort of raft into the water.”
“Let them come, then. Don’t fire on them, for we
don’t want needless bloodshed,” said the Chief; “ and
we shall require all our ammunition for serious work
later.”
And the party moved off into the forest.


CHAPTER VI
The Storm
“ I SAY, boys,” grunted Jack, as the howls of the baffled
warriors grew fainter, “that was a bit of a circus that
might have had a different ending, and I believe fate
was in it. If we had not come on the village we
should most likely have been run into by the escaping
Angeritas, and if we had missed them the mamoose’s
warriors out after them would have been sure to have
had a little argument with us. As it is, we have had a
good dinner, and I have a turkey left yet. Hullo !
where did you come from, King George ? ”
“ Hims hungry,” answered that individual, paying
no attention to Jack’s question, but seizing the remnant
of his dinner from his hands. “ Hims meet bad Tugeris
coming along white fellows’ yesterday tracks. Hims
turn and catch canoe and cross the river, and here
hims am.”
“An’ the next time you leave without a ticket I’ll
send ane efter ye, ye black image o’ Satan,” spoke Mac,
tapping his Winchester. King George did not answer.
He knew better; and after he had dined on what Mac
had so thoughtfully taken away with him for Jack’s
benefit, he seized his old pack from Silent Ted’s shoulders
and ran ahead.
Harry and Kaiser meanwhile were endeavouring to


copy the sang froid of their comrades. Kaiser did not
understand what it had all meant, nor did he care. His
was a phlegmatic disposition, and he believed in the
abilities of his comrades to pull out of any trouble, no
matter whether brought on by their own carelessness or
otherwise. Not so Harry, for although he believed
in the resourcefulness of his Chief and comrades, he felt
that he ought to share their responsibilities, and it
puzzled him greatly to understand why they had allowed
themselves to be trapped that day, or even why they
had entered the village at all.
“ Come here, Boy,” called the Chief, breaking in on
his musings ; and Harry at once went forward. “ I am
very glad indeed to see you taking such an active and
intelligent interest in the expedition,” he continued.
“We had resolved to try to hide some things from
you as much as possible, but Doc and I now think
it is no longer necessary to do so, as you have shown
powers far in advance of your years, and are quite
capable of understanding the serious nature of the
work before us.”
“ Indeed, sir,” said Harry, “ I never look upon our
work in any other light than a serious one. I am not
a boy ” He stopped; Mac’s ponderous form had
rushed past them in pursuit of some object.
“ Look at the bonnie wee butterfly,” the Scot was
saying. “ Come on, Ted ; help me to catch it for my
collection.” Ted and Kaiser at once joined in the
pursuit, and even Doc made a step forward as if to
assist, but drew back again. The Chief smiled. “ You
couldn’t do that, Harry,” he said. “ You think that your
comrades must be mad to waste their energies in chasing
butterflies, when close behind us are the most dreaded
cannibals in New Guinea.”
" Well, sir, I would not presume to criticize the


actions of men whom I have proved to be absolutely
fearless, but certainly I could not —at least, I do not
think I could —so far forget the dangers of our position
as to devote my thoughts to butterflies. It would seem to
me to be showing a lack of responsibility and careless-
ness for which I should expect to suffer, for we can’t
afford to ignore these natives, nor is it fair to leave all
our troubles to you.”
“ Well spoken, Harry ; and yet I fancy that you
are inclined to think that even I am a bit careless
at times. Say, for instance, in coming to the village
this morning ? ”
“Oh no, sir. You know best, and we know now that
we should most probably have been met by the raiders
anywhere else. I confess, though, I could not understand
why we were not on guard against surprises when we
knew some disturbance had happened the night before,
nor how we all took the mamoose’s word that his warriors
were out hunting, seeing that these English-speaking
natives never tell the truth.”
The Chief laughed. “ I suppose, then, Harry,” he
said, “ it would surprise you to learn that not one of us,
excepting perhaps Kaiser —and I do not think he was
surprised either, although from different reasons —was
taken unawares by anything that occurred this morning ?
We knew last night that some tribe had raided the
village.”
“ Great Scott! and yet we walked right into it! ”
“ Certainly ; we wished to know who were the raiders,
because if they were Tugeris, as King George said they
were, then our future journey would be altered some-
what, because of the fact that we should have them
behind us in force, and correspondingly weaker ahead.
We knew they were Tugeris when we saw the women
—they nearly always accompany the warriors when they


mean to retain any village they raid —and we suspected
that the mamoose had men hidden when he, instead of
taking us into his own house, led us to another. Of
course his desire to get us away from our rifles was
apparent, but it was not our policy to show that it was
so. Then, at the first opportunity, your comrades, whom
you doubtless thought careless and frivolous, set about
getting our desired information. Mac climbed into one
of the tree-houses, and found by its furnishings that its
former inhabitants had been Angeritas. Ted discovered
the same thing, and also that their sacred house was
filled with warriors, doubtless sleeping off the effects of
the gorge they had had the night before, for they are
all cannibals. Bill meanwhile had recognized in the
mamoose the most notorious wholesale murderer in New
Guinea. He had been brought up and educated by the
missionaries down on the coast, but had left them and
turned cut-throat when the Tugeris first began to make
trouble. He supplied boys to the Yodda gold-miners at
so much a head. They were stolen, of course, from
other tribes ; and then when the miners trusted him
fully, he led a horde of combined tribes into their
camp. This was the famous raid on the Yodda Camp,
and its result is history ; but the leader escaped through
the intervention of a famous missionary, and he is now
evidently a mamoose of some importance among the
Tugeris.”
“ But why did we go to the feast so tamely ? We
were taken intentionally out of sight of our rifles.”
“Yes, but it suited us to go, because I wished to
obtain some information from the mamoose, and Jack
would have an opportunity of getting our carriers and
rifles across the river without being observed. Ted
meanwhile covered the old men sent to get our rifles
with his revolvers, and thus prevented their giving the


alarm. When Jack had accomplished his work, Ted
then compelled the old men to enter the canoes, and
taking their paddles from them, set them adrift, and
came over and gave the signal to us as you saw. I
wished you boys safely out of danger, hence my ordering
you to look for Jack ; and then when I got the others
away, I transacted my own business with the mamoose.
He knew we suspected him of double-dealing by this
time, however, but thought we had no possible chance
of escape, and so pretended not to understand our
actions. Nevertheless he sent a messenger for his
warriors, and I left shortly after. Now, you see, Harry,
at no time were your supposed careless comrades off
their guard. We knew each other’s thoughts, for we
have faced danger together in every form many times,
and have lived the life you see now until we know
exactly what any one of us will do under certain cir-
cumstances. Even now those butterfly-chasers are not
acting as thoughtlessly as you suppose. You observe
just now that we are walking on hard ground which
leaves no track, while they, with the carriers assisting
them, are smashing down the brushwood over there as
if we had crushed blindly through to the river again.
When the warriors do get on to our tracks here, they
will conclude that we have taken to the water, and may
give up the chase, and anyhow it will give us some time
to be prepared for them, even if they ultimately find our
real tracks and come after us.”
Harry was silent. Doc was smoking a few yards
ahead, and Bill and Jack had joined the butterfly-
hunters.
“ And did you get the information you desired from
the mamoose ?” finally asked Harry.
“Yes; I found that the Mad Wizard is still alive,
and that was all I wanted to know.”


“ Who is the Mad Wizard ? ”
The Chief looked strangely at Harry. “My greatest
friend, and the comrade of all your comrades,” he said.
“ Is he a prisoner among the nativ&s ? ”
“ On the contrary, he is the chief of the people who
inhabit the country to which we are going.”
“ The chief! Then why does he not work those
mineral deposits himself?”
“Ah, Harry! The answer to that entails a longer
story than we have time for just now. He and I were
among the first who prospected the country. Doc, Mac,
Bill, Jack, and Ted were also in that party, and five
others. Some of us lie among those dim ranges that
pierce the clouds ahead. Those who remain, if any but
ourselves now exist, must still be somewhere through-
out this great unknown land, for they have never left
either Port Moresby or Samarai.” The Chief ceased
talking, and they walked on.
Overhead, the many parrots and birds of paradise kept
up an incessant chattering. Behind, the shouts of the
warriors could still be heard at intervals. To the right, the
roar of the rushing river mingled with the noise made by
their companions as they crashed through the dense
undergrowths. The trackless forest lay on the other
hand, and ahead was they knew not what. The day was
oppressively close, for the trees and the creepers which
interlaced them shut out the air, although the fierce
heat of the tropical sun was also tempered down by
their luxuriant foliage. It seemed to Harry ages since
he had left home, and the reasons which had caused him
to do so were almost forgotten in the strange excite-
ment of his present life. He had written to Mr. Black-
wood and his sister at every opportunity ; but those
chances had ceased when they left the last gold-mining
camp behind, and now he was a wanderer like his


brother before him, and lost alike to friend and foe.
Now he was a member of as daring a band as ever
helped to roll back the confines of the British Empire.
Nine months before, he had been a clerk. Yet the
change was not altogether new to him ; for had he not
dreamt of trackless forests, of rushing rivers and hostile
savages, and were not the realities almost as he had
dreamt ?
But what a series of tasks he had on hand ! First,
he was commissioned to find Edward Blackwood ; but
he had the Chiefs assurance that he would meet that
gentleman before the present trip was finished. Then
he had hoped by means of that strange boy he had met
at Tilbury Docks, who was so like some of his comrades
in many ways, to find the opal-field where his brother
was last heard of, whence he could trace him to his
present whereabouts. He had now lost Darling Bill,
but did that mean that he had lost the only clue
by which he could trace his brother ? Edward Black-
wood must also have been on the same opal-fields, and
he was now somewhere in New Guinea. Perhaps the
same reason had made them leave the opal-fields.
Perhaps they had met each other and were together
now. But who had placed the opal necklet in his
pocket ? His brain refused to attempt to unravel the
mystery, and he only became still more confused when
he recollected that he was now a member of an expedi-
tion bent upon still another mysterious quest, the real
nature of which he did not know.
“ Ah, well,” he unconsciously said aloud, “ I will be
free to look for my brother after I deliver my message
to Edward Blackwood, and I can get Mac and some of
the others to help me.”
“ Wi’ a’ the pleesure imaginable,” came an answer;
and the spell was broken.


“I did not know you had come back, Mac,”
Harry said, fully awake now. “Did you catch the
butterfly ? ”
“Ay, but it is just like pleesure. When I got it I
didna want it. But, laddie, you’ve been dreaming a
lang while, for I hae been beside ye for half an hour, an’
I sometimes heard a spoken word or twa that showed
ye had trouble o’ your ain. Noo, I dinna want tae ken
onything ye dinna want to tell, but if my old bones are
of any use tae ye efter we get the Mad Wizard and
some minerals that hae a cash value, ye can just say,
‘ Come on, Mac,’ and I’ll be wi’ ye.”
“ Thank you, Mac ; I have a brother somewhere on
this planet whom I would like to find some day.”
“Dod! I never thocht on that,” ejaculated Mac,
agitated beyond Harry’s understanding. “ Michty me !
I —I—we’ll all help ye tae find your brother, ma laddie.
Hullo! we’re gettin’ oot o’ the tunnel, and cornin’ to an
old lava plain on which trees canna grow.”
Mac was right. The forest suddenly fell away, and
the party found themselves on a hard, black, stony
stretch of ground bare of all vegetation, and which
extended for several miles in front of them. The full
force of the sun now beat down upon them, and the hot
ground burnt their feet through their boots as they pain-
fully struggled over the rugged surface. Evidently they
were crossing what was once a lava stream from some
volcano, and a few of the remarks made by Bill and
Jack anent that volcano and its lava stream were cer-
tainly original and emphatic; but, as Mac said, they
would “break a gramophone,” they may not be re-
peated. That evening, however, they reached the other
side of the plain, and camped on the banks of a dry
watercourse which separated the burnt country from a
belt of forest land not quite so densely overgrown as
(B 762) X


had been the forests through which they had previously
passed.
“We are getting among the foothills now,” said
the Chief, as the packs were opened on the far side
of the creek. “ This belt of timber country must
veil the beginning of the ranges, so we may as well
take what help nature gives us, and work our way
up this creek to-morrow. It must cut through some-
where.”
A few minutes after, the fires were kindled, and the
tea-billies boiling, and then the sun went down. It had
been too late to secure any game when they camped,
and no sign of bird or animal life had been seen while
crossing the plain, so supper that night consisted of a
wonderful pudding designed by Mac, engineered and
constructed by Jack, assisted by Bill and Ted, and con-
sumed mostly by Kaiser. All were very tired that
evening, and despite the many pests of known and un-
known varieties that came out to interview them, they
retired early, contenting themselves with the softest
places they could find on the ground for beds, as suit-
able positions for hammocks could not be obtained.
The carrier-boys were also tired, and after what must
have been a dramatic speech by King George, in
which he recounted his adventures that day after
leaving his companions, they too huddled together and
slept.
Some time in the night Harry woke with a start.
He had been dreaming of home, as wanderers often do,
and for a few moments could not realize where he was.
The night was the darkest he had ever experienced. It
was as if a wall of ink had dropped before his eyes ;
not a star could be seen, and not a sound broke the
stillness. All nature seemed suspended. “Mac,” he
whispered to the form lying beside him, and the


Scot instantly sat up and muttered, “It’s that storm
we’ve been expecting, and noo we’re goin’ to get it
wi’ a vengeance.” Then, raising his voice, he cried,
“Get up, you fellows. You’ll a’ be drooned in a
minute.”
“What have we struck?” gasped Bill and Jack, as
they opened their eyes.
“ Get up the flies. Quick ! ” cried the Chief.
“Can’t. There’s no trees that’ll do for poles, and
we can’t see them if there were,” answered Jack. “ Oh,
Jemima, here it comes ! ”
“ Crawl under the fly, then, and pull it tight,” cried
the Chief. “ Wake up, King George ; get your boys
under some cover.”
“Mind the stores,” cried Mac. “We’ll hae to cover
them. Quick ! Somebody light a match.”
Doc struck a light. The Chief and Harry opened
out the large canvas fly they carried, and stretched it
on the ground. Mac, Jack, and Bill hurriedly threw the
stores and ammunition under the fly, and Ted gathered
some wood and placed it beside the stores. But even as
they did so, the storm burst. “ Get inside! ” shouted
the Chief; and blindly each man felt for the edge of
the fly, and, as a flash of lightning illuminated the sur-
rounding country from the highest peak of the ranges
down to the Kumusi river, crawled under. Next
moment there was a sound as of stones falling on an
iron roof, and a terrific thunder-peal reverberated and
re-echoed down the valley. “Are we all here?” cried
the Chief.
“ I vas not,” cried a voice. “ Vere vas you ? ”
“ Come in, Kaiser,” shouted Mac, reaching out his
hands and hauling Kaiser under the fly. He had been
asleep, and had only been awaked by the thunder.
And then the rain came, one dull wall of water that


struck the ground like a solid body, and then ran into
the creek. In less than a minute the fly was soaked
through and through, and all underneath were like so
many bundles of wet rags. But the fly broke the fall of
the water, which was something for which they had
reason to be thankful. “ I am goin’ oot,” gasped Mac,
after a time; “ I’d rather be drooned honestly than
suffocated.”
Mac expressed the feelings of every one, for all were
on the point of suffocation under the sodden canvas
whence all air had been expelled by the first fall of
water, but they did not follow. Now the lightning fairly
danced through the heavens, and the thunder-peals
shook the ground ; but the rain was not now falling with
the pent-up violence of the first minute. “Ye may as
weel come oot,” cried Mac to his comrades. “ It’s a braw
nicht for studyin’ astronomy, and the pests are drooned.”
But now a new sound burst on the night, a sound like
tumultuous waves breaking on a rocky shore, and a
solid wall of water came rushing down the old creek-bed,
carrying with it trees, rocks, animals, and everything else
it had caught in its mad flight from the higher regions it
drained. Then the rain stopped, and the men crawled
from under the fly and shook themselves. The thunder
was receding towards the distant valley of the Lower
Kumusi, but the lightning still lit up the country in
spasmodic flashes. “ Are a’ you niggers drooned ? ”
called Mac to the carriers, but receiving no answer he
groped towards their sleeping-place and found them still
asleep. Evidently it needed more than thunder, light-
ning, and rain to wake the tired carriers, and Mac was
about to moralize on the fact when a low whisper from
Doc checked him.
“ Lie down, all,” Doc whispered ; and as one man
they lay flat upon the wet fly. Nor did any one require


to ask the reason, for on the other side of the swollen
torrent the pattering of feet could be plainly heard, and
the mutterings of drenched warriors keen on the scent
for blood.
“It is the mamoose and his men,” whispered the
Chief. ’’Providence must have made us choose this side
for a camp.”
“ Ga woz be nunen,” they heard the mamoose cry.
“He says we canna be far away,” chuckled Mac,
“an’ the beggar’s no far wrang, for ten feet isna’
much.”
“ They’re only silly niggers, and I don’t like
giving them their medicine,” said Bill, in what was the
nearest approach to a whisper he could manage ; “ but
1 has got my sights fairly on where the mamoose’s
middle waistcoat button should be, and I’ll puncture
him next flash, if they show any signs of coming
across.”
“ No, you won’t,” answered the Chief. “ That would
mean that they would follow us into the mountains,
where they could cut us off one by one. If we get clear
now we may dodge them altogether, for the rain will
have destroyed our tracks,” He paused abruptly ; Doc
had given him a kick. The natives had stopped almost
opposite, waiting for the next flash of lightning to deter-
mine what the white fly was.
“ Great snakes ! ” groaned Bill ; “we is cooked
now.”
“ Shut up,” growled Mac ; and all lay flat and still.
Bill, Ted, and Jack muttering a strange language to
themselves, Harry thrilled with a strange excitement
that reminded him of the games of his schooldays. The
Chief and Doc were watching for the next flash, Mac was
chewing a piece of damper and admiring the heavens,
and Kaiser had fallen asleep.


Suddenly a flash came, and the forms of the warriors
stood out plainly on the opposite bank.
“ Nae wonder the rain doesna effect these murderous
deevils,” remarked Mac, surveying them coolly ; “they’ve
got nothing on to get wet.” A shower of stones, sticks,
and spears interrupted him, and he covered his head in
the fly. Every man had his revolver ready, but no signal
from the Chief came to fire, and while they waited still
unhurt for his order, Silent Ted rose and went through a
war-dance.
“ Is ye hurt, Ted ? ” queried Bill, anxiously.
“ Nary a scratch,” answered the usually silent one.
“ They’ve cleared.” And so it proved, for the next flash
showed the warriors well down the creek.
“ That was the most exciting game of hide and seek
I ever took part in in my life,” said Harry, as they
scrambled to their feet and gazed after the natives.
“ I wonder they did not investigate further though;
I suppose they thought the fly was simply a pool of
water ? ”
“ Yes,” answered Doc, feeling for his dearly loved
cigar ; “ they mean that we should think that they thought
so, while they go down the creek and find a crossing-
place. After that the rest is easy ; they will rush us
asleep, and Why, my matches are damp. Has any
one got a dry match ? ”
The Chief silently handed Doc his matchbox, and
without saying a word the men began to bundle their
belongings together. Mac then roused Kaiser with a
kick, and Harry and Bill performed the same operation
on each of the boys, including King George. “ Hims
git! Quick an’ lively,” said Mac to the last. “ Some
bad Tugeris have been inquiring for you, King George,
and they will be back presently.”
“Yes, hims smells hims,” muttered the monarch,


sniffing the air; then he yabbered to his companions in
a style that caused them to have their loads in position
almost as soon as the white members of the party were
ready.
“ I reckon all the hims will git,” laughed Bill, as they
groped through the darkness up the banks of the
creek ; “ and when the other hims come along, they
won’t find us hims there.”
“ I’m afraid we cannot make much progress,” the Chief
said, a few minutes later. “ The banks are all washed
away, and we do not know what we may step into. It is
five hours from sunrise, too.”
“Will the natives follow us on this side of the
creek?” asked Harry, stumbling along in the darkness
behind the Chief.
“Yes, they must have cut across country to head us
off, and then run this creek down, knowing they would
cross our track somewhere. Probably another party
followed us direct, and most likely the combined parties
are now on this side of the water, and overhauling
us fast.”
“ But if they are now on this side, shouldn’t we try
the other side ? It is hard country there, and we could
travel much better.”
“We shall have to stay and fight, Harry, although I
had hoped to get along without too much of that sort of
thing. No man could swim that creek, and we are not
likely to find any fallen trees lying across it, in this
darkness.”
“ If you think we could make better headway on the
other side, sir, persisted Harry, “ I think I could cross.
You could fasten one end of a rope to me and I could
secure it on the other side, and with it to hold on by the
others could then cross easily.”
“It won’t do, Boy,” said Doc, from behind. “ You


couldn’t get across that torrent, but it would mean a lot
if we were on that side, and as I am a fair swimmer I’ll
try and drift down and across ”
“ I fancy I am about the best swimmer myself,” said
the Chief, as they all halted. “ I might, by drifting down
a hundred yards, if our rope were long enough, make the
other side.”
“ Let me do it,” pleaded Harry; “ I was considered
a good swimmer at home, and ”
“ I had forgotten, Harry,” said the Chief, quietly,
and greatly to Harry’s astonishment. “You are easily
the best swimmer in the party, and I believe you can
do it.”
And Harry did. He gained the other side by drift-
ing fifty yards down, then running up the opposite bank
he made his rope secure to a solitary tree standing there,
and the other end was fastened to some roots on the
camp side. This done, Doc entered the water, carrying
one of the carrier’s loads, and with the guiding rope
under his right arm, battled and floated and kicked his
way across, Harry helping him up the bank. In this
manner all but the Chief were safely taken over, and
then he, fastening his end of the rope under his shoulders,
plunged in, and was hauled across.
“ That is as good as a day’s start on the warriors,”
said Doc. “ Now, if we only had some dry material
to make a fire, we could warm ourselves with some
coffee. The natives couldn’t see a fire over that last
rise.”
“ There is nothing dry within miles,” said the Chief;
“ we’ll have to push on until sunrise. Hullo, Ted ! What
are you doing ? ”
“Making a fire,” said Bill. “Ted saved that wood
under his blankets when the rain came on, and has carried
it with him ever since we started.”


“You’re a gem, Ted, ma man,” complimented Mac.
“ Noo, a cup o’ coffee would just ”
“Oh, shut up and give a hand,” roared Jack ; and
Mac at once obeyed, and in a few minutes the men were
standing round the blaze, drying themselves and drink-
ing the hot beverage. The carriers had also picked up
some wet timber from the creek, and with the aid of the
already burning dry material this too was consumed,
and the carriers also got as much coffee as they could
drink, a rub down with an old sack being all the
drying they required.
“ Now, boys,” at length said the Chief, “it is only
two o’clock, and we must go forward without any
rest until we strike a camping ground that can be
made impregnable. Then we can halt for a day to
recuperate.”
“ We’ll gang on for a week, if ye like,” answered
Mac; and they started. But this time travelling was
much easier, and they made good progress, chuckling
from time to time as they thought of the surprise
awaiting the natives when they arrived at the deserted
camp.
Morning found them still forging ahead into the
higher country, and at sunrise they halted and prepared
breakfast. This over, they went on again through
quickly changing country until some time in the after-
noon they reached a wall of rocks rising straight in
front of them. Through these rocks the creek had cut
a dark and gloomy passage, and entering the ravine,
they at once saw that here lay the position of an im-
pregnable camp, and being tired and hungry, resolved to
rest whether the natives troubled them or not. While
more elaborate preparations than usual for camping
were being made, Doc and Harry sauntered up the
ravine to look for something edible for supper, and


Kaiser wandered off to examine the formation of the
rocks. The creek had now gone down, and only a
series of water holes remained to show that it had ever
carried water, and after some observations and calcula-
tions the Chief announced that the ravine lay straight in
the way they wished to go, and would probably afford
an easy passage through the ranges into the countiy
beyond.
“ I do not quite understand why this creek carries no
water on its own account,” he said. “It seems to me
that the country that must be drained by it could keep
up a constant supply, however small, but here the flow
has ceased entirely.”
“ I reckon the water just came for our benefit,”
hazarded Bill. “ Things are often like that. I remember
once down on the Queensland desert how a shower o’
fishes dropped from the sky one day when we was about
played out for tucker ”
“Ay, Bill,” said Mac, sarcastically ; “I believe every
word ye say, an’ I’ve nae doobt they were a’ ready
cooked tae.”
“You’ve struck it plum first shot,” cried Bill. “ They
was cooked to a turn.”
“ A’m rael gled tae ken that we’ve got a George
Washington o’ our ain,” continued Mac. “ I was begin-
ning to think the breed extinct. But here come Doc and
Boy wi’ enough stuff for eatin’ to last a month. We’ll
continue oor discussion later, Bill.”
Doc and Harry came in with their spoils, and for the
next hour nothing could be seen of Jack but flour, and
little of Bill or Mac but feathers. Harry and Ted
manipulated the fire so as to get just the right kind of
ashes, and the Chief and Doc wrote up their log-books,
but Kaiser was not in evidence anywhere. Just as the
sun went down Jack announced that all was ready, and


seven hungry men gathered round the fire in eager
anticipation.
“ We’ll no run awa’ to-night though a’ the niggers
in New Guinea should come along,” spoke Mac,
addressing no one in particular as he fell to on the
fare provided.
“ Well, no, Mac,” agreed the Chief; “if they rush us
to-night it will be their own fault.”
“ Where’s Kaiser ? ” asked Doc, struggling with the
leg of some bird no one had ever seen before.
“ Sleeping somewhere, most likely,” answered
Bill.
“No fear,” said Jack; “Kaiser never sleeps when
tucker is near.”
“ Kaiser! ” Mac shouted in a voice like a burst
fog-horn, but only the long reverberating echoes
replied, and they shot back an answering “ Kaiser ” in
a variety of tones, now soft and low, then in a swelling
thunderous discord, until they rolled away and became
lost in the ravine. The meal was finished and the
boys already quarrelling over their share, but still the
German had not appeared, and heaping up the fire with
logs so as to make a big blaze which could readily be
seen from a distance, Mac and Doc set out to look
for him.
They had not gone far when a feeble cry caught
their ears, but where it came from they had no idea.
Mac was about to shout again when Doc touched him
on the arm. “ Don’t shout, Mac,” he said, “or those
echoes will ring through the place for the next half-hour.
I fancy the cry came from up there somewhere.” He
pointed up the face of the rock, and lighting a match
Mac saw that there was a cleavage in the rocks just
above the level of his head.
“ I wonder if the laddie has gone in there ? ” he said,


climbing up, and examining what looked like the
entrance to a cave, and as if in answer to his query,
Kaiser’s voice called faintly from inside.
“Take care, Mac,” Doc called, following Mac,
as the Scot rushed in; “ there are lots of snakes
about.”
A tumbling noise and a scraping of rocks, then a
few words of choicest Scotch dialect was his answer,
and lighting another match Doc walked in carefully.
“ Where are you, Mac ? ” he cried.
“ Keeping Kaiser company,” Mac’s voice replied.
“ And’where may that be ? ” cried Doc.
“You come on another six feet an’ ye’ll ken a’ aboot
it,” returned Mac, dryly ; and next moment Doc saw that
the floor fell away at his feet, and both Kaiser and Mac
were sitting together on the ground about eight feet
beneath him.
“ I am surprised at you, Mac,” said Doc, reprovingly,
sitting down on the ledge, and applying his lighted
match to a cigar.
“ Man, that’s just what I said to Kaiser,” grinned
Mac.
“ But none of you vas half so much surprised as
mineself,” cried the German.
“ Say nae mair aboot it, ma laddie,” began Mac,
kindly ; “ life is fu’ o’ deceptions an’ this cave is ane
o’ them.” Here, Doc improvised a torch with some
gummy creepers growing on the rocks, and with its aid
surveyed the pair.
“ I’m afraid you will have to wait until I get a rope,”
said he, between his puff's.
“ Na, we’ll no dae that, Doc,” said Mac, crawling
forward.
“ Then what will you do ?
“ Leave you here until we get ane, unless you promise


to say nothing.” Mac had jumped and caught Doc’s
dangling feet as he spoke, and next moment Doc was
down beside them.
“ But, Mac,” he cried, “ that was very foolish of you.
Now we must all wait until we are found.”
“ No, we’ll no dae that either,” said Mac, leaping
on Doc’s shoulders, thence to the ledge, which he re-
gained in a moment. “ Come on noo, Kaiser,” he
cried, “an’ I’ll pull ye up, but take care Doc doesna
climb over ye.”
“ I give in, Mac,” said Doc, laughing. “ I won’t say a
word of this catastrophe to any one, so you can pull us
both out.”
“ But you have not seen what I have found,” cried
Kaiser, still standing below.
“ That is a fact,” admitted Mac. “ Have ye found
onything ? ”
“ Yes, look what the walls of this place is made of ?
See all these seams running through ? Dat is osmiridium
and worth nearly one hundred pounds an ounce.”
Before he had finished Mac was down again, and both
Doc and he examined the walls by the aid of Doc’s
torch.
“It certainly looks like some mineral,” said
Doc.
“ It is either platinum or osmiridium,” agreed Mac.
“ I have seen stuff like it before.”
“It is just what I say,” put in Kaiser. “ I vas know
the stuff very well indeed, for it all comes to the
place where I was mineralogist in Chermany to be
treated.”
“The laddie is right,” said Mac, “and there is
thoosands o’ pounds’ worth here.”
“ I vas follow some indications in the walls when I
fell down here,” continued Kaiser, “ und when it came to


mine mind that I was hungry, all mine matches had
been used looking at the walls of this place, und I could
not see the way out.”
“ Never mind, Kaiser, there’s a real guid feed waitin’
on ye,” said Mac; “and noo we’d better get oot an’ tell
the boys.”
Thus it was just as a party was being organized to
go in search of them the trio burst into camp, and while
Kaiser ravenously attacked the fare that had been set
aside for him, Doc and Mac told the story of Kaiser’s
find, and the Chief agreed to devote a day to investi-
gating the matter and seeing what the mineral was
likely to be worth to them.
“Well, I reckon we are safe from attack to-night,”
said Fat Jack, after everything had been cleared
away and all were comfortably seated on logs round
the fire.
“ Are the natives not likely to follow us as far as
this ? ” inquired Harry.
“ Follow us ? ” grunted Mac. “ Man, a nigger wad
follow ye all his life if he thocht he could get his spear
into ye at the end, but I dinna think there are ony
niggers near us the nicht.”
“ Bet you a kick at King George ye is wrong,”
interrupted Bill, watching the expression on Silent Ted’s
face. Ted’s sense of hearing was very keen, and he now
seemed to be listening very intently.
“ Bosh ! ” said Mac. “ Dae ye think there’s nothing
but niggers in this country ? Why, man, there are
enough reptiles and animals within a hundred yards
o’ the mooth o’ this ravine tae stock three or four
menageries.”
But Ted had risen to his feet. “ They’re cornin’! ”
he said, and sat down again, listlessly.
“ What a blamed nuisance! ” commented Jack. “ Say,


Ted, can’t ye find out you are wrong ? We are too
tired to receive niggers to-night.” Jack gripped his
rifle all the same, as did every one else, although no one
but Ted yet heard the slightest sound of anything but
the hum of festive mosquitoes.
“King George,” called Mac, “hims take hims boys
up gully and get behind rock. Bad niggers coming,
and we don’t want you in the road.” King George
instantly began a long wail, and his followers took up
the chorus until Bill and Jack sprang among them
and, with the expenditure of some energy and much
eloquent argument, induced them to desist, and finally
got them removed, chanting their death songs to
themselves, behind some projecting rocks, farther up
the ravine.
But now the sound of a number of people crashing
over the stones at the entrance to the gorge could be
heard by every one, and obeying the Chief’s signal all
drew close into the rocks and waited.
“ They is the noisiest niggers ever I knowed,” snorted
Coolgardie Bill, slipping some cartridges into his rifle
magazine.
“ One is coming along the wall,” whispered Harry.
“ I hear him groping against the sides.”
“ In that case let me get over there to meet him,”
said the Chief. “ I want to catch one of those people to
give him some advice for his fellows.” He inserted a
piece of bamboo between the crevices of the rock as
he spoke, making it stand out six feet from the rocks
and about a foot from the ground.
“They are funny niggers,” muttered Jack to himself.
“Why don’t they yell and rush us as sensible niggers
should do ? ”
“ Hush! ” whispered the Chief. “ I’ll have this one
in a minute.”


And he had.
The unsuspecting investigator had at that moment
tripped over the bamboo, as was intended, and the
Chief had him by the throat before he could utter a
sound. “ Here, Harry, sit on him and hold him down,”
spoke the Chief; “ I expect I’ll be wanted elsewhere.”
He relinquished his grip as Harry squatted on the
prostrate form, and despite the captive’s frantic struggles
kept him on the ground, one hand on his throat all the
time to prevent his making an outcry.
“ Howling snakes ! ” gasped Bill, “ if that isn’t cheek.
Look at the beggars sitting round our fire and hunting
for our tucker ! ”
“ Don’t fire, boys,” cried the Chief. “ There are only
four of them.”
The visitors sprang to their feet at once, only to be
knocked down again as Mac, Doc, Bill, Ted, Jack and
the Chief sprang upon them. One of them apparently
had a gun of some kind, and as he lay on the ground
he fired it off, and immediately Kaiser sent half a dozen
holes through Jack’s flour-mixing dish in response.
Kaiser was not a good shot.
Meanwhile, Harry had struck a match to look at his
captive, who now lay still, and next moment he startled
his comrades by his shout, “ This is not a nigger ; he is
a white man ! ”
“So is my fellow! ” gasped Mac.
“ Centipedes! ” cried Bill. “ They is all white
fellows.”
“Of course we are, ye durned cut-throats,” roared
one of the prisoners. “ Let us up and we’ll fight the
lot of ye.”
“ Who spoke ? ” cried the Chief, hoarsely, and Doc
and Mac also uttered an exclamation.
“ I did, ye most hospitable people,” cried the man


whom Harry had just relieved. “ Most folks know Bob
Wilson and his party.”
“ Our old comrades! ” yelled the Chief. “ Have you
come back from the dead, Bob ? Help them to their
feet, boys. Bob, don’t you know me ? ”
CB »es;


CHAPTER VII
Brother Wanderers
The camp fire was burning brightly, and round it sat
thirteen men, five of them eating as if they had been
fasting for a week, and the other eight doing their best
to keep them company, although they had already done
extremely well that evening.
“ Well, Edward,” said one of the five, apparently the
leader, “ I must compliment you on your strength, but
I might have known that none but some of our own
old fellows could have worked that surprise packet
upon us so nicely. But there are two here new to
me. Who is this young fellow who knocked the wind
out of me ? Great Scott! he is the very image of
him ”
“Oh, that is Boy,” answered the Chief, hastily, “a
very worthy addition to our brotherhood. The other
one is Kaiser, a first-class mineralogist and assayer, and
another valuable acquisition. But allow me to make
you all acquainted. Boy and Kaiser, you are the only
strangers in this party. These gentlemen are old
comrades of your comrades. This is Bob Wilson, the
pioneer of the gold mines on the Mambare. That is
Dave Ford who is sitting next you, Harry. He is
better known as Kangaroo Dave, because he hails from
New South Wales. Opposite you is Canadian Pete, a


man of many parts. Tom Doyle, who answers best to
‘lrish,’ and John James Clement, who won’t answer if
you call him by that name, his friends all know him as
the Parson. Now that you all know each other, you
may talk as you like and do as you like ; Bob and I
wish to get the hang of each other’s doings since we
parted.”
“ Begging your pardon Chief,” said the Parson,
“ unless the old arrangement is broken and we are on
different trails now, I think we would all like to hear
you go over matters, for our interests were once
common ”
“ And are yet,” said the Chief, “if they are bound
up in the fate of our old comrade and leader, the Mad
Wizard of the Mountain People.”
“ Edward, old boy,” spoke Bob Wilson, quietly, “we
have never had any other interests since that night
when you were left for dead by the banks of that
unknown river and I was carted off as a luxury for some
nigger’s table. But how are you alive now ? And
what, and who is he ? ” He paused and looked at Harry,
who was listening intently.
“ My story is easily told,” said the Chief, evading the
latter part of Bob’s question. “It seems I was not killed
in that last stand we made, for Doc found me some
time after the natives had gone and brought me round,
although how he escaped himself I don’t know. Believ-
ing then that all our comrades had gone under, I came
down to Sydney and joined the second contingent of
Colonials, leaving for the war. There, one day I met
Bill and Ted who had also escaped and come over to
the war, and cabling to Doc, who had remained to see
if any of our comrades got to the coast after us, that
I would try again, I went home to Britain, thence out
here. Mac and Jack had meanwhile rolled up, Boy came


from the old country with me, and we picked Kaiser up
at sea, and here we are. Perhaps I ought to say that I
went to Britain because I saw several cases among the
South African wounded that were identical in many
ways with that of our old chief, their memory having
left them entirely. I remembered that Doc had said
the only way to bring back the restoration of our chief
to his full mental powers was to bring him suddenly
in contact with something connected with his past, so
I watched those cases and saw he wa's right. That is
all my story.”
“ But did you get something to bring him vividly in
connection with the past ? ” asked the Parson.
“ I did. I found something by the merest accident.
But come, Bob, your story. How did all you boys get
away ?”
“ I’m sure I don’t know, Chief. I never was any
good talking. The Parson will do the speechifying.”
“ I shudder yet to think of that awful scene,” began
the Parson, slowly. “ Most of us were already down,
and just when catching sight of our old chief dressed in
the full war garments of the natives and about to shout
out to him, oblivion came to me. When I recovered,
Irish was attending to some bruises I had received, and
a little way off lay Kangaroo Dave. I saw you, Edward,
lying by the riverside, and Mac and Ted were bending
over Coolgardie Bill, but I lost sight of them. The
natives had gone, and Irish and I, after three months’
hiding and starving, reached the Yodda Valley gold
camp. We both went down with fever there, and when
we recovered Bob Wilson, Canadian Pete, and Dave
were nursing us. We formed ourselves into another
expedition then, and ever since have been wandering
about these parts, trying to get into that valley again and
get our old chief away.”


The Parson ceased, and all remained silent. Here,
in the heart of the great unknown land, were the
original party again, all still determined, as of old, to
bring away their old chief, mad or otherwise. Would
they be successful this time ? Could Edward lead
them straight to the only entrance they knew of
that strange country ; and if they did get there, would
they be more able this time to fight the natives ?
Each man looked to his rifle grimly as the thought
occurred, but their present Chief and Doc looked at
Harry.
“And hoo did you manage to get left alane, Irish ? ”
inquired Mac of his old friend. “You were aye in the
middle o’ trouble if I mind richt, an’ that fright wasna
exactly a picnic.”
“ Begorra, Scotty! When I saw every one was
down but me, I played ’possum and went down
too.”
“ But you, Bob ? ” cried the Chief; “ how did you
escape? You were a prisoner the last I saw of
you.”
“ I’m blowed if I know exactly,” answered Bob.
“ Canadian Pete did the trick somehow.”
“ Oh, he and I were in the same party,” said Pete,
deprecatingly, “and at night they tied us to trees. I
wasn’t much hurt, and somehow I slipped out of the
thongs—them fellows didn’t know much about tying a
man—and then I cut Bob out, and we cleared back to
the river to see if any of the others were left alive. We
found Kangaroo Dave there, and got down by a lot of
dodging to the Yodda Camp.”
“ Then a’ that I can say is that either these mis-
guided niggers didna hit very hard or we fellows had
wonderfu constitutions,” said Mac. “ I got a bit crack on
the heid, but I gave the chield that gave me it a harder


ane, and when they went awa’ to hold sacrifice, or
something, for their ane folks that went down, I found
Ted puzzling out what had happened, and then we
pulled Bill round. I lost them after that, for I went
awa’ to look for ony others, and found Fat Jack trying
to tie himself together wi’ bits o’ string. Then we
dressed oursel’s in the garments o’ twa niggers that had
nae further use for them, and went back for Ted and
Bill. We couldna find them, and after some experi-
ences I’ll write a book about some day, we got down to
Samarai.”
“ Centipedes! Mac, was you the two niggers that
came back to the field ?” cried Bill, amazedly.
“ Ay, an’ we couldna find you or Ted ony-
where.”
“ Not likely. We was hiding under some rocks ’cos
we hadn’t a shot left in our rifles, or you would have
got it.”
“Thank you, Bill, for your good intentions,” said
Mac. “ I’ll remember them.”
“Well, now that we are thus miraculously brought
together again,” said the Chief, “ we’ll form some new
plan of campaign. Meanwhile, boys, I may tell you
that to-day Kaiser found a most valuable seam of
osmiridium in the rocks over there.”
“ Chief, we found more minerals in our wanderings,”
broke in Bob Wilson, “than ever we can possibly take
away. We are all wealthier too than we have need to
be, and you are all welcome to your share.”
“We have not done so badly ourselves,” said
the Chief, “although we have never looked for any-
thing.”
“ Then suppose we pool the lot and divide equally
after,” suggested the Parson ; and all agreed.
Harry all this time had been gazing in wonderment


at each member of the party as his name was mentioned
in the tales of hairbreadth escapes. He did not seem
to hear the conversation concerning the division
of property. He was thinking deeply, “ I say, Doc/'
he said some time after, “how did you contrive to
be left standing in that awful fight ? You haven’t
told us,”
“I think I must have been smoking towards the end
of the fight,” said Doc, quietly, “ and the sight of a
man breathing smoke must have terrified the natives.
At any rate, they suddenly turned and left me, and I
gave my attention to Edward.”
“ Well, boys, I think we had better turn in now,”
said the Chief, an hour later. “It is late, and we may
have to receive visitors during the night Where are
your carriers, Bob ? ”
“ We left them camped two days back while we came
on to look for a pass through the mountains. We have
been skirting them all the time, and it was just as
well, for last night it rained like old billy, and we were
as dry as an Australian river, sleeping under some
rocks.”
“ You were more fortunate than we were. We had
been getting out of the way of some natives all the
afternoon, and camped in the open, so you may imagine
how we fared. The natives came up too, just after the
rain, and we have been on the move ever since until
sundown to-night.”
“Well, I reckon the niggers will think they have
struck something they can’t digest if they tackle us
to-night,” laughed Kangaroo Dave, as he spread his
blanket. “ But just think of meeting our old mates like
this! ”
Soon the camp was silent. All were asleep but Bob,
the Parson, Doc, and the Chief. They still sat round


the dying fire, Doc smoking, as usual, the others deep in
conversation.
“Yes,” sighed Bob Wilson, after a long pause, “it is
a big contract we have on hand, but we’ll do it What
do you say, Doc ? ”
“ We’ll die trying, anyhow,” Doc answered, as quietly
as if dying were like taking one’s dinner.
“Jove! What a time I can see ahead for us,”
murmured Bob, joyfully. “ We’ll get our old chief away
and be nearly millionaires as well.”
“Yes,” agreed the Chief, the Parson, and Doc, but
they did not smile with Bob’s enthusiasm. Each thought
that when that object was accomplished they would
have to look for new adventures alone, for well they
knew that the fascination of the wanderer’s life held
them in thrall.
No natives came near that night, and at sunrise the
camp was astir, and some of its members out with their
rifles looking for an appetizing breakfast. This was
easily procured, and after the meal all went to examine
Kaiser’s find. It proved to be of exceptional value, and
a carrier’s load of the extremely precious metal was soon
shot out with gunpowder. The rest of that day, until
they retired at night, was spent in relating to each other
their individual doings since they had been together
before, and long before the day was done Harry and
Kaiser were fast friends with all. The two following
days were spent in prospecting for the best pass into the
ranges, in overhauling all weapons, and making general
repairs to their garments. On the fourth day it was
determined to make a start, and the Chief and his party
proceeded up the ravine, that being the only pass lead-
ing into the mountains anywhere near. The other party
retraced their way to their old camp to rejoin their
carriers, intending to try another route nearer their


camp which might cut off many miles, and enable the
two parties to join without their coming back over the
same ground.
“We’ll keep to this pass,” the Chief had said on
parting, “ and follow this dry water channel as long as it
leads into the mountains.”
“And we will cut your tracks somewhere, and then
make forced marches until we catch up,” said Bob ; “ and
if we cut this creek up above, before you have passed
along, we’ll wait for you.”
This plan had been adopted as the best, because if
either party found further progress impossible they
could come back and follow the tracks of the successful
party, until they overtook them. The ravine which
afforded passage to the Chief and his comrades was
dark and gloomy. High walls rose almost sheer on
either side, and in clefts here and there grew acacia,
palms, and bamboos, and clusters of nettle trees. All
that day they persevered over the stony bottom of the
gully, and camped at night seven miles farther on.
Next day they made ten miles, but the ravine was
even more gloomy than before, its high, scrub-clad
slopes shutting out the light of the sun and causing
a depressing influence to fall over the spirits of the
little band. The creek had now become a disconnected
series of water-holes, in each of which Mac and Bill
washed out some gold from their sands. “This should
lead us on to a vera rich reef somewhere,” said Mac,
at dinner that day, disclosing the streak of fine gold
left in his pan after a washing. “But I doubt we’ll
never get oot o’ this dismal hole unless we flee
oot.”
“We are rising all the time, Mac,” Harry remarked,
“ and the water would take the lowest route down, we
may be sure.”


“That’s all right, boy,” said Mac, “but can we ca’
this water ? This seems mair like a blind gully, or
there wad be a big river running through it.”
“Well, the gold is good, Mac,” said Jack, “and so
long as this hole in the rocks takes us the way we want
to go, I don’t think we should complain. I would like
to see the old sun, though.” Jack’s last words expressed
the feelings of every one, for into that close, gloomy
mountain-cleft the sun’s genial rays did not penetrate,
although the moon now in its second quarter shone
straight down at night, lighting up the sombre scrub and
creeping plants with a weird effect.
At last, after some days’ struggling against the
insidious influence of the dark canon, during which
time the walls had grown steeper than ever, and the
space between smaller and smaller, the end came, and
with a cry of disappointment, Doc, who was in advance,
called out: “We are done, boys ; we are at the end of
the gully, and the rocks rise straight in front.”
Such was indeed the case, and as the party surveyed
the steep, unscaleable rocks their feelings found vent in
expressions of disgust which, perhaps, under the circum-
stances, were excusable.
“ Of all the dirty tricks old nature has played on
this little party,” said Jack, “this is about the worst.
It will take us more than a week to go back, and we’ll
never catch up the other crowd.”
“ We’d better camp here for the night, in any case,”
said the Chief, resignedly. “We can’t face that back
track just yet. This is very unfortunate.”
The walls of the ravine opened out at this point into
a sort of circle which was completed by the towering
rocks in front, on the face of which only a scrubby
vegetation found root.
At the bottom of the sheer wall formed by the


encircling rocks was a pool of water about fifty feet in
diameter, from which a peculiar odour arose. Mac
went down towards it to draw water for their tea,
and immediately after, in answer to his shout, his
comrades rushed down. The pool was simply alive
with crocodiles, and the ground which fringed its
shores moving with all sorts of hideous nameless reptiles
and crawling creatures. “ These are the denizens of
the darkness,” said Harry, jumping out of the way of
a gorged reptile sliding past him into the water.
“ Great Powers ! ” he gasped, “ they are too lazy to
move.” He turned one over with a stick, but the creature
hardly moved, although it cast baleful eyes upon him,
and its tongue shot in and out with lightning rapidity.
“Well, I’ll be —be —give us a word, Mac. Quick!”
cried Bill, jumping upon the back of a huge saurian that
didn’t even trouble to dive.
“ I canna, man,” returned Mac, shaking his head
woefully; “ there’s no ane in the dictionary that wad
express ma feelings,”
“Ginger!” gasped Ted; and every one looked at
him in astonishment. It required something to make
Ted speak. But he said no more, and his parted
jaws clicked together again slowly. He had an
eight-foot-long snake in his hand, and it did not even
wriggle.
“ What have we struck ? ” muttered the Chief. “ Surely
my eyesight is not playing me a trick ? ”
“ I fear not,” responded Doc, seeing what the
Chief was gazing at, and going over to the objects.
“Yes, those are human bones,” he continued,
“and those creatures in and around that pool are
simply gorged and in a lethargic condition.”
At this point King George set up a howl, but on
Mac approaching him with business-like intentions, he


ceased, and running up to the Chief, cried, “ Come
see.”
“See what?” demanded the Chief. You are always
seeing things, King George. Go and get your boys
camped somewhere —and Boy and Kaiser, you might
hunt around for the best camping ground for ourselves.
We can’t stay among this menagerie.”
“ Hims no big fool this time,” cried King George, as
Harry and Kaiser departed. “ Hims very clever fellow.
Hims show you. My word ! hims make you sit up.”
King George’s stock of English was limited, but like
all Papuans he had an excellent memory, and could
repeat, although he did not understand it, any conver-
sation he heard that seemed to him “ Good white fellow
talk.” As a result, he sometimes caused a smile of
amusement among the party when they overheard
him admonishing some of his boys, and telling them
at the end of a lengthy harangue, “ Lest we forget!
Lest we forget! Ye streak o’ black misery. Rode
the six hundred. Howlin’ snakes! Hoo did ye ken,
my man ” His words served a purpose, however,
for when his boys were refractory and would not
work for a whole dictionary of Papuan language, a
few quotations generally brought about a change in
their ideas.
“Well, make me sit up,” laughed the Chief, recog-
nizing one of Bill’s favourite expressions.
“Then look see this.” King George ran to a spot
a few yards from the edge of the pool, and cleaning
away the decaying vegetation pointed to the charred
remnants of a fire. “Fire wun,” he cried gaily, skip-
ping along a few feet, and disclosing another place
where a fire had been. “ Fire choo,” he sang out, then
running a few feet farther round the pool he shouted,
“Fire tchree.”


“That will dae, ye prancing lump of darkness,”
roared Mac, who had by this time discovered old fire-
marks on the opposite side of the pool. “Somebody
has been having a picnic here ; that is what these fires
mean.”
“ What kind of picnic, Mac ? ” asked Doc. But the
Scot shook his head.
«I dinna ken,” he said slowly, watching King George
continue his discoveries until a complete circle of old
fires had been disclosed right round the pool, “but I
doot there have been some gey queer capers cut about
this place.”
“ But how could any people get here ? ” said the
Chief, weariedly, sitting down on a stone, and starting
up again hurriedly, for it moved, and proved to be an
animal, or reptile, with a moss-grown shell on its back.
“ It is over sixty miles from the entrance to the ravine,
and we have seen no possible way out except the way
we came.”
“Ah, well,” remarked Doc, philosophically, “we
needn’t worry about trouble until it actually arrives.
At present I am concerned about our supper. To-
morrow we must just take the back track and leave the
mysteries of those fires, and everything else that does
not affect us, alone.”
“An’ if any niggers come along we’ll just eat
them,” put in Bill, ferociously, “although, after all,
they’re not to blame, for we have no right to be in
their country,” he added in a mollified tone.
“ But what are we to eat to-night ? ” wailed
Jack.
“Crocodile,” roared Mac. “I believe they’re vera
guid, especially ane that’s twa or three hundred years
old.”
Bill and Jack each threw some wriggling creature


at Mac, but he stepped aside, and the reptiles landed
a few yards behind him and lazily withdrew into some
holes in the ground near the pool. Just then a shout
from somewhere above, and a huge rock falling
past them, caused all to look up, and they perceived
Harry and Kaiser standing on a ledge in the rocks
which blocked their passage about forty feet above the
pool.
“ Come doon oot o’ that,” cried Mac. “ Dae ye think
ye’re on a concert platform ? ”
“We can’t, Mac,” cried Harry ; “ that is,” he added
cunningly, “ without your help.”
“ What’s wrang wi’ ye noo ? ” then inquired the
mollified Mac, while the others breathed again,
knowing from the style of Harry’s talk that nothing
serious had occurred, and that the boulder which had
splashed into the pool had done no damage to any
one.
“ There is a fine pitch for a camp up here,” continued
Harry. “ This is a flat ledge, extending back about
twenty feet and about the same in length. There is a
spring of good water in the rocks behind, too, and there
are no snakes.”
“ That is the place for us, then,” said the Chief.
“ Where can we get up ? ”
“Throw us a rope and we’ll pull you up, one by
one. The only other way was by means of that
rock which gave way just as Kaiser caught on to this
ledge.”
“I am no an Alpine climber,” spoke Mac, “but
I’ll dae onything before I camp among our wriggling
friends all night.” He trod on some pulpy creature as
he spoke, and sprang hurriedly back. Next moment he
seized a rope and flung it to Harry. Placing his foot
in a loop formed at one end of the rope, and taking a


short pole in his hands with which to push himself
out from the rocks, he signalled “ Haul away,” and
after much struggling was landed safely beside the
boys.
“ The place was made for us,” he called out enthusi-
astically, a moment later, “ and ” He stopped, and
with the boys, disappeared from sight. A sound of
great commotion followed, and in a minute Mac was
back —“an’ we’ve just, caught a native bear, or some
member o’ that family, so we’ve got our supper too.”
“Lower the rope and say less,” growled Jack, and
at once the end of the rope came down, and Jack placed
his foot in the loop. His hurry was occasioned by the
fact that supper had yet to be prepared, and already the
ravine was almost dark. Up he went with a jerk, and
hung halfway. “Go ahead,” he roared. “ I’ve got to
get that bear cooked yet.”
“ Ma man,” said Mac, bending over, “ it’s wonderfu’
hoo Providence always interferes on your behalf. I was
just going to leave you hanging there until ye apologized
to me for your hasty remarks, but I forgot I was hungry,
so you’ll hae to come up.” He threw his great strength
into the rope, and Jack was on the ledge in almost no
time.
Bill and Ted were amusing themselves by lassooing
the long snouts of the crocodiles, so the Chief and Doc
sent the carriers and stores aloft, and then followed
themselves. Shortly after, the two worthies signalled
to be hauled up, and at once proceeded to make them-
selves useful by assisting preparations for supper. But
Bill evidently had something on his mind, and at last he
said, “ Say, Chief, we got good gold all the way up this
here gully ? ”
“Yes, Bill,” the Chief answered. “What of
that?”


“ An’ there is good gold in that hole down there.
Look at this pan.”
“Your pan certainly shows an excellent pro-
spect.”
“Well, the gold didn’t grow there, did it ? ”
“ No, it must have been shed from some reef in the
rocks near here.”
“ Exactly; well, there ain’t no reef, nor a rock that
carries gold within miles o’ this hole. Ted and I have
been trying them all, and they are as barren as a salted
claim.”
“ Shust vat I vas thinking,” cried Kaiser. “ These
rocks are not auriferous, und I don’t know where the
gold must come from.”
“Tucker’s ready,” yelled Jack ; and his welcome call
put an end to all discussion. The sun had now gone
down, but the moon in all her splendour was fast rising
over the eastern ranges, and wonderfully recovered in
spirits as their really good meal neared conclusion, the
men laughed and talked as if no sixty miles of rocky
creek-bed had to be retraced before they could get out of
the ravine. But they were tired, and after they had sat
in the smoke to escape the ravages of mosquitoes and
other pests for an hour or so, they one by one stretched
themselves in their blankets and fell asleep, until only
Doc and Harry were left. Doc, of course, was smok-
ing—how he managed to carry cigars no one knew
—and Harry was writing some notes, so that if ever
they met some outgoing prospectors which was
unlikely —he could send them home, “Well, good
night, Doc,” he said, when he had finished his writing.
“ I think I’ll turn in too.” He rose and stretched
himself as he spoke, and walked to the edge of the
ledge. Next moment he dropped flat and wriggled
back to Doc.


“ What is it ? ” cried the latter, noting his ex-
citement.
“Natives!” answered Harry. “The ground below
is covered with them. They are sitting round the
pool!”
(B 762)


CHAPTER VIII
The Water Spirits and the Full-
Moon Feast
DOC took his cigar from his mouth : “ Sure ? ” he said
laconically, in much the same tone as if asking for a
match.
“ I wish there were some room for doubt,” replied
Harry, in a low voice. “ But see for yourself.” Follow-
ing his example Doc crawled to the edge of the rock,
and gazing down they saw a strange sight. Squatted
round the pool, silent and motionless, were about two
hundred natives; and their numbers seemed to be
increasing, though where they were coming from was a
mystery neither Doc nor Harry could solve. They were
all naked, and their bodies were painted in alternate
stripes of light and dark colours, and their hair, which
stood high above their heads, was ornamented with many
fantastic bone ornaments. A number of men now
appeared from underneath where Doc and Harry lay,
and chanting some unintelligible, unmelodious dirge they
pranced forward in a series of jumps, and with the
torches they carried kindled a circle of small fires round
the pool, the material for which evidently had been
prepared beforehand.
As the flames shot up the watchers saw that the last


comers were grotesquely garbed in the skins of animals
and birds, and wore hideous masks typical of supposed
devils. Meanwhile the creatures of the pool itself
plashed lazily in the middle of the firelit circle, and the
moon shone over the edge of the ravine with an inde-
scribably weird effect.
“Am I dreaming, Doc?” spoke Harry, rubbing his
eyes. “ Surely I smell the odour of that burning scrub,
and surely I see people down there ? ”
“No, you are not dreaming, Boy,” said Doc, “but
the explanation of this is beyond me. Don’t move,
and I’ll waken the rest.” Doc crawled back out of
sight, and touched the Chief on the arm. “ Don’t
make a sound,” he said, as the Chief instantly opened
his eyes ; “ there’s a howling mob of humanity down
below, but they do not yet know of our presence.”
The Chief grasped his rifle and joined Harry without
a word.
“ Get up, boys,” murmured Doc, in the ears of his
sleeping comrades ; “ there’s danger around, and it is time
we were all on deck.”
Like so many automatons the men sat up, and
seeing the Chief and Harry looking down over the pool,
and smelling the pungent odours of the fires beneath,
crawled forward to the edge of their camping-ground.
Doc then smothered out the embers of their own fire,
and seeing that the carrier-boys were sound asleep,
rejoined his comrades.
“ What is this ? ” whispered the Chief. “ Where have
they come from ? They couldn’t have followed us up
the gorge, and there are more people here than the
entire population of the biggest village we have ever
passed.”
“ It’s a corroborree, I reckon,” murmured Bill, “ unless
they are ghosts. Snakes! they must be,” he added


wonderingly. “ See, they is coming out of the solid
rocks under us.”
“ Ghosts don’t paint themselves, you fool,” exclaimed
Jack, in contemptuous tones. “ That’s just some niggers
out to attend an opera in the moonlight.”
“ It’s an optical delusion,” put in Mac, seriously,
“ brought aboot by having too much supper. Even a
nigger canna come oot o’ solid rock as they beggars
are daein’.”
“ I’m afraid it is only too real, Mac,” said the
Chief, “and another of these undoubted New Guinea
mysteries which the white man’s philosophy can’t
explain.”
“ That’s no’ logic, Chief,” persisted Mac; “ either
they folks are niggers, or they’re no niggers. Noo,
if they are niggers, an’ a’ oor senses point that way,
then either they are cornin’ oot o’ the rocks or
they are Hullo! where’s Ted?” Ted had dis-
appeared.
“ Then what can Ido ? ” groaned Bill; “he’s got my
matches.”
“ Shut up, ye meeserable object,” returned Mac ;
“ he hasna gone far.”
“ Find him at once,” ordered the Chief. “ No,
don’t all go ; some of you stay here so that we can
shoot these people down if Ted has fallen into their
hands.”
“ Ted,” groaned Bill, searching all over the ledge,
“Ted, where are ye? Speak, Ted, an’ I’ll do all the
washing up after this without a grumble.” Bill’s grief
was pathetic, but it suddenly changed. “ Ted, ye tongue-
tied son of a gin,” he hoarsely whispered, “ speak, or
I’ll tell who baked the damper with ants instead of
currants.” But even this threat did not reveal Ted’s
whereabouts, although Mac, Jack, and Doc shuddered


as they remembered the exquisitely flavoured damper
they had had for tea some nights back.
“ Hist! ” suddenly whispered Mac. “ I hear some-
thing.”
“ It’s niggers cornin’ up here,” cried Bill, springing
in the direction of the sound, and disappearing in the
darkness. Sounds of a struggle were plainly heard,
and Mac followed Bill over some rocks that marked
the limit of the ledge on their right side. The men
now turned to await the advent of the intruders, and
suddenly, and without ceremony, a figure bounded over
the rocks which Mac had just cleared and dumped
down in the middle of the party a struggling native
whom he carried.
“Ted!” gasped all, “where did you get him?”
Ted looked round for Bill to speak for him, but not
seeing his comrade there he opened his mouth slowly,
and said, “ There’s a ladder of the usual kind along there
leading up to the top of the rocks, and them fellows is
coming down it like monkeys. This nigger was a long
way from any others, so I grabbed him to see what he
was made of, and here he is.” This was the longest
speech Ted had ever been known to make, but his com-
rades were too much surprised with the knowledge he
imparted to take note of the fact at the time, and they
promptly proceeded to gag and bind their prisoner.
During these operations King George awoke and came
forward leisurely to see if, perchance, Kaiser had left any
supper which he might make use of,
“ Hullo! ” he ejaculated, kicking the prisoner, who
wore more garments than those below; “ where hims
come from ? ”
“Down there,” said Harry, thoughtlessly, and King
George looked over the ledge. Next moment all would
have been discovered had not Doc sprung upon the king


and stifled the yell in his throat. “If you make a sound
I’ll pop-pop your brains out,” he spoke in King George’s
ear ; and whether the monarch understood every word or
not, he knew enough to signify that he would be quiet,
and Doc pitched him into a corner. Just then Mac and
Bill returned chuckling to themselves, to the great annoy-
ance of Jack, who wished to know, in pertinent language,
where the fun came in.
“ Ted found a ladder,” began Bill.
“ We know ; he told us,” said the Chief.
“He told ye ? ” gasped the couple. “ Then it seems
surprises are goin’ all round to-night.”
“ Onyway, we waited till the last nigger was doon,
then we cut it,” said Mac, “ and noo naebody can get
up, an’ if onyone gangs doon they’ll gang accordin’ to
the law of gravitation.”
King George at this point came forward again, his
curiosity having overcome his terror. “ None of that, ye
skunk,” growled Jack, as the king kicked the prostrate
warrior. “Ye wouldn’t do that if he was standing up,
an’ by the whiskers of Nebuchadnezzar, ye won’t do it
when he’s down, while I’m here.”
“ Hims only nigger,” cheerfully remarked King
George. “ Hims no fighter like hims down there
Hims Angerita. Hims get wiped out. Hims down
there eat hims.”
“ What is that he is saying, Mac ? ” inquired the
Chief, becoming interested, and turning from the scene
beneath.
“He says that the nigger we have is not the same as
those down there, and that our fellow is an Angerita,
one of the lot that Sartor Resartus wiped out, and he
adds, furthermore, that the gentlemen doon below are
awaitin’ the pleesure o’ his company to dine—upon
him.”


“An Angerita! They are partly civilized. Take
his gag out and hold his throat. If you make a cry
we will pop-pop you,” continued the Chief, addressing
the prisoner, while his mouth was being set free; “ but
if you tell the truth we will not harm you. Who are
you ? ”
“Mamoose no ’fraid to die. Kill mamoose now.
He go to his fathers.”
There was a tone of dignity in the warrior’s voice
which appealed to the white men.
“We do not kill even mamooses without reason,”
continued the Chief. “ What people do you belong
to ? ”
“ Angeritas ”
“ But those are not Angeritas.” The Chief pointed
below, and the prisoner’s eyes flashed.
“No, they are Tugeri. Wipe out Angerita when
moon was new. Kill all people. No kill me ; want me
for feed water spirits.”
“ What! You are a prisoner in their hands ? ” The
Chief was certainly astonished now.
“ Angeritas white fellows’ friends,” continued the
mamoose, reproachfully. “Angerita no tie white man
like this.”
“ Unbind him, Mac,” ordered the Chief.
“ Howlin’ snakes! Chief,” cried Bill, “ don’t believe
the nigger. Them English-talking natives are the big-
gest liars and cheats ever invented.”
“You can keep him covered with your revolver,
Harry,” added the Chief, “ until we are satisfied as to
who he is.”
“You no believe me?” asked the mamoose, as he
sat up.
“ I am very sorry that our experiences have forced
us to believe little of what we are told,” returned the


Chief. “ But still, you may be an exception, and I hope,
for your own sake, you are. What is your name ? ”
“ Great Scott.”
“ What! ” said Mac. “ Wha gied ye that name ? ”
“ Mamoose get it from big white chief mamoose of
mountain people. He come down hunting to my people,
and say * Great Scott,’ when he see me, and that my
name now.”
“ He must be referring to the Mad Wizard,” said
Doc ; and the others agreed silently.
“ Here is some cold tea, Great Scott,” said the Chief,
in a kindlier tone, “ and here is something to eat. It
seems to me you are starving.”
“ Mamoose no eat four days,” replied Great Scott,
attacking the piece of damper with great zeal. “ They
keep him see white men go feed water spirits ”
“ What was that ? Where are the white men, and
what are the water spirits ? ”
“ Big feast to-night, moon full, up straight.” He
pointed overhead. “ Then white men come down feed
water spirits. Angerita mamoose no know Tugeri water
spirits. He feed Tugeri afterwards ”
“Do you understand him, Mac ? ” the Chief said
excitedly. “ There are white men somewhere. Can he
mean us ? ”
“ No,” answered Mac. “ I understand that the
Tugeris have some white folks prisoners, and that they
will put in an appearance somehow when the full moon
is overhead to-night. They are to feed the water spirits,
who are the crocodiles, I fancy.”
“ It wants two hours till full moon overhead.”
“ Ay.” Mac eyed the chief expectantly.
“ Our duty is plain.”
“ Ay, if the nigger is telling the truth, and the ladders
will hold.”


“ Mamoose Great Scott,” said the Chief, turning to
the mamoose. “We are going to save the white men ;
if you have told the truth we will set you free when we
come back.”
“ Mamoose come too. He great warrior ; no’ ’fraid.
Like kill Tugeri, every one.”
“No ; you will stay here. Listen, boys.” The Chief
turned to his comrades, most of whom had been listening
to the conversation as well as watching the performances
beneath. “ From what I have gathered, there are some
white men prisoners up overhead somewhere, and we
must make an attempt to go up the ladder and rescue
them.”
“You bet,” agreed Jack and Bill, with one voice.
“We’ll bring them here, and we can hold this place
against old Nick himself if he comes.”
“Now that that is settled, then,” said the Chief, “I
have to point out to you that we cannot all go. Some-
one must stay behind to guard our camp and keep the
road open for those who go.”
“ That is logic,” agreed Mac. “ Say who is going and
who is staying, and the man that says another word will
have to fight me.” Mac certainly would have been a big
handful for any one to undertake, but the aggressive
tone of his voice aroused Bill’s ire. “ I reckon I’ll say a
word or two just for that purpose,” he remarked; but
luckily the Chief continued before Mac could splutter
out what he intended to say.
“ Then four of us will go, for we do not know what
lies ahead, but four must remain. Bill, Harry, Mac, and
I will form the rescuing party, and on you others we
depend to keep the ladder-way open for our return, and
for defending this camp.”
“ Mamoose like come. He know village well, and
know tapu house ”


“ What! ” cried Doc, “is there a village ? ”
“Big village. Head Tugeri village,” returned Great
Scott.
“ Chief,” Doc said, “ this must be one of the fighting
Tugeri tribes who are in agreement with the people of
the mountains to fight for them, and ”
“ I know what you would say, Doc,” interrupted the
Chief; “ but no matter who the people are, or what their
strength is, you must stay here. We must be sure of a
base to return on, and could we be certain of that if we
all left it to the carriers to defend ? ”
“ The moon will be overhead in an hour and a half,”
said Mac, speaking perfect English as he always did
under the pressure of excitement. “If that has anything
to do with the time of sacrifice to the water spirits, it is
also time we were moving.”
“Yes, let’s away,” spoke Bill, eagerly, and shaking
hands with their comrades they seized their rifles
and revolvers and clambered over the rocks to the
ladder.
Harry was delighted that he had been chosen to go
with the rescuing party, but he was somewhat moved
at parting when poor Kaiser fell on his neck and
sobbed that he would never see him again. “ I haf
dreamt of this, Harry,” he said. “ I wish I vas going to
take care of you.” Harry smiled at this; he thought
he could take care of himself a great deal better than
Kaiser could.
They reached the hanging end of the cut fibre ladder,
and the Chief at once swung on to it and led the way
towards the summit, which they could not see. Bill
followed, then Harry, and Mac came last to see that
everything was right, he said, but in reality to give
Harry any assistance he might require. Up the dizzy
height they climbed, sometimes assisting themselves by


convenient footholds in the rocks, and by grasping over-
hanging limbs of trees. The ladder was cleverly con-
structed, and seemed to be in lengths of about fifteen feet.
This was the approximate length of the tough creeping
fibres which formed the sides, from their roots or where
they left their parent stem to where they were joined to the
next section, which also had independent support. Every
few feet, too, the slender rungs were bound to rock-
plants and scrub, and at no time was the weight of more
than one man on one section of the ladder-way. The
moon was now fast rising towards its zenith, but the
ladder was yet in the shadow of the rocks, or the climbers
would have been seen.
“ Can we not be near the top yet ? ” gasped Harry,
almost breathless. “We must have climbed some
hundreds of feet.”
“ Dinna look doon, laddie,” said Mac immediately
behind him ; but his words came too late, Harry had
looked down. Round the fires encircling the dark pool
the demoniacal forms danced like madmen, and their
shouts came up in muffled groans until re-echoed and
flung back by the higher rocks in deep volumes of
sound expressive of nothing so much as the de-
spairing wails of fiends in torment. Harry’s head
swam, his eyes seemed to see little grinning demons
dancing before him, and the smouldering fires far below
appeared like stars in the sky, through which, gravitation
having lost all power over him, he was falling. How
pleasant to fall so many millions of miles —the awful
thought grew on Harry’s brain, and his hands would
have next moment let go their clutch, but Mac’s voice
brought him back with a startling suddenness to his
senses again, and he dug his fingers into the rocks beside
him and rested.
“Tak’ it easy, laddie,” said the Scot, pushing his


broad shoulder underneath him. “ There, just you rest
a bit on ma shoulders, an’ keep lookin’ to the top.”
Harry allowed himself to rest on Mac’s shoulder for
a minute, and his breath came back.
“I am all right now, Mac,” he then said. “ I should
not have looked down.”
“ I see the top, boys,” said the Chief, who was a
good way ahead.
“ Then go slow,” answered Bill; “ there’s, maybe, a
band o’ niggers awaitin’ us.”
“ Perhaps so,” said the Chief, resting for a moment and
drawing his revolver ; “ but I rather fancy that unless they
cut the ladder I can shoot before they can club me. But
I see no sign of any one on top, nor can I hear anything.
How are you getting along, Harry ? ”
“ All right, sir,” responded Harry, very much better ;
and Mac added, “ Boy could climb a streak o’ moonlight
if there were notches in it.”
“ Well, another pull and we’ll be on top,” said the
Chief, starting again, and a moment later he hauled him-
self over the edge and stood up. “ There is no one here,”
he cried, “ and we seem to be in a different world
altogether.” Bill joined him. “ Snakes! yes,” he ex-
claimed, “ it’s as cool up here as Christmas in China.”
And then Harry and Mac pulled themselves over. There
was a most refreshing breeze blowing, and, after enduring
the closeness of the ravine, the men felt it put new life
into them, and they took off their hats and allowed the
wind to play about their heads.
“ Well, we are up, at any rate,” said the Chief,
“ but I can’t see any sign of the village or anything
else.”
“ What do you reckon is that white track leading
from the top o’ the gorge over there right away back
to them trees we see ? It looks like a made road.”


“ An’ it is,” cried Mac; “ it’s as smooth and
glistening as ony road at hame on a frosty moonlight
night.”
“I don’t understand it,” said the Chief ; “that road,
or whatever it is, terminates at the edge of the rocks.
Ah ! I have it! That was what the mamoose meant by
the white prisoners coming down to feed the water spirits.
They are to be driven along that road and thrown over
the top. Come, we’ll follow it ; it must lead to the
village.”
“ That is, if it isn’t all a trap, Chief,” put in Bill;
“what white men could be up here that we don’t know ?
Oh, howlin’ centipedes! I had forgotten. It must be
our mates.”
“ That fear has been with me for some time,” said the
Chief. “ They were to wait for us when they struck our
creek, and must have been captured while looking for it.
Ah ! there is a native running to the village to give the
alarm. He has been watching at the edge of the cliff
where the roads end. After him ! ” Bill and Mac threw
their rifles to their shoulders.
“ Don’t,” cried the Chief; “ the report will give the
alarm. Boy will do it.”
Like a greyhound Harry had shot out to cut off the
fleeing figure, and was already fast gaining upon him.
“ Michty me! ” cried Mac in delight, “ that laddie can
travel like a railway train.”
“ Give him three hundred yards, boys,” said the Chief,
“ and if Harry hasn’t got him by that time, drop him,
and we’ll chance the alarm. Ah, the Boy is on him.”
He rushed after the two racing forms, followed, not quite
so fast, by the more ponderous figures of Mac and Bill.
But now Harry made a desperate leap, and threw himself
upon the naked warrior, and together they rolled over on
the ground. The native twined his arms and feet around


Harry, and tried to sink his teeth into his throat, but the
boy who had left London some months before had now
become a man, stronger even than he himself knew, and
with a jerk he threw the native’s hands off, and planting
his knee on his chest, to expel the breath from him, as
Mac had taught him to do, he forced his hands back
on the ground, and held him there.
“You have done well, Harry,” said the Chief,
gaining his side just as Harry had mastered his
prisoner. “ I don’t think I need feel anxious about
you after this,”
Harry flushed with pleasure, but the memory of his
experience on the ladder came back to him, and he felt
he did not deserve the Chief’s praise. “ Tie this man
to that tree and gag him,” continued the Chief. “We
have no time to lose, and I see the village straight
ahead now.”
The sullen warrior was at once bound to a tree
which stood near, by means of creeping fibres, and the
party started off again at a run.
“This road is mighty soft for fast traffic,” gasped
Bill, as they raced along.
“ It is a bit dusty,” agreed Mac ; “ it’s needin’ some
water badly.”
“ I see large trees beyond the village,” said the
Chief. “ There must be a big river there.”
“What are those black things in the middle of this
road just as it enters the village ?” asked Harry. “They
look like canoes.”
“ And they are,” answered Mac ; “ but what they are
daein’ there I’ll be macadamized if I can say.”
“ Steady, boys,” called the Chief. “ Let us run along
among those trees now; we are sure to be seen by
some one if we keep to the road.”
“ Whaur can the prisoners be ? ” queried Mac, as


they made for the tree belt which fringed the
roadway.
‘‘Somewhere near the tapu house, if they are in-
tended for any ceremony,” replied the Chief; “ but
I can’t see any people. They must be all down round
the pool.”
“What was that ?” asked Harry, stopping suddenly.
“ I heard some one groan, I am sure.”
“Nonsense, Boy,” said the Chief; “you are unstrung,
and no wonder.”
“ There it is again,” persisted Harry ; and this time
the four men stopped and listened, and to their astonished
ears came the following : “ I say, Dave, have you pegged
out yet ? ” “ Not yet, Bob,” said another voice, “ but I
reckon I’ll manage it afore long. lam tied that tight
that my skin’s burstin’ everywhere.” “ Have patience,
comrades, it will all be over very soon,” moaned still
another voice ; “ already Pete and Irish have gone over
the border ” “You are wrong, Parson,” muttered
a very faint voice, with the trace of an Irish accent;
“ my sins will keep a whole day yet going over them.
Whiroo! did yez hear that ? ”
A shout had rung through the air.
“It is your comrades. Where are you ? ” cried the
Chief, as he and his three companions rushed frantically
over the sands.
“ Here, tied up for sacrifice in the tapu canoes,” called
out Bob Wilson, for it was he. “ Come quickly if you
are in the body, and not spirits. We are about making
a change ourselves.” Before he had finished speaking,
Harry was cutting the thongs that bound him, and in
less than half a minute he was out on the sands leaning
heavily on Harry’s shoulder. The Chief, Mac, and
Bill had meanwhile released Irish, the Parson, and
Kangaroo Dave, and laying Bob down on the ground


gently Harry ran to the fifth canoe and cut out Canadian
Pete.
“ Begorra,” remarked Irish, as he fell to the ground
when Mac left him to assist Harry, “ them howlin’
niggers will git a foine chate, after all.”
“ Don’t talk so loudly,” advised the Chief; “we are
quite close to the village, and if we are observed it will
be all up with us. I wish that moon was not so bright.
It is as clear as daylight.”
“ I don’t think there can be many people left, Chief,”
said Bob, making an effort to stand up. “All the
warriors seemed to be going to prepare for some cere-
mony earlier in the evening. How did you happen to
get here in time ? ”
“ Never mind just now, Bob ; we have to get you
away somehow before we are discovered. Can you
walk?”
“ I’ll be all right in a minute,” Bob answered
grimly, as he steadied himself against the Chief. “ Those
cussed brutes tied me so tight that my blood stopped
flowing long ago, and I am cramped all over.”
“ That is the same with me,” added Irish, “ only I
could shtand if my feet weren’t shlapin’.”
“ I am afraid you will have to leave me,” murmured
the Parson ; “ I have lost the use of my limbs.”
“ That is how I feel too,” spoke both Dave and Pete.
“ Better clear out and leave us while ye can.”
“ Leave ye ! ” grunted Mac. “ May oor ugly sinful
carcases turn into crow’s meat if we leave ye this side o’
oor camp. But we canna bide here, all the same, so
come along.” He lifted Canadian Pete as he spoke,
and threw him over his shoulder. “ Hang on, Pete,” he
cried ; “ I’ll no jolt ye ony mair than I can help.” He
started running with his burden towards the distant
precipice.


“ Blow me for a noddlehead if I thought on that,”
muttered Bill, lifting Dave in his arms and following
Mac.
“ Help Irish and the Parson, you two,” cried Bob ;
“ I’ll be able to run alongside presently.”
“And begorra, I can run with any man now,” ex-
claimed Irish, standing up with an effort.
“Bring them along with you, Harry,” cried the Chief,
lifting the Parson to his own shoulders, and running
after Mac and Bill.
“Let me rub your legs, Irish,” said Harry; “that
will help to restore circulation. See, you are getting all
right already.”
“ And I am all right now, me boy,” declared Irish.
“You get away after the others, and I’ll carry Bob.”
But Harry was now rubbing Bob’s limbs, and in a very
short space of time he also felt able to move, and,
supported between Irish and Harry, he was rushed along
the white glistening track the very way the natives
had intended the white men to go, but in a different
manner.
The last three overtook the others before they
reached the ladder, which they all gained without being
pursued, much to their surprise. They paid no attention
to the native they had left bound and gagged by the
way. At the top of the ladder Mac improvised a rope,
and binding it round the arm of each man so that if one
missed his footing his comrades could bear him up, they
started the descent, the Chief again leading. No time
had been lost in explanation, and the released prisoners
accompanied their comrades wonderingly. But the
descent was eventually accomplished without accident,
and soon the nine men tumbled over the rocks on to
the platform, on which their four comrades kept strict
guard.
(B 762) M


No one now cared whether the warriors round the
pool discovered their presence or not, and the fire was
at once blown into a blaze, and hot tea prepared. After
partaking of this every one felt very much better, and
crawled forward to watch the proceedings below. The
mamoose was now set at liberty, for Bob and the
Parson had at once recognized him as being a fellow-
prisoner in the hands of their common enemy, but
reserved for a different fate.
Down below the natives were now standing in atti-
tudes of expectancy, gazing at the moon as it gradually
approached the middle of the heavens. Some of the
masked men ran round the fires, casting thereon some
powdery substance, which made them glow red without
giving flame, but which caused them to emit a peculiarly
pungent odour. The animals in the pool seemed like-
wise waiting for something they knew was coming.
“ I don’t quite grasp the hang of the thing yet,” said
Bob, at length. “We were to be the chief performers in
some circus, I know, but where we were meant to come
in in that corroborree down there beats me.”
“You were to feed the crocodiles,” Mac informed
him ; “ at least so the mamoose Great Scott says.”
“ Yes, that true ; you come down when moon straight
up,” put in Great Scott. “ Moon soon be up now.”
“Ten minutes should show what it all means if the
moon being overhead has anything to do with it,” said
the Chief. “ But what is that noise that has suddenly
arisen ? It sounds like a hurricane overhead.”
“ Water spirits come ! ” laughed the mamoose. “We
all feed them. White fellow and Great Scott all go
same God. Great Scott no afraid.”
“ I am sorry I don’t understand you fully,” said the
Chief; “if you spoke your own language we might get
along better.”


I ■
I j* Ik \ W |n w- -
I Ml ' L * i
I. rn^^rn
jfr Mj^
T^^^^KSi^vv-»ts •• SB)
, * •* _BB gL, 1 .
!|l IB
'. i [P'h . ; ;,.4 ’ -
v l%: '■! t I ui ■ I; ;i\.m,. :Um
1*7(52
“a black wall shot from overhead and fell around them”


I


“That noise is increasing greatly,” interjected the
Parson. “It sounds like some mighty torrent let
loose ”
“ I’ve got it now,” cried Mac, excitedly ; “ that’s just
what it is. It was a dry river-bed we mistook for a road
up there, and that’s the river cornin’ noo. Bob and the
others were meant to be swept down by it over the top,
and the water spirits would be waitin’ for them at the
bottom of that pool.”
“Be the powers! ” muttered Irish ; “ look what we’ve
missed.”
“ But you have not missed it,” groaned the Chief.
“If that was the intention a pent-up river must be
coming now, and that would account for there being no
continuous flow in the creek we followed up here. It
was dammed back. We shall be swept from this ledge
into the pool without being able to make an effort to
save ourselves.”
“Never mind,” said the Parson, quietly, “and ”
“ I’ll hae twa or three niggers to keep me company
crossin’ the Styx,” roared Mac, jumping to his feet, rifle
in hand.
“ An’ I reckon we’ll all have some,” echoed Bill,
Bob, and Jack, also gripping their weapons. But it
was not to be ; before they could do anything the
noise swelled into a thunderous roar, and with a sound
like a discharge from a thousand cannon, a black wall
shot from overhead and fell around them. A hot,
musky odour assailed their nostrils, a cloud of vapour
enveloped them, and each gripped his comrade’s hand.
“lam no deid yet,” spoke Mac’s voice. “ Hoo are you
fellows ? ”
“ Begorra,” muttered Irish, “ I never knew a man
could live so long after he was dead before.”
“ I’ll bet any man two kicks at King George I isn’t


dead,” rose a voice above the horrible din ; and then the
Chiefs voice broke in.
“ Will you fellows shut up ? ” it said ; “ you are all as
alive as ever you were. The force of the stream over-
head has carried the volume of water past us, but as the
volume becomes smaller it will fall straighter, and then, I
suppose, our call will come.” And it looked as if he
were right; the wall of water gradually closed in on them
until it impinged on the edge of their platform, and they
were almost suffocated by the dense clouds of spray.
No one spoke. The sight was too awful, and none
cared to break what seemed a sacred silence. Slowly
but surely the wall approached them, and their belong-
ings were already soaked through and through. King
George and all the boys were chanting their death songs
with great energy, but Great Scott stood with the white
men, dignified and erect. Suddenly the wall of water
parted in front of them, a stream still rushed down on
either side, but only drops now fell on the ledge.
“We are saved ; thank God, we are saved ! ” cried the
Parson, hysterically. “The water is ceasing, and some
projecting rock overhead has split the stream into two
parts, leaving the middle dry.” The Parson had guessed
accurately; the water was now considerably less in
volume, and even as they looked it ceased altogether as
suddenly as it had come.
The moon still shone down into the gorge, but now
all was light. Far down the ravine the foaming torrent
could be heard rushing and tumbling over the rocks, and
each man’s face blanched at the thought of how they
would have fared had that irresistible flood of waters
met them there.
“ The hand of Providence is in this,” said the Chief,
devoutly, “and we must be destined to succeed in our work
this time. Had we camped anywhere but where the


accident of so-called chance led us, we should now
be ”
u Say nae mair, Chief,” cried Mac. “ I for one am
wi’ ye in your belief, an’ I’ll hammer the life oot o’ ony
man that canna see evidence o’ a higher Power than we
are in a’ this.”
But all were of the same mind. The wanderer often
sees the hand of the Supreme Being, and, unlike many
others in different walks of life, invariably recognizes it.
The natives were now sleeping round the pool,
drugged by the intoxicating power of some root they
had been chewing, and the smell of the drowned-out
fires. Their great water-spirit feast was over, and not
for another year would the full moon shine directly over
that hideous pool again.
“Come, boys,” said the Chief, “pack up, and let us
go. We must get through the village up above before
the warriors return, for although we have cut the ladder
underneath us there may be some other way of reaching
the top.”
“ Let us send just one bullet into that ugly old
sinner with the crocodile head-mask,” intreated Dave ;
but the Chief’s order was stern.
“We have escaped,” he said, “ owing to no actions on
our own part, therefore why should we act as King
George might do, and kill ruthlessly just because we
happen to have the power of doing so ? No, comrades,
until it comes to the fight for him we go to save and our
lives, there shall be no unnecessary bloodshed.”
“ Again I am wi’ ye, Chief,” said Mac, gazing thought-
fully at the sleeping warriors ; “ but I must confess I am
sinful enough to hae a big desire to empty ma rifle
among they bodies doon there. But”—he shook his
head sadly—“ revenge is no for us, so we can only hope
that we’ll find their water-tap when we gang through


their village. We could turn it on again, and wi’ the
help o’ Providence it micht droon them a’.”
With such kind intentions Mac began packing up, all
assisting, and soon the entire party was ready to move.
An hour afterwards they, including Great Scott,
stood on the top and gazed down the peaceful moonlit
gorge.
“I dinna wish the sinners ony herm,” said Mac,
leaning over and cutting the ladder at the top, “ but may-
be the exercise o’ finishing their climb, if they ever get
up this length, will help to cure their indigestion.”


CHAPTER IX
In the Tugeri Stronghold
It was about three o’clock in the morning, and the
moon was well down in the west, when, damp and
weary, they entered the village. It was not stockaded
—evidently its inhabitants feared no raiders—and it was
by far the largest they had yet seen in New Guinea.
That it was one of the strongholds of the dreaded
Tugeris was apparent from the symbolic ornaments that
surmounted the chief houses ; gracing the ridge of the
pouri doubo was a row of human heads, while in a pool
over which this house of the gods was built, the sacred
crocodiles, with distended sides, gaped in a horribly
suggestive manner.
It is commonly believed that the savage tribes of the
New Guinean interior worship these creatures, and, on
account thereof, are placed very low in the scale of
humanity ; but this belief is slightly erroneous. The
New Guinean worships the tomb of his ancestors, and
as accidents frequently occurred even with ancestors,
the crocodile often became his tomb. This crocodile
was from that date rendered “tapu,” or sacred, and, if
possible, gathered in with others inside the piles of the
tapu house, where, living free from worry and care as to
its meals, it grew old as the special property of the


tribe. A crocodile —if no misadventure overtake it —
lives to enormous age, to at least two hundred years,
and if the natives are to be believed, sometimes outlives
the tribe. During this time accidents are continually
happening to the succeeding generations, and thus
more and more come to worship their family tomb,
until a whole tribe may be round one hoary saurian.
At such times it is a comparatively simple matter for
the tomb to claim another victim, for is it not sacred ?
And so life goes on, and the poor Papuan is mis-
understood.
The Tugeris are now about the only remaining
tribe of importance that have resisted the influence of
the white man, and do what it may, the Commonwealth
Government cannot force them to desist from can-
nibalism. Their homes are in the upper reaches and
headstreams of the big rivers beyond the civilizing
sphere of gunboats ; and if, at any time, after a raid on
tribes under British protection, they are pursued by the
Warden or Resident Magistrate and his police, they
escape across the boundary into German territory, where
the British armed force may not follow. There are, of
course, many smaller tribes that have not yet been
brought into contact with the white man ; but that is
because the white man has not found it worth his while
to visit them, no gold having been discovered in their
dominions ; and so long as they confine their fights and
raids to their equally savage neighbours’ villages and
hunting grounds, and do not molest the tribes under the
protection of the Commonwealth, they will probably
be left alone. It must be said, however, that even
among those people some zealous member of the
London Mission Society will likely be found, doing
his best to turn tapu doubos into churches, death
chants into hymns of praise, and a religion of which


cannibalism is an essential feature into simple, peaceful
Christianity.
But our party did not think of these things as they
stood in front of the tapu house. They were watching
with astonishment the actions of a few dozen old men
and women at the far end of the village, wondering
meanwhile where the rifles of Bob’s party were stowed
away.
“ They keep very careless guard here,” remarked the
Chief. “We did not come quietly, nor did we hide
ourselves, and yet it seems that those people up there
have not the slightest suspicion of any one being near
them.”
“Why should they suspect the presence of any
one ? ” said the Parson. “ We, in all probability, are the
first people who ever visited them intentionally, and
doubtless they fancy that some of us at least are now
being digested by the water spirits.”
“ But that fellow we caught and released afterwards
as we came up the watercourse ? ” said the Chief.
“What happened to him that he did not give the
alarm ? ”
“ He was not able to stand,” answered Mac, with a
grin, “ nae mair than were oor ain fellows, so I left him
lying by a water puddle.”
“ But what are those fellows doing, anyhow ? ” said
Bob Wilson. Bill and Ted meanwhile had clambered
up the walls of the tapu house, and were now sitting
astride the ridge.
“Mamoose know,” said Great Scott. “Big river
runs pasts village. They turn big river into other dry
river to carry white men over top when moon full.
They turn river back now.”
“The mamoose is right,” cried Harry, who, with
Kaiser, had been reconnoitring; “ there is a large river


flowing past the end of the village, and the natives have
constructed a sort of swinging weir across it with
which they can turn the water down this way if
they wish. They are now moving it back into its old
place to allow the river to flow on in its natural channel
again.”
“We’ll see into that later,” said the Chief. “In the
meantime, we are standing in the middle of what looks
like the chief village of the most notorious tribe of
warriors in New Guinea; and it strikes me that the
sooner we are out of it the better it will be for our
health.”
“But you’re surely no’ goin’ to run awa’ withoot
seein’ the inside o’ their tapu house ? ” cried Mac. “If
we’re the first folk to visit the Tugeris at hame, we are
entitled to that much.”
“ I’ve found the doorway,” yelled Bill, from the roof;
but, as he spoke, he disappeared from view through the
thatch. Evidently he had not been quite prepared to
find the entrance so easily, for the muffled remarks
which came up from where he had fallen through were
peculiarly Australian, and expressive of deep emotion.
Ted followed at once, and Mac was soon peering through
the hole. “Whaur are ye, Bill?” he cried. “ Dinna
say ye’re deid, or ”
“ Close up, and come down if ye want to see this joss
house,” roared Bill, from within ; and seeing that no one
would hear his philosophical remarks even if he made
any, Mac shook his head and fell through.
“ It seems to me these exploring boys of ours will
get a bit of a surprise,” observed the Chief, looking
towards the river. “ Here come the natives, and in a
hurry, too. Evidently they have received an alarm.
Let us get behind those houses there and watch develop-
ments. We are strong enough to hold the village if


we desired, and they are only old men and women, in
any case.”
“ It are a funny sort of game this, an’ no mistake,”
remarked Kangaroo Dave, as they hid in the dark
shadows of convenient houses, and gathered the carriers
with them. “No one would believe us if we told
them we dodged the Tugeri niggers round their own
houses.”
“You fellows can play at any game you like,” said
Fat Jack ; “but I’ve got to get our breakfast somehow,
and I think that, seeing the trouble these beggars have
given us, it is only fair that they should provide that.”
He disappeared in the shadows, followed by Pete and
Dave, and the rest awaited expectantly the arrival of
the natives.
“What a chance to wipe the whole mob out,” said
Bob, as they came near. “We could just mow them
down, and they would never know what struck them.
It would be saving the Australian Government some
expense, too, for they’ll have to exterminate the breed
some day.”
“ What, Bob! ” cried the Parson. “ Shoot down a
handful of old men ? Surely it was not my comrade
who suggested that ? Why, they will all be dead of old
age very soon.”
“ That’s all right, Parson,” replied Bob ; “ but I tell
you I owe this tribe something for tying me up as they
did, and they have our rifles somewhere, too.”
“We can make those fellows tell where the rifles are,
at any rate, and liberate your carrier-boys if they have
not already been eaten,” said Doc, going through his
pockets anxiously, as if searching for something. “ And,”
he continued, “if there happen to be any cigars here, I
mean to have them, for they have spoiled the few I had
left by that waterwork display of theirs.”


“ How can there be cigars among the Tugeris ? ”
cried the Parson, greatly amused at the idea.
“Wait and see,” answered Doc, mysteriously; and
then the natives came up, and the party became
silent.
But the natives were still quite unaware of their
existence. It was to sing a song of praise to their gods
they had come, for evidently the one night in the year
that witnessed the feeding of the water spirits was one
devoted to prayers and feasting —not fasting—and as it
rarely, if ever, happened that white men provided the
feast, the old men were very anxious to let their
ancestors know what share they had taken in the pro-
ceedings. This information they imparted in their song,
but as no one had seen the ceremony, and each had a
different version of the affair, and vied with his fellows in
telling how he, with some help of course, was really the
brave warrior who had captured the white devils, and
that but for him disgrace would assuredly have fallen on
the bones of his ancestors, it was not very intelligible
even to those of the party who were fairly well acquainted
with the mountain dialect.
“ Great western centipedes ! ” howled Bob, as the
harsh discordant wail rolled on ; “ do ye hear that, Pete
and Dave ? Where are you, you twins ? ”
“ Sure the Parson and Oi are all that is here of the
party thim gentlemen are talking about—barring your-
self, of course,” answered Irish.
“ An’ did you hear what that ugly old sinner said ?
He has just finished describing how he knocked me
down and held me until you fellows came up, and then
took the five pops from you and tied us all to trees, to
await the sentence of the gods.” Bob danced with rage,
and even the Parson was visibly annoyed at the old
warrior’s prevarications.


The Chief and Doc sat down, and their sides shook
with silent laughter. Harry and Kaiser did not yet
understand the language of the hill tribes sufficiently
well to gather the meaning of the chant, but seeing that
Bob was greatly excited they did not think it prudent
to join in the laughter, and so pretended not to
notice. Suddenly the mamoose Great Scott turned to
Harry. “ You want find other fellow-carriers ? ” he
inquired.
“Yes,” answered Harry, ready with boyish enthu-
siasm for any adventure.
He was enjoying himself thoroughly, and the know-
ledge that he was hiding in the shadows of their own
houses from cannibals a few feet away, and in the
heart of their own village, acted as a powerful exhilara-
ting drug upon him, and he burned for yet more
excitement.
“ Then come with mamoose if no Traid,” said Great
Scott; and Harry and Kaiser promptly followed him
across the roadway that lay in the shadows, and plunged
among the cluster of houses that formed the centre of
the village.
“ This is a bit too slow for me,” remarked Doc, when
they had gone. “You fellows can watch this pantomime
yourselves ; lam going on a hunt for some cigars.” So
saying, he also sprang into the dark shadows, and dis-
appeared.
Still the monotonous, self-glorifying chant went on.
Apparently the white men had been as little children in
the hands of these hoary old sinners, who, although now
relegated to tasks such as the turning off and on of the
water at the great moon feast, yet considered themselves
as mighty men of valour.
“ Oh, blow me for a member of Parliament, I can’t
stand this any longer,” burst out Bob, as one paint-be-


smeared savage began his recital over again. “The
dirty skunks say they lifted the white devil’s chief on
high and cast him before their ancestors. We’ll see if
they can do it again. Come on, Irish.” He stepped
out from behind his shelter and confronted the natives,
Irish keeping by his side.
“ Whirroo ! ” cried the latter, waving his arms wildly.
“ Where is the lyin’ thafe that did all those things to
me ? Trot him out, or, by the one snake that was left
in ould Ireland, I’ll eat you all.” He looked as if he
could easily make good his promise, but no one waited
for that, except those whom Bob had already hurled to
the ground. But the laughter of the Chief and the
Parson did not last long, for even as the last of the old
warriors disappeared with shouts of terror at the coming
back to life of the white devils, a great commotion arose
in some other part of the village, and towards them there
came rushing the mamoose Great Scott, pursued by over
a hundred boys, as yet too young to enjoy the full
privileges of warriors, and who, therefore, had apparently
been left behind to guard the village. A number of
women accompanied them, and made the air ring with
their shrill cries of “ Che-ep,” 1 a battle-cry of great sig-
nificance to those who understood it; and the boys did
understand it. Here was their chance to earn the
right of becoming warriors. They had been asleep and
had neglected their duty, but they would catch this
daring person who had come amidst them, and in the
celebration attending his sacrifice, their mistake might
be overlooked or forgotten. They had been left to guard
the carriers of the white devils, who were designed to
provide the great feast for the warriors after the water
spirits had been propitiated by the present of the white
men. (White men are considered too salt for the
1 “ Che-ep ” = “ Fight on ; we are watching the bravest.”


Tugerian taste, otherwise the water spirits might not
have received the same consideration.) Those carrier-
“ boys ” had been spirited away, doubtless by some
white-devil trick, but this man would pay for it, and
they would find the prisoners later.
The said prisoners meanwhile were with Harry and
Kaiser, making towards the junction of the waterways,
whither Doc’s voice had shouted to them from some-
where to go, and the mamoose, as the Chief instantly
surmised, was leading the youthful warriors after him for
a purpose. And they soon knew that purpose. “ Carriers
down by river,” Great Scott shouted, as he raced past the
Chief and the Parson into the shadow of the tapu house
walls. “ White fellows now pop-pop nigger devils.”
The Chief and the Parson stepped out beside Bob
and Irish. “I fear we will have to pop-pop some this
time,” said the Chief, “ although I don’t like it. The
boys are less inclined to listen to argument, and are even
more daring than the full-fledged warriors.”
“ Why white fellows no pop-pop at niggers ? ” inquired
Great Scott, in surprise.
“Do the Angerita people fight with boys ? ” asked
the Parson.
“You bet. Boys grow big warriors bymbye. Kill
him now, no need kill him again,” answered the ma-
moose, seizing a limb of a tree which grew over the
tapu house, and breaking it off. “ Mamoose show white
fellows how Angerita like do all Tugeris,” he continued,
brandishing his improvised club and stepping out into
the open. “ Hims no ’fraid.”
Neither were the Tugeri boys afraid, and they
came on with a rush which was only stopped by
the Chief and Irish each catching up a boy in his
arms and using him as a club against his companions.
The mamoose was more drastic in his methods, and


the prospective warriors went down under his club in
dozens. “ Tugeri pig !” he yelled derisively. “ Where
hims spears ? ”
They did not respond ; they did not understand him,
and in any case, they had no spears except the compara-
tively harmless hunting ones, and already the mamoose
was like a pincushion with them.
“ It is high time we were out of this,” the Chief cried
to the Parson, in the midst of the mel6e. “ See if you
can collect our fellows. The real warriors may arrive at
any moment, and they are by no means harmless.” At
that moment two revolver-shots rang out towards the big
river, immediately followed by an answering two in the
same vicinity, and a moment later by yet another two
from the middle of the village.
“ That was Doc’s signal to come on, those first
shots,” said the Chief, firing three shots from his own
weapon into the air. “The second was Harry’s, and
the third was Jack’s. I have answered, ‘coming,’ and if
we only had Mac, Bill, and Ted, we could go at once.”
Whatever can they be doing inside ? They must have
heard this scrimmage ” He cut his remarks short,
for the boys had now been augmented by the old men,
who, realizing that the white men did not spit fire at
them, concluded that that was because they could not
do so, and quietly formed a ring around them, intending
to keep them there until the warriors should return with
the rising sun. But this was not in accordance with the
Chief’s view of things, for now that most of his com-
rades were waiting at the junction of the river and
its supplementary course, he did not wish to prolong
the interview.
“ There is no help for it,” he muttered grimly, raising
his revolver and aiming at a grizzled veteran who pro-
bably had eaten more men than would populate a small


village. “Bob, see what has happened to Mac and the
others.”
“We’re here,” cried Bill’s voice, his head popping
through the roof; “ we’ve got the lost rifles, an’ a lot
of other things too. Hullo! there’s a circus on, and
we’re not in it. Come on, Mac and Ted ; ye’re wanted
here.” He jumped down as he spoke, and ran at a
crowd of natives who had got Great Scott underneath
them, and were about to club him to death. But the
Chief’s revolver-shot was before him, and the natives
hurriedly ran back, leaving the old man who had
especially roused Bob’s anger, behind.
“Come back, Bill,” cried the Chief; “he’ll spear
you. I only shot him in the legs, and he’s playing
’possum.”
“ I’ll ’possum him,” roared Bill, who had no scruples
of any kind ; but at that moment there was a loud wail
of terror and the natives melted from sight as if the
ground had swallowed them. And little wonder, for
standing halfway through the roof of the tapu house
was a terrible apparition.
“ Howlin’ dingoes! what’s this ? ” cried Bill, as he
perceived the spectre.
“That big fighting god Mnbau,” wailed Great Scott,
rising to his feet. “ Hims poor fellow hims looks at
dies.”
“ I reckon I’ll have a shot at him, anyhow,” said Bill.
“ I never saw the beggar when I was in his house.” He
raised his rifle and the god spoke.
“Ye spongy-brained freak o’ crinkled-faced humanity,”
it said, “ if ye pull that trigger, I’ll come doon an’ ye’ll
never ken whether it was an earthquake or a railway
train that ye ran against.” Bill did not pull the trigger,
and the god descended to the earth, followed by Silent
Ted carrying an armful of plunder.
(B 762)


“I have never worn a crocodile skin before,” remarked
the god, casually, as he manoeuvred to bring his tail into
proper line ; “ but I thocht ye would like to see me in it,
as it seems to be the entire wardrobe o’ the head priest
o’ this tribe. Ma certy! he’s a cute customer. He
doesna believe in spreading knowledge broadcast, for
the whole five rifles and belts o’ cartridges are a’ fastened
inside ma tail.”
“ Then ye have got our rifles, Mac,” yelled Bob, in a
frenzy of delight. “ Give me mine quickly till I feel a
man again.”
“You’ll perceive, ma man, if you look closely, that
I havena the power o’ gettin’ into ma pockets,” re-
marked the object addressed, “but ” But the
Chief, Bob, and Irish had tripped him up, and while
he lay and kicked on the ground, helpless in his
strange encasement, they cut open his tail and pulled
out the rifles.
“ Hurry, now,” cried the Chief; “ our comrades are
waiting for us, and the sun will be up in half an hour.
We’ll have the whole village about us again, and probably
the warriors too.”
They started off, their carriers running before them,
but the god was left struggling where they had thrown
him.
“ Come back an’ help me, ye barbarians,” he
cried. “Ma tail has got under ma legs, an’ I canna
get up.”
“ Come out of it, then,” cried the Chief, and rushed
on heedlessly, until the river was reached.
“ Easy there,” warned Doc’s voice ; “ there are a lot of
crocodiles by the banks, so be careful. Our craft is over
here.” Doc was sitting on a fallen tree, smoking what,
judging by the aroma, was an excellent cigar. Near
him stood Harry and Kaiser with the other party’s


carriers, and lumbering along towards them in the fast-
approaching light of dawn came Jack, Dave, and Pete,
heavily laden with booty of some kind.
“ Where’s Mac ? ” cried Doc, counting the men.
“ He’ll be along directly,” answered the Chief.
“ Where did you get the cigar ? ”
“ From his Excellency Count Von Herman, it
would appear,” said Doc; “he has a very fine taste,
too.”
“ What are you talking about ? ” cried the Chief,
slightly irritated.
“ Cigars. But that reminds me ; will you step inside
my motor launch, gentlemen ? It is only one of the
primitive type of petroleum launches, I must admit, but
even that is more than one has any right to expect in
Tugeri land.”
But all were now examining the strange craft at
Doc’s feet. It was one of the latest type of oil launches,
and was built to carry ten people. On a plate on its
stern was the name of its builder, a famous firm in
Stettin, and it was complete in every way, there even
being a reservoir tank filled with petroleum in the
bows.
“ How did that get here ? ” asked the Parson ; but the
Chief, Doc, and Bob looked at each other silently.
They needed not to ask such a question.
“ It has been carried down from the German patrol,”
said Doc,
“ Which proves that this river comes from German
territory,” said the Parson, excitedly.
“ Which proves that it at least passes through a tract
of German territory,” corrected Doc.
“You mean ?”
“We have no time for explanation here; I think our
find means much to us. The cigars in the locker do me,


at any rate. Get on board, and we can reason the thing
out after.”
“ But it can’t carry us all; and surely that frail craft
cannot make headway up a mountain river ? ”
“ We can tow one of those larger war canoes behind,
and seeing this has come down from German territory
without a scratch, it is just possible that it will afford
us a faster method of progression than any other means.
We can try it, at all events.” The Parson was satisfied,
and the rest were already dividing themselves into the
launch and one of a number of large war canoes moored
near.
“Wait half a minute,” cried Jack, as, with Doc at the
the engines, they were about to start. “ Give us a
hand, Bill, and we’ll throw all these other canoes
over the weir so that Mr. Tugeri cannot very well
follow us.”
This operation was carried out in a very short space
of time, and again they were ready to start up-stream.
“ But where is Mac ? ” cried Harry.
“ Oh, he can come after us,” said the Chief; “it
may teach him a lesson if we leave him behind for a
bit.”
“ I say, boys! did ever any of you see a crocodile
running that way before?” cried Kangaroo Dave sud-
denly, pointing towards the village upon which the first
rays of the morning sun were just striking.
“There’s something wrong with that poor croc, I
reckon,” said Canadian Pete, compassionately. “ I’ll
better put it out of its misery ”
“ Leave the poor brute alone, Pete,” advised Bill,
laying his hand on Pete’s rifle arm. “ It’s only a hungry
tomb coming down for some worshippers.”
“ Full speed ahead ! ” shouted Doc. He pulled the
lever, and with a snort the little craft began to force its


way up-stream, pulling the laden canoe behind without
any appreciable effort.
“ Haud on there,” yelled the crocodile, “ baud on a
wee; I’m cornin’.”
“ Great Sydney ! ” gasped Dave, in amazement, “ who-
ever knowed a crocodile could talk before ? ”
“And with a Scotch accent too,” said Harry,
laughing.
“ Don’t stop,” said the Chief. “He can run along-
side.”
“ Wait on me ! ” now yelled the crocodile-god, stand-
ing upright, but instantly falling again as the cumbrous
tail overbalanced him. “ It’s me —Mac. Come back for
me ; I’ve got something for ye all ” But seeing that
no one paid any attention, he concentrated his persuasive
powers on Bill. “ Bill, ma man,” he cried, “ I’ll never see
yer bonnie face again, an’ I wanted to tell ye how to
make damper without baking-powder. Come back an’
I’ll gie ye ma silver-mounted revolver.”
“ I can’t, Mac,” cried Bill; “ Boy and Kaiser and the
Parson are holding me.”
He made a frantic effort to jump overboard to join
his comrade, but the others simply sat on him, and his
effort came to naught.
“ Why can’t you come after us ? ” cried the Parson.
“ You’re amphibious, you know.”
“ I canna get oot,” wailed Mac, dolorously ; then
seeing that his grief was wasted, and being seized with
an inspiration, he changed his tone abruptly, and
remarked loudly, “ A weel, I suppose if ye’ll no’ come
back o’ your ain accord, I’ll hae to shoot the man at the
helm.” Saying which, his rifle-barrel gleamed from
under the long snout of his covering as he lay on the
bank. Mac never missed what he shot at, and all were
well aware of that fact. “Don’t shoot,” yelled Pete,


throwing himself flat in the boat, but nevertheless
retaining his hold on the tiller rope.
“He can’t fire,” spoke the Chief. “ Never mind him.”
But as he finished, “ bang ” went Mac’s rifle.
“ Who’s shot ? ” inquired every one. “ What has
happened ? ”
“ Boys, Mac has missed me, after all,” chuckled Pete,
raising his head.
“ We’ll let him walk all day for that,” growled
Bob.
“I don’t think so,” laughed the Chief. “We can’t
get the best of Mac ; listen to the row behind.”
“Yes, what in thunder is up in the canoe?” cried
Pete, as the shouts of Irish, Jack, and Dave, and the
startled cries of the carriers rent the air.
“ Nothing,” said the Chief, “ only Mac’s shot has cut
the connecting rope, and the canoe is drifting back to
him at the rate of four miles an hour.”
“By King George’s whiskers! that was a shot,”
murmured Bob, lost in admiration.
“ Swing her round, Pete,” cried Doc, “ and we’ll pick
up the canoe before Mac yet.”
Pete delightedly pulled the steering ropes, and the
launch swung round and darted down-stream after the
drifting canoe. “ We’ll get her first, we’ll get her first,”
yelled Pete, throwing his strength into one of the tiller
ropes to bring the launch alongside the canoe. But
another shot re-echoed over the waters, and the rope
came away in Pete’s hands.
“ I’ll shoot the Parson next,” announced Mac, grimly.
“ He’s of nae use, onyway.” The Parson dodged behind
the engines hastily, and the helpless launch shot past
the canoe before Doc could reverse the engines; and
floundering out in the water, Mac got hold of her gun-
wale and was towed alongside.


“ If ye dinna cut me oot I’ll come in as I am,” he
said, shaking his long tail. “ An’ yer wee matchbox o’ a
boat hasna room for a’ you folk —an’ me.” The threat
was appalling, and, bending over, Harry and Bill
assisted Mac from his outer covering and hauled him
on board.
“Wait till I empty ma pockets,” cried Mac, “afore
we let this Tugeri god awa’. Noo, I’ve got every-
thing.” He pulled several articles from some recesses
in the hide of the late saurian, and, as the carcass
floated away, and connection was again established
between the launch and the canoe, gazed round the
craft.
“ This wee piece o’ clockwork is only meant for ten
folk,” he said, “an I see there’s eleven in it noo. Wha’s
goin’ oot, Parson —you or the mamoose ? ” But here the
Chief interposed.
“Enough of this fooling, Mac,” he said. “We have
wasted an hour of daylight already, and we must get
some miles between us and this village before we can
stop for breakfast.”
“ And while you were playing ghost in the tapu
house, Dave, Pete, and I were fossicking in the
mamoose’s larder,” cried Jack, from the canoe
behind.
“ Were you successful ? ” queried the Parson, eagerly.
“ I am as empty as Mac’s crocodile ”
“ In the head,” murmured Mac, pleasantly, wringing
the water from his garments ; but his remark was
ignored.
“ Oh, we got plenty of something,” said Dave ; “ it’s
in the boat here.”
“ I got some good cigars,” remarked Doc. “So if
any of you want a smoke ”
“ How did you manage to find them ? ” inquired


the Chief; “you must have known something we
didn’t.”
“ Oh, well, I noticed the little squares of silver paper,
in which German cigars are often wrapped, stuck on
a board for ornament outside the tapu house. I knew
no cigars but my own ever came up this way, so that
paper must have come down. Then when I saw
there was a river flowing as this one does, it became
clear that German territory was not far off, and that
the cigar paper, and presumably cigars, inside, must
have come from that direction, I next found the
launch here, and there were two boxes of cigars in the
locker.”
“ I don’t reckon we was playin’ ourselves in the tapu
house,” put in Bill; “we got the rifles ”
“True, I had forgotten that, Mac,” cried Bob, reach-
ing out his hand to the Scot. “ I couldn’t have lived
long without my Winchester.”
“ And we got the carriers,” said Kaiser, anxious to
show that his party, too, had done something.
“ You all did very well,” said the Chief, diplomatically;
“ and now that we are out of sight of the village, and
have not had any sleep for thirty hours, not to mention
our drenching and other excitements, I think we will
run into the banks and sample what Jack and his party
commandeered.”
This suggestion was hailed with approval by all,
and, soon after, an appetizing breakfast was in course of
preparation on the bank of the river opposite the village,
but four miles farther north.
“ I forgot to tell ye,” observed Mac, as they sat down,
“ that I found these bonnie stanes in the tapu house, and
took them wi’ me.”
“You should not steal, Mac, even from natives,” began
the Parson.


“ These are opals,” said the Chief, " and, hullo! they
are the same ”
“ They are the same —they are Cathie’s! ” cried
Harry, excitedly, jumping to his feet and seizing them
fiom Mac’s hands.


CHAPTER X
Among the Gods of their Ancestors
“ Cathie ? ” repeated Mac, looking up. “ Wha’s
Cathie ?”
All eyes were now turned upon Harry. “ She—she
is ” He blushed and stammered, and Bill and Dave
laughed.
“ He’s only a boy yet, an’ hasn’t got over leaving
home, an’ the stones remind him of some little school-
girl he knew,” Dave said.
“ I beg your pardon, Mac,” spoke Harry, at length.
“ I thought I recognized the stones, but of course it was
only imagination. It is not possible that the opals I
am thinking of could have got into the heart of New
Guinea already, seeing I saw them the night I left
London ”
“Of that you may be sure, Harry,” said the Chief,
kindly, “ for you and I both came out the fastest possible
way, and no prospectors could have made better time
to this spot than we have done, even allowing they had
the stones. But are you sure you have ever seen
stones like that ? They are of an unusual shade, you
know.”
“ That is what drew my attention, sir, for the
stones I thought they were, were of the identical
shade.”


“ It may sound absurd,” laughed the Chief, strangely,
“but I too fancy I have seen those stones before, or
some like them. Doc, examine them, please, and let
us know if—or rather, give us your opinion.”
Doc took the stones and examined them closely.
“Yes, I have seen them before,” he said quietly.
“ Suppose we go back to the village and find out how
they came to be there ? ”
“Useless, Doc,” replied the Chief, passing the stones
round. “If the warriors have got back we should never
leave it alive, and if they are still round the pool there
would be no one in the village able to give us any
information.”
Harry was puzzled. Why had he thought he
recognized the stones ? And stranger still, what mystery
lay around them when the whole camp seemed suddenly
to have lost its appetite on seeing them ?
“ I reckon I’ve seen them too,” remarked Bob, very
quietly; and the Parson also signified that he was
familiar with them.
“ I give it up, boys,” said the Chief, in a dry voice.
“Those stones, when we saw them last, were in the
possession of our chief. How did they come here ?
Does it mean that the Tugeris have already raided
the city of the mountains ? and that this is all the
trace we shall find of him who was our chief ? I had
some stones exactly the same as this ; they came from
the same place. I sent them home, but one is some-
where among our possessions now. Ah, I remember ;it
is in my little case in Tear-Him-Up Tommy’s bundle.
Get it, Mac.”
Mac silently opened the bundle, and extracted the
case.
“ It is the same,” said the Chief, comparing the opal
he found inside with those Mac had brought from the


village. He sat down and buried his face in his hands.
Suddenly he looked up. “We had better take break-
fast, boys,” he said. “We need it, and we must keep
up our strength, for I swear that if harm has come
to him I will never rest while an inhabitant of that
valley, or a Tugeri, if they are to blame, remains
alive.”
“ I reckon we are all built that way,” spoke
Bob Wilson ; and then in silence they partook of
breakfast.
When this was over, the Chief, Doc, the Parson, and
Bob held a long consultation, at the conclusion of which
the Chief announced to the others that they would camp
and rest that day. “It is Sunday, in any case,” he said,
making a rapid mental calculation,“ and although we are
only four miles from the Tugeri village it is not at all likely
that they will be able to pay us a visit for some time;
if they do —well, I retract my objections to the use of our
rifles.” He turned away as he finished, and each member
of the party knew that henceforth fighting would be the
order of the day.
Harry was dazed. Clearly the opals could not be
those he still thought they were, or all his comrades were
wrong, and therefore miserable without cause. Again,
if they were right in recognizing the stones, he was
wrong, and his senses were playing him tricks. Then
a startling thought struck him. Was he dreaming ?
Was he really in New Guinea ? Or would he wake up
and find himself back at his desk ? No; a strange
prickly little insect fell from a tree on to his hand at
that moment, and its sting convinced him that there
was no dream about the pain, at any rate. Then, were
the opals a dream ? Had he dreamt that some one had
accused him of stealing those opals, and had he left
home because of that ? Then if so, that scene at


Tilbury Docks, Darling Bill, and Cathie, were all parts
of the same dream ? Ah, well, he was tired ; already
most of his comrades were asleep. He would get
under the shade of that pandanus palm and sleep too.
Perhaps in an hour or so his brain would become
dearer, and matters generally assume a brighter
aspect.
A hand laid on his arm roused him from his
musings. “You are a good swimmer, Boy?” Doc’s
voice said.
“I was considered fair at home,” answered Harry,
thoroughly awake at once.
“ And a good runner ? ” Doc continued.
“ I think so. Why ? ”
“Because, if you don’t mind, you and I will do
some exploring work on our own account this after-
noon.”
“ I shall be delighted to go with you, Doc. Where
are we going ? ”
“I’ll tell you when we are ready to start Try
and get some sleep now. I’ll wake you in good
time.”
And the camp slept, while the sun climbed through
the sky, and all forms of bird, animal, and insect life
became hushed in their noonday sleep. About one
o’clock in the afternoon Jack arose and stretched himself.
“ I suppose I’ll have to get some sort of dinner ready,”
he yawned. “ It’s a bit of a nuisance, this eating busi-
ness. Why can’t a man eat enough at a time to last
him a week ? ” Still muttering to himself he stirred up
the fire, and fetching a couple of pails of water from
the river, filled several tea-billies, and placed them on
the fire to boil. Some minutes after he shouted, “Get
up, you sleepy-headed specimens ; tucker’s ready,
and it’s cold nigger and damper, and that is a lot too


good for people who won’t hustle to get anything
else.”
But the cold nigger, as Jack called the remnant of
their breakfast, proved very acceptable, and with copious
draughts of tea formed as good a lunch as one could
desire. After dining some went out hunting for their
supper, some went to sleep again, and others betook
themselves to cleaning their rifles and revolvers and
sharpening their knives. Obeying Doc’s signal, Harry
had been among those who .sought sleep the second
time, and being very tired, he was soon back in dream-
land. It was late in the afternoon when Doc awoke
him. The Chief and the Parson had gone up the river
to inspect their future course; Jack and some others
were still sleeping. Bob and Bill were out shooting,
and Mac and Ted were washing their clothes in the
river, Great Scott assisting them. Mac was also making
the mamoose try on all the spare articles of clothing in
camp. He had entreated to be allowed to go with
the white fellows, as he had now no people, and as it
was certain death for him to be left alone anywhere
in Tugeri land, the Chief had at length consented, making
Mac and Ted responsible for him. The mamoose was
now being dressed by his two sponsors in a manner
startling in its originality, but wonderfully pleasing to
his taste, and greatly to the satisfaction of Mac and
Ted. For a moment Doc and Harry listened to their
audible comments in amusement, and then Doc said,
“ Well, Harry, we must go now. Leave your rifle behind,
but take all your revolvers.”
“ That means that any shooting will be at close
range,” observed Harry.
“ I fancy so,” returned Doc, grimly. “We are going
to pay another visit to the village, and I expect we’ll
find the warriors at home this time.”


Harry asked no questions ; he knew it was not solely
for adventure that Doc proposed this risky trip, and he
was proud of being deemed worthy by Doc to be his
companion. He followed his leader down the bank of
the river until out of sight of the camp ; then, placing
their revolvers and ammunition in their watertight rubber
holsters, they waded gently into the river so as not to
disturb its occupants, who were at present sleeping
underneath the overgrowing banks, and then struck out
for the opposite shore, on gaining which they at once
plunged into the entanglements of the forest, and steered
for the village.
Meanwhile the village was the scene of great com-
motion. The fighting mamoose had just returned from
a successful raid with his picked warriors. He was
explaining for the sixth or seventh time to those same
warriors, who knew all that he knew, and the old men,
women, and boys of the village, that he had captured
and annihilated an entire tribe, and taken their village.
He also informed them that, not having been able him-
self to get home in time for the great moon feast of the
water spirits, he had sent the mamoose of the captured
village home with some warriors to provide the feast,
and he now wanted to know why the moon feast and
water spirit worshippers had not yet arrived home to
welcome him, and to give him due credit for his great
victories. Some old men had endeavoured to assure
him that the water spirit feast had been a great success,
and that white men had provided the feast, but they
could not tell him why the worshippers had not returned,
and could only suggest that it was owing to some strange
influence of the white men’s ghosts. They were pur-
posely very vague in their statements, and did not
mention that the white men’s ghosts had already come
back to the village, although the warrior worshippers


had not. But the mamoose, although glad to hear that
there were so many white men less in the country, was
not satisfied. He wanted to know, in choicest Tugerian
vernacular, why his people were not before him at that
moment to hear of his doings, and nothing else had any
weight with him. He also wished them to hear of some
still greater project he had in his mind to increase the
glory of the great untamed Tugeris, but darkness fell,
and he adjourned for supper, waited on by the entire
tribe. At length the mamoose could stand it no longer;
it was impossible to preserve his dignity when the tapu
priest kept his warriors so long away from him with im-
punity, and already he fancied some of the old men were
laughing at him. He decided to act, and with him there
never was any procrastination. “My people,’’ he cried
in their own tongue, springing to his feet, “ the tapu
priest has insulted me—me, Sartor Resartus, the fighting
mamoose of the Tugeris. He has kept my warriors at
their prayers to make a fool of me. But lam not afraid
of my ancestors, nor of all the old women tapu priests
who ever lived. lam now your spiritual chief, as well
as leader of your fighting men. Follow me to the tapu
house, and I will tell you more. I will kill the sorcerer
when he arrives ”
With a shout which may have meant approval or the
reverse, his people followed him, and he climbed up
into the screened doorway of the tapu house, and
delivered an address, which for volubility was the finest
Doc and Harry, who were inside, had ever heard.
These two had entered the village at dusk when the
mamoose was concluding his before-dinner oration, and
as all the population were round him at his own dwelling
—he had not yet discovered that Jack and company had
visited his larder —it was a comparatively simple matter
for Doc and Harry to enter the tapu house through Bill’s


trapdoor in the roof without being perceived. They had
been hunting around for some time amidst boxes, masks,
and weapons, and had now grown accustomed to the
stench of decaying heads, which were conspicuously
displayed everywhere. The tapu house was a veritable
museum, or rather, chamber of horrors. Huge snakes,
either most wonderfully preserved by some means or as
cleverly stuffed, shot out their forked tongues from every
recess, and crocodiles of all shapes and sizes reared
themselves in the dark corners. Masks made from
animals’ heads, and others carved and burnt to represent
some fanciful creatures hung on bamboo rods, and the
whole interior was lined with a peculiar dark shiny sub-
stance, well oiled, which Doc pronounced to be human
skin. One end of the house was partitioned off by what
looked like a screen made of this substance stretched
upon a bamboo frame ; indeed, it seemed to be the
actual wall of the apartment, and must have been taken
for such by Mac, Bill, and Ted when they were there,
for signs of their irreverent depredations were visible
throughout the larger apartment, but the screen, as the
innumerable spiders’ webs woven across it showed, had
not been touched.
“It can’t really be a screen, Doc,” Harry said, as he
felt for some part that would move. “It must be a room
which is entered by some sort of stage door from the
outside,”
“Perhaps,” admitted Doc, striking a match; “but
suppose you try if the wings of that gigantic bat hanging
over the middle will move. Ah, I thought so.” Harry
had moved the enormous wings of some strange freak
of the bat family, and instantly had found himself inside a
smaller room, the entrance to which the bat’s wings had
served to hide.
“ This must be the tapu man’s inner temple,” remarked
(B 762) Q


Doc. “ We’ll find all his treasures here.” He applied a
match to some fibres floating in some fat, contained in a
cocoanut shell, and a ghastly light was the result. “ This
is one of his trade secrets, I suppose,” he went on. “He
must have salt or something mixed with that fat to
produce this effect.”
“ But won’t they see the light from outside ? ” asked
Harry, examining a heap of what appeared to be
familiar objects.
“ Not if the priest has done his work correctly ; it
would never do for the superstitious natives to know his
lordship was at home when he wished them to think he
was elsewhere ”
“ Here is an old rifle,” interrupted Harry. “Itis a
German one, too, but it won’t work ; something is broken.
Hullo ! here is a bishop’s full dress. How did it get
here ? ”
“ Perhaps the bishop was inside it at the time,”
suggested Doc, also bending over the heap ; “ but more
probably it has been stolen from some friendly tribe who
received the bishop’s cast-off garments in quite a legiti-
mate way. But here is a box of soap. That surely is
out of place here. And hullo ! we are back in civilized
parts again. There is a tin of jam with Dundee painted
all over it; we’ll take this back to Mac. And, well, I’ll
be frizzled, I’ve got a London Times!' Doc sat down
on the floor and whistled.
“You're doing well,” said Harry. “This is the
strangest church I’ve ever been in, and its pastor must
be very fond of collecting things. I’ve got a pair of
policeman’s trousers, a telescope, a tin of sardines, a
hymn-book—dear me ! there are dozens of hymn-books
here.” He paused and lifted something else from the
heap. “ I’ve got a belt loaded with ammunition,” he
continued. “This will be of service to us. There is


a name on the buckle —John Macpherson,” he spelled
out “ Did you know any one of that name, Doc ? ”
“Ah, poor Macpherson ! ” sighed Doc. “ I knew him
well. He left the Yodda Camp one day with six
carrier boys and never came back ; but is that a letter ?
Give it to me, Harry. Great Powers ! it is our old chiefs
writing.” He suppressed his emotion. “It is addressed
to the gods. We’ll take it back to camp ”
“ There is some one coming in,” whispered Harry.
“ Listen to the noise outside. We are discovered.”
“ Keep cool, then, and don’t fire a shot unless you
are sure of your man.” Doc blew out the light, and
they waited. A door opened somewhere in the outer
apartment, and in the streaming moonlight stood a
warrior chief. He turned to the crowd beneath him
and prepared to address them, “ It’s some ceremony
or other,” whispered Doc. “ Don’t move.”
“ But look ! ” gasped Harry. “ That man is Sartor
Resartus.”
“By Jupiter! you are right, Harry. Let us listen
to him.”
And then they heard the great war speech of
Mamoose Sartor Resartus of the Tugeris.
“What is he talking about?” asked Harry, as the
torrent of sound fell from the mamoose’s lips.
“ He is telling of his great victories, but he is talk-
ing too fast for me to follow him in detail,” answered
Doc.
But the mamoose was not talking for their benefit,
and he warmed into his speech. “My people,” he cried,
as nearly as Doc could understand him, “ I am your
mighty chief.” A loud roar assured him that that fact
was admitted. “ While my father was the pride of his
warriors, the fleetest of foot, and the chief glory of his
ancestors in the pool beneath the tapu house, I went


away. The white devils got me, but what were they to
the son of a Tugeri chief? I soon knew all that they
knew and killed them all, and a long time after came
back to my own village. Another chief led my warriors,
for my father had gone to his ancestors. Who was that
other chief that I should follow him ? Was I not my
father’s son ? By the law of our people which says that
the best warrior shall be chief, and by the right of our
people to claim that position any time, if they can take
it, I slew the usurper and became your chief. Since
then many prisoners have gone over the rocks to feed
the water spirits, and many have been brought to our
village to be stuffed with yams and sweet potatoes.
. . . Never has your chief lost a battle, nor have the
white men with their pop-pops prevailed against him.
Have I not said ? ” He paused, and another roar of
acclamation greeted him. “ Who, then, is the tapu chief
that he should keep my warriors from me when I come
home after a great victory ? ” he continued, to the
best of Doc’s translation. “ Here, I challenge him to
the death. He comes not; he is afraid. See, I stand
up on the tapu house and his gods do not strike me.” He
glared into the darkness behind defiantly, but did not
hear the whispered remark “ No, but they will presently,”
that Doc made, as he and Harry crawled up behind the
masks and other adornments. “ See, then, the gods take
me for tapu chief too,” cried Sartor Resartus ; “ and now,
my people, I will tell you what will give us many feasts
and much yams and taro,” His voice now settled down
to that of a man doing his best to convince people of the
logical nature of certain facts, and consequently his
speech became more intelligible to Doc. “ The people of
the mountains,” he said, “at one time gave us taro, and
pigs, and old men, so that we would not fight against
them. Now they have a white mad sorcerer chief, and


*. >.*, ■ '~wt ■, _^h
re a. jr 2
j 1 I jrn ;
V > A' m, ' *Rb
. U ■ |^ggi .
I JwB&i
DOC AND HARRY IN THE TAPU HOUSE




he gives nothing. Their country is good, their people
fat, and their water spirits not so greedy as ours; let us
go there, and kill them, and take their country, and
their women, and their pigs ; and give their chief to our
water spirits. I will lead you, and victory must come
where I am. I have said. What say you ? ”
Again the old men and boys howled their approval,
and the women added their “ che-ep ” to the chorus ;
but the warriors themselves, who had returned from the
Angerita raid with him, did not hail the proposal with
the same enthusiasm. They thought they would like a
feast or two at home first, and they had many prayers
to say to their ancestors’ tombs. It also struck them
that the tapu mamoose, not being dead yet so far as
they knew, might have something to say about the
matter, and might even hurl the curses of the gods at
the fighting mamoose. If that did not finish matters,
they had a shrewd suspicion that the tapu mamoose
might even retain the warriors at present with him, and
put in a very good fight, before an amicable settlement
could be attained. On the whole, they concluded, while
diplomatically agreeing with the fighting mamoose, that
they would prefer to wait to see what their brethren
thought of combining the two mamooses in one, before
giving any personal opinion. Seeing this hesitancy on
their part, the mamoose started off again, but Doc was
now tired of hearing him boasting of his powers, and
turning to Harry, he whispered, “ When I tell you,
jump out and run. Shoot any one who is likely to stop
you, and make for the river at the weir and swim to the
other side. I will be with you.”
“Yes,” cried Sartor Resartus, “I defy the sorcerer’s
god, I ” Here a yell of terror burst from him, for a
hand had gripped his throat from behind. “I am tired
of this speech of yours, Sartor Resartus,” a voice said in


his ear. Doc threw him down. “ Run, Harry,” he cried.
“ So, I leave you to the mercy of your gods.” He upset
a huge carved wooden image on top of him as he spoke,
then threw a crocodile and a few snakes on the pile, and
added another heavy god to keep them company. “ I
fancy you’ve got the whole family of ancestral gods
there now,” Doc said, “ and the next time I see you I’ll
finish what they leave of you.” He jumped out through
the doorway, and sped after Harry, the astonished and
fear-stricken warriors still powerless to move.
The yells of their mamoose were quite explicit, how-
ever. “White devils ! kill them!” he roared ; and the fear
of their gods thus removed, a dozen started in pursuit
with joyful anticipation of participating in a ceremony
to take the place of the moon feast which they had
missed. But if they could run, Doc and Harry could
also do something in that line. Still Doc had delayed
too long through his politeness to the mamoose, and
already several warriors were running level with him to
head him off. At that moment Harry turned and saw
Doc was hard pressed ; he also noticed that one warrior
was in the act of throwing his spear, so raising his
revolver he took hasty aim, and fired.
“Another, Harry,” cried Doc, raising his own
revolver. “ That was a first-class shot.” The man had
dropped his spear, for the bullet had shattered his wrist.
Harry gave them another, and Doc added one himself,
with the result that the pursuit suddenly lost interest to
the warriors. They came on behind, however, knowing
they would catch them at the river; but to their un-
bounded surprise, the two white devils sprang into the
water, and ignoring the crocodiles which hurried to in-
vestigate, reached the opposite bank. The warriors valued
themselves too highly to follow in the same manner, and
they rushed for the canoes. There were none there.


At that moment they were probably stranded some-
where about fifty or sixty miles down the river. With
howls of rage the baffled warriors raced along the bank,
and Doc and Harry sat down and laughed heartily.
An hour afterwards they burst into camp, just
as Mac, Bill, Bob, and Irish were setting out to track
them up.
“ Whaur hae ye been ? ” roared Mac.
“Getting a present for you,” said Harry, handing
him the tin of jam from Dundee. “And here is some-
thing for you, Great Scott.” He threw the mamoose the
policeman’s trousers, and then sat down to the supper
Jack was taking from the ashes for them.
“ And what have you brought, Doc ? ” said the Chief,
meaningly, while Mac pranced around with his far-
travelled jam.
“ This,” said Doc, handing him the letter.
The Chief took the missive and gazed at the in-
scription on the outside of the packet. “Yes, it is his
writing,” he said ; and opening it as all gathered round,
he read it over silently, and then aloud.
“To the Gods,
“ I am the Chief, fighting and spiritual, of the
Mountain people. Why lamso Ido not know. I do
not know whether this is intelligible to gods or not, but
something always prompts me to commit this to the
River of the Gods with our sacrifices. This language I
write comes natural to me ; I seem to have known it
long ago in other ages. I think I am what in this
language is termed mad. I do not believe in human
sacrifice to any god, and in the hope that the gods will
be equally pleased, I hereby give of my gems. These
are of no value to me, but to my people they are price-
less. My people do not understand the language which


seems natural to me, nor do I always understand the
tongue that is natural to them. They think lam a god.
Perhaps I am. Perhaps in time the Great God will
make things clear to me, and explain why I am white
and my people black.
“The Mamoose of the Mountain People.”


CHAPTER XI
On the Borders of Kaiser Wilhelm’s
Land
The Chief laid down the letter and looked round
inquiringly.
“ How is it dated ? ” asked the Parson.
“ There is no date on it,” replied the Chief.
“It is from him, at any rate.” Said Doc.
“ There is no doubt about that,” agreed the Chief;
“ but how did it come here ? ”
“ That’s easily explained,” put in Mac, who had now
become serious. “He tells ye himself that he is goin’ to
commit it to some mysterious river along with the usual
sacrifices.”
“ Well ? ” Doc and the Parson inquired.
“ Well,” continued Mac, “ that river is either this
one, or else connected with it, and, of course, the people
here would catch most things that got down this length
on that weir they’ve built, the same way as they got
this rattle-trap o’ a boat.”
“But the fact of the boat being here proves
that the river comes from the German side,” said the
Chief.
“ It proves, as we have agreed before, that it passes
through a bit of German country ; but frae ma knowledge


o’ the rivers in this part o’ the world, I wadna be vera
much surprised to find that it had risen at the North
Pole, an’ run roond the Equator, afore it entered the
Kaiser’s land.”
“ I reckon you is right, Mac,” said Bill. “ The rivers
here don’t know the road, and run anyhow, just like a
new chum out in the bush.”
“ I think it is fairly evident that this river has
some connection with the Mountain People, and also
that it passes through a part of German territory
which is patrolled by their police,” remarked the Chief.
“ The only thing I am now anxious to know is, are
we still in time ? Can our chief still be mamoose of
those people ? ”
“ Then I can answer that,” cried Doc. “We are in
time if we get there before the Tugeris. That tribe
now, at the instigation of their fighting mamoose, Sartor
Resartus, who is jealous of the tapu mamoose, and thus
desirous of obtaining more prestige, is planning a raid
on the mountain people, who, since the Mad Wizard
became governor-in-chief, have not paid the customary
tax to the Tugeris. It is true, of course, that the bulk
of the Tugeris are still round the water spirits’ pool, and
may not get up for some time ; and then the high
priest may have some objections to the project. Ido
not think, however, that he will cause much delay, and
but for the fact that there will be a little civil war
between him and Sartor, with a consequent decrease in
the number of warriors, I’d have sent that latter gentle-
man to his ancestors to-night. I would propose that we
push on up this river to the German boundary. There
we may get some information from their police, and if
we cannot follow the river farther with their permission,
then continue without it, or strike up into the mountain
range direct.”


“ We can’t climb that mountain, Doc,” said the Chief.
“ Don’t you remember how we fared when coming out of
the country ? ”
“ Let us follow the river, then. It can’t flow many
miles on the other side of the border, and we know it
must swing back again.”
“Yes, let us follow the river until we find how it
gets out of the place,” said Jack. “If I remember
right, the Chief said we were in German country
just a few days before we first struck those cranky
people, and after that we climbed over a big mountain
that he said was British, and dropped plumb on to
them.”
“ Very well,” said the Chief; “ to-morrow we
start again, and our first halt will be on the frontier.
Let us hope the German officials there will be
reasonable, otherwise there may be serious complica-
tions.”
“ I think we’ll start to-night,” remarked Doc, lighting
a cigar. “ Look across the river.”
“ Oh, Centipedes ! ” cried Bill and Dave, “ they’re here
again.” And in the bright moonlight could be detected,
dodging from tree to tree, a great number of natives.
A fierce yell broke the stillness of the night when they
saw they had been discovered, and an answering shout
came from farther down the river on the same side as
was the camp.
“It seems a fair assumption that the Tugeris have
come home since you left, Doc,” grinned Mac ; “ and I
suppose it is also logic to assume that the Tugeris have
now only one mamoose.”
“ That are a fact,” admitted Bill, who, although he
did not fully understand Mac at times, knew Tugeris
well.
“Ah, weel, there’s nae rest for the wicked,” sighed


Mac, as, obeying the Chief’s signal, he and Ted cast off
the launch’s moorings. Other ready hands had mean-
while pushed the war canoe into the water, and the camp
accoutrements were hastily thrown into both vessels, and
connection made between them. This time, Mac being
a Scot, and therefore naturally an engineer, took his
place beside “ the wee piece o’ clockwork,” and got it in
readiness to start, and Doc perched himself in the bows,
with a pole, to ward off floating trees, and to assist in
keeping the launch clear of the many snags which
abounded. The Chief and Bob stood on the beach with
rifles levelled towards the natives approaching through
the trees from the south, until all was ready, and then,
as a score of warriors burst with hideous yells into the
clearing upon which the camp had recently been pitched,
Mac cried, “ All aboard for the German frontier,” and
they took their places. “Full speed ahead!” shouted
Mac, in great delight at having something new to
interest him, and in answer to his touch the launch shot
into mid-stream.
But the warriors would have reached the canoe
had not the rifles of the Chief and Bob spoken with
deadly effect, and next moment both launch and
canoe were struggling against the stream, but making
headway.
It was indeed a remarkable scene that now appealed
to those of the party who could appreciate strange effects.
The river was about one hundred yards in width, and
the tall trees which grew from either bank bent grace-
fully over until they almost met overhead. Through the
opening in the top of the arch the moon cast her soft rays
of ghostly light, illuminating a correspondingly narrow
path in the centre of the rushing waters. Beyond this
zone of light everything lay in dense shadow ; but the
shrieks and yells of the natives, as they stumbled along


over the treacherous banks, told that danger of a horrible
nature lurked in those shadows. Occasionally a spear
would strike the water near the little craft, and thrice
one had broken on the cylinder end of the engine ; a
carrier in the canoe had also received one in his shoulder,
but as it required at least six spear-wounds to kill a
carrier, that did not matter.
As straight as Canadian Pete’s hand could hold her,
the launch kept on her way, stubbornly contesting every
foot with the swift torrent. The Chief and the Parson
were talking in undertones. Doc was sitting, with his
feet dangling over the bows, smoking as usual. Kaiser
munched a piece of damper he had thoughtfully carried
away with him, and Mac gave all his attention to his
engines. Bill, Bob, Ted, and Dave, from both boats,
sent bullets among the natives whenever they entered
the moonlit clearing, and this at length compelled the
warriors to keep farther into the forest. Harry gave
no thought to his surroundings ; he was trying to piece
together some facts that had come to his knowledge. It
was clear to him now that the opals found in the village
were not Cathie’s, but it was also plain that the Mad
Wizard, whoever he was, had a great number of them.
He then remembered that his sister had some stones
exactly the same as both Cathie’s and those now in the
Chief’s possession. She had got them from her brother.
“Ah!” Harry cried excitedly, forgetting himself, “and
he had an opal-mine.”
“ Who had, Boy ? ” asked the Chief; and Harry
realized to his confusion that he had been voicing his
thoughts.
“ My brother,” he answered ; “but I did not know I
had been speaking. As I told you before, he is lost
somewhere, but those stones Mac got, and one or two he
sent my sister, and some Cathie —I mean a friend —has


in her possession, are exactly the same both in shade
and colour.”
The Chief was silent for a moment. “Do you mind
telling me who this Cathie is, Boy ? ” he said.
“Miss Blackwood, sir,” Harry answered, “the
daughter of ”
“ Oh! I know,” the Chief interrupted, and then
relapsed into silence, and after some minutes’ thought
began talking to the Parson in low tones.
Harry knew he was not intended to hear, but the
words “ dare not tell him ” reached him in a pause
between the shots of the rifles, and he could not help
wondering if the words referred to him, and if so, what
was there he could not be told ? At length the Chief
turned to him again, and said, “ Harry, to ease your
mind, I must tell you I have more knowledge of you and
your affairs than you are aware. I knew your brother.
He did find an opal-mine, but the opals which came
from it were reported worthless because of their dark
colour, so he left it. Now, if you will cease worrying
about the matter, I will make it my business to see that
you find your brother as well as Edward Blackwood, but
you must leave everything to me, and ask no questions
until I give you permission ” A spear struck him in
the chest as he spoke, but pulling it out and throwing
it overboard without comment, he went on, “ I may tell
you that more depends on my keeping you in ignorance
on these matters than may appear to you, but you must
trust me, Harry, and if we pull through this time, as
with God’s help we shall, I promise to give you a pleasant
surprise.”
That the Chief was hiding some knowledge from him
Harry could see, but he had grown almost to believe
that the Chief’s powers were infallible, so he answered,
“ I thank you, sir, and I am content to remain in ignorance


of anything so long as you think it best. But one
question, sir. Did you really know Cathie—l mean,
Miss Blackwood ? ”
“ I did, my boy ; and also another lady who bore the
same name as you ”
“ My sister ! ” cried Harry.
“ If you’ll alloo me to interrupt this family conversa-
tion,” spoke Mac, abruptly, “ I wad like tae point oot
some objects in the surrounding scenery that are escaping
your attentions.” Mac nodded towards the water as he
spoke, and, following his gaze, Harry was astonished to see
that they were surrounded with long black snouts, which
rose above the water everywhere. “ Crocodiles ! ” he
ejaculated. “ I thought they were too cowardly to follow
a boat.”
“I’ve heard that yarn mysel’,” remarked Mac, “but
around us is visible evidence to the contrary.”
Harry at once stood up with the others and blazed
into them, but the bullets ricochetted from their tough
hides as if from a sheet of armour plate.
“ Where are they all coming from ? ” cried the Parson,
pausing to reload his rifle.
“ Never mind that,” returned Bob ; “ what they are
coming for is what concerns us.”
“ Blow me for a burst balloon,” cried Bill; “ they’re
bigger and uglier than any I’ve ever seen before.”
“ And begorra ! it must be some of you bhoys they’re
after,” cried Irish, from the canoe behind. “ Shure, an’
there ain’t wan of thim given as much as a look at us.”
This was a fact. Around the launch with gaping jaws
the creatures splashed. Some were flying alongside in
the shadows, only visible by the white wash they made,
others were rearing themselves in front. The water
had become alive with them, but not one was near the
canoe.


“ They will capsize us directly,” cried the Parson, as
a huge saurian threw the boat half out of the water by
rising underneath it.
“ Don’t waste any more ammunition on them,” ordered
the Chief. “It has no effect, and they are coming at us
from all quarters.” One leaped at the vessel while he
was speaking and almost pulled it over with its weight,
as it rested on the gunwale, its baleful eyes glittering
with dull, phosphorescent fire.
“ Here, tak’ that, ye sausage-machine,” cried Mac,
throwing the boat’s anchor into its mouth. It took it,
chain and all, and sank out of sight, and Harry had just
time to free the chain from its hold on the keelson, or
the launch would have gone too.
At that moment a shout from Doc made them look
ahead, but they could do nothing ; the boat had struck
a snag. She heeled over, and the water came in over
the lower gunwale.
“We is cooked this time all right,” groaned Bill,
laying about him with his clubbed rifle, while the others
reopened fire at close range, sending their bullets into
the green eyes of the ungainly creatures.
“ Noo, I wonder ” began Mac, as he reversed the
engines ; but Doc stopped him.
“ Shut up,” he cried, springing into the water, and
landing on the floating mass of driftwood upon which
the boat had run.
“ Come back, Doc,” roared the Chief. “ Come back
at once! ” A swarm of armour-plated monstrosities rushed
at the intrepid Doc, but he did not flinch, and, paying no
attention to them, began pushing the launch back off the
snag. A storm of bullets poured into their distended
jaws, and through their eyes into their brains, but still
they came on.
“ Mine Gott!” gasped Kaiser, in desperation, dropping


his red-hot rifle and looking round for some more effective
weapon. Next second it would have been all over with
Doc, for even as the launch was being pushed clear, one
gigantic creature, with lashing tail and horrible mouth,
made a wild charge at him. The rifles were emptied
into it, but it heeded not, and its hot, evil-smelling breath
was already upon Doc, when Kaiser hurled at it a tin of
fat which was lying in the bottom of the boat, whither
it had been hastily thrown when leaving their last camp.
The tin struck the creature full in the mouth, and his
great teeth closed on it, squeezing the tin flat, and
causing the fat to be squirted out from its burst sides.
With what Mac said was a grin of unholy joy the
creature sank from sight, a lashing, splashing, foam-
churning, mass of feet, tails, and teeth, after it. Doc
sprang lightly into the launch.
“ Full speed ahead, Mac,” he cried, and began to
fumble in his pockets.
“Yours are wet,” said the Parson, handing him a
matchbox ; “ try mine.”
“Thanks,” replied Doc, resuming his old position,
and blowing clouds of cigar-smoke from his mouth.
There was not a crocodile in sight, and the launch
continued up-stream. For some time no one spoke,
until at length Mac, who never could remain long silent,
said, “ That was a bonnie shot o’ yours, Kaiser, ma man,
an’ a happy inspeeration, but I wad like tae ken hoo
they’ve a’ gone awa’ ? ”
“ Mamoose know,” spoke Great Scott, who, during
the last ten minutes, had been almost mad with excite-
ment. “ Fat gone too. They smell roast fat. Like him,
and come for him. Fat no here now. They no here
too.”
“Hoo did you no’ say that before?” roared Mac.
“Of course, the fat was smelling like a nigger owin’
(B 762) p


to being so near the engines. Hoo did ye no’ tell
sooner ? ”
“ You no listen,” replied Great Scott. “ Hims tried to
tell you all along. Angerita people catch big crocodile
in trap that way. Crocodile smell hot fat bymbye and
come out. We pull fat round tree, hims follow. We pull
round another tree, hims head follow again, and hims
tail stick, and then hims no able move any way, and we
kill hims.”
“ We’re aye learnin’,” observed Mac, dryly, “ even frae
niggers.”
“ But where are the natives ? ” inquired Harry ;
“ they don’t seem to be following us now.”
“ Probably they have gone across country to cut us
off,” said the Chief.
“Or perhaps they think that there may be danger
ahead for them,” said Doc. “We must be near the
German boundary now, for the river has turned straight
towards where it should be.”
The night wore on, and gradually the moon sank
behind the great ranges which towered on their western
flank. The country, too, altered somewhat, the trees
which lined the banks giving place to the more stunted
growths of higher altitudes, for although they had not
risen many feet while on the river, they had been
travelling into the zone of country under the influence
of the cold breezes from the mountains. About two
hours before sunrise they found their further progress
barred by a series of rapids, and landing, they pulled
their boats over them, only to find a higher waterfall
confronting them.
“This is where the river changes from a mountain
torrent into a respectable river,” began the Parson, hoping
to interest the others.
“ Oh, dry up,” shouted Bob, “ and lend a hand. This


boat came down over that, and she’s got to go up
again.”
But they had to drag her up, and a few miles farther
on they came to a long clear line running north-west
and south-east across their track, and in the centre of
which several red-painted poles were planted, with a
black ring round their tops.
As they sailed past this boundary line a loud com-
mand of some kind rang out from the banks, and looking
up they saw a large white-painted bungalow, over which
flew the German flag. Several officials were standing in
front of the house, evidently having been hurriedly
roused, for they were not completely dressed. An
officer came down to the river as Pete steered the launch
with the canoe in tow towards the shore, and just then
the sun cast its first rays over the land. The officer
began to talk volubly, but suddenly stopped and looked
at the launch ; then, becoming excited, he called on
several of his comrades, and they all appeared to be
agitated in similar fashion.
“Tell, them, Kaiser, that we found this boat stranded
in a village forty miles on the other side of the border,”
said the Chief; and Kaiser at once began to talk in a
language which Mac said was like wild pigs grunting,
but which was evidently well understood by those to
whom it was addressed. They talked for a few moments,
and then Kaiser turned to the Chief, and whispered,
“They say dat dere vas no prospecting allowed in
German country, und dat we vas must gif them our
rifles.”
“Tell them,” said the Chief, with a laugh, “that if
that is all the thanks we are to get for returning them
their boat, we’ll take it and go back again,” Kaiser
again began a long conversation, upon hearing which,
the officer addressed began to bluster, but calmed down


considerably, as two others, evidently his superiors,
came down from the house and joined the party. They
at once said something which Doc thought was of a
disparaging nature, for he instantly emptied his case of
any remaining cigars and threw them on the ground,
and was about to say something in French concerning
what he thought of Germans as a whole, and that
group in particular, when Kaiser turned, all smiles,
and said, “ They haf just ask us to join them at
breakfast.”
“ That puts a different aspect on affairs,” muttered
Doc, as the Chief signed to Kaiser to accept, and the
party followed the two Germans to the house ; but
suddenly Kaiser turned in alarm and cried aloud, re-
gardless of who heard him, “ Let us go away ; they vas
now say it is their duty to take us prisoners for being
here.”
“ Keep cool, Kaiser, ma man,” answered Mac. “Tell
them in your best German that even though they had
Kaiser Bill to help them they couldna dae that, an’ that
if ony six of them like to stand up for their country,
Bill and me will hae much pleasure in knocking them
doom”
Kaiser was not able to grasp the purport of Mac’s
words at once, and before he had done so Irish
added, “An’ begorra! shure an’ it's mesilf will shtand
good for old Moses there an’ any other two.” He
swung his rifle round his head and seemed eager to
start.
“ I think they are making a mistake,” said the Chief,
quietly, as the party halted. “ They have no right to
take us prisoners. This boundary line is debatable,
and our arms are only for self-defence.”
“And we don’t care a cent for the whole German
Empire,” cried the fiery Doc ; “ tell them, Kaiser, that if


they are looking for trouble it is here, right in front of
them now, and that ”
“Hullo, Doc! have a cigar.” The speaker was one
of the two senior officers who had joined the party
last.
“Eh, did I hear aricht ? ” gasped Mac. “Tak’ the
cigar, Doc. As sure as I come frae Dundee, that chield
spoke wi’ a Scotch accent.”
Doc stared at the person who had spoken. “ Thanks,
Pat,” he said, taking a cigar. “ I’ve often wondered when
and where I was to run across you.”
“ Then hoo the mischief did ye no say ye vas Scottish
afore ? ” cried the other German officer, a humorous
twinkle in his eye. “We are police, not soldiers, and
we dinna care a bawbee whaur ye gang sae lang as ye’re
no German budies.”
To say that the party was astonished expresses but
feebly their feelings at this moment. Here was a German
patrol, with whom, a moment before, a fight seemed
inevitable, now proving to be commanded by Scotch
and Irish officers.
“An’ how did yez lave Dublin, Doc?” said he who
had spoken first. “Are the girls still as pretty, and
Sackville Street just the same ? ”
“ We’ll talk of old times later,” laughed Doc. “ Mean-
while, let me introduce our Chief, the Parson, Boy,
Kaiser, Mac, Bill, Ted, Bob, Dave, Pete, Jack, and
our countryman Irish. This is an Angerita mamoose,
whose name is Great Scott, and these other gentle-
men fraternizing with your niggers are our carriers.
This gentleman,” he continued, addressing his com-
rades, and indicating the Irish officer, “is an old
schoolmate of mine. When I knew him last his name
was Pat Harland, but what it is now he knows best
himself ”


“Shure, Doc, an’ it’s Harman now,” laughed the
Irish German, “ only there’s a Count tacked on in
front, and a von to make it look decent ; but my friend
and captain, kick me if I hadn’t forgotten all about
him ”
“ For which ye can consider yourself under arrest for
the next ten years,” said the captain, in tones of mock
severity. “My name, chentlemens,” he said to the
others, “is Sandy Fraser, an’ A come frae Aberdeen,
an’ A am vera gled tae see ye, moreover, and what-
effer, an’ twice as much more, an' breakfast is ready
now.”
“ That will no dae, ma man,” said Mac, suspiciously,
yet surprised. “Ye are certainly a gey clever chield for
a foreigner, but you’re no Scottish.”
“ I am very sorry that I do not happen to be either
Scotch or Irish,” put in the Chief ; “ I am only an English-
man ” Here Sandy Fraser actually winked at him,
Here Sandy Fraser actually winked at him,
and the Chief smiled and followed, with the others, into
the house.
“ This, as you will observe, is the German boundary
patrol headquarter station,” remarked Count von Har-
man, as they sat at breakfast. “It exists chiefly to keep
the natives from dying with indigestion from eating each
other. As police, we have also to enforce the law that
no prospecting or mining is yet allowed in German
territory, and that is all. We naturally thought you were
Germans from Astrolabe, or the coast somewhere, and
therefore ”
“Naturally?” asked the Chief. “Why naturally?
Did we not approach from British country ? ”
“ Yes ; but then you came up that confounded river,
and I defy any man to say, unless he happens to see
some boundary posts, when that river is British and
when German. It crosses the boundary line at least six


times before it reaches the coast in our country —I
mean, of course, German country —and westward along
that line there ten miles, but forty round by water, it
first crosses into the Kaiser’s Administration from yours;
but where it comes from originally is more than any man
can tell.”
“It is believed among our natives that a strange
people live among the mountains where it rises,” said the
senior German officer, “ but no people from the outside
world have ever seen them.”
“Oh yes, they have,” said the Chief; “we have.
We left our chief there, and got nearly wiped out. We
are going back now to bring him away.”
“What!” cried the German, who answered to the
name of Sandy Fraser, “ were you in the party that
got annihilated in the mountain pass about twenty miles
from here four years ago ? Our natives told us of a
ferocious fight, but it would have meant a court-martial,
and then a bullet or two, if we had crossed with an
armed force to investigate.”
“We were that party,” said the Chief, “and we are
going back to be cut up again or succeed in our mission.
The Tugeris, too, are coming on behind, and we expect
there will be a three-sided fight.”
“ The Tugeris ! Ah ! they won’t come this way. We
turned a machine-gun on them last time one of your
Resident Magistrates of some goldfields chased them up
here. We couldn’t allow him to follow farther, but we
did what we could to oblige him otherwise, and a good
few Tugeris did not go home.” The German sighed
regretfully. “ Ach ! I wish I were of your country,” he
said ; “ I am so tired of the monotony of things here.
All our natives are civilized, and greater thieves and
liars you never met.”
“ Hoo dae ye civilize them here ? ” asked Mac.


“ With machine-guns, Mac; but tell me, ma freend,
is Aberdeen noo as big as Dundee, an’ has Edinburro
annexed Leith, or Glesca got Govan yet ? Do the
Paisley budies aye carry their corkscrews, an’ dae they
still build ships on the Clyde ? ” The face of the
officer was as grave as Silent Ted’s, but Mac was not
satisfied.
“Ye are well versed, I must admit, in the affairs of
Scotland, but I still hae my doubts aboot ye,” said Mac,
gazing critically at his questioner. “ Noo, ye dinna look
like a Scot, but, of course, a man canna help misfortune.
Did ye ken Glesca weel ?”
“Brawly, mon,” returned the other, with a stolid
face, and the party laughed uproariously at Mac’s
perplexity. “ Mony’s the time I’ve stood on the
Broomielaw an’ listened to the Anchor Line stevedores
swearing.”
“ Ay,” said Mac, and his face brightened, “ have ye ?
Man, gie’s yer haund. I suppose, too, ye’ll have often
watched the big Caledonian engines leaving St. Enoch’s
station wi’ the London express ? That was ma chief
pleasure ”
“Man,” cried the other, and all laughed again at the
exquisite mimicry of Mac’s accent, “ wha kens but you
an’ me were often there thegither ”
“ Did ye ken Provost Dewar o’ Glesca ? ” asked Mac,
irrelevantly.
“ Ay, fine,” came the answer.
“An’ Bailie Robertson, an’ Macpherson, an’ Mac-
intyre ? ”
“ They were a’ freends o’ mine,” answered Sandy
Fraser, his face kindling at the memory of his
friends.
“ Weel, ye have one qualification for a Scot, onyway,”
said Mac. “Ye are a leer o’ the first water ”


“ Mac, you forget yourself,” cried the Chief; while
the two German officers now had a fit of laughter.
“ No, I don’t,” returned Mac; “it’s him that forgets,
an’ a good leer should hae a good memory. He heard
the Anchor Line stevedores swearing on the Broomie-
law!” Mac’s disgust was shown in his voice. “ Noo,
everybody kens that it is at Stobcross they swear, for an
Anchor liner couldna get up to the Broomielaw unless
she’d wheels on her; an’ besides, swearing is prohibited
by the Glesca magistrates. An’ he saw the Caledonian
express leaving St. Enoch’s ! Wonderfu’! It must have
been during the millennium, an’ we’ll next be hearing o’
the Midland expresses leaving Euston ! ”
“Well, what about the people he knew, Mac?”
queried Count von Harman.
“ Naething, except that Provost Dewar was of Perth,
although he had a brother that was Lord Mayor o’
London. As for the other gentlemen he kent, I never
heard o’ them in my life, and I ken Glesca upside
doon.”
“ Stop, Mac. I give in. I am an impostor. lam
not a Scot,” cried the object of Mac’s wrath. “ I am
only a poor German from Berlin, and my name is
Schweeber, but I studied in Edinburgh University,
and if you had tackled me on Edinburgh municipal
matters instead of Glasgow affairs, I wouldn’t have
fallen in.”
“ Say nae mair aboot it,” interrupted Mac, magnani-
mously. “ I kent ye werena a Scot; but you canna help
that. It wouldna dae if we were a’ Scotsmen.”
A murmured expression of thankful assent went
round the party, but Mac took no notice of its innuendo,
and proceeded with his breakfast.
The rest of the day was spent in showing the visitors
round, and during dinner that evening the officers


explained that although the New Guinea possession
was a drain on the Imperial exchequer, and the laws
against mining prevented the country from being opened
up by gold seekers, still, in the hope of attracting peace-
ful colonists who would develop the country for what
its soil could produce, the home Government spent
much money in making roads, and even laying tele-
graph lines throughout the interior; one result being
that German New Guinea, although less populous
than the British territory, had become quite a colony.
“ Do you mean that roads have been cut from here to
Astrolabe, or to other points on the coast ? ” asked the
Chief, in surprise.
“ Certainly,” answered the chief officer, “ and what is
more, the North German Lloyd steamers call regularly
at Astrolabe now, en route from Sydney to Singapore.
It is a loss, of course, but the Government makes it up
for the sake of the country’s future.”
“ That’s a new way of putting the subsidy question,”
grunted Mac ; “ but gie me the country that doesna need
bolstering, an’ the traders that pioneer for themselves, an’
hang the Government.”
Every one laughed, but nothing further was said on
the merits of their respective Governments.
Next morning the party, with completed outfits and
fresh supplies of stores, set out again along the boundary
line, that line, according to the Germans, crossing the
river again ten miles to the north-west, although the
river itself travelled forty miles between the two
points.
“ If you find you can’t travel that way, of course we
have no official knowledge of your having gone any
other way,” said the captain, significantly as they left;
“ and we shall likely find some business to attend to soon,
up towards that country of yours.”


“ If the boundary posts happened to be blown down,
or we couldn’t find them, there’s no telling how far we
might go before we discovered what country we were
in,” sang out Count von Harman, waving a final farewell
to them.
The men laughed at the implied suggestion, and
soon the white bungalow, with its emblem of Germanic
might floating in the breeze, was hidden from sight.


CHAPTER XII
How the Mountain People met the
Tugeris
Their course now led them at right angles to the river,
and up the side of a hill the top of which was lost in the
haze which serves for clouds in such latitudes. It soon
became evident that those who had marked off the
boundary had not taken much trouble over their work,
for about a mile from the frontier station the cleared line
stopped, and further progress was made in German or
British territory, according to the means of passage
afforded by either. Thus they went on, and soon it
became impossible to say without taking an extremely
careful observation which country they were in, the red
poles denoting the line apparently having been placed
only at natural passages between the two spheres of
influence.
“ Dear me,” remarked the Parson, as they clambered
over some rocky ledges, “ I wish we had begun the
ascent at a less rapid rate. I—l don’t feel quite first
class.”
“ It’s only the atmosphere becoming rarer as we go
up,” said Doc. “We have risen over two thousand feet
since we started.”
“ Have we many more thousands to go ? ” gasped
Harry. “ I feel choking.”


“ Und I feel I vas not here,” groaned Kaiser, in-
dicating the region of his stomach.
“ Come on, Boy ; dinna let the Parson beat ye,” cried
Mac, springing over the ledges like a kangaroo and
reaching down a helping hand to Harry.
“ I think if it comes to the bit, Mac,” said the Parson,
“ I can race you up this hill.”
“ I’ll take you. Come along,” said Mac; then,
catching the Parson’s eye, he stopped, “Maybe ye are
richt,” he said; “hill climbing is no ma line, although
I’ll no alloo that ony man could race much up here. I
feel done mysel’.”
“ Halt, boys! ” called the Chief. “ I had forgotten
that we are not all seasoned to this sort of work, and
when Mac knocks up, it is time we had a rest.”
All felt glad of a minute’s relief, for the sudden
change in the atmosphere and the new form of exercise
had affected every one, although Harry was convinced
that Mac felt less inconvenienced than any. The
Parson silently handed Doc his matchbox—he carried
one for that purpose —and Doc was soon changing into
smoke one of a fresh supply of Count von Harman’s
cigars.
“ There’s one blessing we can be thankful for,” re-
marked Mac, as they gazed down over the tree-tops on
the river they had been following. “We’ll hae nae mair
mosquitoes at this height, and the heat o’ the sun will
no mak’ us perspire oursel’s into chunks o’ blotting-
paper.”
“That must be the site of the Tugeri village away
to the south-east,” interjected Doc, irrelevantly, taking
a telescope from a carrier’s bundle ; “ and if they mean
to pay the mountain people a visit, they must either
come up the river as we have done, or strike across
country and tackle the big mountain range direct.”


“You think, then,” said Harry, “that our destina-
tion is on the other side of the big mountain we have
been skirting since leaving the village ? ”
“ I am sure of it, Harry,” answered Doc ; “but what
is worrying me is, allowing Sartor Resartus sets out
with his warriors as we heard them arrange, how will
they get into the valley in which their prospective
victims lie ? It is surrounded on all sides by mountains,
although I know that river down there must get through
somewhere. But if the Tugeris do not come by the
river, and our German friends at the station seemed
pretty certain they would not, will they scale the moun-
tain and drop down into the valley as we did when we
first came here ? ”
“If so,” said the Chief, “ I would like to know at
what point they tackle the climb ; it is a long one, and
must approach nearly eighteen thousand feet if it is an
inch.”
“ I rather fancy the Tugeris have undertaken a
greater task than they imagine,” said Doc, “ for once
they are inside, allowing them to get safely inside, it
will be all up with them if they can’t obtain the mastery
at first onslaught; they certainly cannot escape if they
are beaten.”
“The Germans told us the river kinks all roads,”
suggested Mac. “ Can’t they cut across country as we
are doing, and cut the river again near where we
will, without going near the Germans ? After that,
they will just follow it up without leaving British
territory.”
“That sounds all right, Mac,” said the Parson, “and
in that case we shall have the honour of meeting them
again ; but if my memory serves me right, we couldn’t
find any river leading to the place.”
“You’re right, Parson,” cried Bob, as they prepared


to move again. “ I remember we struck the river—it
must have been this one —only we came at it from the
other side. We followed it because it carried good gold,
until all at once the blamed river ended in half a dozen
gullies and creeks running up into the mountain. We
got the gully that carried the main reef, I remember,
and followed it right to the top pinnacle of New Guinea ;
and then we saw the village lying in the valley beneath
us, with the same ridge that we stood on running all
round.”
“You are talking straight, Bob,” said Canadian
Pete; “ but what 1 never could understand was
how the niggers got out before us, and were waiting
on us when we came over the top. They must
have come a track a good bit easier than ours,
too, for they were fresh, and by the Great Pacific we
weren’t! ”
“There must be a pass through one of the gullies,”
said the Chief, “ and it is our business to find that pass
this time. When we came out we followed no particu-
lar route, while they, knowing the easiest way, got out
before us, and seeing us coming down the outside, pre-
pared the ambush that broke us up.”
“Ye are forgetting, I think,” spoke Mac, “that we
have got veesible evidence that there is a waterway
right into the village. What about the opals ? and the
letter?”
“ I knew Mac would spoil the business,” sang out
Bill, from behind. “He is always finding out things he
has no business with ; and didn’t he give us all a bad
time down at that last village by going and finding
opals ? ”
“Faith, Bill, I don’t know,” observed Irish, sagely.
“Ye never need to look far for trouble to find it; an’ if
the river isn’t there, how could the opals come down it ?


An’ if it is there, shure we’ll find it an* get through all
right.”
Bill did not answer. He needed all his breath at
the moment, for the hill was very steep. All timber
had by this time been left behind, and they were
out on the hard country rock. Suddenly Harry called
out in alarm, and the Chief, Doc, and Mac rushed
to his side. He had stopped for a moment to look
through Doc’s telescope at the panorama spread be-
neath.
“ What is it ? ” they cried ; and for answer he handed
the Chief the telescope, and pointed to a parallel spur
of the mountain about six miles away. Instantly every
field-glass in the outfit was levelled at the spot indi-
cated ; and then Mac chuckled.
“We are going to play referee this time,” he said ;
“an’ after the fun is over we can easily fight the
winners.” His remarks were based upon the fact that,
crawling over the distant spur, was a long column of
something which at first looked like a body of ants on
the march, but which they knew to be the full force of
the Tugeris on their raiding expedition.
“They must know of an entrance, after all,” the
Chief said. “We’ll push on, and get in the same
way.”
“Which is another instance of how people rush
blindly into traps,” commented the Parson. “ They
suspected we would go round the river all the way, and
now have the kind intentions of ambushing us where
they will strike the river.”
“ But as we know of their presence there will be no
trap,” said the Chief.
“ Oh, I wasn’t referring to a trap for us! ” hastily
said the Parson. “ I was thinking of how we could trap
them.”


“ How ? ” cried all.
“Why, they probably know the river well, and
doubtless have estimated the time we should require to
arrive where they intend to welcome us ; but as we, too,
have taken a short cut, we shall be there first, for they
have a much stiffer climb than we have.”
“An’ we’ll build a sort of fort an’ send every skunk
to —to A word, Mac, quick; where will we send
them to ? ”
“Avernus, Bill,” instantly responded Mac, without
the slightest movement of his face ; “ that is as good a
place as ony I ken, though some vulgar folk like to gie
it another name,”
“I thought of tricking them into German land,”
said the Parson, timidly.
“ Boys, the Parson is still on the old racket of not
wanting to kill the niggers,” cried Dave. “We’d best
lie down an’ let ’em kill us.”
“You are wrong, Dave; I merely thought that as
we had other matters to attend to, and the Germans
have machine-guns, a messenger sent back to the station
would save us a lot of trouble.”
“ That is better, Parson,” spoke Mac ; “ you’ll soon be
civilized enough to ken that every Tugeri you leave alive
is an unforgivable sin you’ll hae to answer for some
day.”
“In any case, we are ahead of the Tugeris just
now, although they may not think so,” said the Chief;
“ therefore our business is to get up as far as we can
into the mountains and then await results. If they
get in, we’ll follow, and if the mountain people come
out, we’ll look on from a safe place, and then, as
Mac suggests, attend to the victors, whoever they may
be.”
“ See, boys, that must be the river again straight
(B 762) q


ahead,” cried Doc, “ and I am glad. We must have risen
a tremendous height.”
“ I see no river,” cried Harry. They had reached a
plateau which stretched back into some more ranges
which rose higher still.
“ Of course you can’t see the water yet,” said Doc ;
“ but don’t you observe that long twisting line of trees ?
That marks the river channel, for there is not a tree
between here and there, and that belt denotes that con-
ditions more favourable for vegetation exist which can
only be brought about by a river ”
“ I don’t reckon ye have any right to turn this here
expedition of ours into a school of agriculture,” inter-
rupted Kangaroo Dave. “ Ye’ll be cramming into Boy
next that no sheep could live here ’cos the grass seeds
would kill them, an’ that if only there were some soil
here ”
“We would plant you in it, Dave,” broke in Mac ;
“ ye’re worse than either Doc or the Parson. Ye mind
me o’ a man I once kent who ”
“Shut up, yourself, Mac,” roared Jack; “do you
think ” A gentle tap on the head from Bill’s rifle
silenced him, and like an army of Silent Teds they
marched on.
Eventually they reached the river, and found immedi-
ately on each side of it a cleared space, in which were set
the usual boundary lines.
“ Well, boys,” said the Chief, as they sat down to
lunch, “ we’ve come right along the border line, and
now ”
“ Which way is the wind blowing ? ” asked Mac.
“ Why, what are you thinking of ? ” inquired the
Parson ; but some of the others smiled.
“ I was thinking that it wad be a great sin to know-
ingly break the law o’ the country we’re in,”


“ Certainly it would ; but I don’t think that that
would deter you from breaking any law.”
“ Ah, Parson,” groaned Mac, apparently deeply
stricken with grief, “ye shouldna judge a man by your-
sel’. I hae a conscience as weel as you, an’ it wadna let
me sleep if I had done onything wrong that I kent o’—
mind I said if I kent o’ it —a man canna be blamed for
what he doesna ken.”
“ Which means, Mac ? ”
“ Which means that as the wind is blowing pretty
strong frae British territory into German, if we had a wee
fire to warm oursel’s or to boil another billy o’ tea in that
withered scrub over there, Providence might do the rest,
an’ I doot vera much the boundary post would be burned
doon.”
“ But, Mac,” cried Bill, “ we’ll haul them down without
any fire. Come on, Ted ”
“ Na, na, Bill. Thank ye all the same, but ma con-
science wouldna allow that.”
“ But what do we gain, anyway ? ” asked the Chief,
greatly amused at the idea of Mac having a conscience.
“We are surely able to take care of ourselves.”
“ It’s no that exactly,” said Mac ; “ but, ye see, these
people we are going to veesit might go for oor friends
the Tugeris at one diet. We have had proof o’ it our-
sel’s that they’re no just simple helpless heathen folk
that ye can shoot doon as they come alang, even if we
cared for that sort of work, which we don’t; an’ it seems
to me that we might be met, as we were before, in some
of the outside gullies, and history, ye ken, has a nasty
way o’ repeatin’ itself. Noo, if the boundary posts were
not there, the Germans who will be up this way shortly, as
they told us themselves, wadna ken where the boundary
was, and they wad come right on wi’ their machine-guns
into the mountain. There are times when machine-guns


2 8 The Great White Chief
are grand things ; but that conscience of mine
When ye’ve feenished your dinner, Doc, 1 want a
meenute’s private conversation wi’ ye.” Just before
he had addressed Doc, Mac’s face had lit up for a
moment as with an idea, but apparently seeing that
it was futile, he had thrown it aside at once, and his
appetite claimed all his attention for the next few
minutes.
“I have finished now, Mac,” said Doc, rising some time
after ; “ what did you wish to say ? ”
“ Oh, I wanted your opinion on the geological forma-
tion o’ the substratum o’ they metaphoric rocks over
there.”
Doc looked puzzled, but walked over with the wily
one to where an outcrop of some mineral showed through
the scrub.
“ This is it,” said Mac. “ Noo, does this granitic boss
indicate a metalliferous lode, or are the probabilities that
this is only a hydrothermal conglomeration ? Of course
I ken that the laws of hydrostatics and dynamics are
opposed to the latter hypothesis, but I thought that a
man wi’ an abnormally developed brain like yours would
be able to perceive if there was only dissimilarity in the
protogenetic ”
“ Don’t talk nonsense, Mac,” interrupted Doc, re-
covering himself with an effort. “ That is only a simple
ironstone reef, and you know it. I ” He paused,
and extracted his after-dinner cigar from his case. “ I
thought you knew that metaphoric rocks ” He
paused again, and Mac handed him his matchbox.
“Go on,” Mac said ; “ 1 hae a great affinity for
scientific knowledge.”
“ That metaphoric rock always ” went on
Doc, throwing his lighted match away and puffing
vigorously.


“ Hang metaphoric rocks, and stratified deposits, an’
everything else,” roared Mac, jubilantly ; “ ye’ve set fire
to that dry scrub with your match, an’ a’ yer metaphysical
attainments canna extinguish the conflagration.” He
pranced away, leaving Doc to his own reflections, and
with a roar the crackling whirlwind of fire swept towards
the German boundary.
“ Get everything shifted,” Mac cried to his com-
rades, “or well be burnt oot. This fire will spread
for miles.”
All the men at once sprang to their feet, and
bundled their belongings to the safe side of the raging
flames.
“ Come, boys,” cried the Chief; “we can put it out
by cutting a patch bare in front of it.”
“ Wad ye interfere wi’ the work o’ Providence ? ”
spoke Mac, reprovingly.
“ It’s your work, Mac,” cried the Parson, excitedly ;
“ this is wilful fire-raising, and ”
“You shouldna be oot without your mother, Parson,”
said Mac. “ I had nothing to dae wi’ the fire, an’ ma
conscience is quite clear.”
“ Ah, well,” laughed the Chief, “ Providence, Doc, and
Mac have decreed that our German friends will come
after us, for they can’t tell the boundary now, and I am
not sure that it may not be just as well for us. Let the
fire burn, boys ; a new boundary line can be easily
marked. Ah, there go three of the poles already. Let
us be on the move again.”
The party loaded up, and setting their faces up the
river, began the second last stage of their journey. The
sombre mountain range loomed darkly ahead, and already
obscured the afternoon sun from view, and creeping
up to hit the river at its base came the Tugeri horde.
When darkness fell the party halted for refreshment,


and then went on again, for they could not afford
time to camp until they had passed the point upon
which the Tugeris would emerge. About midnight,
however, they found further progress impossible, owing
to the fact that the river had suddenly split up
into innumerable head-streams, which cut deep gullies
into the mountain, and they could not tell without
investigation which canon would afford the best pass
through.
“ It was just about here that we left this course when
we first went in,” mused the Chief. “ We must make sure
of the best track this time, not so much for our going in,
but to ensure our safe coming out.”
“ What star is that shining so brightly over the
mountain-top ? ” asked Harry, as they lay down to rest
beside their blazing fires, for the nights were now
intensely cold.
“ Oh, Sirius, I suppose,” murmured the Chief, without
looking up; “it is the brightest star we can see just
now.”
“ But Sirius is down in the west hours ago,” persisted
Harry, “ and this star is much redder and larger than
Sirius; besides, it is not in the place where Sirius
should be.”
“ What do you say, Boy ? ” cried Doc, springing
from his blanket, hurriedly. “ Larger than Sirius ?
Nonsense, you must be dreaming. Whew! Great
Scott! ”
“ Hims here,” said a voice from under some flour
sacks.
“ I did not mean you,” said Doc. “ Waken up,
boys ; here is some other hand coming into our little
pie.”
In a moment every man was on his feet, gazing at
the great red star which shone out brightly over the


mountain-top. “ That ain’t no star,” said Bill; “ that’s a
fire.”
“ An’ a mighty big one, too,” added Bob.
“ It is a beacon that has just been set alight,” said the
Parson, “to warn the people of the mountain city in
the valley behind that danger is at hand.”
“ I reckon they are right there,” said Bob, grimly ;
“ but I would like to know whether it is in our honour
or for the howling man-eaters coming behind.”
“ We shall know all about that before we are much
older,” was the Chief’s comment, “ Meanwhile, as
matters will now develop rather faster than we would
like, it is as well that we should save our strength ; there-
fore, turn in, every man, and sleep. No danger can come
here to-night.”
But although every man in the party slept, the Chief
himself did not. All night long he sat on his blanket,
and watched the glimmering ray far up in the mountain-
top. In the morning the men were early astir, eager to
push on into the mystic valley, but the Chief stopped
all preparations. “ Cut down those trees, some of you,”
he said, “ and let the others pile those rocks on top of
each other. We shall have to entrench ourselves here,
for before sunset I expect we shall see one of the
biggest fights that has ever taken place in New
Guinea. That beam overhead has been flashing signals
all night, and that portends something which will not
prove good for every one. We are near the end now,
boys.”
A wall was soon built across the entrance to one of
the gullies, behind which they entrenched themselves
and waited, but the morning air was so cold that they
had to keep big fires burning beside them. “ I never
dreamt that we should feel so cold as this in the tropics,”
Harry remarked, as he brought in a bucket of water


and endeavoured to hide his great excitement over the
impending fight.
“ It’s the altitude that causes the cold,” said the
Parson, also subduing his feelings.
“ Nane o’ your scientific instruction the noo,” roared
Mac, sharpening his knife on his boot; “ everybody kens
that it is the height.”
“ While you are settling your differences,” interrupted
the Chief, “ Doc and I will go up this gully and recon-
noitre. On no account must any one go outside this
barrier from now on, until we know exactly where our
old friends the Tugeris are. I suspect they are not far
off now, and it is better that they should not know our
whereabouts.”
Doc and he walked up the gully, one of the many
which fed the river, which formed only a hundred yards
away, and the others went on with their preparations for
defence.
Slowly the sun climbed the great arc in the heavens,
and the need for the fires passed away, but the Chief
and Doc had not returned. The midday meal was
cooked and kept waiting an hour, but still there were no
signs of them.
“We’d better have our own lunch, boys,” said the
Parson. “ They have probably gone farther than they
intended, which means that they are following some
possible passage-way.” And thinking it best that they
should be ready for any emergency, the party sat down
to dine. While thus engaged Silent Ted, who from
time to time had been peering through some holes in
the barricade, suddenly gave vent to an expression
which might have signified either pleasure or annoyance,
and knowing that something of importance must have
occurred before Ted would have opened his mouth,
unless, as Kaiser often said, “it vas to put something


into it,” all hurriedly crept to the wall and looked
through.
Next moment, every rifle in the company was point-
ing through the holes prepared for that purpose, and
each had a cool, fearless man behind it. The first of the
long, straggling band of naked Tugeris had just come in
sight, and unsuspicious of danger to themselves, were
following the tracks of the white men, a little surprised
perhaps that, after all, their intended victims should
have got ahead of them, but quite confident that they
would overtake them and kill them among the mountain
creeks; for well they knew that the white men always
went mad when they found the heavy yellow metal, and
great stores of it lay just ahead. After disposing of the
white men, Sartor Resartus probably intended to force
a way into the valley beyond by some passage he knew,
or thought he knew.
But if to kill the inhabitants of the mountain city
was his chief object, the necessity of forcing a way in
was suddenly rendered unnecessary, for with a yell which
shook the hillsides, an army of warriors, equal in
physical development to the Tugeris themselves, and of
about the same strength in numbers, issued from a gully
running parallel to the one in which the white men were
entrenched. The last comers were not entirely naked,
the colder climate of their country probably accounting
for this fact, and they carried a great assortment of
strange weapons. The Tugeris were somewhat put out
by this sudden meeting with those whom they had hoped
to take by surprise, but they were philosophers in their
own way, and quickly forming up, they awaited the signal
from their mamoose to fall on their victims, the white
men being now entirely forgotten, or dismissed from
memory as having most probably been dined on already
by the mountain people.


For fully five minutes the two armies stood yelling
at each other; evidently there was much ceremony to
be gone through before they could begin to the chief
business in hand. Neither party was aware that a
third band, a common foe to both, lay behind the
innocent-looking pile of stones in a line almost midway
between them, and it is possible that neither would have
cared much just then.
“ They are working up their steam,” said Mac, as
they stood watching both sides from behind their masked
battery of eleven rifles. King George and his carrier
companions had begun to chant their death songs at
the first appearance of the Tugeris, as was the custom
throughout New Guinea whenever the Tugeris came
in sight; and it seldom was wasted—that is, if their
ancestors really did hear them, and were in a position to
welcome them to the great shadowy land of spirits.
King George’s death chant, however, had a peculiarly
irritating effect upon Mac ; it was one he had been
taught by some gold-miners down in the Yodda gold-
mining camp, who had evidently taken great pains in
assuring King George of its virtues.
It ran—
“ Mar ye had hims littl lam
Hims feet was wite as no
An’ iv ri were tchat Mar ye went
Hims lam hims would not go.”
The royal one had taught his comrades these moving
words, and now they were bellowing out the sad informa-
tion concerning Mary’s little lamb at the full strength of
their lungs. But that could not be allowed on any
account, for when the rival armies got tired of yelling at
each other, they might hear the carriers’ mournful dirge,
and, between them, take steps to ensure the speedy


reunion of King George and his friends with their
ancestors.
“ Stop that gruesome wailing of yours, King
George,” cried Mac, “or I’ll fling ye oot among yer
friends.”
But King George was now wound up, and would not
stop so long as he knew that Mac’s attention was
required in front. He stopped suddenly, all the same,
for a blow on the head from a club in Great Scott’s
hands made him cease to have any further interest in his
surroundings for some time, and as the mamoose
administered the same cure to the carrier next King
George with a like result, and to all appearance
intended to go round the entire party, the singing
stopped of its own accord, and the carriers began
chewing some chunks of betel root they always carried.
The mamoose then returned and took up his place
beside Mac and Ted, as proud as if he had annihilated
an army.
“ Be the powers ! ” ejaculated Irish, “ I never knew
any one so long in getting to work before. Why don’t
they start ? ”
“ Suppose we sail out and lead off against both of
them ? ” suggested Bill; but the others at once overruled
him.
“ Remember the Chief’s orders,” admonished the
Parson.
“The Chief! Howlin’ snakes! I had forgotten him,”
cried Bill, in alarm. “ Hadn’t some of us better go out
by the back door and look for him and Doc ? ”
“Not yet,” said the Parson; “they have dis-
covered something worth investigating, most likely,
and they would not thank us very much if we showed
that we thought them incapable of looking after
themselves.”


“ You’re right, Parson,” said Bob Wilson ; “but how
are we to know when the time comes for us to take
a hand in this game if we keep on waiting on the
Chief?”
“ Ah ! I’ve got it noo,” cried Mac ; “ that’s just what
they fellows are daein’. They are waiting on their
mamoose. I wonder why it is that Mr. Resartus is no
at the head o’ his men, an’ hoo the other folks havena
got their chief? Michty me! there he comes! Great
Powers ! I had forgotten ! He is our old chief! Look,
boys, there is the Mad Wizard ! ”
At that moment the yells of the mountain people
changed to a terrific roar, which even Harry and Kaiser
saw was intended as equivalent to “ Hail to our Chief,”
and there stepped to the front, from behind some rocks,
a tall and extremely well-formed warrior, at sight of
whom the white men were moved with much emotion,
and many fervent expressions of thankfulness that he
was still alive came from their lips. The warrior was
garbed picturesquely in a dress made from the fur of the
mountain bear, held together by a broad belt of crocodile
skin. His feet were also encased in boots made from
the same material, and a large helmet ingeniously woven
from some strange silky material graced his head. His
only weapon was a small bamboo cane. Like his
warriors, his hair stood stiff on end, but evidently it did
not do so naturally, for here and there it was pinned to
his helmet, over the front part of which it clustered.
Unlike the warriors, he wore no facial adornment in
the way of nose-pegs or rings, but the greatest
difference between him and his people lay in the fact
that whereas their skin was of a glossy dark-brown
colour, his face and hands, the only parts visible, were
white.
Harry started when he saw this mamoose ; there was


r ... ' - * 6 **’ V -' ;
>flf 1 M %^I
B 762
“no one heeded the shot, and the battle proceeded”


■
■


something about him that seemed peculiar, but what it
was he could not then determine. For a moment he
stood eyeing the opposite horde, then raising his cane,
he made some signal. In response a shower of spears
flew through the air and fell among the invaders. A
grotesquely adorned figure sprang to the front of the
Tugeris, gesticulating wildly ; they launched their spears,
and the battle commenced. With renewed yells and
much beating of their long, hollow wooden war-drums
the Tugeris charged the defending army in their usual
impetuous style, which was wont to be so successful. But
the others stood the shock, and men went down like
leaves in a storm. The spears were now discarded
on both sides, and spiked clubs and heavy wooden
swords played their deadly part. Blows fell with
sodden thuds, and skulls were cracked like matchwood,
and both armies now became one seething wave-like
mass of bleeding humanity. It was Harry’s first
experience of a big fight, and the sight made him sick.
“ Can’t we stop this wholesale murder ? ” he cried,
appealing to Mac.
“ Ay,” Mac answered, “we can, if we murder them
all ourselves, but nae other way. Ah! ” Mac’s rifle
flashed out a deadly messenger, and a crazy Tugeri
with a head battered to pulp, who had, with a last
effort of his dying strength and consciousness, crawled
up behind the white mamoose with a broken spear in
his raised hand, leapt into the air—and went to his
fathers.
But no one heeded the shot, probably they did
not hear it, and the battle proceeded. Suddenly the
Parson uttered an exclamation, and his face burst
out in perspiration ; his eye glanced along the sights
of his rifle-tube nevertheless, and he pulled the
trigger.


“ I had to do it,” he exclaimed ; “ that poor misguided
wretch had a club raised over his head.”
“ I am proud of you, Parscn,” cried Bob Wilson.
“ I had my eye on that fellow too, but I was waiting to
the last minute on the chance of the chief moving out
of line of my fire. Hullo ! ”
Jack, Bill, and Ted had each pulled triggers this
time, and two gigantic Tugeris, whose ghastly adorn-
ments showed their fame as warriors and that they had
sent many weary souls to rest, went to sleep themselves
with bullets through their hearts. They had rushed the
Mad Wizard, and paid the penalty. Still no one gave
any attention to the rifle reports. All were now blind
with blood, and deaf to everything but the dying gasps
of their enemies, which was music to their souls. Hither
and thither the tall white mamoose moved, directing his
warriors with his cane, and supremely indifferent to the
great danger his figure, dress, and lack of weapons
attracted.
But, although he did not know it, he was the best
defended man there, for eleven rifles covered his every
movement, and certain death awaited every Tugeri who
approached within striking distance of his person ; and
the number thus accounted for was fast increasing. Now
the battle was at its turning-point, the combatants were
exhausted, for human beings could not for long expend
such energy in swinging mighty clubs and ponderous two-
edged swords as they had done. Clearly the victory now
rested with the side that had still sufficient strength left
to resume the offensive. If the Tugeris could yet do so,
they would assuredly force the mountain people back
among the rocks, where they would be compelled to break
and fly, and then be butchered as they ran by the fleeter
Tugeris. If the mountain people themselves had any
reserve of strength, then the Tugeris would be pressed


back down the river, and, once started, would be kept
moving until they were all cut down by the others, who
had a greater knowledge of the country. This fact was
apparent to the onlookers, and, although they well knew
they would have to reckon with the victors whoever they
were, they could not resist calling out to the mountain
people to stand firm. But they did not hear them.
“I say, boys, let us chime in now,” said Jack ; “we
can just about settle things here, and it is time the
Tugeris got a set back.”
“ Ay, man,” said Mac, “ an’ does it no’ strike ye
that the Tugeris are doing our work just now? If
we chip in against them we are just leaving the
other folk stronger to fight us, for it is easily seen
we’ll never get our old chief away from them without
a struggle.”
“Mac is right,” said Irish. “It’s the Mad Wizard
we want, and the more balanced the fight out there is,
shure, an’ it means the less work we’ll have to do
ourselves to get him.”
“ But could we not rush out and, seize him now ? ”
said Harry, burning with the desire to do something.
“We could bring him in here, and hold the place
against all comers.”
“ There’s no ony twa men in this camp could bring
him in here,” said Mac, sorrowfully, “or Ted an’ me
would have done it when we saw him first.”
But the fact that the battle now hung on who had
the greatest reserve of strength was evident to both
Sartor Resartus and the white mamoose, and each
rallied his men for one grand effort. They separated,
gathered, paused a moment, then rushed madly at each
other, and the white mamoose, singling out Sartor
Resartus, who was by no means backward in accepting
the challenge, raised him in his powerful arms and,


despite his struggles, threw his already bleeding form
over the heads of his warriors against the rocks, where
he lay still. The shock of the two armies meeting,
notwithstanding the reduced number of men who now
took part in it, was still great, and more men went down.
For a minute both sides fought like the madmen they
were, and then slowly but surely the Mountain People
began to give way.
“It’s all up now,” groaned Bill, “an’ I was betting
on them winning; but what a throw that was that the
Mad Wizard gave old Sartor.”
“ Wait a wee,” cried Mac, “ that’s no what it
looks. The mountain people are no exerting them-
selves half. Our auld chief is ower guid a general
for that.”
“ They cannot, Mac ; they cannot do more, their
strength is gone,” said Harry. “Oh! let us help the
Mad Wizard now.”
“ Dinna you believe their strength is gone, ma
laddie. That’s a dodge o’ some kind. Div I no’ ken
the chief too weel —tak’ that, ye deevil! ” Mac’s rifle
sent another powerful Tugeri, who had got near the
mountain chief, to his last account ; then he continued,
“The Tugeris are being drawn into a trap, an’ that
you’ll see before long.”
If Mac were correct, however, there certainly was
nothing to show that the Mountain People were not
borne back by the superior fighting powers of their
enemies, and they suddenly turned and rushed for the
entrance to one of the canons. The Tugeris, with
shouts of triumph, followed closely, cleaving many
dwellers of the mountain in two with their shortened
swords as they ran. Soon none but the dead and dying
remained in view of the white men, the others having
disappeared within the gloomy walls.


“ I reckon I am going to see this circus through
now,” cried Bob, leaping over the barricades. “ We’ve
paid for dress circle seats, and we’re entitled to see the
whole show.”
“ You’re right, Bob,” cried Jack, joining him. “ This
sneaking away of the niggers looks too much like the
to be continued in our next, that we always find in
anything we read when it comes to the exciting
part.”
“ I hold myself responsible for the Mad Wizard, so
I’ll hae to follow them,” said Mac, also leaping the
stone wall ; “ but mind, lads, there’s a trap laid—oor
auld chief is mair cunning than ten devils—an’ we micht
fa’ into it.”
By this time, however, all had gained the outside,
and were making for the gully up which the opposing
forces had gone. But now all was quiet, the Mountain
People apparently had fled before their enemies, and
were now hiding somewhere on the slopes of the ravine.
With fierce yells and much sounding of war-drums and
battle-shells the Tugeris celebrated their victory, but an
old warrior stopped their proceedings abruptly, and
ordered a pursuit of the victims. To do this the
Tugeris had to follow the Mountain People up the gully,
whither it seemed they must have retreated, there being
no other way open ; and still shouting their song of
victory, which Dave said was also “ a grace before meat,”
they charged up the stony waterway —but not far.
While they yet marvelled how the mountain people
could have so completely disappeared, a wall of water
came rushing towards them, and they sprang to the
rocky sides to escape its overwhelming torrent. Then
they found that the Mountain People had not retreated
after all, and as their two-edged swords split Tugeri
heads and sent them reeling back into the bed of the
(B 763) R


ravine, the Tugeris began to realize that they had been
a trifle hasty in assuming they had gained the victory.
Nor did that matter remain long in doubt Some
turned and raced for the entrance, intending to climb
above the reach of the advancing torrent, but a
shower of poisoned darts, shot with great skill from
ingeniously contrived weapons in the hands of sharp-
shooters among the rocks, stayed their course, and
writhing horribly, helpless on the ground, they awaited
Nemesis.
Meanwhile, realizing that some floodgates had been
opened somewhere and that all in the canon would
assuredly be drowned, dashed against the rocks, or shot
with poisoned arrows, Mac, Harry, and the others ran
back to the old shelter and awaited developments. And
these were as conclusive as they were startling. A
mighty volume of water swept out from the gorge and
spread over the basin whence the river appeared to have
its source. In its embrace were many dark struggling
forms, but a far greater number had ceased to struggle,
for dashed headlong from rock to rock and pierced with
many darts and arrows, they had soon ceased to exist,
and in a very short space of time nothing could be seen
but a hideous conglomeration of human limbs and
bleeding bodies piled against tree stumps and boulders.
The Tugeris had received their first defeat, and it would
be some time before they could be in a position to court
another.
“ This is awful,” groaned the Parson, surveying the
mangled remains swirling in the waters of the basin ere
they were carried into the main stream.
“That is as you like to think,” remarked Bob.
“ Personally, I think it a very good thing for most
of the natives in New Guinea, although pretty bad
for us.”


“ Bad for us ? Ah, yes, I forgot; the Mountain
People are left so strong that we must of necessity have
considerable trouble with them, and now that they have
defeated the far-famed Tugeri warriors, they will be
quite invincible if it comes to fighting.”
“ I think, Parson, you should lie down and have a
sleep,” spoke Jack. “ I’ve got to get some supper
ready, an’ how can I if you keep singing on that
key ? You’ll make us think the Tugeris were the
finest people that ever lived, and that they were
martyrs ”
“ Oh, close up, Jack,” cried Mac. “We’ll be martyrs
oursel’s if we dinna form some plan o’ action soon, for
these mountain friends o’ oors must ken by this time
that we are here, an’ may drop in the nicht in a casual
sort o’ way.”
“They’ll find us at home if they do, I reckon,”
grunted Bill. “What’s for supper, Jack?”
“ Nothing, until you catch it. Do you think I’m a
portable restaurant?” retorted Jack. “And if you
don’t look alive and get in firewood we’ll freeze to-
night as well, for the sun will go down in half an
hour.”
The knowledge that there was nothing in camp for
supper caused more consternation among the men than
the appearance of the victorious warriors would have
done, and each man instantly set out up the mountain-
sides to look for something to supply the want and to
bring in timber for a fire.
All was silent outside. The Tugeris were stilled for
ever, and the Mountain People seemed to have melted
into space. The sun slowly dipped behind the ranges,
and the darkness of night crept up the valley. Harry
had clambered up the sides of the ravine to obtain some
material for burning which grew there. It was extremely


dangerous to do so in the fast failing light, but Harry
was as sure footed as a mountain goat. His thoughts
were confused, and it was more to get a minute to think
over matters than anything else, that he had scaled the
rocks. Clearly he had not yet attained the supreme in-
difference to life or death that his comrades possessed.
The horrible sight of the maimed bodies, the pools of
blood, and the human limbs which had been scattered
about before the flood washed them away, made him
sick. He wondered who this remarkable chief of the
Mountain People could be, where these people had hidden
themselves, and how they had arranged to have such a
terrific flood of water dammed up to fight for them. His
memory then went back to the water spirit feast of the
Tugeris, and he pictured a similar solution to the mystery
of whence the water came, and why his comrades had
not been able to follow the stream to its real source in
the valley overhead. Then where had the Chief and
Doc gone ? Had they been captured by the Mountain
People ? And might not some of them be even now
watching him from behind some rocks ? He started at
the idea, and, drawing his revolver, looked shudderingly
around into the gloom. At that moment the camp fire
below burst into flame, and he knew that some of the
men had got back with timber of some kind. But what
was that ? Surely he had heard the scrub crackling near
him. No, it could only have been a trick of his excited
imagination, for how could any natives scale the divide
between the gully in which the end of the fight had taken
place and the ravine in which the white men were en-
camped ? It was now quite dark and cold, the camp fire
below being the only indication that any life existed in
that dread valley, where, only a few hours before, about
two thousand men full of life and vigour struggled to
kill each other.


“Ah ! ” Harry smothered the exclamation, and stared
fixedly at the black wall of rocks in front of him, then
cocking his revolvers, he felt along the clammy sides
carefully, for this time he was certain some one was near
him, for he had heard the laboured breathing of a human
being who had over-exerted himself. Suddenly his hand
touched something that drew back before him, and follow-
ing until he had driven it into a corner, Harry ran his
hand over the object, and found that it was a man
dressed slightly more than was usual in a covering of
bark cloth or paper, and the elaborate head-dress of a
mighty warrior. Obeying the teachings of Mac, Harry
at once clutched at the warrior’s throat, but before he
could do so his own was caught in a grip that seemed
of steel. Next instant they swayed in deadly effort,
and then they shook each other clear and felt again for
fresh grips. This time Harry, surprised beyond all
measure that he had not been speared or clubbed, con-
cluded that his opponent had lost his arms, and deter-
mined to try to capture him alive, and slipping his
revolvers back into his belt so as to free both hands, he
groped for his enemy with that intention. Evidently
his intended victim had ideas of a similar nature, for he
at once closed with Harry in the most scientific fashion,
and silently they struggled for the mastery, each seem-
ingly afraid that the other had friends within hail. At
length they flung each other apart again. “ Why doesn’t
the nigger use some weapon ? he can’t have lost them
all,” murmured Harry, as he again advanced in the
darkness.
“ Because the nigger doesn’t like to blow a fellow’s
brains out if he can best him any other way,” spoke the
warrior’s voice. “ But how in thunder didn’t you say
you was a white man ? ”
Harry almost fell with astonishment, but recovering


quickly he said, “ How in thunder was I to know that
you were one ? that is—if you are not another of these
English-speaking natives.”
“ I think we’d better git on with our little circus,
then,” said the other; “ when we’ve found out who’s best
man we can talk better.”
“ But surely I’ve heard your voice before,” cried
Harry ; “there is something familiar about it.”
“ I am sorry I haven’t my card, but the fact is I
never carry ’em in this part o’ the world. But my handle
is pretty well known elsewhere, and you can believe me
or not if you chose. I’m not a nigger, although I’ve
been fighting among them to-day, and fighting like
blazes, too. Now, what are you doin’ here at this time
of night ? Doesn’t ye know that if the niggers get ye
you will git a quicker pass into the other world than even
the Tugeris got to-night ? ”
“ I am a member of an expedition,” replied Harry,
“ and we saw the fight this afternoon ; but come down to
our camp ”
“ Excuse me, I don’t think you have a camp now.
It is wiped out by this time ”
“ What! ”
“Yes, wiped out. Some of the Silent Priests sus-
pected, or found out, that there were white men near, so
a surprise party was arranged for to-night. I came over
to try to warn them, but it is too late now. Look ! there
goes the signal.” At that moment a series of yells burst
upon the stillness of night, and several rifle reports rang
out.
“ Come on,” cried Harry, “ I must join my comrades
at once.”
“ You can’t ; they’ve cleared out by this time, if
they’re not dead. You must come with me ”
“ Come with you ? Not while lam ”


“Oh, drop all that. I know you now. You are my
partner. I was coming to look for you, but I didn’t
expect to find you here although some one once told
me the world wasn’t much bigger than the Never
Never country of Australia. My name is Darling
Bill ”
“You are Darling Bill?” gasped Harry.
“Of course I am. I came out here to look for
your brother, and I had to become a big man of
some kind before I could live, so the fellow that
wore this hat last doesn’t need a hat now—but come
along ”
“ But my comrades ? ”
“ Are looking after themselves, and don’t need
you.”
“ But I cannot leave them. And where do you wish
me to go, and—Bill, did you take those opals? I
have got into serious trouble over them.”
“ I don’t know what you are talking about, and if I
did, I haven’t time to explain. I came to look for help,
and now that I have found you I can see there is a fate
in it and we’ll go back into the village and fight this
thing out ourselves.”
“ What do you mean ? I must look for my comrades.
They will give you all the help you want.”
“ I reckon we can do without them now. I expect
we’ll have to, poor beggars. You’ll have to become one
of the Silent Priests, same as I am, and we’ll cut out the
mamoose before they know what new form of religion
has struck them.”
“ But my comrades are all here to do the same
thing ”
“All the better. But they can’t do it now, at least
not without us.”
“ But ”


“ Hang your buts. It’s your partner Darling Bill
that’s asking you, and it’s your own brother you are
going to help. What more do you want ? ”
“ My brother ! ”
“Of course, the big mamoose of the mountain
people, the Mad Wizard, is your brother ”


CHAPTER XIII
The Passage of the Silent Priests
Harry sat down on a rock. Now he knew the meaning
of many things. His lost brother was the famous white
mamoose or Mad Wizard his comrades had come so far
to find, and they had fought their way from the coast
right into the heart of the dreaded Tugeri land to rescue
him. His brother, then, had been near him all day—in
fact, he had saved his life himself by shooting down one
Tugeri warrior who had crawled up behind him with
evil intent. But where were his comrades now? The
shots had suddenly ceased, and a suspicious silence
reigned where the conversation of his comrades should
have been heard.
“Bill,” said Harry, at length, “this all seems like a
dream. How does it happen that, of all places in the
world, I meet you here ? ”
“ Oh, that is easy enough to explain,” said the other,
“ but I am bested to know how you got here ; this ain’t
no place where you can land from that funny twopenny
tube you’ve got in London.”
“ I left London the same day as you left. Mr.
Blackwood, for some reason or other, and partly, I
suppose, because he thought I would like to travel,
sent me to look for his nephew who had been last
heard of somewhere in this country. I would not


have left so soon had I not wanted to catch you in
Sydney, for I thought that you might be able to put
me on his track, and also help me to find my
brother ”
“ And you just bet I could have done that, mate, but
I doubt ye couldn’t have hustled the same way I did,
although I must say there’s nothing of the new chum
about ye now. But what made ye think I knew any-
thing about your brother ? Oh, I remember I told
your sister that I was going to go on the track.”
“It wasn’t that, Bill. When I was leaving, after
calling upon Mr. Blackwood that night, Miss Cathie’s
opal necklet was found in my pocket. At first I
thought you might have placed it there for some reason
and forgotten to tell me, but I could not get myself to
believe that you would have taken the gems from Cathie,
in the first place ”
“ Did you think for a second that I would steal some
paltry opals, mate ? ”
“No, Bill, I didn’t. But imagine my position. How
could I explain their presence ? Some one must have
put the necklet in my pocket, but ”
“ Come to the point as quick as you know how,
mate ; our time is short.”
“Well, they were of the same kind that my brother
had, that you gave to my sister, and that Edward
Blackwood, the person I am in search of, sent to his
cousin Cathie. I at once connected things together
and thought that if I found you I might also find at
least traces of the others, and as there was no time to
lose, I left home that night and contrived to catch a
North German Lloyd steamer at Naples. On board I
made the acquaintance of my present chief, who told me
he would take me to Edward Blackwood, and through
him I knew his comrades, and joined his expedition


to go and rescue a former comrade of his. We got
this far and saw the fight to-day, not interfering because
we wished to weaken both sides as much as possible.
Now you tell me that the mamoose we have come so
far to rescue is my brother whom I have been thinking
of every minute of my life since I left home, and whom
his comrades, now my comrades, are Oh, I forgot;
we must go and help them at once.”
“Just you sit down again, partner,” said Bill ; “you
are far too hasty in your reckonings. Now, I’ve seen
a bit of this little world of ours, and I have come to the
conclusion that things done in a hurry are never any
good. Take you running away, for instance—but wait;
we’ll have a fire. I would like to see your face again.
I’m blamed curious to see how you look after being
away from the tubes, and banks, and pen and ink, for
so long,”
Bill kicked some scrub together round the roots of a
tree growing from the rocks and signed to Harry to
apply a light.
“ But we’ll be seen,” cried Harry, as he lit the pile
with a match
“ No, we’ll not,” answered Bill; “we are hidden by
this kink in the rocks, an’ anyhow I’m a Silent Priest an’
you’re my special funeral.”
The flame shot up, and Harry beheld a grotesquely
garbed person with an enormous head-dress. His face
was black, and his hair stood on end in front of his
feathery plumes. His garments consisted of a slight
covering of bark cloth over the upper part of his body,
and a strange sort of kilt constructed of fibrous grasses
girdled round his body served as covering for his nether
limbs. In his hand he carried a spiked club, but hidden
in his kilt was a revolver of serviceable size and pattern.
“And you are Darling Bill ?” gasped Harry.


“ I reckon the man that says I’m not is a
liar,” answered the strange apparition, bending over
the fire.
“ But how have you managed to disguise yourself so
well ? You are a perfect native in appearance, and your
head-dress is simply terrifying."
“ It is meant to be ; the poor old Silent Priests depend
upon that. But you’ll be as good a nigger as lam by
to-morrow, although I don’t know yet how we’ll get you
a head-dress as good as mine. This one belonged to a
fighting chief, or priest, or something of that sort; and
it has been in the one family for about a million
years—that’s how it’s so dirty. Of course, you know
every man who wears one of these head-dresses has
to add some feathers to it, that’s how it’s so big. But
blow it! you’re not my old mate, the fellow that hauled
the girl out o’ the water at Tilbury, and who took me
home to his people." Bill was gazing at a stalwart
bronzed youth, whose muscles stood out even through
his garments.
“Yes; I am the same old Harry who, with you,
pulled Miss Blackwood from the water," replied Harry,
with a smile. “But how did you get here ? I fancied
that we had travelled faster than was possible for any
one else.”
“ Well, you see, you didn’t. I came round by
America and was here before you ; and I lost a lot of
time, too, down in Queensland digging out an old shaft
on the opal-fields. But never mind, we’re both in at
the finish. I come out here ’cos I reckoned I knew
where the opals your sister had received from your
brother came from, and she wanted to find him badly.
I found when I git to Tipooburra, however, that he
had chucked the mine and gone north prospecting
with some other fellows three or four years before, so


I just got on to his tracks and chased him here vid
Cooktown in Queensland, and Samarai. I found I
couldn’t do no good without getting in among the
people, ’cos your brother was as mad as a hatter,
so I changed clothes with a fellow that had no further
use for them, and followed a hunting party right
in. After I got in I found that the fellow whose clothes
I was wearing had been a Silent Priest, and you
can bet that was the greatest piece of luck that ever
came my way, for they never knew the difference, an’
I never needed to say a word ; if I had, they would have
made me silent soon enough. That was two months
ago, and I have been trying ever since to get a message
down to the Germans on the border country, but we can
do without them now.”
“Can we go in ourselves?” asked Harry, filled
with enthusiasm at the idea of seeing his brother
soon.
“You bet we can, and have the greatest piece of fun
any man ever had.”
“ But what about my comrades ? ”
“ I ’spect some of them are pretty near it now ; and
the rest, who haven’t gone under to-night, will not be
long in following.”
“ Then we are bound to meet them; it can’t
be more than a hour since we were all down there
together.”
“ No, I don’t reckon we’ll meet them this side of the
village. They don’t know the road and will have to
climb over the top, and that is impossible for any except
fellows who have been chums of the Mad Wizard, and of
his calibre. We’ll take the passage of the Silent Priests
right through the mountain. I reckon there will be a
shortage among these gentlemen after to-day’s work any-
how, and you’ll make a first-class one.”


“ But what good can we do as Silent Priests ? How
can that help us ? ”
“ Because no one one will know us. We never speak,
and if any of the genuine ones suspect anything they
daren’t speak either. I don’t think there are many of
them can, and the mamoose will see that they never do
it twice if they do ”
“ But still, I should fancy we should do far more good
by hiding until we found our comrades, and then going
in force by the passage you mention.”
“No, great New South Wales! No! We should
be collared before we could do anything, and the
mamoose himself would superintend the picnic after-
wards. He is off his head, you know; and how he got
to be mamoose I don’t know; but anyhow, he’s a fair
bouncer when it comes to inventing, or making something
out of nothing ; and he’s got signalling apparatus rigged
all along the mountain-tops, and niggers always on the
look-out. He’s got some sort of cannons made, too, that
fire stones and anything else you like to put into them.
He does it with air, I think ; but I never was no engineer,
an’ don’t know. He has got the niggers trained, too,
till they would stand up before a regiment of Australian
bushmen, and no one did that in South Africa. Lord,
no; we have no chance of fighting them, ’cos their
chief’s full of patents for wiping people out. But you
are cold—ah, there’s that tree catching now ; these trees
are all hollow, an’ once they catch they go like a forced—
draught furnace ” Bill paused, and stirred the fire ;
and very soon the tree at the roots of which it had been
kindled began to glow like red-hot coal, and the resulting
warmth was most pleasing.
“ I reckon you are hungry, too,” next spoke Bill.
“ Here, you go for these ducks while I go down to
your old camp and skirmish for something else.” Bill


produced two half-cooked ducks from the interior of his
head-dress. “ I am always ready to do a shoot for the
Germans, you know,” he said by way of explaining their
presence, “ and I reckon I would have tackled it to-day
if I hadn’t met you.” He disappeared in the darkness
as he spoke, and Harry heard him sliding and falling
down the rocks until he seemed to have reached the
bottom.
Harry had long since copied his comrades’ disposition
to the extent of not showing any surprise at anything
however much he felt, and he already, as he had done
the first time he had met Darling Bill at Tilbury Docks,
regarded that somewhat erratic but dauntless Austra-
lian as a friend and comrade whom he had known all
his life, and he looked forward with pride to the time
when he could introduce him to Mac and the others as
one who could quite keep up the traditions of their
party. But here Harry’s musings came to an abrupt
stop, as it occurred to him that for all he knew his
comrades might now be stretched lifeless in the rocky
bed of the ravine. “ Oh, why was I not with them,” he
cried ; “ to think that it was to rescue my brother those
noble-hearted men dared everything, and that when
danger really came I was not with them ! If Mac were
only here, or Bill or the Parson, or any of them ! Surely
they cannot be killed ! It is impossible to imagine them
being surprised ; they must be hiding somewhere, as I
am doing. But what will the Chief and Doc do when
they return ? ”
“ Don’t worry about them returning, Harry,” cried
Darling Bill’s voice, as its owner gained the shelter of
the rocky bluff with a half-burnt damper, and threw
himself down beside the fire ; “ they won’t return for
some time. I shouldn’t mind betting they never will if
we don’t help them. They were collared this morning


by our fellows as we came out to meet the other
niggers, and by this time I expect they are waiting
the verdict of the Silent Priests as to whether they
are to be thrown over the precipice to the gods of the
air, or down the hole into the underground river to
the spirits of the water.”
“Then let us get away at once,” cried Harry.
“ Surely we can at least do something to help them to
escape ”
“ There you go again,” interrupted Bill. “ A little
while ago ye was all fired to go down there an’ get
punctured by the niggers ’cos ye thought some of your
mates had got their call, an’ ye wouldn’t hear of coming
with me ; an’ now you’re in a bigger hurry than I am to
git into the town, an’ ye don’t seem to care whether it’s
healthy in there or not. No, Harry, lam boss of this
show, an’ ye’ll have to let me run it in my own way.
My, ye didn’t see why ye should become a Silent Priest
half an hour ago. Does ye know now ? ”
“ No, I don’t. I only want to be beside those who
have been my comrades through all sorts of danger, and
whether it means an end of all or not, I care little, so
let’s away. Oh, I beg your pardon, Bill ; I forgot that
you cannot have the same interest in the Chief as I
have, and it is not your brother who is mad up among
these people, so tell me the best way in, and I’ll go
myself, and you can go down to the German station ”
Harry paused, for even in the flickering flashes of fire-
light he could see Bill’s face changing in expression.
For a moment no one spoke, and then Bill said in
tones almost incoherent with suppressed feeling, “ Good-
bye, then, mate; I see you an’ I don’t understand one
another. I’m sorry, but no matter; I’ll show you the
passage, an’ maybe some day ye’ll know Darling Bill of
New South Wales a bit better than ye do now.” He


rose to his feet. “Follow me,” he said; “the Silent
Priest’s passage is over where the fight was in the next
gully ”
“ Bill,” Harry cried, seeing that something was wrong,
“ I am very sorry indeed if I have said anything which
offended you, for I assure you that I did not mean it.
Tell me what I have said ”
“ Oh, it’s nothing,” responded Bill, carelessly ; “ but
the man that thinks I would look after my own skin
when my mate’s people were in danger is no friend of
mine.”
“ But, Bill, you know I didn’t mean that. I was
only thinking I had no right to bring you into my
troubles, though what I can do myself for any one is
not much.”
“ Well, do you want me with you ? ”
“ More than any other person I know, except Mac or
the Chief, and they are nearly twice your age, and gone
from me now —for ever, I fear.”
Harry’s voice broke as he thought of the kindly and
thoughtful Chief, the rugged and resourceful Scot, Doc,
the Parson, Kaiser, and the others, now scattered, if
alive, with but little chance of coming together again.
Strangely enough his brother did not now claim his first
thoughts.
“ Don’t you worry about your mates,” spoke Bill,
kindly. “We will see the business through ourselves,
an’ I reckon we can engineer things better at first
without a crowd. If any of them gits through we can
all stand together an’ have one of the finest circuses
ever seen in this man-eating country.”
“ Then you think they may have escaped, Bill ? ”
“ I am certain that they did not go under anywhere
near that camp fire down there ’cos I saw no signs of
fighting, an’ only two dead niggers, both naked. I
(B 762) g


’spect your mates got away up the gully, separated of
course, but surely they can all look after themselves.
But if ye feel warm now, an’ have taken on board all
the damper ye can carry, though it does look mean
taking away what your mates meant for their supper,
we’ll make tracks for that secret passage.”
“Whenever you like, then, Bill,” responded Harry,
rising. “ I suppose we’ll have enough excitement from
now on to keep us from wearying. If I don’t get plenty
of that soon, I shall go mad. But, Bill, how did you
manage to get here so much ahead of us ? You only left
London some hours before me, and you went out to
some Queensland opal-fields before coming here, and
yet I find you a priest among these natives, and as con-
versant with their methods as if you had been with them
all your life.”
“That’s because I’m a hustler, I suppose. You see,
I know my way about, an’ it took me less than no time
to find out that it was your brother who had been on
the opal-fields long ago. Of course I suspected that,
because when I was out there first I found the same
kind of stones that your sister had—that was them I sold
in London. It was easy after that to track him north to
the gulf country, where he and a party went prospecting
for copper and silver, and I found out from an old fos-
sicker near Chillagoe that they had gone over to New
Guinea. I then came down to Cairns, and interviewed
the officers on board the New Guinean missionary
steamer, and they told me that a big party once went
in past the Yodda fields, and never came back, and a
few questions soon showed that that was your brother’s
outfit. After that I crossed to Samarai, and heard that
a party had just left the island for some big mountains
away up near the German borders. I was told, too, by
some old miners there, that some of this last party were


members of the first party, and when I discovered that
my old captain in the war was the chief of the expedition
I knew he would let me jine them, so I came on to Astro-
labe, the German port, as I couldn’t follow them their
way, and struck inland to head them off, I soon became
as good as a nigger, an’ worked my way up to the
boundary somehow, an’ hearing from some tribes that a
white mamoose bossed things in a mysterious mountain
city no one had ever seen, I guessed that that city was
where I was going, an’ hung about near where we are
now until one day I saw some horrible swells of niggers
come out of a hole in the rocks. I lay low an’ watched,
until they went away to do something in connection with
that water trick of theirs that caught the other niggers
to-day, and then I investigated the place they had come
out of. While I was doing this the fellow that wore this
hat before me came back for something, and without
giving me a chance or even a word of warning, rushed
at me and speared me through my left arm. Now, I
don’t allow no man to spear me, an’ I closed with him
before he could get his club in proper working order, an’
you know the rest. I found the white mamoose, or the
Mad Wizard, as some folks call him, was the man I was
looking for, and that the Silent Priests were his members
of Parliament. I got on very well, ’cos although the
Silent Priests were his advisers they never advised—l
suppose they knew better; an’ somehow the mamoose
seemed to take to me ’cos I could do little engineering
jobs for him, an’ often did them my own way, which was
what no priest could have done. I never spoke though ;
’tweren’t any use until I had got things arranged with the
Germans or the party that I expected would be cornin’
along some day. So every night the watch was kept on
the mountain-top, and every day the mamoose invented
something new for fighting with, an’ we all waited for


the Tugeri raid which we knew was coming. And you
can bet that every day I, too, watched and waited for my
chance. That chance came yesterday, towards evening,
when the beacon on the mountain on the south side of
the village flared up and told us that danger was ap-
proaching. All night long the Silent Priests worked at
the sluice gates of the sacred river which flows through
the village, damming back its waters and preparing for the
great sacrifices which they knew would follow when the
Tugeris came along. The whole range of mountains, you
know, is just like the crater of a big volcano, and the
town is built in the middle of the hollow. Well, anyhow,
the mamoose has caused the entire inside of the rocks
to be cut all round so that any people coming into the
valley from the top would have to fall about four or five
hundred feet at one drop before they got down to the
level of the village, and I reckon that so far as any
army coming over the top could hurt it, that village
is quite safe. Of course I made it my business to
find out all about any other roads out and in, and
the only one known to the people is over the pass
between those two peaks straight above us just now.
The mamoose got long ropes made of some stuff and
built a windlass barrel contrivance near the top of the pass
round which these endless ropes work. When the warriors
are going out they get on board a sort of cage out from
the village a bit, and the sacred river works a big water-
wheel that drives the ropes and hauls the men up an in-
clined plane to the top, where they get out and go down
the outside through the gully next door to us just now,
and the cage goes back for more. Of course the passage
of the Silent Priests is another way, but it is known only
to them and the mamoose. It was made, I suppose,
some millions of years ago by that river which flows
away down from here. Anyhow, it is a passage cut right


through the mountain under the warriors’ road. All the
water which drains into the valley up above forms into
one stream known as the sacred stream, and just where,
if it was locked up, it would make the village into a
deep lake it cuts right into the rocks, as I have said, and
works its way down through them until it gets out again
in the next gully. Now we couldn’t go that way if the
river was flowing, but the mamoose made the niggers
dam it back long ago with sluice gates so that they can
set it free at sacrifice time or when any one is coming up
the gully that they don’t want. Well, it wiped out the
Tugeris to-day, and so will be closed again by this time,
and up its course is the way we are going to-night, and
here is the entrance. Over there is where the first owner
of this hat and I had our little difference of opinion, and
look ! By the Great Australian Bight! there’s a Silent
Priest lying dead by that rock down there. What luck !
We’ll get his dress for you, an’ then we’ll go straight
ahead an’ be in time for the pantomime upstairs.”
While Bill had been speaking they had been scramb-
ling over the rocks, lending a hand to each other, as the
case required, and, just as he had concluded, they reached
the bottom of the neighbouring ravine where the fight
of the afternoon had so abruptly terminated. The
waning moon was now above the horizon, and by the
aid of its light they could see ghastly signs of the struggle
that had taken place, and here and there, among the
roots of trees, were entangled dark motionless things
which gave most eloquent though silent testimony to the
uncertainty of life.
“ There’s what was this morning a Silent Priest,” said
Bill, swinging himself down towards the form he had first
indicated. " He is a bit taller than you ; but then, things
don’t need to fit to be in the fashion here.” He at
once began relieving the painted savage of his blood-


stained garments and ornaments, and, mastering his
repugnance, Harry buckled them on his own person,
placed the charm necklet of bones, teeth, and shells
round his neck, and the huge head-dress composed of
the feathers of birds of paradise and cassowaries on
his head.
“ But you’ll have to leave your trousers behind,
Harry,” laughed Bill. “ A New Guinean doesn’t wear
them, you know.”
“ But my skin is white, and it’s very cold,” said
Harry, shivering.
“Oh, we’ll soon make your skin black enough,”
said Bill. “ I’ve got my own patent dye with me. It is
the juice of that plant you see over there among the
rocks. You’ll always know it, because it is the only
plant that offers you a hold when you are climbing
rocks, and the blamed old thing stings like a hornet
when you do touch it.”
Bill was already rubbing the dye he had evidently
previously prepared into Harry’s skin.
“But I’ll freeze,” repeated Harry; “that dye won’t
keep out the cold.”
“ Oh, you’ll soon get used to the cold ; it is not nearly
so cold in the village, because it is sheltered. Have
you got your shooters all right for business ? ”
Harry signified that his revolver was in working
order ; and fastening his cartridge-belt round his body
underneath his hanging middle garment, he followed
Bill over some more rocks and through a hole,
the sides of which were still wet, and in a lower
part of which a small stream of ice-cold water
trickled.
“ I’ve got a torch hidden here,” said Bill; “ but
it is long since my matches played out. Have you
any ? ”


Harry produced a box from underneath his kilt, and
after wasting a few, for there was a strong current of
air in the cavern, Bill found his torch and set it alight.
They were in an enormous subterranean gallery, which,
although only apparently about six feet in width and
the same in height, extended back into the mountain
farther than the torchlight could penetrate. The air was
damp, but not very cold, and Harry almost felt it com-
fortable in comparison with the cold blast of the outside
world.
“ We’ve got four miles to travel before we get out
into the valley,” said Bill, “so you follow me as closely
as you can. Our road is level for the first little bit, then
it climbs straight up, and after that it goes anyhow.”
Bill spoke correctly, as was soon proved. After they
had gone about a quarter of a mile over a solid bed of
rock cut out by the floods which doubtless for countless
centuries had swept through the tunnel, they came to a
large pool, the silent still waters of which glowed as if
alive with fire flashes in its translucent depths, the
reflection, of course, of the torchlight.
“ I was just going to ask you if you could swim,”
spoke Bill; “ but I remembered in time that affair at
Tilbury. We’ve got to git across that pool some-
how an’ climb the rocks beyond. There was a dry
way round about it when I came through last, but
I s’pose the flood that washed away the other niggers
has filled it up until it has covered the side
track.”
“ But how about our dyed skins ? ” asked Harry.
“We’ll have to rub ourselves over again when we
get through. That’s all,” answered Bill. “ I’ve got
enough prepared stuff with me.” He waded gingerly
into the cold water.
“ But why not remove our clothes and tie them on


our backs ? ” asked Harry, pausing a moment to see that
his matches and ammunition were safe.
“ Because a Silent Priest never takes off his clothes.
They are fastened on with glue and dirt and a hundred
other things, an’ if we got in fresh and dry some inquisi-
tive beggar might cause trouble, an’ burst up our little
game before it was started.”
Harry said nothing more, but struck out for the
other side of the pool after Bill, who, swimming with one
hand, bore his torch on high with the other.
“ I reckon there must have been some sort of soft
country where that water-hole is,” Bill remarked ; “ for
it is darned funny that a hole like that —no man knows
how deep it is—should be there when nearly all the
rest of the channel is on hard rock that you could
hardly shoot out with dynamite.”
“ I expect it is the swirl of waters beneath this fall
that has cut out the hole,” said Harry ; “you see, all the
sand and grit that has been coming down over this rock
in front of us for ages past must have been revolved
here for some time before it got away, and that would
be quite sufficient to wear out a hole in anything in
time.”
“ P’raps you’re right,” said Bill, thoughtfully, as they
landed. “ I never was no good at geneology.”
“ Geology,” corrected Harry, as they shook them-
selves.
“ Well, what’s the difference ? We’ve got to get up
this rock all the same, an’ no matter what kind of ology
dug the hole or made the rock, we’ve got to git over
other three and a half miles of it.”
Harry did not answer, and they began to scale the
slimy precipice over which some water was still falling.
Several times Harry’s feet slipped, (he was not accus-
tomed to clinging to rocks with his bare feet,) but Bill’s


hand gripped him each time and held him till he re-
gained his foothold. Once or twice too Bill slipped, and
Harry’s strength bore him up, until he had obtained a
fresh hold on some outjutting rock. Thus they fought
their way up through the weird, damp gloom, and after
half an hour’s effort they reached what appeared to be the
top, and resumed their onward progress. Several times
they had to swim large pools of water, and often had to
scale perpendicular walls of rock, but they could never
determine how far the boundaries of the cavern extended
above and around them. After two hours’ perseverance,
during which they were conscious of rising a considerable
height, Bill said they were approaching the outlet in the
valley. “We had better paint ourselves up for good
now,” he also remarked, “for unless some idiot turns
on the water again we’ll manage through the rest
without getting any wetter.”
“ But if they do turn on the water ? ” asked Harry.
“ Then it doesn’t matter much whether we get wet
or not, ’cos we’ll be smashed against the roof somewhere,
an’ killed deader than my old mate Joe Smith killed the
Chinaman.”
Harry, on hearing this, quite agreed that it didn’t
matter much whether they got wet or not if the water
was turned on, and they rubbed more dye into their
skins and soon clambered out through a large hole in
the roof, and stood in the famous valley over which
Harry’s brother, the Mad Wizard, reigned as mamoose,
and to gain an entrance into which had been the object
of the expedition of which Harry was the youngest
member. Behind them the mountains rose sheer
and before them lay the village, or rather city, while
beside them a large reservoir was slowly filling with
water, the sluice gates of which opened into the hole
in the rocks through which they had just come.


There were many lights moving about in the village
and the war-drums kept up a continual discordant
noise. “ There’s some sort of ceremony going on
now,” said Bill; “but I am dead certain the warriors
can’t be back yet, for they have to come over the
mountain pass back there and come down in the
cage.”
“ Then what is happening ? ” asked Harry.
“ I am blamed if I know yet,” answered Bill; “ but
we’ll soon git to the bottom of it. Now, remember you’re
a Silent Priest and can’t talk. Do whatever you see me
doing, or what all the other beggars seem concerned in.
Don’t speak to me whatever you see, and don’t get
frightened, even although you could go nap that you’re
found out. If anything happens that you must talk,
come and give my nose a pull, an’ I’ll follow you to
a place where we’ll not be heard or seen. Do you
catch on ? ”
“ Perfectly,” Harry replied ; and they at once pushed
forward and entered the village, there being neither
stockade nor defences of any kind round it. The
people had wisely left all that to the wisdom of their
mamoose, and he had entrusted the defence to the ring
of mountains.
The village was not like any other New Guinean
settlement Harry had seen. It was very large, and
must have contained a population of over eight thousand
people. The buildings were many and very substantial,
being built of wood evidently cut and dressed with tools
superior to those used elsewhere by the natives. Some
of the houses were really artistic in design, and from
the different sizes and styles of architecture it was
evident that rank was by no means unknown among
the mountain people. Apparently, too, there were some
public buildings, for some of the larger erections had


the grotesque gable mountings common to the tribe,
and on the roofs surmounting everything else squatted
the tribe’s great war-god, a huge ugly carved wooden
monstrosity in the shape of a man with a head about
half the size of the body. He sat on what was intended
to typify, in the concrete, the bodies of his people’s
enemies, they being represented by a pile of carved
figures of somewhat dwarfed sizes. There were gardens
round some of the private houses, and Harry could see
away in the distance the common garden of the tribe,
in which they grew their vegetables and cultivated many
herbs and plants quite unknown to the outside world.
There was a large square near the middle of the town,
in the centre of which stood an enormous representation
of the great war-god, with drawn sword in one hand,
and a mighty shield in the other. The war-god was
blessed with only one eye, and from it gleamed a beam
of light which darted hither and thither in all directions
according to the angle at which the god’s head rested,
and round him were dancing thirty or forty natives
dressed similarly to Bill and Harry. Occasionally an
unearthly scream would ring out in the still night air,
but evidently that was quite in the programme, no
attention being paid to it, and the figures moved about
as usual.
Harry and Bill fell in among the performers,
and thus formed part of a procession which, after
a while, seemed to have a more regular and business-
like method than was at first apparent. Out-
side the ring the priests formed was a second ring of
natives, not easily observable, because they stood in
the shadows cast by a number of trees, and after
dancing round the god until they had reached the
end of an incantation, the priest in the inner ring,
who was in line with the ray of light from the god’s


eye, would spring out among the second body of people
and seize the unfortunate being on whom the eye of
the god rested. This person never seemed to realize
the honour done him, for he always did his best to
draw back among his fellows and allow them to have
a share of the godly favour. His companions, how-
ever, also shrank from such great honour; but they
would not suffer the modesty of their comrade to allow
him to escape, and assisted the priests to get their clutch
on him.
When Harry and Bill joined the circle of priests, the
great head with its eye was revolving like a lighthouse
lamp, and the priests were silently marching round and
round, apparently much annoyed that the god could not
make up his mind a great deal quicker as to whom he
would single out; doubtless each thought that he could
have done the business much better himself. The in-
cantation chanted by the outside ring came to an end,
but as the god had not yet determined where to rest
his eye, the candidates for initiation started over again.
Suddenly, however, the dread eye became fixed, and
the priest in front of Harry sprang out and seized the
shivering native upon whom the eye had rested. Harry
jumped out of the ring with the others to assist in the
capture ; but this time there was no need, the victim was
quite resigned to his fate. He was hurried to an altar
at the feet of the god, and two hideously masked priests
bent over him. Next instant the awful scream burst
out, and one of the priests held up something between
his fingers, from which dropped blood. The victim
was then hurried away, and the procession started
again.
Harry felt faint, and he turned to Bill to get him to
explain things. Bill did not seem to be affected in the
slightest; in fact, his eyes shone as if he were enjoying the


performance. Harry gave his nose a vigorous pull, and
stepped out of the ring. But Bill seemed to have for-
gotten this arrangement, and, instead of coming away
quietly, sprang into the air as if shot, and then seized a
sword from one of the outside natives and rushed at
Harry ferociously. Harry thought this part of the pro-
gramme, and ran towards a clump of acacia trees he saw
a few hundred yards away ; but his powers of running
must have deteriorated from want of practice, for the
other gained on him at every step, and suddenly, with a
wild stroke of his ponderous two-edged weapon felled
Harry to the ground.
“Great Jupiter, Bill, surely you needn’t be so force-
ful in your acting,” exclaimed Harry, springing up again,
and thereby just missing another blow. “ Hullo ! here’s
another priest coming.” Another priest was now running
towards them at an extremely rapid rate, and Harry pre-
pared to meet him. But his present companion hurled
himself upon him again with savage energy. “ Bill! ”
gasped Harry, struggling to free himself, “ what do you
mean ? ”
“ Ugh, ugh, tch,” spluttered his companion, aiming a
blow with a bone poniard at Harry’s breast. But he
did not strike, for the other priest had thrown himself
upon him, and together they rolled over and over on
the ground. Harry watched for a chance to interfere,
and then pounced upon what he took to be the real
native, but to his astonishment his captive shouted out a
few words in the choicest Australian vernacular which, to
say the least of it, completely proved his identity, and
before Harry had recovered from his amazement, the
person whom he had taken for Bill, and whose nose he
had pulled, had regained his feet, and was running back
to the village square, like, as Bill said, a young loco-
motive.


“ Centipedes! Harry,” cried Bill, as he stood up
perspiring and re-arranged his dress, “ what has
happened ? What did you do ? And why did you clear
out without letting me know ? ”
“ I did let you know. I pulled your nose.”
“ No, by the great Darling River, you did not. You
must have pulled some one else’s nose, and—great
Jupiter! of course he went for you—that’s it. When I
saw him go for you, I came after. But say, what
was it you wanted to say anyhow, ’cos if we are not
back among the other gentlemen soon there will be
some work for the silent priests a degree ahead of
initiation.”
“ I wanted to know the meaning of the performance,
all about the revolving head, the eye, the light, and what
they did to the man they caught. I was sick, and had
either to come away or betray myself.”
“ Of course, Harry,” began Bill, “ I expected too much
of ye ; I ought to have remembered ye was only a
boy ”
“ I am as old as you,” cried Harry.
“ Maybe,” agreed Bill; “ but then, your eddication has
all been about figures, an’ letters, an’ languages,—though
I don’t reckon ye can talk New Guinean better than me
—an’ I haven’t taken up space in my head with any such
useless stuff.”
“ Well, Bill, explain, and we’ll let that question go.
Of course I know my education really was neglected in
matters pertaining to New Guinean etiquette.”
“ Let’s walk back, then, an’ I’ll tell you all I found
out on the way. You see, I have never seen a perform-
ance like the one to-night any more than you, but it is
as plain as the nose on my face that you didn’t pull that
there’s been a big run on Silent Priests at the fight
to-day, and now those that are left, directed by the


war-god —I wouldn’t mind betting I know who he is—
are making up the shortage, that’s all, and we’d better
git back as boon as possible, so as to be counted among
them.”
“ But what were they doing to that native on the
altar ? ”
“ Making him a Silent Priest. It is a pretty tough
initiation, an’ I reckon over twenty will have to go through
before to-night is over. But you may take it from me,
Harry, that hauling out their tongues is the only way of
making sure that the Silent Priests are silent. By the
Commonwealth ! but that mamoose, or god, or whatever
you like to call him, is as smart a man as poor old Tom
Mackenzie was. He lived down in New South Wales,
an’ could play a Chinaman poker an’ beat him. There
is no silly squabbling parliament for the Mad Wizard—
I mean the mamoose—he takes good care that he is
boss, and we’ll have our work cut out to handle him.
There now, fall into line again, and don’t pull my nose
unless you see me wink at you when you stop in front
of me.”
They again fell into places in the priest-making ring,
and assisted at the adding of several to the brotherhood.
The eye was now tired, however, for it rested at
times where there were no candidates, and frequently
directed its searching glance round the mountain-tops in
a rather aimless fashion for a war-god. Still the cere-
mony went on in a half-hearted manner. Apparently all
were awaiting the return of the warriors over the mountain
pass. At length a beacon on the hilltop above the
subterranean passage flashed out a series of mystic signals,
and all became activity once more. Fires were kindled
in the square, and preparations made for a great feast to
celebrate the victory of the warriors, for it was now known
to all present that their mighty warriors were once more


inside their own valley again, and would arrive with the
prisoners they had kept alive within a very short space
of time.
This assumption was correct; but there were only
three prisoners, and Harry jumped forward and would
have betrayed himself if Bill had not caught him. The
prisoners were the Chief, Doc, and Sartor Resartus.


CHAPTER XIV
The Balance of Life and Death
It was now long past midnight, but the warriors showed
no signs of being exhausted, although they must have
been on the move since sunrise—eighteen hours before.
Amidst loud and prolonged shouts of admiration and
approval they marched round the square, each saluting
the great god as they passed. Finally, they formed up
in a body before the altar, and the prisoners were dragged
to the front for the inspection of the war-god and the
Silent Priests.
It was with extreme difficulty that Harry restrained
himself from attacking those who stood guard over the
Chief and Doc ; but common sense prevailed, for he well
knew that his individual efforts could not alter the posi-
tion of his comrades, while so long as he and Bill remained
free among the natives, they had at least a chance of
doing something for them. The prisoners were not
bound, doubtless because there was no possible means
of escape. The Chief’s face wore an anxious expression
in addition to lines of fatigue ; but Harry knew that his
anxiety in no way concerned himself. Doc seemed in-
different to his surroundings—probably he was wonder-
ing if he would ever smoke a cigar again—and no one
looking at him would have recognized the dare-devil
Irishman of only so many hours before.
(B 1 62) 273 T


Sartor Resartus certainly seemed the most intelli-
gent. His dark gleaming eyes wandered around in
every direction as if taking in the approaches, defences,
and chief characteristics of the village for future use
should he ever again be in a position to command an in-
vading force. But he knew that that was very impro-
bable, and that he would most likely go to feed some
of the mountain people’s gods even as he had sent
many victims himself in his own village.
Silently the priests forced the prisoners down on the
altar, and then stood appealingly before the image, the
warriors and others waiting in expectation. Then the
god spoke, and to the unbounded astonishment of at
least three of his listeners, in English. “Take them
away,” it said ; “ they are of that race which lives across
the water greater than our mountain flood. Take them
to the tapu doubo, and prepare them. To-morrow we
will weigh them on the just and true Balance of Life
and Death.”
Probably no one understood the god’s words; but
as there was only one sentence possible for dis-
tinguished prisoners, the Silent Priests understood what
that was.
“Take your dirty hands off,” growled Doc, as
two Silent Priests marched up to him to lead him
away.
“Tom, don’t you think it is time to end this mas-
querading ? ” cried the Chief, throwing off, with a heave
of his shoulders, the priests who had seized him, and
turning to the idol.
“ Who spoke ? ” cried the god. “ I heard the sound
of a voice that brings back memories of another
world.”
“ It is your old comrade Edward who spoke,” cried
the Chief, eagerly. “He and your other comrades have


come for you ; this is Doc here beside me. Come out
of that monstrosity and shake hands with us.”
“ Ah, you are the tempting devils that come to me
in my dreams ! Away with them ! ” The god’s eye
flashed all round, and the priests rushed at the prisoners
in a body.
“ Lend a hand, Edward,” cried Doc, suddenly waken-
ing up. “ Knock the thing over —it’s only sitting on
the ground.” He threw his weight against the idol as
he spoke, and the Chief did likewise, and realizing that
events would now be precipitated, Harry and Bill also
added their strength and weight. The idol shook, and,
as the terrified priests clustered round to pull off the
prisoners, it toppled and fell with a crash to the ground.
“ Run for it,” cried Doc, as the Chief and he regained
their feet.
“Not without Tom,” answered the Chief, throwing
an armful of priests from him.
A loud shriek of terror had burst from those
assembled round the god when they saw it falling, and
the warriors, at a signal from the priests, rushed in to
assist in recapturing the white devils. But that was no
easy matter, as several of them presently discovered,
for with their backs against the upturned base of the
war-god, Doc and the Chief fought as only men could
fight whose muscles had been trained in pioneering
work, whose lives had been spent amidst danger, and
whose nerves were like steel bands. The warriors were
certainly surprised ; they had never been handled so
roughly in their lives, and seeing that only two men
confronted them, they had not thought it worth while
to run for their weapons. One after another the two
white men threw them over their shoulders, until no
one would come forward. Then Doc and the Chief
each caught one of two priests who had been in the


y6 The Great White Chief
middle of the melee, and raised them, kicking and strug-
gling, in their arms. “ Easy there, Doc,” cried out
Harry, for he it was ; “ we’ve been fighting for you all
along.”
“ I don’t reckon this is a fair way of treating a fellow
that followed ye all through the old war, Cap,” spoke
Bill; and both were lowered.
“Great Heavens!” cried the Chief. “Who are you,
and what are you doing here ? ”
“I’m Darling Bill, I’m Harry’s mate, an’ I’m a Silent
Priest. No, don’t let me go, or the niggers will see.
Give me a toss up. I’ll land on my feet. Catch this
revolver.”
“ But Harry ? ”
“ Is here,” cried that person, who had meanwhile been
whispering to Doc as he struggled in his arms.
“ And the others ? ” cried the Chief.
“Heaven may know. We don’t,” said Bill; “they
were rushed to-night in the valley outside.”
But some warriors had now returned with their
weapons, and it looked as if a speedy termination to
the lives of the Chief and Doc was imminent, when a
tall figure stepped into the arena, and the natives all
stood at attention like a regiment of highly trained
soldiers. It was the mamoose who twelve hours before
had personally directed them in the battle. He was
dressed the same as then, except that he carried no
cane. Looking scornfully at the white men, he said,
“ And you would dare destroy the war-god of the moun-
tain people ? I know you ; I have seen you often in
the spirit land ; but this time you shall be weighed in
the scales of the Silent Priests, and you shall never
trouble me more.”
“ Don’t you know us, Tom ? ” cried the Chief. “ Try
to remember. We are your old comrades ”


“ And you shall go down the sacred river to-morrow,”
continued the mamoose ; then turning to the warriors and
priests standing round, he addressed them in their own
language. In response to his words the priests again
advanced when the Chief stepped out and held up his
hand.
. “Stop one moment,” he cried, in the Tugeri dialect,
which was partly understood by the people ; “ I, too,
am a mamoose, and I claim the right to challenge the
mamoose of this city to fight me.” He stood facing
them, and all were silent.
“You are no mamoose,” at length said a leading
warrior, also in the Tugeri tongue. “You are only a
common white devil.”
“You lie, you old woman,” roared the Chief; “and
your mamoose is another old woman.”
Harry and Bill had got back among the priests by
this time, but they now prepared to fight for their lives.
Well they knew that only one result could follow the
Chiefs challenge.
“ But he is my brother, Bill,” said Harry, forgetting
for the moment the role he was playing. “He will be
killed.”
“No fear,” said Bill ; “ but look, he is going to
fight.”
“ Listen ! ” cried the mamoose, addressing his people
in their own tongue. “ I will show you that your
mamoose is still mighty as he once was. I will give
you this devil to throw down the mountain flood-way,”
The natives cheered loudly, and the mamoose stepped
forward.
“ For Heaven’s sake be careful, Chief,” said Doc, as
his comrade also stepped forward. “ He’ll murder you
if you make the slightest slip. He is hopelessly mad,
you know.”


“ I’ll make no slip, Doc,” answered the Chief; “but if
this plan of restoring his memory does not succeed, and
he is still stronger than I, of course all is over with me.
So good-bye, old fellow; I am sorry I led you and the
others into this ”
“If you say another word about that I’ll challenge
him myself,” said Doc, quickly ; “ and one squeeze from
him, as you know, and I should be into pulp. Go on.
and throw him by that trick of yours if you can, and
may Heaven help our cause.”
They shook hands, the mamoose waiting impatiently
meanwhile.
The priests now gathered round to arrange the details
of the combat, and Bill and Harry on the pretence of
seeing all was fair, shook hands with the Chief and heard
his scheme, which was that, if by a piece of luck, and the
result of hard training, and knowledge of a special trick
he had cultivated, he could throw the mamoose, he would
by virtue of a law of the people become mamoose instead,
and the rest would be easy. On the other hand, should
he not be able to throw the mamoose there was still a
good chance that the combat would awaken the sleeping
memories in the mamoose’s brain, and the similarity of
the situation to that which occurred long ago might even
bring about complete restoration.
“ But if he throws you and does not remember ?” asked
Harry, as they completed their supposed examination.
“ Then I shall have done all that a comrade could do,
even to giving my life,” answered the Chief. “ But it
is you I am sorry for ; I brought you here ”
Some priests approached, and Harry and Bill led the
Chief out to the cleared space where the mamoose was
waiting.
The two men eyed each other for a moment, the one
with a blank gaze in which was absolutely no expression,


and the other with an eager glance that searched his
opponent’s face for any sign of recognition. Both men
seemed well matched, and it would have been difficult to
find another two men of such splendid physique any-
where south of the Equator. But the Chief saw no sign
in the other’s face, and next moment they were in grips,
each disdaining the use of weapons. Silently the crowd
around watched and waited, and just as silently the two
chief actors struggled. It soon became apparent that the
Chief was losing ground, and that the mamoose was the
stronger of the two, despite the fact that the Chief was
easily the strongest man known in New Guinea. Now
they approached the time when, to bring his special trick
into play, the Chief had to sacrifice his grip somewhat.
He did so, and bending his body back, so as to draw the
mamoose forward, recklessly anticipating an easy throw,
he suddenly found himself flying through the air over
the mamoose’s head. His trick had not worked, and he
fell heavily to the ground. Harry and Bill rushed up to
him, forgetting their position.
“ It’s all right, boys,” whispered the Chief, “ I’m not
really much hurt ; but I can’t throw him, and I risked
this. Get away at once,”
All the priests had now come up to take the defeated
man in charge, and the warriors rent the air with their
praises of their mighty mamoose. But there was a new
light in the eyes of the mamoose, and he signed to his
men that the proceedings were over for the time. Then
he walked over to his prostrate comrade, and gazed
intently at him.
“ That was an old trick,” he muttered. “ How strange
that I should have dreamt that it was he who taught it
to me long, long ago ! ” His eyes fell on Harry and Bill.
“Take him away,”he said, not unkindly, in English, and
Harry advanced to obey.


“Ha!” cried the mamoose, seizing Harry by the
arm. “What is this? How came you to understand
the language of the gods ? ”
Harry gazed into his brother’s eyes terror-stricken,
and Bill came forward to his side. “ You go and fling a
brick at yourself, you old madman,” he roared, dodging
back among the priests and knocking one or two over to
hide his movements until he had become merged in their
ranks. The mamoose started perceptibly at Bill’s words,
and gazed after him ; but he said nothing, and the priests
carried the Chief away. The warriors then seated them-
selves at the various fires and began to enjoy the supper
prepared for them by those who had remained at home,
and from their loud voices and gesticulations it was
evident that they were detailing an account of their
great victory. The mamoose bent down and looked at
Harry very closely.
“ Silent Priests have no tongues,” he said. “ Why
have you not gone away with the others? Yet, stay, I
will make sure of you myself.”
He lifted Harry in his powerful arms, completely
ignoring the struggles of the youth to escape.
“ Let me go,” Harry yelled in desperation. “ I am
your brother. I came out here with your old comrades
to take you home. My mother and sister are waiting
for you.”
“ Oh, are they ? ” said the mamoose, seriously. “In
that case I’d better go to them. Run and tell them I’m
coming.” He placed Harry on the ground and gazed
reflectively at the dye which had somehow become trans-
ferred from Harry’s skin to his own hands. “ Run
away,” he said ; “ I know you are only the beginning of
another dream, or I would pull your tongue out. Get
away before the other priest? come.”
Harry considered a moment if he should not try to


touch his brother’s dormant mind by another appeal, but
remembering that the Chief had not succeeded in so
doing, and that he could not afford to run any risks if
he hoped to be of any service to his Chief, for well he
knew that some horrible fate was in store for him, he
decided that he would consult Doc and him before doing
anything.
Leaving the mamoose standing, he abruptly turned
and ran away, and mixed with the priestly procession as
it conveyed the Chief and Doc to the tapu house. Harry
had not the faintest idea which of the crowd was Bill,
but he judged that that gentleman would not be far
away from the Chief, and so contrived to be among
those who appointed themselves jailors.
Meanwhile Sartor Resartus had been tied up to an
old disused idol in one end of the building. He was
considered far more dangerous than the white men. He
was the mamoose of the greatest fighting people in New
Guinea, and as such would be given to the gods in a
manner befitting his position and the dignity of his
captors. The priests deposited the Chief in a corner
screened off from Sartor Resartus, and, after seeing that
escape from the building was impossible, left him to
exercise their powers in controlling all ceremonies per-
taining to the series of feasts which had been projected
to celebrate the tribe’s great victory over the Tugeris.
Doc, to his surprise, was left severely alone, inside the
tapu house, of course, which was guarded well outside.
As soon as he realized this he went over and sat beside
the Chief, two priests also coming forward at the same
time.
“Well, Chief, I suppose we’ll not be long after the
Parson, Mac, and the boys,” he remarked, as he examined
his comrade’s shoulder to see what injury he had
sustained in his fall.


“ Oh, don’t trouble about me, Doc,” the Chief
answered ; “ I’m really not hurt at all, only a broken
collar-bone, but as I had absolutely no chance with him
I thought it might be best to pretend But have all
the boys gone under? ”
“ I fear they have, although I can’t understand how
Harry got here. Poor boy. You had better not tell
him, Chief. It would be too bad for him to know that
the mamoose who will superintend our slaughter is his
lost brother ”
“ Harry knows already, Doc,” spoke one of the
two priests, sadly; “ and I don’t wish to live any
longer if you are—are leaving us. I am going with
you.”
“ Don’t talk nonsense, boy,” spoke Doc, sharply;
“we are not dead yet. Tell us all you know about
your comrades, and how you got here, and what
happened after we left you. We gather that there
was a great fight, and that you and the Tugeris got
mixed.”
“ Then you gather wrong, old chap,” spoke the other
priest ; “ I was in the band that collared you. We came
through a mountain passage, and got there first, and
when going back to see about some trap set in the next
gully, bagged you.”
“ Who are you ? ” cried Doc.
“ Darling Bill, an Ai Silent Priest.”
“ He is my friend, Doc,” said Harry.
“ And mine,” added the Chief, “ if he is really Bill
and not a native.”
“ I am real sorry that it would not be healthy for
us to wash the dye off our skins to prove who
we are,” said Bill ; “ and I reckon we can do good
business in our line when even you two have doubts
about us.”


“ Well, boys, my advice to you is to get as far away
from this accursed country as soon as you can, and
while the road is open,” said Doc. “We shall join our
comrades in the Land of the Great Beyond to-morrow,
I suppose ; and you, Harry, fall heir to all the gold and
everything else we left with the Germans. Now, Boy,
get me a light somewhere if you can ; I have a cigar, and
would like a smoke.”
“ You are mighty fine at playing at pegging out,”
snorted Bill, as Harry produced his water-tight match-
box and gave Doc a light. “It strikes me any fools
could do that. I would have liked to shut my eyes
and drifted away to the happy hunting-ground many a
time myself when I’ve been cold and hungry and hadn’t
a cent nor a pal in the whole blamed world. Does ye
think we counts for nothing ? We are here to see that
the priests get euchred in every little game they try, and
we’ll take ye out of this if we have to kill every man
in the city—barring the mamoose—or I’m the biggest
liar ever lived, and no man has ever called me one
yet.”
“ Bill,” broke in the Chief, “ I know you can do
great things; but you don’t understand. There is
nothing left for us to do. We have played a game
and lost, and we certainly do not intend to live now
that our brave comrades have passed out with their
boots on. They may bring in our executioners and any
tortures they like ; I don’t suppose Doc and I will care
much.”
“ Look here, Captain,” burst in Bill, “ I am almost
ashamed o’ ye. Ye are not the man I knew in South
Africa. He would never be beat by some dirty niggers.
Now, who said your mates were dead ? They didn’t peg
out anywhere near your camp, and I know your carriers
got away ; and if your comrades are half the bushmen


they ought to be, I reckon they are somewhere near
here now, although they can’t get in without falling over
these mountains.”
“ Then you did not see them killed ? ” cried the Chief,
sitting up eagerly.
“No,” replied Harry; “but I will tell you the whole
story as far as I know, and then we can form a
plan ”
“Just wait half a minute until I attend to this priest
that’s listening behind that god,” interrupted Bill ; “ he
can’t talk, but he might cause trouble some other way.”
He walked leisurely over to a god standing near, and
quickly springing behind it, dragged forth a priest. “ I’m
sorry, old man,” said Bill, to the priest’s amazement,
who although he could not speak nor understand what
he heard, could hear all right, and therefore knew that
Bill had a tongue ; “ I’m sorry to have to kill ye, for your
life is just about as miserable as a dingoe’s ”
“Don’t kill him, Bill,” cried the Chief; “he can’t
understand us.”
“ But he knows that some Silent Priests have a
tongue,” said Bill, still holding his victim ; “and that’s
just exactly what the mamoose is particularly careful
that they have not.”
“ I don’t know the meaning of the Silent Priests yet,”
said the Chief. “ Tie the poor beggar up somewhere
just now and come back here. If they are to give us to
their gods to-morrow we want to hear all about what
happened to-day first.”
Bill cut some of the thongs which bound Sartor
Resartus, much to that gentleman’s relief, for he was
already almost dead from the effects of his tight binding,
and with the ropes taken from him hitched his brother
priest to a convenient god. When he returned Harry was
detailing the events that had transpired since the Chief


and Doc left the camp, and with some help from Bill he
soon put these two in complete possession of everything
in the way of knowledge that he possessed. Afterwards
the Chief told Harry that it was his brother who was
their old comrade, and that he had not told him before
because he, Doc, and the Parson, had thought that if
they failed in their mission it would be better that he
should never know who the mamoose was. He also
explained that their idea had been to steal the mamoose
away, and that they had hoped, by surrounding him with
his old comrades, to bring his memory round gradually.
They had thought it likely, too, that on seeing Harry
his full powers of memory might burst suddenly upon
him, for medical science had proved, in similar cases
which had been investigated, that nothing acted so
strongly, or was so difficult to destroy, as the memories
of one’s home associations.
“ Well, boy, we have failed, that’s all,” said the Chief,
in conclusion.
“That’s about it,” said Doc. “Give us another
match.”
“ We’ll git ye out, never fear,” put in Bill, cheerily ;
“so ye’d better try and sleep now, in case ye will need
all the strength ye can raise for the circus that is work-
ing up.”
“We don’t despair now,” said the Chief; “seeing that
there is a chance of Mac and Bob and Bill being alive, I
feel that Doc and I are as good as an army yet, and I
shouldn’t be surprised now to see Mac himself sailing in
to-morrow with his big legs bared, and dyed, and wear-
ing the dress of a Silent Priest.”
“ Give us some more matches, then, Boy, and clear
out, said Doc j ‘ there is evidently a big dinner on
just now, and you might be able to get us something to
eat.”


“ That is a good idea,” said Bill, moving towards the
door. “We’ll be back soon.”
Doc and the Chief stretched themselves out for a
sleep, and the two boy priests opened the door and
jumped down the staging from the verandah among
the outer guards, A way was at once opened for them,
and they walked majestically through, and after a tour
of exploration round the city joined their brethren at the
great feast. The mountain people were not cannibals,
although human sacrifice was essential in their religious
rites, and Harry and Bill had no hesitation in making
a first-class meal. They then appropriated half a dozen
roasted chickens, and several gourds of herb wine, and
conveyed them to their two comrades ; nor did they forget
Sartor Resartus, to that gentleman’s unbounded surprise.
Then, after arranging that Doc should liberate the bound
priest when they had had time to make some change in
their dress, the boys departed again, for they could not
afford to miss any arrangements that might be made
regarding the disposal of the prisoners.
Towards dawn the feast came to an end, and priests,
warriors, and future warriors scattered to their various
houses and sleeping-places. Some time before, Bill had
discovered where the last owner of his head-dress had
lived while at home, and off duty, but as the somewhat
pretentious dwelling was occupied by a colony of people
who claimed to be members of his illustrious family, he
had not appropriated it, preferring to roost, as he said
himself, in the priests’ house, a sort of monastery or
barracks, where a certain number of priests were supposed
to be at all times. Taking Harry thither, he coolly
annexed some ingeniously contrived rugs, made of skins
and furs, belonging to some of the priests, and made a
bed for himself and Harry.
“ As likely as not the fellows who belonged to them


got killed yesterday,” he said, by way of explanation.
“ An’ anyhow I reckon we can fight any one who thinks
he has a better claim than us.”
But no one disturbed them, and amidst forty or fifty
slumbering priests they slept, careless alike of the pre-
carious nature of their surroundings, and the uncertainty
of what might happen before the next sunset. They
were awaked by the beating of a huge war-drum, and
as they had no toilet preparations to make, they were
ready for anything next second.
It was now approaching the hour of noon, and the
drum was a summons to the council chamber, where the
business of the day was to be arranged under the super-
intendence of the mamoose. Without delay all the
priests rose to their feet, shook themselves, and ad-
journed to a large erection where the greatest mamoose
in the history of their tribe was awaiting them. But he
had little to say during that day’s parliament, and, of
course, the priests never said anything. In effect, how-
ever, his orders were that the Balance of Truth should
be put in order at once, and the prisoners judged by it
in the usual way, and sacrifices made to the gods
according to the result.
This, apparently, was in complete harmony with the
ideas of the priests, and they signified by signs that they
would attend to the matter, and the one-sided parliament
was dismissed. All that afternoon, therefore, while the
warriors partook of a second feast, the Silent Priests
worked at the great Balance of Truth, as they elected to
call the instrument which tried all important prisoners.
This was a gigantic swaying balance erected on a little
island in the middle of the pent-up lake which lay behind
the city. The balance was cleverly constructed of dressed
wood, and the cross-beam, on which a platform was
built at either end, was poised on a stand about fifty


feet in height. Needless to say that cross-beam,
although apparently adjusted fairly, was so contrived
that one side was considerably overbalanced by the
other, so that the results were always what the priests
intended them to be. The chief idea was that the
prisoners on the one side should, by reason of their
guilt, presumably, weigh down a double number of
priests placed on the other side, and so bring about
their own destruction. Before the advent of the Great
White Mamoose, this destruction was brought about
by two springy trees which grew under the balance
platforms. These trees were pulled over until they
formed a springy curve under the said platforms, and tied
in that position until a knife blade, fitted under the
platform of the falling side, cut the thongs which bound
them. Then the tree shot up into its original vertical
position, and in so doing tipped the lower balance and
its guilt-stained occupants into the lake, which, being let
loose at the proper moment, carried their bodies through
the subterranean passage to the abode of the many
devouring spirits who lived beyond.
The mamoose, however, foreseeing the possibility of
the natural catapult failing him, or only doing its work
partly at a time when he most required its full assist-
ance, or the spirit, or the gods had made a special call
for victims, had invented and substituted powerful
springs made from some peculiar combination of metals
which abounded in vast ore bodies throughout the
mountains surrounding the city. Incidentally it may be
stated that he had also taught the Silent Priests the
elementary laws of metallurgy and mechanics, and thus
many engines of war existed around the city which would
render it impregnable if it should ever be attacked, even
by a British or German force with field equipments.
Harry and Bill took active parts in the mounting


and adjusting of the balance, and noted with more
alarm than they could hide, the enormous weight of the
side on which their comrades were to be placed. But
the springs took up their attention more than anything
else. They were truly of gigantic dimensions, each
consisting of a spiral of heavy wire drawn from the
strange metallic compound the mamoose had invented.
The height of the springs when compressed was sixteen
feet, and they were at least four feet in diameter, the
priests compressing them into these sizes by means of
hammers and wedges, and then locking them at their
extreme stored-up strengths by a system of bars and
ropes, so arranged that one of the latter, on being cut by
the descending platform, set the spring free, and its
accumulated strength did the rest.
The following day was appointed for the great sacri-
fice. Sartor Resartus was to be buried alive according
to the original programme, he not being entitled to the
just and merciful trial by the balance ; but it suddenly
dawned on some one high in priestly authority that the
colony of ants that lived in the wooden piles round the
tapu house had not been receiving the attention of late
that all things tapu should receive, and so the decision
as to Sartor Resartus’ fate was amended. The new
sentence was that he should be stripped and planted
waist deep in the ground in a hole dug through an ant
bed, and then smeared with fat; the idea being to keep
the tapu ants in fresh meat as long as possible. After
seeing Sartor Resartus comfortably settled in the ant
bed, the city could turn out in holiday attire to see the
two white devils being tried and given to the water
gods. Of course, no one dreamt for a moment that the
balance could give any other result than the one
anticipated. The Silent Priests would see to that,
and if they made any mistake the mamoose would
(B 762) U


give the gods a plentiful and sumptuous repast of
priests.
That night the boys visited the captives and en-
deavoured to formulate some scheme. “We’ve got
sixteen hours left yet,” said the Chief, cheerily, as he
and Doc attacked the food brought them. “Anything
may happen in that time. The mamoose may remember
when he sees us again, or we may make a good fight,
and escape to the mountains.”
“ Ain’t no good, Captain,” said Bill. “ The mountain
sides have been made as steep as walls since you knew
them. I was thinking of shooting at the rope which
ties the spring under the priests’ side of the swing. True
I could not get more than one shot before I was rushed ;
but, by the Commonwealth! I reckon I could send all
the tongueless beggars to their water gods with that
shot, and, anyhow, Harry is still left for another try.”
“Don’t talk of that, Bill,” said the Chief. “You
must not risk Hullo! here is some important
priest coming in. Get out of the way, boys, or he
may suspect.”
“ I’ll pretty soon put him out of the way,” grunted
Bill. “ Come on, Harry ; give us a hand. He’s a blamed
powerful-looking nigger.”
“ I’ll come too,” said Doc ; “ I need some exercise
anyhow.” He rose and extinguished his cigar—for his
supply was almost exhausted, and he had to economize
and joined the boys.
Meanwhile the priest advanced in all the glory of his
office. He carried a torch, but it was too dark to see
his features plainly. One priest did not differ materially
from another, however, and that fact was of little account.
He was evidently bent on some mission of importance,
for he glanced suspiciously from right to left and held
his torch into all the corners as he came along. He was


I Hi if *ipfl
I m&Jy \ \\ i \ : J|
I M --tf >/>. \ . j _ yi A9 n
A .,. v .y J _' B
[2*1 BBpl&
#1 \J >JL H
E' ■ . t ' *.-, < » r —
•-
“to his surprise he went flying halfway across
THE APARTMENT”




tall and burly, and wore a head-dress and an enormous
fibre kilt, but nothing else in the way of clothing. In
his hand was a ferociously spiked club, and his eyes
shone even in the semi-darkness in a fashion that boded
ill for some one. And that some one was Bill. He
had suddenly sprung upon the priest, and, to his sur-
prise, went flying headlong half-way across the apartment
before his hands had even touched the priest. Doc then
flung himself upon the warrior priest, pinioning his hands
in scientific fashion so that he could not use his club.
But it was of no use, the priest’s face expanded in a
grin, Doc felt his arms shaken off and then something
like a pair of steel bands encircled him, and he was swung
off his feet.
“ I thocht ye wad hae acquired mair sense by this time,
Doc, than to try to throw ony man wi’ a grip like that,”
said the priest, as he held Doc in his arms. “ Eh, michty
me ! wha’s this ? ”
Another priest was rushing forward, shouting, “ Mac !
it’s Mac! ”
“ Of course it is, ye kilted gorilla,” grunted the first
priest, “ but wha the mischief are you ? ” He deposited
Doc on the ground, and stared at the two priests
wonderingly, Bill having again come forward with Harry,
and Doc quietly re-lit his cigar.
“ It’s me, Mac, and this is my friend, Darling Bill,”
cried Harry ; and next moment he was locked in the big
Scot’s arms, all care and responsibility forgotten, for was
not Mac easily able to circumvent whatever schemes the
natives could evolve ?
Mac’s voice broke, and probably for the first time in
many years the tears rolled down his dyed face. “ Eh,
laddie,” he said, “ I thocht that poor auld Mac was
ance mair left alane in this weary world, and he is as
tired o’ it as was ever ony man —But whaur’s the Chief ? ”


“I’m all right,” cried the Chief, from his corner.
“ Come and give us a grip of your fist, Mac. I have been
expecting you for some time now. Doc and I are going
off on the Long Trail to-morrow.”
“ An’ by the blood o’ my ancestors! ” exclaimed
Mac, slowly and earnestly, “Mac and every nigger in
this valley, and the city, will go with you, then. I’ve
got all the dynamite we carried, hidden near here, and
I am the man that will be fuse and match combined, and
firer too, and we’ll all go off together.”
“ Are you Mac ? ” the inquirer was Bill.
“ Ay, that’s me,” answered Mac. “ I’m real sorry if
I hurt ye ; but I didna ken I had ony freends among
the black folk.”
“ Oh, ye didn’t hurt me much, but I was thinking if
you are the fellow I’ve heard about you won’t go talking
so much about peggin’ out an’ that sort of nonsense, but
you’ll come with Harry and me an’ invent some way o’
getting clear o’ the hole we’re in.”
“Ma laddie, ye’re a gem,” cried Mac, delightedly.
“ If ony engineering will dae ony guid, or fechting, or
diplomacy, I’m wi’ ye; but let me ken hoo the land
lies. I’m a stranger here.”
Mac was soon made acquainted with all that the others
knew, and then he explained how he had come to be a
priest. “Me an’ Bill,” he said, “were up in the rocks
above the camp getting some firewood when we heard
some nigger howls, an’ looking doon we could just make
out that somehow the beggars had found out about us
and had rushed us. We pot-shotted them as long as we
could see a heid to shoot at, and then came doon to
make a closer acquaintance wi’ our visitors. But there
was naebody there, an’ we shouted an’ hunted for the
boys everywhere, but couldna find ony trace. Thinking
that they had a’ gone under an’ that only we twa were


left tae carry on the business o’ our expedition, we then
went into the next gully and changed clothes wi’ some
niggers that didna need them ony mair, an’ then picked
up the tracks o’ the warriors an’ followed them until we
came to the top o’ the mountain, an’ looked down on the
city. That was this morning ; and after a bit we found
some endless rope arrangement running up and down,
and Bill and me just got on to the ropes and came doon
hand over hand. We saw a lot o’ people dressed like
oursel’s when we landed, but they didna speak to us, an’
we were too tired to speak to them, for it took us three
hoors tae come doon the ropes. However, I came on to
the tapu house, leaving Bill watching outside.”
“ Then Bill is here too,” cried all.
“He is,” answered Mac, “ and that maks us six
strong withoot countin’ our auld friend Sartor, whom
I see ye hae gotten for a companion in misfortune.
But tak’ me tae that wonderful weighing-machine,
laddies, maybe there’s something there that ma
mechanical abilities can contrive to help us oot o’
oor difficulties.”
“ I don’t reckon we can do anything in that way,”
said Bill, sorrowfully, yet trying not to show his sadness.
“ But it might be best for us to get the hang of things
just now when it is dark, so that we’ll not make any
mistake when the corroborree starts to-morrow.”
“ The thought has just struck me,” said Doc, “ that if
we could get half a dozen of the priests here on some
pretence we could tie them up and go out in their dresses,
a piece of burnt cork would give us the means of making
our faces black enough. We could then go through the
passage the boys know and get clear—then —well—no,
boys, that wouldn’t do, we should just have to come back
again or give up our mission, and I don’t suppose any of
us would do that. Go and see the affair, then, Mac, and


invent some plan for playing on the superstitions of the
people, and good luck be with you.”
Mac rubbed his face over with his fingers where the
tears had left two patches of white skin, and with the two
boys gravely walked out of the tapu house. The guards
surrounding the sacred edifice opened a path through
their ranks for them, and making their way in the
shadows as much as possible, to escape observation, they
skirted the city square, plunged through some gardens
which fringed the sacred waterway, and finally reached
the great lake, the waters of which were still rising. On
the tiny headland which ran out to the middle, and
which would be an island at high water, loomed the
ponderous balance, its form only barely discernible
through the darkness. The three priests walked over to
it, and crawling in among the huge spring coils, lit a
torch. The night was bitterly cold, and the men
shivered as the cold winds blew about their bare limbs.
“ I dinna ken,” spoke Mac, as he critically examined
the mechanism of the machine, “but I feel that kilts,
such as we priests are wearing just now, are no alto-
gether satisfactory on a night like this. There’s nae
doobt but oor heids are well protected, an’ a cloak o’
modesty an’ a coat o’ dye should be enough covering for
ony man
“ Say what you have discovered, Mac,” interrupted
Harry, who well knew that when Mac had something in
his mind he always talked irrelevantly, so as to lead up
to his scheme artistically.
“ Ye’re in a big hurry, lad,” said Mac, “ and I’ll no
say but what there’s reason for it ; but has it no struck
you twa priests that there is something peculiar about
these twa coiled springs ? ”
“ They’re thundering powerful ones,” said Bill; “ that’s
all I can see about them that concerns us, unless you are


referring to their not being painted, or something like
that ”
“ Ye’ll grow older some day, laddie,” returned Mac,
good-naturedly. “ I wasna thinkin’ aboot onything that
doesna concern us. I was only noting the strange fact
that only one o’ these springs is a real one, the other one
is only a spiral of heavy metal with no more spring nor
temper in it than is in my club.”
“ What are you driving at, Mac ? ” cried Harry,
excitedly. “ Explain, quick. What have you found
out ? ”
“Just ca’ canny a bit, and ye’ll ken all aboot it,”
answered Mac, climbing over the springs. “To me,”
he continued, “ this looks like a very ungentlemanly
dodge o’ the priests, and I for one will have nothing to
dae with such cheating folk whenever it is healthy for
me to resign my priesthood. I see what I was looking
for noo, and, wi’ the help o’ Providence, we’ll give the
niggers ane o’ the biggest surprises they ever got. You
see, when this side comes doon, as it must, no matter
how many nigger priests go on the other side, this rope
will be cut, and the spring will send the prisoners flying
over into the water ; but when this side is shot up, the
other side must come doon in turn, and then the rope on
its side must be cut too, and then the priests themselves
would get the heave. Noo, that was just what I couldna
understand from your descriptions. I couldna see hoo it
was managed that the spring on their side didnawork as
it should.”
“ That is all very well,” grunted Bill ; “ but how is
that knowledge going to help us ? We never expected
we were to get a fair show, and it doesn’t matter
whether they do the trick with the springs or any-
thing else.”
“ But it does, Bill, ma man,” cried Mac ; “ for between


noo and the next quarter o’ an hoor we are goin’ to
change them ! ”
“But the Chief and Doc will still come down first,
and then if nothing happens the priests will examine the
thing,” cried Harry.
“ A dinna think the priests would know one spring
from the other. This is the mamoose’s idea, and I fancy
he often plays tricks on the priests he has tired of in the
same way as we are going to do. But you’re right aboot
the wrong side coming doon first, laddie.” Mac was
much worried now, and the perspiration streamed from
his black face, and he leaned against the supports of the
balance and groaned in anguish. At length he smiled.
“ We’ll mak’ that right,” he said, “by shifting some o’
the weights on the prisoners’ side over to the priests’
side, so as to mak’ things mair equal. When that is ad-
justed to our satisfaction the Chief and Doc will come
doon easy, and hitting the top o’ the dead spring, will
bump up again. The weights being nearly the same
by this time, the other side will swing a bit, and we’ll
lower the bone cutter on that side, so that when it falls
just a wee bit that string will be cut and the live
spring will hurl them to perdition. The Chief and
Doc will get a bit bump on the top o’ the other
spring, but that is naething to the throw the other
fellows will get.”
“ I knew we would be all right with Mac as chief
engineer,” cried Harry, gleefully. “ Come along, Bill,
let us climb up and shift these weights to the other
side.”
“ Watch your feet, then, boys, for it is no just a
parade-ground up there ; but ye were at the building
o’ the thing, and can feel your way aboot better
than me.”
But the boys were already scaling the central support,


and Mac stopped speaking and began screwing the
live spring down to its smallest bulk with a lever inserted
between the two powerful ropes which controlled it,
which he twisted until the spring was at an enormous
tension. He then locked the spring in position, and
disconnecting it from its base, levered it over and over
until it was standing beside the dead one. The removal
of the fictitious spring was a simple matter, and when
Harry and Bill descended from their airy perch they
found Mac leaning against one of the springs and lost in
contemplation of the starry heavens.
“ What are we to do now, Mac ? ” asked Harry. “ The
weights are readjusted, and the one side is only a trifle
heavier than the other.”
“ Then we’ll connect the ropes and the cutting arrange-
ments and gang hame to the Chief and Doc. Hae ye
ever studied parabolic curves ? ”
“ What’s a parabolic curve ? ” asked Bill, now wonder-
fully impressed by Mac’s engineering skill.
“The curve through the air that our priest friends
will travel to-morrow ; but hurry up, and let us awa’, and
if ye ken whaur the priests’ larder is tak’ me there, for
I havena had onything to eat for the last twa or three
days.”
“ We’ll go and get Bill, and have a prowl round,” said
Harry.
“ Coolgardie Bill! Great jumping beans ! I forgot
all about him,” exclaimed Mac. “They’ll have eaten
him by this time.”
This was an alarming state of affairs, and hurriedly,
but none the less securely, making all connections between
the cross-beam of the balance and the springs, they went
over every working part again, and took their departure.
It was now midnight, but the people, having been
asleep all day, were assembled at a second feast, and


when the trio reached the village, they joined them for
a little in order to steal as much food as they could
hide about their persons. This done they retired to
the tapu house to feed their comrades, not forgetting
Sartor Resartus, but no signs of Coolgardie Bill could
be seen.
The boys then searched the city and closely scruti-
nized every Silent Priest they passed ; but day dawned,
and still Bill’s fate remained a mystery.
“ Oh, you needn’t worry about Bill,” Mac said, when
the boys came back in the early morning. “He will have
found out that silence is golden in this place, and will
likely be chief priest by this time.”
“You boys must try to have some sleep now,” said
Doc, whom, with the Chief, Mac had made acquainted
with all that had happened at the balance.
This seemed to be the opinion of all, and, stretching
themselves out, the five world wanderers slept like little
children. And the sun crawled up the heavens. The
mighty balance on the tiny island, amidst the pent-up
flood of water, swayed in the breeze which had come into
being, and the people began to gather on the shore to
watch the great performance. About eleven o’clock a
fierce beating of war drums awakened the prisoners and
their three comrades. This was the summons to the
priests to begin the proceedings, and, shortly after, a
number of them came in and led forth Sartor Resartus.
He was not a coward, although the white men half
suspected he would show the white feather.
“ Hims like white fellows,” he said, as the priests
hauled him out past his fellow captives. “ Hims think
niggers no good. Sartor Resartus big mamoose. Hims
Christian. Meets him white friends in other world,
good-bye.”
“ Good-bye, old fellow,” responded the white men ;


“ we’re sorry you are leaving us, but we are performing
to-day ourselves.” At that moment a second army of
priests entered to lead them away, and Mac, Bill, and
Harry mixed with them, and in a body they passed out
into the city.


CHAPTER XV
What Happened at the Weighing,
and After
The sports were in full swing. Several unimportant
affairs had already taken place, and the minor gods had
received the usual sacrifices. But now the drums ceased
beating for a moment, and a hush fell over the assembled
throng. The great event of the day was at hand, and the
priests, silent as the tomb, were moving about everywhere,
seeing that all things were in order for the great trial.
The people were vastly interested. Only a few of them
had as yet seen the white devils, and the rest wondered
what they were like. Some of them remembered the white
people who had come to their valley with their great
mamoose many years ago, but as most of the warriors of
that time had since become priests, naturally they never
spoke of those days.
The mamoose was seated on a platform raised above
his people. He sat in solitary state, for he was spiritual
head as well as fighting chief, and he kept up the dignity
of his position. Underneath and around him surged the
populace, their eyes fixed on the planks laid across from
the shore on which they stood to the little strip of rock
where the enormous balance was erected. The people of
the mountain were indeed a contrast to those of the
plains and foothills. They did not kill, except in battle,


for the sake of killing, nor did they sacrifice human life
with any love for the sport. Theirs was a deeply religious
life, and if the gods who had protected and ruled the
tribe since the beginning of time demanded human sacri-
fices, why, then they had to get them. The priests had
been the rulers of the people, and, before the advent of
the white mamoose, acted with a high hand, their chief
being regarded as one holding powers from the gods to
make the sun stand still if he so desired. The fighting
mamoose or warrior chief was then only an instrument
in his hands, and was only used for carrying out the
commands of the gods, as interpreted by the spiritual
mamoose. He had always to be ready to fight for his
position should any warrior challenge him, and, as a
result, mamooses changed frequently.
When the white mamoose assumed command, how-
ever, matters speedily underwent some radical changes.
The high priest’s position was not open for competition
as was the chief warrior’s, but the new mamoose ignored
that fact, and, having fought both chiefs, he was deter-
mined to act as the two himself. This he had done with
great success, and when the priests became unruly, as
they did at times, he invariably received a command
from some god or other, and in carrying out that com-
mand priests often met with accidents. He brought his
faithful warriors to assist when such commands were
beyond the powers of the priests to fulfil, and it was
a remarkable coincidence that the priests were always
among the unfortunate ones in cases of misfortune.
After he had trained all to his satisfaction he received
instructions from the gods that henceforth priests should
be silent. He thereupon assembled them together, and,
after informing them that they were advanced to the
position of advisers to both spiritual and fighting
mamooses, he told them of the order of the gods, and


straightway called in his warriors to ensure their being
silent for ever.
Since that time the people of the mountains had
prospered exceedingly, for now instead of devoting their
time to sacrificing each other to gods who never showed
any appreciation of what was done for them, and generally
acting as slaves of the priests, they tilled the ground,
grew spices, and built themselves good houses. Taught
by the new mamoose, they constructed many appliances
which made their labours much easier, built defence
works, and watch towers, on the mountain-tops, and
generally made their mountain home impregnable. Art
and industry too had made advances. Many of the
people showed an adaptability for painting and repro-
ducing, on slabs of rock and prepared wood, the chief
features of their environment, and the manufacture
of bark cloth, and a kind of silk for dress and home
purposes, had become quite a trade. The mamoose
had also introduced the cultivation of rubber, and
many food plants, such as coffee and cocoa, with the
result that the once priest-ridden valley was now semi-
civilized.
But the New Guinean native has the idea of sacrifice
too strongly instilled into him to leave it off unless under
the influence of a gun-boat, or machine guns, and where
these admirable civilizing machines do not penetrate,
he still practises many weird rites. The mamoose had
made some endeavours to kill the custom, and had, by
substituting a few troublesome priests for those at first
intended to play the leading part in some sacrifice, done
much to modify the demand for such. But he was
warrior in chief of the tribe, and he certainly admired
his warriors as much as he despised the paltry priests.
They had just defeated the famous Tugeris, and surely
were entitled to celebrate such an unprecedented event.


Hence the mamoose had proclaimed a public holiday in
order to thank the gods chiefly responsible in bringing
it about.
And now the trial was about to begin, and the
gods would judge between the prisoners and those who
accused them, and those weighed down by guilt would
be hurled through the air into the sullen waters wait-
ing to carry them to the abode of the spirits. Some
priests had already climbed to the cross-beam and
inserted the locking bar, which, when pulled out,
allowed the ends to swing, and thus give to the gods
their own.
More priests now scaled the vertical supports and
dropped long ropes therefrom to which were tied the
prisoners. They were speedily pulled up and placed on
the platform, bound hand and foot so that they could
not possibly escape even should they survive the throw
into the water. The working priests then descended.
There seemed to be some disturbance in the priestly
ranks, but soon those appointed as accusers climbed to
their perch on the opposite end of the cross-beam. The
drums beat out a weird march for a minute, and then
ceased. The mamoose raised his hand. Some priests
clinging to the upright centre piece pulled out the
locking bar, and the trial had commenced.
The people uttered not a sound. The mamoose sat
toying with the cigar-case his warriors had taken from
Doc, and gazing abstractedly at the surrounding mountain
range. Some seconds passed, then a faint murmur arose
from the people ; but the mamoose paid no attention.
The cigar-case in his hands flew open, and he picked
out a cigar and examined it with a puzzled expression.
The murmur swelled into a roar, but still he heard not.
Mechanically he placed a cigar in his mouth, and bit off
the end, and then he began fumbling with his fingers


about his crocodile-skin belt. But something was
evidently wrong somewhere, the populace were shouting
like madmen, and just at this point the mamoose looked
round for the cause.
“ What can be the matter ?” he said to himself. “ I
shall have to increase the number of silent priests if they
persist in making such a noise.” Then his eyes caught
the huge erection on the island in front ; the cross-beam
was poised exactly horizontal, and did not move one
inch either way.
“ Dear me ! ” the mamoose said, the cigar still between
his teeth, “it is not over yet. I shall have to sacrifice
another priest or two to effect the difference in weight
necessary to supply the gods with their just victims. I
wish I had a match.” But his belt seemed to surprise
him somewhat, for it contained none. “ I wonder what
has gone wrong with the balance ? ” he muttered. “ I
gave all instructions necessary about the adjusting.
Ah ! what is this ? ” He pulled a tiny matchbox from
the chiefs belt lying on the dais before him, and
turned it over in his hand. Next moment it flew open,
for he had pressed the spring, and extracting a match,
he applied it to the end of his cigar and puffed
vigorously.
At that moment a wild yell broke out around him,
and lowering his eyes from the rings of smoke he was
watching, he saw a silent priest running along the quiver-
ing cross-beam from the priests’ side to the other. He
also wondered what the tall priest who had scaled the
upright was trying to do, but soon saw that both had
the same intent. The populace saw that too, and cheered
as people cheer martyrs and heroes when they see them
go bravely and fearlessly to certain destruction. The
balance was still absolutely stationary, and it was easily
evident that the tall priest had climbed the central


piece to add his weight, like a hero, to the side on
which the gods had cast their affections. It was also
evident that the smaller priest with the enormous
head-dress was another hero, for he had deliberately
left the platform on which were his companion priests,
and was actually making his way across that single
beam, upon which even the coolest warrior would have
become dizzy, to the prisoner’s side, thereby openly
giving his own life that the gods might not be dis-
appointed.
The mamoose was interested, and he sat back on
his throne and watched developments, blowing smoke
from his mouth meanwhile to the great amazement of
the somewhat superstitious people who saw him. The
shouting suddenly ceased, and even the murmurings
died away. Fascinated, the people watched the gigantic
beam. It was now quivering, the difference in equili-
brium caused by the subtraction of a man from one side
and the addition of one to the other being more than
sufficient to determine results.
The mamoose was puzzled. “That’s strange,” he
muttered ; “ not that I mind the loss of a few priests,
but —ah ! ” The last exclamation was caused by seeing
the end of the balance on which were the two prisoners
and the little priest go down with a rush. It struck the
spring properly, but instead of being at once shot up
again, as every one expected, it rose rather slowly, and
to the unspeakable dismay of the multitude, and the
terror of the priests themselves, the other end began to
sink correspondingly, materially assisted by the action
of the tall priest, who for some reason known only to
himself had swung his weight out from the poising point
towards the side of his fellows. Another yell went up
from the crowd, but the priests were silent—they could
not very well be otherwise—and their end went down
(B 762) x


lower and lower, and the cutting edge of the great bone
sword fastened underneath touched the binding rope of
the huge coil of suppressed energy. But there it rested
for a moment, and then the other side began to fall.
The people were almost mad with excitement, but not
a breath was drawn in that valley during the next few
seconds. Even the mamoose, his mouth full of smoke,
rose and stared at the falling beam. But what was the
priest doing who stood with the two white devils ? Surely
he was not attacking them, and robbing the gods of
their lawful prey ? It certainly looked like it, for he
was slashing at them with a knife, and they could not
move to save themselves.
“Ha!” ejaculated the mamoose, as the spring was
again struck sharply, with no result but a rebound which
sent the prisoners aloft again, “ I like those white devils.
I’ll stop this business until I smoke this cigar, and then
I’ll see that the springs are right, but I’ll put the
priests on this side; perhaps the gods will be just as
pleased.”
But the mamoose was too late in making up his
mind, for even as he soliloquized the priests’ side was
again nearing the supposed dead spring. This time it
seemed coming down with more momentum than before,
and the priest on the prisoners’ side rushed out on the
beam in an effort to reach the opposite or heavier side.
That decided all, for as his weight became less of a factor
on the one side, it materially assisted the law of gravita-
tion on the other, and he had only reached the central
upright, to which he, with the tall priest, clung tena-
ciously, when the priests’ end touched the taut rope
which controlled the live spring lightly. There was a
scream of excited surprise from the people; but the
priests were not there. Far out on the great lake they
had been thrown with a force irresistible, and acting on


m ■■Mill! W " W
, v HI * \JftdT VV ; ' VfjiI
S^-«J5iy/||f , ~ - r{# a P4HPiflR
; 41 . mJ a ■ W<jg/' T*|
I* / «ww * » I s| . v * 1
. ns ffi’ r . i^_
u762
ON THE GREAT BALANCE OF LIFE AND DEATH




the signal received, those appointed to do so opened
wide the great sluice gates. The mighty turbulent mass
of water gathered itself together, and with a mad leap
threw itself forward into the mountain.
And the priests went to minister before their gods.
The people stood for a moment spellbound, and then
rushed in a body to the balance. Its lower end, having
overturned the dummy spring, was resting on the ground,
and Doc was reclining on the rocks smoking a cigar.
The priest who had brought about the decision of the
gods was doing something to the other white devil, and
the priest who had climbed the upright was also standing
near, his hands hidden in the fringy article of dress
which encircled his frame from his waist down to nearly
his knees. The natives did not know that the priest’s
face could wash to a light tan colour, and that his hands
rested where they did because they held revolvers.
Another priest stood a few feet away similarly armed,
but his revolvers were hidden by a palm leaf which he
held in his hands to cover them.
The warriors and priests surged round the white
men, but luckily for themselves no one ventured to lay
hands on them. One hoary old sinner addressed his
fellows in what must have been very forcible language,
but whether it was on behalf of, or against, the white
men they never knew. A second warrior seemed to
second the motion of the first in a series of ear-splitting
yells, and then the crowd parted suddenly, and amidst a
cloud of aromatic tobacco smoke the mamoose strode
up. He bowed like a courtier to the two prisoners,
offered them a cigar from his case, and stood for a
moment watching Doc.
“ Fine weather this, Tom,” the latter remarked, light-
ing the proffered cigar, and throwing his old one away.
“ It is just like Sydney here.”


“ Sydney ? ” repeated the mamoose, vacantly. “ Ah,
you will make a good silent priest”
“ Don’t you remember us, Tom ? Come home to
England with us,” spoke the Chief.
“ Home ? ” echoed the mamoose. “ England ? Yes,
I am going home to England to see my old comrades,
but you will have to become silent priests to take the
place of those who were lost to-day.” He turned to
his people and spoke a few sentences in their own
tongue, which had the effect of silencing them for
the time.
But they were not satisfied. It had been a long time
since any sacrifices had taken place, and their appetite
for such had only been whetted by what had occurred
that day. No one would speak in answer to the
mamoose, however; a few had at various times ventured
to do so, but they had not said a word since, and most
people were aware of that fact. Calling to his side a
stalwart warrior the mamoose gave a few orders, and
with another bow to the prisoners walked away. The
warriors then gathered round, and the crowd reluctantly
began to disperse. But some lingered ; the mamoose
had departed, and they were not afraid of Kalamo, his
lieutenant. Nor was Kalamo of them ;he had profited
by the training of his chief, and knew what to do.
Jumping on the overturned dead spring, he shouted
some command which surprised the white men some-
what, as it contained at least one unmistakable English
word, and instantly and without comment the warriors
fell upon the loiterers. The ground was cleared in
about two minutes, and then Kalamo turned to the
priests and signed to them to do their duty.
If they had any scruples they knew better than show
them ; so gathering round the Chief and Doc they
signified their intention of taking them back to the


city, and without further ceremony started. They were
indeed a very thoughtful band of silent priests that
afternoon, and doubtless were pondering deeply over
many things inexplicable to them. It was dark before
they re-entered the city, followed by the picked warriors.
A tattoo sounded out over the city as they reached the
square, and in answer to its summons the priests ran
off, leaving the prisoners under the care of about a
dozen of their number. Several of those, however, were
very powerful-looking men ; but even although the white
men could have shot them down, their position would
not have been improved, so they marched quietly on,
and soon were once more in the tapu house. Kalamo
then set a guard of warriors around the building, and re-
entering himself made an elaborate bow to the prisoners,
spoke a few sentences in what doubtless was the choicest
vernacular, and retired.
“ I wouldn’t mind betting he’s been telling ye that
ye’ll be well attended to as long as he is boss,” said Bill.
“ We’ll see to that ourselves,” commented Mac;
“but first we’ll need to attend to they poor deevils o’
priests that the Lord has put into oor hands.” Saying
which, Mac swung round suddenly and knocked down
a priest who was of a more than usual inquisitive dis-
position. At the same moment Bill and Harry tackled
two other priests, and then Mac caught one in his arms
and threw him at the others. Doc joined in, for the
sake of the exercise, he said, and very soon all the silent
priests were bound and flung behind old out-of-favour
gods. The priests never understood why they had been
so unceremoniously treated. Possibly they thought it
was part of some ritual which they had not yet learnt,
most of them having only been initiated into the
mysteries of the priestly craft since the fight with the
Tugeris.


Mac at once proceeded to relieve them of various
parts of their wardrobe, and had succeeded in collecting
the material for two wonderful outfits when Kalamo
entered, followed by a band of warriors escorting half
a dozen priests bearing food of various kinds. He strutted
up to Mac and rolled out a few sentences in polite tones
which Mac acknowledged gravely by bowing. Kalamo
meanwhile was glancing round the apartment, but he
made no comment on the scarcity of priests in evidence,
and, after seeing the chief and Doc begin their meal,
muttered a few words and retired with his men, leaving
two servant priests behind.
“He is a vera intelligent lad, Kalamo,” said Mac,
“he made nae comment on anything, and is wonderfu’
polite.” He caught the .two priestly ones as he
spoke, and while he held them, Harry and Bill ran-
sacked the sacred edifice for binding material, and a
minute later the two priests were thrown among their
brethren.
“ Well, boys,” said the Chief, after they had dined,
“ if only some of our comrades would roll up, we might
be quite comfortable here. I think, however, we might
do worse than take a walk round the town to-night ; it
must have changed considerably since we saw it last,
and a night out will help to bring us up to date with the
march of civilization. We might find Bill, too ;he must
have wandered somewhere.”
“Then remember you are silent priests, and can’t
talk,” said Bill junior, producing a jam tin full of his
specially prepared dye. “ I know the city fairly well,
and can show you most things, but goodness, won’t there
be fun if any visitors should call while you are away
from home.”
Mac chuckled. “ Maybe we’d be better awa’,” he
said. “ But what I’m afraid o’ is that we’ll get locked


oot o’ our happy hame. They keep early closing hours
here.”
“ We’ll risk that,” laughed Doc ; and soon after, five
priests, dressed in accordance with the latest fashion,
sallied out of the tapu house. Bill led the way, for he
had most knowledge of the customs which obtained in
the city. No one challenged them. Some of the guards
passed a few remarks which Mac said were sarcastic, but
as he could not well retaliate without awkward results,
they passed on and into the city square. Large fires
were burning everywhere to serve the purposes of lighting,
cooking, and heating, it being carnival time, and round
each fire were grouped priests and warriors and women
in picturesque confusion.
There was some entertainment proceeding on a stage
in front of a large wooden building facing a row of fires,
and a party of musicians had attracted an audience by
means of the weird sounds they produced from some
tubular bamboo instruments carrying an arrangement of
reeds in their interiors. The eternal drum was there
too, also a huge box, on which were stretched several
leather thongs which emitted strange discordant notes
when struck or twanged by the performer. The five
sham priests passed this exhibition and entered what
was evidently a bazaar or market-place. Here were
gathered together all the products of the valley, manu-
factured articles of dress, curios from the outer world,
and a variety of fruit confectionery. The currency
seemed to be the usual shells, and pieces of coral, but
it could be noticed that little metallic tokens or coins
were greatly prized, and had a very high purchasing
power.
Some of those who had wares to sell called to the
five priests in passing to buy something, but as they had
neither shells nor tokens they could not do so, although


Harry and Bill felt they would have liked to sample
some of the fruit concoctions. The market was covered
in by a close thatch of furs and light sugar cane, and
was lit with hanging lamps made of cocoanut shells
filled with fat, a hole in the shell allowing a wick to
project, and thus completing a most serviceable and
simple illuminator.
After passing through the crowded market-place, the
party emerged upon a roadway flanked by tall trees,
which partly hid the row of dwellings on either side,
behind them. These dwellings obviously belonged to
what might be termed the aristocracy of the city. They
were built upon piles sunk in the ground, and had
verandahs of bark and thatch all round. Beautiful
flowers grew upon the wooden walls and over the roofs,
but the ridge and gables were always kept clear of
vegetation so as to show the god of the family. These
supernatural creatures were represented on the roofs by
carved giants with wings, huge bats with human faces,
and enormous snakes with feet. All these houses stood
back from the roadway, but in perfect alignment, and
that their occupants were happy in their own way was
clear from the sounds of laughter and singing that issued
from them.
“ Well, I must say Tom has transformed this place,”
remarked the Chief, as they walked up the avenue ;
“he has turned a tribe of savages into quite a civilized
people.”
“ That is his own shebang at the end of this road,”
said Bill; “it is a proper palace too, with inner and outer
courts, and water all round ”
“ Hist! ” whispered Mac, “ here’s some one coming.”
The party drew aside, and the person approaching drew
nearer. His step was light and elastic, and a fragrant
aroma floated before him.


“By Jupiter! he’s smoking one of my cigars,”
muttered Doc, sniffing the air.
“ It’s the mamoose,” whispered Bill. “ Shall we tackle
him, and cart him away with ns ? ”
“We can’t,” said the Chief; “ the slightest sound
would bring the entire population upon us, and that
would mean an end to everything.”
“ Walk on,” muttered Bill; “he sees us, and will
raise blazes in a second if there’s anything wrong with
our dress, or if he suspects.”
“ Ha! what do you want ? ” suddenly cried the
mamoose. “ Who are you ? ”
The priests did not answer, but stood silently.
“ Oh, Silent Priests,” continued the mamoose ; “ they
have ears, but not tongues. Get out of the way, you
women, I’ll see about some improvement among you
to-morrow; I fancy tongueless priests have no need for
eyes, and my warrions want some sport.” He passed
on, and the priests looked after him.
“ Rather hard lines on the priests,” remarked
Doc.
“ It’s harder on us,” said Mac; “ naebody kens
whether we hae a tongue or no, but I hae a decided
objection to getting ma eyes put oot, tae keep up our
character.”
“ He’ll forget all about it to-morrow,” said Bill. “If
he had done all he said he would do to me I would
have been an angel long ago.”
“ We’ll have a look at his palace, anyhow, now that
we know he is out,” spoke the Chief ; and walking faster,
they entered a doorway in a hedge of sweetly scented
flowers, and found themselves in a brilliantly lit garden
in which several fountains were playing.
“ This is all right,” commented Doc, as they stood
admiring the effect. “ I don’t know how he managed


it, but I perceive bamboo tubing has been taken
advantage of greatly.”
“ How about the servants ? ” inquired the Chief. “He
is bound to have some of them.”
“ They’re all priests,” said Bill, “ and we can go for
them if there’s any need.”
, They crossed the garden, and found the way blocked
by a lake, on an island in the middle of which the lights
of the palace shone out in many colours, like the illumi-
nations of an enchanted abode.
“ How in thunder does he get in and out ? ”
cried Bill; “he can’t jump across, and there ain’t no
bridge.”
“ Perhaps he swims,” suggested Harry.
“He wouldn’t do it twice, then,” said Bill;
“ the water is alive with big crocodiles, and all
hungry too.”
“ Come here, and I’ll show you how he gets across,”
said the Chief.
“Do you see that tower which rises above the
entrance hall of the palace ? I can see a long rope
hanging down from it, and as there is a slightly raised
artificial platform on our side of the water opposite it,
I am open to wager that some sort of chair or seat is
fastened to the bottom of that rope, and he swings
across ”
“ But how does he get back, then ? ” said Harry,
wonderingly.
“ Let us go up on this bank and investigate,” said
the Chief. “Ah ! just as I thought. Here is the guide
rope fastened to this tree. The other end is attached to
whatever he sits in so that he can pull it to any side he
desires.” The Chief began pulling on the rope, and out
of the shadows on the other side came a little car. It
described a semi-circle in its motion, apparently starting


from a high point inside the palace, and almost touched
the water as it left the shadows of the tower, and rose
again gracefully as it neared the bank on which they
stood. It was simply a pendulum ingeniously contrived
to come to rest at both ends of its swing. It was an
exquisitely carved and richly ornamented piece of work,
cleverly mounted on two suspending ropes, that the
Chief stepped into. “Let go, boys,” he said, “I’ll go
over first, and you can haul it back and follow if
everything is right.” He swung clear as he spoke,
and the car glided across and they heard the Chief
stepping out on the other side somewhere within
the tower. Doc and Bill followed, then Harry and
Mac, and the daring house-breakers stood within the
mamoose’s palace.
It was a wonderful erection. The walls were of wood,
carved and painted in the usual style of New Guinean
art. There were richly mounted window spaces, in which
instead of glass were stretched pieces of some semi-
transparent silky material of various colours. It was
the lights behind showing through them that gave the
wonderful effect seen from the garden outside. The
apartment in which the adventurers stood seemed to
be the main entrance. They had descended into it from
the landing-stage of the car which was an elevated cradle-
like affair high up in the tower. All around hung draperies
of the silky substance, and large quartz crystals cut and
polished to perfection blazed from the walls at every
point of vantage. But here and there some stones
scintillated which were not quartz crystals, and the
visitors were not slow in recognizing them. A cluster
of opals with a diamond in their midst flamed out in
irridescent splendour above what seemed to be a door
leading to another room. Above each recessed window,
too, a fanciful crest of blood-red rubies mingled their


flashes with the deep translucent blue of alternating
sapphires. The floor was of dark red-polished wood,
and high above their heads in the dome of the tower
were gemstones of all hues and shades which .scintillated
and flashed with ever changing colours as some hidden
lights played upon them.
“ I can’t imagine how Tom managed to do all this,"
said the Chief, as they admired the wonders of the
reception hall. “There is a fortune in the gemstones
around these walls. Where did he get them, and how
did he get them cut ? And how did he get the wood
that forms the walls and floors dressed and polished, and
how But it is all beyond my understanding."
“ The niggers are very good stone-cutters," said Bill,
“ and there is a saw-mill at the other end of the valley,
driven by a water-wheel the mamoose invented. He
makes them work all right, and I suppose hundreds
of them have been working at this palace for the last
three or four years."
“ Here is another room," cried Harry ; “ but it is dark.”
He had pushed aside a clinging screen of drapery and a
dark chamber lay in front.
“ We’ll have a look at it, at any rate,” said the Chief;
“it doesn’t matter much whether we are caught or not,
seeing we are prisoners already.”
“Go slow, then," cautioned Bill. “ I’ve never
seen it, nor has any one alive, I reckon, but I believe
there is some secret chamber in this shebang that
belongs to the gods, and people that go in never
come out."
“ I’ve got a torch wi’ me,” said Mac. “ Let’s gang
in. Wha kens but that we micht get a private interview
wi’ a god or twa, an’ get some sort o’ understanding
wi’ them.”
“ Lead on, Mac," ordered the Chief, and pushing aside


the screen they passed from the bright saloon into the
chamber of darkness. Mac held his torch on high, and
they saw that they were in a much smaller room than
the last. It resembled a box more than anything else,
for it was closed in on all sides with walls, and had no
domed roof like the other apartment. Nor had it any
windows, and the walls, roof, and floor were black, while
black curtains fell in gloomy folds over several hidden
recesses.
“ This is certainly a dismal place,” said Doc, ex-
amining the charred walls. “ Hullo ! they are hollow ! ”
He struck them with his fist and they resounded like a
drum.
“ This must be one of the chief gods of the tribe,” said
the Chief, pulling aside a black curtain and revealing a
hideous idol in the shape of a weirdly distorted human
being squatted on the floor.
“ He’s blamed fat and healthy-looking,” commented
Bill, examining the god intently.
“Because he’s a hollow fraud, laddie,” said Mac.
“ See, here’s the door in.” Mac fumbled among
some irregularities in the idol’s back, and a door flew
open.
“ I’ll see what it’s like inside,” cried Harry, with
boyish enthusiasm, squeezing through the aperture.
“ Why, there’s one of these strange lamps in here ! ” he
continued from the inside ; and his voice sounded as if
coming from an enormous depth under the ground.
“ And there is some mechanical arrangement for turning
the head round. And oh ! here is a big lever.”
“Come out, boy,” ordered the Chief; “don’t touch
that lever. I, too, have made a discovery; and it is
time we were back in our prison. This is evidently the
mamoose’s private tapu house, and if we are found in
it he will practise some of his latest ideas upon us.” As


he spoke the Chief bent down and examined the floor.
“Yes,” he continued ; “ this is some sort of trial chamber,
and those with whom the god is displeased will cease
from troubling after receiving sentence in this the highest
court of appeal. The judge simply pulls that big lever
inside the idol beside him, this floor gives way, and
the unfortunate victims of his wrath go underneath to
the crocodiles ; for the entire palace is simply a large
houseboat floating upon the lake. From this lake I
should fancy the river which feeds the big reservoir
proceeds ; and therefore, this is the actual source of our
mysterious river which baffled us so often. I don’t know
yet ; but an idea of how we might get the mamoose into
our hands has just struck me. Let us away, until we
reason it out. We’ll come back soon if we are left
alive.”
They had spent about an hour in the palace, and as
the mamoose might return at any moment and spoil all
hopes of their ever getting him away by making them
sacrifices, it was now time they took their departure.
Strangely enough they had seen no signs of priests
or servants; but as they allowed the little car to swing
back after they had crossed to the mainland, some
lights in the tower flared up and the rest of the palace
became dark.
“ That shows that there is some one at home, at any
rate,” said Bill. “ I wonder why we didn’t run across
them. We could have stolen anything.”
“ Oh,” cried Harry, suddenly, pausing as they neared
the market-place. “ I’ve lost a letter somewhere. I
pencilled one out to my sister before the Tugeri fight,
and have been carrying it ever since.”
“You can easily write another one when we find the
nearest post-office,” laughed Doc ; and then they became
silent, for they were now close to the market.


Like spectres —but substantial ones —they glided
through the happy laughing crowds, nor turned even to
inspect the wares so vociferously advertised by the
merchants. Silent Priests did not obtain much respect
as a rule. The great white mamoose had destroyed
their tyrannical powers ; and the multitude, who at one
time would have fallen down before them, now jeered at
them. Some of them had been famous warriors, how-
ever, and although they had been unlucky enough to be
chosen by the eye of the god to be priests, they still
retained some cunning in the use of club and sword, and
therefore commanded a respect not granted to their less
warlike brethren.
The five priests, therefore, passed through the market-
place safely, for Mac, the Chief, and Doc certainly
looked very formidable, and came out on the crowd
watching the performance they had at first passed.
This was evidently not a state entertainment, for there
were no warriors nor priests in attendance. Obeying a
signal from the Chief, his comrades halted to watch the
proceedings. A snake-charmer was showing his powers
at the time, and it certainly was marvellous how he
handled some of the deadliest reptiles in the country.
His methods were not strikingly original, but they
pleased the people greatly, and they applauded vigor-
ously in a series of cries which resembled the cackling
of poultry more than anything else.
After putting the head of a particularly venomous
variety of whip-snake into his mouth, and placing a
dozen wriggling reptiles in what presumably was his
belt, he strutted off the stage, and the master of the
ceremonies bellowed out an announcement which seemed
to cause much comment among the onlookers.
“ I’ll bet he’s challenging any one to do the same
as that last fellow has done,” whispered Bill to Harry.


“And some one is going to take him up, then,”
answered Harry. “ See, there is a big warrior going up
on the stage now.”
Bill was correct in his surmise. The snake-charmer
had caused a challenge to be issued to any one who
thought he could do anything approaching his per-
formance, and a warrior had taken him at his word.
All was now excitement, and loud and many were
the exclamations which arose ; but what they signified
was not clear to the Chief nor his comrades. The
warrior swung himself lightly on to the stage and
looked round curiously. A basket of reptiles was
brought on and emptied at his feet ; but he made no
sign of any kind as to what he was to do. The people
were beginning to become impatient, for there were
many items on the programme that night, and they had
no time to waste with warriors who only desired to be
placed on show for a brief space. But the warrior was
not a show warrior only, and when he started he quickly
showed that he could handle snakes fairly well. A long,
twisting black snake had disentangled itself from some
others, and was going through some business-like exer-
cises near, so the warrior bent down quickly and caught
it by the tail. The snake sprang round to bite the
daring man who had insulted it; but by this time the
warrior was swinging it round his head, and it did not
get the chance. He kept it swinging for a minute or
so, and the sinuous body gradually stiffened out until
it resembled a piece of heavy rope. Then with a jerk
the warrior threw it from him, and some attendants
rushing up, found that the snake was dead, and that a
broken neck was the cause of its demise.
The warrior next caught up a handful of serpents
from eighteen inches to two feet in length, and about
the diameter of a pencil. These he handled deftly until


all their heads were together—a wriggling, biting mass.
Then, suddenly, they seemed to stand straight up in his
hand, and, after a moment’s rigidity, fall over in one
curve until their heads rested on his arm. But they
were no longer biting and twisting. They had lost all
power of voluntary movement. The warrior held them
outstretched for a minute, then threw them from him,
and they instantly scurried away. Loud and long the
populace cackled their approval, much to the disgust
of Mac and Bill, who saw nothing in what had been
done.
“ The poor bodies are gey easily pleased,” growled
Mac. “ I could dae all that we’ve seen done here mysel’,
and I’d back Silent Ted or Coolgardie Bill to dae ten
times mair.”
“ Shut up, Mac, for Heaven’s sake,” whispered Doc.
“ They’ll hear us.”
But Mac had become interested in something in
front, and with a mysterious sign to his comrades, he
pushed his way through the crowd towards the stage.
The first performer meanwhile had come back to point
out how sadly deficient in the art the warrior had been,
and to show how infinitely superior he was ; but the
warrior did not appear to be interested in his remarks
until his eyes rested upon Mac, who had reached a point
only a few feet away from him. Then he seemed to
realize that he was expected to say something, but in
the belief that deeds were better than words, he promptly
knocked the first snake-charmer to the ground, and
deliberately winked at Mac.
In the commotion which followed he disappeared,
and soon after a warrior strikingly like him in appear-
ance was being jostled amidst the group of five priests
with each of whom he had surreptitiously shaken
hands.
(B 762) Y


“Man, Bill,” chuckled Mac, during the noise which
attended the announcing of the next item, “hoo have
you gone back on the priests ? You were a priest when
I left ye last, and there’s a sad deficiency in their ranks,
while the warrior profession is overcrowded.”
But Bill was taking a leaf from Silent Ted’s book,
and did not seem inclined to give any explanation. He
merely muttered the words, “ He’s here.” And the
terrific burst of cheering made further conversation im-
possible, and when it died away another performer was
on the stage, showing how easy it was to snap fibre
ropes, to break bamboo rods, and raise one’s own weight
with one hand. He also demonstrated how a club
should be used to the best advantage, and even showed
how a strong man such as he was could easily overcome
at least half a dozen less gifted people. At the con-
clusion he gave out the usual challenge to all and sundry
to equal his work, or contend with him in any effort of
personal strength or ability.
The Chief, Doc, and Mac, each felt the spirit of
adventure strongly within them, but as the Chief’s
collar-bone was not yet set properly, and as either Doc’s
or Mac’s interference might mean more trouble than
the joy of victory was worth, they decided to get back
to their prison and make Bill tell his story.
But some one had taken up the challenge, and just
as the six comrades were moving off, a tall warrior of
athletic build jumped upon the stage. His dress was
scanty, and his hair shorter than it should be in accord-
ance with etiquette, but his bared muscles looked like
knotted ropes.
“ Great Heavens! ” gasped the Chief, staring at the
last comer. “That is Tom.”
“It is,” exclaimed Doc. “He has disguised himself
to take part in the people’s sports.”


“He’ll get killed by that big brute,” said Harry.
“ Let us interfere.”
“I’ll bet my hat the other man is in most danger,”
said Bill senior.
“ I’ve got my shooter in good order,” muttered Mac,
grimly ; “ but the mamoose will no need ony help.”


CHAPTER XVI
Darling Bill takes a Hand in the
Game
The two strong men looked at each other. The
challenger, with the air of one pleased to have a victim
on which he could show his great prowess, and the other
like one preparing for healthy exercise. Both were
splendid specimens of humanity, and to the onlookers
there was nothing to judge between them. The first
strong man asked the stranger if he would try any of
the weight-lifting, or rope-breaking, feats, but he
declined, and apparently, much to the other’s surprise,
indicated his intention of meeting him in personal
combat with club, sword, and spear. To this, the show-
manager objected, and the white men gathered from the
remarks of those near them that the mamoose had made
a law that if any warrior met his death in any enter-
tainment, those in charge of that entertainment would
be given as sacrifices when next sacrifice-time came
round. The club meant certain death to at least one of
the combatants; besides, it was not on their programme,
and the gods were not in special need of sacrifices, there
having been so many Tugeris killed, so the fight with
the spiked club was vetoed. The fact was evident,
however, to the six, that it was only the killing of
warriors that meant anything, no penalty being attached


to killing priests. Verily the priests had fallen on evil
days.
With heavy two-edged wooden swords the two
approached each other, and then ensued a battle which
for business-like intention, strength of blows, and
general excellence of the defence, would have compared
favourably with any duel of historic fame. The chal-
lenger was seemingly a great favourite of the people,
and many dark looks were cast on the handsome
stranger when he seemed to be doing more than holding
his own.
“ Let us get closer, lads,” whispered Mac. “ Nae man
can stand that fight long.”
“ Lead the way, Bill,” said the Chief; “it looks as if
we might be needed here after all.”
The fight went on, but each was now drawing upon
his reserve of strength, for the swords were very heavy,
and although supposed to be used with both hands, were,
in the present instance, wielded as if they were canes.
At length the stranger broke through the other’s guard
with a terrific blow. The other had parried it perfectly,
but his sword had not been very carefully seasoned, and
it split in several pieces under the stroke. He staggered
back blindly, as the descending weapon continued on its
course, but not in time to escape altogether, and next
moment he was lying unconscious in the arms of his
friends. Half a dozen angry natives now rushed on the
victor, all sense of fair play being forgotten, but he
treated them with contempt, and easily defended himself
by catching one of the largest by the feet and using him
as a club. By this means he soon cleared the stage, and
looked round for more victims ; but just then none were
forthcoming, and he amused himself by throwing spears
at one or two of the stage*managers who were very much
in evidence.


Suddenly there was a loud shout of command, a
road opened as if by magic, and, with a rush, a body of
police warriors threw themselves on the stage and fell
upon the champion.
“ Fair play there! ” shouted the Chief, forgetting
himself in the excitement of the moment.
“ Gang back, ye rascals!” roared Mac, springing beside
the spear-thrower, and joining in the fray without further
ceremony. Doc, Bill, Harry, the Chief, and young Bill
were with him a moment later, and the battle became
furious.
“ Begorra, but this is foine,” sounded a voice in Harry’s
ear as he matched his strength with a painted warrior
greatly to the latter’s surprise, for priests were not usually
keen on fighting.
“ Irish ! ” shouted Harry. “Who are you ? Where
are you ? Six of us are here.” He threw his man, and
another sprang into his arms. Harry tried to repeat his
last performance, but found his tactics foiled.
“By the powers, Boy, an’ is it you ? ” cried his
opponent, releasing his grip. “ Shure, an when I heard
yez sphake I thought it was your ghost.”
“Itis me all right,” said Harry. “We six in line here
are comrades; join us at once ; we are fighting for my
brother ” A burly form caught Irish and pitched
him to the ground, and a voice said, “ I caught the deevil
in the very nick o’ time, laddie ”
“ Mac, ye blessed idiot,” roared Irish, springing to his
feet again. “ Phat did yez do that for ? Shure, an’ I
would know yez by the size of your feet ”
“ Michty me ! Irish ! What are you doing here ? ”
gasped Mac, knocking down another native as he
spoke.
“ Fishing, of course. Phat did yez think ? ”
But this was no time for talk. “Thought you were


an angel, Irish,” cried Doc. “ Chime in here and
help us.”
Irish did chime in, and the onlookers witnessed as
good a fight as they had ever seen, although it was sur-
prising to see priests and warriors striving against each
other. The Chief was not able to exert his powers as
he would have liked, and Mac kept near him to see that
he was never hard pressed ; they, of course, had armed
themselves with spears, clubs, and swords, taken from
their first victims.
The author of the whole disturbance seemed to be
enjoying himself, and did not appear to be so surprised
at the spectacle of pugnaciously inclined Silent Priests
as were the attacking force of the lawkeepers. The
warriors were not accustomed to the tactics adopted by
their opponents, and consequently suffered severely, but
there were plenty of them, and as fast as one was down
another took his place, until Mac began to wonder where
they were all coming from.
“Gie’s a hand, Irish,” he cried at length, “and we’ll
build a barricade o’ niggers in front o’ us.”
“ Keep silent, you fool,” roared the disguised mamoose.
“ How can silent priests talk ? ”
“ With our fists, Tom,” answered Doc, giving a practi-
cal demonstration upon a couple of over-bold warriors,
sending them sprawling backwards across the stage until
they collapsed against a palm tree which grew through
the floorway.
“ How many are on our side ? ” suddenly cried the
Chief, in surprise. “We seem to be as strong as the
other side. Look at our line of defence.” The Chiefs
words were not without reason, for standing together
around the mamoose were at least a dozen warriors and
priests, and they fought as coolly and systematically
against the others as if breaking heads and getting their


own broken were a most natural everyday occurrence.
The mamoose himself was equal to several warriors, and
the manner in which he kept a clear space in front of
him by swinging his human club drew much admiration
from Mac and Bill. Harry, too, felt proud to be fighting
alongside his brother, and resolved that he would never
leave the valley without him. He had forgotten all about
Edward Blackwood now.
But all things come to an end, and as the supply
of warriors was becoming exhausted, the end of
this fight seemed within reasonable distance. At this
point the mamoose sat down on a bundle of skins,
and, producing a cigar from Doc’s case, lit it, and
began to smoke.
“You fellows are good warriors,” he remarked lazily,
watching Bill senior, as he threw a native halfway across
the platform. “In fact,” he continued, soliloquizing, “ you
are too good for me to allow you to continue as my
advisers. I’m afraid I shall have to make sacrifices of
you. Here, you two boys, when were you made priests,
and where have you been since the last initiation ? I
thought I told you to get your eyes taken out ? ” The
last words were addressed to Harry and Bill just as they
disposed of the last two warriors.
They did not answer, and next moment, as if suddenly
remembering something, the mamoose slipped off the
stage and disappeared in the darkness.
“ Come along, boys,” shouted Doc ; “ let us get him
away now. We’ll never have a better chance.”
“ Too late,” cried Coolgardie Bill; “ here’s another
army coming, and Kalamo is leading them. Let’s get
out of this ourselves, or we are done.” But even as he
spoke all realized that it was now extremely doubtful
if they could get away, for there had crept up silently
another body of picked warriors.


Kalamo’s voice rang out some strange command, and
the warriors closed in. “Don’t fight, boys,” cried the
Chief. “That is the mamoose’s bodyguard, and they
don’t know we are not priests ”
“ But I do,” said a voice behind them, “ and you will
all have to die ”
The mamoose reappeared fully dressed, and with the
dye washed from his skin. The remaining onlookers at
once recognized him, and hailed his advent with great
shouts. He turned to his warriors and addressed them,
and then signalled to them to capture all upon the plat-
form. But his late helpers had gone. They had in a
body slid into the surrounding gloom, and were making
their way as fast as was decorous, through the deserted
streets to the tapu house.
The mamoose hesitated a moment. He did not seem
to understand why his gallant defenders had absented
themselves when he was about to give them so much
glory. His mind was soon made up, however.
“Go to the tapu house,” he ordered in the native
tongue, “ and bring forth the —” prisoners he was about
to say, but he changed his mind and substituted—
“ priests.”
Kalamo and his men had been standing at attention,
but on hearing the order they at once wheeled about and
started off at a run for the sacred house, and the populace
who had witnessed everything that had happened that
night, somehow became convinced that the priests were
entirely responsible for what had taken place, and began
to howl for their punishment.
The mamoose smiled as he cast his eyes over the
surging mob, which, now that all danger was over, had
swelled to abnormal proportions.
“ I’ll never be able to make anything out of them,” he
muttered. “ They were born slaves, and must remain


slaves. Only my warriors are worth working for. In
their veins courses blood of untamed ancestors who gave
sacrifices to the gods of war thousands of years before
the crocodile gods existed. But my priests ? Ah,
they may think they can trick me, but have I not the
confidence of all the gods, and can I not throw them from
the tapu house if they do not please me ? ” He departed,
still musing, the people making way for him and paying
him the homage due to the god he was in their estimation.
He walked through them without noticing any one, and
promptly forgetting that he had given any order to
Kalamo, his lieutenant, continued on his way to the
floating house he had had built for himself. Meanwhile
the seven white men had made their way across the
village to the tapu house without exciting any attention,
but Mac suddenly startled "his comrades by crying;
“ Stop a minute, lads. There’s only seven o’ us sham
priests or warriors here, so far as I ken, but I can coont
eight. Noo who is the other fellow ?”
“It am him,” cried one of their number. “ Hims
fight with hims all night Great Scott niggers same as
people here. Hims find out all about friends in tapu
house, how hims become big priests, and follow hims
and come to help hims with straight up and down and
not big across man, and one two more hims not know.”
“ It’s Great Scott! ” yelled Mac. “ Wha did ye say
was wi’ ye ? Straight up and down and not big across
man ? That means the Parson—whaur is he ? ”
“ For any sake shut up, Mac,” cried Doc. “ Look
there ! Into the shadows, boys. Quick ! ”
All instantly dropped to the ground, and the sound of
swiftly moving footsteps approached, passed, and grew
fainter in the distance.
“ That is Kalamo and his picked warriors,” said Doc;
“and they are going for us to the tapu house.”


“ And as we are not there,” said the Chief, “ they will
take all the bound priests away, and probably entertain
them instead of us.”
“ But,” cried Harry, “ Great Scott says he came in
with the Parson and some others. They will have gone
to the tapu house to rescue us there, and will therefore
be taken away too.”
“ I never thought of that,” said the Chief. “ They
may take another two white men for Doc and I, for they
can’t know the difference, but it is just as well, for we
Silent Priests can then pull them through without being
suspected.”
“ But they’ll fight,” said Bill, impatiently. “ Hadn’t
we better go there to help them, and see who it
is?”
” Yes, let us crawl along in the shadows so as
to be there if required,” agreed the Chief. “ But I
think Ah ! down, men ; we are too late. Here
come the warriors with their prisoners. We can follow
them”
The eight men threw themselves flat on the ground
beneath some trees and waited. Nearer and nearer
came the warriors with about a dozen prisoners. The
watchers held their breaths. Whom had they ? Where
did the numbers come from, and what was about to
happen in any case ?
“ That is the Parson, right enough,” whispered Mac ;
“that fellow in the kilt. I wad ken him onywhere
by the spindle shanks he has got for legs.”
“And that is Canadian Pete and Kangaroo Dave,”
said Doc. “ Nature never made their duplicates—but,
look ! their faces are white. How foolish they were!
What did they hope to do ? Only the Parson is
disguised, and any one could see through his
make-up.”


“ What is to be done with them in any case ? ” asked
the Chief. “It seems to me that we can consider our-
selves free now, and we had better be on hand to join
the corroborree that I can see is coming.”
“ They are being taken to the hall of justice,” said
Darling Bill. “That is over by the river where the
scrimmage was to-night.”
“ Then we’ll follow and join them somehow,” said the
Chief. “Ten of us and Great Scott should be able to
give a good account of ourselves.”
Keeping in the shadows, the eight men followed
Kalamo and his party, and saw them bundling their
prisoners into a building which seemed more like a
prison than the tapu house, but which, judging by the
significant ornamentation on its roof and over its door-
way, was used chiefly by those about to become
sacrifices.
Kalamo lost no time in depositing his charges within
its grim iron-barked walls, and to the relief of those who
were hiding outside, left, after doing so, doubtless to
report to the mamoose.
“ That fellow is a good lieutenant,” remarked Mac,
rising from the ground, and gazing after Kalamo and
his men. “He kens his business, and does it withoot
speaking, and withoot bothering onybody.”
“ Never mind him just now,” interrupted Doc. “ I’m
sure we are all tired, for they keep very late hours here.
Let us get inside and see our comrades, and get a sleep
until the fun begins again.”
“ I’m in now,” cried Darling Bill from the roof;
“there’s a trap-door under this god’s tail.” He dis-
appeared through the roof, and in a few seconds all had
followed him. They found themselves in an apartment
very similar to the tapu house, but instead of its being
a store-room for gods and such like, it was more of a


chamber wherein were collected gruesome relics of the
chief events in the people’s history.
The Parson, poorly disguised as a nondescript native,
Dave, and Pete, were sitting in a corner, a faintly burn-
ing torch hanging near them, and causing the place to
seem alive with flitting shadows. The other priests
were not in evidence.
“ Here is more of them silly priests,” grunted Dave,
as he saw the new arrivals.
“They have come from heaven for us too,” added
Pete. “You speak to them, Parson.”
“ I am afraid they are not broad-minded enough to
listen to my views,” said the starving individual in scanty
dress.
“ But we will, old comrade,” cried one of the priests,
rushing forward, and seizing him by the hand. “ How
did you manage to get here ? What happened to the
others ? Have you had anything to eat ? Tell us every-
thing ”
“ Dear me ! ” cried the Parson, drawing himself up
indignantly. “ Who are you ? I really do not know
you, and ”
The laughter of Dave and Pete drowned his words,
and he turned to see those worthies being thrown about
by a crowd of priests and warriors who talked excited
English and made free use of old camp names.
“You are hungry, Parson,” continued the priest who
had just addressed him. “ Here is something I took
without permission in the market ”
“ Goodness ! ” exclaimed the Parson, in great agita-
tion, peering into his face ; “ are you the Chief, or am
I mad ? ”
“ It’s me all right, old fellow, alive and wonderfully
well, now that I know my dear old Parson is still on
top.”


“ Man Parson, I’m rael gled tae to see ye,” broke in
Mac, his black face beaming with honest joy, and his
bare legs trembling under the excitement of suppressed
emotion. He seized the Parson’s free hand and shook
it vigorously, and then repeated the operation with Dave
and Pete. Irish and Harry then introduced themselves
in characteristic fashion, and Darling Bill was made
known to them all, and soon the entire company were
congratulating each other on the marvellous escapes
each had experienced. True to their nature, however,
they showed little surprise after the first minute, but
each man felt nevertheless that he had been given back
so many brothers whom he never expected to see
again. The Chief made the three new prisoners, with
Irish and Bill, acquainted with what had happened
to the others, and then the Parson, as spokesman for
Dave, Pete, and himself, explained their presence in the
city.
“ I was out gathering timber,” he said, “ when the
natives rushed the camp. I crept up as near as I could,
and saw that they had succeeded too well, for no one was
there. I was wondering how I could end my life to the
greatest advantage when Dave and Pete came up. They
had gone farther up the valley to look for something to
eat, and had only got back in time to find me, of all
their comrades, left alive. We then swore that we would
be with our lost comrades before we would rest, and after
a two days’ struggle, gained the mountain top, intending
to attack the village ourselves. We found a lighthouse,
or watch tower, on the top, and broke into it, and got
something to eat. We then discovered that we could
not descend into the valley because of the walls rising
perpendicularly to where we stood. Going back to the
tower, therefore, we found some lengths of rope, and
lowered ourselves by their joint aid. But a native had


seen us-, and Dave and Pete chased him right into the
city, although he must have been an escaped prisoner,
or something of that sort, for he took the most extra-
ordinary methods of getting there ”
“ Begorra, bhoys, it was me ye was chasin',” grinned
Irish, “ I had just come down with Great Scott a way of
our own when yez dropped from the sky at me feet.
I thought yez was more of them priests, and as I had
taken the clothes of some dead niggers, I cleared like
Barney’s goat. I got in here and saw a fight going on,
and, thinks I, here is as good a way of getting in a blow
for my mates as any other way, and begorra, I sailed in,
and yez know the rest.”
Dave and Pete glared at Irish as if they would have
liked to do him bodily harm, and Harry thought there
might be trouble among the sham priests until he learned
that the reason of their resentment was not because of
the race Irish had led them, but because they had not
been able to follow him to the fight.
“ We came in as fast as hungry men could,” exclaimed
Dave; “ but Irish was jumping along like a kangaroo.
When we got into the city it was dark, and we held up
another nigger running near us. He turned out to be
Great Scott, and he told us that some white men were in
the tapu house, so, sending him back to bring along the
Parson, we went into the tapu house to see who the
white men were. We found a lot of silly old priests
there, with their tongues cut out ; but we found no trace
of white men until we saw that the poor priests were tied
up, and then we recognized the work of Mac and Boy in
the knots tied. Mac’s were fixed so that a mosquito
couldn’t get out, and some was only anyhow, so we knew
Boy had been about ”
“ I’ll tie up a nigger as well as you any day,” roared
Darling Bill. “ I tied a lot of these fellows myself ”


“ What has we struck ? ” gasped Dave. “ Say, young-
ster, does ye realize that I is the great Kangaroo Dave,
an’ that I has eaten more men than ”
“ I don’t care a Chinese pigtail who ye are. lam
Darling Bill, of New South Wales, and the only differ-
ence I can see between us, is that you are uglier than
I am.”
“Great howlin’ snakes ! Iguanas, and centipedes ! ”
roared Dave. “ Have Ito stand this ? ”
“ I’m afraid you will have to, just now, Dave,” laughed
the Chief. “ You see, we are all, and you especially,
very hungry, and it is only Bill who knows how to get
us anything to eat. Besides, you two are prisoners ”
“ I’m wanting to ken the rest o’ the Parson’s story,”
spoke Mac, eyeing young Bill with wrathful glance.
“ Some folk I ken would kick up a row aboot whether
they were buried heid first or feet first doon.”
“ I came in with Great Scott,” hurriedly put in the
Parson ; “ and while he went out again to investigate,
we dined on the few bones you had left from what must
have been a gorgeous repast. After this we thought we
might find a use for the binding material round the
priests, so we cut them out, and had barely finished when
a band of well-trained and half-gentlemanly warriors
entered and bundled the priests out, their leader inform-
ing us by signs that he also requested the honour of
our company. The invitation was too pressing to be
resisted, so we came, and here we are. The priests are
down below in a water tank.”
“ And here we’ll likely be until the mamoose re-
members again,” said Darling Bill ; “ and as it is long
past midnight and no one will be about now, Harry
and me will go out and fossick for something for you
fellows to eat.”
“ Can’t we all go ? ” asked Coolgardie Bill, who had


become very quiet and thoughtful of late. “ I reckon
we can easily make up some more dresses.”
“Of course,” said Darling Bill ; “ and we would all be
collared. The mamoose’s madness helped him to tumble
to the dodge we are playing. He spotted us to-night, and
every silent priest he catches, or is found out to-night,
will be put through an examination to see whether he
has a tongue or not.”
“All right, boys,” said the Chief, “you certainly
know this business better than we. Have your own
way.”
“Then we’re going out as warriors,” cried Bill; “and
by Sydney Harbour! we’ll arm ourselves with those
clubs and swords hanging on the wall there. They look
as if they had done good work in their time, and may-
be they’ll do some more to-night.” Darling Bill was
excited. He was not accustomed to making speeches,
and the Chief saw that something deep lay under his
words.
“ Very well,” he said. “ See that your revolvers are
all right, and don’t try any rash experiments.”
“ We’ll be back before morning,” Bill said, as they
hastily made some changes in their garments, and took
possession of some formidable weapons which had pro-
bably been wielded by some famous warriors of the
past.
“And, captain,” he continued, “maybe it would be
better if all but the two white men who are to be the
prisoners were to camp outside to-night. One never
knows what will happen here.”
“ Oh, I think we can look after ourselves now,” said
the Chief. “We have a fair amount of revolvers and
three rifles, and I think we’ll get the mamoose away all
right before he invents some new form of torture for our
benefit.”
(B 762) Z


Bill did not answer, and, assisted by Mac, he and
Harry pulled themselves through the roof and dropped
down outside in the darkness. Meanwhile, their com-
rades, with characteristic indifference to what had hap-
pened during the last twenty-four hours, and to what
might happen during the next, composed themselves
for sleep.
“ Harry,” said Bill, as they walked hurriedly through
the deserted streets, “ I have an idea. Are you game
to carry it out with me ? ”
“ Certainly,” answered Harry. “ What is it ? ”
“The mamoose has one of his turns to-night.
There’s no telling what he’ll do. He’ll most likely
wander about all night, forgetting one minute what he
has said or done the minute before. Oh, you needn’t
think I don’t know. I have been watching him ever
since I got in here. Now, I propose that we get on his
trail, and when we get a chance go for him, like two
’guanos going for a snake. He’ll never know what’s
struck him. But, howling dingoes! keep out of his
reach, for if he once grips us we’re done. When we
get him we’ll cart him away and make him a Silent
Priest. Doc knows how to do that. Then you can
be Mamoose, and I’ll be your chief adviser. Great
Scott knows the language, and between us we can
make the gods give Kalamo as many orders as we
want ”
“ But shouldn’t we have taken Mac or Bill with us ?
My brother, I mean the mamoose, may be too strong
for us.”
“ No, bless it, no! Mac’s all right, and so is Bill ;
but they would want to boss things, and then they would
spoil it all. We must do this ourselves, somehow; the
two of us should be able to best him although he’s a
terror, for we are not new chums ; an’ after that we can


easily boss the people through you, for if your face was
washed you would be as like him as one mulga tree is
like another.”
“ All right, Bill. What is the first move ? ”
“ Catch the mamoose. We will go right through
the market and on to his palace, and hide from him in
the garden. He is bound to come out before morning,
and —Jumpin’ beans ! here he comes now ”
They dropped to the ground, and a tall figure issued
from the market-place and stood by the embers of a
dying fire in front of the stage on which had been, a few
hours previously, an unrehearsed performance.
The street was completely deserted, and the night
was intensely dark. It was also very cold, and the boys
shivered.
“ Come on, Harry. You get up in front of him
and go right bang at him,” said Bill. “ He’ll catch
you in his arms as sure as nuts, and when his hands
are full, I’ll sail in behind and trip him up—Go
now.”
Harry at once crept silently towards the motion-
less figure by the fire, his heart beating wildly. When
within a few yards he rose to his feet, and, calcu-
lating the distance, prepared to spring upon his brother.
Meanwhile Bill was close behind the unsuspecting
victim.
“ Here it was they fought around me,” the boys heard
the mamoose soliloquize. “ How like my dream it was.”
He drew his hand wearily across his forehead. “ Strange
that I should fancy myself one of a band of white devils
wandering in other lands,” he continued. “ I must be
going mad. I’ll have to get some new gods made and
sacrifice some more priests. Ah! that’s it—it is dangerous
when priests become fighters. But they did not fight as
my warriors fight. They seemed to do as my dream-


people would do. Why am I alone here ? Why do I talk
a language my people do not understand ? Why have I
no sister or brother ? What am I ? Who am I ? Oh,
I can’t think ”
At that moment Harry remembered what he was
expected to do, and sprang straight at his brother. He
had no weapons, of course, and his only intention was to
fill the mamoose’s hands and so enable Bill to do his
part. He succeeded wonderfully well, for without even
looking at him the mamoose caught him up as he would
a child. “You are a very foolish warrior,” he said ; “it
is time you were in bed ” He got no further, for Bill
had thrown himself upon him from behind, and with his
arms round his neck and his knees in the small of his back,
bent him over until his back was like to break. The
mamoose never seemed to think of depositing his first
assailant, but struggled with Harry in his arms to turn
round to face his clinging second antagonist, and in
so doing tripped over Bill’s leg, which in some mysteri-
ous manner seemed to be everywhere at the same
time.
The great mamoose fell. Probably it was the first
time in his life. He swung round on the ground, now
roused to anger, but he uttered no sound, and next
second Bill's fingers closed on his throat with all the
strength the boy could put into them. Almost choking,
the mamoose threw Harry from him and grasped
Bill in a grip of iron. Bill did not relax his hold,
however, and Harry came to his assistance in a
second.
“It aint no use, mamoose,” Bill spluttered. “ You are
not dealing with silly old Silent Priests this time—Oh no,
you don’t get up. Better get unconscious as soon as
you can. Give us a hand, Harry. Quick! he’ll break
away! I can’t hold him. That’s right. You hold on to


his windpipe now, and I’ll give him a tap on the
head ”
“ You are not going to club him, Bill,” cried
Harry. “ I cannot allow that. He is my brother,
remember.”
“ And does ye think I would be such an all-fired
idiot as to be committing suicide this way if he wasn’t ? ”
demanded Bill. “ Hold on. Swing his head round a
little. Now ! ” Bill’s club fell. “ I’m sorrier than if it
were my own head, mamoose,” said Bill, apologetically,
as he watched to see if one blow had been sufficient.
“ But ye see we can’t take any risks, and you’re so for-
getful that even though ye gave your word not to speak,
we couldn’t take it ”
Perhaps Bill might have said more, but Harry had
released his brother’s throat. The mamoose stared up-
ward into his eyes. “ Hallo, Harry! ” he ejaculated.
“When did you come to this country?” He likewise
said no more, for Bill’s club came down again, and this
time it did its work.
“ Come on, now, mate,” said Bill, shaking with the
excitement of the past minute ; “ change clothes, and
we’ll cart him to Doc, and then go and get the gods in
working order, so as to get a free pass from them to
leave this blamed city.”
Harry gazed shudderingly at the still form of his
brother.
“ Where’s your nerve ? ” cried Bill, almost angrily.
“This had to be done. You’re mamoose now. Off with
his clothes ”
“ Oh, Bill, I can’t. I feel as if we had murdered him.
Is he dead ? ”
“Dead ? Not him. But we’ll be soon if you don’t
get a hustle on.”
Bill had already started to undress the mamoose, and


realizing that the success of the whole scheme lay in its
boldness, and their ability and nerve, to carry it through,
Harry assisted, and then stripped himself. They then
washed the dye off his skin, and while he donned the
mamoose’s clothes, Bill painted the latter’s skin with his
own dye preparation. The metamorphosis was complete,
and Harry stood up, the image of his brother in every
way. They then picked up the mamoose and carried
him by the head and feet to the prison-house where
their comrades lay.
The place was empty, and signs of a struggle were
everywhere.
They placed their motionless burden on the ground,
and sat down beside it, and the perspiration streamed
down Bill’s face. “ Oh, Lord,” he groaned, “ we can’t leave
them a minute without them getting into trouble.” He
jumped up and cried hysterically, “ Wait with him. I’ll
go and find them.” Harry did not respond, and Bill
rushed away.
“ Why did I allow this ? ” cried Harry, in anguish
gazing on his brother’s upturned face. “ I have helped
to kill him, and my mother and sister are waiting for him
at home ”
Two natives skulked from the darkness and ap-
proached him. Harry drew his revolver and looked up
indifferently, but with a wild yell of “ Mamoose ! ” they
fled, and Harry replaced his weapon. A few minutes
afterwards another warrior came out of the darkness and
leaned against the wall of the prison-house, “ Harry,” he
cried, “where are you?” “Here,” answered Harry,
standing up. The warrior approached. “We had a
fight in there,” he said. “ Kalamo gave Dave and Pete
the hint to clear out. He seems to have taken a liking
to them. Some of the priests objected, however, and
Kalamo turned his warriors on them. We all cleared


out, but Mac and I came back for you.” Suddenly the
dying fire at Harry’s feet flickered, and the light showed
his face.
“ Great heavens! ” cried Doc, for it was he, “it is
the mamoose ! Come, Mac, quick! We’ll catch him.”
The fire flickered again, and Doc’s eyes fell on the
blood-stained figure on the ground. “Oh ! What awful
deed has been done?” he cried. “He has killed poor
Boy, his brother ”
“Not so, Doc,” cried Harry, as Mac rushed up, and
with a sob lifted the prostrate figure in his arms. “ I wish
it were as you say, but I killed him ”
Doc tremblingly kicked the fire into a blaze. “ No,
no, Tom,” he said brokenly, “ you don’t know what
you’ve done, and poor Boy was —ah ! ” He started at
the figure in Mac’s arms. It was even taller than Mac.
He peered into its eyes, and Mac gave vent to an
exclamation.
“He’s no deid yet!” Mac shouted. “Here, Doc,
attend to him at once.”
“Am I dreaming ? it is the mamoose after all! ”
cried Doc. “ What has happened ? ”
“Bill and I killed him, as I have already said,” said
the figure standing near, “ and I took his clothes ”
Just then hurried footsteps were heard approaching,
and, preceded by Bill, the Chief and the others
rushed up.
“ What has happened ? ” cried the Chief. “ I can’t
understand, Bill ” Then his eyes fell on the figure
in Mac’s arms, and he stopped suddenly and reeled
back.
“ Haud on a wee,” cried Mac. “ It’s no Boy that’s
hurt; it’s the mamoose.”
“ Then our journey has been fruitless,” wailed the
Chief, “and poor Tom never knew us ”


“ Blow you for a set of dunderheads ! ” roared Darling
Bill, dancing with excitement. “ He’s no more dead
than we are. Cart him to the palace at once, and take
command of the city. The mamoose is standing beside
you.”


CHAPTER XVII
Comrades All
Silently and stealthily the comrades bore the mamoose
through the deserted city to the palace. They would
have gone off with him through the Silent Priests’
passage that very hour, but they knew that unless they
could gain its entrance entirely unobserved, and with
no chance of the mamoose’s absence being discovered
during the succeeding few hours, such a procedure
might only mean the end of all, for those in charge could
simply let loose the waters of the lake and drown them
in the heart of the mountain.
But men who were accustomed to looking at matters
from every point of view, and whose coolness and nerve
never left them, were not likely to risk the result of their
long quest by making any error now, and hastily
deciding on a plan of action, they had carried their old
chief to his own house, there to await immediate develop-
ments. Before the attendants in the palace knew what
was happening they were overpowered by the disguised
white men, and soon after, Doc was attending to the
mamoose in one of the rooms.
Anxiously now they awaited daylight. They had
made themselves as secure as possible, and knew that if
nothing unexpected happened they would get safely away.
Harry was the image of his brother, although of smaller


stature, and naturally more youthful in appearance. He
would act as the mamoose, and if his nerve did not fail,
an end to their enforced stay in the palace would be
reached as soon as they could devise some scheme which
would give them undisputed command of the city. But
Harry’s nerve did not fail, and when morning came,
accompanied by Great Scott and Darling Bill, and
followed by Kalamo and one or two warriors as a body-
guard, he went about the city, as his brother was wont
to do. He did not understand anything said to him,
but apparently that did not matter, and he was applauded
vigorously wherever he was seen.
Thus three days passed, and the people were eager
for another holiday. There was occasion for one now,
a number of silent priests having been condemned for
causing the disturbance in the market-place, and the
trial was to take place that day. Great preparation
had been made to ensure the trial being a success, and
the mamoose in person superintended affairs, with the
chief priest dancing continual attendance on him. The
most important gods had been brought out to take an
active part in the proceedings, and were now neatly
arranged in a row on a stage erected in front of the Hall
of Justice. They had evidently been washed for the
occasion, and looked quite respectable with the dust and
spiders’ webs cleaned from their wooden bodies, and as
the people looked at the great protectors of their tribe
they felt that before the day was done many noble and
god-like deeds would be accomplished.
Kalamo marshalled his warriors in a style worthy of
at least a captaincy in the German army, and as the sun
cast its shadow over the foremost god in the row, the
drums sounded and the ceremony began. Not a word
was spoken. The mamoose had given orders that the
gods should have everything in their own hands, and of


course, as they knew all things, that suited the populace
admirably, they having had previous experience of
holidays when the gods’ hands seemed to have been
forced somewhat.
Two of the chief Silent Priests brought forward a half-
starved looking prisoner in very scanty priestly garb, and,
placing him in front of one of the gods, stood beside him
expectantly. For a moment the people were in suspense,
for the god made no sign. The mamoose joined the
party awaiting the decision, and spoke one word in a
strange language, and shortly after the people raised a
cry of delight, for the god was speaking. It was
perhaps as well that their shouts drowned what the god
said, and otherwise took up their attention, for although
they could not be expected to understand the language
of the gods, they might have been surprised at the
manner in which his words affected the mamoose. He
was greatly distressed, and at once seized a piece of the
silky material manufactured by the tribe’s artisans and
threw it over the god’s face. Next moment he pulled it
away again, and in so doing several balls of wool, or
something like that, which seemed to have been used by
this special god for filling up his mouth, eyes, and nose,
when not in use, came with it, and dense clouds of
pungent smoke belched from these apertures.
At this sight the people again roared their approval,
and the god said, in what was doubtless meant to
be an undertone, but what sounded like a storm
blowing through a megaphone, “Man, I was gey near
deid. Wait till I get ma hands on that young deevil,
Bill.”
The people, as those awful sounds fell on their
ears, burst out with shouts of acclamation even greater
than before. It was now clear to them that one god
at least could do what no man could do, and that he


was well able to deal with those who did not respect
him.
The people became silent. The poor prisoner
shivered. The god still vomited smoke, and the priests
marvelled greatly at the whole affair; they had never
known a god to be so demonstrative before.
“ What’s the beggar up for ? ” demanded the god, in
a strong Scottish accent. “Ye’re fined ten shillings or
ten days, and don’t do it again ”
Here the priests threw themselves in front of the
wonderful talking god, and with raised hands mutely
entreated the prisoner as a sacrifice.
“Tak’ him awa’ and feed him,” thundered the god.
“ Next case.”
The mamoose raised his hand, and the prisoner was
hurried away. No one knew what he had been guilty
of, nor what his sentence was —and none cared now.
This god was very popular, and again the valley rang
with shouts of approval, and the smoke gradually ceased.
Ventilation inside the god was not perfect.
A band of about a dozen Silent Priests were next
brought up, the charge against them being that they had
had dealings with the white devils, and had allowed two
to escape, and also that they had caused much disturb-
ance in the market-place some time before. The charge
made no mention of the fact that the two white prisoners
supposed to have escaped were reported as killed by
Kalamo and his men. To make things as evenly dis-
tributed as possible, the priests were ranged before gods
number four, five, and six.
Number four flapped his huge ears at a great rate,
which showed that he was hearing the murmurs of the
people and sympathizing with them. Number five evi-
dently had fallen asleep, for his enormous lower jaw had
dropped on his breast, his eyes had disappeared from


sight, and a discordant sound, something like that pro-
duced by a foghorn, came in periodical jerks from his
interior. This god was Coolgardie Bill, who had now
grown as silent as ever was Ted, the loss of his comrade
having affected him more deeply than he could hide.
God number six was still thinking, but as he stood
twenty feet high, and Canadian Pete could see quite
well through the hole in his body level with his eyes,
that god was planning a surprise.
“ Give the priests ten minutes start and let them take
their chances after that,” thundered number four, other-
wise Kangaroo Dave.
“ A blamed good idea,” agreed number six. “ The
mamoose can order all the natives in the village to chase
them, and then the road will be open for us.”
“ What do you say, Doc ? ”
“ I think the idea is all right,” answered number
three, “ because these prisoners are picked for their
running powers, and are easily the fastest runners in
the village. Prepare them, Great Scott, for their
sentence.”
The people were surprised beyond measure at the
strange godly sounds, but concluded that this mark of
favour was due to the virtues of their mamoose, and
waited patiently to see what was to happen to the
prisoners. The chief priest of the people, who wore a
large peg through his nose, superintended the placing
of the prisoners in proper position to receive their
sentence, and a young active priest also made himself
very useful. The mamoose, tall and stately, stood beside
the chief priest, but he did not seem as cool as he usually
was during any ceremonies, his face was a trifle paler,
and he certainly appeared to have grown much thinner
during the last week. Suddenly he walked up to god
number three, and held a long consultation with him.


That god then addressed the people in a voice like many
drums beating, concluding with a fierce exhortation to
remember “ The Charge of the Light Brigade.” As he
neared the end the other gods awoke to their duties,
and the young priest ran from one to another as
directed by the mamoose. The people thought he was
praying to them, but his prayer to number five was
certainly original. It was, “ Bill, you all fired dreamer,
if you don’t wake up I’ll stick this plug of gelignite in
your back and blow you out the valley.”
A muttered sound issued from number five, and his
jaws began to move. Next moment the mamoose
shouted some signal, and number one belched out his
smoke and made a terrific noise. Number two swayed
like a ship in a storm, and emitted some hideous sounds.
Number three still recited “The Charge of the Light
Brigade.” Number four’s ears flapped vigorously, and
a fierce murmur of indignation came from some part of
his strange anatomy. Number five’s jaws clicked like a
crocodile’s, and his eyes rolled. Number six shouted
out, “Way down upon the Swanee River,” and as he
finished the first verse, his head blew off with a terrific
report, and all the other gods made the earth quake with
their thunders.
Meanwhile the chief priest had run round the
prisoner priests and whispered something in their ears,
and as number six blew his head off, they, to a man,
turned and ran past the gods, jumped the stage, and
made off like so many dust streaks down the valley.
“ Now ! Great Scott,” cried the mamoose ; and the
chief priest shouted out in the native tongue.
“After them—our gods are insulted. Woe to the
man who does not go after them ! ”
For a moment the people stood transfixed in
helpless amazement. Could they believe their eyes ?


Was that really the head of the mighty sorcerer god
that lay at the bottom of the staging ? Were these
terrible sounds they heard actually evidences of the
gods’ displeasure ? Was that a Silent Priest shouting
to them ? How could he speak, and what was he
saying ?
It took some time for the natives to realize what had
happened, and meanwhile Great Scott kept shouting to
them, the gods still kept up their performances, and the
escaping prisoners were swiftly increasing the distance
between them and the village. Soon, however, the
people grasped what was required of them, and then
they certainly were unanimous in their decision, and in
two minutes not a man was left before the gods, and the
road down the valley was black with speeding humanity.
The mamoose, the chief priest, and the young active
priest watched them for a few moments, and then rushed
round the gods. “ Come out now. Quick! ” they
shouted. Trap-doors in the backs of the gods opened,
and Mac, Irish, Doc, Dave, Bill, and Pete climbed out,
the last still holding a piece of the smoking fuse with
which he had dynamited the god’s head.
“ Man in his time plays many parts,” remarked Doc,
as he wiped the perspiration from his face, and replaced
the butt of a cigar in his mouth.
“You’re richt there, Doc,” agreed Mac, thoughtfully,
throwing away the tow with which he had produced the
smoke. “ I’m wondering what’s the next part we’ll play,
and whether the stage will be on earth, or above, or
below it.”
“ I don’t think it matters, Mac,” laughed the
mamoose, hysterically ; “we’ll be pretty well used to all
three.”
“ If only we had Bob and Ted, and Jack and Kaiser
now, I wouldn’t care what we had to fight,” said Harry,


as he passed his hands through his hair to make it stand
up properly, as a mamoose’s ought to do.
“ For a youngster, Boy, I must say you have developed
wonderfully in the fighting line,” said Doc ; “ but I have
still hopes that our comrades will answer to our roll-call
before long. Bob, Ted, and Jack have been killed
dozens of times before this, yet always turned up again.”
None of the others made any comment, but Coolgardie
Bill’s lips moved and his eyes had a far-away expression ;
he and Ted had been more than brothers.
They made record time through the deserted market-
place, along the shady avenue, and over the water by a
plank bridge they had constructed into the palace.
“You have succeeded, then ? ” cried the Chief, as
they entered the great hall.
“ Yes,” cried Harry, “everything went off exactly as
was planned, and the entire population are among the
gullies at the northern end of the valley, chasing some
silent priests specially chosen for their swiftness. We
can leave now by the priests’ passage. Sartor Resartus
must have got down to the German station by this
time. It is five days since we dug him out of the ant
hill, and they are bound to be on this side of the line
now.”
“ All right, boys,” said the Chief, “ everything is ready.
Here is sufficient food for a couple of days. I don’t
think we want any of this gold or precious stones. We’ll
leave that to the people. We’ve got what we came for,
and I am hopeful that Tom’s memory will come back to
him when he sees you, Harry, and his comrades, in
English dress. Besides, he will have all Doc’s attention
now.”
It was now well on in the afternoon, and the real
mamoose was supposed to be sleeping off the effects of
a drug Doc had given him. He seemed to have


forgotten everything since receiving Darling Bill’s
blow, although at times, brief spasmodic flashes of
memory came back to him and he would order his
silent priests to attend to some duties or see about
some improvements he had just, in fancy, arranged
for the benefit of the people. Then, he would glide
back into the mist of forgetfulness, and when next the
vacant look changed to one of intelligence, he would
speak to Doc, whom he recognized at such moments,
on matters relating to their former expedition, without
showing any surprise at finding himself in his present
position.
That day, however, a marked improvement had taken
place, and Doc knew that soon the memory of one phase
of his life would be restored, but whether it would be
that of his life as mamoose, or before that date, was more
than he could determine.
He was now eager to bring the mamoose into con-
tact with his old associates, and also trusted a great deal
to Harry’s personality to assist him in bringing out the
mamoose’s full faculties.
After a consultation with the Chief as to the best
methods of introducing their comrades, Doc and he
entered the apartment where the mamoose was confined.
They found him standing over a heap of rifles and
other weapons and appliances. He held a letter in his
hand, and looked from it to the weapons from time to
time as if trying to understand something in connection
with them.
“ Ah, Doc,” he exclaimed as they came forward, “ do
you know who wrote this letter ? ”
“Your brother Harry. He lost it somewhere ”
answered Doc, carelessly.
“Yes —in that god in the death chamber. Oh, you
need not be alarmed. That was all I wanted to know.
(8 762) 2 A


This letter tells about a wonderful mad wizard living
among some mountain people, and is written to my sister
by my brother, who is evidently a member of a party
looking for him. A great weight seemed to roll off my
head when I read this letter, and I seemed to awake
suddenly from a long complicated dream. Then I
wondered what our rifles were doing here. But my
head is painful. What happened to me ? There is
blood upon it. Ah! that is where the tapu mamoose
struck me; it was an unfair blow; but now I am
mamoose, and we can work out those mineral bodies
without further trouble. I remember everything now.
The Mad Wizard, that was I. I was mad. But what a
dream I had.” He paused and looked at Doc and the
Chief questioningly, and the light of reason shone in
his eyes. “Tell me, comrades,” he said quietly, “am
I mad now or not ? Have I been ill ; and which is the
dream and which the reality ? Have I done much
harm ? ”
“No, you have not, Tom,” said Doc, soothingly,
examining the wound in his head. “You have been
ill, but you are better now. But tell me, do you
remember ”
A mighty mental effort seemed to be taking place
in the mamoose’s brain, then he turned and smiled.
“ Doc,” he said, “ I know everything. I have been
under a hallucination. I thought I was the great white
mamoose, and I dreamt I did all sorts of strange things
—but where are the boys ? ”
“ Edward has just gone for them,” answered Doc.
“Ah, here they all come, every one of them, and your
brother and some others in addition.”
“My brother? So it is. How did he get here. He
was only a boy when I left home.”
“ Tom, you have been ill for a long time, remember,”


said Doc, “and things have happened that you must not
know for some time ” But Doc never finished, for
with a wild shout of joy the men had thrown themselves
upon their old chief, and this time it was not to over-
power him.
“ Ah, Edward, and Mac, and why, you are all here,”
he said, after his comrades had poured out their thank-
fulness at having him in their midst again. “ Why,
Harry, you are a man now, and you look as strong as
a lion. What strange clothes you wear, too. Is that
the fashion now, 1 don’t know how you got here,
but ” He became thoughtful, and Doc looked
alarmed.
“No, no, Tom, you will dream again if you think,”
he cried. “ Edward has been made chief until you get
well, and we must obey him. What is to be done, Chief?
I don’t think we can stay for dinner.”
The Chief understood Doc’s glance. “No, we must
get away at once,” he said, “ it is getting dark, and we
have a long journey before we can camp.”
“One moment, Edward,” interrupted the mamoose.
“ I know I have been ill, but, believe me, I am better
now. I just want to see for myself if my dream has
any foundation.” He walked to a recess and pulled
forth a large wooden box strongly bound with the
peculiar bronze he had invented. “Ah ! ” he said,
significantly, as it opened and there was disclosed a
dazzling mass of gemstones of enormous value. “ How
long have I been dreaming, Doc ? ”
“ Six years,” Doc answered quietly.
“Do come with us, Tom,” cried Harry, anx-
iously. “ Mother and sister are waiting at home
for you.”
“I am coming, Harry. It is time I had a trip
home if I have been six years here. Bring that


box along, boys ; I don’t think there is much dream
about it.”
“ Lead the way, Bill,” ordered the Chief, and lighting
the lamps and leaving the palace illuminated as when
they first saw it, the comrades marched out into the
night, and without turning to right or left, went straight
ahead until they reached the entrance to the silent
priests’ passage. The uprights and cross-beams of the
balance, and the mamoose’s throne, were still standing,
and their shadowy forms loomed up spectre-like in the
darkness. The men endeavoured to hide these erections
from the mamoose by keeping him surrounded, and
thought they had succeeded. Just as they dropped
inside the hole in the rock, however, he turned to
Darling Bill, who was beside him, and said, “ Do you
know, little white devil, I have often thought that, had
you not run out on that beam, the results might have
been different.”
“You’re dreaming again, boss,” cried Bill, evasively.
“ I don’t know what you mean.”
“ I never knew you,” continued the mamoose, “ but I
rather liked you from the first time you joined the
priests. Tell me, who changed the springs in that
affair ? ”
Bill was troubled. He did not know what to say,
but unconsciously responding to the question, his eyes
sought out Mac.
“ I might have known,” said the mamoose, seeing
where Bill’s eyes rested. “ Good old Mac! I knew he
would do something when I saw him come along. I
suppose, too, it was Harry who ”
“ Let me help you, Tom,” interrupted the Chief,
falling back beside the mamoose. He had heard
the conversation, and was afraid of what it might
lead to.


“ Nonsense, Edward,” laughed the mamoose ; “ I
was only thinking of what might have been. But, dear
me, I know this road under the mountains ; it is the
passage of the silent priests. I will lead you ”
“ Allow him to do as he wishes,” whispered Doc to
the Chief. “It will prevent him from thinking of other
things,”
And thus through the long hours of night they
followed the mamoose along the subterranean passage,
and in the grey dawn emerged on the other side.
Signs of the great struggle that had taken place
there ten days before were still in evidence, and Harry
shuddered as he recollected the awful scene and remem-
bered that that day was the last the comrades had all
been together. The mamoose looked around, and a
very puzzled expression came over his face. Was it
only a dream he had had that caused him to fancy this
the scene of many battles ? Had he not led his brave
warriors against the Tugeris here only last week ? How
strange it was, too, that he should fancy that in this very
valley he had once led a tribe of savages against his
comrades! He turned to Doc inquiringly, but Doc
knew well what was passing in his mind, and did not
know how to answer.
“ I think we should camp round that first bluff, and
have some breakfast,” he remarked.
“A good idea,” returned the Chief. “We must
have some stores about here anyhow.”
Bill and Dave went round to their last camping-
ground to see if by chance there was anything in the
way of stores left, and came back laden with tinned food-
stuffs. Proceeding down the mysterious river channel
then, until out of sight of the battlefield, the party
halted, and breakfast was prepared. But even in the
preparing of the simple meal the absence of Fat Jack


was felt by all, and Bill moved about listlessly thinking
of what his life would be henceforth without Silent
Ted, and without any further adventures to take up
his attention.
Suddenly a wild uproar shattered the morning still-
ness, and springing to their feet the party beheld a
frenzied horde of mountain warriors rushing down the
hillside towards them.
“We are done! ” gasped the Chief, “we can’t stop
that rush. History is repeating itself.”
“ Oh, that we had our rifles ! ” groaned Bill. “ But
we’ve lost Ted, so it doesn’t matter.”
“We can run,” said Harry. “Those warriors must
be tired out.”
“No, we can’t,” cried Darling Bill; “here’s a bigger
mob of niggers coming up the gully. We are cornered,
mates.”
It was as Darling Bill had said, and there now broke
into view a seething mass of naked savages coming from
the other side.
But what was happening among the first people ?
They were shouting, and brandishing clubs and swords,
and otherwise wasting their strength, in a manner not
conducive to good fighting afterwards.
“ They are fighting among themselves,” cried Harry.
“ I see men going down everywhere.”
“ It is Kalamo and some of the warriors fighting the
others,” cried Darling Bill. “What is the meaning of
it ? ”
Meanwhile the second army was approaching
rapidly.
Suddenly the mamoose strode out from behind the
bluff. He stood for a moment as if deep in thought,
then he shouted out some words in the native tongue,
and the warriors ceased fighting and cried out joyously.


“ Go back, my people, I will come again,” he cried in
English, and just then Kalamo and another broke
from the ranks of the warriors and rushed towards the
camp.
“ Don’t fire, boys. It’s me ! ” yelled Kalamo, and Bill
dropped his revolver, and, throwing himself upon the
ground, rolled and kicked as if shot.
“It’s Ted!” he shouted; “it’s Ted come back to
life!”
“ And Bob Wilson, too,” cried Kalamo’s companion,
as the two warriors drew nearer. “We knew you would
come out last night, and we’ve been keeping the warriors
back all the time. They saw you half an hour ago
though, and we had to start fighting them ourselves,”
As he finished they ran into the arms of their
comrades.
“ And just in time to get killed, wi’ us,” said Mac.
“ Here is the second edition coming. We are in for it
noo.”
“ No, we’re not,” roared Canadian Pete, madly.
“ Look! there is Kaiser and Fat Jack in front, and I can
see one of the Germans coming behind. It’s a German
force coming to help us ! ”
And it was ; but ere they came up, the mountain
warriors, in answer to the mamoose’s signal, had dis-
appeared as completely as if the earth had swallowed
them.
What words could describe the joy of the next half
hour ?
While Kaiser, Jack, Bob, and Ted pranced around
delightedly, Count Von Harman told how the carriers of
the party had come down to the station, followed soon
after by Sartor Resartus. Their story could not be
readily understood, but a force was mustered and held in
readiness. Three days ago Kaiser and Jack had arrived at


the station, and straightway the native force was placed
at their disposal. “We crossed no boundary-line, how-
ever,” said the officer, “ so we must still be in German
territory,”
“ Perhaps,” laughed the Chief, as Doc led the mamoose
apart; then, turning to Kalamo, he said, “Go on with
your story, Ted.”
“I am too tired to talk, boss,” drawled Ted. “ Ask
Bob.”
“ It was all Silent Ted’s funeral,” said Bob.
“Ye twa microbes,” howled Mac; “if ye dinna get
your tongues started in three seconds we’ll mak’ ye into
silent priests. Hoo does it come that you are the leaders
o’ the mamoose’s army ? ”
“ All right, Mac. Here goes. Ted and I were sitting
by the camp fire when some niggers rushed us. We
dropped at once and played ’possum until a couple more
came nosing around, and made to stick bone knives into
us. We couldn’t allow that, of course, and went for them,
and, thinking it good fun, we took their clothes and
blackened our faces. Before we knew where we were
another mob was round us, and it didn’t need much of
a conundrum guesser to see that they took us for their
two mates, and that they had been some sort of leaders.
I remembered some of the lingo, and evidently the fellow
that had worn Ted’s clothes had not been much of a
talker, and wasn’t expected to say much. Anyhow, we
saw that our camp was wiped out, and thinking you
fellows had sense enough to look after yourselves, Ted
and I decided on going with the niggers in the hopes of
finding the way into the city. We did so, and as Ted
happened to be the leader of the gang, that was an easy
matter, and no one questioned us. We got in in time
to help at the making of the last silent priests, and as a
lot of our warriors were afraid that they would be called


upon to fill up the priestly ranks, I played upon their
feelings and caused a little mutiny, and then they agreed
to fight under Kalamo and me, if called upon, to save
their tongues. Ted fell into his part like a fish falling
into water, and I backed him all I could, and soon
I knew the language well enough to talk like a native
schoolmaster. That’s all. We soon spotted you fellows.
That was as easy as taking a drink, for you were always
looking as if you knew you had no clothes on, and then
we reckoned we had better not make ourselves known,
for we expected you’d need friends soon, and we could
be of more service by playing our own game. When
you chucked out the old mamoose and took on the
government yourselves we still lay low, knowing that
you couldn’t keep it up for long, and that we could join
you when the real fun began You know the rest.
Is our old chief all right now? Let me get a grip of
his fist.”
“ Why, Bob, is it you ? ” cried the mamoose, rejoin-
ing the party with Doc. “ When did you become a
warrior—and why ! what is Kalamo doing here ? ”
“ And have you not a word for me, Boss ? ” wailed a
voice.
“ Dear ! ” said the mamoose, drawing his hand across
his forehead. “My old friend Fat Jack too ? ”
“ And this is another member of our party,” said the
Chief, introducing Kaiser. “And this is a friend—an
Irish German in charge of the frontier station.”
“ Oh, drop the German,” cried Count Von Harman.
“ I am an Irishman just now. If you make me out a
German you’ll get me court-martialled for being here.
But I’ll tell you. Let us move back now. My fellows
can carry any of you who are knocked out, and his
Imperial Germanic Majesty will, through his deputies,
do his best to entertain you at the station. ”


“ Then we accept his hospitality,” cried the mamoose.
“Although somehow I have an idea that he and I are
not on speaking terms.”
“ Oh, never mind that,” laughed the officer ; and
after partaking of breakfast the party accompanied the
great army of native police back to the station.
“But I say, Ted,” said Bill, who had been thinking
deeply, as they proceeded down the gully. “ How did
you manage to talk to the warriors ? ”
“ Yes ; that’s what I wad like tae ken,” put in Mac.
“Ye werena’ famous as a conversationalist.”
Ted opened his mouth as if to speak ; but a tired
look came into his eyes, his jaws clicked together, and
he remained silent.
“ Speak, ye beggar, speak ! ” roared Coolgardie Bill,
seizing him by his frizzled hair.
“ I am not a talking-machine,” Ted answered re-
proachfully. “Ask Bob.”
Bill removed his hand from his hair with a sigh ; and
Ted, as if suddenly remembering something, fell behind
and washed the dye from his skin, and otherwise made
himself like his comrades. The mamoose seemed to be
very much bewildered, and his eyes often fell on Ted.
Then they would wander to his brother Harry and from
him to Darling Bill. He could not yet understand how
they happened to be with the party ; he felt sure, too,
that he had seen Kalamo only a little while ago, but then
that might be part of another dream.
They reached the station that night, for it was
all downhill travelling, and the invading force had
formed a passable track which now served them in
good stead.
Here they halted to recuperate, on the invitation of
all the German officers. Theirs had been a strenuous
life for some time past, and they were all in need of


a rest. But the very last day of inaction seemed to
cause a gloom over all; they had accomplished the
mission which had bound them together for so long,
and each man thought that they would now separate
to the four ends of the earth, and their ranks be broken
up for ever.
The Chief appeared to be saddest of them all,
although he did his best to assume a cheerfulness when
among his comrades, and as he and Mac sat in the shade
of a wild fig tree in the officers’ garden, two days after
their arrival at the station, Harry came up and stood
beside them, and a trio of more disconsolate-looking
men would have been difficult to find.
“ What’s the matter with you, Boy ? ” asked the
Chief. “You should be happy, at any rate; you are
wealthy now, and have found your brother, and can go
home.”
“ I am not going home,” said Harry, moodily.
“Oh ! then you have trouble, too ? Tell us, Boy, if it
is anything that money will clear away ; you are welcome
to all that I have made ”
“ And mine too, laddie,” said Mac, gazing abstractedly
into space.
“We were thinking of going exploring a bit,” said
the Chief. “We don’t care to go home. We mean to
look for excitement elsewhere ”
“So do I,” said Harry, without looking up ; “I think
I will go back to the mountain people, and be their
mamoose instead of my brother. I know enough of
their language now to carry me through, and Darling Bill
says he will come with me.”
“ Ma laddie, I’ll come too, and be your chief Silent
Priest,” cried Mac, his face lighting up.
“ And I’ll be Kalamo,” added the Chief, also allowing
his face to brighten. “ But you have not told us why


you will not go home, Harry. I should have thought
Cathie would have proved a great attraction.”
“ I cannot go home,” said Harry, “ because I have
not yet found her cousin, and the mystery of the
opals found in my pocket—they were the same kind
as those my brother and you have, Chief —has not yet
been cleared up.”
“ I had forgotten about Edward Blackwood,” said
the Chief, musingly ; “ but what were you saying about
opals, Harry ? ”
“Miss Blackwood’s opal necklet was found in my
coat pocket, and as Darling Bill and I had pulled her
out of the water the day before —she had had an
accident at Tilbury Docks —it looked as if I had
stolen them, although Mr. Blackwood did not believe
that.”
“ What connection had you with Mr. Blackwood,
Harry?” asked the Chief.
“ I was a clerk in his employment ”
“ Then, Harry, you may go home now. Our partner-
ship is broken up, and Mac and I will continue wander-
ing over this earth’s surface ourselves—l took the
opals.”
“You, Chief! You are going mad like my
brother!”
“ No, Harry ;itis a fact. I was at Tilbury that day,
and among those who went into the water after Cathie.
I was by her side as soon as any one, but as two others
had come up, and the tug people seemed to have lost
their heads, I left her to them, and climbed on board
the tug to remedy matters there. She was wearing her
opal necklet when I saw her, but it had become detached
and was slipping off, so I took it. The next day I
called to restore it, but while in the hall I heard my
name mentioned, and remembering the terms on which


my uncle and I had parted, I thought I would go away
again without being seen. I did not hear what was
said about me, and only realized that I was in an
awkward position when I heard the drawing-room door
open, I did not know what to do then, but, looking
round, I saw what I took to be my uncle’s coat hang-
ing near, and slipped the opals in one of the pockets
and ran.”
“Your uncle. Then you are
“ Edward Blackwood. I told you I would take you
to him, Harry. What has my uncle to say against
me ? ”
“Nothing, Chief,” cried Harry in happy surprise.
“He has been searching the world for you, and my
special mission was to find you and tell you to come
home, and that he knew now you were entirely innocent
of that affair which happened in the office. Oh, Chief,
are you really Cathie’s cousin ? I can’t imagine it ”
“But I am, nevertheless, Harry,”
“ Then you’ll come home now ” Harry was
interrupted by a burst of laughter from the verandah
of the bungalow, where the mamoose, Doc, and the
Parson were sitting with the German officers.
“ That is Tom who is laughing,” said the Chief,
thoughtfully. “He is all right now, and his life among
the mountain people is but a dream to him.”
“ Hims German white fellows tell me get you an’
come have afternoon tea,” said Great Scott, appearing
beside them. “ All hims old carriers with King George
am all waiting to go with you again. Great Scott want
go too anywhere you go.”
“ And you shall, Great Scott,” said the Chief, as they
rose to join the others. “You will come to Samarai
with us on the steamer, and we’ll arrange there what we
will do next.”


“ Hullo, boys, what’s the matter with you all ? ” cried
the mamoose, as they walked on to the verandah. “ You
look as though you had just awakened from a dream
about silent priests.”
“ Don’t talk of your dream, Tom,” said the Chief,
kindly. “It will only hurt you.”
“ Yes,” said the mamoose, curiously, “ the mad wizard
must say farewell now, or this little white devil will club
him again, I suppose.”
He turned to Darling Bill, who had just joined the
party and looked thoughtfully at him, but Bill only
grinned, and Harry at this point came rushing over, and
the mamoose cried, “ Hullo, Harry, what is the matter
with you ? ”
“Nothing, Tom, only see that you make the Chief
come home with us. I think he intends to go away
again with Mac.”
“Oh no, he won’t, Harry,” said the mamoose ; “ I
know some one who is waiting for him.”
He walked over to his old comrade and whispered a
few words in his ear.
“ Yes, Boy,” said the Chief a moment later, and a
new light shone in his eyes ; u we will all go home
together, I will cable from Samarai,”
“And the mamoose of the mountain people will give
his blessing everywhere,” said Tom, smilingly, looking
round upon his old comrades who had gathered near,
“ We are all wealthy men now, and I insist on you all
coming with me to old England. Who knows but we
may yet all take part in some other adventure. Sound
out the tattoo, Kalamo, and make the gods order the
departure. Oh, don’t worry, Doc, a six years’ dream
must have left some impression, you know. . .
* * * * *
The noble P. & O. steamer, Marmora, is speeding


over the waters of the Indian Ocean, and the Company’s
crest, “ Quis Separabit,” applies well to a band of fifteen
bronzed men she carries in her saloon. At home, many
hearts are beating hopefully, for the cables have been
working, and the fame of the band is great.
Meanwhile on the mountain-tops above a city in the
heart of distant New Guinea, strange beacons flash
nightly, and those in the watch-towers keep constant
look-out. In the city far beneath them, the people
await anxiously, but expectantly, the return of their
great white mamoose.


.


‘‘English boys owe a debt of gratitude to Mr. Henty.”— Athenaum.
Blackie & Son’s
Illustrated Story Books
G. A. HENTY
With Clive in India; or, The Beginnings of an
Empire. Illustrated. New
Edition. 6 d.
At the period of the landing of Clive as a young writer in India the Eng-
lish were traders existing on sufferance of the native princes. At the close
of his career they were masters of the greater part of Southern India. The
author has given a full and accurate account of the events of that stirring
time, and combines with his narrative a tale of daring and adventure.
“Those who know something about India will be the first to thank Mr. Henty for
giving them this instructive volume to place in the hands of their children.”
— Academy.
-Condemned as a Nihilist:
trations by Wal Paget. New Edition. 3s. 6 d.
Godfrey Bullen, a young Englishman resident in St. Petersburg, becomes
involved in various political plots, resulting in his seizure and exile to
Siberia. After an unsuccessful attempt to escape, he gives himself up to the
Russian authorities. Eventually he escapes, and reaches home, having
safely accomplished a perilous journey which lasts nearly two years.
“ His narrative is more interesting than many of the tales with which the public is
familiar of escape from Siberia. The escape of the hero and his faithful Tartar from
the hostile.Samoyedes is quite the high-water mark of the author’s achievement.”
—National Obsti ver.
-Under Wellington’s Command:
sular War. Illustrations by WiL Paget. New Edition. 3s. 6 d.
In this stirring romance Mr. Henty gives us the further adventures of
Terence O’Connor, the hero of With Moore at Corunna. We are told
how, in alliance with a small force of Spanish guerrillas, the gallant regiment
of Portuguese levies commanded by Terence keeps the whole of the French
army in check at a critical period of the war, rendering invaluable service
to the Iron Duke and his handful of British troops.
“An admirable exposition of Mr. Henty’s masterly method of combining instruction
with amusement ."—World.
[46] (1) A


Through Three Campaigns: A al Sl^ °Tirah'
and Ashanti. Illustrated by Wal Paget. With 3 Maps. 6s.
The hero of this story, the son of an officer, joins the Chitral expedition
secretly as a private soldier, but the enormous difficulties which have to
be overcome in the course of the march soon call forth his noble qualities,
and before the end of the campaign he qualifies for a commission. His
subsequent career is a series of brilliant successes. He takes part in the
storming of the Dargai heights, is more than once captured by the enemy,
and by a heroic sacrifice wins the V.C.
“Every true boy will enjoy this story of plucky adventure.’’ —Educational News.
Gives animation to recent ustory, and its confident art and abundant spirit will
greatly satisfy the intelligent and spirited boy.” —Dundee Advertiser.
-With Kitchener in the Soudan: A A^ ale
of Atbara
and Omdurman. With 10 Illustrations by W. Rainey, R.i., and
3 Maps. 6s.
In carrying out various special missions with which he is entrusted the
hero displays so much dash and enterprise that he soon attains an ex-
ceptionally high rank for his age. In all the operations he takes a dis-
tinguished part, and adventure follows so close on adventure that the
end of the story is reached all too soon.
“Mr. Henty has collected a vast amount of information about the reconquest of
the Soudan, and he succeeds in impressing it upon his reader’s mind at the very time
when he is interesting him most.” —Literary World.
-With the British Legion: A ; Story ° f f t , hec T a . l , list
O Wars. With 10 Illus-
trations by Wal Paget. 6s.
The hero joins the British Legion, which was raised by Sir de Lacy
Evans to support the cause of Queen Christina and the Infant Queen
Isabella, and as soon as he sets foot on Spanish soil his adventures begin.
Arthur is one of Mr. Henty’s most brilliant heroes, and the tale of his
experiences is thrilling and breathless from first to last.
“ It is a rattling story told with verve and spirit.” —Pall Mall Gazette.
“The Treasure of the Incas: A Tale . of Ad-
venture m Peru.
With 8 Illustrations by Wal Paget, and a Map. s^.
The heroes of this powerful story go to Peru to look for the treasure
which the Incas hid when the Spaniards invaded the country. Their task
is both arduous and dangerous, but though they are often disappeinted,
their courage and perseverance are at last amply rewarded.
“ TUe interest never flags for one moment, and the story is told with vigour. ”
—World.


With Roberts to Pretoria: ATale °*'. the
African War. With
12 Illustrations by William r.l, and a Map. 6s.
The hero takes part in the series of battles that end in the disaster at
Magersfontein, is captured and imprisoned in the race-course at Pretoria,
but escapes in time to fight at Paardeberg and march with the victorious
army to Bloemfontein, He rides with Colonel Mahon’s column to the
relief of Mafeking, and accomplishes the return journey with such despatch
as to be able to join in the triumphant advance to Pretoria.
“ In this story of the South African war Mr. Henty proves once more his incon-
testable pre-eminence as a writer for boys.”— Standard.
- The Younp; Carthaginian: A s ‘ ory °! t l he Tl ™ es
o o of Hannibal. Illus-
trated. 3s. 6d. New Edition.
Mr. Henty has had the full advantage of much unexhausted, picturesque,
and impressive material, and has thus been enabled to form a striking
historic background to as exciting a story of adventure as the keenest
appetite could wish.
“ From first to last nothing stays the interest of the narrative. It bears us along as
on a stream, whose current varies in direction, but never loses its force.”
—Saturday Review.
-Through Russian Snows: fro^Moscow^with
8 page Illustrations by W. H. Overend. 5.?.
Julian Wyatt becomes, quite innocently, mixed up with smugglers, who
carry him to France, and hand him over as a prisoner to the French.
He subsequently regains his freedom by joining Napoleon’s array in the
campaign against Russia.
“The hero is altogether a fine character such as boys will delight in, whilst the
story of the campaign is very graphically told.”— St. James’s Gazette.
“ One of Mr. Henty’s best books, which will be hailed with joy by his many eager
readers.”— Journal of Education.
-Both Sides the Border: tZtIJr.XZZt
by Ralph Peacock. New Edition. 3s. 6 d.
A story of the wild border country at the beginning of the fifteenth cen-
tury. Oswald Foster casts in his lot with the Percys, and becomes esquire
to Sir Henry, the gallant Hotspur. In following his fortunes we are
introduced to Douglas of Scotland, Owen Glendower, and other notable
personages of this stormy period.
“ Mr. Henty retains the reader’s interest throughout the story, whioh he tells
clearly and vigorously.” —Daily Telegraph.


BLACKIE'S STORY BOOKS FOR BOYS
G. A. HENTY
At the Point of the Bayonet: Mahratt^war 6
With 12 Illustrations by Wal Paget, and 2 Maps. 6s.
Harry Lindsay is carried off to the hills and brought up as a Mahratta.
At the age of sixteen he becomes an officer in the service of the Mahratta
prince at Poona, and afterwards receives a commission in the army of
the East India Company. His courage and enterprise are rewarded by
quick promotion, and at the end of the war he sails for England, where
he succeeds in establishing his right to the family estates.
“A brisk, dashing narrative.”— Bookman.
-Captain Bayley’s Heir: A f^ al . e . ofthe( ;° ldFiel(^ s
l J J 01 California. Illustrated.
y. 6d.
A frank, manly lad and his cousin are rivals in the heirship of a property.
The former falls into a trap laid by the latter, and while under a false
accusation of theft, leaves England for America. There he joins a small
band of hunters, and is successful both as digger and trader. He acquires
a small fortune, and at length returns home, rich in valuable experience.
“The portraits of Captain Bayley and the head-master of Westminster School are
admirably drawn, and the adventures in California are told with that vigour which is
peculiar to Mr. Henty.”— Academy.
-To Herat and Cabul: t St Ti‘*n, irstA ™ an
War. With 8 full-page Illus-
trations by C. M. Sheldon, and Map. s^.
The hero takes a distinguished part in the defence of Herat, and subse-
quently obtains invaluable information for the British army during the first
Afghan war. He is fortunately spared the horrors of the retreat from
Cabul, and shares in the series of operations by which that most disastrous
blunder was retrieved.
“ We can heartily commend it to boys, old and young.”— Spectator.
-With Cochrane the Dauntless: A 3 al ? f Ol
his Exploits.
With 12 page Illustrations by W. H. Margetson. 6s.
It would be hard to find, even in sensational fiction, a more daring leader
than Lord Cochrane, or a career which supplies so many thrilling exploits.
The manner in which, almost single-handed, he scattered the French fleet
in the Basque Roads is one of the greatest feats in English naval history.
“As rousing and interesting a book as boys could wish for.” —Saturday Review.
“This tale we specially recommend.”— St. James's Gazette.


Redskin and Cow-Boy: ™ Tdeo w h l Western
J Plains. With 12 page
Illustrations by Alfred Pearse. 6s.
Hugh Tunstall accompanies a frontiersman on a hunting expedition on
the Plains, and then seeks employment as a cow-boy on a cattle ranch.
His experiences during a “round up” present in picturesque form the toil-
some, exciting, adventurous life of a cow-boy; while the perils of a frontier
settlement are vividly set forth. Subsequently, the hero joins a wagon-
team, and the interest is sustained in a fight with, and capture of, brigands.
“A strong interest of open-air life and movement pervades the whole book.”— Scotsman.
-With Duller in Natal: °^ AB °™Leader, with
10 page Illustrations by
W. Rainey, r.l, and a Map. 6s.
The heroic story of the relief of Ladysmith forms the theme of one of the
most powerful romances that have come from Mr. Henty’s pen. When the
war breaks out, the hero, Chris King, and his friends band themselves to-
gether under the title of the Maritzburg Scouts. From first to last the boy
scouts are constantly engaged in perilous and exciting enterprises, from
which they always emerge triumphant, thanks to their own skill and cour-
age, and the dash and ingenuity of their leader.
“ Just the sort of book to inspire an enterprising boy.” —Army and Navy Gazette.
-By England’s Aid : or, The Freeing of the Nether-
J O lands (i 585-1604). With 10
page Illustrations by Alfred Pearse, and 4 Maps. 6d.
Two English lads go to Holland in the service of one of “the fighting
Veres”. After many adventures one of the lads finds himself on board a
Spanish ship at the defeat of the Armada, and escapes from Spain only to
fall into the hands of the Corsairs. He is successful, however, in getting
back to Spain, and regains his native country after the capture of Cadiz,
“ Boys know and love Mr. Henty’s books of adventure, and will welcome his tale
of the freeing of the Netherlands.”— Athenceum.
-The Lion of the North: * T , al ' of Gust JT“ s
Adolphus, Illus-
trated. 3.?. 6d. New Edition.
In this story Mr. Henty gives the history of the first part of the Thirty
Years’ War, a struggle unprecedented in length, in the fury with which it
was carried on, and in the terrible destruction and ruin which it caused.
The army of the chivalrous King of Sweden, the prop of the Protestant
cause, was largely composed of Scotchmen, and among these was the hero of
the story. The chief interest of the tale turns on the great struggle between
Gustavus and his chief opponents—Wallenstein, Tilly, and Pappenheim.
“ The tale is a clever and instructive piece of history, and as boys may be trusted
to read it conscientiously, they can hardly fail to be profited as well as pleased.”
The Timet.


BLACKIB'S STORY BOOKS FOR BOYS
G. A. HENTY
The Lion of St. Mark : Tale of Venice. With
6page Illustrations. Cloth
elegant, y. 6 d.
_ A story of Venice at a period when intrigue, crime, and bloodshed were
rife. The hero, the son of an English trader, displays a fine manliness, and
is successful in extricating his friends from imminent dangers. Finally he
contributes to the victories of the Venetians at Porto d’Anzo and Chioggia.
“ Every boy should read The Lion of St. Mark."—Saturday Review.
-The Dragon and the Raven: °b, The ,L )ay /
o of King Alfred.
With 8 page Illustrations by C. J. Staniland. s s.
In this story the author gives an account of the desperate struggle be-
tween Saxon and Dane for supremacy in England. The hero, a young
Saxon, takes part in all the battles fought by King Alfred, and the incidents
in his career are unusually varied and exciting.
“ We have nothing but praise for this story, which is excellently written, and will
make the history of the period to which it relates a reality to its readers.”
—School Guardian.
- The Bravest of the Brave: with Peterborough
in Spam. With 8
page Illustrations by H. M. Paget. s^.
There are few great leaders whose life and actions have so completely
fallen into oblivion as those of the Earl of Peterborough. He showed a
genius for warfare which has never been surpassed. Round the fortunes of
Jack Stilwell, the hero, and of Peterborough, Mr. Henty has woven a
brilliant narrative of the War of the Spanish Succession (1705-6).
" The adventures of the aide-de-camp. Jack, will probably be found to be no less
interesting than the marvellous operations of the General himself, in which he takes
a leading part.”— Spectator.
-For Name and Fame: o r ,ToCabui with Roberts.
With 8 page Illustrations.
After being wrecked and going through many stirring adventures among
the Malays, the hero of this story finds his way to Calcutta, and enlists in
a regiment proceeding to the Afghan Passes. He accompanies the force
under General Roberts to the Peiwar Kotal, is wounded, taken prisoner,
and carried to Cabul, whence he is transferred to Candahar, and takes
part in the final defeat of the army of Ayoub Khan.
“The book teems with spirited scenes and stirring adventures, and the boy who
reads it attentively will acquire a sound knowledge on subjects that are of vital
importance to our Indian Empire.”— School Guardian.


-Maori and Settler: * Stol7 *** New “f?
War. With 8 page Illustra-
tions by Alfred Pearse.
The Renshaws lose their property and emigrate to New Zealand. Wilfrid,
a strong, self-reliant lad, is the mainstay of the household. The odds seem
hopelessly against the party, but they succeed in establishing themselves
happily in one of the pleasantest of the New Zealand valleys.
“A book which all young people, but especially boys, will read with avidity."
—A thenceum.
flip • A Story of the Roman Invasion of
DCIIL Britain. With 12 page Illustrations
by W. Parkinson. 6s.
Beric is a boy-chief of a British tribe which takes a prominent part in
the insurrection under Boadicea: and after the defeat of that heroic queen
he continues the struggle in the fen-country. Ultimately Beric is defeated
and carried captive to Rome, where he succeeds in saving a Christian maid
by slaying a lion in the arena, and is rewarded by being made the personal
Erotector of Nero. Finally, he escapes and returns to Britain, where he
ecomes a wise ruler of his own people.
“He is a hero of the most attractive kind. . . . One of the most spirited and well-
imagined stories Mr. Henty has written.”— Saturday Review.
“ His conflict with a lion In the arena is a thrilling chapter.”
—School Board Chronicle.
“ Full of every form of heroism and pluck.”— Christian World.
-The Dash for Khartoum:
page Illustrations by John Schonberg and J. Nash. 6s.
In the record of recent British history there is no more captivating page
for boys than the story of the Nile campaign, and the attempt to rescue
General Gordon. For, in the difficulties which the expedition encountered,
and in the perils which it overpassed, are found all the excitement of
romance, as well as the fascination which belongs to real events.
“ The Dash for Khartoum is your Ideal boys’ book.” — Tablet.
“ It is literally true that the narrative never flags a moment.”— Academy.
“ The Dash for Khartoum will be appreciated even by those who don’t ordinarily
care a dash for anything.”— Punch.
-With Wolfe in Canada: u
page Illustrations by Gordon Browne. 6s.
Mr. Henty tells the story of the struggle between Britain and France for
supremacy on the North American continent. The fall of Quebec decided
that the Anglo-Saxon race should predominate in the New World; that
Britain, and not France, should take the lead among the nations.
“ A moving tale of military exploit and thrilling adventure.” —Daily News.


BLACKIE'S STORY BOOKS FOR BOYS
G. A. HENTY
-Held Fast for England:
page Illustrations by Gordon Browne. s s.
The story deals with one of the most memorable sieges in history. The
hero, a young Englishman resident in Gibraltar, takes a brave and worthy
part in the long defence, and we learn with what bravery, resourcefulness,
and tenacity the Rock was held for England.
“There is no cessation of exciting incident throughout the story.”— Athenceum.
-In the Irish Brigade: A Jale of War in Flanders
O and Spam. With 12 page
Illustrations by Charles M. Sheldon. 6s.
The hero is a young officer in the Irish Brigade, which for many years
after the siege of Limerick formed the backbone of the French army. He
goes through many stirring adventures, successfully carries out dangerous
missions in Spain, saves a large portion of the French army at Oudenarde,
and even has the audacity to kidnap the Prime Minister of England.
“ A stirring book of military adventure.”— Scotsman.
-At Agincourt: of the v^ ite f H ° ods ° f p“is-
o With 12 page Illustrations by Wal
Paget. 6s.
Sir Eustace de Villeroy, in journeying from Hampshire to his castle in
France, made young Guy Aylmer one of his escort. Soon thereafter the
castle was attacked, and the English youth displayed such valour that his
liege-lord made him commander of a special mission to Paris. This he
accomplished, returning in time to take part in the campaign against the
French which ended in the glorious victory for England at Agincourt.
“ Cannot fail to commend itself to boys of all ages. ” —Manchester Courier.
-A Final Reckoning:
Illustrations by W. B. Wollen. s^.
The hero, a young Englishman, emigrates to Australia, where he gets
employment as an officer in the mounted police. A few years of active
work gain him promotion to a captaincy. In that post he greatly distin-
guishes himself, and finally leaves the service and settles down as a squatter.
"A stirring story capitally told ."—Guardlxn.


Story Books for Boys
Capt. F. S. BRERETON
■p A Tale of the Conquest of Mexico.
X\.Ogci me -DOIQ . m ustrate( j p,y Stanley L. Wood.
Large crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6j.
Roger is a great fighter. He is put in charge of a wonderful disc, but a
certain traitor robs him, and he finally comes as a prisoner to Mexico.
The Mexicans think he is a god and offer him all their treasure if he will
fight against the Spaniards. The reader will learn with bated breath of the
adventures which Roger experiences, of the desperate defence which he
organizes, and of his narrow escape before retreat is cut off.
“ The tale forms lively reading, the fighting being especially good.”— Atheiueum.
“The author has excelled himself.”— Outlook.
-With Roberts to Candahar:
War. Illustrated by W. Rainey, r.i. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, s s.
The tale opens at Cabul, when Sir Louis Cavagnari’s mission was being
attacked by the mutinous troops of the Ameer. Major Dennisson is on a
visit to Sir Louis, and, the mission being destroyed, all trace of him is lost.
Alec Dennisson is due at Cabul two days later, but he is attacked, and
escapes, is appointed aide-de-camp to General Roberts, and joins the punitive
expedition. He comes to loggerheads with a certain Yohinda Khan, who
has captives in his hands. One of these Alec believes is his father, and he
determines to rescue him. His indomitable courage overcomes all difficul-
ties, and his efforts are crowned with success.
“A very tried author, who improves with each book he writes, is Captain F. S.
Brereton. ” —A cademy.
- A ‘soldier of Tanan • A Tale of the Russo ‘ Ja P anese
—ooiaier or japan. War iu ust rated. 51.
The opening incident of this war was as great a surprise to Valentine
Graham and his father as to the Russians, for their junk lay opposite Port
Arthur on February 8, 1904, and in spite of their signals was heavily shelled.
They are rescued by the Japanese, and, indignant at their treatment, join the
Mikado’s forces. Valentine promptly takes part in a second dash upon
Port Arthur, and becomes a prisoner. In time he is sent up-country with
other prisoners, with whom he contrives to escape. They join a band of
Hunhuse brigands, and have a desperate encounter with the Cossacks, A
week later they fall in with Kuroki’s army and take part in the battle of the
Yalu. Thereafter numerous adventures befall the hero, who becomes noted
throughout Manchuria for dash and intrepidity.
“The pages bristle with hairbreadth escapes and gallantry, and the historical side
of the tale is worked out with much accuracy and detail.”— Graphic.


BLACKIE'S STORY BOOKS FOR BOYS
Capt. F, S. BRERETON
One of the Fighting Scouts: A J w° f f Guer '
o o rilla Warfare m
South Africa. Illustrated by Stanley L. Wood. With a Map. s^.
This story deals with the guerrilla aspect of the Boer War, and shows
how George Ransome is compelled to leave his father’s farm and take
service with the British. He is given the command of a band of scouts
as a reward for gallantry, and with these he punishes certain rebels for
a piece of rascality, and successfully attacks Botha’s commando. He even
outwits the redoubtable De Wet.
“ Altogether an unusually good story.” —Yorkshire Post.
-With the Dyaks of Borneo: A T . ale „ of t the
J Head Hunters.
Illustrated by Fritz Bergen. Large crown Bvo, 6j.
Tyler wins a commission by a gallant act, but on the way to Borneo,
there to join his ship, he is set upon by a band of Malay and Dyak pirates.
He escapes to land, where he becomes the leader of a tribe of head-hunting
Dyaks. They march through the forests towards Sarawak, defeating the
pirates en route. Afterwards Tyler meets with many adventures, and
sees hard fighting ere he is disabled by a wound.
“ Young readers must be hard to please if With the Dyaks does not suit them.”
— Spectator.
-A Hero of Lucknow: of the Indian Mutiny.
Illustrated by William
Rainey, r.i. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, ss.
The hero takes part in the defence of Cawnpore, but by good fortune
slips away before the capitulation. Soon after he becomes a prisoner of a
rebel leader. He is dragged to Lucknow, where he eludes his captors and
gains the defences. But his adventures have not ended. Thanks to the
knowledge which he has obtained of the city he is able to carry out success'
fully a hazardous expedition, and eventually reaches Delhi. He takes part
in the capture of that city, and then marches to the relief of Lucknow.
“ Full of action and picturesque adventure. A splendid book for boys, as Captain
Brereton’s always are.” —British Weekly,
Dr. GORDON STABLES, R.N.
To Greenland and the Pole:
New Edition. y.
The story deals with skilobning in the north of Scotland, deer-hunting in
Norway, sealing in the Arctic, bear-stalking on the ice, the hardships of
a journey across Greenland, and a voyage to the back of the North Pole.
“The adventures are actual experiences. It is ohe of the books of the season,
and one of the best Mr. Stables has ever written.” — Truth.


BZA OKIE’S STORY BOOKS FOR
ALEXANDER MACDONALD
The lost Fxnlorers • A Story of the Trackless
1 IIC eubl Jixpiurcrt> . Desert . Illustrated by
Arthur H. Buckland. Large crown Bvo, cloth, olivine edges, 6.y.
This is a fresh and original story by a new writer of the first rank. The
heroes dig for gold, and find it too, and meet with some real bush char-
acters ; but later they set out on a wild mission into the interior in search
of a mysterious mountain, near which Mackay’s former party had dis-
appeared. They have many adventures on the way, and ultimately reach
the mountain only to be attacked by a band of warriors, who, after inflicting
serious loss on the party, retire into the mountain by a secret passage. The
expedition force their way into the forbidden land, and there meet with
many pleasant surprises. Mr. Macdonald gives his actual experiences in
crossing the great Never Never Land. Seldom has such a vividly realistic
tale been written for boys.
“As splendid and as vivid a narrative as any boy could wish to read.”
—Daily Graphic.
HARRY COLLINGWOOD
Across the Spanish Main; 'of Queen
Bess. Illustrated. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 5-y.
This is a rattling story of the sea in the days of Queen Elizabeth. Two
youths sail with Cavendish for the Indies. Their three small ships capture
or destroy five Spanish frigates. In this lively encounter one of the friends
becomes a prisoner, and before he escapes manages to secure a cipher
revealing the hiding-place of the hoard of a notorious pirate. After some
exciting adventures in Cuba, one of the heroes is marooned on a lonely
island, but is rescued in time to take part in the capture of the pirate.
Further adventures follow thick and fast.
“A rattling story, crammed with incident,” —Manchester Courier.
HERBERT STRANG
Kobo : A Story of the Russo-Japanese War. Illustrated. s s.
Bob Fawcett, sent out to Japan just before the outbreak of the war to
test the range-finding apparatus of the Japanese fleet, has the good fortune
to do a slight service to Kobo San, the descendant of an ancient Samurai
family, and high in the Government service. Bob shares in some of the
most noteworthy naval actions of the war. These are, however, only the
prelude to as exciting a series of adventures on land as ever boy went
through. Bob is captured by Cossacks, escapes, is besieged with Kobo
in a Korean temple, and after defeating the besiegers reaches the army of
General Kuroki in time for the battle of the Yalu.
The Pall Mall Gazette said: “ Mr. Herbert Strang, whose splendid story, Tom
Burnaby, proved so brilliantly successful, has written another that will rank as its
equal for vivid interest".
(xz)


BLACK lE'S STORY BOOKS FOR BOYS
HERBERT STRANG
The Adventures of Harry Rochester:
A Story of the Days of Marlborough and Eugene. Illustrated. 6s.
The hero, driven by the death of his father to seek his fortune in London,
is kidnapped and carried on board a ship bound for Barbados. Escaping,
he takes service with a Dutchman who is contractor to the allied forces
in the Low Countries. A daring feat while on convoy duty wins him
a commission in a Dutch regiment; he fights at Blenheim and comes
into relations with Marlborough and Eugene. The story is packed with
adventure; and there is a romantic underplot.
“ In The Adventures of Harry Rochester Mr. Strang ha* written one of the best
stories of a military and historical type we have seen for many a day.”— Athenceum.
“The story is full of vigour and movement.”— Literary World.
- Brown of Moukden: * , Story ,!f Russo-Japanese
War. Illustrated. 5-y.
In Kobo, Mr. Herbert Strang gave a picture of the war from the
Japanese side. In the present book he approaches the same great subject
from the Russian side. Mr. Brown is the victim of a conspiracy to connect
him with the betrayal of certain military secrets to the Japanese; he
suddenly disappears, and his son Jack is left friendless in Moukden. Jack’s
strange adventures when caught up in the whirlpool of the war, and the
means by which he ultimately traces his father’s whereabouts, are told with
the same spirit and intimate knowledge of the East that made the success
of Kobo.
“ Mr. Strang’s best-known volume, Tom Burnaby, was a real boys’ book, and was
hailed with delight by every youngster who loves a story full of daring and adventure.
But Mr. Strang puts more into his books than exciting incidents well told. His facts
and dates, and his descriptions of the manners and customs of the periods with which
he deals, have all the merits of complete historical accuracy, so that boys who read Mr.
Strang’s works have not merely the advantage of perusing enthralling and wholesome
tales, but they are, unconsciously it may be, also absorbing sound and trustworthy
information of the men and times about which they are reading.”— Daily Telegraph.
“ The incident of the locomotive race down the Siberian Railway is, for breathless
interest, the equal of anything we know of in the whole range of juvenile fiction. . . .
The book will hold boy readers spell-bound.”— Church Times.
DAVID KER
Among the Dark Mountains:
Illustrated by Frances Ewan. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6 d.
Marmaduke Wyvil sails for Singapore, with his chum Alfred, to bring
home the latter’s father, Colonel Huntley. Arriving there, they find that
nothing has been heard of Huntley, and they go seeking him among the
islands. Learning that he is a prisoner among the savages of Acheen, they
go thither and treat for his release. The savages plot against them, and
they are preparing to sell their lives as dearly as possible when the eruption
of Krakatoa breaks out and enables them to escape.
“ A glorious tale of adventure.” —Educational News.


BL A OKIE'S STORY BOOKS FOR BOYS
MEREDITH FLETCHER
Every Inch a Briton: a school story, illustrated
J by Sydney Cowell. 3s. 6d.
This story is written from the point of view of an ordinary boy, who gives
an animated account of a young public-schoolboy’s life. No moral is
drawn; yet the story indicates a kind of training that goes to promote
veracity, endurance, and enterprise; and of each of several of the characters
it might be truly said, he is worthy to be called, “ Every Inch a Briton ”.
“ In Every hick a Briton Mr. Meredith Fletcher has scored a success.”
—Manchester Guardian.
_ Jefferson Junior * School Story. Illustrated by J. R.
J J Burgess. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
3-y. 6d.
A tale of the adventures and misadventures of a pair of youngsters during
their first term at a public school, written by one of them later on. The
hero’s ingenious efforts to unravel a mystery “set things humming” in
rather a startling fashion; but after many blunders and novel experiences
all comes right at last.
“ A comical yarn. . . . The boy who does not break out into sudden fits of uncon-
trollable laughter on reading it has no fun in his bones." —Yorkshire Daily Observer.
G. MANVILLE FENN
D n * r 0 J Among the Blackfellows in New Guinea.
DUliyip J_>dllQ . Illu strated. 3*.
The story of an eminent botanist who ventures into the interior of New
Guinea in search of new plants. Years pass away, and he does not return.
He is supposed to be dead, but his wife and son refuse to believe it; and,
as soon as he is old enough, young Joe goes in search of his father, accom-
panied by Jimmy, a native black. After many adventures they discover
the lost one, a prisoner among the blacks, and bring him home in triumph.
“ One of the best tales of adventure produced by any living writer.”
—Daily Chronicle.
- Dick o’ the Fens: £ Roman “ °‘ * e , < ? rea J East
Swamp. Illustrated by Frank
Dadd. Cloth elegant, olivine edges, 3s. 6 d.
A tale of boy life in the old Lincolnshire Fens. Sketches of shooting
and fishing experiences are introduced in a manner which should stimulate
the faculty of observation, and give a healthy love for country life; while
the record of the fenman’s stealthy resistance to the great draining scheme
is full of the keenest interest.
“ We conscientiously believe that boys will find it capital reading.”— Times.
“ We have not of late come across a historical fiction, whether intended for boys or
for men, which deserves to be so heartily praised as regards plot, incidents, and
spirit. It is its author’s masterpiece as yet.”— Spectator.


BLAOKIE'S STORY BOOKS FOR BOYS
FRED SMITH
The World of Animal Life. Edited by fred
Smith. Pro-
fusely Illustrated with Engravings after F. SPECHT and other
eminent artists. 5-f.
The aim of The World of Animal Life is to give in non-scientific lan-
guage an account of those inhabitants of the land, sea, and sky with whose
names we are all familiar, but concerning whose manner of life the majority
of us have only the haziest conceptions.
“An admirable volume for the young mind enquiring after Nature.”
—Birmingham Gazette.
J. CHALMERS
Fighting the Matabele: A f ot J of nl' v< ; nt “ r j
o o in Rhodesia. Illustrated
Stanley L. Wood, y.
A story of the great Matabele rising in 1896. The hero and his friends
are surprised by the revolted natives in the heart of the Matopo moun-
tains, and alter experiencing many stirring adventures eventually make
their way back to Buluwayo. The hero subsequently joins the Africander
Corps, and distinguishes himself in the operations by which the insurrection
is crushed.
“The stormy times of the recent insurrection in Matabeleland are described with a
piquantness which will ensure the book becoming a favourite.” —Liverpool Courier.
A. J. CHURCH
T ords of the World • A Tale of the Fall of Car "
or uic vv onu . thage and Corinth Illus .
trated by Ralph Peacock. 3-r. 6d.
Cleanor, a young Greek, whose native town has been barbarously
destroyed, struggles to resist the growing power of Rome. He sees
Carthage and Corinth fall, and at last owns that the Romans are better
fitted than any other nation to be Lords of the World.
“As a boy’s book, Lords of the World deserves a hearty welcome."— Spectator.
“An excellent story.” —Daily Chronicle.
S. BARING-GOULD
Grettir the Outlaw: A . s , tor> iri flcelan f,, in ,, th , edays
of the Vikings. With 6 page
Illustrations by M. Zeno Diemer. y.
A narrative of adventure of the most romantic kind. No boy will be able
to withstand the magic of such scenes as the fight of Grettir with the twelve
bearserks, the wrestle with Karr the Old in the chamber of the dead, the
combat with the spirit of Glam the thrall, and the defence of the dying
Grettir by his younger brother.
“ Has a freshness, a freedom, a sense of sun and wind and the open air, which make
it irresistible.” —National Observer.


BLACKIE'S STORY BOOKS FOR
PAUL DANBY
The Red Army Book, with many illustrations
J in colour and m black-
and-white. 6s.
This book includes chapters on the various branches of the regular army,
and also on such attractive subjects as “Boys who have won the V.C.”,
“Pets of the Regiment”, “The Colours”, “Famous War Horses”, &c.
Each chapter, besides dealing generally with its subject, is full of capital
anecdotes, and the book as a whole is excellently illustrated with colour
and black-and-white illustrations.
“ Every boy would glory in the keeping and reading of such a prize. ’ — Daily Telegraph.
J. CUTHBERT HADDEN
The Nelson Navy Book. W‘ th man y I l lustr !'! ,o " s
J in colour and in black-
and-white. Large crown Bvo, cloth, olivine edges, 6.r.
In England’s history there is no more stirring story than that of her
Navy. Mr. Hadden tells how the foundations of our vast Empire were
laid by the spirit of naval adventure and the desire to explore the distant
seas; and how Britain came into conflict with Dane and Dutchman,
Spaniard and Frenchman, and many more, all of whom she subdued after
many a stout fight detailed in these pages. The book is cast in a popular
style and is thoroughly up to date.
"A stirring, heartening tale, bold and bracing as the sea itself.'— The Standard.
“An ideal book for boys.”— Sheffield Telegraph.
C. J. CUTCLIFFE HYNE
The Captured Cruiser:
by F. BRANGWYN. 3s. 6 d.
The central incidents deal with the capture, during the war between Chili
and Peru, of an armed cruiser. The heroes and their companions break
from prison in Valparaiso, board this warship in the night, overpower the
watch, escape to sea under the fire of the forts, and finally, after marvellous
adventures, lose the cruiser among the icebergs near Cape Horn.
“The two lads and the two skippers are admirably drawn. Mr. Hyne has now
secured a position in the first rank of writers of fiction for boys.”— Spectator.
-Stimson’s Reef: E 4 Y . pa ® e^ Ustrations by w ' s '
This is the extended log of a cutter which sailed from the Clyde to the
Amazon in search of a gold reef. It relates how they discovered the
buccaneer’s treasure in the Spanish Main, fought the Indians, turned aside
the River Jamary by blasting, and so laid bare the gold of Stimsoris Reef.
“ Few stories come within hailing distance of Stimson’s Reef in startling incidents
and hairbreadth ’scapes. It may almost vie with Mr. R. L. Stevenson’s Treasure
Island. ” — Guardian.


BLACKIE'S STORY BOOKS FOR BOYS
ROBERT LEIGHTON
Olaf the Glorious: te‘“7l^
The story tells of Olaf’s romantic youth, his adventures as a viking, and
his conversion to Christianity. He returns to pagan Norway, is accepted
as king, and converts his people to the Christian faith. The story closes
with the great battle of Svold, when Olaf, defeated, jumps overboard, and
is last seen with the sunlight shining on the glittering cross upon his shield.
“Is as good as anything of the kind we have met with. Mr. Leighton more
than holds his own with Rider Haggard and Baring-Gould.”— Times.
R. STEAD
Grit will Tell: The Adventures of a Barge-boy. With
4 Illustrations by D. Carleton Smyth.
Cloth, 2 s. 6 d.
A lad whose name has been lost amidst early buffetings by hard fortune
suffers many hardships at the hands of a bargeman, his master, and runs
away. Ihe various adventures and experiences with which he meets on
the road to success, the bear-hunt in which he takes part, and the battle
at which he acts as war-correspondent, form a story of absorbing interest
and after a boy’s own heart.
“A thoroughly wholesome and attractive book ."—Graphic.
-Will of the Dales: A Story of the Times of Elizabeth
and James. By R. Stead. Il-
lustrated by J. Jellicoe. 2 s. 6 d.
Will, a sturdy and likeable peasant lad, goes up to London to seek his
fortune. He has many exciting experiences as the result of his friendship
with one of Queen Mary’s old soldiers, and his involuntary connection with
the luckless “Rising in the North”, but he attains at length to wealth,
influence, and honours, and becomes the founder of a noble family.
“We are able to recommend this capital boys’ book without reservation."
—Manchester Courier.
HARRY COLLINGWOOD
The Pirate Island. ' vith 6 by c !•
Staniland and J. R. Wells. 3s.
By a deed of true gallantry the hero’s whole destiny is changed, and, going
to sea, he forms one of a party who, after being burned out of their ship in
the South Pacific, are picked up by a pirate brig and taken to the “ Pirate
Island”. After many thrilling adventures they ultimately succeed in
effecting their escape.
“ A capital story of the sea; indeed in our opinion the author is superior in some
respects as a marine novelist to the better-known Mr. Clark Russell."— Times.


[s(/c< p yuxrsf f '&£ if
t M a efcut tf fcuisys , ■
N
£ 2 X I- 2.
jr^
'
.




'
.
.
.
I


