

John Sands Typ Sydney.
Che Rev. Samuel Hlarsden.
FfOltOy




THE
Rev. Samuel Marsden
THE SECOND AUSTRALIAN CHAPLAIN.
Reprinted from the “ Sydney Diocesan Directory
January, 1900.
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, 374 GEORGE STREET.
1900..




THE REV. SAMUEL MARSDEN.
The Second Australian Chaplain,
The Rev. Samuel Marsden— often called the Apostle of
the Maoris was appointed by the British Government
as Assistant Chaplain of New South Wales in 1793. An
assistant to the fitst chaplain, the Rev. Richard Johnson,
had been previously selected in 1789, the Rev. John
Crowther, but he was wrecked near the Cape, and after
undergoing much suffering and escaping many perils,
returned to England, and exercised his ministry there.
Samuel Marsden was born at Horsforth, in Yorkshire,
July 28th, 1764, and after attending the village school
for a time, was sent to the Free Grammar School at
Hull, the head master being the ecclesiastical historian, the
Rev, Joseph Milner. After leaving school, he assisted his
father in his work for a short time, and was then brought
under the notice of the Elland Society by some friends,
who had formed a very favourable impression of his
ability and character. Through this society he was
enabled to enter Magdalene College, Cambridge. After
pursuing his studies for some time at the University,
influential friends, who had watched his career, selected
him as one well fitted to occupy the arduous and
highly responsible position of a chaplain in New South
Wales. He at first declined the position offered, naturally
wishing to complete his studies and take his degree, and
though the Archbishop of Canterbury thought him too
young, he was persuaded to accept the position. He was
ordained at once a Deacon by the Bishop of Bristol (the
Archbishop having granted Letters Dimissory), and Priest
by the Bishop of Exeter, May 26th, 1793. His appoint-
ment by Royal Commission is dated January Ist, 1793.
After some delay, he set sail for his distant sphere of
labour, July Ist, 1793, accompanied by a lady whom he


had married a short time previously, Miss Elizabeth
Tristan. Two incidents, while waiting for the sailing of
his vessel, are worthy of notice. At Hull, while preaching
his farewell sermon, the signal gun was heard. He at
once left, accompanied by many of the congregation, who
parted with him with many prayers, and sorrowed at the
thought that they should see his face no more. The vessel
went round to Portsmouth, and he had the opportunity of
visiting the Isle of Wight, and there preached another
farewell sermon in Brading Church—a sermon full of inspi-
ration from the Holy Scriptures, and delivered with great
earnestness, —That was the instrument used by God to
bring to the knowledge of the truth a gentle and retiring
girl, whose life, recorded in The Dairyman’s Daughter,
and translated into many languages, is well known. The
voyage to distant Australia seems to have been uneventful,
though the weather was unusually rough in the Bay of
Biscay, till the iron-bound coast of our great South land
was reached. Here the vessel encountered very furious
gales, and narrowly escaped shipwreck. The courage of
the chaplain during the storm is said to have been marked,
and influential for good. His arrival, March 10th, 1794,
the historian (Collins) simply records without comment,
“In the ‘ William’ arrived an Assistant Chaplain.” As soon
as he arrived at the post of duty, it was recognised by those
best capable of judging, that he was a man of considerable
mental activity and vigour, determined, bold, and firm in
adhering to and carrying out his principles. He at once
entered upon his duties, and is the second clergyman who
was stationed in New South Wales, the Rev. James Bain,
who accompanied what is known as the second fleet, re-
maining only a short time,, and being Chaplain of the New
South Wales Corps. Mr. Johnson gladly welcomed Mr.
Marsden, worked cordially with him, and rejoiced in a
division of labour.
The moral and religious condition of the colony, it need
hardly be stated, was at this time at a very low ebb. The
society was composed of very strange elements. Many of
the convicts, both men and women, were most abandoned
and immoral, and many of those in authority often


“ disregarded the sanctities of marriage, and lived in a state
of gross concubinage.” Mr. Marsden speaks of the Lord s
Day as being spent in “ cabals, or labour, or gaming, or drunk-
enness, or robberies,” and he declares that Parramatta was
like Sydney, “ no less a scene of everything immoral and
profane.” “ The miserable wretches were lost to all sense
of virtue and religion,” writes Mr. Johnson, “the only hope
I had was from the rising generation.” Immorality and
crime in its various forms swept along like a filthy and
pestiferous river, casting its foul waters in every direction.
Further than this, the humane treatment of prisoners was
not recognised by those in authority, and the punishments
inflicted were often so barbarous and savage, that they
excited men to rebellion, and the perpetration of the most
dreadful crimes. It is no wonder that a man of Mr.
Marsden’s earnest piety and great boldness should from the
commencement of his work find himself surrounded by
many enemies, who were ready to misunderstand his motives
and actions and to thwart his plans. Mr. Marsden, how-
ever, set himself most vigorously to attempt and accomplish
great things. His first sermon was preached March 16th in
Sydney. His residence was at the Barracks, Parramatta.
“My mind was deeply affected,” he writes, “ with the
wickedness I beheld going on.” He always rose very early,
and was enabled to obtain some hours for study before work
at the settlement ordinarily began. His visitation of the
people committed to his care was regular and earnest, and
his labours on the Sunday most abundant. There were no
permanent church buildings in the colony when hearrived, but
a wattle and dab building had been erected by Mr. Johnson
August 25th, 1793. Mr. Marsden opened a church in
Parramatta, at the corner of George and Macquarie Streets,
built out of the materials of two old huts, in August, 1796.
Previous to this the services had been held in a carpenter’s
shop, or room, and in the open air. On the sth April,
1797, the foundation-stone of old St. John’s, Parramatta,
was laid—our first brick church.
In 1800 the Rev. R. Johnson left Sydney for England
in the “ Buffalo,” and Mr. Marsden was responsible for the
church’s ministrations for eight years. He for some time


conducted Divine service in the morning at Sydney (the
orphan school being used for Divine service), and in the
afternoon at Parramatta, It is asserted, that he not un-
frequently walked alone. The time for the journey was
shore, and it can scarcely be presumed that he walked
during the summer heat. The country was also, be it
remembered, full of wild blackfellows, and there were
escaped convicts and bushrangers—not a few. No exertions
and efforts seemed too great, and Marsden was never want-
ing in true courage, manliness, and devotion to work.
In 1800, Mr. Marsden assisted at the laying of the foun-
dation-stone, by Governor Hunter, of St. Philip’s Church.
The work proceeded very slowly, for in 1804 the walls only
were erected, it is stated, in the Sydney Gazette.
On Sunday, 10th April, 1803, St. John’s Church,
Parramatta, was opened for Divine service—Mr. Marsden
preached from the text, 11. Chron. vi., 18 —‘ “But will God
in very deed dwell with men on the earth ? behold, heaven
and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee ; how much
less this house which I have built! ”’ “ Many ladies of the
first respectability were present. St. John’s may justly be
styled the finest building in the colony. The paintings are
well designed, and tolerably executed. The altar piece,
though heavy, is nevertheless entitled to praise. The pews
are not yet put up, but when they are it will certainly
become a handsome, well finished, and commodious place of
worship.” —Sydney Gazette.
In 1805 the old church at the Hawkesbury was com-
pleted, and Divine service performed on August 16th.
In 1807 the church of St. Philip’s was finished, but not
consecrated by Mr. Marsden, to whom authority was given,
till December 25th, 1810.
In 1807 Mr. Marsden left the colony for a time, with a
view of bringing the condition of the colony before the
authorities in England—civil and ecclesiastical.—His parish
of Botany Bay was left in charge of the Rev. Henry Fulton
—a clergyman who had been transported to the colony in
1791 for supposed participation in the Irish rebellion.—lt
was afterwards ascertained that he was entirely innocent of
the charge, and he was set free by the Home Government.


Mr. Fulton was soon prevented from exercising his func-
tions, being made a prisoner for taking the side of Governor
Bligh when he had been deposed. He had been punished
for supposed disloyalty in Ireland, and in New South
Wales he is punished for his loyalty. For some length of
time, there was no minister of religion exercising his office,
and great irregularities prevailed. Mr Marsden while in
England sought out and secured the services of two clergy-
men for the colony —the Rev. William Cowper and the
Rev. Robert Cartwright. —They arrived in 1809—Mr.
Cowper some months before Mr. Cartwright—and at once
entered upon their duties. Mr. Cowper took charge of St.
Philip’s, Church Hill, where he remained nearly half a
century, respected and venerated, and when he entered into
rest mourned as a true father in Israel. The Rev. R.
Cartwright exercised his office generally in the country
districts, and is described in 1810 as Chaplain of the
Hawkesbury.
While in England, Mr. Marsden endeavoured to interest
his friends kn the cause of education and of foreign
missions, or rather a mission to New Zealand. When he
left the colony there were only two schools, partly sup-
ported by himself, besides a male and female orphan school.
He succeeded in interesting the committee of the Church
Missionary Society, and obtained the services through them
of two lay agents. He also secured the services of several
schoolmasters, and received large and liberal donations of
books from several quarters.
He appears to have had much intercourse with the
authorities, to whom he proposed various plans for the
improvement of the convict population, and also with such
men as W. Wilberforce, the Reverends Charles Simeon,
Josiah Pratt, and Dr. Mason Good, and others.
On the occasion of his visit to England, Mr. Marsden
introduced Australian wool for the first time to the public,
taking it in barrels. George 111. ordered a suit of clothes
to be made for himself from this wool in 1809. He also
presented Mr. Marsden with some Merino rams for his
model farm near Parramatta. As Mr. Johnson is said to
have first introduced the orange tree, planting on his farm


at Canterbury and also at Parramatta, orange pips which
he had brought from Rio Janeiro, so Mr. Marsden, without
neglecting his ministerial duties, taught the colonists some-
thing of the mode of rearing sheep and growing wool.
That trade dates from 1811—the year after Mr. Marsden’s
return to the colony. I have not learned, that these men
were less useful as clergymen because interesting them-
selves in the material prosperity and general progress of
the people at that peculiar period of their history.
Mr. Marsden’s visit to England was in many ways most
useful, even the Government being induced through his
representations to carry out some much-needed social re-
forms. He returned March 2nd, 1810, and found Governor
Macquarie installed in his office—a position which he held
till 1821, with much advantage to the country.
In 1811, we find Mr, Marsden consecrating burial
grounds in various places, and carrying on a regular
visitation in various centres of population.
He was also engaged in efforts to visit New Zealand.
Strange to say, on board the “ Ann,” the vessel in
which he returned to the colony, was a New Zealand
chieftain named Duaterra returning home after many
strange adventures. From him much valuable inform-
ation was obtained, and Mr. Marsden took him ta
Parramatta, where he lived some months. On November
19th, 1814, he left Parramatta to initiate a work which
can never be forgotten, and which will cause his name
evermore to be associated with those who love to
undertake ventures of faith and deeds of heroism, viz., his
mission to New Zealand. He went forth full of courage
and hopefulness. On December 15th New Zealand was
sighted, and Marsden saw the land for which he had often
prayed and planned. Some of these people he had well
known, and kindly entertained in huts built for them at
Parramatta. From what he had seen, he was able to write
to the Church Missionary Society, and commend them
highly. “ They axe a noble people,” he wrote on one occa-
sion, “ who are only waiting for what you so richly enjoy—
the means of grace, the heavenly manna to fall around
their hungry tents.” Now he sees afar off the goodly land,


and after a few days, regardless of personal danger, effects
a landing with his missionary party. He determined to
remain all night on the island, and sleep beside a faithful
Maori friend. His sleeping among the natives —surrounded
as he was by cannibals loaded with weapons, and their
spears stuck in the ground—was a very brave act, and
secured their confidence and veneration. The Southern
Cross shone out in its beauty, and was to him a silent
teacher. He was there, as they said, “To teach them how
to make Sunday.” A few hours after, on Christmas Day,
he found his old Maori friend Duaterra had made prepara-
tions for a service, he himself ready to act as interpreter.
It began by the singing of the “ Old Hundredth ” Psalm.
The sermon was preached from the words, “ Behold I bring
you glad tidings of great joy ” (St. Luke ii,, 10). Then
again was literally fulfilled the declaration, “ The people
that walked in darkness have seen a great light. They
that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them
hath the light shined.” That was a gladsome Sunday, most
beautiful, most bright, on which God was worshipped and
the Gospel proclaimed. The little seed was sown and
showers of blessing watered it, and how great the harvest!
The nation of cannibals did not, as some would say, become
a nation of saints, but they became disciples of Christ.
Many a jewel they have added to the Redeemer’s crown.
Christ has seen of the travail of his soul in the great work
of love undertaken by the colonial chaplain. The glory of
the Lord shall be seen in the land, till the kingdoms of this
world become the kingdoms of our Lord and His Christ.
This apostle of New Zealand now returned to the colony
accompanied by ten of the chiefs, and received the
congratulations of the Governor.
The missionaries sent from England were left on the
island, surrounded by great difficulties and exposed to great
dangers. They bore their cross gladly for Christ’s sake,
and were much encouraged by communications from Mr
Marsden.
It was not, however, till 1819 that he was able to pay
his second visit, his duties in this colony compelling him to
remain at his post Had it been possible he would have


volunteered for missionary work himself. When at Tahiti,
he expressed his readiness to do so.
He landed at the Bay of Islands, on the 12th August,
1819. His heart overflowed with gratitude at what he
saw. The kingdom of God was established. He remained
three months. The missionaries thanked God and took
courage. “ There is not one in ten thousand,” writes one
of them, “who could or would have borne the privations,
difficulties, and dangers which he has undergone. I pray
that he may reap the fruit of his labour by New Zealanders
turning from their degraded state to serve the one living
and true God.”
In February, 1820, he was again enabled to pay a visit
to the missionaries, and spent nearly a whole year going in
and out among the people as the servant of Christ. It was
on this occasion that one mournfully exclaimed when told
of the difficulty of getting missionaries : “ Ah, we told you,
we should all be dead before any missionaries came.” Soon
after this a strange incident happened in Sydney, which I
may give as illustrative of Mr. Marsden’s interest in New
Zealand, and also of the condition of the Maoris. A
meeting of the Committee of the Bible Society was sum-
moned in Sydney, the attendance being but limited, the
Chairman (Captain Piper) felt that it would not be
desirable to proceed with the business. “Then,” said Mr.
Marsden, “ let us try and see if we cannot do a little
missionary business. I am told that you have two
beautiful jackasses, Captain Piper. Now, I wish to intro-
diice the jackass into New Zealand. If you will sell them
I will make a present of them to my friend Leigh.” “The
jackasses to which you refer,”said Captain Piper, “are very
fine ones. I have got them from England for two of my
children. They will give them up with great reluctance, but
in the cause of missions everything must be sacrificed They
cost me £2O, and you shall have them for the same money.”
“ Then put them on board at once, said the chaplain, and I
will consign them to my settlers at the Bay of Islands.”
The asses were duly forwarded, and on Mr. Leigh’s arrival in
New Zealand he enquired about them. He was informed that
th ehig pigs had gone upon their “ Wenuatapu,” where their


dead lay. They had, therefore, been put upon a canoe with
their legs tied, and landed on a desolate island. “ But,”
said Mr Leigh, “ they did not know the land was tapu,
being strangers in the country.” “If they did not,” they
observed, “ the white men did, and they should have taken
care of them.” The large pigs were at length brought back
to the mainland in good condition. Mr. Leigh said in the
presence of the natives, if these animals had sense I would
address them in the severest language of reprehension. He
then upbraided the animals for their black ingratitude and
want of decorum, and expressed a hope that they would be
more careful in future. After this warning, the animals were
allowed to remain without undergoing further punishment.
The fourth visit was made in July, 1823, with a view of
arranging some of the affairs of the Church Missionary
Society. The bright visions of success were somewhat over-
clouded, but fortunately the cloud was soon removed. Mr.
Marsden left New Zealand, and on his return suffered ship-
wreck. No lives were lost, but the ship was a total wreck,
Mr. Marsden and others being cast on a desert island. He
at length arrived safely in Sydney. Writing after his re-
turn to a friend, he says, “To bring this whole race of
human beings to the knowledge of the true God and Jesus
Christ is an attempt worthy of the Christian world. I
believe, as God has stirred up the hearts of His people to
pray for them, and to open both their hearts and their
purses, He will prosper the work and raise up a people from
amongst these savages to call Him blessed. In time the
voice of joy and gladness will be heard in the present
abodes of cruelty, darkness, and superstition.”
The fifth visit to New Zealand was paid at the close of
1826. That was undertaken in consequence of the conduct
of some of the chiefs towards the missionaries, and also of
tribal wars. Only five days were spent, but much good
was done amongst the missionaries and the chiefs ; and
often would the good man as he looked round exclaim,
“ What hath God wrought for His own Name’s sake ! ”
In 1830 Mr. Marsden paid his sixth visit to New Zealand.
He hastened there before his decease to set in order things
that were wanting.


In 1837 Mr. Marsden paid his seventh visit, in conjunc-
tion with a daughter who had previously visited the island
with him. The iron frame was now weakened, and the
time of his departure drew nigh. The natives welcomed
him wherever he went. “We wish,” said they, “to have a
long and steadfast look at our old friend, for we shall never
see him again.” The chaplain of the “ Rattlesnake ” gives
an interesting account of conversations with him. His final
departure from New Zealand was singularly affecting.
Crowds of natives followed him to the seashore. They
parted with many tears and prayers. They sorrowed much
for the words which he spake, “ They should see his face
no more.”
That was the first link of a great golden chain which
now encircles so many of the islands of the sea. Those
missions have excited much enthusiasm, and have been
crowned with much success. The faithful chaplain began
the work. He was privileged to see many triumphs,
earnests of great spiritual victories to be won. The last
words that fell from his lips ere he passed to the presence
of God were “New Zealand! New Zealand.”
Returning to our narrative of events, we find that in
1815 the first Sunday school in Parramatta was opened,
Mr. Thomas Hassall being the superintendent, well known
in the colony for many years as the much respected Incum-
bent of Cobbitty, and the first young man who ever left
the colony to be prepared for the ministry of the church.
On his return to the colony, he married a daughter of Mr.
Marsden, and his parish was spoken of as Australia beyond
Liverpool.
In 1817 the foundation stone of St. Matthew’s, Windsor,
was laid by Governor Macquarie, and in 1819 the foundation
stone of St. Andrew’s Cathedral, Sydney, and St. James’,
Sydney. Mr. Marsden was present, and assisted on the
latter occasion.
In 1820 the Principal Chaplain consecrated the Church
of England portion of what are known as the Devonshire-
street cemeteries, in Sydney.
In 1824 Mr. Marsden, together with the small body of
clergy in the colony, was placed under the superintendence


of Archdeacon Scott, the archdeaconry being attached to
the See of Calcutta. His position was somewhat changed,
and instead of travelling as he had been accustomed to do
to different parts of the colony in the performance of his
ministerial duties, he appears to have devoted his attention
to his parochial charge, to the New Zealand Mission, and
to different religious and philanthropic societies which he
had been instrumental in founding. These were not the
days when innumerable church organisations and insti-
tutions claimed much attention from the clergy, and hence
Mr. Marsden was enabled to devote much time to pastoral
visitation. His excursions to the districts which had not
been placed under ministerial supervision were constant,
and he maintained the practice of writing pastoral letters.
All the old characteristics of his life were noticeable in his
later days. His boldness in rebuking vice and reproving
men was strikingly shown only a short time before his
death. Two notorious bushrangers presented a loaded
pistol at his breast, and also at his daughter. He calmly
remonstrated with them, and told them that he expected to
meet them at the gallows if they continued in this course
of life. It actually fell to his lot to visit them in their
condemned cell and at the place of execution. His love for
the young was marked on all occasions, and especially in his
frequent visits to the newly established King’s School
His sympathy with the sad, sorrowful, and suffering, was
noted by his family, and on his return from these scenes
his demeanour was very solemn. His benevolence and
liberality many enjoyed. His latter days saw much
deepening of the spiritual life, and constancy in prayer.
Archdeacon Broughton succeeded Archdeacon Scott in
1828, and with him Mr. Marsden worked most cordially to
the end of his days. When he was installed as the Bishop
of Australia, Mr. Marsden officiated, and all tearful and
thankful “ yielded up (to use his own language) the keys of
a most precious charge.” Though somewhat feeble, Mr.
Marsden continued till almost the last to take part in the
services of his church. For 45 years he had never failed to
assist, but on the Sunday prior to his departure, it is said, he
remained in his pew, and was unable to assist at the Holy


the darkness of heathenism in New Zealand and the isles
of the sea, and upon the darkness, too, no less real of the
depravity of society in early Australia.”
There is no doubt the work of the Church in many of
its branches owes much to him, and his works should be
held in grateful remembrance. Many proposals were made
to honour Mr. Marsden’s memory. The beautiful church
of All Saints’, Marsfield, now Parramatta North, is one of
the most appropriate monuments erected. There are
monuments in St. John’s, where Mr. Marsden’s name was
so long a household word, also in New Zealand ; and in the
chancel of the parish church of Parsley (his native village)
stained glass windows have been placed, and a granite
monument in the churchyard.
Good men will never let his name and work be forgotten.
If we admire devotion to duty, dogged determination,
courage, uprightness of conduct, warm-hearted sympathy,
the absence of puritanic austerity and Pharisaic pride,
faithfulness in ministerial work, zeal, and the performance
of deeds which stimulate and inspire, then Samuel Marsden
is worthy of admiration. If men care for those who believe
in the Divine mission of the church, and who seek to extend
Christ’s kingdom, to spread the branches of our historic
Church of England, to uplift the banner of the cross wher-
ever men are found, and to “ scatter seeds of life on bar-
barous shores,” then they should preserve the memorials of
Samuel Marsden’s life and work. The life lessons are too
valuable to be lost —
And the result of his conquest
Let God’s kingdom’s records tell ;
’Twas the old faith once delivered
Scorn’d so oft, and proved so well
’ W. J. Gunther.
S. John’s, Parramatta.




