

ftzt&o
Price, One Shilling . ALL RIGHTS
Life and Adventures
,E PRINTING CO.i LTD.. BRISBANE,
P. W. mcNHLLY.
The «> $
Wild e
Scotchman




P. W. McNALLY,
The Author.




The Life and Adventures
liiili
The- ®
Wild i
i: K ~k'Js
iIS
Ip
Si
:^tVVtV^»ViW^V»VkW.^V^»V«W»^r>^
| The I
| Queensland fj
| Bushranger i;
pi
Hsi
’ ’
P. W. 7VY C I—l—V.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
CUT »map PRINTIN'* no.. LTD., BP 1 SBANE
FfatCO
Scotchman


In introducing this little book to the public the author
feels confident that the work will prove instructive to many
who may peruse its pages. Having known the “ Scotch-
man ” personally, and from the fact that I reported his
trial for the local paper in Maryborough at the time of his
arrest in ’65, also having at various times interviewed him
during his incarceration at the Island of St. Helena (the
convict settlement in Moreton Bay), places the author in a
position to place the facts contained in the book before
the public with every confidence in their authenticity.
As many accounts of the “ Scotchman ” have appeared
in print in the Queensland “ Figaro,” which (with the kind
permission of Mr. Byrne), are reproduced in this little
volume, and as the hero of the work under notice had pro-
mised to supply that journal with some thrilling accounts
of his “ Bushranging Days,” I consequently waited with
interest to peruse them on their being published by him,
but since the Fates have decreed differently, and as the
grim spectre Death has taken him from amongst us, I
deemed it my duty to publish this work in order to place
the reading public in possession of the true facts of the
case —as they happened—and are narrated. As I have
gone to considerable trouble and expense in so doing, it
remains now to be seen how the generous public will
reward me for my efforts.
P. W. McN.
April, 1899.


The Wild Scotchman.
tBOUT the latter end of the “ sixties ” the township
of Maryborough, Queensland, was but a small
place, the population there living long distances
apart even in the township itself, but more
especially in the country districts. The mails
from town to town were conveyed on horseback,
and the mailmen in charge of them had a most wearisome
time of it—not only on account of the distance they had + o
ride, but also in the many dangers they were exposed to —
fording flooded streams, making long and dreary stages over
rough and dusty roads, the country being parched up in dry
seasons, and port ons of the ground being opened by the
heat of the sun, like great avalanches in the sandy deserts
of Sahara; which, consequently, required the greatest care
to be exercised when one would be riding along.
The horses which were used in the mail service (the
contractors being Messrs. West and Nolan) were of the
worst class—“ scrubbers,” in fact, and, as a consequence,
the work was rendered doubly hard on the poor fellows
who had to ride them, who had to urge them along as best
they could, in order to keep time with their mails. It
frequently happened that at the changing-stages, where
they had been in hopes of getting fresh horses, the herd-
boy had been unable to find them, as they would ramble
in search of food and water, which was scarce, and nothing
would be left for them but to ride the unfortunate animals
double stages, and the poor lad would be left to his soli-
tary reflections.


To and from Gayndah* which is equi-distant 100 miles,
the mails were conveyed in the manner described twice a
week, but the inhabitants eventually succeeded in getting
a coach service established. There was also a weekly
communication between Gladstone (Port Curtis) and
Maryborough, and the mailman was named Armytage,
whilst the man who had charge of the former was Johnny
Guilfoyle, who subsequently did well in Brisbane. Stations,
were far apart, and the principal mode of carriage was by
the proverbial bullock-waggon. The mailman s life was a
monotonous one, as he would frequently ride for days
without meeting anyone to speak to, save the lads at the-
changing-places.
1 have frequently seen them coming into town, the inner
portions of their riding-boots besmeared with blood from
the horses’ sides, in their endeavours to make up lost time-
on their journey, and the poor animal's only food was what
they could gather whilst out of harness.
About that period the brothers Dunn were captured in
New South Wales and incarcerated in the Braidwood gaol,
out of which they escaped by scaling the wall, outside of
which their sisters had horses in readiness for them to
rejoin Hall and Gilbert, all of whom were captured or shot
shortly afterwards. Gardiner, who was keeping a store at
the time outside Rockhampton was captured through a
paramour of his giving the information which led to his
arrest, and I had a look at him on board the steamer
Clarence when she arrived at Marc borough with him on
the way to Brisbane. Falkenberg, the notorious forger,
next appeared and made a name for himself half-an-hour
sfter his arrival, and eventually fell into the hands of the
law.
About that time there was a young man suddenly ap-
peared on the scene, who styled himself the “ Wild Scotch-


man,” and during his reign matters in the police force were
completely mixed. During his youti he had been an ex-
cellent scholar, among his other accomplishments being
that of a thorough linguist, being master of several lan-
guages. At an early age he obtained a situation in the
late Mr. Petrie’s stoneyard, then at the corner of Wharf
and Queen streets —where that beautiful edifice now
stands, which a large bicycle co npany occupies. After-
wards he went unto a cattle station, and, according to
accounts, his friends were averse to his doing so; but he
followed the bent of his inclination —which was his first
downward step —asserting that town life, with all its drud-
gery had no charms for him. He was put “ tailing ” cattle,
that is, minding them at mustering time around the head
station, so as to prevent them from going back to that por-
tion of the run to which they had been accustomed to, until
purchasers would arrive from town to procure a number
for butchering purposes.
He purchased a revolver with which to pass away his
leisure hours in the bush, and would practise at stationary
and moving objects until he became an adept in the use
of the weapon. Time rolled on, and he also became a
splendid horseman—performing many feats of legerdemain
which would surpass many experienced circus-riders. After
a time the reports occasioned by his firing would be heard
at the homestead, and the people were frequently in dread
■of something happening. Suspicion eventually pointed to
him, and on several times he was interrogated on the sub-
ject, but he stoutly denied the “ soft impeachment,” and,
after a while he fled to the bush.
He joined a gang in New South Wales, and —as already
stated—on their being disbanded fled back to Queensland,
where he had a complete knowledge of the bush, and
where he soon began operations on his own account. Sir


Frederick Pottinger came upon the “ Scotchman, who was
on foot, on one occasion, and went in pursuit of him
Pottinger fired at him, and the “ Scotchman ” got away.
Pottinger returned to Brisbane and informed the police
that he had chased the “ Scotchman, who had shot him
in the wrist; but the statement was not believed, and he
eventually committed suicide whilst on his way to Sydney.
He was fond of relating the account of the chase, and used
to finish up by stating that the “ Scotchman ” could run
faster than any horse in New South Wales for a distance.
It was currently believed he had shot himself, and his.
suicidal tendencies afterwards bore out this view.
The “ Scotchman ” was arrested near Rockhampton
shortly after this occurrence, and was being conveyed to
Brisbane by the steamer “ Leichhardt,” which had to call
at Gladstone, where she remained all night, anchored in
the Fitzroy river. The vessel anchored in the middle of
the stream, so as to render it almost impossible for him to
escape, as the river is nearly hall a-mile wide where the
vessel lay.
During the night a number of the passengers and the
escort who had charge of him indulged in a game of cards
’tween decks, “ to while away the fleeting hours,” and the
quantity of drink consumed as the games were lost and
won was considerable, as there were several diggers
aboard who spent their money freely. Several of them
endeavoured to persuade the escort to take the handcuffs
off the prisoner, remarking that he could not possibly es-
cape, seeing they were such a distance from shore and that
he was also leg-ironed as well. But to all these inter-
cessions the stony hearts of the policemen were adamant.
They had received " strict injunctions ” on the subject ere
leaving, one of them said, and the other remarked —“ Why,
he’d scarcely be safe if he had the moighty big anchor-
chain fastened to him as an appendage.”


But, to the astonishment of everyone, the handcuffs at
that moment fell upon the table. “ How did you get them
off ? ” asked one of the custodians. The “ Scotchman ”
enlightened them by allowing them to be again fastened on
his wrists, and then produced a small piece of blanket and
inserted it in the key hole, and after twisting it and giving
it a sudden jerk the handcuffs again became undone. After
this his hands were left free.'
As the hour was late the passengers retired to their
respective berths, and the escort lay down on the forms,
and shortly afterwards were “in the land of dreams.’
The “ Scotchman ” then glided stealthily up the staircase
and along the deck to the “ sponser,” alongside the paddle-
box, and slipping into the water, with the assistance of a
strong current and the darkness of the night was soon out
of reach of his slumbering escort.
The noise occasioned by his dropping into the water
brought a lot of people to the deck, who, in the darkness
were unable to learn the cause of the excitment until the
“ slumbering escort ” came upon deck, with their revolvers
in hand, and fired a fcu-de-joie out on the dark waters of
the placid stream that had so successfully carried safely to
land the “ Wild Scotchman.”
The following morning a search was made on shore and
the leg-irons were found nailed to a gum-tree with the
following inscription attached to them on a sheet of note-
paper: —“Presented to the Queensland Government with
the ‘ Wild Scotchman’s ’ best thanks, that gentleman having
no further use for them, the articles being found to be
rather cumbersome to transit in this age of enlightenment
and progress—the 19th century. —Many thanks; adieu.”
After that he stuck up the Gayndah mailman, and after-
wards the Port Curtis one in a somewhat similar manner.


This sort of work went on for some months, till the
residents of the different townships became incensed to an
alarming extent at the cool audacity of this youthful bush-
ranger, and the police as well as civilians were at their
wit’s-end to know what course to pursue in regard to his
conduct. There was an old sergeant named Ware stationed
in Maryborough at the time, and he used to remark on all
occasions when the “ Scotchman’s ” name was mentioned,
that he knew him well; but it is needless to remark that
the same man would’nt go outside the town after nightfall
if you were to give him a pension.
Falkenberg, the notorious forger, which I mentioned at
the outset, then paid Maryborough a visit after serving a
long sentence at Cockatoo Island, New South Wales, and
scarcely had he been six hours on shore when he forged and
uttered a cheque on a large storekeeper named Souther-
den for He was arrested and placed in the lock-up,
and on the following morning (Sunday) succeeded in
making his escape. Then, indeed, things began to get
very interesting. After about a month had elapsed he was
arrested in an empty hut three miles from Maryborough, at
a place called the “ Old Township,” where he had been
quietly secreted all the time, whilst the police were riding
long distances each day in search of him. He used to pay
a visit each night to the larder of the late Mr. E. 1. Ald-
ridge, when the inmates were asleep, and take enough pro-
visions to sustain him for the following day.
He was seen one afternoon by some boys as they were
returning from school, and the police being informed of
the fact, they went out that night and brought him into
town. On being questioned as to the manner of his es-
cape, he said: —“ Well, I wrenched the handle off the
bucket, and with it picked the mortar out from one of the
bricks which I succeeded in getting loose, and then it was


easy enough getting the others out after the first had been
got clear. The blanket was spread, into which the debris
fell, and thus there was little or no noise occasioned by the
operations.” He was eventually sentenced to seven years’
imprisonment.
The Hon. B. B. Moreton had a station between Mary-
borough and Gayndah on which he had a favourite pony
(Tommy), which had recently won a race in Maryborough,
which made him prized very much by the owner. The
■“ Scotchman ” being in difficulties at the time this con-
sideration did not weigh very heavily with him. His
favourite horse “ Charger ” was knocked up, so he bor-
rowed the pony in order to give his own steed a “ spell,”
in case he should be pursued at any time, when he would
have him in readiness for immediate flight.
He was passionately fond of “ Charger,” as he relied
on him in cases of urgent necessity. The following lines
from Gordon will be applicable on the occasion as show-
ing how he valued his “ favourite steed ” when pursued :
“ What’s up, old horse ? Your ears you prick,
And your eager eyeballs glisten ;
Tis the wild dog’s note, in the ti-tree thick,
By the river, to which you listen.
With head erect, and tail flung out,
For a gallop you seem to beg,
But I feel the qualm of a chilling doubt
As I glance at your fav’rite leg.
*' Yet, if man, of all the Creator plann’d,
His noblest work is reckoned,
Of the works of His hand, by sea or by land,
The horse may at least rank second.
■*' No slave, but a comrade staunch, in this,
Is the horse, for he takes his share,
Not in peril alone, but in feverish bliss,
And in longing to do and dare.


• Ah, me ! After all, they may call us dumb creatures —
I tried hard to neigh, but the sobs took my breath :
Yet I guess’t, gazing down at those still, quiet features*
He was never more happy in life than in death.
11 Scoff, man ! egotistical, proud, unobservant
Since I with man’s grief dare to sympathise thus ;
Why scoff? —fellow creature I am, fellow servant
Of God. can n:an fathom God’s dealing with us ?
The wide gulf that parts us may yet be no wider
Than that which parts you from some being more blest;
And there may be more links ’twixt the horse and his rider
Than ever your shallow philosophy guess’t.
I’ve borne one through perils where many have seen us,
No tyrant, a kind friend, a patient instructor,
And I’ve felt some strange element flashing between us,
Till the saddle seem'd turn’d to a lightning conductor.”
He, therefore, took the pony out of the paddock one
morning for the purpose mentioned, and when the animal
was missed the indignation of the owner was aroused. He
remarked that if the “ Scotchman” was not captured within,
a week he would muster every hand on the station to go-
out in pursuit of him. When the “ Scotchman ” heard this
he sent a letter to the newspaper in Maryborough, in which
he stated that “ if the owner made any more fuss about the
pony he would put him far beyond the reach of his owner;
but, on the other hand, if he kept quiet until the expiration
of a month he would place him inside the slip-panels vn
the same condition as he found him. 1 his course was
adopted, and when the month had expired the pony was.
returned to its rightful owner, according to promise, which,
proved that the bushranger was “ a man of his word.”
There was at that time stationed in Gayndah a police
magistrate named Bligh, who in former days had been in
charge of the black trackers. He sent a letter to the


paper, in which he stated that “ if the ‘ Scotchman ’ was
not soon caught by the police —which by this time had
been considerably augmented —he would go out single-
handed, and, thereby show the police force the quality of
men thev had on the Bench in that colony.’
The “Scotchman ’’ replied to this epistle in the follow-
ing issue, challenging the “ knight of the bench ” to meet
him on a certain day, when he would give him a canter for
50 or 60 miles; but the “ Scotchman ” was to start outside
of shot range. If he agreed to those terms he would
willingly meet him, but that he would not trust him further
than he could throw him, as he knew how Bligh used to
treat the poor unfortunate aborigines in former days, whilst
engaged driving them from the township at dusk, and whilst
the poor unfortunate wretches were fording the Mary river
in order to make good their escape, he would order his
black soldiers to “ fire low and lay them out,” thus —
“ Sending them to their account
With all their imperfections on their head. ’
The terms of the agreement were decided upon eventu-
ally, and they met, and after a smart ride of about 10 or
15 miles a steep precipice was reached, at the bottom of
which the “ Scotchman ” unsaddled and awaited the arrival
of his pursuer. An hour elapsed before Bligh appeared on
the summit; and, although the “ Scotchman ” tried hard
to persuade him to come down and join him in some
lunch, he evidently thought “ discretion the better part of
valour,” returned to Gayndah and informed the residents
that “ horse and rider must have rolled down it.”
THE CAPTURE.
The Port Curtis mailman (Armytage) on arriving at Gin
Gin station one morning informed Mr. Nott, the manager,
that he had been stuck up by the “ Scotchman ” a short


distance away, and that he was going to pay them a visit.
Instructions were given for all the horses to be let go
except two for the manager and young Walsh, of Degilbo,
who had been in the same class as the Scotchman at
school. When he arrived he was riding a little pieball
pony belonging to a man named Royston, and was leading
his well-known horse “ Charger ’’—not dreaming of being
pursued. No sooner had he left the station than the two
“ gentlemen ” mentioned, followed. 1 hey had not gone
far before they passed the mailman, and shortly afterwards
they came up to the “ Scotchman,” who let go his pack-
horse, and tried to make good his escape. At the foot ol
a hill which they descended was a waterhole, into which
the “ Scotchman’s ” pony went — fairly knocked up, and
there he remained until his pursuers came upon the scene.
The “ Scotchman ” threw down his revolvers and gun
an 1 surrendered, but neither of his gallant pursuers would
go near him till Armytage arrived with the “ Scotchman’s ’
pack-horse; and he it was who dismounted and secured
the hands of the highwayman, for which he never received
a penny of the reward.
“The “ Scotchman ” was taken back to Gin Gin, and tied
to a tree all night, and from thence to Gladstone, where he
was forwarded by steamer to Maryborough, and sentenced
by the late Judge Lutwyche to 20 years’ imprisonment.
He was taken to the island of St. Helena (Moreton Ray),
where he endeavoured to escape shortly afterwards by
jumping into the bay with his leg-irons on. He eventually
was shot in the wrist, and brought to land thoroughly ex-
hausted.
The reward of which was given by the Govern-
ment for his capture should have been divided with Army-
tage, who was mostly entitled to it, but he never received a
farthing, as he informed me afterwards.


After being 10 years at that place a petition was drawn
up for his release by the inhabitants of Brisbane, and he
ultimately was set at liberty, the reports forwarded by
Captain Townley (who at that time was the superintendent
of the island) being favourable towards such a course being
pursued.
After leaving St. Helena, he went directly to Cressbrook,
Mr. D. C. McConnel having always taken a deep interest in
him and his family, and was employed as stockman and
part overseer on Mr. McConnel’s station, Mt. Marlow,
[hbouring
country was at that time only lately settled, and
the pioneers of the district had many brushes with and
miraculous escapes from the blacks, who were very trouble-
some at that time.
Many pages of “ Robbery under Arms ” are, it is cur-
rently believed, founded on conversations with the “Scotch-
man ’ which I have alluded to.
He often spoke of the excitement of the “ sixties,” when
everybody was more or less mad after the accumulation of
wealth in the quickest manner possible—not on account of
its intrinsic value, but to spend it again and being con-
sidered “ a jolly good fellow ’; but when a man reached
maturer years he sees all these bubbles burst, and his
hilarious friends, too, one by one, steadily, though surely
pass away from the scene; it is then, in his calmer
moments, after reflection he admitted that an honest, up-
right life was the best in the end, and although slower,
was the surest way to “ success. This is a brief account,
written expressly for the purpose of showing how a man
<an retrieve his lost laurels and become a respectable


member of society once more, providing the “ world is not
against him.”
On the 18th January, 1895, Macpherson wrote from the
South Australian border to Mr. Bobby Byrne, of the Bris-
bane “ Figaro,” the following letter; “Sir, —I am informed
there is a book called the “ Modern Corsair,” which is
supposed to deal with my career as a bushranger, has been
published. Never having heard of such a book before, 1
am naturally curious about it. If you can procure it for
me I shall be much obliged, and any information you can
supply me with concerning the authorship of the same
would be thankfully received. If you will accept them I
will 'forward you some memos, of my bush experience,
which, would, doubtless, make interesting reading. I am,
etc., James Macpherson, alias “ The Wild Scotchman.
The editor of the above journal appended a footnote to
the following effect: —“I first met the notorious Wild
Mac. when 1 was reporting for the ‘ Port Denison Times.'
I don’t care to recall how many years ago that is. After-
wards I ran against him in the early days at Burketown,
before any police had put in an appearance at that place,
and while yet Judge Lynch ruled supreme. As a bush-
ranger Macpherson was the least truculent or outrageous
we have had. The head and front of his offending, as
far as I can remember, was his inordinate fondness for
a good bit of horseflesh; and occasionally being near-
sighted, he might have mistaken the brands on his neigh-
bour’s cattle and driven them unto his own selection.
But this is only hearsay. In those days cattle-duffing was
not considered a heinous offence on the Flinders, that ’s
when it was done by one squatter to another; but, of
course, when the “ Scotchman ” took a hand in the game
it meant St. Helena, as he had no cattle on which they
could retaliate. , Macpherson ought to have some good


4 copy ’ to supply readers with, and we shall be glad to
publish it. I have written him, and we will look out with
pleasure to some lively old-time yarns.”
But the “ copy ” never came, and nothing further was
heard concerning him, except that he had some teams
engaged in carrying out Burketown w'ay, and the worry of
such life took away all his ideas of writing such reminis-
cences.
Tn the same journal, of August 16, 1895, a photograph
of the poor fellow, taken after death by Mr. Sydney K.
Hill, of Burketown, appeared with the following memo,
attached ;—“ The last of the Wild Scotchman. —Macpher-
son w r as attending the funeral of a friend, and on returning
met wfith a very severe accident through his horse falling
and rolling over him. He was carried home, but never
recovered consciousness, and died after lingering three
days. He had received severe internal injuries as well as
a fracture of the skull.”
And so ends the eventful history of “ The Wild Scotch-
man.”
R.I.P.
One thing, in conclusion, I have to state, and it is this.
1 wish it to be clearly understood that I do not blame the
“ Scotchman ” for his actions. I blame the society in
which he lived, and I feel confident that had he been
fortunate enough in his youth to have got into company
that would have taken him in hand, and, by a certain
amount of restraint —with kindness—kept his buoyant
spirit in check, and taught him some trade or profession,
he assuredly wxmld have become an ornament to society.
The system, as I have stated— not the man —was to
blame in those days. It should prove as an object lesson
to the youths of the present day.


The following correspondents having been writing to
“ Figaro ” on the foregoing subject it is only fair to my
readers to give the different versions as they appeared in
that journal (with thanks to its popular editor for the
privilege) :
Mr. Nott writes: “ I think it was in the year 1865 that
* Macpherson ’ was giving some trouble to the police and
causing anxiety to the owners of good hacks in the Bur-
nett and Port Curtis districts, and although the man really
was a very ordinary one yet he had managed to work up a
reputation for devilry that would have been very creditable
to the older hands ‘ on the road,’ who had flourished in
N.S.W, a few years earlier.
“ On the occasion of his capture I was manager of Mon-
duran station, situated on the Kolan river near Gin Gin,
and on returning home one afternoon from the run, 1 found
Mr. ‘ Dugie ’ Gadsden awaiting me with the information
that the ‘ Wild Scotchman ’ had just passed on the other
side of the river along the Kalonga road. There were also
present Mr. Jack Walsh and a lieutenant of mine named
Curry, and we decided that the proper thing to do was to
make an attempt at capturing him. The only arms we
could muster were a rifle, a shot gun and a revolver; with
these and fresh horses we started on a back track which
came on to the main Kalonga road about five miles from
the station (Monduran). As none of us knew the man by
sight the possibility of making a mistake occurred to us.
What if we were to arrest some innocent bush missionary
or other peaceable traveller. Fortunately (we thought) at
the moment before we left the station, the Gladstone mail-
man turned up, and as he had on more than one occasion
been interviewed by ‘ Scotchy,’ we asked him to ride on
ahead, and if we succeeded in overtaking our man, and he
could identify him, to give us a sign. This, however, did


THE ‘WILD SCOTCHMAN."




not come off, as the mail horses were too slow, ami we
passed on hoping to be guided by circumstances. Where
our short cut joined the main road there is rather a high
table land, and on our reaching the top sure enough about
20c yards ahead was a man riding, and leading a pack-
horse. The question of identity again rose, but on our
making a charge at him the doubt was at once dispelled,
for dropping his led horse he turned off and galloped down
off the road and into a rough gully. (If he had only turned
towards us we should probably have gone down into the
gully). At this moment the revolver carried by one of
our party was fired so close to the writer’s left ear that the
order to * cease firing ’ was given, and we continued the
chase until Mac. had reached the crest of the next rise,
when —as evening was closing in—we thought it as well to
bring matters to a crisis. The writer gave the order to
‘ throw up your arms ’ with the usual alternative, ‘ or I’ll
shoot you.’ He at once turned towards the party, balanced
a gun in his hands for a few seconds, and then throwing it
to the ground cried ‘ Do not shoot me down like a dog.’
He then came towards us and being secured on his horse
we marched him back towards Monduran. On reaching
the river, although our prisoner had assured us he was
unarmed, we thought it as well to search, and found in his
pocket two small pistols loaded.
“ We then crossed over to the station, and held our man
till I think a policeman arrived from Maryborough. We
found that the gun dropped was loaded with heavy ‘ slugs,’
and in the pack among other articles were a case of surgi-
cal instruments, powder, bullet mould, and a ‘ Postal
Guide.’
“ The man seemed very intelligent, and was anything but
ill-looking. He told us some amusing yarns about brushes
with the police.


“ How many Wild Scotchmen were there, anyway ?
There must have been three or four at least, according to
your various correspondents, one of whom states that his
Wild Scotchman was taken by Nott, on the Calliope, and
not on the Dawson, and claims that his ‘ above facts are
substantially correct.’ Another said that Jus Wild Scotch-
man ‘ was eventually captured (actually run down) by a
pastoralist and a few stockmen, somewhere near Gayndah.
Still another avers that his Wild Scotchman was collared
•on the Dawson. It is just time that the Wild Scotchman
declared himself and put them on the right track. In the
meantime I’ll do what I can to smooth the way for him.
“ Now for my Wild Scotchman. I only knew one, and
in owning this may expose myself to withering scorn for
the exhibition of my lamentable ignorance. But I lived in
the districts he exploited, for many years, both before and
after his brief, but brilliant career. I knew W. Nott —now
near Banana —and ‘ Jack ’ Walsh intimately.
“ Nott was managing Monduran station on the Kolan
river, seven miles north of Gin Gin, and on the Kolonga
road. Walsh was an assistant. The latter happened to be
out on the run, and saw a man on a horse who, from des-
■cription, he thought was the Wild Scotchman, on the
Wolonga-Monduran road, proceeding towards the latter
station. Walsh rode back to the station and informed his
super, Nott, of his suspicions. Immediate action was
taken. Preparations were made for fight and capture,
because they didn’t expect to take such a crack rider and
good shot with as little trouble as though they only had to
bail up a milker. Well, they started, and when they ar-
rived at a nasty steep stony ridge, the Wild Scotchman was
seen down below, approaching them. He was armed with
a rifle or a gun, I forget which, anyway that doesn t matter.
•Covering him with their rifles, and shouting to him to hold


up his arms, they galloped down the stony steep. He
made neither resistance nor attempt at flight. He said, ‘ I
don’t mind so much being taken by you as you are not
bobbies. I knew you were not police as soon as I saw the
way you came down that ridge.’ His time had come, and
like a sensible man he both recognised and submitted to
the inevitable. He was on a knocked-up horse and his
gun Avas not loaded. On the A\ r hole he seemed quite
resigned, and relieved at the termination of a criminal
career, for had he not fully experienced that ‘ the way of
the transgressor is hard ? ’
“ He A\’as conducted to Gin Gin, and there kept a
prisoner till the police—from Maryborough, I think —re-
lieved his captors of the disagreeable duty of gaolers. He
:said that it was his intention to have changed horses at
Kolonga, but for reasons, which I do not remember, this
little plan Avas thwarted. W. H. Holt, Avho then oAvned
Kolonga, Avas a breeder of thoroughbreds, and had the
"Wild Scotchman got his saddle on to one of their backs,
probably Nott and Walsh, though crack riders, Avould not
have been ‘in it ’ that trip.
“ Just a little more, if you are not tired. I’ll tell you one
■or tAvo little yarns about my Wild Scotchman —one by him-
self.
“ My station Avas not quite 1,000 miles from Gladstone.
There Avas a rumour that the Wild Scotchman Avas ‘ on the
road ’ someAvhere in the district. 1 AA 7 as about to remit a
•cheque to my Gladstone agents to pay my quarterly ac-
count, but changed my mind, and Avrote thus: —‘ Dear
.Sirs, —I am not enclosing my cheque in this, for reasons
Avhich I will explain later on, etc.,’ My agents’ reply
Avas :—■ Dear Sir, —We received your favour of and
quite understand your reason for not enclosing your
•cheque. The Wild Scotchman stuck-up the mailman on


the Port Curtis road, and after cutting open all the letters,
to get at the cheques and money, he left the letters which
the mailman brought on.’ Immediately after this it was.
reported that he was in the neighbourhood of my station,
and a well-horsed and armed party was organised, includ-
ing a black tracker, for the purpose of finding him. Our
object, however, failed. There were scrubs about then,
and doubtless he was concealed in one, for that evening
he turned up at a stockman’s hut about a mile away to get
some rations, and remarked, ‘ There must be game about
here. I saw some fellows riding about with guns to-day.'
“ After he was taken he told some good yarns. Here is.
the gist of one of them about how a mounted ‘Bobby
(not you, Sir,) once chased him in, or rather up to a rough
bit of country. The Wild one negotiated a steep stony
ridge in his own dashing style, and then stopped at the
bottom to see how the trooper would come down, or off, as.
the case might be. The trooper, however, sat on his horse
holding the reins and the pommel of the saddle with his.
left hand, while he grasped the cantle with the right.
Scotchy smiled aloud and revealed his presence. The
trooper then bethought him of the indispensable red-tape
formula which, according to the Police Manual, must be
gone through before shooting anyone. Scotchy wasn’t
kept long in suspense—in fact there was no suspense about
it, the hardened villain was quite cool. The majesty of
the law at length spoke. ‘ Macpherrrson, alias the Wild
Scotchman, I command you in the name of Her Majesty
the Queen to stand, oncet.’ This had to be distinctly
announced ‘ twicet ’ and ‘ thricet,’ before the police could,
fire at a man. In the old bushranging days in New South
Wales and Victoria, on urgent occasions the police would,
take most unfair advantage of poor bushrangers. Meta-
phorically, they drove a ‘ coach-and-four ’ by a shortcut


through that particular regulation. They would say—
* Comman’ stan’ name Queen, three times,’ —Shoot! They
didn’t give a fellow even the chance to ‘ stan’ three times.’
Beg pardon, I’m keeping you in suspense.
“ When the ‘ oncet,’ ‘ twicet,’ ‘ thricet ’ business was over,
the Scotchman replied in a flippant style ill-befitting one in
so perilous a position—immediately under the and ban
■of the law, too ! ‘ Come and take me.’ Further—put
down your ear till I tell you, but don’t print it—the Wild
Scotchman made a rude sign worthy only of a street Arab.
His nose formed the base of the operation, and the out-
spread fingers were connected with it by means of the
thumb. This was too much for the trooper, who felt that
the law and himself were outraged, so he fumbled about
the straps of his carbine while the Scotchman cantered
gracefully away. I positively assure you, Sir, on my
honour, that this was not one of the times the Wild Scotch-
man was captured, because he never saw that trooper
again, though he didn’t try very hard to escape. If that
trooper writes a contradiction of this, don’t believe him.
“ The police had all the talent of the ‘ foorce,’ and some
of the bulliest of their inspectors out from time to time,
and on more than one occasion reports came in that a hard
chase had been given, and a bed of grass was found warm
from the body of the Wild Scotchman, and his fire still
smouldering, etc., etc. Yet they got no nearer to a cap-
ture, and when he was so simply caught by civilians, they
got mad; a report of the affair was sent to the papers of a
most misleading nature, in which ‘ Mr. Superintendent
Nott ’ figured largely. Well, Mr. Nott was a superinten-
dent —of a cattle station—and if the public stupidly in-
ferred from the report that he was a superintendent of
police, why, it wasn’t the fault of the man who wrote the
report —was it ?


“ This is all I know about my Wild Scotchman, and as;
* the above facts are substantially true,’ if you want any
more I must invent them.— Pioneer.”
It was in November, 1865, Mr. Mallon, who was then,
engaged in hawking, came across the “ Wild Scotchman.
With so much by way of preliminary I now let Mr. Malloa
proceed with his narrative in almost the very words he-
used in telling it to me :
“ I was travelling with my drays and two men up the
Dawson, between Taroom (then known as Bonner’s Knob),,
and Roma, when I heard from a passing traveller that the-
Roma mailman had been stuck up and robbed of
and all his mail packages. Next morning I saw by a copy
of the * Dalby Herald ’ that it was the ‘ Wild Scotchman,’
then beginning to make ‘ a name ’ for himself, who had.
done it. About two days after that 1 was camped at
Kanool Station on the river, where I remained for about
forty-eight hours for the usual trade with the station hands.
On the evening of the second day, and being about to*
leave next morning, as 1 was coming down to my camp,
from the station, where I had been for a settlement, you,
can fancy the flutter it gave me when my two men with
their hands up alongside the dray and a tall man a few
paces off covering them with a gun. He had seen me first,
and shouted to me to come on and ‘ bail up ’ too. I saw
there was no help for it, so I put as cool a face as I could
on, and came up.
“ O it’s the ‘ Scotchman, ” I said. “ I know you, I sup-
pose you mean to clean us out. All the money I have is.
in the cash box in the tail of the dray, and you’re welcome
to it. (It was only about or as I had, ac-
cording to custom, sent the bulk of my takings, chiefly
cheques, to Brisbane from Taroom a couple of days,
before.)


“ It seems you know who I am well enough,” replied he,.
“ though I never saw you before. How it that ? ”
"01 know you’re the ‘ Scotchman ’ by the description-
given of you in the ‘ Dalby Herald,’ which I have on me
now. He then asked me to let him see the paper, and'
there he was sure enough described to a nicety as he
stood —‘ Moleskin pants, Crimean shirt, long boots, sash,
and cabbage-tree hat, with double-barrelled gun and two-
revolvers in his belt.’ After a bit of a barney he told me
to my great relief he didn’t want to rob us. He only
wanted a feed, and a change of clothes, for which he said
he would pay. Then we all became friendly like, and I
gave him a good tuck in of tinned salmon (of which he ate
two), and Avhatever else we had; but he kept his loaded
revolvers alongside his hands all the time.
“ After that he selected from my stock (a hawker in a
good way of business in those days carried everything
eatable, drinkable, and wearable; in fact was a sort of
Finney, Isles, Alfred Shaw, and Jean de Raeve rolled into
one) he selected, I say, a pair of long boots, two Crimean
shirts, a slouch hat, flannel shirts, socks, handkerchiefs,
several knives, and a lot of eatables, all to the value of
2s. 6d. When he had picked out all he wanted he
said—
“ Now how would you like to be paid, mate? You can.
have your change in I O. U.’s, notes, cheques, gold or
silver. If you don’t mind I’d rather liquidate in silver,
because among the stuff of which I relieved that mailman
I find I have no less than jQ62 in half-crowns. How would
they suit you ? ”
‘‘ I said of course, which was a fact, that they would suit
me better than anything else. (I learned afterwards that
these £62 in half-crowns were part of a consignment of
money that had been sent up to open the first Queens-


land Bank in Roma with). Then that Caledonian stern
and wild directed my two men to count out the money for
payment out of the swag of silver he put before them
reckoning eight half-crowns to the pound. When they had
reckoned out the jQ 13 2s. 6d. he gave them ss. a piece for
themselves ‘ to drink The Scotchman’s health.'
“ Then,” exclaimed Mr. Mall on, “ a curious thing hap-
pened, which anyone is at liberty to turn to my credit or
discredit just as the humour inclines him. Wanting to
change his clothes which he had worn in all weathers for
weeks Macpherson proceeded to strip, and in doing so
arrived at his inner garment, or to put it plainly, his shirt.
Unbuttoning this at the wristbands he pulled it hastily over
his head, but forgot to undo the throatband, thus imprison-
ing himself in a cul dc sac for a few moments until he was
able to tear the button from its moorings by force. ‘ Did
you know, Mallon,’ said he, as soon as he had extricated
himself from the shirt, ‘ that there is a reward for
the man who cops me alive ? How easily you and your
men could have collared me that time if you were half
sharp.’
“ I answered that I knew of the reward quite well, but I
didn’t want any money for any man’s life, dead or alive.
And that was a fact. I would take his cash fast enough,
but the law could look after the rest, and as far as trade
went I wouldn’t have cared if a ‘ Scotchman’ like that, wild
or tame, turned up every day.
“ Well not to make my story too long, I parted with
Macpherson, not, however, before we had a nip or two, as
we had a demijohn or two as part of the stock in trade.
He swore me not to say a word of him or his whereabouts
for two days, and I kept the oath. I may say here that by
a miracle none of the station hands (the hut wasn’t many
hundred yards off) came up to my drays that night for a


yarn and a deal. If they had it would have been all up
with the ‘ Scotchman ’ that time. The miracle was ex-
plained next day when I found that some of the chaps had
been to the township and brought along two gallons of
rum, so that all hands, according to custom, proceeded to
lay their brains in soak for that night.
“ I saw Macpherson once again after that, but the scene
this time was Brisbane gaol, where he was then confined,
having been ‘ taken ’ by some stockmen, a year after our
meeting, on the Dawson. He was then engaged in making
•cabbage-tree hats, for which I used to give orders to the
gaol authorities. When I mentioned my knowledge of
Macpherson to the governor of the gaol he allowed him
to see me, and after mutual recognition he told me how to
distinguish his make of cabbage-tree hat from all others
made in the gaol. Ever after that I used to have this class
of hat labelled the ‘ Wild Scotchman,’ and they were in
great demand.
“ The time (30 years almost) which has elapsed since,
has no doubt made me forget many things that happened
that night. But there are two or. three other occurrences I
remember. Macpherson showed me that all his cash
■takings from the mailman amounted to only the rest
of the being chiefly dishonoured cheques, P.N.’s,
and calabashes (1.0.U.’5) of which there was a very bounti-
ful harvest that year. ‘ What am I to do with these ? ’ he
asked me. I told him to send them to Mr. Massey, who
was the P.M. in Brisbane in those days. He immediately
took the idea, and calling for pen, ink, and paper he wrote
as follows: ‘Devil’s Bit—lBBs. —Sir, —l send you the
enclosed, of which I relieved the Roma mailman last week.
Kindly keep them till I call for them someday.’ ”


“ When he was polishing off the two tins of salmon and
other eatables, he told me he hadn’t eaten a solid mouthful
for four days; the last bit of tucker he had being from a
German woman, near Mount Hutton, who had given him.
a drink of milk and a damper; ‘ and she didn’t lose any-
thing by her hospitality,’ he added, ‘ as I gave her a five-
pound note I found in a letter of an Irishman to his
mother in the old country. But I have the old woman’s,
address, and will send her jQio for that before I die
or get jugged.’ ”
“Happening to remark to him that I heard he had stolen
a good horse from a poor man I knew on the Burnett, he
roared out, * I never lifted a horse in my life—from a poor
man I mean.’ But when 1 brought the facts of the case to
his recollection, he declared he thought it was a station
horse; and he requested me to let the man know that if he
came to the stockman at Jimbour in three weeks he would
get his horse; if not, he (Macpherson) would send him
I know for a fact that the man got back his horoe
all right.”
Macpherson made his way across from the Dawson to
the Burnett, where he stuck up and relieved the Nanango-
Gayndah mail of a considerable sum of money, chiefly in
cheques—the then substitute for gold, notes or silver.
After sticking up the last-named mail he made his way
towards Gayndah, it then being near Christmas. His
intention was to pay a visit to the racecourse to procure a
good horse or two. Several horses were at the time in
training for the Christmas races. The “ Scotchman ”
found it impracticable to go into the course at the entrance-
gate (always using great caution) so he rode quietly into-
town about a mile and a-half from the course, and pur-
chased a saw from the store of John Conolly, and retraced
his steps to the course, and while in the act of sawing the


rails at the corner of the racecourse he was suddenly made
aware that his enemies had discovered who he was and
immediately gave chase after him. Among his pursuers,
was J. O’Connel Bligh, a man of considerable courage-
The pursuit, however,. proved fruitless, as he got away from
his followers. After helping himself to a racehorse being
trained at Mondure he made his way across the broken
country to Gyrandah on the T)awson River, having ridden
a distance of over 100 miles on Christmas Day, 1865. He
quietly rode across the river and turned his horses out,
returning almost immediately to inspect a lot of horses that
were in the yard owned by the writer (who was absent at
the time, but returned at dusk.) After passing his opinion
upon one or two good working horses he took his depar-
ture in the direction of his camp. My brother noticing a.
revolver in his belt at once suspected him, and decided to-
leave the horses in the yard for the night. After my return,,
upon learning the particulars I decided to pay him a visit,
early in the morning, and consequently arose at daylight
and saddled up a horse and made for his camp. I there
saw two horses near the camp. On a log was a pair of
moleskin trousers (new), a piece of plum cake, and re-
volver in a belt. I rode towards the river, and saw him in
the distance performing his morning ablutions. I then
rode away about half a-mile to see if he had interfered,
with a lot of horses running in the pocket. Upon my
return to his camp—although a bed of sand—he asked me
if I had been there, saying he had noticed fresh tracks. I
then had a long chat with him, and he gave me all the
particulars here mentioned, as well as the circumstances,
mentioned by Mr. Peter Mallon. On leaving my place he
asked me to allow him to leave a horse with me for six
weeks or two months, then for the first time making him-
self known as the “ Wild Scotchman.” I reminded him


that I could have easily captured him while washing him-
self at the river. His reply was “It might be more trouble
than you think.” He then produced a pistol from his
trousers pocket, which he said he always kept in reserve.
While relating his exploits he told me that he had gone
over to New South Wales to join the then notorious Gar-
diner’s gang, and he was instrumental in bringing Gardiner
to Rockhampton, their intention being to establish a gang
and stick up the Clermont Escort, which was expected at
the time to turn out very rich. This was interfered with
by the arrest of Gardiner. Upon the “ Scotchman ” leav-
ing Gyrandah he promised to pay me a visit in seven or
eight weeks to get the horse. He came back according to
promise. In the meantime I took the horse into Cracow
and handed him over to Mr. Inspector Murray, who was
then on his tracks. Macpherson subsequently came to
Gyrandah for the horse. I being away he waited for my
return a whole day, my brother being afraid to let him
know I had handed the horse over to the police. I
travelled out with two policemen and a black tracker from
Cracow to Gyrandah, a distance of 14 miles. We arrived
at Gyrandah about 3 p.m., and found that the “ Wild
Scotchman ” had left about five hours before our arrival.
The police did not show any anxiety to follow him so
quietly camped until about 10 a.m. next day. “ The
Scotchman ” then proceeded towards Gladstone, and was
captured by Mr. William Nott somewhere near the Cal-
liope, and not on the Dawson as stated in your issue of last
week. The “ Wild Scotchman ” seemed tired of wandering
about, and being short of ammunition fell a prey to Mr.
Nott, and then followed his conviction.
“ The above facts are substantially correct. One boast
Macpherson made was that he had never any desire 10
commit murder, nor did he ever rob or illuse the poor.—
Yours faithfully, .”


(From the “Western Star,” 27th March, 1895.)
“ The article in another column (taken from ‘ Figaro
referring to the bushranger, ‘ Wild Scotchman,” recalls tQ
mind some stirring incidents connected with this district,
which occurred twenty-eight or twenty-nine years ago. At
that time Roma was a far-away interior township, with a
coach once a week, sometime's twice a week, to and from
Dalby, the old road through Condamine township being
used by teamsters. There was plenty of traffic, and times
were good all round. Wool was then carried to, and sup-
plies brought up from Ipswich, the railway line at that
time being only open to Bigg's Camp (Grandchester of the
present day.) Police arrangements were then in a crude
state, and the outside districts were left in a great measure
to take care of themselves. The old New South Wales
regulations were in force, and the constables took things
easy enough—doing as little “ duty ” as possible for the
highest pay they could get. The whole force was dis-
organised in the absence of efficient supervision.
* * *
“ At that time robbery under arms was an almost weekly
occurrence in New South Wales, and the Queensland Go-
vernment realised the importance of completely remodell-
ing the police force here. Lieutenant Seymour had only
just been made Commissioner, when the man Macpherson
took to the bush. By the name of the “ Wild Scotchman
he played some most impudent pranks, bailing up solitary
mailmen and sifting the mail bags. He would threaten
and bounce, and for some time by intimidation he some-
how got what he wanted, even including the creating of a
regular scare in these districts. He rode hard, and took
any horses he could get hold of. The rapidity with which


he turned up in distant parts of the country, and joked
with the police of that day, whom he could at any time
■outstrip when the chase was on, originated some amusing
stories in the bush. One thing the “ W ild Scotchman
did not do, he never to our recollection shot anyone, nor
was he guilty of personal violence to man or woman,
except in the way of intimidation, although he stuck up
many people.
“ The Commissioner came up to Roma at this time,
bringing with him several good stockmen who could ride
almost anything, and these were made special constables,
on good pay. Some of them were picked up about Dalby,
but it was currently reported these “ specials ’ did not want
to meet the “ Wild Scotchman,” and were more inclined to
aid in his escape than try to effect his capture. 1 hese
" specials ” had a “ rare old time of it ” in Roma, billiards
and battleaxe being the game and the tipple. '1 he Com-
missioner was young and inexperienced, and had a lot to
learn himself as to the ways of the youth of the new
colony. The “ Dalby Herald ” was a good paying concern
in those days, and the proprietors (Messrs. Robinson and
Jordan) could afford to spend money on their paper, which
they did liberally. They were fortunate in having an
energetic and able correspondent in Roma, who kept the
“ Herald ” posted up with the latest news. By the way,
there was no telegraph wire to Roma, and the “ Wild
Scotchman ” roamed over all the stretch of country north
of the western road from Springsure to Nanango. He was
eventually captured (actually run down) by a pastoralist
and a few stockmen, somewhere near Gayndah, and was
eventually tried and convicted. The fact of his not having
attempted murder, and not done any actual bodily harm of


a serious nature was considered in his favour by the
authorities, and he was sentenced to a long term of im-
prisonment, although the crime of “ robbery under arms ”
was then and is now a capital offence.”
FINIS.


N cqj^
Outetuge Printing Co., Queen st., Brisbane.










* ♦ * * sf« *
The only man of note amongst the Soon after distinguishing himself in
bushrangers of Queensland was the semi defence of Mr. Lilley, Macpherson, in
lunatic known as the “Wild Scotch- ,the most inexplicable manner, ran away
man/’ He had quite a string of names from his apprenticeship and took *o the
—Alpiu Macpherson, alias McGregor, buali. The youth was, no doubt, fired
alias John Bruce, alias Marr, alias Kerr,
alias Scotia, and alias Scotchie. This in-
dividual, in his youth, considered himself
capable of emulating the deeds of Frank
Gardner, Hall, Gilbert and C#., and
other of the freebooting fraternity of
the ’sixties. Macpherson was born in
Scotland, and reached Queensland, with
his father, when very young. The father
worked for Mr. McConnell, of Cress-
brook, which is about one hundred miles
(from Brisbane, and was generally re-
spected by all W’ho knew him. The son,
Alpin, when at school, was a great fav-
orite with his teachers on account of
his diligence and attention. When his
school days were ended the lad w T as
ipprenticed t» Mr. Petrie, of Brisbane, a
ifone mason, and was as well thought
>f by Mr. Petrie and his family as he
.vas by his teachers at school.
* * *
Parliament missed a good man when
Macpherson “took to the bush.” He
was a great reader, and a fluent speaker.
He was a member of the Debating So-
ciety at the School of Arts, and took a
leading part in the debates. On one
occasion, at least, he proved the “mettle
of his pastures” in' defence of the late
Charles Lilley. The latter had become
extremely popular over a Militia Bill,-
and in addressing a meeting at
tude Valley, was the many
.“favors,” not as acceptable to the
[speaker as might be. These /“favors”
took the shape of over-ripe tomatoes,
pneient eggs, and missiles o| a similar
rharacter. Young Maephersob happened
[to make one of the audience, and i
[bravely, in the face of superior odds, de-
by the stories of the exploits of Ben
Hall, Johnny Gilbert, and others of the
New South Wales gangs of bush-
rangers. Maepherson’s first attempt at
a highwayman was the sticking-up ol
Wills’ Hotel, on the Houghton River
This exploit was, however, of too mild
a character for the young Scotch blood
—a very Hotspur of the bush —and he
made his way into New South Wales,
with the avowed intention of breaking
a lanee, or crossing swords, or fighting
a duel, or some other blood-and-thunder
deed, with Sir Frederick Pottinger, then
an Inspector of Police, in charge of the
troopers who were making determined
efforts to wipe out bushrangiug in the
mother colony, and failing to do so.
Potviuger, if he did not catch any of
the bushrangers, certainly gave them a
warm time, and kept them constantly
on the move.
* * *
This part of Alpin Maepherson’s career
as a bushranger is somewhat of a mys-
tery. It is said that he did exchange
shots with Pottinger and some of his
troopers, but it is doubtful that he ever
joined Hall or any of the other N.S.
I Wales outlaws. He said that he had
joined the Hall gang, and had commit-
ted robberies in their company, but
most people who knew Macpherson be-
lieved that he was only “skiting.” Cer-
tainly he did not remain long in New
South Wales; he got back to his old
haunts —his “native heath” —as a bush-
ranger, robbed mails, stuck-up travel-
lers, stole racehorses, and did his level
best to emulate that most notorious of
and i best
Riravely, in the face of superior odds, de- the outlaws and most consummate of
[fended Lilley, acting, as a matter of scoundrels, Frank Gardner.
'fact, as a sort of buffer between the * * *
future Chief Justice and his assailants.
In this encounter he received many |
bruises and much glory.




front across the saddle. Before he had
succeeded in getting the gun free, Noth
had reached him, and, covering him,
ordered him to put up his hands, or
he would fire. As the remainder of the
armed party came up, Macpherson saw
that hia reign was at an end and abdi-
cated.
♦ * *
His arms were taken from him; he
i was brought back to the station, care-
fully guarded. In the pack on the horse
which he had abandoned was found a
case of surgical instruments, with lint,
etc., for treating wounds. He carried
a pocket compass, an American axe,
and other useful tools. The axe was
necessary for cutting down fences, and
making temporary stock-yards for horse-
catching.
♦ •
[ A warrant had*been issued for Mac-
pherson’s arrest for his alleged attack
upon Sir Frederick Pottinger. He was
extradited to stand his trial in New
South Wales. His arrival in * Sydney
was contemporary with that of Pot-
tinger, who came to report himself at
headquarters. It will be remembered
that Pottinger had accidentally shot
himself at the Pilgrim Inn, Lapstone
Hill, dying some weeks after from the
wound. That was in April, 186.5, and
as there was no prosecutor in New
South Wales Macpherson was returned
t* Queensland. From Brisbane he was
sent to Port Denison, and there com- ,
mitted for trial to Rockhampton, the
nearest assize town. He was shipped
on board the steamer Diamantina
(named after Lady Bowen), in charge
of Constable Maher. He was leg-ironed,
his hands being so small that no hand-
cuffs would fit* When the steamer
reached Mackay, Macpherson was seated
near the galley, reading; he had been
so well conducted during the early part
lof the voyage that Maher did not think
it necessary to take him below. At the
Mackay wharf, amidst the usual bustle.
Maher lost sight of his prisoner, and
did not miss him until the steamer had
been at sea one hour, and then Maher
was all at sea. He reached Rockhamp-
ton, hut without his prisoner.
C * -


hlcckJj
