

T H E
“DR.” HALL CURE
COMPLETE,
ALL ABOUT IT,
AND
WHERE IT CAME FROM
~T~) E ADER! this book contains directions for the Enema Cure as given
in the pound pamphlet of the so called “De.” Hall, and also far
more complete advice and directions by De. Jukes, who invented the
, jomach-pump and the enema-pump, and also improved the enema-
fountain sixty years before “ Dk.” Hall began his fraudulent work of
selling the idea to the world of sufferers for £1 each as his “DISCOVERY ”
and under his contemptible “ BON’D OF SECRECY.” See the drawings
of e mma apparatus on pages 6 and 7, as invented by Dr. Jukes, and you
will see how untruthful it is of “ Dr.” Hall to say that he, "of all the
earth’s teeming millions,” was the first to discover the use and value of
copious injections, and make them known to mankind. The book from
which this is printed was published by John Churchill, Princess Street,
iho, London, dated 1836, fifth edition.
eg* I am irformed that 30,000 of the Hall “Secret” Pamphlet have been printed, in
Melbourne, and most of them sold in Australia at £1 each. If this is true, the people of
Australia have already paid £30,000 for this old remedy as a newly discovered “secret,”
another illustration of a community well up in letter-learning being lamentably ignorant
of common useful knowledge. This book, and its predecessor, The Advice of Ten Doctors,
j ay, and I think will, prevent the expenditure of another £30,000 for the same “ secret."
Published and Sold hy E. W. COLE, Booh Arcade, Melbourne.


The “Dr.” Hall Cure.
“ Dr.” Hall at tlie beginning of his £1 pamphlet says— “ 7 earnestly beg
of the reader not to ship one line or sentence ,” and again, farther on, he
says—“ Let me beg the reader not to ship one icord .” How I ask you,
reader, to do the same, with respect to this little book of Dr. Jukes’,
published sixty years ago, and you will get good information about
the use and value of the enema, and also see what an imposter this
Pound pamphlet and bond of secrecy “ Dr.” Hall is to call it his
“ discovery ” and his “ secret.” When I published the hook entitled
“ The Advice of Ten Doctors ,” a short time ago, the Melbourne vendor
of the pound pamphlet advertised that it did not contain “ The Hall
Health Secret .” How, in the first place the pound pamphlet does not
contain a secret at all, hut what it pretends to be a secret is given in
three places in my book, by three different writers, hut that the
uninitiated reader should beyond all dispute know what this so-called
secret is, I will here state it ag’ain, and this time in large type.
“Dr.” Hall in substance says; —“ Take an enema syringe
or fountain, and inject three or four quarts of
warm water into the bowels, then walk about or
roll about on a bed or knead the abdomen for a
time and then void it, and if you choose you can
inject another quart into the bowels, and leave it
there.”
The above is the entire secret or so-called secret of “Dr.” Hall’s
£1 pamphlet; the rest of'the book is filled up with “ Dr.” Hall’s so-
called history of his own case as the shocking example, some out-
rageous quack assertions about its curing all diseases , some mock-
scientific rubbish to mystify the uninitiated or simple-minded reader,
and some testimonials which are not his own ; all that the pamphlet
contains besides the advice to use the enema is not worth one farthing ,
and certainly is not worth re-printing in a book of this kind.
His history of his own case seems very much like an instance of
what is vulgarly, but happily, termed “ piling on the agony.”
He says that at the age of twenty-nine “ I found myself a worn out ,
brohen-down old man , . . . reduced to a sheleton, . . . one of
the most wretched victims of dyspepsia that ever lived.” His brother had
shortly before died of consumption, his doctor told him his case was
hopeless, and he would soon follow his brother to the grave ; a con-
sultation of medical men from the adjoining towns took place; they
sounded him and assured him that one lung was partially gone, and
the other badly diseased, and that he could not possibly live another
year, and that he, finally, finding his case was so bad, set his own wits
to work, and in a few days made the discovery of the large enema,


and in a month through its use he had gained five pounds in weight,
and in a few years rose from a mere skeleton of 120 lbs. to “ 225 lbs. of
the finest muscular structure probably of any man living, young or old.”
The editor of “ Good Health,” referring to the numerous printed
affixes to “ Dr.” Hall’s name, jocularly renders one of them, P.Q.D.,
to mean “ Prince of Quack Doctors ,” he might have rendered another
to mean “ Prince of Agony Filers,” for it is doubtful if ever the world
has seen such an outrageous collection of hyperbolic and eulogistic
testimonies as “ Dr.” Hall has printed in favor of himself in one of his
books. They are given in the “ Advice of Ten Doctors,” section
6, pages 22, 23 and 24. Reader, don’t miss the treat, but read them,
and according to his own invitation given in his “ secret ” pamphlet,
“ don’t miss a word,” but carefully read them aloud to catch their full
meaning, and you will see the character of “ Dr.” Hall revealed
before you to the life from these three pages. Speaking of his
asserted discovery of the large enema “ Dr.” Hall, continuing in his
“ agony ” style, says that he was •“ the very first man of all the millions
past and present to inject a gallon of water into the colon,” and that no
medical man before this “ considered it safe or even possible to inject
more than a pint of water into the rectum .” What an outrageous fib
this is ! Why it was known, and this scientifically educated man
(with as he asserts a life’s predilections that way) must have been
fully aware that it was known to tens of thousands, and to the entire
medical world. The reader will see farther on where Dr. Jukes
asserts that the use of the large enema fountain was the rule and not
the exception in France, and even gives drawings of these enema
fountains, see pages 6 and 7, and he says that three or four quarts
at a time was used, and that in one case he even injected seven quarts
into a patient (probably into a large man) and that it is advisable and
safe to inject it right up to the stomach, to the very place where the
stomach-pump can inject it from the mouth, and so with the stomach-
pump and the enema-pump combined, the entire alimentary canal can
be flushed out from the mouth to the anus. This book, reader, was
written by Dr. Jukes, and brought out by a popular publisher in the
centre of the publishing world, sixty years ago. And now what can
you, what must you think of the assertion of “ Dr.” Hall ? that it
was his “Discovery” and his “Secret,” first made known to the
world two or three years ago, by means of his health pamphlet.
But it is argued by some that although “ Dr.” Hall may have made
a hundred thousand pounds by his “secret” pamphlet, still he has done
the people a hundred thousand pounds’ worth of good, and therefore the
end justifies the means, but this is simply the old teaching, “Do evil that
good may come of it,” and is a most pernicious and immoral doctrine.
A dose of castor oil recommended by a grocer may do a person a
pound’s worth of good, and in many cases even save life, but the grocer


lias no right to call it his “ discovery,” charge a pound for it and hind
to secrecy. Reader, I here advise you—if you feel unwell to take a
few days’run into the country, this will always do you a pound’s worth
and oftimes several pound’s worth of good, and maybe save your life,
but I have no right to say that it is “my discovery ,” and under that
pretence charge you a pound for the advice.
The following guide to health which I here hastily throw together,
is more natural, and altogether better, than “ Dr.” Hall’s so-called
“ secret,” the enema panacea.
1. Eat temperately, of good plain food, at regular hours,
2. Attend to the Calls of nature regularly.
3. Abstain from smoking, or drinking intoxicants in excess.
4. Dress in clean clothes, not too thickly, not too thinly, not too tightly.
5. Guard yourself against dangerous draughts, damps, or chills.
6. Take moderate exercise in the open air every day.
7. Take a few days' holiday far away from home every year.
8. Live in a healthy, well-drained, well-ventilated, well-lighted house.
9. Sleep at regular hours in a dry, clean bed, in a healthy room.
10. Subordinate all your feelings and all your passions to reason.
Follow' this advice through life, and you will rarely require to use
that unpleasant and somewhat unnatural article, the enema, any more
than do the sheep on the grassy plains, or “the cattle on a thousand
hills;” but this advice, good as it is, and which, if followed, would
keep you in better health than all the enemas in the world, and
which here printed, will not cost you a quarter of a farthing, is known
to millions; and I should be a liar, a swindler, and a misanthrope, if
I called it u my discovery ,” charged you a pound for it, and bound you
to secrecy. The use of the enema is also known to millions, and any
educated man who calls it his discovery, and under that pretence
takes money and binds to secrecy, is in plain English—a fraud and a
humbug.
But it is said by some that the “ secret ” pamphlet only costs a
pound, and that this, at the most, is only the amount of a doctor’s
fee, and the pamphlet man hks as much right to take the pound as
the doctor has ; but the case is not fairly put. The quack vendor of
secret pamphlets might sell a thousand of them in a day, although he
might be a totally ignorant person, but the medical man is in quite a
different position, he has to prepare himself by a laborious and expen-
sive education to enable him to understand all diseases and ailments, and
as he grows older he obtains a Vast experience by thousands of cases
passing through his hands and coming under his notice. He comes
at your call, day or night, in all weathers, into all dangers, and does
his best to cure you. How this useful laborer must live, and he is
worthy of his hire, and should be fairly paid. Ido not here speak of
the law-qualified fools and frauds in the medical ranks, but of the
able, honest doctor, and the majority of them are such; but the
action of the quack nostrum man is quite different, he has no


expensively and laboriously-obtained medical knowledge, and no
experience, be does not diagnose or even remotely understand your
case, but he gives you a “ patent ” or a “ secret ” something, and tells
you it will cure you, no matter which one out of a thousand possible
diseases or affections ail you. The universal nostrum of the quack
may chance to cure you, but it is not so safe, nor in fact in the long
run so cheap, as the advice of the more conscientious, careful, long
experienced medical man.
There is one curious thing about this new Enema craze or enthusiasm, it is the way in
which it has come about. Dr. Jukes published his book in the very centre of the publishing
world, strongly recommending these large injections as a grand thing for health, and the
public took no notice. . Dr. Jukes did not know how to boom a thing: sixty years later a most
unprincipled man apparently gets hold of this book, publishes the idea as his own “ discovery,”
and sells it under a bond of secrecy; and tens of thousands rush and buy it with avidity. But the
public somehow like mysteries, and are always willing to pay for them; and many a quack in
Europe and America is making a good living to-day out of a credulous public on the mystery
question. One man makes a huge fortune out of a common pill, another out of a common oil,
another out of a common syrup, another out of a common mixture of salts and sugar, another
out of a common mixture of nitre and herbs. Five millions of money has been made in a
generation by five ‘ ‘smart” men, booming five simple articles, which are no better than thousands
of others that have not been puffed by quack advertisements. Many other boomed fads and
cranks and notions have brought their promoters great wealth, and sometimes the secret or
mystery or catch sold by the smart one has been very comical. One man advertised that for a
dollar stamp he would impart advice to the sender which would save him from GREAT
DAN GEE. Enquirers sent stamps, and the answer came, “ Whenever you whittle a stick
don’t cut it towards you, but always cut it from you, and you are not so likely to cut yourself.”
One advertised that for 30 penny stamps he would give advice which would save from great
disappointment ; the stamps were sent, and the reply came, “Never pay a boy half-a-crown to
hold your shadow, while you climb a tree to look into the middle of next week.” The ladles
(trusting dears) are of ten appealed to and caught by these mystery-mongers ; one advertised
to send six useful articles for ladies, for seven stamps; the stamps were sent, and the return
post brought six hair pins, value one farthing. There are thousands of these “smart” ones
making money by selling these so-called secrets to credulous and honest trusting, people, but
perhaps the most extensive and successful swindle of all, next to the curing secrets, is where
sharpers, often totally unacquainted with horse-racing, undertake, for money, to give correct
tips about the winning horses ; the money yearly filched from the pockets of the innocent ones
in this way is immense. It must be admitted that the vendors of the enema “ secret ” are not
so bad as hundreds of other kinds of “catchers,” true, the “ secret” part of it is a pure fraud,
but it is some good nevertheless.
Respecting the actual value of the enema practice, T)r. Jukes
informs us that sixty years ago its use was almost universal in France ;
I don’t think it is now, and if it is, it certainly does not lessen French
mortality to any appreciable extent, for, according to Mullhall, the
average death rate for the twenty years from 1860 to 1880 was, in
England, 21 per thousand per annum, and in France, 23 per thousand
per annum. Respecting its use amongst ourselves, many who have
used it say that it has done them good, that they feel much better
than they have done for years; but will this last ? A great many
doctors, past and present, say its occasional use is much preferable to
the taking of purgative medicines, but that its constant use would in
many cases bring on great trouble in different ways. Finally, from
all I can gather from all authorities, professional and unprofessional,
the rationale of the whole thing seems to be— Use it when
absolutely required, but do not make a constant practice of it,
and you will do that which is right.
E. W. COLE, Book Arcade, Melbourne.


Dr. Jukes on the Enema Cure.
The Stomach-pump invented hy Dr. Jukes over 60 years ago.
The Enema-pump invented by Dr. Jukes over 60 years ago.


French Enema Fountain, as improved hy Dr. Jukes, in London, more than 60 years ago.
“ The leading object of the
author, in the following pages,
will be to show that the cure of
indigestion , and the diseases conse-
quent upon it , may be effected by
a judicious system of dieting , and
by the substitution of simple
Injections for nauseous drugs ;
which system combines and pos-
sesses all the useful properties
of aperient medicines.
“ The benefit derived from the
use of injections has been known
and understood since the earliest
ages; and their simplicity and
utility are no sooner seen than
acknowledged, superseding at
once the use of all drugs, by pre-
venting, as well as curing, the
disease.
French. Enema Fountain, as improved by
Dr. Jukes, in London, more than 60 years ago.


“ The period seems at length to have arrived when our prejudices
are disappearing before the lights of science and experience. In
no other department of medical science is this so obviously the
case as in that which more immediately relates to the subject of
the present little work. The experience of ages, in every country
and climate, has proved the frequent inconvenience and failure,
and the, not less frequent impropriety, of exhibiting purgative
or aperient medicines in the usual manner, and shown the advan-
tages which accrued from the employment of the same kind of
remedies in a different form, namely, in that of Injections.
Prejudices, in many respects inseparable from our national char-
acter, and honourable to our feelings, have prevented the general
adoption of this practise amongst ourselves, except in dangerous
cases ; although it has long been generally resorted to in foreign
countries, as a necessary domestic mode of treatment in the
majority of ailments, as well as one of the best preservatives
against the first attacks of disorder.
“This disinclination to employ a very beneficial, and, indeed,
almost indispensable method of relief, arose in some degree also
from the construction of the apparatus formerly used for the
purpose. Some of these required the assistance of a second
person; and all of them were either managed with difficultv and
inconvenience by the individual who required their use, or with
little service. Fortunately, the author's invention of the stomach-
pump, and the practical application of its principle to the injection
into, and withdrawal of fluids from the stomach, furnished the
profession, and the public in general, with an easy and not un-
pleasant means of accomplishing that, which had been so great
a desideratum in medical and domestic practice, and led to the
attainment of all that could be desired in the employment of
numerous remedies, as Injections, in the treatment of the various
complaints to which the human frame is liable. This adaptation


of his discovery to so useful a purpose, had been attempted by-
various mechanists, and with some success. None of them, how-
ever, satisfied him; and after much consideration and various
modifications, he has constructed a new apparatus upon
principles which will ensure the convenient, efficacious, and
most delicate employment of this plan of treatment, and which
has been approved of by the most eminent medical practitioners
of this country and the Continent, as the most efficacious one in
removing not only those affections which are noticed in this work,
but also many other diseases which could not be included in its
limits.
“ Having thus attained the principal objects of the invention,
viz., a perfect apparatus for the exhibition of Injections , —complete
in its operation, admitting of the readiest adaptation, and easiest
employment by the person requiring its use, without the least
alarm to the most sensitive feelings,—the Author thinks it only
due to himself, as the person chiejiy concerned in Us invention and
improvement , to acquaint the public (whose ailments it is
intended to remedy) with the advantages attached to the self-
employment of Injections , in the prevention as well as in the
cure of diseases.
“ In order that the reader may understand this first object, viz.,
the prevention of disease, as far as preserving a regular state of
the bowels may contribute to it, the Author will first give a brief
view of the form, relations, and functions of the alimentary canal,
or those organs more immediately concerned in the office of
digestion ; and he will afterwards offer some remarks upon those
circumstances which more especially require the employment
of Water Injections and Medicated Injections. He may truly
state, that there is nothing advanced in behalf of this mode of
treatment, which is not well known to every member of the medical
profession, but which, owing to its novelty in this country,


is generally speaking, unknown to the public, and consequently
to the great majority of his readers.
“ The instrument called the ‘ Stomach-pump ,’ was, when first
discovered, found to be the best one for the administration of
Injections ; and the Author takes the present opportunity of
stating, that his invention of the stomach-pump , has already been
the means’of saving the lives of many hundred persons ; and that,
immediately upon its promulgation, it received the approbation
of the most eminent medical men in this country, and in Paris,
where the Author introduced it with strong recommendations in
its favour, with which he was honoured by Sir Astley Cooper,
and other celebrated Surgeons —and that it is now adopted by
every member of the profession.
: “ The ccecum, or bag-like part of the intestine, and the ascending
portion of the colon, are the seat of almost all those difficult
diseases which the newly-invented apparatus is calculated to
overcome, and which, if neglected, form the basis of many
incurable maladies that soon prove fatal, or render the wretched
patient miserable for life.”
Speaking of medical injections, he says ; —“ In one case I had
the opportunity of injecting a quantity equal to eight glasses of
gin and water, as it is commonly mixed for drinking at taverns,
and in one hour afterwards the man was in a complete state of
intoxication. He stated to me, that four glasses of liquor thus
mixed was as much as his head could bear when taken into the
stomach. I should also refer to the administration of soups,
arrowroot, &c., by which patients have been supported for many
weeks together, solely by means of injections. These are proofs
sufficiently strong to warrant the assertion, that Injections are
indispensable in medical practice, especially as every practitioner
is well aware that he does not possess absolute authority over
the power of digestion, or intestinal action, even if he calls irs


aid his whole catalogue of purgative medicines, down even to
the far-famed croton oil, —one drop of which has been said to
succeed, when all other medicines have failed, —without having
recourse to injections. At the same time I beg it may be
understood, that I set as high a value on the use of purgatives,
as any man in the profession, and am persuaded of their import-
ant influence in the treatment of numerous diseases, that
they are absolutely necessary in medical science ; but it is of
their abuse, not their use, that 1 complain. It is a well-known
fact, which daily experience goes to prove, that our churchyards
are the receptacles of thousands who fall a sacrifice to the
implicit confidence placed on this class of medicines, unassisted
by other means, especially by the use of Injections. Such,
indeed, has been the mad rage for the purchase of patent drastic
pills and powders, that the stomach and bowels have had their
vital energy entirely destroyed by them, and the necessity for a
daily repetition, as well as additional strength, has been increased
by every repeated dose, until the bowels are rendered callous to
all remedies, and the case at last terminates in irremediable or
fatal disease, frequently in most obstinate constipation, cholera,
violent colic, inflammation, iliac passion, gangrene, and death.
“ Your pills can ne’er be prais’d enough.
Although you charge so dear.
They’ve killed my aunt, though devTish tough.
And I’m her only heir.”
It is the same with purgatives as with stimulants. Stimulants
require to be repeated: if a man gets intoxicated to-day, he
wants a dram to-morrow.’ If a person takes a powerful purge
to-day, he will require another to-morrow, or no satisfactory
relief will be obtained; and most persons are acquainted with
this fact. Independent of this, the stomach and bowels are
kept in a constant state of irritation and uneasiness by
purgatives ; and in weak constitutions, numerous are the diseases


produced by this mode of practice ; some of these are particularly
caused hy aloetic purges, of which I shall presently take further
notice when speaking of the treatment. I allude to piles, fistula ,
and stricture in the rectum ; and why should we punish ourselves
hy aggravating disease, when we possess the ready, convenient,
safe, and efficacious means in our own hands, not only to avert
evil, bat to improve our health P I allude again to the use of
Injections , both to assist the operation of mild aperients, as well
as for the purpose of mollifying and mechanically removing
hardened collections of fceces.
OF INDIGESTION AND COSTIVENESS,
It is not my object to treat of all the diseases connected with
indigestion and costiveness in this small work, but to refer to
those that more immediately require the particular mode of
practice here advocated ; and I shall beg to call the attention of
my readers to that state of constipation, which is caused by an
accumulation of hardened fceces, collecting in the ccecum, or the
first of the large intestines. By reference to the plate it will be
easily perceived, that the office imposed on these parts, particu-
larly at the ascending portion of the colon, must, at all times, be
much more difficult than in any other part of the alimentary
canal; inasmuch as it has to overcome the obstacles which the
gravity of its contents opposes to its action, or, in other words,
having to perform the whole of its task up, instead of down hill;
and that the digested matter which hitherto had been of a softer
texture, has now assumed the character of a more dense compact
structure. This may, in many cases, have been accumulating
perhaps not only for many days, but many weeks, aggravating
the difficulty every day, as the bulk increased and the peristaltic
action of the intestine decreased ; whilst, probably, at the same
time, some small liquid evacuations have been daily passing,
which served only to lull the mind of the patient, make him


careless as to i-emedies, and finally lead him on to an irre-
coverable state of ruined health.
This is one of those cases wherein I shall direct the attention
of my reader to the necessity of using Injections , as, with the
proper apparatus, and a sufficient quantity of warm water
(blood-warm) say from one to two quarts, we possess not only
the means of softening the retained faeces, but by the power of
these instruments, we are enabled gently to excite the muscular
fibre of the gut, by which its energy is restored, and the power
of expulsion again brought into action ; besides which the warm
water acts also as an internal fomentation, and increases the
secretions of the intestinal tube throughout its whole length, by
which any tendency to inflammation and fever is prevented, or
if established may be cured.
This obstructed state of the bowels, as above described,
although not the entire cause of indigestion, is by far the most
frequent, and most to be dreaded, and may generally be known
by the following symptoms : —a confined state of the bowels,
difficulty of breathing, loss of appetite, hardened state of the
abdomen, flatulency, nausea, headache, fever, foetid breath,
Ac., Ac.
Another cause of indigestion arises from the want of attention
to a proper system of dietetics , indulging in too great a quantity
of corned or dried meats (sometimes cooked to hardness) ; eating
too much solid food, without a proportionate quantity of season-
able vegetables, and a sufficiency of mild and proper fluids;
indulging too much in astringent wines; in not adopting a
regular period for meals; and following sedentary occupations,
Ac., Ac. Costiveness (from whatever cause it arises) may be
considered as the forerunner and the foundation of most of those
disorders that render our lives wretched or terminate fatally, an


assertion fully proved by the experiences of past ages, and which
reminds me of an anecdote I formerly heard from Sir Astley
Cooper, whilst I attended his lectures, viz. :
An old Scotch physician, for whom I had a great respect, and
whom I frequently met in consultation, used to say to me, as
as we were about to enter our patient’s room together, “ Weel,
Misther Cooper, we ha’ only twa things to keep in meend, and
they’ll searve us for here and herea’ter; one is auways to ha’
the fear o’ the Laird before our ee’s —that’ll do for herea’ter;
and th’ t’other is to keep our boo’els auways open, and that’ll
do for here.”
Females, in particular, should be careful to attend to those
causes which are likely to derange their digestive organs, as they
have much more to encounter, in the preservation of their
general health, than the other sex, and less constitutional power
to resist the havoc of disease ; and whilst I refer to the habits of
females, I must not omit to mention that a false notion of
delicacy prevails very much in boarding-schools, both as regards
the confinement to study, and the dislike to its being known
that the calls of nature require to be relieved. Owing to this
circumstance, the regular functions of these organs become
interrupted, and in consequence they soon become the seat of
disease.
Nothing, also, contributes more than costiveness (from
whatever cause it proceeds) to the obstruction of the monthly
discharge, upon the regularity of which depends the future
happiness or misery of females. Let me, therefore, warn
mothers, and all those who have the care of young females, to
be at all times acquainted with the daily state of their bowels.
Females in this country are more subject to constipation than
males, owing both to constitutional weakness and to their


employments being of a more sedentary nature, and seldom
united to active bodily exertion. The effects of constipation are
much more injurious to females, owing to the various constitu-
tional changes to which they are subject, particularly at the
menstrual periods, and during pregnancy. At this latter period,
the large bowels are subjected to much derangement, both as to
position and function, from the pressure of the enlarged womb.
Indeed, the whole of the alimentary canal, including the stomach,
is liable to disorder from this cause ; and if the use of injections is
more advantageous in any one case, or at any one particular period,
than at another, it is under these circumstances that I should
most strongly recommend it. I need not attempt to show (what
every mother must be acquainted with) that purgative medicines
at those times generally induce bearing-down pains, aggravate
the costive habit, and are very often the cause of premature
labour. lam borne out in this assertion by the observations I
have been enabled to note during an extensive obstetric practice,
wherein I have had repeated opportunities of recommending the
frequent use of injections to pregnant persons, who were before
subject to miscarriages, and in ten cases out of twelve, they have
afterwards gone their full time, and had living and healthy
children. I am likewise indebted to several of my medical
brethren for a corroboration of these facts.
The commencement and cessation of the menstrual discharge
are periods when females ought particularly to guard against
powerful drastic purges ; a mild aperient plan of treatment is
then necessary, to preserve a regular state of the bowels, and, by
rousing the inactive state of the digestive organs, which so
generally characterises both these periods, to prevent those
intestinal accumulations, which so often prove the foundation of
numerous diseases, and often lead to a fatal termination. And
here, again, in order to guard against such circumstances, I do


most earnestly advise the daily use of a warm-water Injection, or
other more active injection, as the case may indicate.
Without enumerating diseases, I scarcely known of any, even
the most trifling, that do not depend' as much or more, on a
proper action of the bowels, as on anything that can be done
besides towards their alleviation or cure; and in the healing art
this forms the first and most important practice, which no one
can with impunity neglect.
Most of the diseases of females (whether they arise at that
delicate period when first the menses should or do appear, or
during pregnancy, child-birth*, suckling, weaning, or when the
menstrual discharge ceases) have their origin in constipation, or
in some derangement of the digestive organs.
Such, then, being the consequences to which we are rendered
liable, by neglecting the state of our bowels, it becomes an
object of serious reflection, to ascertain the best means of
affording relief, and preventing those sufferings to which we are
all exposed, and which, when such means are neglected, often
lead to serious consequences.
The human species are subject to upwards of twelve hundred
varieties of disease, out of which above one thousand are more or
less caused by some derangement of the digestive organs; let this
fact warn my readers of the danger of neglecting their condition,
and at the same time lead them to a consideration of the most
efficient means of preventing as well as curing disease.
OF THE PREVENTION AND CURB OF INDIGESTION AND COSTIVBNESS.
Let me observe, then, as I noticed in a preceding chapter, that
as the food passes through the alimentary passage in twenty-four
* Ten cases out of twelve of death in child-hed, may he traced to the ill effects of
costiveness during pregnancy, when females are more liable to it than at any other
period of their lives.


hours* in the healthy subject, our duty is to take as much care
as possible to protect our health, by attending to this state of the
bowels, and preserving that regularity of their functions which is
so essential to our present, as well as our future, enjoyment of life.
As, from neglect or from constitutional debility, or some other
cause, we are liable to constipation , and purgatives, alone, not
answering at all times the desired elfect, and not being-
acquainted with any other medicines that will do so, I trust
that the use of Injections will be more and more resorted to
they having been found uniformly to give the safest and most
efficacious relief. This recommendation does not arise from
speculative notions, but from my repeated conviction and
experience of their utility, derived from an extensive practice of
eighteen years , during which time I have had many opportunities of
remarking the great advantages derived from having constant
recourse to them.
The following extract from an oration delivered by Dr. JBurne
before the London Medical Society, will show the important
utility of injections as a means of restoring the alimentary
system to its natural state of activity:—
“ An undue retention of the intestinal excretions is another
source of disorder and,of disease arising out of civilised life. It
is produced by affections of the mind, by indigestion, by inatten-
tion to the calls of nature, by mechanical obstruction, and from
organic disease, which last is frequently excited by the retained
excretions themselves.
“ The undue retention of the excretions takes place in the
large (or lower) intestines; for, until the excrementitious
* If we followed more closely the dictates of nature, by abstaining from pernicious
diet, rose early, went to bed early, and in all respects were regular in good habits the
bowels would be generally regular also in the period of their action ; the deviations from
health may be more frequently attributable to the depravity of our customs than to any
original defect in our constitutions. J


matter arrives here, there is no reason to believe that its propul-
sion is arrested, although it may he less quick at one time than
at another.
“ The undue retention of the excrementitious matter allows of
the absorption of its more liquid parts, which is a source of
great impurity to the blood ; and the excretions, thus rendered
hard and knotty, act, more or less, as extraneous substances, and
by their irritation induce a determination of blood to the intestine
and to the neighbouring viscera, which ultimately ends in
inflammation and organic change of the bowel itself.
“ It has, also, a great effect on the whole system ; it causes a
determination of blood to the head*, which oppresses the brain,
and dejects the mind; it deranges the functions of the stomach,
causes flatulence, and produces a general state of discomfort.
“ In civilised life, then, the causes, which are most generally
and continually operating in the production of disorder and
of disease are affections of the mind, improper diet, and retention
of the intestinal excretions.”
The habitual and indiscriminate use of purgative drugs can
only afford a temporary relief by unnaturally stimulating the
digestive organs, which they exhaust of their secretions, and
thereby render them incapable of performing, even with this
repeated stimulus, their proper functions with that degree of
energy requisite to support the body in health. The great
utility of Injections, or domestic clysters, the use of which has so
long been 'practised in France, and almost every part of the
Continent, is noiv so far established in the opinions of the medical
profession in this country, as generally to form part of the directions
of our most eminent practitioners to their dyspeptic or bilious
patients.
* The many eases of sudden death, by apoplexy, &c. are mainly attributable to
these causes.


An eminent physician, in his work on the means of obviating
and treating the varieties of costiveness, speaking of intestinal
injections, says : “ In no country of Europe is the class of remedies
termed Injections or clysters so seldom used as in England. In
France and Italy this remedy is preferred, in cases of costiveness ,
to the exhibition of purgative medicines by the mouth; and it is
certainly very preferable to those cathartic drugs which disorder the
organs of digestion, or hurry the chyle through the small intestines.
In France, the Injection apparatus is deemed as necessary an
appendage to the toilet as the tooth-brush or water-jug; it being
common in that country for males and females to use an injection
every forenoon and the same author adds : “ It has been said,
and perhaps with truth, that the females of France are more
healthy than those of Great Britain , which is attributed by a late
writer to their keeping ‘ the intestinal canal in a regular state by
the occasional and almost daily exhibition of a domestic Injection .’ ”
The following observations are from the pen of the celebrated
Dr. Baillie : —“ Injections do not appear in this country to he so
highly appreciated as they deserve , although on the Continent their
advantages are extensively acknowledged, and they constitute no
trifling part of the practice of medical men. It is remarkable that
they are not in more general use, when we reflect how numerous
are the complaints produced by a confined state of the bowels,
and how quickly they are relieved by a removal of that came.
The occasional employment of injections is certainly the most
convenient and comfortable way of obviating so frequent a
source of misery and pain ; and as injections neither produce
temporary constitutional disarrangement, nor render the habit
so accustomed to their use that they may not be at any time
discontinued, the same objections cannot be urged against their
employment which are so often made to other remedies ; whilst
the simplicity of their formation, and the facility with which


they can at all times be had recourse to, are arguments in favour
of their adoption. In a medical sense they are invaluable:
during the attack of inflammatory disorders, and various other
complaints to which the bowels are subject, when the stomach
rejects medicines of every kind, and when all other remedies
prove quite ineffectual, how often do we find a common injection
of the most simple kind produce the most salutary results*, and
by unloading the lower bowels, by clearing a passage for
flatulent collections, and by acting as a kind of internal fomenta-
tion to the whole disordered canal, suspend the most distressing
irritation, and produce tranquility and rest.
“In a domestic point of view they are not much less impor-
tant ; and I speak with confidence when I state that in all the
cases of hemorrhoids or piles, in which I have been consulted,
and of fistula, for which it has been necessary to operate for
their cure, I scarcely remember one which could not be ascribed
to a long and habitual neglect of the bowels.”
By the injection of warm water f merely, much good may be
done in regulating the bowels of those persons who are disposed
to costiveness ; and I can with confidence affirm, that if this plan
is commenced in the early stage of this and other disorders, and
persevered in daily , gradually increasing the quantity of the fluid,
it will, in nineteen cases out of twenty, completely succeed. If,
from the colour of the evacuations, or from any other symptom,
it is discovered that the cause of the disease is in the stomach or
small intestines, and the stomach is too weak or irritable to receive
aperient or other medicines, such medicines, in stronger doses,
* Sir Astley Cooper, in his lectures, used to say, that in addition to mild aperients
occasionally administered, “ the use of injections, and the warm hath, are the best means
of restoring the secretions of the digestive organs.”
t This system of medicine is of more importance than is generally imagined. Clysters
serve not only to evacuate the contents of the belly, but also to convey very active medi-
cines into the system; opium, for example, may be administered in this way, when it will
not sit upon the stomach, and also in larger doses than at any time it can be taken by the
mouth.—Dr. Buchan's Domestic Medicine.


will have same effect, to a certain degree, if given in warm water
by way of enema, as when taken into the stomach; which effect
is produced chiefly by means of the absorbents mentioned before,
as is proved by many actual experiments. Besides which, if a
sufficient quantity of fluid is thrown into the lower bowels, they
will become so distended that the valve of the ccecum, alluded to
before, will be thrown out of its usual form, and allow water to
be forced into the small intestines. See extract from Dr. Arnott’s
“Elements of Physic,” where, speaking of the stomach-pump, he
says, “Useful as the pump may prove upon occasions, in evac-
uating the stomach, its office of injecting the enema is still more
important, and recent experience seems to shew that such
injection may become a remedy of more extensive utility than
has yet been suspected.
“ From an erroneous opinion, that what has been called the
valve of the caecum, acts as a perfect valve, allowing of the passage
downwards only, few practitioners have ventured to order much
liquid to be injected, for fear of overstretching the lower part of
the intestines ; and the possibility of thus relieving by injection,
disease situated above the supposed valve, has scarcely been
contemplated. It is now ascertained, however, that
fluids may be safely thrown in, even till they reach the
Stomach. Perhaps few, if any, cases of obstruction of the
bowels would resist the force of penetrating water, so that a
mechanical remedy of certain effect may, in many cases, be sub-
si ituted for the drastic purgatives and pernicious bleedings now
used, and often in vain. From what has been said above of the
abdomen and intestinal canal, it appears that an injection tends
to spread itself with singular uniformity over the whole. This
tendency may be rendered obvious to sight, by throwing a sheep’s
intestine, recently extracted, into a bucket of water, and then
pumping water in at one end —a stream will issue strongly at


the other end, although several feet distant, almost immediately,
and without any immediate part having become very sensibly tense
—of course in the living body, in cases of spasm or obstruction,
the liquid must he thrown in against resistance very gradually.
That case is called intussusception of the bowel, in which an
upper portion falls, or is received into a portion below, as one
part of the finger of a glove may be received into another part—
and the receiving portion of the bowel, mistaking the received
for descending food, holds it fast. This occurrence forms a
complete obstruction, and has generally proved fatal. Many
infants with irritable bowels die of it. Now a copious enema,
such as we have described above, is almost a certain cure for this
affection. The liquid advances until it reaches the part where
the portion of gut has been swallowed by the the gut below ;
and as it cannot pass without pushing the intus-suscepted portion
back to liberty, it effects a cure.”
I may now refer to the danger w r e are exposed to, either from
improper treatment, or from neglecting the state of the bowels,
and which I cannot perhaps better exemplify than by mentioning
the case of a female whom I was called to examine after death,
some years ago, during my practice in Westminster. This female
had died in child-birth, from some unknown cause, when, to the
no small surprise of myself and assistants, we discovered the
ccecum distended to more than three times its usual size. On
dividing its coats, together with those of the ascending portion
of the colon , we found the whole of the former, with about one-
third of the latter, filled up with a hard clay-like substance,
firmer in texture than any soil or earth of the heaviest, and most
compact nature I ever remember to have seen. The weight of
the substance was seven pounds and three quarters ; and, from
its general appearance, I should suppose had been collecting for
many months, if not years ; and still, strange to say, from all


that I could learn of the relatives of this person, no suspicion of
anything of the kind was ever entertained, nor had she ever
been known to complain of irregularity. A sort of furrow or
depression existed on one side of this mass, by which the thinner
excrements were permitted to pass. The cause of her death was
from mortification of the parts, which, no doubt, had been
occasioned by inflammation, induced by additional excitement
during the pains of labour.
I think no other remark is required on this case, than that this
patient had either totally neglected the state of her bowels, or
that improper or inefficient means of relief had been resorted to.
And whilst I speak of improper means, I wish to be understood
as referring to an indiscriminate use of purgative medicines,
without having the recommendation of a medical man ; one
instance only of which I shall relate.
A woman, a few years ago, died in one of the Borough Hospitals,
she had been confined there for several months, complaining of
severe and constant pain in or about the stomach, with a con-
siderable hardness and enlargement on the upper part of the
abdomen ; her bowels were always much confined, and, without
the aid of castor oil, no motions could be procured for a week or
ten days, or more, at a time : and this had been her state for
some years. On examination of the body after death, the stomach
was found to contain a large compact ball, in circumference
nearly eighteen inches, which was so firm that it was difficult to
divide it with a saw, and, from its peculiar colour and appearance,
more difficult to determine its precise nature. On conversing
with some of her relations, it was ascertained that the patient,
who had always been of a costive habit, had accustomed herself
almost every morning, to take a quantity of magnesia in her tea,
considering this to be the mildest and most innocent purgative


medicine. And who would blame her? who would say that
this could do harm ? These questions I will presently answer ;
hut I must first observe, that all purgative medicines are not
suitable for the relief of all intestinal or stomach complaints;
for instance, aloes have very little effect on the stomach or small
intestines, but irritate particularly the lower bowels, and are
frequently the cause of piles; rhubarb exerts its influence chiefly
on the stomach; preparations of mercury have a specific action
on the liver, etc., etc.; and yet they all purge, and so will a
roasted apple or a French prune ; and if the only object is to
purge, either of the two latter would answer the purpose as well
as the former, or any other perhaps of a hundred varieties more,
each exerting their influence over different organs in different
Avays *. It should also be recollected, that medicines act differ-
ently on the same persons, according to the dose administered :
for instance, ipecacuanha , in \ T ery minute doses, acts as a sudorific;
in large doses, as an emetic; antimonial medicines the same.
Rhubarb , in small doses, acts as a stomachic ; in larger doses as
a purgati\ r e. Magnesia , combined with lemon-juice, vinegar, or
acids of any kind, acts as a brisk aperient; but when taken alone,
unless a sufficient quantity of acidulated matter exists in the
stomach at the time, it becomes an absorbent. This was the case
Avith the patient mentioned above ; and the magnesia , instead of
purging, collected from day to day in her stomach with the
natural slime and moisture of its coats, which, acting like glue,
combined it together, till it increased to the enormous size here
spoken of, and ultimately caused her death.
Thus I have shown that unnatural accumulations occur both
in the stomach and intestines, and that they both arise either
* Hence the advantages of living in a country abounding with men well educated in
medical science, who are at all times at command, and who are able to discriminate by
external symptoms, where and what is the precise nature of the disease, and which are
the suitable medicines for its relief.


from neglect or mismanagement*. Not that hardened substances
such as I have mentioned, often form in the stomach or bowels ;
on the contrary, I believe that they are of rare occurrence. I
only refer to the above instance to show what injurious con-
sequences may, and sometimes do, arise from the too common
practice of relying for relief on what are termed common, innocent,
mild, and safe remedies f.
“ I was well—
Wished to be better —
Took physic—and died.’ 5
Epitaph on an Italian Count.
But collections of hardened faeces in the large intestines, such
as I before detailed, are unhappily met with in the daily walk of
every medical practitioner ; and it is time that the attention of
the profession, as well as of every individual, should be aroused to
seek relief by those means that are most likely to succeed in
preventing or curing these maladies.
Before I enter on the mode of treatment I intend to recommend
in cases of this nature, it will be proper to observe, that the colon
(independent of the obstruction arising from its natural ascension
on the right side) is divided into several chambers by means of
transverse bands, each of which forms a ready receptacle for the
lodgment of excrementitious matters, and which, in the absence
of sufficient 'peristaltic power, often becomes much loaded, and
permits the fluid, or thinner portions which have been stimulated
by the impetus of purging doses, to pass on without interfering
with these retentions.
* Man is a piece of machinery of the most complex nature, abounding in innumerable
intricate divisions, each depending on the other for the uniformity of its action ; and if
the healthy function of any one part is imperfect, in consequence of neglect or mis-
management, the whole must suffer.
f Innocent and safe are dangerous terms, as applied to physic. Remember that
judgment is necessary to determine why they are so; their appearance, or general
character might mislead you.


Again, with regard to the accumulation of faeces in the large
intestines, I remember the case of Miss P., a highly respected
lady,who was placed under my care in Monmouthshire, the subject
of diseases of the most complicated and distressing nature. She
had been confined to her bed for five or six years, and had been
attended, during that period, by men of the highest medical
character. On my first visit to her, I made every inquiry into
her sufferings ; and amongst the many that were described, my
attention was directed to a large painful swelling, somewhat of
an oblong form, at the lower part of the right side of the abdomen,
and which had been described to her as a rupture. I had, how-
ever every doubt of this; and on learning further that no figured
motions had been passed for a long time, I believed that she had
stricture of the rectum , which had caused a collection of faeces,
and with this view I commenced the practice of administering
twice every day an injection of warm water, with a small portion
of olive oil in it, beginning with half a pint, and gradually in-
creasing the quantity, till, after a few weeks, I was enabled, by
means of the newly-invented apparatus, to throw up as much
as three or four quarts at a time, and it was not until I
could inject about three quarts, that the hardened matter began
to break down and come away piecemeal, day by day, the swelling
and pain at the same time gradually diminishing, the parts
becoming soft and natural, and the motions assuming a healthy
appearance. Notwithstanding the favourable change in this
particular, the lady fell a victim to other maladies affecting the
vital organs, from the pain of which, together with long-protracted
confinement, general wasting of the body, loss of appetite, etc.,
she ultimately sunk. I cannot finish the relation of this case
without recurring to the fact, that remarkable delicacy had
characterized this lady from dier earliest years, and that she
would not allow it to be known, even to her own sex, that her
bowels required relief, and not even her own mother was ever


permitted to be acquainted with those facts. I have no hesitation
in affirming, that all her diseases in subsequent life, as well as
her untimely and lamented death, entirely originated in neglecting
the state of her bowels.
In cases of the above kind, where much tumefaction and
tenderness are present, it will be proper to have recourse to warm
fomentations with poppies and chamomile flowers; and, if much
pain be felt, I should advise the application of from fifteen to
twenty leeches on the part, again applying the warm fomentation
on their falling off : this practice, combined with the use of warm
Injections, and repeated small doses of castor oil, will be found to
be the most advantageous.
Independent, likewise, of the injury sustained by the bowel
itself in consequence of these unnatural collections, I must
remind my reader of the mischief they impart to the neighbour-
ing organs, especially the liver, kidneys, small intestines, stomach ,
bladder, uterus, great blood vessels, etc. by occasioning pressure on
those parts, interrupting the circulation, impeding the passages,
producing irregular breathing’, etc.; indeed, it would be impos-
sible to enumerate all the evils and all the diseases, which,
directly or indirectly, proceed from indigestion and retention of
f cecal matters in the bowels; nor shall Igo too far, if I affirm that
seven-eighths of the diseases to which these organs are liable (inde-
pendent of those produced by accident) depend upon these causes.
One more noxious condition arising from inattention to the
bowels which I shall allude to, is the foetid and morbid state of
the long-retained substances, the particles of which are taken up
by the absorbent vessels and carried into the blood, proving
highly detrimental to the frame, and injurious in all stages of
illness, particularly in fever, where everything that is pure and
free from putrescency is of vital import.


I shall next inquire of my reader, how he is to know, or by
what means can he determine, as to the healthy state of the
•digestive organs P and I reply for him, that as the wheels of a
time-piece are necessarily depending one on the other in their
action, in order to effect their combined result on the face or
dial; so are the abdominal viscera one part depending on another,
and influencing every part of the human frame. It is thus
scarcely possible for any one part to be materially affected,
without some deviation from health resulting from it, either by
pains or aches, want of rest, falling off of the appetite, pale or
flushed countenance, foetid breath, or more than naturally foetid
evacuations ; weariness, drowsiness, dryness, or unusual moisture
of the skin; cutaneous eruptions; cold chills, cold feet, flatulence,
headache, nausea, dimness of sight, unusual thirst, dry and white
tongue, quick pulse ; with many other symptoms that always
clearly indicate bodily disorder. Besides these, much is to be
learned from the colour, consistence, odour, and quantity of the
motions, which are soon known by an observing person.
With regard to the quantity of the fcecal discharge, little can
be said with certainty, as this must depend on a great variety of
circumstances ; in the first place, on the quantity of food con-
sumed, whether most of vegetable or animal; next, fts to the
exercise taken, for on the proportion of this generally depends
the quantity of vapour or perspiration that is lost daily, and
which being- supplied by the food and drink, must necessarily
diminish more or less the bulk of that which is to pass off by
stool. It must depend also on the state of digestion, as to what
part or parts shall be kept back, from the want of peristaltic
power of the bowels, or from other causes. Then, as to the
colour, much has been said on this subject, more than can be
depended on ; for although it is generally a useful guide, still it
is likely to lead us into error, as the colour depends very much


on the nature of the food we take, the age of the patient, and
the greater or less quantity of bile mixed up with it. An.
eminent lecturer in the Borough Hospitals used to observe that
the stools should be as yellow as a guinea; ” but a dose of
rhubarb will turn them yellow, and a dose of aloes or steel will
generally turn them black. So that if we entirely depend on
the colour, we may be misled, and be induced to resort to
improper treatment.
Again, as to the quantity evacuated, it will be well to keep in
mind that only one-fifth of the food (by weight) that we take,
passes off by stool —the larger part by sensible and insensible
perspiration. I state these facts in order that my readers may
not be searching for more than they can find, nor be led into*
disappointment or perplexity.
The difficulties then that arise (to enable persons uneducated
in medicine to judge rightly of their own state) should warn
them of the danger of trusting too much to their own opinions ;■
at least, those who exercise a system of medicine on themselves,
without the opinion of a professional man, should remember
“that a little learning is a dangerous thing.” Rather let your
practice be of that safe kind, that shall leave you no consequences
to dread. lam confident the recommendations I so earnest! v
give, of depending on simple injections, is the best domestic"
practice, it removes so many diseases without the possibility of
injury; for by them disease is not only prevented, but cleanliness’
promoted, and the necessity of disagreeable medicines much lesn
called for.
OF THE USE OF INJECTIONS IN VARIOUS DISEASES.
It will now be my object to point out some of the diseases for
the relief and cure of which I recommend the use of the
apparatus for Injections ; and first, those that require the injec-
tion of warm water only, and which are likely to be alleviated.


by this simple means, without the use of medicines ; whilst at
the same time, an aggravated case of any of these diseases may
require medicated injections , or other general treatment under
the advice of a professional man.
Acidity of the stomach.
Acute rheumatism.
After pains.
Asthma.
After intoxication.
After menstruation.
Bilious complaints.
Bilious colic.
Cholera morbus.
Cessation of the menses.
Chronic rheumatism.
Clap.
Constipation.
Consumption.
Convulsions,
~ of infants.
~ of pregnant women
~ after childbirth.
Corpulency
Costiveness,
~ during pregnancy.
Cramp in the stomach.
Dilirium.
Dysentery.
~ during tedious or protracted
Dilirium after childbirth.
labour.
Dentition.
Difficulty of breathing.


Difficulty in passing water.
Dry gripes.
Epilepsy.
Fever ; with a view to remove putrescent matter.
Fistula and piles.
Flatulence.
Fatigue of body or mind.
Flatulent colic.
Gall stones.
Gripes of infants during dentition.
Getting wet in the feet.
Gleet.
Gout.
Gravel.
Green sickness.
Headache.
Habitual costiveness, without other apparent disease.
Heartburn.
Hectic fever.
Hysterics.
Iliac passion.
Inflammation of any of the organs of the chest or abdomen.
Irritation of the rectum.
Itching about the anus.
Indigestion.
Inflammation of the brain
Inflammatory sore throat.
Influenza.
Insanity.
Intros u seep tion of the bowels.
Irregular menstruation.
Jaundice.
Lumbago.
.Malignant fever.
~ sore throat.
Milk fever.
Miscarriage.
Nervous diseases.
Obstruction of the bowels.
~ of the menses.
Pain in the stomach.
~ head.
„ during pregnancy.


Palpitation of the heart.
Painful menstruation.
Piles.
~ during pregnancy.
Pregnancy.
Putrid fever.
~ sore throat.
Rheumatic gout.
Rheumatism.
Rupture.
Retention of urine.
Sciatica.
Stoppage of the discharge after delivery.
Stone in the bladder or kidneys, producing inflammation.
Strangury.
Stone in the ureter.
Spasmodic affections.
Scalding of the urine.
Stricture in the rectum.
~ ~ urethra.
~ ~ oesophagus.
Suppression of the menses.
Swelled testicle.
Typhus fever.
To those of sedentary habits, who are generally costive.
Ulcerated sore throat.
Worms.
The administration of cold water is, I think, a dangerous
practice, as the parts are totally unaccustomed to the sudden
change of temperature it causes, although I admit the utility of
it on certain occasions, as in some cases of haemorrhoidal and
other complaints; but as this practice should be under the
entire management of a medical man, I shall not here introduce
or recommend it.
I shall now proceed to instruct my readers more particularly
in the application of the newly-invented Injection apparatus,
giving first some general hints that will be found useful.
I have already stated that vast accumulations of fasces will, in
some cases, collect in the ccecum and colon ; and as they become
too hard to be affected by purgative medicines, and are too much


out of our reach to use any mechanical means of removing them
(as we sometimes have done when they are in the rectum instead
of the colon), we have no choice left us but that which happens
to be the best—namely, to throw up a sufficient quantity of
warm fluid to counteract the spasm of the bowel, render the
collections soft, extend the place of their confinement, break
down their structure, stimulate the inactive intestine, renew its
peristaltic power, and open a free canal for their discharge— and
this is to he done, not with a small quantity , as a joint or a pint
and a half, —if so, the old pipe and bladder would answer the
purpose; hut, in these dangerous cases it must he injected in
quantities amounting to from one to two quarts (which can be best
effected by the Clysma-duct), it having a long way to travel and
a large space to fill, and great difficulties to overcome. I have
here alluded to extreme cases. As these decrease in importance
and magnitude, so will the remedies employed for their relief
decrease in like proportion; and as there is no difficulty in
managing every-day cases by gently relaxing the bowels, so all
intermediate ones will derive their benefit from the knowledge
we possess with regard to the worst as well as the best cases.
It is customary in France to use an Injection after dinner ; and a
lady in that country would he considered as indelicate were it
hnown that she had omitted this practice, English lady would
he thought dirty were she to come down to breakfast without
cleaning her teeth or her nails. But as far as it relates to health,
which is all that I have to do with, I recommend its use the first
thing after breakfast, which is certainly the period when nature
appears to require this salutary relief; which I consider to arise
partly in consequence of the rest afforded to the stomach during
the night, that when the fresh stimulus of breakfast is applied
to it, it imparts its renewed action to the smaller intestines, and
they again to the larger, till the required purpose is fulfilled.
With regard to females in a pregnant state, I should generally
advise that in using an Injection they place themselves in a
recumbent position, which is a preferable one, on account of the
pressure of the womb on the lower part of the descending colon
or sigmoid flexure; and also to empty the bladder before they
administer the Injection.
The sensations felt by the patient at the time of injection are
generally the same as those we feel when first the action of
purging medicine begins, and is conclusive evidence that relief
will follow.


Under these circumstances, no system of relief is so certainly
effectual, or so safe as the occasional use of an Injection; and
there are no cases wherein the use of purgative medicines are so
mischievous.
Nothing can he more simple or easy than the application of
an Injection ; it is entirely unattended with pain or inconvenience
of any kind, and a single trial of it has in every instance within
the author’s observation led persons to be anxious for a repetition,
as frequently as their case required it.
Where persons are in the daily practice of using Injections,
merely to assist a somewhat sluggish digestio?i, I should also
recommend them to lake two or three grains of blue-pill, once or
twice a week, at bedtime ; and, in order to increase their purga-
tive action, to add to it occasionally about three grains of the
compound extract of rolocynth. Those who suffer from dyspeptic
complaints, will find that in most cases they may rely on this
practice, without the aid of useless or nauseous medicines; at
the same time I wish my readers to understand that there are
varieties of symptoms depending on different constitutional
causes, where perhaps the simple practice 1 have here described
would require certain modifications which could only be effected
under the superintendence of a professional man. To particularise
these would be impossible in a work so limited as this ; but it is
a happiness to know that medical science keeps pace with the
many other rapid improvements of this intellectual age, and the
author feels pleasure in bearing testimony to several recent
important discoveries and improvements in the healing art for
the cure of these complaints, and in observing that there are
now but few exceptions to the general remark, “ That, if properly
treated, there is a remedy for every disease; ” but in stating
this, he would more particularly allude to diseases occasioned
by indigestion and costiveness, the proper treatment of which
must depend on a long and extensive experience, derived from a
complete anatomical knowledge of the parts more immediately
engaged in the functions of the important processes of digestion.
DESCRIPTION OF THE APPARATUSES FOR INJECTIONS RECOMMENDED
BY THE AUTHOR.
The injecting syringes made by many of the manufacturers are
much too small, as they only hold half an ounce, or one-third part
of a common wine glass, which I have observed in many of my
patients, to teaze and tire them, from the time it takes to throw up


a sufficient quantity. A better syringe, which I invented will
hold about two ounces, which is seldom found too much for each
descent of the piston. At the lower part of the side of the
syringe is attached a flexible tube, about a foot in length, with
an ivory pipe at the other end to be introduced into the anus , and
which may be retained there by the patient sitting down upon it,
on a chair; then placing a stool between the legs of the patient,
about four inches lower than the chair on which the patient sits,
put on it a large wash-hand basin, which is to contain the pro-
posed liquid for injection ; put the lower open end of the syringe
into this fluid, and commence the process of pumping.
The plate on page 6 is a good representation of a syringe , and
of the manner of using it, but the Glysma-duct , next described,
is altogether preferable, inasmuch as it is a self-acting apparatus,
and, therefore, requires no exertion on the part of the patient,
independent of which its action is so gentle that no pain or other
inconvenience can attend its use.
This other more simple apparatus, which I recommend, and
which I have improved from one lately introduced in practice
at Paris, I have called the flexible Glysma-duct. It is more
simple and safe in its operation than any apparatus hitherto
employed, and is admirably adapted for females, both because
it is self-acting, and also that it is used without the slightest
appearance of indelicacy (which is not the case with syringes);
it is, therefore, not only peculiarly well adapted for the adminis-
tration of injections in diseases of the bowels, but also in
affections of the womb. It consists of a long, tapering, India
rubber water-proof funnel or hose, of about four feet in length
four inches in diameter at its upper extremity, and about half
an inch only at the lower end, where it is attached to a tube
supplied with a cock, the extremity of which tube is adapted
for introduction , as in the instrument already described. When
an injection is to be administered, the fluid is to be poured
into the long funnel-shaped part of the apparatus, having
previously taken care that the stopcock is turned, so as to
prevent its running out at the opposite extremity. When thus
filled to within four inches of the top, the hose is to be hung on
a hook or nail placed in a convenient part of the wall of
the room, at such a height that the lower end of the tube
shall reach to within one inch of the floor. The tube may be
now introduced, and the patient may sit, or lie down, when the
stopcock being turned, the fluid passes into the bowels fey its


own gravitation. By this apparatus, an injection, whether in
affections of the stomach or bowels, or in diseases of the womb,
may he thus used, either in a sitting, lying, or standing posture,
without the least difficulty to the patient, or exposure of the
person, whether it be used by the patient herself, or administered
by another individual.
(Dr. Jukes here gives fifty-eight receipts for medical injects,
most of which medical men are acquainted with).
Having said thus much on the benefit to be derived from the
use of simple warm water injections for the prevention of some
diseases, and the cure of others, and given some directions for
the management of diseases of a more complicated nature, by
the injection of medicated fluids, I must now remind my readers,
that health cannot depend alone on the employment of these
means, any more than on the more usual practice of physic,
even under the advice of the most eminent physicians. Remem-
ber that there are other agents to be called in aid, which I
believe to be of vital importance: I allude to air, exercise, sleep,
clothing, regular quantity and good quality of food and drink, with
medical assistance and advice, &c., &c. (He then goes on to
describe these).
The last subject to which I shall refer is, that, although the
leading object of this work is avowedly to recommend the use of
injections of warm water for the prevention of simple, and
frequently for the cure of more obstinate diseases, and the use
occasionally of some medicated injections, yet, when disease
assumes a violent character, our own domestic judgment ought
never to be relied on ; and, in a country where every opportunity
is afforded for the promotion of medical science, no difficulty
can ever prevent the calling to our aid the judgment of men
who are the ornaments of their profession and of society; and
to them only can we look with confidence in cases of difficulty
and danger. I trust that the rules which I have laid down,
with the hints that accompany them, will, in some measure,
assist in detering the public from the dangerous practice of
trusting to empirics—of spending their property and risking
their lives, by flying for relief to the advertised nostrums of
the day.
Let it be remembered that a proper attention to the condition
of the digestive organs is of primary consequence in every stage
of life. Hot only will disease be prevented by it, but in almost


every malady to which we are liable, even of the mildest and
most simple nature, the cure must depend more on this than on
any other measure.
If the functions of the bowels be properly attended to, so as
to keep them regularly open at least once in every twenty-four
hours, I assert, that with very few exceptions, exclusive of those
from accidents, perfect health may be relied on. And here
allow me to add, that regularity with regard to the hour at
which nature should be relieved, is of more consequence than is
generally supposed. Let the individual fix on a stated time
(I have before said that immediately after breakfast is the
period most convenient, as well as the best, in all respects); and
whether he has an inclination or not, let him urge and encourage
an action of the bowels, by which attempts, in a short time
(such is the effect of habit on the system) relief will always be
obtained.
In order that the digestive organs may perform their offices
with the greatest advantage, it is necessary that they have not
too much to do at once, remembering, that a little well done, is
better than a great deal badly done; in short, never overload
the stomach, but rather leave the table with some degree of
appetite; this, by custom, will be found infinitely more agree-
able than the disgusting habit of gorging till ready to burst.
For whatever is taken into the stomach beyond that what is
convenient, is hurtful, inasmuch as there is only a sufficient
quantity of the dissolving fluid, called gastric juice, for the
natural and proper digestion of just as much nutriment (and no
more) as is required for supporting our existence; all beyond
this becomes, in consequence of the heat and moisture of the
stomach, soon decomposed and putrid; in which state it is
taken up into the system, and thus lays the foundation of
innumerable diseases, such as apoplexy and gout. To medical
men, it is evident that they are produced by the causes I have
stated, and leave no doubt but that a vast number more persons
die from excess in eating than are annually killed by the vice
of intoxication.
Next in importance to quantity is the quality of nutriment,
both as regards purity* and simplicity, which the experience of
•The Egyptian remedies for diseases produced by impure or foul diet, consisted in
abstinence, vomits and injection s. —Diodorus Siculus, historian of Egypt fwho was born
exactly 1900 years ago,—E.W.C.]


ages fully proves; but should additional evidence be necessary
to maintain this fact, we have only to notice the squalid,
emaciated, or else bloated, countenances of the rich, who indulge
in luxuries, and compare them with those persons whose walk
in life is a little below mediocrity. Tf the stomach were made
-of iron or brass, or even silver and gold, or any other hard
metal, instead of the durable substance of which the all-wise
Creator has constructed it, such materials would not last as
many days as it now does years of our natural life. I say it
would be impossible for these substances to be preserved under
the application of such chemical decompositions and unnatural
-combinations as those with which our stomachs are generally
supplied—as, first an acid, then an alkali, now a bitter, then a
sweet, now a dram, then an ice, now hot soup or burning tea,
then cold beer or water, &c. —with everything the ingenuity of
a foreign cook can invent, to fill the stomach with heterogeneous
masses of all that is unwholesome and opposed to common sense
are causes sufficient to account for the bulk of those infirmi-
ties to which we are subject.
The quality of food should be as simple as possible, on account
of the chemical changes it has to undergo in the stomach , and its
being more assimilated with other matters previously received,
as well also as its being generally better adapted to the powers
of a weak stomach. If chemical decomposition takes place, the
result will often be that the patient is troubled with sour
eructations ; if the food is not of an assimilating nature , only a
part of the contents of the somach will be rendered fit for chyle,
while the remaining portion will pass off thrqugh the intestines
in an indigested state, without affording the least nourishment,
thus imposing on the organs an useless and hurtful labour; and
if the food is of a tough unyielding disposition, the muscular tone
of the stomach will be impaired in its triturating process.
Having alluded to the ill consequences of an overloaded
stomach, as well as to the injury it is likely to sustain from food
of an irritating and pernicious quality, I yet do not wish to be
understood as recommending that at every meal we should be
provided with scales and weights for ascertaining the exact
number of ounces to be swallowed, nor a graduated measure for
dividing our beverage into potions ; this would be inconsistent,
as every one knows that the cravings of the stomach are con-
tinually varying in proportion to the bodily or mental exercise,


sleep, changes of air or wind, perspiration, occupations, or state
of digestion, bo which are subjected, and that necessarily
nature must require more support at one time than at another,
Neither do I urge that every meal should be so simplified as to
consist of a repetition from day to day of one particular kind of
food —mutton ! mutton ! —always ; on the contrary, a well-
selected variety of mild, nutritious, digestible food, both of the
■animal and vegetable kind, will enable us to effect that change'
which is both pleasant to the palate and essential for the pre-
servation of health and prolongation of life.
It is impossible to lay down a definite system of diet, it is a-
question involved in much perplexity, and has ever been a
subject for controversial writers; an organ like the stomach ,
which has been known to digest brass buttons, pins, and even
clasp-knives, while others, on the contrary, have suffered the
most serious inconvenience by the mere smell of something
offensive, or the reception of a trifling quantity of food of
apparently the most simple kind, appears so inconsistent in the
execution of its functions, as almost to defy any attempt at
prescribed rules for diet, —and when again we hear that every
thing that moves on earth, air, or sea, even man himself, i»
devoured by man, the catalogue is so swelled that we are almost
compelled to conclude, that what appears in general to sit easy
and digest freely, is the food that we should take. The English
appear to us to live the best; the French system of diet is
different, and of course they think their’s the best. I remember,
on one occasion, when dining at a restaurateur, in the Palais-
Royal, that I counted the variety of articles that composed the
bill of fare that was presented to me by the waiter, which was
four feet in length, and contained a list of four hundred and
fifty-seven articles. The following extract from the Calcutta
Literary Gazette will show the various tastes of different nations
as well.
“ In some valleys of the Alps, the rearing of snails is carried
on as a trade, and in the month of September they are sent
down the Danube to Vienna and Hungary, where they are sold
as an article of luxurious food. In South America nothing in
the shape of life comes wrong to them—they eat serpents,
lizards, and ounces ; and Humboldt has seen children drag
enormous centipedes out of their holes, and cranch them up.
At Emeraldi their delicate morceau is a roasted monkey*


Puppies, on the Missouri and Mississippi, are choice food.
Horse-flesh in Arabia; elephants’ flesh in India ; camels’ flesh
in Egypt, The Pariahs of Hindostan contend for putrid carrion
with dogs, vultures, and kites. The Chinese devour cats, dogs,
rats, and serpents; hears’ paws, birds’ nests, and sea-shy are
dainty hits. The inhabitants of Cochin China prefer rotten eggs
to fresh. The Tonquinese and inhabitants of Madagascar prefer
locusts to the finest fish. In Australia a good fat gull would be
preferred to everything else; and in the West Indies a large
caterpillar, found on the palm, is esteemed a luxury; while the
edible nests of the Java swallow are so rich a dainty, that the
ingredients of the dish will cost £ls. The quantity of frogs
seen in the markets of the Continent is immense. At Terracina
the host asks his guest whether he prefers the eel of the hedge
or that of the river. The astronomer De la Lande was remark-
ably fond of spiders. Great Britain even transcends her
continental neighbours. The ‘ braxy ’of Scotland is putrid
mutton, the sheep having died of the rot; game and venison is
seldom relished till it is ‘ high,’ or, in honest language, till it is
a mass of putrefaction, disengaging, in abundance, one of the
most septic poisons the chemist knows of; in numerous cases it
is a mass of life and motion, the offspring of putridity. Pigs are
still whipped to death ; lobsters are boiled alive ; cod are
crimped; eels are skinned, writhing in agony; hares are hunted
to death; and white veal is the greatest luxury.”
In a clever little book, entitled “ Simplicity of Health,” page
138, we read as follows :
£ " On examining the domestic history of those who attained to
extreme old age, we find that they gave themselves little trouble
about such matters. They mostly ate and drank indiscriminately
of what they knew was not decidedly unwholesome, and which did
not particularly disagree with their constitution (a knowledge
that requires neither learning nor science), rose early, were of
active and exercising habits, temperate and sober from choice,
and were not afraid to be overtaken by a shower, when
unprovided with a great coat or umbrella.”
Let it not be supposed that, by showing the importance of
solid food for our support, I mean that animal matter should
form the larger portion of our aliment; on the contrary, lam of
opinion that we all indulge too much in this sort of food, and
that it would be better for us individually, and far better for
society in general, were we to use more vegetables in our diet.


Meat is highly stimulating and always produces a temporary
fever, which every person is acquainted with, who observes the
sparkling eye and flushed cheek produced after flesh meals; by
which (as in all inflammatory fevers) the energy of the system
must he destroyed by a continued and excessive demand on its
vital fluids. Again, it would appear by analogy, that animal
food in too great proportions, by its excessive stimulating
qualities, has also a tendency to brutalize our dispositions and
habits, by producing the most injurious effects on the mind,
whereby we are less mild, gentle, and affectionate one to the
other. The Tartars live chiefly on meat, and are described as a
most brutal, savage, cruel, and vicious set of brigands. On the
contrary, the Hindoos live solely on vegetables, and are character-
ized as a harmless, meek, and amiable people. I might also
adduce that all ferocious beasts and birds are carnivorous ; for
instance, the lion, tiger, wolf, fox, eagle, hawk, etc., while the
tamer kind, such as the cow, sheep, hare, rabbit, pheasant, dove,
etc., are graminivorous. A story is told of a person who trained
up a tiger to follow him about like a dog, and that he was in all
respects as familiar and domesticated, which he had been able
to effect by entirely feeding him on vegetable food; that one day
he was taking his accustomed walks in the fields, when, happen-
ing to scratch his finger with a thorn, and allowing the animal
to lick the blood, he immediately sprang on him and tore him
to pieces.
We have lately had an opportunity of observing in an exhibition
at Drury-Lane Theatre, that Monsieur Martin, by feeding lions
entirely on vegetables, is as familiar with them as we are with a
domestic cat.
A further proof that the aliment contained in vegetable matter
is suitable food for carnivorous animals, is given in a splendid
work lately published, entitled “The Gardens and Menagerie of
the Zoological Society Delineated.”
The Author says, speaking of bears that had been confined in
the pits of Berne, and others in the Menagerie of the Jardin des
Plantes at Paris, the former for thirty-one years, the latter for
forty-seven ; in both establishments their only food consisted of
bread, occasionally varied by the addition of fruits and vege-
tables. —At Berne, in particular by a regulation of the police, all
the unripe fruit that was brought to market was ordered to be
given to the bears. They were never allowed to taste of flesh; and


their thriving condition proved that such an addition to their
usual diet was perfectly unneccessary to the maintenance of
their health.
It is a curious fact, that the chyle produced from a diet of
vegetable substances alone, appears in no way different from
that produced by a diet of animal matter; and that the blood
and flesh generated by either, is so similar as to make it extremely
difficult, if not impossible, to detect the difference; a fact,
sufficient to oppose the prevailing opinion, that vegetables
d.o not contain a sufficient quantity of nutritious matter to
nourish and support the body. But a much stronger proof of its
capability of sustaining life is, that by far the greatest number
of animals in the creation subsist entirely on the substance of
vegetables; and that this is not confined to animals of a slothful,
inactive nature only, but to animals the most powerful, muscular,
and active. It is well known that that stupendous quadruped, the
elephant, will travel eighty and a hundred miles in a day, heavily
laden, beneath the burning sun of India, subsisting entirely on
vegetable substance; and in our own country, that powerful,
active, and noble animal, the horse, whose abilities for enduring
fatigue are truly astonishing, is nourished on its natural food of
vegetable matter also. Besides which the properties of vegetable
food are not only confined to the mere support of life, but also
impart to animal flesh a richness of flavour with a superabundant
quantity of oily juices and fat; we may, therefore, justly conclude
that the substance of vegetables is well calculated to support the
vigour of the body, to encourage its growth, to repair its waste,
to supply sufficient strength, and to preserve sound health.
Hot only are animals thus supported, but by far the greatest
number of the human species also live and thrive entirely on the
productions of the vegetable kingdom ; and in our own country
a very large proportion of the inhabitants, particularly the
peasantry, who subsist on brown bread and potatoes, possess
sound health, look well, labour hard, and whistle a cheerful note.
But as Europeans are more accustomed to animal food than
perhaps some other inhabitants of the globe, and, as an in-
dustrious, active, labouring people, numbers from habit require
it, I shall, whilst on this subject, simply recommend that
vegetables compose a larger portion of our diet than custom
generally sanctions.


One of tlxe best examples of the advantages arising from pur-
suing a regular system of dieting is recorded of Cornaro,
celebrated Venetian nobleman, who attained the great age of
107 years, as stated by his niece, who was the inmate of a
nunnery at Padua. It appears that this great man had lived a
dissipated life up to the age of forty-three, about which time he
began to find his strength fail, and his constitution on the decay,
and he was induced to consult some physicians in Italy, who in
vain endeavoured to restore his health by medicines, and he was
reduced by disease to the lowest degree of human infirmity.
Cornaro’s mental sufferings at this time kept pace with his-
bodily diseases, and his reflections awakened in his mind such a
dread of death, that he was led to regard long life as an inesti-
mable blessing, and he from that time determined, if possible, ter
attain it by adopting a system of temperance; to avoid spirituous
liquors, and all high-seasoned viands; to limit the quantity of
his food, and partake only of one plain dish, merely sufficient to-
satisfy the cravings of nature; to retire early to rest, and to rise
betimes in the morning; to avoid damp air, to keep his feet
warm, and body and mind in a state of tranquillity. Nor was it
long, under these regulations, before he had the satisfaction to-
find himself gradually return to health and cheerfulness ; and he
was able, at a very advanced period of his life, to partake of the
pleasures of the chase, and most other amusements, in common
with the young men of his country ; and that he might diversify
his taste for pursuits at eighty years of age, he wrote an enter-
taining comedy. But whatever constituted the variety of his
recreations, he was never known to alter in quality the simplicity
of his table, or to exceed in quantity his moderate allowance. He
preserved a good appetite to the last, and was often heard to say,
when eating a crust of stale bread, “Oh how delicious it is ; it is
so delicious that I am almost tempted to exceed my allowance,”
but he was never known to do so. Thus his health and his
intellect were preserved in a sound state till the latest period of
his existence.
IRegularity in our pursuits is not only commendable, and will
ensure a fortune, but is particularly advantageous to health.
Rise early, go to bed early, divide and fix the periods for meals
with regard to dress, make no sudden changes, nor allow the
allurements of fashion to decoy into indelicate or dangerous
practices, among which latter I include the fatal habit of many
females in this country who are sacrificed to tight lacings; of


such cases I have had frequent opportunities of making post
mortem examinations, and these have proved my previous opinion
and conviction of their state, which, by a display of morbid
appearances too shocking to relate, have demonstrated the im-
possibility of health with unnatural binding for a foolish display
of figure. I also warn from sitting in draughts of air, from all
sudden or immoderate changes of heat or cold, and at the same
time I recommend that the feet be always kept warm and dry.
BATH I NG.
A warm water bath is frequently found to assist materially
other remedies for the removal of disease, by its soothing effects
on the internal organs, imparted to them in consequence of their
great sympathy with the surface of the body, at the time of its
immersion in the water, independently cf the benefit received by
the quantity of water (imbibed by the absorbents), acting as an
internal fomentation, a fact that has been proved by experiments
which have shown that the whole surface of the body will
absorb from three and a half to four pounds of water in the
space of ten minutes.
DRINK, Etc.
Be temperate and forget not that drunkenness lowers man
beneath the beast; it weakens the digestive organs, impairs the
memory, enervates the whole frame, and not only ruins the
health, but destroys all happiness, and is frequently followed by
the worst evils. “Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, and
whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise;” (Prov., chap, xx.) —
and remember, that the oftener a building is shook, the sooner
it will fall.
“ Drunkenness expels reason, drowns the memory, defaces
beauty, diminishes strength, inflames the blood, causes external
and incurable wounds, is a witch to the senses, a devil to the soul,
a thief to the purse, the beggar’s companion, the wife’s woe, and
the children’s sorrow; makes a strong man weak, and a wise
man a fool. He is worse than a beast, and is a self-murderer,
who drinks to others’ good health and robs himself of his own.”


It will be found from the register of the Society of Friends , or
Quakers, that as a consequence of their temperance, 1 in 10 arrives at
80 years of age ; of the general population of London, only 1 in 100.
Never did a more powerful argument support the practice of
temperance and virtue.
Moderate all excess of passion, of whatever kind ; excess in all
things is prejudicial to health ; endeavour to he calm under trials,
contented with your lot in life, and cheerful in your disposition,
under such regulations, the first of earthly happiness may he
best obtained the enjoyment of health, and the reasonable
prospect of a lengthened life.
Having mentioned the different Injection syringes that have been
introduced to the public, and also the manner of using them, I
shall now proceed to a particular recommendation of a more
simple instrument which has lately been presented to me (con-
structed by the French), and which I have considerably im-
proved ; it consists of a bag or hose, composed of a wmterproof
substance; and is from four to six feet in length, and at the top,
or opening into it, about four inches in diameter, gradually and
regularly decreasing in size to the lower extremity or outlet,
which is not more than three-eighths of an inch in diameter, and
is here provided with a stop-cock, to which is screwed a metallic
tube, the other end of which is adapted for introduction, as will
be seen in the plates. (See page 7.)
With this simple and cheap instrument every purpose sought
for by this method of medical practice may be accomplished, and
with the most easy and comfortable feeling to the patient,—its
force being equal, and its pressure more uniform than in
any other apparatus I have ever seen for similar purposes. It is
to be used in the following manner :
Having first observed that the stop-cock at the bottom is
turned, so as to prevent the escape of the fluid, you pour in at
the upper end of the hose the fluid intended for injection, first
brought to its proper temperature; and when it is filled within
five or six inches of the top, you are to hang it up by the loop,
to a hook in the wall of your dressing-room or water-closet, so
high that the lower end of the metallic tube will just reach to
within one inch of the floor, then place a chair at such a con-


BftbC-JO
46 p nfO DR. JUKES OK THE ENEMA CURE.
venient distance as will enable you to lay the tube on its bottom,
when you may sit down, and having introduced it, you have
both hands free. You then turn the cock with one hand, whilst
with the other (if additional force is required to overcome obstinate
cases) you are gently to grasp the hose at about one-third of its
distance np, and drawing the hand down towards the small
extremity, force or propel onwards the fluid : and repeat this
frequently ; which, together with the natural inclination of fluids
to attain their level, will prove sufficiently strong to overcome
any difficulties that may occur. In an experiment which I had
an opportunity of making with this apparatus, I was enabled,
by refilling it. to throw up fourteen pints of water,
which proves its very great capability. But in ordinary cases,
where Injections are resorted to merely to assist, in a gentle
manner, the daily evacuations, and are not employed to overcome
difficult diseases, no pressure from the hand is required, nor need
it be hung upon a hook, but merely held high up by one hand,
as the mere weight of the water is sufficient to accomplish the
intention. The quantity of fluid contained in instruments of
this kind is from one to two quarts ; and should more than this
be required, it can be replenished. This most useful and delicate*
little apparatus, which is contained in a small mahogany case,
with lock and key, is so compact that it can be put into the coat-
pocket ; and is manufactured and sold, together with every other
kind of apparatus for injections, by Mr. Harcourt, 12, Carlton
Street, Regent Street, two doors from Waterloo Place.
Those which are used in Prance are fitted without a stop-cock,
which is supplied by merely twisting the lower end of the hose;
but I consider the addition of a stop-cock, and the substitution
of a tube, a considerable improvement, by preventing the
possibility of the escape of the fluid, which would be obviously
unpleasant.
And now, Reader, if you have read this little book through,
what can you think of the brazen effrontery of “Dr.” Hall , when
he says that he was the first of earth’s teeming millions to inject
more than a pint of water into a human being.
* The use of syringes or pumps for female purposes appears extremely indelicate,
Resides which the labor of working the piston up and down is particularly harassing and
fatiguing for a weak person. The Clysma-duct is in all respects a superior apparatus.
Troedel & Co., Print.


DIRECTIONS HOW TO USE THE ENEMA
By an Expert.
First put half a gallon of cold water into the fountain, and then
fill up with half a gallon of boiling water; you will then have
the temperature about right. Some prefer it over 110 degrees,
hut from the experience of the writer as near 110° as possible
suits best. Have a spare supply of hot wmter to replenish if
needed. Hang the fountain up about seven feet high, just so
high that the rectum tip attached to six feet of tube, should
reach to within a foot of the floor, then turn on the tap and let
the wind and cold water out of the tube, close the tap and insert
the tip, which, by the way, should he made of bone, ivory or
vulcanite, into the anus, and allow as much water as possible to
enter the colon, kneading with your hands over the colon with an
upward rubbing on the left side, and a downward rubbing on
the right side; when you feel that you must void it, turn off the
tap, and allow the discharge. It will be necessary to have a bucket
or commode close handy; I find Stephenson’s patent commode
most convenient for the purpose. After this, if the temperature
of the water has fallen too much, add some hot water and repeat
the injection ad lib. ; if you have to charge the colon half-a-dozen
times, so much the better. Do this every other night for a
fortnight, and afterwards once or twice a week according to
desire or complaint. In cases of gravel or diabetes, or any
kidney complaints, it is well to allow a quart or so to remain in
the colon all night, and that will be discharged through the
bladder, early in the morning, cleansing both kidneys and bladder
en route. As long as the temperature is studied, it is quite safe
to use the enema at any time, morning, noon or night, before or
after meals, but I find most persons prefer night. It need
hardly be said that a disinfectant should be used, especially at
the first flushing, when foeces which may have been fermenting
in the colon for weeks or months will be discharged to the great
relief and pleasure of the operator. Many persons have asked
me about the position —that is immaterial —perhaps the best
position is to kneel down with head a little lower than the
rectum, but the water will flow in whether kneeling, standing,
sitting or lying; I generally stand and knead well during the
flow, and after several months’ use, I would not dispense with it
on any account. I keep a bath thermometer in the fountain all
the time.
The above writer is very enthusiastic about the great value of the perpetual enema
practice. Time will tell if his enthusiasm is justified; we shall see in a year or two.
—Editor.


Second Edition,
Enlarged.
Advice
OF
Ten
Doctors
1.— “Dp.” WILFORD HALL, on the Enema Cure.
2.—Mr. ROOT, on the Enema Cure.
3 Dr. FAIRCHILD, on the Enema Cure.
4.—Dr. WILD, on the Enema Cure.
s.—Professor KIRK, on the Enema Cure.
6. —Dr. KELLOGG, on the Enema Cure, and on Quacks
and Quackeries in America, including “Dr.” Hall.
7.—Dr. TRALL, on the Water Cure.
B.—Dr. CUTLER, on the Hot Water Cure.
9. —Mrs. WALLACE, on the Hot Water Enema Cure.
■JO.—Dr. JACKSON, on the Sun Cure.
11.—Dr. W. W. HALL, on Lhe Exercise, Pure Air & Diet Cure
12—Dr. KELLOGG, on Alcohol and Tobacco.
13.—“ Professor”
, on the Laugh Cure,
Edited by E. W. Cole.
Sold retail and wholesale at Cole’s Book Arcade, Melbourne ; also sold retail
b> most of tbo Bookseller +hronsf> ■ *> Ar-*ralasia. Price, 2/- ; by post, 2/6.
