

THE
SPLENDID • SPENDTHRIFT
THE GREAT HOLD-UP IN AID OF THE WAR CHEST
PRICE - SIXPENCE


Johnson’s Toilet and Baby Powder
I Po'WPFB $
AND
SNURi^g
U a*
Ntw e*'"* 3 '"' H
* J -' ) \Jk
ANT
talcum
RFUMI2
rPt
BEST FOR BABY
BEST FOR YOU
Johnson’s Toilet and Baby Powder is the purest, most exquisite
- Talcum Powder in the world, and this claim is endorsed by lead-
ing physicians and nurses for whose use it was first prepared.
In point of purity, agreeable odor and delicacy and daintiness of
texture, it is second to none.
Johnson’s Toilet and Baby Powder is made of chemically pure,
washed and floated talcum combined with boric and salicylic acid,
contains no starch, clay or fillers of any sort to make bulk and
weight, and fill up the pores of the skin.
Johnson’s Toilet and Baby Powder is indispensable for baby
delightful after bathing or shaving—destroys the odor of perspira-
tion-makes the skin cool, dry and comfortable, and gives grateful
relief to sore, swollen feet.
Your Local Chemist Sells it in Sprinkler
Top Tins at
1/-
Johnson & Johnson’s Red Chain Absorbent Cotton Wool
(formerly Red Cross) holds the confidence of doctors,
hospitals, and nurses in every part of the world.
Only the finest quality of specially selected cotton is used
in its manufacture, and every known method of modern
science is used to purify —sterilise and protect it.
Johnson & Johnson’s
Red Chain Absorbent Cotton Wool
It is packed in blue cartons, and so rolled
that every fibre of cotton, whether in or
out of the carton, is protected from germ
infection until the last particle is used.
The whole package is sterilised before it
leaves the laboratory.
Its surgical cleanliness and wonderful
sorbent qualities make it ideal for ladies’
sanitary use.
In addition to its uses in the sick room it
has also a wide use in every household.
For filtering milk, water or other-liquids;
for applying oinments, washes and lotions;
bathing eyes; applying powder; and in
fact for any purpose where clean, absorb-
ent, soft, spongy cotton is required.
YOUR LOCAL CHEMIST SELLS IT
In V2OZ.. loz„, 20z,, 40z,, Boz, and 16oz, Cartons
OOOOOCCCfcOOOOC
ttorv
*
UP
irjD
m
m
- //
BUY FROM YOUR LOCAL CHEMIST
All Red Chain Goods manufactured by Johnson & Johnson
can be had at most chemists; and, as your local chemist
is a great convenience, as well as a- safeguard in-your - *
locality, we urge you to patronise him.
' y T\
H
SPLENDID ) SPENDTHRIFT


The
SPLENDID • SPENDTHRIFT
THE GREAT HOLD-UP ON THE NORTH SHORE LINE
In aid of the War Chest
The War Chest has been aptly termed “The
Splendid Spendthrift . ” It distributes freely
and never accumulates CASH
Prologue.
There is nothing in the War Chest. It is as bare
of cash as a frog is of feathers.
So, the War Chest Councillors chewed the end
of it<= pens.
“Let the North Shore Line hold a War Chest
Fair.” The words boom out loudly —“Those m
favour say, ‘Aye’ the voice continues,.“A concen-
trated H.E. bombardment be timed to break out
with terrible intensity on September Bth, at 2 p.m.
Epilogue.
What of the result ? who knows —the splendid
“Spendthrift” smiles!
The Coming of the Hon. Secretary.
Then there came the Hon. Secretary —of sex,
the fairer, of nature, energetic. She toiled and
thought, and dreamt and schemed. Organise!
Organise ! This was the burden of her cry. The word
came and went, it ran back and forth, and thus the
nucleus was formed.
The Story.
On the fateful 24th of May, 1917, a solitary mem-
ber of the Spendthrift Society went to work with
her “contemptible little army.”
Their objective was to secure something about
five figures to pour into the greedy maw of the
hungry “War Chest” by means of a Village Fair.
They held up the Committee of the Killara Golf
Club —“Kamerad! Kamerad !”it called. “Do what
you will.” They did! And it cost money and labour
too, much hard thought and some cursing. This
time the Staff worked with the Field Forces, and it
was decided to sell goods (at less than cost price!),
to give entertainments, vaudeville shows, to set
up a miniature “Hampstead Heath” —arrange com-
petitions among the recreation clubs —in short, to
give something for nothing—which is after all the
usual practice of the “War Chest.”
Since then the stall-holders have been busy ar-
ranging their own particular displays.
There arrives the “Soldiers’ Comfort Stall,”
where everything possible for the lads in the
trenches will be found, including parcels of gifts
already packed and ready to be sent off for Xmas.
From the “Kitchen Stall” there will be sold clothes
lines, saucepans, dusters, brooms, groceries, kitchen
utensils at prices as pleasing to gaze upon as the
early morning dew drops on the petals of a rose.
Those with a mind above utility naturally turn their
aesthetic souls to contemplate the beauty of
flowers. A stall for flowers —garden chairs and
tables —hoses —tools —seedlings and plants. The
values will make the florist turn as green as cabbage
leaf. The Sweet Stall whispers of dainty devices
to enhance its delicious confections —stalls for
towels, bags and doilys—stalls for cakes of a con-
sistency and perfection too wonderful to describe —
all home-made, and to be sold at the people’s prices.
An Apron and Handkerchief Stall. One for
smokers, run by the “Independent Tobacco Associ-
ation” (no connection with the Trust).
Then a miniature “Paddy’s Market” discloses it-
self. A Produce Stall, from which to buy a potato
to send to friends in London, with best Xmas
wishes.


Further on come the Lingeries and the dainty
frou-frous—baby clothes—how appropriate! Babies
are fashionable—no one can afford to be without
one nowadays. Who does not admire dainty china ?
Who is not a collector, and what house is complete
without its china cabinet ? Come and visit the china
stall.
Even the energetic child is busily collecting for
the Toys Stall —hoop-la and lucky dip! The ama-
zons of sport, giving up for the nonce their mashie
approaches and 20 foot putts, are busy. “O ’appy,
’appy ’Ampsted,” they sing as they work—’Ampsted
’Eath! Back to the homeland, and peanuts, and
beer, and changed hats, and merry laughter—Roll
up ! Roll up !
Mr. Punch, the hero of a hundred fights, and
his spouse, intimate their gracious acceptance to
be present with a glorious company of conjurors—
ice cream carts—penny drinks and cakes, and the
numerous satellites of their Court.
Hush! Do not make a noise—it is the Creche—
no tired moth-
ers and cross
papas trying to
still more tired
wails from
baby. Do not
forget that
there will be a
creche under
trained control
—no charge for
this service.
Sweet and
dainty maids,
with fingers
itching to spoil
the unwary,
and with be-
witching glan-
ces to soften
the cautious,
will look after
the Refresh-
ment Stall, and
on the Club
verandah over-
looking this
happy scene,
another bevy
of muslin ap-
rons and rogu-
ish eyes will
assist the Spendthrift—for a consideration—to be
true to himself and to drink the scented tea and eat
sweet cakes of the east.
The parcels office, with much foresight due to
the P.O.D. (parcels office director), whose talent
for organisation and administration amounts to
sheer genius, will look after all purchases. It will
take from the men the chivalrous privilege of carry-
ing packages about from stall to stall—the men will
THE LAST STRAW.
VISITOR: “ How many times were you hit?”
TOMMY: “ Only once, mum.”
VISITOR (disappointed): “What; only once?”
TOMMY: “Blimey, ’ow often did yer want me to be ’it—yer old cannerbal?”
be free to go to the vaudeville show on the flat.
The P.O.D. will take parcels at the “Fair Depot”
for 3d., or will send them to the railway station for
6d. A force of bright-eyed scout boys will be on
<luty for this business, and at the end of the day
all parcels will be found at the Depot as surely as
a man will find a letter in his pocket which was
given him to post the day before.
The Fuller Vaudeville Company have, with their
ever-ready sympathy and kindness, given their ser-
vices. Their programme will be an entertainment
in itself. For the evening, Mr. J. E. Brownlow, of
Palings, has arranged a concert, at which Madame
Verbruggen and many very talented artists will
assist.
The Killara Golf Links, ever a lovely expanse of
country, will be transformed into a busy laughing
fair by day, and by night into a bright and beautiful
Fairyland of enchantment and joy.
LIST OF STALLS.
Hornsby: China and Lucky Dip.
In charge of
Mrs. Summers
and Mrs. Hum-
phrey.
Wahroonga;
Flower Stall.
In charge of
Mrs. Doyle and
Mrs. JMettleton.
This will be
one of the most
attractive o f
all the stalls
Everyone loves
liowers, and
here they will
be found in a
rioting mass of
color —all sizes,
all kinds. Gar-
den utilities
will also be of-
fered for sale —
such things as
garden seats,
chairs, and
tables. There is
also a specially
good hose, com-
plete with fit-
tings, etc., to be
raffled. Woo
Madame Fortune on the big “Lucky Wheel”—you
never know what the Gods have in store for the
intrepid.
Fancy and Baby Clothes —In charge of Miss Sar-
good, Mrs. Pockley, Mrs. W. A. Parker.
Located third in the row of stalls as the ground
is entered. All fancy goods, with the exception of
those provided by the other stalls, viz., cushion
covers, everything for babies under two years old.
SPLENDID (pp*) spe^dthrift:||^>


basicets, coverlets, etc., etc. On view at Miss Pig-
got’s, florist, Circular Quay, is a special baby’s bas-
ket, beautifully made and fitted up. It is to be
raffled, and tickets may be secured for a nominal
sum from Miss Piggot.
Warrawee: Kitchen Grocery, &c. —Mesdames Percy
Hardy, Elliott, Grant, Lewis, and Mander Jones
Turramurra: Soldiers’ Comforts —Mesdames Turn-
bull, Armstrong, and Miss Swayne.
This will be a most interesting stall. The scheme
of decoration will be carried out in khaki, relieved
by the various battalion colors. A special feature
will be the packing of souvenir parcels by expert
packers from two Battalion Depots. Five shillings
and ten shillings parcels will be put up.
Toys and Hoop=la —Mrs. E. E. Brown, Mrs. G.
Wright, Mrs. S. Snow, Mrs. Dawson.
This stall will be found in the miniature “Hamp-
stead Heath,” or near it. Very attractive displays—
dolls in all shapes and
sizes—dressed and un-
dressed. Also useful ar-
ticles for boys and girls.
Running in conjunction
with toys will be a Hoop-
la run on a very large
scale by the husbands of
the four ladies in charge.
Plenty of prizes and
plenty of fun! Take a tic-
ket in the raffle for the
Baby Doll! It is fully
dressed. Then there’s the
doll’s Solid Oak Bedstead,
with Doll and Bedclothes
complete. This is going
to be raffled too; tickets
now available. See the
bed on view in McCathie’s
Pitt-street window.
Pymble: Refreshments —
Mesdames C. M. Buck
and Crossing.
Sweets Mesdames
Wright, Jackson. Mo-
catta, Orr, and McDiar-
mid.
Gordon; Bags and Doilys
—Mrs. Callaghan, Mrs.
Morley.
Killara: Produce —Mes-
dames Budden and
Perdriau
This stall will sell vege tables and fruit, meat,
dressed meat and small goods, eggs, butter, cream,
bacon, poultry (alive or dressed), hams, cheese, lard,
dairy produce, jams, jellies, honey, pickles, bottled
arid dried fruits, corn, chaff, bran, poultry food
every kind of produce.
Tobacco —Mesdames W. P.' Mas'chwitz and J. E
Donoghue.
Lindfield: Aprons and Handkerchiefs —Mrs. Cuth-
bert, Mrs. Clarke, Miss Beazley.
A NASAL DISASTER
“ Here! Who are ye signallin' to ? ”
“ I’m not signalling ? ”
“ Oh, ain’t ye ? Well then, pull yer bloomin’ cap over it—”
Here you will be able to purchase fancy black ap
prons, trimmed with colors, plain black aprons,
fancy colored aprons, aprons for boys and girls,
nurses’ aprons, and all kinds of handkerchiefs.
Roseville: Towels —Miss Archbold, Mrs. Nott, Mrs
Capell.
Chatswood; Wearing Apparel —Mesdames Read,
Dawes, and Miss Nardin.
Cakes —Mesdames Peden. Pike, Maclean, Dal-
rymple-Hay, and Neil Barclay.
Everyone has given freely in coin and service!
The ladies in particular have set themselves the
pleasurable task of making the Fair a real joyful,
money-winning proposition.
A THOUSAND AND ONE ATTRACTIONS
CALL YOU.
In addition to the above
attractions, there will be
“Heads I win and tails you
lose” Raffles. Afternoon
Teacup Reading, Fortune
Tellers, excellent motor
service from the different
suburbs, golf competi-
tions, and a myriad of
amazing, novel, and
unique attractions —all de-
signed to extract cash
from the pockets of the
rich and poor.
Concert —“A Real
“Clinker.”
To be held at the Club
House on the evening of
the day of the “Great
Hold Up” at 7.45 p.m.
The price is 35., and seats
may be reserved without
extra fee.
Smoking will be permit-
ted on the Club verandah
not only to the male per
son. The seating accom-
modation is limited, and
the quality of the artists
unexcelled, which explains
a booking plan at Palings,
with Mr. J. E. Brownlow
in charge.
The Clown.
There must be a down for the “Fair”—not every-
one is a clown. Clowns are born, so thev can be
obtained —somewhere. Being good they die early—
this one is an exception—he is old, bald and solemn.
He has taking ways. This clown will scout for a
football, which industrious people will try to kick
into an alleged mouth belonging to a face—not his
face! This stunt costs 3d. per punt.
SPLENDID SPE.NDTHRIFT^|f^)


The Boys Know and
Welcome —
“REX”
GOODS
Make up and forward a parcel to-day
containing one tin each of
vYC*Y OY OYCYOVS
ioo oJNCWf ’
1
■ '■' 9 ]
il 02 NCT C
ECLIPSt (jP / BRAND
( PURE CREAMERY )
-
< r %
C $
t. ' r ';
OsS£s\ J .
SE ©
“ Rex ”
Luncheon
Cheese
“ Rex ” Ham
Pate
“ Rex ” Veal
and Tongue
Pate
“ Eclipse ”
Brand Butter
As much as 10/-
has been paid
for a pound of
Butter at the
Front. Makes
one think the
boys have more
money than
friends.
All Grocers sell
“Rex” Goods.
Foggitt,
Jones
and Co. Ltd.
Packers of
‘Rex” Pure Food
Products.
Curers of
‘Rex” Hams and
Bacon,
Fill the Billy for the Boys
War Chest Song, by
ARTHUR H. ADAMS
Written for The Spendthrift.)
Our boys are out to “out" the Hun; %
And though they’ve got him on the run,
It isn’t always only fun:
The job requires some doing.
And zvhen our boys have done their zvhack
And straggle from the trenches back,
When every blooming thing looks black,
Their spirits need renewing.
Chorus:
Fill the billy to the brim —
It’s for him,
Bill or Jim!
Send him all the dear remembered joys!
Fill the billy! Every shilling
Given with a heart that's willing
Fills the billy,
Fills the billy for the boys!
Our boys soon learn they’re not forgot,
For, waiting at a likely spot,
There’s something good and something hot,
And comforts for the chilly!
The War Chest has a cigarette >
A zvord of cheer, and something zvet!
And this costs money, don’t forget!
So fill the War Chest billy!
— Chorus.
The War Chest spends and spends and spends;
Its stream of comforts never ends;
But for each present that it sends
It has your cash to rope in!
So if zee do not do our zvhack,
Some hero zvill some comfort lack;
But, thanks to you, for Alf and Jack
The War Chest’s always open!
— Chorus.
So, sisters, mothers, sweethearts, zvives.
Your money brightens heroes’ lives.
Throw in your pennies, or your fives —
Five pounds, I mean, you silly!
And you who, though no doubt you’re keen
To join them, still you haven’t been,
Throw in your cash — lt’s you, I mean!
Australians, fill the billy!
Chorus.
“Is it true that Insecticide is no use to our poor
boys ?” an old lady asked a returned officer.
“Well, the boys say it only ‘agitates the Zoo.’ I
tell you what one Brigade asked the War Chest to
send them from London —FLAT IRONS! The boys
said that when these were good and hot and run
up the seams inside their pants. Well —American
pop-corn was a fool to it!
SPLENDID (Sj[) BPEM)THMFTi|^^


best
-ftAt
&?
I
P 7
fea?
r
•-v«i>
- •»
• '
:iK/
\lto
f'-«TS
c cP*
Si
TO O'
m
:■-
i
5K
Nothing thrown away
except the can
There is sound economy in each tin of
“Horseshoe” Salmon. Every particle can be
eaten and no cooking is actually required.
u
Horseshoe
Salmon
Karluk
Red
is just as digestible as the best sirloin steak and
is even richer in the body-building materials.
Get a tin of “ Horseshoe ”
Salmon to-day. It always opens
up fresh and juicy.
»d §
ml wf
S
r
Z
It is perfectly cooked, and
comes to you with the savory
flavor of the fresh fish.
SOLD BY ALL
GROCERS
Insist on “Horseshoe”
Spendthrifts
Spendthrifts of life, they live
Where death and darkness lower,
Where hate makes fugitive
Love’s beauty and Love’s power,
Earth’s gentleness and ease:
Life’s splendid spendthrifts these!
Lovers of life, they leap,
With scarcely quickened breath
And eager steps, to keep
Their constant tryst xoith death.
Our saviours zvhere they lie,
Life's splendid spendthrifts die!
These splendid spendthrifts fling,
With open heart and hand,
Life — freedom — everything —
All gifts at their command,
To conflict overseas.
Who gives, who gives for these?
A. UAnson.
Soldiers’ Sweethearts
The sweethearts of our soldiers
Are fair and fine to see;
But in their eyes are shadows
Where sunshine used to be.
Oh, when the morning lightens
The bay and dreaming ships,
The little dawn-wind pauses
To kiss their eyes and lips!
Some of the soldiers’ sweethearts
Are wives and mothers, too.
Their thoughts are long and lonely
With weeping woven through.
Vet, to the world, they’re smiling,
As though Life held no fears,
For, in the nights, God’s angels
Stoop low and kiss their tears.
One sweetheart of a soldier
Is clad in sombre black.
For her, all doubts are over;
She knows he won’t come back.
Oh! men must march to battle
At drum and bugles’ call,
But the sweethearts of the soldiers
Are the bravest of us all.
Will Lawson.
I that have nothing to spare
Cheerfully fart with the same;
Little I envy their pile,
Misers that grudge yon your share;
His is the joy of the game;
His who can pay with a smile.
Owen Seaman.
SPLENDID (fBl) SPE^DTHRirr|i^|>'


“Eagley” stands for
Extra Quality in
All Wool Underwear
Every approved style and every wanted
weight is obtainable for men, women and
children, under the "Eagley” trade-mark.
With the approach of warmer days —a
change in Underwear becomes necessary.
Nothing will give you more comfort for the
Slimmer months than
The Original Australian
All Wool Underwear
in Special Lightweights
“Eagley” is made from the finest Australian
Wool. It affords the utmost in comfort and
protection from our sudden climatic changes.
All Stores sell the “Eagley” make—ask for
it, and see that you get it.
The “Eagley” trade-mark is on every gar-
ment for your protection.
Wholesale only from
I. & B. PTY. LTD.
89 York Street
SYDNEY
THE FIGHTERS OF
THE AERY BLUE
By C. A. JEFFRIES
Written for The Spendthrift
It is the profound conviction of a number of well-
informed people that the present war will come to a
sudden termination when Germany is attacked by
an overwhelming - aerial force. A few weeks ago an
American Minister of State announced to the world
that by the coming (European) spring, if not before,
the Allies “will enter Germany by the air route.”
That the Germans are apprehensive of what may
be done by the air route” is evident from a recent
article in the Cologne Gazette, a semi-official paper,
which demanded that something should be done to
stop the slow but certain British advance in Flan-
ders. It was pointed out that unless this “creep”
could be checked that it was only a question of time
till Flanders was lost, and then—the deluge. A
deluge of British, French and American aeroplanes
over the whole of the industrial districts of the
valley of the Rhine, and even, possibly, Essen and
Thyssen, Krupps’ cities. This, the paper declared
would be an irrepairable disaster.
It would, and may it soon come.
Three years ago aeroplanes were toys, and dan-
gerous ones at that. Then came the war. and the
Germans had a regular war fleet of airships and
some specially constructed aeroplanes for fighting
purposes. The Allies had some airships, which ad-
mittedly were not in it with Zeps., and a crowd of
aeroplanes that had been tried and tested at various
periods with a view to developing the idea rather
than fighting. So the Allied airmen were called on
to go forth and develop the new arm in the face of
German artillery.
Fortunately, Allies and Germans alike started
from scratch as regards aeroplanes. Had they con-
centrated on aeroplanes as they had on airships, the
war would have ended in a speedy German victory.
But they had not done so.
One of the first things that became evident was
that a special type of man is required for this work,
and youth was essential. Between the ages of 18
and 25 a man is at his best for aviation purposes.
After that, each succeeding year sees him grow
more and more ineffective. Of course, there have
been notable exceptions.
During the retreat from Mons the aeroplane was
reasonably safe between three and five thousand
feet high. The guns could throw shells far above
that, but the gunners could not score hits. Then,
somewhere, men in dingy offices worked hard over
figures, and one day 14 of our aeroplanes were either
shot down direct or so badly damaged that they
had to descend in a hurry. The real anti-air-craft
SPLENDID SPE7VDTHRIFT:|ffi|>


LftjJ
U.r_
m
lff
The good policy of
buying near home
Applied to the buying of furniture, and
in so far as the residents of the Northern
suburbs are concerned it means just this:
To buy at Gourlay’s means that you buy
furniture of distinctive quality—but that
you get it at a price lower than you
would pay in the city. That is because
Gourlay’s are out of the area of heavy
rents and taxes.
Private motor car at the service of any-
one interested.
Gourlay Bros. Ltd.
Artistic Home Furnishers.
116-122 Miller St, North Sydney
Local shopping
made easy
Ring North
Sydney 1 and
our car will
be sent to you
-w
Sun had arrived. An order was issued that the
German lines must be crossed at not less than 0,000
feet.
But the Allied calculators were working over
figures also, and six weeks later the German Com-
mand warned the German flyers that at 9,000 feet
the Allied gunners would get them with the third
shot if they were in range. They were ordered not
to be within range.
Another incentive to high climbing was the fact
that in the aerial fighting of the time the advantage
was all with the party who managed to get above
his opponent. He had the advantage of shooting
down on his enemy and was also in a position to
refuse battle if he wished to. In the beginning
the fighting was all done at comparatively short
range with automatic pistols and hand-thrown
bombs. Naturally the one who got overhead got in
with the bomb, and if the aim was true the battle
was over.
By the second year of the war the Anglo-French
were producing huge armoured aeroplanes, some of
which carried several guns and quite a number of
men. They were found to be useless against fast,
quick-climbing machines which got above them and
used either bombs or the machine gun. Thousands
were immediately scrapped, and the British and
French produced machines that could climb higher
and quicker than those of Germany. The real con-
test was not between the planes in the air, but the
engineers in the factories.
1 he advantage kept changing from one side to the
other. Sometimes the Allied engines were the best,
and then the Germans would make a desperate efifor.'
and evolve some improvement, and for a time make
a better showing, and do things that made civilian
hair stand. 1 hen the Allied engineers would go one
better, and there would be a holocaust of German
machines.
After 18 months of fighting among the clouds it
was thoroughly established that the average-British
or French aerial fighter was more at home in the
air than the average German. It was not a question
of courage, neither was it a question of skill. It
was temperament. The Anglo-French had devel-
oped a flying instinct that the German, except in
a few notable exceptions, has so far failed to
acquire.
This characteristic of the Anglo-French aviators
did a great deal to minimise any engineering ad-
vantage the Germans might gain over our men.
Another thing that kept the German aviator from
excelling, even if he possessed the temperament, was
that his orders were to avoid aerial battles where
possible. Ringed round by a blockade that increased
in intensity every month, the German official mind
was haunted by a dread of shortage of material. So
German aviators were to make their planes last as
long as possible, and when attacked to endeavour
to lead their opponents over anti-aircraft batteries.
The effect of this order on the Allied flyers was
excellent, to the German it was quite disastrous.
The Allied flyers cheerfully pursued them over the
batteries and sometimes paid for the audacity.
SPETVDTHRIFT?^^^)


Berger'ss
Matone!
MirTwallfc'"'
=*>C < .t2 h,h ,nd 52C<>lc "' 5 .
iL* T OW| MUST HOT Be STIPPl t JLIp-^^^'l
Lewis Berger i Sons L rt
" r NOMfBTOH INOIAf’O.Ht
distinctive wall finish
that CAN be washed /
If you have a beautiful home you cannot
afford to use an inferior finish on the walls.
What you want is something both beautiful
and durable —in short “MATONE” the
washable wall-finish. It is a leadless flat
enamel. That is, it has the consistency and
hard-finish of enamel but none of its glossi-
ness. You can wash it repeatedly, oblitera-
ting all finger-marks.
Made in White and 21 pleasing tints all
intermixable. You can get ANY artistic
shade required when “Matone” is used.
Ask your painter—he knows! Colour-cards free.
SELLING AGENTS IN CITY, ALL SUBURBS, AND
COUNTRY TOWNS.
LEWIS BERGER & SONS
(Aust.) Ltd.
16-18 YOUNG STREET, SYDNEY
Founded in London 1760
“Mr. BERGER
Sometimes the -German aeroplanes and anti-aircraft
battery both paid.
To-day the aviators of both sides fly as high as
25,000 feet if the occasion demands it. At this enor-
mous distance the earth is often invisible, obscured
by mist that is invisible from below. Mt. Everest,
the highest mountain in the world, is 28,000 feet.
To-day. the average aviator fighting on the Western
Front, is constantly soaring to a height greater than
the altitude of the highest of the Alps. Needless
to say, the strain on the heart and lungs is terrific.
Man was not made to live at 20,000 feet part of the
day and at sea-level the rest. The difference m
temperature is terrific, and at that height the flyers
experience conditions that are absolutely arctic. 10
combat this they wear charcoal heaters under their
leather jackets, and to cope with the rarefied atmos-
phere every aviator carries a small quantity o
oxygen. ,
The intense cold is one of the great dangers of
flying at high altitudes. Masks have to be worn.
To fly barefaced is to court disaster, for if. the
aviator should, while flying at 100 miles per hour or
so put his face from behind his wind-shield, skin
and flesh will be peeled off. On return to hospital
these injuries, though inflicted by cold wind, are
treated as though they were burns.
The average man is quite unaware of the limi-
tations of aerial fighting. Many prominent writers
have urged that the Allies should build 100,000
aeroplanes and simply overwhelm Germany. It is
not such an easy proposition as it sounds. When
the United States entered the war the British Mis-
sion handed the American War Department an in-
teresting description of the conditions of service
on the Western front, which, when published, cre-
ated a profound impression. Every aviator on the
Anglo-French line has five aeroplanes, all used for
different purposes, and all of which he may use
in one day. This means that every aviator must have
at least three mechanics to look after and maintain
and clean those planes and their engines. Besides
these there are extra mechanics who assist wherever
they are required. , . , ,
There are about 20 different kinds of aeroplanes,
but they fall naturally into five classes; Bombers,
Battleplanes, Scouts, Artillery spotters, and Photo-
graphic planes. And, of course, all of these have
their own subdivisions. The monoplanes are no
longer used by the British, only biplanes and tri-
planes. The latter are wonderful climbers and arc
the dread of the German raiders, as owing to the
rapidity with which they climb they frequently cut
off retreat. . . .
Aerial fighting changed in character as time went
on. At first there were only single combats with
automatic pistols. When the aeroplanes were arm-
ed they commenced to act in squads, and battles
were fought between units of five and six on either
side British planes went raiding behind the Ger-
man lines, dropping bombs on railway stations,
moving trains and other places of military impor-
tance. The German planes endeavoured to prevent
them, and there were occasional fights.
Continued on Page 44
(g]p^rii^ N DiD^^prSPE^DTHRIFT:fgf|>


Spendthrift Motorists
may have no interest in the economy
of using DURABLE TYRES , but
the man who keeps track of ex-
penses will be interested in this:
No matter what the roads |are like
in your locality, no matter how heavy
your car, your tyre bills will be less
per year if you use PALMER CORD
TYRES, They contain no canvas,
they do not run hot even at excessive
speed, nor do they generate internal
friction. It’s the rubber-cord founda-
tion that makes the difference. It is
an exclusive PALMER CORD patent.
A TRIUMPH FOR BRITISHJ.THOROUGHNESS *iS
Interesting Catalogue sent on request mum,
THE SILVERTOWN RUBBER CO.
279 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY
m
WHEN ADVERTISING
WAS PROHIBITED
Being merely an Allegory
By WILSON J. BAILEY
Written for The Spendthrift
You took away both the daily papers this morn-
ing, my dear,” said Mrs. Holland to her husband on
his arrival home from the city, “and I particularly
wanted to see the drapers’ advertisements of the
new spring fashions. I suppose you have left your
evening paper in the train, too.” It was a habit
Mr. Holland had. ‘‘Oh! Hang the drapers’ adver-
tisements!” was Mr. Holland’s only reply. I wish
the Government would prohibit all advertising.
Half the women in Sydney are deluded into spend-
ing more money than they should by these adver-
tisements. Then there are the jewellery advertise-
ments, too, and the furnishing advertisements, and
lots of others. Half the domestic unhappiness is due
to these cursed advertisements. I wish they we r e
all
At that moment the servant announced dinner,
and Mr. Holland checked himself abruptly. Good
breeding forbade him to be rude to his wife—in
the presence of the maid.
Now Mr. Holland had the reputation of being
a most sweet tempered man in the big factory
where he was manager, and was never short tem-
pered with his employees. But then they would not
have stood it because they had a Union—spelt
with a capital “U,” and his wife had no union, except
with him, so that she could not “kick” as the
Americans say. But that is another story.
“Can you imagine what the world would be like
without advertisements?” said Mrs. Holland quite
suddenly, when dinner was half through.
“Uh ! What! A world without advertisements !”
said her husband, suddenly looking up from his plate.
He had forgotten all about his petulant outburst.
But his wife had not. Women don’t forget these
little things. And therein lie many of the tragedies
of life.
“Of course I do, my dear; life would be a jolly
sight easier. There would be no canvassers worrv-
ing me daily; no heavy expenditure to eat up our
profits; no advertising staff to pay. That ugly man
with the mask over his face, advertising—what the
Dickens is it he advertises?—would not be offending
my aesthetic nature every time I open the paper.
I would be spared the invitation to ‘Consult Mr.
Barraclough’; ‘Try Rex Ham Pate’; ‘Use Johnson’s
Kidney Plasters’; ‘Furnish my modern flat at Beard
Watson’s’; ‘Buy a Beale Piano’; ‘Do it Electrically’;
‘Fit Palmer Cord Tyres’; ‘Get it at Danks’; ‘Wear
Abbey Shoes’; ‘Buy Berger’s Paints’; ‘Hear the
Angelus played’; ‘Buy it locally—at Gourlay’s’; and
SPLENDID (||g|) SPE^ p THRIFT^^>


the hundred and one other things that disfigure the
pages of my morning paper, and take my attention
when I want to read the news.”
“Yes, but, my dear,” said Mrs. Holland gently,
when her husband’s torrential eloquence was stayed
a moment, “just think what the world would miss.
Think of the beautiful pictures in the magazines, the
lovely catalogues from the leading fashion houses,
the clever posters on the hoardings, and ” “Yes,
I do think of the posters that disfigure the hoard-
ings so that when I look for my station I see
‘You'll get it cheaper at Mary Foy’s’ or ‘Keep the
Home Tyres Turning.’ ”
And then they retired for the night. But Mr.
Holland did not sleep well. He had worked him-
self up into a state of excitement, and he was dis-
turbed and restless all through the night, as the
sequel will show.
all advertising, and they say that it is advertising
to put a label on a thing to tell you what it is.”
“That be hanged for a yarn,” said Mr. Holland,
“I ” then he remembered his sweeping condem-
nation of the previous night, and checked himself.
“What about the morning papers, Mary; have
they come ?” asked Mr. Holland as he finished his
breakfast. “No, sir,” was the reply; “I think the
man must have forgotten them.” “Oh, well, I’ll get
one at the station, and you rouse that man for
forgetting.”
On arrival at the station Mr. Holland asked the
boy for a paper. “Yes, sir,” said the boy, “five shil-
lings, please sir.” “Five what?” exploded Mr. Hol-
land. “A penny, you mean?” “No, sir,” said the
boy; “they are five shillings now. Don’t you know
the Government has prohibited all advertising, and
the people what makes the papers say that it don’t
MERRY FACES—SAD HEARTS. French Farm Girls bringing in their Sheaves
Mr. Holland came down to breakfast not in the
best of tempers. However, his porridge was well
cooked, because his wife always superintended the
preparation of meals, and he became somewhat
mollified as breakfast proceeded, especially as the
eggs and bacon were just as he liked them. But
when he came to his coflfee he uttered a sudden
exclamation that shocked his wife. “What’s wrong
with the coffee, dear?” queried she.. “Mary made
it this morning, as I was busy with the eggs and
bacon.” “Wrong!” said Mr, Holland. “It’s not
coffee at all. I don’t know what it is. Some rubbish
Mary has got hold of.”
Mary came in answer to the bell, and when asked
to account for the coffee she explained that there
were no labels on the tins, and she must have made
a mistake, and used the curry powder, thinking it
was the coffee. “The tins,” she added, “were both
alike.” “Not labelled!” exclaimed Mr. and Mrs,
Holland in chorus. “No,” said Mary. “Didn’t you
know, Marm, that the Government has prohibited
pay to print them at less'than five shillings each,
now there ain’t advertisements to ’elp to pay the
cost.” “Then I’ll do without,” said Mr. Holland,
very much annoyed at the prospect of a train jour-
ney without a morning paper.
He walked on to the platform, and, as was his
habit, pulled out his watch to check it by the station
clock. But the clock was missing. “Where’s the
clock —gone for repairs?” said he to the station
master. “No, sir,” was the reply, “it’s gone for
good. Didn’t you know about the new Act the Go-
vernment passed prohibiting advertising? They
say that clocks advertise the time, so they have to
go. It is a go when the clocks go like that, isn’t
it?” said the station master, who was a facetious
man.
Mr. Holland could scarce believe his senses, and
pinched himself to see if he was dreaming. But, no,
surely he was awake all right.
He wandered up the platform as the train came in,
looking for a smoking carriage. But he could find
SPLENDID flip)) SPE7VDTHRIFT^|^>


CARNEGIE
possess all the musical attributes necessary
to satisfy the most cultivated musical tastes.
There is a certain prestige in the posses-
sion of a Carnegie Piano, and abundant
satisfaction in the knowledge that it is
BRITISH.
The Human Touch of
Without using technical terms it is difficult
to explain why the Angelus Player Piano
so closely imitates the human touch, but if
you should call, it can be demonstrated in
a few moments. It is due to what are
called Diaphragm Pneumatics, found only
in the ‘‘Angelus.”
In very truth the “Angelus” is unique.
CARNEGIE & SONS
334 GEORGE ST., just below G.P.O.
SYDNEY
PIANOS
The “ Angelus ”
The House for GOOD Pianos
no lettering to inform him which car was a smoker,
nor which was first or second class, so he climbed
into the nearest carriage, and found to his relief that
it was “a first,” and that the men were smoking, so
he supposed it was all right.
He noticed that there were no hoardings along
the railway line; but that was a relief to him.
“Rum go this, isn’t it?” said the passenger sitting-
next to him, “this prohibiting all advertising?”
“Then, it’s true, is it?” said Mr. Holland, “I thought
they had been pulling my leg.” “No fear” said the
man; “it’s true enough. I wonder what fool thing
the Government will do next?” •
Mr. Holland ihandged tb get to his tram car all
right, as he’knew just whence it started, and was
too deep in conversation with a friend he met to
notice anything strange until he alighted at King
street. He walked into the vestibule of the large
building in which his office was located, and noticed
WHEN POLYGAMY IS COMPULSORY.
Fancy marshalling one’s platoon, twenty at least, for the
honeymoon, every Saturday afternoon.
that the memorial tablets on each side, erected by
an affectionate landlord to the memory of the ten-
ants who paid their rents regularly, and bearing
their names and numbers, were all missing. Then
as he entered the elevator he noticed the driver
counting the floors. This was rendered necessary
owing to the fact that the numbers were gone.
“Are not the numbers on the floors?” said he to
the driver. “No numbers, sir. Government has
took ’em off. Said it was advertising which floor
it was, and advertising ain’t allowed now, sir.”
“Well, I’m dithered,” said he; and so-he was. But
he was to be still more dithered before the day was
out.
On entering the office he noticed strange looks on
the faces of the staff, and on reaching his private
' , -
/fie SPLENDID SPE^DTHRIFT^j^


Mcllrath’s
Soldiers Parcels
contain just those fresh, wholesome goods that
will appeal to the boys at the front. They
will carry perfectly. Let us send one to your
soldier friend. If you have no soldier friend
send the money to the War Chest Fund.
When ordering, be careful to give name and
address of soldier to whom you wish the
parcel to be sent, with full details as to rank,
number, battalion, etc.,
Mcllrath’s Limited
Head Office and Country Order Department
Cor. Pitt and Goulburn Streets, Sydney
Branches in all the Principal Suburbs.
room he also noted that his name had been taken
off the door. “Here, what’s this?’’ said he to his
typist. “Who took my name off the door? What
trick is this ?” “No trick, sir,” said the typist. “The
Government sent a man to remove it early this
morning. Said it was advertising, and was pro-
hibited by law.” “Oh! hang the Government,”
shouted he. “It might not be a bad thing,” said his
typist, gently.
Then Mr. Holland rang the bell and asked for the
chief accountant. “Kindly ask him to bring ledger
‘A to C,’ ” said he.
After several minutes had elapsed the accountant
came, bringing the ledger, with many apologies
“Couldn’t find it readily, sir. You see, they won’t let
us letter them now. Say it is advertising, and ad-
vertising is prohibited under this new law.”
Mr. Holland said nothing. He felt that what he
might say would perhaps be “taken down in writing
and used in evidence against him,” as the police
have it, so silence was golden.
Having opened his mail, he rang for his typist to
take some dictation in reply thereto. “By the way.”
said he, “bring me a few memo, forms with our
business heading. “They are only blanks, sir,” was
the reply. “The Government has ruled that it is
advertising to put your name and business on your
stationery, and they have served us with a notice
to withdraw all we had printed.” Again Mr. Hol-
land was speechless.
Then he rang for his office boy to go out to buy
him some cigars. After a prolonged absence the
boy returned, and handed the cigars to his employer.
“Here, boy,” said he, “these cigars are not the brand
I have, and, besides, there are no brands on them.”
“No, sir,” said the lad (he was one of-those rare
birds who always called his master “sir”); your
tobacconist said he knew your brand all right, but
he was not so sure about them himself, as the Go-
vernment would not allow brands on the cigars, nor
names on the boxes, now, because it’s advertising,
and advertising is prohibited.”
Then came lunch time, and Mr. Holland betook
himself to his favourite restaurant, seated himself
at his usual table, and asked for the menu. “No
menu now, Mr. Holland,” said the girl who was
accustomed to wait upon him. “No menu! Why,
what on earth do you mean? You don’t say they
class that as advertising?” Mr. Holland was be-
ginning to size up the situation, so to speak. “Yes,
sir,” said the waitress, “the Government have de-
cided that it comes under the heading of advertis-
ing to print any menus or wine cards, so we just
have to tell you what is ‘on.’ ” “Like a ninepenny
hash-house,” muttered Mr. Holland.
Then one by one Holland’s friends came in to
lunch, and they discussed this new move of the Go-
vernment. “I wonder what fool ever conceived
such a hare-brained scheme?” said Jobson, who was
always “agin the Government.” Mr. Holland’s ears
tingled. He remembered the conversation of the
night before with his wife, and was silent.
One by one they narrated their experiences, and
told how they had been inconvenienced at every
turn. This one had wanted a directory to look up
an address. It was missing. The Government had
ruled it out as advertising. So also with the tele-
phone book, the street maps, maps of the State and
Commonwealth, and even the railway and steamer
time-tables.
“But these things cannot be done without,” pro-
tested Mr. Holland. “They are necessary to busi-
ness ; its very essentials. The world cannot exist
without them.” “Neither can it without advertis-
ing,” said Jack Admans, who was a publicity expert.
“You cannot have business without advertising, any
more than you can have omelettes without break-
ing eggs.” All assented except Mr. Holland. He
sat silent. He was thinking deeply.
On his return to the office his wife rang him up
to say that her maid had not been able to get
through her work, owing to the number of delivery
men, porters, and others who had been constantly
ringing the bell, searching for the houses of people
to whom they had been commissioned to deliver
parcels.
“Can’t the fools read the numbers on the houses?”
asked Mr. Holland. “That’s just the trouble, dear,”
said his wife, sweetly. “There are no numbers.
Even the names of the streets have gone.”
“Names of the streets gone! What in heaven’s
name do you mean?” “The Government say that it
is advertising to print the names of streets, or to
have signs to direct people,” replied Mrs. Holland,
“You know you said last night you wished ” Her
husband rang off angrily.
Continued on page 44


FO
! |RFI IWWI IRWITmTT
iOwju
frr
l'S^‘
I
Mark Foy’s
Complete Organisation
Consists of Three
Separate Establishments
1. The Piazza (Main Building), in Liverpool Street,
devoted to the service of the public in supplying
every description of Wearing Apparel, Household
Drapery, Boots and Shoes, Fancy Goods, Travelling
Requisites, Jewellery and Silver Plate, Grocery,
Crockery, etc.
2. The Furniture Emporium and Showrooms,
corner of Liverpool and Elizabeth Streets (facing
Hyde Park), devoted to the interest of the public
in the sale of all classes of Household and Office
Furniture, Carpets, Linoleums, Bedsteads, Bedding,
etc.
Furniture Catalogue Post Free
3. The Hardware Building (opposite “The Piazza”
in Elizabeth Street). The service offered by this
section of our business appeals particularly to the
Country Resident, the Grazier, the Squatter, the Man
on the Land —for here are stocked every
of Tools and Agricultural Implements, Poultry
Farmer’s Requisites (Incubators, Brooders, etc.).
Poultry Foods, Electric Fittings, Stoves and All
Classes of Heating and Lighting Arrangements, Iron-
mongery, Paints, Wall-papers, Sanitary Ware, All
Classes of Kitcnen Ware, Sporting Goods, Fishing
Tackle, Tobacco and Cigars, etc., etc.
It will thus be seen that the comprehensive nature
of Mark Foy’s Business renders them particularly
well fitted to serve the interests of Country Resi-
dents—no matter what sphere of business life they
are engaged in.
Write to Mark Foy’s
for All Requirements
Coffee Stalls Again
Col. Morshead, 33rd Battalion, writes to one of
our Commissioners in France under date 17th
March last:—
“Your supplies of cocoa and milk, bovril, oxo
and soups for the men in the front line, and your
coffee stall which is practically in the trenches, and
which gives any man, at any time, biscuits and a
cup of hot cocoa, free of cost, have been the great-
est boon to my men during the severe winter
weather. It is most gratifying that the Aus-
tralian Comforts’ Funds cater for the men in the
trenches, the men who do the hard work and
fighting and endure all the hardships.
“I am very grateful, too, for the many gifts
you have made us for our recreation when in
billets- —Gramophone and records, footballs, box-
ing gloves, punching balls, quoits, and games.
“All ranks appreciate your many kindnesses
and never-failing courtesies. I cannot thank you
too much nor commend your efforts too highly.”
But Here’s About the Latest and Best Regarding
Coffee Stalls.
Cable from Commissioner Woodburn, at the Lon-
don office: —
“Staff Captain Fraser (4th Infantry Brigade)
called to-day convevino r General Brand’s appreci-
ation of War Chest work in recent advance. Re-
.ports that representative Fell (John Fell,
Northwood, Sydney) served hot coffee in cap-
tured enemy trenches within an hour, thus enabl-
ing our men to continue. Speaks most eulogistic-
ally of our front line work,”
No wonder that Padre Dexter calls Fell his “Get
there man.”
To get there ! an hour after occupation !
To get oil stoves, coffee and milk, and water
there 1 Well —(H. Budden talked for 45 minutes on
this subject whilst ye Editor didn’t listen, and we
regret good copy is lost).
No. 2156 Serg. L. K. Swan, “C” Co., 40th Bat-
talion, 3rd Australian Division, 8.E.F., France,
writes:—
“My word, the Comforts’ Fund are doing good
work all right.”
And General Sir William Birdwood endorses the
above thus:—
“All members of the A.I.F. send our most grate-
ful thanks to the kind workers in Australia, who
have done so much to help the Australian soldiers
through times of difficulty and discomfort in the
field. What that help has meant none but those
who have seen it on the spot can possibly realise,
and we hope that our friends in Australia, who
have assisted in making the Australian Comforts’
Fund the wonderful success it has proved, will
accept our Christmas greetings Which are sent
with a feeling of deep gratitude to. them.”
Note. —The “Australian Comforts’ Fund” is the
War Chest at the Front.
SPLENDID (^yfsPE^DTHRIFT^^^


A.I.F. Australian Comforts Funds
February 6th, 1917.
COPY.
To H. E. Budden, Esq., J.P.,
66 Victoria Street. Westminster,
London, S.W.
I would like to tender my thanks and those of
the men of my Battalion on Active Service in
France, for the past 9 months, for the very active
and excellent interest you have maintained in their
welfare, during- times which have been both
strenuous and trying. The able and timely assist-
ance of your representative, Mr. Fell, has been ours
without asking, and I don’t think that I am wrong
in saying that the comforts sent to us by you
through him have been largely instrumental in
enabling the boys to pull through their trials in the
trenches and during their brief periods out of the
line.
Comforts Fund is doing for the boys so that you
can tell the people at home.
(Signed) ERIC LEWES,
Lieut.-Colonel,
Commanding Officer 47th Battalion,
12th Australian Infantry Brigade.
30th January, 1917.
The Garden Book
Edited by S. H. Hedworth.
A book written by experts on five of the most
beautiful of modern garden flowers. Here are all
the secrets of producing prize blooms laid bare for
the first time. If you want to “scoop the pool” at
the next flower show, buy a copy of Mr. Hedworth’s
book. It tells everything about growing roses,
carnations, sweet peas, dahlias, chrysanthemums.
This book will be for sale on all of the stalls at
Killara Village Fair, and on the War Chest Day—
price 2/- per copy.
H.M.S. “Lion” returning to port after North Sea engagement
We established soup and cocoa kitchens, manned
by our own men, right in the firing line to give
everybody a hot drink day and night, and they
were mightily availed of. Comforts supplied by
you then entirely formed the means of doing this.
Without them I would be unable to carry on.
I thought I would like to bring to your notice
some little idea of the good work your War Chest
Major Hector Clayton (of Sydney) writes from
4th Aust. Div. Base Depot —“Herewith I forward
receipt for the goods which came to hand with the
promptness characteristic of the War Chest Fund.
The sporting material is absolutely fine, and this
is a great incentive to the men to take care of it.
The gramaphones have never ceased to Melbatise
the Gallic air since they arrived. (We could do with
another thousand needles soon.)
' SPLENDID SPE*I>THRIFT"||f^


I I
(ic (
\ J '
Afjasf!
A Perfect Bath Heater
No home is complete without a Bath Heater —a warm
bath is an absolute health necessity—and when get-
ting a heater you may as well get the latest and best
The [ Dim ”
With Hot Shower Attachment
is something new—something different —something
better than an ordinary bath heater. Tested at the
Technical College it was proved most economical in
gas consumption.
It is a highly superior, SYDNEY-MADE article, made
of copper and exquisitely finished —artistic, strong,
and ever ready to give a quick supply at minimum
cost.
It takes up no floor space, you can hang it on the
wall over the bath.
Call in—see one demonstrated —learn the low price,
and have one sent home at once.
Also the latest Gas Stoves and Cookers, Electric
Cookers, Heaters, Utilities and Lights~in fact,
everything in modern heating and lighting.
“BANKS”
Otherwise John Danks & Son Pty. Ltd.
“ The House for Heat and Light ”
324 Pitt St., near Liverpool St., Sydney
391 Bourke St. ■ ■ Melbourne
ON NIGHT DUTY
By HERBERT TRACY
Written for The Spendthrift
“This is your first case, nurse, I understand.” Dr.
Thresher struggled into his heavy motor-coat and
turned to the young girl who had followed him along
the dimly-lighted hall.
“It is my first—out of hospital,” she answered,
quite needlessly.
“Of course, of course,” he grunted, “You will
need to be extra careful. He must have that medir
cine every hour —every hour, understand. Do not
let him sleep beyond the hour. Not that sleep is
likely, though. Morphia if he gets out of hand—
not otherwise. Good-night.”
“ Well, yer know, I like the photo of you in your
gas mask best.”
[London BYSTANDER
Stella Graham, qualified nurse, was somewhat
nervous. That was unusual. For a girl who could
endure, undaunted, the horrors of the operating
theatre after a frightful train smash it was dis-
tressing. She remembered that occasion. Five
nurses had fainted. She, the youngest of them, had
braved it. “I must not be nervy now,” she told
herself.
It was past midnight. Satisfying herself that
the patient was comfortable she retired to the ad-
joining room where she was to sit, a silent sentinel
guarding a life that flickered like a long-burned
tallow-dip. She smiled grimly as the simile occurred
to her. Yes, he was like that—a tallow-dip, small
and old-fashioned; yet now and again she had seen
SPEA'DTHmFWff^f^


an expression in those haunting eyes which sug-
gested a searchlight sinister and powerful.
She stirred the small fire which burned in the
large barely-furnished room, and promptly moved
away from it. Warmth promotes sleep. She must
not sleep.
The house was an old one —very old, and built
of weatherboards. Years ago, when old Broderick
McKinnon owned the homestead and its pastures,
folk would drive miles to partake of its cheery
hospitality. His son, who succeeded to it was
miserly and unpopular. Shunned by his neighbours,
Gerald McKinnon led a lonely life. Now, when the
crisis of his undermined health was hard upon him
he had none to tend him but his servants, and the
nurses they had sent from Sydney—two of them
to watch him night and day.
Andrews, the groom, told Stella Graham some of
the McKinnon history that day when she took her
Serving the tired Troops with coffee after an attack.
Drawn for "The Splendid Spendthrift" by P. A. Leason
exercise in the grounds. The son had been a hot-
headed ne’er-do-well, causing much grief to the
Honorable old Broderick. “There was some,” said
Andrews, though he was not the one to spread such
tales, as said that Gerald’s brother, David, had not
fallen down the dry well shaft, but was cast over
the side by his brother during a violent quarrel.”
“Yes, missie, he was killed,” said Andrews, “but
the verdict was accidental death, all right.”
So, perhaps, Stella mused, there would be a ghost.
Well, that was all in order. It was a likely house
for ghosts, and a likely night. She arose and drew
the curtain tight across the window. It gave her a
feeling of greater security. Distant rumbling and
the sharp cadences of the wind foretold a coming
storm. Inside the house an ominous silence pre-
vailed. The ticking of the clock noisily measured
out the slow-passing seconds. Stella, new to night-
duty in a silent house, had never experienced a
situation quite so tense. Of a sudden she heard
from the adjoining room an agonising cry, “Oh, my
God—my God!” She rushed to her patient. This
was one of his fearful paroxsyms of pain. Seized
by a malignant disease his life was slowly ebbing,
and each day and night brought additional torture
for him.
For an hour she tended him, administering again
the prescribed dose of sedative. Then she returned
to the outer room. Slowly the minutes dragged.
She kept herself awake by trying to count the
stripes in her blouse and by listening to the swish
of the branches against the window pane. Once
she started violently. She heard sounds as of mea-
sured footfalls on the stairs. No one came. She
thought of David, and the ghost. “This will not
do,” she exclaimed suddenly, “I’m getting nervy
I’ll write a letter to Jack.”
Passing the mirror she glimpsed her tall shapely
figure. Her arms, bared to the elbows after the
performance of her duties, revealed the lithe lines
that belong to patrician stock. “Yes,” she told
herself, appreciatively, “I guess I’d still pass muster
in an evening frock despite my probationing slavery.
That gash above the elbow was an unkind cut of
Fate, all the same.”
Leaving her sleeves rolled up she commenced
to write.
In the oppressive stillness of the room the
scratching of her pen competed with the ticking of
the clock. These two between them monopolised
the noises of the night. The wind had fallen. Out-
side the storm mustered its forces prior to its
attack.
“I am writing to you,” so she started, “from a
quaint, weird old place that reminds me of some
house I knew in the long, long ago, when I was
quite a wee bairn. How it all comes back now in
the stillness of the oppressive night! Two por-
traits on the wall above me remind me strangely of
my own father and mother —but this is the merest
fancy, surely, for I was quite a little girl when I lost
them both.
“I wonder what you are doing to-night, over
there in France. As I am doing, perhaps—‘On
guard.’ Oh, yes, lam doing my ‘sentry go’ here.
They would shoot you if you slept, wouldn’t they ?
Me too! Oh, but they would. I’m sure that old
fudge of a doctor would have the life of me if
I slept.
“But you would not sleep at your post with
so many lives in your charge, would you, Jack?
And I, if I am to be worthy of you in the after-
years, I shall not forget my duty. Though frank-
ly the life that is in my care should have gone
out long ago. He suffers so —and there is no
hope.”
Thus she wrote, chattily, far into the night, and
the great stillness crept up around her like the
fog that weaves a shroud for the vessel speeding
to its doom.
Continued on page 45.
SPLENDID SPE^JDTHRIFT:f|^>


Commence Now— and give
your Children
Elliotts
Fruit
Saline
( ■ i
Continue right through
the Summer, and they
will not be troubled by
any overheating of the
blood.
Elliotts Fruit Saline is
pleasant to take, being
more in the nature of a
Summer Drink than a
medicine. v
Take it yourself if you
are subject to bilious-
ness, acidity of the
stomach, torpid liver or
headache.
11
Elliotts Fruit Saline
is procurable from all Chemists
in New South Wales
In Action
Written for the Spendthrift.
The purple night is scarred with blood.
“How arc you, mate?.. . . Try not to squeak!”
Out of the night there comes a flood
Of crimson fire . . . “Mate, did you speak?”
' l'he night is spilling slaughter now.
“Move over, mate ... I’m with you stilt.
That beggar caught me . . . Curse the coze!
1 cannot see you . . . God, hozv chill!’’
The noise of battle dies azvay.
“We’re home again. . . Mate , have a drink . .
The world is swinging into grey . . .
“We’ll have another storm, I think.’’ .
“Mate, speak. . . No anszver yet . . . I’m done .
War has the same old tale to tell
Of every mother’s fallen son
In mateship at the gate of Hell.
Z. c. s.
ONLY HIS WAY OF PUTTING IT.
Private O’Rafferty (convalescent) : “ Well, goodbye
nurse. If ever there was a fallen angel, you are
one.
The Miser.
7 he Demi is a jester dry,
And of his gifts a miser.
Fools prayed, “Send us a King!” The sly
Old rogue chucked them a Kaiser.
Ah, but since the patriot glow
Burns Australia’s bosoms t yet
Twice and thrice ye will, I know,
Pay your debt!
Owen Seaman.
SPLENDID SPENDTHRIFT


Voluntary Clerical Workers
Having- overheard scraps of conversation in tram
and ferry between groups of my fellow travellers,
T gathered something of the work being done by
the Voluntary Clerical War Workers. My curiosity
was further aroused by seeing now and then in the
newspapers donations to this Fund "and that, of
sums varying from iio to £5O. This led me to make
enquiries and 1 hud that this unique association,
with a subscription of threepence weekly, has given
PAINFULLY PROPHETIC—THE KAISER AND
HIS RECRUIT.
Wilhelm : “Ah ! that’s right, Ferdy, my boy! We Germans must
hang together y’ know.”
Ferdinand (sotto voce): “Beastly unpleasant way of putting it! ”
£3OO to various funds, and its total expenses for the
year is under £3 stg.
My next step was to call on one of the branches
of the association for assistance in issuing’circu-
lars —2,000 circulars were supplied with envelopes
and stamps, and in a few days were all returned,
envelopes addressed and stamped, circulars folded,
and the lot ready for posting, and enquiries showed
that as the strike had interfered with working over-
time, and usual office routine, the work had been
distributed through a new club which has recently
been launched and to which a number of these
clerical workers belong.
A vast amount of clerical work has been done by
these clerical workers, notably bands of trained
workers attended at the State Recruiting Campaign
live evenings a week for six months —representing
about 1,000 hours’ labour for this job alone.
In addition to this circle of activity, 350 men were
equipped with woollen comforts, and assistance has
been given to returned soldiers and dependents in
stocking their farms with poultry, etc.
My readers will probably ask for the local habita-
tion and the name of this association, and the club,
but I don’t intend to give it. They shun advertise-
ment and limelight, and as they have shown such
a quiet efficiency in getting things done, it is not
my intention to “butt in.” If my readers’ curiosity
is' aroused. I suggest they enquire of their most
capable acquaintances and they won’t be long in
getting in touch with and probably becoming mem-
bers of this fine organisation.
Illuminated Advertising over
a Dugout
■ v ‘ ' . i
Private J. W. H. Dennis, writing to his wife,
“Wyandra,” Bamfield St.,
Sandringham. Victoria,
ti/6/’ l7.
(At Bapaume, and since reported wounded!!)
“Last night we had a long walk three or four
miles each way over duck-boards and muddy: road
our squad was carrying things.V,
“On the way home we called at the ‘Soup Kit-
chen.’ The sign is cut out of a tin like a wool bale
stencil plate, and nailed over the front of a biscuit
box with a lighted candle it;side. You can read the
sign plainly SOUP KITCHEN. It is over the en-
trance to a dugout. | . V :?.
“In a big enjpty biscuit tin are s ) am and milk tins
with rough edges, the lids on just as they were
opened; the turned-up lid acts as a handle, as the
soup (pea soup mostly) is steaming hot. Each
soldier takes a tin an*l %o£g down four steps
into the dug-out: r Here another soldier serves out
the soup over a little counter (boxes). It s grand
to have a drink of hot soup when the nights are
so cold, and men are coming home from all night
work tired.”
He goes on :
“We came home last night past the Soup Kitchen
again, but we three did not wait for any soup, as
there was quite a little crowd of soldiers waiting,
and it would have delayed us too long. These men
had been in the front line of trenches for two days,
and were just coming back to rest. It was a very
cold day, with a cold northerly wind and snow!
“The'Soup Kitchen I mentioned is run by the
‘A.C.F.’ I saw the flag over the dug-out to-night.
I think the soup is made from tinned soup; anyhow,
it is jolly good Some nights there is cocoa, hot
and steaming. Two evenings ago while we were
SPLENDID


“Her hair was like the pale faint gold,
September's sun sheds o'er the land ,
And soft to touch and slim to hold,
The white perfection of her hand."
INTELLIGENT and persistent
care, that’s the secret of pre-
serving a good complexion or
improving a poor one.
The delicate tints of a clear,
smooth skin enhance a woman’s
beauty to a marked degree.
Nyal’s Face Cream
(with Peroxide)
The faithful and constant use
of this delightfully clean non-
greasy cream will cause your
complexion to become as dainty
and as soft as the tender bloom
of a ripening peach.
Wrinkles, the-bugbear of every
modern woman, quickly dis-
appear after gentle massage;
also blackheads, greasiness, skin
blemishes, etc.
NyaPs Face Cream is sold by your
chemist in dainty opal jars,
at 1/6 and 2/6
waiting our turn, a gramophone was reeling off
tunes from the dug-out!
“I also hear that our waterproof capes came from
this Fund. They deserve thanks—just see if you
can send an acknowledgment yourself.”
March 15th, 1917, in France.
Socks!
It may have been humble —it was huge!
It may have been lowly—it was for the feet!
120,000 pairs of socks!!!
That was the offering by the women, and child-
ren, workers for the War Chest, in two months to
their soldiers at the front!
This was the splendid effort made in response to
a message from Commissioner Woodburn:—
“As time goes on we find more and more need
for SHIRTS and SOCKS, mainly because in
present war conditions the facilities for clean
changes of underclothing are not available. We
could do with SOCKS and SHIRTS bv the HUN-
DRED THOUSAND, and—please do not omit it—
mark every one of them GIFTS.”
A remarkable photograph depicting the explosion of a
projectile from a 12-inch field howitzer
Remember also, you men, that last year, before
Christmas we distributed to the ist, 2nd, 4th, and
sth Divisions at the front, 81,960 pairs of socks!
That is why Pte. H. A. Boddington, of sth
Pioneers, writes home (to Brighton-le-Sands,
Sydney) : —“No trench-feet in our crowd because of
the sox, those received from the War Chest.”
After the private, let the Colonel testify. Lt.-
Col. A. W. Ralston, D. 5.0., 20th Battalion, writes: —-
“The things that have proved most useful have
been the socks; when they do get trench-feet
they are generally not so bad as to be in danger
of losing them.”
There you have the work of the War Chest made
clear!
Preventing trench feet by supplying extra socks.
Preventing sickness by supplying changes of diet.
Preventing coughs and colds by supplying warm
clothing and warm food.
SPLENDID (fgfl) SPE7»JDTHRIFT^^)


■BiBWISIWIIBIBIfIIBIBIBIB
B Che
: vennorc
Smile
: : '
■II
i •
ill ; •
_
s a
i .
mm
■!■!■!■!■!■!■
You know this
smile but
dojyou know—
<C/ie
EVERMORE^
■
I
oTROPPER
Price J3/~
The only automatic Stropper
which g|vcs the true Sly de-Stroke
so essential in sharpening any
raTpr.
Special adapters are provided
with each Stropper for the.
sharpening of any make of
sa/cty -razor blade both sirse
and double ecked.
■B!BNBiA!llB!B!B!i!BlBlB!B!B!B!BIB!B!B[B!B!IlBlBlBlB
-I. *
Arrows
DiACOHAL
OIACOMA
-X
GOING
DOWN
GOI
x h"
m pull*
Ask your Dealer to demonstrate it
KBIBIBIIIiII'EIBIIiRIHBIBSBIBIBIHSBIBIBJBIBIBIBIBIBIBI
" The Spendthrifts” Good Friends !
t “The Spendthrift” is a victim of “Speeding-up.”
Any resentment? Nary. Being a war-worker he
didn’t recognise overtime. The notice was all too
short. The job had to be done in one week! It was
done. Now a word or two for those who made it
possible.
We went to some of Sydney’s prominent adver-
tisers, put the proposition up to them, told them it
was to aid the North Shore Line Village Fair at
Killara on the Bth September, and the big War
Chest Hold-up on September 28th. The cost ?
No, it wasn’t a cheap scheme by anv means. Did
they hesitate or refuse? None of them. Had it
not been for their kindly aid “The Spendthrift”
could never have started. Now we want YOU to
remember THEM. It’s a fair thing. They’re all
good firms, and we would be glad if you will re-
member their timely aid when you need goods such
as they sell.
TRUE IMOERIALIM.
Friendly Butcher (to wavering customer) : “Now ! Ma, can’t I
tempt you to a bit of ‘Noo Zealand’—our special Anzac
breed? Guaranteed as tender as the soldier-boys is tough.”
Our cover-design ? That is by Artist Syd. Smith.
Good chap that he. is, he did wonders in the very
short time allowed him. Hartland & Hyde made
the printing-blocks from this design, with the same
ready responsiveness. Engravers Fred Randle and
Geo. Woods also rendered appreciable assistance.
The blocks illustrating “The Spendthrift” were
burgled from Mr. H. Chilton Young, Editor of The
P.F.A. Magazine. He looked the other way and
grinned whilst the deed was perpetrated. Attkins,
McQuitty, Ltd., did the printing for next-to-cost. All
the contributors rose to the occasion like the good
sports that they are —so here’s “The Spendthrift” a
regular profiteer for the cause we all of us admire.
If we have had to commandeer one or two little
things, then as the purpose has justified the deed,
we know that we’ll be forgiven as quickly as we
hope our manifold sins will be.
Ourselves? Well, we’re just some of the Adver-
• tising Service Agents of this city, for this good
purpose associated. But perhaps you never heard
of us before. Never mind, you'll hear of us again!
SPLENDID SPENDTHRIFT^|^>


Women War - Workers
and their SIGHT.
THE womenfolk are carry-
-1 ing much of the war
burden, silently, effectually.
Knitting and sewing, cooking,
packing, writing—all day long
and far into the nights they
toil so that fighting men may
have their comforts.
All this means a heavy tax
upon the sight.
BARRACLOUGH GLASSES,
being scientifically prescribed and
prepared, restore weakening eyes
to normal visual power. The relief
is remarkable. That is because
the process is optically correct.
Prices including testing, from 17/6.
Barraclough
(H. A. Barraclough Ltd.),
J. A. BARRACLOUGH > D.8.0.A.
H. K Barraclough I
E. K. Barraclough )
A. H. Barraclough lonhow
585 George St., opp. Strand, Sydney.
And Newcastle and Melbourne.
Breezes
A little breeze came forth from the South across the
mellowing lands;
It placed a finger on my mouth and fumbled with m\
hands;
It brought the scent of flowers and of loquat trees!
And my Soul sought Southward for the heart of the
breeze!
A bright wind bustled from the West, I heard the
spinmng screws!
Loud bows upon the deep sea quest!—the singing of
the crezvs!
And all the salt teas wakened in the blood of me;
And my soul journeyed Westward at the call of the
sea!
A soft breath sought me from the street, warm, yellow
zvith the lights!
It In ought the march of merry feet —the City's singing
Nights! '
And straight my heart fared outward to find the rosy
joys
! hat szvim up on the current of the town-tide's noise!
A lazy breeze stept down the slopes o’er banks of
golden gorse!
It told of paths that tzvined like ropes!—of many a
cropping horse!
And then my heart diced zvith the town to have its
gipsy will
And found a pair of sturdy legs and climbed a zvonder-
hill! '
O! Soon a grey breeze szvept the chill of night across
the skies
But there above your zvindozv-sill I sazv your shining
eyes!
Soft lights . zvithin the dim shades like flashes of
amethyst! .
And the East Star and the West Star, leaned over
and kissed!
Yet never voice nor eager lips, nor lily hand can still
The music of the driving ships!—the tunes upon the
hill!
And my soul fares forth to where the world breaks
wide,
For the singing heart, though anchored, must szving
zvith the tide!
Boyce Bowden.
This was not written by an Australian soldier to
an Australian girl:—
Thanks for the socks,
They were some fit!
I wear one for a helmet
And one for a mit;
I Would like to meet 'yon
When I’ve done my bit;
But where in hell
Did you learn to knitf
7/g’ SPENDTHRIFT:^^>


THE MANOEUVRES
OF DELICIA
By J. W. W. CORNFORTH.
Written for The Spendthrift.
I do not mind confessing that the early hours of
the day discover me with a tinge of melancholy
beclouding my usually sweet and amiable disposi-
tion.
To-day, particularly, I was conscious of it. The
long walk home last night and the loss of a collai
stud this morning both contributed to the cloud
which enveloped me.
I was, therefore, distinctly irritated on entering
the breakfast room, to find Delicia awaiting me
looking fresh, untroubled, nay positively joyous.
1 passed to my seat with a certain solemnity of
demeanour which I hoped would be considered im-
“Allah Strafe Willie.”
pressive. Evidently I was insufficiently solemn, for,
before I could open the paper preparatory to com-
mencing my no-gas-after-eight breakfast, Delicia
said brightly “you must be saving a lot of money
now the trams don’t run after dark.”
This as a gambit to a would-be cheerful conver-
sation struck me as peculiarly tactless. The mem-
ory of my last night’s homeward plod ceased to be
a merely subconscious irritant to my mood and be-
came an active cause for discontent.
Still —with great nobility as it seemed to me —I
determined to enlighten Delicia’s ignorance. “My
dear wife,” said I, “you labor under a woman’s dis-
ability, in arguing only from the prima-facie ...”
“What’s three sixes,” said Delicia. 1 cannot deny
that I was annoyed by this interruption to what I
felt was going to be an impressive piece of economic
exposition.
Still clinging with both hands to my reputation
for kindly courtesy, I remarked that eighteen was
the answer favoured by most of the better-known
mathematicians. “But,” said 1, “as 1 was about ro
remark, women invariably fail to consider the ”
But I noticed Delicia was not attending. I caught
little muttered sentences, “and it’s three-hapence a
section now, and he takes two trams, that’s three-
pence and three eighteens” —here followed some
rapid finger play upon the tablecloth, and then—“So
you’ve saved five shillings since the strike started.”
A crumb of toast prevented me from correcting her
arithmetic and from once more embarking- on that
economic disquisition which now, my newly awak-
ened suspicions warned me, was likely to become
urgently necessary.
Delicia regarded me sympathetically. She even
made no reference to the cofifee spilt on the cloth
at the height of the paroxysm.
I confess that I adopted unworthy tactics here by
contriving to simulate an intermittent coughing
what time I opened the paper. I glanced at the
headlines when —
“Jack, dear, what’s a tithe?”
A trifle wearily, though with a little prayer of
thankfulness that the matter of the tram fares was
forgotten, I cleared my throat and began “Accord-
ing to Hebrew Law as laid down by the author of
the Pentateuch, whose identity may I say in par-
enthesis, is the subject of much controversy among
exponents of the higher criticism ”
A great light dawned on Delicia’s face. “I know,”
she said, “a tithe means ten times.”
I was aghast! but before I could bring my verbal
batteries to bear, Delicia rushed on —
“And if the strike lasts another three weeks you’ll
have saved ten shillings, and ten times ten shillings
is five pounds. So that’s what you have to give me
for War Chest Day. It says so in the Penta-some-
thing and I’m on the committee, anyway.”
I rose:
“The War Chest,” said I, “is a fund which com-
mands my every sympathy. Its work upon the
burning sands of Egypt, in the midst ”
Delicia clapped her hands delightedly.
“Dear old thing,” she purred, “I’m so glad you
think like that about it. You won’t miss that fiver;
it’s the one you hid in your old tobacco jar. I
found it yesterday in your study.” Then innocently
“Did he mean to buy cigars with it?” I left the
room somewhat hurriedly.
Two thoughts occur to me. First, that Delicia
should have been a company promoter or a Federal
Treasurer, where her talents would have had more
scope; secondly, I know exactly how a jam tart
feels when it’s trodden on.
SPLENDID SPE^DTHMFT?|ffig>


The “SHACKLETON"
REFRIGERATOR
Economical , Hygienic and
handsome in appearance
These Ice Chests
are manufactured
by us in our
modern factory-
by skilled work-
men from special-
ly selected well
seasoned oak,
French polished,
and in addition to
being economical
in use, form an
attractive piece of
furniture.
1
t
Size
I CHEST
. 20 x 14 x 36
With Brass Fittings, £2 18s.
With Nickel Fittings, £3 7s.
6d.
6d.
m
-
No. 4 CHEST
Every principle
that makes for
economy— cleanli-
ness and effi-
ciency is em-
bodied in their
manufacture, and
they are superior
in every way to
the expensive im-
ported refrigera-
tors.
We illustrate two
popular lines, and
invite inspection
to other sizes and
styles.
Brass Fittings and Galvanised Inside, £5 Os.
Nickel „ „ „ £5 10s.
Nickel Fittings and Porcelain Inside, £6 Os.
Open until 9 p.m. every Friday
S. WALDER Ltd
340, 342 Pitt St., Sydney
What About Warm Food ?
Gee! Haven’t you heard of the “Tommy
Cooker?” What says this man. Lt. S. W. Reale,
D. Com., 59th Battalion:—
“Your Tommy Cookers are God-sends. There
is no better sight than to see two or three men
heating up their issued ration on a cold, wet
morning, especially with this mud in fashion.”
There’s more between the lines still in this;—
“In acknowledging the receipt of Tommy
Cookers and refills, I would like to express, on
behalf of the battalion, our appreciation of this
gift. We were just about to go into the line when
we received them and they are issued to the men,
as far as possible, about four (4) to a Cooker. As
the position was so exposed as to prevent com-
munication by day and impossible to light fires,
these Cookers were very useful in the trenches
and posts.
“A number were also used at the Regimental
Aid Post, which had been established so close up
as to be impossible to light a fire, and we were
thus able to give the wounded hot drinks while
waiting (sometimes for hours) in the cold and
wet.
“The Refills are being held until we go into the
line again, when they will be issued to. the men
going into the forward positions.
“Faithfully yours,
“(Sgd.) H. JAMES,
“Major 12th Battalion,
“(Temp.) O.C. 12th Battalion.”
Can you read between the lines? Yes! Then
you read how the War Chest Commissioner with
the Ist Division knowing when a battalion is moving
IN distributes Tommy Cookers and other essentials
to that unit just at the right time! That’s economy
of your gifts!
Also, you read how a unit of men —aye and their
wounded, as it happened—in an advanced position
“where no fires could be lighted” were dependent
upon your gift—your Tommy Cooker for the only
hot food it could enjoy for several days, three or
four days usually, but sometimes a week or more!
You try a week on army rations, and cold at that,
and then set a price on a Tommy Cooker! Yet
every eighteenpence you give the War Chest pur-
chases a Tommy Cooker for two or three men for
two or three days in an advanced post.
Eighteenpence, eighteenpence! it’s too good to be
true, you say. Well, make it three bob for two!.
Oh, you Splendid Spendthrift!
The only complaint I ever heard against our
Tommy Cookers was that the solidified alcohol fires
was solid alcohol!
General Birdwood in trenches at Gallipoli to 6ft.
4in. of Australian bone and brown skin, wetting his
face from a Dixie less than half full of water ;
“Good morning, my man, having a bath?”
“BARTH!! d’yer think Pm a canary!”
SPLENDID (fi^SPEJNDTHRIFT^^


They'll Know it's from You.
Say! how do the boys know that little tin Tommy
Cooker is sent by us daredevils at home? Ah!
that’s a good point! Well look on the lid, stamped
in the lid for all to read—“A Gift from the War
Chest. France, 1916.”
Here’s Commissioner Woodburn’s cable; —
“PURCHASED 50,000 TOMMY COOKERS
GOST £5,000 WILL REQUIRE ADDITIONAL
i 5,000 FOR REFILLS.”
£Bj,ooo in little Tommy Cookers (for little Mary)
how many eighteenpences ? Quickly! One hundred
and six thousand odd! Nothing when you say it
quickly, and but little when you give it quickly!
EIGHTEEN PENCE.
NIECE (to Aunt, who has appendicitis): “ Oh, how
fortunate you are; it must be a dream to be
operated on by him.”
Who Did This?
“The best thing I have struck yet is a little Coffee
Stall they were running just at the corner of
Reaucourt Wood, about half-way between Albert and
Pozieres where men coming and going from the
firing line would get a steaming hot drink at any
hour of the day or night for nothing. A couple
of Australian chaps were making kerosene tins of
cocoa and coffee by the dozen, and you simply filed
past and had your mug or Dixie filled.
It is the best thing I’ve seen and the right men
PTE. GEOFF. KENT, Strathfield.
ist Machine Gun Coy.
You Did!
You War Chest Workers! You Splendid
Spendthrifts!
Blood and Mud and Men
H. Budden, late Commissioner, writes: —
I have not seen, but your present Commissioner
T. S. Woodburn has, and I cannot forget his descrip-
tion —he has seen your men coming out of the
trenches, a broken Battalion, the survivors of an
awful bombardment, of an attack so simply de-
scribed in the paper as “being checked by barrage
fire.” Ask these poor fellows in hospital what that
means, ask these portions of men walking the world
again more as new inventions —half men, half
mechanical toys—those that have their reason left
—But many you have not and never will see have
lost that wonder of life too—lost reason —Some of
these men coming out will drop themselves in the
mud and weep and sob like broken hearted children
—it’s a pitiable sight to see brave men sit and weep
—simply broken up, nerve shaken—shell shock per-
haps.
Have you got the picture ?
The colour is all mud colour!
Everything is that colour because that pigment
is over everything and everyone.
The distance is say 3 or 4 miles behind the firing
line and this broken Battalion has another 3 or 4
miles to zvade before it rests and feeds—have you
got that? 3 or 4 miles! Wading, remember, not
walking! Mud from 3or 4 inches to 23 or 24 inches
deep; you won’t believe that, but I can’t help it! I
know the depth only in part —the tops of my boots!
But have you got the picture? Mud and Men—
more Men more Mud, and close beside is a dressing
station where is more Blood and Mud and Men!
Now here you step in: don’t mind the mud! Really,
if you could but step in and feel and see the con-
ditions ! Nothing you have done or are going to do
would give you an easy mind: you will seek activity
after activity and make effort after effort on behalf
of those brave fellows at the front.
Give the Youngsters a Bean Feast
Buy a copy of Will Donald’s “Kids Cannon”
Alpha Picture Book. 2/- is the price, but both you
and the little ones will get a fiver’s worth of joy
out of it. The whole proceeds will be given to
inflate the War Chest Fund. On sale at all stalls
on THE day.
That thing which I understand by real art is the
expression by man of his pleasure in labor. I do
not believe he can be happy in his labor without
expressing that happiness; and especially is this
so when he is at work at anything in which he
specially excels. —William Morris.
The Women Workers: —
And you, zvhose burden is to watch and wait —
High-hearted ever, strong in faith and prayer,
You ask what offering you may consecrate,
What humble service share.
Owen Seaman,
SPLENDID SPENDTHRIFT?^^


MOTHER
$
SYRUP
SHARPENS APPETITE, AIDS DIGESTION
ENSURES GOOD HEALTH
utvtj
The elite Corset of the British Empire
Rust-Proof, Tear-Proof, Unbreakable.
No lady who values her health, her
grace and daintiness of outline, her
perfection of form and figure, should
fail to obtain one of these creations
evolved from a lifetime’s study of
the human frame.
Try the
delighted.
and you’ll be
UROSAL FOR
Rheuma-
RHEUMATISM Sc
LufllbagO
or Gout
by using WAWN’S UROSAL, which is positively the great-
est eliminant of Uric Acid ever offered. A wonderful
remedy, giving quick relief and eventual cure. Price 2/6
of all Chemists, or post direct 2/9. Use WAWN’S
WONDER WOOL externally. Take WAWN’S UROSAL
internally. V. A. Wawn, Manufacturing Chemist, Grigor’s
Pharmacy, 186 George Street, Sydney. Next Nock & Kirby Ltd.
“DINKUM OIL”
(Reviewed for The Spendthrift.)
It is not a very elegant phrase—“Dinkum Oil” —
and no one seems to know where it came from; but
all Australians understand that it means a good
thing—the right sort —honest injun—O.K.—or,
briefly, A.i. Under this title one, Fred. J. Mills,
alias “The Twinkler,” has published a little book
which is boldly declared to be a volume of original
Australian Wit and Humor. It is all that, borne
ten thousand copies of it were sold in two months,
and Melville and Mullen, Ltd., of Melbourne, have
issued another fifteen thousand, so it is clear that a
lot of people think it all right, it is issued in aid
of the funds of the Returned Sailors and Soldiers’
Association, which is almost as deserving a cause as
the War Chest.
“The Twinkler” does not confine himself to the
war, nor to soldiers. He has a good many yarns
about the bush, excellent hints on gardening, and
some travel sketches —ail in' his breezy Mark
Twainy style. Here is one of his ‘ Khaki Yarns/’
which is fairly representative:—
Imagination.
“The average Australian isn’t given to exaggera-
tion, but if you really fire his imagination he can
soar to heights where even the average American
cannot reach. In a London cafe last month a soldier
who hailed from the other side of Oodnadatta fell
into a friendly argument with an American, as to
the relative greatness of the two countries, “Wal,”
said the Yankee, “that bit o’ sunbaked mud yew call
Australia ain’t a bad bit o’ sile in its way, and it’ll
be worth expectoratin’ on when it wakes up and
discovers it’s alive, but when yew come to compare
it with Amurrica, wal, yer might ’swell put.a spot
o’ dust alongside a diamond. Y’see, sonny, we kin-
der do things in Amurrica; we don’t sit round like
an egg in its shell waitin’ fer someone tew come
along and crack it; no, we git hustlin’ till all
Amurrica’s one kernormous dust storm kicked up
by our citizens raking in their dollars. Why,
there’s millions of Amurricans who ’ave tew climb
to ther top of their stack o’ dollars on a ladder
every morning, so’s they ken see ther sun rise.
We’re some people!” The Australian took a hitch
in his belt, put his cigarette behind his ear, and
observed: “Dollars! Do yer only deal in five bobs
over there! We deal in nothin’ but quids in Aus-
tralia. Anything smaller than a quid we throw
away. Too much worry to count, and it spoils the
shape of yer pockets. The school-boys ’ave paper-
chases with pound notes. Money in Australia!
Why, you can see the business blokes cornin’ outer
their offices every day with wads of bank notes like
blankets under each arm. I remember just before I
left Adelaide all ther citizens was makin’ for the
banks with the day’s takin’s, when a stiff gale sprung
up pretty sudden. Them citizens let go their wads
‘/TTc SPLENDIpf^^)^PEiNDTHRIFT-^f|^^


ter ’old their ’ats on, and immediate the air was full
of bank notes—mostly ’undred quiders. Yer couldn’t
see ther sun fer paper. Ther corporation ’ad to hire
a thousand men ter sweep them bank notes in a
eap and burn ’em. Dinkum !”
Copy of Letter from Dr. Conrick to
A. C. F.
Hotel De Normandie,
Havre.
December 28th, 1916.
To the A. C. F.
I would like to point out the good work your
Coffee Stall at Quarry Siding does. Our Ambulance
has a collecting station there—a buffet which ran
for the wounded in addition to yours. It was during
a very cold and muddy snap that we were there,
and your coffee stall was much appreciated.
On one occasion 1 remember the 19th Batt. (I
A fifteen year old English girl who has herself cut
fifty tons of clover for the army
think; coming out of the line dead beat, covered
with mud, lame, and generally about done up; they
still, had about 9 miles more to march. Together
your coffee stall and our ambulance gave them hot
coffee, cocoa, and biscuits, and in about an hour’s
time; they could resume their march, a thing I
believe they could scarcely have done without the
rest’ and the refreshment.
I also happen to know that your coffee stall at
Lillegate, Ypres, under Air. Woodburn, did good
work. I congratulate your Committee on what they
have done,’and wish them every luck.
(Signed) VICTOR CONRICK,
Major,
No. 7 Field Ambulance,
2nd Australian Division.
And of “Como,” Carlyle St., St. Kilda.
The Lights of Flanders
Written for The Spendthrift
By ADAM McCAY
I he lights are lit in Flanders,
The fires that fill the sky;
And he whose gaze has met that blaze
Shall see it till he die:
Before his eyes the dame shall pour
And in his ears shall be the roar
Of all the infinite crash of war,
Gun-fire and battle-cry.
hor the lights arc lit in Flanders; zee have not seen
them flare;
In a twilight gray zee have learned to say that zee have
little care
hor the glare of hell and the gloze of heaz'cn blazing
over there.
They who stare out on Flanders
Have eves unlike our own;
hor boys behold what men grown old
Had never guessed or known;
J hey have looked on life, and life was naught;
They have looked on death, and death has taught
How men in traps of terror caught
Can look at death—alone.
Whoever has lived in Flanders has seen with open
eyes
Ihe giant Fate zehich rules all things beneath the
eternal skies,
And has wondered at the little hopes zvhich men had
learned to prize.
There’s no man's face in Flanders
That slacks its mouth for speech.
The thought is quick, the throat is thick
With what the hour may teach:
We weave our words, our tales we tell
Of life and death, of heaven and hell,
But they have seen in mine and shell
The best and worst of each.
They are living men in Flanders—yea, livinig who are
dead;
hor the souls of them have yet to speak when all the
rest is said,
And zve shall be dumb zehen their mighty wings szveep
homezi'ard overhead.
Hrs. Bradford, of Killara, kindly gave a very hand-
some bronze-built writing cabinet to be raffled at the
Killara \ illage Fair. Phis set is worth from £6O to
kyo, and attracted much attention when shown at the
Baris Exhibition.
.Mr. G. H. Watson, of “Merridale," Cremorne
kindly donated a copy of the third issue of “Brad-
shaw s Guide. This old relic of bygone days is
valued at £25. Ihe winner will have no difficulty in
securing that amount for it.
Many others contributed gifts, but as space
is limited we cannot give all the details, so these
splendid givers must accept our hearty thanks for
their valued donations.
SPLENDmf^y) SPEiNDTHRIFT^^^)


When the tone of the blood vessels is
normal the body feels light, happy and
vigorful. Suppose the blood pressure is
low. The blood flows sluggishly in far
corners, nutrition of the cells is inter-
fered with and blood congestion develops
bringing pains and aches along and
making life miserable.
For Sore Throat
WAWN’S WONDER WOOD is the
remedy. It is a NATURAD health process, acting
directly and beneficially on the circulation, with an effect
that is purely in accordance with the NATURAD laws of
bodily recovery. There is nothing to equal it for
RHEUMATISM, SCIATICA, GOUT,
LUMBAGO, ABDOMINAL PAINS,
NEURITIS, NEURALGIA, SPRAINS,
COLIC, INFLAMMATION, SORE
THROAT, PNEUMONIA, PLEURISY
BRONCHITIS, COUGHS & COLDS
AND ALL PAINS AND ACHES.
WAWN'S WONDEK wool. STOPS PAIN by elimin-
ating blood congestion, being a scientific combination of
valuable medicinal substances impregnated in highest
grade cotton wool. By means of it a stream of gentle,
soothing heat energy is created, which quickly, certainly
and absolutely dispels all pains and aches and overcomes
inflammation.
Anyone can use WAWN’S WONDER WOOD anywhere.
It is dependable, safe and inexpensive. Your Chemist
and Storekeeper should have it. Get
a packet to-dr.y. PRICE 2/- If not
obtainable locally order direct from
the Manufacturer, mentioning the name
of y ur Chemist or Storekeeper and we
will see that you gel supplies in future.
V. A. WAWN, Manufacturing Chemist,
~ , , Grigar’a Pharmacy, 186 George St., Sydney.
r or R he u m aitstn
Make a note of it: WA WETS WONDER WOOL
THE “BOOK OF THE
BALLARAT”
By B. S.
( Reviewed for The Spendthrift.)
You will remember the “Ballarat”! She left
Australia on a fine day in February with troops
aboard, and on another sunny day, the 25th April,
1917, the anniversary of the Anzacs’ landing at Gal-
lipoli, she was torpedoed not far from England. The
behaviour of the men was excellent. There was not
a trace of panic; instead, they laughed or sang or
played cards until the destroyers and trawlers took
them off. It is a fine story.
Some of the men on board had prepared a souve-
nir of the voyage, and had it ready for the press
when the torpedo got them. Part of the material
disappeared; but the editors —Lieut. Ramsay Wood
and Sergt. W. R. Armstrong —collected enough
“copy” and photographs to print an attractive
memorial booklet.
This “Book of the Ballarat” will, of course, be
specially interesting to all the men who were on the
transport and their friends; but it has also a great
deal of value for any reader. The descriptions of
the departure, the voyage, and the disaster which
overtook them so near the end, are very good read-,
ing. The torpedo was seen before it struck, and the
ship manoeuvred so as to avoid a hit amidships,
which might have sunk her in a few minutes. The
men, wearing lifebelts, assembled in their places
and remained there as the ship was slowly settling,
a big hole having been made at the stern. The sick
were put into the lifeboats first; some of the others
were ordered into the boats, and got off in perfect
order, taking with them the ship’s pets. ■'
“They have given us a splendid day for it, any-
how,” said one cheery soul. Amongst those left on
board was one who had saved a pack of cards, and
he secured some mates for a game of poker. An-
other started a mock auction, and others sang to
pass the time, not knowing whether they would be
rescued or go down with the doomed ship. Fortu-
nately destroyers had picked up the S.O.S. message,
and were racing to the rescue, and all the men got to
London safely.
We hope the editors will not mind if we “lift” for
the benefit of “Splendid Spendthrifts” one little item.
It is “The Troopships’ Standing Orders.”
Submarine Drill.
On the alarm sounding, all ranks will fall in with
lifebelts (at the slope) and kit bags and training
cards. Officers will not wear sam-brownes, but
may carry cabin trunks.
Absolute silence must be maintained, and on no
account may conversation be carried on with the
crew of the hostile submarine.
SPLENDID flgpf) SPENDTHRIFT fig


On the command, “To your boats move,” the right
hand man of each boat party will lean over the rail
and look inwards, taking care to block the gangway.
The remainder, taking time from him, will drop
their kit bags on the heads of any men in the boat
(which should previously be lowered). The whole
will then move into the boats, while the band, which
will assemble on the poop deck, plays “There’s
Something in the Seaside Air.”
No N.C.O. or man will be allowed to enter a
lifeboat without his training card.
Should the Board consider that the man fell over-
board accidentally, and that he had no ulterior
motive in so doing, they may instruct the ship’s
Q.M.S. to requisition for a lifebelt.
This done, the duty company must be informed
by the S.O.R.S. that a fatigue party of two men be
detailed to throw a lifebelt in the direction the man
was last seen.
By this time, any self-respecting private should
be well and truly drowned.
WARRING ELEMENTS: DRIVING THE GERMANS EASTWARD FROM YPRES IN RAIN AND MIST
British and Indian Troops driving the enemy from their trenches outside burning Ypres : A night attack outside the Belgian town
m which the Kaiser proposed to announce the annexation of King Albert’s Country
Duntroon sergeants must present their certifi-
cates before falling overboard.
Man Overboard.
I.
The following routine must be observed when a
private falls overboard :
Report same to orderly corporal, who must im-
mediately rush to the sergeapts’ quarters and
awaken the orderly sergeant. He in turn will re-
port same to platoon commander. It must then be
brought to the notice of the O.C. company.
If the O.C. thinks it of sufficient importance, he
will suggest to the adjutant that a Board of Enquiry
be appointed to ascertain—
1. How this man came to fall overboard.
2. Had he some ulterior motive in so doing?
3. Should the ship be stopped and a boat low-
ered to his rescue?
11.
In the event of a Duntroon sergeant falling over-
board, the following routine must be observed;—
1. All lifeboats to be lowered into the sea.
2. All rafts and anything floatable to be cast
overboard.
3. 'All units to parade with lifebelts, same to be
thrown in his direction.
4. All gangways to be lowered.
5. Oil to be poured on the waves.
6. Wireless signals to be sent in all directions.
7. All men to kneel in an attitude of prayer
and supplication.
8. Ship’s band to play some suitable tune, such
as “Throw out the lifeline.”
9. If lifeboats fail to pick up Duntroon ser-
geant, the captain to be ordered to “About
turn” and take the ship back to Australia.
The war is lostl
SPLENDIpf^^^SPE.NDTHRIFT^|^>


An APPRECIATION
This is the girl who is helping to win the war
by taking her brother’s place in the office - and
doing his work WELL. Her mere presence
brightens a business house, makes business in-
tercourse run smoothly, while the way her REAL
EFFICIENCY has lightened the load of many a
harassed business man is now gratefully and
freely admitted by the men themselves. Atten-
tive to instruction, obedient, anxious to do her
work well, taking a real interest in the business
of her employer, careful, methodical, industrious
and well disposed, the girl—and especially the
“Metropolitan Girl”—has won. her place. The
most sopr business man admits that the only
fault a good business girl has is that she gets
married. And that is a big compliment to the
girl; her loss is FELT.
We KNOW that every true business girl will do
her utmost to help the good old WAR CHEST.
Metropolitan Business College
- Limited ——
338 Pitt Street (Near Snow’s) :: :: Sydney
By H.M.C.
Written for The Spendthrift
Though the “S.S” is devoted to the three Efs of
Finance, Frivolity, and Fluff, this article in some-
what serious strain seeks intrusion.
The four ems is a printing term; isn’t that so
Mr. “Comp”? But what makes the printing pay
is Men, Machinery, Money and Management. And
that is just what is going to make the Splendid
Spendthrift pay his way to the North Shore Village
Fair.
But it’s not the Printing Office, or the paper,
we want to talk about —it’s the welfare of our
Returned Soldier Men, which promises to be well
looked after by the Repatriation Folk.
The War Chest people, the Y.M.C.A., and the
Red Cross, look after them at the front, but the
purpose of this article is to try and get greater
public enthusiasm in organising the Returned
Forces —at least those who can’t work a farm or fill
the regular kind of job going, though the schemes
of Farm Settlement are best for the able and strong.
Machinery plays such a big part in Modern Manu-
facturing that one may wonder why there are such
contentions regarding labour. Put a one-armed
man in front of a certain machine and there we
see steel pens, buttons, pills, or roasted pop-corn
coming out of the delivery end. Put a one-legged
man on a tooth-pick machine and 10, we needn’t
send to Japan for another tooth-pick!
You get me, I suppose —there are many machines
that any careful, though incomplete man can work
with the best of them. Haven’t you read of won-
derful things achieved by a man who wrote with his
toes ? How much more can be done by a man with
a pair of hands, even if he hasn’t a pair of feet—and
vice versa.
So much for Men and Machinery, of which there
is ample supply. Now, about the Money. Well,
if the North Shore Line Fair can raise £lO,OOO for
the War Chest —and they will go so close to it that
perhaps a cheque or two will make it complete —
there’s no doubt £lOO,OOO can be raised in each State
to provide the plants for the Returned Soldiers’ In-
dustries, Ltd., which the men will loyally see suc-
cessful just as they loyally stood to Australia and
the Empire. And the people will see that they
stand loyally to the Soldiers by purchasing the
goods bearing their Trade Mark—the Mark making
the fifth M.
Now we have the Men, Machinery, and Money,
and there is only now needed Management. First,
the Industries must be organised, then Managed.
There’s no difficulty there. There would be no
trouble about it, as the matter of preference would
be Settled, and the Returned Soldiers’ Union would
co-operate with the Management —and the operatives
would share in the profits.
(£3s Tfa SPLENDID (|S) SPE^DTHMFT||j|)


The Advertising would create the public demand
for the goods bearing the Trade Mark, and the Ad
Men who can advertise the North Shore Village
Fair can successfully boost the soldier-made goods.
NEW GERMAN FAIRY TALE-” ALADDIN.”
J hey will fairly set the people crazy after the
Soldiers Products. All it now needs is a Mover—
another M, to be.sure, but nevertheless as important
as the I ress Button on an Electric Tin Stamping-
Machine. 1 rue, the Repatriation People will do
magnificently—but they will require the loyal help
of every citizen.
THE BABIES’ BAY
(Written for The Spendthrift.)
As I went down to the shore to-day
II ith a tripping toe for a pint of play,
I saw swing high
Where the white fish ply '
A silver ship zvith a poop of gold:
If ith a captain bold and a bos’n old,
Who shouted “Ho,
If yon wish to go
To a laughing land zvith a winking way
Come along zvith us to the Babies' Bay.”
/ dropped my Age. and I climbed on deck.
O! the boards were bright as a starry speck.
And Jack and Jill
With their bucket still,
C ame running down to collect my fare.
For a happy heart and a childish air
A smile forsooth
From the lips of 'Truth
II ill procure you a bunk in the silver ship
At the sunset hour when she takes her trip.
Away zve sailed on a sea of pearl
And the Bos'n Time made the billows swirl
IF ith “Heave, heave ho!
For a jolly row
And safe return to the good ship Sleep
With her freight of dreams and Little 80-Peeb
Whose tiny fold .
Is the golden hold.”
siud the skipper Love sang a song of glee
As he steered us along through the Nursery Sea.
And when zve got to the Babies’ Bay
II here the stars spin mirth and the rainbows play
I he girls and boys
IF ith their rosy toys,
FfifiW A ousensc bells till the moon ran out
I ill I heard a hush through the pearly rout
A tinkling tap
Like a fairy's rap,
And Wee Willie Winkle stilled the bliss
At the stroke of eight zvith a good-night kiss.
Zora Cross
THE TOURISTS. 19-?
“Remember this place, Bert?”
' Yes it’s where we used to chuck the
fish to you, ain’t it Bill.”
SPLENDIpf^^) BPEJVDTHRIFTrf|^>


MEMH
o\cd
m
"v
<y ll;e
jjj Country s
IpJ ,im/(/r.i/iijj njat/n-'t I
j||ij (j/e>ert;</<ij/ ustfu/pess |
3 I
m Farmers f
STOtKOfEg
(Breeders s
SS
((
The Land Outback
))
To us, who spend our lives in a seaboard city, “Outback” is
generally accepted as applying to all the outlying lands,
whether north, south, or west, devoted to Pastoral and Agri-
cultural pursuits. There the great heart of Australia throbs.
There, in the vast outdoors, where Fife call of the open has
attracted her hardy sons. Australia fosters a power that shall
ever keep her prominent among the producing countries of
the world.
To keep your finger upon this
throbbing pulse of Australia
to learn and to realise what a vital, healthful, energetic people
awaits your message—to tell them of yourself and of what
you have to interest them —you must approach them when
the hours of toil are over —you must reach them in their
homes. What easier, less expensive, or more direct way. to do
this than to
Advertise in a magazine
that reaches the homes!
The P.F.A. Magazine is a quarterly devoted to the interests
of the country people. It deals with matters of interest to
them. It is a magazine that goes direct by post to the
wealthiest class in New South Wales—the graziers. ; , rf
It is well printed on good paper—one of the very few maga-
zines that is still printed on good paper, which is now scared
and expensive. Its recent issues run to 100 pages, and its
guaranteed circulation is 25,000 per annum. ,i .
Merchants, educational establishments, anyone and everyone
who can benefit by advertising direct to country residents
will profit materially by advertising in “The P.F.A. Quarterly
Magazine.”
For rate cards and specimen copy write to . ..
The Advertising Manager
Pastoral Finance Association Ltd.
Phillip Street, Sydney
PRO PATRIA
By M. COX TAYLOR
(Written for The Spendthrift.)
“Let us die for the land!”
“Be brave and enduring this day. Be victorious!
The parent who maintains us is the land. Let us
die for it!”
“No man who will not fight for the land deserveth
sufficient to cover his bones! The crows shall feed
on his flesh.”
So spake the famous old Maori when the ships
of Abel Jansen Tasman rocked in the swell of
Taranaki on a fine summer morning in 1642. Similar
words were muttered in council by the chiefs who
signed the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840. Or, again,
by the cross grained old warrior who was so sound
on the land question in the fifties.
“I will not sell Waitara, for it is mine! I will
not! I have spoken, thou boiled head.”
The boiled head —a scathing term of contempt,
was no less a person than Colonel Gore-Browne.
C. 8., at that time Governor of New Zealand.
Civilisation echoes this challenge in the blood-
stained fields of France —“Let us be brave and en-
during this day. Be victorious !”
The modern Maori fights with us for his native
soil as fiercely as if the struggle were on the green
Waimate Plains. He has the Highlander’s passion
for owning a bit of Mother Earth and the Irish-
man’s love of an argument —so long as the argu-
ment rages round the complexities that come to a
head in a native Land Court.
Years ago I happened to be in Hawera, N.Z.,
when such a Court was sitting. Since dusk the
night before, the place seethed with Maoris. Many
of them came from Parihaka —a famous village in
open rebellion up to the end of 1881, and even eleven
years ago, bursting to air its grievances. At dawn,
the suit in equity started in the street a few yards
from my window. It is not necessary to understand
Italian in order to appreciate grand opera. I be-
came a partisan firmly attached to the cause of a
widow.
Was she not a primitive Portia, who snapped her
fingers till they clicked like castanets in the face of
an ancient Shylock, who wilted before her
eloquence ? She was middle-aged and buxom, and
she meant to have her rights. Her complexion was
nearly as black, and quite as shiny as a well polished
boot.' In her hair she wore green sprigs—symbol
of mourning. She was one of the litigants who
claimed a fourth share in the very small farm of a
deceased relative on her late husband’s side. Even
the Maori dogs, squatting on the road, howled in
sympathetic chorus. In five minutes it appeared as
if the whole company would be engaged in mortal
combat. In the midst of the uproar a fat baby
rolled out of his mother’s shawl. Everyone con-
sidered it a joke —except the baby. He sat on the
SPLENDID~(^^ySPE7VDTHRIFT^^>


ground with an air of hurt surprise, uttered short
piercing yells, and settled— temporarily—the land
question by trying to push a small portion of the
road into his mouth. Good humour being restored
the litigants strolled off, to wait for the opening of
the Court. &
The judge sat at a long table placed at one end
of the room. Next to him was a Maori makiim
notes. He was a fine looking old man, well dressed
m grey tweeds. His manner had the solemnity of
an Archbishop at a State funeral. An authority on
pedigree he swiftly picked flaws in the relationship
° . e plaintiffs to the departed, who seemed to be
the inarticulate defendant. The judge, a New Zea-
lander, though familiar with Maori language, was
supported by an interpreter. Beyond him was a
native who took prolific notes in a greasy little
book. He is in some unofficial way—probably for
love of a hard fought argument—acting as Counsel
for the relations who opposed the widow. Ide
“Things are looking serious, Jimmy; even the
horses are getting their respirators! ”
stands up and interjects. He is requested to sit
down. But he wears an exasperating smile that
lashes excitable witnesses to fresh fury. He stands
up again. The widow snaps her fingers within a
yard or two of the learned judge’s nose.
Contempt of Court if you like ! Out she goes to
cool down. Vacant land round the building hums
with vociferous Maori ejaculations. New-comers
rub noses, tears run in rivulets down swarthy faces.
Dogs howl! Orators, half a dozen together, ad-
dress the crowd. The noise at last is deafening.
The judge sends a messenger to keep the peace.
His tact and patience are admirable, but he must
at least be allowed to hear the sound of his own
voice. Mild sunshine filters through the windows.
Native witnesses trip each other up in minute
details relating to the tenure of the long deceased
grandfather of the dead man.
One thing is evident. So far as they can believe
in any verdict that goes against them* the widow
and her friends are apparently satisfied of the
impartiality of the judge. His judgment is wrong,
but he means well. Was he not a Pakeha Ranga-
tira? s
I he most famous authority on Maori land tenure,
I akeha Maori, sums o up the problem in these
words;—
Every native who is in actual possession of land
must be held to have a good title, till someone else
shows a better—by kicking him off the premises.”
At the root of our own social system is man’s
primitive instinct to have and hold some portion of
the soil of his native land. Belgium runs with
rivers of blood; Northern France is ablaze, and
Australia s noblest sons sleep for ever under foreign
skies. But there are others.
“No man who will not fight for the land deserveth
sufficient to cover his bones. Ihe crows shall feed
on his flesh!” - :
What about it ?
To the Day!
Written for The Spendthrift.
\\ e listened to the toast “1 o the Day” with a
calm tolerant air, and in our smug exclusiveness,
took it for what it was worth, and after many years
the day has come to the Hun, but whether it is
for good or ill awaits to be seen.
Every woman both yesterday and to-day lifts her
eyes and breathes a prayer “To the Day.”
After all, it is but a toast to Hope.
■ Hope that heavy burdens will be lifted from our
shoulders.
Hope that there is a silver lining to the cloud.
Hope to the barren woman.
Hope to the mother and the ultimate happiness
of her child.
Hope to the youth starting out in life.
1 lope to the lover and the maid.
Hope to the man and his goal.
Hope to the aged for a haven of rest.
And therefore we are always drinking to the day.
Sometimes we feel we have hold of a piece of
chiffon, and that is often what Hope is.
The determination to win is fed on Hope.
Many would have given in, thrown off their weary
but they have held on, and looked “To
the Day, and if we convince ourselves that the
day will come, of a surety it will.
It is a good toast, and it will carry you through
to success.
Help you over many a rough stile. .
Prepare yourself for the Day, be ready to enjoy
it without regrets.
Work through the dark night, waiting for the
Dawn of the Day.
And who has not witnessed a glorious sunrise
but has not been renewed with Hope and vivified
by the promise of warmth, sunshine, joy, and to-
wards the close peace and contentment of the
twilight.
And again and again we lift our glass and drink
to 1 he Day, and with eyes on the far horizon look
to the Dawn.
SPLENDID SPE7VDTHRIFT~^^)


Anderson & Co. Ltd.
For Seeds and Plants
m
mMhmm
Fine Collections of
Chrysanthemums and
Dahlias
NOVELTIES IN
CHRYSANTHEMUMS
3/6, 1/6, and 1/- each.
Show and Single Varieties.
From General List, I'- each; 9/- per doz.
DAHLIAS
New Cactus Varieties 2/- each
New Collarette Varieties 1/6 each
New Paeony Varieties 2/- each
New Single Varieties 2/- each
Popular Varieties of Dahlias
from General List
Cactus Varieties 1/- each, 10/- dozen
Paeony Flowered Varieties ... 1/- each, 10/- dozen
Collarette Varieties 1/- each, 10/- dozen
Pompone Varieties 1/- each, 10/- dozen
Send for our 1917 Chrysanthemum and Dahlia List.
Anderson and Co. Limited
Seedsmen and Plant Merchants
399 and 401 George Street ; : : Sydney
THE WAR CHEST
COMMISSIONERS
WITH THE A.I.F.
Running the A.C.F.
By ONE WHO KNOWS.
Who are these to whom the needs of our men at
the front has appealed so strongly that they at
their own cost and time, month in, month out, aye!
and some, year in year out! pay homage to the
other cheerful givers of gifts in Australia by serving
the great A.C.F. —Australian Comforts Funds at
the front, of which the famous War Chest —that
Splendid Spendthrift—is the NSW. Division?
Who’s the Chief Commissioner? Who’s Wood-
burn ? Woodburn grew in Victoria —don’t blame
him, he couldn’t help it! and he fills nothing better
than Euclid’s definition of a straight line. Like
other products of Victoria he has a great heart, so
great a heart that it outgrew its strength, and once
when he was missing for some days and telegrams
had sought him at various headquarters in vain,
that heart of his had lain him low in a French town,
and not a soul knew him or tended him. Yet when
he recovered sufficiently to cross to England he sat
on deck the eight hours through, a wet midwinter
night, because hundreds of our Australian lads on
leave had to do the same, and “what’s good enough
for them is good enough for me,” was his excuse.
I know no other Commissioner having done such
a fool thing—but that’s Woodburn’s old heart!
He possesses three necessary qualifications for
his post, viz., tact, more tact, and yet more tact,
besides which he ran a country business of neces-
sity, and is a grazier by choice!
The 0.C., 2nd Aust. Div. Train, to which unit
Woodburn was “attached,” called at our London
H.Q. his first morning on leave, not to ask more
gifts, but to return thanks for having such a man
as Woodburn attached to them! So much for a
Colonel, a private introduced him as “Me Cobber,
the blasted cove as gives us the pickles.” I don’t
know which compliment is more gratifying.
A well-known Sydney business man writing re-
cently, says, “I congratulate the War Chest upon
the wisdom it displayed in selecting Woodburn to
rule this growing and complicated concern.” Well
may we hope that his health and means allow him
to serve “for the duration.”
The Chief’s staunch and able fellow-commis-
sioners are Thomas Henley and A. C. Barry.
Thomas Henley! but few there be who do not
know this honest hearted battler, and. knowing him
respect him, and knowing his family respect him
still more, for his good wife and daughters are all
active partners in his patriotism, his philanthrophy,
SPLENDID BPENDTHRIFT:|O^


and his hospitality extended, as it always is, to any
straight right-minded man, addressed by so many
as “a lonely soldier,” and there are many such who
owe much to the Henley family in Egypt before the
loss of that gallant son of theirs, but even more
so in England since that sad loss which has but
opened their hearts the wider to any other mother’s
son longing for home.
For the War Chest Mr. Henley manages the
Shipping Department, and has handed over a hun-
dred thousand cases of Australian comforts! His
old persuasive ways tell when English Customs
regulations based upon Median and Persian proto-
types, have to be bro-
ken for “those extra-
ordinary Australians.”
So also in Egypt did he
even persuade a gun-
boat to do special
duties for him and his
gifts to our lads at
Mersa Metruh!
I have but little doubt
.that the increased ship-
ping space granted for
Australian Christmas
boxes was partly due to
our good friend’s power
and prestige.
A, C. Barry completes
the trio —any concern
would be much nearer
completion by the in-
clusion of Mr. Barry—
Dad —the lads at the
War Chest Club in Lon-
don endearingly term
him —he chose that
War Chest Club as his
special work, and what
a success he has made
of it! Genial and gen-
erous, patient and plea-
sant, he gradually re-
lieved General Si r
Robert Anderson of
administrative details,
and retained all those
valuable considerations
".he General had granted
this, his pet institution,
founded by the War Chest under direction of the
London Headquarters, for the inestimable benefit
of Australians on leave.
Those workers who have already retired from
their self-imposed duties, Larcombe, Budden, Stewart,
Titmus, Lease, Cotterel, are referred to later, and John
Fell, of Lane Cove, is one of these, but John Fell has
retired so recently from the A.C.F. to become actu-
A BRITISH PRISONER OF WAR
But the Hour of Revenge is at Hand
ally attached to the A.l.F.—he deserves a rest —
and his good work is still being felt, that he must
come next. That great worker and enthusiast on
gifts and coffee stalls, Padre Dexter, worked much
with John Fell, and wrote recently of him as “Your
get-there man, and what could be read into that
expression would fill a volume! The difficulties to
be overcome, the extraordinary conditions! the
mere fact of a civilian organisation attached to, and
indeed deep-rooted in a great military organisation,
is something, the best authorities assure us, never
before allowed.”
“Never been done before” was quite sufficient to
secure the work ad-
verse criticism, if not
opposition, from many
authorities—not bene-
fiting from it, as the
Australians were. Our
Generals Birdwood and
White, at the front,
never have ceased to
help overcome all such
difficulties, and what-
ever may or may not
have been done before,
we claim as an unique
record of civilian effort
a recent performance
by John Fell, briefly
summarised in a cable
per General Brand,
G.0.C., 4th Infantry
Brigade:—
“Comforts Commis-
sioner John Fell served
coffee in trenches with-
in one hour of our tak-
ing them from the
enemy, so enabling our
men to continue.”
Oh! John Fell, you
silent, solid, sober ser-
ver; your surely joined
up to get a rest, for
War Chest workers at
the front are never off
duty! “So enabling our
men to continue,” that
is the whole object of
War Chest work, in
one brief sentence!
This memo might well stop at that to allow the
Splendid Spendthrift readers to think it out and
pledge themselves to another great effort to enable
our men to continue! but this first edition must
refer to the great work going on for our famous
Light Horse in Palestine. Ray Goward, of Ash-
field, went to Egypt with Mr. Anthony Hordern as
his private secretary and accountant to assist him
dSS&K
SPLENDID I j \DTHRIFT^^>


THE
FOUNTAIN
PEN that
fills itself and
cannot leak
is
British made.
Don’t put off. Go to-day and buy an
Self-Filling - -
Safety Fountain
You know it by
reputation of
course —the
ONOTO but
are you using it
yourself - tak-
ing advantage
of its great con-
venience ?
No other pen is like it
no other pen is always
ready for use —no other
pen never leaks —or
fills itself from any ink
supply. Cleans itself
in filling.
May be obtained from all stationers, jew-
ellers, and stores, price 14/6 and upwards.
Also ONOTO VALVELESS,
for those who do not want a Self-Filling
Safety Pen, from 10/6 upwards.
Manufacturers —
Thos. De La Rue & Co. Ltd.
Bunhill Row, London, E.C.
Managing Agents—
Norman Baker & Longhurst,
50 York St., Sydney
Also ask for Onoto Ink—the best for fountain and all other pens
in his voluntary work for the Australian Red Cross,
but Mr. Hordern saw the needs and the deeds of
War Chest there, and generously allowed Mr.
Coward to join the cause of the sound man, whilst
he served with the cause of the sick man.
That was a good day for our cause! Ray Coward
kept accurate record of all accounts both in Egypt
and England till need came to send someone back
to Egypt to relieve Mr. Larcombe—it needed one
of tact, experience and probity. Mr. Coward filled
the bill and ofifered to face the land of sun and sand
and sin at a few hours’ notice. He is living with
our lads in Palestine now, distributing about a
thousand cases per month to those fine fellows.
A recent letter from Palestine says: “I wonder if
you heard what Mr. Coward did during the last Gaza
fight? He set out there with gifts, and then started
stretcher-bearing, saw the urgent need for refresh-
ments for the poor boys who were carried in, went
back to the nearest cacnteen and bought up all the
fruit, milk, etc., and distributed to men in three Field
back to the nearest canteen and bought up all the
officers were just full of praises for Mr. Coward;
they said he was just splendid, and came forward
when most needed, and worked hard. ' What a com-
fort that news would be to some of the boys’ mothers!
When the Red Cross heard from those in the field of
what was done, they asked Mr. Coward for the bill,
and paid it.”
Sharing the Pie
(Written for The Spendthrift by
Mary McCommonwealth.)
Here in the changing world’s remotest corner
Where spring with tender blue has splashed the sky
And hurrying winds, dream-laden, hustle by
Australia, as the ultimate Jack Horner,
Amid world-hunger keeps a wealth of pie.
The roaring guns that scourge the treaty-scorner
Exhaust the world from bank-account to cupboard
Till wrong at last by right be overthrown:
And Europe’s resolute old Mother Hubbard
Makes no lament about the absent bone.
The day goes well. And when grim death talks loudly
And marks the path of hope with bitter red
Australia's sons in battle bear them proudly
Till the last word in flame of truth be said.
So from the changing world’s remotest corner
We join our cheers with those who face the fray,
Our cheers and more — it’s up to you, Jack Horner,
Eating the pie of peace, war’s plum to pay.
His songs are not exactly hymns;
He never learned them in the Choir;
And yet they brace his dragging limbs
Although they miss the sacred fire;
Although his choice and cherished gems
Do not include “The Watch upon the Thames.”
Owen Seaman.
y/g’ SPLENDID tm BPEJVDTHRIFTr^^


PETER THE PACIFIST
By DEL. McCAY
Written for The Spendthrift
“. . . And to depart out of this mortal shape,
and to dwell in the flesh of the unclean.” The voice
that seemed to come from within the hollow of the
palm-thatched roof trailed off in the rustle of a thous-
and fans in the grove, and was cut away by the sharp
note of a bird.
The man who listened stood for a moment with
bowed shoulders, upon which there rested an almost
perceptible robe of fear, infinitely thin and deadly
NOT INSURED EITHER
The Trio : “ Why don’t you stop it, Wilhelm ? ”
Wilhelm : “ I'm trying, but I don’t know how. I wish I’d bought
that Ford they offered me ! ”
chill. Then he moved away between the palm trunks
with footsteps that hurried to the edge of a run, but
feared the sound of haste among the dried and rustling
leaves. ......
Peter the Pig chewed at a tough fragment of pump-
kin with a perfunctory air. A displaced board a dozen
yards to the rear showed how he had left his stye.
Branigan and I leaned on the rail and watched him.
“That pig,” said Branigan, digging a few strands of
whisker out of the corner of his mouth as he spoke,
“that pig do be contemplatin’ some immortal villainy.
’Tis look at ye, he will, wid an eye as full av sorrow
as the story of me country; then it’s down the road
he will be, racin’ like a mad steer, fightin’ wid every
mongrel-bred, loafin’ dog in the districk, or it maybe
like it was last Saturday three weeks, scarin’ John
O’Brine’s young team into the swamp.”
“Who knows the secret sorrows of Peter’s soul?”
I asked, to fill in the pause.
“Divil the wan av me knows them,” said Branigan,
“but if ever a mortal-born hog set out seekin’ the
sorrows av combat, there’s the wan. Not a cock-fight
cud be started on this farm, but he’d be in it.”
Peter suddenly dropped his fag-end of pumpkin,
cocked an ear, and stared ahead for a moment with
eyes suddenly grown interested. Then he started at
a trot along the curving lane which led around the
barn.
“The baste has got me fascinated like,” explained
Branigan, apologetically, as he hastily cut across lots,
with me in his wake. Peter completed his arc, and
came into sight beyond an excited group of boys. “If
you don’t like the way I halved it,” young Terence
was shouting; “if you won’t take the half I halved
ye, will ye fight me for the lot, ye that’s got a swivel
eye on ye like Murty Donovan’s roan steer after it
lighted wid the coil of barbed wire?” Squinny-eye
Dawes made no reply in words, but let swing a wild
right that grazed the rim of Terence’s hat. Thus was
the knightly gauntlet flung down and taken up.
“Under the big she-oak is a good smooth patch,”
commanded Ginger Ally Rourke, taking charge with
that assurance of manner and method which were
afterwards to make him the Honorable Aloysius
O’Rourke, M.L.C., and the directing brain of the
world’s greatest gladiatorial institutions. “Stinker, put
that quince down by the foot of the tree while they
fight for it.”
As Stinker meekly obeyed the youthful Emperor of
O’Halloran’s Flat, I saw the casus belli, a huge green
quince bisected in a way that would have sent old
Dominie Euclid crazy. Peter, by a masterly detour,
outflanked belligerents and neutrals.
“Shake hands,” commanded Ally, and my eyes fol-
lowed those of the boys, which were glued upon the
scowling fighters.
“Whisht,” said Branigan, softly, “never mind the
spalpeens. Watch the pig!” Peter advanced, screened
by the tree-trunk, and in a moment half the quince
was well between his teeth. Enjoyment quickly con-
quered discretion, and the sound of his feasting rose
above the noises of the fight. Every onlooker rushed
at the pig, who eluded them neatly, and charging
across the battleground, upset Terence and Squinny-
eye in one stride, before he disappeared in the scrub
with a yelling pack of young humanity at his heels.
“Now how the devil did he know there was a fight
on?” asked Branigan, whereat I talked in lordly wise
of coincidence and the doctrine of chances. “Ye’re
clever at y’r books,”’ said Branigan, “but ye cannot
read the sowl av a pig. though more be token ye spoke
yerself av the sowl av him.”
The moon was as big as the lid of the kitchen
copper that night, and it came over the ringbarked
ridge as red as the sun goes down when the smoke of
a wide-running fire is all along the ranges. To-morrow
would be a day for dozing somewhere down by the
creek, where the young thick-foliaged timber shaded
cool, green patches. The shadow-blotted line of the
stream below me called with voices in the moonlight,
and I went down to explore this land of mys-
terious hidden things, and of things half-suggested,
that would be so ordinary a place when the day-
SPLENDID ) SPENDTHRIFT:|f^>


Test for Yourself
how the Smith Motor Wheel
ANYONE who has done a day’s
run on a Push Bicycle, knows
that tired feeling one gets when
there is a stiff hill coming home.
This is where the Smith Motor Wheel
is a “Friend in need.” It takes all
the fatigue away from bicycling. It
easily propels your bicycle along level
roads and up the steepest grades
without any effort on your part.
So great is our faith in the ad-
vantages of this clever device that
we will give free instructions in
riding a Smith Motor Wheel to any-
one who has a Push Bicycle. We will
attach it to your bicycle free of
charge, and when the lesson is over,
the Smith Motor Wheel can be de-
tached so that you can use your Push
Bicycle as usual. Call and see the
manager of our Sports Department
and he will arrange an appointment
for you with our Instructor in the
Smith Motor Wheel. ■ There is no
charge and no necessity to purchase
anything. We wish to prove to every
bicycle rider that the Smith Motor
Wheel is a genuine help and a big
improvement to his bicycle.
Juaz tojeVlt lacefauK
Vastly improves bicycling
The Model
Store
Broadway
Sydney
light was here again. At least one other was
abroad. I heard the stirring of a stick and the soft
sweep of feet in the grass ten yards ahead of me, or
it might have been thirty. But, even where the sounds
seemed to cross some' open, silvered space, I could
see no head and shoulders outlined against the light.
Somebody stalking—l thought—but what ? Suddenly—
absurdly—a sentence of Branigan’s came into my mind :
“I tell ye that pig do be out looking for trouble wid
the witches and the little people when Christian folk
are abed.” The spirit of the night took possession of me,
and I set out on the trail of the sound—either it was
Peter or the Little People. I got down, nose on the
grass, to get a rising fold of the ground for sky-line,,
and, as I saw a shape trot over it, I began to feel that
there was something more of kinship between me and
Peter than our common inquisitiveness. So Peter
stalked the unknown, and I stalked the pig. I lost
him in the darkness of a thick clump of bushes, and,
as I came up to that spot, I heard the murmur of
voices. My heart began to thump. Was Peter indeed
something beyond his piggish fellows? Did he steal
out in the moonlight to hold converse with the lepre-
chauns? Between Branigan’s accent and the whisper-
ing secrets of the leaves and the befooling moonlight,
I was far enough away from O’Halloran’s Flat, via
Binjie-winjie. Then I could distinguish some words
crooned softly in a light tenor voice—
“ Believe me, if all those endearing young charms
That I gaze on so fondly to-day . .
That altered my outlook. Whatever kind of a
Circe-enchanted pig Peter might be, he didn’t come
out along the bank of Blinkhorn’s Creek to quote Tom
Moore to a leprechaun. I heard the voice again. In
the same moment I was aware, not by eye or ear, that
I had reached Peter’s side, as he stood silent in the
shadow. Slowly and dimly I made out his shape.
Then, was it merely the glint of the moon on a moving
leaf, or did the pig wink at me in the darkness?
I heard the voice again, and I knew it was young
Charlie Pelson, the beauty boy from Sydney, who was
staying over at Mungovan’s. When I heard the words,
I guessed that his companion was pretty Tessie
Branigan.
“Ah! Tessie,” the articulation just reached us —and
I felt a nudge to attention —“do you know what is
singing in my heart every time I meet you?”
“Hggh—hggh!” said Peter, in an undertone.
“ ’Tis too loud for a frog!” said Tessie, more intent
upon the remark of my companion than the question
of her own.
Charlie was plainly staggered, but he came at it
gamely. “A sweet bush girl like you,” he said, “can
interpret the voices of the bush, but when we listen
together to the breathing of the wind, is there nothing
sweeter and deeper that you hear?”
“Hggh-hggh!” repeated Peter, with an unchanged
note.
“Do I be hearing the grunting of a pig?” asked
Tessie, in some concern. “Charlie, there’s somebody
of something behind those bushes.” “Nonsense,”
Charlie soothed her, “who could be here but ourselves ?”
And he fell to more effective methods of wooing
Tessie Branigan than the asking of soulful questions.
SPLENDIP~^gp) SPEA'DTHRIFT~|f^>


1 resentlv we heard speech again. “No, Charlie; stop
k’ lssni rnc while I tell yon. You mustn’t come near
the farm. It wud be dangerous. There’s I
mean the dogs. Now don’t come. They’re that
savage.”
Peter again uttered his contemplative “Hggh-hggh !”
“There’s someone,” ejaculated Tessie; “how can I
be sittm’ here, lettin’ you kiss me, when somebody-
even if it’s only a dirty, interferin’ pig ”
With a violent rustling, a face and a voice of wrath
rose from the bushes opposite. “Dirty interferin’ pig!”
choked the voice; and the face, I perceived, was that
of young Prank Boyle, Tessie’s cousin, who had a
solid interest in Branigan’s farm, and more than a
H. Y. BRADDON, President Citizens’ War Chest
solid interest in iessie. “You and your dam city dude.
I 11 break ”
1 essie backed away with sounds of alarm. Charlie
mumbled and backed a little, too. They both trod
upon Peter, who drowned all the quarrel with a wild
and echoing squeal. He charged out of the bushes,
tull tilt against the shins of Boyle, and sent that young
man’s anger to cool in a water-hole of the creek.
Under the cover of Boyle’s splash, and the com-
bined squeals of Peter and Tessie, I streaked for the
house.
I got there first. “Ye’ve been runnin’,” said Brani-
gan, who sat on the verandah steps. “Oh no,” I
panted lightly. My host pulled at his pipe and re-
garded me narrowly. Next moment Tessie fled sob-
bing past us, and locked her door behind her. “Well ”
began Branigan, but stopped to stare at the dripping
and gesticulating figure of his nephew, who halted to
harangue us. “That girl is meeting that dam dude
by the creek.; I’ll break his neck, the gussy-boy from
over at Mungovan’s. I’d have killed him to-night only
for that dam pig of yours. I’ll kill the pig, too'”
And Prank stormed past us into the house, where we
heard his door, too, violently slammed.
Branigan moved-closer to me. “Now, how the divil
did the pig,” he began, in a whisper, but suddenly
stopped. He sniffed a little. “Ye smell a little bit
piggified yourself,” he said; “did ye go out wid him?
Phwat happened ?”
I rose sharply. “Don’t be utterly absurd, Denis,”
I said, as I went to my room.
Ihe next afternoon Frank ramped into the house
again. “I said I’d kill that dam pig,” he shouted, “and
1 will. He would.better be fightin’ the Germans than
on a peaceable farm. Breaked Nicky Quinn’s arm
is what he’s done now. Nicky and Roy Gellavin is
failin’ out down the lane there, and just be shapin’ up
to one another when along comes your dam pig, and
bowls Nicky over like a ninepin, breaks the arm of
him, and now’s the doctor tying it up wid splints.”
God knows! ’ said Branigan, ruminating deeply.
Then he looked up. “Well, Frank, me boy; kill him
then. Tis a rampageous, fightin’ devil, he is, and in
the middle av everything within a mile av him. But to
see him die without a fighting chance! Well, me boy,
kill him.” Then he turned to me. “Now,” he said'
“how the divil do you suppose that pig knew thim
boys was ”
“Denis,” I said, coldly, “if the pig has an effect like
that on your mind, you'd better turn him into bacon
before you go as crazy as he is.”
Denis stared at me aggressively. “Ye smelt piggy,”
he challenged.
Absurd! I said. 1 rose and left the room.
I hree Prussians, a Bavarian and a Saxon sat in an
advanced trench. To them came a sergeant. He flung
down a package. “Australian ham,” he said; “cap-
tured from a merchantman by our splendid ‘Aloewe.’ ”
Ihe men ate. The Bavarian in one direction, the
Saxon in the other, went scouting up the trenches.
1 hey returned with bad news. Ihe British were out-
flanking their little post on either side.
“ We wi]l clie fighting,” said one of the Prussians.
“We will finish the ham,” said the Saxon. They fin-
ished it. They looked at one another. They “rose.
They seemed to be moved by a common purpose.
I hey leaped over the parapet and ran towards the
British lines, shouting; with hands upheld. Above
their call of “Kamerad” the aif seemed to hold a
faint and ghostly squealing.
in a distant palm-grove a voice somewhere in the
shady spaces droned, “Atta, the maker of strife, pun-
ished by imprisonment in the flesh of the unclean, hath
atoned by turning the minds of men from strife, and
now entereth into the peace. , , .”
Airs Branigan looked up from her knitting in the
farm-house at O'Halloran’s Flat. “Denis, dear,” she
said, “I do be thinkin’ sometimes that we misjudged
I eter. It was not fightin’ he went after, but interferin’
wid fightin’ ”,
“God knows!” said Branigan, with his eyes on the
red caverns of the log-fire. Then he raised them to
me with a challenging glare, which I had learned to
know and hate.
“Ye smelt piggy,” he said.
I left the room without a word.
SP£ j NDTHRIFT^|^>


HOME
BEAUTY
CULTURE
COURSE FREE
50,000 Samples of Dainty Toilet Requisites offered
FREE to our Readers.—Simple Home Treatment
that Proves Remarkably Successful.
□
Secure Your Beauty Gift TO-DAY. It will surprise you.
To every woman who takes a pride in her appearance, her
complexion, the condition of her hands, arms, etc., this
announcement is of wonderful interest'. We have issued a
booklet which beautifully illustrates a series of lessons in
Beauty Culture, specially devised by a Beauty expert. This
book is a valuable guide to home beauty treatment, and
together with liberal samples of CRETONIC TOILET PRE-
PARATIONS, which will be sent you FREE on application,
will enable every lady reader to gain without cost, practically
the same benefits as would be secured by a personal visit to an
expensive Beauty Specialist.
The Ideal of Toilet Creams
When you take CRETONIC Cream upon the fingers and
massage it into the dull, faded, wrinkled or blemished skin,
an astonishing an(jl striking improvement is immediately
noticeable, and yet when the exercise is finished there is no
Cream visible. It has all vanished, having been absorbed into
the skin! This is perhaps the greatest factor in the success
of CRETONIC Vanishing Cream. All its wonderful soothing
and beauty-giving properties are thus brought into the greatest
possible use. It is cooling, refreshing, and has a faint but
entrancing perfume.
Send for Your Beauty Gift NOW !
Fill in the Coupon below now, while you think of it, and
the samples you require will be promptly sent by return,
together with a copy of this valuable Beauty Guide, all Free of
Charge. If you are satisfied after a trial, that Cretonic Pre-
parations are reliable, you can obtain supplies through your
chemist or store, at the following prices: Cretonic Face Cream,
3/-; Face Powder, 3/-; Hair Massage, 3/6; Shampoo Powders,
3d. each, or 2/6 doz.; Tooth Paste, l/>; Medicinal and Toilet
Soap, 1/-.
Be sure and always ask for CRETONIC. If you experience
any trouble in getting what you ask for, your order will be
sent post free by the proprietors— The Cretonic Chemical Co.,
178 Castlereagh Street, Sydney. Samples and Booklet sent
on receipt of 6d. to cover postage and packing.
—BEAUTY GIFT COUPON
THE CRETONIC CHEMICAL CO.
178 Castlereagh Street, Sydney
Please send your Free Book and Samples of Cretonic Toilet
Preparations. I enclose 6d. for postage and packing.
Name
Address
State
COLD STEEL
By KODAK
Written for The Spendthrift
Dover was the greatest bar-room strategist and pa-
triot who was ever silenced by unlucky chance. Some-
how he can’t work himself up to the Brusiloff pitch
now. It is shutting-up time in both senses before he
arrives at the stage when he can execute a rapid flank
movement whilst holding ’em with his centre. Ihe
Spanish Surprise and the Early Closing regulation
practically put him on the retired list.
As military expert of Hogan’s Royal Arms and un-
official recruiting sergeant for the district, Dover al-
ways made it plain to everybody before starting that
nothing could have held him back from the war if
he hadn’t been a married man. “I only wish it had
come in my time!” he would say to any younger listen-
ers. “You boys have a great opportunity —a wonderful
opportunity! You oughtn’t to miss it!” And they
would all listen attentively, for Dover was a large
heavy man, and had a way of saying commonplace
things that made them sound like quotations from
a Shakespeare birthday book.
Always after his fifth drink, Dover would take the
war news of the day and start drawing beer-maps on
the counter. “Look here now” —making a curved line
with a wet forefinger—“here’s Brusiloff! And here’
—drawing another line—“here is Von Bothmer ! Now
1 don’t suppose any of you noticed a scrap of news
to-night about a fierce engagement at a little place called
(long name of little place given)? Oh! YOU did!
Well, never mind if you DID —you probably didn’t
attach any special importance to it! (Close reader
retires crushed.) Now, I’ve studied this part of the
front pretty closely and I know what 1 m talking
about! I can see exactly what this chap Brusiloff is
after, because I’ve studied his methods. That little
engagement at (name of little place given again) means
that he is holding Von Bothmer with his centre while
he throws forward both wings and envelopes him,
d’ye see? That chap knows his business; he doesn’t
mess about at all. I like him, and if I was in his
place I’d do the same as he is doing now—hold the
German with his centre, then throw both wings for-
ward and roll him up; outflank him and turn his line!
That’s what Brusiloff is doing at this minute.”
“Ah,” some other lunatic would say, “but what about
Hindenburg taking charge?”
“Never mind about Hindenburg! Hindenburg can’t
throw his armies about because he hasn't got em!
He’s got to keep them where they are! If Hinden-
burg dares to pitch his men across to the Somme,
Alexieff will hurl in fresh troops and go straight
through Hindenburg’s lines just as if they were paper.
Old Falkenhayn knew what he was doing when he
warned the Kaiser to shorten his lines —they can’t
keep their men strung out the way they are and be
safe! I’ve gone into this matter pretty thoroughly
and I know! I’m with Falkenhayn all the time!’
Then there would be an impressive pause for drinks.
■//£’ SPLENDIptI^^E^PTHRIFT^^


After the interval, Dover would start to denounce
the enemy and all shirkers for not liking the cold
steel. “They’re all curs at heart! / know ’em ! Good
enough with siege guns and machine guns, p’raps, but
show ’em the cold steel and they’re done! They won't
even wait for the bayonet! Why ? Because they don’t
like it!” (It was quite clear that Dover had no use
for a man who didn’t like cold steel and who wouldn’t
wait a reasonable time for the bayonet.)
SUPERFLUOUS ADVICE.
“ Your getting on very slowly with that trench,
aren’t you ? ”
“ Ground as ’ard as iron, sir ! ”
„ Why don’t you try blasting it ? ”
Been doing nothing else all the morning, sir! ”
Having exposed the shameful cowardice of the
enemy, Dover would take another drink with terrible
solemnity and glower at some younger man, demanding
angrily, “Why aren’t you at the front, eh?”
If the young man were very skilful in debate and
had a sharp tongue and a good excuse, he sometimes
escaped without humiliation. But Dover was the sort
of zealot who didn’t shy at trifles. One night he order-
ed to the front a married consumptive with nine chil-
dren and an artificial leg. When the wretched man
refused to promise that he would try for enlistment
first thing next morning, Dover told him he was afraid
of the cold steel, and turned his back on him for the
rest of the evening.
But the surprise came the night he picked on a
swarthy young stranger who had been listening to
Dover’s discourse as though it touched him nearly.
“Are you a married man ?” he demanded suddenly.
“No,” said the stranger coolly.
“Then why aren’t you at th’ front?”
“Why ? Because it is none of my business!”
Dover fired up all his moral boilers at that. What
made it easier was the fact that he had been taking
in more liquid fuel than usual. “But it is your busi-
ness; d’ye hear! Certainly it’s your business!”
“Pardon, I think not!” The stranger was as smooth
as silk, but there was a glint in his eye as he watched
the fuddled patriot waving his arms.
“I know what’s matter with you!” sneered Dover.
“I’ve met your sort before! I know ”
“I tell you I am a Spanish neutral!”
“I don't care what you are, m’ boy. You don't like
cold steel!”
The stranger’s jaw set, and with one lightning move-
ment he had plucked from his belt a handful of the very
commodity Dover had talked so much about. It was
in the form of a knife made of the very coldest-look-
ing steel that ever froze a smoky bar-room into silence.
Big blustering Dover bulged his bloodshot eyes at
it and its crouching owner, then turned and left pre-
cipitately, presumably for the front.
(Moral No. i). —No man really likes cold steel if
it isn’t his own cold steel.
(Moral No. 2). —There isn’t much profit in waiting
for the bayonet if you haven't something worse about
you.
The War Chest Cook-Book
By Killara (Lakes and Dells).
As it is a practical impossibility to obtain a single
ingredient mentioned in the Cook-Book, housewives
will find it helpful in filling a void. Young men who
desire to sidestep the bachelor tax should try one of
the Cook-Book recipes. Small legacies will be grate-
fully accepted by the editor. Fifty thousand War
Chest Cook-Books will be sold at the Killara Produce
Stall, at 1/6 per copy.
My Dug-Out: A Lay of the Trenches
What is this slimy, dismal hole
Where oft I’m lurking like a mole
And cursing Germans heart and soul?
My Dug-Out.
Where is it that beneath the floor
The zvater’s rising more and more
And where the roofs a broken door?
My Dug-Out.
Where is it that I try to sleep
Betwixt alarms, when up I leap
And dash through water four feet deep?
My Dug-Out.
Where is it that I’ll catch a chill
And lose my only quinine pill
And probably remain until
I’m dug out?
My Dug-Out.
SPLENDID SPE^DTHRIFT^^>


CHANDLER VI.
PRICE -
CJ The CHANDLER VI. is a cat o(
the HIGHEST QUALITY. We express
with ABSOLUTE SINCERITY our
FIRM BELIEF that, REGARDLESS
o( PRICE or ANY OTHER CON-
SIDERATION, the MOTOR o( the
CHANDLER VI. is the VERY BEST
six-cylinder motor EVER PRODUCED
—a belie! that is shared by THOU-
SANDS of owners of CHANDLER
cars who have owned and driven other
cars of world-wide reputation.
*1 Consider a ROOMY, LUXURIOUS,
SEVEN-PASSENGER. SIX-CYLIN-
DER car, with POWER to SUR-
MOUNT ALL HILLS; STRONG,
STURDY and SWIFT; WEIGHING
LESS than 3,0001 b. FULLY EQUIP-
PED -honest weight; running SIXTEEN
MILES and MORE per GALLON of
gasoline, HUNDREDS OF MILES on
ONE GALLON of oil, and averaging,
on good roads, 7,000 miles to ONE
SET of TYRES; and it can be under-
stood why the CHANDLER LIGHT
WEIGHT VI. IS NOT ONLY A
SIX YOU CAN AFFORD TO BUY.
BUT A SIX YOU CAN AFFORD
TO RUN.
•I ’Phone CITY 88 6 2 and arrange a
demonstration.
MARCUS CLARK & CO. LTD.
#
GARAGE AND SHOWROOMS
162 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY
SLAVES of the RING
Written for The Spendthrift
The lights shone out by yellow he os and threes,
The stars zvere white in the pale evening sky,
A little breeze zvas in the taller trees;
And in hot pans the fish began to fry —
The hollozv fish that knezv nor song nor sigh.
I did not knozv Amelia planned the raid;
But in the glimmer of the grozving dark
What time the long street vistas seemed to fade
And homing carts went by with no remark
I saw her moving szviftly through the park.
Six maidens and a szvish of petticoat
That told of little feet in sudden haste.
And how should 1 who loved her fail to note
The rapid movement of h'er slender zvaist? —
Her chin zvas poised exactly to my taste.
1 saw them go, and all my heart beat high.
Some sense of large adventure filled the air,
I rose, I followed, though I knew not why;
And had I known I really did not care,
for all in love and war is strictly fair.
The darkling August eve, the dingy street,
On high the triple golden Lombard sign.
And six tall maidens paused on timid feet,
Six maids, but one alone zvas marked as mine—
-7 he girl whose lips were like the kiss of wine.
The Jew was sad. 1 think most Jews are so,
A melancholy race, devoid of mirth,
Who while the broad star-rivers szvell and flow,
Think mostly of the food that grazes on earth—
Squat dullards squeezing mud for gold and girth.
Six girls with a peculiar ring to pawn —
A ring that flashed six lustres in a rozv —
And one sad Jew in a dark hole withdrawn
Nosing the gems the zvhile his fingers slow
Twisted the gilded circle to and fro.
Unseen 1 entered. There Amelia stood.
Pier five companions squeezed a tittering queue.
"Paste,” said the Hcbrezv; and in a manner rude
He held the glittering gew-gaw up to view.
Amelia softly frowned upon the Jezv.
I slipped aside. With whisperings they came
Back from that place of harvest and despair.
Amelia spoke, "Well, isn’t it a shame.
The ring my great-grandmother used to wear.
Paste! and'they used to say the stones zvere rare.”
I raised my hat. Amelia blushed as red
As bright peach blossom on an early tree.
"Oh, Mr. Jones,” zvas the sweet word she said;
And as she moved the stone flashed full and free
A gold-green-crimson sort of fire on me.
I started; for that flash like zmtchcraft seemed,
In spite of Israel and all its tribes.
I knezv no gems of paste had ever gleamed
With that zvild lustre since first Europe s jibes
Annoyed the Pharisees and riled the scribes.
SPLENDID ] SPE^PTHRIFT?||^>


That ring,” I said. “The stones are full of fire.
Hozv delicately zvrought and purely chaste.”
Amelia took it off at my desire,
And, as I turned it o’er in wondering haste
She murmured, “Moses says the thing is ’paste.”
It seemed as hot as a live cigarette.
And zvas it fancy that I saw it zvink
Where the green stone beside the red zvas set?
Its conduct, as I had not had a drink,
11 as such as forces even love to think.
I loved Amelia; and this ring despised
Was mad in some delightful sort of zvay.
I said "Some alchemist this thing devised.
Its trick of zmnking takes my breath azvay.”
1 he jezvel heard and smiled a golden ray.
“Slave of the ring?” I asked. “What tale zvas that?
Arabian Nights or something, I believe.”
The six girls giggled, and Amelia’s hat
Tilted tozvards mine. The subtle spell to weave
I i übbed the ring three times upon my sleeve.
With one swift zvriggle all the world went red.
As if torpedoed by a submarine,
last trees were waving softly overhead
And a broad garden suddenly was seen
All showering roses and smooth lazvns of green.
A music seemed to szvell up from the ground.
The air was warm zvith incense of delight.
I i übbed my eyes and slozvly looked around
To sec twelve pinkest legs flash out of sight—
I said, "This suburb suits my soul all right.”
And then I blushed—at least I felt I did—
For I stood naked as a cab-horse there.
Beneath a leafy vine I szviftly slid
And looked about for something fit to wear
More meet than trousers of Elysian air.
A fig-leaf garment such as Adam zvore
I easily contrived in that sweet shade,
So large the leaves the bushes round me bore.
I fancied much the suit of green I made
A neck-to-anklc garb with vines of braid.
Straight I arose and zvalked the grassy turf
And laughed aloud to feel the moving wind
That tossed rose blossom like a finer surf;
And I zvas not at all displeased to find
A lady near me who zvas fair and kind.
Amelia had passed beyond recall,
But this bright damsel filled me zvith surprise.
She zvalked the szvard divinely szveet and tall,
Pink robed, with welcome in her kindling eyes —
I am the ring’s glad slave, as you surmise.”
Surmise just then zvas far from all my thought.
The ring, the pawnshop and the girls had gone.
My happy tongue some subtle phrases wrought,
We ate ripe peaches and the clear sun shone;
Sind as we laughed the pleasant breeze passed on
It might have been a fortnight or an hour.
Time on those lawns had zvasted all his sand.
I kissed her lips that seemed a crimson flozvcr,
And pressed the lily of her fragrant hand;
And the nice girl seemed quite to understand.
And through the bowery green we softly zvcnt
\l ith easy steps that scorned a fasten pace.
The elms above us made a leafy tent.
My arm about her zvaist zvas still in place—
And there we met Amelia face to face.
Leaf girt she was from pallid stem to stern,
Broad garlands glistened on her shoulder bones;
About her zvaist zvas zvealth of kilted fern;
Her ankles szvelled to green and grassy cones
Shocked and surprised she murmured, “Mr. Jones!
I too was shocked. The tall trees seemed to sing
Derision of my own more slight attire.
I looked; and on my finger shone the ring,
Flashing a mirthful and unholy fire.
My fig leaf trousers caused me to perspire.
I looked to my companion. .She had turned
Her face aside to hide a tzvitching smile.
1 felt ridiculous. My hot heart burned
And Paradise retreated mile on mile—
/ said This sort of show is not my style.”
I rubbed the ring. The world went grey and brown
As if upended by a ten-inch shell.
I knew that we were on the road to town
And named the passing districts by the smell—
Ultimo, Darling Harbour, George Street—Hell!
IVc had arrived. The sign of Moses glozvcd.
Afar a tall policeman's boots zvere seen.
One taxi-cab zvas just across the road.
All things around zvere as they once had been
But seven shipwrecked souls zvere draped in green.
Yes, that accursed ring had done the trick.
Our clothes were somewhere ’mid the bozvers of sin.
II e stared at one another sad and sick
. hid shivered zvith cold leaves against the skin —
Home zvas sweet home, but home we could not win.
The tall policeman s steps zvere coming near.
We knew the horrors that his boots must bring.
Amelia breathed her terror in my ear;
My thoughts seemed tangled like a piece of string
In sheer despair I rubbed that cursed ring.
With one swift wriggle all the zvorld went red
As if torpedoed by a submarine —
Look sixteen stanzas back for what I said
About the garden and its wealth of green.
We landed there and felt the show zvas mean.
And now that sparkling ring works overtime
ifaking us to and fro from lazvn to street
I ill zve may strike some hour when sloth or crime
Removes the tall policeman from his beat
That we may sprint for home on naked feet.
SPLENDID j~ SPETVDTHRIFTf^I^^)


four Nome Completely
furnished LyNeara Watsons
for £llO.
EVERY item shown in our COTTAGE
SCHEMES is made at our own Factory
by skilled men of GOOD material, and
is reliable in every respect. We are most
willing to arrange for any customer inter-
ested to visit our factory and inspect the
progress of this and'other work.
iht
UFS
rrr:
r
m
l—
Inventory
Size 13Teet 6 inches x 12 feet
Axminster Carpet, 10 feet 6 inches x 9 feet,
and Linoleum Surround ; Oak Sideboard;
Oak Circular Dining Table; Oak Side
Table ; Palm Stand ; Settee upholstered in
Burlap; Easy Chair; Rocking Chair;
Four Dining Chair
Living Room Complete: £42il2i-
UL
Oft have zee tried, but still our luck is out.
Our ferns and fig-leaves zee with pain renew.
Three balls and roses have it turn about;
But for a single plate of Irish stew
We’d pawn both ring and garden to the Jew.
Pat O’Maori.
On the Izonzo
Specially Written for The Spendthrift
By MONTAGUE GROVER
With purr of gear and whizz of wheel,
Exhausts that pant and gasp,
With art of bronze and strength of steel
The splintered heights they clasp;
With terrier-drills that bite the rock,
Where man-made lightnings play,
Behind the man-made thunder’s shock,
The Legions hew their way.
Through pass and pinnacle and peak
The Roman road is made,
Through stiowy slopes and canyons bleak
The Roman plies his trade —
His trade of old a zvorld that won
And gave a zvorld its light,
That rose a mighty golden sun
On black barbarian flight.
O'er cliff and cleft, o’er crags and crests,
They scramble through the mists,
They bear no banners on their breasts,
No bucklers on their wrists;
The science that the ages yield
Is bent to do their will.
Their fathers' swords they do not wield —
But Caesar’s legions still.
The tortoise and the ram have flown,
The szvord has gone its way;
With ’plane and buzzer, tank and ’phone
The legions fight to-day;
But Roman blood to Roman hands
The Roman vigour gives,
And steadfast, strong the legion stands
While Caesar’s spirit lives.
With magic of the prisoned volt,
With power of prisoned oil,
With flange and rivet, cog and bolt,
Redeeming Roman soil,
Come Caesar’s legions as of old
To light the gloom again,
And let a play of sunlight gold
Upon a world of pain.
“A gift with a kind countenance is a double pres-
ent.”
SPLENDID SPE7VDTHRIFT' :^f^>


Then Allied aeroplanes raided right into German
territory, destroying crops,* bridges, and, where pos-
sible, ammunition factories.
Ihe first great aerial pitched battle was fought
over Verdun in May, 1916. The advantage had
swung over to the Germans’ new and improved
Mercedes engines. With these they beat both Brit-
ish and French, and having gained aerial ascend-
ency the attack on Verdun began to show signs of
succeeding. The deadly accuracy of the German
artillery fire was due to the fact that they could
see exactly where.the shells fell and check the
range. The French could not respond so far as the
German batteries were concerned or with troops
massing for storming attacks. Things were almost
desperate when the British War Office rushed a
shipment of 100 new engines designed by Louis
Coatelen, probably the greatest of our aero design-
ers, to France. They were hastily fitted into as
many aeroplanes, and this tremendous squadron
flew over the German lines, and, sweeping round,
attacked the German artillery spotters in the rear.
J he guarding battleplanes hurled themselves upon
the English planes and the French attacked them
in the rear. The Germans, caught between two
fires, were wiped out. The German artillery lost
the range, and the Crown Prince was defeated.
O’er Verdun in a fierce array
The vaunting “Aviatiks” came
7 o mark zvhere France’s armies lav
And guide the Huns' destroying flame.
Belozv them like a carpet spread
The smoke of all their thousand guns,
And through the ragged rifts and red
They poured the fire on France’s sons.
Beyond the reach of shot and shell,
Above the clouds, in aery blue,
7 he black cross messengers of hell,
The signal-throwing " Fokkcrs” flew.
And o’er the anguished earth bclozv
7 he storm of German iron rained,
While airmen waved it to and fro
As ridge and fort were held or gained.
When soaring o’er that raginci hell
The battleplanes of England came,
“ Tokker” and “Aviatik” fell
In ragged ruin, zvrapt in flame.
Three miles within the aery blue
Their guns poured dozvn a ghastly rain,
Till zvhere of late the “Fokker” flezv
There floated then the French “Morane.”
And far across the fields of Gaul
Its death directing signals flezv
To guide the storm of steel to fall
Upon the hozvling German crew.
And floating through the stricken day
The pilots heard the hymns of praise—
-7 hey looked zvhere slaughtered armies lay,
And shouted back “La Marseillaise.”
Mr. Holland left the office about 4 o’clock, as he
had promised to take his wife out to spend the even-
ing with friends. He rushed into Pitt-street to
catch a railway tram, but could not pick out the rail-
way cars from the Crown-street or any other, as
none bore any notice board. I hen he remembered
the advertising prohibition. He looked about for
the policeman usually on that beat whom he knew
well, to ask which was a railway car. He had dif-
ficulty in finding him, and eventually discovered him
in plain clothes. “Not on duty to-day, Lockham ?”
queried he. “Oh! yes, sir, I’m on duty all right.”
“Then why not in uniform as usual?” “Don’t you
know, Mr. Holland ? Uniforms are done away
with now. Advertising is prohibited, and the uni-
form advertises the fact that we are policemen.
Good thing, too, perhaps. We may be able to catch
offenders more easily.”
So Mr. Holland took a chance at the next car,
and found to his relief that it was “a railway” all
right. He had some difficulty in ascertaining what
platform his train moved from, as he was not in the
habit of going home so early, and there were no
indicators, announcing times of departures, or num-
bers of platforms.
Prohibited advertising!” said the porter in an-
swer to his query as to why the indicators had been
removed. During the journey home Mr. Holland
began to think furiously. “ 1 his fool law will have
to be repealed,” he said to himself. “The public
won’t stand it. Why, it will stop everything.”
When he reached home he had to listen to a cata-
logue of his wife s troubles. She had been unable
to order her household supplies by telephone, as
usual, because the telephone book had been taken
away, in obedience to the Government law prohibit-
ing advertising. The groceries ordered the day be-
fore had been delivered, but she had to smell or
taste everything, as nothing was labelled. She
supposed these fools that had passed the law pro-
hibiting advertising would say that one’s own name
would have to be given up, because, after all, a name
was merely for the purpose of advertising us to
one another telling who and what we were, and so
on.
“And what do you think is the last straw?” said
she. I received a notice just before you came in
that our rooster will have to be killed if he crows in
the early hours, as it will be advertising the fact
that it is morning.”
At this juncture the whole thing seemed so absurd
that Mr. Holland decided he would pinch himself
again, to see if he were awake or dreaming, when
he heard a voice very familiar to him saying, “For
heaven’s sake, what’s the matter, James? Don’t
pinch me like that. You have nearly taken a piece
out of my arm.”
And Mr. Holland found he had really been
suffering from a bad nightmare. He is now firmly
convinced that advertising should not be prohibited.


M
n*
4
BEALE
simply
pu the fib//
or to the ~
PLAYER • PIANO
And immediately you commence to
play - play with a glorious technique
that years and years of steady prac-
tising could not impart. And every-
thing is so easy. You experience no
muscle fatigue —no mental strain;
just the unalloyed delight of pro-
ducing the kind of music that
best reflects your musical emotions.
But this wonderful techni-
cal ability of the “Beale”
Player-Piano does not con-
stitute its greatest feature.
By itself it would be use-
less for rendering any-
thing but the most
mechanical effects. The
REAL superiority of the
“Beale” lies in the deli-
cately responsive expres-
sion devices. With these
one may infuse the great-
est amount of light and
shade into every rendition.
The melody in the treble
or bass may be accented
above the accompaniment,
or it may be accented in
both treble AND bass. If
you wish to accompany
a singer, it is possible
to entirely eliminate the
melody and thus give
a true accompaniment.
Piano, Pianissimo, Cres-
cendo, Diminuendo, Ri-
tard, Accelerando, Fortis-
simo—there is not a mu-
sical term which cannot
be as fully interpreted on
the “Beale” Player as by
a hand-player.
We should be pleased to
give you a demonstration
at any time you can call.
Head Office
333 George Street
Sydney
iecfle
&G> JLls
Factory
41-47 Trafalgar Sf
Annandale
Branches throughout the Commonwealth
Three o’clock! That medicine again. She must
see to “Old Jerry” as she familiarly called him, to
herself. The old man was lying wide-awake and
free from pain. “Nurse,” he said to her in a low
weak voice, “Come here and sit by me.” She went
to the bedside. “I am lonely,” he murmured, “lonely
and afraid. Will you let me hold your hand for a
while?” She looked at him intently. This was a
new “symptom.” A younger man and she might
have thought longer. Oh, but he was so old —“Yes,
he could hold her hand—so.” An half-hour of this.
Then: “Nurse, you have pretty hands. How is it
they are not hard, as nurses’ hands usually are?
You remind me —of one I—used to know, nurse.
Beautiful woman —lovely hands —such shapely
arms. Yours would be shapely too, nurse.” She
started violently and flushed. “Now, just you settle
off to sleep,” she commanded, “and no more of that
nonsense —you old devil,” she added quietly.
For a few moments, silence. Then, again; “It
is an old man’s whim, nurse,” he added, “perhaps
his last. You are so like her, and I sacrificed my
wealth and happiness at the altar of her beauty.
Bare this arm for me —let me run my hand along
it, just to the elbow.” She looked at his bony hand
and shuddered. Yet he was too old, too weak, to
despise for this new weakness. She loosed the
sleeve and pushed it back giving her bare arm to
the clutch of his gaunt hand. Subconsciously she
kept the scarred elbow away from him. But he
seized the elbow suddenly and turned it towards
him. He saw the scar livid upon the delicate white
skin. “My God, my God,” he cried, and this time it
was fervently, reverently. “It is she. Stella, Stella
—my Mabel’s child!” He writhed and heaved in
his excitement. His eyes stared wildly. She grew
suddenly afraid. Startled by his words, she was
more startled by his condition. She seized the
hypodermic syringe. Interrupted by a knock upon
the door, she then admitted Dr. Thresher, oppor-
tunely calling to see to his critical case. “You all
seem very much excited here,” he said sternly. The
old man spoke first. “Doctor, do this for me, quick.
A folded paper—that top drawer. Yes, there.” The
doctor found the paper. “It is my will,” gasped the
old man, “pen and ink—hurry.” Thresher produced
his fountain pen. “Write this,” urged the invalid,
iust this: “To Stella Alderson, known as Graham,
hospital nurse, I leave all I own.” The doctor
wrote and glanced at the nurse. The nurse gaped
open-eyed at the doctor and patient. The old man
seized the pen, “Witnesses,” reminded the medico —
“get Andrews.” The nurse summoned the sleepy
groom. The candle burned low and spluttered. In
the failing light the old man falteringly affixed
his signature. The two men signed as witnesses
“That’s all, doctor,” muttered the dying man, “I’ve
made it right—for the girl. I recognised her. Per-
haps—the dead mother—will —forgive me—now.”
Those were his last words. The doctor busied him-
self at the bedside. The girl, agitated, stood by the
SPE.NDTHRIfT^^)
ON NIGHT DUTY, by Herbert Tracey
{Continued from Page 16)


dying - fire, her head bent over upon her arm that
rested on the mantel. Ere long the doctor ap-
proached and gave her the document. “This makes
you a wealthy woman,” he said, “lucky girl—all
very romantic, isn’t it?”
She took the will listlessly. “If you knew my
mother’s story you would say it was tragic,” she
answered. “This man oppressed my father and
ruined him financially, wrongfully accused him of
theft, and secured a conviction. Then he tried to
win my mother’s love.” She added vehemently;
“This for his will —may his soul know no better
CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY.
We are great; we are free; we are wonderful. We are the
most Wonderful people in all the jungle. We all say so,
and so it must be true.” —Kipling’s Jungle Book.
ending.” So saying, she cast the paper into the
flames and fled from the room.
Returning to where she had left her letter un-
finished, she wrote again: “I am too agitated now
to write much more. Jack —but it is all over. You
see I did not sleep! I proved worthy of my charge
and of myself.”
The storm broke with a tremendous drum-fire of
thunder. Stella Graham, qualified nurse committed
to the charge of a serious case, had slept at her
post! Roused by the thunder, she glanced hur-
riedly about the room. Her bare arms were chilled.
There was the letter—ink beflooded! There was
the fire—no, surely it could not have happened!
There was the clock. 4.35. Two hours and a half!
With a stifled scream she grasped her clinical ther-
mometer and electric lamp, and rushed towards the
invalid’s room. At the half-closed door she paused,
terrified. The stillness was ominous. The doctor’s
words drummed in her ears, “If you miss one dose
he may collapse.” Sighing deeply, she entered. The
patient lay outstretched, his features composed
She went nearer, flashing the light full upon his
face. She took up his gaunt wrist. He slept—his
pulse was feeble, but not critical. “Thank God —
oh, thank God!” she exclaimed. She went to the
window, releasing the spring blind. Through the
glistening rain-drops that bejewelled the pane she
saw the lightening sky and the first faint flush of
dawn. In a eucalypt nearby a kookaburra set up his
hilarious laughter. Her pent-up feelings found
their release: “Laugh, you weird mocker; laugh
she cried. “I wonder whether you laugh now at
night nurses who sleep and dream, or at doctors
who say a patient must not sleep. Old fool—l won-
der what he’ll say in the morning.” Then she re-
membered the words of her unfinished letter. They
would have shot her soldier over in France if he
had slept; and she, so she thought, would have
despised his memory. She shuddered. The kooka-
burra laughed again. She then threw up the win-
dow and met the morning air with the exuberance
of youth. “Well, after all, YOU’RE right, my weird
friend, the cases are somewhat different—but it will
never occur again.”
False Alarm Recipes
By “KODAK.”
Poor Man’s Scones.
Borrow 4 cups self-raising flour from Mrs. Smith
next door; i-81b. butter from Mrs. Brown on the other
side; little baking powder from Mrs. Sneerer across
the street; paste board from Mrs. Jones around the
corner; water from Water and Sewerage Board (they
can spare it) ; owe grocer for a little sugar.
Mix and roll dough in usual way, and bake for 20
minutes in Mrs. Robinson’s gas stove. Borrow one of
Mrs. Robinson’s best tablecloths in which to keep
scones warm whilst taking home. Don’t return any-
thing until insulted. A very cheap and satisfactory
dish.
Strike Curry.
Take 1 lb. black steak—(lt may look red, but any
striker can tell you by eating some if it is good
“black”) ; take another ilb. of “black” steak—(You
may not be able to get it to-morrow) ; add some
“black” curry powder.
Mix it all in a “black” pot; put it on a “black” gas
stove. Cook it—keep on cooking it until it looks like
something. If it ends up in a sinister way by looking
like nothing, give it to the dog. If the dog strikes,
give it a “black” look, kick him and call in a non-
unionist dog to do his work. Lock up the house and
go to a matinee of “Damaged Goods” with the rest of
the housekeeping money.
SPLENDID SPENDTHRIFT.||^)


Are You Trained
To Fill the Gap ?
Every man who enlists leaves a gap in
the economic machine —a gap which the
Commercial World can only fill with
women. This is your chance to render
a service to your country by taking up
some absent man’s work. But you can
only do this if you are trained.
Let Stott & Hoare’s
Train You
Our Courses of Instruction include those
subjects that are of practical value in
the business world. Earnest students
qualify quickly owing to the efficiency
of our training.
Personal or Postal Tuition.
Begin your training to-day—you can’t
afford delay.
Call, or write to Mr. Geo. H. Rose, 8.A.,
the Principal, for full particulars.
STOTT & HOARE’S
Business College
“REMINGTON HOSUE,” LIVERPOOL ST., SYDNEY
FACING HYDE PARK
“ONE OF THE
THOUSANDS”
Specially written for The Spendthrift
By AILEEN A. N. SMALL
He had never seen his son in the flesh. On the
battlefield he had come into his heritage of father-
hood —on Gallipoli, two years ago. He had only
touched on the shadow of the wonder in Molly’s
life, but even the shadow made Gallipoli livable. He
could talk “son” with any man now. Many photos
of Bob Pearson, junior, garnished his tent. Bob,
open mouthed, stolidly patching a canary, Bob in
early love throes strangling the cat, Bob laughing,
Boh howling, Bob, serious and destructive, tearing
the petals from x a daisy—a bright eyed, active little
beggar with a smile that entrenched itself in your
affection dugout for life. Every man in that platoon
loved Bob Pearson’s kid. Oh, Molly Pearson was
no amateur in tightening the love cords round her
man’s heart. Yet in none of the photos was his son
standing. Pie wrote, at last, almost impatiently—
“l want to see the length of him, Moll; snap him
as he makes round the yard handing out a few
bricks to the cat.”
Boh Pearson, father, was only an ordinary Aus-
tralian, with the ordinary big heart. The part he
played in the great Redemption was “after all only
my little bit.” Life had not been all Spring. But
he had not been all angel. Now Molly had come.
To-day in his front line trench, Pearson opened
Molly’s letter, hungrily! She was in high spirits.
“There is some talk, Mate, of the First Division
coming home! I can hardly write. I have just
squashed the life out of your cub —and he protested.
He’s once again cancelled his membership with the
Great Unwashed —and, oh, that kid! He’s the dash
of blue in the sky. He’s kept me sane. You’re
coming home. Bob, the Cootamundra is all gold,
the gums are russet-red with the new growth, and
the air is nutty sweet with the pittosporum’s scent.
I heard a solitary thrush this morning; he sang
“Perhaps—perhaps—per —haps, he’s coming home.”
Some day—and perhaps! He buried his face in
his hands. His soul was among lions. Old? He
must be a thousand, and the war was not finished
by a big strafe. He saw, too —afterwards. The
letter sealed, her head upon the table, the cub tug-
ging at her skirts.
Down to the Southward, heavy howitzers roared,
behind the lines battery upon battery spat forth its
rations of death, machine gun fire ceaselessly swept
the parapet. So it was he wrote to Molly.
“Maybe, I’m going out on the long journey, my
girl. The god of war is a jealous god; he may take
your very heart’s blood. There is no rest for the
SPLENDID SPE^DTHRIFT:ff^


First Division till this cursed business is done.
Bite hard, cheer oh. Life is such a little thing to
give for your wife and your son. Out in the West
the sun is shining, and remember, I shall face the
dawn with you.”
Strange, that when he went over the parapet, he
only heard the wind moving,among the gums, red-
tipped and grey, he only saw Molly and his son.
There were two shades,
Bob Pearson, junior, re-
membered for many a
day. One was khaki—
the other black. Every-
where it seemed round
him. Child-like, he tired
of it. Red was prettier,
and blue! oh, blue; he
loved it. A vision moved
through his little brain,
a bad dream of a day
when his mother roamed
the paddock, talking
wildly. That was after
the man had gone away.
He, too, wore black. The
dream almost passed. He
heard his mother laugh
again—it sounded queer.
Burrowing, way down
in a drawer one day, he
happened on a little
bronze cross. He took
it out and tied it on the
strap round Nipper’s
neck. For half a morn-
ing he played with it.
Suddenly down the slope
came a whirr of skirts,
and next moment his
mother slapped his ears.
Sobbing frantically, she
unloosened her precious
Cross, and laid her face
against it on the sweet
young grass. Bob Pear-
son stumbled round and
placed a chubby, grubby arm round her neck.
“Your big man,” he coo-ed.
She caught him to her in a frenzy of love that
almost choked him. He blinked uncomprehend-
ingly. She was a very funny woman, his mother.
But she had come to a resting place where the
husheen in life was halo-ed by the years of
lachrymal. She was listening to the lullabies that
had stirred in women’s breasts and would never be
sung. She had had her miracle. The glory of the
revelation almost blinded her. Peace and calm, like
some quiet creeklet, flooding barren inland shores,
came to her, sweeping away the torment and unrest
of the last two and a half years. Perhaps the spirit
of Sergeant Pearson, watching from his long home,
saw more exquisitely, than is possible in life, the
brave guarding of her secret, the unslept nights, the
IN FRANCE
“ Thy will be done on Earth ”
endless days, the Spartan gaiety of her letters.
Perhaps, too, his arms enwrapped with hers their
little son —their son with the laughter imp in his
eyes, their son cursed with a club foot.
The Rabbiter at Gallipoli
Colonel Foott, D.A. and Q.M.G., ist Aus. Div.
H.Q. (and that’s all true) was old soldier enough
never to ask his batman
at Gallipoli where any
little luxury that appear-
ed at table came from!
When that batman
asked for money the
Colonel gave it and ask-
ed no reason, but came
in for dinner a little
’'barber perhaps! One
afternoon half a sove-
reign was asked for, and
the 50 piastre note with
red Turkish super stamp
was given. Imagine the
Colonel’s surprise when
that evening he returned
later and found neither
meal nor batman wait-
ing! (Australian spoken
here.) When the lad did
arrive, breathless and
radiant, and carrying his
rifle, the Colonel asked,
“What did you get?”
and the jubilant reply
was, “Two, sir! one run-
ning,” and the interpre-
tation is—the lad had
bought a sniper’s place
with the money, and
claimed to have potted
two Turks, “one run-
ning” ! The Colonel but
repeated “Australian”
.till the meal was served,
land that meal had but
•few luxuries to it!
There’s better shooting at fatter game to be had
in France for less money, right now! Sportsmen
only wanting!
Useful Household Hints
(Note. —All good cookery books are expected to fill
np with useless information.)
To Cure Fits in Cats. —Don’t; a cat’s life is a dull
one on the whole, and you may be spoiling the cat’s
fun as well as your own.
To Remove Dull Visitors from Drawing-room
Chairs. —Tell them you have that all-overish feeling
that is the advance agent of influenza. Even the dull-
est visitors don’t enjoy your influenza. They will
vanish at once.
SPLENDID SPE7VDTHRIFT |f^>


Ilex An Invitation
313 George St.
Sydney
We extend to you a cordial invitation to
inspect our opening display of
Ladies’ Spring and
Summer Footwear
The Shoes shown are the very latest; are made on ouriown
smart bespoke lasts, which are perfect fitting and give the
utmost comfort. We suggest you pay us an early visit
while the full range of sizes is complete.
Kindly note that our Ladies’ Depart-
ment is at the George Street address only.
ABBEY
313 George St. Sydney
No. Lies
Highest Grade Patent Court
Shoe, light welted soles, leath-
er Cuban heels - - 37/6
Stocked in narrow, medium,
and wide fittings.
SPORTING &
REPAIR
«s
■mil
<3 Cor
Did it ever occur
to YOU that we are
specialists in
Sporting
Repairs
Guns, Rifles, Revolvers,
Tennis Rackets, Cricket
Bats, Golf Clubs, Hockey
and Lacrosse Sticks,
Skates, Fishing Rods,
Reels and Sporting Re-
quisites of all kinds,
repaired by expert workmen in
the finest equipped factory in
the Southern Hemisphere.
First Class Workmanship,
Lowest Charges.
Illustrated Sports List and Angler s
Guide gratis and post free.
. 7rfic£ Simmons M.
J
Head Depot: Haymarket, Sydney.
Newcastle and Brisbane
Ufa Lump
that counts
B.T.H.
Mazda
AUSTRALIAN GENERAL
ELECTRIC COY.
Mazda It oust. Corner Wentworth Avenue
and Coulburn St. Sydney
Corner Queen & Little Collins Streets.
Melbourne.
You are Liable/
for Damages
for any injury sustained by
your employees. This in-
cludes domestic service of
every description.
In the event of death, the maxi-
mum compensation is £5OO.
Arrange a policy with the
I Employers’
Liability Corporation
Insurance
and secure full protection at a very small premium.
You can also provide for loss sustained through acci-
dent, Fire, Burglary, or death of stock.
All claims met promptly. Reserves exceed £2,300,000
Application for Agencies invited.
EDWARD CHAPMAN & CO.
Managers for Australia :: BOND STREET, SYDNEY
.V >
w
The
yjg» SPLENDIP,|I^p)SPE7\DTHRIFTfj^|>


DAVID JONES’
GUINEA MILUNERY
DAVID IJONES’ aim —to produce the very latest word
in fashionable apparel at prices that are truly moderate —
is once again proved beyond all gainsay in the present
display of Guinea Millinery (Second Floor Showroom).
The new Droop and Cloche shapes, the Broad Brimmed
Sailors and the Mushroom shapes so popular in Paris
and London are all represented, and the favoured
tones of Mastic and Lime are greatly in evidence.
An Example in
Rough Straw
This new droop shape is
greatly favoured for Spring
and Summer. Carried out
in rough straw of Tuscan
or Navy shade also in
Black trimmed with rib-
bon of contrasting
colour 21 -
Y
c
Another Example
in TAG TAGEL
Equally prominent are
the various broad-
brimmed shapes of
which this example
in Tag Tagel is
representative. In
navy, white or black
trimmed with posies of
mixed fruit and hav-
ing band of
aerophane ... 21/-
WE PAY THE CARRIAGE
DAVID JONES LIMITED
OPPOSITE G.P.0., SYDNEY
kA
PERDRIAU
“ WATERSHED”
Regd.
Brand
RED RUBBER
GARDEN HOSE
MADE IN AUSTRALIA and obtainable from all Stores
Perdriau Rubber Co. Ltd.
Sydney Melbourne Brisbane Adelaide Perth
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Attkins, McQuitty 1,1d..0f Sydney, and published by William O. Richards, of Roscrea Avenue, Rand-Wick,
and the Advertising Service Agents’Association of Sydney, on behalf of the Citizens’War Chest, Dalton Chambers, 115 Pitt Street. Sydney
SPLENDID SPETJDTHRIFT^^^
