

The ROMANCE OF
THE HOUSE OF FOY




Foreword
IN a country not yet a hundred and fifty years
old, fifty years is a long span of time. Aus-
tralia, still three years short of her sesqui-
centennial anniversary, is the youngest of the
world’s nations, yet, in many things, the most
advanced.
Since the beginning of colonisation, Australia
has progressed unbelievably, because of the cour-
age, the resource, the enterprise of her pioneers.
Sydney, the greatest city in the Southern Seas, and
the capital of Australia, has expanded and pros-
pered in consonance with the development of the
fertile hinterland, because of the forcefulness, the
acumen, the ability of her captains of commerce.
Among those to whom Sydney owes much of
her distinction and stability is the late Francis
Foy, founder of the business of Mark Foy Ltd.,
an enterprise which this year will have completed
fifty years of achievement in this city.
To signalise the occasion of the fiftieth business
anniversary of this firm in Sydney, Mark Foy
Ltd. has issued this booklet, which briefly
epitomises the history of the family of Foy and
the events that marked the half century of progress
of their enterprise, now one of the greatest and
most important in this city.
This will convey a faint idea of the romance asso-
ciated with the firm’s beginnings, and will depict
something of the forthright, lovable character of
that very human personality, the founder of the
Sydney house, the late Francis Foy.


MR. FRANCIS FOY.
Founder of the firm of Mark Foy’s Ltd., Sydney.


CHAPTER I.
STRANGE things often influence the destinies of men and countries. Some such
happenings are so bizarre as to be incredible, yet truth has always been stranger
than fiction.
That there could be any possible connection between the terrible events of the
French Revolution during that affair of the Vendemiaire—when a howling Parisian
mob shrieked execrations of hate as the guillotine took off the heads of the King and
Queen of France —and the establishment of one of the greatest drapery businesses
in Australia many years later, is beyond credence. Yet had it not been for the French
Revolution, Mark Foy’s store in Sydney would not exist to-day.
France was a troubled country in the year 1787. Civil unrest seethed in every
town and village. The King and his court roystered and feasted at Versailles,
squandering with reckless extravagance the money wrung by exacting tax-gatherers
from people and peasants. While the aristocrats indulged in every luxury fantastic
imagination could conceive, the people starved. Famine stalked like a gaunt spectre
throughout the unhappy land. Everywhere men murmured against the King and his
courtiers; whispering, in the shadows, of a day of reckoning, of a commune, of death
to the aristocrats and the Bourbons. Despair was held at bay only by thoughts of
the “liberty, equality, fraternity” that it was believed would come once the people
themselves ruled France.
At that time, situated some distance from Paris, on the beautiful upper reaches
of the Somme, was a flour mill that had served the needs of the neighbourhood for
generations. The swift-flowing river turned huge, creaking wheels that ground the
grain to coarse grey flour; grain that the frugal peasants had furtively concealed from
the rapacious tax-gatherers of King Fouis, and from the Marquis who permitted them
to till the rich acres he owned. The mill was conducted by two brothers, Marc and
Xdaximilian Foy.
The elder brother, Marc, was a quiet, thoughtful man of definite, if somewhat
conservative opinions. Although the tyranny of the regime that oppressed troubled
France caused him to shake his head sadly, he was nevertheless intensely loyal to the
King and the Bourbon family. Those that whispered of rebellion against the throne


found no eager listener in him. He silenced them with his fervid justifications of
Louis. To his mind, the King could do no wrong.
Maximilian, the younger brother, was entirely the opposite. Aggressive of
temperament, ardent, and deeply moved by the miseries of the people of the neigh'
bourhood, the barbarities he witnessed being inflicted daily on innocent people—his
friends —by the nobles and their minions, stirred him deeply. He was one with those
who would overthrow the King, and challenge his divine right to reign.
The two brothers talked in their home of the state of affairs they could not
avoid observing, and the effect of which was indeed felt in the business of their mill.
Neither derived much hope in contemplating the future. One day, when a montlvold
Parisian newspaper came to their home, they read that the British Government had
sent a fleet of ships to New Holland, or Australia, as it was sometimes called, the
great continent in the South Seas, of which, for years, so much had been spoken since
the fame of Captain Cook’s discovery of it in 1770 thrilled the world.
Marc Foy was strangely affected by what he read. He knew that France had
placed the Count de La Perouse at the head of an expedition to take possession of
this vast, rich land in the name of the King Louis, and he wondered which ships
would reach there first. Already he had visions of following to the new country
with the earliest French colonists in order to escape the unhappiness and misery that
beset the land he loved so well. Sleeping, he had dreamed of this new continent;
picturing waving fields of grain, smiling vineyards and pleasant villages. Waking, he
had almost decided that he would fare thither. That Great Britain should send out a
fleet of ships to forestall M. La Perouse, and to take Australia for the English King,
was to him a severe blow.
Events in France moved swiftly, however. In 1789 the revolution began. The
Convention, asserting its powers, defied the King. Intrigue, chicanery, conspiracy,
and plotting undermined the power of the Royal house and the aristocrats.
In 1791 King Louis fled to escape the wrath of the people. A year later he and
his Queen, Marie Antoinette, were beheaded on the guillotine. Then followed a grisly
orgy of slaughter, the insatiable blade of the grim machine of death ending the lives
of thousands of aristocrats. Napoleon strode upon the scene, a magic figure of mar'
tial inspiration, who launched a campaign of conquest against the world.
In those years so fierce became the intensity of public sentiment that the brothers
Foy, Marc and Maximilian, had to declare themselves. Maximilian threw himself
eagerly into the turmoil of war, joined Napoleon’s army, distinguished himself by
his courage and ability, to win to the rank of general. He was the only one of Nap'
oleon’s leaders to inflict a reverse on Wellington, in an engagement on the Penfiv
sula.
Marc Foy, his loyalty to King Louis paramount, was aghast at the savagery of
the mob against those with royalist sympathies. Realising that there was no safety
for him save in flight, he bade farewell to his beloved France, embarked by stealth
upon a speedy frigate from a lonely part of the coast, and sailed for Ireland, in
company with many refugee compatriots. Because Great Britain had forestalled
France in taking possession of Australia, he thought that he still might reach this
great new land from the haven of refuge.
Arrived in Ireland, the young refugee made his way up the River Shannon,
where there was a French settlement. Fortunately he was not at the same disad'


vantage as many of his compatriots, who had escaped without money, jewels or
valuable possessions of any kind other than their lives. Marc Foy had made such
wise provision before his flight that he faced his new world with some backing of
capital.
It being necessary to establish a business to make a livelihood, it was but natural
that he should turn his thoughts to the only occupation he knew —that of flour milling.
Carefully investigating possibilities, surmounting obstacles that would have daunted
many another man, bargaining with shrewd tradesmen, Marc Foy, despite his in-
ability to talk English, quickly acquired a site for a flour mill and the plant to equip
it. Situated at Moyestown, near Bannagher, a town world-famous for its fairs,
portion of the old mill stands to-day, a mute monument of the ambitions of its
founder.
At a time when Europe was an armed camp, when all countries were frantically
endeavouring to feed vast armies in the field, any establishment producing foodstuffs
could not fail to prosper. The young Frenchman, assiduously attending to his busi-
ness, paying a little more than his competitors for the wheat the farmers brought him,
had the satisfaction of seeing his mill working day and night and his profits ever
increasing. Through the dark, uncertain years of the Napoleonic wars the mill wheels
turned unceasingly, and prosperity smiled upon him.
Adaptable by nature, still pursuing his dream of establishing himself in the great
new land in the southern seas, stories of which he now continually heard, Marc Foy
found himself insensibly assimilating the national sentiments of the people among
whom his lot was cast. The shattering of the power and prestige of the Bourbons in
France, the relentless extirpation of the Royalists, the steady growth of the Republic,
convinced him that never would it be possible for him to return to his native land.
He decided to become a Briton. .
MAXIMILIAN TOY.
MARC TOY.


MARK FOY (Father of Francis Foy).
Founder of the Bendigo and Collingwood Stores.


CHAPTER II.
ONCE Marc Foy assumed his new nationality, he became as ardent an Irish'
man as the most loyal of his neighbours. He hoped still to migrate to
the great new continent, and thus dreaming he decided to found a family
to fill its place in the new world. He married Margaret Hennessy, daughter of
a compatriot. She proved a devoted wife, and through the years gave him sons
and daughters.
One of these sons, born about 1815, was named Mark, an Anglicised application
of his own French Christian name, Marc. Another was Francis. Both boys were
destined for the bar. Educated at the best schools, they went on to Trinity College,
Dublin, to complete their studies, and were progressing well when financial disaster
overtook their father. He lost his fortune in Sadler’s Bank, which failed shortly
afterwards. The boys were recalled from college to work at the mill to support the
family.
Mark, however, evinced little inclination to engage in milling pursuits, profitable
though they had proved to the family in the past. The only portion of the business
that appealed to him was the chaffering with the farmers for their grain. He was a
shrewd, able dealer —a hard bargainer—but the mill offered such scant scope for his
undoubted ability in this respect that he sought something more suited to his talents.
He determined to engage himself to the drapery firm of Todd 62? Burns, in Dublin.
Here he was in his element. His natural vivacity, his inherent knowledge of the
psychology of buying and selling, speedily marked him out for advancement. Ere
he emerged from his ’teens, his principals entrusted him with important buying com'
missions, despatching him to Fondon to haggle with the merchants there for the stocks
needed to fill the shelves of the Dublin shop. So ably did he execute these commissions,


so capably did he avoid the pitfalls set by eager sellers, that his fame spread far and
wide. He became known as the “boy buyer.”
From his earliest boyhood he had had instilled into him tales of the old regime
in France, and romantic stories of the great new continent, Australia. Always his
father talked of the time when the whole family would quest across the lonely seas
to this new land of promise which, one day, was destined to grow to nationhood.
It is not to be wondered at that the mind of the youthful draper should be filled
with constant thoughts of the distant country of which his father never ceased to
talk.
The years sped on. Marc Foy, waiting patiently for Britain to cease transport'
ing her malefactors to Australia, found himself growing older. Soon he realised that
for him the dream of founding a family in the new land could never be realised.
Then he began more earnestly than ever urging his sons, Mark and Francis, to migrate
when opportunity came.
But Mark, happy in his chosen avocation, well remunerated by his employers,
preferred to remain in Ireland. Francis, too, decided that the flour mill offered a
more profitable and assured return than any venture in an unknown country where
settlement was in its infancy. But there was perhaps another reason that discouraged
Mark, at that time, from questing across the seas. That reason was Mary Macken.
Mark, having seen this sprightly young colleen when she had just completed her
education, and having heard of her brilliance as a contributor to the fiery, partisan
newspapers of the time —a time when Ireland was torn by the bitter strife of rebellion
—fell in love with her.
Fate, however, frowned on his suit at the beginning. Mary Macken, accompanied
by three friends, one day went out to a ship lying at the river mouth, to bid farewell
to a band of patriots who were leaving their “distressful country” for the United
States, there to begin life anew. While the tearful valedictions were being said, a
sudden gale sprung up. The ship cast her moorings and beat out to the open sea,
the captain paying no heed to the tears and entreaties of the four young girls who
had been unable to return to the shore. Against their inclination they were taken to
America.
Mary Macken landed in New York penniless, but well furnished with courage,
ability and determination. Within a few days she found a position on the
“Times” as social writer, in which capacity, before long, she distinguished herself.
The editor entrusted her with important assignments, such as writing the folkdore
of the great southern cotton fields, and special Christmas stories.
Her heart, however, was in Ireland. After she had been two years in New York,
letters from home telling of the failing health of her mother, caused her to abandon
her post and hurry back to the Emerald Isle. She arrived just in time to bid her be'
loved mother a last farewell.
Mark Foy comforted her in her hour of sorrow. Quietly and unobstrusively he
did what he could to assuage the pain of her grief. She came to look to him for
advice, for help. Before a year had passed she has given him her hand in marriage,
in 1848, the year of the rebellion.


CHAPTER III.
NOT many years after the marriage of Mark Foy and Mary Macken there
rang across the world a rumour that gold had been discovered in Australia.
Wild, incredible stories were told of creeks whereof the sands were virgin
gold; of riches that could be picked up in buckets full; of nuggets so big that a
dozen men could not lift them. At first the rumours were received with general
scepticism. Then came confirmation. Lucky diggers appeared in the Old Country
with chamois bags bulging with the gleaming yellow metal A few of them came
to Dublin- big, rough, uncouth men who spent with reckless prodigality and told
such strange tales of gold-filled gullies that men’s blood was fired with the lust of
covetousness or adventure.
Mark Foy heard these tales. He sought out the men who had returned. These
he cross-examined carefully, patiently, lengthily. From the chaff of their wild exag-
gerations he sifted the grain of truth—the truth he sought. Not doubting that there
was gold at Bendigo and Ballarat and Mt. Alexander—he had seen enough of the
yellow dust to convince him of that fact—his inquiries were directed to ascertain how
the miners fared for food and goods on these fields. From the answers he received
he discovered that exorbitant prices were demanded for everything; that the diggers
paid carelessly with their easily won wealth, often tossing on the counter a nugget
ten times the value of the article they bought. He learned, too, what was more im-
portant, that thousands and thousands of the hardiest adventurers of the world were
flocking to Australia to seek the fabulous riches on the new fields that were being
daily discovered.
In 1853 his brother, Francis, who had seemed content to remain quietly at the
mill, becoming suddenly smitten with the gold fever, had hurried off to the Eldorado


of the South, taking his two sisters with him. He promised to write home telling the
real truth of the fields, but his letters were long a-coming.
In 1854 Mark Foy’s wife bore him a son, who was named Francis, after the
uncle who had gone across the seas. This event prevented the father from completing
the plans he had been making to hurry off to the land of promise. He did not dare
to migrate with a young wife and an infant child. Impatiently he waited until a
convenient time arrived.
Meanwhile he thought more and more about the land of gold. Not only did
the opportunities that existed in Australia appeal strongly to him, but there was the
influence of the family tradition of the dream of his father that, one day, the house
of Foy would be firmly established in the great southern continent. He could not
escape it. The shadowy presence of his dead and gone ancestor seemed to be urging
him thither. s s
Two more children were born during the period of waiting, Mary and Edward,
and Mark Foy wondered, as his father had so often done, whether his destiny would
ever lead him to Australia. When, eventually, he made up his mind, he found that
half the population of Ireland was eager to go a-gold seeking. Disappointment met
hnn at every turn. The shipping offices, not only in Ireland, but in England, whither
he directed his search, could hold out no hope of a berth for years to come. All the
adventurers of the world were frantically endeavouring to get to the harvest of gold
waiting to be garnered in the new world.
Obstacles, however, meant nothing to a man who had gained the reputation of
being one of the keenest buyers in British commercial circles, and though he found
a berth on the clipper “Champion of the Seas” he felt he could not ask his wife to
endure the discomforts and hardships inescapable on that grievously over-crowded
vessel. Arranging for her to remain behind with the children until a more propitious
opportunity offered to follow, he sailed for Melbourne early in 1859, his heart high
with hopes for the future.


CHAPTER IV.
DISTANT fields are always greenest. Near approach brings disillusion. Mark
Foy found, on arriving in Melbourne, that gold could not be picked up in
the streets and that it would require a considerable amount of capital to enable
him to establish himself in business on any of the fields.
If he lacked capital to launch out on his own account —and the tragic reversal
of his father’s fortunes had meant that he came almost empty-handed to the new
land of promise—he had initiative and resource. Three days after his arrival he
secured well remunerative employment with Buckley 6? Nunn, the Bourke Street
drapers. Here, as in Ireland, he soon made a name for himself. Studiously he avoided
the countless pitfalls the lusty, full-blooded young city set for the feet of the careless.
While most of the menfolk were roystering about the taverns, or feverishly specu-
lating on the gold exchange, he busied himself cultivating the acquaintance and
winning the confidence of the traders; the staid, phlegmatic men whose heads had
not been turned by the shower of gold incessantly spilled from a hundred diggings.
He saved his money, too.
It was not long ere he had saved enough to pay for a comfortable passage for
his wife and children. With a happy heart he dispatched the letter that summoned
them, eagerly looking forward to the joyous re-union with his loved ones.
The sea had been unkind to Mary Macken in her girlhood days. It had swept
her away, against her will, to far-off America before she married Mark Foy. It had
separated her for nigh a year from her loving husband. As she embarked with her
two little ones, Francis and Mary (Edward being left behind with his grand-parents
because of illness) she thought that now it was being gracious to her.
How nearly that voyage blasted the love and hopes of Mark Foy only those
that survived the ordeal of it ever knew. One night, when the vessel was making
a leisurely way down the African coast under full press of sail, the terrifying cry
of “Fire!” rang out. Almost in an instant passengers and crew tumbled pell-mell
to the deck, stumbling in bewilderment about the boats. The stentorian voice of
the captain and the roaring oaths of the officers quelled an incipient panic. A hur-
ried survey revealing the impossibility of coping with the conflagration, the captain


ordered everyone to the boats. Land was not far distant, and towards this the
castaways steered.
They landed on an uninhabited island. Fortunately a calm sea and the slow
progress of the fire on the ship enabled a large quantity of provisions to be saved,
otherwise the whole party must have perished, as two months elapsed ere they
were rescued. Even with the food they saved they might still have perished had
not the captain placed the entire crew, save the children, on half-rations from the
beginning. When succor did arrive there was barely another day’s supply of food
remaining.
Water was scarce on the island; so scarce in fact that with pipes, salvaged
from the wreck of the ship, which had been driven ashore, they were forced to
condense sea-water for their needs. Lack of water and food soon began to affect
the health of the castaways. When sickness began to break out the young Irish
wife came to the rescue. Having a knowledge of the value of various herbs, she
brewed medicines that averted the threatening danger, and thus preserved the
health of the little community.
It was a happy day when the castaways were rescued. Picked up by another
ship bound for Australia, they were given passage to Melbourne, and landed eight
months after leaving Ireland.
In that year Mark Foy had accumulated sufficient cash and established a suffic-
ient measure of credit with the warehousemen to feel warranted in establishing a
business on his own account. He decided to open a drapery store in Bendigo. His
first shop was not a pretentious place. It was, as a matter of fact, little more than a
mere hut, but it was not out of keeping with the rest of the business establishments
on the field. It held a considerable stock, which soon began to find buyers. The
pleasant personality of the young Irishman won the hearts of those he met. They
came to the store for their purchases.
Ere long the business was prospering soundly, but the returns were not nearly
great enough to gratify his soaring ambition, and Greytown was prospering just then.
He opened there, and became mayor of the town. But he needed more capital for
expansion. He could see that he could expand. A Mr. Bentley, chancing to meet
him one day, mentioned that he had a considerable sum, made from a lucky strike,
that he would like to invest in a business. As Bentley was a draper, a partnership
was effected at once. Within a few weeks there was a new store at Castlemaine,
with Bentley in charge. Mark Foy ran the one at Bendigo, and that at Greytown
was sold.
Prosperity always attended the store at Bendigo. That at Castlemaine did well
while the field prospered, but, when the miners began to rush to other finds, trade
languished. Then, one night, a fire destroyed half the town, including the drapery
establishment of Foy & Bentley. That also ended the partnership between the two
men.
Later the Bendigo shop was removed to Spring Gully Creek, then a rich part
of the field, and here Mark Foy gained a firm hold by honest dealing and businesslike
methods.
Francis, his eldest son, was a lad of eight or nine when his father settled on the
creek. But he was an unusual boy in all respects. From the outset
his father taught him to work. The lad, sturdy of frame, lithe, active


and self-reliant, received such schooling as the field afforded two careless
years with a teacher who confessed he could not understand him —but the real foun-
dation of his education was built on his association with the men of all types and
nationalities who thronged the field. He found more pleasure in talking and mingling
with the hard-working miners than in playing with the lads of his own age in the
township. The wild tales told by the men as they yarned about the camp-fires, of
strange doings and strange countries, fired his imagination and stirred his ambitions.
Very early he conceived the idea of doing big things in a big way.
Not many lads would have come through that school of hard and harsh exper-
ience unscathed. But young Francis Foy, safeguarded by an instinctive shrewdness
and a sound judgment inherited from a long line of keen-brained ancestors, gained
only what was profitable from the dangerous environment in which his early boyhood
was spent. One day he saw the miners mete savage and summary punishment to a
man who had robbed the tent of a mate. The sight of the battered face and torn
garments of the thief as he stumbled ashamedly along the dusty track that led from
the field taught the lad a lesson of the value of honesty in a fashion no amount of
preaching could achieve. Thus early he learned how important was scrupulous recti-
tude in conduct.
Although the miners lived according to a rough code, it was one very definitely
founded on principles of manliness, undeviating integrity, and even-handed justice.
And the code was enforced with a savage ruthlessness that young Francis saw and
appreciated. The fundamentals of upright dealing taught by his father were further
impressed on him by the lives men lived about him.
The free, open existence on the field developed the youngster amazingly, both
as to physique and intelligence. When he was but ten years old—as stalwart and
self-reliant as a youth of twenty —his father calmly informed him that he was to
drive a lately-acquired team of bullocks to Melbourne for a load of goods. Francis,
delighted at the prospect of the adventures to be found along a hundred miles of
bush track, could not get under way quickly enough. He undertook the trip, negot-
iated the double journey without mishap, and afterwards did most of the hauling of
goods with the bullocks. How many ten-year-old lads of these days would face such
a journey? That the boy, Francis, cheerfully faced a trip that would have daunted a
majority of men, gives an inkling of the courage and confidence that inspired him
thus early in life. That he handled the bullocks with such skill, and his father’s
goods with such care, that the trip was successfully accomplished, provides a clue to
the determination, resourcefulness and thoroughness that became so unmistakably
prominent in his character during his manhood years.
After that first arduous journey on the road with the team, Francis faced re-
sponsibility, did a man’s work in the store, accumulated the wisdom of experience
from the vicissitudes through which the field was passing, and gained in bodily
strength. To him, in no small measure, was due much of the popularity of Mark
Foy’s establishment during the lean years when gold production was inexorably
diminishing.
About 1865 Mark Foy, having seen how difficult it was to procure such things
as butter, cheese and honey—high-priced luxuries they were to the miners—left his
wife in charge of the shop, and taking young Francis with him, set out for New
South Wales to buy a supply of these commodities that offered such a chance of


profit. They arrived in Sydney, but no merchant would, or could, sell them any'
thing in the nature of the goods they sought. This did not discourage Mark Foy.
Hiring a gig he set out for the Illawarra, the dairying centre of Australia at that time.
At Wollongong he found a small barque, the captain of which said could be chartered.
It was chartered, to carry a cargo to Melbourne. Mark Foy, with a ship ready to
transport his purchases, began to buy. From farm to farm he travelled, buying for
cash, casks of salted butter, great barrels of honey, huge crates of cheeses. For weeks
there was a procession of farm carts to the side of the little vesel. At last she was
loaded. Mark Foy and his son went aboard and an uneventful voyage was made to
Melbourne.
When these goods landed at Bendigo, Francis was sent to hire a cart and horses.
The vehicle was loaded and the lad was sent around the field to sell them . He drove
hard bargains with the miners—much harder perhaps than would his father have
done—and after two weeks of huckstering he had sold the last article. The profit
reaped from this venture was considerable.
He, too, in 1868, realised the truth of what his father had so often said of late:
“That it would be wise to get away before the field petered out completely.” The
gold fever never smote him with its disturbing aggravations. Like his father, he was
determined to pursue a purely business career. And he was but fourteen —young in
years, but very old in sagacity and experience.
In 1868 Bendigo, one of the oldest and richest of Victoria’s goldfields, was lan-
guishing to decay. Kangaroo Flat, Bendigo Flat, the countless golden gullies even
as far out as the Whipstick, had long since yielded their richest treasures of yellow
gleaming nuggets to a frenzied army of diggers who had worked for a brief space
and won riches ere the lure of other distant rushes drew their restless spirits away.
After the questing diggers, who only sought nuggets in the gold-strewn alluvial, the
quartz reefs had been worked for several years, 8,000 ozs. of gold per week being
regularly collected from the batteries. But long before 1868 the reefs pinched out as
the shafts went deeper, or ran into wet ground that was too costly to work with the
primitive machinery available. The output of the precious mineral had diminished,
wages had fallen, miners packed up and departed, and the future was full of gloom.
Over the flats, where a tented city had once throbbed with pulsing life, was now
a desolation of mullock heaps, deserted huts and blackened tree stumps. Little clusters
of settlement here and there offered a courageous resistance against the threatening
decay, and out on Spring Gully Creek, over the hill south-east from Kangaroo Flat,
there were men who still held firm faith in the future of the field.
These were the old-time miners, in whose hearts hope never dies. Fleedless were
they of what the silenced battery-stampers portended. Steadfastly chasing the rain-
bow’s end for the fabled crock of gold, they neither saw nor understood the signs
about them.
One man on the field, shrewd and able in business, beheld these portents and
comprehended the warning they gave. He, among the few, had not been stricken
by that mad fever for gold that warps men s senses and destroys their faculties of
judgment. He had come there, not to scramble in wet clay for elusive wealth but to
conduct a business in a business-man’s fashion. This was Mark Foy.
Those who have bestowed some of their leisure on tracing the romantic develop-
ment of this Australia of ours cannot avoid being impressed with a remarkable fact


namely, that not one of those thousands of lucky men who wrested untold wealth
from diggers’ holes in the roaring days ever figured in the later history of the country.
Their wealth went as it came, quickly and easily. They passed on and were forgot-
ten. That golden epoch, the historian discovers, did, however, produce others who
became the real founders of Australia’s wealth and prosperity —the men who pursued
their ordinary business avocations deliberately, dispassionately, tenaciously, unaffected
by the frantic struggle around them for easily gained gold.
Mark Foy, as has been said, was essentially a business man. At the Spring
Gully Creek store, which he had built with his own hands, he served the needs of as
heterogeneous a collection of customers as ever entered a shop. During 1867 and
early in 1868 he sold them food, clothes, picks, prospecting dishes—anything they
required. They paid him with coins minted in every country of the world, in greasy,
clay-stained notes, in pinches of alluvial dust that he weighed on the gold scales that
stood prominently on the counter. Often they did not pay him at all—all they had
were their hopes.
When the foreign-minted money came into circulation, and when the pinches
of dust were eked sparsely out of nigh-emptied chamois bags, Mark Foy realised very
clearly that not only was no fortune to be made by continuing his business on that
field, but that actual failure was not far distant if he remained. The foreign money
was the last of the hoarded currency of hardy adventurers who had been swept up
there from the Seven Seas. It was kept so long because it could not be got rid of
before.
At last he decided, like those of the miners who agreed that the field had petered
out, to try elsewhere.
There were other fields still thriving. Opportunity beckoned from many a luring
spot. He decided to go to Melbourne, then a comparatively small city, hardly yet
accustomed to the self-government it had wrested from New South Wales by the
sheer weight of the eloquence of squatter and digger. Melbourne attracted him, this
young, vigorous city, fired with the spirit of the men who had been forced to fight
the tyranny of a stupid official autocracy from behind the blood-stained planks of the
Eureka Stockade; men who, though disciplined, armed redcoats shattered their ranks,
yet gained a victory —a victory of nationhood—that will never be forgotten.
Melbourne, sprawling along the banks of the Yarra, its streets scarce formed to
keep pace with the buildings being rushed aloft to house its growing enterprises, its
suburbs spreading steadily about its feet, called Mark Foy and his son.
To leave Spring Gully Creek was something of a problem. The transport diffi-
culty was one not easily overcome, but Mark Foy was not a man to be daunted by
obstacles. He could not sell his stock on the Bendigo field where men were penniless;
in any case it would be needed as a nucleus of the business he proposed to open in
Collingwood. Building material and builders were so greatly in demand in Mel-
bourne that he might have to wait months to have premises built in the new centre.
With characteristic acumen he and young Francis loaded the waggons with the stock,
the shelves, the counters, even the very timbers of the shop, and began an arduous
pilgrimage to the capital of the Colony.
One can imagine what hardships, what difficulties, what dangers, that long
journey involved. Over unformed roads, across watercourses unspanned by bridges,


up boulder'Strewn hills and down the other
side rougher still, the bullocks strained
in the yokes, day after day, making steady
progress. The highways were infested with
bushrangers, fierce, lawless men whose trade
was robbery and who cared nought for
human life. They had to be avoided or
defied with musket and pistol.
Mark Foy and Francis overcame all diffi-
culties with a cheery courage that inspired
the rough members of their company.
They were the first to sefie spades when
a wheel sunk in a bog in the soft ground.
They were the first to grasp the guns when
bushrangers called on the caravan to "'stand
and deliver.” Their high spirits were con'
tagious. After countless mishaps they ar'
rived safely and triumphantly at Colling'
wood.
WILLIAM GIBSON.
MARK FOY’S STORE, COLLINGWOOD, 1882.


CHAPTER V.
COLLINGWOOD in 1868 was probably Melbourne’s busiest suburb. It was
then, as it is now, in a political sense, the most democratic part of the new
capital—an extensive, densely peopled flat to the north-east of the city proper.
Incorporated in 1855, municipal affairs always provided excitement for the populace.
Political events of the time, too, were pregnant with possibilities of turmoil as grave
as those of the days of Eureka Stockade. The fight waged between the Legislative
Assembly and the Council over the passage of money bills necessary for carrying on
public services—a fight of several years’ duration—during which feelings ran to
fever pitch, and men occasionally rioted in the streets.
It was in this disturbed period that Mark Foy launched his new enterprise with
characteristic vigour. Knowing the uses of advertisement, understanding something
of mob psychology, he first of all spent a considerable sum, for that period, in building
premises suitable for his purposes. His shop was both commodious and impressive.
Because he realised how momentous was a successful opening, he made elaborate
preparations to arrest the attention of the public. Collingwood at that period carried a
big sprinkling of Irish people among its population, and to these he made a direct
appeal by advertising that his shop would open with a great fair, modelled on the
style of the great fairs of Bannagher that they all knew so well. In conformity with
his ideas he filled the windows with Irish slogans, such as “Faugh-a-ballagh,” “Erin-
go-Bragh,” and the like, green flags, shamrocks and golden harps.
The public talked of the fair for many a day before it was due. On the eventful
morning they began to flock to Smith Street with horses, cows, pigs, vegetables and
all manner of trafficable goods, having somehow or other made up their minds that
it would be really a fair like that of Bannagher—a place where barter would rule.
This misconception was beneficial to Mark Foy’s business rather than otherwise.
The crowd enjoyed the joke against themselves hugely, took their stock and goods
home again, and returned to purchase the bargains specially marked down as an at-
traction to them. The staff worked like Trojans to serve the endless stream of
customers; the day’s takings far exceeded the most sanguine expectations. The
opening was most auspicious. It was the first rising of the flood tide of success that
followed in the years that came after.


Mark Foy, newly established in his Smith Street shop and striving to hold his
place in public regard, threw himself into the disturbed politics of the day with the
same unlimited sest he bestowed on his business. Taking the popular side, he sup'
ported McCulloch’s party, not only with the ardency of his enthusiastic nature, but
with liberal donations of cash.
This was a period when politics formed the sole topic of conversation among all
sections of the community, when opinions were firmly held, when questions were
fiercely debated. There was no place for the rail-sitter in Victoria’s scheme of things.
For all that, Mark Foy never let an opportunity pass by of ensuring the expansion
and development of the business he had bodily transferred from Bendigo to Colling-
wood.
To capture trade in a suburb where quality and low prices were major con-
siderations with the populace, Mark Foy necessarily had to possess both enterprise
and shrewd business ability. The acumen and resourcefulness that had gained him
high repute in his career in Ireland were now brought into full play. He used
every form of advertisement common to the period, and invented others both novel
and arresting.
In 1870 Mark Foy must have imagined himself back in troubled Ireland of the
grim year of ’4B, so unrestrained and bitter were the disturbances continually arising
from the political turmoil of the times. Rebellion was talked of openly—there was
that matter of the £20,000 grant to Governor Darling by a Colony that could not
pay its ordinary obligations in cash —and all the portents on the political horizon
were menacing. Time and again the crowd in the streets seethed and shouted as
brass-tongued orators inflamed their passions.
One day a procession of some of the malcontents was formed. The men, voci-
ferous and angry, marched through the streets of Collingwood, threatening vengeance
against the authorities. When they reached Smith Street, ths wilder spirits began to
smash windows and assault inoffensive bystanders. Soon an ugly riot reared its
savage head.
At this stage the police took a hand. A handful of constables courageously
dashed into the fray with their batons, vainly endeavouring to restore order. This
happened in front of Mark Foy’s shop. He stood at the door, calmly watching
events. It was not long before he perceived that the police were hopelessly out-
numbered; that bloodshed and looting were imminent.
Rushing into the shop he summoned his staff, hurriedly armed them with im-
provised clubs made from carpet rollers, placed himself at the head of the little
battalion, roared a fierce Irish hunting cry, and dashed into the fray. The shop hands
wielded their weapons fiercely and effectively. The rioters, dismayed by the furious
rush of determined men led by a yelling demon, hesitated in a moment in uncer-
tainty, then broke into precipitate flight.
This timely intervention undoubtedly saved many lives and much property. For
his services Mark Foy was publicly thanked by the authorities, and his decisive action
generally acclaimed. Indeed, this act of public duty firmly established him in popular
favour.
First assistant in the Collingwood shop was young Francis, the quiet, open-faced,
curly-headed lad who had wielded the bullock whip so capably on the Bendigo road
during previous years. Not much over fourteen, the boy did the work of two men,


FRANCIS FOY, aged 10 years.
and did it well. Observant, wise far beyond his years, fired with a restless energy
that drove him relentlessly about his tasks, he attended to multifarious duties around
the shop and gained in knowledge of drapery—and men.
If Mark Foy did not spare himself in his work, neither did he spare his willing
son. The two formed an excellent combination, and when Francis was fifteen the
father frequently entrusted him with full control of the shop while he attended to
business affairs elsewhere. The lad justified his father’s confidence in every way. He
became thorough in all his doings. He insisted on members of the staff performing
their duties with the same scrupulous care as he himself exercised. He learned to
direct men. He learned to discriminate between the worker and the shirker.
The responsibility thrust on his willing shoulders also had another effect—as it
was bound to have. It established an independence of spirit in the mind of the boy
which, as the years passed, became a dominating trait in his character.
Meanwhile other children of the family were growing. Still too young to assist
in the business, nevertheless they formed the background of a happy, homely family
circle in which a gentle mother instilled into their impressionable minds the lessons


of love, kindliness and loyalty. The Foys were indeed a happy family. Prosperity
was smiling kindly upon them. No cloud was in their sky.
It might be said that Mark Foy’s hobby was his politics, but this was only-
indulged after business affairs had been attended to. That he was a man of vision is
evident by his action in connection with the huge swamp areas which, at that time,
occupied the land where Mordialloc and contiguous suburbs are to-day. Always
haunted by the dream of his father of doing something to assure the fruitfulness and
productivity of the soil in the great southern continent, he looked over this wilder-
ness of water-logged country and visualised it as a smiling garden. Once that picture
impressed itself on his mind, he set himself to the seemingly impossible task of making
it a reality. .
Carefully he surveyed the swamp, examining its levels, testing its soil. It did not
take him long to perceive that a system of drainage would transform it into sweet,
fertile farms. He acquired an area and proved what could be done by the application
of his theories. Then he beseiged those in authority with demands for action. His
enthusiasm and persistence eventually induced Mr. Patterson, an influential Ministei
of the day, to provide money for the proper drainage of the whole 10,000-acres com-
prised in the waste area. When the water disappeared and the country sweetened,
men came there to settle. Within a very few years that formerly desolate swamp
became the market garden of Melbourne, solely due to the foresight of Mark Foy.
About Collingwood to-day stand innumerable mute monuments to his energy
and splendid national prescience. If he advertised for business purposes, his public
services were rendered unostentatiously and quietly. In these he was actuated by
'patriotism and love of his adopted land, qualities no doubt engendered by heredity,
but nourished by a deep and abounding faith in the new land that had yielded him
both health, wealth and domestic happiness.
Strangely enough, although Mark Foy was never a follower of races, he made a
spectacular display on the day the Melbourne Cup was run. Driving a spanking four-
in-hand, he would proceed to Flemington with his family, making a picnic of the
occasion. And on his first Cup day he closed his shop. Huge, striking signs across
the windows announced that Mark Foy and his staff had gone to the races. This was
an innovation that caught popular fancy with a vengeance. A storekeeper who gave
his staff a day off to attend the greatest race in the Southern Hemisphere! It was not
long before public opinion caused all the shops to close on that momentous day, and
so, because of Mark Foy’s action, the first Tuesday in November has ever since been
a public holiday in Melbourne.
Until 1872 Francis worked assiduously and tirelessly in the shop. At eighteen
he was a man, both in stature and in mentality. He had matured rapidly in his en-
vironment and under the responsibilities that had been thrust upon his young and
willing shoulders. To outsiders he was a man in all things—he was treated as an
equal by hard-headed old veterans of business, venerable enough to be his grand-
father. Yet to his own parent he was still a boy, filling a boy’s place, yet withal,
capable, trustworthy and dependable.
Francis had his relaxations. He played as he worked, with all his heart and soul.
Horses attracted him strongly, and he made friends among those who bred and
trained aristocrats of the racecourse. His burning enthusiasm for the turf impelled
him to learn about pedigrees, about form, about the shape and conformation of a


horse. It was not long before he was as good a judge of horseflesh as many a
trainer.
Among the youth of the city he was a leader. He dominated the games they
played, and played harder than them all. His mates submitted to his dominance and
loved him for his fearlessness, his enthusiasm and the spice of the devil that was in him.
The boxers of the period had a strong fascination for him. He loved to watch
the swift-hitting, evasive exponents of the noble art as they danced lightly about the
padded ring, glorying in the courage, skill and endurance they displayed. Needless
to say the sport attracted him to the extent that he soon donned the gloves and set
about mastering the science of self-defence. Before long he was renowned as a clever,
hard-hitting amateur boxer. His fistic ability led to an event that had a remarkable
effect on his whole subsequent career. Some trivial dispute with a comrade ended in
their fighting it out in the time-honoured manner with their fists. Francis’ opponent
was older and heavier and the battle soon resolved itself into a grim and bitter con-
test. In the end Francis punished his antagonist so severely that an irate parent was
soon at the Foy home excitedly demanding retribution.
Mark Foy spoke sharply to his son over this affray, would listen to no explana-
tion, and threatened all manner of dire penalties. The high-spirited boy, resentful of
what he deemed the injustice of his father, uttered threats that he would “clear out.”
Believing them to be the usual vapourings of youth, his father thought no more of the
matter. But the stubborn streak in Francis’ nature, and his fierce independence, sent
him seeking along the water-front a ship that would take him far away.
He found what he sought. A barque, nearly finished loading her cargo of wool
for Ireland, needed a boy. Francis signed on. Then he went home to inform his
parents of what he had done.
Not for a single moment did Mark Foy imagine that Francis was in deadly earn-
est. Refusing to take the matter seriously, he declined to discuss it. The lad, mean-
while, quietly made his preparations for departure. On the day the ship was to sail
he bade farewell to his parents, brothers and sisters, shouldered his small bundle of
belongings, and left his home.
After he had departed from the house Mark Foy sensed that the boy genuinely
meant what he had said: he was going to Ireland. Hurried inquiries proving that
his fears were well founded, Mark Foy determined that his son should not land with
his pockets empty in a country where he had many relatives. Going to the bank he
drew out ,£5OO in sovereigns, which he placed in a chamois bag. Taking a cab, he
drove swiftly to the wharf, arriving just in time to see the sailors casting off the
lines. On the deck stood his son, his curly head thrown back, his ga2,e fixed on the
distant city. His attention attracted by the arrival of the cab, Francis beheld his father
alight and rush to the edge of the wharf. He heard a shouted remark that there was
something to help him on his way —and the bag of gold fell clattering at his feet.
Calmly and deliberately he picked up the sack of golden sovereigns, walked to the
bulwark, and, across the ever-widening gap of blue water, he tossed the bag back
again to his father.
I need no help,” he said. “I will stand or fall on my own merits. Good-bye.”
Six months later he was in Ireland.


FRANCIS FOY, at the age of 21.


CHAPTER VI.
UNUSED to the sea, knowing nothing whatever of the craft of sailor--men,
utterly strange in his environment, young Francis Foy turned to with a zest
t at surprised the captain and his rough crew. He was young, adaptable, wilb
mg. Within a week he could go aloft and bear on a sail with the most experienced
seamen aboard. Once, when, as is the custom of those who go down to the sea in
ships, his forecastle companions essayed to impose on his inexperience and good nature
he turned on his tormenters with the fury of a lion. Then the skill he has acquired
with his hsts stood him in good stead. After a fierce, savage fight the bully of the
decks was sprawling in the scuppers and Francis Foy was inviting the next best to
stand up to him. After that he was never again molested.
Arriving in Ireland he went to the home of his uncle, James Macken, who gave
him a cordial welcome. Within a few days his innate independence impelled him to
seek a position Turning matters over in his mnd, remembering how well his father
had done in the drapery store at Collingwood, realising the possibilities in such a
business m Australia if he could ever establish one, he decided to find employment in
some enterprise where he could learn all that was to be known concerning softwoods
Applying to the firm of Messrs. Arnott and Co., of Dublin, for a post, and helped
by the good offices of his uncle, who had some influence in the city, he was engaged
and started as a counter hand.
Observant, assiduous, as mindful of his employers’ interests as he was of his
father s when he worked in the Collingwood shop, Francis Foy quickly fitted himself
to the_routine of the Dublin establishment. Within a few weeks he understood the
entire ramifications of the business—far better than the principals, as a matter of fact
—because he discovered that a number of the employees had combined and were com
ducting what was tantamount to systematic robbery on an extensive scale.
Greatly peiturbed by his detection of what was organised crime, he reported the
matter to the directors. An investigation revealing the criminal complicity of the


offenders, they were P rom fj d J ’temper’ of the Irish was such
trr“^T3'-:is:“-
"£’Erii:Sff^rr3
SHSSaSSSf^«=-»s
"ii'C»s"s;hi l c ssf “.s a\ -p ts
[*i». jh,., »■“* P * ” w»t“'i™ !'...j. i.O i—
fhfmTn a effective trouncing Then turning to the crowd he urnted
the man & f ard There was a strained silence for many seconds.. No one
° ne ed a At°leneth spontaneous recognition of his courage and absolute fairness burst
watting Irishmen. They cheered him to the echo. Thence-
forward he was firmly established in popularity. rpi
His service to the firm prompted his principals to recognise his merit. They
placed him in full control of one of the departments of their great loading
voung and willing shoulders with a full measure of responsibility How well he
discharged his trust may be judged from the fact that at the end of a year he was
further*promoted to the position of buyer. In this capacity he travelled far and J lde ’
much time being spent in England purchasing goods for the various branches of t
firm His duties demanded a comprehensive and searching knowledge of the wh
of the drapery business, an equable temperament, a psychologic understanding of men,
a resolute determination, an unimpeachable honesty, a shrewdness beyond the o
arv That he was endowed with these qualities was recognised by his employers to
a degree that would be difficult to understand in these days. He had their entire
There is no doubt that the experience gained during the two years he acted as
buyer for Arnott & Co. exerted a tremendous influence on his later career m Aus'
tralia His work taught him exact values, the technical details of the goods he band'
led the tricks and wiles of merchandising firms, the ways of men. It was a hard
school in which to learn, but it was the best education he could have had tor what
followed later.


CHAPTER VII.
THERE can be no doubt that Francis Foy would have risen high in the firm
had not Fate intervened at the end of three years. Always his thoughts
were turning towards his beloved Australia, even when successes were
thickest upon him and greater business triumphs enhanced his already brilliant
reputation. He longed for the land of the Southern Seas. One day a letter
received from his mother acquainted him with the fact that his father’s health
was causing the family great concern, and although she did not ask him to return
home, he sensed her loneliness and abounding love for him. A great tenderness
for his own folk, his father, his mother, his brothers and sisters, surged up in his
heart to the exclusion of all else. For a day he was silent and distrait. Then he
made up his mind. He handed his resignation to the firm, refusing brusquely all
requests to reconsider his decision and an offer of a substantial salary to remain,
and within a week was pn the high seas, homeward bound.
None in Australia knew he was returning. He landed in Melbourne unheralded,
unannounced. His father only learned the tidings when the ship was sailing up the
bay. Overjoyed at the prospect of reunion with his well-loved son, all past mis-
understandings forgotten, he hurried to the wharf to meet him. The scene, as father
and son greeted after so long a separation, was deeply moving.
That same afternoon Mark Foy took Francis through Flinders Lane, and event-
ually to the warehouse of Paterson, Laing and Bruce, from which most of the goods
for the Collingwood shop were purchased, introduced him to Mr. James Bruce (father
of Mr. S. M. Bruce, aforetime Prime Minister of Australia) and announced him as
a partner in the firm of Mark Foy.
Francis soon after this was in full control of the business. In 1880 his mother
died, at the age of forty-six. His father re-married, and later decided to take a tour
of the world. Prior to his departure he had a serious conversation with his young


son The result of this was that he withdrew from the business all the money he
had made, and handed over the shop and its contents to Francis to conduct for the
benefit of his brothers and sisters, all younger than himself. , , o
Mark Foy sailed for the United States towards the end of 1882, reached ban
Francisco in a seriously impaired condition of health. After landing he was removed
to hospital for treatment, but medical science was of no avail and he gradually san \
He was buried there, far from the land he loved, on alien soil, a worthy pioneer o
the great country for which he had done so much during his busy lifetime.
About this time Francis Foy’s personality manifested itself most markedly in
the Collingwood business. By all manner of stratagems, by astoundingly unconvem
tional methods of advertising, by giving better bargains than his competitors as a
result of keener buying, he attracted the public to the shop. Those who came through
curiosity remained to purchase. He soon built up a clientele of customers that repre'
sented Melbourne and every one of its suburbs. His name was the first spoken among
the commercial houses when progress and success were being discussed The
tion of “Sonny” Foy, as his intimates called him, was extraordinarily high.
At this juncture a Scottish commercial traveller, William Gibson, nephew
of Robert Dick, the famous leather belting manufacturer, of Glasgow, mentioned to
Mr. James Bruce, of Flinders Lane, that as he had some capital at command he
would like to buy a partnership in a flourishing business.
Mr. Bruce immediately suggested endeavouring to join with Francis Foy. He
is a rough diamond,” he said, “but one of the cleverest men in Victoria. If you can
get in with him your fortune is made.” That same afternoon the old Flinders Lane
magnate introduced the two men.
° Although they were different from each other in every respect, although they
seemingly did not think in common upon a single subject, each was so impressed with
the other’s personality that within half an hour they had joined forces, Francis to
continue as manager and buyer, Gibson to take charge of the office work.
William Gibson was a quiet, silent man, sparing of his words, slow in making
decisions. A strong character, once he had made up his mind, nothing would change
it. Thoroughly trained in business affairs, particularly on the accountancy side, his
ability in this respect, combined with his Scottish caution, ideally suited the position
he filled in the firm and harmonised in peculiar fitness with the restless energy, the
impetuosity, the unconventional methods of his partner. They made a splendid com'
bination, working together without the faintest sign of disagreement.
The Collingwood business was still conducted under the name of Mark Foy.
The shop had been enlarged again and again to cope with the steady expansion of
business until, in 1884, it was of two storeys and carried a staff of over 350 people.
Actually it was one of the largest establishments of its kind in Melbourne, and cer'
tainly the busiest.
Those were the days when early closing was talked about. Shops opened at nine
o’clock in the morning and remained open while there were any customers about.
When Mark Foy first opened in Collingwood he pioneered the movement for early
closing, suggesting that shops should shut at 6 or 7 p.m. on week days and at 9 p.m.
on Saturdays. Realising that only the law could enforce the regulation of working
hours, he appealed for legislative action, but in vain. His was a voice crying in the
wilderness. No action was taken until more than thirty years later. In 1883 at


Collingwood the usual closing hour at night was nine o’clock, but Francis seldom
left the shop at that time. Having many friends among theatrical folk—he had set
himself out specially to cater for their tastes —he would wait until the artistes had
finished their performances, bring them to the shop and show them the latest goods.
The business he built in this fashion was very considerable.
When he decided to finish for the day, he would travel in a smart trap drawn
by a spirited trotting mare to his home at Heidelberg, an hour’s journey away. No
matter what the hour he reached his home, he was first at the shop on the following
morning to open the doors. And often he was home very late. He would frequently
halt at the house of friends to play cards; he might visit some rendezvous where the
boxing fraternity staged championship bouts; he would call at the meeting place of
those who were connected with horse racing. These were his only interests, apart
from the store, save swimming, at which he was an adept.
All Melbourne wondered at the success of this young man, still in his twenties,
who, in addition to conducting one of the greatest drapery businesses in the capital,
scrupulously discharged the duties of a parent to his younger brothers and sisters.
For he did succeed. The business, under his direction, expanded to a degree his
father would have believed impossible; the Collingwood shop became a landmark in
Victorian commerce.
Inevitably this burden of responsibility strengthened a character already firmly
moulded. The multitudinous duties to be discharged in connection with the conduct
of one of the greatest businesses of the day brought to full fruition his capacity for
meticulous attention to detail. He learned to handle men, goods and money. The
task of standing in loco parentis for the rest of the family, two brothers and three
sisters, all utterly dependent on the success of his efforts, brought to full bloom a
deep and abiding brotherly affection that never faded throughout the years that
followed. His was an intense nature that destiny developed in its own inscrutable
manner.
At Collingwood he learned the value of being unconventional in his business
methods. He did unusual things, acts that were odd and unorthodox, and that were
often misunderstood. Some men went so far as to describe many of his actions as
evidences of eccentricity. Francis Foy was not eccentric. Everything he did, no
matter how far beyond the ordinary it proved to be, no matter how incomprehensible
it seemed to others, was done with studied deliberateness.
Years afterwards, when dispatching his brother, Victor, to London, he said to
him: “Impress yourself on people. Do something, or say something, no matter what
it be, that will make people remember you for years.”
That advice was based on the principles that had guided his own behaviour
through life. He did unusual things, deliberately and for a very definite purpose, and
men never forgot him nor his name. Instances of his unconventional methods will
be related in subsequent chapters.
It is to be anticipated that, having by his personality and his own personal
qualifications, achieved success in the Collingwood business, Francis Foy should have
become so strongly independent in character that he would tolerate no interference
with his activities. This, in fact, led to the dissolution of his partnership with Wil-
liam Gibson.


The capital brought into the venture by William Gfcon had been furnished by
his uncle, Robert Dick, the old Glasgow merchant, who further assisted the rm >
-avintr cash on its behalf for all the goods purchased in Great Britain. The liabil y
to him was so considerable that he continually sought fuller information from his
nephew as to the precise position he (William Gibson) occupied in the fi .
P Mr Gibson’s P character was such that he needed no prompting to urge him to seek
a greater measure of power and responsibility in the business of whichi was
owner It is not difficult to imagine how this move would be regaided by Francis Foy.
He objected very firmly to the relinquishment of any authority he possessed, he re
fused to consider any suggested division of responsibility that involved his emg
d ePr Busine f ss havfifg 6 called Francis Foy to Adelaide about the middle of 1884, he
spent several weeks at the South Australian capital. During his absence a traveller
called at the Collingwood store offering to install a cash telegraph system o supc
sede the old and tardy practice of having boys convey the money for every purchase
from the counter to the office. These cash telegraphs, so common later were then
novel innovations, but the possibility for economy and for facilitating the dispatc
of business that they offered made a powerful appeal to William Gibson He
arranged to have the system installed in the shop. It was in full working order when
Francis returned from Adelaide. . , f m
When he saw the carriers whirring overhead, converging on the office fro
every Dart of the shop, he was amazed. Then he was angry. ,
Bursting into the office of Mr. Gibson, he bluntly announced that that was the
end between them. The astounded partner could get no explanation for some time.
Finally he endeavoured to justify himself. Francis Foy would not listen.
That evening July 28th, 1884, Mr. Gibson remained in his office and wrote a
letter to his partner in which he formally asked for, as partner an equal rig tin
the buying and general management, which I do not ask as a favour, but dem
as a right.” Then he laid down a plan for the division of duties. The lettei was m
the hands, of Francis Foy next morning. i .
Late that night the partners sat in the counting house discussing what was,
without question, the crisis of their careers. The conversation was amicable. Fra ™*>’
as usuaC was forcible, forthright, but obdurate. Mr. Gibson was quiet'Spoken
cautious, but unshakably insistent as regards his right When the argument had
continued without result for several hours, Francis Foy demanded finality.
“Write down your valuation of your own share,” he said to his partner, and
I will write down mine. Then we will spin a coin, and whoever wins will buy the
other out at the figure written down.”
Mr. Gibson eventually agreed to this, though it went against his conscience and his
better judgment. He wrote down his valuation on a slip of paper. Francis Foy did
likewise. The coin was tossed and Francis Foy won.
William Gibson’s disappointment was so marked that he could not conceal it.
The thought flashed through his mind that he was forty'three years of age, fixed in
his ideas and habits, and that it would be a hard, bitter task to find anything like such
a profitable enterprise in the whole of Australia. He would have to begin again the
weary job of establishing himself somewhere else. He sighed deeply in his disappoint'
ment.


Then Francis Foy did one of those characteristic things that are rare in history,
a thing which, more than any other deed of his whole life, reveals the strength of
his courage, the golden charm of his chivalry, the magnitude of his generosity, the
potency of his sympathy. Placing his hand on his partner’s shoulder he said: “You
are terribly disappointed, William. Would you have liked to have won?”
Yes, Francis,” replied Mr. Gibson, brokenly, “I would indeed.”
“Then consider you have won,” said Francis Foy. “I will take your chance. I
will go to Sydney. I will sell to you at the figure I have written.”
Although a conservative estimate by authorities in Flinders Lane at the time
assessed the value of the business at £60,000, Francis Foy had written down the
figure of £B,OOO as the sum he wanted for his share. And that was the sum he
received.
He left the shop that evening and did not return to work there again.
Original Oxford Street Store, founded by Francis Foy.


Another view of the original Store in Oxford Street , Sydney.


CHAPTER VIII.
ALTHOUGH barely a hundred years had elapsed since the rude huts of the
first pioneers had been erected along the course of the Tank Stream, never'
theless Sydney was a place of some importance in 1885, being the throbbing
heart of a gigantic concentration of commerce, the greatest shipping port of Britain’s
Colonial Empire. Indeed, statistics of the time reveal that the shipping of the Port
of Sydney was greater than that of London itself fifty years before.
In 1885 there was an air of prosperity about. Commerce with the interior was
brisk; the effect of the free selection system introduced a year earlier was making
itself felt; people began to manifest powerful nationalistic sentiments because New
South Wales had just sent a contingent of her soldiers to aid the Motherland in
the Soudan.
To Sydney came Francis Foy in that propitious year to seek a footing in the
commercial world of the rapidly developing city. He was not an absolute stranger
to its environs. Previous visits to the metropolis of New South Wales had im-
pressed him with the possibilities that existed there. His foresight, inherited from
his strong-minded ancestors, gave him a vision splendid of a mighty city, pulsing with
trade, and prosperity smiling on every hand. Finding the atmosphere reacting favour-
ably on his uncanny sensitiveness to immediate surroundings, he determined to open
in Sydney.
Because his whole future depended on the choice of the proper site for his
new shop, Francis Foy did not hurry in making up his mind where he would start.
With characteristic shrewdness, and in a completely unorthodox manner, he acted on
his own initiative and according to his own ideas. Roaming the streets he first chose
what he considered to be the most suitable spots. These he haunted, day and night,


watching the people pass by—and counting their numbers. He stood at the corner of
Pitt and Market Streets for days, and discarded that place. He stood in William
Street, at the foot of the hill—then a busy centre —but that also he ruled out. At
other places his broad, sturdy figure became a conspicuous landmark for days. Finally
he chose Oxford Street, a place where Sydney’s citizens walked both in the afternoon
and evenings, a place easily accessible, a place where the most people thronged
morning and evening.
Not far from the Liverpool Street corner was an empty shop formerly occupied
by a furniture firm. The owner of the property was approached and a lease for twenty
years was taken by Francis Foy. Immediately he began to renovate the premises and
equip them for his purpose. The shop would be deemed hopelessly old-fashioned judged
by modern standards, yet in those days it was regarded as most up-to-date. Its roof
was in the form of a huge dome set with coloured glass, through which the sunlight
poured during the day. It had but one entrance, that at the front door. But it had a
basement, and it was commodious. Quickly a small army of workmen fitted it with
shelves and counters, made the necessary alterations to the windows and transformed
it into an establishment that met the approval of the new proprietor.
While alterations were in progress, Francis Foy hurried to Melbourne to buy
the stock to equip it. Even in that purchase his business ability revealed itself. He
could have bought just as advantageously in Sydney, which adhered to a freetrade
policy at that time, but he bought in Victoria, where protection was in operation.
His knowledge of the business he proposed to conduct prompted him to purchase
£30,000 of goods in as comprehensive an array of drapery as could be seen. He
MARK FOY.
Younger brother of Francis.
drove harder bargains than usual, and per'
haps a little sympathy moved the merchants
with whom he dealt to shade prices a little
more for him than for others. He shipped
his goods by steamer, and then obtained the
drawback from the Customs, so large a sum
that his entire stock cost him an insignificant
price when he collected what represented
the duty that had previously been paid on
it By re-exporting the goods to a free-
trade Colony he became entitled to this very
considerable concession.
Guided by his experience of the fairs that
had succeeded so immensely at Collingwood,
he determined to open his Sydney estab-
lishment with a similar great sale. Every
possible form of advertisement com-
mon at the time, and scores of others,
novel and arresting, that he invented for
the purpose, were utilised to provoke the
interest of Sydney citizens. The shop win-
dows had been filled with startling and


unusual signs—the thirty hands employed had been busy for weeks marking the
stocks at prices that would surprise not only buyers, but competitors.
On the. evening before the fair opened Francis Foy and his younger brother,
Mark, then a youth of twenty, locked the shop and walked across to Hyde Park,
where they seated themselves on a bench.
‘To'morrow will tell the tale,” said Francis gravely. For the moment it seemed
that his confidence and courage had forsaken him. “I have put every penny I have
into this business. I have put your money, too, and that of the girls, and if I fail,
God knows what will happen to us all. But I must succeed. I will succeed. For
the sake of the youngsters.”
Mark, inspired by the heedless optimism of youth, utterly confident of the future,
comforted his elder brother with cheerful reassurances. He reminded him of the
multitude of customers the fairs had always brought to the Collingwood shop; he
reminded his brother that people were the same the world over in that they liked
good quality articles at prices lower than were asked elsewhere. For the time being
the position of the brothers was reversed. Mark, the youth, was the comforter,
the inspirer. They sat there until midnight, Francis having staked his all in the
new venture, having jeopardised in a strange city, as he thought, the future welfare
of his orphaned brothers and sisters, was beset with dark, disturbing doubts. Mark
was full of rosy hopes that nothing could diminish.
An hour after the fair began Francis Foy knew that his fears had been utterly
groundless. From the moment the doors opened the shop had been thronged with
customers. They overflowed out of the shop to the footpath. They spread from the
footpath to the street. At eleven o’clock all progress in Oxford Street was held up,
and the police were called upon to open a passage for ordinary traffic. Even the
steam trams, puffing, whistling, shrieking, were forced to stop. Early in the afternoon
the shelves were welbnigh emptied. At four o’clock there was nothing left to sell.
It was the most astounding sale ever held in Sydney. The city was staggered.
Before the last of the goods had been sold, however, Francis Foy had rushed to
York Street in a cab, dashed into warehouse after warehouse and bought frantically.
The goods were rushed to Oxford Street, cases unpacked on the footpath, and the
shelves replenished. Far into the night customers took away bargains in drapery
that were carried in from the street a moment before by perspiring packers enlisted
for the occasion. When, at midnight, the doors were closed Francis and Mark sat
together in the tiny room that served as an office. “We will never look back, Mark,’
said Francis.
And they never did. At the end of the first year he had cleared £B,OOO profit.
Next year it had increased to £17,000. In twenty years he had made a million
pounds in Oxford Street.
Methods employed in modern business differ so vastly from the practices of the
’Bo’s that only the older generation can now appreciate the easy friendliness that was
the basis of trade at that time. Then the proprietor of a shop took pride in his
personal knowledge of his customers. He was not content to be a mere figurehead,
he had to be the dominating and dominant individual in the establishment.
Francis Foy was unique in this respect. He was the soul of the shop. He had


chosen to perpetuate the traditional name of Mark Foy when he opened in Oxford
Street, and although people came to Mark Foy’s shop, they came to see Francis Foy.
Having an almost miraculous memory for faces, names and facts, he would walk
about the shop all day, cheerily greeting hundreds of customers by name, making
friendly inquiries about a son, daughter, relative or some family incident of which he
had but casually heard perhaps weeks before. His smiling face and merry eyes
radiated friendliness and sympathy; they inspired confidence. Those he greeted and
interrogated were proudly conscious of his personal interest in them; they felt that
this man who could remember their little troubles had a warm, human heart. This
faculty for creating and retaining personal goodwill proved one of his greatest assets.
It did as much as any other factor to cement solidly the foundations of the business
that was being built.
His inherent urge for thoroughness spurred Francis Foy to work at the shop
with a tireless energy. It is said of him that he never slept. Indeed, like many
another great man who finds there are not enough hours in the day to afford outlet
for his boundless energy, he limited his sleeping hours to very few. Always the first
to arrive in the morning, he locked the doors when the shop closed at night. He
never spared himself in the numerous and exacting tasks that were always to be
performed, being determined that everything to be done should be done well. And
because he did not spare himself he tolerated no idleness or carelessness in his
employees.
Some savant once wrote that genius is merely the capacity for taking infinite
pains. If such be true, then Francis Foy was indeed a genius. He never overlooked,
nor omitted, any detail however insignificant it seemed; he exacted the same meticulous
care from his staff. Consequently there was harmony, genuine cooperation and
friendliness in the Oxford Street emporium—for he rewarded well those who served
him well.
He had the uncanny capacity, so marked in all great organisers, of being on
the spot whenever an emergency arose that demanded his presence. No one had a
smoother suavity to soothe ruffled feelings than he; no one could be more out'
spokenly indignant when circumstances warranted righteous wrath.
His innate sense of justice would not permit him to heed any malicious whispers
against any of his staff, nor would he listen to the vilification of a person who was
not present to defend himself. He was mentally and physically too “big” for such
pettiness.
Naturally his character, so unorthodox, so frank, so decisive, so impetuous, so
just, so generous, was often misconstrued. The unusual methods he nearly always
practised, while they revealed an extraordinary mental and imaginative energy, also
called for a good deal of courage in an age when conservatism in all things was a
fetish. He would perhaps not be so misjudged in such sceptical and unromantic days
as these. But his acts emphasised all the features of his greatness. Some men
described him as a harsh and exacting employer. Investigation of such stories usually
disclosed that they emanated from a chagrined employee who had been summarily
dismissed for a flagrant breach of the code that ruled the shop—a dismissal no doubt
richly deserved. The most convincing answer to the canards that were circulated
against him in those days was the continued amazing progress of the business con'
ducted by “the wonder man of Oxford Street,” as he came to be called.


Francis Foy did not find it an easy task to fit himself into Sydney s commercial
world. Although his reputation was set at the highest limit of respect and esteem
in Melbourne, he was not known in the sister capital. Nor did the warehousemen
know the extent of his credit and financial resources. Not long after he opened, he
went to York Street to buy a range of goods at a welbknown warehouse. After
inspecting the stock he gave what was an unusually large order. The salesman,
looking askance when he gave his name, summoned the general manager. That
individual, a pompous, imperious gentleman, who had only heard vaguely of Francis
Foy, announced that before the goods would be despatched he would require to be
shown the exact total of the new buyer’s bank balance.
The reply he received from Francis Foy was so forcible and impolite that it
shocked his staidness beyond rejoinder, but Francis walked out of that warehouse,
nor did he place an order with that firm, despite unceasing pleas, for twenty-five years.
But Francis Foy forced himself to the front of Sydney’s business world by sheer
ability and by rendering service. His beginning was propitious, for many reasons,
but as he was introducing new methods he was sagacious enough to import for
assistance during the opening months the best men on the staff of the shop he had
quitted in Collingwood. It speaks volumes for the affection that existed between him
and his late partner, that Mr. Gibson should have made, a score of men available to
help the launching of the new enterprise in Sydney. These men assisted to establish
the principles and the code that have ruled Mark Foy’s from that day to the present.
When choosing the staff who were to remain with him permanently, Francis
Foy relied on his own judgment. References did not matter a great deal to him.
The applicant for a position was scrutinised carefully and closely. If he could meet
the bold, piercing gaze of the blue eyes that bored into his, if he had the appearance
of an alert, active man, he would be engaged. Let his glance falter, let him be
slovenly in appearance, then he would be turned away. Women employees he chose
by the appearance of their hair. If it were neat and tidy, he claimed that it bespoke
careful and painstaking habits. He rarely made a mistake in his judgment, and
during his lifetime he engaged thousands of people to work for him. In each one he
took a personal interest. He trained his staff with the firm disciplinary exactness of a
regimental sergeant-major. Many successful men in Sydney’s business world to-day
owe their advancement to the training they received from him.
For all that he was a disciplinarian, he was singularly humane and profound in
his understanding of and sympathy for the weaknesses of his employees. He never dis-
charged a man for drinking unless that man failed to respond to the kindly efforts
he made to reform him. Whenever sickness overtook a member of the staff he was
so solicitous that he would summon a doctor, obtain medicine himself for the sufferer,
and if necessary convey him to home or hospital in a cab.
He treated every man according to his temperament. Those that required
driving, he drove ruthlessly. Those who had to be coaxed were encouraged and
persuaded. Should a man prove unsatisfactory in one position Francis Foy would
patiently try him in others until he had found his niche, or demonstrated his entire
unfitness. He reposed entire trust and implicit confidence in those he employed, once
he had proved them, nor was that faith ever betrayed.


First motor delivery vans in Sydney.


CHAPTER IX.
WHEN Francis Foy opened the shop in Oxford Street, the portion of the city
in which it was situated was comparatively ilhserved so far as business estab'
lishments went. Between Liverpool Street and the top of Darlinghurst hil
there were only two emporiums of any importance, the few others being modest
little places that attracted only casual customers.
Within a very short space of time attention was attracted to the neighbourhood
of Mark Foy’s. It became the favourite after'tea walk of the citizenry. In those
days there were but four theatres in Sydney, admission to which was at a figure out
of reach of the purse of the average family, consequently the only amusement at
evening was to stroll about the streets, shopping, or inspecting the gaily decorated
Wmd Francis Foy was at first delighted that the crowds should flock to his shop
during the evenings. It gave him a feeling of satisfaction that his establishment
should be the centre of so much attraction, especially as he was the only draper in
Sydney who kept open every night until nine o’clock. After a time he began to
notice that while the crowds outside were so dense that traffic was blocked, few
people could enter the shop because of a press of men at the doors. He soon diS'
covered that these men who thronged the doorways were pickets from organisations
endeavouring to have early closing made the law of the land. His measures to check
this were prompt and effective. Displaying amazing bargains near the front door,
they proved so irresistible to the women on the footpath that, they blushed the
pickets aside in their wild rush to gain admission to buy. Even the pickets succumbed
to the temptation of smashing bargains. . .
It was said that some of his competitors, seeking to restrain his advancement,
circulated the story that he was a Chinaman, proffering his name as proof He
replied by advertising widely, “Foy is no Chinaman; he s an Irishman ask the


ladies.” Then, to prove that he was Irish, he opened a fair on St. Patrick’s Day,
standing in his doorway with his hair dyed green. That ended, for all time, the
Chinaman story.
His early fairs were certainly epochs in the business world of Sydney. If he
prepared the public mind for the great eruption of bargains by subtle and arresting
advertising, he prepared his shop with the same scrupulous care. Two days prior
to the opening of the fair he would close the premises to the public while the whole
place was scrubbed clean, fitted with new curtains and valances, and the goods
arranged freshly and attractively. Under the doors of residences in the metropolis
would be thrust a catalogue of prices, interspersed with amusing anecdotes gathered
from all the books of humour procurable, inviting the housewife to come to the fair.
And they came. Always the crowd would be so great that the street would be
thronged to the tram lines. Sometimes the guards he engaged to protect the windows
would be swept away and the enormous press of people would close in until the
huge sheets of glass were shattered and there would be scenes of the wildest excite'
ment. Police regulated the passage of customers into the shop; strong men conducted
them to an outlet in Brisbane Street when they had completed their purchases. And
this would continue from .morn until nearly midnight.
It is not surprising that other wide-awake business men should seek to secure
premises in such a popular vicinity. There was a rush to Oxford Street. Francis Foy,
too, found that the shop he had opened, and which he believed would be large'
enough for his requirements for many years, had become altogether too small for
his rapidly expanding business. Next door was an establishment adapted in every way
for the creation of an adjunct to the Nlark Foy premises. The owner was inter-
viewed and offered a good rental for the place. Regretfully he explained that he had
given half a promise to let the shop to another firm and at a much lower rental, but,
he said, that if Francis Foy could arrange to get possession he would prefer him
as a tenant.
The lease of the former occupants had expired, and they removed their goods
one Tuesday evening. As soon as the last load had departed, the door was locked
and the key taken to the owner. But Francis Foy busied himself at once. A brick-
layer he had secured picked a hole in the wall between the shops large enough to
permit the passage of men and goods. The whole staff was set to carry an enormous
quantity of stock through this hole and spread it on counters, in the windows, and
stack it on the shelves. By ten o’clock everything was placed in readiness for business
on the morrow. Francis Foy was in possession. So delighted was he at the success
of his ruse that then and there he treated his hard-working staff to an oyster supper
in the new shop, and later ran a hurdle race around the premises, leaping piles of
carpets and blankets with the abandon of a schoolboy. Next day he opened in a
greatly enlarged store. This was in 1887, and for years afterwards Mark Foy’s
continued to progress under his able guidance.
That Francis Foy appreciated the wisdom of advertising is revealed in many
of the unorthodox things he did in those days. When it became necessary to remodel
the newly acquired premises, he decided to superintend and carry out the work with
his own workmen. Two enormous hardwood girders were among the necessary


material required, and these were being carted on a truck to the premises one busy
Saturday morning. He arranged with the driver of the truck that a wheel should
come off when the load was being turned in the street, and this happened according
to schedule. The result was that trams were blocked for over two hours and huge
crowds collected outside the shop. Francis and his staff took advantage of the
presence of so many people. Attractive bargains were hurriedly displayed in the
windows. Men dashed out from the shop to the waiting trams with rolls of silk
that they thrust into the hands of women passengers, asking them to feel its texture —
and—leaving the end to be examined, dashed back, unwinding the roll as they went.
Soon scores of women were alighting from the trams, making for the shop and rolling
up lengths of silk as they proceeded inside. Most of them remained to purchase.
Indeed, Francis Foy had an arrangement with several of the drivers of the
cumbersome steam trams that puffed their way up and down the hill, to stage
break-downs in front of his shop at convenient times. This never failed to pack the
place with buyers who, disappointed in not being able to get farther into town,
alighted and did their shopping at Foy’s.
On another occasion, when he was absent in Melbourne, his brother-in-law, Mr.
J. J. Macken, decided to engage a balloonist to make an ascent from the roof of the
shop for the sake of the advertisement. On the balloon was painted the slogan “Aim
straight for Mark Foy’s.’’ As the balloon had to be filled with gas, it was taken to
the roof, and tubes were connected with all available mains in the building. This
naturally dimmed the lights until the interior of the shop was in funereal gloom.
Also the stamping on the tin roof of the men holding to the swaying silken bag
created a terrific uproar. In the midst of this Francis Foy walked in, having returned
unexpectedly. Loudly he demanded to know what was wrong with the lights, and
what was causing the din on the roof. Being informed, he climbed the ladder leaning
against the wall, and thrusting his head over the parapet, shouted, “What is all
this?” The men clinging to the balloon were so astounded at his unexpected appear-
ance that they released their hold, and the contrivance soared away in a sagging
flight, amid the yells of the crowd, until it landed ignominiously on the roof of a
rival shop, slogan and all.
No man can succeed, as it is said, unless he have faith in himself. Francis Foy
had a sublime faith in himself, and in the quality of the goods he sold. Always
content with a reasonable profit, he bought cannily and keenly, giving his customers
the benefit of his advantageous bargaining. A thing that outraged his feelings more
than aught else was the disparagement of his goods by a customer, or anyone else.
On one occasion this led to his rebuking a famous actress in very forcible fashion.
As in Collingwood, he made a speciality of catering for theatrical people. Special
costumes and materials were imported for them; the greatest pains were taken to
gratify their somewhat individualistic tastes. Mark Foy’s were able to satisfy all
but this great lady.
She came for some costumes. First she found fault with the materials, describing
them as worthless and useless. Then she declared that the dressmaker who measured
her was hopelessly incompetent. This was told to Francis Foy, who, seising a tape
measure, went to the room where the lady was standing. He proceeded to run the
tape over her, and did this in such an extraordinary manner that the actress pro-


tested that he could not be measuring her for a dress. “No,” he replied; “I’m
measuring you for the wooden box you should be in.”
Having fitted the shop with a series of mirrors, he could observe what was
happening almost at any counter from wherever he chanced to be standing. One
day he noticed, in the silk department, a salesman striving to please an apparently
particularly difficult lady customer. The counter was stacked with scores of pieces,
but still the lady demanded to see more. Other customers came, waited patiently—
and departed. The salesman in desperation turned to take down the last of the
pieces from the shelves when Francis Foy walked up and ordered him to replace all
the material and serve others who were waiting.
With intense indignation the lady demanded to know what right he had to
interfere, declared her intention of reporting him to the manager, and loudly an'
nounced her name —one welbknown in society and business circles. “Well, Mrs.
t^ie y° un S man quietly, you go home and tell your husband to give
you a jolly good hiding for wasting my man’s time.”
If his blunt and straightforward methods won him a reputation in the retail
portion of his business, his subtlety as a buyer soon established his name for shrewd-
ness among the warehousemen of York Street. A habit, created by his restless energy
—that of never remaining still, but continually walking up and down—he turned to
account in his buying operations. Notified in advance of his intended arrival the
salesmen in the warehouses would spread their goods, according to price for his
inspection. Never knowing whether he would buy a do*en or a thousand articles
they were eager in their attention to him.
Thus would he be seen, parading up and down a warehouse, followed by a
group of hurrying salesmen, making pungent comments on the goods displayed and
firing brusque, blunt questions at the obsequious crowd. Knowing his forcible lan-
gauge, they treated him with diplomatic deference and profound respect. He
received more attention than any other customer, but he was the best customer for
he bought extensively and he always paid within seven days to obtain the discount
After he had purchased a line of goods from a warehouse he would personally
supervise the unpacking of every article, see that the correct prices were marked and
that he had received the goods he had ordered. The knowledge of drapery and of
various lines of textiles gained during his brief years as a buyer for the Dublin house
of Arnott’s stood him in good stead in his transactions both in York Street and
Flinders Lane.


CHAPTER X.
TOWARDS Che end of the 80’s the annual turnover at the Oxford Street shop
had grown immensely. The goods needed for the constant replenishment of
stocks coming from York Street and Flinders Lane, naturally the warehousemen
had to gain their profit from what they sold. Francis Foy percetved that tf hei couU
contrive to do hfc own buying in London as years before, he_had bought forja.
Dublin employers, the profit that went into the pockets of Sydney and Melbo
importers could be saved. Thus he could sell cheaper than ever, and gam a far
wider clientele of customers.
He made up His mind to open a buying office in London.
Realising that buying for himself in England was an altogether different pro'
poJon from buying for a long-established Dublin house, Francis Foy determined
that he would have to adopt an unusual course of action to impress himself and his
name indelibly on the minds of British merchants. What he did
still forms the basis of many a legend in English commercial circles.
Taking premises in Aldersgate Street early in 1890, he advertised in the news*
papers as follows: “Foy will buy anything for cash,” and announced the date the
Lri ij ODen Everyone in London who had anything to sell must have read
the advertisements'. By nine o’clock the street was packed by people whci had brought
along all sorts of articles to show him. There were costermongers with donkeys, men
with S cages of birds, Jews with hats and old clothes, vendors of puffins and fish
dealers in wild animals, marine brokers, and thousands of others, each with some odd
or useless bargain they desited to sell to this amazing man who offered to pay cash
for anything. ,1
The sensation created by the congregation of this motley concourse natura y
f+rarted universal attention to the man responsible for it, and its advertising v
‘beyondTpT—nt Among those it brought to the office was one who


““ ™ g °‘ d
Francis gravely uncorked the bottle, took the tiny brush and applied a coat of
he shining paint to the heel of his left boot. When it dried he applied another coat
nd repeated this several times. Then, replacing the cork, he handed the bottle to the
wondering salesman and bade him return in a fortnight. Next day he went to
Manchester to seek the names of some of the firms who manufactured the classes of
goods he required—still wearing the boot with the gilded heel.
In Manchester his procedure was entirely unorthodox. He did not inquire in the
ordinary way among business men and warehouses for the addresses hi required-
ad Tf d a h OUt the Cart ' docks in yarnfag W ththeXers'
and packers, telling them exciting stories of Australia, and deftly extracting from
inte”ef immenlT at This th™ 8 ’"f g ° ld ! n hed ° f bis boot excited their
merest immensely. This they could not understand, and they did not care to ask
h m Tf at lt wi? lfied ‘ In any CaSe they believed il: to be solid gold. Children followed
and talked g of h wSi *“ d OId “ folks saw thatTeel
and talked of it. Within a week everyone in Manchester knew that there was an
fXtgVd f y W W gold hed 0n his boot wb ° ™ prepared fo buy good”
him bargams dne The o n e 'he b° Se '£*• anytl f ng Se “ 80,18111 Flands F °y “d offered
' . Th “. he brought into play the knowledge he had gained hv hi,
adroit questionmg of the carters Knowlng the merlt of ev g ery leLolt
mit, he dealt only with those that were dependable.
heel W A h “th% r r n f d h to L ° nd ° J n the gold P aint sti)l shone brightly on his boot
, A , lf had st °° d him in good stead by achieving the object he desired he gave
the traveller an order for a thousand long gross and diWtriLrl fif • he gave
Sydney to be sold in the shop. g g the consignment to
While it was not altogether easy to make contact with the most renutablp anrl
reliable houses, it was still far more difficult to nersuadp tL l! f P ,
or these businesses that anything he ordered could be paid for promptly
Foy overcame this obstacle in characteristic fashion apL- i • P pt y i Prancis
Chanced T"' IT
sovereigns, on the table before the LtLdXchanti “TS
he proceeded toTake h°is departure. * baCk to ' m ° rrOW for tbe <W,” and
tb W ld «* d °
had unlimited the" firm. to ' m ° rr ° W the ch “ ge ” Afte“he
Commercial circles soon came to know him intimatelv—W * u r 1 •
next amazing move. Wearing a wide-brimmed cabbage ree hat the a
typical Colonial, he was a strikino fig ure w u Prpvpr L " n clothes of a
focussed on him. This, of course, was what he desired IT to’m l attentlon being
on London was something of a notable achievement. ’ im P ression
His ability to do the unexpected was remarkable. On his first buying trip to


Paris he attended the races one afternoon. Attired in the height of fashion and he
was a man who on formal occasions dressed better than the ordinary —everything
was in keeping but his silk hat. Very carefully he had brushed the nap the wrong
way. Even in smart Paris, where strangely individualistic whims characterised the
attire of some of the most fashionable, this created unbounded interest. Everyone
on the course gased at this unique head'gear. One of the writers for the leading
society journal finally could not restrain his curiosity. Approaching Francis Foy he
inquired very respectfully if this were the newest fashion in England. He was
assured that such was the case, and the papers next day rang with the news—and
the name of the man who introduced the novel style.
The London office was a mere clearing house for the goods he bought. The
rooms were always stacked with cases, either being unloaded or repacked for ship'
ment to Australia. Very little furniture graced the establishment as a consequence,
the unconventional Australian preferring to do what writing was necessary on the
top of a bale of goods, or taking his ease sprawled on a case. Visitors, of whom
there were scores each week, would be invited to seat themselves on boxes or piles
of carpets —and in deference to their unusual host, would do so.
Francis Foy utilised this office, as was his wont, definitely and deliberately to
create impressions. In this he was eminently successful, too. On one occasion he
was responsible for a happening that set the whole trade rocking with laughter.
One of his idiosyncrasies was that he would never permit anyone, more par'
ticularly those seeking to do business with him, to entertain him. He would never
accept an invitation to lunch, take a drink, a cigar, or even a cigarette, from any
person, nor would he permit any of his employees to accept even the most minor and
commonplace forms of hospitality. Among the travellers who visited the office were
several who were always pestering him with invitations to lunch.
Finally, tired of refusing, he explained to one after another of them that he
could not accept their hospitality, but would be gratified if they could come to the
office and have lunch with him on a certain day. They arrived in due course at the
appointed time, seven of them, all immaculately attired in morning coats, gloves, and
tall silk hats. Francis, coatless and with his sleeves rolled up, waved a casual welcome,
pointed to a few cases, and invited them to be seated on the broken boxes about.
Ultimately, after waiting for some time, one of them deferentially reminded
him of the luncheon appointment. Francis was all apologies immediately. Then,
going to a rear door, he called one of his packers. Here, Tommy, he said,
giving him a sovereign, “go out and get a couple of boiled fowls and two loaves of
brCa When the man returned with the provender, Francis opened the parcels, and
called his guests around him. Tearing off wings and legs from the fowls, and
breaking hunks of bread from the loaves, he thrust the fare into the hands of the
astonished travellers, and bade them eat. “There’s nothing like a bit of chook for
lunch,” he said, nibbling a drumstick himself. The frock'coated visitors ate hur'
riedly and silently, making their escape as quickly as possible.
His stern objection to accepting hospitality was almost an obsession with him.
It is related that, on one occasion in London, he observed one of his employees
taking a pinch of snuff from a box proffered by a visitor. He discharged him


promptly, but re-engaged him next day after a vigorous lecture on the unwisdom of
any man buying goods placing himself under an obligation to a man who sought to
sell.
At Zurich, on the Continent, he once gave a young traveller a large order for
silks. In delight, the young man suggested a drink. “Are you thirsty?” asked Francis
Foy. When the waiter came he ordered a bottle of champagne, gave the traveller a
glass, and drank the balance. The traveller a few minutes later suggested another
drink. Still thirsty? inquired the Australian. This time he ordered a magnum—
and drank the lot. Then he calmly tore up the order and told the young man to
begone.
Sending for him again next morning, he administered a fatherly lecture to the
crestfallen youth on the folly of trying to bribe men into concluding business deals —
and sent him away happy with a bigger order than ever.
Some men struck his fancy immediately. When he encountered such a one he
did his utmost to secure his services. A remarkable instance of his singularity in this
respect occurred at the London office. One Thursday afternoon a young man carrying
' line of valuable lace goods entered the place. His qualities immediately appealed
to Francis Foy. Taking some of the goods he began examining them carefully. Then,
while talking to the young traveller, he started to use them to dust some of the cases!
Naturally the salesman was aghast and protested. “Come with me,” said Francis,
grasping his arm, and propelling him to the door. Outside was a Victoria and
pair, and into the vehicle the young man was thrust. Mounting the box and grasping
the reins Francis Foy drove briskly to his home at High Barnett, fourteen miles dis-
tant, and on arrival there informed his enforced guest that he was to stay the night.
He kept him there next day, took him to the races on the Saturday, and to his home
again for the week-end.
Meanwhile the young man was frantic with perturbation. He could not com-
municate with his firm or his parents. His samples were apparently lost. He was
desperate with worry.
On the Monday Francis Foy took him back to London. Inside the office he
sat the traveller on a case and warned him to remain there until he returned. Dashing
out of the office, he called a cab in the street and hurried off. Within an hour he
rned - Thrusting a piece of paper into the hand of his astounded guest he said :
That s a ticket for Australia. You leave for Sydney next week. Your salary will
be £6 per week.” Over-riding the protestations of the bewildered youth, he gave him
a huge order for the goods he was trying to sell and sent him back to his principals.
Within a few months that young man landed in Sydney and has been with the firm
ever since.
If he could transact business in an unorthodox manner he delighted in so doing
Once when passing through France, being pressed for time and desiring to place
some big orders for lace, he telegraphed three of the largest manufacturers in Brussels
asking them to have their travellers with samples on the railway station at a certain
junction to do business. The salesmen were there, with their samples displayed on
cases on the platform. As the train waited only a short time, Francis Foy played one
off against the other, and, just before the whistle blew, clinched deals for some
astounding bargains.


London, with its amazing collection of heterogeneous types, had a strange fasciiv
ation for Francis Foy. The stark poverty and gripping penury he so often beheld
troubled his generous heart greatly and excited his charitable instincts. Night after
night he would wander through the gasdit streets, talking to the waifs and strays
he encountered, relieving their distress by lavish gifts, and often finding jobs for
them. The flower sellers could always rely on a five shilling tip when he bought a
bouquet. The cabbies loved him for his liberality—but he always insisted on selecting
one with a good horse, irrespective of his position on the rank.
One evening he halted to talk to an all night stallholder near Smithfield. Per'
ceiving that the man was greatly agitated, Francis Foy inquired what the trouble was.
When it was explained that it was financial Francis immediately proffered his
assistance. Years later a nephew of Francis Foy’s met the man when travelling from
Europe. He was then one of the most prominent and wealthy figures in London’s
meat business, and he acknowledged that that timely gift had been the turning point
of his life.
While he was lavish in his generosity, he never gave if asked bluntly for help.
The whining beggar who essayed to trick his liberality would only succeed in drying
up the springs of charity. His rewards, too, had a certain mordaunt humour in them
on occasions. Once, being shaved in a barber s, he was in a thoughtful mood. The
barber did his work without speaking and was rewarded with the tip of a sovereign.
Thinking a mistake had been made, he drew Mr. Foy’s attention to the fact. “It’s
right,” said Francis Foy. “That is for keeping your mouth shut.”
If he rewarded liberally those who gave service, he reacted characteristically
when anyone tried to impose on him. Once, at Roubaix, in France, he had stayed
at an hotel for a few nights, and, on being presented with the bill, discovered that
he had been charged four francs for two candles in the bedroom. Not having used
the candles, he naturally protested, only to be informed that it was the custom to
make this charge and that he would have to pay. Francis Foy said nothing. When
he was leaving, however, and the staff had gathered about him in expectation of
being lavishly tipped, he gravely produced the candles, broke them in pieces and
presented a part to each of the bewildered menials. “There is your tip,” he said.
“A franc each.”
Having established the buying office on a firm basis, having formulated the code
to govern and regulate its conduct, he appointed a staff selected after his own careful,
but unconventional fashion, and returned to Australia.
After that he visited London frequently, a year seldom passing without seeing
him there engaged in the spectacular but successful prosecution of business.


HUGH VICTOR FOY.


CHAPTER XI.
THE purchase of manufactured goods through the buying office in London uiv
doubtedly gave a decided impetus to business in the Oxford Street shop. This
arrangement enabled prices to be reduced, newer and more acceptable articles
to be offered, a wider and more attractive range of stuffs to be displayed.
During the whole of the ’nineties progress was made. Whether or not Francis
Foy foresaw the tragic financial crisis of 1893 is not definitely known, but so ably
were his resources marshalled, so efficiently were the ramifications of his business
planned, that the firm felt scarcely any of the ilbeffects of a debacle that brought
ruin and bankruptcy to many thousands. Probably some premonition of disaster had
urged him to prepare to withstand the attacks of adversity, for it is inconceivable
that he would have taken all the measures he adopted for a mere whim. Whatever
may have been the case, his sagacity and prescience enabled the firm with the utmost
security to weather the storm of financial adversity that struck Australia.
When the country emerged from the slough of depression, the business of Mark
Foy was riding on the crest of the wave.
During the next few years Francis Foy continued to conduct the huge enterprise
with greater sest and care than ever. His advertising methods still continued to
provoke the interest of the buying public, his encounters with warehousemen still
intrigued the trade.
Having occasion to visit Melbourne once to buy goods, he went to a certain
warehouse, where there was a new floor manager in the dress department to whom
Francis Foy was unknown. This manager, not greatly impressed by the visitor who
was apparently only making a cursory examination of the goods on the tables, did
not trouble to pay him much attention. Eventually he walked over to Mr. Foy and
sarcastically remarked that he didn’t think Mr. Foy wanted to buy anything. Mr.
Foy asked, “What will you take for the whole stock on the floor?” Believing that the


stranger was taking a rise out of him, he replied: “£4,000.” “Right,” said Francis
Foy, ‘Til take the lot.’
Calling two men who had come with him, they began to haul down rolls of
goods from the shelves and mark on them the prices at which they would be sold.
This went on for some time until the manager, tiring of what he believed was a
joke, intervened. “You get out,” shouted Francis Foy. “These are my goods now,
and I'll trouble you not to interfere.' 1 Vainly the manager protested that it was a
joke, and that there were over £lO,OOO worth of goods in the department. “That’s
your funeral,” commented Francis Foy.
Ultimately the head himself was summoned. Taking in the situation at a glance,
he went to Mr. Foy, who was an old friend:. “Surely you’re not going to hold me
to it, Francis?” he said. “If you put it that way, I won’t,” replied Mr. Foy, “but
never let your man play a joke like that again.” Needless to say he obtained the
lines he wanted at his own price after such a handsome renunciation.
His shrewd understanding of psychology manifested itself in many ways. Though
never a gambler, when bargaining with warehousemen he would fix his price (usually
less than theirs), produce a penny and ask them to decide the deal on the chance of
the coin showing “heads” or “tails.” Always he placed the coin on the back of his
hand with the “tail” uppermost. Covering it quickly with his other hand he would
ask the merchant to nominate his choice. Usually he won, for, as he said years after,
in ninety mine cases out of a hundred, a man will call “heads.”
Again, when one of his London buyers, who had been celebrating unwisely,
was persuaded to buy £lB,OOO worth of statuary—totally unsuitable for Australian
customers —he cabled a friend in London certain instructions. This friend casually
dropped into the office of the firm handling the statuary and mentioned in an off'
hand fashion that Mark Foy’s, of Sydney, were on the verge of bankruptcy. The
order was cancelled immediately without a request from Francis Foy.
He evidenced promptitude on another occasion in getting rid of a big line of hat
feathers sent from London that proved unsaleable. Waiting for a windy day, he
ordered a table to be placed outside on the footpath. The feathers were bundled on
to this, and the howling gale did the rest in a few seconds.
Another line, secured at bargain prices by the keen London buyers, but utterly
unsaleable in Sydney, were frock coats. These were beautifully tailored, of splendid
material, and a gift at the price asked, twelve and six. They hung fire for weeks
until one day a man walked in off the street and purchased one. Ten minutes later
he came back and bought two. A little later he had returned to purchase four. When
he made the next trip, and sought to buy eight, a Jewish gentleman dashed in to
investigate. It then transpired that the man had been pawning them up the street
for a pound each at the Jew’s pawn-shop.
In the free-and-easy days of the nineties unconventional methods obtained in
the Oxford Street shop in many ways. The effective concealment of the day’s takings,
for instance, was ever a disturbing problem, as, in those times, safes and strong-rooms
were unknown. The money—sometimes totalling £s,ooo—would be hidden in a pile
of blankets, behind rolls of silk, among hats, any place likely to baffle the ingenuity
of a burglar. Often it would be so well planted that next morning its exact where-
abouts would be forgotten, whereupon the whole staff would begin a frantic search
for it.


One Saturday night, after the shop had closed and the money had been hidden,
a terrific clamour was heard at a billiards room next door. Francis Foy rushed in
to discover that a crowd had tackled a man and were savagely assaulting him. Fie
intervened, rescued the victim, rewarded one or two of the most truculent with a
half sovereign and retired.
A few evenings later, having decided to take the cash home instead of leaving
it at the shop, he was driving in his buggy when a voice hailed him from the
roadside. When he halted a stranger warned him against continuing, as there was
a gang of men waiting to waylay and rob him a little farther on. The giver of this
timely warning was the man he had rescued from being kicked to death.
“Push” fights were frequent and violent in those days. One Saturday night re'
presentatives of the “Rocks” push gathered in front of the shop to fight it out with
the boys of Surry Hills. It was a willing scrap while it lasted, stones, bottles and
fists flying viciously. Francis Foy, playing cards in the shop with a few cronies,
heard din and went outside to investigate. He saw the melee and he realised
that his windows were in danger. Raising his stentorian voice he called for silence
The rival “pushes” ceased hostilities in amaze. “Here,” he said, “you fellows will
break my windows if you go on. I’m playing poker inside, and I have four aces.
There is a park opposite; go and finish the fight there and give me a chance to clean
up on this game.” Strange to relate, the belligerents retired and did fight it out in
the park.
As has been mentioned previously, his foresight was amazing. One Greek fish'
shop proprietor, who died a very wealthy man, owed his fortune entirely to Francis
Foy. Being fond of oysters, he frequently patronised this restauranteur, who was
incessantly laemoaning the difficulty he experienced in obtaining regular supplies of
the biwalves. Having been at the Hawkesbury River on many occasions, Francis Foy
suggested the wisdom of the Greek securing some oyster leases there. The suggestion,
however, made but little appeal. Eventually Francis Foy literally forced the fish'shop
man to make application for a big area of leases and saw to it that he began oyster
culture on proper lines. Within a decade the Greek was well on the way to making
his fortune.
His judgment and ability may be said to have introduced Australian wool to the
East, thus laying the foundation for a section of trade that is tO'day, one of the
mainstays of the Commonwealth. Kinematsu, a Japanese, had come to Australia
with a show organisation called “A Japanese Village,” which was exhibited in the
various capital cities with great success. It was mainly composed of Japanese goods
of all descriptions which, when the exhibition was over, Francis Foy purchased for
a mere song.
In settling with Kinematsu, the Japanese mentioned the difficulty he was
encountering in having his money transmitted to his homeland. “Come with
said Francis Foy. “I will show you how to get your money over and to double it
Calling a cab he took the foreigner to one of the big pastoral firms and persuaded
him to outlay all he had in wool. Kinematsu shipped the consignment, sold it at
such a profit in Japan that he immediately began to trade with Australia for wool,
hides, skins and trochus shell. His firm is, tO'day, one of the biggest operating be'
tween the East and the Commonwealth.


Much bitterness was caused in Sydney commercial circles by the refusal of
rancis boy to close his shop early. As no law regulated the hours of shop em-
ployees at that time, the cessation of business depended on the choice of the
business man but many and spirited were the agitations to effect some regularity in
the matter. Naturally Francis Foy came in for a good deal of criticism, one member
ot Parliament going so far as to direct a vicious attack against him on the floor of
the blouse.
Francis was incensed. Consulting with his friends he decided to interview the
member and deal with him in the time-honoured manner. He proceeded to the House
sent toi the member, and soundly thrashed him in the lobby. No further personalities
were indulged in at Francis’ expense.
Few men possessed as many firm friends as he did. And he had very few
enemies. Among politicians, all the notable men of the day were proud to have the
honour of his friendship, such men as Sir William Lyne, Sir Edmond Barton, Sir
Henry Parkes, Sir John Robertson, E. W. O’Sullivan and John McElhone being his
cronies. Among the sporting fraternity, also, his friends were legion. Two men
with whom he was on intimate terms for years, were Cecil Rhodes and Barney
Jbainato, both of whom played such prominent parts in the affairs of South Africa
lhese he met in London.
Among the theatrical folk he figured as a sort of demi-god. No “first night”
was complete without his presence; no theatrical event worthy of notice unless under
his patronage. When hard times overtook actors or actresses none ever sought in
vain for his help. He was particularly generous to the profession.
One thing for which his friends remembered him particularly was his love of
practical joking. Once he had a small coflin made that he carried with him on a
railway journey. At his destination the friends who met him with heads bared in
solemn reverence were given a tip as to how to secure a carriage to oneself.
Again a friend came to the Oxford Street shop late one night considerably
under the influence of liquor. He was so somnolent that he demanded a place
sleep. A bed having been made up in one of the windows, Francis Foy indicated
that as a suitable place for slumber, and persuaded his friend to turn in. Next morn-
ing passers-by were astounded to see a man sleeping soundly in the bed in the
shop window.
Not always did he succeed in taking a rise out of his friends. One, at least,
turned the tables on him. Francis was driving this man into town from Bellevue
Hnl in a sulky to which was harnessed a particularly fast and lively trotting mare.
u.nd when they passed Bondi Junction he tied the reins to the dash and began calmly
to read the paper. The mare careered along at a terrific pace, Francis looking out
ul the corner of his eye occasionally to see how his friend was taking the matter
Finally his companion touched him lightly on the arm. “Francis,” he 'said, “if you
have finished with the front part of that paper I would like to have a peep’ at it.”


CHAPTER XII.
MOST great men have a hobby. Some collect pictures, others books; preferences
in thif respect have such a variety that it would be impossible to enumerate
the extraneous pursuits in which men find relaxation and genuine pleasure
Francis Foy was of too ardent a temperament to be either aesthetic or artistic
was natural that his hobby would be virile exciting, entirely different from the
hurly-burly of business in which he lived and worked. , ,
Always, from earliest youth, an intense lover of horses, it seemed natural that
he should turn to racing. Probably the Irish blood in his veins-for sons of the
Emerald Isle ever loved a galloper—tended to turn his inclinations to the thrill an
joy of thudding hooves and flashing silks. Whatever was the factor responsible, it is
ror fain that he determined to figure as an owner of horses. . .
With characteristic thoroughness he resolved, when he made his determma ion
to patronise the turf, that nothing but the best of the breed he fancied and h
knew pedigrees well-would ever carry his colours. Consequently he secured from
the beginning the finest offspring of the lines of blood he fancied. This practice h
rigidly*followed throughout his racing career, and, later on, when he engaged m
highly technical work of breeding blood horses. . „ u.
g No one enjoyed a race meeting with keener test than Francis Foy_ When his
own horses were competing, he derived more thrill and excitement from a har
fought finish than any man on the course, even though his wagers were mvana Y
modest and the odds he could obtain from the bookmakers usually short. It may b
trulv said of him that he ran his horses purely for the sport of the game. Unlik
manv owners when he believed that his candidate had a likely chance of winning
an event he made no secret of the fact. His friends, and the customers at the shop,
were always ”he first to learn the news. Indeed he was so generous with informa-
tion concerning his own horses, and his opinions concerning other animals, that he
wal consulted \y all and sundry who wished to venture a modest wager in the
betung ring capita lised his hobby for the benefit of his business, a
coursl of action with which no one can quarrel. His frankness about his own horses


— an <J he probably won as many big races than any other individual owner of his
generation attracted people to the shop and served to advertise widely his name
and reputation. People rather liked to visit a shop where they could personally chat
with the smiling faced proprietor over the chances of candidates for the next race
and later tell their friends that they had a “tip” straight from Francis Foy.
In the naming of his horses, too, he evidenced a sharp appreciation of the value
of advertisement. No commonplace name would suit his whimsical fancy. He
would select titles amazingly unorthodox but singularly striking, names that caught
and held the public mind. Occasionally his choice of a name met with the
frowning disapproval of the conservatives on the A.J.C. Committee, and they would
decline to register it. Thus, when he put forward as names for two horses, You’re-a-
liar and Youranother, he was requested to find less suggestive titles.
He had a strong predeliction for Irish names for his horses as is shown by some
of those he raced, such as Boucal-a-Soggarth and Faugh-a-Ballagh. On one occasion,
Mr. Foy had imported an aristocratic thoroughbred from England, entrusting its care
to that well-known trainer John Allsop. This colt was by the classic winner of his
year, Diamond Jubilee, and when the time came to nominate the horse for its first
race Allsop discovered, a few moments before the closing time, that it had never
been named. In a dilemma he rushed to the shop to consult the owner. Francis Foy
was besieged with callers, and Allsop had to interrupt him by shouting the nature
of his business. Too busy to attend to the naming of a horse, the owner said: “Call
him anything you like, but let it be something Irish.” Allsop caught the last few
words, returned to the A.J.C. Office and solemnlv registered the animal as “Some-
thing Irish,” in which name he subsequently raced and did service at the stud.
Although he won many classic events on the Australian turf, Francis Foy never
achieved his greatest ambition, that of winning a Melbourne Cup. He had good
horses, was always a trier, but Fate dashed the goblet of success from his lips on
each occasion. The nearest he was to winning was when Voyou gained second place
in 1899. In other years his horses filled third, fourth and fifth places. The crowning
honour was denied him, which was a pity, as a straighter racing man, a more cheerful
loser, a more liberal winner, and a cleaner all-round sportsman never graced the
turf of the Commonwealth.
An example of his amazing big-heartcdness is told by an old employee who, in
the course of his work in the tailoring department, occasionally heard racing infor-
mation from sporting clients. Once, a prominent trainer had told this man to back
his horse for a certain big race, but exacted a promise from him not to invest more
than ten shillings. The tailor went to a bookmaker to make the wager, who, as the
horse was 100 to 1, refused to take anything less than a £2 investment, which event-
ually was made. A few days later the employee mentioned this to Francis Foy, who
owned a mare that had been installed as favourite for the event and seemed likely
to win. “Why did you make that bet,” said Mr. Foy. “You cannot afford to lose
£2. My mare will win.” This perturbed the tailor greatly, and mournfully he said
that he supposed his money was gone for good. Next day Francis Foy scratched his
mare from the race, though he had backed her himself, and the other duly won.
Never was man more meticulous in insistence that his instructions should be
implicitly obeyed. In 1907, when attending the Melbourne Cup, he instructed an
employee to outlay <£6 on Blue Spec to win £2OO, the market price at the moment


being 33 to 1. When the commissioner entered the ring the price had shortened and
he could obtain no better than £2OO to £B, despite assiduous endeavours. Not being
able to find Mr. Foy he took it on himself to invest the additional amount, and when
Blue Spec duly won he collected the money and sought his employer. In handing
over the £2OO he explained what he had done. The verbal castigation he received
for exceeding his instructions fairly blistered his ears. Mr. Foy finally declare
that he would rather not have had the wager at all than that his instructions shoul
be disregarded. . ’
His interest in horses and his almost fanatical determination for thoroughness
impelled him to study racehorse pedigrees as closely as a scholar would his classics.
And here his marvellous memory stood him in good stead. He became as inf alii e
as the stud book. Asked the breeding of any horse racing in his time, and he would
recite the pedigree without a mistake, embracing generation after generation. This,
combined with his knowledge of horses, his shrewd judgment of form, his remarkable
ability to out'think others, gained him a unique reputation for prescience among
followers of the sport of kings. An amusing story illustrates the marvellous memories
that he and a few of his colleagues possessed. One evening at Andy Flanagan s hotel,
conversation turned on men’s powers of memory. A wager was made and a test pro'
posed. The publican was to take the order for drinks from the crowd of thirty men
present pour them and place each one before the man who ordered it. He succeeded.
Mr Foy’s brotherdndaw, Mr. J. J. Macken, was to name the individual employees
in the store—l 27 in all. He did so. Mr. Foy’s task was to name the sire and dam
of ten horses racing at the time, selected haphazard from the Turf Register. He
gave the details without the slightest hesitation.
About the beginning of this century, Francis Foy decided to embark on the
highly technical business of breeding thoroughbreds. Purchasing a stud faim some
eleven miles distant from Parkes, he named it The Monastery, a title that puzzled
his friends and the general public. At this establishment he bred some fine animals
during the few years he maintained it. The first sire that did service there was
appropriately named His Reverence.
Probably the real impulse that caused him to establish this stud farm was his
desire to breed a colt that would win the English Derby, an ambition he had cherished
for many years, and one that no Australian had gratified—at least with a horse of
his own breeding. Having five brood mares in foal, he duly entered the prospective
progeny for the great English race. The disastrous drought of 1902 was at the
height of its intensity when the foals were dropped, the consequence being that
their chances of reaching sturdy maturity were slim. This prompted him to scratch
his entries for the Derby, but he concentrated on saving the foals.
When they were yearlings, he informed his brotherdndaw, Mr. J. J. Macken,
that he had five youngsters at his farm that might turn into gallopers and told him
he could have one. The pair made the trip to the farm, and Mr. Macken during
the course of conversation with the stud groom learned that one, an unsightly'
looking colt was the most active and the best galloper in the paddock. This he chose
in preference to a pretty, welhshaped mare that Francis Foy indicated as the best.
The colt turned out to be Tartan, a famous performer later on, and the mare was
Lord Ullin’s Daughter, who carried Mr. Foy’s white and black check jacket to victory
in many a hard'fought race.


After he sold The Monastery, having five excellent brood mares, he decided to
take theiti to France to be mated with Prestige, a sire whose blood he was con'
vinced, combined with the strains in the mares, would result in progeny that would
become distinguished gallopers. He acquired a small farm in the Pyrenees, and the
mares were duly landed there. Unfortunately, war broke out before he could bring
them and. their foals back to Australia. Eventually he did get them out, but only
with the greatest difficulty. One of these foals, dropped on Christmas Eve, was
named Christmas Bells by his wife. Another was My Valentine, both of which
became well known, on the Australian turf.
During his career as a horse-owner, Francis Foy imported many notable gab
lopers. Among those best known was Playaway, Voyou, April Fool, His Reverence,
and a number of brood mares. His practice was to buy mares in England, ship
them to Ireland to be run on the limestone country about Limerick for a year to
strengthen their bone, and then transport them to Australia.
Always a prominent figure at Flemington on Melbourne Cup day, he perpetuated
the picnic custom his father had established so many years before. He would have
luncheon tables set out under the trees to which he would invite a host of friends
from all parts of Australia.
On these occasions his hospitality would be lavish. Champagne flowed freely,
everyone would be in the highest spirits and happiness would prevail on every hand
for Francis Foy saw to it personally that everyone was entertained and well served.
When the saddling bell rang for the next event he would drink a last toast and the
party would hurry off to watch the racing.
At the Cup of 1918, when his health was failing, he staged a gayer and
happier party than had ever been known. His spirits were at the top bent of
apparent enjoyment the whole time and he made sure that not a moment of dullness
intervened. Just as the little gathering was ending, a bookmaker approached him
and asked if he desired to have a bet on the Cup. “Not on the Cup,” said Francis
Foy, with a wistful smile, “but I’ll bet you three to one that I do not get back to
Sydney alive.”
He must have had some poignant premonition of his approaching end. It is
said that many Irish people have a second sight that enables them to peer beyond
the veil that separates life from death, and undoubtedly this great'hearted man knew
that the grim adversary of all humanity was preparing for ultimate victory. That
same evening, having asked a number of friends to dine with him at his hotel, he
found himself too ill to preside at the banquetting board. But he insisted that the
repast proceed without him. Before the guests had finished he came down from
his room in his dressing gown, having defied the orders of his doctor. Taking a
glass, then having received the assurance of his friends that they had enjoyed
themselves thoroughly, he filled it. “I will drink your healths, now,” he said. “It
will be the last time, for I will not be with you much longer.”
Raising the glass he smiled his warm, benign smile on the assembly, and slowly
drained the goblet. Then, waving a farewell that included all in the room, he passed
through the door and returned to his bedroom.
Next day he left by train for Sydney. A sudden seizure struck him down en
route and his. great spirit passed away as the train drew into Goulburn station. That
was the day before the signing of the Armistice.


CHAPTER XIII.
IT might be as well to describe Francis Foy as he was in his hey'day.
He carried himself with an air. His face was firmly and strongly defined;
his figure suggested tremendous strength. He was not tall of stature —he stood
s'ft. B'in. high—yet he gave the impression of greater height. Probably this was
due to his unusually broad shoulders, his massive torso, the bold leonine head that
dominated his figure.
His countenance was frank and open, the features being modelled generously
yet firmly. Humour lurked at the corners of his lips, yet his mobile mouth
registered delicate, subtle changes in his expression. His eyes were a brilliant and
clear blue, often twinkling with mirth; and these eyes, more than aught else,
furnished the infallible signs by which character is made manifest. They had in
them a certain magnetism, an intangible, elusive quality that both compelled and
attracted. When stern, his gase was disconcertingly direct; when humour touched
him they gleamed with mirth; in his meditative moments they were the eyes of a
thinker.
When Francis Foy entered a room full of mixed company, attention was
irresistibly focussed on him. The fire of his virile personality, the pulsations of his
restless energy, radiated from him with a potency that affected and influenced those
about him, perhaps unconsciously, but none the less very definitely. In a second,
almost, he would be dominating the situation whether the discussion were of
business, sport or mere trivialities.
There he would stand, his big, fair curly head thrown back, his steadfast eyes
holding the regard, seemingly, of each one of his colleagues.
There were no half'measures in life for Francis Foy. He was direct, impetuous
perhaps, but utterly forthright. When circumstances provoked his anger, no one
was more spectacularly furious than he, both in gesture and in speech. He could
be as profane as an admiral of His Majesty’s Navy, yet his profanity was vigorous
rather than vulgar. When a story of suffering aroused his sympathies, he would be
as tender as a child. On these occasions his heart and purse were always wide open.
When humour stirred his mood, he would roar great gusts of boisterous laughter


that could be heard a hundred paces away. And his sense of humour was nearly
always paramount.
In his home he was a beloved husband, an affectionate father, an hospitable host.
That kindly thoughtfulness for others, displayed strikingly with his staff and
among his friends, was revealed most markedly in his home circle. Never a birthday
passed without rich and appropriate manifestation of his thought of the occasion, the
natal anniversary of every member of the household being always remembered. The
abiding love of family in his heart endured all his life—a love that prompted him
as a youth not yet twenty-one to shoulder the responsibility of caring for a family
of three girls and two boys, all his juniors and the youngest only ten, while his
father set out on a tour from which he never returned. The same care and affection
he lavished on his orphaned brothers and sisters, the jealous scrupulousness with
which he preserved and expanded their interests in the business he conducted, was
manifested in his own immediate domestic circle. He loved his family and was
beloved by them.
As a host he was the soul of hospitality. His board was ever spread for the
entertainment of his friends. His breezy bonhomie, his sympathetic understanding,
would put his guests at their ease so that the home was always genuinely happy both
for those there permanently and those whom friendship brought temporarily thither.
His pleasures were simple. He loved a game of cards with a few cronies, always
naming very modest stakes so that there would be a mild interest in the pastime and
that no-one could lose more than a few shillings.
Music was his delight. His welcome to any guest who could sing, or play the
piano well, was doubly cordial. Indeed many of the great stage stars of his day
frequented his home at week-ends, there to sing and play, amid unconventional
surroundings, for his delight. His own voice, had it been trained, might have won
him renown on the stage. It was a mellow, resonant baritone with remarkable
range. On the rare occasions he sang, he would be encored enthusiastically by his
appreciative friends. This accomplishment he too seldom displayed during his busy
life.
But he could and did whistle. He had a natural gift in this respect. Gaily he
would trill the latest music hall hit, or some classic composition, with runs and
variations so that it sounded like the music of a hundred birds. Few of the artists
who have won fame on the stage as whistlers could excel him in the art.
Of his generosity it is impossible to say enough. He was lavish in his benefac-
tions, nor did he ever turn deaf ears to a genuine tale of hardship or sorrow. More
will be said in regard to his charity later. It will suffice here to quote the words of
the head of the counting-house, a man grown old and silver-haired in the service of
Francis Foy: “Only his God, himself and his accountant knew the extent of his
charity.” What finer tribute could man have?
His consideration for employees and friends prompted him, when living at
Killara, to purchase an extensive property that he transformed into delightful picnic
grounds, replete with an artificial lake, cricket pitch, dancing floor, swings, etc.
There he delighted to have his friends enjoy themselves with simple pleasures. It
was thronged on Sundays, and at the annual staff picnic was a scene of rare
festivity. To-day those grounds form the famous Killara golf course.
His home life, as has been said, was singularly happy. He married Mary


Flanagan, not long after he opened in Sydney, and there were eight children, the
issue of this union. Tremendously proud of his sons, when they were reaching
manhood’s years, he determined that, in some of them at least, the dream of his
grandfather should be realised —they would go upon the land to produce wealth from
the soil. The family of Foy would have its roots deep in Australian soil at last.
With that object in view he purchased two stations in Queensland, in the
Barcaldine district, one of which he named “Autiel” and the other “Garches,” after
suburbs of Paris. These were utilised for raising Merino sheep and were exceedingly
profitable ventures. In 1912, also, he took a lease of 4,300 square miles of country
on the Barkly Tablelands, in the Northern Territory, intended to be used as a
cattle breeding station.
The outbreak of war, in 1914, shattered his dream, as had the Napoleonic wars
of more than a century before dissipated the golden visions of his ancestor. His
three eldest sons heard the call of duty, answered, and fared forth to meet the
country’s foes. Then, advanced in years, convinced that the war would last for
longer than anyone anticipated, and uncertain of the future, he abandoned the
Northern Territory run and sold the two other stations. For “Garches” he received
£30,000, which he invested in a French war loan —the only error of judgment he
ever made in his life, as the manipulation of the franc, in early post-war days,
resulted in almost the entire loss of that sum.
As his charity has been referred to previously, a few instances thereof will not
be out of place. The Catholic Church, of which he was an adherent, was the
recipient of munificent support from him at all times, although he was equally
generous in his response to requests for help from other denominations. When
His Eminence, Cardinal Moran, was seeking to build a Hospice for the Dying, he
approached Francis Foy, who owned the site where it is now situated. He had
bought the property years before for £IO,OOO, and conducted a boarding-house there
for his employees, but, although it was valued at far beyond that amount, he let
the Cardinal have it for the price he originally paid.
A well known sisterhood owes the foundation of their order to his warm-hearted
generosity. When the first four sisters landed from Ireland to establish the order
in Australia, they visited Francis Foy at the Oxford Street shop. They were without
means and without money. Learning that they were able to sew, he installed four
machines for them in a tiny cottage at Marrickville, sent them huge supplies of
material and instructed them to make it up into night-dresses. He purchased at
trade rates everything they made, forgetting to deduct the cost of the material. This
he continued to do for years, until the order expanded and became self-supporting.
The poor and indigent found a warm friend in him, literally, when the icy
winds of winter raged. Each year he would distribute blankets among those who
were in need, always evading every effort to thank him for his goodness. His
generosity in this respect was unbounded. Thousands there are whose hearts were
warmed by his beneficence.
It has been said of Francis Foy that he gambled on the chances of business.
This is a complete misconception. There are few men who took less risks than he.
What might appear to others to be a gamble on future events was but a subtle,
carefully-thought out, well prepared plan of operation specially designed to meet
circumstances he foresaw would inevitably arise.


Furniture Retail Store.
The "Piazza,” Main Retail Store.
K.A.S. Exhibition Pavilion.
Parking Station.
Woollen Mill, Mascot.
Knitting Factory and Bulk Store.
London Buying Office.


CHAPTER XIV.
WHEN the lease of the Oxford Street shop was approaching the date of deter'
mination, Francis Foy decided to secure premises that would be nis in fee
simple. At once almost insuperable difficulties presented themselves in the way
of purchasing a suitable site for a new store. The news having leaked out that he
was seeking a site, those who had likely land to sell demanded outrageously high
prices. .
As difficulties were only made for him to surmount, he overcame this trouble m
his usual able and shrewd fashion. A meticulous survey of the city fixed the idea in
his mind that an island block confronting Elisabeth, Liverpool, Castlereagh and
Goulburn Streets would be ideal for his purposes. At that time the blocks that
made up this section of the city were held in fifteen separate titles owned by various
individuals, and the shops on them were ramshackle buildings occupied by Chinese,
Hindoos, nondescript bird and animal dealers, and cheap eating houses. These he
resolved to purchase.
Knowing full well that if he approached one owner with an offer to buy his
block the price of the others would soar immediately, he laid his plans with care.
Selecting a group of friends in various far-distant parts of the Commonwealth, he
instructed them to make secret offers to different owners. The negotiations occupied
some time, but eventually when the name of the real buyer was disclosed Sydney
realised that Francis Foy had bought the choicest island block in the city at prices
ranging from £l2 to £2O per foot—a smashing bargain even in those days.
On completion of the transfers he found himself confronted with the problem
of erecting a new and suitable building, one appropriate for the purposes of a great
drapery store and worthy of the name of Mark Foy. Once more his thoroughness
manifested itself. He chose a most capable architect and took him on a world tour
for the sole and express purpose of inspecting and investigating the great emporiums
in the leading capital cities.
The result of this tour was a decision to build somewhat on the pJan of the
Bon Marche in Paris. On his return, preparations were made for the beginning of
the work. The first trouble encountered was that of removing the former tenants of
the old shops. The Chinamen muttered “whaffor,” but went after a time. The
Hindoos said “ut cha” philosophically, and departed. One sturdy Australian, a pie-


shop proprietor, resisted every effort to remove him, and announced “business as usual.”
When, however, scaffoldings were erected before his door and piles of bricks laid
on the footpath on either side he gave in.
Sydney was discussing the possibility of the underground railway being con-
structed when all was in readiness to lay the foundation stone. Many believed that
the project was merely another political ruse for capturing the votes of the unthink-
ing. A few, including Francis Foy, realised that the city’s rapid expansion demanded
some such method of handling the ever-increasing traffic. Visiting the Minister for
Works of the day, he learned from him that, sooner or later, the work would begin.
He therefore constructed the foundations of his new shop in such a manner that a
subway could be carried to Castlereagh Street for the convenience of passengers
alighting at the station, that his foresight convinced him would be erected on the
Hyde Park corner of Elizabeth and Liverpool Streets. The result was that when
eventually the city railway was constructed —many years after his death—the subway
came under Elizabeth Street from Museum Station, and not a brick had to be re-
moved. During the intervening years what is now the subway was part of the
store, and was utilised for the purposes of the tailoring department.
The new store as it was in 1908, an illustration of which appears in this booklet,
was commodious, impressive and something altogether novel for the city of Sydney.
It contained the first escalator ever seen here. It held the first restaurant established
in .a drapery store. It had the first circulating library conducted by a store.
It had been designed in such a manner that goods could be displayed to the
fullest advantage under the best of natural lighting conditions. It was built so that
customers could make their purchases with the greatest convenience and in the most
comfortable surroundings.
That the fullest advantage would be taken by Francis Foy of the possibilities for
advertisement offered by the opening of a new great store is but natural to expect.
He prepared for the transfer of the entire stock of the premises in Oxford Street in his
usual efficient manner.
No matter how other firms in the circumstances may have carried out the
undertaking, he formulated his own plan, and adhered to it strictly. No single
detail was overlooked in his preparations. When the new premises were ready to
receive the stock from the old shop, the eventful day was fixed. Every member of
the staff had been coached carefully in the part he had to play, every extra hand
engaged for the occasion instructed as to the nature of his tasks. Early in the
morning of 28th September, 1908, the transfer began.
Many witnessed the extraordinary change-over. It was one of the most impressive
spectacles ever staged in the streets, an exhibition of speed, efficiency and resource-
fulness that has had no equal since.
Naturally a tremendous amount of organising work had to be accomplished, not
only to prepare the goods for removal and to arrange for their receipt and display
in the new shop, but to procure adequate and sufficient mediums for the actual
transport of what indisputably was an enormous stock. Francis Foy superintended
the whole of this work himself. Every sort of vehicle that Sydney boasted at that
time was pressed into service to carry loads of drapery, etc., from Oxford Street to
Liverpool Street. There were pantechnicons, lorries, drays, spring carts, with an
Irish jaunting car to lead the procession.


Each load was under the guard of the man in whose charge the goods on that
vehicle would subsequently be. Each load was received and unpacked with the
utmost celerity. Although indescribable confusion seemed to reign, everything was
actually working according to a carefully prepared plan. During the whole morning
the removal continued amid scenes of the most intense excitement. Inside the new
store hundreds of frantically working assistants were rapidly educing order from
apparent chaos. Francis Foy was everywhere.
At two o’clock the last item was in place, every display was set out to the most
attractive advantage. The windows, even, were dressed. Then the doors were
thrown open and business began.
The first purchase, fittingly, was made by Mrs. Francis Foy. In the jewellery
department she bought a golden trinket that she cherishes to-day as one of her
most prised possessions.
Thenceforward the history of Mark Foy’s, from a purely commercial angle, is
merged inextricably in the history of Sydney’s rapid progress and development.
During the first years in the new shop the personality of Francis Foy was a
powerful influence on the continued success of the business. He still dominated every
portion of the emporium, he still devised novel and arresting advertising campaigns,
he still gave striking evidence of his amazing foresight.
But, unfortunately, his health began to fail. Not that he ever allowed his
indisposition to interfere with his activities, not that illness ever impaired his alert
faculties, for he never complained nor even mentioned his sufferings. Asthma had
gained such a hold on him that he could not recline in his bed; indeed, he experienced
the greatest difficulty in sleeping. Where many another man would have succumbed
to the incessant stress of the complaint, he fought doggedly on, his grim determina-
tion, his unyielding courage, sustaining him to heroic endurance. The old business
methods were vanishing, however, before the march of modern progress, and this
probably induced him to form the business into a company not long after 1908, with
a capital of £600,000, in eight per cent, ordinary shares and six per cent, preference
shares. The first directors were Messrs. Francis foy, J. J. Smith, W. McDougall, and
FI. V. Foy. Mr. Mark Foy, who had been a prominent figure in the Oxford Street
shop, had retired from active participation in the firm to devote his attentions to
various outside interests.
The land on which the new shop stood was put into the new firm at cost price.
During the first four years the company paid eight per cent, dividend and £lOO,OOO
was written off the goodwill. This rate of dividend was continued, plus one shilling
a share bonus, for several years, ultimately increasing to fifteen per cent. In 1913,
Francis Foy, finding his health so impaired by illness, decided to retire. After that
war broke out and Sydney experienced several critical years.
Although not actively participating in the conduct of the business, the war
troubled Francis Foy greatly. Unlike the majority of people in those early days of
hostilities, he did not believe that peace would be gained within a few months. To
his brother, Victor, then managing director of the firm, he expressed his opinion
that the end would not come for at least five years, and urged him to scour Australia
to purchase all the imported goods he could find. This course was adopted as far
as practicable, with the result that Mark Foy’s maintained supplies when the markets
had very little to sell.


As the war continued, Francis Foy further advised that an office should be opened
in Japan to purchase what dress goods, materials, glassware and other suitable manu-
factured articles were procurable in the East. Again his advice was followed, Mr.
Victor Foy undertaking the task of conducting the buying, both in Japan and China.
This proved a remarkably successful venture, goods being procured at a time when
the submarine campaign of the enemy had practically stopped all trading between
Britain and Australia.
It is hardly necessary to describe in detail the enormous business that the firm of
Mark Foy conducts to-day. It is a tradition of Sydney, just as the Flarbour is—just
as firmly enshrined in the hearts of Sydney’s citizens. Since the days of 1908 the
shop has been added to greatly. It has been lifted higher towards the building limit,
it has been extended until it now occupies the whole of the section.
Subsidiary activities have been established, not the least important of which is
the Target Woollen Mills, Mascot.
At these mills most of the woollen goods sold over the counter are manufactured
from Australian materials by Australian workers. It is worthy of mention that a
few years ago the mill created a world’s record in manufacture that is likely to stand
for many years. Inspired by the boasted speed of American and British mills in
making a suit of clothes from raw wool —the former did it in four hours, the latter
in 2 hours and a half—an attempt was made to reduce this time.
The whole process from the shearing of the sheep to the dressing of a man with
a suit made from the wool was accomplished in the astounding time of 1 hour 53
minutes.
As has been said, Mark Foy’s is one of the traditions of Sydney. The code that
ruled the business from its inception —the code of honest dealing formulated by its
founder on the goldfields of Bendigo in the roaring days—still governs the whole of
its comprehensive activities.
Mr. H. V. Foy still holds a seat on the present directorate, which comprises
besides himself:— ,
Mr. Herbert Priestley (Chairman)
Mr. Hugh M. Macken (Managing Director) and
Mr. J. V. Macken (nephews of Mr. Francis Foy)
Mr. W. J. Cleary (former Chief Railway Commissioner of New South Wales)
Mr Donald J. Bourke
Mr. A. A. Sparks
men whose reputation for ability and business efficiency is well known in the com-
mercial circles of the State.
In their hands the future destiny of the firm may be confidently entrusted. To
inspire them, to sustain them, remains always the hallowed memory of Francis Foy,
a man whose courage, doggedness, ability and ideals left them an enterprise worthy
of his amaffing personality.
People seldom realise that there is any real romance in business, yet the House
of Foy is aglow with it. This brief story is an epic, not of warriors, but of captains
of industry who, by initiative, energy and enterprise created a great business, pro-
viding employment for many thousands of people, and adding to the wealth and
prosperity of the country.
This is a story of a ’’victory of peace no less renowned than war.”


Board of Directors of Mark Foy’s Ltd., 1935
From left to right:—Herbert Priestley (Chairman), W. J. Cleary, A. A. Sparks, H. V. Foy,
A. W. Hilderbrand (Secretary), H. M. Macken (Managing Director), D. J. Bourke,
J. V. Macken.


Mark Foy’s Ltd., 1914.
Mark Toy’s Ltd., 1935.




