

The T heosophical
World-University
OUTLINE OF
CONSTITUTION




THE
THEOSOPHICAL WORLD-UNIVERSITY.
OUTLINE OF CONSTITUTION
T(ectoi —
ANNIE BESANT, D.L. (Ben. Hindu Univ.)
Vice-Rector and Principal —
Rt. Rev. BISHOP ARUNDALE,
M.A., LL.B. (Cantab), D.L. (Nat, Univ. Madras)
‘Directors of Special Studies —
Rt. Rev. BISHOP LEADBEATER and
Rt. Rev. BISHOP WEDGWOOD, D.SC. (Paris)
Registrar and Treasurer —
H. BAILLIE-WEAVER. LL.B. (Lend.).
Eastward-Ho, Wimbledon Common, London, S.W. 19
Vlssistant Registrar —
IVAN A. HAWLICZEK. B.SC. (Belfast),
St. Christopher’s, Letchworth, Herts.
October, 1925,
John Sewell, Ltd., 166, Victoria Street, S.Wa


ABBREVIATED STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES.
The Theosophical World University, with three great centres at
Huizen (North Holland), Adyar (Madras, India), and Sydney (New
South Wales, Australia), has been established to co-ordinate
existing Theosophical educational activities in various parts of the
world, and gradually to impress education, both as to principles and
practice, with the Theosophical interpretation of life, so that the
youth of the world may, from the earliest possible period, be sur-
rounded by that spirit of practical brotherhood and understanding
of life which will enable them to become wiser parents, more effi-
cient members of their professions and avocations, more enlightened
citizens, worthier members of their respective faiths, and, in the
international and inter-religious fields, messengers of peace and good-
will. Adult education along similar lines will, wherever possible,
also form part of the activities of the University.
The Theosophical World University exists, therefore, for the
study of the Divine Wisdom—for the understanding of the Divine
Plan which is evolution, through thei expressions of this Wisdom and
this Plan in Nature, in the sciences and in the arts, in every subject
of the various curricula of studies, from the most elementary to the
most advanced.
A common source whence all life originates, and therefore a
fundamental Unity of Life ; a graded process of evolution under the
Laws of Justice and of Love, through the various stages of unfolding
consciousness which we know as Kingdoms of Nature ; a common
purpose and therefore a common end or goal of life ; these are the
essential truths for which the University stands, and all study and
exercise, whether physical, emotional, mental or spiritual, will be
approached in the light that these great truths shed.
The University will reassert the ancient four-fold objectives of
education, as given by a great Indian Sage, many thousands of years
ago :
1. Service.
2. Study, to the end of wise service.
3. Simplicity of Life.
4. Self Control.
THE THEOSOPHICAL WORLD-UNIVERSITY.


Hence the University exists to Kelp its students to become more helpful
to those around them, more self-sacrificing citizens, worthier servants
of humanity. They will learn that nothing can grow alone, and that
their own growth, and consequent peace and happiness, is largely
measured by the loving service they render to their surroundings of
whatever kingdom of nature, thus learning to fulfil the essential one-
ness of all Life, so sadly outraged to-day, especially in regard to the
animal kingdom. They will learn that no knowledge or capacity or
power can ever prove a real blessing to their possessor save as used
also in the service of others. And they will learn that only in eager
service can be found that Freedom upon which their own progress
depends.
OUTLINE OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE THEOSOPHICAL
WORLD-UNIVERSITY.
The Details of which will be worked out and filled in as the
Organisation develops and takes shape.
The Theosophical World-University.
The first constituted officials are as follows, namely :
Rector: Annie Besant, D.L. (Ben. Hindu Univ.), President of the
Theosophical Society.
Vice-Rector and Principal: The Rt. Rev. George Sydney Arundale,
M.A., LL.B. (Cantab.), D.L. (Nat. Univ.,Madras), F.R.Hist.S.
(Lond.), Bishop of the Liberal Catholic Church.
Directors of Special Studies: The Rt. Rev. C. W. Leadbeater, and the
Rt. Rev. J. I. Wedgwood, D.Sc. (Paris), Bishops of the
Liberal Catholic Church.
Registrar and Treasurer: Harold Baillie-Weaver, LL.B. (London),
Barrister.
Assistant Registrar: Ivan A. Hawliczek, B.Sc. (Belfast), Secretary of
the Theosophical World-University Association.
Other officials will, as the different Sections of the University
Organisation come into existence, be appointed to take charge of or
work in them.
I. The statement of the General Principles and purposes of the
Theosophical World-University, which appears above, is a shortened
form of a longer statement, which can be obtained on application to
the Registrar. To these General Principles and purposes every


member of the Senate and Convocation and every person holding
office in the University or registered as one of its teachers, and the
Governing Body of every Institution admitted to the University, will
be expected to subscribe. They declare the basis upon which the
University stands, and shall not be altered without the permission of
the Rector.
2. The University shall consist of the Rector, the Vice-Rector,
the Principal, the Directors of Special Studies, the first Registrar, the
Fellows, the registered teachers during their term of office, the
Graduates and the Students, and is open, as are all its offices and
positions, to all without distinction of race, creed, caste, colour or sex.
3. The University, as its name implies, will function all over the
world through its affiliated universities, colleges, schools and educa-
tional centres of every kind, but it will have three main Centres at
Adyar in India, at Sydney in Australia, and at Huizen in Holland.
All its property, whether movable or immovable, will be held and
controlled by a Central Board of Trustees subject, of course, to the
law of the country in which such property is situate, which law may
require special arrangements to be made in the matter in order that
its provisions may be duly complied with.
4. The first Rector shall be Dr. Besant and, unless incapacitated
by ill-health or other infirmity, she shall hold office during life or until
resignation. When she shall cease to be Rector, her successor shall
be nominated by herself, for life or until resignation, but when such
successor shall have ceased to be Rector, all subsequent holders of
the office shall be elected by the Senate for such period as it shall
determine. The Rector shall be the Head and Chief Officer of the
University and member ex officio of the Senate, of Convocation and of
all Committees of the Senate, and whenever present shall be entitled
to preside over all meetings.
3. The first Vice-Rector shall be Bishop Arundale who, unless
incapacitated by illness or other infirmity, shall hold office during life
or until resignation. When he shall cease to be Vice-Rector, his
successor shall be elected by the Senate for such period as it shall
determine. The Vice-Rector shall represent the Rector for all pur-
poses and shall be entitled to exercise all rectorial functions.
6. Bishop Arundale shall also be the first Principal and shall,
unless incapacitated by ill-health or other infirmity, hold office for life
or until resignation. When he shall cease to be Principal, his suc-
cessor shall be elected by the Senate for such period and on such terms
as it shall determine. After Bishop Arundale has ceased to hold
office, the Vice-Rectorship and Principalship shall not again be held
by the same person, unless the Senate decide to the contrary. The
Principal shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the University, and


shall ex officio be a member of and entitled to preside over all Boards
of Studies and such other Sections as may be established to deal with
the educational work of the University as soon as the same shall have
been organised by the Senate.
7. The Rector shall have power by and with the advice of the
Senate to appoint suitable persons as Fellows of the University.
8. The first Registrar shall be Harold Baillie-Weaver, who shall,
unless incapacitated by ill-health or other infirmity, hold office for life
or until resignation. Wben he vacates his office, his successor shall
be appointed by the Senate on such terms as to salary, status and
activities as he thinks fit. The first Registrar shall be responsible for
all the administrative work of the University and the management of
its property, and shall ex officio be a member of all Committees and
Boards appointed to deal with the same.
9. The Senate shall consist ex officio of the Rector, the Vice-
Rector, the Principal (whenever the Vice-Rectorship and the Prin-
cipalship are not held by the same person), the Chairman of Convoca-
tion, the Directors of Special Studies, and the Registrar (so long as
the post shall be held by Harold Baillie-Weaver but not otherwise
unless the Senate shall so determine), and of representatives in such
proportions as the Senate may determine of the Fellows, the Centres
at Adyar, Sydney and Huizen, Convocation and the various Faculties
(duly constituted in accordance With regulations which shall have been
passed by the Senate for the purpose), the Theosophical World-Uni-
versity Association, and of such other persons (whether graduates of
the University or not) as may be co-opted by the Senate from time
to time. The first members of the Senate shall, sit for three years
certain, and at the end of that period the elected or appointed' mem-
bers shall retire as to one-third of their number every year, but shall
be eligible for re-election or re-appointment.
10. The Senate shall, in conjunction with the Rector, be the
supreme governing and executive body of the University and shall
have the entire management of and superintendence over the affairs,
concerns and property of the University, and subject to the provisions
of the Constitution for the time being of the University the Senate
shall take such measures and act in such manner as shall appear to it
best calculated to promote the objects and interests of the University
and secure the adequate protection of all classes of students, whether
internal or external, collegiate or non-collegiate.
11. The Senate may, in conjunction with the Rector, alter the
Constitution as it thinks proper, provided (1) that due notice is given
of the nature of any proposal to alter it and that the alteration is
approved by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the members
present either in person or by proxy at the meeting at which the alter


ation is considered; and (2) (a) that no change in the Constitution is
made which will conflict with the law of any country in which it is
functioning, unless that country is expressly excepted from the effect
of such change, and (b) that no disability or test of any kind (except
the obligation to subscribe to the statement of principles referred to
in Article I) is imposed on anyone connected with the University or
desiring to enter it or to be appointed one of its officials or teachers,
on the ground of race, caste, creed, colour or sex. In all other
respects the Senate shall be at liberty to manage the affairs of the
University, decide its own composition and conduct its own procedure
in any way it thinks proper and to pass such regulations for the
purpose as it judges best, subject to the Constitution of the University
for the time being.
12. The Convocation of the University shall consist of the Rector,
the Vice-Rector, the first Principal, the Directors of Special Studies
and the first Registrar and, subject to such conditions as the Senate
may impose, of all holders of degrees of the University, and also of
such officials during their term of office, who are not holders of
degrees, as the Senate may think proper to appoint.
13. Convocation shall be entitled to discuss any matter relating
to the University and declare its opinion thereon to the Senate ; to
elect its prescribed number of members of the Senate, and, subject to
confirmation by the Senate, to pass such bye-laws for the conduct of
its proceedings and the management of its affairs as it thinks proper.
14. The first Faculties in the University shall be eleven in number
—that is to say :
1. World Religion, including Buddhist, Christian, Hebrew.
Hindu and Islamic Theology and Culture.
2. Arts.
3. Laws. =====
4. Music.
5. Medicine.
6. Veterinary Medicine,
7. Science.
8. Engineering.
9. Economics and Political Science (including Commerce and
industry).
10. Civics and International Relations.
11. Theory and Practice of Teaching, including physical, emo-
tional, mental and spiritual development,
but the Senate may establish other Faculties if it thinks proper to do so.


15. The following persons shall during their employment by the
University be members of the respective Faculties of the University,
that is to say :
1. All appointed teachers of the University as hereinafter
described.
2. Such other teachers of the University as may be admitted
from time to time to a Faculty by the Senate.
16. At any meeting of a Faculty the members shall consider and
report upon any matter referred to them by the Senate and may also
consider and report upon any matter relating to courses of study,
provision for teaching or research, examinations or the granting of
degrees or certificates of proficiency in the subjects comprised within
the Faculty.
17. Every Faculty shall, subect to confirmation by the Senate,
be entitled to make bye-laws to regulate its procedure in its own
way, both as to election of its prescribed number of members to the
Senate, election of its Dean, and otherwise.
18. The Universities, Colleges, Schools and other Educational
Centres of the University shall be such as the Senate shall from time
to time admit on such terms as it shall think proper, but the teachers
of such institutions shall not thereby become teachers of the University
unless they shall have been individually recognised as such by the
Senate. In the case of Universities, Colleges, Schools and other
Educational Centres within the area of one of the main Centres, all
arrangements with them shall be made through such Centre and not
directly with the institutions themselves. Students of all such establish-
ments shall be called internal, being all students who have matriculated
at the University and are pursuing a course of study approved by the
University either (a) under the direct control of the University or a
Committee appointed thereby or in any one or more Schools of the
University, or ( b) under one or more of the recognised teachers of the
University. All other matriculated students shall be called external
students. In due course Committees of the Senate will be appointed
to look after the interests of those two classes of students and admin-
ister their affairs, but from the outset it must be understood that no
distinction between them in favour of internal students will be drawn,
and that at any rate in the beginning of things, as the result of the
absence of buildings and organised centres, most students will neces-
sarily be of the external variety.
19. The following persons shall be teachers of the University,
that is to say :
(d) The Professors, Assistant Professors, Readers and Lec-
turers of the University appointed as officers of the Uni


versity by the Senate, who shall be called appointed
teachers.”
(h) Such members of the teaching staffs of the Universities,
Colleges, Schools or other Educational Centres admitted by
the Senate under the preceding clause as shall have been
recognised as teachers of the University by the Senate.
They shall be called “ recognised teachers.”
(c) Persons appointed to deliver special courses of lectures,
who shall be called “temporarily recognised teachers.”
20. Boards of Studies shall be constituted in due course in the
subjects of University study as may from time to time be prescribed
by the Senate.
21. The following degrees may be granted by the University
on such terms as the Senate shall see fit to prescribe, namely :
1. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of World-Religion, or of the
Theology and Culture of one of the Faiths referred to in
Article 14.
2. Bachelor and Master of Arts and Doctor of Literature.
3. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of Laws and Comparative
Jurisprudence.
4. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of Music.
5. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of Medicine,
6. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of Surgery.
7. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of Dental Surgery.
8. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of Veterinary Medicine and
Surgery.
9. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of Science (including in the
phrase other things than pure Science).
10. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of Commerce.
11. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of Philosophy (in several
faculties).
12. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of Civics and International
Relations.
13. Bachelor, Master and Doctor of the Theory and Practice of
Teaching.
22. The Senate may also grant diplomas or certificates in such
subjects, or groups of subjects, in which it does not grant degrees, as
may appear desirable from time to time according to the needs of the
students of the different countries in which the University is function-
ing.
23. Pending the formation of the Senate, the Rector shall make all
such arrangements as may be necessary or convenient for the proper
conduct of the undertaking and affairs of the University.


Statement of Principles
The Theosophical World-University has been established to
co-ordinate existing Theosophical educational activities in various
parts of the world, and to help to make alive throughout the field of
education the great truths of evolution manifesting in the three vital
energizing forces of Will, Wisdom and ACtivity-Love. Certain basic
truths will underlie the Study of the human kingdom with which the
University is primarily concerned.
(i) That perfect justice, and therefore perfect love, rules the world.
The nature and expression of this justice as God’s Will will be
Studied as it manifests in every detail of evolution.
(ii) That there is a great evolutionary pathway leading from uncon-
scious to Self-conscious Divinity, through five great Stages in
every kingdom of nature —self-discovery, self-expression, self-
sacrifice, self-surrender, self-realization. The nature of this
pathway will be Studied as it manifests in the kingdoms of nature
and especially in the human kingdom.
(iii) That there is a great Brotherhood of Religions within an essential
World-Religion.
(iv) That there is a great Brotherhood of the nations and peoples of
the world expressing and fulfilling the essential Brotherhood of
Humanity—itself part of thegreater Brotherhood, so sadly ignored
to-day. This Greater Brotherhood includes the sub-human
kingdoms, whose membership of the same great family is too
often denied, to the grave injury of all, as well as the super-
human kingdoms peopled by those who have advanced further
on life’s great pathway than their human brethren.
(v) That all true growth, whether of individuals or of groups, consists
in achieving the release of the God within, and that such release
demands a purposeful Freedom so acting that the freedom of all
is respected and encouraged. There is no freedom which limits
the juSt rights of others. To grow truly is to perceive that the
release of the God within is a release of the inherent Divinity for
the ever-increasing service of all, till that perfect Freedom is
achieved which expresses itself in perfect Service.
Hence the Theosophical World-University stands for Service,
and for Study, therefore, to the end of ever wiser and more loving
Service.
Further particulars obtainable on application to
I. A. Hawliczek, B.Sc., St. Christopher, Broadway, Letchworth, Herts.
ST. CHRISTOPHER PRESS, BROADWAY, LETCHWORTH
The Theosophical World-University


Notes on The Theosophical World-University
The World-University does not exist to teach “ Theosophy ” in the
usual acceptance of that term; nevertheless, its education is “theo-
sophical” in the sense that it will show how the ordinary subjects of
Western academic Study are related to the spiritual life, to brotherhood,
and to service, and can be and should be interpreted and amplified
by Eastern philosophy and science.
The World-University will at all times, but particularly in its early
years, seek the co-operation of existing educational bodies as far as is
possible, making the beSt possible use of the help they can provide
in giving to Students the ordinary Store of academic knowledge.
This knowledge will then be amplified, and related to the Eastern
philosophy and teaching, and to the spiritual Standard of values.
In conferring its degrees, diplomas or certificates, the World-
University will endeavour to have regard not only to the results of
examination, but also to other methods of arriving at the fitness of a
candidate, it being recognized that there is a certain type of Student
who does not do himself justice in examinations of the ordinary kind.
A certain capacity to live brotherhood will be a necessary qualifi-
cation in candidates for degrees, and appropriate methods of testing
this capacity will be devised in due course.
The World-University will not confine its attention to the under-
graduate Stage of its Students, but will also interest itself in, and
endeavour to direct, their previous training by recognizing and
encouraging existing schools, and other educational centres, which
are providing the right kind of education, as also by promoting the
establishment and maintenance of new schools or other centres of the
same type.
Notes on The Theosophical World-University Association
The Theosophical World-University Association exists to promote
and to assist in the work of the World-University.
In part it is a propagandist organization whose duty is to make
known the World-University and its principles, and to secure as far
as it can the widespread acceptance of those principles as the basis
of ordinary education.
In part it is a co-ordinating body, providing a common ground on
which all people who have to do with education, in the widest sense
of that word, can meet for the exchange of ideas, for the fuller under-
standing of their relative positions and difficulties, and hence for the
establishing of a closer co-operation for the common cause of edu-
cational progress.
Membership of the association is open to any person who is in
sympathy with the Principles of the World-University (given overleaf).
Annual Subscription: Teachers, 5/-; Non-Teachers, £ 1-1-0. Further
particulars from I. A. Hawliczek, B.Sc., St. Christopher, Broadway,
Letchworth, Herts.




