

THE JEST OF LIFE
ARTHUR GASK


THE JEST OF LIFE


WHAT THIS STORY IS ABOUT
A story rich in humour, it tells under what
strange circumstances, cloaked in varying dis-
guises, an unassuming dentist came to preach
in Adelaide Cathedral; impersonate a high
Society lady; deputise for a distinguished
surgeon; explore, as a deputed spy the pits of
social sin and shame; and, finally, ascend
himself to affluence by a sharp turn of For-
tune’s wheel. Love, laughter and tears! A
delightful and naive exposition of the work-
ings of some human minds.
For other books by the same Author
see pages 315-6


THE
JEST OF LIFE
BY
ARTHUR CASK
HERBERT JENKINS LIMITED
3 YORK STREET ST. JAMES'S
LONDON S.W.i 111


First printed . . 1936
MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
EBENEZER BAYLIS AND SON, LTD., THE
TRINITY PRESS, WORCESTER, AND LONDON


CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
I THE SPELL OF THE ASIATIC . . 9
II THE CHANGE IN THE ARCHDEACON . 28
111 HE GOES TO THE RACES ... 44
IV THE AWAKENING OF ST. BENGEr’s . 71
V MR. TWIGGS BECOMES FRIVOLOUS . 104
VI LADY FITZ-TOOTLE’s RECEPTION . 122
VII A GREAT DOCTOR . . . • 1 37
VIII A GREATER ONE STILL . . . 160
IX “ WINKING THE NAUGHTY EYE ” . 173
X THE AFTERMATH .... 199
XI THE PIT OF SHAME .... 233
XII A COURTESAN OF THE KNIFE . . 254
XIII THE RETURN OF THE ASIATIC . . 264
XIV THE RESURRECTION OF HENRY MUFFINS 278
XV “ GINX’s BABY ” . . . . 298
XVI MORE BABIES . . . • 3 11


All the characters m this book are purely
imaginary and have no relation what-
soever to any living persons.


THE JEST OF LIFE






THE JEST OF LIFE
CHAPTER I
THE SPELL OF THE ASIATIC
ONE fine sunny morning Mr. Montague Twiggs,
dental surgeon of Adelaide, South Australia,
walked slowly up the steps of his professional
chambers on North Terrace, carrying a professional-
looking bag that contained a sporting paper, two
apples and a packet of neatly-cut cheese sandwiches.
Ordinarily a happy, jovial-looking man, his face just
now was clouded over with a dark, despondent frown.
He proceeded into his surgery, and the white-
gowned young woman who was dusting over the dental
chair at once exclaimed brightly: “Good morning, sir.”
Mr. Twiggs forced his face into a sort of smile.
“ Good morning, nurse,” he replied. “ Anyone wait-
ing?
“ No, sir.”
“ Any letters? ”
“Yes, sir, four and a small packet.”
Mr. Twiggs’ face brightened as he started to thumb
over the letters, but then at once it fell as quickly again,
“No cheques! ”he muttered. “ Now why the deuce
don’t they cash up? ”


He took off his coat and hat. “ Oh! have you made
any appointments, Hypatia?” he asked.
“ Yes, sir, one for half past ten,” the nurse replied.
“ A new patient who said he wanted a set of teeth! ”
“ Good! What sort of person was he? ”
“ Quite well-dressed, sir, and with a big gold chain.
He said he kept the ‘ Wattle Tree Hotel,’ in Hindley
Street.”
“ Splendid! Hypatia, a publican! Publicans and
sinners are the ones to attend! They always pay hard
cash, and run no long-winded bills.”
The telephone rang sharply and the nurse went out,
returning, however, in a few moments.
“ A gentleman wants to know if he can have an ex-
traction under gas this morning,” she announced.
“ He says he’s got no nerve.”
The dentist was busy with his letters. “Tell him
I’ve got the nerve, if he’s got the money,” he replied,
without looking up. “Yes, he can come at eleven.”
“ He says he’s heard a lot to your credit,” the nurse
added.
“Credit! ” ejaculated Mr. Twiggs turning angrily.
“ Great Scott! it’s everlasting credit with the people
here.” He nodded significantly. “ And you just men-
tion to him, please, that the fee will be a guinea, and
with anaesthetic work it is customary for it to be paid
at the time.”
“ Very good, sir,” replied the nurse, and she swept
softly from the room.
The dentist returned to his letters and with their


perusal his despondency deepened. He opened the
little packet and the broken parts of a plate of artificial
teeth fell out upon the desk. A letter accompanied
them in the box.
“ Sir,” he read, “ when you made me my plate, you
told me most distinctly that it would last me for twenty
years, and yet it has actually broken in just over one.
I was only eating a piece of bread and butter, too, at
the time. I must say lam very disappointed, for my
friend, Mrs. Gumby, has had her set for fifteen years
and they are as good as the day when Mr. Spanker put
them in. I understand Mr. Spanker is still practising
and is most moderate in his charges. What do you
intend to do? ”
Mr. Twiggs closed his own teeth with a snap, and
then with a gesture of contempt snatched up a pen and
a sheet of his professional notepaper and commenced
to write rapidly.
“ Madam,” he wrote, “ it was an upper set of teeth
that I had the privilege of making for you in the
thonth of June last year, and it is a broken lower plate
that you now forward to me. Its quality and lasting
properties, therefore, are no concern of mine. Breaking
it, however, as you inform me you did when consum-
Uig only a piece of bread and butter, I would suggest
that the butter may perhaps have been a trifle strong!
“ With compliments, yours faithfully,
“ Montague Twiggs.


“ P.S.—By-the-bye, my secretary has just reminded
me that the fee for the upper denture has not as yet
been paid. Doubtless, it has escaped your notice. So
may I therefore expect a cheque by return of post? ”
Mr. Twiggs read the letter through and then for the
first time that morning, really smiled.
“ A wicked world! ”he murmured. “ The usual
try-on! ”
There was a knock upon the door and the nurse
entered again. “ A lady on the phone, sir. She wants
to know what your charge is for a set of teeth.”
The dentist sighed heavily. “ I used to think it was
twenty guineas, Hypatia, but I believe now that I do
them for nothing. Tell her, however, to come and see
me and I’ll discuss it with her then.”
Alone once more, Mr. Twiggs rose up from his desk
and stood looking gloomily out of the window.
“ Rootity-toot,” he hummed abstractedly to him-
self—
" Rootity-toot, she plays the flute.
In a very charming manner ”
“ A dog’s life, a dentist’s,”' he soliloquized, “ and
so much of the time it is working all for nothing! A
poor thing, at any rate, to be a professional man, and
don’t I wish I’d got a shop or something, or was even
keeping a public-house, instead! Then I’d be able to
enjoy life a bit and have a day off when I wanted to,
and go out with the kids.”


A boy went by outside yelling shrilly: “ Race-cards,
race-cards for Morphettville.”
Mr. Twiggs sighed deeply. “ I wish I dared go,”
he muttered, “ for I’m sure Whiskers will win to-day.
He’ll streak away like blue blazes in the straight and
win by half a street. Blotter will be riding him, and
he’ll get the brute all out.” He fingered a little packet
of notes in his vest pocket, and then shook his head.
“ No, I’ll not risk it. There’s that wretched rent due
on Wednesday and I must not be late again. I wonder
now—hullo! hullo! Ido believe that chap’s coming
in. He’s stroking his face in a suspicious manner.”
There was a few seconds pause and then came a ring
at the bell.
“ Ah! ” muttered the dentist, “ I thought I was
right, but it’ll be another God-reward-you job, prob-
ably, for he doesn’t look up to much.”
“ Gentleman to see you, sir,” announced the nurse,
coming briskly into the surgery.
“ Show him in,” said Mr. Twiggs, “ and, if anyone
else comes, say I shan’t be long.”
The stranger was a small and elderly-looking man,
dark and swarthy, with long hair and black, piercing
eyes. He was shabbily dressed and the collar of his
coat was buttoned up to his chin.
“ Well, what can I do for you, now? ” asked the
dentist in the act of drying his hands.
The stranger salaamed deeply. “ I want a tooth out,
please,” he replied. “ I have a swelling under my jaw.”
His voice was low and gentle and he spoke in per


feet English, although it was plain to see he was a
foreigner. He had the look, too, of long years under
burning suns, and he held himself like one whose body
was always bowed.
“ I don’t want chloroform,” he added, “ and you
need put nothing on my gum, for I don’t feel pain
when I have willed my thoughts away.” He spoke
serenely. “To the initiated the body is but the ser-
vant of the mind.”
“ Ah! ” murmured Mr. Twiggs, “ a crank, of
course! I thought he looked strange.” He examined
the tooth and then said aloud; “ But it’s a bad one
and I’d better give you a little cocaine.”
The stranger, however, shook his head. “It will
not be necessary,” he said, “for I shall be far away
when you are taking it out.”
The dentist picked up his hypodermic syringe.
“ Now don’t be foolish,” he said persuasively. “ It’s
a bad tooth, I say, and I shall have to hurt you quite a
good bit.”
“ But you can’t hurt me,” said the stranger smil-
ingly, “ for I shall be among the stars when you begin.”
His voice took on a note of authority. “ I know what
I am saying, for I am a Master in my own land.”
Mr. Twiggs hesitated for a moment and then turn-
ing round proceeded to fill a tumbler with hot water.
“ I shall not want that either,” said the stranger,
shaking his head again, “ I shall not bleed, for I have
willed it so.”
“ Good Lord ! ” ejaculated the dentist. He shrugged


his shoulders. “ Well, just as you like, have it so.”
He picked up a pair of forceps and the stranger leant
back and closed his eyes. Mr. Twiggs bent over —
there was a moment of intense silence—then came a
deep indrawn breath and with a click the tooth fell
into the basin by the side of the chair.
“Good man!” said Mr. Twiggs, “you didn’t
make a sound! ”
And the stranger continued to make no sound. He
lay back quiet and still, but his eyes were open now
and he stared dreamily before him.
Then just when Mr. Twiggs was beginning to get
uneasy, the man stirred and a moment later was smil-
ing blandly as before.
“ No, I never felt anything,”' he said, “ and in those
few seconds I went a far journey and learnt a lot about
you.”
Mr. Twiggs smiled dryly. “ Well, there wasn’t
much to learn, anyhow. My life’s too darned monoton-
ous to have any secrets and I’m just a public slave.”
“ But you are a worker in the vineyard,” said the
stranger sofdy. “ You minister at the altar of human
pain! ”
“ Worker in the vineyard! ” echoed the dentist
scornfully. “ Yes, I work there right enough, but
precious few of the grapes come my way any time.”
He took a cachou from his pocket and stared stonily
at the stranger. “Do you know, my friend,” he con-
tinued, warming up, “ that for half the work I do here
1 don’t get paid a penny? Look at those books there.”


He pointed disgustedly to a row of ledgers upon a
shelf. “ Those represent my bad debts, sir—the work
I’ve done and shall never be paid for.” He shook his
head gloomily. “ No, there’s no collection in this
tabernacle here and I’m just the sacrifice upon that
altar you refer to.”
“You labour for no reward then? ” queried the
stranger, with his eyes opened very wide.
“ Have to,” replied the dentist sadly. “ Threaten-
ing letters don’t frighten them and I lose money if I
summons —every time.”
“ Then you are a good man,” said the stranger after a
pause, “ and you will be one of the elect, in due time.”
“Eh?” exclaimed the dentist, looking rather
puzzled, “ what does that mean? ”
“ In the next world you will reap great harvests.
You will be one of the lords of the skies. I, Bizrah,
say it, who have great powers lent me from on high.”
The dentist smiled bitterly. “ That’s all very well,
sir, and I’m sure it’s very kind of you to say so. It’s
certainly quite nice to know that things are going to
be O.K. with me at some future time, but what about
just now ? That’s what troubles me.” His voice rose em-
phatically. “ What about this week, sir, next week and
the week after ? What about this world here ? On Wed-
nesday they will be coming for the rent and it’ll be ‘ out
you go ’if I’ve not got the needful ready. Understand ? ”
The stranger regarded him searchingly. “ Then
you have troubles,” he said very gravely, “ and the
yoke of this world galls upon your neck? ”


“ Too right it does,” replied Mr. Twiggs feelingly,
“ and it’s a precious tight fit sometimes, too.”
The stranger rose up from the chair. “ Then I must
remedy it,” he said very gently. “ I must give you
ease,” and he put his hand into his pocket.
“ Half a guinea, please,” said Mr. Twiggs promptly.
But the man was standing in a sort of daze, and he
ignored, if indeed he heard, the dentist’s request.
“ Hush! ”he said softly. “ Make no sound, for I would
commune with those who light the stars,” and he closed
his eyes, with his hand, however, still in his pocket.
Mr. Twiggs looked furtively in the direction of the
door, and then he smiled when he remembered how
slight and frail the stranger was.
“ Quite dotty,” he murmured, “but still I do hope he’ll
cash up. It’ll be useful, for I’ve got no small change.”
The stranger opened his eyes. “It is well,” he said
solemnly, “ for word has been given me that you are
to have peace and rest.”
“ Oh! ” said Mr. Twiggs rather uneasily, “ and
what’s the ticket now? ”
“Hearken, O Dentist,” said the stranger impres-
sively. “ Hearken, O Montague Mackerel Twiggs! ”
Mr. Twiggs started. How on earth did the fellow
know one of his names was Mackerel? He had never
used the name, and it was not on his professional
plate. It had certainly, however, been given him in
baptism, after a long defunct brother of his mother,
but he had dropped it years and years ago and his most
intimate friends, even, had no knowledge that it was his.
a


“ Montague Mackerel Twiggs,” went on the
stranger in grave and solemn tones, “ you are wearied
on the road of life. Your feet chafe and bleed and
thorns pierce to your flesh. The burden you bear is
heavy, and it is meet therefore that for a time you
should have rest. Behold! I give you this.”
At last the hand came out of the pocket, but instead
of the crisp note and shining sixpence that Mr. Twiggs
had hoped for, it produced only a small glass phial.
“ Here, take this and break it when you are alone.
No, be not afraid,” for the dentist had suddenly
stepped back. “It contains only three drops of a most
beautiful perfume, distilled from the flowers in the
garden of Nirvana, and its wonder is—that for a time
it will set free your spirit from your body. It will give
you change and rest.” The stranger drew himself up
with dignity. “Itis a gift to you because of the unre-
quited work that you have done for human kind.”
His voice became very slow and stern. “ Montague
Mackerel Twiggs, when you have broken this phial
and inhaled its vapour, the spirit of you will be
loosened from the body and for forty days and two it
will be freed to wander and to find a home in the
bodies of some other human beings.”
Mr. Twiggs edged himself stealthily round to the
other side of the chair and glanced once again towards
the door.
“ Yes, quite dotty,” was his muttered remark, “ but
if I humour him, perhaps he’ll pay up now and go.”
“ Very much obliged, sir,” he exclaimed heartily,


“ then I shan’t be a dentist any more? ” He pretended
to appear anxious. “ If so, who’ll look after the practice,
pray? Remember, I’ve got a wife and three children
to support and there are always little bills to pay.”
“ The same powers,” replied the stranger sofdy,
“ that liberate you from the daily toil will see to it that
those dear to you suffer no harm.” His face lit up admir-
ingly. “ But it grieves you that you leave, even for a
short time, your work of service to mankind ? ” he asked.
“ It will be a bit awkward, certainly,” remarked Mr.
Twiggs hesitatingly. “ There’s no knowing, for in-
stance, what my assistant will do, if I go away.”
“ Fear not,” said the stranger confidently, “ all will
be well, and even in your wanderings the good work
will be going on. The whole time you will be purify-
ing the minds of those into whose bodies you will
choose to enter.”
“ Goodness gracious! ” ejaculated Mr. Twiggs, not
knowing exactly what to say, “ will that really be so? ”
“ Yea, and for such time as your spirit is inhabiting
their bodies, you will each hour hold their minds in
sway. You will guide them; their thoughts will be
your thoughts when you so desire it, and then their
very speech and actions will be yours. You will teach
them the glory of sacrifice and the sweetness of work-
ing for others without reward.”
“ Great Jupiter! ” groaned Mr. Twiggs in real
earnest this time. “I’ve certainly had enough experi-
ence in that department and no one should be a better
teacher there.”


The stranger reverently placed the little phial upon
the table and then picked up his hat. “ But remem-
ber,” he added solemnly, as if in afterthought, “ the
boon that has been granted to you will last only forty
days and two. During that period your spirit shall
wander where you will, but, once you have chosen its
habitation, it shall pass only from that being to some
other—by the touching of your hand.”
He walked slowly in the direction of the door.
“ Gosh! ” muttered the dentist, “ he’s not going to
pay after all! ”
But Mr. Twiggs was mistaken there, for as the
stranger was passing the fire-place he put his hand in
his pocket —the trouser pocket this time—and then
came the unmistakable clink of a coin upon the man-
tel-shelf.
“ A small tribute, sir,” he said politely, “ to your
courtesy and skill,” and with a low bow he opened the
door and was gone.
Mr. Twiggs tip-toed stealthily across to the mantel-
shelf and then exclaimed delightedly:
“ A yellow-boy! A real sovereign of gold! Now
who would have thought it?
The nurse came in to clear up.
“ Hypatia,” cried the dentist excitedly, “ my luck’s
going to turn, for a cash transaction has eventuated at
last! ” He picked up the sovereign and weighed it in
his hand. “ The very least I can do now is to take a
ticket in Tatt’s for the sweep on the Melbourne Cup.”
He hesitated, but only for a moment. “ Put on your


hat now and go straight round to Flack’s, the tobac-
conist—you know where his shop is—and order me a
ticket at once. He’s not supposed to deal in them, but
mention my name and it’ll be quite all right.”
“What is this ticket you want me to get, sir? ”
asked the nurse, looking very puzzled.
Mr. Twiggs raised his eyebrows in surprise. “ Oh!
innocence! ”he exclaimed incredulously. “ I had no
idea that such could exist in this guilty world.” He
beamed upon her. “ Tatt’s, Hypatia, is a lottery con-
ducted in the little adjoining island of Tasmania. The
prizes run from five pounds to twenty thousand and
the cost of this particular ticket for the Melbourne Cup
will be exactly one pound. You understand now? ”
“ Yes, sir,” smiled the nurse, “ and I’ll go at once.”
The door closed behind her. Mr. Twiggs thought
with amusement of the little phial, and taking it up
gingerly he carried it over to the light. It was smaller
than his little finger and the glass was of a dark amber
colour. He smiled as he regarded it, and his thoughts
harked back to its donor.
“ Rum old cove! ”he remarked. “ I wonder from
what part of the world he comes. I ought certainly to
have asked. Not much to look at, but some authority
with him and a decided splash of the sacerdotal in his
tones. Now what’s in this phial? Just some ordinary
kind of scent, I suppose! I’ll take it home to the wife,
anyhow.” He grinned. “ I’ll be generous and she
shall have the sniff.”
It was not destined, however, that the absent Mrs.


Twiggs should ever even see the phial, let alone have
what her scoffing husband called ‘ the sniff,’ for when
the latter was in the act of replacing the fragile tube
upon the table, he slipped suddenly upon the linoleum
and—hey presto! —it fell on to the floor, and lay
broken by the side of the dental chair.
“Oh! confound it!” ejaculated Mr. Twiggs in
great annoyance. “ Now I’ve broken the beastly thing,
and it’ll stain the carpet, too.”'
He snatched a napkin from a cupboard, and bend-
ing down began to rub vigorously at the small offend-
ing stain.
“ Hullo! ” he exclaimed suddenly, and he remem-
bered afterwards that he had stopped almost at the
very first rub. “ What a funny smell! But it’s not at
all bad, though! ”
He bent his face quite low down until his nose was
almost touching the floor. He sniffed hard several
times and then—he drew in a long breath.
“My word! ” he ejaculated faintly, “ but how
giddy I feel! I must lie down.”
He tottered across the room and threw himself
down at full length upon the sofa. A fearful drum-
ming noise came into his ears, and a spark of dreadful
brightness flashed before his eyes. Something seemed to
tear horribly inside him and then came a sound as of a
rusty sword being drawn forcibly from its scabbard. He
felt he was being stifled and he wanted to shriek out.
Suddenly, however, all discomfort left him, and a
beautiful feeling of ease began to prevail through all


his limbs. He felt light and buoyant, and there was a
strange abandon in his smallest movement. He rubbed
his eyes and drew in deep draughts of air. He stood
up and then turning round —found that he was look-
ing down upon himself recumbent upon the sofa!
* * *
It was several minutes before Mr. Twiggs regained
his composure, but then somehow he did not feel very
extraordinarily surprised.
“ Gosh! ” was his first remark, “so the foreign
Johnny was right after all, and there’s to be six weeks’
holiday now for M. M. Twiggs, Esq., from his body
and his clothes.”
He strolled across the room and looked into the
glass; or, rather, he thought he looked into the glass,
for he could see nothing there.
“ But, of course, I am invisible now,” he said
proudly. My blooming spirit’s not on show.” He
looked back to his body on the sofa. “So that’s me, is
it? ”he remarked thoughtfully. “ Well, I had no
idea I was getting so bald, but the wife has certainly
put a good crease in those old trousers of mine.”
Then somewhere in the building he heard the sound
of people talking.
“ Ah, but I must hurry,” he ejaculated fearfully.
“ The two of us must not be found here at once.
Hypatia may be back any moment now, and then, of
course, there’ll be no end of a how-do-you-do.”
He darted quickly into the hall and then for a


moment stood hesitatingly wondering if in his spirit
condition, it would be possible for him to open the
hall-door.
The matter was, however, solved suddenly of its
own accord, for the door clicked open and a man in
over-alls entered clumsily. He was carrying a ladder
and a pail. Obviously in a great hurry, he bustled bois-
terously forward before Mr. Twiggs had time to step
aside, and the protruding end of the ladder struck the
dentist squarely in the chest.
Or rather—it did not strike him, for it passed right
through him, likewise the man himself and likewise
half the pail.
“ Gee-whiz! ” remarked Mr. Twiggs airily, “ that’s
one advantage of being a spirit anyhow, “ and with no
more ado he hopped down the steps and was out on to
the terrace.
“ Now wait a moment,” he said, “ and let me think.
Now why,” he asked frowningly, ** didn’t I get
straight away taken into the body of that workman
chap? Goodness knows, we were close enough, for
the beggar actually passed right through me! ”
He thought for a moment. “ Ah! I have it! ”he
exclaimed. “ I didn’t will it; it was not my wish.”
He scoffed contemptuously. “ Exactly —and quite
right too. No workmen-fellows for me to spend a holi-
day in. I’m out for something better. I can choose
where I will, and I want a bit more life.”
He glided invisibly along the terrace and took up a
position by one of the public seats.


“ Oh! what a glorious day! ”he exclaimed with de-
light, “ and I am free to go anywhere —free as air. So,
I’ll be off to the races now for sure, directly, of course,
I’ve found someone appropriate to take me there.”
He frowned. “Ah! someone appropriate, that’s the
thing. I must have somebody respectable and nice.
Now let me see,” he went on, “ what did that fellow
say ? ‘ When you so desire it, their thoughts shall be
your thoughts, and their very speech and actions shall
be yours.’ ” He nodded. “ Yes, when Iso desire it!
That’s it. Then I can sail in and do nothing if I wish,
or I can take command at once and boss the whole
show. Just as little or as much interference as I please.
Well, I’ll probably go easy at first anyhow, until I
begin to feel my way a bit.”
He believed that he shook his head. “ But I must
do nothing rash and must be very careful whom
I choose. Somebody important, of course, and some-
one, too, who lives well.” He threw out an imaginary
chest. “ Dominion and power will be mine, but still
•—still there is no reason for the creature comforts of
life to be neglected.” He affectionately patted an
imaginary stomach. “ Why, I could do with a good
lunch straightaway, I believe. Ah! here’s Sir Marcus.
Now what of him?
A short fat man came waddling by. He was red in
the face and breathing heavily. Two men respectfully
passed the time of day to him, and a pretty woman
bowed and gave him a sweet smile. To the two men
the fat man returned a curt nod, but to the pretty


woman he lifted his hat with a grand flourish, and was
obviously inclined to stop, had she not seemingly been
in a great hurry and passed on.
“ Oh, you wicked old sinner, Sir Marcus,” com-
mented Mr. Twiggs. “ I don’t wonder the pretty one
gave you the quick go-by. In your public achieve-
ments you may be an excellent advertisement for the
city, but, in private life your reputation’s not too good.
Now is it, old boy? ”
He looked thoughtfully after the retreating figure.
“ I’m half—l’m half inclined, though, to giye you a
trial. No, no, I won’t. You’re a bit too cardiac for my
liking, and besides, I really ought to have someone
more delectable, at any rate for a start. But there’s
Bunions, there; now what about him? Bunions, one
of the crack doctors of South Australia! No, no, he’s
too old for me and, again, I feel my nerves want a
complete rest from the worries of a practice, and all
the relief-of-pain stunt. I want something restful, at
any rate to begin with. Hullo! hullo! here’s Poodlum,
the banker. Now, he’s much more my mark. He’s
respectable and rich and I’ll bet anything he keeps
a good table. I’ve often wanted, too, to know how
they run things in that rotten old bank of his. Yes,
Poodlum shall be my first home and then I’ll go
round at once and put myself down for a jolly
good overdraft. So here goes for the quick
creep-in.”
Mr. Twiggs glided stealthily forward to intercept
the unsuspicious individual whom he had designated


as Poodlum, but when close near him a pedestrian
farther away suddenly caught his eye.
“Ye gods! ” he exclaimed excitedly, “ but here’s
someone better still! The archdeacon! the great
Botdeworthy himself! Oh! what a chance.”
A most important-looking person was approaching,
a man dressed in severe and immaculate clerical attire.
He had a proud, handsome face and a commanding
eye, and tall and of a good figure, he carried himself
erectly, taking each step forward exactly as if he were
marching at the head of some very important pro-
cession.
“ Oh! Bottleworthy, Botdeworthy,” went on Mr.
Twiggs reproachfully, “ what a lot you think of your-
self and the whackings you’ve given me at St.
Benger’s! ” His eyes gleamed. “ But now to get back
a bit of my own.” He thought quickly. “ Again,
what did that foreign chap say? Ah! I have it. Their
thoughts shall be your thoughts and when you so de-
sire it their very speech and actions shall be yours!
Oh! great Jehoshaphat! ”
He glided forward to meet the newcomer; there was
a rusde in the air, a sharp click somewhere, and then
for the nonce the spirit of Montague Mackerel Twiggs
was housed in the ample and prepossessing body of
Augustine Botdeworthy, Archdeacon of St. Jehu’s
Cathedral and Head Master of the great St. Benger’s
College.


CHAPTER II
THE CHANGE IN THE ARCHDEACON
Archdeacon bottleworthy was a
very well-known person in Adelaide, the beauti-
ful city of the plains, and there were few citi-
zens there who were unaware who he was when they
encountered him in any public place.
In the early fifties, a proud cleric of cold
imperious mien, he was reserved in disposition
and most distant towards those not in his own social
circle.
Undue humility certainly never troubled him and
believing always to the point of an obsession that an
admiring Providence had destined him for great things,
he was sure that his high advancement in the Church
was only the matter of a very short time.
For twenty years Head Master of St. Benger’s Col-
lege, one of the great schools of South Australia, and
eleven, as Archdeacon of the Cathedral, he was quite
aware that he loomed large in the public eye and he
saw to it, accordingly, that all his movements should
be well chronicled in the City Press.
By no possibility could it be said that the public
were ever, even for one day, kept ill-informed as to
exactly what he or his family were doing.


“ Archdeacon Botdeworthy,” they read, “ left yes-
terday by the Melbourne Express —Archdeacon Bottle-
worthy returned from Melbourne this morning—
Archdeacon, Mrs. and Miss Botdeworthy are spending
a few days at Victor Harbour —Archdeacon Bottle-
worthy will preach on Sunday at St. Stephen’s—Arch-
deacon Botdeworthy is confined to his room with a bad
cold,” etc., etc.
At St. Benger’s, with a litde less reserve, he would
have been an even greater success, for he was a fine
organizer, and had all the routine of school life well
at his fingers’’ ends. By the masters and the boys alike
he was feared and respected, but not loved.
Such then was the man whom Fate had ordained
should first receive the wandering spirit of Mr. Mon-
tague Mackerel Twiggs.
* # *
The archdeacon had been walking majestically
along. The day, being a Saturday, was a holiday, but
for all that, he told himself he was ‘on duty.’ He was
always ‘ on duty,’ it was his habit to say, and at that
moment he was casting around a cold and severe eye
to determine if any of his scholars should be comporting
themselves in a manner that he would consider detri-
mental to the interests and reputation of the college.
He walked up North Terrace and then at once his
eyebrows contracted into a frown. Pilcher secundus
was eating an apple in the street! Most disgusting!
He must be reproved for it. Pilcher always did look


a greedy youth, and it should be brought sharply home
to him on Monday that the consumption of fruit upon
the public highway was not in accordance with the
traditions of St. Benger’s.
Then Riddle, the junior mathematical master, next
caught his eye. He never had liked Riddle much, he
murmured, and the fellow was now actually reading
a sporting paper whilst waiting at the corner for a
tram! The archdeacon knew it was a sporting paper
at a glance, for it was highly pink in colour and upon
the exposed front page there were pictures of horses
galloping at great speed. Good! then Riddle should
be interviewed on Monday and advised strongly as to
the desirability of keeping his sporting proclivities
within the confines of his own home.
But the archdeacon’s annoyance was not over yet,
for suddenly he visualized Holt, the school butler, in
the act of buying a race-card from a yelling boy.
“ So, so,” he hissed angrily, “ and that’s what he’s
up to, is it? That’s the flower-show for which he
asked for early leave to go to this afternoon I ”
He frowned contemptuously and then in majesty
walked on. He nodded curtly to Wangleton, the Bap-
tist Minister of North Unley, and then catching sight
of Poodlum, the banker, in front of him, slackened
his pace so that he should not have to say ‘ Good
morning.’ He despised Poodlum because, although
a wealthy man now, the latter had had no university
education and his parents had been of poor social status.
Presently he arrived opposite the Public Library and


then, just when he was considering whether or not he
should cross to the other side of the terrace —Poodlum
really was walking so slowly—he suddenly felt a
twinge.
He did not know exacdy what it was, or indeed in
what part of his august body he had actually felt it,
but it starded him considerably and made him catch
his breath.
Something had happened he realized; something
had given way, and then to his great astonishment he
burst into a hearty laugh.
It was a loud laugh, an exultant laugh, the laugh of
a man who was enjoying a good joke. Two passing
pedestrians looked up inquiringly; a litde boy in front
began to run, and Poodlum, the banker, turned half
round to see what was happening.
“ Rootity-toot,” hummed the archdeacon gaily to
himself—
" Rootity-toot she plays the flute
In a very charming manner,
Pinkjtty-pong she patters along,
On the \eys of the grand planner.”
He waved his hand smilingly to Poodlum and the
latter, smiling back, waited for him to come on.
“ Good morning, Poodlum,” cried the archdeacon
hilariously and in a most friendly manner, “ and pray
how are all the litde Poodles to-day? ”
The banker’s jaw dropped. Surely he could not
have caught the words aright!


“ All wagging their little tails, eh? ” went on the
archdeacon gaily, “ and being good boys and girls and
not running after motor-cars or chasing the cats.”
A frown, a reluctant frown, came into the banker’s
face. That Archdeacon Botdeworthy was a most im-
portant person he was quite aware, but it was clear the
man was now insulting him and he felt most in-
dignant.
“ I don’t quite follow you,” he said very coldly.
The archdeacon beamed good nature. “ Only a
little joke,” he smiled apologetically. “ The sun and
the holiday really are too stimulating for an old man.”
He put his arm into that of the banker and, after a
moment’s hesitation on the part of the latter, the two
walked on.
“ Now, where are you off to? ” inquired the arch-
deacon. “To that musty old bank of yours, I sup-
pose.”
The banker nodded without replying. It still
rankled in him that the archdeacon had punned so dis-
respectfully upon his name and referred to his children
as ‘ poodles.’
Two young fellows, walking quickly, overtook
them.
They were dressed sportingly, in light check suits,
with light ties to match. They wore bowler hats and
they carried race-glasses, slung across their shoulders.
They were laughing and talking animatedly together
but, catching sight of the archdeacon, their faces
sobered instantly and they both got rather red.


The archdeacon put up his hand for them to stop.
“ Ha! ”he exclaimed heartily. “ Bulger primus,
and Perkins secundus.” He turned all smiles to the
banker. “ Both old St. Benger’s boys, Poodlum, and
very good boys, too, except perhaps for being a trifle
wild.” He shook his finger playfully at the taller of
the two. “ Now tell me, Bulger,” he asked, “ how
many times did I whack you whilst you were at St.
Benger’s? Now how many times, pray? ”
“ Couldn’t say, sir,” replied the young fellow looking
very innocent, “ but I’m sure it was more than once.”
“ More than once,” ejaculated the archdeacon, ele-
vating his eyebrows in mock surprise. “ Why, you
young rascal, it was at least fifty times and the same
with Perkins here, too. But where are you off to so
hurriedly now? There’s plenty of time, if it’s to the
flower-show you are going.”
“ No, sir, we’re going to the races at Morphettville,”
replied young Bulger stoutly, yet getting redder in the
face than ever. “ There are some crack horses from
Victoria running against ours in the Cup to-day.”
“ Ah! so I understand! ” commented the arch-
deacon thoughtfully. “ But the Victorians won’t win,
anyhow,” he added, “ for we shall beat them, and
Whiskers will do the trick at the home bend. He will
streak away like blue blazes—er—er ” —he seemed to
wince suddenly, but steadied himself and went on—
“ he’ll—he’ll accelerate his pace considerably at the turn
and will ultimately achieve success by many lengths.
He will pay a good dividend, too, I should say.”
3


For a few seconds, then, an intense silence ensued.
The faces of the archdeacon’s hearers were pictures of
surprise, and both Bulger primus and Perkins secundus
stood literally open-mouthed. The contempt that the
Head Master of St. Benger’s had for racing was so well
known and indeed it was his boast that he did not
know the name of even one race-horse in the Common-
wealth. He was dead against all forms of betting, too.
Poodlum was the first to recover. He was still
annoyed about the punning and inclined to be spiteful,
in consequence.
“ Dear me! Archdeacon Botdeworthy,” he re-
marked dryly, “I’m sure I had no idea you were so
well posted in racing matters. Why, perhaps you are
even intending to go to Morphettville yourself?
The archdeacon looked sternly at his interrogator.
His face had dropped to cold, proud lines again and all
traces of the jovial humour of the few moments back
had passed.
“ And why not? ”he asked with dignity. “ Why
should I not, if I want to? ” The ghost of a smile
flickered into his eyes. “ I should meet, lam sure, not
a few of the fathers and mothers of my boys.”
“ You would, sir,” said Bulger primus heartily,
“ and I’m sure you’d enjoy yourself if you came. It
will be a great afternoon’s sport and besides ” —the
young fellow grinned rather impudently here—“ you
could keep us all in order whilst you were there. But
good-bye, sir, we must be going now,” and touching
their hats respectfully, the two young fellows moved off.


“ Good-bye, Poodlum, too,” said the archdeacon
carelessly. “ I expect our roads part here. lam going
to the club,” and with a wave of his hand the great
man resumed his walk and turned up into King
William Street.
The archdeacon’s club, one of the best in the city,
was the great Boodle Club in Bunkum Square, and
considered by its members to be aristocratic and exclu-
sive to a degree. In a vulgar world, it was a refined
oasis for the great ones of the earth and, as far as new
membership was concerned, its rules and regulations
were of so hard, so stringent and of so inflexible a
nature, that no one except those of extreme importance
could ever hope to enter in.
It was true of some of its members that their origins
were obscure, and of others that their appearance and
intelligence hardly suggested the incidence of gentle
birth, but still—still—they were undoubtedly pos-
sessed of qualities that uplifted them far above their
fellows. They were giants in their own way, for—
they were great masters of £. s. d.
Yes, pounds, shillings and pence were most highly
esteemed in this holy of holies, and to members of the
club, generally, their possession in no wise detracted
from the worthiness of a candidate, when at election
time he approached its sacred doors.
But the archdeacon was a member by virtue of his
position in the Church, and he saw to it, accordingly,
that he preserved his dignity as a unit of the profes-
sional classes. He never mingled too freely with the


other members of the club, and was never too familiar
with those whose merits had been appraised upon a
strictly cash basis.
Arriving then at the club upon this particular morn-
ing, he walked slowly into the lounge, and, with a dis-
tant nod to those whom he encountered, ensconced
himself comfortably in a large armchair, and picking
up a magazine proceeded unconcernedly to read.
For quite a long time he remained absorbed in his
periodical, and then in spite of his abstraction he was
forced with some reluctance to take interest in the
conversation that was going on around him.
An election of new members, it appeared, was
shortly coining on and the desirability, or otherwise,
of a certain candidate was being energetically dis-
cussed. From the remarks passing it was evident there
was nothing at all detrimental about the individual in
a general way, for he was well-connected, a gentleman,
and well-known in the insurance world, but doubt was
being covertly expressed as to his importance in a
strictly financial sense.
“ But he’s not a bad sort,” drawled a tall man with
a monocle, “ and he plays quite a good game of golf.”
“ He tipped me the winner of the Hurdle’s last
week,” chirruped a short, stout individual who was
absorbing cocktails like a sponge, “ and I don’t forget
that it paid nearly seven to one.”
“ He was pretty good too during the war, wasn’t
he? ” contributed a third speaker. “ I remember he
worked hard for the Soldiers’ Fund.”


“ That’s all very well,” exclaimed a fussy little per-
son with some irritation, “ but look at the house he
lives in. Why, it’s hardly larger than a good-sized
cottage! ”
“ Dreadful, dreadful! ” groaned the cocktail man,
“ but hasn’t anyone been sent to take an exact measure-
ment of the rooms? ”
“ Oh, you needn’t try to be funny,” replied the fussy
person warmly. “ Think of the good name we’ve got
here. We must all try to keep up the reputation of
the club.”
The archdeacon put down his magazine. He
thought, strangely, that it was his duty to make some
comment.
“ And do I understand,” he asked, in his quiet and
aristocratic tone, “ that there is some doubt as to the
desirability of this gentleman as a member, simply be-
cause he lives in a house of somewhat smaller dimen-
sions than those we inhabit ourselves? ”
An instant hush came over the room, and for a few
moments not a sound could be heard. It was most un-
usual for the archdeacon at any time to take part in
the general conversation of the club, and now that he
was so doing, everyone was interested to learn the
reason why.
“ Well, it’s not exactly that,”’ stammered the fussy
nian, looking rather embarrassed, “ but—er—er, you
see we can’t be too careful and must all pull together
to keep this club select. We’ve got our reputation to
keep up, you know.”


“ Pooh! pooh! ” exclaimed the archdeacon scorn-
fully, “ our reputation is quite an imaginary one, for
really, we are many of us nonentities here. Just the
sons or grandsons of men who made money in very
humble occupations and handed it down when they
died.” He shrugged his shoulders. “ Worthy men,
undoubtedly, but butchers, drovers, farm-hands and
people who kept little shops or inns.”
There was a gasp of astonishment from the fussy
man, and the hush deepened in the room. The arch-
deacon was the cynosure of all eyes.
Could members believe their ears? What—the
great Boodle referred to as a club of nonentities and
their early and long-forgotten histories dragged ob-
scenely into the light! It was unthinkable, and from
the archdeacon of all people, too!
The archdeacon smiled. He seemed to be enjoying
the sensation he was creating. “ Not that all of us in
callings or professions either, have great cause to
boast,” he went on, “ for very few of us, indeed, are
the really important people that we imagine ourselves
to be.”'
For quite a long moment no one took up the chal-
lenge, and then Professor Sinker from an armchair by
the window, broke the silence.
“ Really, Archdeacon,” he remarked reprovingly,
“ you’re a little bit hard on us, aren’t you? ”
The archdeacon looked over towards the speaker.
“ Not at all, Professor,” he replied calmly. “ It’s
quite a mild statement that I made. We are just a very


ordinary lot of people here and apart from our medi-
ocrity I may add, too, that we are not all of us —even
honest.”
The fat was in the fire right enough this time, and,
in spite of all the awe usually accorded to the arch-
deacon, he was now regarded with scowling faces and
black brows. This really was beyond a joke!
“ Come, come. Archdeacon Bottleworthy,” snapped
the professor very sharply, “ you’ve no right to make
a statement like that. It’s a libel upon us all.”
The archdeacon looked round disdainfully. “Sir,” he
replied coldly, “ I lost two umbrellas here last month.”
For the moment, the drop even of a pin could have
been heard, and the atmosphere was charged every-
where with grim suspense.
Then suddenly the cocktail man exploded violently
into a loud and rapturous guffaw, and all eyes were on
the instant levelled in his direction.
What was the fellow up to? The archdeacon had
openly stigmatized some of them as dishonest and here
was one of their number actually laughing and treat-
ing it as a good joke! His amusement was worse than
out of place! It was disgraceful!
But their black looks were of no avail and the cock-
tail gentleman continued to rock and roar with laugh-
ter. Then notwithstanding everyone’s resentment, their
merriment began to spread. The angry lines upon
faces softened, lips began to twitch, and then before
anyone could realize that it had happened, a delighted
roar of laughter was rolling round the room.


“Oh, lor! ” groaned the cocktail man, wiping his
eyes, “ but who could have pinched the ecclesiastical
umbrellas? ”
Professor Sinker alone had preserved his equanimity.
“ But these umbrellas of yours, Archdeacon,” he asked
frowning, “ were they expensive ones? ”
“ The first one had an ivory handle,” replied the
archdeacon, “ but the handle of the second one was
only bone.” He smiled dryly. “ I was acquiring wis-
dom, you see.”
A short and stout man with a round, fat face bustled
breathlessly into the room, and throwing himself into
a chair, called for a whisky and soda. He was the
great Dr. Bunions, of North Terrace.
“ Hullo, Doc,” said a member, “ you’re late for
prayertime this morning. What’s happened? ”
“ Oh, I had an urgent call, just when I was coming
away,” replied the doctor pompously. “ Twiggs, the
dentist, had some sort of seizure, and I had to go at
M
once.
A mild interest was occasioned. “Anything seri-
ous? ” asked one man. “ Twiggs is my dentist.”
“ Can’t say yet,” replied Dr. Bunions, “I’ve never
seen anything quite like it before. The man seems to
be in some kind of trance. He’ll probably get over it,
however, but in any case he’ll be laid up for some
months.”
“ Not at all,” said the archdeacon, breaking in.
“ He’ll be indisposed for exactly six weeks, and then
he’ll be better than he’s ever been before.”


Dr. Bunions stared at the archdeacon in great sur-
prise, and then, from the expression on his face, seemed
upon the point of making some sarcastic remark. But
he remembered, in time, that he had many church
patients, and also that the archdeacon was far too im-
portant a person to offend. So he just contented him-
self with a smile, and remarked dryly:
“ Then we’re rival practitioners, are we, Arch-
deacon? But I didn’t know you had already made a
diagnosis of the case.”
“ Nor have I,” replied the archdeacon carelessly,
“ but for quite a long time I have thought something
of the kind was coming on. Young Twiggs has been
much too hard-worked.” He raised his voice.
“ Twiggs is the best dentist in the State.”
“ But I thought Fangles was your dentist,” said Dr.
Bunions.
The archdeacon inclined his head haughtily. “Twiggs
is our best dentist, I say.”
“By the by, Doctor,” broke in the man with the
monocle, “ now do you happen to have any umbrellas
in your house? ”
“ Certainly, sir,” replied the unsuspicious doctor,
looking rather puzzled, “as a matter of fact, I have
two.”
For the second time that morning there was a de-
lighted roar of laughter round the room, and the stout
man ordered, paid for, and consumed another cocktail
before the hilarity had quite died down.
For a while then the archdeacon resumed the perusal


of his magazine, but soon becoming aware that he was
feeling hungry, he proceeded into the dining-room to
partake of lunch. There, to his astonishment, for it
was his rule of life never to drink alcohol at any mid-
day meal, he found himself ordering a pint of bur-
gundy and later two brandy liqueurs.
“ But I ought not to have done it,” he frowned as
he returned into the lounge, “ for it is not seemly that
the cloth should be seen drinking in public. It is sure
to be remarked upon and may get back to St.
Benger’s.”'
The clock struck one, and with everyone apparendy
bent upon going to the races, the lounge quickly
emptied and soon the archdeacon was the only one re-
maining there.
He tried to concentrate upon his magazine but, do
all he could, his thoughts were very far away, and
above all things, to his very great annoyance, he kept
on wondering how Whiskers would fare in the Cup.
But what a lovely day it was, he mused, and how
delightful it would be to stroll about at Morphettville!
How gay and bustling the race-course would look and
how happy and animated everyone would be!
He sighed heavily, for he had not been to a race-
meeting for nearly thirty years, not indeed, since his
undergraduate days, and the memory of everything
now came back to him, and struck at him like a blow.
He was growing old, he told himself; he was losing
grip on the happiness of life, and he was getting
mouldy, like so many of the other clergy were.


He remembered so well the last race he had seen.
It had been on the great, wide moor at Doncaster, in
the far-off days at home. Yes, he could visualize, even
now, the whole scene, with a great bunch of horses,
nearly a score of them, all charging up the course in
line. It had been anyone’s race up to within a few
yards of the judge’s box, and then a beautiful little
chestnut filly had flashed out in front and snatched the
spoils almost in the last stride. It had been terribly
exciting, and he remembered his delight, because it had
been the winner he himself had backed.
Ah! those had been happy days, and he had not
thought then that racing was an evil thing! He
wrinkled up his forehead and looked very troubled.
Then why did he think so now?
He thought on for quite a long while and then sud-
denly his face broke into a relieved and happy smile.
Perhaps, after all, he was mistaken, he told himself,
and therefore, as a just man, surely it was his clear
duty to ascertain at once if it were really so. Yes, of
course it was, and so he would go straightaway down
to Morphettville and see for himself how Whiskers
would—he corrected his thoughts quickly—how
things were conducted on the race-course side. It was
his duty, plain and unmistakable, and the wonder was
he had not thought of it before! Really, he had been
very remiss!
He picked up his hat and passing out of the build-
ing proceeded to walk quickly in the direction of the
railway station.


CHAPTER III
HE GOES TO THE RACES
THE afternoon was certainly going to be a
glorious one, and within a few moments of
leaving the club the subde influence of blue
sky and bright sun appeared in some mysterious way
to have worked a most extraordinary change in the
archdeacon. He walked with elastic, springy steps; he
threw out his chest, and he inhaled delightedly the
soft, warm air. His eyes twinkled and he smiled
broadly. Indeed, the austere and scornful eccliastic of
the Boodle Club was now replaced by an individual
who scintillated joy and contentment, as if there were
no cares or troubles in all the world.
At the top of the railway-station steps he came again
upon Wangleton, the Baptist Minister, and the latter,
remembering that curt nod of but a little while ago,
now turned his head away and pretended not to see his
colleague in the spiritual world. But the archdeacon
stopped point-blank, and in the friendliest manner pos-
sible, proceeded to engage him in conversation. He
asked him about his family, his work, and how his
church was getting on. He invited him to come up
to St. Benger’s and hear the new organ they had put in,


and also he expressed the hope that in future he should
see more of him.
“You know, we black-coated chaps,” he said finally,
wagging his finger in the astonished minister’s face,
“ ought to try and pull together more. The Reunion
of Christendom will never eventuate, until we do,” and
off he went down the steps, smiling and beaming as
before.
His smile, however, sobered somewhat down after
he had taken his ticket and was approaching the plat-
form from where the race-specials were about to start.
Then he frowned in a puzzled kind of way and
pinched himself furtively to make sure that he was not
dreaming, but was truly and actually awake.
What had happened, he asked himself, that he,
Augustine Bottleworthy, of all people, should be going
to the race-meeting at Morphettville ? And then he
suddenly remembered. “ Ah! it was his duty,” and
at once he chuckled at the very thought of all the
gossip there would be.
Now racing is undoubtedly the most popular of all
pastimes in the great Commonwealth of Australia, but
for all that it is, and always has been, strictly taboo in
Church circles. No clergyman or minister of any
Protestant denomination is ever to be seen upon the
race-course side, no matter how many of their congre-
gation may be given openly to the sport.
So the archdeacon might well smile to himself when
thinking of the stir his presence would now occasion
at Morphettville. He knew it would be quite impos


sible that he would pass unnoticed, even amongst the
large crowd that would be assembled there, and that
speculation and interest would be aroused at once.
And he was quite right, too, but the speculation,
and the interest he excited, began long before he had
left the railway-station itself.
Before he had gone even five yards from the barrier,
the official who had clipped his ticket there, turning to
follow his retreating form with astonished eyes, gave it
emphatically as his opinion that his own after-life was
destined to be an unpleasant one. The inspector who
politely showed him into the railway carriage gulped
hard, as if he were in the act of swallowing his whistle,
and the boy who came round with race-cards grinned
impishly when he saw what manner of man it was
who was handing him the sixpence.
But the archdeacon settled himself unconcernedly in
a corner, congratulating himself that he had come in
good time, for the carriage, a large saloon, began fill-
ing rapidly. He started to study the programme, and
then again he found his hand wandering to his leg
and once more he began pinching himself to make sure
that he was actually awake.
What had happened, he again asked himself, and
this time much more fearfully? What had come over
his mind? The whole contents of the racing pro-
gramme seemed perfectly familiar to him, and he
sensed, without any possible doubt whatsoever, a most
extensive acquaintanceship with the names, and even
the very merits of the horses down to run!


He knew somehow, for instance, that Podger would
be top-weight in the hurdles, and he was quite expect-
ing that Dripping Tin would be carrying somewhere
about nine stone one. He took it for granted that
Baby Boy would be one of the bottom weights in the
Welter, and that the burden of Whiskers would be
seven stone four in the Cup! He appeared to know
lots of other things, too, about the racing, and indeed
the whole business seemed to be one with which he
was on perfecdy familiar and even intimate terms.
He pinched himself vigorously. Who was he—
Augustine Bottleworthy, or some dreadful racing
man? He could not for the life of him understand it.
Two personalities were fighting in him, one cold, stern
and haughty, and the other free-and-easy and profane,
and each of them in turn appeared to be getting the
upper hand.
The train started upon its short six-mile journey,
and for the first few minutes or so he sat thoughtfully
regarding the passing objects as the train flashed by.
Then he sighed heavily, but immediately followed up
the sigh with a chuckling laugh. Why should he
worry, he asked himself suddenly? Life was for hap-
piness and enjoyment, and it was a lovely day!
He looked round to find himself being most intently
regarded by a young man sitting opposite to him. Like
the archdeacon, the latter was holding a race-card in
his hand, but his eyes were now fastened furtively
upon the clergyman’s face. He seemed not only
puzzled, but a trifle uneasy as well, as if apparently he


did not relish such close proximity to a man who was
given to laughing to himself.
The archdeacon smiled blandly. “ Lovely day, sir,
is it not? he remarked.
“Yes, it is,” assented the young man rather nervously.
“ Sure to be a good crowd,” went on the arch-
deacon.
The young man just nodded his head this time, and
for a moment there was silence. Then the archdeacon
suddenly bent over and asked with his most ingratiat-
ing smile: “ Now what do you think of Reunion? ”
The young man appeared most embarrassed.
“ What weight has it got? ” he stammered, as he
began hurriedly to turn over the pages of his race-card.
The archdeacon burst into a loud and hearty laugh.
“ Very good, very good! Excellent, my young friend! ”
He tapped the young man jocularly upon the knee and
then suddenly became grave again. “ But I’m afraid
it’s got a very big weight indeed, for it’s weighted with
all the jealousies and mistakes of nearly two thousand
years.”
The young man looked more uncomfortable than
ever, and it almost seemed as if he were about to get
up and change his seat, but happily for his peace of
mind the archdeacon’s attention was at that moment
diverted into quite another direction.
A man at the other end of the carriage, hearing the
laughter, had turned round to see what was going on.
Meeting the archdeacon’s eye, however, he had in-
stantly averted his gaze, and sinking his neck into his


collar had tried forthwith to make himself as un-
noticed and inconspicuous as possible.
The archdeacon frowned as if rather puzzled, but
then light seemed to break in upon him and he smiled
with the pleasure of a man making an unexpected and
agreeable discovery.
“ Ah, Riddle! ” he exclaimed. “ I thought I knew
that suit of clothes,” and, with a courteous bow of
apology to the young man opposite, he rose up and
moved briskly along the carriage to where his junior
mathematical master was sitting.
The luckless Riddle, however, was not alone, for
there were a lady and two little boys with him. The
archdeacon gave him a friendly pat upon the shoulder
and squeezed down beside him.
“ Well, Riddle,” he said jovially, “ so you wouldn’t
notice one of your friends, eh? ”
The junior mathematical master was hot in his em-
barrassment. He had recognized the archdeacon the
instant he had looked round, but had devoudy hoped
that the recognition was not mutual, for to be caught,
as he was now, by the Head when going to the races
Was a ghasdy piece of misfortune that might easily
lead to his dismissal from the school. The archdeacon,
he knew, had absolutely no mercy where his prejudices
were concerned, and he felt sick in his dismay when
he thought of his wife and two little boys.
But he pulled himself together and forced his lips
into a smile.
“ I didn’t think it could be you, sir,” he replied,
4


and then he inclined his head towards the lady oppo-
site. “ This is my wife, sir. Mary, this is Archdeacon
Bottleworthy, our Head.”
Mrs. Riddle coloured. She, of course, knew all
about the archdeacon and was quite aware that the
situation was most awkward, and indeed, might mean
positive disaster for her husband, but she was a clever
woman, as well as a pretty one—she was still only in
the twenties—and rising to the occasion, gave the
archdeacon a most captivating smile.
“I’ve often heard you preach,” she fibbed bravely.
“ We always try to go, when it’s your duty at the
cathedral.”
The archdeacon raised his hand protestingly. “My
dear young lady,” he replied, “ now don’t please refer
to that, upon a beautiful day like this. We’re all on
pleasure bent this afternoon and unpleasant matters
should be put away.” He smiled at the two little
boys and patted the elder one upon the head. “ Now
what’s your name? ” he asked.
“ Jack,” replied the little boy.
“ Well, when you’re old enough, Jack, your Daddy
must bring you up to my school. Now don’t forget
that, Riddle.” He turned again to the little boy.
“ You’d like to come. Jack, wouldn’t you? ”
“ Yes, please,” said the little boy and he added
timidly*. “Daddy says there’s a bear up there.”
The mother blushed scarlet and Riddle himself
broke into a clammy sweat.
The archdeacon looked puzzled for a moment and


then, observing, as he could not help doing, the em-
barrassment upon the parents’ faces, a sudden light
came into his own.
“Ha, ha! ”he laughed happily. “A bear! Of
course there is! That’s me! ” He wagged his linger
roguishly at the luckless master. “ ‘ Out of the mouths
of babes and sucklings,’ Riddle, but you really will
have to be more careful as they grow older.” He
chucked little Jack delightedly under the chin.
“ Well, you shall come up and see the bear, my boy,
and perhaps he’ll be able to find you a nice warm
corner in his cage.” He smiled pleasantly at Mrs.
Riddle, and then turned again to her husband. “Now
where are you going to take these youngsters to this
afternoon, Riddle—on to the grand-stand?”
“ No, sir,” stammered the perspiring Riddle,
“ we’re all going on the Flat. It’s just a little picnic
we’re going to have there. We’ve brought our lunch
with us! ”
“ And very nice too,” said the archdeacon. “It
will be lovely for the children, I’m sure.”
“ If Ju-Ju wins,” said little Jack shyly, “ Daddy’s
going to buy us pistols that fire caps.”
There was a horrible glare from the boy’s father
and Mrs. Riddle looked as uncomfortable as anyone
could possibly be.
The archdeacon’s face became all suddenly cold and
stern and he turned frowningly to the junior mathe-
matical master.
“ Riddle,” he said sharply, and there was anger as


well as incredulity in his tone, “ you’re not surely
going to put money on Ju-Ju ? You can’t be such an ass! ”
Poor Riddle winced, and in his own mind he felt
more muddled than any ass. He could think of no
adequate excuse at all. His misfortunes had all come
so quickly that he had had no time to prepare for
them. Fate was indeed dealing a disastrous blow.
He had boarded the train expecting to have a nice,
happy afternoon and perhaps back a winner or two
with a lucky half-crown, and then —in had butted this
dreadful ecclesiastic and everything was being spoilt.
Visions of instant dismissal on Monday loomed up into
his mind, and he wondered where on earth he would
be able to get another crib.
“ A friend of mine, sir,” he stammered crestfallenly
at length, “ advised me that Ju-Ju was certain to win
the race to-day and I was going to have a trifle on him,
for luck.”
The archdeacon shook his head. “ Ju-Ju won’t
win,” he said emphatically. “ They’re not running him
to win to-day. I’m sure of it.” He looked round signifi-
cantly and lowered his voice. “ Back Whiskers,” he mut-
tered; “he’s the nap for this afternoon. He’s a snip.”
The junior mathematical master could not believe
his ears.
“ Back Whiskers! ” he exclaimed incredulously—
“ put some money on him, sir! ”
The archdeacon nodded. “ He’s a sure thing,” he
whispered, “ and you’ll be able to make your wife a
nice little present afterwards.” He smiled most


benevolently upon Mrs. Riddle. “ Here, give me your
race-card, Mrs. Riddle, and I’ll mark what I think’s
going to win. I’m not a bad judge, as you will see.”
Mrs. Riddle was all smiles as she handed over the
card. She could not for the life of her understand it,
but she realized thankfully that whatever danger had
threatened them had, at any rate for the moment,
passed, and she was so bright and animated in her
relief that the archdeacon thought how pretty and
attractive she looked.
The remainder of the journey passed very quickly
for them all, and Mrs. Riddle, for one, was quite sorry
when it was over. She was simply charmed with the
archdeacon. He was so polite and so courtly and had
such aristocratic manners. Besides, he undoubtedly
wanted to be so friendly, too. Twice, again, he spoke
about the little boys going to St. Benger’s and when
finally upon their arrival at the race-course, he said
good-bye, he gave them all a hearty hand-shake and
wished them good-luck.
“ Hm! ” he muttered thoughtfully to himself, as
he walked towards the entrance gates. “ Riddle’s not
at all a bad sort and not half such an irresponsible chap
as I have thought him. Nice little wife, too, and good-
looking children. Must cost him something to keep
them so spick and span. That’s why, I suppose, he
always wears that one shabby suit himself.” The arch-
deacon frowned. “I’ll see what salary we are paying
him on Monday. It’s time, perhaps, he had a rise.”


The horses had gone down to the starting post for
the first race when the archdeacon arrived upon the
course, and most of the spectators had already taken
up their positions upon the grand-stand, to ensure a
good view. All the lower rows were crowded, and
so he had to proceed some way up, before he could
obtain a seat.
Now it could convey no very good idea of exactly
what occurred to say that the archdeacon was noticed
at once. Not only was he noticed, but he immediately
became the centre of lively interest for a great many
pairs of eyes, and his stately march up the steps was
punctuated, at almost every stride, by the greetings he
both gave and returned. He was lifting his hat all the
time.
“ How do you do, Mrs. Wopple-Smith? how do you
do, Mrs. Muggs? a lovely day, Mr. Bumbletoes;
beautiful weather, Mrs. Potts.”
He simply beamed amiability, and every line of his
fine, handsome face and every curve of his upright and
commanding figure spoke of the good temper which
possessed him.
He found a seat at last, and in the friendliest man-
ner possible at once opened a conversation with the
man sitting next to him.
“ Glorious afternoon, isn’t it? Yes, but I like it
hot; in fact, it can’t be too hot for me. Ah! this race
is only a mile, I see. Then they will be starting right
opposite to us on the other side, won’t they? No, I
don’t think myself that Turk’s Head can give the


weight. He’s a good horse, I know, but nine stone’s
a steadier any day for a three-year-old. I think one
of the middle brigade will take it. Chatsworthy for
instance, or Friar’s Oak. But there goes the starting-
bell, and now we shall soon see.”'
A couple of minutes later and a roar from the crowd
announced that the horses were off. Then for a few
minutes followed the usual almost breathless silence.
“ Turk’s Head got a good break on them any-
how,” said the archdeacon’s neighbour triumphantly.
“ They’ll never catch him now.”
“ Don’t you be so sure, my friend,” replied the
archdeacon calmly. “ Turk’s Head’s only a six fur-
long horse, remember, and he’s not bred to stay. He’s
certainly running well, but they’ve a long way to go
yet.”
The man looked round in astonishment. He knew
well who the archdeacon was, and now to hear him
talking so familiarly of racing matters surprised him
immensely. But a minute later and he was destined
to be even more surprised still.
The horses came thundering into the straight and
then things happened almost exacdy as the archdeacon
had forecast. Turk’s Head led easily until just beyond
six furlongs and then he shut up like a concertina,
leaving Chatsworthy and Old Joe to carry on. The
pair ran neck and neck, until within ten yards of the
winning post and then up came Friar’s Oak to beat
them both by more than a length. Chatsworthy took
second place, by the shortest of heads.


The archdeacon walked down off the grand-stand
with an amused smile upon his face. “ Really,” he
murmured, “ I don’t know at all what’s happened,
but I’m certainly not a bad judge. One with each
barrel, first time.”
He was pounced upon at once by a showily dressed
woman, with a highly-powdered face.
“ Archdeacon,” she exclaimed volubly, “I’m
astonished to see you here! Fancy you’re coming rac-
ing, now! ”
“ Why not, Mrs. Gobling? ” replied the archdeacon
blandly. “ Why separate the glad shepherd from his
flock? ” He smiled grimly and waved his hand
around. “ Quite a number of my sheep I see are here,
although from the way they’ve just missed supporting
Friar’s Oak, I’m almost inclined to believe that many
of them must be goats. Look! he’s paying an .£lB
15s. od. dividend in the totalisator and I regarded him
as quite a good thing.”
“ Oh, Archdeacon Bottleworthy! ” exclaimed the
showily dressed woman delightedly, “ I had no idea
you knew anything about racing. Now do, please,
mark my card for me.”
“ Certainly I will, Mrs. Gobling,” replied the arch-
deacon, laughing, “ but, remember, I am only doing
it in my capacity as a private individual.” He looked
round with a well-assumed appearance of guile and
lowered his voice to a whisper. As Archdeacon of
the Cathedral, and Head Master of St. Benger’s, I have
no knowledge whatsoever about horses, for they are


only the very languid predecessors of motor-cars to
me.”
“ Oh, Archdeacon,” said Mrs. Gobling, “ you are a
wonderful man! ”
The two walked up and down the lawn and it was
soon known all over the race-course that Archdeacon
Botdeworthy was in the enclosure. People edged near
to have a look at the bold cleric who was so defying
the conventions of his order, and many were the lau-
datory remarks that were passed about him.
“Well I’m damned! ” exclaimed a bull-necked in-
dividual whom, from his general appearance, no one
would certainly have suspected of being a teetotaller.
“ A blinking parson, is it, and enjoying himself too!
Now where’s his show, I wonder? I must find out
and take the missus to see what form he shows on his
own course. Sure I will.”
“ Oh, look! ” said a middle-aged lady upon the
grand-stand, vigorously powdering her nose. “ Now,
just fancy Archdeacon Bottleworthy being here! Who
would have thought it, and he looks as nice as any-
thing too. I’ll give it to my boy the next time he says
the Head is a bear.”
“ Ha-ha! ” sniffed cynical old Major Kanns,
“ Bottleworthy’s got more go in him than I thought.
I really think I must return the compliment and go
and hear him preach. I’ve got a crooked threepenny
bit that’s been bothering me for quite a long while,
and it will just do for the collection bag. No one will
take it in the City.”


Just after the fifth race had been decided one of the
committee-men of the racing club rushed excitedly
into their private room.
“ Look here, you fellows,” he called out, “we
ought to invite old Bottleworthy in to have some re-
freshment. Gingerbeer or anything he likes. He
seems a decent old sort and it won’t do us any harm.”
“ Oh, no,” said another member, “ leave the, old
blighter alone. I’m told he’s going to preach to-mor-
row in the cathedral and he’ll probably pitch it in
then, hot and strong, about the evils of gambling.
He’s only come here to spy out the land.”
“ Spy out the land! ” ejaculated the first speaker
disdainfully. “ Why he’s been picking out winners
all the afternoon! He’s been marking people’s cards
ever since he came on the course and I know for a fact
that he’s already given three firsts and one second. He
told simply scores of people to back Whiskers and
there are whole bevies of Church females now count-
ing up their cash. I tell you it’s the greatest blow the
Nonconformist clergy have had for years. Spy out
the land indeed! Why, he’s been by far the best
tipster here this afternoon.”
And there could be no denial of the truth of the
committee-man’s report. The archdeacon had cer-
tainly been most successful in his prognostications. He
had picked out Blucher for the Hurdles when the
bookmakers had been offering ten to one. Then he
had given Conger Eel for the Welter and it had re-
turned its gratified supporters £6 ss. od. in the totalisa


tor. But it was Whiskers that had been his greatest
triumph—for Whiskers, the despised Whiskers—rid-
den by a raw apprentice boy, had simply romped home
and had paid the delightful dividend of £27 for each
pound invested.
It had been the easiest win of the afternoon, too.
All the horses had got off well and Ju-Ju had led for
half a mile. Then Grey Salmon had suddenly headed
the field, and it had been shouted everywhere that the
son of Tinned Fish would take the spoils. But just
after turning the bend and coming into the straight,
Whiskers had been noticed to be going like a scalded
cat and almost before anyone could realize it, he had
established a lead of at least half a dozen lengths.
Nothing could then make any impression on him, and
retaining his advantage to the end, he had simply
rolled home as he liked.
The congratulations to the archdeacon had been
almost overwhelming and not even the comparative
seclusion of a corner in the tea-room had been able to
preserve him from the attention of his admirers.
But the best summary of all that happened upon
that memorable afternoon was undoubtedly that given
by the committee-man, Puffett-Hughes, to his wife
that night at dinner.
“ Yes, my dear, it’s quite true that the great Arch-
deacon Botdeworthy came to the races, although it
seems incredible, and no one can understand it, even
now. But there he was the whole afternoon strutting
about like an old peacock, with all his feathers spread.


He went everywhere and he was friendly and affable
to everyone. He took a most active interest in the
racing, too, and simply reeled off winners, as if he
were quoting texts. They say he was right through
the card without one mistake. I know for certain he
gave Whiskers to win the Cup, for with my own ears
I heard him implore the Button-Browns to back noth-
ing else in the race. He said Whiskers would head all
the others as he came round into the straight, and,
funnily enough, that’s exactly what the old beggar did.
“ Then you should have seen Bottleworthy clap,
when young Blotter rode up to weigh in. Of course
most people had lost their money and the boy was get-
ting quite a cool reception until the archdeacon started
the cheers. Then everybody began to laugh and the
cheering that followed was as much, I am sure, for
the archdeacon as for the boy himself.
“ Then the next thing that happened was that we
invited Bottleworthy into the committee-room to have
some refreshment, and, by Jove, we got the shock of
our lives there again! We asked him if he would
like some lemonade or a cup of tea, and he replied as
bold as brass that he’d prefer a large whisky and soda.
A large whisky and soda, mind you, not a small one!
“ Then Spicer, the chairman, as a compliment,
suggested he should be taken into the weighing-room
and other places where the general public are not per-
mitted to go. Spicer thought it would be an education
for him and give him some idea of the inner workings
of the racing game. But, bless your heart, Bottle


worthy seemed to know as much about things there as
we did, if not more. He even knew all the jockeys
by name, and started chipping one or two of them for
the way they rode. He told Muggins he was a bad
finisher, and used his whip too much, and he advised
Ferntops to ride with a much longer stirrup, for it
always looked as if he had got no control over his
mounts.”
Puffett-Hughes nodded smilingly to his wife. “ Yes,
my dear, everyone thought it most extraordinary
Bottleworthy should have come to the meeting and,
to return the compliment, scores of racing folk have
arranged to go to the cathedral to-morrow to hear him
preach.” He made a grimace. “ I’m going and so
are you.”
The archdeacon arrived home that evening, very
cheerful, although rather tired.
His family was a small one, consisting only of his
wife and daughter, and no one could by any possibility
have said that he was not fortunate in their possession.
His wife, a small and fragile-looking woman, had a
great affection for him but was very much afraid of
him as well. All her married life, she had never
crossed him, regarding him as a superior sort of being,
who was wise in all things, and whose will should
always be law. His daughter, Margaret, however, was
much firmer in disposition than her mother and
rather resembled her father in appearance. She was
a tall, good-looking girl of two and twenty, with clear


cut aristocratic features and beautiful grey eyes. She,
too, stood in some considerable awe of her father, but
by no means to the extent that her mother did, and of
late years she had often dared to argue with him, and
to laugh at some of his ideas, when he happened to be
in a particularly good humour.
The archdeacon was certainly happy in his home
life and, if he were seldom demonstrative in his affec-
tion for his family, it was apparently because it was
natural for him to be reserved.
His wife met him as he came into the hall. “ Ah,
now don’t scold me because I’m late,” he said gaily.
“I’ve been to the races, my dear.”
“ The races, Augustine! ” she ejaculated, looking
very startled. “ What made you go there? ”
He bent down and kissed her affectionately on the
cheek. “Why not, Theresa? ”he asked. “It was
quite an experience and I met so many people I knew,
quite half the cathedral congregation, I am sure, and
certainly more than half the choir.”
“ But you must have felt out of place, Augustine,”
she said.
“ Not at all, my dear,” he replied, looking rather
pleased and then, after a moment, puzzled. “ Indeed
everything seemed to come quite naturally to me and
I made some really wonderful prognostications as to
which particular horses would come in first. In fact,
Theresa,” and he dropped his voice and smiled mysteri-
ously, “ although I don’t quite understand it, your hus-
band was verily among the prophets, this afternoon.”


Contrary to the usual order of things, it was quite
a lively dinner that evening, and under the mellowing
influence of some old wine the archdeacon overflowed
with wit and humour, indeed, he was so bright and
merry that he kept his wife and daughter in smiles all
the time.
He remarked how becomingly the former had done
her hair, and laughingly said it reminded him of the
day when he had first met her.
“You remember how you squeezed my hand then,
Theresa,” he said, “ that afternoon when we were in-
troduced at the bishop’s garden-party? Oh, yes, she
did, Margaret! ” —for his wife had smilingly shaken
her head—“ she squeezed it right enough and I
couldn’t prepare a line of my sermon that evening, in
consequence! She looked at me, too, as she is looking
now.” He pretended to sigh heavily. “ I remember
I was intending at that time to join the High Church
party and become a celibate priest, and I am always
convinced it was that squeeze that upset all my plans.”
“ Was mother’s then the only girl’s hand that ever
gave you a squeeze. Father? ” asked his daughter de-
murely, but with a twinkle in her eyes.
“ Tut, tut! ” replied the archdeacon grandly. “ Re-
member, my dear, I was ordained when I was quite
young ” —he affected a discreet cough—“ and the
Church was never without its privileges. Oh, by the
by, Margaret,” he went on, as if his thoughts had sud-
denly been turned into some particular channel, “ I
met young Grainger at the races this afternoon. He


came up and shook hands with me, but somehow he
didn’t think to ask after you.”
The girl flushed hotly. She was surprised as well
as embarrassed, for she knew it was not like her father
to make any mention at all of young Grainger’s name.
Everyone was quite aware that the latter was an
admirer of hers and also that because of the occupation
of his people he was never invited up to the house.
His father was a provision merchant in the City, but
he himself had just been admitted to the practice of
the law. A little more than three years Margaret’s
senior, and an old St. Benger’s boy, he was well
spoken and undeniably good-looking. He was also
not without some determination of character, for not-
withstanding repeated snubs from the archdeacon,
whenever, indeed, the latter deigned to notice him, he
was always about and handy at any public function,
where it was probable the girl would be. What
exactly Margaret thought about him no one knew, but
it was averred by some that, when at the cathedral, she
always took care to look, at least once, in the direction
where he usually sat.
“ Yes,” the archdeacon went on thoughtfully, “ he’s
certainly a good-looking young fellow, and there’s one
thing I always did like about him—he’s always most
obliging and polite. This afternoon he was most
anxious to explain to me all about the details of horse-
racing, but I assured him it was quite unnecessary, and
in return I advised him to back a quadruped called
‘ Whiskers.’ ”


“ And did it win, Father? ” asked his daughter,
who had now recovered her composure.
“ Certainly it did, my dear, and it paid a most
healthy dividend, too, £27 for each pound invested.
Its progress was, moreover, exactly as I predicted. It
was not of much account in the early part of the race,
but once round the corner it was seen to be galloping
like blue blazes ” —he smothered a cough—“ ahem!
was seen to be proceeding at a greatly accelerated pace
and finally it easily outdistanced all the others and
came in first.”
Dinner over, they went into the drawing-room, and
the archdeacon was just lighting a cigar when the
telephone bell rang sharply in the hall, and a moment
later the parlour-maid came in.
“ It’s a Mr. Grainger, sir,” she said to the arch-
deacon, “ and he wants to know when he can see you
for a few minutes, about the Old Boys’ Concert. He
says he won’t keep you long.”
“ Ah,” remarked the archdeacon, thoughtfully
“ certainly a most determined young man. I thought
he had not been given that square chin of his for
nothing.” He turned to his daughter.
“ You speak to him, Margaret,” he said rather
slyly. “ Tell him he can come up this evening if he
likes, but impress upon him that I can only give him
a few minutes, and that if he stays longer than that,
then you or your mother will have to entertain him.
I have my sermon for to-morrow to prepare.”
Some twenty minutes later a student of psychology
s


would have been enabled to make at least three subde
analyses in the drawing-room of Archdeacon Bottle-
worthy, at St. Benger’s College.
First, he would have considered the archdeacon
himself, a man of seemingly two distinct personalities;
the one cold and narrow-minded, and contemptuous
of the young fellow then before him, because the
latter’s father pursued an occupation that to the arch-
deaconal mind was incompatible with the calling of a
gentleman, and the other —warm and sympathetic, but
for long years entombed in prejudice and pride, and only
now tearing at its cere-cloth and rising from the dead.
Then, next, there was young Grainger. A chal-
lenger in the lists of love! A youth who had for his
incentive the desire of all the ages, and who was urged
forward and made bold by the inherited instinct of all
time.
And then there was the girl. What of the girl?
Was the mystery and sweetness of Love calling to her,
and was she, even now, preparing for the great sur-
render, when a woman bows her head to the woman
nature in her, and gives up all?.
Who could have told ?
4fc £«
IP Iff “Tv*
The following evening, the Sunday evening, a full
quarter of an hour before the time when the service
was to begin, the great cathedral of St. Jehu was filled
to its utmost capacity, and in hoarse whispers the


cathedral officials frankly admitted to one another
that they could not understand it at all.
That the archdeacon was always a good draw they
conceded readily enough, but for the cathedral to be
fully occupied so early, required more explanation
than on the surface was apparent.
“And such a mixed lot, too. Mottle,” whispered
Spiker, the head verger, to his assistant. “ There’s
people ’ere I’ve never seen come before.” He
covered his mouth with his hand, and with a great air
of mystery dropped his voice very low. “ Racing
crowd—lots of them. That’s old Bloxam, the trainer,
I just showed to the front pew, and before him there
was Spooner and the jockey ’Obbs, and there’s lots of
others, too.”
“ Pooh, pooh! ” whispered back Motde, whose rule
of life it was never to be outdone. “I’ve been show-
ing in nothing but trainers and jocks for the last half
hour. There’s four jocks all together over there by
that pillar now.” He nodded his head solemnly, as if
he were confiding some tremendous secret. “ That
little one’s Blotter, who won on Whiskers yesterday,
the one with the red tie.”
“ You don’t say so,” muttered Spiker, with a rever-
ence that he had never in his life accorded to any
Church dignitary, “ and it paid twenty-seven pounds
for one! ”
But there was no doubt that, even allowing for the
somewhat exaggerated statement of Mr. Mottle, there
were a large number of racing people in the cathedral


that evening. Indeed, as Bloxam, the trainer, re-
marked when once, for one brief moment, he sum-
moned up courage and turned his head to look round,
there was enough material at hand to have made up
quite a respectable race-meeting, in all its departments.
“ Quite a good-looking lot, we are too,” he whis-
pered to his neighbour, “ if our blooming faces wasn’t
so red. But I do hope the boys won’t fidget and’ll
behave. We don’t, any of us, know the course too
well, but it’ll be all right if we go easy and just follow
old Bottleworthy over the jumps.”
But Mr. Bloxam, as events proved, need have had
no anxiety at all on the score of good behaviour.
Nothing at all went wrong. It was true that habitual
frequenters of the cathedral could sense a certain feel-
ing of strained awkwardness in the building, and it is
quite possible as several of them afterwards averred,
that a palpable rustle of excitement did flutter round
when the numbers of the hymns went up into their
frame, but apart from this little and peculiar happen-
ing everything else was just as ordinary and regular as it
possibly could be, and the offertory afterwards showed
most conclusively in what appreciation the service had
been held.
Punctually at the stroke of seven the choir appeared,
and behind them marched the clergy, with Arch-
deacon Bottleworthy and the bishop last of all. It
was remarked by several that the archdeacon looked
rather pale, and indeed it seemed that he was even
nervous as he took his place in his accustomed stall.


But he looked as dignified and majestic as ever, as
if he were quite aware that the chancel of a cathedral
was the only fit and proper setting for a personality
such as his. And when in due time he mounted the
pulpit steps and, after a silent prayer, paused for a
moment to look thoughtfully upon the sea of upturned
faces before him, there was no one surely in that great
congregation who was not moved to some small or
great extent by the mien of priestly authority that was his.
It was quite a short sermon that he preached, but
one very much to the point.
Undoubtedly the greatest failing of many well-in-
tentioned religious people, he told them, was their
narrow-mindedness. They took to themselves certain
views of life—in most cases quite by accident, and
without any thought at all—and for those who did not
agree with them they had nothing but condemnation
and distrust. They arrogated to themselves superior
judgment in all things, and were convinced, abso-
lutely, that they alone were right. The more ignorant
they were, the more certain they were, for it was their
obsession that they should measure all the corn of the
earth in their own little pottles.
And it was these narrow-minded people who so
turned the world against religion, for they made of it
a deadly Upas tree, beneath whose shadow were to die
so much of the joy and happiness of life.
But in reality religion was a kind and beautiful
thing, giving to all a consciousness of right and wrong,
and without something of it, in some form or other,


no man could be a useful member of the community
and of service to his kind.
No matter what his disposition was, everyone must
have and follow some definite rule of conduct, and
whether in his business or his pleasure, he must see to
it that he did not fall away from his reverence for
ideals. It was the cheat and the liar who filled the
world with distrust. It was the trickster and the thief
in any calling who robbed that calling of its honour
and good name, and it must be remembered always
that things that were not wrong in themselves, became
wrong and harmful to the community when their pur-
suit was carried on among surroundings of evil.
So, in conclusion, it must be the endeavour of every-
one to so purify his calling that the slanderer and the
bigot should be able to cast no stone.
* * *
“ Jim,” whispered old Bloxam, to his friend
Maloney, as they were coming out of the cathedral, “ I
shall only run one of mine in the Handicap next week,
and the racing folks can chip in with me on Fairy
Queen if she’s good enough to win. There shall be
no stalling them off with Beggar Boy, as I intended.
I’ve done with all that.”
Major Kanns took his crooked threepenny bit home
with him after all. He had put half a crown in the
plate and, as he tucked himself into bed that night, he
ruminated rather thoughtfully on the many years that
had passed since he had last said any prayers.


CHAPTER IV
THE AWAKENING OF ST. BENGER’S
THE days of the ensuing week were certainly
not without their surprises both for the mas-
ters and scholars of St. Benger’s, and it was
soon remarked in many quarters that something must
have happened to the Head. He seemed to have
altered most strangely, and to be in every way so dif-
ferent from his former self.
In all respects a changed man, he was revealing
characteristics which no one had dreamed that he pos-
sessed before. He was inquiring and sympathetic, and
he had lost much of his lordly detachment from any
interest whatsoever in the private affairs of either the
masters or the boys. He was exhibiting, too, a sense of
humour, and things that would before have roused him
to contemptuous anger, now only made him smile.
Altogether, he seemed to have become kindlier, and
there was a touch of common human nature about
him that no one had ever noticed until then.
The change began first to be remarked upon when,
on the Monday morning, he was dealing with the
usual weekly punishment squad.
Mondays were always ‘ Black Mondays ’ at St.


Benger’s for all those who either in their work or con-
duct during the previous week, had fallen short of the
standard required of them, and punctually at eleven
o’clock that day they were accustomed to be lined up
in the corridor adjoining the Head Master’s study and
later to be interviewed, one by one, in the grave and
solemn precincts of the study itself.
On this particular Monday morning there were
twenty-three of them waiting in varying degrees of
dread and expectancy to see the Head, and they noted,
with the usual foreboding, the school marshal precede
them into the study with a good-sized bundle of solid-
looking canes.
“ Old Bottles is none too good this morning,’'’ whis-
pered Stubbins ominously. “ Catcher says he looked
in a fearful rage when he heard there were twenty-
three of us up to-day.”
“ It’s that beast Harker again,” said young Gels-
worthy with some heat. “ He’s reported eight of us
this week for his rotten Latin, and you’ll see we’ll get
the stick all round and lose the half holiday as well.”
“ Bottles went to the races on Saturday,” remarked
Tod Brown impressively. “My pater saw him there
and he’s sworn ever since that he’s a very fine man.”
Young Brown fingered the seat of his trousers ten-
derly. “ I wish my pater was going to be here now.”
The study door opened suddenly and on the instant
all conversation ceased. The Head Master appeared
in the corridor and stood regarding the boys with a
cold, stern eye.


“ Ah! quite a full house, I perceive,” he remarked
dryly, after a moment’s pause. “ Twenty-three of you,
I am given to understand.” He pushed the study
door wide open and, with a show of great politeness
waved his hand. “ Come in, young gentlemen. Yes,
all of you, please. Come in. That’s right. Stand
over there by the wall. Don’t crowd. Now, Stubbins,
shut the door, if you’ll be so kind.”
He sat down at his desk and, picking up a sheaf of
papers, began slowly, one by one, to go over their con-
tents. The room was very silent and the boys hardly
dared to breathe.
“ Exactly,” remarked the Head presently, “ and you
appear to be a very desperate lot of boys. Mr. Hen-
derson has had to report three of you, Mr, Golds-
worthy and Mr. Henning each report four, Mr. Harker
reports eight, and Mr. O’Connor and Mr. Riddle each
two.” He looked up and eyed the boys grimly. “ Really,
really, this is a very dreadful condition of affairs! ”
The boys stared at him in surprise. There was
nothing certainly in his words to convey any idea of
kindliness or clemency, but with the instinct of young
animals they sensed in some way that he was not really
very angry with them, and in their perplexity they just
opened their mouths and gaped.
The Head Master went on.
“ Come, I’ll take Stubbins first. Step out, Stubbins,
please. Now what have you done, pray? ”
He picked up one of the reports off his desk and
proceeded to run quickly through it.


“ Ah! ” he exclaimed sternly, “ your Scripture’s
bad. You didn’t know the names of the Kings of
Israel.” He eyed Stubbins as if he were some strange
sort of animal. “ You didn’t know them, eh? ”
“ No, sir,” replied Stubbins, and his voice quavered,
although he was a sturdy-looking boy.
“ Ah! ” again exclaimed the Head Master, and
there was a perfect wealth of expression in his voice.
“ How old are you now? ”
“ Fifteen and a half, sir.”
“ A boy of fifteen and a half who doesn’t know the
names of the Kings of Israel! Goodness gracious,
what’s coming over the school? ” The Head’s voice
deepened in intensity and he shook his finger in the
boy’s face. “ Stubbins, Stubbins,” he said slowly,
“ and how do you expect, pray, to become a decent
and an upright man, if you are not cognizant of the
names of the Kings of Israel? How in the name of
conscience can you ever hope to live a happy life?
How—” but he stopped suddenly and, shrugging his
shoulders in despair, apparently controlled himself
only with a great effort. He motioned to the luckless
Stubbins to stand back. There was a moment’s awed
silence and then the Head picked up another paper.
His voice dropped into very quiet tones. “ Pilcher,
now, please. Pilcher primus, I believe.”
A tall, thin boy with a very freckled face stood for-
ward. He looked bright and intelligent, but was now
obviously very anxious. The Head spoke quite gently.
“ Mr. Harker reports very poorly of your Latin,


Pilcher, and he adds that your home-work, particu-
larly, is very bad. How’s that now? Surely you have
someone at home who can help you with your Virgil ?
Let me see now, what’s your father? ”
“ A butcher, sir,” replied Pilcher, with a little catch
in his voice.
The Head smiled. “Of course, of course,” he ex-
claimed blandly. “ I ought to have remembered that.
Mr. Pilcher, of Unley Road. He supplies us with
meat, and with very excellent meat, too. I couldn’t
wish for better.’'’ He appeared to think for a mo-
ment. “ Well, what are you going to be, Pilcher? ”
“ A butcher, too, sir,” replied Pilcher, a little de-
fiantly and getting rather red.
“ Excellent,” said the Head, “ excellent; a most use-
ful occupation. But still—still, Pilcher,” and his voice
became very grim and stern, “ however do you expect
to become a good butcher without a sound classical
education behind you? ‘ Bonus—bona—bonum.’
Now how on earth could you ever cut up joints of
meat or serve customers properly without knowing
that? Think how you’re handicapping yourself.
Think of it, boy.”
But apparently Pilcher primus for the moment could
think clearly of nothing at all. He just stared and
stared, like a rabbit fascinated before a snake.
The Head picked up another paper and went on.
“ Then there’s Spinkston here. His Latin is terrible
as well. Couldn’t even decline equus —a horse. What
are you going to be, Spinkston—a butcher, too? ”


“ No, sir,” squeaked a very small boy with curly
hair and a frightened little face. “My father’s a
farmer, sir. I’m going on the farm.”
“ Goodness gracious! ” commented the Head again.
“ Going on a farm and you can’t decline equus —a
horse! ” He looked very serious. “ Now, what on
earth are you going to do? ”
The little boy looked very much as if he were going
to cry.
“ Tut, tut,” said the Head kindly, perceiving the
lad’s distress. “Don’t worry about it now.” He shrugged
his shoulders, and then his face suddenly brightened.
“ Ah! I have it. You must use motor-tractors
instead of horses. That’s it. Motor-tractors are what
you must have. No horses at all. Now, don’t forget
it, Spinkston. It’s most important. You understand? ”
“ Yes, sir,” replied the little boy tearfully. “ I’ll
tell father about it when I go home.”'
The Head nodded approvingly and picked up
another paper.
“ Something different now. Middleton late for
prayers, and Rusher reported for breaking one of the
school windows with a stone from his shanghai. Now,
Middleton, what is your excuse? ”
“Please, sir,” pleaded Middleton, who was a fat,
red-faced boy, “ I had to feed the chickens on Friday
and I missed my train.”
“ So, so,” said the Head —“ then Friday is the only
day on which your chickens are fed ? Like the snakes
in the zoo, eh! Only once a week? ”


“ No, sir,” stammered Middleton, “ they’re fed
every day.”
“ And you feed them? ”
“ Yes, sir.”
“Then why particularize about Friday?” The
Head Master frowned sceptically. “ No, no, Middle-
ton; it won’t do. You were late on Friday not because
you had to feed the chickens, but because you either
didn’t get up early enough or else you spent too long
over your bacon and eggs.” He waved his hand as if
to dismiss the whole matter. “My punishment is—
you take a dozen eggs up to the hospital to-morrow.
Now do you agree? ”
“ Yes, sir,” replied Middleton promptly, and look-
ing very much relieved.
“ And now, Rusher,” continued the Head, “ what
about you? Caught red-handed, I suppose, using your
catapult about the school? ”
“ Yes, sir,” replied the boy almost inaudibly.
“No excuses,” asked the Head, “no mitigating
circumstances, no explanations of any kind? ” The
boy shook his head. “ Just sheer, wilful disobedience
of the rules of the school? ”
“ Yes, sir,” said the boy again, very quietly.
There was a long silence and then the Head sighed.
“ I had a catapult myself, once,”' he said musingly,
and more as if speaking to himself than to the
assembled boys, “ and I believe I was very proud of it.
It had notches cut in it for every bird I had killed. It
was very cruel.” He suddenly leant forward to young


Rusher. “ Now, had yours got notches cut in, too? ”
“ Yes, sir,” replied the boy.
“ Little notches for the sparrows, and bigger notches
for the large birds, eh? ”
“Yes, sir,” again.
“ Ah! ” The Head dropped back into his chair
and stared fixedly out through the window. A strange
chord had been stirred in him and he was going back
in memory to the years of long ago. He had been a
careless boy himself then at school, and he smiled now
at his thoughts. He, too, had hated Latin; he, too,
had been late for chapel, and undeniably he had been
caught with catapults.
“ Egad, but I was a bad boy then! ”' he said sud-
denly, aloud. “ A regular litde bad egg, I must have
been.”
He looked round at the assembled boys and then
frowned heavily. Quite unwittingly, he realized, he
had spoken his thoughts and now, mindful of his
lapse, he searched among his audience for any signs
of levity or amusement.
But all there were grave as mutes. They were too
uncertain and too puzzled to be amused. They stood
waiting for the breaking of the storm.
Suddenly the Head smiled. He picked up the
bundle of canes and threw it into the corner.
“ It’s peace to-day, boys, and I shan’t cane any of
you, but mind you ” —he looked menacing and stern
—“ I put you on your honour—you must try hard not
to be sent here again.” He shook his head sadly.


“ You see, my boys. I’m really very sorry for some of
you. You are round pegs in square holes and a good
many of you have no business at all to come to this
college, for you are learning some things that will be
of poor service to you in after-life.” He shrugged his
shoulders and smiled sardonically. “ But I can’t help
it; you’re the victims of a vicious social system. You’re
sent here, many of you, not because you will learn
what will best fit you for the years to come, but simply
because it’s considered the correct thing in certain
circles for everyone who’s supposed to have a little
money to send his boys to St. Benger’s. Your parents,
apparently, only just want you to be able to say when
you’ve grown up: ‘ Oh, yes, I went to St. Benger’s.
I was educated there. Old Bottles often gave me the
stick! ’ You needn’t grin, Stubbins. I’ve got ears as
well as eyes, and my study windows are not always
closed.” He pursed his lips in scorn. “ Yes, that’s all
it is. For so many, this barren, empty, useless pride.
You’re just pitch-forked here as an adjunct to the fur-
coats, the electric washers, and the eight-cylinder
motor-cars that your parents can afford to buy. But
you must realize my position and how I am placed.
This college takes your parents’ money and I, as its
Head Master, must give them what they pay for, in
return. So Stubbins must learn his Kings of Israel,
Pilcher must ‘ bonus—bona—bonum,’ Middleton must
not be late at prayers, and Rusher must keep his
shanghais at home. It’s all in the contract that I have
to carry out.”


He stood up and smiled in some amusement at the
boys.
“ Well, you can all go this morning. I’ll let you off
this time.”
There was a moment’s silence and then a low voice
—it was Stubbins —murmured: “ Thank you, sir! ”to
be immediately followed by a chorus of ‘ Thank you’s ’
from the other boys as they filed slowly out.
“ Mr. Marker, ” said the Head, when, a little later,
he chanced upon the Latin Master in the quadrangle,
“ if you can arrange it, please, I should like fewer boys
to be sent up to me for punishment in future.” He
smiled pleasantly as if to soften the reproach. “ You
know, Marker, it’s a bad master who relies upon the
cane.”
The Latin Master coloured in annoyance. He was
old and crabby, and had been at St. Benger’s years
longer even than the archdeacon himself, and he was
netded, as well as surprised, to be made the subject of
reproof. He, alone, of all the masters, was on some-
what familiar terms with the Head.
“ Whom the Lord loveth, He chastens,” he growled.
The archdeacon poked him slyly in the ribs. “ But
you’re not the Lord, Marker. You must remember
that.”
* * *
During all that week, following upon the example
set by the Head, quite a happy spirit of friendliness
setded over St. Benger’s, and the boys themselves con


tributed not a little to the general atmosphere of con-
tent. They were certainly less obstreperous and, as far
as conduct was concerned, there were no flagrant
breaches of the rules of the school.
“What’s come over the young beggars? ” asked
Henderson, the Science Master, on the Thursday after-
noon in the common-room. “I’ve only given two
impositions so far this week.”
“ Epidemic of plague, I think,” grunted old Barker,
sourly. “ They’re all sickening for some disease. I
left my handkerchief on my desk this morning, and no
one cleaned the blackboard with it when I was away.”
The boys were seeing a lot more of their Head
Master, too, for not a little to their surprise he appeared
often upon the playing-grounds during the periods of
recess. He took quite an interest in their games and
chatted almost as if he were one of them himself.
But it was on the Saturday following that it was
destined he was to astonish everybody most.
It was the annual inter-sports day and, according to
the yearly custom, St. Benger’s was to be engaged in
friendly rivalry with the neighbouring College of King
John’s.
The day was always arranged for during the middle
of the summer term, and great interest was invariably
occasioned as to which college would be successful in
the greater number of events. The colleges took it in
turns for the contests to be decided upon their respec-
tive grounds, and this year it was at St. Benger’s that
the sports were to take place.
6


King John’s was another of the great colleges of
South Australia and the rivalry between it and St.
Benger’s was always keen, both in scholarship and
upon the playing fields. Its Head Master was the Rev.
Andrew McTavish, who, true to his name, was born
north of the Tweed. About the same age as the arch-
deacon, he was, however, most unlike him in appear-
ance. He was spare and thin to look upon, with a
long face and grizzled hair, and he had a straight and
rather severe mouth, but kind-looking and gentle light-
blue eyes. In his speech he was witty with a dry,
caustic humour.
The two head masters, in the ordinary way, asso-
ciated very little with one another and, indeed, rarely
had speech together except upon the playing fields
when their respective schools were in rivalry. If at
other times they happened to encounter one another
they were wont to nod distantly and pass on.
There was dislike upon both sides. The archdeacon
considered McTavish as of poor birth and a schismatic,
and the latter regarded the archdeacon as both a prig
and a snob.
Imagine, therefore, the surprise of Mr. and Mrs.
McTavish to receive, in the middle of the week, a most
cordially-worded invitation from Archdeacon and Mrs.
Bottleworthy to come to luncheon on the inter-sports
day. Mrs. McTavish laughed rather bitterly. “ And
I suppose they think they’re doing the great thing now
in inviting us,” she sniffed, “ but I know exactly what
it’ll be. Just a hole-and-corner scratch meal, with no


one there but ourselves. They won’t ask any of their
grand friends to meet us and it’s just done to patronize
—that’s all.”
“ Then we won’t go,” said Mr. McTavish at once.
“ I don’t want to have any more dealings with Botde-
worthy than I can help. I detest the man. We won’t
go, I say.”
“ Nonsense,” replied his wife, with decision, “ of
course we’ll go. I want to see the old curmudgeon in
his own house. I’ll love to see how he carries on at
home. Besides, if we don’t go, they will think we are
afraid,” She nodded her head viciously. “ Yes, we’ll
just go and peck at the lunch and be very distant all
the time. You can look bored and I’ll wear my new
taffeta. We’ll hardly speak a word.”
It was not destined, however, that the plan of Mrs.
McTavish should be carried out, at any rate in its en-
tirety. They both went to the luncheon sure enough,
and the good lady certainly did wear her new taffeta,
but then after that all her intentions met with an
abrupt decease, and the whole plan of campaign fell
ignominiously through.
The archdeacon happened to encounter them as
they were entering the school grounds, and from that
very moment he was amiability and friendliness itself.
“ I’m so glad you’ve come,” he said heartily. “ I’m
afraid we gave you very short notice, but it was only
at the very last moment that we thought of having any
luncheon party at all.” He lowered his voice con-
fidingly. “My wife said I was getting quite an old


fogey and must really make myself more sociable to
my friends.”
Mrs. McTavish bowed stiffly and gave him a very
limp hand. The archdeacon, however, shook it
warmly and held it, she thought, for quite an un-
necessary time.
“ My word ! ” he exclaimed gallantly, “ but you do
look young! Fancy now, you being the mother of a
graduate in honours! Oh, yes, of course, I’ve heard
about your boy. Bachelor of Arts and a first class in
classics! Now that’s the sort of man I want here.”
He nodded his head emphatically. “ I must speak to
your husband about it and see if your boy would
come.”
In spite of her animosity, Mrs. McTavish flushed
with pleasure. Her only son was the pride of her life,
and the archdeacon, like a conqueror, was stabbing
through the chinks of her armour. A master at St.
Benger’s! Of course, her boy would not accept, but it
was very gratifying to be asked, all the same.
Mrs. Botdeworthy appeared at that moment and
carried her off, leaving the two head masters by them-
selves.
“ Now, come along, McTavish,” said the arch-
deacon briskly, “ I want to show you all the arrange-
ments we have made and see if they quite meet with
your approval.”
He linked his arm with that of the Head Master of
King John’s and together they paraded the school
grounds.


Although it was still early, there were a good few
of the boys and their relatives about, not only the St.
Benger’s boys but those of King John’s as well, and
the head masters were kept busy taking off their hats
the whole time.
“ Nice-looking lot of boys, yours,” remarked the
archdeacon, “ and well-behaved too. There’s one
thing I will say—l don’t think I ever remember see-
ing any of them misbehave themselves in the streets!
He made a grimace. “ I only wish I could say the
same of mine.”
Mr. McTavish swallowed something in his throat.
He was feeling very embarrassed. He had come to St.
Benger’s determined to be as cold and formal as was
consistent with bare politeness and expecting a like
frigidity from the archdeacon had prepared himself at
all points for the fray.
But such friendliness upset his plans altogether. The
archdeacon, without doubt, intended to be as friendly
as he possibly could be—quite naturally friendly, too,
without any straining for effect.
They walked round together and inspected all the
arrangements that had been made, and then, on their
return to the school garden, the archdeacon took out
his watch.
“ Still a few minutes to go,” he said. “ Now what
do you say—what do you say ” —he looked knowingly
at McTavish—“ to just a wee appetizer before lunch? ”
- The Head Master of King John’s promptly shook
his head. “ It’s against ma preenciples,” he replied


stolidly. “I’m almost teetotal and never drink be-
tween meals.”
“ Same here,” said the archdeacon quickly. He
looked round guiltily and dropped his voice to a whis-
per. “In fact, I don’t know what Mrs. Bottleworthy
would say if she knew I had suggested it; but still, still,
this is a special occasion and ” —he hesitated a moment
—“ myself, I’m almost inclined to risk it.”
“ It’s against ma preenciples,” replied McTavish
again.
“ I’m opening some special champagne,” went on
the archdeacon, still whispering. “ We’ve got the
Governor and Lady Ekin coming, and I want to test
a bottle to make sure the wine is not corked.”
McTavish opened his eyes in surprise. The
Governor and his lady coming! Then it wasn’t going
to be the hole-and-corner lunch his wife had expected,
after all!
“ Dr. Bunions will be here, too,” continued the
archdeacon, “ and he’s a great judge of wine.”
“ Champagne is a fine medicine, certainly,” ad-
mitted McTavish cautiously, after a moment’s thought,
“ when used, of course, at the proper time.”
“Exactly,” exclaimed the archdeacon with relief,
and as if a great burden had been lifted off his mind.
He poked McTavish slyly in the ribs. “ It’s a medi-
cine, as you say, and we’re both feeling rather low,”
and with no more ado he laid his hand upon his com-
panion’s arm, and drew him unresistingly through the
french windows into the study.


A few minutes later Mrs. Bottleworthy was anxiously
waiting to give the order for the luncheon to be served.
All who were expected were present, except her hus-
band and Mr. McTavish, and she imagined they were
still out in the grounds.
“ It must be some yery important matter that is
keeping them,” she apologized to the company gener-
ally. “My husband is never late and I can’t think
what has happened.”
“ Oh, when these schoolmasters get together,” said
the Governor smilingly, “ they’re worse than old ladies
any day. I expect they’ve quite forgotten us and are
absorbed in mapping out some new forms of punish-
ment for their boys.” He raised his eyes piously.
“ Thank heaven my school-days are over and their de-
liberations will not affect me.”
A hearty laugh was heard outside, and, the door
opening, the two absentees appeared. The archdeacon
was profound in his apologies for keeping everyone
waiting, and, Mr. McTavish having been duly intro-
duced, the party proceeded into lunch.
The meal certainly promised to be an excellent one,
and Mr. McTavish, catching his wife’s eye, gave her
what was intended to be an agreeably surprised wink.
“ But what kept you waiting so long, Augustine? ”
asked Mrs. Botdeworthy of her husband, when the
guests had settled down.
“ Business, my dear, business,” replied the arch-
deacon airily. “ Mr. McTavish and I had some most
important matters to discuss.”


“ I was suggesting,” observed the Governor banter-
ingly, “ that you were devising some new forms of
torture for the wretched boys. Thumb-screws and
scourges, for instance, instead of detentions and canes.”
“ Not at all, not at all,” replied the archdeacon
smilingly, “ for our present resources are quite ade-
quate for all contingencies that may arise. It was just
business that kept us and we forgot the flight of time.”
“Business, eh? ” commented the short, stout and
famous Dr. Bunions, of North Terrace, “ but I thought
I heard the popping of a cork as I passed by the study
door! ”
A short silence followed and then a ripple of laughter
ran round the room, in which the archdeacon joined.
“ My good friend, Mr. McTavish,” he began, with
his eyes twinkling, “ was in need of some little ”
“ No, no, dinna ye put it down to me,” broke in the
Head of King John’s quickly, dropping humorously
into his broadest Scotch. “It was ye who were the
tempter with yer wire-cutter and yer honeyed words.
Ye were the serpent in the garden this day.”
Thereupon the archdeacon laughed as heartily as
anyone and the meal proceeded under the happiest
conditions possible. Mrs. McTavish, in particular, was
enjoying herself, and, at the same time, wondering
how she could ever have been so mistaken about the
archdeacon. He was a courtly English gentleman and
there was not a trace of snobbery about him. He was
kind and considerate to everyone and particularly so,
it seemed, to her husband.


Presently, the matter of the afternoon’s sports came
up and the archdeacon was emphatic that St. Benger’s
would win the rubber of the nine events.
“ No, there’s no hope for you, McTavish,” he re-
marked, “ we’ve got you fair and square this time.”
“Ye think ye have,” sniffed McTavish grimly,
“ but there’ll be one or two leetle upsets that ye don’t
expect.”
“ We’ve got you in the Hundred Yards,” said the
archdeacon, “ the Half-mile and the Hurdles, for cer-
tain. Then, we’re pretty sure of at least one of the
Jumps, and the ‘ Old Boys ’ will be a walk-over for
us.”
“ Pooh! pooh! ” said McTavish, “ but I dinna give
ye any of them for certain. We’ve got a new runner,
I may tell ye, who’s a champion, and we’ll take all the
events up to half a mile,”
“ Our boy, Stubbins, has, so to speak, won the
Hundred Yards already,” replied the archdeacon em-
phatically, “ and it’s only a matter there of folding up
the tape.”
“ Stubbins! ” sniffed McTavish contemptuously,
“ why our Mcßobertson will beat him by ten yards.”
“ Not at all,” retorted the archdeacon. “ Stubbins
will win there, I repeat.”
“ No,” insisted McTavish. “ Mcßobertson’s the
pea.”
“ Stubbins, I say,” said the archdeacon.
“ Gentlemen, gentlemen,” implored the Governor
in mock distress. “ Remember you are head masters.”


Both the archdeacon and Mr. McTavish laughed
heartily.
“ Well, anyhow,” said the former, when the laugh-
ter died down, “ I’ll wager you a cigar that St.
Benger’s is top dog to-day.”
“ Done,” replied Mr. McTavish prompdy, “ and
Sir Robert shall umpire the bet. But who’s yer cham-
pion, pray, in the ‘ Old Boys ’ race ” he went on.
“ Ours is Wagstaff. At least we think he’s our best.”
The archdeacon smilingly waved his hand. “ Ours
is my young friend, Mr. Grainger, here, sitting next to
my daughter.” He laughed slyly. “ He’s a most de-
termined young fellow and will stick it, every inch of
the race.”
They all looked interestedly at Harold Grainger, and
the latter coloured slighdy, under the general regard.
“ Good gracious! ” suddenly continued the arch-
deacon. “ I quite forgot. Now what are you eating,
Grainger? ” He looked anxiously down the table.
“ None of that trifle, I hope. You can’t run on that.”
“ On the contrary, Mr. Grainger,” advised McTavish
with a grin, “ have two helpings, with plenty of
cream. Ye’ll run ten yards better, after a heavy meal.”
But neither counsel fell upon very attentive ears, for
young Grainger, at that moment, had no interest at
all in anything so earthly as eating or drinking.
Instead, profound and tumultuous emotions were
holding him in their sway, and all his thoughts were
centred upon Margaret Bottleworthy, now sitting by
his side.


Always, from his late boyhood, the archdeacon’s
daughter had possessed his thoughts, and all his young
manhood she had been his divinity, from afar. Now
for the first time he had been brought closely into liv-
ing actual contact with her. He was speaking to her
alone, he was looking into her eyes, and he was watch-
ing the delicious play of her lips as she spoke to him
in return. He could catch the perfume, too, of her
hair as she leant towards him, and once, when their
hands touched, he was stung as if by the scorch of
some consuming fire. He was the moth before the
candle of love, and nothing mattered to him but his
nearness to the flame.
* * *
It was a Homeric contest between the two colleges
that afternoon.
To begin with, King John’s won the Half-mile with
the greatest of ease; first, second and third, with none
of the St. Benger’s boys giving serious fight. Then
the High Jump fell to them also, but —it must be said,
to St. Benger’s credit —only by a bare inch.
There were glum faces, among the home party, and
only the archdeacon’s equanimity was in no wise un-
disturbed.
“ Tut-tut,” he exclaimed confidently, making use
of his favourite exclamation, “ the battle’s only just
beginning and we shall gather strength as we go along.
Bumbletoes will win the Hurdles straightaway. He’s


a marvel over the sticks. After that, too, everything
will go swimmingly.”
And sure enough, the archdeacon’s optimism was
at once rewarded, for Master Bumbletoes won the
Hurdles exactly as he pleased. Jumping like the pro-
verbial cat, he just played with his opponents from
start to finish. He won easing up, with a smile from
ear to ear, and was carried shoulder-high past his
admiring parents to the dressing-room.
Then St. Benger’s won the Quarter-mile. Not by
yards, it is true, for only by hard-won inches could
Fraser finally peg his opponents back. Still, it was a
good win and the youth well deserved the acclamations
that followed.
“Two all, Archdeacon,” said McTavish grimly.
“ Poor leetle King John’s is giving ye quite a run, any-
how.”
The two head masters were certainly the best of
friends, and their unexpected cordiality was much
commented upon by the parents present.
“ Archdeacon Bottleworthy’s quite a gentleman,”'
remarked Mrs. Pullet, whose husband worked in a
Government office, “ and he evidently thinks quite a
lot of our Mr. McTavish, and so he ought. McTavish
is a splendid fellow, though I do wish his wife
wouldn’t wear such dreadful shoes.”
The Long Jump went to King John’s and, to the
great consternation of St. Benger’s, the Obstacle Race
too.
“ We’re beaten,” grunted old Harker, to the other


masters. “We can’t possibly win the next three events
off the reel.”
“ I’m not so sure of that,” exclaimed Riddle. “ I’d
like to bet anybody an even fiver anyhow that we win
the next two.”
But there was general gloom all round and no
acceptance was forthcoming of the junior mathemati-
cal master’s sporting offer. Besides Riddle, only the
archdeacon himself seemed hopeful, and the Head of
St. Benger’s was still all smiles and confidence.
“ We shall get the Mile right enough,” he said,
“ and then Stubbins will win the Hundred Yards.”
But suddenly, to the consternation of all concerned,
a dreadful rumour began to gain currency among the
officials of St. Benger’s. From where it first emanated
no one knew, but in a few moments it caused a great
bestirment in the home camp.
Stubbins had been hocussed —he had been got at by
the other side! There was no doubt about it! He
had eaten four meat pies!
All the afternoon, it was remembered now, he had
been noticed in the vicinity of the refreshment tent,
and scheming minds and bulging purses had no doubt
deliberately encompassed his downfall.
The junior mathematical master was one of the first
to hear of it, and in great concern he rushed off to find
the Head.
“ Stubbins is gorging on pies, sir,’’ he gasped.
“ He’s eaten four of them already, and he won’t be
fit to run.”


The archdeacon paled in dismay, “Pies,” he
ejaculated, “ and four of them! Good heavens! We
have been out-generalled! We must find him. Quick!
He must be given an emetic, if he’s not been hidden
away.”
But there proved to be no question of any hiding
away, for the devouring Stubbins was found easily
and at once in the refreshment tent and—oh horrors!
—he was holding an enormous pasty in either
hand.
“ Stubbins,” roared the archdeacon, “ you soulless
little wretch! What have you eaten? ”
Examination and cross-examination proceeded at
lightning speed and it was very quickly elicited that
the four meat pies were by no means the whole of the
tale.
Buttered Londons, hot pasties and ice-creams made
up the full dreadfulness of the confession, and in a
couple of minutes, with a stern guard on either side,
the gorging but still unsatisfied Stubbins was hurried
quickly away.
An emetic was insisted upon, and by the chemistry
master’s advice a rush was immediately made for hot
mustard and water; but at this stage of the proceedings
the patient became truculent, and so in the end it was
decided that he should simply be kept fasting instead.
St. Benger’s won the Mile as the Head had pre-
dicted. Their chief representative ran a most confident
race and the issue, after the first few hundred yards,
was never in doubt.


“ Hurrah, hurrah,” roared out St. Benger’s. “ Well
run, sir, well run! ”
Then, at last, came the Hundred Yards, and seven
white-faced and nervous-looking boys lined up in front
of the starter. The eighth boy was not nervous at all.
He was the redoubtable Stubbins and it seemed that
his courage had been inflamed, rather than submerged,
by the consumption of pasties and meat pies. At any
rate, he alone of the contestants showed no apprehen-
sion at all. He took up his position with a swaggering
gait, he grinned round impudently at the masters of
his school, he spat upon his hands with the utmost
sang-froid, and it was said, even, that he actually
winked at the Head, when the latter was whispering
to him final instructions as to how the race should be
run.
“ Bang! ” went the pistol, and off like a flight of
swallows darted the boys.
Then followed moments of most terrible suspense
for the supporters of St. Benger’s. There was no sign
of their champion appearing in the front. Forty yards
—fifty yards—sixty —and the consumer of meat pies
was buried in the ruck. Seventy yards —and then,
suddenly a tousled head of black hair was seen bobbing
up right in the middle of the runners! Eighty yards
—and a perfect hurricane of shouting rent the air, for
an impish figure had jerked violently forward, with a
face sensual with the debauchery of pasties and meat
pies!
Stubbins had arrived!


Like a bullet he sped forward, like an avalanche he
burst towards the tape, like Destiny it was impossible
he could be stayed.
It was all over and he had won out completely by
himself. A roar of frenzied cheering burst from the
spectators and Stubbins was immediately surrounded
by a crowd of frantic admirers. His hands were almost
wrenched from him, he was patted violently on the
back, and he ejaculated wotds and phrases that in re-
spectable families are supposed to be unknown to small
boys.
Finally, he was led, or to be more exact, he was
followed, into the refreshment tent, where, as an old
habitue of the place, he at once nonchalantly resumed
his accustomed stool by the counter, sacrosanct to the
consumption of pasties and meat pies.
In the meantime, the contestants were stripping for
the Old Boys’ Race, and it would convey no idea of
the precise conditions to say that excitement ran high.
Everything was now depending upon this last race.
“ Grainger,” said the archdeacon impressively, “ if
we don’t win, never you speak to me again.”
“ And if we do, sir,” replied young Grainger
quietly, “ what then? ”
The archdeacon looked at him smilingly and then,
all in a moment, his smile faded and died away. In
the midst of foolishness he realized that he was in Life.
He was playing with fire.
He was encouraging this youth, it came suddenly
to him. As a man himself, and not too old to have


forgotten the divine stirrings of his younger days, he
knew quite well where young Grainger’s longings lay,
and it made him all at once —afraid.
This youth was in love with his daughter and
through him, if he were not careful, might be carried
on the continuance of his line. It was a tremendous
thing to consider. The two streams of their blood
would mingle and a bond of flesh would be between
them.
Then the archdeacon smiled again. Well, why not?
he asked himself, and his eyes took in admiringly the
young man’s face and form. A nice face and a good
face and a body clean and strong. Lithe, virile limbs
and the whole appearance —just the very kind to make
a young girl proud.
The archdeacon patted Harold Grainger kindly on
the shoulder.
“ Fortune ever favours the brave,” he said enig-
matically, “ and I’m not quite an old fool, although it
does happen I’m an archdeacon.”
Young Grainger crimsoned up to the very roots of
his hair. He had not dreamed his query would be
taken seriously, but, realizing now that it had been,
the sympathetic nature of the reply thrilled him to a
great hope
“ All right, sir,” he said confidently. “ I’ll give
them the run of the afternoon.”
And certainly St. Benger’s did give King John’s the
run young Grainger had promised.
There were six selected runners, three from each of
7


the colleges, but it was mainly upon Wagstaff and
young Grainger that all eyes were turned.
The race was for three hundred yards and, to the
consternation of St. Benger’s Grainger made quite a
bad beginning. He got off slowly and lost a good
three yards at the start, but instantly he made an
amazing recovery and at thirty yards was practically
on terms again. At any rate, he had actually drawn
level with the King John’s crack at that distance, and
from then onwards there was no separating the pair.
Locked together, they shot away from all the others.
Foot by foot and stride by stride they ran, as if they
were one man, and finally, to a hurricane of cheers,
they both breasted the tape in the self-same fraction of
a second.
“Dead heat! ”
Everyone had expected the verdict, and for the
moment a pandemonium of excitement reigned. Four
and a half wins each! A tie and never had such a
thing happened before!
There was a hurried consultation of the sports com-
mittee, a great bobbing of heads, and then it was
announced that the dead heat must be run off. Ten
minutes was to be allowed for the contestants to re-
cover their breath and refresh.
The archdeacon was in great feather. So far from
being depressed at the turn events had taken, he
seemed of everyone the most delighted.
“ A glorious contest, McTavish,” he exclaimed. “ I
would not have missed it for worlds. A veritable


battle of the gods. A race the boys will remember all
their lives.”
“ The committee are men of no imagination,”
growled McTavish. “Far better to have left it as a
draw. Then we could have all gone home happy.”
He shrugged his shoulders gloomily. “ Now, half of
us will go home in tears.”
There was an intense hush everywhere when the
two champions again took their places in front of
the starter. The gossip of the elders had died down
and the raucous treble of the small boys was stilled.
Indeed to many of the young ones it was the most
intense moment, hitherto, of all their lives. The
honour of their respective schools was in the melting
pot and under many a small, tight waistcoat a little
heart beat tremulously.
“ Bang,” and the race which was to decide every-
thing had started. A mighty roar rang out and then
■ —instantly—it was merged into a still mightier wail
of “O—o—oh! ”
Grainger had got away like a greyhound, but
Wagstaff had slipped violently and fallen to his side.
He made no attempt to regain his feet, but instead
lay clutching one of his ankles, with his face drawn
up into an expression of great pain.
For a few yards, Grainger ran at his utmost speed
and then sensing from the exclamations of the crowd
that something unexpected had happened, he glanced
like lightning over his shoulder, to find that he was
running alone. Instandy he looked back, and then


realizing what had happened, immediately stopped
running and with no hesitation returned quickly to
where his opponent lay. He bent down and made to
help him to his feet.
A sudden hush had fallen on the crowd; the shout-
ing was all stilled, and for the moment it seemed that
no one could quite grasp what was taking place. Then
the generosity of young Grainger’s action broke sud-
denly upon them, and a great roar of cheering rose
from all round the field.
“ Bravo, Grainger! Bravo! ” they yelled, and they
surged impetuously over the ropes to where he stood.
In a moment he was the centre of a cheering and
excited crowd, and with great difficulty the officials
pushed their way through.
The archdeacon patted him delightedly upon the
back.
“ Excellent,” he exclaimed enthusiastically, “ the
action of a gentleman! I’m proud of you.” He
turned to the committee-men. “ Our representative
declines to complete the course, so the dead heat must
stand.”
The injured man was lifted up and it was found
that he had sprained his ankle.
The Head Master of King John’s sprang up on to a
chair.
“ Ladies and gentlemen,” he called out, “ and boys
of my own school. lam sure that there is not a single
person here who is not glad that things are to be
allowed to remain as they are. St. Benger’s, to-day,


has given us a magnificent example of true sportsman-
ship and although upon some future occasion we may
reasonably hope to beat them in the race-events, I am
quite sure we shall never be able to excel them in the
courtesy and generosity that they have exhibited to-
wards us this afternoon. Three cheers now for St.
Benger’s.”
“ Three cheers for St. Benger’s,” yelled the King
John’s boys.
“ Three cheers for King John’s,” yelled back the
St. Benger’s boys.
There was cheering and shouting everywhere, and
not a face was to be seen that was not happy and
beaming with smiles.
“ One thing more,” called out Mr. McTavish.
“ Three cheers now for Archdeacon Bottleworthy.
Now then—hip, hip, hooray! ”
A perfecdy thunderous cheer followed immediately,
and it was so vociferous and so prolonged that, in spite
of an attempt at nonchalance and sang-froid, the arch-
deacon became visibly affected. The easy smile died
from his face, he drew in the corners of his mouth and
then—then, was it a tear, or only just a fleck of dust,
that he wiped furtively from the corner of his eye?
# * *
“And who said that Botdeworthy wasn’t popular
at St. Benger’s,” remarked the Governor when later
he and his wife were being driven home in their car.


“ Why, the old blighter seems quite an idol with the
boys, and yet up to to-day I’ve always thought of him
as a pompous old fool, detested by them all.”
* * *
Later that evening Margaret and young Grainger
were sitting, in the walled garden, under the trees.
They talked casually together, but always he was
watching her, and always —she turned away her eyes.
They spoke of ordinary matters and they sat quite far
apart upon the garden seat. Two very ordinary young
people, anyone would have said. Just a pretty girl and
a nice, clean-looking boy. All the observances of their
class lay between them, and the customs and conven-
tions of the community in which they lived. She —
was just ‘ Miss Bottleworthy ’ to him and he—was
just ‘ Mr. Grainger ’to her. So matter-of-fact, so com-
monplace, and just the everyday politeness of a boy
and girl thrown together for the moment —alone.
And yet —yet, had the veil been lifted, and had the
secrets of the heart been known, nothing about them
was ordinary, nothing about them was conventional,
and it was no walled garden that hemmed them in!
It was a wide and mighty world in which they
breathed, a world of phantasy, a world of dreams.
They were both sleeping too, and, in their sleep their
thoughts were all of one another and they shivered
and they sighed delicious sighs.
Nothing would wake them for awhile and all the


thundering facts of Life would pass unheeded—for
their sleep was deep, and heavy with the opiate dreams
of Love.
Foolishness! foolishness! and dreams that fade and
die! Yet, may Heaven in some way compensate those
who have not so dreamed and sighed!
* * *
As the archdeacon was just getting into bed that
night he remarked casually to his wife:
“ I think, dear, we ought to invite young Grainger
up to dinner next week. He’s a nice young fellow,
and he certainly brought great credit upon St. Benger’s
to-day.”'
“ Very well, Augustine,” replied his wife meekly.
“ I’ll write to him to-morrow.”
“Oh! no, don’t do that,” said the archdeacon.
“ Just invite him incidentally when you see him at the
bishop’s garden party on Monday.”
“ But he mayn’t be there, Augustine. He mayn’t
be able to be away from his work.”
The archdeacon smiled grimly as he switched off
the light.
“ I think he’ll manage it somehow, Theresa. I
heard Margaret mention to him that she was going
and, as I have remarked once or twice before, he’s a
most determined young man. Yes, he’ll be there
right enough.”


CHAPTER V
MR. TWIGGS BECOMES FRIVOLOUS
THE bishop’s garden party upon the following
Monday afternoon was favoured with delight-
ful weather, and at the appointed hour the
faithful and unfaithful from all parts of the city were
disporting themselves with dignity and decorum upon
the episcopal lawn.
All who were of importance in church circles had
gathered together there and many who were of no
importance at all. The company, like a box of
assorted biscuits, was mixed.
The great Lady Fitz-Tootle was present and Mrs.
Bangs also, the butcher’s lady from Walkerville. Mr.
and Mrs. Wopple-Smith, the millionaire cattle-owners
from Alice Springs, were there, and likewise Miss
Piper, the young person who typed at the Church rum-
mage shop in Butler Square. Dr. Hoop-Brown, too,
who had incised some of the wealthiest cuticles in all
Australia was much in evidence, in the same way as
Mr. Box, who at Bundle Street corner kept the chew-
ing-gum and candy store.
And so on, with hosts of other people, both of high
and low degree.
Outwardly, at all events, they appeared to constitute


a most happy and harmonious crowd, for whatsoever
opinions they may have been holding privately of one
another, the very sanctity of their surroundings for the
moment blotted out all memories of social inequalities
and masked in smiles the faces of great and small alike.
Nearly all the clergy of the diocese were there and
they moved to and fro among the guests, like glad
shepherds shepherding their flocks.
There was activity and conversation everywhere
and, as the stimulating effect of the tea and cakes
began gradually to make themselves felt, the animated
voices of the revellers rose, anthem-wise, upon the air.
The Archdeacon of the Cathedral was, of course,
among the guests and it needed no second glance to
see that he was in an excellent humour with himself.
He was very different, however, from the purposeful
Head Master of the previous week, for now a spirit of
careless and light-hearted levity seemed to be possess-
ing him. He had a joke and a jest and was all smiles
for everyone, poking fun at his friends and acquaint-
ances, with his witty sallies provoking laughter and
amusement wherever he went. In appearance he was
certainly a credit both to the cathedral and St.
Benger’s, for none there looked so distinguished as he,
and he shone resplendent among the other clergy, like
a sun among the stars. The bishop, even, lacked
something that he possessed —the aristocracy of his
Bearing and the regal bonhomie that he dispensed to
everyone, as he marched along,
“ Don’t know what’s happened to Bottleworthy,”


growled the rector of St. Asaph’s to the vicar of St.
Joan’s. “ He’s generally so stand-offish and distant
and now, to-day, he’s as friendly as if his Easter Offer-
ing were coming round.”
And the rector was not by any means the only one
who was remarking upon the affability of the arch-
deacon. Many people had noticed it, and it was occasion-
ing much conversation over many cakes and cups of tea.
Mrs. Bangs was surprised to be shaken warmly by
the hand and Miss Piper coloured in delight when she
was addressed in a fatherly way as ‘my dear.’ Mr. Box,
too, was elated that his opinion should be asked about
the weather, and lots of other unimportant people were
unexpectedly gratified at the interest taken in their affairs.
Indeed the archdeacon seemed to be bent on mak-
ing himself agreeable to all and sundry whom at other
times he would scarce have noticed with a nod.
Late in the afternoon he found himself in the
vicinity of the great Lady Fitz-Tootle of Fitz-Tootle
Hall, a very important person indeed in her own esti-
mation. Of haughty and aristocratic mien, it was well
known to everyone that it was not her wont to mingle
with any but the most exclusive among the high lights
of Adelaide society, and her presence now at the garden
party was accordingly regarded as a gesture of most
queenly condescension to the sanctity of the lord
bishop’s calling.
A generous patroness of the toilet specialist and the
chemist’s shop, she was an expensively dressed woman
of well beyond middle-age, and this afternoon she was


looking very bored. Hardly speaking a word to any-
one, she stood staring stonily through her lorgnette at
the other guests.
That she was regarding them as decidedly out of
the ordinary was quite apparent, and the pursed-up
lips and elevated eyebrows spoke eloquendy of the
great gulf that a wise and considerate Providence
between her and them had fixed.
She sighed with great relief, therefore, when the
archdeacon came up, and she held out to him a soft,
well-manicured hand. The archdeacon raised his hat
with an air of deference that was quite magnificent
and then, after a few words of greeting, the two sat
down at a small vacant table near at hand.
“ Oh, what a mixed lot! ” murmured the great lady
plaintively. “ I suppose, of course, the poor bishop
had to invite them, but where, oh, where did he find
them all? ”
The archdeacon was all sympathy and understand-
ing at once. “ In the Garden of Eden,” he replied with
an amused smile, “ for they are just ordinary and com-
mon Adams and Eves.” He lowered his voice impres-
sively, “ And the bishop is the serpent who is now trying
to brighten and enliven the monotony of their lives.”
“ But what dreadful people! ” said her ladyship.
“ Dreadful! ” echoed the archdeacon with intense
feeling. “ Why, lam quite sure not half of them
even have got motor-cars.” His voice deepened in
gloom. “ And the worst of it is, we may have to
meet them in heaven later on.”


“ Oh, but that’s very far away, Archdeacon Bottle-
worthy,” said her ladyship reprovingly, “ and many
things may happen before then.”
“ And let’s hope they may,” said the archdeacon
emphatically, “ for no harps or haloes can make up
for their disgraceful lack of cash.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle frowned. The archdeacon was
making fun of her, she felt sure, and for a moment
she glanced at him quizzically. “ But look at the way
some of them are dressed,” she said pityingly, turning
away and ignoring his remark. “ Look at that crea-
ture by the tree there. Now, how many different
colours has she got on? ”
“ Seven,” replied the archdeacon promptly. “ I’ve
counted them already.” He lowered his voice in rever-
ence. “ She reminds me of the seven deadly sins.”
Her ladyship frowned again. Really she could not
understand the archdeacon. She turned the conversa-
tion abruptly.
“ But I’m very worried, Archdeacon Bottle-
worthy,” she said. “ I have nearly a hundred more
invitations to get out for my reception to meet Lord
Sanderson on Friday, and they must all be dispatched
to-night.” She looked very troubled, “ His lordship
arrives here on Friday morning, you know, and I do
so want his first impression of Australia to be a good
one. I want him to be brought straight into contact with
those people who are helping to make Australia great.”
“ Ah, exacdy,” said the archdeacon solemnly, “ I
understand. And so, of course, you are inviting the


farmers, the fruit-growers, the sheep-people, and the
cattle-folk from out-back.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle opened her eyes very wide. “ I
am inviting the people Lord Sanderson would wish to
meet,” she said haughtily; “ the important people in
the city, and the people of class and culture here.”
She smiled and bowed. “ Such as you and I, for in-
stance, Archdeacon.”
But the archdeacon shook his head. His face was
grave and it had lost its bantering look.
“ Our class is not of much account, I am afraid, to
Australia,”' he said sadly. “We are only the froth
upon the surface and the good liquor lies all under-
neath. We are ”
“ We are quite different from the common people,
Archdeacon,” interrupted her ladyship with some
heat, “ and we represent something that they do not.”
Again the archdeacon shook his head. “ The differ-
ence is only on the surface, I say, for as far as wealth
and means are concerned, we have been more fortunate
than they have, and that is all.” He bent towards her and
smiled with great good humour again. “ Now take our
own two cases for example,” he went on, “ and see
where our good fortune has come in.” He looked at her
with great benevolence. “ Now you were a shop assistant
once, in a draper’s, weren’t you, years ago? ”
Lady Fitz-Tootle sat up with a jerk. She stared at the
archdeacon in amazement; she seemed almost to stop
breathing and then, from pallor under her cosmetics,
she reddened furiously, as if she were going to burst.


“ Oh, yes,” continued the archdeacon blandly,
“ everybody knows it. And a very pretty little shop-
girl you were, too, they say.” He went on. “ Well,
you married young Shepley Tootle, not Fitz-Toode
then, whose father had made money in hides, up
Brisbane way, and invested it in real estate. Your
husband’s land inheritances turned out very valuable
ones, and, a prosperous man, he was knighted, just
ten years ago. Unhappily, he died, and later, you came
over to Adelaide and took your place ” —the arch-
deacon made a deep bow here—“ of such importance
in this beautiful city of the plains.” He sighed. “It
is a regret to us all there are no children to carry on the
line.”
Lady Fitz-Toode made no comment; indeed it
seemed that she was no longer listening. She gazed
out stonily at the crowd, but without her lorgnette now,
and her bearing had lost something of its stately pose.
The archdeacon shrugged his shoulders. “ But I
myself have not much to boast of, as regards birth,”
he said smilingly, “ for my grandparents were quite of
the labouring class, and they lived, I know, in a litde
cottage at a rental of a few shillings a week. My
grandfather, I have often heard, was a market gar-
dener in quite a small way and their son, my father,
of course went to the village school. But he was in-
dustrious and persevering and, winning a small
scholarship, he was able to proceed to a higher school,
and later to enter the Church through a third-rate
training college. He had no university education and,


handicapped in every way, he lived and died a poor
curate, with never more than two hundred a year. But
I was more favoured, for my poor father had starved
and scraped to give me good schools and to send me
on to Cambridge. I worked hard, took my degree,
and later was fortunate to marry into a little money.
I came out here to Australia where, as you know,
every sixpence counts for righteousness and ” —the
archdeacon laughed with great good nature —“ here
am I now, a dignitary of the cathedral and Head
Master of the great St. Benger’s College.” He waved
his arm round. “So you see, your ladyship, you and
I are really no different from the others here, only
more fortunate, as I say, and that is all.”
But her ladyship still made no comment and, the
archdeacon having apparently finished all he had to
say, there was silence at the little table.
Two of the other guests at that moment passed near,
a man and a woman. The man was middle-aged and
wore big boots and stiff, awkward-looking clothes. He
had large, horny hands and a strong, pleasant face, and
he was sun-burned to a rich, deep brown. He kept
looking round from side to side, as if he were uncom-
fortable and out of place in his surroundings. The
woman with him was short and stout, and appeared
to be very hot. She had a big, happy, red face, and
her clothes were in much better style than those of her
companion. She seemed very pleased with herself and
to be enjoying everything immensely.
The archdeacon rose suddenly to his feet. “ Ah,”


he exclaimed enthusiastically, “ here are Mrs. Bangs
and her brother, who lives out-back, beyond Oodna-
datta. Most interesting people. I must introduce
you,” and with an energetic wave of his arm, he
beckoned to the passing couple to approach.
But the rosy-cheeked Mrs. Bangs did not appear to
be too willing to comply. She looked uneasily at
Lady Fitz-Tootle and seemed more than half inclined
to pass on. But the archdeacon called out to her.
“ Oh, do come here, please, Mrs. Bangs. I want
to introduce you and Mr. Chickseed to Lady Fitz-
Tootle. Her ladyship is dying to meet you both,” and
he laid his hand upon her ladyship’s arm.
And, indeed, it did almost seem at the next moment
as if Lady Fitz-Tootle were dying of something,
although it was certainly doubtful if the impending
decease had anything at all to do with Mrs. Bangs or
her brother.
Her ladyship had suddenly become hunched-up as
if in pain and there was a look of startled and extra-
ordinary amazement upon her face. She had paled
and whitened to the utmost limit that the rouge
allowed, and she blinked hard several times.
“My smelling salts,” she murmured faintly;
“ quick, in my bag.”
Oh, wonderful sympathy and intuition of all
womankind! It was Mrs. Bangs, of course, who was
promptest in first aid and who at once located the
ammonia-bottle in the exact spot in which it lay
amongst the other vital articles in her ladyship’s bag.


She was most quick and methodical, too, in her
ministrations, and, forcing the salts upon the sufferer,
implored her breathlessly to take a sniff, a deep sniff,
and a strong sniff, until she felt quite herself again.
Mr, Chickseed and the archdeacon looked on with
scared and frightened eyes, the former regarding the
sufferer as anxiously, no doubt, as he was wont to re-
gard sick cows out-back up Oodnadatta way, and the
latter—well the latter was both feeling and looking
very ill himself.
Happily for everyone’s peace of mind, Lady Fitz-
Tootle began to come to very quickly. She took
several very deep breaths and then she smiled as if
she were suddenly amused about something.
“ How—very —very foolish—of—me,” she ex-
claimed faintly. “ I really do not know what did
happen, but it seemed—it seemed that something in
me went click inside.”
“ Take another sniff of the salts,” urged Mrs.
Bangs, sympathetically. “It can’t do you no ’arm,”
you know.”
“ Oh, you are kind, dear Mrs. Bangs,” said Lady
Fitz-Toode. “ I’m sure I should have fainted right
away, if you had not been so quick. I had a dreadful
pain.”
“ Perhaps it was nooralgy or toothache coming on,”
suggested Mrs. Bangs.
“ Oh, how clever of you to think of it! Of course
it was! Now I shall have to ring up at once for an ap-
pointment with Mr. Twiggs.” Her ladyship’s voice took
s


on sharp and decisive tones. “ Mr. Montague Twiggs,
of North Terrace, is the best dentist in all Australia.”
The archdeacon regarded her intently. “ What was
happening,” he asked himself, “ and where had he
heard that expression of opinion before? ” He felt as
if he had just come out of a bad dream.
“ And so this is your brother, Mrs. Bangs,” said her
ladyship with a beaming smile. “I’m store I’m very
pleased to meet you, Mr. Chickseed. You live a long
way from Adelaide, I understand? ”
“ Seven hunnud miles,” said Mr. Chickseed slowly,
regarding Lady Fitz-Tootle interestedly with his clear
blue eyes, “ and two hunnud and fifty miles from the
railway station when I’m at home.” He spoke very
deliberately, his manner of speech seeming almost a coun-
terpart of the measured assurance of his movement.
“ Oh, how interesting,” exclaimed her ladyship
with enthusiasm, “ but how lonely you must be.”
“ Nay,” said Mr. Chickseed solemnly, “ we’ve
neighbours only sixty miles away.”
“ Sixty miles! ” cried Lady Fitz-Tootle, lifting up her
hands, “ and you call them neighbours, at sixty miles ? ”
“ Well,” drawled Mr. Chickseed, “ in th’ opposite
way, it’s hunnuds of miles afore you’d meet anybody
at all.”
“ Oh, how magnificent your courage must be! ”
exclaimed her ladyship with animation, “ to live all
those miles away from shops and civilization! How
brave of you to go so far away from doctors and
clergymen, too! ”


Mr. Chickseed turned at once to stare stolidly at the
archdeacon, for all the world as if he were wondering
to what use that gentleman could be put, ‘ seven hun-
nud miles away.’
“ But you are the splendid souls who make Australia
great,” declaimed her ladyship, raising her voice; “you
are the backbone of the Commonwealth’s prosperity.
It is you who living in those lonely lands out-back
make it possible for us in the cities to grow rich. Yes,
you are the real makers of Australia. We here are
only the froth upon the surface —you are the good
liquor that lies underneath.’'’
Mrs. Bangs mopped her red face energetically. She
was intensely gratified with the interest that Lady Fitz-
Tootle was taking in her brother, but the metaphors
were quite lost upon her, the allusions to froth and liquor
only suggesting forms of refreshment cooler and more
stimulating than cups of tea. She sighed deeply.
The archdeacon was pinching his leg very hard.
Where, he asked himself, frowningly again, had he
heard those very sentiments expressed just recently?
Lady Fitz-Tootle went on with great enthusiasm.
“ Oh, how fortunate it is I met you. You must
both now be introduced to Lord Sanderson at my ‘ At
Home ’on Friday evening. He will be delighted to
talk to you, for you are the very people he has come
out to see. And you must bring your husband, too,
dear Mrs. Bangs, as representative of the commercial
classes of the State.”
But Mrs. Bangs now looked most embarrassed.


“ It’s very good of your ladyship, I am sure,” she fal-
tered slowly, “ but I don’t know as ’ow we can both
leave the shop. We keep open Friday evenings, you
know, until nine o’clock.”
“ Well, you must come afterwards then,” insisted
Lady Fitz-Toode emphatically, “ when you’ve shut up
the shop. I shan’t take any refusal, for it will do you
both good.” She smiled most amiably at Mrs. Bangs.
“You see, I know something about shops, for when
I was quite a young girl I worked in one myself.”
Mrs. Bangs gasped, and the archdeacon stared as if
he were turned to stone. “ Yes, I served behind the
counter at Fenton and Briggs, in Brisbane, for two
years before I married and very tiring I know I found
it.”
She stopped talking and sniffed vigorously at her
smelling salts. No one made any comment. The
archdeacon seemed altogether too astounded to speak,
and Mr. Chickseed, it appeared, was still ruminating
as to what use the reverend gentleman could be put
‘ seven hunnud miles away.’
A moment’s silence, and Mrs. Bangs glanced fur-
tively round to see who among her acquaintances
might be noticing the august company she was in, and
she was at once considerably gratified to observe that
at least one, her friend and neighbour Mrs. Huggins,
was intently absorbing everything with an amazed ex-
pression in her eyes.
Lady Fitz-Tootle took another sniff at her salts and
then hummed sofdy to herself.


“ Rootity-toot, she plays the flute
In a very charming manner —
Pinketty-pong ”
She broke off suddenly and, picking up her lorg-
nette, stared intently into the crowd.
“ I fancy,” she remarked after a moment, “ I fancy,
my dear Mrs. Bangs, that a lady there is trying to attract
your attention. She has passed here several times and
upon each occasion I have noticed that she seems to
be making signs in your direction. It is that lady in
the many colours. Seven, I think the archdeacon
counted, a little while ago.”
Mrs. Bangs beamed with great delight. “ Oh!
that’s my friend, Mrs. ’Uggins,” she explained. “ I
borrowed her hanky a little while ago and I expect
she must be wanting it back. That’s her ’usband with
her; he’s the greengrocer in Rumble Street.”
“ Oh, do introduce me,” exclaimed her ladyship en-
thusiastically. “There will be some more interesting
people to introduce to Lord Sanderson on Friday. I
know he wants to get as much insight as possible into
our commercial life.”
Mrs. Bangs felt most important. “ Sophy, Sophy,”
she called out loudly, “come ’ere, will you? Lady
Fitz-Tootle wants to speak to you, and bring Andy
with you, too. There’s plenty of chairs.”
The multi-coloured Mrs. Huggins opened her eyes
very wide. Lady Fitz-Tootle wanting to speak to her!
It must be a mistake! No, no—it was no mistake!


The great lady was smiling at her and motioning to-
wards a chair!
Mrs. Huggins controlled her feelings with an effort
and rose bravely to the occasion. Although her heart
beat many times faster than usual, she gripped her
husband tightly by the arm and advanced with serene
aplomb towards the table.
But it was different with her lesser half, for Mr.
Andrew Huggins, of greengrocery fame, was obviously
very much overawed, and with most reluctant feet he
dragged behind his triumphant spouse.
He had seen who was seated at the table, but it was
not by any means of Lady Fitz-Tootle that he was the
more afraid. It was Archdeacon Bottleworthy who
was filling him with fear.
All his life long, Andy Huggins had been brought
up in Church circles, and from his early days he had
delivered cabbages and cauliflowers at church-goers’
doors. As a small boy he had sung in church choirs,
as a youth he had been a zealous attendant at church
guilds, and as a grown man he had been wont to
regard church dignitaries as different from all other per-
sons, and as beings of a higher class. So it was border-
ing on the irreverent now, he thought, to approach the
archdeacon on equal terms. It was penetrating into the
holy of holies, it was almost like the uplifting of the veil.
But Lady Fitz-Tootle was quite gushing in her re-
ception as they came up.
“ I am so very pleased to meet you, Mrs. ’Uggins,”
she exclaimed.


“ ’Uggins with a haitch,” corrected the lady
promptly;the ’Ugginses of Hunley Park.”
“Oh yes, of course,” exclaimed her ladyship
brightly, after a pause. “ How very stupid of me. I
remember the name quite well now. The green-
grocery and fruit emporium, just by the Unley Town
Hall. I’ve often bought my tomatoes there.”
Mr. Huggins blinked very hard. He did not at all
know what an emporium was, but it sounded respect-
able and big, and it inspired confidence and import-
ance accordingly.
“ Yes,” went on her ladyship impressively, as the
two Hugginses shuffled into their chairs, “ and you,
Mr. Huggins, and Archdeacon Bottleworthy should
find so many things to interest you both. He himself
comes of good greengrocery stock, I understand, for
he has just told me that his grandfather was a market
gardener, but not by any means of course in such a
big way as you. Indeed, he says his grandfather paid
only a few shillings a week rent.” She turned towards
the archdeacon. “Is that not so, Archdeacon? ”
All eyes were turned at once upon Archdeacon
Bottleworthy. The latter’s face had paled, and it was
damp with perspiration. His mouth was drawn up as
if he were in pain, and for a moment there was a look
about his eyes as of a hunted animal at bay. He
looked afraid, and glanced round as if wanting to hide
somewhere.
Then suddenly, on the turn of a second, so it
seemed, his whole expression altered. The blood of


his curate father —the man who had starved himself so
that his son might go to Cambridge—had stirred in
him, and on the instant his courage all came back.
He straightened himself sharply, the proud lines of his
face reasserted themselves and his lips broke into a
dry smile.
“ Quite so,” he said quietly, “my grandparents
were only tillers of the soil.”' He shrugged his
shoulders sadly. “ But I am afraid, myself, I know noth-
ing of those matters now, for as a clergyman I sow and
reap only in the garden of souls, and there are unhappily
more weeds there than fruit or flowers.”
“ Then it’s that snake that’s doing it,” said her lady-
ship with great decision, “ that serpent in the Garden
of Eden, Archdeacon, that you referred to just now.
He must be gobbling everything up.”
The archdeacon refused to meet her eye. “ Evil is
tolerated now,” he said coldly, “ and the world has
lost its sense of shame.”
“ But the serpent, Archdeacon,” insisted Lady Fitz-
Tootle earnestly, “you really must not blame us for
being tolerant there. We have to be polite to him, you
know, for he’s quite one of the family now.” She
sighed plaintively. “No one, either, in these uncertain
times, can afford to make any enemies unnecessarily,
so we must all put down our little saucers of milk —
and hope for the best. It’s tactful, now, isn’t it? ”
The archdeacon looked scornful, but made no com-
ment, and then suddenly her ladyship rose excitedly
from her chair.


“ But, oh look,” she exclaimed. “ I see Miss
Evangeline Tubbs from The Key-Hole over there.”
She turned, all animation, to the little table. “ Come
now, quick, Mrs. Bangs and Mrs. Huggins. You must
both have your names in The Key-Hole to-morrow
and your hats and frocks described too.”
The two ladies blushed crimson with delight. Fame
and notoriety were descending avalanche-like upon
them. What would their people say?
“ Besides,” went on her ladyship briskly. “ I want
to be introduced to all your friends. They must be
invited to meet Lord Sanderson, too.” She turned
with a winning smile to Mr. Chickseed and Mr,
Huggins. “ Now, I’ll leave you gentlemen to Arch-
deacon Botdeworthy. You won’t mind, will you? ”
She laughed reassuringly. “ He’s quite entertaining,
you know, and will tell you all about the Athanasian
Creed or what’s going to win the Melbourne Cup,
whichever you prefer. So, good-bye, for the moment,”
and off she went, with the quavering Mrs. Bangs and
the quivering Mrs. Huggins in her wake.
* * *
The archdeacon walked home very thoughtfully
that afternoon, and he was so quiet afterwards at
dinner that his wife asked him if he felt unwell.
“ Oh, no dear,” he replied with a smile, and then
added evasively: “ but I think, somehow, I must have
got a touch of sun.”


CHAPTER VI
LADY FITZ-TOOTLE’S RECEPTION
LADY FITZ-TOOTLE’S reception upon the fol-
lowing Friday evening to meet Lord Sanderson,
the great and distinguished traveller, was in
every way a most remarkable success.
There was no doubt about it, and even her severest
critics, in spite of their annoyance and bewilderment
at the very varying social positions of those who had
been invited, had to admit that it was so.
The refreshments were perfect and the quality of
the champagne excellent —likewise the quantity, too.
It is true that in the earlier stages of the proceedings
the guests seemed much inclined to divide themselves
sharply into two distinct parties, and that not a little
embarrassment was observed on several occasions when
certain of them met face to face.
Mr. Pipe-Smith, for instance, was naturally not
over-pleased to rub shoulders with Mr. Puggs, the
tailor, to whom he owed for nine suits of clothes, and
Mrs. Chown thought it hardly nice to meet, socially,
the young person who served her with paint and pow-
der at the chemist’s shop. Mrs. Spragget, also, was
obliged to notice some poor relations she had not


spoken to for years, and the Button-Browns were
greeted—and actually drawn into a brief conversation
—by individuals who lived in a much smaller house
in the same street. Undoubtedly, too, things were
trying in various ways for many others, and surprise
Was expressed that Lady Fitz-Tootle, of all people,
should have been so indiscreet in the invitations that
had been sent out.
But supper quickly proved a great leveller of all
things, and when the champagne corks began to pop
briskly, like a machine-gun in full blast, a great toler-
ance descended on all present; the restraint on all sides
was relaxed and smiles everywhere began to take the
place of frowns.
Lady Fitz-Tootle, herself, was gay and buoyant as a
flapper maiden in her teens, and no one there was
merrier or more bright than she. She had a word for
everyone in turn, and with equal favour she beamed
upon high and low alike.
Lord Sanderson was greatly impressed with every-
thing.
Between fifty and fifty-five years of age, he was a
tall, stout man with a big, important face and large,
innocent blue eyes. He was square in the chest and
round in the waist, and he carried himself stolidly, as
became a member of the House of Lords. He evinced
an almost child-like curiosity in all things appertain-
ing to Australia, for he had come out from the old
country to absorb all the information and knowledge
of the great Commonwealth in about six weeks, with


the intention, upon his return home, of writing a book,
so that the great problem of colonial emigration might
be solved, forthwith, at once and for ever.
And certainly, he thought, his investigations were be-
ginning under the most auspicious circumstances con-
ceivable, at the reception held that evening in his honour.
Hosts of interesting and important people had been
brought up to him; the shining lights of the South
Australian world, he had been informed.
He had been introduced to Mr. Chickseed, the great
catde expert, from hundreds and hundreds of miles
out-back. He had conversed with Mr. Huggins, the
great authority on all things vegetable and green, and
he had been supplied with much and varied informa-
tion by the celebrated Mr. Bangs, whom, he under-
stood, was the last word in everything relating to de-
funct sheep and cows.
Everyone, too, had been most deferential to him and
he could not fail to appreciate the interest and respect
in which he could perceive so plainly he was held.
Altogether he was very satisfied, and in due time
during the evening he expressed himself as such to his
genial and lively hostess.
“ Really, your ladyship,” he began warmly, “ I can
never be grateful enough to you, for the great kindness
you have shown me to-night.” He raised his voice in
his best parliamentary manner. “You have laid bare
to me, all at once as it were, the great heart of Aus-
tralia. I feel my fingers on its mighty pulse.”
“ But, my dear Lord Sanderson,” laughed her lady


ship, “ it’s stomach only you’ve been hearing about, up
to now, the places where it gets its food! ”
The face of his lordship clouded. His own meta-
phor he had thought to be a beautiful one, but its
elaboration thus by his hostess struck him as un-
pleasant, and altogether too physiological to be nice.
“ Well,” he said after a moment, and he smiled
genially, “ everyone has certainly been most kind to
me and most anxious to give me all the information
possible. They are interested, I see, in my mission to
a most remarkable degree.”
“ Oh, my lord,” smiled back Lady Fitz-Tootle in
great amusement, “ but missions like yours are every-
day occurrences to us over here. By every mail-boat,
almost, we are over-run by good people who come to
do Australia in half an hour, and that is no novelty
to us at all.” She looked up archly and tapped him
on the arm. “It is you, my lord, who are the attrac-
tion to us to-night, because you are Lord Sanderson,
a peer of the realm.”
His lordship opened his blue eyes very wide. “ But
Lady Fitz-Tootle,” he exclaimed looking very puzzled,
“ I thought—l thought you were all democrats here
and that titles and class distinctions were of no account
at all.”
“ Pooh! pooh! ” laughed her ladyship. “ Why, we
dote upon a lord! ” She nodded her head emphati-
cally. “ Yes, make no mistake about that, Lord
Sanderson, a title or money and there’s a halo for you
at once over here.” She lowered her voice signifi


candy. “ Poor—and were most particular—money
and no questions asked.”
“ Dear me, dear me!” said his lordship, looking very
surprised, “ but I quite thought that when I came to Aus-
tralia I should find everyone, socially, on equal terms.”
Her ladyship laughed merrily. “ Now, don’t you
idealize us,” she protested. “We are only just
ordinary human beings here, and in our own com-
munity we have all the social vices of any little Eng-
lish provincial town.” She waved her arm round.
“ Why, do you know, Lord Sanderson, that half the
people who are eating and drinking together here, to-
night, won’t even nod to one another when they meet
again in the street to-morrow? They’ll turn their
heads away or else pass by with, perhaps, a stony
stare.” She shook her head solemnly. “ No, no, my
lord, their lives can never mingle, for there are differ-
ences between them greater even than race or creed.
They are separated by a great gulf of cash.”
“ Good gracious! ” said his lordship. “ You don’t
say it’s like that? ” He glanced round the room and
then at once his face brightened. “ Well, they look
very sociable to-night, anyhow,” he remarked. “ It’s
all peace and good-will now, at any rate.”
“All Moet and Chandon,” corrected her ladyship
quickly, “ or else all Black and White. It’s the tolerance
of the animals in the ark. It’s the peace of Noah, my
lord. Yes,” she went on after a moment, “ and the
really amusing part of it is—the most exclusive of us
here have, many of us, risen from nothing at all.”


Lord Sanderson looked very thoughtful, and she
dropped her voice to a confiding whisper. “ Nearly
all the most important people here to-night—thirty
years ago would have come round to my back door, if
they had wanted to speak to me.” She chuckled in
great amusement. “ And I, for one, should have come
there myself.”
A broad smile crossed over Lord Sanderson’s face.
“ Really,” he exclaimed, “ you are most delightfully
candid in your revelations.”
“ And why should I not be? retorted Lady Fitz-
Toode quickly. “ I’ve been more fortunate in my life.
That is all.” She looked up gravely. “ I worked my-
self, Lord Sanderson, as a young girl, in a shop for
fifteen shillings a week, and my husband’s father once
cleaned and sold sheep-skins by the half dozen at a
time.” She shrugged her shoulders. “ And we are
most of us in the same boat, I tell you. Nearly all of
us here.”
“ Very meritorious, then, of you all,” said Lord
Sanderson emphatically, “ and you ought to be very
proud ”
“Yes,” interrupted her ladyship, “ but we are all so
ungrateful about it. That’s the point.” She sighed
heavily. “We will not remember the little people we
Were once, and we pass our lives now trying to forget
the common callings that have made us rich. But
come, my lord,” and she laid her hand ingratiatingly
upon his arm, “I’ve lots more people to introduce to
you yet, and there are lots more of our bush aristocracy


that you have to meet. And besides, I want you, too,
to help on a most interesting little romance.”
“ Romance! ” ejaculated his lordship dryly. “ Then
even in these cold, pecuniary surroundings that you
tell me of there is still—love in the air.”
“ There is always love, Lord Sanderson,” said her
ladyship sharply, “ where young people are, and youth
is always mocking at the sordid calculations of middle-
age.” She sighed. “ A pretty face, a pair of sparkling
eyes, and all this social cant of ours is barren of its
power for ill.” She dropped her voice again into a
whisper. “ A very nice young fellow here is in love
with a very pretty girl, and the girl’s father would like
to spoil the romance. He’s a dreadful old snob, the
father. He’s our archdeacon here. Now, if he sees
you talking to the boy, he’ll think a lot more of him,
and it may go a long way towards unhardening his
Pharaoh-like heart. You won’t mind, will you, Lord
Sanderson? It will be helping on a good cause.”
“Mind?” said his lordship with enthusiasm. “I
shall be delighted, lam sure. I’ll be very nice to him,
I promise you, but ” —and the great man smiled slyly
and held up one finger roguishly before her face —
“ look here, I’ve a great eye for beauty myself, and you
must be sure to introduce me to the young lady as well.”
“ Certainly, I will,” laughed Lady Fitz-Toode,
“ and later you shall have another treat, too. We are
going to finish up with a little dance and you shall
lead off ” —she appeared to think for a moment —
“ with Emma Bangs.”


“ Ah,” exclaimed his lordship with great zest,
“ another beauty, eh? ”
“ Oh, you bad, bad man,” said Lady Fitz-Toode
delightedly, “ but you must judge for yourself there.”
She bit her lip. “ You must wait and see.”
They moved off together among the assembled
guests, and all those people who thought particularly
that they should be noticed edged close up to her lady-
ship, so that they might catch her eye.
“ Alderman Simon Mullet,” announced Lady Fitz-
Tootle, introducing a fat man who had planted him-
self so squarely in front of her that by no chance could
he possibly be passed by. “ One of our most im-
portant citizens, my lord.” The alderman looked red
and swollen and Lord Sanderson shook him warmly
by the hand. “An old colonial family,” went on her
ladyship sweedy, “ that originally came out from the
old country, from Seven Dials. His grandfather was
one of the early setders here, and opened a small public-
house in Bindley Street.” The alderman’s jaw dropped
sharply and his redness deepened to a dusky hue.
“ Very worthy family,” smiled Lady Fitz-Tootle, “ and
his sons are now professional men.”
“ I congratulate you, sir,” said Lord Sanderson.
“ Nothing could be more commendable than a rise
from such humble beginnings. It must be most grati-
fying to you to think how you have got on.”
But Alderman Mullet looked anything but gratified,
and, the introduction over, he shuffled quickly off,
with covert glances from side to side to note who
9


among the other guests had been within ear-shot dur-
ing his brief interview with the great man.
“ Mrs. Stone-Robinson,” said Lady Fitz-Tootle, in-
troducing a tall and angular-looking lady who had
moved up near to them. “ One of the stoutest pillars
of our social life here. No function in Adelaide is
complete without her, and her name appears many
times in every paper in the society columns. Her
doings are of great interest to us all, and every journal
at once records her briefest change of domicile. Mel-
bourne, Houndsditch, or a trip abroad, it is all the
same and into the newspapers it always goes.”
The eyebrows of Mrs. Stone-Robinson twitched per-
haps ever so slightly, but she held herself with import-
ance and smiled with the reserve of one great personage
being brought into contact with another.
“ I am charmed, I am sure,” said Lord Sanderson
in his most gracious manner. “ A native of Australia,
of course, Mrs. Stone-Robinson? ”
“ Oh, dear me, yes, true colonial, Lord Sanderson,”
broke in Lady Fitz-Toode with enthusiasm. “Her father
was the policeman at Kapunda once. Wasn’t he, dear? ”
An amazed and baleful light blazed into the eyes of
Mrs. Stone-Robinson, and incredulity and fury struggled
for the mastery in the glare with which she regarded
her hostess. “Yes, and colonial, too, on her mother’s
side,” continued Lady Fitz-Tootle quite unperturbed.
“ She was the cook on the Balgowrie sheep-station here.”
Her ladyship smiled in great amusement. “ Another
family, you see, my lord, who made money quickly.”


“ What, in the constabulary? ” queried Lord San-
derson in great surprise. “ Then is the Force so well
paid over here? ”
“ Oh, no,” laughed Lady Fitz-Toode, “ but her
father left the police direcdy he was married, and with
the little money that his wife had saved they opened a
shop. They did very well and then speculated in land
here in the city.” She shrugged her shoulders. “ The
old story —they couldn’t help getting rich.”
A deep hush came over those standing near, and no
graven image could have stood more still than did Mrs.
Stone-Robinson. Her face was the picture of black
anger, but Lord Sanderson smiled blandly at her as if
waiting for her to speak.
“ Suddenly, however, Lady Fitz-Toode touched
him on the arm.
“ Ah! here’s young Mr. Grainger,” she exclaimed,
and she lowered her voice to a whisper, “ the hero of
the little romance I told you of. His father’s got a
provision store in the city, but he’s well educated and
is a very nice boy. Mr. Grainger,” she said aloud,
beckoning the latter to her, “ Lord Sanderson wants to
talk to you. You can tell him all about our dried fruits
now, and why Australia doesn’t fill the markets of the
world.” She laughed merrily. “Be stern with him,
Mr. Grainger, and find out why everyone at home doesn’t
buy Australian raisins and currants, as they should.”
Young Grainger came forward with a considerable
fluttering of the heart, for, if he had been astonished
at being invited to the reception, he was amazed now


that he should be singled out particularly for an intro-
duction to the guest of the evening. He could feel
that he was getting uncomfortably red, but with all
eyes upon him, as he knew, he pulled himself together,
and outwardly, at all events, it was a very calm and
self-possessed young man who shook hands with Lord
Sanderson. His lordship was amiability itself, and for
some minutes the two were engaged in earnest con-
versation. They were interrupted at last, however, by
Lady Fitz-Tootle, who, like a great general, had
planned all her campaign and had no intention of
risking that his lordship should become bored.
“ Archdeacon and Miss Bottleworthy,” she an-
nounced—then in a whisper: “ the girl I spoke to you
about, my lord.”
Lord Sanderson beamed. Margaret Bottleworthy
looked pretty enough for any man to enthuse over and,
remembering what he had just been told, his lordship
smiled knowingly as he shook hands.
“ The archdeacon is one of our notabilities,” smiled
Lady Fitz-Tootle, “ and most important and influen-
tial in the spiritual sense.” She clasped her hands
piously. “ When there’s a drought on, confidence is
established everywhere directly he is put up to pray
for rain.”
“ Naturally, naturally,” said Lord Sanderson most
politely, “ so I should expect,” and he looked with
curiosity at the archdeacon. “ A most useful reverend
gentleman to have, I am quite sure.”
“ Yes and he’s sporting too,” went on Lady Fitz-


Tootle, her voice dropping into flippant tones, “ he’s
sion come into Margaret Bottleworthy’s eyes, and ap-
peared immediately to check her flow of words.
“ Well, he’s a credit to us anyhow,” she added after a
momentary pause, “ in everything he undertakes.”
“ Most pleased to hear it,” said Lord Sanderson
solemnly, and he bowed to the archdeacon. “As a
new-comer to this beautiful country, sir, I note with
pleasure the esteem in which the cloth is held.”
The archdeacon, the expression of whose face had
hitherto been nervous and disturbed, allowed his fea-
tures to relax.
“ Her ladyship is very kind,” he said smiling, and
he bowed towards his hostess, “ even though, I am
afraid, at the expense of extreme veracity. Indeed I
am only a very humble and insignificant unit of the
Church it is my privilege to represent.”
“ Nonsense,” exclaimed her ladyship promptly,
“ you’re by far the best-looking of all the clergy here,
and you’d have been a bishop long ago if some of the
old fogies were not so indecently long-lived;” and
then, to the great relief of the archdeacon, she and
Lord Sanderson moved away.
Many more people were brought up and introduced
to his lordship, and of all of them Lady Fitz-Tootle
had something piquant and interesting to say. It may
be there was not undue enthusiasm everywhere at the
comments of her ladyship, but everything was uttered
with such innocent and child-like candour that no


traces either of ridicule or malice could be detected in
anything she said.
“ Now, there’s one more person I must introduce
you to,” she said at last. “ Our most celebrated medi-
cal practitioner, the great Dr. Hoop-Brown. He’s a
perfectly wonderful operator. He can cut you to rib-
bons in five minutes, and then sew you up again in
another ten.”
“ Dear me, dear me! ” ejaculated his lordship,
opening his eyes very wide.
“ Yes,” went on her ladyship, “ and we are natur-
ally very proud of him.” She lowered her voice most
impressively. “ They say, you know, that he signs
more death certificates than any man in Australia, and
he’s been doing it for years.”
Lord Sanderson’s eyes opened wider than ever.
“And have you very many doctors in Adelaide,” he
asked with just the slightest suspicion of uneasiness in
his tones, “ besides this most remarkable man? ”
“Many!” laughed Lady Fitz-Tootle merrily.
“ Why, we’re just over-run with them.” She became
more serious. “ But we need them all, every one of
them, with all the new diseases that are being invented
every day.” A proud light came into her eyes. “ Yes
they’re a splendid body of men, our doctors, and their
post-mortem work brings home most clearly to us how
really capable they are.”
“Their post-mortem work? ” gasped his lordship.
“ Oh, yes,” said her ladyship, “ for the diagnosis is
invariably confirmed then.”


Lord Sanderson made a grimace. “ Well, I’m leav-
ing here on Monday,” he exclaimed thankfully, “ and
I trust —I trust these remarkable qualities of diagnosis
possessed by your medical gentlemen will not need to
be exercised on my behalf.”
“ Of course not, of course not,” promptly assented
Lady Fitz-Tootle. “ You look the very picture of an
advertisement for some baby’s food! ” She smiled in-
sinuatingly. “ But still, still, if you did feel any little
twinges of indisposition, now, I am sure you would
appreciate their attention very highly. As I say, they’re
a fine body of men, and apart from their profession
they’re a great social asset, too.” She laughed in great
enjoyment again. “ Years ago, when there were only
twelve of them, they were known as ‘ the twelve
apostles.’ Then, when their number rose to forty, we
spoke of them as ‘ the forty thieves.’ Now that there
are over a hundred ” —she shrugged her shoulders—
“ well, they talk among themselves about ‘ the hun-
dred best lives.’ ”
“ Ha! ha! ” laughed Lord Sanderson. “So the
human touch comes in after all. I like them best
there.”
* * *
There were, indeed, many gay and festive moments
that evening for the guests of Lady Fitz-Tootle, but
surely the climax of all interest and excitement was
reached when the great Lord Sanderson led off with
the blushing Mrs. Bangs upon the ballroom floor!


His lordship was dignified, courtly and magnificent,
as became a peer of the British realm, and Mrs. Bangs
—well, never surely would North Walkerville send
forth a more triumphant, fluttering heart.
From Lord Sanderson all recollection of that dance
was speedily to pass away, but to his partner those
burning moments were to be a memory inviolate for
evermore, and generations of small Bangs’s yet to come
were to listen wonder-eyed to the recital of how at
Lady Fitz-Tootle’s reception their grandma or great-
grandma achieved celebrity and fame.
That night Lord Sanderson wrote in his diary:
(Memo. —Lady Fitz-Tootle is of opinion that six
weeks will not be long enough to obtain a thorough
knowledge of Australia and suggests another fortnight
or at least ten days.)
First impression of Australia. The Australians are
really remarkable. They are most interesting people
and the courage and resource of their fore-fathers must
have been truly wonderful. They are most delight-
fully straightforward and candid in their speech and
indeed seem rather to pride themselves upon their
abruptness. They appear to get more enjoyment out
of life than we do and are very pleasure-loving. They
are a highly emotional people, and foreign singers,
music-hall artists, great healers, travelling evangelists
and overseas actors are always assured of good gate
receipts. Socially, the possession of wealth is the first
consideration and lack thereof is a graver misde-
meanour even than at home.


CHAPTER VII
A GREAT DOCTOR
THE next morning Lady Fitz-Tootle awoke
with a splitting headache and there was a
drumming in her ears that was insistently
reminiscent of the popping of champagne corks. She
dragged herself painfully to the mirror and was not
surprised that her eyes looked tired and heavy and her
face distraught and pale. She felt very sorry for her-
self and got back into bed. The maid came in with
the early morning cup of tea.
“ Take it away,” exclaimed her ladyship petulandy,
“ and go and ring up Dr. Hoop-Brown. Tell him I’m
not well, and ask him to come round at once. Bring
me the morning paper, please. I’m not going to get
up.”
She lay back wearily and thought of the uncertainty
of life. She believed almost that she was going to die,
and wondered then how many wreaths she would get.
What would the newspapers say about her in their
obituary columns, too, and would they put it on the
front page? She hoped to goodness, at all events, that
they would have the hyphen in her name correctly.
She was not sure there would be any lying-in-state, but
she felt somehow that it would comfort her if she


knew it was going to be so. She shut her eyes and
tried to picture the exact pose her features would
assume upon her decease. She felt really very ill.
Her meditations were interrupted by a knock upon
the door. Her medical attendant had arrived, and he
bowed gravely as he came into the room.
Dr. Hoop-Brown, as Lady Fitz-Tootle had correctly
informed Lord Sanderson during the previous even-
ing, was certainly one of the most fashionable surgeons
in Adelaide, and of all members of his profession he
was the one most generally consulted by the wealthy
classes; indeed, in society circles, no one was considered
beyond aid who had not ‘ called in Hoop-Brown.’ A
middle-aged bachelor, he was a typical professional
man, and was attired always in the severest black. He
had a keen intellectual face and rather cold and in-
scrutable eyes. He was not of a very sympathetic dis-
position, however, and was very seldom seen to smile.
In manner he was always solemn and important, and
he waited on his patients with the dignity of an arch-
bishop and the diplomacy of an ambassador.
In the pursuit of his calling he was undeniably a
man of exceptional ability, and his opinions always car-
ried considerable weight with his professional brethren.
Naturally he had critics among them, but these had
little common ground of disparagement except, per-
haps, where his use of the knife was concerned. There
he was regarded as being altogether too hasty in his
resort to the operating table, it being cynically averred
that he held to the view there were always portions of


the human body which, as a matter of routine, it was
desirable to cut out.
He lived by himself, in a large pretentious mansion
in one of the best parts of North Adelaide.
“ I am very ill, Dr. Hoop-Brown,” said her ladyship
weakly. “ Look at me—l’m a perfect fright.”
The doctor gravely took out his watch and pro-
ceeded to feel her pulse.
“ Nerves,” he said solemnly, after a moment’s
pause. “Nerves and over-strain.”
“ Nerves,” snapped her ladyship with irritation.
“ More likely cocktails and champagne! ”
Perhaps for just one second the doctor’s eye-brows
were elevated ever so slightly; perhaps his eyes stared
just a little wonderingly, but his voice continued in its
usual even tone.
“ But you do too much,” he said suavely, “ and
then, in your over-wrought condition, a little he
dropped his voice discreedy —“ a litde stimulant exerts
too great an influence.”
“ A litde! ” sniffed her ladyship contemptuously,
“ why I was drinking champagne all the evening.
That old fool Lord Sanderson was a dreadful bore, and
I had to make up for it somehow.” She smiled faintly.
“ But, oh, it was funny to see him dancing with Emma
Bangs. Ten years ago and my corsets would have burst to
bits,” and she chuckled now with a litde more strength.
Dr. Hoop-Brown frowned. He had always a pro-
found reverence for tides, and even from Lady Fitz-
Toode ridicule of the King’s anointed was unseemly.


He took out his stethoscope.
“ I should like to listen at your chest, please,” he
said quietly. “ Now, say ninety-nine.”
“ I’d rather say ‘ when,’ ” sighed her ladyship. I’m
sure a brandy and soda would do me more good than
anything. I ought to have had one before you came in.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown made no comment, but a minute
later he stood up and regarded Lady Fitz-Tootle with
a most funereal air.
“ You are upon the verge of a very serious break-
down,” he announced solemnly, “ and you must take
at least three weeks of complete rest. You must re-
main in bed and you are to have a low diet of broths
and milk. No alcohol of any kind, and no cigarettes.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle groaned. “ But aren’t you going
to operate? ” she asked bitterly, stung to spitefulness
by the dreary prospect he was unfolding. “ Surely I
have got something more you would like to take out.
I’ve only had two operations so far, you know, and
my friends tell me the scars don’t match.”
Dr, Hoop-Brown looked very grave. “You must
have no visitors,” he continued quietly, “ and I had
better send in a nurse.”
“ Oh! but am I really as ill as that? ” wailed her
ladyship, now looking very frightened. “ Three weeks
in bed! It will be worse than prison for me and I
shall mope to death.” She clutched the doctor by the
arm. “ I can’t go through it,” she sobbed. “ No, I
really cannot.”
She stopped abruptly, noticing a strange expression


on the doctor’s face. He had suddenly grown pale,
his eyes were bulging and he pursed his lips as though
in pain. He placed his hand over his heart and
dropped unceremoniously into an armchair.
“ What’s the matter. Dr. Hoop-Browp ? ” she asked
sharply. “ Are you ill yourself? ”
■ The doctor appeared to pull himself together with
an effort. “ No, no, just a spasm,” he replied weakly.
He looked round in a very startled manner. “ Really,
really, I don’t know what’s happened to me. I feel
as if I’ve just had an electric shock. Dear me, dear
me, I do feel strange.”
He rose up and walked towards the window, and
then turning round, suddenly began to laugh.
“ How very stupid of me! ” he exclaimed, passing
his hand across his forehead. “By Jove! I must have
caught something of your complaint.” He made a
wry face. “ I must have had a thick night myself, I
think.”
But Lady Fitz-Tootle had shut her eyes and was not
listening. “ Oh, my poor head! ” she groaned. “ I
feel as if it were going to burst.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown’s professional manner at once re-
asserted itself and he returned instantly to the bedside
and took hold of one of her ladyship’s hands. “ Now
look here,” he said kindly, “ don’t go and worry
yourself at all. There’s nothing wrong with you that
a few days’ rest and quiet will not put right. You
must go easy for a time, that’s all. You’ve been doing
too much lately. That’s what’s the matter.” He


patted her hand in a fatherly way. “ Why, think of
the strain of last night. You were on the go, and talk-
ing the whole time.”
“ I said some very foolish things, I know,” came a
faint voice from the bed, “ and it frightens me now,
when I think of them. I must have been crazy, I
believe.”
“ Not at all,” said the doctor stoutly, “ you were
perfectly splendid and the life and soul of us all.”
He broke into a chuckling laugh. “ The way you
told off the Wopple-Smiths was as funny as anything
could be, and when you picked out Mrs. Bangs to
dance with Lord Sanderson —well, it makes my sides
ache to think of it now.”
But the humour of things seemed somehow to
appeal no longer to Lady Fitz-Toode, and she lay
back weakly, with a frightened expression upon her
face.
“ Now,” said Dr. Hoop-Brown, as he got up to go,
“I’ll send round some medicine at once, and I’ll look
in again this evening to see how you are. In the mean-
time,” and he smiled benevolently upon her, “ I’ll re-
lax my hard-and-fast rule, just for once, and let you
have a brandy and soda. Now only one, mind, and
not deeper than two fingers.” Once more he patted
her hand and then with an encouraging nod, he bowed
himself out of the room.
Her ladyship had the prescribed brandy and soda,
and in a few minutes, feeling considerably better, she
took up the morning paper, and turned to the society


news. There were three columns devoted to her re-
ception and more than two of them were given to the
names of the guests.
She glanced hurriedly down the list, and then a deep
groan escaped her.
“ Oh! what awful people,” she wailed. “ Whatever
made me ask them? ” Tears brimmed to her eyes.
“ Oh! what will people think? ”
She heard the telephone bell tinkle in the passage
and a moment later the maid knocked, and came into
the room.
“ A Mrs. Bangs is on the telephone, your ladyship,”
she said. “ She wants to know what time you are ex-
pecting her and Mrs. Uggins to tea this afternoon.”
Lady Fitz-Toode quivered like a jelly and sought
refuge beneath the bed clothes. The maid had to re-
peat the message.
“ Oh! tell her I’m not well and have to remain in
bed,” panted her ladyship. “ Say —say, I’ll write and
appoint another day when I’m better.”
The maid retired, but was back again almost
direcdy.
“ Mrs. Bangs would like to know if she could come
and sit with your ladyship.”
“ No, no,” exclaimed Lady Fitz-Toode hastily.
“ Tell her I’m very ill and it may be infectious. I’m
to have perfect quiet, the doctor says.”
The maid again retired and then ensued what
seemed to the trembling invalid, a long and indeed
almost interminable conversation on the phone.


Finally, she heard the ring-off, and then the maid re-
turned once more.
“ Mrs. Bangs is very upset to hear your ladyship is
so ill. She is sending up some gravy-beef and Mrs.
Uggins is bringing some oranges and flowers. Mr.
Chickseed sends his kind regards. They are ringing
up again presendy.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle shut her eyes and groaned.
In the meantime, Dr. Hoop-Brown had passed out
of the house, into the garden. He stood still upon the
path for a moment, and, throwing out his chest, drew
in full, deep breaths of air. He looked up at the sun
as if in great approval, and then sniffed vigorously at
some roses that were growing near.
“ Rootity-toot,” he hummed—
“ Rootity-toot, she plays the flute
In a very charming manner ”
A highly amused smile came into his face and
sauntering down to where his well-appointed car was
parked at the bottom of the drive, he took in admir-
ingly its fine lines and beautifully polished appearance.
Then he stood regarding his chauffeur thoughtfully,
and for so long a time that the man at last began to
fidget and redden under his tan.
“ Banks,” said the doctor suddenly, and with a most
decided frown, “ you want a new set of teeth. Your
present ones are a disgrace to my car.”
“My teeth, sir? ” exclaimed the astonished Banks,


who could not believe that his ears had heard aright.
“My teeth! ”
“Yes, your teeth, Banks,”' said the doctor sharply.
“ They’re too white and much too small. They’re
the wrong shape as well, and don’t suit your type of
face. They have worried me for a long while.”
“ Very good, sir,” stammered Banks, staring hard
at his employer. “ I’ll get some new ones.”
“ Yes, get a new set,” said the doctor, as if gready
relieved. “ I’ll pay for them. Go to Twiggs,
Montague Twiggs. He’s by far the best dentist in
all Australia.”
“ Yes, sir,” replied the chauffeur, brightening up at
once, and almost losing his astonishment in delight at
his master’s generosity. “ I’ll go about them this
afternoon.”
The doctor got into his car; he was now all smiles
again. He took out his appointment-book.
“ Ah,” he exclaimed, “ number five Hill Top Ter-
race, please. I’ve got an appointment there with Dr.
Weeks, sharp at nine.”
A few minutes later the car came to a standstill be-
fore a small house in an unpretentious street. Another
car had pulled up just in front, and its occupant, a
young and boyish-looking man, alighting quickly,
hurried back to meet Dr. Hoop-Brown.
“ Good man, Weeks,” called out the latter cheerily,
‘ we’re both exactly on time.”
“To the minute, sir,” replied the younger man,
with some deference, “ and I’m sure it’s very good of
.10


you to come upon such short notice. I didn’t like to
ring you up at all.”
“ Nonsense, my boy,” said Dr. Hoop-Brown. “ I’m
always pleased to come at any time, when you want
me. Now, what’s the trouble. Pneumonia, you say? ”
Dr. Weeks looked nervous. “ Yes, sir,” he replied.
Both lungs affected and the case quite hopeless.” He
went on apologetically. “ I wouldn’t have troubled
you, for I know how busy you always are, but the
patient’s wife was so insistent you should come that,
in the end, I had to give way. She says you pulled his
mother through once, when everyone else had given
her up.”
“Condition quite hopeless, you say?” asked Dr.
Hoop-Brown.
“ Yes, the man’s been temperaturing a hundred and
five ever since Tuesday and I’ve been in already this
morning and the respiration’s over forty.”
“ Well, well,” said Dr. Hoop-Brown sympathetic-
ally, “ at all events I’m glad you’ve called me in, for it
will comfort his people to think that everything pos-
sible is being done.” He laid his hand upon the
young man’s arm and spoke very gravely. “ You know,
Weeks, it’s a dreadful thing for any family when the
breadwinner dies. It’s a very earthquake in their
lives.” He ruminated for a moment. “ How old’s
the man? ”
“ Twenty-six,” replied Dr. Weeks, “ and they’ve
only been married a year. They have a child a few
weeks old.”


“ Dear me, dear me,” remarked Dr. Hoop-Brown,
“ how dreadfully sad! ”
Dr. Weeks glanced curiously at him. He was sur-
prised that any reference should be made to the per-
sonal aspect of this case. Qualified himself, only a few
years back, from the Adelaide Hospital, he had a very
lively recollection of Dr. Hoop-Brown there, both as a
lecturer and a teacher, and certainly no one could have
said then that the great man was ever disturbed over
the feelings of any patients he was considering. They
were only ‘ cases ’ to him.
“ Well, let us go in,” continued Dr. Hoop-Brown
with a sigh. “I’ve a busy day before me and must
hurry on.”
A young woman opened the door and it was evident
that she had been crying. She was not more than two
or three and twenty, and was very pretty, with large,
soft eyes.
“ This is Dr. Hoop-Brown,” said Dr. Weeks, and
her face brightened at once.
“ Oh! it is so good of you to come so quickly,” she
exclaimed, and a catch came into her voice. “My
husband’s dreadfully ill, but he’s always talking of
you. You saved his mother once.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown patted her kindly on the shoulder.
Well, we must see what we can do for him now,” he
said gently. “ One thing, he’s got youth on his side.”
With a strained white face, the woman led the way
into the bedroom. A nurse was standing just inside
and she made room for the doctor to pass.


The sick man was obviously desperately ill, and the
labour of his breathing was eloquent of the straits that
he was in. He was, however, quite conscious and he
smiled faintly when Dr. Hoop-Brown came up to the
bed-side. With an encouraging smile in return, but
with no comment, the latter proceeded quickly and
methodically to make his examination, with the suf-
ferer watching him the whole time with the mute and
pathetic expression of a sick dog.
The examination over, for a long while Dr. Hoop-
Brown sat silently regarding the patient, and then, his
eyes wandering, they fell thoughtfully upon the wife,
who was standing by the other side of the bed. She
was watching him in an agony of suspense, waiting,
he realised, with a sharp pang, for the opinion that was
to predict for her husband—life or death.
Dr. Hoop-Brown felt the nearest approach to a lump
in his throat that he had experienced for many years,
and he looked down quickly to mask the expression
on his face.
What could he say to them, he thought dismally, to
give them any hope? It seemed, almost, that death
was already in the house. The poison-laden lungs, the
dreadful respirations, the awful racing pulse—why,
there was only one chance in a million that the man
could win through!
His eyebrows came together with a jerk. “ Ah!—
one chance in a million. Well, what about that one?”
Suddenly, then, it seemed to him that he was lifted
violently out of himself. A rioting idea surged


through him. A reckless disregard of probability, a
contempt for all the deductions of a scientific mind.
He bent forward and glared into the sick man’s eyes.
“ You’re going to live,” he exclaimed sternly.
“ You’re going to get over this.” He raised his voice
and it was harsh in its insistence. “ Understand, do
you hear me? You —are —going —to —live.”' His
face broke into a convincing smile. “You are going to
live and hold your children on your knees. You will
be up again in three weeks. Do you hear me? ”
The sick man’s eyes opened very wide. He nodded
weakly, and then looked hard at his wife. He smiled
happily, and closed his eyes.
Dr. Hoop-Brown rose briskly to his feet and, with
a motion of his head, beckoned the nurse to follow
him from the room.
“ Sister,” he said sharply, “ he’s very bad, but we
must not let him slip through. I’ve put some hope into
him and you must keep it up.” He took out his
watch. “ Within ten minutes I’ll send round a botde
of particular old brandy and you’re to rub it well into
him, and all over his limbs. Don’t be afraid, rub it in
well.”
The wife came into the hall. She was holding a
purse in her hand.
“ Oh, Doctor! ” she exclaimed brokenly, “ I’m so
grateful; it’s like coming into Heaven, out of Hell.”
“ Tut-tut,” exclaimed Dr. Hoop-Brown stoutly, but
looking, all the same, a trifle uneasy, “ as I told you,
he’s got youth on his side and youth always tells.”


Then with a nod and pleasant smile, he picked up
his hat and made to leave the house.
“ But your fee, Doctor,” interrupted the wife. “ I
would like to pay you now.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown looked down. Perhaps he was
noticing that the linoleum was worn and shabby, or
perhaps he was only absent-minded and was looking
at his shoes; at any rate the wife had to speak
again.
“My fee! ” he exclaimed, as in great surprise.
“ Why, there’s no fee, my dear young lady.” He
laughed good-naturedly. “ I came here only as a
friend for my old pupil, Dr. Weeks. Only as his
friend, you understand,” and he was out of the house
and half-way down the garden path before she could
thank him, or think of what to say.
Dr. Weeks was at his heels, and they halted for a
moment at the gate.
“ So you think he’ll recover? ” asked Dr. Weeks
with some hesitation, “ you think he’ll pull through?”
Dr. Hoop-Brown looked hard at the younger man.
“ Why not? ”he said sharply. “ Don’t you think so
now, too? ” His face broke into a whimsical smile.
“ Better err with Hoop-Brown, you know, than be
right with lesser men.”
Dr. Weeks looked away across the road. “You
brightened him up anyhow,” he said slowly.
“ You ”
“ I gave him hope, Weeks,” broke in Dr. Hoop-
Brown solemnly. “He expects to live now and ”


he laughed slyly—“ in medicine the expected often
happens. You remember that, my boy.”
A minute later, and the great man was being driven
swifdy homewards in his car. He leant back with a
smiling expression on his face. He felt somehow rather
amused, and, for some reason he could not explain, he
wanted to laugh. Presently, however, he caught sight
of himself in the little mirror that was suspended at
the side of the car, and at once his appearance of
amusement was changed into a frown.
“ Now, why the deuce do I always want to dress
like this? ”he muttered crossly. “ I look for all the
world like some undertaker’s tout.” He scrutinized
himself disgustedly. “ There’s the real smack of the
cemetery about my clothes. Mourning coat and vest,
funereal trousers and post-mortem tie. Bah! I must
get rid of this black stuff and dress as if there were
some hope in life.” He sighed heavily. “ Really my
appearance must be most depressing to my patients.”
He picked up the speaking-tube that communicated
with the chauffeur. “ Banks,” he said sharply,
“ directly we’ve dropped that brandy at Hill Top Ter-
race, drive to Bungles’ the outfitters. I’ll look in there
before I go tp the rooms.”
“ Very good, sir,” nodded the chauffeur, and the
doctor leaned back again in his seat.
“ Now I wonder,” he soliloquized presently, after
feeling in his pockets, “ I wonder if Banks has got a
cigarette.”
About an hour later Dr. Hoop-Brown arrived


opposite his consulting rooms in North Terrace, and
jumping briskly from his car, almost collided with
Archdeacon Botdeworthy, who, at that precise mo-
ment, was passing rather hurriedly along.
“ Your pardon, my dear Archdeacon,” exclaimed
the doctor, all smiles and geniality, and with a sweep-
ing bow; “ but another six inches and one of us would
have said ‘ Damn.’ ” He looked most innocently at the
archdeacon. “ Myself, I never go farther than ‘ Blow.’ ”
The archdeacon seemed not over-pleased with the
encounter.
“ You’re in a hurry. Dr. Hoop-Brown? ” he asked
coldly.
“ Always am, my dear sir,” replied the doctor with
great affability. “ Bodies are not like souls, you know,
and they have to be attended to at once.” He struck
an attitude and spoke unctuously as if almost he were
preaching a sermon. “ They are the trees in the
Garden of Life, Archdeacon, and we poor doctors are
always pruning and pruning at them to let them live.”
He lowered his voice solemnly. “ I have four opera-
tions this afternoon.”
The archdeacon eyed him curiously. “ Then let
us hope the patients will all recover,” he remarked
dryly, “ and that the services of my calling will not
need to be invoked to supplement those of yours.” He
pursed up his lips sarcastically. “ With so much
operating work, you must have many anxious mo-
ments, Dr. Hoop-Brown.”
“Oh, I do, I do! ” replied the doctor feelingly.


“ It’s a most worrying time for me, for instance, when
the bills go in. I’m never certain whether I’m going
to get paid or not.” He looked very solemn and
shook his head. “We want a lot of Faith and Hope
in our profession, Archdeacon, and we dispense quite
a lot of Charity in quarters we never intend to.”' His
face brightened. “ But there, there, we jog along
somehow and enjoy ourselves between whiles. Oh! that
reminds me! I’m dining with Lord Sanderson to-night
and young Grainger will be there too.” He looked
slyly at the archdeacon. “ Nice young fellow, Grainger,
and I’m not the only one that thinks so either.”
Archdeacon Bottleworthy made no comment. He
was looking straight ahead of him and his eyes, it
seemed, were fastened on something far away.
“ Yes, very good-looking boy,” went on the doctor,
“ and I know of one young lady, at least, who is not
averse to him.” He sidled up close to the archdeacon.
“There’s romance in the air, Archdeacon. Romance,
my dear sir. I was watching Grainger with your
pretty Margaret last night, and if in any way my pro-
fession has made me a judge of human nature —then
I see a love-match there.” The doctor shook his head
knowingly. “ But the girl will want some wooing,
for she’s proud like her father. She’s ”
“ Good-bye, good-bye,” broke in the archdeacon
suddenly. “ I must be off at once. “I’ve a meeting
to attend,” and with his coat-tails flying, and all the
stately motions habitual to him thrown to the winds,
he dashed precipitately away.


“ Well, I’m damned! ” ejaculated Dr. Hoop-Brown,
staring after him in amazement. “ I’m ”he swal-
lowed and corrected himself hastily. “ I’m blowed, of
course, I mean.” He looked up the road. “ Goodness
gracious! Bottleworthy running as if the devil or the
bishop were after him! Now what on earth is it for ? ”
A red-faced, horsey-looking man came hurrying by
and the doctor’s face broke into a grin.
“Ah! Bloxam, the trainer! ”he whistled. “Of
course, of course. He’s going to give old Bottleworthy
a tip. Now, what if I went after them and got it too?
I could do with a win for next Saturday.” He took
out his watch and then solemnly shook his head.
“ No, no, Bartholomew Hoop-Brown,” he muttered,
“ profession before pleasure, my boy. Tummies and
not gee-gees are what you’ve to consider,” and turning
back, he walked quickly up the steps of the building
where his chambers were.
“ Anyone waiting, Nurse? ” he asked, entering his
consulting room.
“ Mr. Poodlum, Doctor,” was the response. “He
rang up several times and says he must see you.”
“Ah! He must —must he? ” exclaimed the doc-
tor and a grim look came into his eye. “ Well, show
him in at once, please.”
A few moments later and the banker, Poodlum,
shuffled into the room. He was puffing hard and
looked white and seedy.
“ Good morning, Doctor,” he said with a sickly
smile. “I’m feeling bad again.”


Without replying, the doctor motioned him to a
chair, and then, for a full minute, sat regarding him
sternly and in chilling silence.
“ Ah! ” he exclaimed at length, “ you do well not
to excuse yourself. You’ve been at it again, Poodlum,
at it again; over-eating and over-drinking.” He
raised his voice contemptuously. “You animal—you
gastronomic thug! ”
“ Eh? What? ” ejaculated the banker, astounded
at the reception he was receiving. “ What did you
say, Doctor? ”
“What did I say? ” echoed the doctor scathingly.
“What did I say? ” He looked menacingly at the
banker, and, pointing at him with his finger, went on
in slow deliberate tones. “ I saw you guzzling last
night at Lady Fitz-Toode’s, Poodlum. Eating and
drinking as if you were a slim youth of twenty, instead
of an abdominal-rounded, prematurely-aged and en-
larged-livered reprobate of over fifty.” He leant back
and pursed up his lips. “ You disgusted me! ”
The banker stared as if fascinated. There was no
mistaking the viciousness of the doctor’s words and
they fell like a thunder-clap upon his ears. He could
not understand it; it was incredible! This, from the
polite and suave Hoop-Brown; this, from his courtly
medical attendant, whose exorbitant bills he had
been paying without question for years and years!
This
The doctor gritted his teeth together. “ I shall
operate at two-thirty to-morrow,” he announced


curtly. “ There will be a bed vacant by then in Miss
Mogrington’s private hospital.”
The banker looked alarmed. “ But what do you
think I’ve got? ” he asked tremulously.
“A hundred guineas,” purred the doctor very
sofdy, and more as if speaking to himself.
Poodlum smiled in a strained and sickly manner.
“ But you don’t know what’s the matter with me yet,
Dr. Hoop-Brown.”
“ Pooh! pooh! that’s a small matter,” replied the doc-
tor in careless tone. “ The post-mortem —”—he correc-
ted himself hastily—“ er —subsequent investigation will
reveal that. I shall remove your appendix to-morrow.”
“ But you took that out two years ago,” wailed the
banker, “in the same month that you operated upon
my wife and daughter.”
“ Ah! so I did,” said the doctor reflectively. “ Well,
your tonsils will have to go now.”
“ Dr. Bunions took those out last August,” said the
banker, “ when you were away.”
“ The poacher! ” exclaimed the doctor indignantly.
“He had no business to, then. He should have given
you a gargle instead.” There was a moment’s silence.
“ Well, what about your teeth? ” His face brightened.
“Ah! that’s it. You’ve got focal infection. We’ll
have Twiggs in and make a complete clearance there.
Twiggs is the best dentist in all Australia.”
The banker drew in a great breath of relief, and
smiled; he felt on safe ground now. “ They’re all
false,” he exclaimed gleefully. “ I’ve not got one of


my own left,” and he grinned in triumph at the doctor.
But Dr. Hoop-Brown looked graver than ever. “ So,
so,” he muttered darkly, “ then yours is indeed a des-
perate case, and I shall have to graft something on to
you. You are very, very ill,” and he reached out and
laid his fingers on the banker’s pulse.
Poodlum glanced apprehensively round the room.
Fear and mistrust were gripping him like a palsy and
he thought the doctor must be going mad. He seemed
to be going through a dreadful dream.
For years and years he had had such implicit faith in
Dr. Hoop-Brown. He had been wont, indeed, to regard
the doctor’s opinion as the very last word in all that con-
cerned the erring human frame, but now —now it
seemed the man was only bent on finding some excuse
to cut him open; and, apparently with this end in view,
there seemed no lengths to which he would not go.
He looked back at the doctor and, to his great sur-
prise, saw that the latter was now laughing quiedy.
“ Poodlum, Poodlum,” said the great man in quite
kindly tones. “It was time I gave you a good fright.
I’ve been much too lenient to you up to now.” His
face suddenly became cold and grave again. “ Now,
how many years have I known you, Poodlum? ”
“ About fifteen,” replied the banker, with a catch
in his voice. “ Ever since I went to live in North
Adelaide.”
“ Well, Poodlum,” said Dr. Hoop-Brown solemnly,
“ in those fifteen years I’ve watched you grow old and
I’ve watched you grow fat. I’ve watched your Litde


Mary become Big Mary and your skin grow as yellow
as the fabled guineas of your bank.” His voice became
raised in its earnestness. “ And I’ve warned you —
I’ve warned you, Poodlum, all along. Now haven’t IP”
“ You’ve told me to diet,” said the banker lamely.
“ Diet, man! Diet! ” exclaimed the doctor, begin-
ning to grow fierce again. “I’ve told you to eat less,
to drink less, and to sleep less. I’ve told you to take
more exercise. I’ve told you —but you know well
enough what I’ve told you. And all you’ve done ”
he shrugged his shoulders—“ has been just to guzzle
on and on and treat all my advice with contempt.”
“ But, Dr. Hoop-Brown,” began the banker tremu-
lously.
“ No, don’t excuse yourself,” broke in the doctor
sharply, “ for with my own eyes I saw you last night.”
He leant forward and tapped the banker on the knee.
“ Brandies and sodas, Poodlum—champagne, mayon-
naised cray-fish, more brandies and sodas, and then
jam tarts and cream.” He laughed sardonically. “ Yes,
I noticed a good many of you guzzling tarts and cream
last night, and I left the place early, on purpose to get
a good night’s rest for the heavy work I knew I should
be having to-day.” He sniffed. “ The telephone began
ringing before six.”
The banker shivered. It was like the day of judg-
ment to him, only it was his body and not his soul
that was on trial. All his organs were being arraigned
to testify against him, and his liver was a bitter witness
to his dreadful life of dietetic crime.


Dr. Hoop-Brown eyed him very sternly and then,
suddenly, he smiled again.
“Well, Poodlum,” he said gently, “I’ll give you
one more chance, and if you don’t obey me now—
never, never let any message come to me from your
house until I’m wanted to fill in the certificate of
death.” He spoke sharply. “Go home and fast. A
Seidlitz-powder first, and then nothing but gruel and
water for three days. You understand. No drinks but
water and no rich foods. Now for your general rule
of life. Never eat until your hungry, and walk six
miles a day.” He thumped his fist upon the desk.
“ Walk to the cemetery, Poodlum, every morning before
breakfast. Count up the gravestones and breathe piously
to yourself: ‘ There, but for the guineas I’ve got to pay
Hoop-Brown, lies Richard Poodlum ’ ” —the doctor’s
voice became low and menacing—“ and add: ‘ His
end was pain.’ ”
The banker took out his handkerchief and mopped
a clammy face. Following upon a sleepless night,
the interview was too much for him, and he felt upon
the verge of tears.
The doctor rose from his seat. “ Well, good-bye,
Poodlum,” he said briskly. “ Come to me again in
three weeks and you’ll weigh quite a stone less.” He
threw out his chest. “ Yes, I, Hoop-Brown, say it.”
The banker crept out like a man who had seen his
own ghost.


CHAPTER VIII
A GREATER ONE STILL
IT was in many ways an extraordinary Dr. Hoop-
Brown that went down to the Adelaide Hospital
the next day, and there was some excuse for the
hall-porter when, for the moment, he failed to recog-
nize him.
The whole appearance of the great man was altered
in so many ways. Gone was the sombre suit of black,
the coat of sober swallow tail, and gone also the tie
that was all meet and ready for the burial of the dead.
Gone, too, were the gloves that suggested the passing
round of hymn-books, and the tall silk hat that spoke
of partings and the tolling of church bells.
Instead—a natty suit of sporting grey —a suit that
made one think of holidays, of honeymoons, of races,
or of dainty luncheons at some crack hotel. The tie,
too, suggested happy times, for it was delicately laven-
der-coloured, with shades and shadows in it like a
pretty woman’s eyes. Then the hat—well, the hat
was Trilby-fashioned, grey, like a dove’s wing, and
jaunty as a cavalier’s, and by no stretch of the imagi-
nation could its smiling owner be avowed as seeming
burdened with the sorrows of the world.


Altogether, indeed, the whole attire was typically
that of a care-free and happy man.
And it was not only that the doctor was altered in
dress—he was altered in other ways, too. He looked
so pleased and smiling, he carried himself so gaily;
and his eye had a merry twinkle in it, as if he were
thinking of some good joke.
Approaching the main entrance, he met two of the
hospital sisters coming down the steps, and off came
his hat with a grand flourish, as he beamed upon
them with a warm, admiring gaze.
“ Good gracious! ” whispered one of them. “ Did
you notice that? ”
“Yes, and how nice he looks, too! ” replied the
other. “ Why, he’s quite a young man in that suit! ”
Then very quickly, in some subtle way, it spread all
round the hospital that something peculiar had hap-
pened to the senior surgeon, and when a little later he
appeared in the operating theatre he was scrutinized
with unusual interest by a hundred and more of very
curious and puzzled eyes.
The theatre was well filled, as indeed it always was
when Dr. Hoop-Brown was operating. The doctor
himself was quite aware that he was always a good
‘ draw,’ but on ordinary occasions it never appeared
that he was in the very slightest degree interested as
to whether his audience were large or small. To-day,
however, it was evident that the contrary was the case,
and he smiled with undoubted approval upon the tier
upon tier of students who had crowded in to watch him.
II


He regarded them paternally and with the benevolence
that a great teacher might bestow upon his disciples.
“A very simple operation to-day, gentlemen,” he
announced, as the first patient was being brought in.
“ Just an ordinary gastrectomy, and one that I am
compelled to do, because, in the opinion of my col-
leagues and myself, the trouble will not yield to treat-
ment.” He glanced round gravely at the students.
“ There is one thing, gentlemen, I would wish to
impress upon you, now and for always, and that is—”
his voice became very low and solemn—“ remember,
that as members of the great profession it will be
your privilege one day to adorn, it must be always
your endeavour to interfere, surgically, as little as pos-
sible with the human body. Just as the old Venetians
inscribed upon their cannons, ‘ Ultima ratio regum ’ —
the last resource of kings—so should you inscribe
upon your scalpels —‘ the last resource of the medical
man.’ ” His voice deepened in intensity. “ The knife
comes last of all.”
A gasp of amazement escaped his audience. Could
they believe their ears? These strange opinions from
Hoop-Brown! From Hoop-Brown, the most notori-
ous wielder of the knife! This urge of caution, from
the mightiest exponent of cold steel and stitches!
What could have happened—could some brother
surgeon have been suggesting operating upon the great
man himself?
Dr. Hoop-Brown adjusted his rubber gloves. “ Yes,
gentlemen,” he continued, “ we live, indeed, in curious


and enquiring times and with the advance of know-
ledge the veil of mystery is being lifted everywhere
alike from sacred and profane things.” He shrugged
his shoulders. “ These poor old abdomina of ours, for
instance, are no bags of mystery to anyone now, and
the ease and safety with which we can open them,
breed in the lesser and the shallower minds a desire
to be continually tampering with their contents. . . .”
He dropped his voice impressively again. “ But re-
member, gendemen, a great operator is not necessarily
a great surgeon, and he who operates when there is
no necessity—however brilliant may be his skill and
however masterly his technique—sullies the honour of
the profession to which he belongs, and becomes—a
courtesan of the knife.”
Two junior surgeons, four nurses and about a hun-
dred medical students were sure it must be all a dream.
* * *
Later that afternoon young Dod Irons, a medical
student in his fifth year, burst uproariously into the
common-room of the hospital.
“ I say, you fellows,” he called out excitedly, “ old
Hoop’s gone really dotty or he’s had monkey-glands
or something. Never known anything so extraordi-
nary in my life! Been going round with him in the
wards, and what do you think? He’s been smiling
at all the nurses and looking at them like a young


cock-sparrow. Properly flirtatious, I tell you. Fancy!
Hoop-Brown! ”
“ Get out,” scoffed a sallow-faced youth who was
busy checking his own pulse-rate with two very nico-
tined fingers. “We shan’t believe that. Hoop’s cer-
tainly surprised us this afternoon, but he’s Brownus-
intactus and he’s got a virgin mind.”
“ Virgin mind! ” sneered young Irons, disdainfully.
“ Well, its virginity was of the pater-familias variety
just now. But no jokes, you fellows. Hoop’s fair got
his eye on all the females here. He told matron she
wanted some colour in her cheeks and ought to get
more fresh air, and he offered to lend his car any
afternoon for her and some of the nurses to go down
to the sea. You should have seen how astonished they
were. Then he squeezed Sister Ruth on the arm
and promised them all boxes of chocolates on Satur-
day. They were flabbergasted, I tell you, and so
were we.”
“And do you really mean to say,” queried the
sallow-faced youth, in slow and mock-judicial tones,
“ that these things actually happened, and that they
are not the dreamings of your alcoholic mind ” —he
thumped upon the table and glared round—“ that our
Hoop so far forgot himself as to regard the female
form in any other than an anatomical or pathological
sense—that our senior surgeon ”
“ Oh! shut up, Simkins,” growled a third student.
“You hum like a bad egg. Go on, Irons, tell us what
happened next. Is that all? ”


“ No, by Jove, it is not,” exclaimed young Irons,
who had kept his most exciting piece of news until
the last. “ Now, I’ll surprise you.” He looked grin-
ningly round the room. “ Hoop’s coming to the
smoker to-night! ”
“ What, coming to the show? ” yelled an astonished
chorus.
“Yes, and what’s more,” went on Irons, his eyes
widely distended, “ he says he may perhaps give us a
song. Young Boulton asked him to, just in fun, and,
to our amazement, after a moment’s hesitation, he
winked and answered— ‘ I’ll see.’ ”
“ Oh! Hoopy, my Hoop,” gurgled the sallow-faced
youth, “ you are no longer the innocent that we
thought. Someone has wronged you.” He covered
his eyes with his hand. “ You are a fallen man.”
* # *
Now there could be no doubt that from first to last
everything at the students’ smoking concert that night
went with a swing.
Between the students themselves and the great
teachers, lecturers and high hospital dignitaries who
graced the occasion with their presence, there was a
spirit of camaraderie and friendliness that was delight-
ful and inspiring to behold.
They were all gathered there together upon the
common ground of laughter and enjoyment, and from
the first moment when an unknown benefactor, mod


estly and at his own expense, uncorked a flagon of
particularly evil-smelling sulphuretted hydrogen in the
body of the hall—to the last when it was discovered
that all the cloak-room tickets had been changed, each
and all shared alike in the hilarity and surprises of the
evening.
The dean of the hospital was in the chair, and the
concert was opened by one, Thomas Winkle, with a
song— ‘ The Maiden’s Prayer.’
He was a short, thick-set young man and proved,
as is not unusual in such cases, to be the possessor of
a deep bass voice. Truth to relate, he was accom-
panied by far more than the piano in the rendering of
his item, for doubt was expressed continually and in
many quarters as to his fitness or otherwise to deal
with the theme of his song. But the dean called
sternly for order and ‘ The Maiden’s Prayer ’ pro-
ceeded more or less decorously to the end.
Next followed a trombone quartette, and the
volume of sound emitted here effectually drowned all
unofficial assistance from the back of the hall. It was
certainly hard there on Mr. Simkins that his mouth-
organ, for which he had that very morning paid three-
and-six, could make no headway in the way of noise
against its larger and more expensive colleagues of
brass; but promptly realizing the situation, like a wise
tactician, he conserved his energies and retired tem-
porarily from the fray.
A recitation was the next item, and Bill Adams won
the Battle of Waterloo to a chorus of cat-calls and


sounds that savoured more of the environment of the
farm-yard than that of an historic field of strife.
The concert proceeded merrily upon its course, and
with songs, grave and gay, there was quite as much
vocal activity off the platform as on. Everyone, it
seemed, was desirous of contributing individually to
the success of the evening and all exhibited a lively
appreciation of the endeavours of the various artists to
entertain. Concrete evidence of this latter feeling was
apparent at the conclusion of each item, when gifts of
various kinds were showered upon the performers as
they modesdy, but hastily, retired from the platform.
Greengrocery of many kinds was apparently the
most popular form of presentation, and carrots, tur-
nips, potatoes and even onions, testified most elo-
quently to the warm and generous heart of youth.
Towards eleven o’clock, however, and just before
the last item of the programme should have been ren-
dered, a strange thrill commenced suddenly to ani-
mate the younger members of the audience. A thrill
of great expectancy, a delicious shudder as of the com-
ing of the miraculous, a weird shiver as of the immi-
nent happening of some great event.
A whisper arose somewhere, like the far-off sighing
of a wind. “ Hoop-Brown, Hoop-Brown!—a song
from Dr. Hoop-Brown! ”
It was heard first on the back benches, then it took
stronger sound in the body of the hall and finally it
boomed like a thunderclap from the throat of every
student there.


“ Dr. Hoop-Brown! Give us a song, sir. Dr.
Hoop-Brown! ”
All eyes were at once turned upon the occupant of
a chair at the far end of the front row. A man there
was leaning back and looking round at the excited
throng behind him. He had a happy, smiling face
and his eyes were twinkling in amusement. He
looked benignly at the crowd and then shook his head
several times. Then he frowned, but the frown was
an amused one and it was plain to see that he was not
annoyed.
“ Dr. Hoop-Brown! Give us a song, sir. Dr.
Hoop-Brown! ”
The usually calm and severe face of the chairman
was now seen to be relaxed in an expression that
looked uncommonly like a grin. He leant forward
and said something to the senior surgeon. A colloquy
in pantomime followed, and then the chairman rose
from his seat, and held up his hand. A deep hush
fell over the hall.
“ Gentlemen,” announced the chairman, his face set
in a grim smile, “ an extra item is being added to the
programme. Our senior surgeon ” —roars of delight
instantly from all parts of the hall, cat-calls and a per-
fect hurricane of clapping hands —“ our senior sur-
geon, Dr. Hoop-Brown, will give us a song to his own
accompaniment.” The chairman looked very sternly
round the hall. “ But I hope, gentlemen, you will
show your appreciation of the favour he is conferring
upon us by refraining from noise or interruptions of


any kind. I am sure it is a very great favour upon
the part of Dr. Hoop-Brown, and a very unexpected
one, too. I have known and worked with my es-
teemed colleague for over twenty years, and until this
moment ” —the chairman here shrugged his shoulders
and laughed dryly —“ have never even been aware
that he could sing or play at all. Now, Dr. Hoop-
Brown.”
Amid renewed loud cheering, the doctor rose lei-
surely from his chair and, mounting the platform,
seated himself nonchalantly at the piano. Instantly
the cheers subsided and a deep and breathless silence
gripped the hall.
But the doctor was evidently in no hurry to begin.
He hummed something to himself and then he turned
round and faced his audience.
“ Now, you’re bad boys,” he said laughingly, “ to
make an old fogey like me sing a song. It’ll have to
be a very short one, at any rate, for my memory’s very
bad.” He shook his head sadly. “ Why, it must be
thirty years since I’ve touched a piano.” He sighed
heavily. “I’m sure I shall play a lot of wrong notes,
but here goes, I’ll do my best.” He smiled know-
ingly. “ But no greengrocery, gentlemen, if you
please, when I’ve finished.”
He struck a few chords and then, with his face ani-
mated and his eyes twinkling, in quite a clear and
pleasant voice began to sing:


“ In my youthful days I knew what’s what,
And many naughty ways I’d got.
Heigh ho!—as a laddie!
I used to hnow my way about,
And ta\e the charming creatures out,
Heigh hoi as a laddie!
A pair of nice blue eyes I’d see
Were the finest stars in the world for me,
Heigh ho! as a laddie!
A pretty face and a figure neat,
Dear little hands and shapely feet,
Heigh ho! as a laddie!
Heigh ho! as a laddie, but I was a bad boy then,
I’m older now but I’m nearly as bad,
For I can’t forget the time that I had
When I was a gay young laddie —
Heigh ho! as a laddie!
Heigh ho! as a laddie! ”
A great roar of cheering rolled round the hall and
there were vociferous demands for an encore.
“ No, gentlemen,” laughed the doctor, “ that’s all.
I can’t give you any more. I’m sure I’ve shocked my
colleagues enough already.” But the students were
not to be denied and continued to demand insistently
another song.
The doctor shook his head, shrugged his shoulders
and finally frowned, but still the cry was every-
where—“ Encore, Dr. Hoop-Brown —encore.”
Suddenly, however, the door-keeper was seen by


everyone to hurriedly mount the platform and whis-
per something in the doctor’s ear. The doctor there-
upon held up his hand for silence, and announced
that an urgent call had come for him and that he must
go at once.
With no attempt then to hinder him, the great man
departed upon his errand of mercy. But he had not
far to go. He was, indeed, only led into the adjoining
cloak-room, where he found the attendant there un-
conscious upon a heap of many coats that had been
thrown down to cope with the emergency.
The sufferer was breathing heavily. His eyes were
closed and, upon being shouted at, he did not answer
or indeed seem to know his name.
Endeavouring to elicit something of the history of
the case from those standing round, the doctor was
informed that the attack had been quite a couple of
hours coming on. From all accounts it appeared the
attendant had not been quite up to the mark earlier
in the evening. He had been heard to tell several
persons that he was feeling ‘ chippy ’ and ‘ run down.’
Thirst, too, had been another of his symptoms. He
had wanted someone to ‘ save his life,’ he had ex-
plained, and he had felt both a desire and an ability
to ‘ keep one down,’ as he expressed it. Also he had
complained that both his mouth and his throat were
inordinately dry.
A young medical student of great promise had
thereupon prompdy suggested a gargle of malt liquor,
and most obligingly had procured a couple of bottles


of beer. Another young gentleman in the same walk
of life had prescribed two doses of rum.
This, then, was all the information that could be
elicited, and with no more ado, the doctor, with quick
and deft fingers, proceeded to unloose the sufferer’s
garments.
The poor fellow’s jacket was buttoned up tightly
to the chin, so tightly indeed, that it took quite a few
moments to undo.
Then a gasp of astonishment arose from all those
standing by, for a most extraordinary sight met their
eyes. Upon the waistcoat of the unconscious man was
pinned a large sheet of paper, and upon this paper in
big characters was inscribed:
“ Please do not operate upon me for appendicitis for
I am only drunk.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown frowned angrily. He muttered a
short, sharp ejaculation of annoyance and then —sud-
denly, he smiled.
“ Gentlemen,” he remarked to those standing by,
“ quite a reasonable request, for I believe ” —he felt
the patient’s pulse —“ I believe the diagnosis to be
quite correct.”


CHAPTER IX
“WINKING THE NAUGHTY EYE”
THE following evening a few minutes before
eight o’clock a company of about fifty to sixty
persons could have been found gathered to-
gether in the small hall of an unpretentious building in
one of the back streets of Adelaide, the beautiful city
of the plains.
In appearance, for Press purposes, they would have
been described as “ earnest-looking,” that is to say they
were for the most part commonplace and uninterest-
ing. The women were middle-aged or old and mostly
angular in form, and the men were nearly all bald-
headed, or grey and scant of hair. The few younger
men present were all mere youths, pale-faced and
insipid-looking as in the pimpled days of adolescence,
but very grave and serious in demeanour.
It was the monthly meeting of the Society for the
World’s Regeneration, a society that was much es-
teemed and applauded in certain small and peculiar
circles of the city. Its energies were devoted to the
unmasking of evils that it believed to abound ,on every
side, and it accordingly delved and dug everywhere for
the wickedness that it was certain underlay most of


the seemingly innocent happenings of life. Its admir-
ers held that it was a great and important instrument
for the social purification of mankind, but its detrac-
tors averred it was nasty-minded, and consisted only
of interfering busy-bodies, who were of no service at
all to the community.
The company assembled was split up into little
groups, and, either sitting or standing, they conversed
together in low tones.
Presently a tall and rather mournful-looking man
with long grey whiskers, advanced to the foot of the
platform and took out his watch.
“Friends,” he said loudly and in rather theatrical
tones, “ it is now three minutes past the hour and, as
your chairman, I think it is expedient to commence
the proceedings.”
Amid a thin clapping of hands, he mounted the
platform and was followed there by two men and a
woman. They took their seats upon some chairs be-
hind a small table and then, with a few preliminary
coughs, the tall man rustled a bundle of papers with
an air of great importance and rose to his feet to
address the meeting,
“Friends,” he began pompously, and with a com-
prehensive survey of the room over the tops of his
glasses, “ this is the ninth monthly meeting of our
Society and, as a result of our activities since our first
gathering, we are duly giving birth to projects of mo-
mentous import to the community. Although our
labours are so vital to the interests of mankind, we


have not, for financial reasons, deemed it advisable as
yet to meet here more than once a month —still you
may rest assured that in the interim the good work
is being always energetically carried on by the execu-
tive committee, in whom you have placed your trust.
(Hear-hears and clapping in several parts of the hall.)
“These last weeks, indeed, we have been very busy.
Letters have been written to the newspapers about the
moral depravity we see all around; a watch has been
kept upon the bathing beaches for scanty and indecent
attire, and loyal workers have been everywhere scour-
ing the park-lands after dusk, to report upon all sus-
picious things that they might see and hear. (Clap-
ping and more cheers.) As a concrete instance of the
good work we are doing —a bad case of ginger-beer
selling on Sundays was reported to us from Unley,
and upon our bringing the matter under the notice of
the Borough Council there, the tenant of the shop, a
widow with five children, was proceeded against and
fined She has since had to give up her business
and, with her children, gone on the Destitute Board.”
His voice was cheerful. “ Let that, I say, be a warn-
ing to others conniving at the perpetuation of evil.”
(Hear-hears and great clapping of hands.) “To con-
clude my report, I have much pleasure in informing
you that since our last meeting we have become affili-
ated with the 4 Strict Reformists ’ of Mount Gambier,
the ‘ Pointing Hand Crusaders ’ of New South Wales,
and the ‘ Nosey Parkers ’ of Brisbane.”
Loud and prolonged applause greeted these last


items of news, and the chairman took a long sip of
water and thoughtfully consulted his notes, until the
excitement had died down.
“ Well, my dear friends,” he went on, “ we are met
together once again in the great cause of Humanity.”
He raised his voice. “We are soldiers in the great
army of Reform, we have nailed our banner to the
mast and we are stretching out our tentacles in all
directions.” He paused a moment in his best oratorial
manner. “And it is not for nothing that we have
called ourselves ‘ The Society for the World’s Regen-
eration.’ ” (Cheers and clapping of hands.) “ No, we
have not minced matters, we have disguised nothing
and we have hidden from no one our true objectives.”
He thumped suddenly upon the table. “We aim
straight at the very root of evil, and in plain and
simple tongue we trumpet our challenge to the sins
and evil of the world.” (Hear-hears and cheers again.)
He now assumed a most fierce and bellicose atti-
tude, and thundered with the light of battle in his
eyes: “ There shall be no shrinking either from the
foul hosts of sin. We shall not cringe before the
massed forces of the devil and we shall blazon our
message, like a sun for ever on the rise, before the
visage of the earth. Encounter opposition we may, ob-
struction upon obstruction may clog our path, but as
I was saying this morning to a distinguished profes-
sional man, my medical adviser in fact—ah! that
reminds me.” He took out his watch and frowned.
“ I was hoping—l was hoping to have brought at least


one new adherent to our cause to-night, for when
speaking to the eminent Dr. Hoop-Brown ” —a mur-
mur of intense interest ran round the room —“ and I
told him of our movement, he was sympathetic, most
sympathetic, and so much so indeed, that he promised
he would, if possible, be with us in person to-night
and would, moreover, endeavour to bring some of his
young friends from the hospital with him.”
He looked at his watch again. “I am disappointed,
I am disappointed ” —he suddenly held up his hand—
“ but hark! They may be coming even yet.”
Everyone looked round. There was the sound of
subdued laughter outside, the tramp of footsteps in the
passage, and the door opened to admit quite a number
of new arrivals. A tall and smiling man led the way,
followed closely by about a dozen or so of merry-
looking young fellows, who pushed and jostled one
another to get in first.
“ Ah! here they are,” exclaimed Mr. Muffins de-
lightedly. “ Dr. Hoop-Brown and his young friends.”
The doctor advanced briskly into the hall and with
a smiling bow towards the platform, prepared to seat
himself unobtrusively upon one of the back benches.
“ No, no, Doctor,” called out Mr. Muffins heartily
and beckoning with his hand. “We must have you
up here. The platform for you, sir. Now, up you
come.”
But with a gesture of great unworthiness, Dr.
Hoop-Brown shook his head. “ No, really, Mr.
Muffins,” he exclaimed, “ I am here as a private indi-
-12


vidual to-night.” He smiled round at the audience.
“ I am a very humble person, you know.”
But the grey-whiskered Mr. Muffins was insistent
and would take no denials, and so in a few moments,
finding all protests unavailing, the doctor was installed
upon the platform and seated next to the chairman
himself.
A loud clapping of hands showed unmistakably that
the arrangement met with the approval of everybody
present, and Dr. Hoop-Brown bowed smilingly in
appreciation, no doubt, of the esteem in which he
could see that he was held.
In the meantime the medical students who had
seated themselves at the back of the hall were busy
taking stock of everyone present, and the feminine
portion of the audience, in particular, was interesting
to them. They craned their necks this way and that
to see what the ladies were like and then, all suddenly,
they looked at one another, as if unexpectedly they had
opened a bad egg.
“ Virgins,” hissed the sallow-faced Mr. Simkins,
elevating his eyebrows to an acute angle of surprise,
“ and tough ’uns at that! ”
“ Rough stuff,” whispered back his neighbour, a
round and rosy-cheeked youth, “ rough stuff, of ancient
birth.”
But the chairman was again starting to address the
meeting. “ Friends,” he said smilingly, “I am sure
we are all most gratified at the presence of Dr. Hoop-
Brown amongst us to-night.” (Hear-hears from all


parts of the hall.) “We are very glad, too, that he
has brought with him so goodly a company of young
gentlemen from the hospital.”
Everyone here turned to stare hard at the medical
students, and the latter, dropping their sotto-voce ob-
servations, composed their features to the stern and
grave lines becoming the great and solemn profession
to which they had dedicated their lives.
“It is a very significant thing,” went on Mr.
Muffins impressively, “ that we should be attracting
young men of their class to our meetings.” (“ I wish
the devil I hadn’t come,” whispered the rosy-cheeked
youth. “ Where’s all that youth and beauty old Hoop-
Brown told us were sure to be here? ”) “ Very signifi-
cant,” continued Mr. Muffins, “ for it proves conclu-
sively that we are making headway against the forces
of evil that encompass us. Our aims are beginning to
be understood.” He took off his glasses and wiped
them vigorously with a silk pocket handkerchief.
“ Well, as I was indicating a few minutes ago, we have
dared openly to proclaim that our Society is mainly one
for the suppression of the worst kind of evil, which to
use a convenient term, I will describe as of the
‘ naughty ’ kind, and favouring naughty ways.” He
paused a moment and looked significantly round the
hall with the interest of the students now brightening
considerably. “ Naughty ways! Now what are
naughty ways and how shall we discern those who
practice them ? What does it say of naughtiness in the
Book of Proverbs? ”


Again he paused, and then his words, now stern
and impressive, came very slowly. ‘“The naughty man,
he winketh with his eye. He winketh with his eye.’ ”
A flutter of intense excitement thrilled through the
feminine portion of the audience. Apparently then
the unmasking of the naughty man was strangely easy,
and so with great expectancy the ladies, almost with-
out exception, turned and looked this way and that to
see if there were any winkers at that moment present
in their midst. But the other sex sat staring stonily
before them, and so with no discoveries, in a few
seconds the excitement all died down.
“ But why does he wink? ” pursued the relentless
Mr. Muffins from the platform, in loud and strident
tones. “ I will tell you why.” A breathless hush
descended upon the hall. “He winks to lure a partner
for his base, degraded joys. That is why he winks.”
A gasp of thrilling horror filled all present. The
speaker with unerring skill was plumbing to the very
depths of human frailty.
“ Oh, yes, we live in dreadful times,” he thundered.
“ Morals are in the melting pot, virtue has become as
a sounding brass and tinkling cymbal, vice has been
sculptured in the whitest marble, and evil in every
form has got its grip upon the world.”
A long and prolonged burst of applause greeted
this great oratorical effort and none there was more
enthusiastic than Dr. Hoop-Brown and his little band
of medical students. The great doctor, from the
pleased and happy expression of his features, was un


doubtedly in entire accord with all the sentiments of
the speaker, and from the elated demeanour of the
students it was obvious that they, too, were cognizant
of the wickedness he had exposed so ably. They
cheered and cheered with a great vehemence, and the
sallow-faced Mr. Simkins cleared his throat prepara-
tory to starting; ‘For he’s a jolly good fellow.’
But Mr. Muffins raised his hand majestically for
silence and when quiet had been reluctantly conceded
announced that he himself did not intend to occupy
their time any longer. He had touched, he said,
upon the objects of the Society, and he would now call
upon the great social reformer, Mr. Soaker Ram, to
deliver an address.
“ Mr. Ram, friends,” he concluded, “ for many
years a worker with the ‘ Shining Beacons ’ of Vic-
toria, has come to speak to us to-night at some little
personal inconvenience and as an expert in social re-
clamation he will explain to us the exact nature of the
forms of wickedness we have to combat.” He waved
his arm. “ Mr. Soaker Ram.”
A short, thick-set man, who had been sitting next
to him upon his right, rose slowly to his feet
and advanced to the edge of the platform.
He was gloomy and truculent to look upon, with a
square and heavy face. His eye-brows were big and bushy
and his eyes were very deep set. His arms were long in
proportion to his body and he had large, sinewy, red
hands. He was dressed very severely in deep black and he
wore a semi-clerical collar, fastened high in the front.


For a few moments, he stood with a hard, impassive
face, looking coldly round upon his audience, and then
in a harsh and unemotional voice he commenced to
speak.
It was soon apparent that, like the previous speaker,
he was very dissatisfied with the existing order of
things, for he at once started to fall foul of everybody
and everything in particular.
All the world, it was his convinced opinion, was on
the downward path, and with a perfect wealth of alli-
teration he proceeded to depict the exact methods of
its decline.
Men and women were dancing to the devil, they
were cock-tailing to crime, they were racing to their
ruin. The dancing hall was the vestibule of Hell, for
there women doffed their modesty; there they hung
up their purity, and there they left behind their souls.
No men and women could dance together with clean
thoughts. The close contact of their bodies, the rhy-
thm of their swaying limbs, the touch of their hands —
all—all provoked the animal, and called up the dread-
ful evil of desire.
Then, there was wine. The man who drank wine
was drinking poison, the woman who sipped it was
sipping shame. Beer, too, was as dangerous as strych-
nine, and they who partook of it were drugging them-
selves down to disease and death.
The picture palaces, too, were of evil tendencies.
They were houses of the devil for they portrayed sin
and gave to it a setting of rare jewels and silken


clothes. They created false values of life and made
virtue dull and uninteresting, with vice an adventure
for the enterprising and the brave to undertake.
Then there were motor-cars, and they also were
deadly and most harmful in their tendencies. They
weaned men and women from spiritual things and
they fostered, too, an unhealthy desire for continual
change and novelty in everyone’s life, pandering to
that restless spirit of excitement that was now ruining
all mankind. And there was even a darker side to the
evil of the motor-car, for it made so easy an access to
lonely places. His eyes glowered balefully. Who had
not seen the hidden car among the trees, the silenced
engine and the switched-off lights, the lowered hood
and the close-curtained sides? Who had not guessed
what was going on? Some man, perhaps, was bar-
tering his hopes of Heaven, and some woman laughing
in the very sight of Hell!
Then there was the telephone and that, too, had its
dreadful possibilities, for it so facilitated the guilty
assignation, without the danger of the written word.
The speaker paused here to take a deep draught of
water, and in the hushed silence there were no eyes
in all that hall that were not fixed intently upon the
squat and solid figure on the platform.
It was obvious that he had captured everyone’s
imagination, and also that he had stirred everyone’s
emotion, although it might be, in the latter respect,
in very different ways.
The ladies of the audience were thrilled to ecstasy


at his cold and ruthless unveiling of the sins of the
younger generation; the elderly men were ruminating
and thoughtful, and a cynic might have ventured that
they were deploring the omissions of their lost youth;
the pale-faced adolescents were shivering plaintively
at the temptations that were everywhere surrounding
them, and it was only the medical students who were
without regrets, and unafraid.
“ Hot stuff,” whispered one of the latter, jerking
his head in the direction of the water-absorbing Mr.
Ram. “ The old bean knows a thing or two, you bet.”
“ We ought to get him to show us round,” whis-
pered another, “He knows all the right spots! ”
“ I shall take up dancing at once,” muttered Mr.
Simkins darkly, “ and I’ll hire a motor-car for the
week-end.”
But Mr. Soaker Ram was resuming his address and
he went on to denounce all pastimes, sports and
amusements as the temptations of the devil, indeed
according to him, temptations lurked everywhere, and
he was withering in his contempt for the frailty that
made the weak ones fall.
He rose to his greatest heights in invective, however,
when he touched upon the subject of the female dress.
Then, it seemed to his audience, that he was more
inspired than at any time during the evening, as with
biting sarcasm and a perfect wealth of picturesque
detail, he proceeded to describe some of the toilets that
had recendy caught his eye in the streets of Melbourne.
The girls and women in that city, it appeared, were


attired in less even than when they were born, and,
compared with them, Eve herself must have been an
extravagantly over-dressed young lady.
“ But they do not always go unrebuked,” he thun-
dered. “ They do not always escape the word of scorn.
I’ll tell you what I myself saw happen the other day in
one of the parks of Melbourne. A young girl was
walking unconcernedly among the crowd. She could
not have been more than sixteen or seventeen, and,
both in face and form, she was what the world would
have called beautiful to look upon. Outwardly, she
had all the charm and grace of young maidenhood
but—her attire ” —he paused for a moment and raised
his hands in horror—“ her attire was scandalous! ”
Once again a thrill of great excitement ran through
the hall. All held their heads well forward, so that
by no chance should one single word of the great
reformer be lost.
“ Yes, her attire was scandalous. There is no other
word to describe it. Her dress, flimsy and almost
transparent in its texture, was attenuated, and scanty
to a degree. Every line, every curve of her lithe young
body could be most plainly discerned. Her arms were
bare to the shoulders, her neck was bare to ”
But a loud and resounding crash came from the
back of the hall, where in the intensity of his excite-
ment one of the medical students had overbalanced
himself and fallen out of his seat. Everyone looked
scowlingly at the interruption and audible comments
were made in many quarters about his clumsiness. It


was some moments before Mr. Ram could resume.
“ Well, this young girl walked on through the
crowd and at first it seemed that, with all their disgust,
no one there would yet dare to say a word. But sud-
denly, a man stood out in front of her and barred the
way. He laid his hand upon her ”
“ Lucky beggar! ” ejaculated Mr. Simkins, in a
voice that, in his absorption, he forgot could be heard
plainly all round the hall.
“ Lucky! ” snorted Mr. Ram savagely at the inter-
ruption, and then suddenly his expression changed and
his face broke into a warm, approving smile. “Ah!
I get you. I see your meaning, my young friend.”
He raised his voice emphatically. “Yes—lucky! For-
tunate that he was there to administer a rebuke, for-
tunate that he was there to tell her to return home and
cover her nakedness from the world.” He shrugged
his shoulders. “I do not know what he said to her,
but it was no doubt very much to the point, for with-
out a word, she allowed him to escort her away, and I
saw her no more.”
His audience sighed deeply. Was it that they were
grieving over the scantiness of the young woman’s
attire, or was it that they were disappointed at the lack
of further details of the youthful anatomy that had
been left bare? Who knows?
Mr. Ram spoke on, but it was very evident now that
he was tiring, and after producing voluminous statistics
to show how many people had gone to dances and after-
wards been put in prison, followed by another fierce de


nunciation of the general depravity of mankind, amid
loud cheers.and hand-clappihg he resumed his seat.
The chairman, Mr. Muffins, beaming with great
delight at the swing with which everything was going,
allowed what he considered a decorous interval to
elapse in order that the gratitude of the audience to
Mr. Ram might be in no wise cut short, and then,
rising to his feet, with a bow of great gallantry,
motioned to the only lady on the platform to step
forward and address the meeting.
“Miss Jane Meddlin Brimstone,” he announced
with unction—“ another star in the great firmament
of reform.”
The lady indicated, rising briskly to her feet, bowed
right and left with quick, jerky movements to acknow-
ledge the clapping with which she was received.
Her personality, like that of the preceding speaker,
was decidedly an unusual one. She was tall and gaunt
in figure, with a long face and prominent, high cheek-
bones. Her eyes were large and fierce in their expres-
sion, and the colour of her hair and face was red. She
Was of middle-age and looked weather-beaten, but full
of energy. She started at once to speak very rapidly
and in high-pitched tones.
It must have been with great pain, she rattled out,
that they had all listened that evening to the speeches
of Mr. Henry Muffins and Mr. Soaker Ram.
Shame and disgust must have filled every heart at
the terrible portrayal that had been made of the lives
of the men and women of to-day.


But everything that had been said, as they all knew,
was true. There had been no exaggeration and no
straining for effect, and no picture that had been
painted had been too black, or of too dark a hue.
Undoubtedly, a blight of wickedness had descended
upon all classes of the community, and acts of sin and
wrong-doing were now jested at in all quarters, as if
they were the smart and clever things to do.
She proceeded fiercely. “ But now let us realize it
straightaway. It is we women who are the temp-
tresses, it is we who lead the men astray.” (Sighs of
sorrowful but gratified approval from the ladies, and
faint murmurs of ‘ Help, help ’ from the young friends
of Dr. Hoop-Brown.) “ Therefore we must concen-
trate our efforts upon the women of this city.” (‘ Hear,
hear,’ from a pale-faced youth, and immediate jealous
and angry glances in his direction from all the medical
students.) “We must go where women are ”
(storm of applause from the back benches) —“ for it is
with their co-operation alone that wickedness can be
put down.”
She paused and took a sip of water.
“ Well, we cannot fight against the unknown. We
cannot grapple with the ways of the wrong-doer, until
we know exacdy what these ways are. So what must
we do? ”
She became now most slow and deliberate in her
speech. “We must send one of our members, as
did the Israelites of old, to spy out the land. One
of us must descend into the pit and one of us for


the moment must act as one of the wrong-doers them-
selves.”
A deep ‘ Ah ’ of intense interest at the very audacity
of the proposal rolled round the hall! The audience
were electrified. Their Society was indeed going to
be a moving force in the world! Truly they were
destined to be actors on the great stage of Life and
without doubt they would be makers of history indeed!
Jane continued in matter-of-fact and business-like
tones. “ Now it had better be in Melbourne where
our investigations should begin, for it is so notoriously
a wicked city, and it must be one of the gentlemen of
our Society who must go. A man can move the easier
among the crowd, so that temptation will at once be
dangled before his eyes.” (A loud audible sigh came
here from the medical Mr. Simkins, and muttered
inquiries from his companions followed, as to whether
it might not yet be too late for them to join up with
the Society and help on with the good work.)
“ Yes,” exclaimed Miss Brimstone fiercely, “ in the
great cause of brotherly love for all the world our
missioner must, I say, descend into the pit of wrong.
He must frequent the dancing halls and mingle there
with the puppets of vice and sin. He must go to the
picture-palaces and note intently all that follows upon
the lowering of the fights. He must visit the race-
courses and see the poor fools gambling with the em-
bezzled money of their employers. He must sit in the
lounges of the big hotels and see the cocktails sipped,
and he must tolerate the glances of desire that will be


flung upon him.” (“ O, corks! ” from Mr. Simkins,
“if we’d only known of this Society before! ”) “He
must make friends of wickedness of all kinds and, in
the furtherance of his great cause, he must wink the
naughty eye.”
Again the audience gasped, and a mighty spirit of self-
sacrifice seared like a burning iron through all the men.
“ Now, who will assume this burden? ” cried Miss
Brimstone shrilly. “ Who amongst us is prepared to
toy with sin and shame? ”
With dramatic suddenness then, she turned, and
her right arm shot out like a piston. “ I know the
fitting one! Our Henry Muffins is the man! ”
A moment’s breathless silence, a bravo from a lady
in the front row, and then great cheering, in which it
was obvious the voices of the female portion of the
audience predominated.
“ Mr. Muffins! Mr. Muffins! ” exclaimed the ladies.
“ Our chairman! ” piped the pale-faced adolescents.
“Good old Henry! ” roared the medical students.
“ Muffins for ever! ”
Mr, Muffins paled visibly. He was touched by the
trust and the enthusiasm of the meeting, but it was
apparent that for the moment he was undecided and
unprepared. He rose to his feet and bowed.
“ Friends, my friends,” he exclaimed with emotion,
“ I must think, I must think. lam unworthy, lam
unprepared.”
“ No, no,” urged Jane Brimstone, “ you alone are
the man.”


“ Henry to do the trick,” shouted Mr. Simkins.
“Muffins for sin and shame! ”
Still, however, Mr. Muffins stood hesitating. He
looked this way and that and it was obvious he could
not make up his mind. Suddenly, however, his face
hardened and his eyes became very stern. He held up
his hand for silence.
“Very well, friends,” he said with decision. “If
you so wish it, I will go. I will investigate the whole
matter fully.” He threw out his chest defiantly. “ I
will tread the paths of evil and I will descend into the
pit of wrong. I will go where vice flourishes and
nothing shall escape my eye.” He buttoned up his
coat, as if to dispose of the whole matter. “ I will be
off at once. I will go to Melbourne to-morrow.”
The cheering was renewed in great strength and
indeed was only stayed when it was observed that Mr.
Muffins was expostulating earnestly with Dr. Hoop-
Brown. The doctor was smiling, but at the same time
shaking his head. Mr. Muffins turned to the meeting.
“ Friends,” he announced, “ we really cannot dis-
perse without a few words from Dr. Hoop-Brown.
We are all aware of the high reputation that he enjoys
in this State, and as a practitioner of long standing and
great experience he will be able to speak to us of the
medical aspect of our crusade.” He turned round
smilingly to the doctor. “ No, sir, we can take no
denial from you. We are waiting.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown, with an expression partly of
amusement and partly of annoyance, rose slowly from


his chair, and advanced to the edge of the plat-
form. He looked round at the meeting and then a
broad smile spread over his face.
“ Really, ladies and gentlemen,” he exclaimed, “ it
is not much good asking me to make any kind of
speech for I confess frankly I can contribute little to
the experiences—l might almost say to the suspicions—
of the evening.” He shrugged his shoulders, and
assumed a very sad look. “ From all that has been
said to-night, I am inclined to think I must have
missed a lot in my life. A lot of evil, of course, I
mean,” he added hastily. He smiled whimsically. “ I
have done no dancing now for thirty years, and my
chauffeur is always with me when I go out in the car, also
it is my butler who takes all my messages on the phone.”
The little band of medical students laughed and
clapped delightedly, but the others in the hall looked
coldly at the doctor and did not smile. Mr. Muffins
had rather a pained expression on his face, and Mr.
Ram had all the bored appearance of a man who was
trying to suffer fools gladly.
The doctor went on. “We have certainly had
some very eloquent speeches to-night, and I have no
doubt that the speakers were perfectly sincere and
honest in all they said, but still—still—we are all of
us very liable to make mistakes, and possibly at times
to see harm and evil in things, where actually none
exists.” His eyes twinkled merrily as he looked round
the hall. “You must not forget, ladies and gentle-
men, that it is perfectly natural for every healthy, nor


mal man to admire every pretty woman that he comes
across.” (Great stamping and cheers from the medical
students.) “ Why, even lat my age am not averse to
the attractions of physical beauty. A pretty girl always
takes my eye. Dainty ankles, shapely —er —er ”
the doctor coughed hastily —“ well, a nicely propor-
tioned figure—every time appeals to me.”
The back benches were uproarious in their delight.
They clapped and cheered and stamped and cheered
again.
Mr. Muffins rose majestically to his feet and, with
the gesture of an archbishop, imposed silence and
endeavoured to quell their enthusiasm.
“ This is not a tavern,” he announced scathingly,
“ and in order that we may continue our meeting, it
is well there should be, at least, some intervals of quiet
and order.” He took out his watch and turned
coldly to the doctor. “ Continue, Dr. Hoop-Brown,
but it is getting late, I would remind you, and ”
“ Oh! I don’t want to say anything more,” laughed
the doctor, “ except just one word of congratulation to
you that you are now going to see things for yourself.
Perhaps then ”
“You come with me, Dr. Hoop-Brown,” inter-
rupted Mr. Muffins very sternly, “ I should be glad
of a companion.”
But the doctor shook his head smilingly. “I am
sure I should like to immensely, Mr. Muffins, but un-
happily my professional work here will not allow me
to spare the time. Still s —l wish you every”—he laid
*3


his hand upon Mr. Muffins’ arm—“ I wish you ” —his
voice trailed suddenly away to nothingness, and a
strange bewildered look came into his eyes. Like a
stone statue, he stood staring straight before him; like
a graven image, he stood rooted to the floor.
Mr. Muffins coughed violently; he was choking, it
almost seemed. Something had gripped him by the
throat. He sat down and leant heavily upon the table.
His face was very white. Then, to the great relief of
everyone, his breathing quietened and he lifted up his
head. Shakily, he felt in his pocket for his silk hand-
kerchief, and then —he broke into a hearty laugh.
“ Great Scott,” he exclaimed, “ but it was like an
attack of colic in the head.” His hand shot out and
he poked Dr. Hoop-Brown jovially in the ribs. “ Now,
how’s that for a new disease, Doctor? Something to
get your name up in the newspapers, eh? ”
But the doctor did not respond to his jocularity.
Instead, the great man sat huddled up and as if quite
oblivious to everything that was going on. He was
frowning, and it was noticed he was now looking
very pale.
Mr. Muffiins turned smilingly to the meeting.
“ Now, where were we,” he asked, “ when that unfor-
tunate cough of mine interrupted things? Ah! I
remember. The good doctor was just in the middle
of the charming little speech, and he was telling us
how greatly he was influenced by the beauty of the
fairer sex. It was most interesting to us all and indeed,
friends, I can tell you that anything that the doctor


says will always be most interesting. We are indeed
fortunate to have enlisted his sympathies on our behalf,
and I intend to personally propose him as Vice-
Chairman of the Society. It is the very least we can
do.” He turned round to the doctor. “ Now, Dr.
Hoop-Brown, if you will kindly resume your speech.”
But the doctor was already standing up and had
got his hat in his hand. “I am sorry, Mr. Muffins,”
he replied coldly, “ but I have no further remarks to
make. Also, as it is getting late and I have some patients
to attend to, I beg you will pardon my leaving you.”
He bowed formally to the meeting and then, with-
out another word, descended from the platform and
passed down the hall.
He looked neither to the right nor to the left, and
had all the bearing of a man who was in great trouble.
* * *
The following afternoon, a few minutes prior to
the departure of the Melbourne Express, a gentleman
of smart and imposing appearance shot hurriedly out
of the saloon bar of the South Australian Hotel. He
was attired in a light suit of very large checks, laven-
der-coloured tie, and bowler hat of rakish cut, and he
was carrying a travelling-bag of large dimensions. He
sported a small red rose in his buttonhole, and across
his shoulders were suspended a pair of excellent bino-
culars of the latest type.
The gentleman was smiling jauntily to himself.
“ Rootity-toot,” he hummed gaily:


“ Rootity-toot, she plays the flute
In a very charming manner
and with quick, jerky step he kept time with his
engaging melody.
He crossed the street in a direct line for the main
entrance of the Adelaide Railway Station, but turning
interestedly to regard two young ladies who were
standing on the kerb, he narrowly escaped impact with
a passing motor omnibus. The driver of the bus
inquired coarsely and with some heat as to his precise
and exact intentions, but Mr. Henry Muffins, for the
pedestrian was he, uplifted his hand reprovingly and
disdaining any reply, proceeded smilingly into the
station entrance and down the steps into the hall.
Then suddenly the smile faded from his face.
“ Damn,” he ejaculated angrily, “ Jane Meddlin
Brimstone! And damn again, old Soaker Ram! ”
A little knot of people were gathered at the foot of
the steps, and they bravoed delightedly upon the
appearance of Mr. Muffins.
“ Exactly! ” whispered the latter very softly, fumb-
ling quickly in one of his waistcoat pockets. “ Now
I knew I should want those peppermints, somehow.
It was an inspiration—nothing less.”
Hastily, and with great dexterity then, he abstracted
two small white lozenges from his pocket and thrust
them into his mouth. Then—smiling more broadly
than ever—he advanced blithely to meet the little
band awaiting him.


But it was as if some chilling wind had all suddenly
swept down upon those whom he approached. They
stared hard and curiously, as if the closer view of him
were disquieting. Their faces lengthened and they
looked uncomfortable. Miss Brimstone and Mr. Ram
even frowned.
“Ha! ” muttered Mr. Muffins, “ Ram’s jealous! I
thought so last night. He’s jealous of my clothes now.”
“We hardly knew you, Mr. Muffins,” said Miss
Brimstone severely. “ Indeed, if we had not been
expecting you, we should have let you go by.”
For a few moments Mr. Muffins looked very em-
barrassed, but, clearing his throat, he rose with great
aplomb to the situation.
“Ah! friends,” he exclaimed sadly, “glorious as
my mission is, it has, you see, its mournful side.”
He lowered his voice darkly. “ You notice my attire.”
He looked round furtively. “ The loudest checks in
all Adelaide, and in cut and fashion of the most
debauched design! I could find nothing worse in the
whole city! It was the most dreadful suit that any
shop had.”
In turn, he took in every member of the little band
with a firm commanding eye. “ It’s a disguise,” he
went on exultingly, “ and no one now will ever guess
my mission from my attire.”
For a moment they looked starded, and stared with
incredulous eyes. Then all l simultaneously, they drew
in deep breaths of relief. Of course, of course, they
could see his object now. It was a subterfuge on his


part and they at once smiled knowingly, and nodded
delightedly at one another.
“ Not only that,” went on Mr. Muffins proudly,
“ but I have booked my room at the Hippodrome
Hotel under an assumed name. My identity as your
missioner will be hidden then. lam leaving nothing
to chance. lam taking the enemy unawares.” He
tapped his binoculars significantly. “Notice even,
my equipment to cope with the dreadful racehorse
evil! lam all prepared.”
His followers, quite at their ease now, chuckled
admiringly at his astuteness, and in their enthusiasm
crowded the closer round, so much so indeed, that
Mr. Muffins thought it prudent to insert at once
yet another peppermint.
Suddenly, however, the loud clanging of a bell was
heard, and the gay crusader at once picked up his bag,
“ Good-bye, friends,” he exclaimed cheerily, moving
away. “ Good-bye! In three minutes we shall be off.
I must take my seat now,” and, smilingly waving his
farewells, he hurried through the barrier.
“Wonderful man!” ejaculated Jane Meddlin
Brimstone enthusiastically, as the Melbourne Express
steamed out of the station. “ Who would have
thought he could so look the part? It was thrilling!
It was realistic! ”
“ Yes—’um, realistic! ” commented Mr. Ram very
slowly, and then he added thoughtfully, “ even to the
peppermints and —the need for them, too.”


CHAPTER X
THE AFTERMATH
IN the meantime, Dr. Hoop-Brown had passed a
very troubled day. After a night of heavy dream-
ing he had awakened much earlier than was his
wont, and then for an hour and more, had lain uneasy,
and tortured with his thoughts.
Something, he realized, had recendy occurred,
something the import of which he could not grasp or
understand.
Into the calm and even habits of his life, a great
happening had been thrust and with all the preciseness
of a trained and scientific mind he endeavoured now
to trace that happening to its source.
With memory that was as disconcerting as it was
distinct, he probed into his recent actions, as he would
have probed for a foreign body in a wound. He dis-
sected all his conduct as coldly and dispassionately as
he would have dissected a corpse.
But it was all to no purpose, and when his man
came in to call him to his bath he was as mystified as
ever. No feasible theories had suggested themselves
and he could account for nothing at all.
His eyes fell suddenly upon some neatly pressed and


folded clothes that his man had lain upon a chair,
and immediately his face clouded.
“ Bring me back a black suit,” he said frowning,
“ a morning coat and vest.”
“I beg your pardon, sir,” replied his man, who
in manner was as cold and stately as the doctor
himself.
“ A black suit, James,” repeated the doctor testily.
“ One of those I said you might have. One of those
I always used to wear.”
James looked at his master gravely. “You gave
them, sir, you will remember, to Mr. Banks and myself
on Tuesday. You ”
“ I know that,”' interrupted the doctor sharply,
“ but I’ve altered my mind. I’ll buy them back from
you, now.”
James coughed with some embarrassment. “I am
sorry, sir, but as they were not exacdy our style, Mr.
Banks and I ” —he hesitated a moment —“ sold them
on Wednesday.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown expressed no surprise. His face
was quite unmoved. “ Very well,” he said carelessly,
and he moved off to his bath.
Half an hour later, he unfolded the morning paper,
and at once, prominent on the middle page, he caught
sight of his own name. Intuitively, he composed his
features to tranquillity to meet some annoyance—and
annoyance he certainly found.
In triplicate headings he read:
“ Dr. Hoop-Brown and the World’s Regeneration.


Excellent Speech at Meeting. Proposed as Vice-Presi-
dent.”
He read very carefully through the report of the
meeting that followed and then, looking up, stared
thoughtfully, very thoughtfully, out of the window.
What indeed had come over him, he asked himself,
and by what malign influence had he been brought
publicly into contact with these dreadful people? He
—a man of culture, a man of scientific attainment, a
Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons, and they—
the very scum and dross of intellectual thought. Theirs
was the creed of ignorance and bigotry and from con-
stant contemplation they were themselves mired with
the very nastiness of the vices they imagined they were
suppressing. Their minds were unclean and unhealthy.
He whistled softly and his eyes grew frightened.
A sudden thought had come to him. Unhealthy?
Yes, but what about his own mind? Was he in a posi-
tion to throw stones there? His face paled and his
forehead grew damp!
Leaving his breakfast untasted, he rose up and for
some minutes paced restlessly up and down the room.
Then he sat down at his desk and leaned his head
upon his hands.
“ I must think,” he muttered hoarsely. “ I must
think. Now have I any mental taint anywhere in my
own family? My father? No. His brothers —his
sisters? ” —he ticked them all off on his fingers. “ No.
My mother? ” His face softened and he sighed
deeply. “ No—a thousand times, no. Her brother,


the clergyman? ” He hesitated a moment, and then
he shook his head. “ No, he was a shrewd man, that
uncle. He was always at loggerheads with the other
clergy about doctrine and besides, he made money on
the Stock Exchange. No, he was all right.”
He stood up and mopped his face. “It was a
phase,” he muttered assuringly, “ just a passing phase,
due perhaps to the heat. At any rate, it is gone now
and I feel none the worse. My memory, too, is per-
fecdy clear about everything and that certainly is a
good sign! ” He shrugged his shoulders. “ I did
some foolish things, perhaps, but nothing very bad. I
was more familiar and less dignified than I should
have been and I certainly paid some attention in cer-
tain quarters, that must have surprised everyone.” He
frowned. “ Ah, of course, of course, I have arranged
to take Sister Ruth and Sister Dora out again in the car
this afternoon, and I suppose I must go through with it.”
He smiled grimly. “ At any rate, I chose two pretty ones,
especially Sister Ruth. . . . That evening in the car
—did I actually kiss her? ” He blushed body and
then smiled again, but this time no longer grimly.
Still smiling, he sat down to resume his breakfast,
and then suddenly his face took on a worried look again.
“ But my work,” he exclaimed anxiously, “my
profession—have I done anything foolish there? ”
He pursed up his lips. “ I have enemies,” he mut-
tered, “ I have detractors, I have colleagues that do
not always wish me well. Bunions is jealous, and
Sawberry would love to see me make a slip.” He


thought rapidly. “ No, all my operations have gone
well, my nerve has not failed me, and I have been as
quick and confident as ever. No, nothing wrong
there. Nothing.” He sat up with a start. “ But my
consultations? ”he stammered. “Now, what about
that case with Weeks? ”
He hesitated for a moment and then, with a quick
motion, reached over to the phone.
“ Central eight seven five, please,” he said sharply,
and then followed a minute of hard suspense.
“Oh, that you. Weeks? Hoop-Brown speaking.
I have a hysterectomy coming off on Thursday and
wondered if you would care to give me a hand. No,
not at all, I shall be very glad if you will. Well, that’s
settled—at the Calvary Hospital on Thursday. How
are you? But, of course, you ought to be at your age.
So am I, but hard work keeps you young, you know.
By the by, that pneumonia I saw with you last week.
Oh, you rang up, did you? Well, I’ve been away a
lot lately, and they must have forgotten to note the
message. Getting on splendidly? Well, that’s good.
Never looked back, eh? No, no, Weeks, he saved
himself. Once the thought that he was going to live
and—as I told you, the battle was well on the way to
being won. Good-bye, my boy. Thursday at eight-
thirty a.m.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown hung up the receiver and on his
face there was an expression of great relief. “ Well,”
he smiled grimly, “ my brain could not have been so
very clouded, if I could go plumb to the correct prog


nosis there.” He shrugged his shoulders. “ Really I
can hardly remember a more hopeless-looking case and
yet —I said, I said emphatically, he would get well.”
He returned to his breakfast in quite a cheerful
mood. “ Now, I see what I must do,” he remarked
thoughtfully. “ I must only return very gradually to
my old self. No abrupt change anywhere in my de-
meanour. No hasty repudiation of any of my recent
acts. Just a slow sliding back to the man I once was.”
He frowned. “ I shall have some annoyances to con-
tend with, of course, but if I put a good face on them
they will soon pass, and, thank goodness, people’s
memories are very short.” He shook his head. “ But
it’s going to be a trying day for me to-day.”
And a trying day it certainly was. At the hospital
he was met everywhere with smiles, from the students
who mobbed him almost affectionately the moment he
appeared, from the matron who fussed over him the
whole time he was in the wards, and from his col-
leagues who all made an excuse, somehow, to come
and have a word with him.
But he forced himself to give back smiles and
pleasantry to everyone, and, if he were not quite the
free and easy Hoop-Brown of the immediate days be-
fore, he was at least very far removed from the cold
and haughty senior surgeon whom they had all at one
time known.
“ I see you are becoming quite a public reformer,
Dr. Hoop-Brown,” grimly remarked Dr. Bunions,
who stopped him in the corridor. “ That new society


you have joined must be an interesting one, judging
from the report.”
“ Interesting,” laughed Dr. Hoop-Brown, and to
his interrogator’s astonishment in no wise abashed.
“ Why, my dear Bunions, that’s not half the word for
it.” He looked round mysteriously and lowered his
voice. “ You take it from me, it’s the finest field for
the study of morbidity I have ever met and, as a society,
it’s unique. There are most extraordinary people in it.
Why, there are men and women there who are cock-
sure they’ve got the Almighty in their waistcoat
pockets. They blow their little tin whistles and believe
they are making more noise than the last trump.”
“ And you’ve become their Vice-President,” sniffed
Dr. Bunions. “ You’ve become one of the inner circle
of the elect! ”
Dr. Hoop-Brown laughed lightly. “ They may cer-
tainly do me the honour to propose me, but between
you and me, Bunions, I’m not going to accept.”
He passed out of the hospital with a great sigh of
relief. “ Now that’s the worst over,” he muttered,
“ and I don’t really think it’s been too bad.”
He was just getting into his car when a short, fat
man, travelling at a great rate, shot along the pave-
ment. The man was very red of face, and the per-
spiration dripped from him profusely. His arms
moved like a flail to keep time with his legs, and he
was puffing hard.
“ Poodlum! ” ejaculated the doctor. “ Gone mad
on taking exercise now! ”


The banker saw the doctor and smiled exultingly.
“ I can’t stop,” he exclaimed, panting. “I do four
times along the terrace, in twelve minutes, night and
morning, and I’m twenty seconds now behind my
schedule time. Feeling grand, I am—thirty years
younger; never better in my life. See you next week,”
and he was off round the corner in a whirl.
“ Bull’s eye number two! ” muttered Dr. Hoop-
Brown, elevating his eyebrows. “ Really, it seems I
did quite a lot of good! ”
At half-past one, according to arrangements, Sisters
Ruth and Dora were picked up on North Terrace, and
driven down to Glenelg for a breath of sea-air, in the
doctor’s luxurious limousine.
The doctor had been gready dreading the excursion
but, strange to say, once embarked upon it, he seemed
to lose all his apprehension and quite enjoy it. Cer-
tainly, as he had remarked to himself that morning,
Sister Ruth was very pretty. She was sweet and dainty-
looking, with a clear-cut profile and large grey eyes.
“ Old enough to be your father, my dear,” he
whispered sofdy, when an hour later he squeezed her
hand in saying good-bye, but he was delighted, all the
same, when she gave him an arch look and squeezed
his hand in return.
“ Am I really getting so old? ” he murmured sadly
when, a minute afterwards he was being driven to his
consulting rooms. He sighed deeply. “ Young
enough, every day, to be the arbiter of life and death
upon the operating table but—to make love—l am


esteemed too old! He sighed again, “ Really, when
love and passion leave us, Nature intended us to die.”
Shortly before five he was walking briskly in the
direction of the great Boodle Club, for his usual after-
noon cup of tea.
Arriving almost at the club entrance, however, he
hesitated, and then suddenly his intention changed.
“ No, not there, to-day,” he muttered frowningly.
“ 111 go somewhere quieter, where I can be alone,”
and he turned off to some small tea rooms in the base-
ment of a big building close by. He had been to the
place before and he knew of a little alcove in a corner
where he would be able to sit unnoticed and undis-
turbed.
The entrance into the room was dark and after the
bright sunlight everything seemed very dim. The
place appeared to be quite deserted, and threading his
way quickly between the tables, he gained the corner
he had chosen for himself.
He sat down with a great sigh of relief, for he was
feeling tired, and then to his disgust he heard his sigh
echoed from a chair close near him. He turned round
sharply to encounter the astonished stare of another
occupant of the alcove. For a moment, in the semi-
darkness, he did not recognize who it was, and then
his jaw fell.
“ Bottleworthy,” he ejaculated, “ the archdeacon! ”
The other visitor was equally as surprised, but he re-
covered first. “ Good afternoon, Doctor,” he remarked
rather coldly. “ I didn’t know you came here.”


Dr. Hoop-Brown inclined his head stiffly. “ I was
passing,” he said, “ and by chance I came in.”
They both ordered tea and bread-and-butter and
then, with half-hearted interest, proceeded idly to dis-
cuss the varying topics of the day.
Presently, however, the conversation languished and
finally came to a full-stop altogether. They both of
them seemed too tired, or else too preoccupied, to
talk.
Quite a long silence followed, and then Dr. Hoop-
Brown took out his watch. “ But I must be off,” he
said briskly, “ I have a lot to do yet before my day is
over.”
Perhaps it was that the archdeacon imagined there
was a note of superior importance in the doctor’s tones,
or perhaps it was only that his nerves were jagged that
afternoon, but at any rate he at once observed almost,
it seemed, with a trace of malice in his tone;
“ Going to another meeting to-night then. Doctor?
I read about you in the papers, of course, this morning.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown frowned in annoyance, but he
answered carelessly enough: “ No, I have no meeting
on to-night,” and then he added dryly: “ Going to the
races on Saturday, Archdeacon? ”
Archdeacon Bottleworthy stirred uncomfortably.
“ There is a college cricket match on Saturday,” he
said quickly, “ and it is necessary that I should be
present.”
“Oh! I see,” remarked the doctor. “Duty before
pleasure, of course,” and, picking up his hat, he made


to rise from his chair. But the archdeacon suddenly
gripped him by the arm.
“ Dr. Hoop-Brown—Doctor,” he said hesitatingly,
“ I should like to ask you a question, if I may.”
The doctor stared curiously at him. The words
were quite ordinary, but his professional instinct sensed
a note of trouble and anxiety in the voice.
“ I have something on my mind,” went on the arch-
deacon rapidly, “ and I thought perhaps you might
clear it up.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown smiled kindly. “Very pleased
to, lam sure, if I can.” He added gravely: “You
know, Archdeacon, the absolution of my profession
may be sometimes quite as far-reaching as that of
yours.”
Archdeacon Bottleworthy put his head close down.
“ It’s like this, Doctor,” he whispered, “ it’s like this
—I want to know one thing.” He hesitated for just a
moment and then went on quickly. “ Can a man,
for no apparent reason whatsoever, suddenly and vio-
lently change all his habits and mode of life and yet —
be a sane man? Can he for a few days think and act
like quite a different person, and then as suddenly
again go back to his old self? Can he do this and yet
not be on the verge of a mental breakdown? He
seized the doctor roughly by his coat. “ Come now,
Dr. Hoop-Brown, surely you ought to know.”
The face of Dr. Hoop-Brown was a study. From
kindly sympathy for the trouble of the archdeacon and
mild curiosity as to what that trouble might be, it had
14


passed abruptly to a condition of outraged self-respect
and burning anger. His eyes blazed with indignation.
“ Mind your own business, sir,” he replied harshly.
“ It is a piece of impertinence. Archdeacon, for you to
speak to me like this.”
“ Mind my own business! ” exclaimed Archdeacon
Bottleworthy, almost in a wail. “ But it is my busi-
ness. Can’t you see, man, the worry of it is unnerving
me? ”
“ Unnerving you! ” sneered the doctor, “ and what
pray has my state of mind to do with your nerves?
Come, we’re not such friends as all that! ”
“ Oh, don’t fence with me! ” exclaimed the arch-
deacon bitterly. “ You know what I mean. Of course
you saw the change in me. Everyone saw it. I was
supposed to have taken drugs,”
Dr. Hoop-Brown had put his hat down again and
was leaning back in his chair. His lips were parted
and, with an amazed expression, he was regarding the
archdeacon as if bewilderment had quite bereft him
of all powers of speech. His forehead was damp with
perspiration.
Archdeacon Bottleworthy made an effort to pull
himself together, but there was litde of the old im-
perious manner in his tones.
“ I ask you, Doctor, can a man for ten days act in
every way contrary to his natural mode of life and
then in the space of, say, ten seconds revert again to
his own self —and yet be sane? ”
Dr. Hoop-Brown spoke with an effort. “ Tell me


exactly what you mean,” he asked slowly. “ I don’t
understand you at all.”
The archdeacon wetted his lips. “ Three weeks ago
last Saturday,” he said weakly, “ something happened
to me and my actions at once became strange.”
“What happened to you?” asked the doctor
sharply.
“ That’s what I don’t know,” replied the arch-
deacon, his voice beginning to shake again. “ That’s
the dreadful thing to me. It was like this, Doctor.
I was walking along North Terrace, I remember, and
suddenly I felt ill and rather faint. It was only for a
few seconds, however, and then I felt quite well again
and began to laugh. I was exhilarated as if I had
drunk champagne.” He laid his hand impressively
upon the doctor’s arm. “ From that moment, for the
next ten days, I was not myself.”
“ But what did you do? ” asked the doctor quickly.
“ What was the change? ”
The archdeacon shrugged his shoulders. “ I was
irresponsible. I was like a man who didn’t care what
he did or said. I hummed a ridiculous rhyme begin-
ning ‘ Rootity-toot.’ I had no respect for public
opinion, and behaved not as a clergyman should.” He
passed his hand over his forehead. “ Almost the first
thing I did was to go to the races and advise people
to back various horses that were running there. I
joined in argument everywhere and was very different
in my behaviour at the college. Not that I always did
foolish things, however ” —he smiled sadly—“ for I


can see that for some reason I am rather popular at
St. Benger’s now. lam closer to the boys and I seem
to understand them better, too. But the fact remains
that all this time I was not my normal self. I was like
a man whose mental balance was upset. I seemed to
be acting a part.” A note of fear again crept into his
voice. “ What does it mean, Doctor? I ask you —
what does it mean? ”
“ It lasted exactly ten days, you say,” said Dr. Hoop-
Brown thoughtfully, “ and then the ending was
abrupt? ”
“ It ended as suddenly as it had begun,” replied the
archdeacon decisively, “ and I can recognize, within a
few seconds, when the end came. It was at the
bishop’s garden party and I was talking to Lady Fitz-
Tootle. I was ”
“To Lady Fitz-Tootle? ” gasped Dr. Hoop-Brown,
and his eyes opened very wide.
“ Yes, yes, and I remember I was being very dis-
courteous to her, for I had recalled to her that she had
once served in a shop. I had spoken tactlessly, too, of
lots of things, and I—l ” he commenced to stam-
mer—“ I had mentioned intimate and uncalled-for de-
tails about myself.” He winced. “ But it was not I
who had spoken, I feel now. It was someone else.”
His voice shook. “ Then I laid my hand upon her
arm and instantly I was my old self again.”
He paused and looked to the doctor for sympathy
but it seemed now that the latter was not listening.
Instead, Dr. Hoop-Brown was staring hard into va


cancy and from the expression on his face it was evident
that his thoughts were very far away. The archdeacon
took out his handkerchief and mopped his forehead.
Quite a long silence followed and then the doctor
drew in a deep breath, and with a curious look of relief
upon his face turned to his companion.
“ Now,” he said briskly and in a precise, profes-
sional manner, “ I am going to ask you a few ques-
tions and it will help me materially if you are very
exact in your replies.”
A quarter of an hour later Dr, Hoop-Brown laid his
hand assuringly upon the archdeacon’s shoulder.
“ Well,” he said emphatically, “ one thing I am
quite convinced about. You need not have the slightest
worry about your mental condition. You are in every
way as sane as I am ” —and he added with a smile—
“or perhaps, indeed, even saner. All that has hap-
pened to you has probably arisen from some small con-
dition of mental irritation, and is a condition some of
us often get.” He shrugged his shoulders. “ The hot
weather, or your liver, perhaps, upset. Just a small
matter that you have taken too seriously. You brooded
over it until you lost the right perspective and it be-
came an obsession with you. That is all.”
“ And you think I shall always be quite right
again? asked the archdeacon anxiously.
“ As right as you’ve ever been,” said the doctor em-
phatically, and yet repressing a smile. “I am certain
of it. You have nothing to worry about. The whole
incident is closed.”


“ No, not quite,” said the archdeacon, shaking his
head. “ There are the consequences still to be faced.
I have become mixed up with a lot of racing people
now, and I know my name is up for membership for
at least two of the racing clubs.” He smiled mourn-
fully. “ I believe I have given my consent.”
“ Well, well,” said the doctor laughing, “ then you
will be able to give me the latest about the Melbourne
Cup.”
They parted with a friendly nod at the top of the
stairs.
“ I must live things down,” muttered the arch-
deacon. “ Thank heaven people soon forget.”
“ I must interview Lady Fitz-Tootle,” remarked the
doctor under his breath. “It is vital for my peace of
mind now.”
* * *
The archdeacon looked up from his paper at the
breakfast table next morning.
“ I think, my dear,” he said, addressing his daugh-
ter, “ that you might call on Lady Fitz-Tootle to-day,
and see how she is getting on. The telephone there is
so unsatisfactory just now. The maid who answers it
always seems to be hesitating, as if she were being
prompted by someone behind her, and the reply is
invariably the same— ‘ Still weak, but improving.’ ”
He coughed slightly. “ You might inquire, too, if
my services would be in any way acceptable to


her.” He assumed an air of resignation. “The
Church has always its obligations you know, and the
well-to-do should be as much our concern as the very
poor.”
His daughter suppressed a smile. “ Very well,
Father,” she said dutifully, “ I’ll go soon after break-
fast.” She blushed slightly. “ I have to do some
shopping to-day.”
Margaret Bottleworthy was looking unusually pretty
that morning. Indeed, as her father had remarked
more than once to himself, she had never before looked
quite so pretty as in these last few days. Her eyes were
bright and sparkling, there was a gentle flush upon her
cheeks, and about her lips were curves of tenderness
that only dreams and happy thoughts could have
placed there.
It was just before eleven o’clock when she walked
briskly up the drive leading to Fitz-Tootle Hall. Con-
trary to the custom prevailing at that time of year, the
front door was closed, and following her ring, a long
period elapsed before she heard any movement in the
hall. Then the door was opened, very stealthily it
seemed, and part of a face peered round to see who the
visitor was,
“ Her ladyship is not at home to anyone,” said a
voice. “ She is not well, she is ”
“ I’m Miss Bottleworthy,” broke in Margaret,
recognizing the parlour-maid. “ It’s all right, Susan,
I shan’t bite you.”
There was a sound of low voices in the hall, the


door was opened a little wider, and Margaret was
whisperingly invited to walk in.
Very mystified, the girl did as she was bid, and then
the door was quickly closed again behind her. Lady
Fitz-Tootle was standing by the parlour-maid, and she
was holding her finger to her lips.
“ Come into the dining-room, dear,” she whispered,
and, laying her hand upon the girl’s arm, she almost
dragged her from the hall.
“You were quite alone, Margaret? she asked,
nervously. “ There was no one else waiting outside? ”
“ Oh I no, I came by myself, but whatever is the
matter? ”
Lady Fitz-Tootle ignored the question. “ There
was no man waiting in the drive, was there? ” she asked
sharply. Margaret shook her head. “ Not a tall, big man,
with stooping shoulders, and a very sunburnt face? ”
“ No, really, there was no one there at all, but what-
ever has happened? ”
“ It’s Andy Chickseed,” groaned her ladyship.
“ Oh! Margaret, I’m in such trouble,” and she almost
burst into tears.
“ But tell me, what is it? ” asked the girl.
“ He wants to marry me,” groaned her ladyship.
“ He haunts the house.”
“ Who? ” The girl opened her eyes very wide.
“ Andy Chickseed,” replied her ladyship plaintively.
“ That man you were talking to at the reception—
the man with Mrs. Bangs? ” exclaimed Margaret
incredulously.


Lady Fitz-Tootle nodded. “ He’s Mrs. Bangs’
brother,” she said, “ and just because I was friendly,
and interested in him, he wants me now to be his
wife.” She looked as if she was going to cry. “ Oh,
Margaret, you needn’t laugh. It’s too serious for that.
I can’t get rid of him. He calls here three and four
times every day, and won’t go away, and I get letters
from him by almost every post.”
“What! —love letters? ”
“ He supposes them to be,” sighed her ladyship,
“ but they’re mostly about cows and the price of beef.
His sister’s encouraging him, I am sure. She calls
here continually, too, and they’re always sending up
presents of meat. The larder is full of meat. We are
having much too much, and the house is getting un-
healthy. The cats won’t catch any mice, either. Oh!
what am I to do? ”
There was a knock at the door and the parlour-maid
entered. “If you please, your ladyship,” she said,
“ Mrs. Bangs has sent up a sucking pig with her kind
regards. She says to-morrow ”
“ Go away, go away,” exclaimed her ladyship with
great irritation, “ and don’t let any more meat into the
house. I won’t have it. You understand? ”
“ Very well, your ladyship,” replied the maid. “ A
case of apples has arrived, too, and ”
“Go away,” almost shouted Lady Fitz-Tootle. “ I
don’t want to know anything about them. Give them
away to your friends.”
The maid retired and Lady Fitz-Tootle turned de


spairingly to Margaret Bottleworthy. “ That’s Mrs.
Huggins,” she explained. “ She’s another of them.
They mean to be kind, I know, but they’re so per-
sistent they get on my nerves.”
“ But what’s it all for? ” asked Margaret very
puzzled. “ Why do they do all this? ”
Lady Fitz-Tootle sighed wearily. “ It’s all my fault,
I know. I encouraged them. They’re common people,
of course, but I started to make great friends of them.
I told them they were every bit as good as most of the
Society folk here. I said we had nearly all of us risen
from nothing and it was only a bit of money that made
us seem different from them now. I promised I would
get them into Society and they would see for them-
selves exacdy what we were. Then, as you know,
they came with their friends to the reception that I
gave to Lord Sanderson. I introduced them to every-
one and made a fuss of them and now ” —tears welled
up into her eyes, and she began to dab them with her
handkerchief—“ and now—l can’t shake them off.”
Margaret Botdeworthy laughed merrily. “ But
really, Lady Fitz-Tootle, I don’t see why you should
worry at all. They’ll soon get tired of coming if they
don’t see you, and then the whole matter will drop.”
She nodded her head sagely. “You know, you were
so nice to them that you can’t expect them to forget
you all at once.”
“ Your father introduced them to me, Margaret,”
said Lady Fitz-Tootle rather resentfully, “or I
shouldn’t have met them at all.”


“ Oh yes, father has known them a long time,” re-
plied the girl calmly, “ and I think he rather likes Mr.
Bangs. But I mustn’t forget,” she added smilingly,
“ father sent me up specially this morning to inquire if
he can do anything for you. If you would like to see
him, he means.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle shook her head. “ Thank you,
Margaret, but the dear bishop has been up here twice
already. He is so sympathetic and so practical. He
has given me such splendid advice about my corns.
Margaret smiled in amusement and her ladyship,
after a moment’s hesitation, smiled too. The hard
lines of her face softened and her worn eyes suddenly
took on a gentle look.
“ Oh! it’s well to be young, child,” and she sighed
deeply, “for there’s nothing so glorious in life as
youth.” She patted Margaret affectionately upon the
arm. “ Make the most of every moment of it, dear,
for it goes so very soon, and it’s only when you’ve lost
it that you realize the treasure that was once yours.”
Her eyes took on a far-away look. “ Remember, I was
young like you once, years ago. I was fresh and pretty,
and I had dreams and longings, too, such as I know
you must have.” She sighed again. “ I was poor then
and worked for my living, but I see now I lived in the
joy of life. Yes, I gulped down happiness in big deep
draughts then instead of sipping it, as I should have
done, slowly, drop by drop.” She smiled very sadly.
“ Now I am old, dear. I’m a painted old harridan
and the only interest I have in life is to imagine that


I’m important and mix with people who have money,
too.” She shook her head savagely. “ Money is every-
thing to us over here, and we who have it herd
ourselves together like fat cattle at a show. The rich
toady to the rich with gifts and offerings that are not
needed, and the unmonied folk are of different flesh
and blood to them, every time.”
“ But Lady Fitz-Toode,” protested Margaret,
“ you’re ”
“ No, child, I know exacdy what I am. I’ve been
thinking a lot about these things lately, and besides ”
—she sniffed grimly—“ your father was good enough
to mention them to me, as well. No, Margaret,” she
went on, “ it’s notoriety so many of us live for. The
craze to be talked about and to stand big in the public
eye. To get our names in the newspapers and to have
every stitch of clothing we’ve got on, described. With
some of us it’s our religion to get noticed, that’s all.”
Margaret laughed gaily. “ Well, marry Mr. Chick-
seed, and start the reformation of things at once.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle shook her head. “ Marriage is not
for me, child.” She smiled suddenly. “ But what
about yourself? ”
Margaret flushed uncomfortably. “No one has
asked me yet. I’m going to be an old maid, I think.”
“ Not with those eyes, Margaret,” said her ladyship
decisively. “ You’re going to give some man an idea
of Heaven soon. What about young Grainger now?
Hasn’t your father come to his senses about him
yet? ”


“ Mr. Grainger and my father are good friends,” re-
plied Margaret, “ if that’s what you mean.”
“ No, it is not,” snapped her ladyship, “ and you
know it, quite well. Does your father let you see the
boy when you want to? That’s what I mean.”
The girl smiled happily and gave a little bow. “I’m
over twenty-one, your ladyship, and can do as I feel
inclined.”'
Lady Fitz-Toode regarded her very thoughtfully for
a few moments. “ Well, about your father,” she said
at length, “ yes, upon second thoughts I should like to
see him. It’s very kind of him, I’m sure. Any day
when he can spare the time. Give him my kind
regards.”
A bell burred loudly in the hail. Lady Fitz-Tootle
looked startled and then she smiled. “ Really, Mar-
garet,” she whispered, “ I shan’t mind so much now
if it is one of those people. My talk with you has some-
how done me a lot of good.”
The maid entered. “ Dr. Hoop-Brown, your lady-
ship,” she said. “ I have shown him into the morning-
room.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle frowned. “I am almost inclined
not to see him,” she muttered, “ but still, still for my
own sake, I must.” She nodded to the maid. “ All
right, Susan, tell him I’ll be with him in a minute.”
Margaret Bottleworthy rose up to go. She held out
her hand to Lady Fitz-Tootle, but to her astonishment
the latter pulled her forward and kissed her affec-
tionately on both cheeks.


“ Good-bye, dear,” she said, “ and don’t forget
what I’ve told you. Make the best of your young days,
while you have them,” and regardless now of any lurk-
ing visitors outside, she herself accompanied the girl
to the front door.
With Margaret gone, for a long minute Lady Fitz-
Tootle stood irresolute in the hall and then, with a
curious expression upon her face, opened the door of
the morning-room and walked in.
Dr. Hoop-Brown was looking out of the window,
but hearing her enter he immediately turned round.
He bowed gravely and advancing towards her held out
his hand.
But Lady Fitz-Tootle waved him back.
“ No, Dr. Hoop-Brown, I’m not friends with you,”
she said curdy. “ I’m not pleased with you at all.
You’ve not been near me for a whole week.”
The doctor was quite unperturbed. “It was not
necessary,” he said calmly.
“ Why not,” she snapped. “ Didn’t you say I was
ill? ”
“ All that you required was rest,” he replied, “ and
I was sure that you would send for me again, if you
were not getting on.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle’s face expressed her surprise. “ So
you didn’t come simply because I didn’t send for you,
Dr. Hoop-Brown? ” Her medical adviser inclined his
head. “ Then,” exclaimed her ladyship triumphandy,
“ why, pray, have you come to-day? I didn’t send for
you. Why, now? ”


In spite of his habitual self-control, Dr. Hoop-Brown
looked uncomfortable. He frowned. “ I deemed it
advisable to call to-day,” he said stiffly, “ to see if you
were sufficiently recovered to be able to go out.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle regarded him sarcastically. “ The
explanation is not good enough, Dr. Hoop-Brown, and
I tell you frankly ” —her voice was hard and resentful
—“ I would not have seen you at all if I had not been
curious.” She laughed suddenly as if she were amused.
“ Yes, I am curious about you, as curious probably ”
she nodded her head—“ as you have been about me.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown regarded her intendy. He had
recovered himself, and the expression on his face was
now one of perfect dignity and repose.
Lady Fitz-Toode moved up nearer to him. She
was smiling animatedly now and there was no trace at
all of the annoyance of a few moments before.
“ Sit down, please, Doctor. I want to have a talk
with you.” She laid her hand upon his arm. “ And
I want to have a good look at you as well.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown was very puzzled and, although
he did not show it, very angry too. He had called ex-
pressly to determine the state of Lady Fitz-Toode’s
mind, and now, instead—she was bent upon the in-
vestigation of his. However, he regarded her quite
calmly, as if he took everything as a matter of course.
For a full minute she sat facing him, without speak-
ing a word. It was a most intent examination that the
doctor felt himself undergoing, every particular of his
appearance being subjected to a critical regard.


At length she relaxed her attention, and then slowly
shook her head.
“ I am disappointed,” she said reluctandy. “ I
thought —I thought I should be sure to notice a great
change.” She sighed. “ But you look just the same.
Your clothes are different, of course. Your hair is
shorter, too, and you are smarter in several ways, but
still—still you are the same Dr. Hoop-Brown I used to
know.” Her voice trailed to a low murmur. “ The
same cold, fish-like individual, the same precise dis-
sector of people’s bodies, the same pompous, conse-
quential, middle-aged old fo ” She broke off sud-
denly. “ Oh, I beg your pardon,” she exclaimed in
contrition. “ I was thinking aloud.”
“ No matter,” said the doctor with great politeness.
“ The analysis was interesting ” —he smiled grimly —
“ and no doubt in the main quite correct.”
“ Look here, Dr. Hoop-Brown,” went on her lady-
ship quickly, “ I am not trying to be rude to you, and
I’m not crazy, at any rate at the present moment. I
have a reason for speaking to you like this. A reason,
please understand, that concerns myself.”
The doctor bowed. “ I am at your service. I
have plenty of time. Pray go on, Lady Fitz-
Tootle.”
“Well, what’s been the matter with you lately? ”
asked her ladyship bluntly. “ You’ve been acting as
if you were not quite in your right mind.”
Just a little tremor passed over the doctor’s face, and
there was just a slight hurried intake of breath, but


he faced the situation calmly and there was no emotion
in his voice as he spoke.
“ Explain, your ladyship,” he said. “ I shall be
interested to know what you mean.”
“You joined that awful Society the other night, for
one thing—the Society for the Regeneration of every-
thing.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown smiled grimly. “ I attended as a
visitor,” he corrected. “ I was there in a professional
way, so to speak.”
“ Why did you go? ”
Dr. Hoop-Brown shrugged his shoulders. “ Why
should I not have gone? ”he asked. “As a profes-
sional man, I am interested in all morbid conditions of
the mind.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle frowned. “ Then you have been
rude to your patients, right and left, so I under-
stand.”
“ Particularize,” said the doctor quietly. “ Give
chapter and verse, please.”
“ You insulted Mr. Poodlum. His wife told me so
and you refused to give him any advice.”
“ On the contrary, I gave him the best advice pos-
sible, and I happened to meet him only yesterday and
he said he had never felt better in his life.”
“ Then, you refused to operate upon young
McTavish on Tuesday when two other doctors had
said an operation must take place instantly to save his
life.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown smiled. “ The young man was
is


playing cricket yesterday, and I understand he made
more runs than anyone else on his side.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle spoke with less conviction. She
felt the ground slipping from under her feet.
“ Then you said the lady doctors were not all ladies,
and they were not all doctors, either.”
It was Dr. Hoop-Brown’s turn to frown now. “ A
foolish gibe,” he said, “ and one which I regret. I
should not have said it, whatever I thought.” He
shrugged his shoulders again. “ But it was bad taste
only, at its worst.”
Lady Fitz-Toode smiled sourly and tapped him on
the arm. “ You’ve been going out with the hospital
nurses, Doctor,” she said. “ You’ve been taking them
to Glenelg in your car, and you can’t deny it.”
For the first time during the interview. Dr. Hoop-
Brown looked angry. “ And why should I deny it? ”
he asked sternly. “Am I responsible to everyone for
the conduct of my private affairs? ” His lips curved
sarcastically. “ And is it any evidence, pray, of my not
being in my right mind, because I take two ladies for
a ride in my car? ”
“ It was unusual, Dr. Hoop-Brown,” said her lady-
ship sharply. “You will admit that.”
“ Unusual,” agreed the doctor, “ but—insanity! ”
He looked very reproachful. “ Well, 1 hope it was a
long way from that.”
Lady Fitz-Tootle was suddenly on the verge of tears.
“ Oh, but I’m so frightened, Doctor,” she exclaimed
brokenly, “ and so disappointed too. I expected such


relief of mind, after seeing you.” She leant forward
and spoke very rapidly. “You know I have found out
I was pardy mad myself a few days ago, and I believed
when I saw you that I should recognize the same
symptoms of this madness in you. There has been a
madness going about lately, and it has been passing
from one to another, lam sure.” Her voice dropped
almost to a whisper. “ The archdeacon was mad for
a time and then he got rid of the malady, by passing it
on to me. Then, for some days I was not responsible
for what I did, and I hoped, I believed from all I had
heard, that I had become sane again by passing the
madness on to you. When you came in just now, I
expected to see you were still affected, and then I
should have been quite sure that I was free, but now
—now, I see the whole idea is wrong. I may still have
this madness hanging round me, and I may become
mad again any time.”
She stopped abruptly, her breath came sharp and
hurried and then she burst into tears.
And all the time, with a cold, impassive face, Dr.
Hoop-Brown had sat listening. Not a muscle of him
moved, not an eye-lid quivered, and he was just the
calm, serene professional man. Apparently, from his
demeanour, it was only the very commonplace recital
of some very ordinary experience that he was receiving,
just a tale of symptoms such as he was accustomed to
receive many times each day, and yet —yet, in reality,
the story he had been hearing was one which stirred
him to his very depths. His brain was working like


an engine at full speed, and every faculty that he pos-
sessed was being called upon to grapple with the
problem that lay before him.
So he was not alone in his conjectures! The idea
that had gripped him had seized also upon another
victim! They had both, it seemed, been playthings
of some mysterious and unknown force, even as the
archdeacon had been, and all in turn, had been the
bond-slave of some vampire of the mind! It was in-
credible, it was unthinkable, but it must be true!
But this woman must not know it. It was too
dangerous a secret for her to hold. She would betray
everything. She would tell everyone and in the telling
his own reputation would be involved.
He spoke very quiedy. “ You are imagining
things,” he began. “ You are ”
“ No, I am not,” she snapped at once, angrily sup-
pressing her tears. “ It’s all as plain as day. The
archdeacon was mad—that is, if he had been sane be-
fore. Then everything went a mental somersault with
me. Then in come you, with your light suits and your
jaunts with nurses —your ”
But Dr. Hoop-Brown imperatively held up his
hand. “ Now listen,” he said brusquely, “ and take
care you don’t let your imagination bring you to the
very state of mind you are now dreading to-day. No
—no, hear me first,” for he could see that she was
about to break in, “ hear what I’ve got to say. Look
round this room, Lady Fitz-Tootle, ordinary furniture,
ordinary table, ordinary chairs. Look out of the


window there; ordinary trees, ordinary sky and
ordinary sun.” He spoke very sternly and there was
contemptuous anger in his tones. “ And do you mean
to tell me, as an educated woman, as a woman of in-
telligence, that in all these ordinary and everyday sur-
roundings you can, for one moment, believe such non-
sense as madness passing from one person to another,
like the deal in a game of cards? ” He raised his voice
emphatically. “ Have you ever heard of such a thing
before? Have you ever read of such a thing? ” He
almost sneered. “ Because if you have, I have not.”
“ But, Doctor,” faltered her ladyship, undoubtedly a
little overpowered by his vehemence, “ how else do you
account for all that’s happened to us? ”
“ Nothing’s happened to us,” said the doctor
sharply, “ except what’s happening to thousands of
people every day. We threw off some mental indiges-
tion, that’s all. The archdeacon got a brain-wave of
common sense. He forgot he was a proud and sancti-
monious ecclesiastic and became a natural human
being for once. You threw off the sickening snobbery
of your class and the pretence that you were of dif-
ferent flesh and blood from everyone else, and I—well
I came suddenly to the conclusion that I was an old
fool and missed quite a lot of the enjoyment of life.”
His face broke into a smile. “ Now, to change the
subject, I’ll ask you something. I’ll come to your lady-
ship for some advice. Do you think ” —he hesitated
for a moment and looked a little sheepish—“ do you
think I’m too old to get married, now? ”


Lady Fitz-Tootle looked incredulous. “ You get
married. Doctor? You’re not really thinking of it, are
you? ”
Dr. Hoop-Brown looked very serious. “ But I am.
I certainly am.”
She beamed upon him. “ Oh, do tell me all about
it. I’m so interested. Fancy you getting caught! ”
It was then quite an animated Lady Fitz-Toode who
a little later herself showed the great doctor out of Fitz-
Toode Hall. All her thoughts had been switched off
into quite a new direction. She was all smiles and
brightness now, and very different from the care-worn
and depressed woman of but an hour ago. Margaret’s
visit and the subsequent friendly confiding with her
medical adviser had all in a flash, as it were, dispelled
her forebodings. Her mental condition had no longer
any terrors for her and she was even prepared now to
dismiss the whole matter, as indeed the doctor had in-
tended that she should, as a foolish imagining, and
one the sooner forgotten the better for all concerned.
“ Really, Doctor,” she laughed in parting, “ you
may be a bad surgeon, but you are certainly a great
physician of the mind. I shall have the car out and do
some shopping now.” Her face sobered a little.
“ Whatever I’ve said or done, I am still Lady Fitz-
Tootle, and, with a cook like mine, I shall always be
a power in the land.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown laughed gaily in return, but once
out of sight of the house his eyes grew grave and stern.
“ The impossible,” he muttered, “ the fantastic, in


this cold prosaic world! Bottleworthy, this woman,
and then me! ” He clenched his hands together.
“ Now to find the beginning and the end of the trail.”
* * *
Lady Fitz-Tootle had one more visitor that day.
The archdeacon called in the afternoon, and his mien
was as important and as dignified as ever. He was,
perhaps, in just the slightest degree uneasy when they
first shook hands, and perhaps for just one moment her
ladyship, too, averted her eyes. They talked quite casu-
ally of nothing in particular for awhile, and then Lady
Fitz-Tootle abruptly brought the conversation round
to his daughter.
“ How pretty Margaret looked this morning,” she
remarked, and then she added, with a note of challenge
in her tones: “ But then, every girl does look her best
when she’s in love.”
The archdeacon made no comment. He was look-
ing out of the window and her ladyship, as if expecting
no reply, went on carelessly:
“ By the by, I am taking away the legal business of
my estate from Rise and Cost’s and giving them over
to young Grainger, instead. He’s a nice young fellow
and deserves to get on. They’ll make a very good-
looking pair, Archdeacon.” She smiled graciously,
and laid her hand upon his arm. “ I may tell you,
although it’s a great secret of course —I am giving
them my house at Glenelg as a wedding present.” She


shrugged her shoulders and sighed. “At my age, one
house is quite enough for me.”
The archdeacon opened his mouth in astonishment.
Her Glenelg residence was one of the most beautiful
houses at the Bay and was worth a lot of money, he
knew. The generosity of the proposed gift took his
breath away. His hands shook and the colour rose to
his face.
“Really, your ladyship,” he stammered, “your
generosity is magnificent. It would be a queenly gift.”
He passed his hand across his forehead, and his voice
broke. “ Between the lot of you, you are too much for
an old man. lam getting weak and full of years, I
see.”
“ Nonsense! ” said her ladyship stoutly. “ You are
getting sensible, that’s all—and you’ll be ‘ my lord
bishop ’ yet, before you die. I’m certain of it.”


CHAPTER XI
THE PIT OF SHAME
THE days subsequent to the departure of their
esteemed chairman, Mr. Henry Muffins, for
Melbourne, were ones of intense interest and
expectancy for the members of the Society for the
World’s Regeneration.
They felt that they were now surely on the eve of
great events, for following upon the investigations of
their appointed representative in Melbourne their
society would soon be lifted up into the limelight, and
they would all enjoy the notoriety and publicity for
which they craved.
Mr. Muffins had promised that daily reports of his
progress should be received at headquarters, and sure
enough, less than forty-eight hours after his departure
from Adelaide, Miss Jane Meddlin Brimstone received
the first bulletin. It was written on a postcard and was
signed, simply ‘ M.’ It was very brief and ran:
“ Arrived. Like Daniel have descended into the
den of lions. P.S.—The food is excellent.”
The eyes of Miss Brimstone scintillated with ani-
mation as she read.


“ How brave he is,” she ejaculated admiringly,
“and how practical too! ‘The food is excellent.’”
She nodded her head. “ And he will want it, too. He
will need good nourishment to keep up his strength.”
The postcard was shown all round to the members
of the committee, and with great excitement they
awaited the advent of further news.
The next day a second postcard came.
“ Things worse even than expected,” they read.
“ Temptations everywhere. Scented syrens in the
lounge. Pregnant happenings possible any moment
now. Have winked the naughty eye,” and it was
signed this time ‘ St. Augustine.’
“ Oh, how thrilling! ” enunciated Miss Brimstone,
powdering the perspiration from her nose. “ A real
Sir Galahad! He will unmask them all! ”
The second postcard was read and re-read a hundred
times that evening and discussed even to its minutest
details. The lady members speculated animatedly as
to what particular scent was being used and the gentle-
men debated with intense vigour as to the probability
of the tempting syrens being either tall or short and
dark or fair.
The third day brought a third postcard, this time of
much greater length. It was of mixed metaphor and
the interpretation of it was obscure, but to its recipients
it suggested dark mystery and hinted of the under-
world.
“ Enemy advancing in great strength,” it recorded,
“ but all defences secure. Am swallowing the bait.


Shall follow trail to wheresoever it may lead. If lured
a lamb to the slaughter, in the end the sheep may yet
turn out to be a Ram. More anon,” and it was signed,
‘ Creme-de-menthe.’
A thrill of horror ran through the committee.
What was happening? they asked one another, and
why, with all his nobility of mind, could not Henry
Muffins have been more explicit? Now they would
have to wait in apprehension and suspense until
another pennyworth of postal matter should tell them
all was well.
But alas!—no further communication of any nature
reached them. No postcard, letter or any lightning
message over the wires! Nothing the next day—the
day following, and the day after that!
They were filled with fears. It was so unexpected,
it was so incomprehensible. It was as if night had
fallen suddenly, blotting everything from sight. It was
as if the silence of the tomb enveloped them and as if
the black waters of oblivion had closed for ever over
Henry Muffins’s devoted head.
And then, gradually as it were, waves of movement
began to quiver through from Melbourne, unmistak-
able intimations that something there was going on.
Happenings that did not touch their Society directly,
and yet which in some way suggested to them that
Fate was pulling strings of which they were at one end.
It was certainly very curious!
To begin with Mr. Soaker Ram received, at his pri-
vate residence in Tiddle Street, a visit from a short,


thick-set, bull-necked individual, who had just arrived
by the Melbourne Express. He, the gentleman of
bovine characteristics, was, it appeared, desirous of pur-
chasing a public-house in Adelaide and he had come to
Mr. Ram as being, he understood, the best man to deal
satisfactorily with the matter.
Mr. Ram was aghast, and at first was seriously in-
clined to order the visitor, as an intoxicated practical
joker, peremptorily from the door; but finding the man
perfectly serious and devoid, moreover, of all traces of
alcoholic aroma, he thought better of the matter and
proceeded trenchantly to expand himself upon the
whole question of the traffic of drink in general. Un-
happily, however, the licensed-victualler-to-be was very
deaf and, upon Mr. Ram producing statistics as to the
number of families which had been ruined by the con-
sumption of stout and beer, he waved them all con-
temptuously aside, believing them to be only tables of
the amount of commission expected by Mr. Ram, in
the event of a sale. He announced gruffly that he was
prepared to pay full commission on the scale as recog-
nized always by the Trade.
After much bawling and shouting, it was brought
home to him at last that Mr. Ram did not deal in
public-houses, and then explanations, or at least partial
explanations, ensued.
Mr. Ram indignandy wanted to know who had told
his visitor to come to him, and the man thereupon pro-
duced a dirty piece of paper that had been given to
him, he said, by a stranger, in a place of refreshment


in Melbourne. Upon it, in straggling characters, was
inscribed:
“ Mr. Soaker Ram, Toshem Villa, Tiddle Street,
Adelaide.”
The stranger, it appeared, had suggested Mr. Ram
as knowing more about the outsides and insides of
public-houses than any man in South Australia, and
had moreover averred that he, Mr. Ram, had an inti-
mate acquaintance with every good-looking barmaid in
the beautiful city of the plains.
Mr. Ram carefully scrutinized the hand-writing
upon the paper, and was starded to find that in several
ways it was familiar to him. For one thing, he could
distincdy remember having somewhere seen the tail
of the m in Ram.
Mr. Ram and the public-house proprietor-to-be
parted on very distant terms, and the same evening the
former brought the whole matter before the assembled
committee of the Society for the World’s Regeneration.
To everyone’s astonishment, Miss Jane Meddlin
Brimstone then immediately capped the experience
with something that happened to her, less even than
two hours before the meeting that night.
She also, she announced, had had a visitor, and that
visitor, as in the case of Mr. Soaker Ram, had come off
the Melbourne Express. It was a middle-aged woman
who had called upon her, and she had come over from
Melbourne purposely, she said, to seek Miss Brim-
stone’s advice. She had been married, she explained,
for over ten years, but no babies had come to her.


Now —and Miss Brimstone was quite cool and made no
attempt to hide anything, or gloss over the matter —
she wanted one, badly. She had been informed in
Melbourne, she said, that Miss Brimstone was a
specialist in such matters, and indeed had practised
with such success that she had become known in
Adelaide as ‘ The Stork Queen.’
Pressed by Miss Brimstone, who had dissembled
her disgust, to disclose the source of her information,
she had reluctantly admitted she was not in the posi-
tion to be able to furnish any names. It appeared, how-
ever, that a few days previously, her husband had en-
countered a gendeman in the bar of some hotel in
Melbourne, and in the course of conversation had hap-
pened to mention his fondness for children, and the
loneliness of his home without any. Thereupon, the
affable stranger had at once suggested the assistance of
Jane Meddlin Brimstone, and had forthwith obligingly
furnished her address. This was all the information
Miss Brimstone could elucidate and no description at
all of the informant could be obtained.
The committee had listened with profound astonish-
ment to the experiences of both Mr. Ram and Miss
Brimstone and then they regarded each other in a very
puzzled way. That it was more than a coincidence that
two of their number should have been singled out for in-
sulting communications from Melbourne they were sure,
and that being so, from whom could they possibly have
come? From whom, also, had the private addresses of
Mr. Ram and Miss Brimstone been obtained ?


Then, too, why was Henry Muffins silent now, and
could there by any chance be any connection between
his silence and the visits of these two persons from
Melbourne?
Melbourne was a notoriously wicked place, and was
it possible that Henry Muffins had met with some mis-
hap? Had he been shot or sandbagged or drugged
and subsequently his papers stolen from him? If that
were so, then to be sure, everything was very easily
explained, for undoubtedly he would have been re-
cording in black and white the impressions of every
single happening since he had left home, and, of
course, his memoirs would contain many references to
his affectionate regard for both Miss Brimstone and
Mr. Soaker Ram.
The pity of it was—-they could not communicate
with their chairman. They were quite aware, indeed,
that he had intended to stay at the Hippodrome, but
they knew also that he was there under an assumed
name, and what that name was going to be, in the
hurry of his departure, he had omitted to disclose.
They discussed the whole matter with great
thoroughness, but no conclusion was arrived at as to
what action, if any, should be taken, and finally the
meeting terminated with no course of action resolved
upon.
The next morning, Mr. Ram himself received an
anonymous postcard from Melbourne. It featured a
sunny day upon the St. Kilda sands and depicted a
most pretty and well-proportioned young woman in


an alluring bathing costume of attenuated design. The
girl was lying in about six inches of water at the
margin of the waves and the sea was lapping caress-
ingly about her shapely limbs. The picture was en-
titled: ‘ Now what are the wild waves saying? ’
Mr. Ram gasped with horror when after a moment’s
hesitation he snatched the postcard from the postman’s
reluctant hand. It was animalism, pure and simple,
he groaned. It was a beast-like picture and would
appeal only to a beast-like mind. For some minutes,
so animated with disgust was he, he could not take his
eyes off it, and then, then—for a long time he scru-
tinized the hand-writing on the addressed side.
But he was plainly baffled there, for the hand-writ-
ing was disguised and the letters, all in Roman charac-
ters, effectively masked the identity of the monster who
was thus outraging the unearthly purity of the great
reformer’s home.
Still Mr. Ram was thoughtful, very thoughtful about
something, and that evening, just before the shops
shut, he slipped out and bought a sixpenny copy of
‘ Handwriting and What It Tells.’
Four days more passed, with no further tidings of
the chairman of the Society, and then upon the fifth
day Fate hurled a dreadful bomb into the tabernacle
of the faithful. A bomb that burst in the very holy of
holies and rent the veil of mystery in twain.
Henry Muffins was unmasked! He had exceeded all
limits! He had sold his soul to the devil on the time-
payment system, and the great Cause was betrayed!


The news came to them in a curiously roundabout
way.
A Miss Bloggs, an obscure member of the Society,
received a letter from a cousin of hers in Melbourne.
This cousin, much to Miss Blogg’s disapproval,
worked in the office of the Hippodrome Hotel in
that city. She did not often write to Miss Bloggs, be-
cause they were not on particularly friendly terms, and
indeed Miss Bloggs was surprised to receive any com-
munication from her at all. The letter was dated only
the previous day and read:
“ My dear Emma,
“ I hope you are well, and Maggie too. lam writ-
ing to you for information, because you always know
everything about everybody in Adelaide. There is an
extraordinary man staying here, at our hotel. He
makes out he is a foreigner and comes from Italy, but
we don’t believe him, and think he comes from
Adelaide, for the chambermaid says his pyjamas were
bought there. He calls himself Henrico Muffino. Do
you happen to know anything about him? He is
about fifty years of age and tall and rather pompous-
looking. He had long iron-grey whiskers when he
first arrived, but he has cut them off since, and now
wears his hair very short, too. He dresses in very loud
style, and always has a lot of young girls hanging
round him. They make a great fuss of him and call
him ‘ Poppa.’ He has been here quite a short time,
but he seems to know everyone, and I don’t wonder,
16


considering the money he throws about. He must be
very rich, for he is a great racing man and bets heavily.
It is said he won a fortune last Saturday when Wet
Kisses won the Cup at Moonee Valley. At any rate,
there have been dances and champagne suppers ever
since. He dances splendidly and he is very daring when
a ‘ Twilight Number ’is posted up. He makes out he
is single, and he is an awful flirt. His greatest
favourites here are two pretty girls, known as Flossie
and Di. They are both always with him, and every-
one is wondering which of them will get him in the
end, that is, of course, if he marries either of them.
Everyone is very interested in the man, but he rather
shocks us sometimes, and if he is, as we all think, an
importation from wicked Adelaide, then we don’t
wonder you have to have a society there for stopping
such things.
“ Well, so long, Emma, until I see you again.
“ Your affectionate cousin,
“ Laura Jerks.”
Emma Bloggs, snorting in disgust, had put on her
hat and run round to Miss Brimstone at once.
* * *
One afternoon, in a most luxurious hotel in Mel-
bourne, a gentleman of gay and debonair appearance
might have been observed occupying the largest and
most comfortable armchair in the lounge.
He was a happy-looking man of middle age and it


was evident, from his surroundings, that Fate and Life
were dealing kindly with him.
He was expensively, if peculiarly, attired, his light
suit being of a decided chess-board pattern. Indeed, to
an enthusiast of the ancient game the pattern of his
coat, together with his buttons and its button-holes,
might very easily have suggested the opening moves of
the Allgaier Gambit or the French Defence. He
sported a large diamond in his cravat, and a larger
one, even, in his ring. His shoes were of patent
leather and tapered to very fine points.
He was evidently a man of some importance, for all
the staff of the hotel were particularly deferential to
him, from the manager, who smiled at him with the
cordiality always extended to a good customer, to the
waiters who watched for the crook of his little finger,
as lackeys wait upon the order of a king.
He was not alone, this gay and festive-looking
man, indeed quite the opposite was the case, for five
very pretty girls were close in attendance on him, lean-
ing over and hanging upon his every word.
“ Well, girls,” said the happy man, “ and what is it
to be? ” He shook his finger reprovingly. “ No, not
cocktails yet. It’s too early. Ice-creams now, or
glasses of milk.”
A vivacious-looking dark girl laughed merrily.
“ Why, Signor Muffino,” she exclaimed gaily, “ you
know we all agreed to be teetotal till dinner, and then
you promised us oceans and oceans of champagne.
You remember, you promised us, didn’t you? ”


“ Tut, tut,” replied Mr. Muffins loftily, for of course
it was he. “ Men promise anything, my dear, so most
likely you will only get ginger-beer in the end.”
“ Oh, Poppa,” said a fair girl reproachfully, “ you
would not deceive us for anything, now would you? ”
Mr. Muffins beamed delightedly upon his pretty
interrogator. “ Not in the matter of liquids, certainly,
Miss Flossie, but in other matters ” —he shrugged his
shoulders—“ well, does not the psalmist say ‘ men are
deceivers ever ’? ”
“ I don’t believe it was the psalmist who said it at
all,” broke in another girl. “It sounds like Dean Inge
or Bernard Shaw.”
“ Well, it was said,” replied Mr. Muffins with dignity,
“ and consequendy it will hold good until it is offici-
ally contradicted in the proper quarters.”
“ Oh, Signor,” exclaimed the girl with admiration,
“ how clever you are! ” Then she added inquiringly:
“ And do you speak any other languages as beautifully
as you speak English? ”
“ Many, Miss Flossie,” replied Mr. Muffins grandly.
“French, German, Scandinavian, Simian and Majong.”
“ Then you have travelled all over the world,
Signor? ” asked a fourth young lady with great
interest.
“ Not quite all over,” said Mr. Muffins with becom-
ing modesty. “ I appear to have no recollection of
visiting either the Sandwich Islands or Bow Bells.”
“You must be very rich,” suggested the dark girl,
“ to have travelled to so many places.”


Mr. Muffins patted her hand. “I am rich always
when you smile upon me, dear,” he replied, “ and
poor only when you turn those eyes away.”
The dark girl laughed. “ And do you know
Adelaide too? ” she asked, with a studied expression
of innocence in her voice.
Mr. Muffins coughed. “ I have heard it spoken of,”
he replied evasively, “ indeed, I believe I have once
passed through.” He appeared to consider for a
moment. “Yes, now I come to think of it, I have
stayed there—just for a few days, some time ago.”
“ It’s a wicked place, isn’t it? ” asked the girl, with
a sly look round to her companions. “At least, that’s
what we are told over here.”
Mr. Muffins leaned back and assumed a strictly
judicial air. “ Adelaide, my child,” he announced
pompously, “ is a city of class, culture, and—but there,
I hate alliteration. It is the coin of a shallow mind.”
He beamed round at his audience. “ No, Adelaide is
very harmless, although it loves to be told it is a
wicked place. It contains very many charming people,
but many others also ” —he made a wry face —
“ who ought never to have been born.”
“ Have you ever heard, Signor,” asked Miss Flossie,
“of a man there called Ram? A great missioner, they
call him. We read about him in the newspapers last
week.”
Mr. Muffins raised his hands in horror. “ Mis-
sioner ! ” he exclaimed indignantly. “ Why he is a
man of sick and dreadful mind! Missioner! ” he


snorted. “ Yes, I know him,” and his voice vibrated
with contempt. “Heis a blot on every cause that he
espouses. He is a killer of the joys of life. He is a
poker-nose, he is an interferer in everybody’s business,
he is ” Mr. Muffins dropped his voice despair-
ingly, and then shook his head with great sadness.
“ Why, he would see evil even in your smile, my
dear.”
“ Oh, Signor,” exclaimed the girl, “ you talk like a
clergyman ” —she laughed delightedly —“ and Ido
believe you are one.”
“ There! ” ejaculated Mr. Muffins with a gesture of
mock embarrassment. “ I knew I should be found
out some time. My garments are too sacerdotal and
I was sure they would give me away in the end.”
“ Well,” said Miss Flossie, when the laughter had
subsided, “ and what is our programme for the even-
ing? What are you going to do with us? ”
“ If you all honour me with your company,” said
Mr. Muffins carelessly, “ it’ll be a theatre ” —his face
broke into a sly smile—“ but, if only one comes, then
it’ll be a motor ride.”
“Oh! you wicked man! ” exclaimed one of the
girls in great delight. “You make us quite afraid of you.”
At that moment the glass doors revolved, and a
smartly dressed, clean-shaven man walked briskly into
the lounge. His appearance was the signal for quite a
diversion of interest.
“ Markem, the trainer,” whispered someone. “ He
trains Pet-me and Pickled Pork.”


For a few seconds the new-comer searchingly re-
garded all the occupants of the lounge, and then, with
an amused smile upon his face, he made his way over
to where Muffins and his party of young girls were
seated. He shook hands cordially with Mr. Muffins
and then, responding to the latter’s invitation, sub-
sided into an adjacent chair. He bowed gallantly to
the young ladies.
“ So, Signor Muffino,” he remarked in envious
tones, “ you are still the lucky man, I see. You back
all the winners at the races and now I find you capti-
vating the youth and beauty of our city. How do you
manage it? ”
“ Oh, it’s a gift,” replied Mr. Muffins loftily.
“ Just judgment and personality.” He waved his hand
towards the girls. “ The best is good enough for me.”
The trainer leant over towards him. “ I fixed up
that deal all right for you,” he whispered quietly. “ I
got Ginx’s Baby for the five hundred guineas. They
haggled a bit at first, but they let me have him in the
end.”
“ Good,” replied Mr. Muffins, in equally low tones.
“ I’m very pleased about it.”
“With all engagements,” whispered the trainer,
“ and, as I look at it, he has more than an outside
chance for the Melbourne Cup.”
“ We’ll get a hundred to one? ” queried Mr.
Muffins.
The trainer nodded. “We may,” he replied, “if
we get on at once.”


“ Well, I’ll speculate a couple of hundred,” said Mr.
Muffins, “ and I’ll give it you now to get on for me
straightaway. You might kindly arrange the commis-
sion and remit to me afterwards, if we collect.”
“ Certainly, Signor,” agreed the trainer. “ I’ll see
to it to-night.”
A few minutes later, and Mr. Muffins was again
alone with his pretty companions. He smiled indul-
gently as they complacently puffed at their cigarettes.
“ Well, Poppa,” said the fair girl who was known
among her companions as Di, “ and what is going to
win the Cup? You seemed pretty thick with Mr.
Markem just now and he’s supposed to have ‘ the
goods ’ up his sleeve as a rule.”
Mr. Muffins frowned. “ Don’t be slangy, my child,”
he reproved. “ Slang in a pretty woman is like an
onion flavour in an egg.” He cleared his throat and
went on in grave paternal tones. “You see, children,
if you are to make a success of your lives in this world
—if you are to have motor cars, live in fine houses and
dress so expensively that you will appear to have no
clothes on at all, you must set yourselves to exercise
tact from the very outset of your predatory careers.
You must regard Man —not as the bold hunter that he
believes himself to be, but as the timid quarry, to be
enticed for ultimate dispatch within reach of the
weapons you employ. Yours must be the victory and
not his—and so the ambush must be prepared with all
due consideration for the habits and peculiarities of
your prey.” He regarded them all very solemnly.


“ Of course, I am speaking now as if life were a serious
undertaking, and not just as a flippant adventure to
end nowhere, and last ” —he shrugged his shoulders
—“ just as long, only, as your freshness and prettiness
are pleasing.”
The dark girl laughed vivaciously. “ Good gra-
cious,” she said, “ but what more can we do to please
you men now? We copy you faithfully in everything,
so surely you have no right to complain? ”
“ A mistake, my child,” exclaimed Mr. Muffins
emphatically, “ a great mistake, and for your purposes
the very worst one you could possibly make.” He
leant back and relapsed again into solemn and paternal
tones. “ You see, young ladies, in some ways men
most admire in woman those very qualities that are
exactly opposite to the ones they possess themselves.
The lover of experience for example, the connoisseur
of sex, has no cravings for his own shortcomings to be
mirrored back from the soul of his adored. He may
be coarse and rough of thought himself, but she must
be refined and gentle in all her ways. He may be bold
and forward in his wooing, but she must be coy and
begrudgingly reluctant in all she gives. For example ”
—and the face of Mr. Muffins became all twinkling
smiles—“ one of you will no doubt remember the
other night, when she and I were sitting alone to-
gether, in the garden, under the palm. It was pitch
dark and we ”
“ I don’t remember,” broke in Miss Flossie with
marked decision.


“ Nor I,” said Miss Di, with equal emphasis.
“ Nor I, nor I,” exclaimed the others, until denials
had passed all round.
Mr. Muffins sighed. “ Well, it must have been a
dream then,” he said sadly; “ still, still, I thought ”
“Tell us your dream,” interrupted the dark girl
very hurriedly. “We know you quite well enough
now to be able to bear it.”
For the moment Mr. Muffins looked pained, and
then he smiled slyly. “ Well, I was holding her
hand,” he said slowly, “ and I remember it was a little
warm, soft hand. I pressed it tenderly and the pres-
sure was not unreturned. I put my arm round her
waist and pulled her to me. Her head came to my
shoulder, and I bent and kissed her forehead. Then ”
—he paused here for effect—“ then I sought for other
favours, another, and a greater one.”
“ Oh, how thrilling,” exclaimed Miss Di, with en-
thusiasm. “ How I wish I’d been there, with a torch! ”
“ But I was denied,” continued Mr. Muffins ignor-
ing the interruption, “ I was denied—and yet believe
me, the denial was more entrancing even than would
have been the granting of the favour.” He spread out
his hands. “ And what, pray, was the result? ”
“ You promised her a pair of silk stockings,” sug-
gested Miss Di innocently, “ or else you asked her for
her address.”
Mr. Muffins frowned majestically. “ I was imme-
diately impressed with the value of the privilege she
was withholding from me. I realized her favours were


no light trifles to be thrown away and ” —he bowed
gravely—“ my estimation of her rose accordingly.”
“ Dear me,” said one of the girls demurely, “ and
what happened next? ”
Mr. Muffins sighed. “ Nothing,” he said resign-
edly, “ for at that moment all the others of you came
into the garden and we had to get up and move away.”
He sighed heavily. “ And I have had no opportunity
since of pursuing the adventure.”
“It was a dream, of course,” suggested Miss
Flossie, looking from one to another among the com-
pany, “ only a dream.”
“ Of course, of course,” replied Mr. Muffins care-
lessly, “ a dream, as you say.”
“ And I suppose,” said the fair girl, “ that this is
intended to be a lecture for us? You are instructing
us in deportment? ”
“ Exactly,” replied Mr. Muffins with a smile. “You
didn’t know I was a moralist, now did you? ”
“ No,” exclaimed Miss Flossie, “ we thought of
you rather as an fmmoralist. Didn’t we, girls? ”
Everyone laughed, and Mr. Muffins himself looked
highly gratified at the bad character he was receiving.
“ Well,” he said, “ give me one of the newspapers
there and I’ll see what I can do with you all, this
evening.”
One of the girls bent down to the rack and tossed
over the first paper that happened to come to hand.
“ Ah,” said Mr. Muffins, after a moment’s silence,
“ this is no good. This is an Adelaide paper and two


days old at that,” but he opened it interestedly all the
same, and proceeded to run his eye down the middle
page.
Suddenly, then, he frowned. He contracted his eye-
brows as if very puzzled, and then stared hard at a
paragraph in the personal column.
“ Mr. Montague Twiggs,” he read, “ the well-
known dental surgeon of North Terrace, is still in the
same condition. If no improvement, however, is mani-
fest before Saturday, we understand it is the intention
of Dr. Bunions to perform a cranial operation then, in
the hope of restoring Mr. Twiggs to consciousness. Dr.
Sawberry has been called into consultation, and he is
of opinion that it is the only step to take.”
Mr. Muffins’s face grew furiously red, he bit his lip,
and his eyes almost started from their sockets.
“ Oh, he is, is he? ” he muttered hoarsely. “ That’s
Sawberry’s opinion, is it? Sawberry and Bunions, a
pretty combination anyhow! Damn them! They’d
operate upon their own mothers for coughs and colds
if they got the chance. Sawberry and Bunions! ”he
reiterated angrily to himself. “ They’re brigands, cut-
throats,” and his lips curled to a sardonic laugh;
“ they’re courtesans of the knife.”
He looked up, to find his young friends regarding
him with great amazement. Indeed, they seemed
almost frightened.
“ Why, whatever is the matter, Signor? ” asked
Miss Flossie sharply. “ Are you taken ill? ”
“No, no,” replied Mr. Muffins with a reassuring


smile. He tapped the newspaper he was holding.
“ Just bad news of a friend of mine. He is very ill.”
“ But you were swearing,” said Miss Flossie. “We
heard you say ‘ damn.’ ”
“ Oh! a habit of mine,” said Mr. Muffins, “ when
I’m worried.”
“ Well, you frightened us,” said the girl. “ You
gave us quite a turn.”
“ And wouldn’t it give any of you a turn,” asked
Mr. Muffins warmly, “if you heard suddenly that
your head was going to be cut open. If you knew
that two unscrupulous ruffians ” He checked
himself suddenly. “ But goodness gracious, what am
I doing? lam wasting time. I must be off. I must
go to Adelaide at once.”
He snatched his watch from his pocket and stood
up.
“ Thirty-five minutes,” he exclaimed breathlessly,
“ to setde up everything and catch the Adelaide Ex-
press. Good-bye, my children. Pardon my abrupt-
ness. I shall be seeing you again on Monday,” and
with his coat-tails flying and no longer happy-looking,
he flew out of the lounge and vanished into the lift.
“ I believe he read his wife is after him,” said the
dark girl.
“ No,” said Miss Di, “ he saw he’d got another baby.
Give me the paper, quick.”


CHAPTER XII
A COURTESAN OF THE KNIFE
NOW it is natural that a spirit of subdued re-
straint should pervade all hospitals, for they
are monumental alike to the despair and to
the hope of humankind. To despair, because they
whisper always to us of the grim reaper who crouches
ready for his harvest at all seasons, and to hope, be-
cause they symbolize the myriad victories of Life over
impatient Death.
A new arrival feels all the senses of the body called
instantly to the alert. The eyes are intrigued with
the strange garments of the nurses, the ears hear the
voices that are lowered and the footfalls of muffled
sound, and the nostrils are assailed with odours that
have no place or being in the ordinary and everyday
world.
In effect, the whole place is suggested as being in
some subtle way an arena where strong and energetic
forces are grappling manfully with the dark spectres
of disease and pain.
But it is the operating theatre which excites the
imagination most, for it is there that, in the stage of
climax. Life is at battle royal with Death and within


its dread precincts, the exact progress of the conflict
can so often be observed, moment by moment, to the
very end, when victory is either lost or won.
The anaesthetist bends over with his deadly vapour,
the surgeon drives his scalpel deep into the flesh that
errs, and within the passing of a few minutes almost,
the issue is decided once and for all.
The hopes of the sufferers are buoyed up with tales
of triumphs that have been, and they know that the
sum of all knowledge tempers the weapons that their
champions wield, but still, still, as they lay themselves
down upon the operating table, their hearts beat with
a chilling fear, their breathing comes in quickened im-
pulse, and in their thoughts the valley of the shadow
is never far away.
But one Saturday morning there was an exception
to this rule in the operating theatre of Miss Mogrington’s
Private Hospital in North Adelaide, for there was a
patient there who had no such qualms, or, indeed, any
fears at all. In fact he had no thoughts of any kind,
and all the world might have come and gone without
his being the happier, the sadder or the wiser.
Poor Montague Twiggs was outstretched upon the
table, and as oblivious to all his surroundings as he
had been at every moment of the preceding six weeks,
or, to be exact, for six weeks all but thirty minutes. It
was only just eleven o’clock, and the two and forty
days would not expire until half past.
He had just been brought into the theatre, and the
adventurous Dr. Bunions was intending to trephine


him in the hope of restoring consciousness. The great
operator himself was now bending over him, and the
matron and two sisters were in close attendance.
Presently Dr. Bunions looked up at the clock and
frowned. “ Dr. Sawberry is late,” he remarked. “ I
told him a quarter to. Has he rung up, Matron, do
you know? ”
“ No, Dr. Bunions,” said the matron, “ but I think
I hear him coming now.”
The door opened and a tall, ginger-haired man
walked briskly in. “ Sorry, Bunions,” he said, in
rather high-pitched tones, “ but I couldn’t help it. It
was an accident. A woman had a baby.” He handed
a bag to one of the sisters. “If you please, Sister.
It’s ether I’m giving,”' and he bobbed out again.
He was back very quickly in his coat sleeves, and a
minute later was robed like Dr. Bunions in the regu-
lation theatre-gown. He walked up to the operating-
table and laid his fingers on the patient’s pulse.
“ Quite all right,” he remarked, after a pause. “ I
needn’t examine him. I did so on Tuesday. All
ready, Bunions,” and with a quick survey he saw
that all he would require for the anesthesia was at
hand.
Dr. Bunions gave a last glance over his instruments
in the tray and was upon the point of signifying to his
colleague that the anesthesia might begin, when a
third sister came hurriedly into the theatre and whis-
pered to the matron. The latter shook her head em-
phatically but turned immediately to Dr, Bunions.


“ Someone wants to speak to you, Doctor,” she said,
“ only for two seconds, he says, and the matter is very
urgent.”
Dr. Bunions scowled. “ Speak to me! ” he ex-
claimed irritably. “ Well, tell him he can’t. But who
is he? ” he asked, as an afterthought of the sister.
“ A Mr. Henry Muffins, Doctor,” she replied. “ He
has just come off the Melbourne Express.”
“ Pooh! Muffins! ” sniffed Dr. Bunions. “ I won’t
be interrupted. Tell him I’m engaged for an hour—
or perhaps two,” he added. “ I don’t really know how
long I shall be,” .and the sister at once disappeared.
“ Like people’s colossal cheek,” went on the doctor
to his colleague. “ They expect they can get hold of
you at any time, and this fellow’s not even a patient of
mine. Start the ether. I’m all ready now.”
“ Oh! one moment! ” exclaimed Dr. Sawberry.
“ Confound it! I’ve left my glasses outside. I shan’t
be a second. They’re in my coat,” and he bustled hur-
riedly out of the theatre.
The sister who had interrupted them returned at the
same moment. “ The gentleman won’t go, Doctor,”
she said, looking rather frightened. “He says the
matter is of vital importance, and he wanted to force
his way in.”
“ I’ll speak to him,” said the matron importantly.
“ I’ll make him go away,” and she sailed majestically
from the theatre.
Dr. Bunions, standing waiting for his colleague, be-
gan to fidget with his feet. One minute passed—two
17


—three—nearly five, and all the while he was frown-
ing in annoyance.
“ What the devil’s up with Sawberry? ” he mut-
tered. “We shall be here all night! ”
The matron returned to the theatre. She looked
flushed and rather upset.
“The man gone?” queried Dr. Bunions. The
matron nodded. “And where’s Dr. Sawberry?
What’s keeping him? ”
The matron hesitated. “ He’s walking down the
drive with that Mr. Muffins,” she replied, in a manner
as if she hardly dared to impart the information.
“ Walking with him down the drive,” ejaculated Dr.
Bunions incredulously, “and keeping me waiting here! ”
“ Y-e-s,” said the matron, in a tone which suggested
that she did not understand it herself. “ The gentle-
man saw Dr. Sawberry in the passage and went up to
speak to him at once. They had some conversation
and then I heard him ask Dr. Sawberry if he were
giving an anaesthetic for you. Then he took hold of
him by the arm.”
“ Took hold of Dr. Sawberry! ” exclaimed Dr.
Bunions, the more and more dumbfounded. “ Dragged
him away, do you mean? ”
“ Oh, no,” replied the matron, “ there was no vio-
lence used, although I certainly thought Dr. Sawberry
went very white. They were talking quite friendlily
together, and then they both began to walk towards
the gate.” She turned to one of the sisters. “ See if
Dr. Sawberry is coming, Sister Bates.”


But there was no necessity for the sisfer to leave the
theatre, for at that moment Dr. Sawberry appeared.
He was smiling broadly.
“ He’s gone,” he announced in a chuckling voice,
“ and really I don’t know what he came for. He but-
tonholed me at once, as if I was his greatest friend,
and he was deuced inquisitive as to what we were
doing here. I let him have it, of course, and he
departed like a rabbit in the end. Ha! ha! he was
very funny though, and possessed of quite a sense of
humour.” He burst suddenly into a loud guffaw.
“ He’d got you sized up to a T right enough, Bunions,
for he asked me —he asked me ” —his voice choked
and his eyes filled with tears —“ he asked me if you
and the coroner always worked in co. Ha! ha! ha! ”
Dr. Bunions stared as if he were faced with an
apparition. His jaw dropped and he held his breath.
Dr. Sawberry took out his handkerchief and wiped
his eyes. “ I had to laugh,” he apologized; “he was
so candid and came so coarsely to the point. He said
if you got the chance you would operate for a cold in
the head upon your grandmother.”
Dr. Bunions spoke in icy tones. “lam waiting,” he
said sternly, “ for you to commence the administration
of the anaesthetic.”
Dr. Sawberry composed his features to seriousness
again. “ Oh! ah! the ether of course.” He moved
over to the operating table and stood thoughtfully re-
garding the recumbent form.
“Good dentist, Twiggs,” he remarked musingly,


“ the best in all Australia, Montague Twiggs! ”
He looked round at his colleague. “ Need you
really operate, Bunions? Do you think it absolutely
necessary, now? To me it seems perfectly un-
necessary.”
Dr. Bunions glared balefully at him. “ Get on, with
the anaesthetic,” he said angrily. “You are playing
the fool. I believe you are mad.”
“Mad?” queried Dr. Sawberry, his eyes flashing
on the instant, “ and a fool as well, eh? ” He sneered
scoffingly. “ And all because my diagnosis happens
to differ from yours? ” Then with a swift movement
he tore off his gown. “ And that’s what I think of
you, Adolphus Bunions,” he shouted. “ That’s my
candid opinion.” He stamped his foot. “ I refuse to
administer the anaesthetic, for the operation is quite
unnecessary, I say.” He pointed to the recumbent
Twiggs and began to shout louder than ever. “ That
man there has got nothing the matter with him. He’s
as healthy as a trout.”
Dr. Bunions looked really frightened, and the
matron and the two sisters had turned quite pale.
“Healthy as a trout,” shouted Dr. Sawberry tru-
culently—he looked up at the clock —“ and in less
than five minutes, I say, he will be sitting up and talk-
ing to us as well as he ever was in his life before.
There’s nothing the matter with him, except that ring-
worm patch where they’ve shaved his head.”
Dr. Bunions had, in part, recovered his equanimity.
“ Matron,” he said calmly, “ I require another anxs


thetist. Is there likely to be any other medical man
in the premises, do you know? ”
“ There may be,” replied the matron hesitatingly.
“ Several are visiting this morning and it’s about their
usual time. I’ll find out at once, Doctor.”
“ Do, please,” said Dr. Bunions with dignity, “ for
if not, I must get on the telephone with no delay.”
“ The more the merrier,” drawled Dr. Sawberry
when the matron had gone out, “ and I shall be glad
to have my diagnosis confirmed, whoever comes,” and
leaning back against the wall he proceeded to hum
casually:
" Rootity-toot, she plays the flute
In a very charming manner —
Vin\etty-pong, she patters along
On the keys of the grand planner.”
A very tense two minutes followed and then voices
were heard outside. The theatre door opened and the
matron, with a most relieved expression upon her face,
ushered in Dr. Hoop-Brown.
“ Damn! ” swore Dr. Bunions under his breath—
but he dissembled his annoyance.
“ Most opportune! ”he exclaimed. “ Now could
you possibly spare time to give an anaesthetic for me,
Dr. Hoop-Brown? ” He pointed to the operating
table. “ I’m trephining here and the case is urgent.”
He glanced defiantly at Dr. Sawberry. “ Sawberry,
here, was to have administered, but he apparendy is
not too well.”


“ Not too well, not too well! ” burst in Dr.
Sawberry in thundering tones. “ I’m deuced well,
too deuced well to please you. That’s what’s the
matter. My mind’s normal and healthy, and my
judgment, too.” He turned angrily to Dr. Hoop-
Brown. “ Don’t give it, Doctor. Don’t be mixed up
in this business at all. He glanced up at the clock and
began to chuckle in amusement. “ Besides, you’re too
late now, unless you’re going to strap the beggar down.”
The clock struck the half-hour.
“ Dr. Hoop-Brown,” began Dr. Bunions pomp-
ously. “ I beg of you ”
A renewed chuckle from Dr. Sawberry, that died
suddenly to a sort of gasp —a sharp cry of warning
from one of the sisters, and all eyes were focused
upon the operating table!
The patient was beginning to raise himself up!
Then —not a sound stirred in the theatre, not a
movement anywhere except upon the operating table,
as slowly, and breathing heavily, Montague Mackerel
Twiggs was coming out of his trance!
With an effort he raised himself upon one elbow,
with a further effort he slipped his legs over the side
of the table and sat up. Once, twice, he blinked his
eyes and then slowly, very slowly indeed, he turned
his head this way and that and stared at his surround-
ings. He eyed the sisters curiously, and the doctors
with a puckered frown. He looked down at the side
of the operating theatre and the shining instruments
in the tray caught his eye.


Then suddenly he sniffed, and on the instant he
found speech.
“ Ether! ” he cried, “ ether! ” —and his voice rose
to a wail. “ This is an operating theatre and they
have been operating upon me! Oh! what have they
done, what have they done? ”
In his emotion, it seemed that he was about to fall
back, and the matron —the first to recover her self-
possession—darted forward to support him.
“ Oh, what have they done? ” he reiterated with a
dreadful catch in his voice. “ What part of me have
they cut away? ” and, spurred on to action by his
terror, he began vigorously to feel himself all over to
determine where he was minus anything.
“ Hush! hush! ” exclaimed the matron. “Be
quiet, you’re quite all right! ”
“Quite all right, eh?” exclaimed Mr. Twiggs,
whose manual investigations had, in part, removed his
fears. “ Quite all right, you say! ” He pointed to
the doctors, and his voice began to quaver again.
“ Then what are they doing here? ” He glanced up
at the clock and light seemed suddenly to illuminate
his face.
“ Eleven-thirty-two! ” he exclaimed. “ Oh, I
know! I know! ”he went on exultingly. “ I have
been saved by the time-limit.” He shook his fist at
the doctors and his voice rose to a great shout.
“ Saved by the time-limit! Saved from the courtesans
of the knife! ”


CHAPTER XIII
THE RETURN OF THE ASIATIC
MR. MONTAGUE TWIGGS, dental surgeon
of North Terrace, was back at his consulting
rooms again. He sat moodily before his
desk and there was a very troubled expression upon
his face. He looked whiter and thinner than before,
and on one side of his head was a baldish patch, upon
which the hair was just beginning to grow. He was
going through a pile of letters, and that the task was
not a happy one was evident from his deep and
heavy sighs.
“ Seven people writing for money,” he muttered
ruefully, “two gas bills and two electric light, ditto!
Demand for rent and subscription to the Dogs’ Home!
A sample of Slink’s Shaving Soap and some sticky
stuff to keep up artificial teeth when they don’t fit! A
prospectus of a new company for finding oil on the
Victoria Park race-course, and the programme of Miss
Schreecher’s concert at the Town Hall, and two
accounts I sent in, returned through the Dead Letter
Office and marked ‘ unknown.’ ”
He eyed the correspondence with great disgust and
then sighed more heavily than ever. He shook his


head gloomily. “ A deuced awkward state of things!
Funds deadly low and weeks and weeks before me
until I shall get fairly going again! The practice is
stunned and Fangles will be spreading it about alt
round that I am not 0.K.! Curse that yellow idiot! ”
He grinned suddenly. “ But, ye gods, what a time I
had, especially towards the end! It’s a good thing
certainly that Mrs. Montague wilt never know, or
Mother Muffins either.” He shook his head again.
“ But it was Muffins more than I, every time. There
was no holding the beggar in, when once he got his
head. It was the pent-up inclinations of years and
years finding their natural vent directly they got the
chance. He could reach the grapes then, and, by
James! he didn’t find them sour.”
Mr. Twiggs leant back in his chair and with brood-
ing eyes stared into vacancy. “ I’d like to see Flossie,
again,” he muttered very softly, “ and of course Di,
and Maudie and Berenice and all the others.” He
sighed gently. “ But it was Flossie all along that I
liked. Oh, that night in the garden, under the palms!
I shall never forget it! How she nestled to me! It
was instinct that told her it was someone else and not
Muffins who was there. Dear little Flossie, and how
bravely she fibbed later, when I pretended to the others
that they had come just in time to spoil all the sport.”
His eyes moistened. “I do hope Flossie will get a nice
boy. Nothing wrong in her, nothing wrong. Only
a little butterfly out for the sunshine of Life ” —he
suddenly screwed up his face and gave a low whistle —


“ but I say —I say, old Muffins must be having a
dreadful liver on him now. All that champagne and
stuff would be much too much for a middle-aged man.
And Hoop-Brown too —he had a festive time! Not
a bad sort, Hoop-Brown! Quite a sport when I had
gingered him up a bit! Now I wonder—l wonder
if he’s going to marry Sister Ruth.”
A note of indignation crept into his voice. “He
ought to, I’m sure he ought to, anyhow. That last
ride in the car should have made things certain. When
I kissed her —when Hoop-Brown kissed her —er, er —
when we kissed her, how tenderly she responded, and
how shyly she dropped her eyelids, too. It quite
thrilled us, through and through. Really, really, I
shall be most disappointed about Hoop-Brown if we
don’t hear of the engagement soon.”
“Then there was Lady Fitz-Tootle.” He sighed
again. “ I couldn’t do much with her. She didn’t
give me enough time. I really couldn’t put up with
the headache she had the day after. Her constitution,
too, couldn’t stand up to all the fizz.” He laughed
suddenly. “ But hadn’t she got a tongue on her and
couldn’t she be sarcastic and sharp! Poor old arch-
deacon—she gave him a bad time. And Bottleworthy—
how delicious when he was humming Rootity-toot!
Well, I put some sense in him, anyhow, and preached
two jolly good sermons as well. Margaret will marry
young Grainger now, but, of course, I’ll never get
any thanks.”
He went on. “ No, no one will ever thank me for


anything I did and yet —what money Muffins made!
Two hundred pounds on Wet Kisses at twenty-five to
one and a cool thousand on Red Wine at fives.” He
whisded again. “ Whew!—what a bundle to pick up,
and here am I embarrassed now for the want of twenty
quid.” He shut down the lid of his desk with a bang.
“ Yes, yes —it was a hectic time, but I’ve now got to
foot the bill.” He snapped his teeth viciously together.
“And I can’t afford it. That’s flat.”
The door opened and the nurse came in.
“A gentleman to see you, sir,” she said. “He
won’t give his name, but I remember he’s been here
once before.”
“ A patient,” queried Mr. Twiggs dubiously; “ not
any tradesman with a bill, eh? ”
“ Oh! no, sir,” replied the girl. “He’s a patient
and I think you took a tooth out for him once.”
“ Then show him in, please, Nurse,” said Mr.
Twiggs, looking very relieved, “ but if any people
come, except patients, say I’m too busy to attend to
them to-day.”
A moment later and the caller was ushered into the
surgery. Mr. Twiggs stood by his green plush chair
and bowed in the usual stereotyped professional
manner.
“What can Ido for ”he began politely, and
then, as the door of the surgery closed, he started vio-
lently. His face paled and he trembled visibly —for
it was the Asiatic, the cause of all his troubles, who
was now standing, meek and calm, before him!


“ You! ” exclaimed Montague Twiggs excitedly,
when he got back his breath. “ You! ” His voice
grew deep and hoarse in its intensity. “ Oh! I won-
der now how you dare to show your face! ”
But the dark man smiled, in a quiet and gende
manner.
“It was ordained that I should see thee,” he said
sofdy. “It was written in the Book of Fate that we
two should meet again.”
“Oh! it was—was it?” exclaimed Mr. Twiggs
truculently. “ Then it may turn out to be a very bad
thing for you, let me tell you. A bad thing, you
understand? ”
“Thou dost remember me,” said the Asiatic pla-
cidly. “My face has not then passed out of thy
mind? ”
“ Remember you! ” ejaculated Mr. Twiggs, pass-
ing his hand excitedly through his hair. “ Re-
member you! ” He grew a little calmer but there
was still a catch in his breath. “Yes, I was
thinking of you not two minutes ago, and ” —he spoke
with deep earnestness —“ I was wishing you were
dead.”
“Lo! Death is peace,” said the dark man sofdy.
“ Peace, always, if thou hast deserved well. Rest for
thy tired limbs and balm for all thine ills.”
Mr. Twiggs was mesmerised by the very quietness
of the stranger’s tones and, his excitement passing, he
sank wearily into a chair and held his head between
his hands.


“ Look hare,” he said weakly, after a long silence,
“ you’ve done me a deuced bad turn —in fact, as far as
I can see, you’ve just about ruined me.”
The dark man eyed him keenly. “ Did I not give
thee rest and change? ” he asked.
“ Heavens! it was change enough,” replied Mr.
Twiggs feelingly, “ but I don’t know about rest. I
was gadding about the whole time and that Henry
Muffins quite ran me off my legs. There was no hold-
ing him when he got going, and there was certainly
no rest there.”
The stranger spoke in soft, purring tones.
“ But thou hadst remission from thy labours here.
For forty days and two, the yoke was lifted from thy
neck.”
“ But you oughtn’t to have done it,” burst out Mr.
Twiggs almost in tears. “You oughtn’t to have
forced that holiday on me, for I couldn’t afford it.”
His excitement began to rise again. “ Yes, you’ve put
me in a nice hole, I tell you, and I don’t see how I’m
going to get clear.” He tapped the desk viciously.
“No money coming in, rent unpaid, accounts owing
everywhere. The wife wants a new frock and it’s one
of the kids’ birthdays next week. The position is des-
perate, you see. Desperate—and it’s all through
you! ” A thought seemed suddenly to strike him.
“ Great Scott! ” he exclaimed, “ but I believe it’s
actionable. I could get heavy damages in a court of
law. Here, I say, my friend,” and he took out his
fountain pen in a most business-like manner, “ you’ll


have to give me your name and address. I should
like to know where you live, please.”
The stranger regarded him dreamily and with a far-
away look in his eyes. “ Thou shalt lose nothing in
the end,” he said. “ Thy reward shall come in due
time.”
“ Lose nothing in the end! ” echoed Mr. Twiggs,
with a touch of sarcasm. “ I wonder! Now look
here,” he went on impressively, “ you don’t seem to
understand. You haven’t got the hang of things at
all.” His voice rose to a shout. “I’m hard up, I tell
you. I’m short of L.S.D. You put me away for six
weeks, with good intentions I’ve no doubt, but—look
what you’ve done. The practice has all gone phut.
Fangles is bogeying the focal infection stunt on my
patients, and Blowitt, I know for certain, is making
sets of teeth that ought to have been mine.” A lump
came into his throat. “ Now, what’s going to happen
to me and my wife and the kids? That’s what I want
to know.”
The dark man spoke very slowly. “ Didst thou
do no good,” he asked, “ in the wanderings of thy
spirit? ”
“Good? ” queried Mr. Twiggs, as if in great sur-
prise. “ Too right, I did. Look at the money I made,
for instance, for Henry Muffins. He’s a rich man
now.”
“ Riches are not everything,” said the stranger.
“ Ho! ho! ” countered Mr. Twiggs. “ It’s plain
you’ve not been in Australia long.” He thumped


again upon the desk. “ Why, money is everything
here.”
The stranger shook his head. “ Riches are not
everything,” he repeated sadly. “ Riches ”
“Oh!” interrupted Mr. Twiggs contemptuously,
“I’ve heard that said tons of times before” —his lips
curled into a sneer —“ but, funnily enough, it’s never
been told me by a rich man yet. Never once.”
“ Peace,” said the dark man after a long pause.
“ Thou shall not suffer because the wanderings of thy
spirit led thee from thy hearth. Riches of this world
shall thou now have, but lo! —I warn thee, never shall
fulfilment taste so sweet as hope.” He lifted his hand
solemnly. “ So, thou shall have riches, as thy wish,
but see thou to it that thy life be good.”
“ Certainly,” replied Mr. Twiggs with an attempt
at jocularity, “ everything then shall be A.i and true
to label.” He sniffed rather dryly. “ But what about
some of this money on account? A few pounds would
come in very handy just now.”
“ Hast thou no trust? ” said the dark man reproach-
fully. “Was not everything I told thee fulfilled? ”
“ Er, er, yes, it was,” admitted Mr. Twiggs rather
hesitatingly, “ but still ”
“ Peace unto thee, Montague Mackerel Twiggs,” ex-
claimed the dark man suddenly. “I go, The Masters
call,” and, giving Mr. Twiggs one long intent look,
he raised his hand as if in benediction. Then, turning
upon his heel, in one moment —he was gone.
Mr. Twiggs started to his feet and made to step


forward. But an invisible force chained him to the
floor. He endeavoured to cry out, but his voice choked
within him. He strained hard, but ineffectively, and
then—with a shrug of resignation, he sank back into
his chair and gave vent to a long-drawn sigh.
Some minutes later, there was a knock upon the
door and the nurse entered.
“Do you want anything, sir? ” she asked, looking
round the surgery, and then her eyes opened in sur-
prise. “Oh! I didn’t know that gentleman wasn’t
here. I didn’t hear him go.”
Mr. Twiggs found his voice. “ Yes, he’s been gone
some time, Hypatia,” he said faintly. “He wasn’t a
patient. He had a message for me. That was all.”
“ Oh, by the by, Hypatia,” he went on sarcastically,
“I’m coming into money, I understand.”
“ How very nice, sir,” said the girl, pausing in her
work. “Isit a surprise? ”
“It will be,” remarked Mr. Twiggs dryly. “ I’ve
only been promised, so far, and it has not been even-
tuated yet. Perhaps I’m only going to draw Tatt’s.
Ah! ”he started up in his chair and an excited expres-
sion crossed his face. “ Now, did you order that ticket
for me, before I was taken ill? I asked you to go out
that very morning, you remember.”
“ Yes, sir,” replied the girl, “ and it came about a
week later. There was another letter, too, from Tas-
mania. It came about three weeks ago. I didn’t open
that. They’re both together in the top drawer.”
“ The result-slip, Hypatia,” exclaimed Mr. Twiggs


excitedly, “ the winning numbers of the draw! Quick,
let’s have them.”
The girl found the envelopes at once and Mr.
Twiggs, with trembling fingers, drew out the ticket
first.
“ Number 42975,” he muttered. “ Funny! The
number of days I was ill, forty two, and my telephone
number here, nine seven five. Poof! ” he went on
scornfully, “ a coincidence! Nothing more,” but his
heart nevertheless beat uncomfortably as he opened
the second envelope.
A moment’s scrutiny of its contents and his face
went white as chalk. “ I’ve drawn a runner,” he
gasped. “ Ginx’s Baby, the horse old Muffins bought.
Great Scott!” He passed his hand across his fore-
head. “ Hypatia,” he said shakily, “ this may mean
I win the £20,000 prize in the Melbourne Cup. If
Ginx’s Baby comes in first, I’m a rich man, and I shall
give up this darned dentistry business and go on the
land. I’ll buy a share in a sheep station. I’ll have
an eight-cylinder motor-car. But, no, no, it’s impos-
sible. He smiled wanly. “ Ginx’s Baby has no
earthly hope. No hope, no hope, unless ” —he looked
through the window at the bright sunshine outside
■ —“ unless it pours and pours with rain, just before the
race.”
“ Then I hope it will, Mr. Twiggs,” said the nurse
smilingly. “It would be very nice to win £20,000.”
Mr. Twiggs strode across to the telephone. “ Pro-
spect, one-seven-three-two, please,” he demanded
18


briskly. “Oh! is that you, Marion? Yes. I’m feel-
ing quite well, thank you, dear, and there are a few
patients coming in. Now listen. I sent for a ticket
in Tatt’s the very morning I was taken ill, and what
do you think? I’ve drawn one of the horses in the
Melbourne Cup! Actually drawn a horse! No, not
much of a one, Ginx’s Baby, but still, I’ve drawn a
horse and that means about for a starter, at any
rate. No, no, quite an outsider but not a chance in
the world unless the course is like a swamp on Tues-
day. Yes, a week to-day. No. Oh, yes, he has won
one race, about a year ago. It was pouring hard then
and he ran away from everything else in the mud with
quite a good field behind, too. Yes, it may be our
luck’s really going to turn. Good-bye, dear, see you
at the usual time—about half-past six. Mind you
don’t have the beef too well done.”
He hung up the receiver and turned round. “ Hy-
patia,” he began, but the girl had left the room and
he heard her talking to someone in the hall. “ Well,”
he remarked cheerfully to himself, “a hundred
pounds is not to be sneezed at, anyhow.” He nodded
his head. “ Yes, Ido believe my luck’s really begin-
ning to turn.”
The door opened and the nurse returned. “ Dr.
Hoop-Brown to see you, sir. He wants to speak to
you for a minute, he says.”
“ Dr. Hoop-Brown! ” ejaculated Mr. Twiggs
numbly, and he felt a cold shiver run down his spine.
He turned round, so that the nurse should not see his


face. “ All right,” he said, after a moment. “ I’ll
ring when I’m ready,” and the girl went out.
He took out his handkerchief and mopped his fore-
head. “ Hoop-Brown! ”he muttered, “ now what in
Heaven’s name does he want? ” A frightened look
came into his eyes. “Great Scott, if it should ever
be found out! If anything should ever be traced to
me. My word! but wouldn’t there be a rumpus all
round.” He thought hard for a moment and then his
face cleared. “ No, no, quite impossible,” he chuckled
to himself. “ The laugh is on my side. I know and
they don’t.”
He touched the bell. “ Show Dr. Hoop-Brown in,”
he said when the girl appeared, “ and if he’s here
longer than five minutes, come in and say there’s
someone waiting for me. I don’t want him to think
I’ve got nothing to do.”
“ Good morning, Doctor,” he said carelessly, when
the great man entered. “ And what can Ido for you,
now? ”
Dr. Hoop-Brown eyed him intently, so intently
indeed, that with all his sang-froid Mr. Twiggs felt
uncomfortable.
“I’ve called about a patient I’m sending to you,”
said the doctor, smiling. “ But how are you feeling
now, Mr. Twiggs? ”
“ Fine,” replied the dentist hurriedly. “ I’ve never
felt better in all my life.”
“ Wonderful case, yours,” went on the doctor.
“ Quite unique in the experience of all of us here, I


should say. You’ve no weakness, headache, or bad
after-effects at all? ”
Mr. Twiggs smiled nervously. “ I feel as fit as a
fiddle, Dr. Hoop-Brown. Just as if I’d been away for
a holiday or a rest.”
“You had no premonitory symptoms of your
trouble, I understand,” asked the doctor after a mo-
ment’s pause, “ nothing to warn you that it was
coming on? ”
Mr. Twiggs shook his head. “ I just felt a little
giddy and, I remember, I lay down.”
“And after that?” queried the doctor. “You
remember—what? ”
“ Nothing,” said Mr. Twiggs, but the doctor noticed
now that he was turning away his eyes.
“What was the very first thing, then, to strike
you? ” asked Dr. Hoop-Brown, and he reached over
and laid his fingers on the dentist’s pulse. “ I mean
after you had once fallen into the trance.”
Mr. Twiggs forced himself to speak calmly. “ The
smell of the ether,” he replied, “as I was coming
round.” He shuddered. “It gave me quite a shock.”
“ But the ether oughtn’t to have upset you,” pressed
the doctor, “ for as a dentist you would be well
acquainted with the smell.”
“ But it did,” nodded Mr. Twiggs, “ for I guessed
somehow that it was intended for me.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown regarded him as if he were search-
ing him through and through. He had relinquished
the pulse. “ And you remember nothing of anything


during those six weeks? ” he asked thoughtfully.
“ Nothing that happened at all?
“ Nothing,” said Mr. Twiggs, and he looked down
on to the ground.
A long silence followed.
“He suspects me,” thought the dentist —“ his eyes
have a nasty look.”
“ He’s lying,” thought the doctor—“ his pulse is
going much too fast.”
There was a knock on the door and the nurse
entered.
“ A gentleman waiting to see you, sir,” she said to
Mr. Twiggs, “and he hopes you won’t keep him long.”
Dr. Hoop-Brown at once got up to go. “ Well,
take things easy for a little while,” he remarked.
“ Remember, that poor brain of yours has been
through a strenuous time,” and, with a smile, he
passed out of the door and was gone.
“ He’s afraid of me,” he muttered. “ Yes, for some
reason he’s afraid. There’s no one waiting, of course.
The nurse would have given the patient’s name, if
there had been. Also, I heard no bell ring, and my
hearing’s quite good. Besides,” and he smiled grimly,
“ I know how I get rid of awkward callers myself.”
He frowned. “Yes, he remembers something, but I
wonder—l wonder how much.”


CHAPTER XIV
THE RESURRECTION OF HENRY MUFFINS
IN the meanwhile, Mr. Henry Muffins had put
himself to bed in no very comfortable or enviable
frame of mind.
For four days, following upon his return from
Melbourne, he had refused to see anyone, and only his
wife had been allowed into his room. He had con-
sumed vast quantities of liver pills and his diet had
consisted mainly of dry toast and barley-water. He
had refused to have a doctor and had insisted that he
was only suffering from a chill, but his wife was
frightened because of his unusual quietness and meek-
ness of demeanour.
He had hardly spoken at all, but had lain quite still,
with his eyes widely open and staring into vacancy.
He appeared to be most worried about something, but
to all his wife’s inquiries he declined to give any
explanations.
The news of his return had soon become noised
abroad and quite a number of callers had come to the
house, the most persistent of whom being Mr. Soaker
Ram. This last gendeman, indeed, had called every
morning in the hope of getting speech with the inva


lid, and upon each occasion, with a sinister smile, he
had fingered a small scrap of paper that he was carry-
ing in his waistcoat pocket.
But like everyone else, Mr. Ram had been sent
empty away, and in no case had any specified date been
mentioned as to when it was probable that Mr. Muffins
would be visible again.
Upon the morning of the fifth day, however, to the
great relief of his family, Mr. Muffins announced his
intention of getting up and proceeding to the office to
resume his routine of daily work. He appeared at
breakfast at the usual time, and seemed to be quite
cheerful and easy in his mind; indeed from the expres-
sion on his face it might readily have been gathered
that he had come to some resolve about whatever had
been troubling him, and was now sure that he was
going to take the best course.
The family at breakfast consisted of his wife, a
pleasant motherly-looking woman, his daughter, a slip
of a girl about fifteen, and his son, a shy, lanky youth,
nearly three years older.
Mr. Muffins gazed thoughtfully at the boy. “ Good-
ness, gracious,” he exclaimed presendy, “ how Charles
grows! He seems taller even than a couple of weeks
ago.”
“ Yes,” added his mother proudly, “ and he’ll be
eighteen next week. You remember that, Henry.”
“ Eighteen,” said Mr. Muffins, and he smiled kindly
on his son and heir, “ and what does he want for a
birthday present, eh? ”


Charles got very red and glanced furtively at his
mother. He was in many ways afraid of his father,
and it could never have been said that the two at any
time were on confiding terms. Birthdays, too, were
not a strong point with Mr. Muffins, being more often
forgotten than remembered. So it was no wonder now
that the boy felt both embarrassed and surprised.
“ Well, what about a motor-bicycle? ” went on Mr,
Muffins genially. “It would be a good thing, I think,
to give him confidence and make him resourceful and
self-reliant.”
Mrs. Muffins at once got even redder than her son.
She was amazed at her husband’s proposed generosity,
and the very suggestion, too, of a motor-bicycle aston-
ished her. It had been always so well understood in the
family that privately-owned motor contrivances of any
kind were to be considered as carnal in their tenden-
cies, and as detracting from the seriousness of spiritual
minds.
“ Well,” continued Mr. Muffins carelessly, and as if
taking the matter for granted, “ find out what the best
one will cost, Charles, and I’ll get it for you, straight-
away.” He turned to his wife. “ I shall walk up to
the city, my dear. The exercise will do me good, and
besides, I want to look in and see Mr, Twiggs on my
way. I’ve had a twinge of toothache in one of my
back teeth.”
It was a truly astonished household then that put
their heads together and discussed motor-bicycles when
the master of the house had gone.


Mr. Muffins walked leisurely along and it might
certainly have been said that his attitude was a chal-
lenging one. He held his head high in the air, and if,
from time to time, he glanced coverdy from side to
side to determine if he were in proximity to anyone he
knew, only his eyes and not any movement of his head
would have betrayed him.
Arriving without recognition or adventure on North
Terrace, he was just about to mount the steps to Mr.
Twiggs’ surgery when he suddenly encountered that
very gentleman himself.
“Ah! good morning, Mr. Twiggs,” he exclaimed
smilingly, “ a most fortunate meeting! Now, can
I see you for two minutes? I shan’t keep you
long.”
But for the moment Mr. Twiggs made no response.
He just stared hard at Mr. Muffins, as if he had en-
countered an apparition, and his face was white and
set.
“ I’ve got toothache,” explained Mr. Muffins, “ or I
wouldn’t have troubled you so early. Now, can you
manage to see me for a minute, please? ”
j “ Certainly,” stammered the dentist, finding his
voice at last. “ I’ll see you straightaway,” and he
opened the hall door and led the way into the con-
sulting room.
In less than two minutes, Mr. Muffins was seated in
the chair and receiving attention. Mr. Twiggs, now
quite at his ease, was smiling to himself.
“ A cavity in the wisdom tooth,” he announced


after a short investigation. “I’ll put a dressing
in and give you an appointment for one day next
week.”
The operation over, Mr. Muffins thanked him and
rose up to go.
“ What day shall I come back? ”he asked. “ Will
next Tuesday do? ”
“No-o, not Tuesday,” replied Mr. Twiggs hesi-
tatingly and bending over his appointment book.
“ That’s Melbourne Cup day and I don’t want too
many —I don’t want ” —he looked up suddenly and
blurted out: “So, you own Ginx’s Baby, sir, running
in the Cup? ”
Mr. Muffins started as if he had been stung and his
eyes literally bulged from his head. He stepped back
as if he were expecting a blow.
“ What! ” he gasped hoarsely, “ who told you
that? ”
“ I heard it—l heard it from Melbourne,” replied
Mr. Twiggs feebly, and looking now as embarrassed
as Mr. Muffins himself. “ A friend of mine wrote to
me about it.”
“ But I purchased him under an assumed name,”
gasped Mr. Muffins again. “No one could have
known possibly that it was me! ”
“Oh! but they could,” said Mr. Twiggs, now be-
ginning to smile. “ Henrico Muffino was a very thin
disguise, wasn’t it? ”
“ Well, I’m going to stop him from running,” said
Mr. Muffins, sullenly, after a moment’s pause. “ I’m


going to send a telegram and get him sold. I’m not
going to have him run.”
“ Not have him run? ” gasped Mr. Twiggs in his
turn. “ Why, sir, I’ve drawn him myself in Tatter-
sail’s sweep! ”
“ You’ve drawn him in the Tasmanian lottery,”
frowned Mr. Muffins. “ Well, what does that mean? ”
“What does it mean?” exclaimed Mr. Twiggs,
wringing his hands. “Why, it means that if he wins
I shall get £20,000.” He sprang over to his desk and,
snatching out the Tattersall’s ticket and the result slip,
thrust them both under Mr. Muffin’s nose. “ Look,
number 42975, and that Ginx’s Baby’s number. See.”
His voice took on a pleading tone. “You mustn’t
scratch him, sir. It may mean all the world to me.”
Mr. Muffins scrutinized both the ticket and the result
slip, and then shook his head dubiously. “Yes, you
may have got the ticket right enough, but ” —and he
looked cunningly at Mr. Twiggs—“ will they pay you
if he wins? That’s the thing.”
“ Will they pay me! ” almost shrieked Mr. Twiggs.
“ Will they pay me, if he wins! ” His voice was most
confident and assured. “Of course they will. Why,
Tatt’s is like the Bank of England over here. It’s as
safe as judgment day and guaranteed by the Govern-
ment as well. No one ever doubts Tatt’s.”
Mr. Muffins shrugged his shoulders. “ Well, I’m
not a racing man and I don’t understand these
things.” He coughed embarrassedly. “It was quite
by chance, quite by accident, as it were, that in the


way of business I acquired the animal.” A thought
seemed suddenly to strike him. “Now, what should
I get if the horse won? ”
Mr. Twiggs sighed plaintively at so much inno-
cence.
“You would get, Mr. Muffins,” he said calmly,
“ about £IO,OOO in cash and a beautiful gold cup
besides ” —he looked at Mr. Muffins very intently —
“ besides the money coming in from bets, if you hap
pen to have made any.”
“ But does the horse stand any chance at all? ” asked
Mr. Muffins thoughtfully. “ I understand from the
papers lately”—he looked embarrassed again—“l
have been going through them, curiously—that the
animal is of no account.”
“ Sit down, Mr. Muffins,” said Mr. Twiggs in a
business-like manner, “ and I’ll explain everything to
you.”
“Really, I shall be glad if you will,” replied Mr.
Muffins, taking the proffered chair, “for I tell you,
frankly, I know nothing about racing.” He looked
hard at Mr. Twiggs. “ But I suppose you do.”
“ Everything,” replied Mr. Twiggs confidently. “ I
know the whole swindle, from Ato Z.” He drew a
chair close up to Mr. Muffins and lowered his voice to
very impressive tones. “ Now look here, sir, when
you bought Ginx’s Baby for five hundred guineas, it
was a sort of spec. Oh, yes, I know that’s what you
paid for him,” for he had seen Mr. Muffins start.
“My friend in Melbourne mentioned the amount.


Well, as I say, it was a speculation on your part but —
knowingly or unknowingly —it wasn’t a bad one
under certain conditions.
“ Under what conditions? ” broke in Mr. Muffins,
whose eyes had never left Mr. Twiggs’s face.
“ If it rains,” said Mr. Twiggs promptly, “ for if it
rains I believe Ginx’s Baby to be a good thing. You
see, Ginx’s Baby is what is known, in racing terms, as
a mud-lark —that is, he is only seen at his best when
there has been heavy rain and the race-course is like
a swamp. Therefore, in fine weather there’s not much
chance, but given bad weather —real heavy weather,
with the mud above your ankles and the creeks run-
ning bankers down the hills—then Ginx’s Baby will
romp away where other horses can almost only toddle.”
“ Then we’re gambling on the weather,” said Mr.
Muffins thoughtfully, “ banking on plenty of rain.”
“ Exactly,” said Mr. Twiggs triumphandy, “ and
from the look of things we’re not unlikely to get it.”
He snatched a newspaper excitedly from the table.
“ Look what the Fremande weather correspondent,
wiring last night, says! ‘ Threatening weather ap-
proaching overseas from the West. Heavy rains expec-
ted within twenty-four hours.’ ” Mr. Twiggs thumped
the desk with his fist. “And what does that mean?
To-day is Friday, four days only to the running of the
Cup. Rain in Western Australia, say, to-day then, the
wind holding, we get it here on Sunday and it reaches
Victoria somewhere in the twenty-four hours that fol-
low.” His voice took on a most emphatic tone. “ I’ve


often noticed, Mr. Muffins, that at this time of year
bad weather here follows automatically upon bad
weather in Perth, and that in turn it is then passed
along to the Eastern States.”
Mr. Muffins seemed much impressed. “ Well, sup-
posing,” he said hesitatingly, “ supposing I had made
a big bet in Melbourne about my horse, would they
pay me, do you think, if he won? ”
“ Oh, that depends entirely with whom you made
the bet,” replied Mr. Twiggs, grinning covertly to
himself. “ Some bookmakers are all right up to hun-
dreds of thousands of pounds. Now, with whom did
you have your bet? ”
“ Well, as a matter of fact,” said Mr. Muffins very
slowly, “ although I did lay out some money, £2OO to
be exact, I didn’t make the bet directly with anyone
myself. I gave it to someone to put on for me at a
hundred to one, and he gave me no receipt. To be
perfectly frank with you, I gave it to the horse’s
trainer to put on.”
“ To Markem ! ” exclaimed Mr. Twiggs as if greatly
surprised—“to Bob Markem of Rising Downs? ”
“Yes, that is the man,” replied Henry Muffins,
looking very astonished. “You seem to know every-
one. Now do you think he is to be trusted? ”
“ Trusted! ” almost shouted Mr. Twiggs—“ why,
he’s the straightest man in all Australia! Bob
Markem is known to everyone! He’s safer than a
bank, and if there’s fifty thousand of yours to come,
you can count on it to the last penny.”


They discussed things for quite a long time and
when finally Mr. Muffins got up to go, it was plain
from the expression on his face that in no small degree
he was sharing both the confidence and the enthusiasm
of Mr. Twiggs himself.
“ It’s a good thing you mentioned the horse to me,”
he said laughingly, in parting, “for I had intended
wiring Mr. Markem this morning to tell him to get
rid of the animal straightaway, for any price he would
fetch.” He shook Mr. Twiggs warmly by the hand
and lowered his voice mysteriously. “ Now what
about having a bit of lunch with me at the South
Australian to-day, say at one thirty, sharp. I shall
be glad of a companion and we might ” —he half-
closed one eye —“ we might crack a small bottle to
bring us luck.”
“ A large one,” corrected Mr. Twiggs beamingly
and closing one eye completely, “ for I think the occa-
sion is well worth it.”
* * *
Mr. Muffins proceeded along North Terrace in
quite an extraordinarily cheerful frame of mind. From
the terrible depression of but a few days ago, from the
depths of humiliation following upon his return from
Melbourne and his restoration to his own proper self,
he had passed now to a condition of philosophical
complacency and complete mental calm.
The previous Saturday he had been stunned by the
realization of the possible consequences of his Mel


bourne adventures and he had been frightened to his
very marrow at the bare idea of what his friends and
associates would now say of him. He had been certain
of speedy exposure, if, indeed, everything were not
already known.
His mind was not an analytical one, like that of Dr.
Hoop-Brown, and he made no attempt to ascribe his
recent activities to any outside or abnormal influences.
He just took them all for granted, as being what he
supposed would not have been unnatural at any time,
had the circumstances been presented to him.
He had not been able to think, either, of any pos-
sible explanation that he could offer to the friends
and associates of his own circle, and it had been abso-
lute torment to him to ruminate over the sneers and
scoffmgs to which he would be now subjected.
Then, suddenly, it had come to him that there was
one way that would end it all, a way that would deliver
him from all his troubles and perplexities at once.
He must cut himself altogether adrift from the
people he had been accustomed to associate with! He
must meet them no more, he must consider them no
longer and then —their power to wound and humili-
ate would be gone forthwith and for ever!
Yes, that was it, he told himself—that was the
course to follow and it was, besides, the only right and
proper one, too. He had been an ass, he told himself
emphatically, a fool, a bigot and a fanatic, but—he
had become converted now to saner and more reason-
able views of life.


Yes, it was to be good-bye for ever, to the hysterical
nonsense of Jane Meddlin Brimstone, to the mental
beastliness of Soaker Ram, and to the whole nauseat-
ing bag of tricks so beloved by the members of the
Society for the World’s Regeneration.
So Mr. Henry Muffins, as becoming his great resolve,
adopted a devil-may-care, come-what-may, swagger as
he marched along. He held his head now still higher,
for his interview with Mr. Twiggs had greatly heart-
ened him, and already he saw himself the possessor of
many more thousands of pounds and drinking his
wine or what not—out of the golden depths of the
Melbourne Cup.
Arriving at the offices of Henry Muffins and Co.,
Exporters and Importers, of Waymouth Street, City,
he was greeted respectfully by the staff and was soon
immersed in the consideration of ledgers, invoices and
correspondence of varying kinds.
“ You appear to have carried out everything most
satisfactorily in my absence, Watkins,” he remarked
presently, to his head clerk, “ and I shall show my
appreciation of you all on pay-day this week. I will
look over the wage-sheet this afternoon and see where
any increases in salary can be given. Bring it to me
after lunch.”
“ Very good, sir,” replied Watkins, almost upon
the verge of an apopletic seizure in his astonishment.
“ I was very glad to be able to report to you that
everything had gone well.”
Towards the end of the morning, and just when
19


Mr. Muffins was thinking it would soon be time for
his lunch appointment at the South Australian Hotel,
one of the clerks entered and announced: “ Mr,
Soaker Ram to see you, sir.”
Did Mr. Muffins pale somewhat or was it only a
shadow on the blind? Did his hands tremble or was
it only the vibration of a passing tram-car, in the
street? At any rate, his voice was steady enough and
there was almost a lack of interest in the careless tone
in which he replied: “ Show him in, please.” Then
his eyes fell again upon the paper he was perusing.
A few moments later, a heavy tread in the passage,
the opening of a door, and Mr. Ram was in the room.
He stared hard and curiously at Mr. Muffins, he wet-
ted his lips like an animal before his food and then a
cold and sinister smile flickered into his face.
“ Take a seat, Ram,” said Mr. Muffins carelessly,
and without lifting his eyes, “ and excuse me, just a
moment, will you, please? I’m checking some figures,
and I want to finish them straight away.”
“ I can wait,” replied Mr. Ram grimly. “ There
is all the day before me.”
Mr. Muffins nodded his thanks and went on with
his figures. “ Twenty-seven, thirty-five, sixty-one,” he
murmured, and then gradually his voice became in-
audible and it was only by the movement of his lips
that it could have been presumed that he was counting
at all.
Presently, with a great sigh of relief, he put down
the paper and looked up over his glasses at Mr. Ram,


to note that gentleman regarding him with a male-
volent and steely glitter in his eyes.
“ Oh, by the by, Ram,” he announced gravely, “ in
my absence from the office a most terrible piece of
depravity has been brought to light.” He paused for
a moment and noticed with satisfaction that, in spite
of his undoubted appearance of animosity, Mr. Ram
was now intently pricking up his ears. “ Yes, a
terrible piece of depravity, I say.”
He paused again and then went on most impres-
sively. “ The office cat, Felicity, has become a
mother and the identity of her betrayer is unknown.”
Mr. Ram tightened up his features to a nasty scowl,
but Mr. Muffins continued sonorously: “Yes, un-
known, but still, from the colour of the progeny, and
there are six of them, the charwoman of the building
is of the opinion that the father of them should be of
ginger hues.” He thumped here so suddenly upon
the table that Mr. Ram oscillated in his chair. “ Put
the Society on it, Soaker, straight away, and let them
find out who is the perpetrator of this dreadful deed.
Fiat inquisitio —let a search be made.” He raised his
voice loudly. “ Morals are in the melting pot —virtue
has become as a sounding brass and tinkling symbol,
and premeditated depravity has descended even to the
lower animals.”
Mr. Ram eyed him furiously, and with great con-
tempt.
“ You think it funny, I suppose, you ”
“ Funny! ” ejaculated Mr. Muffins indignantly,


“ and pray would you think it funny to suddenly be-
come the mother of six little ones, with no income pro-
vided and no adequate arrangements made.” He
shook his head sadly, “ A box in the back kitchen
and scraps over from the office lunches are all that
poor Felicity has.” He glared angrily. “ Now would
that content you? ”
“Are you mad?” asked Mr. Ram, shaking with
anger, “or inebriated, perhaps? ”
Mr. Muffins leant back wearily. “ Inebriated, my
dear Soaker,” he exclaimed, “ as a word of expression
is entirely out of date, and its employment thus by you
is indicative, most clearly, of your mouldy state of
mind. Shickered—sozzled, canned, or shot, are the
words that are now used in the circles of the aristocracy
and the well-to-do, and—as poor commoners our-
selves—it would be an impertinence for us to speak
otherwise.” He smiled most pleasantly. “ No, Mr.
Ram, I am, at present, more sober than the proverbial l
judge.”
“ Are you coming to the committee meeting to-
night? ” asked Mr. Ram fiercely. “It has been spe-
cially convened to receive your report. Are you
coming? ”
“ No,” replied Mr. Muffins promptly. “lam not.”
Mr. Ram retained command of his temper with an
effort. “ Then, what are your intentions? ”he asked
sharply. “ With you, the president of the Society, we
have a right to know.”
“ Quite reasonable, Ram,” replied Mr. Muffins, and


for the first time speaking in serious tones. “ And I’ll
tell you in five words what my intentions are.” He
paused for a moment. “ I have done with you.” He
raised his voice emphatically, “I am sick of you all.
I am sick of your ignorance, your humbug, and your
hypocrisy. Sick of your pornographic minds, your
ravings and your shoutings, and your fever to get
yourselves into the public eye.” He leant over his desk
and shook his finger menacingly. “ Now, you under-
stand that, Mr. Soaker Ram? My intentions are quite
clear to you now? ”
The face of Mr. Ram was furious and he clenched
his fist, as if it were almost in his mind to strike a
blow.
“ Renegade! apostate! ” he shouted, “ you have
sold your soul to the devil.”
Mr. Muffins held up his hand. “ Quieter! quieter!
if you please, Mr. Ram. No bad language is allowed
in this office. My clerks are respectable young men.”
“ You are a scoundrel,” retorted Soaker Ram bit-
terly. “ You have deceived us all along.” A look of
triumph came into his face. “ But you are unmasked,
already. We know all about your conduct in Mel-
bourne, and your association with vice and sin.”
“ Excellent! ” exclaimed Mr. Muffins, “ then there
will be no grieVing if I make no report.”
“You have imbibed intoxicating liquids, you have
gambled,” went on Mr. Ram furiously, “ and you
have taken young females about.”
“ Very charming girls, too,” commented Mr.


Muffins smilingly, “ although not nearly so responsive
as I had been given to understand they would be.” He
sighed. “ But perhaps that was because of my age.”
“ Bah! ” snorted Mr. Ram, “ you have been a defiler
of the purity of the world, a poisoner of the stream of
life.”
Mr. Muffins sat up instantly, with a jerk. “ Now,
don’t you talk about the stream of life, Ram,” he said
fiercely. “ Don’t talk about that. You know no
stream of life. Life to you is a sewer —a sewer of
guilty passions and subterranean sin.” He laughed
scoffingly. “You know no stream of Life, you
never see the sunshine, or hear the birds, or smell
the flowers.” He banged upon his desk again. “ You
are bending over a drain all the time. You are a moral
rat, sir, a sewer rat, Ram.”
“ Very pretty,” sneered Mr. Ram, “ and most elo-
quent too. But then Henry Muffins always was ver-
bose and windy, always a man of froth.”
Mr. Muffins rose majestically to his feet. “ Good
morning to you, Mr. Ram,” he said icily. “ There is
no need to prolong our interview. We each believe
we can understand each other, I see.”
Mr. Ram rose to his feet, too. “ But you don’t
escape us like this,” he cried, and the fury on his face
changed suddenly to a mocking smile. “ I have an
account to settle with you, myself—a little slip that
happily brings you within reach of the Law.” He
whipped out a small piece of paper from his pocket,
and held it out with both hands, about ten inches


away from Mr. Muffins’s eyes, “ Now do you know
what this is? ” he hissed.
“ ‘ Mr. Soaker Ram, Toshem Villa, Tiddle Street,
Adelaide,’ ” read Mr. Muffins slowly. “ Your name
and address. An impromptu visiting card, I suppose!
Well, what of it? ”
“What of it? ” mimicked Mr. Ram, with a sneer
and then his face hardened vengefully. “ Well, who
wrote it, pray, who wrote it? ”
Mr. Muffins took another look at the paper. “You
did it yourself, didn’t you? ” he said slowly. “ It looks
like your hand-writing, anyhow, although maybe it
is a bit disguised.”
“ Liar! ” shouted Mr. Ram furiously. “ You wrote
it and you grossly libelled me at the same time. I’ll
have the Law on you. You told that man ”
“ Mr. Ram, Mr, Ram,” interrupted Mr. Muffins
sternly, “ I will not have such language here.” He
moved to the door. “ I tell you —our interview is at
an end.”
“ All right,” said Mr. Ram savagely, and picking
up his hat. “ Leave it at that. I shall go and find a
solicitor at once.”
“ Yes, and find a good one, when you’re about it,”
boomed Mr. Muffins significantly, “ for I’m sure a
man of your type will need one, soon.” He looked
very gloomy. “ You’ll be in the Courts for something,
before long. I’m certain of it, for your mental balance
stands on a razor edge” He shook his finger warn-
ingly at the great reformer. “ A little, a very little,


and you’ll go wrong. A pair of girl’s stockings, seen
in some back garden upon the clothes-line, a minute
too long before the window of a draper’s shop, and ”
he shrugged his shoulders —“ Another scandal in Ade-
laide. Grave charge against a man called Soaker
Ram. No, no, don’t get foul-tongued again. I’m
only telling it you for your own good. But there,
further conversation is quite unnecessary.” He opened
the office door and smiled most politely. “ Good
morning, and remember me to them all to-night.
Watkins, show this gentleman out.”
“ Really,” he muttered to himself, when a few
moments later he was brushing his hat, “really, I
ought to go into parliament, my views are so adapt-
able, and I feel so sincere about them, too.” He nod-
ded smilingly. “ Yes, certainly I am wasted in private
life.”
*7V* TT
That night when in the sanctity of his own home,
Mr. Muffins was again in the bosom of his family, he
remarked casually to them all:
“ Oh! by the by, about that motor-bicycle for
Charles. I’ve altered my intentions somewhat and
instead of the boy getting a motor-bicycle ” —the face
of Charles paled desperately, and his jaw dropped
almost until it touched his waistcoat—“ I intend to
invest in a motor-car myself. I shall buy one next
week. Charles shall learn to drive and we’ll all go
for an extended tour to Sydney and through New


South Wales.” He leant over and placed his hand
caressingly upon one of his wife’s. “We are getting
old, my dear, and I seem to think somehow that we
are not getting all the best out of life.” He coughed
slightly. “ I shall renounce all my social work—for
the time being, at all events, and take a long holiday,
to grow young again. We shall motor straight to
Sydney, I think.”
Mrs. Muffins and Charles were too overcome to
speak, but the daughter so far forgot her awe of her
father that she clapped her hands.
“ Oh! how lovely,” she exclaimed, “ and shall we
go through Melbourne, Father? ”
“ No-o-o, Evangeline,” replied Mr. Muffins hesi-
tatingly, “ I think we shall not touch Melbourne. We
shall go the other way.”


CHAPTER XV
“GINX'S BABY”
THE days that follow, as can easily be imagined,
were ones of great anxiety for Montague Mackerel
Twiggs. He was playing for high stakes, and
his nerves were strung up almost to breaking point at
the consideration of all he might win—or lose.
For many years a puny flutterer upon the race-
course, he had a very clear perception of the remote-
ness of the chance of Ginx’s Baby in the great Melbourne
Cup, and imbued as he was with the sanguine tem-
perament of the little punter, he could not yet persuade
himself to believe that the Baby’s prospects were any-
thing but very poor.
Still, still, he was buoyed up somehow with a great
hope, for he could not shake off the memory of the
Asiatic’s prophecy that riches were to come his way.
A thousand times, he told himself, he was a fool
to think of the man at all, and then a thousand times
again he remembered how every word, hitherto, of the
dark-skinned stranger had come true. One minute,
therefore, he was all buoyancy and hope, and the
next —with bowed head and dejected mien he believed
almost that everything was already lost.


But, if Mr. Twiggs had alternating moments of
hope and despair, and if at times every atom of his
experience and commonsense told him most unmis-
takably that he was a foolish, sickly dreamer—Mr.
Muffins, the partner of all his fortunes, had no fears
or misgivings at all.
Not for him were doubts and improbabilities, not
for him the hazards and uncertainty of the race-course
side, not for him the thousand and one happenings
that might take place at any moment to remove the
prize for ever from his reach—for he knew nothing
of any of these matters, and in his mind he had the
cup already won.
He was a champion, was Ginx’s Baby, for had not
Mr. Twiggs said so, over the third glass of champagne,
and with the coming of the rain the animal’s success
was quite assured! No other horse would be able to
get near him, and he would just romp along in the
soft ground and win how and when he liked.
This optimism on the part of Mr. Muffins was,
however, wholly the outcome of his almost hourly
communications with Mr. Twiggs, who both as a
meteorological and racing expert, had gained his most
profound respect.
Had not Mr. Twiggs put the whole matter before
him beyond question? Ginx’s Baby would win, he
had said, if heavy rain should arrive, and he had added
with every confidence, that from all signs heavy rain
would come.
Well, heavy rain had come exactly as Mr. Twiggs


had predicted, and the first half of the prophecy being
realized, fulfilment of the second half would follow as
a matter of course. Mr. Muffins was sure of it, because
undoubtedly Mr. Twiggs was sure of it, too! ”
And if, in reality, the convictions of Mr. Twiggs
fell somewhat short of Mr. Muffins’s estimation, cer-
tainly, however, he had reason to be greatly elated at
the rain.
A cloudless and almost perfect Friday had been suc-
ceeded the next day by a strong and hourly-freshening
West wind, ‘ Heavy rain in Western Australia ’ had
been the burden of the weather report, with confident
prognostications of rain in South Australia within
twenty-four hours.
And sure enough the rain had come, and with a
vengeance, too!
In the early hours of Sunday, Mr. Twiggs had been
awakened from a fitful sleep by the pattering of the
raindrops upon the roof, and jumping feverishly from
his bed his heart had thumped like a piston-rod at the
vista of black and lowering clouds that he could see
from the window. All day it rained—a heavy soak-
ing rain that swept furiously across the State, a rain
that was hurled onward by the boisterous Western
wind.
Mr. Twiggs rubbed his hands gleefully many times
during the day, and towards evening, for the fourth
time, he telephoned Mr. Muffins.
“Well, what do you think about it now?” he
asked. “Didn’t I tell you so? ”


Mr. Muffins was very guarded in his reply, for evi-
dently the family were within earshot.
“ Excellent! excellent! ” came his comment, and
there was no mistaking the elation in his voice. “ Just
what the farmers are all wanting, and it will do every-
one good. I suppose, I suppose, you are sure the wind
now is in the right direction to benefit the pastoral
industries in Victoria as well, say towards Melbourne
way? Oh! you are, are you? What! an inch and a
half; well, well, that is first rate! By the by, what
about an appointment with you to-morrow, at
the same time and place as last Friday? Yes, yes,
at half-past one and we’ll both be punctual, too. Good-
bye.”
Monday was a fine day and, all signs of the storm
having passed over, Mr. Twiggs waited with great
impatience for news of the weather conditions in
Melbourne, but it was not until the evening papers
appeared that he was able to obtain any news.
Then —he whistled gloriously to himself. There it
was, in big head-lines on the first page.
“ Nearly Two Inches of Rain,” he read. “ Mel-
bourne Receives a Soaker. Going at Flemington Very
Heavy To-morrow.”
“ Gee-whiz! ” he ejaculated, “ and now for the
sporting news! ” He turned breathlessly to the second
page and here he was more gratified still. The odds
against Ginx’s Baby had shortened, precipitately,
from fifty to ten to one!
He was at the telephone on the instant, and he


caught Mr. Muffins just as the latter was about to leave
the office for home.
“ Ah! no,” replied that gentleman interestedly, “ I
have not seen the evening paper yet. No—is it so?
But just wait a moment, will you, until I shut the door,
for the trams are making such a noise that I can hardly
hear you at all. Now, that’s better, Twiggs. I can
speak now. What, the bets are only ten to one! That
means then that everyone else thinks it’ll win, doesn’t
it? Of course it will, too. Really, you are a wonder-
ful 1 man, Mr. Twiggs, and everything is turning out
exactly as you said. Oh! by the by, one thing I shall
insist upon. lam going to give you a motor-car. I
am buying a Jehu for myself to-morrow, and I shall
bespeak one for you, too. No, win or lose, my boy,
I can afford it. I’m not a poor man and—er —my
investments lately have been quite profitable ones. So
don’t worry about anything. What! The start is not
often long delayed and we shall know for certain by
ten minutes past three! Goodness gracious! as soon
as that! Well, good-bye, my boy. You and I will go
to Melbourne on Thursday, to bring back the Cup.
Yes, I’m quite sure of it. Good-bye, good luck.”
* * *
We will draw a veil over the hours of that moment-
ous Tuesday morning, for there be times in all lives
when no kind-hearted chronicler is anxious to probe
too deeply. It is sad, however, to contemplate that
whereas the joys and happiness that come to us pass


on at whirlwind speed, the pains and sorrows of this
world flap by on leaden wings. We measure the
realization of our hopes by seconds, but our suspense
and agonies—by hours.
So, suffice to say that poor Montague Twiggs drank
deeply of a bitter cup that morning, and three o’clock
in the afternoon found him in a state of nervous
tension, almost bordering upon collapse.
The race for the Melbourne Cup is by far the great-
est sporting event in the Commonwealth, and the
interest taken in it is probably eclipsed by no other
race in the world.
On the afternoon of the first Tuesday in November,
all the thoughts of Australia are turned to that long
stretch of turf at Flemington and, as the starting hour
approaches, the inhabitants of every town and city
begin to look impatiently at their watches, while far
away, out-back, in lonely places hundreds of miles
from any railway track, men pause in the work they
are engaged upon and wonder how their particular
fancy is getting on. The broadcasting stations vie with
one another in the efficiency of their services, and
long before the race has actually started, the minutest
happenings upon the race-course are being thrown
upon the air.
Mr. Twiggs was attending patients as usual that
day, for he had realized it was the only way to keep
himself from absolutely breaking down, and just
before three o’clock, it so happened, several patients
were waiting to be seen, and among them Lady Fitz-


Tootle. Her appointment was for 3.15, but she had
come early, telling the nurse she hoped Mr. Twiggs
would not keep her waiting long.
At two minutes to three Mr. Twiggs showed out
the patient he had been attending, and then when the
nurse would have stayed to tidy up the surgery, he
expressed the wish to be left alone for a few minutes.
“But there are five patients waiting, sir,” said the
nurse, looking very surprised, “ and her ladyship said
expressly that she did not want to be kept long.”
“ All right,” replied Mr. Twiggs wearily, “ it will
be only for a few minutes, but don’t come in, please,
until I ring for you.”
The surgery door closed, he darted over to a cup-
board and from under a heap of newspapers abstracted
a small portable wireless set that he had that morning
smuggled into the room. He proceeded instantly to
turn it on, making its volume, however, so weak that
no sound of it would reach outside.
Bending down to listen he was so overcome with
emotion that he could hardly get his breath. He was
only just in time, for the horses were lining up at the
barrier, with the starter having some trouble to induce
them to take up their allotted positions.
Eric Welch, the crack racing-broadcaster of Austra-
lia, was at the microphone and with his finely modu-
lated voice he was making every second of his
broadcast a thrilling one.
“ Broken Nose won’t go into line,” he cried, “ and
O-o-oh! he’s kicking out at Beery Boy and trying to


bite Pimpled Peter. Now, Black Bertie has turned
the wrong way round and he’s bumping into Podger.
Mouldybones is giving trouble, too, and he’s lashing
out at Dirty Face. Fish and Chips won’t go in next
to Onion Queen. Now’s a chance! Yes, yes,” his
voice rose excitedly, “ they’re off and the race for the
Melbourne Cup has begun. It looked a good start and
Pigstein is the first to show up and he ” —but
Mr. Twiggs’s heart was palpitating so violently that he
could not listen any longer and he switched off.
With a red mist before his eyes he looked at his
watch and saw it was six minutes and twenty seconds
past three. “Three minutes and twenty-two seconds,”
he murmured brokenly, “ is the record for the two
miles, but in this heavy going, I reckon to-day it will
be at least ten to fifteen longer, so I’ll switch on again
at nine and a half minutes past, and then ” —he could
hardly get his breath —“ they’ll not be far off the two-
furlong post.”
Then suddenly the front-door bell rang and he
heard voices in the hall. He opened his eyes very
wide. “ Bottleworthy! ”he ejaculated excitedly, “so
they’re gathering to be in at the death! ”
He looked down at his watch again. Three minutes
had gone by and he held his breath. Slowly, slowly,
the little second-hand jumped on, seeming, however,
that it would never reach to half-way round its litde
dial. Twenty, twenty-five —it had touched the thirty
at last, and with a convulsive jerk of his fingers he
switched on again to learn his Fate.
20


“. . . and passing the three-furlong post ” came
the clarion voice at the microphone, “ Broken Nose
is just clear of Gilbert Larose, with Mouldybones,
Onion Queen and Beery Boy all in a line just two
lengths behind; then come Dirty Face and Ginx’s
Baby, with Podger making a fast run on the outside.
At the two-furlong post Gilbert Larose has headed
Broken Nose and Onion Queen, but—oh! oh! Ginx’s
Baby has now run into third place. Yes, yes, Ginx’s
Baby is flying and at the distance he is level with
Gilbert Larose! He passes him and is drawing right
away from the field! Yes, yes, Ginx’s Baby has got
the race won! He’s three lengths in front now! It’s
all over and he passes the winning-post a good four
lengths in front of Gilbert Larose. Then come Onion
Queen, Mouldybones, Broken Nose and—” but Mr.
Twiggs had switched off and was lying back almost
fainting in the armchair, his face white as death and
clammy with perspiration.
Then all at once he smiled, a smile that commenced
nervously, but quickly became one of pride and
strength as he remembered he was now a rich man.
He stood up and squared his shoulders. He planted
his feet firmly upon the consulting room floor. He
was as good as anybody now!
“ Rootity-toot,” he began to hum delightedly to
himself,
“ Rootity-toot, she plays the flute.”
He opened the consulting room door and stepped


into the passage, whereupon the nurse immediately
came out of the waiting-room, leaving the door wide
open behind her.
She regarded him very anxiously.
“ Lady Fitz-Tootle says she won’t wait any longer,
sir,” she whispered, “ and there’s Archdeacon Bottle-
worthy here now, to make an appointment.”
Mr. Twiggs snapped his fingers. “ The deuce take
them all,” he said, tossing his head. “ I’ll see no more
patients to-day.” He waved his hand with a gesture
of complete indifference. “ Send them all away,
Hypatia. Say Mr. Twiggs—Mr. Montague Mackerel
Twiggs—has drawn the winner of the Melbourne
Cup,” his eyes sparkled, “ the inimitable Ginx’s Baby.”
“Tell Lady Fitz-Tootle that? ” asked the startled
girl.
But Mr. Twiggs had turned back into his surgery
and the girl, in spite of her instructions, stood hesitat-
ing as if she were not exacdy sure what she should do.
The hall was very quiet. From the waiting-room,
however, came the subdued hum of quiet conversation,
in which the deep voice of Archdeacon Bottleworthy
could be distinguished every now and then. He was
talking in low tones to Lady Fitz-Tootle about his
daughter.
“ Yes, they will be married before Christmas,” he
said. “ Margaret is twenty-two and there is really no
need for them to wait. Young Grainger is, as you
say, a very fine young fellow, and I was most happy
to give my consent”


Lady Fitz-Toode smiled approvingly. “ She is a dear
girl, Margaret, and they will make an excellent pair.”
The conversation languished and her ladyship looked
at her watch. “ Really,” she began, “ I shall have
. >5
to
But the archdeacon suddenly interrupted her, “ Did
you hear anything? ” he asked, and she noticed that he
looked shaky and that his face was pale.
“ Hear what? ” she asked, and then she, too, felt
emotion surge through her.
There was the sound of gaily-tripping footsteps in
the next room, and someone there was singing quietly:
“ Rootity-toot,” they heard quite plainly, and to-
gether their eyes opened and their jaws dropped:
" Rootity-toot, she plays the flute
In a very charming manner —
Finhetty-pong she patters along
On the of the grand planner! ”
“ I can’t wait,” muttered the archdeacon thickly.
“And I’m late, too,” said her ladyship all in a
twitter. She trembled and dropped all pretence.
“ Quick, Archdeacon, or we shall catch it again.
Quick!”
There was a simultaneous rising from their seats, a
rush together to the door, and in a moment they were
out together upon the terrace.
Montague Mackerel Twiggs was still chortling his
‘ Te Deum.’


Dusk was just falling that same evening, and Mar-
garet Botdeworthy and Harold Grainger were strolling
slowly through the park lands. Eventide was in the
sky, and Heaven was in their hearts. They walked
very close together and, from time to time, their hands
touched. Then a mighty thrill surged through them,
for they were in the supreme intoxication of love.
They were not speaking, but thoughts more won-
derful than anything in life were telling them of the
great secret passion holds.
Their expressions were quite natural, but when they
looked at one another the face of each one, to the
other, was transfigured and they sighed from a very
ecstasy of happiness.
Presently, a man came striding by. He was hum-
ming to himself, and he walked with springy, joyful
steps. He carried many parcels under his arm. Ap-
proaching the lovers, he raised his hat smilingly and
passed on.
“ That’s Mr. Twiggs,” said Margaret sofdy. “ You
don’t know him, do you? Father was going to him
for an appointment to-day.”
Young Grainger looked down into her eyes. “ Don’t
talk to me of Twiggs, darling,” he said fervendy.
“Tell me only of yourself.” He added carelessly:
“ Twiggs is nothing to me.”
* * *
Sister Ruth was sitting up in bed. She was brush-
ing her hair and talking to her mother.


“ Yes, you’ll want at least six nighties, dear,”
remarked the latter, “ and I should have three pink
and three light blue, if I were you.”
The girl blushed. “ And I must get that tooth
done, too, this week, Mother,” she said. “ I think
I’ll go to Mr. Twiggs.”
“ No, not Twiggs,” said her mother; “ he goes to
races, so I’ve heard. Mr. Fangles will be the best for
you. He takes round the bag in church for us now.”
It was towards midnight and Dr. Hoop-Brown
was sitting in his study. He was gazing meditatively
at a large photo he was holding in his hand.
“ Beautiful eyes,” he murmured, “ and a face as
good as gold! Sweet and gentle, too, with just that
trace of weakness in it that a woman’s should always
hold! And to think that in less than three weeks
now she will be all mine.” He sighed happily. “ I
wonder if we shall have a child. If we do, and it’s a
boy ” —he smiled as if he were amused—“ I really
think we ought to call it Montague.” His face hard-
ened a little and he shook his head. “Yes, it’s an
uncanny world, and with all our knowledge we are
only just beginning to lift the veil. Twiggs was our
vampire, without doubt, and he knows it, too —at any
rate in a partial way. He lied most distinctly to me
the other day, and he remembers far more than he is
willing to admit. He knows that absurd rhyme, too,
for I heard him singing it the other evening as I passed
him in the park.”


CHAPTER XVI
MORE BABIES
FIVE years have rolled away since that memor-
able Tuesday afternoon when the chestnut son
of Workhouse and Unwanted won the Mel-
bourne Cup.
Ginx’s Baby has long since acquired babies of his
own, and it is not improbable that one of them may
soon repeat his father’s successes on the Turf.
Time has dealt kindly with most of the characters
of our story. Mr. Montague Twiggs—no, I beg his
pardon, M. Mackerel-Twiggs, Esquire —is part owner
of a flourishing sheep-station in the North-East and,
with the prosperity in the wool industry, he draws a
substantial income from his possession. He has long
since left the dental profession, and long-winded
patients and bad debts are now only an unpleasant
memory to him.
In partnership with his great friend, Mr. Henry
Muffins, he is an important patron of the Turf, and
when their black gelding ‘ Rootity-toot ’ for the third
time in succession won the Adelaide Birthday Cup, it
was agreed on all sides that the fortunate partners
were among the most popular owners in the State.


Mackerel-Twiggs, as becoming one upon whom
Fortune smiled, has many friends, but perhaps none
closer than Dr. and Mrs. Hoop-Brown. The doctor
was indeed at first inclined to be a little jealous of the
undoubted partiality of his charming wife for his
young friend, but with the coming of the first baby,
a bouncing boy, it was evident this cloud had dis-
appeared, for Mackerel-Twiggs, at the express desire
of the great doctor himself, stood as god-father, and
the babe was even baptised Montague, after him.
Mr. Henry Muffins has every appearance of being
a most happy man. “A fine old boy,” so everyone
calls him, for nothing more delights him than the
companionship of young people. With the youthful
members of the opposite sex, particularly, he is always
a great favourite, and in their troubles and anxieties
his advice is often sought. He is most broad-minded
and charitable in all his opinions and, if truth were
only known, many a trouble has been smoothed over
or averted by his advice and timely help. To a psy-
chologist he would seem a man who had been through
many experiences himself. His family adore him.
Lady Fitz-Tootle is altered. She is much less of a
snob than she used to be, and much more humble
about herself than in old times. She is an important
person in Adelaide Society still, but—for the upstart
who forgets, for the crawlers and the climbers who
would disavow the soil from which they sprang —she
has always the sharp sword of her good memory and
bitter tongue.


The archdeacon is as important and dignified as
ever. Greyer and a little stouter, perhaps, but with the
same proud mien and pontifical air. He is immensely
proud of his two little grandchildren, who delight to
sit across his knees whilst he hums to them their
favourite melody:
" Rootity-toot, she plays the flute,”
accompanying each note with a rise and fall of the
ecclesiastical extremities.
The bishop of a neighbouring State is old and ailing,
and in racing circles in Adelaide it is an odds-on bet
that upon his decease the See will be offered to the
archdeacon.
Margaret is just as sweet and pretty as ever. She
worships her husband, who is rising rapidly in his
profession and who has recently been elected to the
City Council.
Dr. Bunions is not so fond of the knife as he used
to be. He swallowed his false teeth one day and they
had to operate upon him to get them out. He never
quite got over the shock.
Mr. Chickseed married Susan. She answered the
door of Fitz-Tootle Hall to him so many times that
in the end they got to know each other so well that
they became sweethearts.
They were married at the Cathedral by the arch-
deacon and now live ‘ hunneds and hunneds ’ of miles
out-back. One of their most treasured possessions is a


big photograph of Lady Fitz-Tootle set in a thick
silver frame and given to them by the great lady her-
self. When Andy is not by, Susan tells everyone it is
one of husband’s old flames, but he did not marry her
because she, Susan, cut her out.
They have a fine handsome little son and he was
christened Tootle Chickseed.
Mr. Huggins is having one of his boys educated for
the Church and one of Mrs. Bangs’s is going to become
a doctor.




Thrillers by Arthur Gask
7/6 net
THE HANGMAN’S KNOT
3/6 net
THE HIDDEN DOOR
THE POISONED GOBLET
2/6 net
THE DARK HIGHWAY
RED PASTE MURDERS
GENTLEMEN OF CRIME
THE SHADOW OF LAROSE
THE JUDGMENT OF LAROSE
SECRET OF THE SANDHILLS
THE HOUSE ON THE ISLAND
2j* net
CLOUD THE SMITER
THE LONELY HOUSE
THE DARK HIGHWAY
THE SECRET OF THE GARDEN
PUBLISHED BY HERBERT JENKINS


HERBERT JENKINS LATEST
Mystery and Thrillers
"Each 7/6 net,
RUDE JUSTICE
L. Austen-Leigh
THE DURAND CASE
Sefton Kyle
DEATH GOES BY BUS
Leslie Cargill
DEATH IN THE WOOD
Charles Rushton
MURDER AT THE BAR
Traill Stevenson
THE HAND OF JUSTICE
Francis Duncan
MURDER IN THE BANK
Richard Essex
THE DENMEDE MYSTERY
Wyndham Martyn
DEATH CALLS THE JESTER
H. E. Wheeler


HERBERT JENKINS LATEST
Mystery and Thrillers
Each 7/6 neU
DANGER ZONE
Kathleen Lindsay
THE SHOE FITS
Robert Ladline
DOUBLE EVENTS
Alexander Wilson
DEADLY DECREE
J. C. Lenehan
NO OTHER KILLER
James Corbett
MICROBES OF POWER
Alexander Wilson
DEATH ON DARTMOOR
John Rowland
MURDER AT THE PALACE
James Corbett
RENDEZVOUS WITH DEATH
James Corbett
THE MAN WITH HALF A FACE
G. Davison


HERBERT JENKINS LATEST
Light Romances
Each 7/5 net.
BIJOU MERLE
A. A. Thomson
SECRET LIVES
Richard Starr
HELEN SPENCER
Patrick Macgixl
KNIGHT ERRANT
Edgar Jepson
SILVER MOUNTAINS
Prudence O’Shea
THE INFINITE ROAD
Roy Brooks
AN ARTIST IN CRIME
K. M. Sheahan
MISS BUNGLE MARRIED
D. E. Stevenson
JEWELS OUT OF EGYPT
Verb Lockwood


HERBERT JENKINS LATEST
Humorous Novels
"Each 7/6 net.
UNLUCKY DIP
John Glyder
LAUGHING GAS
P. G. WODEHOUSE
HAUNTED ABBEY
Patrick Leyton
THE JEST OF LIFE
Arthur Gask
SCOTLAND EXPECTS
J. Stoker Clouston
TABLET INTERVENING
E. Tusting Cocking
WASP-WAISTED ARABELLA
John Bagley
MUCH ADO ABOUT SOMETHING
T, Heath Joyce


cs
The Herbert Jenkins’ Wireless Is published
monthly and it is priceless. In other words
It will be sent post-free' to all book-lovers—and
others.
q
It tells all about the latest Herbert Jenkins’
Books. It also contains many good stories and
Interesting personalities—ln the best sense of
the term.
There are facts about authors and fictions about
publishers. Above all there Is real information
about books, not Just press-opinions and other
people’s opinions, but what a book is about.
One enthusiastic reader of The Herbert Jenkins’
Wireless writes that it has enabled him to
discontinue his subscriptions to Punch and The
Times Literary Supplement I
The Star in big headlines refers to The H. J.
Wireless as “ Gingering up the Book Trade,” and
goes on to say that “ nothing so Ingenious has yet
been issued in this country.” Are you going to
■end for it to Herbert Jenkins Ltd., 3, York Street,
St. James’s, London, S.W.I ?


THE
JEST
OF
LIFE
ARTHUR
CASK
