

THE
SURPRISING ADVENTURES
OF
®jmt IkkuMaMc pnig|t of Jaatakitygo,
THE HONORABLE
SIR HENRY PARKES,
K.C.M.GColonial Secretary of NS. W.,
ON HIS WAY
ZR/OTJ-tTX} THE ‘WOIR/LID,
TOGETHER WITH HIS
SPEECHES.
£
s
I
(n
jSwjtiue—firtrt «j in 1900.
Foretold by '‘Octopus,” Astrologer.
SYDNEY:
GRATTAN, 284 GEORGE STREET.
1882.
j
o
o


(0
THE GENUINE AMERICAN
SHOP BITTERS.
fSEN Kc ° 3=>
j y Contain Hops, Buchii, Mandrake, & the Purest & Best
m
6
i s <1
s- c
JS £ »
n tc Q
II fc
3l W
li 5
a ? »ro
£ £ Q
Sie K L.J
II Q
H
es a
Medical Qualities of all other Bitters.
They Curs ail Diseases of the Stomachy Blood, Bowels, Liver, Kidney, & Urinary Organs,
.., a *
Ask your Druggist for Hop Bitters,
Will be paid for a Case
they will not cure or help.
and try them before you Sleep. Take no other.
3 I <1 I
i ijgttHt
n, [ MORTIFIOS
OSOLE AGENTS
ii
AT c ’ ■.‘/‘■'l
UOSTSFIOBI, STUART A C 5„ 86 Pitt Street, Sydsey,
SOLE AGENTS FOR ALL THE COLONIES OF AUSTRALASIA.
M HOP BITTERS TTrm Bittpr^T
If you are a man of business, Are tho Purest and Best Medicine XXUp .DJ.UbtH.O .
w eakened by the strain of your duties, j ever made. | . , . r
■ ' ..... It you are married or single, old
f avold BtimulautB » an(l til <e : They are compounded from Hops, Buchu, g suffering from poor health,.
© * Mandrake, and Dandelion. ,
5 £ TTn-n ‘Rlttprs * i The Oldest, Best, most Renowned, and or languishing on a bed of sickness,,
•g g J,XU r ,UiUU * ‘Valuable Medicines in the World; and in take
£ K i addition contain all the best and most effec- #
•I % If you are a man of letters, toil- j tire curative properties of all other Bitters, TJoT) BltterS !
£ £ . J .. . . , being the greatest Liver Regulator, Blood - ■ UiUUWO •
.SP ” mg over your midnight work, to re-| p rHiriEßj anc t Life and Health Restoring j
| f store brain and nerve waste, take j W , Whoever you are, wherever you
Ask Your Druggist or Physician, j are> whenever you feel that your
Jz Tf •ii _ f I Do not suffer yourself or let your friends . . . ,
Hop Bitters! ! suffer, but use and urge them to use system needs cleansing, toning, or
hop bittebs. stimulating without intoxicating, take
a> i t tt * “ J
stimulating without intoxicating, take
a* % ... , a . . ! Remember, Hor Bitters is no vile,
•i Ti yon are young, and suffering from | rU g ge j } drunken nostrum, but the Purest ; TT ~Ri Have f
« any indiscretion or dissipation, take ; and Best Medicine ever made, and no person j XiOp IJlLltvlS •
‘ ‘or family should be without it. 1
m MONTEFIORE, STUART & CO.,
l“ Sole Agents for Australasia,
p 65 PITT STIR/lEIET, S"STIDIsrE'Sr.


ANTICIPATED
By " OCTOPUS.”
DETAILS ol past events are not invariably in
accord with facts ; the most stirring incidents
in the world’s history, and in the lives of its
famous characters, become distorted out of all sem-
blance to the originals in a few short years; not
so, however, with prognostications, these carry with
them an amount of respect witheld from the records
of the past. Expectation, superstition and science,
combine in the work of fortune-telling, the servant
girl who believes in the ace of diamonds as the
symbol of a wedding ring, may become the mother of
a Murchison who fortells the discovery of gold in
of Fate,, Old Moore, and Zadkiel, have not less
readers; and Spiritualists flourish with increasing
vigour. Astrology with its fascinations has benefitted
mankind as the fore-runner of scientific research.
The forecastings of the utterances of the greatest
Australian Statesman, of the day, will serve a like
purpose to the advantage of his countrymen. It is
not a question of what Sir Henry Parkes has done for his j
adopted land, but what he will do. The Knight of
Fanlconbridge has promised, wonderful improvements ,
for New South Wales in ten years. Great Britain i|
waited a like time for Sir Edwin Landseer’s Lions. .
Australia. There are always believers in Witches Well, G. B. got the Lions at last, and G. B. is proud
and Wizards; Mother Shipton has been a disap- thereof. May N. S. W. be equally content with the
pointment, but the Dream Boak, Napbleon’s Book works to be carried out by Sir H. P. when she gets
'Ty&PvA * Y
W-? - DEC 1992 ~
vP//
SIR HENRY PARKES^-^


cq ■ p E
=h Iqrr
h \nSmm
u& JMmKrSM
U z WKJI
ffll IKAHMI
i i <
h Jk.SmM
a IHB
y HngUan^HDHßßne
?» ® c Hr |\
*2 -I I \ They Curs all Dissa
S c « HI i -
« I
IS 5
? O 18/ 1,0 no * BU ®® r yourself or 1
Sc te ( a ■ but use and urge thei
lIP \
w :
E- g f
11 A 1 Ask your Druggis
*i< I /
* 1/
fi I "■
OSOLE AGE
ii
WHOP BITTERS
11 you are a man or business, re Purest and Best Medicine
weakened by the strain of your duties, i ever made.
rg~ avoid stimulants, and take They are compounded from Hops, Buchu,
J * Mandrake, and Dandelion.
5 P TTotr "Rl f’.f’.fiTS f The Oldest, Best, most Renowned, and
•e £ IT | Valuable Medicines in the World ; and in
£ P 5 i addition contain all the best and most effec-
S fc If you are a man of letters, toil- 1 tire curative properties of all other Bitters,
£ £ . I being the greatest Liver Regulator, Blood
Vp" mg over your midnight work, to re- | p rim - lEK> an d Life and Health Restoring
"3 js store brain and nerve waste, take ! -^S enl on eart^l-
- Ask Your Druggist or Physician.
je-c Tj *q»jj f ■ Do not suffer yourself or let your friends
t % JtjLOp JjluuGx S . i suffer, but use and”urge them to use
«g X S HOP BITTERS.
£' % , I Remember, Hoi’ Bittees is no rile,
-3 rc If you are young, and suffering from j drilgged) drunke n nostrum, but the Purest
1. any indiscretion or dissipation, take | and Best Medicine ever made, and no person
l l ; or family should be without it.
Hop Bitters!
Hop Bitters!
Hop Bitters!
_ any inuiscreiion or dissipation, iaive ; «iu ara jnwußuo .......... Jr -
|_ 1 ‘ !or family should be without it.
m MONTEFIORE, STUART & CO.,
l“ Sole Agents for Australasia,
p 6S PITT STBBBT, STTHDHSTIETr.
. i
If you are married or single, old
or young, suffering from poor health,
or languishing on a bed of sickness,
take
W hoever you are, wherever you
are, whenever you feel that your
system needs cleansing, toning, or
stimulating without intoxicating , take


... . 3
- DEC 1992 ~
vP 7
SIR HENRY
ANTICIPATED. .
By “ OCTOPUS V 9
rA
• i J ~ ’ ~
oi past events are not invariably in of Fate, Old Moore*,, and Zadkiel, have not less
LJ accord with facts ; the most stirring incidents readers; and Spiritualists flourish with increasing
in the world’s history, and in the lives of its vigour. Astrology with its fascinations has benefitted
famous characters, become distorted out of all sem- mankind as the fore-runner of scientific research,
blance to the originals in a few short years ; not The forecastings of the utterances of the greatest
so, however, with prognostications, these carry with Australian Statesman, of the day, will serve a like
them an amount of respect witheld from the records purpose to the advantage of his countrymen. It is
of the past. Expectation, superstition and science, not a question of what Sir Henry Parkes has done for hia tj
combine in the work of fortune-telling, the servant adopted land, but what he will do. The Knight of
girl who believes in the ace of diamonds as the | Faulconbridge has promised. .wonderful improvements j
symbol of a wedding ring, may become the mother of ; for Kew South Wales in ten years. Great Britain >;
a Murchison who fortells the discovery of gold in i waited a like time for Sir Edwin Landseer’s Lions.
Australia. There are always believers in Witches ! Well, G. B. got the Lions at last, and G. B. is proud
and Wizards; Mother Shipton has been a disap- I thereof. May N. S. W. be equally content with the
pointment, but the Dream Book, Kapbleon’s Book I works to be carried out by Sir H. P. when she gets


them. But why delay the reader ? It is but necessary
to remind him that space admits not of descriptions of
places, persons, and events outside of the Knight’s own
experiences. The design to the architect, the bricks
and mortar to the hodman!
* * * *
[Extract from a speech delivered by Sir Henry Parkes, at the
memorable ovation he received in San Francisco.]
“ It is, indeed, a great difficulty for me to find
suitable terms in which to convey to you the im-
pression your city has made upon my mind. The
enlightened enterprise and skill which have been con-
centrated in its progress; its broad avenues, fine
buildings, palatial hotels, commodious public con-
veyances, &c., tell of a high intelligence and of
ungrudging expenditure. It is almost beyond con-
ception, that you, with a population barely in excess of
that of Sydney, should have done all this, and you a
city of but half its age. A.h ! me ! to look back upon
what might have been done is but a shadowy comfort.
But when I witness these things, I grieve. It forces
upon me the regret that I had not many years since
visited other lands, and I arn convinced now that no
man should be elected to represent his country in the
Legislature who does his travelling in his library, and
makes his acquaintance with the manners and customs
of other lands by the means of books and pictures.
We have Civil Service examinations in my place, and
if, shall be my first care upon my return to introduce a
Bill providing for the exclusion from Parliament of
those who cannot pass a standard of literary and
scientific acquirements to be determined therein.
Reverting to your city and its great attractions, and to
the surprising richness of its surroundings, the present
is, I think, a fit occasion on which I, as an Australian,
may be pardoned if I contemplate for a moment the
vast alteration there would now exist in the relative
positions of your country and my country, had the
finger of the Almighty pointed to Australia as the spot
where the first modern discovery of gold should attract
thousands to its shores, and left California the one year
behind, which was decreed to be our position. To go
back yet further with conjecture into dreamland, wfiat
would have been the result, had the little parcel of
yellow metal f scraped from the dirt ’ in California,
(circa, 1776 to 84) and shipped to China to test its
real nature, ever reached its destination ? Had this
shipment of Gold but come to hand, what flag would
now wave o’er your land. The United States had but just
obtained its Independence, and although sufficiently
powerful for that great result, it knew nothing of Cali-
fornia as one of its own States —and it is not likely that
the mother country would have let another power secure
so great a prize. In those days England was not
troubled with those conscientious scruples eliminated
by the Exeter Hallites, so where’ere her discoverers
lighted upon a new land, she hoisted her flag and sat
her foot upon it, and few were found bold enough to
try and dispoSess her. But now, alack, France, Ger-
many, Russia, or any other power, may pounce upon
Islands intlie Pacific —not for the purpose of coloniza-
tion but as coaling stations, from whence their cruisers
can spread over the seas to prey upon our commerce
and our cities. You must not suppose, Mr. President,
because I aiil entertained by you with a generous wel-
come, so wholly un-antibipated, and which I deeply
feel, that I can absolutely ignore subjects having a
political bearing, and matters which are accumulating
with great rapidity, wherein the interests of the United
States and the Australias must be fully considered.
One of these matters, and it is one to which I shall
have to give my attention when in Washington, is the
Panama Canal. I will say little on the subject now,
but since we in the Pacific have not been thought of
sufficient importance to take any interest in the success
of the undertaking, it is as well you should be unde-
ceived. We, as Australians, would never give a con-
senting voice to the United States having supreme
control over a canal cut through a territory over which
you have no rights, and which would, at your caprice,
subject us to be at any time debarred from commercial
intercourse with our sister colonies of the North
Atlantic and the mother country ; No, sir, no ! The
Monroe doctrine is but a sugared pill. By the by, you
have made John Bull swallow a good few of late;
don’t try any more just yet; it may make him
squeamish, and then—well, we don’t know what
happens then, but, as a friend, I reckon it is not
absurd of me to ask you to remember Teniel’s cartoon
in Punch “ Waiting for an Answer.” If you don’t
know it, get a few copies printed and sling ’em round
gratis like, the same as you do Scripture texts. But this
is getting away from my purpose. I have come into
the United States for the object of making myself
familiar with your people and your institutions, and
not to wound your feelings nor to touch your pride. Your
proud pre-eminence as a country where invention is
encouraged and new ideas brought to perfection, alone
entitles you to the respect of thinking men. You
honour the names of inventors, and Franklin with his
electric kite, and Edison with his electric light, would
not make a bad pair of subjects for one of your
Michael Angelos. Let me hope this happy idea may
blossom. But it is not these two alone who have built up
American greatness : hosts of others, of undying fame,
have done honour to their birthplace and filled the
outside world with wonder, (Prolonged and enthusi-
astic cheering.)
The worthy knight having w(h)etted his whistle (he
tried Hop Bitters), followed by saying “As I before
observed, I have come abroad to learn, and I rest
assured that in the territory of Uncle Sam, I have
drop’d upon the right shop. Unaccountable as it
may appear, I am quite innocent as to the knowledge
of what is and what is not gambling. As a states-
man, and in my capacity of a private citizen, I do not
like to be in doubt. There was a period in my life
when I limited gambling to betting on races, card-
sharping, Yankee grab, hazard, chuck-farthing,
skittles, and the best two out of three for drinks, and


BQWENFELS COAL COMPANY’S COLLIERY,
lithgo w.
W- H. BOGIE* Lessee, (for Seven Years the Government Public Service Contractor),
TTTHOLESALE COAL for Steam / IOAL supplied to all Stations along TJ E E AlL—Delivered withm tiie
W Mills, Manufacturers, or the ' the Railway. • Clt y Boundary 20s per ton ;
i I a ■p™ flic Is. per mile extra outside City
trade may be arranged ior on tire Boundary.
most liberal terms. J
This Coal is now so well known that comment is unnecessary,


during my 27 years of Parliamentary work, I have
done my level best to put a stop to these practices, but
with age comes those broader views which point to
the conclusion that gambling is not confined within
such limits,. It strikes me now that institutions of the
“Shuttleship and Drown’em Marine Insurance and
Underwriting Association” species, may be a kind of a
sort of gambling; I don’t say it is so, it’s a puzzle.
Again, I’m in a fix as to the “ Arson Fire Insurance
Companies” The one says if we don’t have any ships
founder or wrecked, we can’t stick up the premiums,
and there are no dividends. The Arson people say, if we
have no fires nobody will insure, and seeing with half
an eye that these colossal enterprises (?) have palatial
offices, presided over by Tigg Montagues of the
bounceable big bug kind, whose condescending nod is
to be taken as comparable with nothing short of a
Yankee bowing to a nigger, [sotto voce —Sydney style)
I don’t exactly make out where the pull is. Of course
we know they talk of actuaries, statisticians and many
other mysterious and incomprehensible beings, as idols
to be fallen down to and worshipped, but there must be
long odds against the public somewhere, and that, is
what I am bound to find out. When in New Vork I
intend making a little pile of information in Wall
Street, I’ve not much to venture, and that little is
secured, and if I really learn that there is anything
approaching to gambling in institutions of
this character, I shall upon my return to Sydney lay
the whole case before my colleagues, with the intention
of inducing the Government to introduce a measure
into Parliament, to authorize the State to step in and
take the lives and property of its people under its own
control. I am well aware that the citizens of the
United States are free from the odium of stock jobbing,
mining speculation, rings, and the like social
moralities. So also I am happy to say are the people of
New South Wales. Other countries bear a bad name
in relation thereto, but as I have been invited to
banquets by the Members of the London Stock Ex-
change, and the Paris Bourse, I will not individualize,
and forbear to mention names. In conclusion, I must
say that I shall estimate this day as one of the most
if ’ not the most gratifying of my life, the cordiality
with which you have greeted me, and the boundless
hospitality you have accorded to me, and mine, is
indelibly impressed on my heart, and will linger with
fond remembrance in my mind, until the time shall
come that I shall sink into eternal repose (much
cambric). I should not, however care to take my leave
of you, without asking you to accept a small memento
or two of my visit, I should like to leave behind me
some things that you could gaze upon daily, some things
you would, when once in your possession find it
quite impossibe to do without, some things,
you could look up to and say “ these are the
blessings bestowed, upon us by that grateful
foreigner Henry Parkes.” In asking your kindness to
accept these presents, I must tell you that I have not
brought them with me. However, you have only to
give a cordial assent and I’ll cable for them to be
sent along right away. Don’t be the least fastidious
in the matter, they are of no use to us, and the country
would be only too glad to defray any expense incurred
as to freight. If they don’t do you much good they
will act as sign postsu that you can point out to your
children and say, “ There sonny, or sissy,” as the case
may be, “ That’s not the road to Heaven.’, It’s a
small parcel ready for shipment, and here’s the invoice,
auctioneer fashion:—
Lot 1. 20 Cs.M.G., more or less.
Lot 2. 20 Ms.L.A., more or less.
Lot 3, 20 Js.P., more or less.
Lot 4. 20 Fourths Estate, more or less.
Lot 5. 150 Bank Managers, Insurance Agents,
Laud Agents, &c., &c., &c,, assorted, more
or less.
Sir Henry resumed his seat.
This is coming about the middle of next week :
TELEGRAM EXTRAORDINARY.
Sir Hbnry Parkes carried off by the Mormons.
FURTHER PARTICULARS.
It was not the Mormons, but the Red Indians who
stuck up the cars and carried off Sir Henry Parkes.
FULLER INFORMATION.
It is reliable that Sir JElenry Parkes was captured
whilst asleep in a Pulman’s sleeping car, by a band of
desperadoes, disguised as Ancient Druids, or Mormon
Elders ; it has leaked out, however, that the great
statesman was equal to the occasion, for upon finding
the situation he was in, he managed to prick his face,
neck and hands over with a pin, and with his accus-
tomed bland smile, assured his captors that he was
suffering with a mild form of small-pox, upon which
the whole of the band decamped.
LATER.
The man who sent the last .cablegram has been
lynched.
STILL LATER.
Swamp Valley, 11 p.m.
The perpetrators of the Parkes outrage blocked the
track and lit fires as a signal to the cars to bail up.
Sir Henry Parkes is the only person carried off. The
correspondent of the Evening News begged very hard
to be captured, but the robbers declined.
Frisco, 7 a.m.
Great excitement exists respecting the Parkes affair.
Sir Henry Parkes is held to ransom, rumour says, at
a quarter million dollars.
Frisco, Noon.
The rumour as to the ransom is correct. It is fixed
at £50,000.


WOODWARD’
ROO m Si.
85 Castlereagh Street,
NEXT THEATRE ROYAL.
137 Klirtgr Street.,
NEXT TELEGRAPH OFFICE.
X 97 IPitt Street, Opposite Farmer’s.


Washington, 1 p.m.
Government highly indignant. A regiment to be
raised, drilled, equipped, and despatched to the
scene of the outrage at once. President Arthur adver-
tises for a Colonel to-day.
London, 10 a.m
The EmpVess of India instructed Mr. Gladstone to
pay Sir Henry Parkes’ ransom. Mr. Gladstone de-
clined. He referred Her Imperial Highness to a
Treasury circular, wherein it is notified to all British
subjects that if they travel in foreign countries they
must do so at their own risk. A stormy scene took
place. The Empress turned upon Mr. Gladstone with
perfect fury. “ You sir, you, ” she is understood to
have said, “You call yourself the Prime Minister of a |
great country, and you let our subjects be captured by f
brigands in Italy, in Greece, in Spain, and now in the
States. You a minister, indeed! Why, if an un-
educated blackskiu happens to eat a missionary
uncooked, you send, a fleet and burn his village, his
plantations, cut down his cocoa-nut trees, and leave
whole tribes to perish by starvation, and dub yourself
a Christian. Safe work this. But you are positively
afraid of what you call embroiling yourself, I tell you
what it is, it is downright cowardice, and the English
citizen is the least protected of all peoples. Let the
Greeks only touch a hair of the head of a Yankee, and half
the American navy will be before Athens, and all the - !
ruins that are left standing in that old rookery will be |
tumbling about in no time. — Go, sir, it is my j
positive command that the circular note be at once j
withdrawn,and that if you and your fellow ministers paean }
to keep the A rmy and the Navy as dancing schools, j
you had best make a present of the lot to the Russians, ;
or the French, or the Prussians. Oliver Cromwell i
had not much respect for Kings, but he knew how to j
make an Englishman respected, and not only knew I
how to do it, but did it, whilst under your puerile ;
policy an Englishman is the butt for all low foreigners |
to mock at. What have you done for Ireland ? I
Tried your half measures again ? Why don’t you do I
one thing or the other, either hang all the landlords, |
or shoot down the Land Leaguers ? I know what it ;
is, you’re afraid of America again, or you’re afraid ;
of a tin of nitro-glycerine or a cake of dynamite. I |
am almost ashamed of my title, you’ve withdrawn
from Afghanistan that we lost thousands of troops and
and millions of money to conquer, without even getting
a war indemnity from Russia, who stirred up the whole !
business. Heavens alive, man ! do have some pluck I
in you, or else resign, and let me get some one who has. j
Who’d be an Empress, or a Queen, if they were to be
held prisoner in action, by a set of maudlingold fools ? |
I’ll have Sir Henry Parkes out of that, if I die for it,
so see to it at once.”
London, 10 a.m.
It is current that Gladstone tenders his resignation
to-day ; Salisbury will be sent for.
Chicago, noon.
The Fenian Assassination Congress held a special
meeting last night, and unanimously elected the
Parkes purloiners members of the Fenian Murder hood.
The last atrocity invented is a clockwork balloon,
filled with dynamite, to be sent over London. The
clockwork is set to let the gas out, and the fall of the
dynamite will ignite the fuse on touching the ground ;
great results are anticipated and much slaughter.
While these telegrams are coming in, Sir Henry
Parkes is being hurried on as fast as possible to the
Robbers’ Retreat. This is situated in the Valley of
the Yo Semite, and the den itself is in one of the
largest and tallest Wellingtonii Gigantia, there are
two chambers, which have been hollowed out of the
trunk of the tree, at the height of 200 feet from the
ground; the rooms are approached by a spiral stair-
way, likewise hewn out of the tree itself, and the
entrance is closed by a door made of the bark, and. is
quite secret: No time is lost in placing the Knight in
security, and Sir Henry Parkes finds himself
literally
DP A TREE.
Up a tree for fifty thou, as the Banker's Gazette
and Monetary Times would say, a desperate plight to
be in, but desperate diseases require desperate remedies,
and a desperate man will do desperate things, and thus
with Sir Henry when left to himself in his new eleva-
tion. As a man of action, he wastes no time in
regrets, but decides upon the right thing at a moments
notice. He will write a book, and the title —happy
inspiration—shall be
THE UMBRAGEOUS RUMINATIONS OR “ ARBORIST.’ 5
and this is what he would have written, had there been
shirt cuffs and blacking at hand.
“ Here am I, 1 the Premier of the colony of New-
South Wales, the trusted representative of three other
colonies, 1 a Knight of the Order of St. Michael and
St. George, boxed up without prospect of relief, a
price set upon my head, and no friendly hand to sooth
my pillow, I only wish I had a pillow : What’s the
good of wishing ? I wish I was out of this, ah ! the
question is : How is it to be done ? there’s nothing
like flying a kite if one wants to be sought after, but
where’s the material ? I’ve read of tying notes to
ducks legs and weighting them, but I’ve got no ducks;
let me think, how Baron Trench escaped, a file of
course. Then there was Baron Munchausen, he got in
or out of something or other; I don’t remember how
though, but neither of these people had. to find their
way out of a tree four hundred and fifty feet in height,
with a lodging house in it, half way up. Here the
Knight’s thoughts were interrupted in a most singular
way, he was startled by the sound of a voice of
melodious intonation proceeding from a female, and
asking permission to enter. “ Come in,” said Sir
Henry, and Columbia waltzes in with a liberty pole in
her hand, and a case of tobacco in her right cheek.




“ Citizen Parkes,” she says, “ I guess you are sur-
prised to see me here, but I wanted right along to
interview you privately, I’ve gotten a big notion
that you are constructed of the right sort of stuff to
make Presidents out of, and so I just dropped in to
get your opinions on matters in general.
Sir H. P. “ Tip us your daddle Cumby and wire
right in.”
Columbia. “ Citizen Parkes, I do not like slang,
IVe come here to render you a service. By one touch
of the wand I hold, I can transport you in an instant to
the White House in Washington, where you will meet
with a welcome you little expect. I have quite a
number of appointments to keep to-day, so give me
your best attention. What do you think of the
Chinese ?
Sir H. P. Miss Columbia, pray pardon this little
slip of my tongue, I was under the impression that the
use of concise terras was customary in this country,
and that they would therefore be acceptable to you. Hav-
ing perused Sam Slick, Mark Twain, Bret Harte, and
other of your authors’ writings, that was the inference I
drew; I will not so offend again, you ask me what I think
of the Chinese —It is not a difficult question to answer,
but it wants looking into. What 1 think of the nation
as a nation, and what I think of the people from China
who are induced to take themselves to foreign lands,
requires explanation. I have made many speeches on
the Chinese Question, which I will forward you : —I
do not doubt but you will find them of service. I have
not however said in them all that I believe, because it
is not what we statesmen term policy, to let your real
sentiments become too public, China is according to my
view, now on the eve of a great social revolution, and I
have my reasons to suppose that the Celestials will prove
themselves a trouble, if not a terror, to other peoples.
We have forced them to trade with us, and, they being
an adaptable race, have discovered at last, that to keep
pace with the growing requirements of the Empire,
the conservatism of five thousand years has to be
abandoned, and a System of things introduced.
Tins alteration has been of slow growth, but it has
reached that stage, when a most rapid development
must accrue. I do not think that the Chinese are, as a
body, to be judged, by the majority of those who are
to be seen in California or in Australia, but even these
set an example of diligence and perseverance before
the artisan class of our countrymen, which they would
do well to imitate. The great cry in Australia, as in
California, is that the white man cannot compete with
the Mongolian, This is but a shallow scare. The
truth is that the workmen, or rather the working man
(for I hold that workmen are made of better material
than the political orators’ working man), is no working
man at all, and, whilst he has become a great power,
he has acquired certain habits inimical to the welfare
ef the Slate, prejudicial to his own character, and
decidedly detrimental to the security of capital. You
may say. What has this to do with the Chinese ? You
will see directly. “Unity is strength,” that is his (the
working man’s) motto —but unity for one class means
hostility to some other. As to the State, the measures
advocated by his representative demagognes, mean
nothing but political coercion, not individual freedom.
It is but despotism in another form, and then comes
the point as to whether the ruling of the working
man, or the tyranny of the Oassars would be the better.
So far as his character is concerned, I cannot reconcile
the anomaly, that if a man can lay four or five thousand
bricks in a day, and he is bound by his rules to lay but
two thousand, and does but lay two thousand, he can
be looked up to as honest, and industrious. It is not
alone with bricks the practice of limiting the quantified
or numbers is in vogue. It is but necessary to name
the strike system, to indicate the danger which sur-
rounds the investment of capital in large undertakings.
I have said sufficient on this matter I ti ast to show
you that a nation which numbers its population not by
the thousand nor by the million, but by the hundred
million, must become an immense focus of manu-
factures ; and here is apparent the absurdity of the
procedure adopted by the working man : he cries out
for protection against the Chinaman, and at the same
time drives the capital out of the country to the land
of the Mongolian, If you want proof of what I say,
witness the progress the latter has made in a few years.
China has now, lines of steamships, manned and
engineered by her own subjects; railways are in the
course of construction, woollen mills are multiplying,
and factories of all descriptions are springing up
throughout the country, engineering works meet with
great encouragement, and mining enterprise is being
promoted to a large extent. Not only are these
evidences of internal changes conspicuosly brought to
our notice, but the external progress of the people is
attracting much attention; Chinese merchants are
establishing businesses in all directions, and there are re-
presentatives of Chinese Houses in the large cities of
America and Europe. China is also turning her old
junks into iron-dads, and arming her troops with
Martini-Henry rifles, creating works for the making
of large guns, ammunition factories, and torpedo-boat
building yards. It is an important transition which is
now taking place in the land cf the Emperor of the
Sun, and presuming that no interruption of national
amenities should occur during the next decade, it is
not improbable, but possible, that we shall have Chinese
steamers and lines of steamships trading with America,
Australia, and Europe ; it is not too great a stride, to
look forward to, and by that time China will be able
to say to the poll-tax imposers that she would like the
little amount collected from her subjects returned, and
get it too. Give to China a navy in proportion to
her population, and she is mistress of the world. Eire
her people with a thirst for conquest, and with the
myriads of men she could mass, she could sweep from
the Great Wall to the Atlantic. Speaking of her mer-
chants, they are content to make a very small per-
centage upon large transactions, and they have the
business capacity and integrity which engenders con-


PATRICK BROWN,
PRINT SELLER AND PICTURE FRAME MAKER,
HOUSE PAINTER & DECORATOR,
Agent for the London and Glasgow Art Unions,
87 MARKET STREET, SYDNEY,
(CLOSE TO THE TRAMWAY.)
Oil Paintings lined, cleaned, and restored. Frames re-gilt. Engravings and Water-colour Drawings cleaned.
j ßemember the Address—B7 MARKET STREET,
CHARLES BATH,
WHOLESALE WINE AND SPIRIT MERCHANT,
Office-2 Bridge Street,
Stores Queen’s Place.
SOLE AGENT FOR THE FOLLOWING:—
L. Bessieres & Co.’s Brandies (pale and dark) in bulk, case, flask, and half-flasks.
P. Melcher’s Celebrated Schiedam Juniper Tree Gin. Opossum Blend Scotch Whisky,
bulk and case.


fidonce. Looking upon the Celestials in respect to
their desirableness as immigrants, I am not prepared
to my that I should recommend the importation of any
considerable number, but we could do very well in
Australia with ten times the number we have, they
make good domestic servants and are peaceful and
obliging citizens. They are inclined to herd too
closely and have peculiar vices of their own, but
tbey are certainly far more temperate than the
bulk of our own population; they are moreover,
the less understood, as they are but birds of passage
unaccompanied by wives and families, and making few
domestic ties in the places of their sojourn. I could
give you many other reasons to convince you that the
Chinese Question is as yet but in embryo. To be
lore-warned is to be fore-armed, and my own conviction is,
that to provide a means of counteracting the immense
exportation of manufactured goods which will even-
tually take place from China to the closing of our own
works and the impoverishment of our workers, should
b« considered a matter well worthy the study of our
Legislators. My present view of the case is, that
every encouragement should be given to inventors and
the improvement of machinery and multiplying powers.
To hold our own, we must be prepared to produce
cheaper and better goods,and this cannot be done
while the discrepance in the wages earned is so vast,
unless machinery can be so perfected as to be made to
act as a counterpoise.
Miss C. Thanks, you are right, but you are, I think,
anticipating the date; you should put it at one
hundred years, and not ten. Now tell me something
about drainage.
Sir H. P. Drainage, Miss, is about to become a
thing of the past; that is to say, the scientific men of
the day have come to the conclusion that no system of
sewers in connection with cities and townships has
been found to answer the sanitary requirements indis-
pensible to the health and comfort of the inhabitants.
Open drains, cesspits, and accumulations of household
refuse will not be tolerated. Covered sewers soon
become of little avail, as the districts in which they
are connected with the dwellings increase, nor are they
efficient relieffor the more sparsely-populated suburbs.
This is not the only objection. They must have out-
lets be it into river, harbour, or ocean, No, ray dear !
heat is the agent of the future. Pioneers have already
appeared upon the scene with results so practically
beneficial that doubt no longer exists. Hermetically
sealed receptacles for household purposes are to be
collected and replaced at intervals, the contents sub-
mitted to the action of heat, and converted into ferti-
lizing manures for the husbandman ; the sewers will
have hut to convey the rain-water and the liquid waste
from the houses; and this last will not be permitted to
enter them until it has passed through a carbon filter,
to be attached to each residence. This is easily ac-
complished by an Act compel ling the builders and
owners of house property to supply them iu duplicate,
one for removal and on* lor use. Properly constructed,
they will be no inconvenience to the tenants, and with
these measures in actual operation there need be no
residence where offensive matter should be allowed to
remain. The pollution of ground by soakage, and the
defilement of our sources of water supply, together
with the danger arising from decomposition and
noxious gas generation will be thus reduced to a mini-
mum and the life rate proportionately increased. With
the adoption of this plan for the treatment of sewage
will come the introduction of a method of regulating
the temperature of the rooms of a house or public
building. Yes, the time has at last arrived when the
makers of mantel-pieces and the builders of chimneys
will find their occupations gone, and the sooty appear-
ance of our towns will no longer detract from the
architectural grandeur of the buildings, when the
carbon disseminated by the consumption of coal will
cease to be a nuisance and a danger to health. These
will be halcyon days, indeed! The thing is reasonable
and equally as simple as practicable. Octopus proposes
that in connection with the heat appliances for the
deodorization of the sewage, there should be machines
designed for the purpose of forcing highly heated at-
mospheric air through a series of pipes laid after the
manner of gas-mains. This heated air could be
supplied to householders by meter, and used as
required. There could then be a constant supply of
hot water in every house, whilst all the cooking could
be done by the same element assisted by gas ; and by
the use of a flexible tube and a nozzle, the walls of
hospitals and other structures, sick rooms, beds, bed-
ding, and wearing apparel be at once purified. This
proposal has other important advantages—the cost
would not be a tithe of that of fuel, and the sources of heat
supply (the coal measures) would be less drawn upon
and their exhaustion postponed for many centuries.
This proposition has but to be put in working order,
and you have London without smokeI—there 1 —there would be
no blacks and much whiter linen.
Miss C. Dear Henry, I think, you are better on the
drainage question than on. the Chinese ; I am not
aware as to what honors await you at the hands of mj
sister, your Sovereign, but if a letter from me will be of
service to you, I will instruct O’Donovan Rossa to
indite it; he composes internals beautifully; but tell
me what your views are respecting Railways.
Sir H. P. Railways and Tramways, young lady,
are the sinews and arteries of a country.
Miss C. There ! There !! Henry, you are beginiug
one of your meaningless rigmaroles, you have done
very well, so away you go to Washington; get astride
the liberty pole and we’ll plough the azure vault of
heaven together, and as we glide with lightning speed
through space, your gaze shall rest upon visions of
terrestrial splendour; you shall look on the gorgeously
tinted snow clad summits of the Rocky Mountains :
view the boundless plains and woodlands, and witness
the progress of the mighty waters on their way to the
ocean, your understanding shall be strengthened.




your knowledge increased, and your heart throb with
ineffable rapture.
$$- * $
“ Wall Citizen, here you are, at last,” said President
Arthur, as the Knight of Faulconbridge came skipping
into the general’s presence-chamber, like a green tree
frog down a chimney. “ I’m pleased to see you, I am,
and that’s a fact, Miss Parkes and your war correspon-
dent ai’nt been making any fuss, you bet. Those
tarnation varmjnt out west, jest riled me considerable,
they did; but I bet you my last bottom dollar, I’d
have made everlasting smash of the hull crowd any-
how they could fix it. They’d have been down without
much ventilating I reckon, when they saw Dave
Crockett’s rifle. The Kernel’s dead, but we’ve got his
shooting-iron in the gin case whar we keep the barrel
of old Rip’s gun, and I meant sending that ’ere relic
along, I did, to scare ’em a trifle, while the
engineers war sceuping out a track so I could get the
Brigade of Generals under way to your rescue *
Take a gin sling old hoss, and let’s have a yarn.
“ Mr. President,” said Sir Henry, “ you do me
proud, I see in your person a man lifted to the highest
point of human greatness. I see the chosen ruler of
fifty millions of free and enlightened citizens. It little
becomes me therefore to presume upon my position
and dub myself of equal eminence ; I am but the
representative of less than one million, and, reasoning
by analogy, I can be but less than a fiftieth part as
big as you. Please accept my most grateful thanks
for the measures you took for my release. It is
probable Mathusalah would have appeared in after
ages as a mere youth, compared to myself, had I not
died during the interim of my capture, and the pro-
bable date the phalanx of dauntless heroes you were
advertising for arrived at the place of my detention.
By the help of Columbia, and a nice good girl she is,
lam with you. Here’s your health; stop. I’ll give
you a toast: f Permit us to indulge in those pleasing
delights which cement the golden chain the links of
which bind us so closely together, and of which we are
such bright, brilliant, and effulgent examples. Now
to business.”
“ Very well,” says the President, “ I’m quite agree-
able, I know you are travelling for the sake of your
health, and the sooner you settle your trafficking
overtures, the easier you will feel in your mind. I’m
listening.”
“Mr. President,” rejoined the Knight, “ I have
somewhere gravitating towards me two or three tons
of credentials, from various portions of Australia. I
may, indeed, say from the whole of Australasia, with
the exception of a minute district, known up to recent
times in geographical works as the Colony of Victoria;
the name was altered after my departure, I believe on
the very day I left, it is now called ‘ the Cabbage
Garden.’ The godfather who gave it that name still
lives, and is happy, but like Sir Isaac Newton’s
* The remainder of President Arthurs remarks are rendered into
English, for the comfort of the blind. P. D.
poodle, ‘He knows not what lie’s done.’ The cre-
dentials are for presentation to yourself and if you pay
the freight, you can have them. They authorize me
to treat with you for a remission of a portion of the
duties you have placed upon wool. So far as we are
concerned, we feel that by your so doing we should
have a rival market for our wool produce, and that the
prices would go up. Two cents a pound rise on a
year’s crop, means five figures, if not six, and we are
quite ready to do the fair thing by you. In fact, I
don’t know what we will not do if you accede to our
request. So name your terms.”
“ Sir Henry Parkes,” said the General, “you know
not what you ask for, if knowing it, you ask, I shall
think less of your perceptive faculties than 1 should
wish. You are simply asking the United States to
abandon the policy of Protection and pander to the
ruinous doctrines of Free-trade; Free-trade, I admit,
is a glorious institution in the countries where it allows
of the free importation of American produce and manu-
factures. You want our goods, or you would not buy
them; we don’t want your goods, so we put on a pro-
hibitory tariff and keep them out of the country. We
have been trading with Great Britain and with you
upon this protective reciprocity scheme for many years,
and have found it answer. Had you have placed
duties upon our wheat and Yankee notions, you would
have had something tangible to offer : you could then
have submitted proposals to lower your scale, as you
now wish us to db. It is too much to ask, wo have all
to gain and nothing to lose by continuing as we are.
Ho not think I am endeavouring to throw cold water
upon your exertions. I know your intentions are
strictly honorable; nevertheless, a marriage with the
property all on one side is not the sort of union I should
desire to see consummated. Our citizens have pecu-
liar notions as to the fitness of things generally. This
I can illustrate; take the trivial * sing-song view of us,
and, my word for it, you have a tolerably correct
one.”
“ What is the sing-song view, Mr. President,” says
our K.M.G.
“ A simple one enough, Parkes,” explains Arthur.
We consider it the duty of our citizens, when travel-
ling foreign, to yell forth upon festive occasions where
singing is introduced, our national ditties. “ Hail,
Columbia!] “The Star Spangled Banner,” Yankee
Doodle,” and “ The Bird of Freedom; ” but let a
Britisher, while dodging through the States, pipe up
“ Rule Britannia, ” or “ The Chesapeake and Shan-
non, ” and if he wakes up in the morning without a
slung-shot headache, or a bowie fever, call me a saint.
We reckon this is free-trade in singing, we do, and
our principles extend outside of singing.”
“ General Ai’thur,” ejaculated Sir Henry, “ if you
were to tell me the people of America had conceived it
possible you could have so traduced them, you would
never have occupied the presidental chair. This kind
of talk must be what we hear of as bunkum. I can’t
believe there is any truth in it, and I won’t believe it.


CLdotlxlxc Oobricl 4 C-
SWtlsts
3iVo doors from
ffif flhitH’S Iffifol;
Messrs, Adolphe Gahrlel and Co,
REGRET TO FIND IT NECESSARY TO
Caution tlie Pulolic
Against S YSTEMA TIC & UNPRINCIPLED A TTEMPTS
WHICH ARE BEING CONTINUALLY MADE TO MISLEAD.
We have no business connexions with any other Dentist of the same name.
OUR ONLY ADDRESS BEING AS ABOVE.


Such rowdyism, if it ever existed, except in your own
imagination, must have long since perished under the
outcrop of national politeness, engendered by your
admirable course of public education, and the parental
care bestowed upon the training of your youth. Let’s
quit the subject and go back to wool.”
“ All right, Henry, you want to know the terms
upon which we can commence negotiations, they are as
follows :—-We have only one condition; Annexation; you
will then gain all you desire; you will get your wool
in here duty free, and won’t be shut out of the English
market, that is advantage number one. Number two is
that after being admitted into our glorious Union ; you
can repudiate your debts, and save the annual interest
upon the amounts borrowed to construct your Public
Works. This is my ultimatum ; annexation or no reduc-
tion in the wool duties. A word in your ear by way of
explanation about my Buncombe talk as you deem it.
The American people have no objection to be told of
their foibles by one of themselves, they respect the
man who does it. What they do object to, is a parcel
of bookmaking idiots rummaging about the States for
sensational incidents, and perverting alike facts and
fiction. Let’s go and “ see the baby,”
* * * *
Extract from the speech delivered bj Sir Henry Parkes at the ban-
quet given in his honour bj General Arthur, at the White House,
Washington.
“ I cannot but look upon the position I stand in at
the present time as being unprecedented. It appears
to me, that instead of my passing- as an ordinary tra-
veller through your territory, that I have been selected
as the medium through which you would convey your
expressions of good-will to Australia, and I am there-
fore journeying upon an unofficial triumphal march.
It is outside of ray power to adequately convey to you
the sentiments I entertain toward you for the honours
you have conferred upon me and, through myself, upon
my country. That we may become in the future more
closely connected is my greatest wish. The Anglo-
Saxon race, Wherever be the land it inhabits, is active,
restless, and enterprising, and is always eudeavoui-ing
to promote the means of communication between one
country and another, and as more speedy methods of
travelling; with diminished cost, facilitates the inter-
course, so does it promote feelings of friendship and
bonds of closer intimacy. In this manner will Aus-
tralia and the United States discover that, with a grow-
ing commercial interest, there will come a longingfor a
more perfect knowledge of each others ways and re-
sources. It is not to be expected that these results will
transpire in a day, neither is it to be supposed they will
be developed spontaneously. There can be no fitter
occasion than the present, when the subject has been
mooted, that I can endeavour to give a description of
matters of interest, and how things are managed in
New South Wales. To begin with the City of Sydney.
We number a quarter of a million, the location is
healthy, it is situated on the shores of the most mag-
nificent harbour in the world; there is nothing to
prevent this city attaining the dimensions of New
York or London. When I say nothing to prevent it,
I mean nothing in the shape of want of commercial
relations with other countries, nothing wanting in the
coasting trade, and the internal manufacturing dis-
tricts are vigorously pushing ahead. The only fear
that can be entertained in regard to the Metropolis of
the South not continuing to hold its position as the
premier city, exists in the ignorance of the people
themselves in respect to the sanitary requisites that are
necessary to prevent the place being decimated by
some epidemic every few years. It is scarcely to be
believed, but it is nevertheless true, that the bottom
of the harbour, in all parts near the city, is one mass
of reeking filth; that the sewers flow into it, and at
the very outlet of these drains steamers ply all day
long loaded with passengers. The people clamour for
a railway to Circular Quay, but the death-dealing
sewers are left to the tender mercies of the City
Corporation, and that other old slow-coach shop, the
Harbours and Rivers Department. These ai-e the
two blights from which we suffer, these are the two
old men of the Sea who have the necks of the
population of our capital between their legs. We
have a Town Hall that has cost, or will cost
before it is finished, a sum little short of ten
millions of dollars, and we have the worst paved
streets and side walks of any city in the Universe.
New South Wales is a glorious country for the
political loafer and the working man. Our resources
are brought to light gradually and carefully; there is
nothing like rushing with us ; the City of Newcastle is
but sixty miles from Sydney, yet for the last thirty years
we have had to fetch coal from thence by sea, and have
sent millions of tons of shipping away from our port,
and no government has attempted to connect the two
places by a railway. Now this will not give you a
profound respect for our spirit of enterprise, but it will
give you an idea that a few of your energetic ways,
with your perception, and your rapidity of discerning
the right- thing and carrying it out, would be most
useful to us, and I can assure you that there is plenty
of occupation for talent, if the prejudices of the masses
against every thing in the way of genius could be
eradicated. It might strike you that we encouraged
the building of the large steamships which now fre-
quent our ports. You may think that some of our
moneyed men promoted the formation of these com-
panies ; not so, the money goes into land, everybody
buys land, sells land, mortgages land, lends money on
land, dummys land, selects land, swaps land,, auctions
land, builds on land, mines on lands ; no other occupa-
tions or avocations have so great a following as those
which are connected with land. It is a continual
scramble going on for who shall hold the most land.
This is is not as it should be, but will cease as soon as
the residue of the unsold land has been disposed of,
and this will be in a very few years, for not only are
the land grabbers at work all over the colony, but their
uncles and aunts, and sisters and cousins who live at


\ \ TVi
All That l-Ht
“W. H. PALING,
PIANOFORTE, ORGAN, & MUSIC WAREHOUSE,
352 GEOBGE 3TK.SET,
Has for Sale the Largest and Best-selected Stock of Pianofortes, Organs, Harmonium*? U#W
Music in the Australian Colonies.
SHCOND-HAHD PIANOFORTES, SECONDHAND PIANOFORTES,
By first-cla** makers ac exceedingly low price* FOR CASH, or on the EASY TERMS SYSTEM.
Bell and Co.’s Organs are the Cheapest and Best Instruments made.
BELL and CO.’S ORGANS obtained First aad Special Prise* over all others, at the late Sydney IntenurfiaAftl
Exhibition.
Bole Agent :~W. H. PALING, 352 George-st., opposite Wynyard-et.


home at ease, are called upon to acquire land. In my
opinion there should be some inclination shewn to
encourage other ventures, —but whilst the Banks and
and Investment Companies are but chartered pawn-
brokers on a large scale, what other business can be
profitably established ? These institutions, practically
control the business of the colony, and by their pawn-
broking style of trading the proper course of capital
is diverted. Did they confine their transactions to the
purposes for which they were established, it would be
well for the community, but their usefulness ceases
immediately they step outside of their legitimate
calling. The people believe in these establishments
simply from long custom and use. But were the
secrets of their large dividends exposed to the public,
it would not be a “no Rent” cry as in Ireland, but a
“no Bank” cry everywhere. The Banks are very
useful to money lenders and squatters. To the seven
hundred per cent and as much more as they can get
lot, the banks will grant overdrafts to fabulous amounts,
or discount their Bills at current rates. But if
I want ten dollars the Banks won’t lend it me,
oh ! dear no ! but they will melt my paper,
with the money lender’s name on it. Bank in-
terest 10 per cent, money lender’s interest 999 per
cent, and the money lender never parts with a penny.
But there was ntf occasion for me to come all the way
from Australia to tell you these things. 'W hat I
really want you to learn is that New South Wales is
paramount, the chosen spot of all lands in the Pacific.
What I wish you to take to heart is, that Sydney is
the Parisian Capital of the South. What I wish to
advertise during my tour round the earth is, that the
Corporation of the City of Sydney, is the purest, most
thrifty and beneficent body ever conceived by man.
Speaking of advertising, I am but an advertising
agent myself, and I take the role with pleasure. My
line in the States is wool, in London it will be money,
and in Paris, Berlin, and Vienna, goods. You may be
apt to form but a poor opinion of advertising can-
vassers as a rule, but they are a noble race of beings,
they can stand more snubbing, and more bad whisky
than any other crowd in the universe, barring it may
be a journeyman hatter, I remember getting Field
Marshall H.R.H. the Duke of Cambridge to do a little j
canvassing once, and he landed the Ads. for me too ; j
by-the-by, I never paid him liis com., no matter I’ll |
get him to tell me how he manages his troops, it will
be useful information for me when I take command of
the army of Australia, then I can settle up with him
for the two transactions. I’ll give him a contract for
the construction of the Rush cutter’s Bay sewer, this
will be a hopeful thing for him, and be likely to last
him as long as the world goes round. You may not be (
aw are as to what the Rushcutter’s Bay Sewer scheme is, |
it is therefore necessary that after having alluded to it |
I should give a brief description of its value. Rush-
cutter’s Bay has been polluted for centuries by an
open drain which flows into it, and the Government in
its wisdom has come to the conclusion not to stop the
Bay being further contaminated, but to construct a
tubular drain, or simply to cover in the sewage on its
way to the Bay. . You will at once perceive the beauty
of this arrangement, when I explain that reclamations
have been proceeded with for the purpose of forming a
public garden upon the borders of the Bay. That is
to say, the Government of the colony of New South
Wales, turns one of its prettiest little spots into a
monster cesspit and ornaments its edges with flower-
beds. This is not all; the original plan of the
works to be carried out has been so chopped about,
mixed up, improved upon, condemned, and disjointed,
that its own mother wouldn’t know it. What has to
be done is, thirty-eight thousand caissoons have to be
sunk thirty-six thousand feet in the sand. Each
caissoon is to be nineteen hundred feet in diameter, and
they are all to be lined with heavy concrete blocks
twenty-seven feet thick. These caissoons when sunk
to the requisite depth will be called piers, and act as
supports for the sewer. Ido not know exactly why I
alluded to this Rushcutter’s Bay business at all, except
that it is to show you how our public undertakings are
pushed through. And in the case in point, I can give
you my Colonial word, that it would be worth the
while of the whole of the Civil Engineers of the United
States to charter a steamer and cross the Pacific, to
watch the rapidity of the construction of this stu-
pendous work. The said work has been in hand not
less, as I stated before, than a century. Three men
and a boy have already grown old on it, and the clerks,
overseers, engineers, and contractors are getting greyer
every day. Well, the three men and the boy have
actually set about getting the first caissoon under way,
and taking the whole of the scheme into considera-
tion, by the time the three men and the boy get through
with the thirty-eight thousand piers, the Bay will have
become a thing of the past, and the land upon which
Sydney once stood will be turned to use as the conse-
crated burial ground of the Heathen Chinee. This is
an illustration of how things are done in my country,
and I give you the information for the purpose of
advertising what a paradise it is for Government
officials. Government contractors, and imbeciles in
general. I must say a few words on the subject
of our mineral wealth, be it known to you and to
all men, that Australia . abounds in gold, silver,
tin, iron, and other precious stones, that it is
built up of granite, slate, sandstone, and other
agricultural elements, that from the centre of the
Earth to the surface it partakes of the form of an
inverted cone, it is not yet navig'able to its apex, but
the miners have succeeded in getting a thousand feet on
the way. It is perhaps only known to a few of the
elect, that Jules Verne is preparing a plan for the
establishment of a centralization exchange in the
interior of the earth, which is to be scooped out by
means of a monster diamond drill. This is for the pur-
pose of facilitating the transmission of correspondence.
This last word, correspondence, puts me in the mind of
the how not to do it tactics, we men in power pursue :


CASH lE' JRi X OIE LIST
Wines, Ales, and Spirits.
COLONIAL WINE-lied. SPIRITS.
Per I>oz. i Per Doz. j Per Doz -
Cloxot .. .. 9s Oci |J.T. E alien's Port .. Od i Hennessy's * Case Brandy.. 59s Od Impen
gSST :: ;; iS S!jI ! “ !l
Burgundy 12s 6d ! Adelaide Port . Od j Good Pale French Brandy.. 45s •Od Rum, I
Sweet Shiraz .... 13s Od i | Goo ,j j)ark do . . 45s Od Brandj
WHITE . : Walker’s Old Highland 2 doz
Reisling ~ 9s Od 1 Brown Muscat .. • -s Od | Whisky 46s Od Oin, E
Hock . 10s Od j Muscatj. mintage,7s.. • r ’H jjj K Scotch do 42s Od (l*rg
Madeira .. .. lis Od | Adelaide Tokay •• •• •’ J", . , (‘•iin
Bouffier’s Pineau .. .. 15s Od | Tokay, vintage’73 .. .. 80s Od Vaughan Jones Usquebaugh ™’ 4
PGRPirV WTNTIVS Scotch Whisky .. .. SSs 6d i-iod
FOREIGN VINES. Imperial • Scotch Whisky.. 40s Od ™e’,
Port .. .. 34s Od to 80s Od | Good Sherry 24s Od to tOs Od
Champagne from .. .. 00s Od j Claret from 25s 0d Imperial ** do .. Us Od
Per Doz
Imperial *** Seoteh Whisky 44s Oil
Burke’s Irish Whisky 40s 0d
Rum, Red Heart ~ .. 48s 0d
Brandy in flasks, in cases of
2 doz 52s Od.
Gin, Key, case of 15 bottles
(Urge size) 4ds Od
Gin, Key, case of 16 kettles
(medium size) .. .. 4S« Od
Welfe’s Schnapps .. .. 44b M


It was but the day before 1 left, that I was button- Tim
holed by a fellow, who had a plan for shortening the with
mail route between London and Sydney by eight days, can
I thought well of it, and said it was in my opinion, quite dow
practicable, and I sent the man along to the Post- Coy
master-General. I have since learned that this gentle- So
man told the inventor, that now the telegraph has grea
come into use, the saving of eight days in delivery of port
correspondence was in his opinion of no importance * N ov
I beg to differ in this opinion, and can point out that I c<
steam ship companies are vieing with each other, and bett
spending enormous sums for the purpose of shortening one
the time by one or two days only. The fable of the Eng
Hare and the Tortoise is again to the fore. We are } f ura
going to change our motto from “ Advance Australia/’ j He
and fix a tortoise up with a chain round its neck, in ] Kev
lieu thereof. Mr. President : I fear I have occupied ; Any
too much time with my remarks, I have but to thank | him
you once again on behalf of Australia, and myself, for feet
the great interest you have taken in our welfare. And him
wishing you every prosperity, &c., &c. accl
* * * * tena
“ In New York at last,” says Sir Henry to his war
correspondent. “In New York at last, weTl have a
sleigh and fling round Central Park, and go to the
skating rink in the evening, and to-morrow morning
weTl do the elevated Railways, dance over the Brooklyn
Bridge, interview a walking beam North River boat,
wake up Gordon Bennett, and stick up Barnum for a
ten dollar bill. Why, is it possible ? here’s the man
himself, waiting at the Depot.” “ Barnum, how are
you ? ” ‘the Knight proceeds to say, “ I am so glad,
fancy you're being the very first to meet me in New
York, this is kind, why your name was on my lips as
X looked up and saw you,” Ido hope all the curios
are well.
“ Now, look you here, stranger,” returns the Show-
man, “ I tlqmght we were pretty smart people at talk-
ing, but we can’t- come up to you, that’s a fact. Thanks
for your kind wishes, the curios are O. K., the giant
and* the dwarf, and the Choctaws are all anxiously
waiting to greet you. lam mighty glad to see you
myself, I am. I suppose you got my letter ail right ? ”
a What letter ? ” inquires Sir H. P.
“ What letter,” says Barnum. “ Why the letter I
wrote yon to ’Frisco. Didn’t I make you a liberal
offer in it ? I should think I did, indeed; why look
here, now, I said in that letter that if you’d make up
your mind and stay in. the States, I would give you
three times the screw you get as Premier of New
South Wales, and we’d rig up a big Panorama and go
on a spouting tour together, what do you say? Will that
suit your book ? ”
il Barnum, my friend,” replied the knight, “ I am
sensible of your worth as a showman, and I am grate-
ful for the notice you have taken of me. But I am not
in a position, at present, to accept or to decline. I
have to see Bennett, of the Herald , Walter, of the
* A. fact. Octopus
Times , and Queen Victoria. After I have finished
with them, I will give you an answer. Meantime, we
can do a little trading, if you like. There’s a tumble-
down sort of a fiction spread abroad that our paternal
Government looks after the walflit'e of its servants.
So it does, my boy, so it does, if they only show too
great ability. ’ The Government, in that case docks a
portion of their salaries —this is byway of emolument.
N off, you might want to increase your menagerie, and
I could readily part with it; or, mayhap, you would
better like to have the servants, but I was reserving
one or two of them as offerings to Her Majesty of
England. One of these gentlemen has an architec-
tural genius about the size of the State of New York.
He was the right man in the right place at the time
New South Wales was in a corner for an Exhibition.
Any other country in existence, would have given
him a medal, or a piece of ribbon, or a bonus, or six
feet of land in a cemetery, or a cheque. We make
him subscribe fifty pounds a year to assist in the
acclimatization of the Colorado beetle, or the main-
tenance of the Macquarie-street Badgering Saloon, or
the Patriotic Dispensation Fund for the relief of the
indigent kangaroos. This is the course we pursue for
the stamping out exhibitions of zealousness and ability.
It is an example to be copied. You shall have my
proprietory in these articles made over to you cheap;
I’ll make a swap if you prefer it. I want a sop in
the pan for the public-house keepers. I’ll take an
article of this sort, if you have it. By the by, it is a
wonder to me that there is not an hotel in all Aus-
tralia, certainly, not in Sydney, that is worthy of the
name. It is only a year or two back that I slung the
people one of my ideas. They always appropriate my
ideas and in a few years carry them out ; but Lord
bless us ! they’re not my ideas then, they are the ideas
of the appropriators. I’ll tell you what this notion of
mine was. It was termed “ The Travelling Club
Hotel Company.” and there was to he constructed a
large hotel in each of the principal cities of Australia,
and other hotels were either to be established or affi-
liated in all parts of the world. There was to be an
uniform charge, and every subscriber could, by simply
informing the book-keeper that he was going to New
Zealand, to London, or to New York, find his rooms
ready and his luggage in them on arrival at his desti-
nation. It would be necessary to pay something like
half-a-dollar a year, and so become a proprietor, and no
licensing laws wou.d stand in the way of his getting
his Sunday beer; but the principal benefit would
consist in the saving of time and the vexatious annoy-
ances in connection with hotel life outside of the
States. Your hotels and your baggage arrangements
are certainly perfection. I must now say good bye,
&c., &c., &c.
* * * *
Extract, from a Speech made by Sir Henry Parke 3 in thj Tammany
Hall, New York, on the occasion of his being presented with the
freedom of the city,
Mr. Mayor, when proposing my health, you remarked
that you would like to hear from me how I should


M. J. LAMBERT & CO.,
Wine M[€>rol3.aui3.-fcs, <S& o..
2 3 JAMIESON STREET, SYDNEY
OUST H-A.3STID -A.T GKROWZBES.’ PRICES
Mxmro’s Prize Bebeah Wines, Fallon and Greer’s Celebrated Albury, and
a large stock of Hunter Biver Wines, from 10s. to 30s. per dozen.
BEST BRANDS of English and Colonial ALE and PORTER, bottled by ns at Lowest Price*.
AGENTS EOE
SCH WEPPE’S RENOWNED MINERAL WATERS.
4 ’ ** A
JOHN A. WILKINSOK
WINE GROWER AND MERCHANT,
COOLALTA WINE,CELLARS, SYDNEY.
ATiisrEirjLS-nD; T td opitct; :
COOLALTA, BBANXTON, NEW SOUTH WALES. j 119 PITT STREET (opposite Vickery's Buildings.
BULK DEPOT: -MCOZEiT'S PASSAGE.
-
PRICE LIST;
DP IE! ZD WINDS quarts. tints, tergal. "WHUTiE WIITES. Qu-r-rs, pints, mau.
s. d. s. d. s. d s J. s. d. s. d.
COOLALTA HERMITAGE (extra quality) .. 30 0 17 6 12 6 MUSCAT .. 80 0 17 6 12 6
Bo 1 COOLALTA RED 21 0 12 6 8 0 Do No. 2 .. 21 <1 12 6 » fi
No. 2 , .. 16 0 9 6 6 0 SHERRY 21 0 186 8 0
BURGUNDY , 21 0 12 6 8 0 No. 1 COOLALTA .. .. .. ,21 12 6 8 0
PORT 21 0 18 6 8 0 No, 2 „ 16 0 9 6 6 0
VIN ORDINAIRE .. 12 0 V 6 4 0 VIN ORDINAIRE 12 0 7 6 4 0


propose to encourage or to foster larger commercial
relations between the two countries 1 look upon this
subject as a very important one for you who are lai’ge
manufacturers. We are a growing people, and if you
want our custom as consumers, you should secure the
market for your productions at as early a date as you
possibly can. The Germans, the French, the Swiss,
and the Italians are already in the field. Put a little
more spirit into your merchants and do not let your
commodities be swamped out by others. We know in
Australia what your citizens have the capacity to
accomplish, there’s Boyd in Sydney, he’s from 'Frisco,
and that man has set the photographers a task to fetch
themselves up to his mark, and he is, or ought to be,
meeting the reward of merit and coining a fortune;
we all go to him to get our cartes. Now there is
plenty of room for dozens of enterprising men like him
in New South Wales. I am on the lookout for a few
hundreds, but they are so shockingly scarce there is
no finding them. I was with Mr. Edison this morn-
ing, and I asked him to come over to Sydney with me,
and rig up his Electric Light machinery. He said he
didn’t think he could spare the time just yet, he
thought he could fix up New York and a hundred
other cities, whilst he would be waiting for us to get-
ready to accept the invention, he said he had read of
slow going places in his time, but certainly never of
such a one as Sydney. I feel constrained to mention
these remarks of his, as I think that it is my duty to set
them aside by explanation; did I suffer them to go
forth to the world as they stand it might convey to the
minds of prejudiced people, that we never make any
advance in anything. Now I have promised to
renovate, decorate, and transform the City of Sydney
in the space of ten years. The Circular Quay Rail-
way will then become a fact, it would have been
constructed long since but the plan of the thing could
not be hit upon, it would cost too much money, and it
was not until Octopus cropped up that the work was
decided upon. He cut the Gordian knot at once.
Says he, “ what do you want to buy up property for
to extend your line to the Circular Quay ? Why you’ve
got it all before you; public laud all the way. Just
knock that old sixpenny Noah’s Ark on the head
which is called the Benevolent Asylum. Cross the
roadway with an elevated railway, make the passenger
station where the Asylum now stands, and you hav£ the
rest of the old station for goods accommodation. Run
your elevated railway across the cemetery, you need not
disturb the ashes of the dead, then across Belmore Park,
along Elizabeth-street, across Hyde Park, to the corner
where the Old Women’s Home is, rattle that down and
make a station, then straight down the centre of
Macquarie-street, down by the Water Police Court on
to the Quay. This elevated railway could then be
carried round the Point to Darling Harbour ; it would
not interfere with the wharfage accommodation. There
are ten thousand other advantages to be obtained by
the Elevated Railway system; it would only be
requisite to take the precaution of building the lines
as lightly and elegantly as possible. The Custom
House has to come down, so the site would do for the
station; the goods department might be made
lower down, there is plenty of government land; and
to spare. For your better information, I have had a
few plans -printed. Here is one.
* * * *
Well, this is what Octopus proposed and what we
are going to have carried our.; but don’t you think
he’ll get the credit of it or be a penny piece the better
for it, we know a jolly sight too much for that. If he'd
come along with a Burlesque with ail the petticoats
missing, or a two headed calf, it would be a different
matter altogether, we could then have put him on the
estimates for a sum of money, or found him occupation
in one of the Governmental Departments. After having
seen for myself the elevated railways of America, I
have no hesitation on the subject, they are just the
ticket for an up and down hill place like the Empire
City of the South. When I get back I’ll have those
abominable tramways stuck upon telegraph poles, and
we shall hear no more of frightening horses, and
damaging the human form divine. There are turning
points in the destinies of countries as well as of men, and
the turning point in the history of New South Wales
will be the day on which I once again set foot on the
land of my adoption. I feel that I am appointed to
become the master spirit of the Island Continent of
Australia and that I shall be spared sufficiently long
to witness the completion of the glorious changes I
purpose inaugurating. In conclusion, I beg to tender
you my sincere, &c., &c.
* * * *
The Speech of Baron Pabkes of Faulconbridge, K. GK, &c., &c,, de-
livered by him in the Guildhall, at the banquet given in his honor
by the Lord Mayor and citizens of London.
“My Lord Mayor and Gentlemen, —It is with a due
conception of the prodigality of your generous wel-
come that I rise to say a few words, not in the form
of thanks, for, for that purpose, my vocabulary would
be wholly inadequate, but I cannot let the present
opportunity pass without endeavouring, in some
measure, to express the sentiments I entertain, I
Am happy and proud that 1 can number myself as
one of the citizens of that Mighty Empire upon which
the Sun never sets; lam proud, and I trust pardon-
ably so, that you, in your kindness, should think me
worthy of being ranked amongst the pioneers of the
Land of the South. It is far beyond my poor powers
of description to pourtray the boundless resources of
the territories comprising the Australias; suffice it to
say that they .are exhaustless, as is also the loyalty of
the people. Blood is thicker than water, and the
blood of the new country is so closely commingled
with the blood of the mother country, that it would
be utterly impossible to sever the relationship. I can
see the time rapidly drawing near when we shall be-
come more closely united than at present. I can see
approaching with giant strides the time when the
federation of the colonies of Australia will but precede


DRUNKENNESS CURED.
Dr. LESLEY E. KEBLEY’S
DOUBLE CHLORIDE OF GOLD CURE,
A TESTED AND INFALLIBLE REMEDY
BdOK wm EE.
S. FRESHMAN, Australian Representative,
359 GEORQE STREET, SYDNEY.
INGLIS, BROWN & CO.
TECHNOLOGICAL MUSEUM ,
Melbourne, August 31st, 1881 .
REPORT ON THREE SAMPLES OF INDIAN TEA received from
THE CALCUTTA TEA ASSOCIATION.
“The above samples have been carefully examined by us. They are ABSOLUTELY PURE, and
we may add that even the Lowest Quality of your Tea has a higher extract than any Packet Tea we
have examined. “J. COSMO NEWBERY,
“FREDERICK DUNN.”
WHOLESALE WAREHOUSE:
28 CKjAIE&ILOTTIH] SYZDZtsTiE’X".


the federation of the British Empire, when the title of
Empress of India, bestowed upon Her Most Gracious
Majesty, the Queen, will be necessarily exchanged
to that of Empress of Britain. I can see before me
the time when the Empire Parliament will meet, and
representatives from all portions of the Dominion
assemble. It will not, in my opinion, be possible to
continue for a much longer period as detached portions
of a nation. We must either break the links which
bind us so intimately together, or become absorbed in
one magnificent system.
I can picture to myself the future Empire, em-
bracing within the vastness of its area countries in
every clime, and people of every race. I can, 1 be-
lieve, shadow forth the working of the Imperial sys-
tem of those days to come, when the same law and the
same system of government and taxation shall be for
one and for all; when the absurdity of attempting to
build up manufactures at the public expense will cease
to exist, and the policy of utilizing the materials at
hand will be better understood. I hold that the inter-
change of goods should, like the interchange of
thought, be free. The dawning of the day has at
length arrived, events are tending in the direction
indicated, and thinking men are making it their study
how to guide the ship in the time to come. That the
advisers of Her Majesty have had the federation
of the Empire under consideration is exemplified in
the unexpected elevation of myself to the Peer-
age. I do not take that honour to myself. I
know how little I am entitled thereto, but
I do take it as a recognition of the growing importance
of Australia. The only regret I feel is that some
statesman more worthy than myself had not been
selected. It is not likely however, that I shall ever be
permitted to take my seat in the House of Lords, I
have promised and I must perform, I have to return
to my post. It shall never be said that I for one
instant turned ray political position to my own advan-
tage, and were I to allow myself to be tempted to
accept any of the offers which have been made to me
I should only deem it fitting return, that my country-
men should hold me as disgraced and themselves dis-
honoured, by the action. I have to go back to work.
The City of Sydney wants looking to, and I have
pledged myself to do it. After my work is ac-
complished, I may possibly be induced by ’the
unanimous wish of my country, to return here
and assume my new dignity, with its responsibilities ;
but I very much fear that by the time I have finished
my work in the South that I shall be unfitted to com-
mence a new task in the North. Some gentleman
asked me what I proposed to do to improve Sydney,
this may not be exactly a fitting time and place to in-
troduce the subject, but it having become a question
ot interest, I trust I may be excused if I answer the
enquiry. First of all I shall proceed to extend the
Railway to the.. Circular Quay, this will be an Elevated
Railway, I shall then, resume all the land from Bridge-
street to the quay, between Pitt-street and Macquarie
SIR HENRY PARKES ANTICIPATED.
Place. This will be for the erection of a gigantic
hotel, upon the American plan, for the accommoda-
tion of the travelling public. The hotoj will like many
of those iu the States contain a theatre and shops,
where every necessary of life can be acquired.
There will be ten thousand rooms in it, it will be
nineteen stories high, and have four hundred lifts, a
centrifugal railway, with a summer retreat and
a winter garden on the top. This immense structure
will be built of concrete, made solely from the Star
Cement, the agents for which in Sydney, are Doehling
& Co. This cement has the highest recommendations,
and I will you a few barrels to test it, if you think
of a new i Guild Hall. Then I am going to rebuild
Macquarie-street, and in fact, lay out the city a fresh.
Sussex-street and the older portions of the city wdll
have to come down. The Pyrmont Bridge must be
removed. AH the filth will have to be dredged out of
the harbours. The North Shore and Balmain will be
connected with the city, by the Elevated Suburban
Railway system. The North Shore will have the
Newcastle Railway coal depot, and the Pittwjater
branch. The Coffee Palaces will be multiplied, and
every endeavour be made to induce the public to make
a trial of the Indian Teas imported by Ingles, Brown
& Co. '
It remains then for me but to express my profound
admiration for the country to which I owe my birth. I
have seen during the visits I have paid to the centres
of its population, nothing to indicate deterioration in
the physique of the people ; neither has any evidence
presented itself to my view, to show that the energy
and activity of the nation has lessened during my
absence. I am disposed to think that in these respects
there has been a large increase. That there remains
with yon in England an old fashioned way of carry-
ing out improvements and, business purposes only
after much deliberation, is, I believe, the main source
of the greatness of the nation. Sudden emergencies
undoubtedly occur in all lands, and these are more
likely to be successfully coped with, if taken in hand
by matured statesmen, than if left to be dealt w r ith by
more youthful politicians. I have had, during ray
own career, to deal with some few ot these pressing
necessities. At this particular time an occasion of this
nature may arise at any moment, and, which I fear both the
mother country and her colonies, are not prepared to
meet. I allude to a foreign war. Now war with
France, with Russia, or with America, would indeed
be a serious calamity. lam told that all our relations
with foreign powers are friendly ; but I cap, I think,
at ray time of life be allowed to judge for myself, and
without wishing to appear as a prophet of evil, iu my
opinion, a war is not far off, and I can boldly assert
that the commerce of the Pacific Colonies, is at the
mercy of an enemy. There is even now a Russian
Squadron visiting our shores, and examining every port.
It is true that the force is not large. But the officers
in command are engaged in visiting no Russian
possessions, nor is the object of the voyage set forward


.131 “Star” Brand PORTLAND CEMENT “Star" Brand; c ~
O 1 . 4 _ *rj-
g REGISTERED TRADE MARK. i
O . . , . , , . „ . Vfc
UJ jr
C 3 Is the “ only ” Cement in the market that can stand, and is guaranteed by the manufacturers to stand the following j
MINIMUM TENSILE STRENGTH:—
PJ Neat “STAR” Cement, 7 days'test. Breaking strain per square inch 568.9 lbs. i C/3
C> 1 Cement and 3 Sand, 7 do. Do. do. do. 213.3 lbs. m
tX Particular attention should be given to the many Reports of Experts, as Mr. Henry Reid. C.E., Mr. Gilbert, R. Redgrave, C.E., Dr. Micha.lU, |
and the Juries of all International Exhibitions, who all agree “that the value of cement must be judged by the bebaxing strain of W
„ ; NEAT CEMENT, THE PROPORTION OP SAND IT IS CAPABLE OF BEARING BEING IN PROPORTION TO THE STRENGTH OF THE NEAT CBMENT." Refer
~ Dr. Micbaelis’ Table. All the latest Cement Tests ha ve proved that there is no other Cement in the market that will stand the above breaking


6i6UO
p3>53:
SIR HENRY
Coj/U
PARKES
as a scientific one. These officers can however
handle larger craft, and with knowledge gathered
during the cruise, they will necessarily become
dangerous enemies. What we want in the Australias
is a powerfully equipped fleet; there are only two vessels
on the station that are fit to cope with a foe, the
Nelsonin Port Jackson, and the Cerberus in Melbourne.
This is not as it should be, far from it. I would have
if I could a dozen swift steaming iron rams; capable |
of watching the coasts, and steaming not less than j
eighteen or twenty knots an hour. Whether England
would be inclined to expend so large a sum as would be
needed to meet such a demand, I do not know ; but I
for one strenuously advocate the adoption of a plan of
this character, moreover I think it nothing but fair
that the colonies should contribute to the outlay. The
interests which areat stake are enormously in excess of
the generally formed belief of the wealth and
commercial importance of our cities. There are
Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Launceston,
Hobart, Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch and
Dunedin, besides others I could name, which stand in
need of more vigorous measures being taken for their
protection. Some places I mentioned are defended
by forts and batteries, but ofj how little use these
stationary modes of defence would be in opposing the
entrance of a thickly armoured ironclad, or an attack
by a flotilla of torpedo boats, is easily imagined; others |
have no defences whatever. This is our positiqn should |
a war break out; I therefore speak advisedly when X
say look to the consequences and be prepared in time.
When in the States I visited Mr. Ericson, and he
kindly allowed me to witness some experiments with
his “ Destroyer.” This is beyond question the most
death dealing kind of war vessel afloat. Upon my
return I intend advising my colleagues to obtain from j
Mr. Ericson, one or two for the defence of Port j
Jackson, Whilst upon this subject I should like to i
call attention to an idea of mine, about the size of |
Mont Blanc, that Torpedo and Destroyer may both |
be defied. Ido not say so positively, but I can see a
weak spot in the construction of our war-ships. We
have only armour-plated, to the water-line, or a few
feet below it. This is, to me, the reason why in-
ventors have taken to plans for sub-marine projectiles.
Then why not construct the vessels with the greatest
thickness of plating at the bottom. No torpedo yet
brought into use could smash up a ship constructed of
24 or 36-inch iron throughout. The engineering diffi-
culties in the way are only in name. They are like all
the rest of the engineering difficulties I ever heard of
—to be surmounted by patient experiment. The
scheme of the Americans, to build steamers for com-
mercial purposes, without masts, and perfectly enclosed
like a cylinder is no new suggestion. Twenty-five
years ago the same proposal was made, and the
Wvnant’s cigar boat was but a modification thereof.
Then why should not cylindrical ironclads come to the
fore ? Reverting to our colonies, wo have been
endeavouring to form a Postal Union, a Defensive
ANTICIPATED.
Curtain Falls.
CITY OF SrDNEY PRiN I CU.. BRIDGE STREET.
Union, &c., &c.; but there is a little matter that stops
the way in regard to these efforts, and that is the
differences in our various tariffs. We, in New South
Waves, have adopted a Free-trade policy ; in Victoria
there is an approach to American exclusiveness ; South
Australia and New Zealand are moderate. Could the
Colonies only be induced to adopt the same tariff,
everything else would follow. It is the fiscal differ-
ences in the policies of States and Nations that are
alone to blame for very many of the enormities
enacted. I look upon duties as the primary cause of
the moral degradation of a people. They, the duties,
offer inducements for smuggling, lying, and cheating,
such as few can resist. They foster adulterations, the
forgery of trade marks and labels, and the production
of inferior articles. They are in a great measure, if
not altogether, to be blamed as the cause of the forma-
tion of trades unions, and the consequent strikes which
periodically take place to the ruin of capital and
labour alike. There is nothing like looking things
steadily in the face. All indirect taxation is a social
evil, and the only justifiable sources of revenue are
those which should be raised from income and pro-
perby. I speak on these subjects to point out, as it
were, the tendency of the people of the colonies to put
on one side the consideration of the future. The
“ letting of succeeding generations take cave of them-
selves ” doctrine is very prevalent, and that at the
very time we are borrowing money for our successors
to pay, and pledging their inheritance as security.
Whilst on. the subject of money, it will be as well to
remind my Right Honorable friend the Chancellor of
the Exchequer, that we shall be in want of a few
more millions shortly. When I say a few more, about
sixty or seventy will do for the next decade. We have
to construct new streets, new squares, new railways,
new graving docks, and new schools. I have little
more to say, but to repeat over and over again the
deep gratification my tour has afforded me, &c., &c., &c.
At the conclusion of Baron Parkes speech, H.R.H.
the Prince of Wales addressed the guest of the even-
ing, stating that Her Most Gracious Majesty had been
pleased to confirm the recommendation by the Privy
Council, that Baron Parkes, of Faulconbridge, be
nominated as the future Governor of the Colony of
New South Wales, as a preliminary step to the Vice-
royship of the Australia's.
Prolonged and vociferous cheering.
Band plays —“ For He’s a Jolly Good fellow.
> - 1
* 4^


GRATTAN’S
TELEGRAPHIC
PRESS AND
AGENCY.
LITERARY & NEWSPAPER CORRESPONDENCE BUREAU
O. L. GRATTAN,
PRESS AGENT AND ADVERTISING CONTRACTOR,
284 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY, Near Hunter Street
SPECIAL P Ll* OPTS, verbatim or condensed, of matters sometimes overlooked by
the Metropolitan Press provided for.
The Proprietor is in connection with the principal Press Writers of Sydney for supplying Correspondence on
topics of general interest, Leading Articles, Editorials, and Paragraphs, on any subject. His connection with the
Sydney Press and other special interests enables him to supply full and early information on all matters of
importance.
A PLGISTLP for Lditors , Reporters, and- Correspondents kept.
Thoroughly efficient CAN VASSERS are actively employed in obtaining advertisements for Metropolitan,
Provincial, and Intercolonial papers.
PPIXTIXG PL AXT P urchased and Disposed of on Commission. Grattan's Press Agency,
list George Street.
Sole Agents in Australia for MM. PIP MIN DIDO et Cie., PATHS, Publishers of “ ALMA XACH
1)1 COMMLPCL” (Mercantile Directory of the World).
The Ton'll and Country Journal, the Most Popular Weekly Newspaper in Australia.
The Lveniny Xeu-s —Daily Circulation, 40,000.
BRANCH OFFICE FOR
The Sydne y Dai Iff Teleif raph, Published Every Morning, containing the Latest Telegraphic and
General News. Price One Penny, or Os. Od. per Quarter.
The A rif as —Overland Every Day.
The Australasian , the Most Influential Weekly Journal in Australasia. Price Od. Overland every Saturday.
The Ape —Overland every day. Grattan’s Press Agency.
The Leader —Monday, Overland,
The Sportsman —The Melbourne Sportsman —New South Wales Sports. Price 3d, post free 4s, Od. per
quarter. Overland every Thursday.
The Led era I Australian —A Weekly Journal of high literary distinction. Price 6d., post free 7s. Od. per
quarter, overland every Saturday.
Ouee ns lan d Pa nch —Monthly.
Colonial, Intercolonial, and Pare iff u Xewspapers may he inspected at the above address.
A dvertisemexts received for all Newspapers at their local rates and the usual reduction allowed
on continuous insertions.
GRATTAN’S NEWSPAPER PRESS DIRECTORY OF AUSTRALASIA
MAY IB IE HAD OUST APPIICATIOBT
284 George-st., Sydney.


Sewing Machines,'
W *
. 6d. per week,
