

THE CELEBRATED
TARANGANBA GOLD MINE,
ROCKHAMPTON, QUEENSLAND;
ITS
HISTORY, DESCRIPTOR, and PROSPECTS.
Capital - - £1,000,000,
IN ONE POUND SHARES.
Working Capital - - £33,000.
PRICE SIXPENCE .




THE CELEBRATED
TARANGANEA GOLD MINE
ROCKHAMPTON, QUEENSLAND;
ITS
HISTORY, DESCRIPTION, and PROSPECTS.
Capital - - £1,000,000,
IN ONE POUND SHARES.
Working Capital - - £33,000.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




The Taranganba Gold Mines,
QUEENSLAND.
ffpi HE Directors have deemed it desirable to publish in
■(fiK pamphlet form the following information respecting the
Taranganba Proprietary Gold Company, Limited, with reports
and testimonies respecting the Gold Mines of Taranganba.
The Company has been registered under the Companies’ Act
as a limited Company, with a gross capital of £1,000,000, and a
net working capital of £33,000. All the shares have been allotted.
The Memorandum and Articles of Association may be
inspected at the Offices, No. 131 Pitt Street, Sydney.
This Company is formed as a prospecting and proprietary
Company, to take over the 99 years lease of, and to prospect
that property of apparent marvellous value known as the Taran-
ganba Golden Hills, near Rockhampton, Queensland, with the
view of working one portion of it, and disposing of the remainder
to other Companies here or in England.
This property, which comprises 614 acres, with rights to
mine under adjacent lands, is apparently similar in strata and
geological formation to the famous Mount Morgan Mine, but
of greater extent, and believed to be equally valuable.
It is proposed to erect, with the utmost expedition, the best
and most complete gold saving appliances attainable for working
that portion of the property retained, and simultaneously to test
the other portions for the purpose of floating sub-Companies to
work them. There is ample scope for several Companies.
Although gold was discovered on the land some time since,
its wonderful richness has only latterly been ascertained, as
under:—
Early in December last, this property was placed under offer
to a syndicate for the purpose of testing and proving it, and
shortly after, the property was visited by the proprietor of the
Northern Argus, Rockhampton, who, on the 14th December,
described the property in his journal as follows :
“TARANGANBA MINE.
“ The proprietor of this journal, through the courtesy of Mr. Robert
Ross, the owner of the Taranganba Estate on the coast near Yeppoon,
had an opportunity afforded him last week of inspecting the property,
and of witnessing the crushing in a mortar and washing off of a
number of pieces of stone from several mines, which gave excellent


results. The first visited was what is commonly known as the “ Pig
Sty Hill,” so named from its proximity to that part of the owner s
estate. This lease contains an area of about eleven acres, comprising
the lower portion of a hill of considerable height, situated at the back
of and close to the homestead. Two long trenches have been cut across
the hill exposing a large body of iron-stone quartz, similar m character
to that at Mount Morgan, and tests of stone from which have given
excellent results, both b} assays and by washings. A tunnel has been
driven from the western slope of the hill, a distance of 110 teet, wnic i
has cut three reefs or lodes. One is four feet wide, and assay tests
and washings from these have also shewn very good results, Ihe
main body of stone is expected to be reached m the tunnel m about
forty feet, and will doubtless prove as auriferous as that tested from the
lodes previously cut, and if so, the main body of auriferous stone will
then have been proved to a depth of about 55 feet from the surface.
The next mine lies to the south of this, and is a continuation of it, of
greater height and dimensions, comprising an area of about 33 acres.
Very large bodies of stone show their outcrops m several places on the
summit, and nine trenches have been cut in different places, and at
various heights on the slopes, from which a number of samples of stone
taken and tested by Mr. A. T. Brown, representing Messrs. Newberry
and Yautin of Melbourne, gave from over 2 oz. to 25 oz. per ton, or an
average of about 10 oz. per ton from six trenches. The stone from the
outcrops also returned excellent results. A gully divides this from the
next mine situated to the west, and comprising an area of about 20
acres on which also large bodies of stone outcrop, but little work has
been done here. Only one trench has been cut, but the stone from two
makes of quartz tested showed gold freely. Following the southern
slopes of these hills the lode can be traced a long distance, until it
apparently disappears under a plain, and is not seen again, except at
one spot on the flat, until it reaches the Central Hill, about a mile
distant where it again outcrops, and stone tested from the surface here
has given 4 oz. to 10 oz. to the ton. No work has been done on this
ground. About half a mile further south the South Hill Mine is
reached, consisting of thirty-six acres. A clear well-defined body of
stone outcrops almost from the base of this hill, and is traceable to its
summit and down the southern slope. Several trenches have been cut
across this lode, exposing a large body of stone, from which assays have
given highly satisfactory results. The owners are putting m a tunnel
on the eastern slope, which has been driven fifty feet, and has P £ |' ss ®d
through one leader, which was tested and gave 15 oz. per ton, and the
main body of stone is expected to be cut in about 40 feet. .
“ A valuable feature about all these mines, is their close proximity
to permanent water, which can either be forced, up to the machinery,
or the stone can be conveyed by tramway to machinery near the water.”
Early in January last, Dr. Robertson, M.E., F.G.S.,
F R.G.S., in company with Messrs. Russell Barton and M. Lyons,
inspected and reported on the property on behalf of in-
tending purchasers. After careful examination he took with his
own hands from various parts of the lodes or dykes, portions of
the rock, in which no gold whatever was visible. A portion of each


of these stones was crushed and panned out on the ground, showing
gold in nearly every dish; the other portions were set aside and
marked for assay in Rockhampton and Sydney. The assays in
Rockhampton and Sydney are appended.
After this examination, and after the results of assays made
in Rockhampton, at the instance of Messrs. Barton and Lyons,
these gentlemen concluded the purchase of the Taranganba Mine,
and paid a deposit of £IOOO.
Upon returning to Sydney, they at once took steps with the
intention of forming a Company upon the basis of a capital value
of £1,000,000.
Several gentlemen, conceiving that Mr. Russell Barton was
their representative in the purchase, and finding that Messrs.
Barton and Lyons were entirely ignoring them, commenced
proceedings in the Court of Equity to enforce their rights, and
obtained an injunction restraining the said Barton and Lyons
from dealing with the property without their concurrence.
Up to the time of the decision of the full court, Mr. Barton,
Mr. Lyons, and their agent on the property (Mr. Gleadow)
testified in the most emphatic manner that the Taranganba Mines
were of enormous value. Yet, so soon as an adverse decision was
given by the Supreme Court, they sold their interests in the
purchase to plaintiffs, and since that date have industriously
asserted that the property is worthless as a gold mine, and that
the vendor (Mr. Ross) has been guilty of fraud and deceit.
The promoters of this Company had the option of completing
the purchase and paying to Mr. Ross £19,000, but were in no
way bound to do so ; they, therefore, took the precaution of obtain-
ing a further careful examination of the property in view of these
adverse reports, and being satisfied therewith, they paid the
money and secured the property.
On the 22nd January last the following paragraphs appeared
in the Capricornian , a Rockhampton weekly, the authors being in
no way connected with the present promoters
“TARANGANBA GOLD MINE.
“ It is with very great satisfaction we have to announce the
sale of about a square mile of Mr. Robert Ross’ estate of
Taranganba, with a view to the development of the lodes
bearing gold found in it. At the end of last week, as we
announced, Dr. Robertson, the well-known and experienced
metallurgist, and Mr. Russell Barton, late Member for Bourke
in the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales, arrived at
Rockhampton for the purpose of inspecting the auriferous reefs
which have been discovered in the vicinity of the dwelling-house
of laranganba. I hey proceeded thither on Thursday, and were
accompanied by Mr. Maurice Lyons, solicitor, brother of Mr.
Robert Lyons of this town. These gentlemen made a thorough


examination of the land in the vicinity of Taranganba, and
especially of the outcrops of rock, and mineralogical features,
of the surface, and where the rock has recently been broken up
by mining operations. The result of their observations was
that Mr. Barton and Mr. Lyons entered into negotiations with
Mr. Robert Ross for the purchase of a long lease of a portion of
the ground with all mining rights, privileges, &e. These extended
over a couple of days, and were concluded on Tuesday. The
area of land is about a square mile, 640 acres, the lease is for a
period of ninety-nine years. Mr. Ross receives now the sum of
£20,000 cash ; and is to receive one third of the net proceeds of
the mine. The purchasers are to have the right to mine undei
the land on the estate adjoining that leased; the right to erect
railways, tramways, roads, and carry out all works necessary to
carry on mining operations on a complete scale. The land abuts
on Ross’s Creek and extends a distance of two miles on the
course of the lodes to the Southern claim, acquired by the Hon.
W. F. Lambert, and Major T. B. Robinson. The lodes are
apparent from the outcrops, and extend to an extraordinary
width. There are two distinct lodes, discernible on the Pigstye
Hill, the Big Hill, the Western Hill, the Central Hill, and a
small hill not yet named. Any one of these would make a mine
of considerable size, the lodes in many places being from fifty to
sixty feet wide. The assays, taken from the surface down to a
depth of fifteen feet, vary from 3 oz. to 26 oz. on the average ;
but special samples have been obtained which went as high as
250 oz. to the ton. Dr. Robertson expressed the opinion that
the Western Hill alone was equal to Mount Morgan in the extent
and richness of the auriferous stone. The gentlemen were
perfectly astonished at the quantity of gold-bearing stone, or
bits of loose rock picked up a hundred yards away from the
apparent lodes gave wonderful prospects of gold, even by simple
crushing and panning out. Dr. Robertson, who left for Cook-
town on Sunday, and who merely visited Taranganba pro-
fessionally, at the request of Mr. Barton, informed us that
judging from the prospects, the property will probably equal m
value the famous Mount Morgan. That Mr. Barton is not
likely to put money into an undertaking of a kind that will not
prove remunerative, will be apparent when we mention that he
is intimately connected with the Etheridge G.M. Company, the
Ravenswood Silver Mining Company in this colony ; Chairman
of the Great Cobar Copper Mining Company; the Nymagee
C.M. Co. ; the Hartwood C.M. Co.; the Central Broken Hill
Silver Mining Co.; Torrington Tin Mine; Foxton Tin Mine;
Kyandra G.M. Co ; Hydraulic G.M. Co.; Empress G.M. Co.;
and numerous commercial and insurance companies in Hew
South Wales. It is the intention of Mr. Barton and Mr. Lyons
to obtain reports on the property from the most eminent geolo-


gists and mineralogists in Australia. Thereafter a company
will be floated contemporaneously in the London, Melbourne,
Sydney, and Brisbane markets—that is to say, the stock of the
company shall be offered in these markets at the same time.
The purchasers purpose leaving for London in the first week in
March to make arrangements for floating the Company. We
have to thank Mr. Barton for the bulk of the information
contained in this article, which he furnished to us with the
utmost readiness. He seems confident that he will have no
difficulty in floating a company to work the mine, as he and his
partner are associated with eminent bankers and capitalists in
London • and that it will prove a profitable undertaking. Our
readers will share with us the pleasure we feel at the prospect
opened up of increased prosperity in the district.
“ THE SURROUNDINGS.
“ From time to time notices have appeared in our columns
that lodes, or reefs, of gold-bearing stone had been discovered on
the estate of Taranganba, and that they were being opened up
with the view of testing their mineralogical value. Though, on
various occasions, it has been suggested we should visit the place,
we declined because the mine was on private property, and
because we were assured more satisfaction would be found in
doing so after some work had been done. Mr. Ross, moreover,
has been averse to anything being said that would have the
appearance of cracking up the mine before its value was deter-
mined. When the negotiations for the purchase of the land
were concluded this week, and the probability of a considerable
addition being made to the mining industry of the district, we
felt it to be our duty to visit, and endeavour to describe the
locality, where, in the opinion of experts, an auriferous deposit
has been found, which will equal, if it do not surpass in value,
that of the now world-renowned Mount Morgan. Though
familiar with the locality, we wished by recent inspection to see
where the reefs lie.
“ Taranganba is a freehold estate of several thousand acres,
and is situated on the coast near the township of Yeppoon, about
26 miles N.E. of Rockhampton. It is accessible by the road
leading to Yeppoon, the turn-off to Taranganba being on the
outskirts of the township. Another approach to it is by the
Emu Park road, turning off to the north a mile or so beyond
Coorooman Creek. The distance from Rockhampton this way
is about 32 miles. Taranganba estate is famed for its lovely
scenery. A range of bare eminences, with precipices facing the
sea, runs along the coast; and inland from these rise gentle
slopes and wooded heights in picturesque variety. To the south
are the lovely headlands and bays on Mr. James Ross’s estate of
Mulambin, forming coast scenery that for variety and beauty


cannot be surpassed anywhere. The outlook seaward includes
the North and South Keppel Islands—Kanoomi and Wopobberah
—and clustering islets. To the north is a magnificent prospect
of sea and land, including the heights of Nuncoobah, Barmoyea,
the long line of coast near Yeppoon, and the distant hills of
Corio. A few years ago Mr. Ross got a portion of the coast land
laid off as a township, the native and appropriate name of which
is Lameroor, not Lammermoor, as the advertisements made it.
Most of the lots have been sold, and several dwellings have
already been erected in it. The dwelling house of Taranganba,
with its offices, sits on the ridge of a spur of the hills already
alluded to. It will be about 200 feet above the level of the
beach, and nicely-wooded eminences rise beside it, where it fronts
the Pacific. In the comparatively smooth slopes and rounded
eminences there is nothing to lead to the surmise, that at any
time this portion of the earth’s crust had been subject to a
convulsion, leading to the accumulation of gold in large
quantities. The hill described as No. 1 in the plan, but
familiarly known as Mount Piggery, is a rounded eminence
adjoining the men’s quarters of the homestead. Stunted bushes
and long grass have clothed it in green. It was by accidentally
crushing and washing the residue of some of the stone from this
hill that the presence of gold in the locality was discovered.
Repeated trials gave results which led to farther search. On
the hill we find evidence that operations have been commenced
in earnest, and carried on systematically. So far as our un-
practised eye can discern, there are trenches like cuttings for
drains; masses of stone here and there; and in the sides of the
hill a tunnel. The red colour of the earth shows it to be im-
pregnated with iron; but let us examine the stone however
narrowly, we cannot see any trace of gold. We think we can
notice in it, however, a resemblance to the lumps of stuff to be
found in the quarries at Mount Morgan. Pieces of stone picked
up among the grass have the blasted, irridescent, and, in some
bits, honeycombed appearance with which we are familiar.
What are now called the Big Hill and the Western Hill rise to a
height of about 300 feet, some three hundred yards to the south
of Mount Piggery. They are complements of one hill, in fact,
the broad crown of which has been cleft by exposure to the
elements, and the sides furrowed by deep water-courses, which
lie north and south, showing the stratification of the rock to be
in the same direction. On the Big Hill pits have been dug, and
the rock laid bare. The surface soil is of the same ferruginous
colour as that on Mount Piggery. The stone bared appears to
be of the same character as that already noticed, but harder and
heavier. In one place a shaft fifteen feet deep by eight feet
broad has been sunk into this dark rock. From the top of the
Big Hill to that of the Western Hill is but a short walk among


long grass, ironbarks, wattles, &c. None of the hills is very
heavily timbered. But that the Western Hill is of different
material from that of the Big Hill is at once evident. The stone
is of a yellowish white composition, with thin seams of pitchy
material through it. Here, again, we are reminded of the
appearance of stone in the quarries of Mount Morgan, seen on
the occasion of our first visit to it, when not much work had
been done. The whole summit of the hill appears to be composed
of this homogeneous stuff, and it is found on the slopes sticking
out among the long grass. The other hills are some distance to
the south of the eminences just named, and do not at all form
conspicuous figures in the landscape. Indeed, looking south-
ward from the top of the Big Hill, we have before us a pleasant
green valley, about a mile wide, and about three miles long, with
a chain of waterholes running along the bottom of it. On the
east it is bounded by the coast hills of low elevation, and on the
west by spurs of the Cawarral Range, which rise to a higher
elevation. Ross’s Creek drains the hollow to the north, and to
the south some low ridges only separate it from the inlet opposite
Mulambin. When the coast line of Australia was lower than it
is now, the probability is that the peninsula of Mulambin and
Taranganba were surrounded by the sea on salt-pan flats. It is
in this valley the Central Hill and little mount already referred
to are situated. As no work has been done, and as they are a
mile distant across country, we defer our visit to them. The
whole of the eminences we have described might be included in a
circle a mile in diameter, and with the dwelling-house of
Taranganba near its northern circumference. The views from
the Big Hill and Western Hill are even more comprehensive
than from the dwelling-house, and the miners engaged upon them
will have most cheerful, breezy, and cool-working quarters. To
the unprofessional visitor, the beauty of the scenery will possess
an interest and attraction not to be found in masses of stone.
“ The road from Taranganba to the Emu Park Road runs for
about eight miles through the Taranganba and Mulambin
paddocks. The surveyed road, and the one on which the
telegraph posts are being erected, is through the valley referred
to, and to the west of the track now used. Where the surveyed
road is followed by vehicles the area of it is being restricted by
the trees felled by the telegraph linesmen. It would be well, we
think, if the Divisional Board should open up this public road.
It will be used by many people now, and will be the highway to
Yeppoon from the Emu Park Railway. A little judicious ex-
penditure upon it now would lead to its being in a good state as
the traffic increases. The rates from a property valued at
.£20,000 should pay for a fair amount of useful work.


“ THE REEFS.
(By our Mining Reporter.)
“ The leasing of the auriferous portion of Mr. Robert Ross’
Taranganba Estate to southern capitalists for mining purposes,
and the large sum of money in cash paid for it, have naturally
excited a vast amount of excitement and curiosity in mining
circles. In order to give readers some particulars of these gold
mines, we have made it our business to visit the locality,
and form our own opinion of the auriferous land, and the value
of the work done on it. In what follows we have endeavoured
to give readers a clear idea on these points. It must be
mentioned that so far the value of the reefs rests entirely on
prospects obtained by hand crushing, and from assays made by
various persons. These, we are assured, in the majority of cases
have been highly satisfactory, and as the new proprietors took
stone fairly from every part of the lodes exposed, and obtained
splendid yields before deciding to purchase, it may be taken for
granted they have not wilfully thrown their money away with
their eyes open. The gold, however, is exceedingly fine, and
none can be seen in the stone with the naked eye or glass; at any
rate it can only be seen in a few picked specimens. It has been
said that the stone resembles that obtained at Mount Morgan.
This is partly correct, for some pieces certainly have a striking
resemblance to that found on the famous mount, but much of it
only resembles the Morgan stone very slightly. The lodes in
every case are easy of access, and machinery could be erected so
as to be readily and inexpensively reached from either or all of
them. All the work hitherto done has been of a somewhat crude
character, and necessarily of limited extent. The miners working
on the reefs are delighted with the situation of the locality, which
for salubrity and healthiness could not be surpassed anywhere.
“No. 1 Hill, or Mount Piggery, is situated immediately to the
west of the stables and outhouses belonging to the Taranganba
homestead. It was on this hill gold was first discovered. The
appearance of a piece of stone caused Mr. Ross to crush it, and
try a prospect. His curiosity was rewarded by finding free gold
in the dish. This discovery led to the hill being systematically
prospected. Near the c r own of the hill three outcrops of quartz
were trenched across, and in each case showed a well-defined lode.
These follow a nearly north and south course, and so far as can
be judged from the few feet uncovered, they underlie slightly to
the west. The largest amount of work has been done on the
most westerly of these reefs, the “ cap ” being exposed for some
thirty or forty feet. The stone is a mixture of brown and black
iron and quartz, and pieces from it prospected so well it was
decided to penetrate the hill from the western side by means of a
tunnel, so as to see what the three reefs referred to were like at a


depth, and also to prospect for other auriferous veins. Accord-
ingly, an east and west tunnel was commenced at a suitable spot.
At the present time it has penetrated the hill a distance of some
130 feet. At about eighty feet from the starting point a vein of
black stone was cut. It was about eight inches in thickness, and
we are informed yielded, by assay, 16 oz. to the ton, whilst good
returns could also be got from hand crushing. Work was
continued easterly, but nothing was found of importance until
lately, when a lode was met with of gossan and quartz, streaked
in places with “blush” of variegated colours. Prospects gave
satisfactiory yields by hand crushing, whilst the assay returns
are given as in excess of 4 oz. per ton. The reef is of a slightly
broken character, and is easily worked, but gives indications of
becoming more solid as it attains greater depth. The miners
have already gone through more than six feet of this lode, but
have not yet reached the hanging wall. The reef is underlying
to the east in the tunnel; so if it be identical with the outcrop
on the surface, the direction of the dip has changed from west to
east. So far as can be judged, the underlie is at an angle of
about forty-five degrees. Mr. Ross is decidedly of opinion this
reef is not the lode which outcrops on the surface, and that work
will have to be advanced some twenty or thirty feet further
before it will be reached. The new proprietors will probably
continue the tunnel until the eastern side of the hill is reached,
and then the north and south veins and leaders it contains will
be exposed. The country is easy to work, and the boring is of
course dry. It may be mentioned that the depth of the tunnel
from the top of the hill is about fifty feet, leaving that quantity
of “ backs” to be worked.
“ About 200 yards south of Mount Piggery, is No. 2 or Big
Hill. Several small cuttings have been made on the northern
side of this mount, and in some of them there are indications of
reefs similar to those referred to on Mount Piggery. The largest
amount of work, however, has been performed on the southern
side of the crown of the hill. Here a huge shaft or paddock has
been sunk to a depth of some fifteen feet, right in the middle of
the lode. No walls have been reached on either side, but the
main course of the reef is evidently pretty nearly the same as the
others—north and south. The stone is a mixture of brown iron-
stone and quartz, with black streaks, and presents a very solid
and massive appearance. Hundreds of tons could be grassed at a
trifling expense, and a small yield per ton would unquestionably
give a payable return. As the walls have not been reached it
is impossible to say how wide the lode may be, but it is
undoubtedly in excess of ten feet in thickness. Most of the
stone is what is called “ good-looking” from a miner’s point of
view, and we were informed that from top to bottom of the shaft


it gave excellent results, both by hand crushing and assay. The
rather scrubby nature of the timber precluded a reliable estimate
being given as to whether this lode was a continuation of that on
Mount Piggery, but in all probability it is a parallel vein lying
further to the west.
“No. 3, or Western Hill, is divided from Big Hill by a
depression which becomes a gully towards the base. A few small
trenches have been made where quartz “ blows” are visible, but
the work done on the hill is not so great as on the two already
described. Near the summit, there is a huge outcrop of stone,
perhaps better in appearance than much of that already referred
to. A good portion of the stone resembles some of that from the
Mount Morgan claim. There are undoubted evidences of the
action of fire, and there is not quite so much solid quartz to
be seen in what is exposed here as in other places. There are no
means of ascertaining the width of this lode, but it is certainly of
immense size. It is quite distinct from that on Mount Piggery,
being probably one hundred yards to the west. On the northern
side of Western Hill there is another massive “blow” of a reef.
The stone very much resembles that on the southern side, except
that more quartz is mixed with the brown and black iron. The
Western Hill is the one regarding which Dr. Robertson expresses
the opinion it is equal in value to Mount Morgan. If the quality
of the stone be like that of Mount Morgan, the learned metal-
lurgist’s view may be quite correct, for apparently the lode is
from forty to sixty feet in width on the surface, and in all
probability increases in size as it descends, like those veins that
have been most prospected.
“ Shortly, the position of the three hills described is this;
Mount Piggery not a hundred yards to the west of Mr. Ross’s
house; Western Hill three hundred yards to the west and south
of Mount Piggery; and Big Hill about two hundred yards to
the south of Mount Piggery. Big and Western Hills are about
equal in height, and are probably a hundred feet or so higher
than Mount Piggery, which is elevated some thirty feet above
Mr. Ross’s residence. Central Hill is considerably to the south
of the localities described and no prospecting has yet been
done on it.”
An agreement for about 614 acres of the Taranganba free-
hold estate having been executed, a Mr. Gleadow, who was
employed by Mr. Barton to further prospect the property and to
assay the stone, sent the following letters :


“ Taranganba,
“ February 26, 1887.
“ The Editor
“ Northern Argus,
“ Eockhampton.
“ Sir, —For publication in your mining items, I send you the follow-
ing results obtained by myself from assays made from the Five Golden
Hills Mining Company’s property, Taranganba :
Top cutting, West Hill, yield 100 oz. 14 dwt. 21 grs. per ton
South ~ East ~ ~ 118 „ 14 ~ 18 ~ ~ ~
East ~ ~ ~ ~ 30 ~ 15 ~ 21 ~ ~ ~
No. 2 ~ Pigstye ~ 29 „ 11 ~ 14 ~ ~ ~
In only one sample was gold visible to the naked eye. The last cutting
in the East Hill is in a greyish ironstone conglomerate. The width of
the lode is at present not ascertained. A general assay made from the
Pigstye Tunnel, 85 feet of the lode being taken, gave a yield of 3oz.
sdwt. Bgrs. per ton. In this assay stone showing any gold was rejected
from the general sample. By publishing the above you will confer a
favour on
“ Yours truly,
“ (Signed) John C. Gleadow,
“ Mining Manager,
“ Five Golden Hills Company.”'
This letter appeared in the Northern Argus, Rockhampton.
“ Taranganba,
“ sth March, 1887.
*• Leonard Dodds, Esq.,
“ Sydney,
Extracts.
“ Dear Sir, —Since my arrival I have scarcely had time to turn
round, what with one thing and another, building furnaces, erecting the
house, and also travelling over the whole of the property prospecting*
and then assaying * * * but as the mail leaves at 12 to-day, I
have just time to write you a few lines re the property, but first must
ask an explanation about a wire received from Lyons yesterday, stating
that the business had been removed from your office. I cannot under-
stand this, and also other things that I have heard since my arrival.
I have been living a few days with Mr. Kobert Boss, who although a
great talker, is nevertheless a real straight good fellow at heart, and has
shown me and told me all correspondence and verbal conversations he
has had relative to this place, and I do not think —in fact am sure—from
what I have seen that he has not in any way misled anyone. The
equal distribution of the gold throughout the whole of the Hills is
something wonderful, in fact, Mount Morgan is not a patch on it. You
of course will know what the assays I made gave * * * I must
now conclude, as I have a lot of correspondence for Barton. With kind
regards.
“ I am,
“ Yours sincerely
“ (Signed) John C. Gleadow.”


“ Taranganba,
“ 26th March, 1887.
“ Leonard Dodds, Esq.,
“ Sydney,
“Dear Sir, —I received yours of the 17th inst. yesterday—has been
ten days on the road —and intend wiring you to-morrow as follows,
“Infernal swindle, everything false, keep clear —letter posted to-day,”
which means this, That the so-called Five Golden Hills will prove the
greatest swindle ever perpetrated in mining history. You of course
will think that I am wrong, but when this letter is read, you can then
use your own judgment. When I first arrived on the ground I met
Eobt. Boss, and started erecting assaying furnaces; but before these
were completed Barton wired to me saying Boss had wired him that
an excellent body of stone had been cut in the Pigstye tunnel, and, if
true, to stop the work there. As you may well suppose, I was taken
rather aback, but at once started and took out a general sample from
85 feet width of lode and made a rough assay in the forge. I obtained
the magnificent yield of 8 oz. 5 dwt. per ton. I must tell you that in
the crushing of these samples, which was done on Sunday, Ross in-
sisted on sending one of his sons to help crushing in the mortars, and
seemed greatly put out when I told him I didn’t want him ; and so
eventually he, the son, got hold of a pestal and mortar, and went on
crushing portions of the samples taken. At the time I thought every-
thing was all right, and although the underground boss and numerous
disinterested parties had given me hints that everything was not all
right and square here, I thought that Barton and Lyons must be per-
fectly sure that the mine was genuine, so this was the reason why I
didn’t forcibly object to young Boss helping. The father, I must tell you
was knocking about all the time and handled several of the parcels of
stone. When I erected and finished the assaying furnaces, as Lyons
asked me to send down as soon as possible some sensational assays, I
said to Boss I wanted to do so, and he at once offered to get me the
stone, as he said he was thoroughly up in the values of the different
lodes. So I walked down from his house (where I was staying) to the
office, and hadn’t been in the office five minutes when down came Boss
on horseback, and to my surprise said he had ridden over the hills and
got the samples, which he gave me labeled and ticketed from the
different places he said he had taken them. I remarked at the time to
the underground boss he had been very quick in getting the stone, but
I didn’t take any more notice until I had the assays finished, which
gave results from 2oz to 120 oz per ton. After I wired these results to
Barton, I got a wire from him telling me to keep all information as to
results to myself. At the time I didn’t say anything to Boss, but asked
him to show me the places where he took the stone I had assayed
from. He put it off from day to day, until one wet morning he said he
would get up on the hills and show me. We went, and I took the
samples he gave me and others for myself. I noticed at the time that
there were three or four pieces in the stone he gave me that although
they somewhat resembled the ironstone here, that on close inspection
were not the same; but, however, I took them, and as Barton wanted
some stone to take home with him to England, I thought it
best to keep these and send them to Sydney, but before, to make
a certainty of it, I tested a sample of each that I had taken, when
imagine my astonishment when I only got traces (and very small


traces of gold) and about 14 or 15 dwt. of silver from all the stone
I had taken myself ; and the same results with the stone he gave me,
excepting the three or four samples that I noticed the difference in
when getting them. I was in such a state that 1 didn t know what to
do, and ever since Ross has been kept away by my refusing him the
information of the yields ; and I have done the assays with only my
own men. I have absolutely got nothing from the assays of stone I
have taken myself, and I have tested over 50 samples by dry assaying,
and crushed in the mortar nearly half a ton of stone. Now, to my
mind this looks very unpleasant, and in talking over the matter to the
underground boss, he told me the following about Barton and Lyons
visit here On the evening previous to Mr. Barton taking his samples
from the tunnel, Ross was seen to go in the direction of the tunnel.
The following morning, directly after the men starting work, they were
surprised to notice on the candle-box (standing at the mouth of the
tunnel) and the tools they were using a great deal of fine gold sticking
to them, and also examined them and found fine gold on their hands
as well. He told me this in strict confidence, but I thought it my duty
to speak to these men at once, who, although at first seemed disinclined
to state anything, afterwards made a statement exactly corresponding
to what the underground boss had told me. Of course this is some-
thing very serious, and I told them so, but I have not the slightest
hesitation in saying that these men will swear it if put on oath. I was
utterly dumb-founded, and thought of wiring for Barton at once, but
to make sure that some trick had been practised on me when I made
the first assay from the tunnel, I again took samples from exactly the
same spots where I had previously marked with pegs and made an assay
from same. The result was 16dwt. silver per ton and trace of gold.
I am now thoroughly convinced in my own mind, and I wish I had
never seen the place. It has been a well carried out swindle, and
although it has gone so far, I think I will be able to catch the perpetra-
tors and sheet it home to them strongly. I may tell you that I sent
Barton a box of stone from here to be assayed, and when he gets the
results I have asked him to come up immediately, —as I look at it in
this light, that it is these infernal swindles that are ruining mining, and
it is time they were put a stop to. I couldn’t tell you how grieved and
anxious I feel about the matter, and I intend shortly (after I have
advice from Barton) to speak to Ross, tell him all, and then see what
he will do. It will then prove whether lam right or not. lam sorry
Barton and yourself have had some unpleasantness, but hope it will
soon be explained; but if this letter or my wire reaches you in time,
take my advice and have nothing whatever to do with it.
“ I am, dear Len.,
“ Yours very sincerely,
“ (Signed) John C. Gleadow.”
In April, after receipt of this letter, Mr. Leonard Dodds
visited Taranganba, and although professing no scientific know-
ledge of gold-bearing stone, broke off from the lodes and
brought away a quantity of stone not shewing gold to the
naked eye, and handed the same to the Hon. E. Vickery,


M.L.C., who, after crushing them, sent six portions to
Mr. Dixson and three portions to Messrs. Smith and Leipner
for assay, with the results shewn at foot. Although perfectly
satisfied with the tests thus attained, yet in consequence of
adverse and damaging reports having been industriously circulated,
the promoters before paying for the property, took the precaution
to obtain a further examination and report, and a second time
secured the services of Dr. Robertson to go to Taranganba and
again examine the property in the light of these damaging reports,
and of all that had been said against the property.
After having for several days pursued his examinations,
crushed and panned out samples taken with his own hands from
various parts, in presence of Thomas Mylne, Esq., Registrar of
Titles, Queensland a gentleman totally disinterested—Dr.
Robertson advised the promoters that he not only saw no reason
to alter his previous opinion, but was fully confirmed in it, as he
found a good prospect of gold in nearly every dish panned out on
the ground, although the stone shewed none either before or after
crushing. A quantity of stone from the lodes was then put up in
separate parcels—marked, packed, and sealed in the presence of
the above-named gentlemen, and forwarded to Sydney for assay.
The seals were broken and the box opened in Sydney in the
presence of Messrs. Josiah Mullens, E. Vickery, James Fletcher,
Dr. Robertson, G. R. Dibbs, Mr. Dixon, Assayer, and Mr.
Herring, Acting TJnder-Secretary of the Mines Department. The
whole were then taken away by Mr. Dixon, crushed, and each
sample divided into three parcels, with instructions to Mr. Dixon
to assay one sample of each. The result of Mr. Dixon’s assays
are appended. The result of every assay (good or bad) obtained
for or by the promoters is published herewith, and with this
evidence of untold wealth before them the promoters completed
the purchase. The gold is of the finest description, but differs
slightly from the Mount Morgan in that it contains a small per
centage of silver—a sufficient refutation of the insinuation that
some of the stone was brought from Mount Morgan.
Dr. Robertson was specially instructed to obtain stone fairly
representing the property, and as gold cannot be seen in the stone,
even with a powerful glass, selection was impracticable.
Reference is made to the appended reports, the originals of
which can be seen at the office of Messrs. Watt and Dodds, Legal
Managers of the Company, Pitt Street, where also the Company’s
Memorandum and Articles of Association can be seen.
Before procuring extensive plant and machinery, it was
deemed prudent by the purchasers to themselves visit Taranganba,
to determine upon machinery sites and make a further examina-
tion of the property. Mr. Cox, Mining and Civil Engineer, was
also engaged to make a special and critical inspection, and to give
an independent report whether good or bad; and it was arranged


that Mr. Arthur Mullens, of the firm of Messrs. Josiah Mullens
and Son, should accompany and assist Mr. Cox.
According to the * bove arrangements, Messrs. Cox, Mullens,
Robertson, and Birrell (mining expert), who have no interest in
the property, and Messrs. E. Vickery, G. R. Dibbs. Shepherd
Laidley, and James Fletcher, who are interested as part pur-
chasers of the property, paid a visit to Taranganba extending
over several days. Many stones, from over an extensive area
comprising three large hills, were, by everyone of the party,
broken off the solid rock, or taken from heaps excavated from the
various pits and trenches. These stones, or many of them, were
on the ground powdered and panned out in the presence of the
party, and in nine out of every ten pannings good prospects of gold
were visible. In some instances the show was equivalent to
hundreds of ounces to the ton. Either all or nearly all of the party
were present watching each of these tests, and every one of them
expressed surprise at the results palpable to the eye. It was
then arranged to take triplicate samples over the three extensive
hills known as the Pigstye, the Eastern, and the Western hills,
in the presence of Messrs. Cox, Mullens, and Vickery, who were
provided with linen bags, and each took one bag of samples from
each reef or dyke over a width of 20 to 150 feet. There was no
attempt to pick or select. The stones were broken off the solid
every few feet across the three hills indiscriminatelv. As
the country for hundreds of yards was thus sampled, "only a
small average assay was looked for.
After these numerous tests thus carefully and critically
made on the ground, each member of the party gave expression
to their belief that the property contained enormous wealth, and
surprise that the owner had for so many years been living over a
mountain of gold without knowing it.
Mr. Laidley remained at Taranganba fossicking about with
similar results, while four of the party left to visit Mount Morgan.
This visit both impressed the visitors with the wonderful richness
of Mount Morgan and confirmed them in their belief in Taran-
ganba, which it resembles, except that the latter is more
extensi ?e.
The following independent reports have been given in
writing:—
Mr. E. Vickery’s Statement.
The Hon. E. Vickery, M.L.C., says“ I had read two
reports of Dr. Robertson, and from seven years’ knowledge of
that gentleman, and seven years’ experience of the reliability and
value of his reports, notwithstanding adverse statements, I con-
cluded the purchase and paid the purchase money for Taranganba.
Subsequently, although I deemed it quite unnecessary, I consented
to a further and more critical inspection and examination of the


property by Mr. S. H. Cox, mining engineer, and accordingly
instructed that gentleman to inspect Taranganba in the light of
all adverse criticisms, and furnish an independent report, good or
bad. I also determined personally to visit Taranganba, and bring
my own best judgment to bear upon the property ; and, having
done so, my conviction is that the mine is of untold value; that
Dr. Robertson’s reports are cautiously within the truth; and
that deception has not, and could not, have been practised. Mr.
Ross was seldom present at our tests, and never interfered with
them or influenced us in any way. On arrival at Taranganba, I
was met hy Messrs. Birrell, Fletcher, Dibbs, and Laidley, who
had arrived some five days previously, and who stated they had
thoroughly prospected the various hills, crushed and panned out
thirty or forty stones broken off by themselves, and had found a
considerable show of gold in all but two or three instances.
Having received this statement, in company of several of the
party I then walked over the Pigstye, the Eastern, and Western
hills, bringing away two stones from each hill. They were at
once crushed and washed out, without the possibility of deception,
and each gave a remarkable show of gold. I had similar ex-
perience the two following days, and others of the party, in my
presence, also treated a great number of stones with good results,
except in a very few instances. I sealed up and brought away
thirteen bags containing numerous small chips of stone taken
from a large extent of country. In one of these bags, opened in
Sydney, a result was obtained equal to the best on the mine. In
three other bags the result was poor, giving only specks or traces
in the dish. The other nine bags remain with seals still un-
broken. I also picked up and brought away in my box and
portmanteau about twenty stones from different places. There was
no gold visible, but I brought them away to test in Sydney, be-
cause they were similar to those that gave good results on the
mine. Most of these have been crushed and panned in Sydney,
showing as a result, in three out of four instances, a good yield
of gold. Parts of four stones were assayed, yielding—
No. 1 0 ozs. 4dwts. 15grs. to the ton.
No. 2 7 ozs. ~
No. 3 69 ozs. gold & 2 ozs. silver ~
No. 4 195 ozs. gold ~
E. Vickery.
August 20th, 1887.
Mr. Mullens’ Testimony.
“ The Hon . E. Vickery,
“ Pitt Street.
“ Dear Sir, —In compliance with your request, I beg to state that
I went to Taranganba with yourself, Dr. Robertson, and Mr. S. H.


Cox. During our stay there I saw different lots of stones brought from
the hills, crushed and panned out, the results being apparently good
gold. I brought down 13 samples from the Estate I ';' ihesq- were care-
fully taken in the presence of yourself and others as "fair average
samples from the different reefs. These samples were seat to the Mint
for assay, and the results were traces only. \' J
“ I am, dear Sir,
“ Yours faithfully,
“ H. L. Mxjllbns,
“ (Of J. Mullens & Son).”
Extracts from Messrs. Cox and Seaver’s Report.
“ Sydney, August 17f1v1887.
“ Hon. E. Vickery and Others,
“ Dear Sirs, —Having as requested examined the Taranganba
Property, and carefully sampled the stone from various points, we
forward herewith our report thereon. * * *
“ The property embraces four distinct hills. The character of the
rocks composing these different hills are the same throughout, consist-
ing of ferrugenous slates and quartzites, which strike about 20 degrees
east, and are traversed by dykes or lodes of a more ferrugenous
character, with bands of grey laminated quartz and black hornstone,
some of great size and others from six inches to one foot thick, but all
striking in the same direction as the country rock, and underlaying at
high angles to the eastward.
“ Between the southern side of the Eastern and Western Hills and
the Central Hill, there is a plain about three-quarters of a mile wide,
through which a chain of water holes represent the upper part of Ross
Creek, but across this plain there is a low ridge which appears to make
a continuation of the rocks between the two hills.
‘ 1 Work Done * * * Eesults of Washings on the Mine. —During
our stay on the property we collected, crushed, and washed many
samples of stone from different parts of the ground, and saw about fifty
samples taken by Messrs. Dibbs, Fletcher, Vickery, Robertson, and
Mullens crushed and washed, and in only four cases did we fail to
obtain prospects of fine gold, which, in some cases, indicated a very rich
yield, even the hornstone referred to, and a yellow flinty quartz, giving
good results. Most of these samples were crushed and washed by
members of our own party, and entirely without the intervention of fee
original proprietor.
“ Assay returns of samples, —lrrespective of these trials on the
Mine, we procured samples of all the different classes of stone, taken in
the following manner : —The different classes of stone which should be
sampled having been decided upon, Dr. Robertson, Hon. E. Vickery,
Mr. A. L. Mullens, and Mr. Cox proceeded to sample the stone by
breaking blocks off the solid and spalling them roughly as broken.
From the spalled sample Mr. Vickery, Mr. Mullens, and Mr. Cox each
took a chip, and continued doing this until the sample bags, which each
held, contained what was a fair average of the special place in question.
Our samples were then tied up and carried by Mr. Cox to the house,


where they were at once sealed and locked in a portmanteau. Care
was taken to bring these samples in chips and not in powder, and they
never left our hands until sealed and packed. The results of these
samples, as assayed by Mr. W. A. Dixon, F.1.C., are as follows: * *
No. 6 C, gold and silver, 1 dwt. 7 grs. per ton; No. 7 P to No. 19 P, gold
and silver traces.
“ General conclusion. —The exceedingly small returns obtained by
assay of die foregoing samples, these samples being taken in the most
careful manner possible, and broken by Dr. Robertson himself, force us
reluctantly to the conclusion that a systematic course of deception must
have leen practised by someone on the ground, for the purpose of mis-
leading us and others, and that the property is valueless as a .gold mine so
far as proved by the present workings. We may state that we personally
crushed three of the samples when in Sydney, viz., Nos. 9 P, 9a P, and
16. before sending them for assay, and although these were taken from
those parts of the property which apparently yielded the best results on
the ground, we were unable to obtain any gold from samples of them
in Sydney by ordinary dish washing, a result which has since been
confirmed by assay.
“ Yours faithfully,
“ (Signed) Cox and Seaver,
“ Mining and Civil Engineers.”
Dr. Jas. R. M. Robertson’s Report.
“TARANGANBA.
“ Preliminary Observations.
“ The freehold estate of this name is situated on a picturesque
and pleasant part of the sea coast, north of Keppel Hay, and 26
miles distant from Rockhampton, Queensland. The freehold is
held by the trustees of Mrs. Robert Ross. The estate consists of
several thousand acres of rich pasture land. On the east it is
bounded by the sea coast, and to the north a deep salt water
inlet curves round the portion of the estate to be referred to, and
on which gold-bearing stone of a most unique character has been
found. I append a rough plan of the area that has been, after
careful consideration and selection, obtained on lease from the
proprietor.
“ The homestead is situated on the space shown on the plan
between No. 1 and No. 2, and has been built at an elevation of
about 250 feet above the sea level. To the north and west
silicious and ferruginous schists and dykes, or line of quartziferous
rocks, form a low, broad, and stony ridge known as Pigstye Hill,
and embraced on space marked No. 1.
“ Pigstye Hill.— The general trend of these dykes is N. 20
W., and the apparent dip or pitch is towards the east. Gold
was discovered by accident in this ridge about 12 months ago,
and some surface costeaning trenches, stretching for about 80


yards in an east and west direction across the ridge—transverse
to the course of the dyke - have exposed at least five quartzi-
ferous dykes. These trenches are shallow,.-and have done little
else than expose the course of the dykes. The western dyke is
ferruginous and solid. The eastern dyke is broad and strong,
and consists of an immense mass of ferruginous quartz less solid
than the western. The intervening dykes consist of dense, close-
grained, and flinty quartz. The country intervening and
separating these dykes apparently consists of thin and friable
layers of quartz, tilted on end wfitli a strike, and nearly west.
The exact character or disposition of the country has not, how-
ever, been as yet determined. A tunnel has been commenced on
the western slope of this hill, and the face of this tunnel at the
date of my visit was within 30 feet of the eastern dyke. A
sample of a leader cut about a yard distant from the face, and
also a sample from the face of this tunnel, assayed as follows :
Gold, 1 oz. 6 dwt. 23 grs.; silver, 5 dwt. 17 grs. None of these
dykes show visible gold, but small samples taken from the
eastern and western dykes, roughly crushed and panned off “in
situ,” gave remarkable prospects of exceedingly fine and impalp-
able gold. Samples were taken with the utmost care by myself
from each of these dykes in each of the two trenches, also of the
intervening country, representing about 250 feet wide, in presence
of Messrs. Russell Barton, Maurice Lyon, and Robert Ross.
These, after being pounded and sampled, were bagged and
marked, and are now being analysed. A test sample, represent-
ing parts of every solid dyke, however unpromising, exposed in
No. 2 trench, were sent to Mr. Heath, an analyst of repute in
Rockhampton, and the result of two assays gave :—Gold, 4 oz.
11 dwt. 11 grs.; silver, 6 dwt. 22 grs.
“ Big Hill, to the south, is joined to Pigstye Hill by a low
saddle of auriferous rock, representing the course of the auriferous
dykes already referred to. This hill rises to an elevation of
about 280 feet above the homestead. It seems to be composed
of a succession of quartz or silicious dykes, more or less
ferruginous. The north-western shoulder of this hill is traversed
by a continuation of the auriferous dykes situated to the east of
Pigstye, while the dykes to the east will intersect the hill towards
the apex. This hill sweeps towards the south-west. Eight
trenches and shallow holes or shafts have been cut at intervals
across this ridge, and in these dense and strong dykes have been
exposed. Careful samples were taken at short intervals across
the whole of these trenches, also of the intervening country ;
and these, after being broken, mixed, and crushed, were bagged,
marked, and are being assayed. Towards the south of this hill,
and on the very apex, the country is much discoloured by the
oxidation of the iron held by the silicious rocks, and bears
evidence of metamorphosis by igneous forces. A deep cut and


an irregular hole or shaft, 15 exposes over 20 feet of
this deeply-stained silicious rock. From these many tons of rock
have been blasted -v>ut. A very large and carefully selected
sample, consisting of* about 200 fragments, broken from the heap,
was taken, and a test analysis by Mr. Heath gave Gold, 9 oz.
0 dwt. 14 grs.; silver, 2 dwt. 19 grs. But samples taken from
the bottom of this'shaft by a Mr. Brown, of Melbourne, assayed
22 oz. 4 dwt. 6 grs. The sample taken by me in presence of
Messrs. Barton and Lyons represents an honest and fair average
sample of this mass of auriferous rock so far as opened up. The
limit of this strong auriferous mass of rock has not been
determined, but it undoubtedly contains a quantity of auriferous
rock unusual in the history of gold mining. The ridge that
emanates from the Central Hill—and that can be traced across
the country intervening—appears to join the Big Hill at this
spot, and may account for the extraordinary richness of the ore
here. The Big Hill appears to be built up of a succession of
auriferous dykes. These were assayed by Mr. Brown, with the
following results:—Gold, 9 oz. 17 dwt. 7 grs.; 4 oz. 16 dwt.
16 grs.; 2 oz. 7 dwt.; 12 oz. 7 dwt. 9 grs.; 2 oz. 17 dwt. 11 grs.
Considering the enormous bulk of rock sampled and assayed, the
results are astonishing, and none thevless so that the contained
gold is perfectly invisible, even under the most powerful lens.
“A narrow saddle, as yet unprospected, connects the Big
Hill with the Western Hill (Ho. 3 bn sketch- plan)., 'The crest
of this ridge is composed of a tumultuous mass, of .weathered and
moss covered rocks. In several places these have been brbken,
and at two situations towards the two extremities of "(he ridge,
and separated by about 150 yards, many tons of this rock have'
been blasted and exposed. It consists ef a yellowish mottledyjnd
ferruginous rock, softish in texture. The- width of this rock ljasv
not been determined, but at the- excavations referred. To* it
certainly exceeds 60ft. in width. In*. appearance this dbes not
resemble any known auriferous rock. An assay hy Mr. Heathy
of samples taken by me, gave of gold:3 oz. 8’ dwt. 14 grs. y
Considering the enormous bulk of the auriferous rock, the Value
of this hill cannot be over-estimated. Thd flank >of this-' hill,
towards the gully that separatesit from the Bill Hill, is composed
of a great thickness of grey laminated landstonev t This, Though
especially unpromising in appearance, when crushed atid .panned,
gave a remarkable prospect of pulverulent gold, much of which
floated on the tops of the bubbles. A v>
“Central Hill (Nos. 4 and 5 on sketch) is situated aboht f
of a mile distant from No. 10 Cut on Big Hill, and is connected-
by a low ridge clearly discernible. Stone picked up indiscrim-
inately along this ridge or from the Central Hill gave good
prospects of gold ; but as this ground was included after I left


Taranganba, I did not take samples of this important part of the
concession.
“The ground leased amounts to upwards of 600 acres, and the
duration is for 99 years. The lease gives the sole right to mine
for gold in the land outside the specified boundaries. Power is
also given to use Ross’s Creek (which is navigable), also the use
of the large fresh water lagoon that exists on the property, to
make roads and railways, to erect works &c. The terms of the
lease are of an unusually favourable character.
“If the test analysis by Mr. Heath be supported by the
analysis of a large number of samples now in progress, the prac-
tically inexhaustible amount of auriferous stuff in these three hills
first enumerated, this leasehold will contain without any doubt
the largest and most valuable gold-mine yet discovered in Aus-
tralia. The cost of mining will be nominal.
“James R. M. Robertson, M.E., F.G.S., F.R.G.S.
“Sydney, sth February, 1887.
“ To Messrs. Watt & Dodds,
“131 Pitt Street, Sydney.”
N.B. —The samples obtained, powdered, and put into bags in
presence of Messrs. Barton and Lyons were given to the custody of
Mr. Barton, and handed by him to Mr. W. A. Dixon for assay wit
following results.
James B. M. Robertson.
“ Sydney, March 3rd, 1887.
“ Messrs. WATT & DODDS,
“Gentlemen, —The following are the assays of the samples sent on
the Ist instant:—
No. 1, Pigstye
Gold per ton.
oz. dwt. grs.
15 3 5
„ lA
4
11
11
9
3
11
21
,, 2 a
0
14
9
(2nd) ,, 2 b
6
10
16
„ 7 Big Hill
4
8
20
,, 7 A
0
10
11
„ 10
10
6
11
„ 11
1
5
20
„ 12
2
8
8
„ 13 ...
2
8
8
,, 1, Special Deep Cutting
... 7787
5
23
Special ,, 1, Deep Cutting...
22
5
3
,, 2 do
4
3
15
,, 1, Blackstone ...
0
9
3
,2 do ...
0
19
15
,, 1, Northern Side, Western Hill
0
14
9
,, 2 do do
5
17
14
2nd Special Reef, Pigstye Hill ...
9
9
10
“W. A. DIXON.”'


“ Report on three samples received for Assay from Messrs. Watt and
Dodds , on the 2nd instant :—
“ The samples were found to contain as under: —
No. 1 (marked No. 10 Big Hill)
Gold at the rate of nine ounces and six pennyweights.
Silver at the rate of half an ounce. '
No. 2 (marked No. 12 Western Hill)
Gold at the rate of one ounce and five pennyweights.
Silver at the rate of one ounce and a half.
No. 3 (marked No. 13 Western Hill)
Gold at the rate of one ounce and two pennyweights.
Silver at the rate of three-quarters of an ounce to the ton.
“ ROBERT HUNT,
_ , “ Deputy Master.
Royal Mint, Sydney, 4th February, 1887.”
“ Sydney, Bth February, 1887.
“ Messes. WATT & DODDS,
“Gentlemen, —The following are the assays of the samples last
sent: —
Mark Gold per Ton.
oz. dwt. grs.
No. 11 0 14 9
>, 12 2 7 1
» 13 2 19 0
Red 17 14 17
“ I remain,
“ Yours truly,
“ W. A. DIXON.’
[copy.]
“ TAR AN GARB A.
“ Gentlemen, —At your request, I have just returned from a
second inspection of laranganba Estate, near Rockhampton,
Queensland, for the purpose of satisfying myself and reassuring
you and your friends as to the character and value, as well as
fixing the boundaries, of the portion of the Estate proposed to be
leased to you by the trustees of Mrs. Robert Ross, and have to
submit to your consideration the following observations :
“ On the 13th, 14th, and 15th current, I went carefully over
four the hills included in the proposed lease, and took pains to
obtain fair average samples of the various reefs, by taking pieces
from the solid at short intervals across the width of the belts of
rock.


“ Pigstye Hill.
“ The relative position of this—with the other hills to be referred
to—is shown in the accompanying hand sketch, No. 1. Sketch
No. 2 is an enlarged view of the hill, showing the position of the
surface, more particularly described in my report dated sth of
February, 1887, on which my opinions and conclusions are, so
far as lam entitled to do from surface, based. The hill
immediately adjoins the home and yards of Mr. Ross, to the
north-west. It is a rocky eminence, consisting of quartzose rocks,
that probably does not rise more than 50 feet above the level of
the dwelling-house, or 250 feet above the sea, to the level of
which it gradually slopes towards the north, east, and west. The
surface is covered by fragments of crystalline and silicious rocks
—and these by tall, rank grass. Nos. 1 and 2 represent two
shallow trenches that have been cut in an east and west direction
across the hill. These trenches have cross-cut several lines of
solid quartz ‘reefs’ (or belts of rocks), but have not exposed the
solid rock during their whole length. The character of the strata
between these bands of rock can only be conjectured. It appears
to consist of a succession of laminated quartz, holding iron, and
tilted on end with a W.N.W. strike. To the oxidation and de-
composition of these rocks the red earth shown in the trenches
has been derived. No. 2 trench is 250 feet in length, and
is the most northerly. Towards the west several hard reefs of
close-grained quartz have been exposed. To the extreme east the
trench ends at a solid body of ferruginous and laminated quartz
rock of breciated appearance. From surface appearances, I esti-
mate the thickness of this reef at 18 feet. In the trench an
interval of 30 feet of broken quartz and red earth separates this
from a reef of exactly similar character, exposed in the trench,
that measures 24 feet in thickness. The course of these is ap-
proximately N. 28 W., and they can be followed for some distance
towards the south for 50 or 60 yards. Whether these are one or
two separate reefs remains to be proved by adequate works.
They are apparently strong masses of quartz, and enclose masses
of grey flinty quartz, which, from appearance, I should consider
to be non-auriferous. I crushed several pieces indiscriminately
broken from these ‘reefs,’ and obtained, by careful panning
manipulation, good prospects of very tine gold. In no case was
any gold visible to the naked eye or when assisted by a magnify-
ing glass.
“-Vo. 1 Trench. —This has not been carried sufficiently to the
east to intersect the line of the eastern reef referred to in No. 2
trench, but it apparently intersects a continuation of the second
reef referred to above. Nos. 14 and 15 trenches on the Eastern
Hill are on a continuation of this line, the course of which can
be seen on the surface midway between them (Nos. 1 and 2


trenches), and contiguous to the garden fence. This trench does
not sufficiently prove the exact character of the country between
the solid belts of stone exposed in the cuts. Appearances would
seem to indicate that it consists of thin laminations of grey
quartz rock. During my first visit I carefully took samples (a)
of the solid stone or reefs exposed in both of these trenches, and
( b ) of the country intervening. The assays prove that both were
auriferous to an extent in excess of what the physical appearance
of the stone would have suggested.
No. 3, or Western Trench.— This commences at the western
termination of No. 1 cut, and runs for 45 feet to the north, where
it suddenly disappears. This exposes a strong vein of ferrugi-
nous quartz, in country composed of broken layers of quartz on
end.
Tunnel. —This had been commenced before my first visit,
and since then it has been extended feet. The face now
stands at 180 feet from the mouth. It commences on the west
slope of the hill, about 30 feet under and 100 feet west of the
western reef, and after the first 7 5 feet it passes through similar
country, viz., thin laminations of quartz, broken and divided by
earth layers, with a strike apparently N. 60 W. At 75 feet it
passes through a strong leader— 6 inches thick—of black,
ferruginous quartz, i.e., quartz deeply stained, probably with
titanic iron. This dips east. Pieces of this crushed gave good
prospects of gold in a state of fine division. The sides of this
tunnel were cohered by damp and dust, but numerous leaders
similar to the above were passed through. At 38 yards from the
mouth, almost under but to the east of the reef in the western
trench, a rubbly vein of ferruginous quartz, and 5 feet thick,,
was passed through. The dip is undefined, but apparently it is
to the west. At 40 yards another mass of rubbly quartz, 15 feet,
suceeeds. These are undefined. The country consists of quartz
—yellow ferruginous, gossan, and black veins; through this
leaders and joints run at all angles. These black veins contain
“ bughs” and open joints lined with blistered and waxy ex-
crescences, and these all give abundant prospects of gold,
although no gold is visible.
“Western Hill.
“The position of this is shown on sketch No. 1, while No. 3
sketch shows position and thickness of the rocks from which
samples were taken. This is a huge mass of gossan quartz and
breciated rocks, cemented together by threads of titanic iron or
manganese. It is situated to the south-west by the Pigstye Hill,
from the base of which it rises to an elevation of 180 feet.
Traversing these rocks on the eastern side is a belt of grey
laminated quartz. The approximate course of these quartziferous
belts is N. 18 W. They are covered by straggling trees and tall
coarse grass. Along the apex or long diameter of the ridge, a


well defined belt of boulders can be traced. At OA a large hole
has been blasted out of this belt of rocks ; it measures 22 feet in
width. Apparently, rocks of the same character extend on each
side. To the west they can be traced for at least a distance of
90 feet, where they disappear under the earth and long grass.
This westerly belt marked on sketch 08. To the east, the
surface partially obscures a belt of apparently identical rock,
and 66 feet in width, where a strong reef of grey laminated
quartz, marked on sketch C, either bounds them to the west or
divides them from similar rocks to the east. So far as I can
judge from surface appearances, samples A, B, C represent a
thickness of 180 feet. In none of these was gold visible, but all
gave good prospects of very fine gold when carefully panned.
Belts marked A and B can be traced to the south for at least
130 yards, where they form the southern fall of the ridge. One
hundred yards south of A, a saddle connects the Western and
Eastern Hills. Opposite the saddle, but in the same belt as A, a
hole, 6., has been blasted. Here the rock is softer and less stained
with iron, but has, otherwise, the same character. So far as I
am warranted in forming an opinion, the Western Hill is com-
posed of an enormous mass of these peculiar gold-bearing rocks.
As the contained gold is entirely invisible, I am unable to state
whether it is equally disseminated through the substance of these
rocks, or whether it impregnates certain parts only. Samples
were taken of these described belts by chipping fragments off
surface boulders indiscriminately. Indeed, where gold is in-
visible it is impossible to select.
“ Eastern Hill.
(See Sketch No. 4).
“ This is separated by a deep gully from the Western Hill,
and appears to consist of a succession of reefs very similar in
appearance to the Pigstye Hill. South of the Saddle, connecting
this with the Western Hill, a shaft 13 feet deep or so has been
sunk on the crest of the ridge in a dark, heavy, ferruginous or
manganiferous quartz. The eastern end of this shaft has ap-
parently exposed the country rock. The west end is still in dark
stone. The apparent course of this peculiar reef is N. 30 E.,
but the evidence is too meagre to state this with confidence.
This shaft is shown on Sketch No. 4, as No. 12. Samples were
taken by me off the solid stone in the bottom, sides and end of
this shaft. On crushing and panning some of the pieces of stone
from this shaft, excellent prospects of gold were obtained. The
samples of the country east of this shaft are numbered 13.
Having, during my last visit, taken samples from the several
trenches on the apex of this large hill, I deemed if inexpedient, at
least unnecessary, to repeat the process, but observing stone
similar in appearance, and in the exact line of the eastern reef
described under No. 2 trench, Pigstye, in the small trenches


marked 14 and 15 on the north-eastern spur of the hill, I took
samples and numbered them as below By crushing and panning
good prospects were obtained from these samples also. In none
of these, even after crushing, was gold visible, and no attempt
was made to specially select the samples. In the case of wide
belts of country pieces of the rock were broken off at short
intervals across the thickness, and these being mixed, a portion
was roughly crushed and secured in a small bag, and another
portion of the same stone was parcelled and labelled as follows :
1— Eastern Reef, Pigstye Hill ) -v T 0
2 Do. Do. [ No. 2 cut.
3 Reef near centre, No. 1 cut.
4 Western Reef.
5 6 inch Leader, 75 in Tunnel.
6 Strong reef, 38 or 40 yards in Tunnel.
A—From Western Hill, hole in central reef (22 feet thick) towards north.
B—From Western Hill to west of central reef (90 feet thick).
C—From Western Hill, reef 66 feet east of A (about 20 feet thick).
—From Western Hill, 120 yards south of A, same reef,
12 - Eastern Hill, from sides, end and bottom of shaft.
13 - Eastern Hill; the country east of bottom of shaft.
14—Eastern Hill ) n ~ , . . , , _.
15 do. | On north spur, being m line of eastern reefs, Pigstye Hill.
Central —From Central Hill.
“ The whole of these were taken, crushed, and packed in the
presence of Mr. Mylne, of Brisbane, who accompanied me. It is
difficult to give an opinion as to how these peculiar rocks will
behave in depth, or in what way the gold occurs. So far as my
experience goes, they differ from any other auriferous rocks I
have seen in the colonies, and the discovery of gold in these,
while it adds to the knowledge we possess as to the occurrence of
gold, opens up in the future vast possibilities as to sources from
whence this metal may be derived.
“As to Taranganba, all our knowledge has yet to be
obtained. Meantime, the evidence before us tends to show that
gold in a minute state of division exists in unique rock, and over
a thickness which, if it be continuous in depth, and if the value
indicated by the first series of assays be confirmed by those now
suggested, will make this property of almost incalculable value.
“ Central Hill
Is situated about a mile to the south of the Eastern Hill, a valley,
a chain of waterholes, and an inlet from the ocean intervening.
The hill is conical, of no great height, but covers several acres of
land, and is covered with rocks very similar to those exposed in
shaft No. 12. No work whatever has been done in this situation.
An examination of the surface reveals a ridge that apparently
connects this with the Eastern Hill. I n the line of this ridge the
samples were broken off surface boulders. No selection was
practised. No specimen shows visible gold.


“ Boundaries.
“ These include the chain of water holes, except one, that
traverse the valley, and which are never dry. They also include
the whole of the hills described, much of the useless land adjoin-
ing the inlet, a large expanse of valley and richly-grassed land,
and a large area to the west of the Central Hill, in which no pros-
pecting work at all has been done. As the north-eastern boun-
dary cuts off the eastern slope of the Pigstye and Eastern hills, I
would advise a clause to be inserted in the lease that this boundary
may, if required, be extended in that direction eight chains.
Power ought likewise to be taken for giving up a portion of the
whole area stipulated for, should at any time the property be
found to be unworkable to profit, on giving months’ notice
to this effect in writing.
“ During the whole of this inspection, and in taking, crush-
ing, and packing the samples for assay, I was accompanied by
Thomas Mylne, Esq., Registrar of Titles, Brisbane, who was most
careful in his supervision, and his desire that the samples should,
as far as possible, honestly represent the average quality and
value of the various reefs. They may safely be considered as
honest records of what exists at the situations named in Taran-
ganba. That no dubiety may exist as to the appearance and
quality of the reefs sampled, I have retained a portion of the stone
in ibs natural state. The crushed samples in the bags were so
treated for facility of transport. The sample bags were filled, tied,
and numbered as they came from the mortar. With the exception
of B and C samples, they were taken from the same situations
as those formerly assayed; and, as far as surface crops go, they
fairly represent the rocks exposed on the respective hills. Tn
event of the reefs reported upon proving persistent in three hills,
they should, down to the level of the house, produce about
2,000,000 tons of stone; but on this subject, in the absence of
prospecting works, it is impossible to speak with precision. The
value of these reefs will be represented by the assays of the
samples which accompany this report.
“JAMES R. M. ROBERTSON,
“ M.E., F.G.S., F.R.G.S.
“Sydney, 23rd June, 1887.
“ Messrs. Watt & Dodds, 131 Pitt-street, Sydney.”
“ Technical College Laboratory,
“ Sydney, Ist July, 1887.
“Messrs. E. Vickery and Son.
“ Gentlemen.—The following are the first results of eight of
the samples. The numbers represent gold and silver together,


but the metal appears to be nearly fine gold. I have not had
time to go over the slags, so they may be higher.
GOLD AND SILVER.
ozs. dwt. grs.
A. Western
... 0 7 4 per ton.
W. of A. B., Western ..
... 6 4 3
W. of Hill, E. of A.
... 3 4 16
B. Hill, W. of A.
... 8 0 12
Greystone, E. of A.
Traces.
Central ...
... j)
Central
... 0 2 14
Tunnel, 6-in leader
... 1 16 0
“ I remain,
“ Yours truly,
“WILL. A. DIXON.”
“ Technical College Laboratory,
“Sydney, 2nd July, 1887.
Messrs. E. Vickery and Son.
“ Gentlemen, —The assays of the further samples are as
follows:
oz.
dwt. grs.
E. T. No. 12
Traces
per ton
E. T. No. 13
2
7 1
33
E. Spur, E. Hill, No. 14 and 15
1
0 21
33
Tunnel average of last 36 feet ...
Traces
40 yards Tunnel decomposed vein
Traces
Average, Western Cut, 45 feet ...
Traces
Tunnel at 38 yards, rubbly vein...
0
2 14
33
No. 1 cut, Pigstye
0
13 1
33
E. Reef, No. 2
0
5 21
33
“None of the samples contain more than traces of silver and
gold, being 999 fine. I have not had time to go over the slags,
except No. 1, which yielded nothing further.
“ I remain,
“ Yours truly,
“WILL. A. DIXON.”
Mr. Gr. R. Dibbs’ Statemeet in Reference to the Taranganba
Property.
“ Sydney, 22nd August, 1887.
“In company with Mr. James Fletcher, M.P., late Minister
for Mines, and Mr. Thomas Birrell—a practical and experienced


miner, I visited the Taranganba Mine, and the following is the
result of my experience :
“ The Hills, as described in Dr. Robertson’s reports, contain
dykes or lodes to the full extent of those reports. I saw stones
broken off various parts of the property, after clearing away all
surface stone and debris. Thirteen separate samples from thirteen
different places I saw crushed and panned out and assisted
in the crushings, with a result that twelve out of the
thirteen samples gave large prospects of gold in the dish.
During my stay at Taranganba I saw over one hundred samples
of stone panned, and, in nine cases out of ten, with good
prospects. After leaving Taranganba I visited the Mount Morgan
Mine, carefully inspected that property and the mode of treatment
under the Chlorination process. The stone of Taranganba closely
resembles the Mount Morgan stone. After I had been at Taran-
ganba some days, Mr. Yickery, Dr. Robertson, Mr. Cox, and Mr.
Mullens arrived, and these gentlemen obtained samples and
crushings similar in character to those I have above described.
“ I give my opinion for what it is worth : that the Taran-
ganba Mine, in richness and extent, is fully equal to the ‘Mount
Morgan.’
“ GEORGE R. DIBBS.”
Mr. Laidley’s Statement.
“Sydney, September, 3rd, 1887.
“To Messrs. Watt & Dodds,
“ Pitt Street.
“ Dear Sirs, —As requested, I forward you a short report of my
late visit to Taranganba. In July last I visited, in company with
Messrs. Dibbs, Fletcher, and Birrell, Taranganba, the property of
Robert Ross, Esq., situated near Yeppoon, near Rockhampton.
We explored the five hills embracing the mineral area under offer,
collecting therefrom numerous specimens, which were in each case
broken off from the solid, and afterwards crushed and panned in
my presence, shewing in the majority of instances very fair pros-
pects, and two or three pieces, notably those from the con-
glomerate on eastern side of East Hill and Pigstye Trench, near
the blacksmith’s forge, giving very rich results. These inspections
were made, I may state, before the arrival of Messrs. Cox, Mullens,
and Yickery, and not in the presence of Mr. Ross, except on one
or two occassions, when it was actually necessary for someone
knowing the ground to show us round, and to point out the different
places that had been previously opened up. I subsequently
inspected the same ground alone, knocking off in all eleven pieces
from the solid, and as far underground as circumstances would


permit. On bringing them down to Sydney, I handed them over
to Mr. Smith for assay, personally witnessing the whole being
crushed to powder and well mixed, from which two samples of
1000 grains each were taken, and subjected to the ordinary test,
the result yielding 4 oz. 1 dwt. 16 grs. of gold per ton, and silver
a trace, as per original certificate herewith.
“ I am,
“Yours faithfully,
“S. E. LAIDLEY.”
Mr. Dodds’ Statement.
“ In April last I visited Taranganba and examined the gold-
bearing hills. I broke off from the solid formation many pieces
of stone which were crushed and panned out, and in the majority
of cases they gave good prospects of gold. I also brought away with
me several pieces of stone from the different hills, and on my
return to Sydney, I handed them to the Hon. E. Yickery, M.L.C.,
who had them assayed, and the results were as follows :
Pigstye, No. 1
Gold.
oz. dwt, grs.
Traces.
,, ,, 2
South Hill
23 8 10
0 9 3
Eastern Hill ...
56 2 17
Western Hill...
0 11 18
Central Hill ...
Traces.
“ Sydney, September sth,
1887.”
“Leonard Dodds.
Mr. Thomas Birrell’s Statement.
“ Newcastle, 29th August, 1887.
“My dear Sir, —You ask me my opinion of the Taran
ganba mine, which I visited last month, in company with yourself,
Mr. Dibbs, and Mr. Shepherd Laidley. I was present and as-
sisted in all the sampling of stone taken, and in the crushing and
washing both of the stone obtained by yourself and Messrs. Dibbs
and Laidley, and the samples taken by Dr. Robertson and Messrs.
Mullens, Cox, and Yickery. I helped to crush most of the samples.
I have been on most of the northern fields of this colony—l have
also had large experience in New Zealand, both in reefing, cement,
and the beach diggings—and I never in my experience saw so many
payable crushings out of the total number tried I think, out of
all we tested prior to Messrs. Yickery, Mullens, Cox, and Robert-


son coming, there were only two or three blanks, and only some
three or four blanks out of the number taken by the last-named
gentlemen. I can further state that the samples taken were
from the solid rock in every case. My instructions from you
(and followed by me) were to clean away all debris , and break
from virgin rock which had not been seen or exposed before.
“ After leaving Taranganba, I had the opportunity of visit-
ing Mount Morgan. Mr. Hall was kind enough to permit our
party to freely examine that property. The character of the lodes
and formation is very similar, almost identical, with that of
Taranganba. In my opinion, the latter property is of enormous
value, and that it only requires developing to be one of the mining,
wonders of the age.
“ Yours obediently,
“THOMAS BIRRELL.
“ James Fletcher, Esq., M.P.
“ Castlereagh-street, Sydney.”
Memorandum of James Fletcher, Esq., M.P.
“In company with Mr. G-. R. Dibbs, Mr. Laidley, and Mr.
Thomas Birrell (the latter a miner of large experience), I visited
the Taranganba gold-mining property, on the estate of Mr. Robert
Ross, about thirty miles N.E. of Rockhampton. The property
consists of five hills, three of which I examined fully and two
cursorily. I carefully examined and traced the various dykes
and leaders running through the property, and after having satis-
fied myself of their continuance and extent, I took a large number
of samples from the solid formation, and also several tests from
the intermediate country. In every case but one, upon crushing
and panning the stones from dykes and leaders I found gold;
many of the samples yielding large (very) prospects; some of these,
I have no hesitation in saying, equalled a result of fully 200 ozs.
to the ton.
“ A tunnel has been driven from the west side of the Pigstye-
Hill, intended, no doubt, to intersect the dykes which run north
and south through this property. This tunnel I consider as so-
much waste money. The ironstone dyke, which it cuts near to
the mouth, could have been tested from the surface at one-tenth
of the expense, and also the leaders and country between. The
conglomerate dyke on the east side of Pigstye Hill has not been
reached by the tunnel. I, however, took samples both from the
ironstone dyke leaders, the country intervening, and the con
glomerate dyke. The dykes and leaders gave excellent prospects,
and the intervening country, in two or three cases, gave prospects
equal to 1 oz. per ton, and in others traces. I also got large


prospects from some of the dykes and leaders on the Eastern and
Western hills.
“In addition to the test made by myself, I was present and
saw the samples taken, crushed, and panned by Messrs. Robert-
son, Cox, Yickery, and Mullens. There must have been from 40
to 50 of such tests made, and in nine out of ten of such tests, gold
was clearly visible, in some cases in large quantities. The idea of
the property having been salted is too absurd to be even thought
of. There is at least 20,000 tons of stone visible on the surface,
and it is an insult to ordinary intelligence to suggest such an idea.
But if such were possible—which I deny—the tests I have spoken
of were taken from the solid formation, in the absence of the
proprietor. The absence of a successful assay from the stone
brought by Cox and Mullens at the Mint, and elsewhere, in no
way alters my opinion of the extreme value of this property; and it
is what would have been expected by nine out of every ten practical
gold miners in the colony. The tests were taken, not only from
the gold bearing portion of the dykes, but from the whole of the
intervening country. To more clearly convey my meaning, I would
suppose the gold-bearing portion of the dykes to be, say, 50 feet
wide, out of a possible 190 feet of width. The tests were taken
over the whole of the cross section—perhaps 201bs. in weight, out
of that large quantity some 2| lbs. have been tested or assayed,
and it is more than probable that a few grains only of the
thousands tested were from the gold bearing portion. Every
practical gold miner will admit that unless gold is equally dis-
tributed in a reef or dyke—-which is not found once in a hundred
times—a fire test of so small a portion is no reliable criterion of
the value of a property. Such practical men would infinitely
prefer trusting to the result of their own sampling, crushing, and
washing to any known forms of assay, unless where the gold
is found in refractory ores—which Taranganba stone is not.
“ After my personal inspection of this property, I am fully
satisfied of its extent and richness.
“ JAMES FLETCHER.
“Sydney, Ist September, 1887.”
“ Messrs. Watt and Dodds,
“Bell’s Chambers,
“ Pitt Street,
“ Dear Sirs, —Apart from anyone’s knowledge, and for our
own guidance, we requested Mr. W. R. Grove to visit Taranganba
and give us his opinion upon that property, and received from him
the following letter, which you can make use of if you think
proper.
“Yours truly,
“ Bloomfield & Dixon.”


Mr. Grove’s Letter,
“ Rockhampton,
“ July, 6th 1887.
“ D. P. Dixon, Esq.,
“ 10 Macquarie Place, Sydney.
“ Sir, —In accordance with your instructions, with Mr. Russell I
proceeded on Tuesday, sth July, to Taranganba to view the property
more particularly known as “Mount Ross.” Mr. R. Ross being
absent, Mr. A. Ross was kind enough to accompany us. I found three
long trenches had been cut upon this hill, all showing the existence of
the same auriferous quartz and ironstone. A tunnel has been driven
about 100 feet across the hill, showing the same auriferous formation
to a depth of 60 or 70 feet below the top of the hill ; about 20 feet from
the mouth of the tunnel I broke a number of pieces, but could not
detect visible gold. At the same time I have no doubt but that gold
exists in it, though in what quantity I am unable to say, not being
allowed to take samples. A short distance south-east is a much larger
hill which it is connected with. Several small cuts and trenches have
been put in ; in one place a shaft has been sunk about 12 feet deep,
with a deep trench from each end, showing a great extent of auriferous
quartz and ironstone. If samples taken give payable results, this pro-
perty is without doubt a second Mount Morgan, and in my opinion
there is a far greater extent of auriferous ground than is the case in the
Mount Morgan Company’s property. The advantages for working it
could hardly be better.
“ Yours faithfully,
“(Signed) Wm. R. Grove.”






<2.


If the losses of Australian mining
investors and speculators couidbe reckoned
up, the total would be something enor-
mous : it might compare possibly with
the amount of the public debt. The mis-
fortunes of speculators pure and simple,
those who gamble in stocks and take
the chances of the market, do not excite
much sympathy. People who go into the
game do so with the knowledge that
they are running a risk, and if they (
lose they have no right to complain ; i
it is the fortune of war. Besides, j
what is one man’s loss is another’s gain,
and the community as a whole suffers no
direct in j ury f rom the unlucky speculations
of individual members of the community.
But with the mining investor, the man who
puts down his money with the purpose of
turning some new mineral discovery to
practical account, it is different. If the
venture fails, and unfortunately ventures
of this kind too often end badly, the com-
munity as well as the investor suffers ; the
money invested is wasted almost as com-
pletely as though it had been thrown into
the sea. During the recent silver “ boom”
there were many examples of this
sort of thing. Enterprises which looked
very promising in their inception
proved to be mere bubbles ; good
money was swallowed up in worthless
mines. The same process was repeated
over and over again. A dazzling pro-
speotus, backed up by the reports of mining
experts, was issued, a rush for shares fol-
lowed, and handsome fortunes were made
—on paper. Time went on, and the
expectant shareholders were undeceived.
They had built castles in the air ; they
had put their money in valueless mines ;
their savings or their borrowings, as the
case might be, had gone never to return.
Unfortunate mining transactions have
been so common that it may seem
to be going out of the way to refer to any
particular case, but one mining company
has been brought so prominently before
the public that it is scarcely possible to
refrain from noticing it. We refer to
the Taranganba Gold-mining Company
which was formed by Sydney capitalists to
work “ the Great Taranganba Mine,’’ as it
was called, near Bockhampton. The reports
that were made by experts and others as
to the prospects of this mine were of the
most glowing character. It was to
j be a second Mount Morgan ; in
the words of one enthusiast, it
was u a mountain of gold.” A company
with a capital of £1,000,000 was formed
to work this remarkable mine, expensive
I and elaborate machinery was erected, and
| some thousands of tons of stone were got
| ready for treatment. After much money
had been expended, doubts arose as to
the value of the mine, and it has been
| recently reported upon by professional
men specially engaged for the purpose.
One of them is the Government Geologist
of Queensland, Mr. Jack, whose re-
port we published last week. He
made an exhaustive examination of
the mine, taking samples of stone from
here, there, and everywhere, and subjecting
them to careful, analysis. Instead of
finding the rich gold which the other
experts had discovered, he was unable to
discern, in the bulk of the samples,
anything that would be likely to pay
for the cost of working. “ The undoubted
presence of gold in the quartzites,” he
says, “ may possibly justify the assertion
that the hillocks of Taranganba are, in a
, certain sense, ‘ mountains of gold,’ but
the gold bears a proportion to the
stone which is very far, indeed, from
being payable. In the same sense
sea water is auriferous.” From a
portion of the mine, described as the “ big
cutting,” 2500 tons of stone, estimated to
give lOoz. of gold to the ton, has been
raised, and it is there still. This “ rich ”
stone is contemptuously described by Mr.
Jack a 3 “an accumulation of rubbish.” It
was a waste of time and money to exca-
vate it, ho says, and “to represent such
stuff as being worth lOoz. of gold per ton,
or even worth treating,” was, in his opinion,
“in the highest degree misleading.” On
the whole his report is exceedingly un-
favourable. But a still more condemna-
tory report has been made by Mr. W. B.
Henderson, a mining expert, who has !
spent two months at the mine. During
that time Mr. Henderson examined every
part of the property, and submitted to
analysis 249 samples of stone, taken from
all parts of the workings. Out of these
numerous samples there was scarcely one
which gave even a trace of gold, either by
panning or by assay, and Mr. Henderson
is led to the conclusion that the Taran-
ganba mine is “ absolutely worthless.”
In view of the prospects with which
the enterprise was launched these reports
are startling. According to the experts
who examined the mine before the
prospectus was issued, the stone in
many parts of the workings was
exceedingly rich in gold ; the experts who ;
have receutly been over the same ground
are unable to find any stone worth treat-
ing, and Qne of them condemns the mine
as u absolutely worthless.’’ It would
be difficult, we should think, to
meet in the whole history of mining
J a more remarkable case than this. It is
j nothing- unusual for a claim which has
j given good prospects to turn out unpay-
' able; but in this case we have,
I first of all, detailed reports of experts
! describing auriferous stone of extraordinary j
| richness, and then we have the testi-
: mony of other experts, who have gone
! over the same ground, to the effect
! that they can discover nothing of any
; value in the mine. How this remarkable
j discrepancy is to be accounted for it would
I be useless to inquire, unless one had the
powers and privileges of a royal commis-
sioner. We have chiefly to concern
ourselves with the fact that a mine
which was considered good enough to
warrant the raising of capital to the
j extent of £1,000,000 is now reported to be
i “ absolutely worthless.” If the verdict
| pronounced is sound, and no appeal
seems to have been made against
it, a heavy blow has been struck against
mining enterprise. Investors cannot
examine a mine for themselves, and they
must accept the statements and opinions of
others or keep aloof from mining ventures
altogether. No doubt the people who applv
for shares in new mining companies take
the statements contained in the pros-
pectuses with a grain of salt, but when
official reports of assays are given tkev
have been accepted in much the same way
as a gold-digger accepts the prospect
which he gets from his tin dish. But
if the reports published on the
formation of a company are not only not
borne out by actual work, but are abso-
lutely contradicted by other reports, the
[ investing public will draw its own con-
| elusions, and will become more cautious
than it has been in the past with regard
to new mining enterprises.
y' THE TARANGANBA MINE. . S
few days ago we published the report of
j Mr. Jack, the (Jueensland Government geo-
logist, on the notorious Taranganba property.
We are now in receipt of the report, furnished 1
by Mr. W. B. Henderson, who has made a care-
! ful and exhaustive examination of the place.
There is no necessity to reproduce the whole
of the document, as the following extracts con-
tain all that is perrinent to the crucial matter
of the present and prospective value of Taran-
ganba :—“ I received from Mr. Robert Ross,
one of the local directors, every assistance I
required. He pointed me out the spots that v
gold had been got and also in pointing out to
me spots where he himself had obtained gold, ;
even on to and concurrent with my inspection. \
The inspection of the property would not have
occupied anything like the time it has
only for the singular circumstances con- !
nected notably, that Mr. Ross {tirade '
several reports to me of rich discoveries j
of gold in the new workings in course of pro-
gress, which, of course, I investigated j
thoroughly in order to bring my report fully to [
date. I have made investigations, accompanied
by tests throughout, and am perfectly and
resolutely firm in the opinion I hold.” After
describing the plant, machinery, the general
formation of the country and the workings
which have been carried on, Mr. Henderson
says : “In the main or pigstye shaft from the
j tunnel down 40ft. odd reports of rich gold
were made to me by Mr. Ross, he producing me
assays signed by the company’s assayer in
proof. Mr. Ross made all his own tests. He
did not call my assistance to get the stone he
crushed in these instances, nor to see it crushed.
I was merely informed it came from such and
such a place, and shown the assay returns,
copy of which you will find in appendix.
Mr. Ross, however, at my request—and wil-
lingly so—went with me into tnis tunnel and
shaft, and pointed me out the spots and the
class of stone he got the gold from. I spent
days and days, again and again, as these reports ;
happened to come in, now here and next there, j
taking scores of bags of samples from the spots j
and all around the spots indicated by Mr. Ross.
Each bag contained about an average of eight
pieces or samples of stone. Two hundred and
forty-nine bags in all taken by me from all
classes and descriptions of rock throughout the
mine, as well as spots stated or pointed out to
me as auriferous by one or both of the local
directors, and my selection of samples, was
made under their eye on several occasions,
and the crushing and panning open at all
times to their inspection. I had new !
iron dishes supplied me from Rockhamp- t
ton for making my tests with. No hands ,
used them but myself. Each day’s samples |
were crushed, screened, panned, and assorted
for assay, and all bags and toolejused placed in
safety under seal or sign mark for use the fol- :
lowing morning. I made my tests with unusual
care and magnitude, and in a manner defying
deception, placed the tests as broken down in
bags direct, bags numbered, booked, description
of place taken from, and contents; then and
there taken direct, under my own eyes, crushed,
screened, panned off, panning every dish my-
self. The samples from each test, before pan-
ning, being thoroughly mixed in proportionate
quantities to various parcels of stone crushed.
Samples thus treated were taken direct to the
company’s assayer, mixed again, portion assayed
on the spot, passing into the crucibles
direct without additional pulverising; por-
tion retained •by the company’s as-
sayer for check purposes, and -x portion
taken with me to Sydney under seal for similar
check purposes if so required. Summing up
with respect to the mode, magnitude and
results of my tests, it leads me unmistakeably
to one firm conclusion which I am very sorry
to have to state, viz. That the Taranganba
mine, as a mine, is absolutely worthless. It is
by far and away the poorest thing designated
by the name ‘ mine’ I ever'set foot on 'or heard
tell of, and I advise discontinuing any further
expenditure upon it even to the cancellation (if
possible) of the present contract works going
on. I express no opinion (as I consider such
outside my province) as to the correctness or
otherwise of reported rich yields of gold made
to me by Mr. Ross, but I hold myself respon-
sible for the correctness of the tests I made
myself, as given in such appendix, and the
full facts connected stated in this report, which
speaks for itself.”
In an appendix Mr. Henderson gives the
tabulated results of 249 differeut samples
crushed, panned and assayed under his direction.
In every case but one the results of the assay
for gold are described by the significant word
“ nil.” In the one exception a trace was found.
The latest word, therefore, is that the Taran-
ganba mine is absolutely worthless. When the
facts of the case are taken into consideration
the reports that were published, the expecta-
tions that were held out, and the circumstantial
reports by which they were substantiated, it
appears evident that in the interests of public
morality the matter ought not to be allowed
to remain where it is.


