

Emigrant’s
FAREWELL.
THE shamrock rose and I overheard conversing,
While Britannia mournfully stood and for awhile,
On the subject of Emigration together they were dis-
coursing,
And the dark clouds of poverty that set oVr Briton’s isle
Sure brothers dear, the shamrock cried, the sufferings i
have undergone,
To gain an honest liveliliod has caused me to deplore, J
That my mind is wrought to such a state, i am resolved
to emigrate.
And seek the comforts here denied, upon Australias shore
3Viy now unhappy country once flourished with prosperty
it’s hardy sons arose at morn to prepare for daily toil,
With hearts as light and minds as bright as the shannon
or the li-ffey,
And at night to their humble cabins was welcomed with
a smile;
But the chilling hand of famine has our fertile fields
laid prostrate,
Our iron hearted landlords has turned us out of doors,
And the neglect of our absentees, has reduced our homes
to such a state,
That i will bid adieu to Old Ireland to seek Australia's
shore.
Then up spoke a poor artizan, who England’s rose did
represent,
Whose sunken eyes and visage pale bespoke a heart
o’ercharged with grief and care ; (content,
When I was for my labour paid, i gaily work’d in sweet
But now like you and thousands more 1 am driven to
despair,
Our tyrant task-masters grind us down, till our trade
we cannot live,
Such arbitary systems no longer I’ll endure,
But seek employment where for a fair day's work a fair
day’s wages we’H receive,
And strive to live in happiness on fair Australia's shore.
is there a man throughout this land could behold the
partner of his heart,
Or hear his child en cry for bread when no relief was near
Who for one moment could heve a sigh, or grieve from
England to part,
To seek that succour in a foreign land that is denied
him here;
Methjnks I hear you say not one to stay at home could
have a wish,
Or else his boasted strength of love indeed must be
most poor.
To cure him of his Ghurlish mind, let him with savage
beasts exist,
Nor alow him to contaminate fair Australia’s shore,
England possesses far more wealth to what it did in by-
gone days,
And yet the poor man had in those days of comforts
had his share,
But instead of bf being scattered round, they sweep it
in large heaps,
Audits keepers with a misers eye watch it with a
jealous care ;
Such selfish acts brings to light that rigtit is overcome
by might. (core,
But time will prove their golden fruits are rotten at the
So with my brothers hand in hand I’ll quit this pride-
tainted Babylon.
And seek ahmoe on that fair land call’d Australia* s shore
Britannia tearfully replied, my sons, i grieve with you
to part,
God speed your passage out across the briny main,
In bright hopes of future endeavour to forget the past,
May my blessings rest upon your headsand you to fame;
The vessel spread her swelling sails the emigrant* on
board they flew,
I heard them raise their voices high amid the billows roar
They eried farewell to England to thee one lasting long
abieu,
And the gallant barque sped on her way to Australia’s
shore.
Drink to me only
With thine Eyes
Drink to me only with thine eyes.
And I will pledge with mine,
Or leave a kiss but in the cup.
And I’ll not look for wine ;
The thirst that from my soul doth rise,
Doth ask a drink divine ;
But might I of Jove's nectar sip,
I would not change for thine.
I sent thee late a rosy wreath,
Not so much honouring thee,
As giving it a hope that there,
It would not wither'd be ;
But thou thereon didst only breathe,
And sent it back to me ;
sixice when it grows and smells, X swear,
Not of itself, but thee.
