

||||^
Issued by the - - -
New South Wales Government Tourist Bureau,
PER dTrector TER ' CHALLIS HOUSE. SYDNEY.


For full particulars
of tine
Health,
Holiday, and
Todrist Resorts of
New Soiitti Wales,
or for iriforrriatiori about bow to
Noruiriate Friends or Relatives in
Great Britain for passages to tbe
State at Greatly Reduced Fares,
Apply to . . .
THE IMMIGRATION AND
TOURIST BUREAU,
Cl\allis House, Sydney.
PERCY HUNTER, Director.


Qi 9 :L &
T» ■ ■ ■
BLUE MOUNTAINS.
N J
Thk Blue Mountain Range, famous for its gems
of scenery, is crossed by the Main Western Railway
SLine, the first point of contact being on the Lapstone
Hill, just beyond Emu Plains, 36 miles. The
highest point reached by the railroad is 3,658 feet *
( above sea level, at Clarence, 88 miles, but Mount
Victoria, distant 76 miles, with an elevation of
3,424 feet, is the last of the mountain stations
proper. After leaving the station at Sydney, the
SSS Strain flies through the western suburbs, which are
thickly populated and closely built on, but many
fine hemes surrounded by spacious grounds may be
observed from the train window.
■ Parramatta (population 23,000) was founded in V
I7BS, the year he landed here, by Captain
Phillip, the State’s first Governor. To us it is a
I; hoary and venerable town, having seen the begin-
nings of our history. For many years the State
S Government House was located here. Parra-
matta has some fine buildings, and some manu- w
factures of considerable importance, such as the k
weaving of tweed, making of tiles and pipes, soap, k
I J


BRIDAL VEIL FALL LEURA.


and candle making, and a brewery. The country
S%] surrounding is gently undulating and famous for its
orange groves. For miles around the lands are |k
frugiferous, and many varieties of English fruits
are successfully grown. Between Parramatta and
Penrith, a large Railway Depot at the foot of the
SS mountains, the country is similar in character,
and is largely used as orchards and for grazing.
Approaching the mountains it becomes more flat.
Just past Penrith the Nepean River is crossed. Of k
‘J this river one writer has said, “ Rapids alternate with k
> limpid sheets of open water, while far up stream,
standing out in bold relief, tower peaks, around J
the bases of which winds the mountain torrent, and
S where, save the noise of a distant fall, the purling
of running water, or perhaps the note of the bell-
Sbird heard in a far-away glade, there is all that
stillness necessary to complete our imagination of
the home of fairy and romance.”
Soon after leaving Penrith the stentorian puffs
of the locomotive indicate that it has reached the- J
j quickly rising grade, and in this first rise looking
k; back towards Penrith there is presented to the
gaze of the beholder a panorama, than which few
others from a train window excel.
The first of the mountain stations is Glenbrook 40
miles, and from this point to Mount Victoria, 76 miles,
the railway-line traverses a world-renowned region.
1 J


CLIFFS AT WENTWORTH, BLUE MOUNTAINS.


r — —I
The vastness of the depth and extent of the
S precipitous gorges and valleys of the Blue Moun-
tains inspire one with feelings of silent awe and
S' wonder, and impress the minds of some persons A
with the notion that such enormous ravines in the
mountains must have required violent convulsions k
in the earth’s crust for their formation; but if we
examine the rocks on all sides of the valley we
see no breaks nor signs of violent disturbance. The
S various beds of rock in horizontal strata may be J
seen to continue uninterruptedly around the sides
S' 4 of the valley, and the succeeding layers of rock, «
as we descend one side of the ravine, gradually
approach the corresponding layers on the other k
side, until at the bottom, in the bed of the water- t
course, we find that they actually join, which they
would not do if the sides of the ravine had been
violently torn asunder. We perceive, therefore,
y . that the various outcropping strata must once
SShave been continuous right across the valley or
ravine, and that they have been removed by some
agency without disturbance of the underlaying
beds. What then is the agency? Not volcanic k
fire, but running water. Look at the sloping
surface of any earth cuttings or embankments
that have been exposed to rain action; see the
miniature ranges and intervening valleys that the
water draining off has furrowed out. Notice the
$




miniature precipices left where the harder earth
k material has resisted the action of the running
water; also at the bottom of the embankment,
SS where the incline ceases and the water flows gently,
how it deposits in miniature alluvial flats the
p earth it has scooped out and washed down from
above. Now, could we look down from a con- k
siderable height, and, as it were, take a bird’s-eye L
view of the Blue Mountains, exactly similar features k
would be presented to us as we observed in the
earth embankment. Wherever the soft clay strata
Sof the Coal Measures exist, there are sloping sur-
faces ; where the harder Hawkesbury rocks appear,
SS there are cliffs; while the easily-disintegrated
clay-beds have been washed away, even to the
undermining the overlying sandstone. Ihe latter k
k has resisted to a great extent the denuding agencies, k
and been left in projecting masses which, at last,
k having the supporting soft strata removed, break
away and roll in great bosses down the sides of
SSS the hill, perhaps as far as into the bed of the stream
below, a perpendicular cliff being left where they
broke away from the main mass of rock.
The only considerable valleys which can be k
classed as originally inaccessible (though, of course, k
no valley any more than any mountain is absolutely k
so) seem to be the Yosemite, in California, and the
valleys of the Grose and Cox Rivers, in New South
—J


Sr*-- ———"g *- - -'■" ■■' ►— —^PISHF^
5
*
N
N
N
N
*
A BLUE MOUNTAIN PROMONTORY.
Wales.' 'ln some respects the valleys carved out
of the great sandstone plateau of New South Wales
are even more remarkable than the Yosemite itself.
The ravines which discharge their waters into the
little Cox River occupy an area of 1,212 square
miles. The whole forms the basin of this mountain
stream, and is bounded by cliffs increasing from
about 1,000 feet near its outlet to about 2,500 feet
near its western limits; the valley bottom being
not much above sea-level, and the only outlet being


s
through a gorge about a third of a mile wide. k
SSome considerable amount of decay is still going
on in the giant cliffs of the Blue Mountains.
Though in the life of a man a block may seem
unchanged, in a few thousand years it may have
entirely disappeared, and such a lapse of time
probably bears a less proportion to the period
occupied by the valley formation than does a §
single hour to the life of a man. Every characteristic k
the valleys possess is fully explained by that simple C
theory of earth sculpture by atmospheric agency.
In the westward portion of the Blue Mountains
the soft strata of the Coal Measures, which underlie
the sandstones of the Hawkesbury Series, stand
high, and have thus been much exposed to denud-
ation, and have led to a constant undermining of
k the sandstones wherever these softer rocks have k
been 'brought within reach of denuding agencies. w
As, however, the soft strata of the Permo-carbon-
Siferous Coal Measures dip eastward, it follows that
in the east portion of the Blue Mountains the
rivers leave the strata of the Coal Measures and
% ffow over the hard sandstones of the Hawkesbury
Series, so that no undermining action is possible
on the eastern area; hence the narrowness of the k
river gorges near the eastern escarpment.
These mountains are famed far and wide for their
scenes of rugged majesty, and for the peculiarly
t


I
w £
o %
0$
9
8
e i
8 J
e 2
g 1
8 5
s y
g y
y
1
!
S
i


,
exhilarating and health-giving qualities of the air
V of their upland forests. The scenery is magnificent,
|| and is yet strangely different from that made up l
k of bleak, snowy peaks, and glacier torrents which
L one is so apt to associate with the name of moun-
Stain. In the Blue Mountains the most characteristic
features are mighty abysses and towering head-
lands, and the spectator, gazing from the vantage-
ground of some beetling crag, views wonderful
panoramas of giant precipice and intervening
tree-carpeted valleys at giddy depths, with a
k delicate veil of blue mist softening the outlines on the
k distant horizon; or the many waterfalls, of marvel-
SS lous beauty, that plunge in silvery torrents of spray
over mighty cliffs, or rush in graceful cascades
through fairy bowers and nooks of mountain fern.
Of the Blue Mountains, Darwin says:—“lt is
not easy to conceive a more magnificent spectacle
than is presented to a person walking on the summit L
plains, when, without any notice, he arrives at the
brink of one of these cliffs, which are so perpen-
L dicular that he can strike with a stone the trees
growing at a depth of between 1,000 and 1,500 feet
S‘ below him. On both sides he sees headland beyond
headland of the receding line of cliffs, and on the
opposite side of the valley—often a distance of
several miles —he beholds another line rising up to
the same height on which he stands.”




A characteristic blue haze overhangs the whole
vision, and the vastness of the precipitous gorges,
Sand the immense extent of the silent, rugged
mountain scenery, all so wild and impressive,
cannot fail to inspire a feeling almost akin to
% awe, only to be replaced by one of soothing calm k
and restful peace, when the closer view unfolds k
|| the gorges clad in ferns of delicate loveliness, and
cascades and waterfalls of rare beauty and grace.
This wide extent of sweeping vales and rugged
mountain chains, first met at Wentworth, stretches
Saway westward to Mount Victoria. Before reach-
ing the latter township, such famous centres as
Leura, Katoomba, Medlow Bath, and Blackheath
' : are passed. About a mile from Blackheath station k
is Govett’s Leap, overlooking the Valley of the w
Grose, one of the principal sights on the Moun-
tains., Here a creek flows over the lip of a
S mighty precipice to the great yawning valley of
the Grose in a shimmering, swaying fall of over
500 feet. The gorge just here is impressive in
its vastness. The tops of the trees, 1,200 feet
Si below, look like a smooth green sward. So wonder-
fully prolific in beauty spots are these renowned
Blue Mountains, that every railway station on the
whole range has its own enticing array of satellites
—bush rambles by valley, crag, and fall, which
during the year are visited by thousands whose stay


SIN THE JENOLAN CAVES.
s - s


. , k
on the mountains invariably proves delightful and
benefiting. The rustic paths leading to the several
places of interest are maintained in good order by
S Government grants of money, controlled by enthu-
siastic and patriotic trustees.
By a pleasant route of 36 miles from Mt. Victoria,
terminating in a bold sweep under the Grand Arch,
the Jenolan Caves are reached. These marvellous
limestone caverns have attracted tourists from every
corner of the globe. Deep in the recesses of the
mountain lie fairy palaces, supported on fluted k
columns, hung with magic tapestries woven of k
shining stone, and draped with delicate lace-work
whose filaments are spun by water sprites from the
k hard rock of the earth’s inmost fastnesses. The
SSS stalactites, stalagmites, shawls, pillars, and grottos
at Jenolan are of varied and most fantastic forma-
tion, of a colour graduating from the deepest
chocolate to the most perfect white. The walks k
through the Caves are well made and protected, k
i|j and a complete system of electric lighting has been
installed. A splendid Government accommodation
k house lies in the hollow of the hills close to the
LZLJ


L. « J


«a
(M
| 8 ;
J i
|lj 3
3, 5
a £ | V
W QCj *>
\% ®
X la c*^b i ' T %.* ,) ' ;
<|l| i3w
'■ 5 '"><#®1 li.
H <i 5
3E - *w


