

'
*
<
X‘ 1
-
—
.
„
.
'
• - —
-




0




wkS&P''/rsS&i-ASPjSSfcmM % " fSSP- ; '|lB8|?*^fc' : »- >, * * ■ ffipjfjMtft &\ &/ , jOS/fi Bfef ■••*., 1 H I
, I' * ■ V “ /f** 4 ft*
Slonj of Teddq Koala




The Story of
Teddu Koala
Stories and Uerse by Dorothea Uautier
ITlonotones by Courtesy of
Tloel Burnet, Koala Park
W. H. HONEY PUBLISHING CO.
SYDNEY
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY
PRATTEN BROS. LTD.. SYDNEY


Out uj Harm’s Way


The Storu of Teddvj Koala
EDDY KOALA looked at us with his curious little face all puckered
U up, and his bright beady eyes blinking in the glare of the after-
noon sun.
Poor little fellow, he was feeling ever so sorry for himself, and some-
how we knew that he was asking for our pity.
“If you see my lovely long tail hanging somewhere among the trees,
would you very kindly tell me, please?" he whimpered, his little head cocked
on one side in the most imploring and disarming manner.
Then, little by little, as he daintily nibbled his evening meal of delicate
gum-tips, this sad story was told.
Once, a long time ago —it seemed so long ago that he had really for-
gotten the date —he had lived in the same gunyah with a friend of his, the
whip-tail kangaroo. They hunted together and were very proud of their
long tails. At that time there was a drought in the land, so they had camped
near a pool of still water, which they were forced either to drink or die of
thirst.
At last, one day, they found themselves in a sorry plight, for their
water-hole was dry and spent.
’Roo sat still for a long while, a far-away look in his eyes
“When I was little," he
said, “my mother carried me
in her pouch, and I remember
the time when the earth was
dry and the trees looked sad
and thirsty as they do to-day.
The birds fell to the ground,
the animals died fighting
around the empty water-holes,
and the flowers withered and
died.


' i
An innocent and lovable bundle of fur.
E. B. Studios


■
, CTioBwg^M^il > *Miyiy «p9ff
* t%T* Mi • rffr ■ V '^■■L
-< VH jMi J0***9lV ■
f < : j* • / JR. <p.
“My poor mother found me a wearisome burden, but she struggled on
till she came to a sandy river bed. Then she dug a deep hole in the sand,
and it gradually filled with beautiful clear, cool water. Now I shall go to
the river and dig in the sand, for if we stay here we will surely die."
Teddy was delighted. Yes, let us both go, for I have strong arms and
will help you."
On the way they stumbled over some of their friends who had died of
thirst, and this made them more anxious than ever to find water.
It was so hot and they were both tired, but after many hours of weary
tramping they reached the river. Teddy thought it would be a good idea
if ’Roo started the digging, as he knew most about it.
Poor ’Roo dug and dug, but, alas! not a drop of water appeared. Teddy
said he felt ill and that he could not possibly help; in fact, he thought he
was about to die.
This made 'Roo very sad, so he went to work again with a will. At last
a trickle of water could be seen in the bottom of the hole, and it slowly
filled to the very brim. Vei'y gently 'Roo bent over bis sick friend. “I have
found clear, cool water and will bring you some.”
Naughty Teddy sprang to his feet, for, sad to relate, he had been sham-
ming all the time. He dashed straight to the water-hole and drank his fill,
and, as he was drinking, his long tail stuck out like a dry stick above the
pool of water. ’Roo was so angry with him that he seized his boomerang
and cut off Teddy’s tail. So now Teddy Koala, because of his laziness and
cunning, has no tail.
Oh, Teddy! We can hardly be-
lieve such a story is true, but we are
very sad, for we know you feel ever
so miserable. Some day, perhaps,
you will find your tail in the forest,
waiting for you to put it on, but then,
little Native Bear, we shouldn’t love
you nearly so well, for you would be
just a stranger to us.


The Land of the Koalas
IN drowsy mood, one day, I lay beneath the sun-flecked branches of an old, old gum-
tree. Indeed, so old it was, tlie inquisitive little pathway, winding from its roots
to the quaint rustic gateway on the other side of the meadow, might have led it from
thence to the very land of Memory itself.
hrom between the leaves of this sturdy old tree, the rays of the sun shot darts at me,
like little pointed arrows of light, which poised in the air awhile, and then suddenly de-
scended to the ground, where they lay quivering in the soft, moist earth.
Now, there are some who will say it was just a dream, hut there are others who have
heard the clear, insistent call of the woods, lingering awhile to listen to its voice, and who
even declare they have seen the Bush Folk in the very act of blowing a succession of sweet,
soft, flute-like notes on their Elfland Horns. These will know that my tale is true. Yet,
perhaps, there was a trick in the sunlight that afternoon, for, as it filtered its way through
the leafy branches, it may have got tangled up in my brain and there spied out threads
with which to weave such a plot. Whether that indeed was the truth, or whether Old Man
Nod was having a jest with me, I know not, for the sun was warm, and soft, and drowsy.
In a flash of time, I was, at it were, plunged from that shining afternoon, into a very
odd and topsy-turvy-looking world. Maybe it was the whirling in my head that produced
this strange sensation of a land all slanting with shadows and stray wisps of sunlight,
for very soon I was standing on a broad roadway feeling very lost and lonely, as a tiny
craft must feel when cast adrift in mid ocean.
A wi Id woodland path seemed to jut ofl" from this highway, though one could spy
little more than a yard or so down this twisty lane, so jealously was it guarded by tall,
spiked hushes, and nodding, wise-faced flowers. Suddenly, I tripped over something lying
trodden among the leaves, and, on looking down, saw two large scrawly letters —T.K. It
was a sign-post, with its battered face turned to the ground, and the other side of the hoard
revealed these curious words, “The Land of the Koalas.” Strange that no other lanes or
turnings were visible from that great, wide road, hut had I not travelled in some amazing
vehicle which had hurled me through space and dropped me at the foot of this pathway?
Parting the brambles and bracken fern, T boldly entered this cunningly-hidden land,
and soon, from every nook and cranny, there trooped hefoi'e my bewildered eyes, so many
diminutive and unique little creatures as I had never before seen.
Each little fellow was carrying, tucked under one
strong arm, a brown bundle, and there was such a chatter-
ation in all pitches and tones as would make anyone dazed
and puzzled.
Koalas, there were, of all ages, ranging in steps and
stairs Mothers, Fathers, and even Grandparents, with
their train of little ones —all were ambling about in the
most quaint and amusing fashion, looking like so many
wound-up toys with the springs let loose. One undignified
little gentleman was scratching his ribs with his hind claws,
while the lady he was conducting to the party, for so it
(Turn to page 11.)


|||||^^
Amid the tall gums and bright blossoms so rare,
We may picture the home of our wee Native Bear.


A si
vi
4 S
j !
crlie LUee
Seated aloft in the fork of a tree,
The wee Native Bear, he peeps down at me;
A curious look of surprise and fear
Such a quaint little soul —Our Native Bear.
A whimper, a piteous look, a cry,
And Teddy sits there with face all awry.
While the tears rain fast and fall down his cheeks;
“Please, you won’t hurt me?’’ he humbly entreats.
Then down from his hough with comical gait
Such a sad tale in your ear to relate,
Teddy comes bouncing with lumbering trot,
And whispers to you the dastardly plot.
From dingoes, strange dogs, and foxes that pry.
He fled all a-tremble. Oh fie! Oh fie!
Just a droll and harmless wee Native Bear!
Driven, and hunted, and chased from his lair.


H fit I
&MJ
jXjtrS
live Dear
If seek him ye would, all secure from harm.
Steal a brief moment for “Teddy-Bear-Farm
There, drowsy with dreaming, nor thought nor
Bides Teddy Koala, our Native Bear.
And to-day we pause in the bushland fair.
Seeking a trace of our wee Native Bear;
We linger awhile, then turn with a sigh;
Not an echo faint, of that strange, wild cry.
care,
"The delicate gum-tips, I'll tell you sire;
Do you know the god with the eyes of fire ?
A-down the green hillside with blazing stride,
He has swept with his sword, afar and wide.’
Then Teddy, he climbs to my shoulder high,
“I'll tell you the rest,” says he, “bye and bye.
But Sleep Man’s cobweb has tangled my eyes.
A wink and a nod, then asleep he lies.


jJ&£‘ JlS&t ...' i ; W
Two Little Australians.


proved to be, was adjusting her large bushy ears in the most comical manner. Some of
the tiny Bears were perched, in high glee, on their mother’s backs, riding in the wind care-
free and happy.
No one seemed to notice me, unless my intrusion was resented, and they had decided
to pay no attention to the uninvited guest. "This must be the reason, I mused, when one
of the funny little creatures pressed close to me, his rubbery black nose twitching in such
an adorable way that I wanted to hug him.
‘*We knew you d come. The little fellow was actually talking in plain English.
“And how did you know? I queried, still somewhat taken aback at being whirled
so unexpectedly into this land of the “Teddy Bears.’
“Because we shot those tiny arrows at you, then you got all drowsy and funny inside
you know, and —well, you just came."
“Did I, though? And may I ask how lam to get back again. ’
“Don’t be so rude.” Come along, how about a race up that gum tree.''
So quicklv had he switched from one subject to another, that, before I could answer,
he had scuttled away, his comical form next being seen speeding to the topmost heights of
the tallest gum within sight. Soon, so many others joined in the fun that I quite lost sight
of my little companion. Such a busy lot of folk I had never seen, all picking gum-tips
and stowing them away into brown bundles. Ah, now, I understood. Each guest, of
course, had to take a basket to the party.
Needless to say, I was ever so anxious to examine this queer place with all its notices
and peculiar drawings which sat up and looked at me from every angle, or else appeared
round corners like so many surprise packets. A number of round gum-tree huts, with
funny, square, stone steps leading down into a mysterious basement of some kind had
caught my eye, and I was about to explore when someone whispered in my ear;
“Come and join the party —please, do. There he was again at my elbow, for, at the
moment of his surprising me, I was down on my knees peering into a cunning-looking open-
ing in the hollow of a tree trunk. He was pinching my arm and coaxing me with his
bright brown eyes.
“Right,” I said, “but wouldn't it he a good idea if you led the way?
“Of course. Here, you carry the gum-tips. ”
With this remark, he pushed a little brown crumpled-up parcel into my hands, and
was off. It was then I no-
ticed a tiny wristlet watch
hanging from his left paw.
“ 'Possum gave me this,”
he ventured; “his mother
made him watch the time
and he home early every
day. So Possum told her
he had lost it down the big
well over there, but he gave
it to me. I’m the time-
keeper at the Court, you
see, and the sun goes down
so quickly it’s hard to check
up the hours. By jeminy,
we ll be late!”


/tp ' VJ .
.1 1
Before I had time to question him about the Court or anything else, we were scrambl-
ing through bracken and fern. Over moss-grown banks, up and down trees, and through
deep dark hollow trunks, we crawled, till I was quite breathless, and seriously began to
wonder how I should ever find my way back again midst this labyrinth and maze of
branches and fronds.
Just as luck would have it, the party was nearly over when we arrived. All the gum-
tips had I )een demolished, at least all those which had been served at table and daintily
cut into a salad. The menu was tacked on a tree trunk and comprised two dishes: “Tips
a la Gum,” and “Gum de Beau.”
“Gum de Teau?” I repeated the words half to myself.
“Fry some, ' said Teddy, “you must be thirsty after our ramble
"But —but it’s so bi-bitter,” I stuttered having taken one gulp and finding it more
than enough.
“Silly and that was all he said at the moment. Still, he really looked quite vexed.
"What a funny table, and why do they all crowd round one end of it?” was my next
question.
Teddy didn't seem to understand my remark, so passed it by. Truly, it was a curious
party. The table was about nine inches high, and made from the bark of a huge tree, and
there were dozens of little wobbly legs attached to it. It looked as though, at any moment,
it might wander away and leave the occupants standing there, for no one was seated. Such
a pattern of colour the Koalas made —grey, silver, greyish-black, and brown —all mingled
together, while their white breasts dotted the whole scene. Hundreds of little figures were
running to and fro, for at this party there seemed to he a cash-and-carry service. Even
Grandpa had to wait on himself. What the party was in aid of, or whose birthday it was,
no one knew nor cared. Some of the wee chaps spoke to me, but mostly they were so
interested in their own affairs that I was left out in the cold.
“You'd better share with me,” my Teddy pal was saying.
But, really, I couldn't eat that stuff,” I murmured, feeling very impolite and rude
Before Teddy had time to gasp his astonishment
at the poverty of my palate, the bell rang and Grand-
pa Koala was addressing the assembly.
“The time is now 3.30.” I saw Teddy tilt up his
watch and twist the hands of it round and round.
Finally, he gave it a soaking in some of the precious
“Gum de Feau” and hung it out to dry. Meanwhile,
Grandpa was talking in a very impressive voice.
“The Juvenile Court opens at 4 p.m. sharp. You are
all familiar with the case to be beard to-day. At
Gum-Tip Gully, the scene of our sports last week,
Peter Koala grossly insulted old Mr. Platypus and
his sons. We all know our Platypus friends are not
fond of climbing trees, but Peter jeered and laughed
at them for their clumsiness. For this offence he will
be tried at the Juvenile Court this afternoon.”
At these words the party ended rather abruptly.
Within a few moments the table was deserted. Silence
crept into the trees which, but a short while ago, had
echoed the laughter and merriment of Koalaland.


f'f*
jEmmA
; . - • }
_J \ I £ M*Jei •*'. «* tbL Mb-
An armful of Baby Koalas.
Koala Park.
“T eddy-Bear-Farm”


f *
Courtesy Australian Museum.
“Seated aloft in the fork of a tree,
The wee Native Bear, he peeps down at me.”


Hanging from boughs, and nailed to tree trunks, were signs covered with queer,
scribbly writing telling the story of the naughty Teddy Bear.
Such a scurrying there was to reach the place of trial and get a “best seat. e
whole of Koalaland bustled its way to a place hidden deep in the centre of the bush. A
were armed with leaves and branches and might easily have been mistaken for a mimatuie
forest out for a walk.
Eagerly I searched for my little friend. They were all so much of a muchness these
funny creatures. Ah, there he was.
“What happens now?” I asked. Needless to tell, I was expecting the strangest o
proceedings, and I was not disappointed.
“You just see,” gurgled Teddy, his bright little eyes nearly popping right out ot bis
head with excitement. First they draw a huge circle—that’s for the Judge and Jury am
prisoner, don t you see.’ , , ,
Yes I did see, and an odd sight it was. The leaves and branches with which 1 had
seen them advancing were quickly turned into quite splendid little seats, and soon the
place looked like a huge arena. , ,
Teddy, watch in hand, was keeping guar 1 on the minutes, and just at lour o clock le
counte d “One, two, three, four!” A breathless hush followed this announcement, and 1
began to feel quite nervous and funny.
Such a hotch-potch of a trial I had never seen. First, in filed the Jury, two of whom
were uncles of the young Platypus boys, at least so Teddy confided to me Then there
were heralds to read from a scroll of leaves strung together, the misdeeds of our poor c n>-
obedient Peter. Jackie Winter and Willie Wagtail, who were not allowed to come to tle
trial, had sent a lot of quills for pens, and gum-leaf tablets were there for the Jury o
scribble their notes on. t4T ui
“My little sister writes for the Bush Neivs ,” Teddy told me, still m a whisper;
send you a copy next week and then you can read the whole story.
“You are a dear, Teddy,” and when I go home
I’ll write a story just about you.
“S-sh;” he gave me a nudge, for old Grandpa
Koala, the Judge, had his eye on us.
There he was seated on a dais in the centie of a
raised platform, which, by the by, was a huge ants
nest, and he was looking, oh, so severe. There was
a titter among the younger Bears when they caught
a glimpse of his gum-nut wig and his long trailing
gown, over which he stumbled two or three times.
“That’s what comes of trying to be too proud,
said Teddy, in my ear.
“Order in the Court! cried Grandpa, the Judge.
In one corner, his paws tied together with twigs
and some stringy stuff, stood the culprit, Peter
Koala. Such a pert, defiant little fellow, with a
mocking smile playing round one side of his com-
ical slit of a mouth. On the opposite side, Mr.
Platypus and his two sons. Old Platypus wore such
an injured air, while the Platypus Juniors looked so
sulky and surly that the tiny Teddies hissed at them.


“Silence!” called the Judge.
Then a little chap in funny, furry breeches with great bushy ears and round beady
eyes, rose from his seat. He fumbled about with a lot of papers and books, and then
coughed once or twice. During this interval, Peter was dragged into the witness-box.
“Peter Koala,” the little chap in the furry breeches was saying: “At the Koala Sports
last week, it is said you behaved in a most unruly manner. Mr. Platypus tells me you
jeered at him, and said ugly, cruel things about the little Plats. Is this true, Mr. Platypus?
Old Platypus nodded, and the little Bears hissed again.
“What have you to say for yourself, Peter Koala?”
Peter tried his best to look innocent, and then, in a half-pleading tone, he began:
Please, you ought to know how jealous Old Plat and his boys are because they can t
see over the tree tops. One of them had the cheek to ask me to carry him up there, and
when I said no, he spat at me. So then 1 punched him, and he called me horrid nick-
names —and that’s all that happened.”
It needed only half an eye to see that Peter was winking behind his paws and nod-
ding to a group of his friends who were peeping from behind the trunk of an old gum-tree.
“Good Old Pete,” they shouted, then scuttled up the tree in high glee
The Jury sat there and wrote down every word, that is, those who were left, for more
than half their number had slipped away to doze and dream in the shade.
I could see by Teddy’s face that he had something important to say.
“Peter’s mother is away,” he shouted boldly, “and there’s no one to speak for him.
At this, everyone got excited and talkative. Seats were overturned and thrown in the
air, and there was such a din that the whole of Bushland must have been awakened.
Amid all this noise and storm of protest the Jury gave their verdict. For thirty days
Peter Koala would be chained to the ground as a prisoner. Then he would learn not to
mock those who were unable to climb.
“But,” I pleaded for the little culprit, “isn’t that rather unfair. It isn't done that way
you know, not at real trials.”
“Get out," ordered Grandpa Koala, “and what are you doing here anyway?"
Then showers of leaves began to fall on me, and my thoughts flew to the little path-
way that had led me to this land. In vain I searched for a way out, when suddenly my
foot caught on a spike, and I fell headlong into a round, dark pool of water.
Shivering with the cold I turned and struggled, but something seemed to pin my arms
down. Then, all at once, there I was sitting up under that old, old gum-tree and hugging
myself to get warm.
Amazed, I stared wide-eyed at the twilight, for, not ten minutes ago, the sun had
been warm, and soft, and drowsy, and now Day and Night were meeting on the rim of the
sky, struggling for the supremacy of the world. A pale flickering star shone out like a
banner to declare Night the winner.
“Well, that’s the strangest thing ever,” I said out aloud, “and I don’t care who be-
lieves me or not, I’ve been to the Land of the Koalas.”
As it dodged among the tall grass and through the trees, the winding pathway seemed
to mock my fancies, and I heard just the faintest suspicion of light, gay laughter—or was
it the rustle of the leaves playing with the twilight breeze?
“You may laugh as you please,” I said, as I started to wend my way homeward; “my
only regret is that, when I fell into the deep dark pool, I was unable to get out again and
so missed the opportunity of spending night time in Koalaland.”


»


N.S.W. Bookstall Co. Ltd.
Sydney






wxh
VAU
3 1508
02052446 3


( —-
; *,,■
>. . .
*
i
‘V
.
- j:
.
■ ‘.V- •
• -
■
• V - *
*
/
■»
-> , ir ; h
