

HOW IT CAN BE DEFENDED
AND
HOW IT CAN BE TAKEN.
DR. BERNCASTLE,
£ g fc It t a .*
C. T. SANDON, PUBLISHER, 818, GEORGE STREET.
1666.
/ ;
Jrfmelm Sfal* af Sjjheg:
MEMBER OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS OF LONDON; OF THE ROYAL
COLLEGE OF SURGEONS; CONSULTING PHYSICIAN; OCULIST AND AURIST;
SURGEON TO THE SYDNEY EYE AND EAR INSTITUTION.
AUTHOR OF "TRAVELS IN INDIA, CHINA, AND SOUTH AFRICA;” OF THE "REVOLT OF
THE BENGAL SEPOYS;” OF “ THE USE AND ABUSE OF TOBACCO“ THE
TREATMENT OF AUSTRALIAN SNAKE BITES,” Ac.
DEDICATED TO THE AUSTRALIAN VOLUNIEEBS.




■* I - ■»
PREFACE.
IT a vino spoken and written on the Defenceless state of Sydney, and how it
can be remedied, ever since my arrival in the Colony in 1855 to the present
day, and having at last had the satisfaction of seeing my frequent sugges-
tions approved of by the highest practical authorities out here, and adopted
pretty nearly in substance by the Select Committee of the House on Harbour
Defences in their report of the Bth June, 1865; with the hope of still giving
greater publicity to this most urgent, but much neglected business, which
only requires to be understood to be appreciated, and perhaps at last acted
upon, I have, at the earnest request of a few military friends, placed my
views in an easily accessible and intelligible form, with a plan of the
Harbour and proposed Defences, convinced that, however shelved and
snubbed the question may now be, it will some day be the question of more
vital importance than any other to every member of the community in the
Southern hemisphere; and I would say with Junius :
“ It is not my cause, it is not your cause, but the common cause of every man in Australia.”
I have no confidence in any assistance from a levee en masse of a
pastoral population, who, with ourweak and incapable rulers, havener three
years allowed a country as large as England to be tyrannised overby a half-
dozen cowardly ruffians, called bushrangers, or who allowed “ King
Morgan” to proclaim and carry out a martial law of his own over a territory
as large as Scotland, rich and poor all complacently submitting to his
murderous rule ; it being publicly admitted, that these quasi-military efforts
have cost the country <£200,000 alone, which sum, absolutely wasted, would
suffice to fortify the Heads as here proposed.
I have no confidence in the event of a general war, in timely assis-
tance from England, or in the amenities of modern warfare when in the hands
of the Despots of Europe; my recollection of events, since the last quarter
of a century, Denmark included, serving me sufficiently to distrust them;
or in the extreme forgetfulness amongst the great maritime powers, that
such very insignificant spots as Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Hobartown
and Brisbane, (besides all the other Australian group of cities), are at sixty-
days steaming from Cherbourg and Toulon, Cronstadt and Odessa, Charles-
town and New Orleans.
But I believe in putting your house in order, and locking the stable-
door before the horse is gone; and I believe in trusting entirely to those
well-tried faithful friends—sabres and bayonets, rifles and Armstrong guns,
strong booms, iron-plated forts, and well-planned earth-works.
The Author.
229, Macquarie-street, Sydney,
12th August, 1865.


CONTENTS.
Plan of the Harbour and proposed Defences.
Five Letters on the Defences of Sydney, by Dr. Berncastle, viz
Ist Letter—Signed “ Junius,” in the Empiek, 9th October, 1860.
2nd Letter—Signed “J. Berncastle,” in the Sydney Morning Herald, 20tb
April, 1861, (of which he had 1000 copies printed at the time for gratuitous circulation.)
3rd Letter—Signed “ Cavendo Tutus,” Herald, 25th January, 1862.
4th LETTER-Signed “J. B. 229, Macquarie-slreet,” Herald, 10th April, 1862.
sth Letter —Signed “ Cavendo Tutus” Herald, 27th June, 1863.
APPENDIX.
I.—Motion by Captain Towns at the public meeting held at the Sydney Exchange, on the
Defences of Port Jackson, 27th August, 1855.
2.—Dr. Berncastle’s Speech in support of those views at that meeting.
3 gj r iff' Denison’s reply to the resolutions adopted at the meeting, and his disregard of all
such suggestions.
4.—Dr. Berncastle’s Speech at a public meeting, having been requested by a deputation to
move the first resolution to establish the South Sydney Volunteers, the Mayor in the
g.air. See Herald, 31st August, 1860.
Letter from “ Signal Gun,” probably one of the Naval Brigade in the Herald, 27th
June, 1863,
g_ Letter in Herald by “Old England,” 19th June, 1865.
7.— Extract from Leader in Sydney Mail, 27th July, 1865.
8.-~Letter from Captain Towns to Dr. Berncastle, requesting the use of his plans and papers
for the Select Committee of the House, which were furnished to them for use.
Paper. Report of Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly on the
Harbour Defences, of the Bth June, 1865.


DEFENCELESS STATE OF SYDNEY.
Ist Letter.
THE DANGER OF INVASION AND CONQUEST.
To the Editor of the Empire.
Sir, —What is to prevent Sydney falling into the hands of
an invading force, and being permanently retained by it ?
The culpable apathy of our Government, and the still
more glaring apathy of our leading citizens in the new volunteer
movement, in which I have enrolled myself, and carefully watched
from its beginning, prove to me beyond all doubt that no
effective system of defence against a powerful European arma-
ment, such as in time of war, might reasonably be expected to be
sent against positions of such immense importance as the A ustra-
lian capitals can ever rest with the volunteers alone, the move-
ment being quite a partial one amongst the junior portion of the
community, but not a spontaneous and unanimous one amongst
the wealthy and influential citizens, who, in case of attack,
would be the greatest losers, they personally ignoring the
whole affair, as the enrolment lists will easily prove. I under-
stand, from a member, that the Artillery Corps has already
dwindled down to 50 effective practising men at drill, and pro-
bably other corps will meet with the same gradual decline. And
why this striking failure in a movement originating with
apparent success, and so soon falling off from the sanguine
expectations it had raised ? The reason is obvious. The whole
affair is snubbed at head-quarters ; nothing is done to encourage
it—nothing to give it dignity or power, but everything to pooh-
pooh and damp its ardour. The old Volunteer Rifles, although
still in existence, find themselves superseded hy a new corps,
holding their head-quarters over a shop, with published orders
issued out to the corps by the Sergeant-major, instead of a
Commanding Officer. Ihen, there were two artillery corps
formed, indifferent and rather opposed to each other, the new
one eclipsing the old in numbers, the Commandant resigning at
once. In the whole affair, want of union is apparent, and the


defence of Sydney —
100
. 400
600
Ditto suburban districts
400
authorities, instead of taking advantage of the moment of
enthusiasm, do nothing but allow it to exhaust itself and die
out.
The Mounted Rifles having reached the number of 50, con-
sider it a great feat, but a still greater one will be for them to
keep to 50 in a year’s time. In this moment of the greatest
enthusiasm, not more than 600 effective men could be found as
volunteers to be assembled under arms in Sydney, and when
fully formed, the various suburban districts might send 400
more, the outside then being 1000 fighting men. Of regular
troops at this moment, about 300 could be brought together, and
had it not been for the New Zealand war 500, making in round
numbers the whole force available at the best of times, for the
1500
in all, to which might be added any available naval force here at
the time, 200 men being the outside to be depended upon, the
chances being much greater of their being at Tanna, or the
Woodlark Islands, on some petty expedition for which a colonial
armed gunboat would be quite as useful, leaving us our naval
defences in position in the hour of need.
Assuming that no more than 1500 men could be mustered
for the defence of Sydney, we will now consider the probabilities
of the attacking force. In case of war with the astute ruler
of France, which is admitted by all as an event quite possible to
occur at any time, nothing would be easier, knowing the weakness
of the place, and its great wealth in gold ; and also its immense
advantages as a commercial and warlike station —nothing would
be easier than for him to send out in two large 60-gun steam
frigates, a force of 3000 men, or even double that
number of ships and men, the prize being quite worth the
trouble and no risk, and carry Sydney by a coup de main ,
with facility. I hold it as an axiom, that nothing can successfully
oppose a regular armed force but a similar armed force, and
then the Giod of battles decides the fate of victory; but no man
in his senses would ever dream that 1500 men, two-thirds of them
volunteers, could defeat from 3000 to 6000 French regular


troops, flushed with the prestige of having recently, on the plains
of Magenta and Solferino, defeated the Austrians, admitted to be
the finest troops in the world, and that, after a most desperate
hand-to-hand struggle, the Austrians being on their own
territory, the French, the invaders, coming by sea, and debarking,
in one day, 40.000 men at Genoa, with all their materiel de
guerre. No, Sir, such enemies as these, with the modern
appliances of war and steam transport, backed by a despotic
government, with endless resources of ships, men, arms, and
ammunition, are too dangerous to think lightly of; and what I
say of France, will equally apply to Russia, or even America,
should hostilities ever arise between these two last nations and
ourselves.
Supposing, under such a defenceless state of things, in
time of war, the French did occupy Sydney, what would be their
first steps ? They would garrison it with at least 6000 men,
improve its fortifications, render it, as it easily might be made with
such a force, impregnable by sea or by land, to any moderate size
flotilla or invading army.
The tricolour would replace, on the various flagstaffs, the
Union Jack ; the Herald and Empire would be replaced by the
“Moniteur official,” and in lieu of politics we might be kindly
permitted to read some trashy feuilleton of a nauseating
romantic nature, or Journal des Modes, to replace our leading
articles and wholesome intellectual daily literature contained in a
Free Press, the Times would be interdicted, and an iron yoke
would prove the blessings of the change from one flag to another.
But would not the English send out a force to retake
Sydney from the conquerors ? She might, or she might not;
her means might be so crippled by a coalition of Powers against
her, or a second Indian rebellion—she might have so many irons
in the fire that a colony must be lost to effect a treaty of peace,
and if the retaining of certain positions acquired during the war
were a sine qua non of any treaty, reasons of State, or stern,
necessity, might dictate such a sacrifice, and then my words
would become too true, and Sydney must remain a French colony.
Possession is nine points of the law in military as well as in civil
parlance. Mauritius, a French colony, similarly situated, has had
to remain an English colony since the last war, in spite of the'
entreaties of the Bourbons to retain it in 1815. The Cape of
Good Hope, a Dutch colony, had to become English and remain


so. Sarrelouis, a French frontier fortress I have visited, is now
Prussian to their intense disgust. Gibraltar, once Spanish, is
now English. Hongkong, once Chinese, is now English. Macao,
taken 300 years ago, on the mainland of China, has been retained
by its puny conquerors to this day. Malta, Heligoland, Ceylon,
Canada, and endless other important positions we now occupy all
over the world, with the exception of Java we gave back to the
Dutch, prove the danger of being once occupied by a foreign
enemy. The right of conquest being as old as the world, there is
no exemption for Sydney or any other British possession in these
seas, but by the old beaten track of self-defence —Aide toi et le
del t’aidera. To depend for effective help from home in time
of actual war, would be to lean perhaps on a reed. How then
can this defence be effected ? My answer is, very easily. Unless
the volunteer movement can produce an effective force of 4000
men, of all arms, for Sydney proper, and as many for the country
within fifty miles of Sydney, in all 8000 fighting men, pronounce
it a failure, and recourse must be had to a compulsory militia, which
will embody about 8000 men, the volunteers then remaining as
useful auxiliaries to the extent they may attain. Such a militia
•force would render us independent of the mother-country, careless
of foreign invasion, and allow us to live and breathe, as our
ancestors have done, without any fear of domination from that
country whose ruler we twice sent into captivity for his ambition,
and whose capital we held as conquerors not many years ago, and
more than that, imposed upon them the ruler we deemed it safe
for them to live under. In those days the “ Givis sum Britan-
nicus” was a passport all over the world, respected and even
feared by every nation upon the earth. Surely we cannot have
degenerated so much since 1815 that we could tamely dream of
ever submitting to a foreign yoke ? At home they have not,
then why should we in the South Seas.
non animum mutant
Qui per mare currunt.
I am no alarmist, but having always taken interest in, and
had great opportunities of observing military matters, I see no
difficulty in an invading force such as I have described, landing
at night at Botany or in Watson’s Bay, carrying Sydney almost
sans coup ferir , spiking the guns or turning them against the
town, their naval force then entering unmolested, and shelling
Sydney until it capitulated. You take good care to publish once


a quarter that the banks contain four millions of specie, you fairly
tempt an enemy by a great prize, but you do not secure the
entrance of your harbour, by fortifying the Heads and obstructing
the entrance by booms at the Sow and Pigs; you have no force
to oppose a landing, or meet an enemy in the field, when he has
landed, but you spend your money in making almost useless
defences around the heart of the city, where from the present
long range of artillery they may never be wanted, and if they
were, 1000 artillerymen would be required to man them effectually,
and you can muster 150, just enough for Dawes’ Battery alone.
A ship in Chowder Bay or behind Garden Island, would be out
of the reach of all the existing batteries, and could shell the city
almost with impunity.
To secure Sydney against an invading force from Europe,
such as might reasonably be expected to be sent into these seas,
where all the sister colonies form a great temptation, you must
have 4000 militia-men, with a country reserve of 4000 easily
available, the volunteers acting as very useful auxiliaries to this
permanent “ compulsory”army. Youmust fortify the Heads in
the manner just described, which,by keeping the enemy out, will
secure the city against any hostile attack by ships of war.
Unless these very natural precautions are taken, which
anybody with a clear head and alittle reflection will admit, and see
the necessity of, 1 say again : What is to prevent Sydney falling
into the hands of an invading force, and being permanently re-
tained by it ?
Junius.
Empire, October 9th 1860.
2nd Letter
HOW SYDNEY CAN BE DEFENDED AND HOW IT CAN BE TAKEN.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, — I am induced to offer a few remarks on the defence-
less state of the capital of New South Wales, a propos of our
worthy Mayor’s demand for a grant of twenty-five pounds per
annum for a hundred mounted volunteer rifles, which is a step in
the right direction, and merely a trifling item of expenditure for
so very important a purpose, that of adding to the means of defence
of this community against a foreign attack by sea and by land.
When the large sum of £lO,OOO is alluded to as having already been
granted to the Volunteers —and that is the only useful expenditure


as yet that has been made—it becomes perfectly farcical to any
man of matured judgment, either civilian or military, to allude to
such a miserable sum for so great an object, and one that some day
will be the vital question of paramount importance for every
inhabitant of this country. Sydney, like every other place if
attacked, must either defeat the enemy or surrender ; and I ask
whether those entrusted with the head of affairs of this rich colony
are not capable of the greatest dereliction of duty in leaving every-
thing to the chances of peace being maintained in Europe, when
each mail may bring news to the contrary. Instead of organising
as at Melbourne, a defence committee of military men to devise
the best means of putting the metropolis in an efficient state to
repel, with a fair probability of success, any invader of these
peaceful and too confident shores. Without such a committee,
all warnings, from the highest to the lowest authority, meet with
the same fate.
Six years ago, at a public meeting at the Exchange, Captain
Towns offered his “ rotten row” to block up the east channel of the
harbour, and I at that time suggested a boom ready to obstruct,
in case of attack, the west channel from Sow and Pigs to George’s
Head. Captain, Yiney, H.N., and others wrote to the same
effect. The thing dropped as usual, and Parliament voted a large
sum for fortifications, entrusting the entire management of the
scheme to the late Governor, who, as Colonel of Engineers, was
expected to be a guarantee of security for any plan he might
undertake. He has spent about £BO,OOO in fortifying the imme-
diate vicinity of the city, as if a fleet would cannonade the town
about Circular Quay; which is purely an absurdity, as any ships
lying behind Bradley’s Head, in Taylor’s 03 Chowder Bay, have
deep water, close to the shore, and are out of reach of every one
of the fifty-eight guns already mounted at Dawes’ Battery. Fort
Macquarie, Lady Macquarie’s Chair, Kiribili Point, and Pinchgut,
consequently are out of harm’s way of our present means of
defence. But are we out of harm’s way from them ? Certainly
not, as Bradley’s Head is exactly two miles from the heart of the
city, and cities are generally bombarded at that distance, as most
convenient—modern shells even carrying three and four miles.
Thus, at the present moment, after six years of a military
Governor’s rule, we are as helpless as before a shilling was spent,
and all the money has been purely thrown away. Of course, until
Garden Island is fortified, the same objections apply to that spot.


as a vessel behind Garden Island is out of reach of every gun at
present in position.
Two years ago, Parliament having, it appears, some suspicions
of the necessity of further investigating the matter, ordered Com-
modore Loring, Colonel Perceval, Colonel Barney, and last,
though not least, Major Nasmyth, the illustrious defender of
Silistria in the Crimean to report on the present system of
defences, and suggest any other they might deem proper. Each
one gave in his report, filling one side of the Herald, on the 2nd
December, 1859, and all condemned the system adopted for
reasons given “in extenso,” and advocated the system suggested
many years ago by General Sir John Bourgoyne,—that of keep-
ing the enemy out by shutting the door, or fortifying the Heads
efficiently, permanently blocking up with stone the east channel,
and obstructing the west channel by a boom from Sow and Pigs
to George’s Head, only half a mile across, and being four miles
distant from the town, would render it safe from a sea attack.
These valuable suggestions from such high practical authori-
ties, all of them men who have been in the “ imminent deadly
breach,” met with the usual fate of every thing else that ever has
been written on the subject, they were duly recorded with red-
tapism, and became soon after vox et proeterea nihil.
The apathy displayed by the citizens is only surpassed by
the Government, and it appears as if those who, like myself, do
stir up the question, are riding a hobby, talking of a myth, and
belong to the family of croakers. Sydney is tabood ground, no
hostile foe would ever dream of so distant a spot, so unimportant
and protected by the British flag. People forget that since the
days of Copenhagen, the Nile, and Trafalgar, when we swept the
seas of every hostile flee£ powerful navies have sprung up, equal
in number to our own, perhaps equal in the new system of modern
naval warfare in which they have never met, but for various
reasons, it will not do to hold them too cheap. People forget that
the present arbiter of the destinies of Europe has, without any
ostensible reason, raised the French navy to an equality of
numbers with our own, a position it has never occupied since the
days of the Grand Monarch, of Sufiren, and of Jean Bart. That
he is greedy of colonies, New Caledonia, the Marquesas, Mada-
gascar to wit. That a distant expedition by sea has no difficulties
but a positive charm for him, Cochin China, and lately, Pekin, to
wit. I will not enter more fully into the views of this great man,


but should a war between the two countries unfortunately occur,
Sydney reminds him quarterly that she has millions
sterling in the banks, and the author of the coup d cUit will
not forget her j and as a colony she will be an improvement on
Port de France, where more money has been spent already on an
inferior settlement, and, I dare say, more strategic skill than we
can boast of having been spent on Sydney after eighty years’
occupancy, with 80,000 inhabitants and unlimited wealth to
protect. .
The position of Melbourne is entirely different, having what,
I am sorry to see we have not, a more martial population who
have a colonial marine, a large volunteer force, who lately mustered
4000 strong in camp; have had their rifle matches, and show a
fixity of purpose in their defensive means, which can only be
attributed to a superior race of men, forming the Government or
the population of the sister colony.
In Colonel Perceval’s report he recommends, as part of the
force required, a Volunteer Mounted Rifle Corps, armed with
double-barrelled breech-loading rifles, consisting of four troops of
twenty-five men each, 100 men.
The cost of such a force, if Mr. Sutherland’s proposition of
£25 per man is agreed to, will not amount to more than the cost
of ten mounted troopers of the Sydney police, and no doubt would
be followed by similar corps being organised at Parramatta and
other towns within easy access to Sydney.
I will quote from Major Nasmyth, in his report from the
Brigade office, 3rd August, 1859, before alluded to, who says :
With regard to the second contingency—of a combined land and
sea attack.
Doubtless it would be a very serious undertaking for any nation, however enterprising,
to send out from Europe an adequate force to levy contributions on such an out-of-the-way
place as Svdney ; and the mere knowledge of a strong force being in readiness here would have
a very great moral effect in deterring an enemy from entertaining the idea. As tar as the
transport of the attacking force and its material is concerned, I conceive it perfectlyfeasible.
During the last war several French frigates transported (without interfering with their own
efficiency) as many as 120 * men ; and allowing for the difference of the length of the voyage,
we may conclude that 800 infantry might be taken in each of that nation’s steam frigates and
accompanied with tenders for the conveyance of provisions, &c., might be capable of landing
an expedition in an efficient state. Artillery against an open town like Sydney, and for the
purposes of such an expedition, would notbe requisite now that the rifle has been proved to be
so formidable ; and there can be no question that 2000 disciplined and resolute men (who cou
be brought out in three frigates, armed as they now are) would, by being on many
portions of the coast which are quite practicable, not only take the whole of the batteries
existing in the rear, thereby facilitating the entrance of his navy, but would be in a position
to dictate terms to the town. With a view of meeting this contingency, I would suggest,
on the principle I have already proposed, augmenting the present force to 1000 artillerymen,
500 mounted rifles, and 2000 dismounted ; total,<3soo men,’


Colonels Barney and Perceval’s evidence was very similar to
the above; and Commodore Loring dwelt more on the defences of
the entrance of the port, and the facilities the enemy would have
of running the gauntlet, and silencing the present batteries,
summing up in these words
But cannot the natural defences of the harbour be turned to account to prevent his
entrance ? The shoal at its entrance, the three cliffy heads which form that entrance, and the
heavy swell and sea which always exist there, are very great local advantages.
The batteries as formerly proposed would scarcely be sufficient to stop swift steamers, and
again, a boom would not be sufficient if undefended. But the two combined would be a very
serious impediment to the present class of ships.
The harbour’s mouth, from the point outside Camp Cove to George’s Head, is 1700 yards
across One half of this, or even much more could be ,’partially stopped up with stone, and
this without causing any very material alteration in the practical navigation of the entrance
beyond an increase of the strength of the tide stream.
Strong booms composed of chain cable, floated by light wood, could be prepared and kept
on a convenient part of the beach during time of peace, and ready for service in time of war,
to be hauled over to George’s Head obelisk point at night, or if suspicious vessels were in the
offing.
The best of guns should be mounted at the Heads in such positions as would enable them
to bear on the enemy’s ships whilst entering the Heads, and when stopped by the boom, and it
would be very probable that these guns should be detached, and masked in every practicable
manner, and not too close to their work.
It is possible that an enemy might attempt to land and storm these guns.
It is not very easy to man and arm boats under fire and in a sea way; but in order to
guard against the contingency, it would be advisable to erect strong towers in the rear (some-
what similar to Fort Denison) for the gun’s crew to retreat to. These forts being well retired
and at considerable elevation, could scarcely receive much injury from the fire of the shipping,
and being placed in commanding positions, could pour down grape and canister and rifle balls
on the storming party. ,
If it be determined to spend more money on the erection of batteries inside the harbour,
I would recommend that retired positions should be chosen, where a long range could be
brought to bear on the ships with comparative impunity. It is to the advantage of the ship to
get close to her work, and vice versA.
Solomon says, “There is wisdom in a multitude of counsel,”
and so it would appear from the very valuable information elicited
from these four superior officers, which although “ex post facto,”
can still be profited by, and might at an earlier period have so
modified Sir William Denison’s opinions as to prevent the useless
expenditure of money caused by his old-fashioned system of
defence, which, if laid out at the Heads, would go far towards
rendering the harbour impregnable.
The defence of Sydney must be decided at the Sow and Pigs
in an hour, as no invading force could remain before the booms,
under such a plunging cross-fire on deck without immediately
forcing it or being sunk before it, or obliged to retire, crippled,
to sea, and equally crippled if the boom is forced, and an
entrance effected on this side. ( v
Most of the guns, placed" as I shall presently submit, are
inaccessible to a boat attack, in the event of which, the keeps


provide a refuge for all the guns’ crews, and a cross-fire from the
two reefs alone would, with showers of musketry from riflemen
in all directions, render the position of a ship untenable.
Separate from, or simultaneous with, a sea attack, an invading
force might land at Botany, or Coogee, and either entrench them-
selves on the heights around, with a view to shelling the city,
or march on to Sydney, take the guns in the rear, and point them
against the town, or allow their ships to enter unmolested.
Cutting off the water supply at Botany would not be a very
pleasant process for Sydney; but I would remind my readers
that such things are done, and much worse. The damage done
by a hostile attack on Sydney would not have to be counted
by thousands, but by millions sterling, besides loss of prestige
and honour if successful, and our sapient, economical legislators
cannot spend the people’s money better, or to greater advant-
age, than by putting this great city in the dignified position
of being able successfully to defend itself from all foreign
enemies, Fortiter, jideliter, feliciter. When Sydney is con-
sidered safe by the means above described, Botany, Broken
Bay, and the various bays between those two harbours, such as
Coogee, Bondi, &c., must be looked to as offering, in calm
weather, under cover of their ships’ guns, peculiar facilities
for a sudden descent. All this a defence committee would
study, and make themselves masters of.
I have no patience with our present system of trusting every-
thing to chance, and staking the dearest interests of this country
on the forbearance or ambitious designs of one man, for it amounts
to that, as I do not apprehend there would be much to fear
from any other State, although the Russian navy is very
powerful, and our relations with America very uncertain. I
have written frequently, but shall write no more on this subject,
as I am tired of acting the part of Cassandra; and besides, I
think I have now exhausted it. As well may people neglect
to insure their houses and property because of the doubtful
risk of fire, or to assure their lives because of the uncertainty of
leaving survivors who may require the money, as to leave a
city 20,000 miles from the mother-country entirely unprotected.
Any person by examining Captain Denham’s Admiralty Chart
of Sydney Harbour will be able to understand exactly the system of
defence I propose, which is supported by overwhelming evidence
from high authorities, and is founded on the modern rules of the
art of war, as well as on common sense.


The defences of Sydney against a sea attack must consist in,
Ist. Obstructing the East Channel between Camp Cove and
Sow and Pigs permanently by stone sunk across it.
2nd. Obstructing in time of war at night, or when suspicious
vessels are about, the West Channel, from Sow and Pigs to
George’s Head by strong booms composed of chain cable floated by
light wood, to be kept in time of peace on a convenient part of the
beach, and ready for service in time of war.
3rd. The booms must be defended by a series of batteries, in
all forty guns, on the heads of both shores. These guns should be
detached, masked in every manner, and not to close to their work.
They should be placed as follows : six on Inner North Head, six on
Middle Head, six at George’s Head, six on Bradley’s Head, —for
the North Shore. Six on Inner South Head, six on Green Point,
four on Shark’s Point. The six guns on George’s Head, and
opposite on Green Point, should be mounted on a keep, or strong
tower, surrounded by a ditch, to enable the guns’ crews to retreat
to in case of an attack by boats on the separate batteries, which
they could not resist. These forts being well retired could
scarcely receive much damage from the ships, but could sink the
boats, and cripple or sink the ships arrested by the booms ; these
booms would in no way obstruct the navigation of the port, as a
small steam tug would be in constant attendance to open or close
the entrance end for the passage of ships, and coasters might pass
over a part sunk deep enough for their purpose.
4th. The heavy swell at the Heads is a great natural defence
against a boat attack, and with the central reef of Sow and Pigs,
and adjoining bold headlands, render the harbour by nature
peculiarly adapted for keeping an enemy out.
sth. Supposing an enemy, crippled, forced the passage and
took up a position in Chowder Bay to bombard the city, then he
would be exposed to the cross-fire of all the guns in this plan,
except six out of the forty.
6th. Thirty guns, by this plan, would bear upon the enemy
as he entered the Heads to approach the boom, and might by an
active, well-served fire prevent him reaching it.
An enemy behind Bradley’s Head, in smooth water, can shell
the city at two miles range with total impunity, being out of reach
of every gun mounted in the five existing batteries. An enemy
outside the Sow and Pigs is in a heavy swell, four miles from the
city, too far for hostile purposes; and with the Heads fortified as.


I here propose, would he made short work of, without any danger
to the city, and not much to the defenders.
J. Berncastle.
229, Macquarie-street, 20th April, 1861,
3rd Letter-
THE DEFENCELESS STATE OF SYDNEY", AND A DEFENCE COMMITTEE.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, —Now that in Europe there are wars and rumours of
wars, how is it that a defence committee has not been organised
in this important city, as at Melbourne, our interest and position
being identical with theirs ? A great deal of attention is paid
to cricket, and a little to other matters of public utility, but
somehow or other the subject of fortification has always been
distasteful to a British community. Many writers have alluded
in plain terms to the utterly defenceless state of Sydney, exposed
at any time to a hostile attack and bombardment from a single
vessel of an enemy without the slightest means of resistance—
but it is Vox et proeterea nihil.
I will not speak of the fortifications of Sir W. Denison,
because that would be prostituting the name of a science , which
he has turned into a sham , but I will ask the simple question of
any person in his senses, whether any single gun of the fifty-
eight he has placed in position, can touch a ship in Chowder or
Taylor’s Bay, two miles from the heart of the city, the very spot
selected by art and favoured by nature, aided by this sapient
Colonel of Engineers, for a bombardment of the city, modern shells
as every body knows, reaching even five miles, and that distance
is two miles only* Sir W. Denison wasted totally our means
when the Ministry of the day gained a vote of £BO,OOO for
the defence of Sydney, and out of deference to the supposed
superior knowledge of the Colonel of Engineers, entrusted him
with the arbitrary control over the entire amount, guided by, the
not unreasonable opinion, that it was the peculiar specialite of an
officer of Engineers, and they could not do better than leave it
to him. How he betrayed that trust, the entire sum of money
utterly wasted on his miserable system of defence, that a mere tyro
of Woolwich academy would be ashamed to own to, is the best
answer; and in case of a hostile attack, a city set on fire, and
its inhabitants exposed to military outrage and an enormous


ransom or immediate destruction, will some day or other open the
eyes of its too confident population and rulers. If such a catas-
trophe ever occurred, I maintain that Sir William Denison, having
as a Colonel of Engineers, been intrusted with a certain duty, and
a large sum of money to perform it with, will have committed
a dereliction of duty in his absurd expenditure of money on
a useless system, thereby exposing the city he was bound to
protect, to a constant danger of destruction from a foreign foe,
which had he followed out the plans of Sir John Burgoyne,
Colonel Barney, or others, he was enabled to consult, would, with
the same means, have enabled him to put the city in a proper
state of defence against any coup de main from outside.
No enemy has any business inside the Sow and Pigs, where
batteries properly placed seaward of that reef can give a good
account of them. The east channel, between Camp Cove and
Sow and Pigs, permanently obstructed by a dyke, would leave
only half a mile to defend across to the other side, and booms there,
aided by sunken electrical torpedos, would form an excellent
obstruction to a hostile fleet, which, played upon by the
surrounding batteries, would soon sing out peccavi , and under no
ordinary circumstances could any damage happen to the city, as
the fight would be at the Heads. I would undertake with a
thousand men to land and take all the present batteries in reverse,
spike their guns, or turn them against the town, and, in the
absence of a naval force (not an uncommon event in Sydney),
dictate terms to the town. Or, without coming near the
batteries at all, a forty-gun frigate, well armed with mortars and
shell, could, behind Bradley’s Head, set Sydney on fire in a hundred
places, and all the police and volunteers together would not be
enough to put it out and protect the city from its own Arabs.
Instead of spending £6OO on a prize far *the best House of
Parliament, our present being quite good enough for the eloquence
and work done in it, and a larger sum to bring up the best
cricketers, I should like to see a defence committee formed, who
would thoroughly investigate the subject, and a premium offered
of £lOOO for the best system of fortifications for Sydney and its
environs, which might even be sent to all the military schools
of Europe, and would bring out the weak points of this matter
and render more service to the community than any similar sum
otherwise spent. Then wmuld be seen the rottenness of our pre-
sent defences, the follies of our late military ruler, whose talent for
B


presiding at Dorcas meetings and similar entertainments we all
give him due credit for, but who certainly was a most conceited
and incompetent engineer, judging from our own experience of
his deeds. If Government will not grant the sum required,
I will myself head a subscription with five pounds for the same
purpose, and when the hour of trial arrives, as sure as fate it will
do, let it be said that there was one voice who wielded his pen and
opened his purse-strings in furtherance of this most momentous
and critical cause.
“ Cavendo Tutus.”
25th January, 1862.
4th Letter.
ON THE DEFENCELESS STATE OF SYDNEY.
(Per favour of the Sydney Morning Herald.)
Nobody can have perused the leader in yesterday’s Sydney
Morning Herald without feeling a deep debt of gratitude for the
masterly and clear-sighted expose, of the danger hanging over
our heads from the absolutely defenceless state of this great city,
the metropolis of a country equal in extent to France and Eng-
land together, and exceeding in wealth and importance, perhaps,
any city of similar size in any part of the world. Newspapers
may print columns of sound argument against such an anomalous
position ; men of matured experience may write energetic letters
on the subject; but of what avail ? Has any action been taken
or ever dreamt of by the Government, or the authorities whose
duty it is to attend to this important question? Nothing has
ever been, or ever will be done, unless the citizens, by a public
meeting, take the matter into their own hands, and insist upon a
Defence Committee being formed, as at Melbourne, out of the
best materials to be found in the colony, and let them set to work
in earnest. It certainly does appear to me that the principal
blame can be traced to the superior military authorities at head-
quarters, and as Major-General Pratt is the general commanding-
in-chief in these colonies, I suppose naturally that providing for
the military defence of places under his command is one of his
principal duties, particularly in time of peace, when all his leisure
can be devoted to such important matters. Then again his
locum teneUns here, the Colonel commanding, might also be
considered ins an authority to look up to, who with the Commodore


on the station and the commander of the Royal Artillery might
together be fairly considered as the persons whom it most con-
cerns, and who should be the most competent to suggest some
rational system of defence. Not a word has ever dropped from
either. It then resolves itself into the old French proverb,
Aide toi, et le del Voider a ; and unless the citizens of Sydney
arouse themselves, and take ’the matter into their own hands,
they may some day find to their sorrow that it is too late. I
will take nothing for granted, and our never having been sub-
jected to insult or to actual attack from a hostile force is purely
a matter of accident and good luck, since nobody can deny that
of late years there have been several possibilities of such an event.
People say—Who is to come here? What is there to fear?—
There is no war, nor likely to be any as long as we live. But
look for a moment at the last ten years, and answer who foresaw
the late French Revolution, the Russian war, the Indian mutiny,
the French and Austrian w r ar, the Italian revolution, and fast,
though not least, the American civil war, and its dangerous com-
plication with the Trent ? Here are warnings enough for the
most sceptical peace-monger, and gentle hints to put our house
in order ; but the Trent affair flew over so soon that it had not
actually time to make the good impression expected of it on our
apathetic, and I may say criminally negligent, rulers, who still
persist in exposing at any time —perhaps even whilst I now
wr ite—this great and rich community to the daily risk of plunder,
destruction, or death. .
A writer, under the name of “ Verbum Sapienti, in a
recent number of the Herald, has done me the honour of quot-
ing from my letter of last April on the Defences of Sydney,
where I embodied with my own views, those of General
Burgoyne, Colonels Barney and Percival, Commodore Boring,
and° Major Nasmyth, the illustrious defender of Silistria,
who was brigade-major in Sydney after the war. I
had a thousand copies of that letter printed for circulation
amongst those who, from position or wealth, might be expected to
take more than usual interest in the question, but such is the
state of things, that I believe if Yauban himself were to rise up
from his grave and abuse them for their folly, the only answer
he would get would be the echo of his own voice, sent back from
those cliffy heads which his genius would have easily rendered
impregnable.


The idea of a ship canal to Botany has more of novelty in
it than of reason ; it is very much like walling up your door for
fear of robbers, and slipping out by the windows. Surely those
who possess the finest harbour in the known world, and by
nature the easiest to be defended, can with British spirit and
independence afford to hold it and defend it by the usual
legitimate and recognised means, without being driven to the
wretched expedient of creeping out by the back door!
For much less than the expense of a ship canal as alluded
to —even if such a project were possible, and unattended with
immense inconvenience and other drawbacks —Sydney harbour,
from the Sow and Pigs to the Heads, could be so fortified as to
render it impregnable to any marauding or even minor naval
force that might engage in the attempt.
Very few harbours have been so favoured by nature to assist
the military engineer in his work. If France, Austria, or Russia,
held a place of such commercial and strategical importance, so
favoured by nature in every point—they would, I will venture to
affirm soon turn it for all purposes of security into a a
Comorn, or a Cronstadt. The mouth of the harbour from east to
west, at the Sow and Pigs, is just 1700 yards, or one mile across.
The eastern channel is not required for shipping, and can be
permanently blocked up by stone, leaviag the western or usual
channel, just half-a-mile across, for all purposes of navigation, and
thus narrowing your line of defence to half the distance.
The only effect of this would be to deepen and improve that
channel. r i oulon and Brest, the great naval harbours of France,
are only wide enough at their entrance to admit one ship at a
time. Detached batteries erected on Inner North Head, Middle
Head, George’s Head, Bradley’s Head, for the North Shore-
arid on Inner South Head, Green Point, and Shark Point, for the
South Shore—would offer altogether a cross fire of forty guns,
which would all be within half a mile to a mile range from the
moment a vessel entered the Heads. And in time of war a boom
or booms composed of heavy chains, floated by light wood kept
ready for the purpose, can be hauled over from George’s Head to
the Sow and Pigs, during the night, without in any way
obstructing the navigation, but offering, with the aid of sunken
electrical torpedos a very efficient impediment, when defended by
the batteries surrounding it, in the plan I proposed formerly,
according to Captain Denham’s chart of the harbour. The cliffy


Heads would reader the batteries thus placed inaccessible to a
boat attack, and the heavy swell at the Sow and Pigs would render
it impossible to man and arm boats under fire in a sea way; but
to guard against such a contingency one principal battery on each
side at George’s Head and at Green Point, might be fortified by
a keep for the guns’ crews to retire to, and being well placed
back, could scarcely receive much injury from the fire of the ship-
ping, but could pour down grape and canister and rifle balls on
the storming party. All these batteries should be placed in
retired positions, where a long range could be brought to bear on
the ships with comparative impunity.
So much for the land defences.
I will now find employment for the Naval Brigade afloat,
which if carried out in conjunction with a system as above
described, would make the entrance to Sydney rather hotter work
than many would like to try it. Send to England for an old
dismantled seventy-four gun ship, of which dozens are rotting in
the harbours, have a small steam power fitted to her, with the
steering apparatus well protected for all purposes, mount twenty
Armstrong guns, and fit her up to be manoeuvred as a steam
floating battery by 350 men, composing the Naval Brigade, well
trained to great guns and small arms, of whom, say fifty in war
time, might be a paid staff permanently attached to the battery,
who could train the others, and form of themselves a nucleus
ready for any sudden emergency. In time of war this battery,
by being anchored handy 10 the Sow and Pigs in the west channel,
would, with or without the booms, offer a very effectual means
of opposing any night arrival, and would have the immense
advantage of being able to follow an enemy into any of the
numerous headlands she might take cover under, after running
the gauntlet of batteries, which w T ould at once put the town at
her mercy. An enemy could actually run up at present behind
Gnat Island to do her ■work of destruction at her leisure. By a
given signal one naval brigade could at once be mustered and
carried on board, where every man would be at quarters ready for
action, as if he belonged to the ship, and such a battery run
alongside an enemy could engage her fairly with her armament,
01 carry her by boarding, with something like a chance of success.
As a tender to this block ship, an old steamer might be usefully
strengthened by the bow, and turned into an iron steam ram, which
could be run full speed against the attacking vessel or vessels, as


we hear of lately at New Orleans, and could thus he doubly useful
for all purposes connected with the floating battery and naval
brigade. Such a service would be highly popular amongst our
seafaring and harbour population, and the cost would be nothing
compared to the building of expensive gunboats, that, after all
would be mere toys against any force at all imposing; whereas a
steam block ship as I have described would be equal to engage a
very formidable enemy at the Heads, and, with the co-operation
of the booms and the land batteries, manned by volunteers carried
quickly to their post, render Sydney Harbour unassailable by any
ordinary naval force, much less by a privateering one. Unless
your line of defence is four miles away from the city it is perfectly
useless, as it has been repeated over and over again that ships
can bombard cities with shell within that range ; which brings
me now to examine the coast south of the Lighthouse, and as
Voltaire says, u with figures you can prove anything,” I am
rather sorry to find that, from Bondi or Coogee Bay, as the crow
flies, to the centre of Sydney is about three miles and a half
which, with an ofiing in calm weather, of half a mile, just barely
saves us from aggression outside. I see in the recent military
periodicals, that shells are now being made to carry five miles,
which is giving serious apprehension at home about the safety of
Portsmouth, from a bombardment from the sea, and this is
followed by the suggestion of removing our principal naval
arsenal 200 miles inland, to avoid such a disaster, proving that
the discoveries in modern gunnery and warfare, force them at
home to put their house in order, and shall we here neglect to
profit by such a lesson ? lam not quite sure that Botany harbour
is beyond five miles direct from Sydney, which would thus require,
with Bondi and Coogee, to be protected by a strong battery in
case a vessel should begin her work outside, finding us too well
prepared inside to receive her. A proper survey by a defence
committee would elucidate all these points, and had such been
done six years ago, we should have been spared the waste of
money and foolish exhibition of a set of batteries, not worth, for
any purpose of utility, the paper of the plans they were drawn
upon, unless like Paddy’s gun, they are able to shoot round the
corners, as any man coming nearer than behind Bradley’s Head
at present to attack Sydney, must have as much brains as the
person who ever thought they would at present dream of placing
themselves anywhere else. You have in Chowder Bay deep water


for ateighty-gun ship, close to the shore; you are there completely
out of sight of every one of the fifty-eight guns now in
position, ahd you are about two miles distant from the heart
of the town which for bombardment is just a convenient range.
The facilities of landing by the side of these batteries,
taking them in reverse, spiking the guns, of turning those of
Macquarie’s Chair against the others, of course never for a
moment struck the man to whom a complacent Government gave
the wielding of .£BO,OOO of our hard earned money, which with
another £IOO,OOO well laid out at the Heads, as suggested,
would go very far towards completing the bill of fare. Rough
excavations in the solid rock, faced with earth and turf, in the
eight position are not costly, but much more useful than finely
chiselled masonry in the wrong one Deabsentis nihil , nisi
bonum, but it is rather hard for those living here, to know that
at any time if a sudden war should occur, we are at the mercy of
any privateer that the knowledge of our wealth in specie iray
tempt to make a razzia, which in the absence of a man-of-war,
could hardly fail to succeed, and which it is clear would be a very
good investment for the sharers in the venture. America, Mexico,
and other States are full of lawless, daring men, who would never
wish to be better employed, and if we are satisfied with remaining
in this dangerous and undignified position, with the sword of
Damocles actually over our heads, when certainly, as I believe I
have proved, there can be no possible difficulty in the way of
removing it, all I can say is that, the Anglo-Saxon race must
degenerate in pluck and spirit when transported from its island
home to the Southern hemisphere. As you have so ably pointed
out, a three or four hours’ bombardment, of Sydney would set it
on fire in a hundred places. The destruction of property would
have to be counted by millions, of life by thousands, of honour and
prestige by all that is dear to every Englishman. An enormous ■
ransom must follow, or ruin is inevitable. All warnings of the
present will be then too late, and a century would be required to
recover from such a blow, if even then. Talk of the amenities of
modern warfare, and look back to the destruction of Sinope by one
of the five great Powers, before war was actually declared. Look
at Gaeta, bombarded from the sea, and not three houses left, in
any street together. I could multiply examples—some actually
are taking place whilst I am now writing—amongst a race of
British descent, who a yearago were on terms of union with each


other, now engaged in the most deadly feud of modern history.
Cannot we learn from the book of experience, not only of the past,
but even of the present ? If common sense and rational argu-
ment will not prevail, surely something may be expected from self-
interest and that law of nature, self preservation.
I have done my part, and believe I have fairly exhausted
the subject. The Volunteer movement has been a partial success,
and but for the cold water thrown upon it would be a complete one.
A dozen corps are anxiously waiting to form and be proclaimed,
the money has been voted months ago by Parliament, but your
rulers only tolerate the movement, and impede it whenever and
wherever they can. They might, if they promoted it as at Mel-
bourne, have in Australia 5000 men under arms—enough to secure
the colony against any aggression by land or by sea. As it is,
with unlimited means and facilities at command, they have
weeded it down to 1000 men —just sufficient in case of danger
from outside, to guard the town from its Arabs and help to extin-
guish the fires.
There are throughout the population the germs of an excellent
martial spirit, and with proper encouragement anything, and
everything could be done by the Volunteers alone of New routh
Wales.
1 crave your indulgence for this lengthy communication, my
only excuse being its great and urgent importance.
J. Berncastle.
229, Macquarie-street, 11th April, 1862.
sth Letter.
THE DEFENCELESS STATE OF SYDNEY HARBOUR
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, —Now that the attack on Charleston, by the largest
fleet of iron-dads ever brought into action, has clearly proved the
facilities any port has of resisting a naval force by batteries well
placed several miles from the city, and assisted in their work of
destruction by some sort of obstruction in their immediate vicinity
to the attacking force, so as to concentrate a continuous fire upon
it, and disable it, thus preventing it running the gauntlet, as it
is quite evident any iron -clad, or even wooden, ships can do under
steam, without any material damage, and, having succeeded, are
able to dictate terms to the city or lay it in ashes, as it may suit


their good will and pleasure, can the citizens of Sydney, for once,
take a hint, and also read a lesson from this celebrated attack on
Charleston, which is all in their favour, and put at last their
house in order ?
It has been pointed out, over and over again by myself,
and a host of other still better authorities, that the Heads, and
the Heads alone, must be defended by narrowing the entrance at
the Sow and Pigs, leaving the west channel of only half a mile
to look after. This channel, surrounded by half a dozen batteries
on the most suitable headlands in the immediate vicinity, would
concentrate a deadly fire on an invader in case of war, arrested at
the Sow and Pigs by booms with sunken electrical torpedos, or
any other easily removable obstruction, and with the co-operation
of an iron-clad ram as a second line of defence, in case the first
should be passed, would form, as at Charleston, a rational and
most effectual system of defence, five miles away from the city,
consequently securing it from threats or bombardment, and a very
safe one to the defenders, who could not, on the heights I have
before pointed out, be taken in reverse, or reached by anything
but musketry, on account of their great elevation.
Some of the headlands admit well of casemated batteries in
the solid rock ala Gibraltar. Major-General Chute has arrived,
and I maintain that, as commander-in-chief of these colonies, it
is his duty, and his alone, to initiate here, as at Melbourne, a
defence committee of all the head combatant authorities, and carry
out some such system as I have suggested the broad outline of,
having given my plan more minutely years ago. No more
Denison follies, but cheap earthworks, or excavations in the solid rock
fir embrasures, at the most suitable points, are what is required. The
present batteries must he dismantled, as they are a standing insult to
the science of military engineering in the British army. I will say
nothing of their projector, as his many excellent qualities should make
us draw the veil over this, his weakest point, the Government who
confided such an enormous trust to an untried man being the most to
blame.
But for mercy’s sake let something be done before it is too
late; to protect, from not the chance, but in case of war the
actual certainty of destruction or ignominious capture, a city
with a population of a hundred thousand British subjects, and
probably for its size, containing more wealth in specie, goods, and
buildings, than any similar city in the world.
Putting a naval force quite out of the question at present,


one steam privateer of forty guns, of the right sort, and 600 men
who mean it, might reach us as soon as the news of war, and would
he quite equal to the task, as there is a snug berth behind Bradley’s
Head, in ten fathoms, just two miles from George-street, reserved
as if expressly for any such visitor by our late “ Vauban,” quite out
of reach of every one of his fifty-eight guns now in position, unless
they can be made, as Paddy’s gun, to fire round the corner. I re-
peat again, that it is the sole duty of the head military authorities
in this colony to advise with the Colonial Secretary, or the Exe-
cutive together, on this most momentous question; and although
some may only lose a few pounds against the thousands of pounds
of we all may be exposed to loss of life or limb, to loss of
business, and to eternal disgrace and dishonour in the event of
such a disaster as, in case of war, I at present foresee will be safe
to happen to us.
Charleston, by its splendid achievement, has taught us what
can be done against the Goliaths of the ocean, supposed invincible.
She can well say to them, “Us porteront ce nom pour la derniere
fois .”
Our harbour is something similarly situated, but requiring a
comparatively trifling outlay to obtain the same results, as any
force coming here would be naturally an inferior one to the nine
turretted iron-dads she defeated. In my opinion the question is
quite equal in importance to railroads, and the money spent would
never be regretted, as it is nothing more than an annual premium
for insuring our lives and property. We may rest assured that,
on the first outbreak of a war, the large sea-ports in these seas
will be the very first attraction to an enemy; and if ever such a
calamity occurred, I would say, but then too late, to the sufferers,
whose name would be legion,—
Remember Charleston !
“ Cavendo Tutus.”
229, Macquarie-street.


APPENDIX-
THE DEFENCES.
A public meeting, convened pursuant to adjournment from last Monday,
(24tb August, 1855,) was held yesterday afternoon, at the Exchange Eooms,
for the purpose of further considering a series of resolutions relative to the
defences of the harbour and of the colony generally, submitted to the meeting
on the former occasion, and to consider such other propositions relative to the
same subject as might be brought forward. The chair was taken by T. C.
Breillat, Esq.
Moved by Captain Towns, seconded by Mr. W. R. Piddington—“ This
meeting views with painful alarm the continued delay which has taken place
in fortifying the port and harbour of Sydney, and, without entering into the
merits of the several plans proposed for the inner defences, is of opinion the
most effectual means of protecting the harbour of Port Jackson and pre-
venting an attack upon the city of Sydney, will be by forming a barrier
constructed of the hulls of vessels or spars so connected together by chains
and placed between the shores and the shoal on the Sow and Pigs in each
channel as may be sunk in a few minutes on a gun signal, and thus finally
impede the progress of an enemy ; with temporary forts so placed and con-
structed on each shore as would sink any vessel, placed across the barrier in
a few minutes. That these resolutions be embodied in a memorial to his
Excellency the Governor-General praying the same be at once constructed,
and should the funds already voted by the Council be found insufficient, the
Council be petitioned to render a further supply.”
Dr. Berncastle should have preferred to see the resolutions submitted
by Captain Towns appended to the original motion instead of being proposed
as an amendment. He saw no reason why the one should be put against the
other. He thought it was too bad that such a proposal as that of Captain
Towns’s should be set aside, probably only because it did not come from some
other quarter. How, in opposition to the objections urged against a barrier
of ships or booms, numerous precedents could be referred to, and at the
present time they found it adopted at Sebastopol and Cronstadt. At the
present time, and before permanent defences could be constructed, a fleet of
hostile vessels could enter the harbour and shell the city with perfect
impunity, and leave again if they chose before morning without their ever
having an opportunity of knowing by whom the assault was perpetrated.
At the same time he did not think that the vessels of Captain Towns would
be so effective as was generally supposed, unless they were considerably
strengthened ; but that a barrier of ships or booms should be presented, he
fully approved of. He could not believe that an enemy would only send a
single vessel to invade the port when it was known that there was as much
as four millions of treasure in their banks, a sum sufficient to encourage an
enemy to send a large and well equipped fleet against them ; and it was
necessary for them therefore to prepare to resist the entrance of such a fleet.
The only likely way to effect such a resistance was in his opinion, to have
such a barrier as that proposed by Captain Towns. To oppose the entrance
of an enemy’s vessels, the Chinese sunk twenty large junks in the Bocca Tigris,
and the only vessel that passed the barrier was the Nemesis ; and she only
succeeded in consequence of her light draught of water. Besides Cronstadt,
Sebastopol, and the Bocca Tigris, he might also mention that at Londonderry


a boom was laid across tbe river to prevent tbe entrance of vessels during'
the war between William the Third and James the Second; and had a similar
barrier been placed across the Tagus the French, in the reign of Louis Phillip,
could not have passed the forts —which it was considered impossible for any
fleet to pass as they did and threaten to destroy Lisbon.
DEFENCES OF THE HARBOUR.
To the Editor of the Sydney Morning Herald.
Sir, —I beg to hand you the following copy of a letter received in
reply to the resolutions passed at the meeting lately held here in reference
to the above subject, and request you will kindly insert the same for the
information of those who took part in the proceedings.
Exchange Rooms, 11th September, 1855. Alex. Thomson.
[Copy.] Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, Sept. 10, 1855.
Sir, —I am directed by the Governor-General to inform you that he
has carefully considered jhe resolutions adopted at a public meeting recently
held at the Exchange Rooms, which were submitted in your letter of the
Bth instant, and to state to you in reply thereto,
Ist. That his Excellency’s attention from the time of his arrival in the
colony has been earnestly directed to the subject of the defence of the
harbour and city of Sydney, and that he hopes in a few months to be able
to complete the works for which the Legislative Council has just granted
the necessary funds. _ _
2nd. That his Excellency has brought under the notice of her Majesty s
Government the large amount of British capital engaged in the of
these colonies, and has no reason to doubt that an adequate naval force will,
in case of war with an enemy in a condition to injure that trade, be stationed
in these seas.
3rd. That in his Excellency’s opinion the works which are about to be
constructed will be fully adequate to defend the harbour and city, and any
attempt to close or narrow the entrance into Port Jackson, would be
productive of serious injury to the trade of the city.
4th. That he does not see the least ground for the opinion that an
invasion of these colonies could ever be contemplated; there being no
nation which could detach a force into these seas of sufficient strength to
justify an attempt to occupy a country inhabited by upwards of half a
million Englishmen, and supported by the whole strength of the British
empire. His Excellency cannot, therefore, see any necessity for the intro-
duction of a compulsory Militia Bill, the effect of which would be to
withdraw a great number of persons for a certain portion of the year from
profitable employment, and be productive of a large annual expenditure.
I have the honour to be, Sir, &0.,
(Signed) W. Elyard,
T. C. Breillat, Esq., <feo. (for the Colonial Secretary.)
SOUTH SYDNEY VOLUNTEER RIFLES.
A public meeting was held last night in Christ-church schoolroom, for
the purpose of forming a volunteer rifle corps for South Sydney. When the
proceedings commenced there were about seventy or eighty persons present,
but at the close there were fully two hundred.


The chair was taken by the Mayor of Sydney, who expressed himself
gratified to see that his young neighbours of the south of Sydney had taken
up the subject so warmly. He had no doubt the aspect of affairs abroad
demanded that we should be ready for any emergencies that might arise;
and besides this, there were many advantages both physical and mental
conn ected with military exercises. The state of affairs in Hew Zealand
should show them the necessity of putting themselves into a proper state
of defence, whereby they might avert attack. He hoped they would enter
into the subject with, spirit.
Dr. Berncastle said he thought there could only be one opinion as to
the necessity for a Volunteer Corps. (Hear, hear.) They could not be
accused of too much eagerness in the matter, since all the other colonies had
moved in it before them. But although the last to join, he hoped that
they would be the last to lay down the rifle. (Hear, hear.) The necessity
of a volunteer corps was obvious to everybody, and it was hardly worth
while to dwell upon it. When they saw England initiating the movement,
Eord Palmerston serving as a private, and the Queen reviewing the volun-
teers, it was quite puerile for any person to raise a voice to the contrary.
He had always thought that the cricket bat and ball must give way to the
rifle, and he had considered it rather ridiculous when the Domain was given
up to the cricketers, whilst the volunteers had not a place to hang a coat
on. (Hear, hear.) He had said at the time it was an anomaly that could
not exist long. He had heard men say what was the use of fortifying
Sydney, for it was not worth the notice of any foreign foe. But when they
published once a quarter that they had four millions of specie in the banks,
they invited attack, either from some foreign nation or from buccaneers.
It was worth while to remark that Eord Nelson lost his eye in the attack of
Calvi, and his right arm in the attack of the Castle of Santa Cruz, whei’e he
was repulsed, both insignificant places in comparison to Sydney, and that
Lord Anson fitted out a fleet a hundred years ago, for the purpose of attack-
ing Spanish galleons. But these prizes were not to be spoken of in com-
parison with the treasure that a successful enemy might obtain in Sydney.
(Hear, hear.) It could not be said that Sydney was not likely to be
attacked, possessing, as she did,the finest harbour in the world, and having
also many commercial and political advantages. If there was any one
country more likely to be selected for attack than another it was Sydney,
Melbourne, or Hobart Town. (Hear, hear.) The facilities now offered by
steam, would make two thousand men equal in importance to foux
thousand in former days. They all knew how the Enfield rifle and
the Armstrong gun, with iron-dads, steam rams, and electric torpedos
had revolutionised the conditions of warfare, and if they were not able to
resist these new weapons they must fall, not only to a legitimate foe like
France, but even to a privateer of fifty guns. (Hear, hear.) The batteries
now in Sydney required 1000 men to man them, out their system of defence
was useless unless thev formed rifle corps. If an enemy landed in Botany,
a body of 4000 good* riflemen would prevent any foe from attacking the
city. The foreigners who came here knew the defenceless state of the city,
which seemed to court attack. Everything in Europe now threatened war,
and before the volunteer movement occurred in England, nothing would
have surprised him less than to have seen the French flag waving on the
Tower of London. As for themselves their principal resources would be
not only in fortifications, but in their strong arms and rifles. (Hear, hear.)
After all, rifle practice was a mere amusement, putting aside the utility of


ifc. The Rev. Dr. Croly, LLD. of St. Stephens, Walbrook, in a speech he
delivered upon the subject, had shown that in Switzerland the annual
meetings for rifle practice were the merriest time in the year, and had given
it as his opinion that England would never be “ merry England” again till
the rifle movement became thoroughly national. The rev. doctor had
further stated that the wisest and bravest of the nation have declared their
conviction of the national danger. The use of steam, the railroad, the new
weapons, and the new science of war, have placed England in a new position
of pexil. If the French Emperor were the very genius of conciliation, we
must not trust the safety of our country to the infirm purposes of human
nature. UEmpire c’est la paix” has vanished from royal records before
our eyes. Our only security must be in our own right arms, and in the
help of Heaven.
I have written these thoughts in no unworthy fear, nor in any wish to
create idle alarm. But I only follow authorities of the highest name in
deprecating the dangers of the British Empire. When Wellington, years
ago, expressed his alarm in the memorable words, “I have lived seventy
years in honour, and I pray that I may die before I shall have to witness
the disgrace of my countryand when we see the present condition of
Europe, in still deeper darkness than when it lay so gloomily before the great
soldier, well may we feel alarm. Since that day despotism has become more
despotic, armies are more directly the instruments of sovereignty, popular
rights more directly extinguished, until at last the decisions of European
Empire have been condensed into the conversation of two powerful
individuals closeted together—one of those individuals, at the head of
500,000 men, the best equipped army in Europe, flushed with success and
openly longing for one great enterprise, as the crowning achievement of the
national glory. The French fleet is at least equal to our own in numbers,
superior in men, and ready to start from all its ports at the first signal from
the Tuileries. Whether the French Emperor will realise the wishes of that
inveterate hostility, in which, as Lord Howden has told us, “There is not a
widow in France who would not give her ojaly son if it was for the invasion
of England,” must remain to be decided by the event. But, England stands
alone. We can see nothing in the map of Europe but the track of irresistible
power, and the demarcations of arbitrary will. We see over the whole
continental horizon nothing moving, but the thunder-cloud. Continental
liberty is extinguished. It is buried in the cemetery of the Italian campaign.
Whether Europe will ever be restored to even the fluctuating independence
of late years, may be a question, but she is now as fettered as if she were in
the slave market. With England there can be but one question. There
must be no concession, and no compromise,—the one a scandal, the other
ruin. She has an invincible strength within her borders —in the bravery,
loyalty, and freedom of her people. But, it must be remembered, that these
noble qualities may be made utterly useless by indolence, by a weak reliance
on fortune, or by an infatuated contempt of opportunity. We must not
vapour about our national glories, nor mention the names of Pitt, Nelson,
and Wellington, except to think of their warnings and emulate their
example: “ Ecce ante oculos msestissimus Hector.”
We must have five hundred thousand volunteers in arms, a hundred sail
of the line, and a naval militia to man them. He had much pleasure in
moving the first resolution—“ That, in the opinion of this meeting, consider-
ing the threatening aspect of affairs in Europe, and the present defenceless


state of Sydney, it is desirable that a company of volunteer rifles be formed
in the southern portion of the city, to be styled the South Sydney Volunteer
Rifles.”
THE VOLUNTEEB CAVALEY.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sib, —I have noticed a letter signed “ Bluecoat,” taunting me with
ignorance on military questions, who held a commission in her Majesty’s
service when he was flourishing 'a yard measure across the counter; and
having had at an early period of my life abundant opportunities of being well
acquainted with military matters, on the continent and elsewhere, am quite
able to discuss them when I think it necessary. He then
attempts to ridicule the busbee, and quotes Nolan about its being
a muff and a jelly-bag, which of course is very witty, but he does
not say that the late Prince Consort, having the choice of any regiment,
preferred to be colonel of the 11th Hussars, and wore this muff and jelly-
bag. Lord Cardigan, the most dashing cavalry soldier in the British army,
adopts it also, and the most heroic feat ever done in modern warfare—the
charge of the Light Brigade at Balaclava, when 200 returned out of 600,
were nearly all hussars with the ridiculous muff and jelly-bag.
Be does not, I should say, peruse the recent orders at the Horse Guards,
where, four months ago, all the regiments of light dragoons were ordered to
be changed to hussars. At Melbourne they have a fine corps of hussar
cavalry. The two Sydney companies of artillery have just adopted the
same head-dress, and the finest regiments in the great armies of Europe are
proud, for the last three centuries down to the present moment, to number
the hussars amongst the elite of their cavalry.
He probably is not aware that the red cloth bag acts as a syphon to
throw off the water that falls on the busbeej and is pierced at the end for
that purpose ; that the busbee is the lightest of all hats, weighing 120 z., the
fur protecting the head from a sword cut; also that the pelisse, slung on
the left arm, is in lieu of a cloak, and fits over the jacket, to be worn only
in winter, full dress not requiring it at all in warm weather. There is a
dash about the dress that speaks for itself, and as Lord Elcho says,
“ Volunteers should not lose sight of elegance and attractiveness in uniform,
as many a gallant soldier has been attracted to the ranks by it, who might
otherwise have been lost to the service.”
The Mounted Rifles are neither one thing nor the other. Their forage
caps are their full dress ; their sabre their only arm; the revolver and
carbine are dispensed with, and the turn-out is unattractive, unmilitary,
unfinished, and unpopular. Their grand muster (of fifteen members) to do
honour to General Pratt’s review, only proves the utter absurdity of their
proceedings. Much better to disband and form again on a better footing,
with new officers, who, instead of acting as Marplots, would take a pride in
advancing the interests of the corps, and in bringing a creditable number of
men into the field.
It is a positive disgrace to the colony, and to the volunteer service, that
a body of 1000 infantry should only be supported by fifteen horsemen, when
cavalry should always be in proportion of about twenty per cent, of the
brigade, ■which would require for Sydney 200 mounted rifles. Major
Nasmyth, formerly brigade-major here, in his parliamentary report, recom-


mended a force of 500 mounted rifles and 3000 foot, for the adequate defence
of Sydney. At Melbourne, at the last sham fight, I find the cavalry present
Were as follows :—
Eoyal Y. Y. Cavalry
Melbourne Mounted Eifles
.... 42
Kyneton Mounted Eifles
.... 32
Bacchus Marsh id
.... 30
Geelong Mounted Eifles
.... 36
Castlemaine Light Dragoons
.... 30
in all, out of a force of about 400 effective men.
Now, following their example, I should say, sink all foolish rivalry of
mounted rifles or light horse ; disband the present wretched remnant of a
corps that never can come to anything, and under more favourable auspices
with more experience gained by the present failure, re-organise the cavalry
of New South Wales, by asking the country towns within twenty to
seventy miles by rail or by road from Sydney to furnish their contingent
troop towards forming a Eegiment of Horse, under the name of “ Cumber-
land Light Horse” Hussars, if such be the uniform chosen by the corps.
Eichmond, Windsor, Penrith, Campbelltown, Picton, Liverpool, Berrima,
Newcastle, Maitland, Singleton, would each furnish twenty-five troopers,
and Sydney, Parramatta, and Wollongong fifty each; making in all a force
of four hundred men, all animated by the esprit de corps of belonging to the
same body, easily called together for reviews or other purposes, and one
drill serjeant could go the round at stated times, and drill the entire number
of country corps.
I have taken the trouble to get an estimate of the expense of a Hussar’s
full dress for a private, cloth light blue as Bombay Lighl Cavalry, trimmed
all over with narrow silver braid, white facings, busbee of opossum skin or
otherwise, and find it would not exceed fifteen pounds, and wmuld last three
years, say five pounds a year outlay per man for the Government, or 2000
pounds a year to ensure the services of -a regiment of horse, who, it must
be remembered, can all act as infantry when required, and are drilled for
both services, each trooper should find his own saddlery,: but arms, accoutre
ments and drill to be supplied free.
If the Mounted Eifles are in earnest, why do they not take some such
action, and put their arm in an effective condition, when everything is ready
at their hand, and the materials only want calling together. Some retired
cavalry officer should take command, and by his example stimulate them to
a proper sense of zeal and duty. By such means as these the\olunteer
Cavalry would attain the same efficient, useful, and honourable position that
is held by the sister services—the Artillery and the Eifles.
July 16, 1862. J- Bern castle.
BLOCK-SHIP AND BLOCKHEADS A MUDDLE ABOUT PORT JACKSON HEADS AND
HARBOUR DEFENCES.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, — “ Whilst the grass is growing the steed is starving,” is a very old
proverb, and it will strictly apply to our Jiddle-de. deing about a blockship lor
Port Jackson. Why, before queries and answers are concluded between the


parent land and the colony, and much more before the block-ship could be
mailed, equipped, manned, and arrived in port, Yankee Doodle, assisted by
his many friends will have done us very satisfactory to themselves, and proved
what a set of blockheads we are here in Sydney to make such tall talk instead
of quick work.
What is the use, then, of a blockship ? and what is the use of one at all,
since the natural feature of Port Jackson, if properly estimated and occupied
by cannon, would be far more economical and far more effective in defence
than any blockship ? .
I do not presume to dictate how and where such defences, by batteries
on shore, should be erected, and what obstructive defences could be effected.
These performances are left to military engineering, combined with naval
science and tactics. But this, I presume to add, we have a very faithful
illustration of such defences by the thrashing that the Confederates gave the
Federal Monitors from their well erected batteries and heavy cannon ; and
that we shall be really a set of blockheads if Monitors by their smashed iron
castles and wheel houses, and terrible riddling in their hulls, don’t awaken
something to quickest action for a better defence and with less confabula-
tions. ~
Depend upon it, Sir, the enemy that may try our golden gates will not
be a solitary privateer or buccaneer, but his name will be legion, and amply
repaid for the fit-out he knows he will be by the clear-out of our banks.
Why not begin the work at once, and remove, their present positions,
being dangerous and useless —Kirribilli, Denison, and Macquarie Port guns,
down towards the Heads, dud Sow and Pig rocks, and erect earthwork
batteries ? Who knows but the enemy may be even now but a few leagues
off our shores ? Our Naval Brigade will be all ready at the
June 27, 1863. Signau Gun.
CnpY.l From R. Towns, Esq., to Dk. Berncastle.
Sydney, 23rd July, 1863.
My Dear Sir. - I am to give evidence before the Select Committee on Defences to-day,
will you oblige me with your views, which I will gladly give you credit for ; and will you allow
me to name you as willing to give your evidence on the subject, as few men have taken more
trouble to keep the matter before the public. Please send per bearer anything you have, as I
will be out after 10. - Very truly yours,
To Dr, Berncastle, &c. &c , 229 Macquarie-street, B. iowxs.
PARLIAMENTARY PAPER. -Harbour Defences.
The following Report has been brought up by the hon. member for the Murrumbidgee
as Chairman of the select committee, and a motion for its adoption stands on the paper tor
Tuesday next t
The select committee of the Legislative Assembly, appointed on the 2nd oi JVlay last
“to inquire into and report upon the present state of the Defences of Port Jackson
and other Harbours in the Colony, and the best means ot effectually guarding them
against foreign attack and to whom, on the same day, were referred the Hepoit
of the select committee on Harbour Defences appointed on Ist July, 1863, with
the evidence taken by the said committee, and all documents referred to it ’ have
agreed to the following report: .
Your committee have deemed it their duty, in the first instance, to ascertain whether the
experience of the last two years, and the changes made during that period in construction
efforts, guns, and ships, have rendered necessary any change or modification in the plan ot
defence recommended by the select committee appointed in the year 1863.


With this view, your committee have examined Commodore Sir W. S. Wiseman, Bart..
C. 8., whose great experience and practical acquaintance with all the latest improvements in
guns and forts, render his evidence peculiarly valuable.
It will be seen from the evidence of that officer (page 4, question 3S), that he is of opinion
that the plan which was originally suggested by Colonel Gordon, of placing the defences at
the Heads, is undoubtedly the best; and it will be gathered from the rest of his evidence, that
his reason for recommending a different system is because he thinks that it would be difficult
and costly to bar the entrance to the harbour effectually.
As the complete closing of the channel to hostile ships is a necessary part of the system of
placing the fortifications at the Heads, your committee have, in consequence of the doubts
expressed by the Commodore, directed their attention to the question of the practicability of
preventing the passage of ships without injury to the harbour, and without any very extra-
vagant outlay.
The evidence of Mr. Morell, and Mr E. Moriarty, which contains much information on
this subject, has satisfied your committee that the channel on each side of the Sow and Pigs
shoal can be effectually boomed, without either of the objections mentioned above.
Your committee, therefore make the following recommendations, which ditfer only in a
few unimportant details from those of the former committee :
Ist. Booms to be stretched across the passages between George’s Head and the Sow and
Pigs, and between the Sow and Pigs and Green’s Point, on the plan suggested in the
evidence of Mr. Moriarty.
2nd. A battery of fifteen 68-pounder guns, on Middle Head, with barracks for 150 men;
the whole to be protected in rear by a deep ditch and loop-holed wall.
3rd. A battery of GB-pounder guns, or guns oi greater power if procurable, on the elevated
point between the Inner South Head Lighthouse and the Gap; this battery also to
ne entrenched and to have barracks for L 0 men.
4th. Three heavy guns to be placed on George’s Head : and four at Green Point. These
two batteries to be supplied only with portable or expense magazines, and to be
manned from the batteries at Middle and Inner South Heads.
slh. Platforms, with earthworks and embrasures for three guns, to be prepared at Shark’s
Point, as positions for the 40-pounder Armstrong guns when required.
6lh. Roads fit tor the conveyance of guns, to be made to Middle Head, George’s Head,
Bradley’s Head, Inner South Head, Shark’s Point, and the North Head of Botany Bay.
Your committee are of opinion that these works should be carried out without delay, and
that the guns now in position at Kiribilli Point, in the open battery at Fort Denison, and at
Mrs. Macquarie’s Chair, should be placed on the new batteries, until heavier guns can be got.
The defences proposed mi Jit be subsequently much strengthened by the erection of a
strong iron fort on the Sow and Pigs and Bradley’s Head, on the plan suggested by Mr. Morell
I see Appendix, p. 4), each armed with two 300-pounder guns; and by one or two guns of the
same calibre being placed near George’s Head and Green Point. It will also be advisable at
some future time to provide for the contingency of an enemy s ship running unexpectedly past
the batteries and booms near the Heads by the erection of towers of the kind and in the
positions recommended by Sir William Wiseman, on Garden Island, Fort Phillip, and Goat
Island. &c , &c
Your committee are also of opinion that the recommendation of the former committee, as
regards the city of Newcastle, should be carried out.
Your committee would further advise the speedy completion of telegraphic communication
with all the lighthouses along the coast, so that the earliest possible information may be
obtained of the approach of a hostile squadron.
Your committee desire to call special attention to the able and elaborate system of defence
laid before them by Mr. G. A. Morrel. The large amount of information which he has collected
and the originality and the excellence of many of his plans, merit in their opinion favourable
consideration on the part of the Government.
(Signed) William MacleAt. Chairman.
Legislative Assembly Chambers, Sydney, Bth June. 1865.
Printed by Hanson and Bennett, 104, Pitt Street, Sydney.
