

f late |U&. J&nmrtl |pnben. f
m /sy AMUEL MARSDEN, who has appropriately been called the “Apostle of New
fij Zealand,” was born at Farsley, in the Parish of Calverley, Yorkshire, on July Jjpr
28th, 1761. His parents had a small farm in Farsley, and young Samuel was
S sent early to reside with some relatives in the neighbouring village of Horsforth, Jp
jp where he received the elements of'learning at a small school. He afterwards
went to the Free Grammar School at Hull, which he left in 1789. Samuel now Jp
Mi longed to be a minister of Christ, and being a young man of more than ordinary 1m
Ifi promise is at once evident from the fact that he was adopted by the Elland Society and Jr
111 placed at Magdalen College. Cambridge, to study for the ministry of the Church of
England, which he left in. 1792. He was ordained by royal mandate on January Ist,
JP 1793, and appointed by special commission second chaplain to the new settlement at
fif Sydney, Australia, in 1793, when he was in the twenty-ninth year of his age. After his
JP marriage to Miss Elizabeth Tristan, which took place on April Ist, he started for his
fi[ future home from Hull, December 3rd, 1793, landing at Botany Bay on March 2nd, ,
Jp 1791, and in a few days took up his abode at Paramatta. He was appointed a magis-
fif trate in 1796. The next fourteen years of his life were spent in the performance of his .
Jp duties as a chaplain, chiefly amongst the convict prisoners and soldiers. Besides
iff labouring most assiduously in the erection of orphan and charity schools and churches,
JP he was particularly active in establishing “ The Model Farm,” at Sydney, and for the
iff rearing of sheep, Ac. The land which he possessed had been pre ented to him, in ■
Jp common with every officer of the crown, at a time when it was absolutely worthless,
to eke out his insufficient stipend. His efforts in this direction also greatly prospered. ,
Jp and he went on year by year adding to his estate, which he called “ The Plains of
iff Mamre,” until it consisted of several hundred acres. He sailed for England and (
Jp brought with him several barrels of wool grown on his own farm, which after a most
® perilous voyage, was safely landed in ISOB. This is supposed to be the first Australian (
JP wool imported into England, and it was exhibited at London, Bawdon and Leeds, in
fix order to have its quality tested, that he might be able on good authority to encourage (
JP its growth for the English market. The circumstance was soon brought under the
notice of the Government and the Prime Minister (Lord Castlereagh) when Sir Joseph ■ j
JP Banks introduced the Rev. Samuel Marsden to King George 111. His Majesty was so
delighted with it that he ordered a suit of clothes to be made from the first cloth (
JP manufactured out of Australian wool in 1809. His Majesty next presented Mr. Marsden
with five sheep— rams,—Merino breed, for “ The Model Farm,” at Sydney. Mr. .j
JP Marsden arrived with them safe in Australia in 1810, and the wool trade of Sydney
dates from the year 1811. In 1814 he fitted out an expedition to New Zealand to i
JP Christianise and civilise the cannibal tribes of the Northern Island ; and took with him
cattle, horses, sheep, Ac. He was the first who succeeded in teaching them religion, ,
JP agriculture and arts, and preached the first sermon ever heard in New Zealand to
%H\ crowds of savages on December 25th, 1815, from the text, Luke ii. 10, 11, “ Behold, I <
JP bring you glad tidings,” Ac. For twenty-three years he had the supervision of the
missionary operations in New Zealand, and made seven voyages to, and expeditions 4
JP through, those extensive islands, teaching religion and agriculture, the mode of rearing
sheep, Ac. He was occupied in building churches, schools, Ac., until civilisation took 4
JP deep root in the country. This remarkable man closed his very active and useful life
at Sydney, May 12th, 1838, in the seventy-fifth year of his age, where a memorial was 4
JP at once raised to him at a cost of £6,000. In addition to this mark of esteem by the
people amongst whom he had laboured, other lasting and appropriate memorials were 4
JP erected by friends and several woollen manufacturers of the West Riding in his own
native place. In the Parish Church, Farsley, there are five stained glass windows, that <
JP in the East representing “The Good Shepherd,” (Mr. Marsden’s mission), and in the
churchyard a red granite monument is erected, which together cost several hundred
JP pounds. The Committee who promoted this Memorial, were, the Rev. P. J. Maning, jla
Vicar of Farsley, Chairman ; William Hawkswell, Esq., Secretary; Elijah Slater,
JP Fsq., John Lambert, Esq., Charles Hainsworth, Esq., B. Waite, Esq., »
I. Roberts, Esq., and H. Hainsworth, Esq.
m rtflljfcouc ofmll be in cncrlaslimj remembrance.” m
Psalm cxii. t>.
MU


