

- LXZJ -...~.Mt«nMiiiiiiiiiLini^^
* r • k J a s
• V * - - • 4»
••THE £■ M ,
VORTICES DEMONSTRATION
• / * •
• • , • 0 •
• • . OF
V A‘«AT,URE fi ■ :
OR.. • ' ©
-THE PHILOSOPHY'OF OBSERVANT ASTRONOMY.
THE HEAVENS, THE SOLAS SYSTEM—AND ASTRONOMY A
in a Wholly new' aspect.
L * .
4
\
I
i
h-A
M)
c
V
H;.
, i V
l\J
.
«
1
! _i
i
i
AN ORIGINAL AND UNIQUE SYSTEM OF SCIENCE FOR THE MILLION.;.
-Founded upon the Great Discovery—by the ELDER HEUSCHEL —of Subjection to Translation
in the Heavens, of tlie Whole Solar System.
DISCOVERY OF. SOURCE OF CELESTIAL ENERGETIC •
AND VERITABLE MOTIVE FORCE PROPER ;
✓ * 4
RENDERING AN •
INTELLIGIBLE ‘ DESCRIPTION OF ITS NATURE OR CON-
* SISTENCE, AND MEANS OF SOSTENTATION.
A Demonstrable System of Knowledge, divested of all Technical Abstrusetiess, and, also,
of all Mathematical I’roblems and other Mystifications.
.< REVELATION OF NATURE’S MANIFOLD
MYSTERIES AND SECRETS;.AND SOLUTION OF OLD
AND DIFFICULT PROBLEMS.
* © •
With a lucid Description and complete Explanation of the Newtonian view and conception
• of a tinUersal Gravitation, Celestial Attraction, Repulsion, Central and
Centrifugal Force —rendering comprehensive elucidation of Nature's
Forces, -Nature's Laws, Astronomical Laws, Ac. —in general.
‘DIFFUSION OF NEW IDEAS RESPECTING THE “ CON-
STRUCTION AND MECHANISM” OF THE , .
-
4
MAJESTIC UNIVERSE ;
Substantiated and verified by AstrQnomical Observation . Facts , Data . &c., and
accordant with tnnciples ofi the exact Science ofi Mechanics,
Effects acconfpiulyintf “ &c., &c.
i
•]
• COPYRIGHT AND TRANSLATION RIGHT BOTH RETAINED. * • * FIRST UDIl lON.
• #
JllcUjounu: *
l
CHA*S. TrOEDEL & Co., PRINTERS, 43 COLLINS STREET EAST. **
.. * . *. 1882.
i
■■■■■■11111111111^^-


INAUGURATION
A MECHANICAL SYSTEM OF PHYSICS!
EXPLANATION OF NATURE’S PHENOMENA
FROM THE STANDPOINT OF VIEW OF
■PREVALEITGE
—IN FIRM A MENTAL CREATION—OF
BUT ONE SOLE KIND OF FORCE.
EXTENSION of SCIENCE PROPER; with DETECTION of
MISSED LINKS in the CHAIN of .MAN’S KNOW-
LEDGE to the PHYSICAL HEAVENS.
Discovery OF SOURCE of Celostial ENERGETIC MOTIVE Force
Proper, in its TRANSMITTED and CONSECUTIVE form of GROWTH!
An Intelligible and Comprehensive Descrip-
tion of the Combined Veritable Causes in
operation at work, effecting SOLAR TRANSLATION,
PLANETARY STABILITY, PLANETARY TWOFOLD MO-
TIONS, SATELLITE MOVEMENTS and Celestial Corn-
plex Motion in general! Also, explaining the
various correct grounds and reason of the
Phenomena of PLANETARY ‘‘PERTURBATIONthe
reason how and why it be of the rotative move-
ments of the orbs known as URANUS and NEPTUNE
are of a “Retrograde” character! likewise,
rendering correct explanation of the Nature and
Consistence of COMETARY MASSES, means and
principle of their STABILITIES, precise LOCATIONS,
ORBIT MOTIONS, &c, in the scheme of things
celestial.




YORTICES DEMONSTRATION
. ** NATURE s’*
J OR.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF OBSERVANT ASTRONOMY.
THE HEAVENS, THE SOLAR SYSTEM —AND ASTRONOMY—
IN A WHOLLY NEW ASRECT.
AN ORIGINAL AND UNIQUE SYSTEM OF SCIENCE FOR THE MILLION;
Founded upon the Great Discovery—by the ELDER HERSCHEL—of Subjection to Translation
in the Heavens, of the Whole Solar System.
DISCOVERY OF SOURCE OF CELESTIAL ENERGETIC
AND VERITABLE MOTIVE FORCE PROPER ;
RE NDERING AN
INTELLIGIBLE DESCRIPTION OF ITS NATURE OR CON-
SISTENCE, AND MEANS OF SUSTENTATION.
A Demonstrable System of Knowledge, divested of all Technical Abstruseness, and, also,
of all Mathematical Problems and other Mystifications.
REVELATION OF NATURE’S MANIFOLD
MYSTERIES AND SECRETS; AND SOLUTION OF OLD
AND DIFFICULT PROBLEMS.
With a lucid Description and complete Explanation of the Newtonian view and conception
of a Universal Gravitation, Celestial Attraction, Repulsion, Central and
Centrifugal Force—rendering comprehensive elucidation of Nature’s
Forces, Nature’s Laws, Astronomical Laws, Ac. —in general.
I
DIFFUSION OF NEW IDEAS RESPECTING THE “ CON-
STRUCTION AND MECHANISM” OF THE
MAJESTIC UNIVERSE;
Substantiated and verified by Astronomical Observation . Facts, Data , &c., and
accordant with Principles of the exact Science of Mechanics,
Effects accompanying “ Perspective," &c., &c.
-frfg-§f-3s§*-
COPYRIGHT AND TRANSLATION RIGHT BOTH RETAINED.
FIRST EDITION.
Hlelbouriu:
Chas. Troedel & Co., Printers, 43 Collins Street East,
1882,




THE
VORTICES DEMONSTRATION
“NATURE
THE PHILOSOPHY OF OBSERVANT ASTRONOMY.
THE HEAVENS, THE SOLAR SYSTEM AND ASTRONOMY
IN A WHOLLY NEW ASPECT.


TO THE READER.
f» ~■; -ik.iH)
■AVING perused and studied ancient and modern philosophy
with care and solicitousness—and, devoted long time and a vast
amount of anxious research and labour in the task, —the authors
Ji of this little introductory volume, deem having succeeded in
detecting the important wherewithal—the results and outcome of which—
compose obviously, stauncher bases for scientific research ; and, evidently,
comprise superior foundations for human reasoning on Nature and
Nature’s phenomena in general, than such as having hitherto been accepted
as good, and thought capable of serving mankind in the light of being
trustworthy and reliable.
Therefore, in submitting the contents of this preliminary publication
to the public at large, the authors have for aim of drawing attention
of unbiased followers of science—and of interested mankind at large—
towards certain serious errors (at this epoch of scientific knowledge and
acquaintance to Nature, happily, redeemable) surrounding the so-called
“ Gravitation System’' of Philosophy : errors, too, proving to be of a
charactei such as to demand the most serious consideration of all men lying
claim to be possessed of mental enlightment and culture, and, professing to
be in search of trustworthy knowledge. Hence, an attempt—in a brief
mannei is here made to show diverse important results of a certain,
comparatively speaking, recent Celestial (Astronomical) Discovery ; the
momentousness of which—in so far as concerns our present state of
knowledge to Nature, and, as affecting our philosophy of Astronomical
Observant Science, Physics, &c., to a very high extent—will dawn to
the mind of the reader and make itself manifest to his reasoning faculty,
as, by degrees, he follows the authors along.
Probable it be, that upon perusal of this little treatise, some portion
of our readers would fain feel inclined to take umbrage (and others to
wonder) at the somewhat assertive mode of writing and expression
used and adopted by the authors upon this field of science—one,
heretofore, of so exclusive and hypothetical a character; and


conjecture that, a less pronounced tone—and a more conciliatory
demeanour—would have served as well and remained equally
effective, and so forth! but, the authors have good reasons for
dissenting from such views ; and confidently assure their readers,
that such would not well apply to—nor yet meet—the urgency
of this case in hand. It is true, that persons, possessed of uncer-
tain and half-digested knowledge, are commonly found to cringe and
pander to other people with the object in view of enlisting interest in favour
of their own undecided propositions and speculations ; and, in whose hands
—feeble-minded enough—they are willingly inclined to leave the fates and
fortunes of their labours : by far too much of this folly pervades
Literature. The present Authors, however, do not belong to that stamp
of minds ; nor to that class of Literati. Being fully conscious of the impor-
tance—and applicability in the scheme of things—of their own advanced
system of knowledge, the writers of this little volume, accordingly,
proceeds quite heedless of versions rendered by previous posted up
authorities ; whatever so be their attained social ranks, stations, fame,
wealth, &c. : otherwise than in virtue of same becoming priviliged
—commanding or controlling literature and its accessories—Science and
its status, we dare to opine, has got nought to do with these kinds of
things.
Hence, we would courteously remind our readers, that, whilst not
troubling ourselves much about the “ who” or “ whom” of the individual
—or the “Authority”—we, on the other hand, investigate and subject
his ivritings and teachings to the most scrutinising analysis of which
being capable ! Aye, in the cause of diffusion of intellectual light—and
for the sake of disseminating sound and “ Fruit-bearing Knowledge”
generally—this, we most certainly strive to do. And we kindly advise
our readers to apprehend, that, in this light, our forthcoming original
expositions ought to be viewed and judged : and—we should further
add—that it is not of any avail shrinking together credulously imagining,
that posted up “ Authorities” are able deciding the important subjects for
you; or, otherwise, fancy that these men should prove equal to the oppor-
tunity dispensing with the important determinations and discoveries here
laid before the reader! ... Such ideas would be simple and foolish to
entertain : enough, forsooth, to make your philosophic magnates chuckle
triumphantly in their sleeves, behind the scenes at you. Gravitation
philosophy and teaching, it should be recollected, is of a character apper-


taining to “ Doctrinal ” element, and among its pledged adherents is,
therefore, looked upon as something approximating the character distin-
guishing religious Creed and Sect! . . . . Not so, however, the system
of thought-stretch here advanced : it comprising pure science, knowledge
and erudition ; and appeals to the mature understanding, to the developed
judgment and mental perception of man for recognition. Accordingly,
similar to the general reader so, also, your philosophers must likewise first
apply themselves to, and master a fair comprehension of this our version of
things, before being able judging of its worth. Materially interested
scholastic learning, it should be remembered, invariably comes in the rear
adopting itself to outside opinion and circumstances; its systematically
reduced principle of thought and teaching, precludes it, from ever beigg
found in the front anywhere.
Inasmuch, then, as the present Authors write—and publish —their
acquired knowledge in the interest and for the information of the general
public, rather than for a mere section ; they accordingly, proceed utterly
irrespective of all anciently descended and modernly practiced European
Cloister Learning ; and remain wholly independent of either decision or
recognition issuing from thence—to this end or the other ; favour, wrath,
graces and all. But whilst results of our investigations of Nature dis-
tinctly points towards, and crave for a desirable and much needed beneficial
“ Reform ” and emancipation of the mind in scholastic science, still, the
authors do in nowise advocate such kind of convulsion as might be said
and held to border upon the revolutionary.
Subsequent to being thought out by the Authors, and carefully
digested, the large subject —in form of a pathway of knowledge wholly
new—proved itself exceedingly difficult of framing, and, also, difficult
of intelligible description : yet—once reduced and explained—easy enough
of comprehension, ,the Authors deem ; and, further, trusting, that the
reader will enable himself to follow—with as little prejudice as under the
circumstances possible—through this their contribution to Philosophy.


CONTENTS.
Chai\
I. Introductory Observations
11. Analytical Inquiries and General Considerations
111. Demonstration of Celestial Previous or Primary*
Centrifugal Force and its Consistency, with
Comparative Analysis of Mathematical and
Mechanical Order of Force ...
IY. Demonstration of Celestial Secondarily Generated
Centrifugal Force and its Consistency, with
further Comparative Analysis of Mathematical
and Mechanical Order of Force
Y. Further Comments aud General Considerations
YI. Comparative Analysis of Terrestrially and Celesti-
ally Manifested Force-Evolution, with Consider-
ations on their Analogous Circumstances . .
VII. General Considerations and Summary Comments ..
VIII. Abridgements and Extracts from the Great Yortices
Demonstration of Nature; with Inferential
Exemplifications, Elucidations, Testimony, &c....
* All throughout the forthcoming expositions, the term “ primary
preceding or previous force.
Page,
force, implies


2, line 43, instead of “ discernable,” read “ dis-
cernible; and, for '"of being able,” read
“ being able of.”
3, linej, for “ For to better,” read “For bet-
ter to."
5, line 20, for “as we go along.” read “ in
going along.”
8, last line, instead of “for granted and,” read
“ for granted as being correct, and.”
9, line 5. for “appear,” read ‘"appears.”
10, line 4, for “ that what seems,” read ■‘that,
things which seems line 9, for “Taking
all things,” read “Taking everything;”
line 10, for “might be inclined to infer,”
read “ might justifiably infer.’’
11, line 1, for “the question of this great fact,”
read “ a question of such testimony;” line 19,
for “and, in fact,” read “and, as such;”
line 29, for “such we would,” read “this we
would;” line 31, for "‘under altered,” read
“under these altered ;” line 43, for “the
attested,” read “ the now attested.”
12, line 9, instead of “to any ordinary.” read
“by any ordinarily.”
13, line 11, for “All physical nature would,”
read “ Physical nature, throughout, would;’’
line 14. for “imply,” read “implies;” line
41, for exponents alike of nature,” read
“ exponents of nature alike.”
14, line 3, instead of “ For to better enable,”
read “That we may better enable:” line 13,
for “and to our,” read “and which to our;”
line 29, for “appeared,” read “appears;”
line 4c, for apply or account,” read “ appiy
to or account.’’
15, line 36, for “in not taking to,” read “from
not taking into;’’ line 45, instead of “in not
taking to,” read “ since omitting taking
into.”
16, line 6, for “The Themes,” read “These
Themes line 40, for “the teaching,” read
“the theory.”
17, line 39, for “ other trick mediaeval,” read
“other trick which mediaeval;” line 43, for
“ toward solution, by man,” read “ towards
solution by man
18, line 11, for ,l portentious,” read portentous
line 23, for “key destined,” read “key
which were destined;” line 48, instead of
“ upon, and the,” read “ upon; the.”
49, line 9, for “ but what shows,” read “ but that
which showsline 10, for “ having dis-
cernable,” read “ being possessed of dis-
cernible-”
20, line 4, for “These were,” read “And, these
wereline 5, for “ what really he,” read
“what he really;” line n, for “out of
which,” read “by dint of which;” line 14,
for “ pathways being, evidently,” read
“pathwayshaving,evidently,been line 15,
for “ such inroad and havoc,” read “ such
inroad, such havoc;” line 31, for “was in-
volved,” read “ is involved.”
21, line 27, for “opportunity of,” read “oppor-
tunity for.”
23, line 18, for “whatever it claims exists,” read
“ whatever it claims to know, exists ;” line
35, for “ it being subjected,” read “ it is sub-
jected.”
24, line 49, for “ than we do the,” read “ than do
we know either.”
25, line 6, instead of “ the fact of,” read “ the
fact, that;” line 9, for “is equally baffling,”
read is alike baffling;” line 15, for “all we
understand,” read “allwhat is understood;”
line 22, for “ seem,” read “ seems.”
26, line 5, for “on the pliable,” read “on pliable ;”
line 9, for “of force,’’ read “of trans-
mitted local force ;”line 16, “and with which.”
read “ and such as with which;” line 21,
“ than what at,” read “ than such as at.”
29, line 22, instead of “ for prolonged expiry of
lapse of interval,” read “prolongation of
lapse of intervals.”
30, line 23, for “minds alike in pursuit,” read
“ minds, and such as have engaged them-
selves in pnrsuit;” line 36, “of too primi-
tive,” read “ of mere primitive.”
31, line 30, instead of “or elemental,” read “or
of elemental;” line 44, for “ the light of,”
read “ the light as if being of.”
32, line 36, for “ being all,” read “are all.”
33, line 34, for “people seem,” read “people
seems.”
35, line 1, instead of “and for to enable,” read
“ and in view of enabling;” line 8, for
“potent, governing,” read ‘"potent and go-
verning ;’ r line 11, for “ and, its,” read “ and,
also, consider its.”
38, line 35, for •* resources since,” read “resources,
ever since;” line 36, for “of which it is,”
read “of which it is, that the ;” line 38, for
‘"Upon the field of,” read “ Upon considera-
tion of.”
39, line 13, for “in the form of,” read “in a
form; line 14, for “ The demonstration,” read
“ A demonstration;” line 41, for “ become ,”
read “ becomes.”
43, line 9, instead of “ having most fatuitously
clung,” read “having (fatuitously enough)
clung;” line 30, instead of “ force appear
to,” read “force appears to;” line 41, for
“ Seoome to each in turn what is,” read “ be-
comes these accompanying adjuncts.”
45. line 37, for “in their belief,” read “ in their
own vain beliefs.”
47, line 11, for “equal to opportunity,” read
‘‘ equal to the opportunity line 21, “ en-
volved continue,” read .“ envoived within
same, continue;” line 31. for “energy per-
petually proceeding,” read “ energy invari-
ably proceeding;” line 44, for “ compare
account of our astronomers anent the,” read
“ compare astronomical account respecting.”
48, line 5, for “ peruse the accounts as rendered,”
read “peruse accounts rendered!” line 7,
for “ transformation going continually on,”
read “ transformation continually going on ;”
line 10, instead of “for “reflecting mind,”
read - * reflective mind ;” line 35, for “as sub-
stantial,” read “ so much substantial.”
50, line 4 “ Destiny,” read Destinies.”
54, line i 3, “situate near,” read “ situate nearer.”
55, line 17, for “ knowledge destined,” read
“knowledge as were destined ;” line 25, in-
stead of “ for granted the,” read “ for granted
as being correct the various;” line 27, for
“ exponents for to be,” read “ exponents, to
be ;” line 33, instead of “ bases for know-
ledge,” read “ bases of knowledge.”
56, line 19, “ unknowable,” read “ inscrutable ;”
line 38, for “among,” read “amidst.”
63, line 39, for “ victimised,” read “ duped.”
64, line 37, for “ present,” read “ presents.”
69, line 10, for “ than others,” read “ than do
others;” line 23, for “ same equally,” read
“ same argument equally.”
78, line 44, for “ known as weightiness,” read
“ known as * weightiness’ (or denseness.)”
79, line 5, for “ larger one,” read “ larger ones.”


THE
VORTICES DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE;
Or, THE PHILOSOPHY OF OBSERVANT ASTRONOMY.
THE HEAVENS, THE SOLAR SYSTEM, AND ASTRONOMY
IN A WHOLLY NEW ASPECT.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY OBSERVATIONS.
After referring to several examples of the high practical utility of astronomy,
Comte takes this science as an illustration of the fact, that the sublimest
scientific speculations often, without premeditation, lead to the most ordinary
practical and useful purposes, and he exposes the folly of those who would
interdict all speculations except those which have obviously an immediate
practical object in view.—Comte’s ‘Philosophy of the Sciencesby
G. H. Lewes.
During lapse of ages the time-honored science of astronomy has formed
an inexhaustible field for human research and expenditure of talent. For
all time the physical heavens with its wondrous and amazing problems
has set the more reflecting and thinking portion of mankind musing,
marvelling and pondering. Generations having followed generations, yet
the aspect of the “ starry vault,” —the appearance of the vast firmament
in its grandeur and loftiness exhibited above and around us, remains,
apparently, unchanged ! So, at least, astronomical record and account
from the more primitive times informs us.
In our inquiries into the history of astronomy we find that noble
science to have encountered many reverses, many vicissitudes, as it were !
its followers in their honest endeavours to instruct man in lofty lessons
having during advance of time been subjected, some, to sneer and ridi-
cule, others, again, to foul persecution,
Similar to all other human pursuit so the science of astronomy, in
its different phases and aspects, proves itself to be one of growth, a know-
ledge of gradual development, in fact. Such seems, howevei, not to ha\ e
been altogether understood or sufficiently thought of by either the followers
of the cult themselves nor yet, or less so, apprehended by the outside lay-
man. Generations following each other in successions have believed the
science perfect and complete of their age and day; perhaps but little
B


thinking of what this knowledge should ultimately prove itself capable of
revealing to the reasoning faculties of man, of what wonderful light
this noble pursuit were destined to shed upon the most veiled and shrouded
of nature’s mysterious pathways, namely. Unconscious though we be
ourselves of the fact, yet, when looking back, all physical discoveries prove
themselves to be like so many separate links belonging to one great chain,
destined to be brought together some time or day, and connected for the
intellectual, moral and social elevation and well-being of mankind in
general, doubtlessly !
The various great discoveries by degrees revealed by the followers of
astronomy have, in turn, by prejudiced minds and but little informed
people, been interpreted as something palpably damaging and ruinous to
religious precepts among some sects ; the teachings and dogmas of which
being at the time thought to be jeopardised by promulgation of fresh light
and insight into the pathways and economy of physical nature or the
heavens! so that between intellect with its imbued legitimate promptings
on the one hand, and prejudice and bigotry on the other, a certain battle
for ascendancy seems to have been nurtured during advance of time and
ages. The jealousy on the part of some people entertained anent celestial
dicoveries and revelations over and above terrestial ones, is at once as
remarkable as suggestive. Even in our own present day awe and superstition
makes a great many people believe it to be fraught with danger, of some
sort or other, to come to know much of the secrets attached to physical
and celestial science, and become alarmed lest we should know too much
and more than what would prove good for ourselves.
Remarkable as it appears, we shall yet perceive that the very science
itself having been thought the disturbing element to religious precepts and
tenets proves, after all and at length, the very medium whereby the great
foundation of all sound and enlightened belief in reality asserts itself ;
proving itself to be, in fact, the veritable and formidable fulcrum where-
upon for its stability on the human mind it were destined to rest! and
such being divinely predestined intend and purport, doubtlessly.
It is a most extraordinary coincidence and an equally significant
fact, that the trait of which we have spoken, and, the apprehension felt
less something of a 'positive character of knowledge should creep in and
obtain a footing to the exclusion of artifice and uncertainty anywhere,
also, and, likewise, characterises the followers and brethren themselves in
their several paths of science If, by any means or chance, any one mem-
ber happens to approach the verge of solution of any particularly difficult
subject agitating the fraternity, the entire body is, instinctively, up in arms
against the bold and daring explorer on the instant ; his views are denounced
as monstrous, extravagant, untenable and so forth. Such is indeed
plainly discernable everywhere. The authors trust, however, of being able
of convincing the reader that knowledge to the economy of nature abroad
is still in its crudest state and celestial science in general merely emerging
from its more primitive stages.
In the contemplation of astronomy in its observant and practical
aspect, as a recorder of the movements of the heavenly orbs and as a
registrar in general of celestial phenomena, namely ; and, astronomy in its


theoretical or speculative aspect, engaged in studying the resources of wide
nature and its economy in general, namely, and having for its aim of dis-
covering and explaining causes and forces at work by the aid of such facts
and data as are at its disposal; between these two a vast distinction exists ;
but to less conversant minds such difference is not easily discriminable,
because of scientists among themselves generally mingling up these two
subjects and making it thereby appear to the layman as if the two were
but one.
For to better comprehend the vast distinction really existing between
the two pursuits, say we then, that precisely in proportion as it is possible
for an individual to be an excellent navigator, and, proficient seaman or
sailor though remaining totally ignorant of the causes of oceanic currents,
or the causes at work culminating in wind, (the motive power of the
sailor) &c., etc., so in a like measure is it equally possible for the observant
and practical astronomer to successfully perform his various duties and
observations enabling him, by dint of computation, to foretell events, such as
eclipses, &c., without himself being conscious of or otherwise comprehending
anything respecting either the cause or the nature of force at work pro-
ducing or effecting celestial movement, or, otherwise be conversant with the
consistence of that great power moving worlds and universes ! These ques-
tions lies alike beyond and outside the functions and offices of either of the
two pursuits alluded to ; but, as aforesaid, in astronomy these distinct sub-
jects are mingled up with each other because of their being somewhat
derivably dependent and related. Observant astronomy studies and
registers effects and residts setting the other branch busy enquiring into
causes of observed phenomena, hence the relation existing. Previous to
the former we should not know of the latter.
Accordingly, although not so generally understood and accepted, the
observant branch exists nevertheless, but as the great recorder of events
becoming the material supplied to the other wherewith to build up and lie
open, by degrees, new truths and additional light anent natures resources
and general economy, and which arc destined, namely, to instruct man
and so re-act upon the human mind. Consequently, if not for the specula-
tive branch, which, in truth, constitute the philosophy itself of astronomy,
the observant branch itself, left alone, would remain a mere futile pursuit
of idle curiosity.
Between the pursuit of the navigator, ploughing the limited terres-
trial fluid ocean, and that of the practical and observant astronomer
placed upon the surface of the greater craft, ploughing the illimitable
celestial gaseous oceans of the mighty firmament itself, a certain signifi-
cant analogy exists ; so much so, that whilst the former is enabled to
guide his craft much at pleasure and go where his destination lies; the
latter, on the other hand, is obliged to confine himself to the more modest
task of merely tracing out and recording the pathway pursued by our
greater and mutual craft, the globe we inhabit, namely ; and, doubtless, the
better thing" it should so be, seeing that our sailors have, at times, been
known to wreck their vessels ; and, from the copious allusions to be met
with in astronomy and among astronomers,respecting celestial catastrophe
and alarming prophesy of destruction and annihilation in general, it is


much to be feared that if our physicists had their own way and AA r ere able
to guide our common craft and stand by its helm, they Avould prove
themselves someAvhat indifferent navigators, and Ave should soon hear of
collision and disaster.
The observant science submits its plain data and apparent facts ; if,
however, it be found that theorists contords and perverts same for to suit
their ends, and, so make these several manifestations, in inverted forms,
appear to substantiate their erroneously conceived hypothesis, the former
must in no Avise be either blamed or held responsible. Nevertheless, it
should be noted that, Avhilst the so-called theoretical branch—on account
of its abstract and philosophic (self-creating) character—consists of
science proper and in its real sense ; the other section, on the contrary,
contain or comprise science only in the light of any other once instituted,
reduced and acquirable pursuit cultivated by man.
Noav, it is Avith the so-termed “ theoretical,” or, nioro properly,
“ philosophical ” branch of astronomy that the present authors purport
to deal and treat on ; that science, namely, Avliich devotes itself to the
discrimination of nature’s pathways, to the discovery of nature’s resources,
causes, sources of force, and, in short, endeavours to render a rational and
intelligible explanation of physical phenomena in general accordant Avith
experience and teachings derived from out of stored up human knoAvlcdge
in various directions.
It is true, that certain recent philosophers have tried to lie down the
dictum for us that we have no business or occasion to inquire into causes,
but that all what is required to be known is an acquaintance to “ Nature’s
LaAvs,” “ Phenomena,” &c. ; but the authors hold out of being able, by this
time, to shoAv that these are but arguments emanating from disciples of
science totally devoid of trustworthy bases, rendering them incapable of
comprehending the purport of source of force, or the meaning of cause,
failing themselves descrying any, avo hear these men, in their disappointed
and baffled acumen, arrive at the conviction that causes in nature are
not Avorth knowing! Woe, then, be to anyone trying to teach to the con-
trary and slioav that causes are really discoverable in physical nature !
Yet, despite all sage decision, some people may perhaps be found whom
Avould like to hear something about the old subject of causes. Such being
just possible, Ave shall prefer then to deal Avith and treat upon this pro-
scribed theme and discuss causes here.


CHAPTER 11.
ANALYTICAL INQUIRIES AND GENERAL
CONSIDERATIONS.
“ Astronomy stands first in virtue of its absolute independence of all other phenom-
ena. It stands aloof. It is in no way subordinate to any physical, chemical,
or physiological phenomena. But, on the contrary, it is certain that physical,
chemical, physiological, and even social phenomena, are essentially subordinate
to astronomical phenomena, in a more or less direct manner, independently of
their mutual co-ordination.—Q. H. Lewes on ‘Comte’s Philosophy oe the
Sciences.’ ”
Of such structures, erected from out of assertainments by observant
astronomy, that of Sir Isaac Newton lias, of more modern times, stood the
more famous and taken a firm hold not alone upon the astronomical
mind but on science in various paths and directions in general ; so much
so, indeed, that everywhere we hear the so-called gravitation system
alluded to and spoken of as a philosophic edifice—the foundation of which
being thought to be of so unassaible an order, and, its doctrine and whole
teaching looked upon as being so religiously truthful as to quite exclude
all suspicion of doubt and question. Such like fatuous settled conviction
seems to be a trait peculiar to any age and characterising all generations
committed to any one kind of philosophic doctrine. Leading calibre of minds,
along with the multitude at large, appears to feel a sort of relief in
pledging themselves to some theory or other wherefrom to make a start
and whereupon to base reasoning capabilities.
It would seem, that except in one recorded instance, and, from the
outset of his speculations, the propounder of the gravitation philosophy in
vogue did not take to proper consideration manifestations exhibited in and
about this our mundane sphere, or taken sufficient cognizance of things
terrestrial ere proceeding to speculate upon things celestial, as we shall have
ample opportunity to point out to the reader as we go along.
In his little work “ On Liberty,” John Stuart Mill finds occasion to
state : “ If even the Newtonian philosophy were not permitted to be ques-
tioned, mankind could not feel as complete assurance of its truth as they
now do.” And here we find a great thinking mind apparently deeply
pledged to a system of philosophy the drifts and whole bearings of which,
we shall presently perceive, having at no time by himself been understood
or intellectually apprehended; for in thus speaking, this eminent
philosopher would verily suggest and imply that he himself, personally at
least, was alike morally and intellectually satisfied of the truthfulness of
the Newtonian version of nature and its economy ; and, that, that this


system of thought-trend had adequately proven itself so certainly trust-
worthy and reliable as now, in the present day, to exclude all thoughts of
misgivings and doubts.
Indeed, to scholastic learning, of our age and day, it would almost
seem as if doubting the reliability of the Newtonian system would be a
suicidal act, and that, to revolt against its hallowed held doctrine, would
precipitate the hapless culprit in nought less than social ostracism or some
such like equally comfortless thing ! And this, notwithstanding, it pro-
fessing to be questions and subjects of pure science, this philosophy ? But
whom was it now really proved its trustworthiness ? and whom was it now
confirmed it ? Amidst infatuation and admiration we hear grumblings,
doubts, misgivings and so on ; the theory is believed to explain, and when
put to the test it fails to explain anything.
It has been said that one must not attempt upsetting a government
until well assured of being able to supplant it and put in another thought
to be better in its stead ; this axiom may, possibly, be thought by some
people equally applicable in the reign of philosophy ! No one feeling
equal to the opportunity displacing the one extant at the present time
and supplying science with another and better, so in preference, inquiring
and dubious minds, making a virtue of dire necessity, subdue any mis-
givings they may here and there entertain, and, conform in silence.
Time was when the present authors took for granted, and, believed
too, that the Newtonian theory was something invulnerable and amazingly
bold and great! Such we did, because, time was when we did not perceive
its vulnerable and untenable points, and when possessed of but indifferent
stretch of mental vision. Time was when we were all children and knew
little or nothing, namely, then we read our Arabian fairy tales, and, as no
one informed us of their untruthfulness, we believed them true until in due
course of time we found out for ourselves their hollowness and worthless-
ness. However, the prejudices of ages are not to be overcome in a day,
and the interests of society in general seems so wonderfully intermingled
and interwoven that we must fain respect such reluctance and caution
which all measures alike meet with having a tendency to affect and over-
turn once embraced theories, beliefs and dogmas. Still, for reforms of a
beneficial character to be at all enacted or instituted, it must needs involve
conflict and convulsion of some sort or other. Halt we now here and
calmly consider a while.
M. Ward, in his Telescopic Teachings, writes to say : u But the ob-
servations of Honati’s Comet —are those which will be chiefly referred to
by future inquirers into the grand and mysterious phenomena connected
with the development and expansion of comets,” and respecting which this
author informs us further ; “ of which the ordinary theory of gravitation
does not afford an adequate explanation.” Such this author tells us to
have been stated at the Royal Astronomical Society’s Monthly Notices,
February 1859, p. 148, and wherefrom it will be seen that the failure of
the theory, anent, at least, the features above alluded to, stands as an
officially announced one. In further speaking to the subject of comets,
the same author also remarks : “ perhaps even in our days, the nature of
that mysterious force which acts upon comets will be discovered. If so,


the discoverer will indeed (to imitate the well-known words of Newton)
have rescued a precious gem from the vast ocean of still unexplored truth.”
Now it is obvious enough that, if these be the utterances of
Sir Isaac Newton once upon a time, it is equally cogent and convincing
that in his own estimation and to his own mind his imagined gravitation
or weight force proved itself, after all, somewhat imperfect or mere
approximation, as it were ? since otherwise, we should scarcely have met
with such outspoken language admitting of there being of such thing
as a “vast ocean of still unexplored truth" after all ? Whereas, one should
have thought that either must his conceived forces explain things, or else,
fail in explanation .of phenomena ! Could it be that a scientific theory,
proven and admitted to be incapacitated rendering explanation, becomes
legitimate, nevertheless, from mere vested belief in its efficacy ?
Again, in perusing the prefatory observation to W. L. Jordan’s little
volume “ The Elements, II,” we find that author informing us, that in
the preface to his “ Principia,” Sir Isaac Newton remarks that—“ all the
difficulty of philosophy seems to consist in this —from the phenomenon of
motions to investigate the forces of nature, and from these forces to
demonstrate the other phenomena.” “ And then,” continues W. L. Jordan,
“after stating that on this principle he ‘(Newton)’ had, in the work above-
mentioned demonstrated the motion of the heavenly bodies, he goes on to
say : ‘ I wish we could derive the rest of the phenomena of nature by the
same kind of reasoning from mechanical principles ; for I am induced by
many reasons to suspect that they may all depend upon certain forces by
which the particles of bodies, are either mutually impelled toward each other,
and cohere in regular figures, or are repelled and recede from each other :
which forces, being unknown, philosophers have hitherto attempted the
search of nature in vain ; but I hope the principles here laid down will
afford some light either to that or some truer method of philosophy . . .
I heartily beg that what I have here done may be read with candour, and
that the defects I have been gurlty of upon this difficult subject may be
not so much reprehended as kindly supplied, and investigated by new
endeavours of my readers.”
Now it must be conceded that from the above quoted utterances by
Newton to judge, it would fully appear that so far from that philosopher prov-
ing himself to be either intellectually or morally convinced of anything
absolutely reliable having been shown or demonstrated by the means of
his proffered theory to the world, the language by him employed would,
on the contrary, rather point to the very opposite being the fact! since we
hear him saying, “he hoped the principles he had laid down would afford
some light ? either to that or some truer method of philosophy ?” and, we
inquire, what then could possibly be clearer than that, in thus speaking,
this philosophers object was ostensibly that of paving a way , or, lay some
sort of foundation, towards some kind or method of reasoning which should
land man in reliable knowledge to nature! guiding future investigators on
the same path, in fact ? Again, when we hear that writer saying, “ I
heartily beg that what I have here done may be read with candour ; and
that the defects I have been guilty of upon this difficult subject may be
not so much reprehended as kindly supplied, and investigated by new


endeavours of my readers,” it will at once be perceived that, if the above
implies anything, it plainly invites and extols other minds, feeling com-
petent and equal to the opportunity, to further investigate and rectify any
possible errors attached to the difficult subject, and by himself inadver-
tently committed ! This request stands here prominently forth, as certain
as it is plain ? It is true, that in his work “ The Heavens,” —Amedee
Guillemin informs us that Sir Isaac Newton “showed, also, that all the
circumstances of the movements of the planets are well explained by
supposing that the force of gravitation is gravity itself,” (weight of
matter, namely) exercised by the sun on the planets in the inverse ratio
of the squares of their distances : “ But, as we shall presently proceed to
satisfactorily explain to the reader, this idea, of Newton, of the sun’s
weight, namely, exercising its influence on the planets in the inverse ratio
of the squares of their distances, was a mere ingenious way of surmounting
the great difficulty detecting and demonstrating source of force ! and, it
is just here where the present authors intend to come to the rescue and
repair the defects which that philosopher inadvertently did really commit,
and of which he would himself appear to have been somewhat mentally
cognizant. The great error of Newton and his philosophy must be
principally ascribable to the fact of there not being at his time any
astronomical data at his command sufficient to have enabled that arduous
thinker on nature to have well arrived at any better estimation or worthier
conception respecting real and veritable source of force proper. At
Newton’s time sounder views were possible of being held, better speculation
or hypothery conceivable; but, not as yet provable or demonstrable. With
the elder Herschel, however, such demonstrable source of celestial force
proper dawned to the minds of man and to the human understanding in
general. This the authors trust of being able to satisfactorily point out
to the intelligent reader. Simultaneous with Herscliel’s discovery
dawned the clue towards understanding of that formidable “ force which
acts on comets,” in the words of M. Ward. That astronomer found its
nature, and thus “rescued a precious gem from the vast ocean of still
unexplored truth,” without himself being ever aware of it though ? The
discovery by that great observer of the heavens—fully substantiated and
confirmed by subsequent investigators—becoming the formidable fulcrum
for this our system of thought-trend, the reader shall see.
The quoted reasonings by Sir Isaac Newton —anent motion, forces,
phenomena, and so on—contains much which, in our estimation and from
our standpoint of view, appear incorrect and unintelligible ; the limited
space here at present at our command debars us, however, from entering
upon and discuss these themes circumstantially. Nevertheless, we shall
have occasion to allude to this and other kindred subjects as we progress
along. Otherwise, the foregoing quotations contain within themselves
sufficient subjects and substance for us to treat on and will adequately
serve us for the purpose of the limited present ; hence, in our forthcoming
expositions we shall have occasion to refer to them off and on.
From what we have now gathered it would much seem, as if sub-
sequent astronomers and physicists had preferred to take indiscriminately
for granted and as absolutely true, that, which, by the propounder of the


theory, had been proffered in the light of the propositional and suggestive
rather than aught else, and, choosed to look upon his advanced liypothesy
as something sublimely truthful and quite beyond the questionable ; and,
altogether, seems to have made among themselves what the structure now
at the present time of day appear to be.
Suffice it then here to make it be understood by the reader, that in
the aim and object on the part of the present authors of adding to
and attempt correcting and improving previously advanced imperfect ideas
and cruder views respecting the difficult subject of knowledge to nature’s
resources, forces, pathways and general economy, namely; we are, not alone,
individually prompted morally and intellectually on, ourselves, but are,
moreover, and, as shown to the reader, encouraged and invited so to do by
the great thinking minds of preceding generations! by men, whom,
similar to ourselves, have toiled on long for to reach at unknown things
and truths, and solve, if possible, difficult problems, and afterwards, have
been obliged to battle stoutly for to be heard among the throng and the
great noise going on. Dessimination of new ideas and fruit-bearing
truths, —in the face of bias, prejudice and other formidable elements of
obstruction, —proving by far the more difficult thing to overcome of all.


CHAPTER 111.
DEMONSTRATION of CELESTIAL PREVIOUS or PRIMARY
CENTRIFUGAL FORCE and its CONSISTENCY, with
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS of MATHEMATICAL and
MECHANICAL ORDER of FORCE.
“ All science consists in the co-ordination of facts. If our different observations
were entirely isolated, there would be no science. We may even say that, in
so far as the different phenomena will permit, science is essentially destined
to dispense with all direct observation, by allowing us to deduce the greatest
possible number of results from the smallest possible number of immediate
data. —* Compte’s Philosophy of the Sciences,’ by G-. H. Lewes.”
Like so much else and so many tilings besides alike subject to modifica-
tion and change with advance of time, so, also, some kinds of truths appear
to be of a mere time-serving character and susceptible of alteration as time
goes on ; so much so, indeed, that what seems to be truth to, one epoch
or age does not necessarily and absolutely remain truthful to a forthcoming
age or to future following generations. Such, at least, appears to be the
fate of truths in connection with outside physical nature, where accepted
truths for ever vary in their value of reliability according to the varying
state of our knowledge respecting same. Taking all things to considera-
tion. one might be inclined to infer that all things seem, rather, as if
proceeding from a negative conclusion, as it were, and going towards a
distinctive beginning than otherwise or contrarywise, surrounding physical
nature, destiny of the human family, human knowledge and all !!
Thus comes it to pass also and likewise with the kind of truth at
present engaging our attention ; that, namely, until it was ascertained
that the entire solar system was subjected to perpetual translation in the
heavens—a discovery of a most momentous character, and one hitherto
suffered to be thought but little of by philosophers since its dawn—the
gravitation system propounded, or, rather, revived in its modern, form, by
Sir Isaac Newton appeared as if being unquestionably correct and truthful.
From the moment, however, that that important discovery became known
through the instrumentality of the observant science, that system of
philosophy proved itself to have been too prematurely conceived, and
formed from out of imperfect material, and its teaching and truths,
therefore, unreliable. Without himself being conscious of the fact, the
elder William Herschel demolished with his ascertainment the whole
foundation of the very philosophy to which he had evidently committed
himself, and brought forward evidence of so high an order as to effectively
shake to its very foundation the structure erected by Newton ; brought
forward, we repeat, testimony of a character destined to render that system


of reasoning obsolete with time. It becoming but the question of this
great fact being understood and sufficiently diffused and ventilated among
mankind, conjointly with the gradual retirement from the field of action
of teachers materially interested in the preservation of the system in vogue.
Thus it goes, in philosophy as elsewhere, one builds up his premises upon
the scattered ruins of another ; and such too, at times, without being aware
of the deed. With Herschel came proof that Sir Isaac Newton had
speculated prematurely, and, not just wisely.
Since not being aware 'of a solar displacement taking place, the
founder of the present popular system of philosophy—in engaging himself,
at the time, in the attempt at rendering a (plausibly) feasible explanation
of the direct source of force, —instinctively and naturally, as it were, looked
towards such source of forces to lie within the confines of the system itself
and believed same to generate themselves with the several visible pro-
digious masses of matter in form, namely, of globes, and, in fact, with
matter in general ; such force being by him thought capable of sustaining
itself in virtue of the property or attribute known as “weiglitiness” and
such as with which all matter were understood to be possessed of. This
being by Newton thought to be an adequate source of force ; and, in fact,
now constituted his so-called force of gravitation! That extraordinary
kind of force of our mathematicians, namely.
The authors would fain believe, nevertheless, that if at all the great
prodigy of a mobile or translatory system had been known to Newton, or, but
so much as suspected of taking place by that great thinker, the world would
hardly have heard anything of this modern revival of an anciently instigated
theme, nor have been told by that philosopher that “ all the circumstances
of the movements of the planets are well explained by supposing that the
force of gravitation is gravity itself, exercised by the sun on the planets,”
&c., &c. ; such we would fain be inclined to think science and the world
at large would scarcely have heard of ; and such, because, it could not
well fail but under altered conditions the astute mind of Newton would soon
have mastered the great secret and perceived that all the circumstances of
the movements of the planets are really well explained by supposing (or
comprehending?) that the force conferring movements to the planets
originate with and is sustained by the constant translation in the
firmament of the whole mass of matter composing the solar system —
in form, namely, of a prodigious volumed and transparent gaseous
mass—perpetually so advancing in the mode and manner of revolution
about itself (rotating) upon its axis, and, thus describing its translation
in the heavens! analogous to the planets themselves within the mass;
expressing, as they do, their orbit motions about the sun in rotating about
themselves, namely.
But in the absence of the attested and confirmed fact of such transla-
tion of the whole taking place, Sir Isaac Newton laboured and speculated
under great difficulties and adverse circumstances; assuming—as he could
but have done—the solar system to have been immobile, and, the solar
orb, although stationary, yet revolving nevertheless about itself, thereby
engendering some sort of energy taking the form of a force capable of
acting and reacting, in turn, upon the other secondary planetary globes !


and from the notion of which we find all subsequent speculators having
taken their cues and conceived likewise. Celestial philosophic science
proves itself to be too conservative by far for its own good, so much so,
that we find this science far in the rear of the achievements of the
observant branch and left behind in the race of practical science everywhere.
Throughout astronomy, the arguments of physicists and exponents of the
heavens are those which philosophers used anterior to the discovery of
solar translation, and, are the considerations belonging entirely to the idea
of an immobile solar system. A fact easily detectable to any ordinary
discriminating mind.
As previously observed, too little attention has hitherto been bestowed
on one of the most important of modern celestial discoveries, that, namely,
of the ascertained translatory movement of the system itself and with the
manifold important results and consequences following, the wondrous
phenomena therefrom accruing—and becoming most magnificently demon-
strable of the entire circuit of phenomena everywhere manifested to us—
have been allowed to lie till now unattended to and altogether neutral and
dormant. When here stating that simultaneous with this altered state of
things and knowledge—completely changing bases of reasonings and
whereby the orthodox system of reasoning ceases to any longer remain
truthful cr applicable—the authors mean to imply that, though to the
consciousness of science and mankind at large not there and then
at the time actually realized , the discovery itself indicated the fact,
for all that ; and its revelation is virtually traceable to that past time,
and, certainly, due, also, to the discoverer. For we contend, it was
a great conception to form on the part of the elder W. Herschel.
Contriving the means, and, set to and ascertain for himself, was a
task and effort eclipsed but by few followers of the cult before his
time. In stating that it will be found, that this our present exposi-
tions—founded upon the said discoveries by Herschel—opens up a
fresh and fertile field for future observers, the authors do not
think they are very much wrong. Still, for to intelligibly and com-
prehensively shed home to this revealed prodigy in question the cause of
such phenomena as planetary stability, planetary twofold movement and
numerous other accompanying and relative phenomena, innumerable other,
and, equally momentous things at no previous time by philosophers thought
of or considered, has to be drawn attention to and described ; but, of which
at a more advanced stage and appropriate place.
In the meantime we should observe that, when meeting such like sug-
gestions as that made by M. Ward, running: “perhaps even in our days,
the nature of that mysterious force which acts upon comets will be dis-
covered, &c.,” with the reply, that, at the cost and sacrifice of a heretofore
thought truthful and reliable theory will it alone be at all possible to appre-
hend, the nature of that mysterious force so acting,—do in no wise, on that
account, become alarmed at the consequences, we would remind and im-
plore ! For we shall find, that, the gains returned to us with the dis-
covery of this self-same mysterious force so acting upon comets, will show
itself to make up in a quite substantial mode and munificent manner for the
loss of the other and former ; one, namely, proving itself to be of a wholly


imaginary and illusory character in every aspect and respect, despite
all previous vested belief in its efficacy: and quite certain it is, that, for to
he in the secret of the one we must needs renounce our faith and belief in the
other. We have little hesitation in stating that, in wide nature but one sole
kind of force prevails. That matter and its weights are not the motive
powers of universes. That two distinct and opposed forces will in no
wise and in no instance agree. To believe to the contrary is the unmis-
takeable sign of lack of intelligence, want of knowledge and mature ideas
—even previous to being distinctly shown,—aye, even this ! All science
has analogy for its base, gained by previous experience, and wherewith we
legitimately enough generalize. All physical nature would seem to consist
of an interwoven and intricate mechanism, precise and positive, and for to
fathom which, we must be versed with mechanical method and understand
what positive principles of mechanics imply ; devoid of acquaintance to
same, the secrets of the celestial spheres remain a sealed book t 6 the ex-
plorer.
Since being so circumstanced and so situate as to be brought to refer
to locally circumscribed sources for origin and means of sustentation of
force, Newton was next obliged to infer and believe that two distinct and
opposed forces were requisite for explanation of planetary stability and
movement conjointly. One, namely, of an attractive character, and another
of a counter-attractive one. The former being thought to preside in the
sun itself and existing in virtue of its enormous weight as an immense
mass of particles of matter, the other, again, being presumed to be per-
petually engendered by the rotatory movement of that great mass of mat-
ter, and having a throw off or repelling effect, precluding the circulating
planets from being precipitated on to its surface by the acting influence of
the former. This it is which our mathematicians interpret and understand
as comprising celestial “centrifugal force? ” equivalent to repulsion, levi-
tation, and so forth ! inability on their part, to point out source of motive
energy sustaining the rotative movement of the sun, is not thought to be
any serious draw back. However, seeing that the planets also revolve
upon axes and rotate, why should not they also be able to cause their own
motions ? and why then, and wherefore, refer to the sun as the prime
mover ?
In the foregoing the reader beholds the nature and substance of celes-
tial force such as conceived to be understood by the mathematical student,
and, as taught by this our present age of “ mathematical stage of mind,”
as Comte would have it. That these really represent the views commonly
held by indoctrinated scholastic science of the day is sufficiently evinced
by the writings of all exponents alike of nature.
One of the principal features of distinction existing between a
mere mathematical system of physics and the mechanical system as here
expounded on, is this, that, whilst the former refer to the mere ocularly
demonstrable heavenly objects, as well as to matter in general, for explan-
ation of either the direct cause , or as being the agent of such cause of celes-
tial motion, (and the sense being difficult of defining), the latter, on the
other hand in all instances, refer to the invisible transparent gaseous
elements intervenihg between the several relative orbs as being instrumental


in conferring the diverse movements to each and all alike. It next be-
comes the question to ascertain, or explain to the reader, the way in which
this wonderful thing takes place , and how such comes to pass. For to
better enable ourselves so to do, it would be advisable to trace out before
the reader some few important matters belonging to the history of events
leading up to the point landing the authors amidst their intellectually
scientific discoveries.*
Among many other equally incompatible and irreconcilable subjects
attached to the speculative astronomical science, that of the thought preva-
lence of tiro such distinct and opposed forces formed, in our estimation and
judgment, one of the more insurmountable obstacles towards both intelligible
comprehension and rational explanation of the two-fold phenomena known
as planetary stability and movement, and to our understanding appeared
utterly beyond the recognisable. The more so when considering the now
well ascertained fact of the planets moving in elliptical orbit pathways
about the sun, —located, as that orb is found to be, at one of the foci of
the elongated pathways,—whereby it comes to pass of the planets alter-
nately receding and advancing to and fro this thought seat of all force,
the sun, namely ! Upon this view—taking the Newtonian version for it
—we were now in a still greater fix than ever ; the sun not being centrally
situate. Unless it could now be thought possible,—evincable and provable
—for the conceived attractive force to so increase in efficacy or strength
with alternate increase of intervening distance of the planets from the sun
individually and as when observed to move further away from that orb,
and, thus, in that manner and in virtue of such constantly-growing
potency, thereby preclude and prevent the several planets from going either
beyond certain limits or straying away altogether, unless such should
prove to be, it certainly—upon that extraordinary version of things celes-
tial—appear to us wholly incomprehensible how and by what means else
it really at all comes to pass of the circulating planets coming duly back in
successions ? and, in their advancement towards the solar focus afresh,
enable themselves to perform their perihelia passages with so admirable
regidarity and so wonderfully maintained precision ? Now since the “ law”
propounded by Sir Isaac Newton is found to be precisely the diametrically
opposite purpose of the foregoing, and, to the effect, namely as it tells us,
that “ Every particle of matter in the universe attracts every other particle
of matter with a force or power directly proportional to the quantity of
matter in each and decreasing as the squares of the distances which
separate the particles increase ,” it is, therefore, quite evident that that
mode of explanation cannot apply or account for the prodigy in question !
indeed, Newton’s law further embarrasses the whole theme, and renders
the subject much more perplexing and unintelligible than if we had never
heard of this inapplicable “ law.” Planetary orbit motion proves itself
totally opposed to this; because in the advancement of the planets from
their previous greater removal from the sun, this latter orb—upon the
* In contradistinction of mere physical discovery ; such, for example, as discovery
of more rapid motions of ocularly visible celestial objects, and features distinguishing
same. Everywhere the term “ intellectual ” associates itself with and appertains to
things invisible, whereas “physical” implies things optically visible.


Newtonian version of tilings—actually and distinctly proves its thought
efficacy or force-capacity to increase, there and then, and not decrease in
strength with greater intervening distance ; or else the planets would not
so come back towards and advance near to the sun again as they are
really observed and found to do ! The whole theme is envolved in an
inextricable network of anomalies and troubles wheresoever we turn our
eyes ; and the simple fact is this, that, except superficially viewed and at
first sight considered, nature’s manifestations prove themselves, through-
out, to be really the complete reverse of the Newtonian reading and
teaching ; and it is not a little matter of wonderment how and why
science has ever been induced to behold anything of “ knowledge ”
attached to these crude and undigested expositions forming the so-called
gravitation system ! for there is, in sober truth, not one solitary fraction
of real sterling knowledge deposited with it. The whole edifice is a
superficial one, and founded upon optical illusion, ocular deception, mis-
carriage of judgment and misconstruction in general.
A centrifugal “movement” (as it has been thought proper to term
simple circular motion-effect or sequence), arising with circulation of the
planets about the sun, we find to have been appropriated as if being a force
by itself, and sought shelter under and thought capable of explaining
some things in the light of causation ! but, intervening distance gradually
increasing bespeaks of centrifugal force being in the ascendant ? and
should hurl out further all matter, in consequence ? But what happens ! in
spite of all, the planets come back and gradually advances towards the
sun once more, and (contrary to all mechanical principle and teaching
wherever circular motion obtain) we are told that when farthest away from
the sun the planets move the slowest, and, again, when nearest the sun
their velocities are the greatest ! Strange things these ! Could it be,
that observers of the heavens and of celestial manifestations in general,
did not take into intelligent consideration such simple effect at all times
accompanying perspective when and wheresoever continual displacement of
objects takes place! and which, distinctly enough, informs us that :
according to intervening distance of uniformly moving objects so, at all
times, appear to the vision of the observer to be rate of movement or
degree of velocity of such continually uniformly moving objects. Could it
be, that, in not taking to consideration and allowing for continually vary-
ing intervening distances, our astronomers and physicists have gone astray
on this great field ? The absolutely incontrovertible fact of such really
being the accompanying effect and result of perspective, entirely changes the
whole aspect of modern astronomy and upsets at once the whole theory
extant; away altogether from any other consideration and discovery. The
theory rampant among astronomers being founded upon a law having pure
optical illusion for its base; velocities of the planets being given as they
appear directly to the vision, and believed to be their actual and true ones.
Thus it comes to pass, that, in not taking to intelligent consideration the
various manifestations exhibited in our own mundane sphere and surround-
ings, philosophy expends its talents on myths in its soaring on the heavens.
The above discussed astronomical determinations —purporting to be
the direct outcome of t\fo distinct and contrary motive forces —appeared,


as aforesaid, to our minds absolutely beyond all recognition, and fully
convinced us of something being amiss somewhere ; and, moreover, of a
character of the determinable and refutable ! And, the authors by degrees
felt more and more morally and intellectually assured that so incongruous
a reading could in no wise truthfully and correctly represent Nature’s own
mode of procedure or describe its lofty pathways. The themes formed
food and subject for musings, reflections and deep study of other days,
of course, and, of years ; now gone by. But the more we consulted and
considered the subject, and the longer we exchanged notes between us, the
more untenable the proffered account appeared to our minds, and, convinced
us of its fearful errors. Emancipation of the human mind in its investi-
gations of physical nature, being at stake ! !
By degrees we further assured ourselves that, not alone do the several
planets move with perfectly regularly equable motions or uniformly main-
tained velocities all throughout their orbit motions about the sun, but,
we likewise enabled oui’selves eventually to descry that, whatever the
Newtonian forces implied or signified, they were not in any way of such
causal order as by doctrinal physicists believed, nor of such character as to
entitle them to be regarded in the light of motive powers , and, as causing
movement to the heavenly orbs or to the structures of the vast and majestic
universe as a whole.
“ Nature’s (Physical) Laws,” we found, to be something widely
different to what they have hitherto been looked upon to be. “ Astrono-
mical Laws,” we found, to be something invented by bad readers of the
lofty book of Nature ! Something created by lively imaginations, rich in
fantasy, but sorely wanting in other elements.
We reasoned thus :—saying to ourselves :—that, in the marvellous
precision of celestial motion—making (in the words of Humboldt) “ all
nature appear as one stupendous universal time-piece of unapproachable
exactitude and uniformity of impulse—it were, we thought and opined,
extreme mental benightedness—if nothing worse—to think and believe
that mere matter (with whatsoever property or attribute imbued to it)
could in itself and by itself sufficiently account for ! it be in form of some
so-called “ natural law,” or it be under the guise of some so-termed
“ astronomical law,” the idea appeared to our minds equally unsatisfactory,
equally untenable ? and but bespoke of some dark opinion, some
monstrously benighted notion fatuituously clinging to the human mind
from purely temporal associations and worldly considerations. The fact
of the teaching having been propagated by Sir Isaac Newton in the
17th century, and by him universally applied, did not now make the
extraordinary teaching one whit more truthful or sacred in our estimation.
On the contrary, as fresh lights continued to flow' in upon our minds
(from external sources wholly unknown to our former selves,) in a most
surprising manner, the authors were brought to think less and less of that
misled philosophic exponent as they became absorbed and engrossed with
their own important theme, and only refer here to the orthodox teaching
with the object in view of explanation of their subjects by comparative
analysis and inquiry.


The foregoing recounted subjects thus composed some of our chief
and fundamental grounds and reasons for departure from so anomalously
constructed a philosophy as that of primitive Newtonian speculations.
And we have shown that they were weighty grounds and well-founded
misgivings ? Abandoning the whole system as something to our minds
now utterly untenable and unanswerably erroneous, the authors set out in
search of new foundations ; sought for fresh bases, namely, and where-
from to arrive at sounder knowledge ; keeping yet, nevertheless, the
orthodox forces in view, but looking the while upon same as comprising,
at the best, some kind of manifested energy of a secondarily generated
character. This aspect of things gradually appeared supported by our
inquiries, and subsequent intellectual discoveries and discriminations sub-
stantially confirmed and verified our formed conviction to that end ; and,
we shall perceive that whatever of either real or imaginary character
attach itself to these gravitation forces (and they are truly such mixture
of reality and illusion), such do really prove to be of a yielded and —from
relative major or primary regions— transmitted kind ; and, in entering
through the medium of peripheral regions of the system, arrives thus
from ivithout and proceeding towards the centre of any one celestial system.
It would seem as if no previous thinkers on Nature had ever thought
of the possibility of celestial force arriving from without or coming from
outside of celestial systems! Speculating upon the belief of the system
being stationary in the heavens, such thought-stretch could not well either
have occurred to men anterior to knowledge of its mobility. The absurd
notion propagated by antediluvian philosophers, of empty spaces and
vacuums pervading the firmament, has clung pertinaciously to the
astronomical science ever since and darkened all minds and all learning.
Even in our day scholastic learning stands committed to the belief that
vacuums pervade Nature. This would seem to have been one other trick
medioeval philosophic secret art thought proper nurturing and preserving ?
The manifest relationship and connection exhibited by visible objects
and matter with centres and centralised regions of celestial systems,
having, evidently, brought all philosophers alike to conjecture that the
seat of force lay with the prodigious visible primary orbs there located ,
and that icith same reposed the sources causing manifested celestial
phenomena! and weighty grounds exists for stating that, so the
astronomical cult would for evermore be inclined to believe, and such the
followers of the science would fain prefer persisting in thinking and
teaching. However, we gravely maintain that, upon that inverted view
and interpretation of sublime Nature, science would for all time remain
completely in the dark ; inasmuch, as by arduous study and protracted
consideration of the subject, the authors have arrived at the full con-
viction of there not being the remotest probability of access toward
solution, by man, of Nature’s profound wonders and phenomena from the
standpoint of a central force theory.
In possession of a universally displayed peripheral force, as now
(since discovery by Herschel of solar progression among the stars) we are
really initiated into and put in possession of, in a manner of speaking, it
becomes at once a widely different thing, and—intelligently interpreted—


all Nature’s marvels now become as plain to understand and fathom as do
the contents of any book containing correct information of things, and
such as we should like to be possessed of and read. No more mystifi-
cation, we shall see, no more of misleading theory and doubt! All which
is now required is but to master a fair comprehension of the subject, and
the mind is at once emancipated from former intellectual thraldom, and of
all previous degrading mental bondage. The indomitable hard-working
and toilsome observant astronomer has, fortunately enough, by this time
of day supplied us with all things requisite for our want and thorough
recognition ! and it is a most wondrous spectacle to behold ! as lofty as
portentious, indeed.
From the contemplation of such highly suggestive manifestations of
firmamental creation as, for examples, starry systems or constellations,
star clusters or groups, Nebula, and other such like immense aggregations
as that composing the great Milky-way—inclusive, also, of consideration
of our own solar system with its contents, —the authors were led to regard
the vast heavenly firmament as if being, in some mode or other, divided
into separate yet co-relative sections, or, separated into divisions com-
posing, in virtue of same, these very distinct systems the visible portions
and more centralised parts of which being manifested to our visions in the
mode alluded to! Now although this our conception not being (in
some aspects) wholly original or altogether new, that conjecture became
nevertheless the great key destined to open up by degrees to our minds a
wonderful amount of light.
By mathematicians we were informed that “ space”—as by physicists
it being termed—“ has its centre everywhere but its periphery nowhere” :
this dictum we had now found to be quite erroneous and misleading, and,
to have no foundation in point of reality or fact. It being, in truth, one
other of those false determinations having been established with the
superficial views arrived at by early investigators of Nature, and descended
to us as cherished and infallible truth! this faulty notion having been
come to from contemplation and consideration t only and alone of merest
risible centralised objects and ingredients ; such, namely, as constitute
the primary and luminous orbs, lighting up the adjacent and denser
portion of matter, becoming, thereby, conspicuous to the eye—and by
astronomers receiving all sorts of grotesque appellations and doing the
strangest of deeds. But, despite all veneration for anciently descended
dicta, the authors assert that peripheries do exist wheresoever on the heavens
centres exist ; and are—in their actual and veritable states—of an absolutely
demonstrable character. By the aid of the telescope, astronomers
distinctly themselves prove such fact for us, without themselves being
aware of it! Such we shall see to be really the case ; and is it not, we
ask, at once rational, plausible and compatible with all things from
experience known, to conceive and believe of there being circumference
regions whenever and wheresover central regions obtain ? What is there
to prevent such boundaries to consist of attenuated and transparent
gasiform material ? and such as is thought to envelope the globe we live
upon, and the atmospheres of which is believed to have a termination and,
therefore, circumference or boundary regions in their limited states? What


is there, avc repeat, to impede or prevent peripheral regions to consist of
gaseous invisible substance ? seeing that they must needs obtain in the
scheme of things ; and considering that they are not composed of fluid
substance ; nor yet constructed out of solid material ; what else could it
be then, than gaseous material? the formidable invisible elements (in their
native or unconverted states) themselves, namely ; but which our savgus
reject as not being good or substantial enough, there not being anything
for the eye to descry. Now it is very plain, that, inasmuch, as
astronomical science takes heed and cognisance of naught else but what
shows form to the se?isual sight and having discernable figure and propor-
tion, &c\, etc., it is all in vain relying upon that pursuit with its
determinations for light and solution of Nature’s secrets? Clues must
needs come from outside sources and from minds ivithout taking also into
intelligent consideration the vital part played by the directly invisible
elements in the scheme of things ! the elements, which, indeed, are the
bases of all converted and visible matter.
Conscious as we must—as reasonable beings —all be, that, for to con-
vey force and power from one place to another, a medium of continuity
and of some consistence or other, must needs intervene co-existent with the
mighty firmament itself ; and, therefore, though not directly revealable
to astronomical “ocular demonstration,” boundaries or circumference re-
gions of such gaseous structure as for example, nebula', cometary masses,
&c., must absolutely have an existence in some form, and their limit be ap-
pointed in some manner or other ? Vastness and expansiveness, state of
transparency and diffusedness combined with great intervening distance,
would all militate against direct discrimination, and, make detection of
peripheries or distinct boundaries of such celestial structures among the
things impossible for the human eye. Hence, on account of their atten-
uated gaseous compositions, such bounds and limits must for ever remain
directly invisible to observers.
The fatuous neglect of the 'moderns to consider the all important
function of the gases in investigating the resources and phenomena of
physical nature, could only be accounted for by considering scholastic
learning being, as aforesaid, pledged to the superstitious belief and
teaching that vacuums obtain abroad.
The authors had now arrived at a stage where no doubt could any
longer linger, but, they felt convinced everywhere of having entered upon
a heretofore untrodden path in philosophy ; and, that, in only and merely
taking to account and considering the several visible globes and other
similarly conspicuous substances involved within the confines of these
celestial structures, the human mind had till now deceived itself and all
science gone totally astray in consequence ; not also taking to account the
transparent gaseous mediums surrounding, and, also, intervening between the
heavenly orbs, namely ; and, doubtlessly, bearing such relations to each
other as indicated by the diverse and varied directions of movements of
the orbs located within each structure ; and, the said directions of motions
of which (the globes) would then render an adequate and satisfactory
explanation of the direction of force-flow or energy existing or prevailing
in their several relative volumed media-masses, and which, upon this


legitimate field of reasoning, would therefore, inferentially, become the
palpable direct material cause rendering explanative the twofold move-
ments of the visible contents (the orbs) located within their bosoms ! !
These were , obviously, what we have heard Sir Isaac Newton enjoined,
or at least, what really he intended to convey in his injunctions to future
investigators ; and these were the staunch kind of bases in pursuit of
which to obtain the authors set out; and, such were the trains of reason-
ings wherefrom subsequently they deduced their invulnerable data. The
held continually opening up before us, we were gradually enabled to see
oiu way demolishing the entire array of arguments attached to the
so-called gravitation system of reasoning, and such as out of which that
structure is erected ; and the whole fabric seemed, little by little, to come
down by itself confronting our invincible inferences and deductions.
Nature s truths and genuine pathways being, evidently, traced out correctly
at length I as without which such inroad and havoc could assuredly not
have been possible of taking place as do really prove to have taken place.
bo let it then be understood, that, in following up our clues farther
and in contemplating such like physical manifestations as sun spots, red
clouds, the solar corona, the saturnian ring appendage, the zodiacal, and,
anticrepuscular lights, &c., &c., it dawned, by degrees., to our minds that
all these marvels pointed, one with another, most forcibly towards some
further subdivisions of relative greater volumed mediums, and, evidently,
composed the more conspicuous parts and portions of such secondarily
generated internal media masses, accommodating the several planets and
respective satellite systems, namely ; and, which minor mediums would,
then, (in form of gaseous eddies, as it were,) float within and follow with
the relative greater media-mass (composing the solar vortex as a whole)
upon its own journey in the vast firmament!!
Each primary planet (inclusive of relative satellites, if possesed of
an y>) was involved in a medium of its own then, and extending towards
and going beyond, somewhat, the region of its satellite system ? and which
medium, in revolving separately about the solar focus in the mode and
manner of rotation upon an axis (analogous to the concrete masses forming
the globes) would adequately and satisfactorily explain the real and simple
mechanical cause of the two-fold motions of the primary planets, and along
with same also explain the reason of circulation of the satellites about their
respective primaries ? The whole phenomenon being due to translation on-
ward of the greater and primary medium, the solar itself, namely, the in-
ternal secondary mediums being engendered and sustained in virtue of dis-
placement of the whole mass, and constantly describing, in orbit motions
about its axis, (as indicated by the solar focus) its rate of advancement in
the heavens ; and such as is found to be the case in the instance of the
earth ; it expressing in orbit motion about the sun the rate of velocity of
the sun’s motion among the stars, namely.
These proved to be great strides forward ; and with cues of this
calibre before us such former abstruse subjects as, for example, the cause
of ellipticity of planetary orbit pathways, and other kindred but equally
difficult and formerly unapproachable subjects and things, became by de-
grees upon study and consideration intelligibly accountable and reducible


to positive knowledge. From perpetual subjection to twofold hurling
motions (revolution in extended orbit motion , and, revolution or rotation
about an axis during such progression in orbit motion, namely,) these
gaseous and pliable media-masses assumes, in consequence, an oblong form
or elongated contour ! the visible ingredients involved within them ex-
pressing, during rotations, this elongated contour of the hurled elastic
elemental mass of matter. Hence the elliptical orbit motions of
the planets and satellites alike. And hence the great prodigy of the more
centralised orb—the sun—occupying one of the foci, as it is termed. The
perihelion section or hemisphere of the solar vortex implies, therefore, the
denser half of the mass ; denser, namely, from the ingredients in revolving
through that portion, being subjected to a greater amount of compression,
and, from contraction setting in in that place of the medium, it comes to
pass of the circulating planets advancing nearer the solar situation than
when moving in aphelia ; which means that section or hemisphere of the
medium subjected to greater influence of hurling motions, whereby such
expansion takes place as liberates the elements with the increased room.
The orbs, continuing to follow the elemental energy, recede with same ;
and the result of which being that, when moving towards maxima aphelia
they continue, until there, to increase in intervening distance and move
away from the solar focus. Of course we are quite prepared to hear
scientists committed to gravitation philosophy, and vacuuists in general,
to come forward and declare, that there is really no truth in all these !
and such because, of it rendering explanation once for all and settling the
difficult subject. Many persons profess to be in search of light and ex-
planation so long as there is not any probability of explanation and light
forthcoming ; but let an opportunity of an explanation present itself, and
then list to the altered tune of these folks.
A great deal of speculation and pondering appears to have at all times
been bestowed on the subject of magnetic and electrical attraction and
repulsion, as it is quaintly termed; and by superficial philosophy it is
thought that with these manifestations in question lie momentous secrets
buried! but, it may not be out of place here to inquire of such superficial
learning, and ask—“ could it be thought likely, that, even the most
intimate knowledge to the causes at work culminating in either terrestrial
or experimental electro-magnetic manifestations (and wherefrom celestial
attraction and repulsion has been conceived or derived in astronomy)
would in any way avail philosophy, and, land it among such celestial
discoveries and such character of determinations as with the authors here
expounded?” But, for to proceed with our subject, we should here
mention that so self-supporting did our structure of knowledge ultimately
prove itself to be, that, in finding everything known to the observant
astronomical science to come in and meet in the most beautiful harmony,
it became, by degrees, an incontestable and quite unanswerable system
of induction ; one capable of completion ; and of an order setting aghast
and taking by surprise all such thinking minds and stocked up learned
as previously having believed and beguiled themselves being in possession
of reliable and correct knowledge to Nature and Nature’s pathways ; and
wheresoever we appeared with our account and version of things silent


wonderment seemed to take possession of all and reign supreme. And
how could it well be otherwise ? seeing that, for the first time within the
history of man’s knowledge to wide physical nature, real evident source of
veritable and energetic force with its means of sustentation or consecutive
growth has thus with the authors here been pointed out to science and
philosophy in general ?
With determinations of this important character, and, with a defini-
tion of the sublime heavens read from this formidable standpoint of view,
it next became a question to search for and descry the wherewithal with
which to further substantiate and render comprehensible, in a plain and
positive method, the reliability and trustworthiness of our various in-
tellectual discoveries, and, endeavour to show and convince mankind of the
great truth of the solar system really comprising a prodigious encompassed
mass of transparent attenuated gasiform substances subjected to two-
fold hurling motions upon an axis. Determined not to leave our
momentous discoveries in the open field—relying upon such vague means
of support as individual opinion, merest choice of supposition, or such
other equally unsatisfactory elements of foundation—the authors accord-
ingly set to work systematically for object of defining reliable data where-
with to construct and build up towards the named purport. But few men
of sagacity would have descried aught; the theme being so wide and hard
of reducing. Nevertheless, by dint of some acumen, forming luckily
enough, part of our minds, we eventually, and by prolonged consideration
and research, arrived at what we consider to be incontrovertible and in-
telligible data.
From the well ascertained fact in astronomy of the sun not being
centrally situate, namely, but occupying what is termed “ one of the foci,”
and, therefore, to one and all alike of the alternately advancing and
receding planets in but one and the same place during circulation of all the
planets about that named focus, we are herein enabled to satisfactorily
apprise ourselves of the momentous fact of the solar system really con-
sisting of such an immense mass of attenuated, transparent and
gasiform matter! analogous, thus, to those innumerable manifestations
wherewith the heavens abound in all directions, and in their states of
aggregations revealed to our sensual vision, and such, namely, as in
astronomy are known by the terms of spiraloid nebula, comets with
“ multiple tails,” and cometary masses in general, &c. ; for, since the
sun cannot well be in many places at one and the same time, and for
so to accommodate agreeably each advancing and retiring planet indi-
vidually namely, it accordingly follows, that that which—in view of the
external heavens or the fixed stars, —to this one and the same focus, proves
to be alternate perihelion and aphelion for any one individual planet at
any time considered, must needs and absolutely also remain alternate
perihelia and aphelia for all the other planets of the solar system ! Such is
an obvious, quite clear and irrefutable fact! because, the sun itself is but
in one place and situation all the while of planetary access and recess.
Whence—from the gravitation point of view—we here encounter one
other untoward anomaly ; that, namely, of the sun being enabled to
exercise all degrees of power and influence upon the surrounding circulating


(and continually varying distanced) planets at the same instant of time !
the planets, namely, performing their respective perihelia and aphelia
indiscriminately , and, independently of each other and of all outside cir-
cumstances. Remarks John Stuart Mill: “If even the Newtonian
philosophy were not permitted to be questioned, mankind could not feel
as complete assurance of its truth as they now do”: What are we to
think of our philosophic magnates now ? Did that philosopher ever
understand the Newtonian philosophy himself ? Could he have himself
felt assured of its truths ? Did he then merely believe and take for granted
that which now prove to be no truth at all ? And our philosophers are
then found to teach on the strength merely of their own gratuitous
beliefs ! Seeing the fact of the above being seriously thought to contain
knowledge, the question arises : does scholastic philosophy of the day really
possess any truthful and reliable knowledge, of any kind, respecting
Nature abroad ? Now if we were to reply to this our own query, the
answer would be in the decided negative ; for we have come to the con-
viction, that on the great heavens, science is on the wrong track everywhere ;
and whatever it claims exists but in belief. That it should now so prove to
be is no fault of ours.
Whom was now the sagacious individual that by the aid of figures
and arithmetic, use and force of algebraic signs, &c., &c., endeavoured to
render explanation of the cause of elliptic orbit motions of the planets ?
Whom was the sage mind contriving adroitly making all scientists believe
and accept it as being possible, and, legitimate science ? Whom was it,
we inquire ?
Now we should further state that, such additional relative yet
subordinate facts as, for instances, planetary orbits throughout being of an
elliptical contour and not circular ; along, also, with the very fact itself of
a mobile and translatory system being among the things ascertained, all of
which further substantiates our assertion to the effect, namely, of the
entire solar system comprising a gigantic volumed mass of attenuated
(and more or less transparent) gasiform substances revolving and rotating
upon an axis and expressing its translation in the mode of rotation about
itself, and, during its progression assuming an oblong or elongated form
from the influence of hurling motions to which it being subjected. For,
in which other form than that of being wound together as a volumed
medium (connecting the whole into one mass) could such ascertained
translation of the whole take place, after all ? Whom was it now ever
conceived of or pointed out any other mode ? one more plausible, better
commendably rational, in fact ? Of course, there is a standing chance for
subtle sophists to evade and dispute the subject, because one cannot take
it in hand and show it! and scholastic learning (consisting, as it does, of
mere philosophism) require to see before believing. A very suggestive
fact this, by the way, seeing that our philosophers in common behold one
thing, and belietnng same, nevertheless, to be some widely different tiling
to what it really is. Comte finds occasion to state “ Well might Shelly
exclaim”—
“How green is this grey world!”
But seeing that, that this - author has the hardihood asserting “ that the


elements of this system “ (the solar)” are certainly not disposed in the
most advantageous manner, and that science permits us easily to conceive
a happier arrangement ! it appears to us the funnier thing of the sardonic
onslaught coming from that quarter ! for of all the idle things we ever fell
in with, and coming from the baseless and woeful system of science rampant,
this reckless statement certainly surpasses the lot.
In the foregoing recounted features we possess, then, the direct means
of intellectually proving, and, mentally convincing ourselves of the truth-
fulness and reality of that marvellous phenomena taking place ; and though
additional testimony were possible of forthcoming, its character could but
be of that kind which appeals to the reasoning faculty, and such as is
realizable to the mind’s eye alone ; yet, derived from analogy and experience
not the less reliable or trustworthy. Correctly interpreted, all things
known in astronomy is found to accord and concur. The authors have had
no need of pressing anything to come in. Physical Nature—in a mode
of speaking—fits in herself throughout; simply because, of her pathways
having at length been traced out and discovered with our departure from
an irrelevant theory. Nature, it should be conceded, could but be one
certain thing ; she could not well he many and conflicting things ? having
found that certain one thing, we can get no more or other things ! Nature
will assuredly not change because of the human mind being prompted on
to trace her out in her marvellous and wonder awakening pathways here
and there.
Depict we then to our mind’s eye the solar system—in form of a
prodigious volumed medium—subjected to continued translation in the
heavens (in some extended orbit motion) and carrying along with it its
relative minor or secondary systems—likewise in form of encompassed
mediums—and as the engendered sequences of the advancement of the
major masses ; these secondarily engendered mediums, in their advance-
ment in orbit motions about the solar focus, would in their appointed
locations each individually describe the advancement (in an easterly
direction) of their common primary medium, the solar vortex itself,
namely ; and which we must now behold to consist of a great combination
of minor mediums, together making up the entire solar vortices system.
Accordingly upon this aspect of things, one force would then beget and
generate another of its kind! and, in being transmitted from exterior
relative major systems through •peripheral regions (whether edgewise or
laterally viewed) would become as the motive one pervading minor,
secondary, or ternary systems ! One media-mass becoming the motive
power of another and its minor, in fact; and such on account of their
constant subjections to translation. And with this the authors felt conscious
of having alighted upon such knowledge as mankind had for evermore
been in fruitless search of ! No more anxious and baffling enquiry anent
questions of origin of force locally displayed and manifested anywhere ;
no longer any cause for such like vain search. Precisely analogous to all
mundane experience, so, also, throughout firmanental creation, one force
causes another into being.
The seat, source and origin of all force (in the first instance ) we know
not; no more or better than we do the seat, source and origin of our own


minds, intellects, or, mental thinking and consideration capacities in general ;
all these things or attributes are equally shrouded and in form unrealisable
to the sensual sight, and in every way as dark and incomprehensible to us
as is the former ; and of the source and consistence of which we know
no more about than do our readers. It may nevertheless be worth the
while pointing out the fact of real source itself of motive energy or power
such as known to us in general and mundane mechanics, is equally totally
obscure and unfathomable to man ; whether we l’efer to wind, water, steam,
horse or manual power, &c., the subject is equally baffling, and as
insoluble as is the other and former. But since nothing will operate by
itself and of its own accord, it follows that for to operate and perform
aught towards any given point or purpose we must either be possessed of
it or at least intelligently recognise its all important function in the
scheme of all things, whether celestial or terrestial. In displaying its presence
and activity within us, it comprises life itself and all we understand by that
term. Ostensibly enough, man has not as yet, in any path or pursuit,
rose to a fair conception and estimation of its true value and indispensable
function and office.
In view, then, of celestial phenomena, we must learn to discriminate
between the cause of motion of the heavenly orbs, and the cause of move-
ment of the several mediums wherein the orbs like so many germs repose.
A great difference existing. All things seem to be coming in routine and fol-
lowing in the most beautiful order. But although debarred from defining
the consistency itself of force at its seat and at its first place, we have,
nevertheless, extended our mental perception so far as to be able account-
ing for “ the grand and mysterious phenomena connected with the develop-
ment and expansion of comets v ; and becoming demonstrative of the fact
that “even in our days the nature of that mysterious force acting upon
comets” have really been discovered ; in its transmitted state of consecutive
growth, namely! inclusive also of the force at work culminating in what
is known as planetary “ perturbation the force engendering terrestrial
cyclonic and other atmospheric disturbances ; and numerous other
phenomena ; all of which now become among the things knowable ; and
reducible to precise knowledge ; and such because, of our having in the
great prodigy of translatory motion of the greater and primary medium—
detected and found the direct and immediate material cause of movement
of its relative and internal minor or secondary gaseous mediums accommo
dating the several distinct planets with their respective satellite systems ;
and, as we shall further show to the reader, likewise, and also, having dis-
covered such ternary vortices systems as—for reasons to be explained
henceforth—prove themselves to revolve and rotate (oppositely) upon the
borders or boundaries of each medium, edgewise, and which structures in
astronomy is known under names of comets, cometary masses and in other
forms, but of which more bye-and-by.
A translatory motion of the whole system being positively known to
take place, and such ascertained translation of the mass being—by dint of
revolution of the discernible planets about a common focus—also thus proven
to be effected in the mode and method of rotation upon an axis and revolving
about itself as the mechanical means of its continued displacement, it


comes to pass, in consequence, that the force pervading the medium and all
its contents, (in form of secondarily generated mediums), is of an incoming
order in the first instance, or, arrives in all directions at once from
periphery, or circumference regions; and (from the force exerting its dominion
on the pliable gaseous ingredients) advancing, in a spiraloid form and
contour, towards central or foci regions. This external previous or
primary incoming centrifugal energy, and, the onward translatory movement
of the mass itself, are, therefore, altogether equivalent to each other and
convertible things! It constituting our veritable mechanical order of
force, in fact. The one existing in virtue of the prevalence of the other.
Hence comes it to be, that, in virtue of discovery by Herschel of the
advancement in the heavens of the solar system, we have remitted to us
the nature of the force pervading the ramifications of this our solar system.
Now seeing the fact of this our present system of science merely, so
to say, extends the previous orthodox teaching, respecting these so-called
“ atmospherical envelopes” and with which we positively know the earth to be
surrounded, and which, from analogy, is generally held to also envelope the
other planets of the system, it will be no great difficulty to perceive,—taking
all things into fair consideration, —that this our advanced expositions will,
after all, prove themselves to be of a much less convulsing or revolutionary
character than what at first sight might appear or seem! This system of
knowledge simply includes within these planetary atmospheres their re-
spective satellite orbs, and, further extend same somewhat beyond them ;
and explains, as we shall see, how and in what manner their limits and
boundaries become among the things knowable to us. The chief point of
departure being this, that the visible orbs do not themselves (as primaries)
represent the actual centre of their mediums ; but, in revolving about same
at variable distances (according to their volume and weightiness com-
paratively considered) prove themselves to conform to one other, and,
third principal motion ; * this is all! The whole of which, therefore,
amounting but to some easily reconcilable modification after all. With
the knowledge of observant astronomy itself, w r e ai’e no more at variance
than are we with mundane experience anywhere. It is the erroneous and
prematurely conceived theory alone with which we have to contend and
struggle ; and which we find to have done an incalculable amount of mis-
chief that should be corrected. Science should live, not for mere curiosity,
but for the sake of diffusion of light and distribution of knowledge generally.
It would seem, however, as if opulence imagined that science lived alone
for to satisfy its curiosity and should be held exclusive! But the age of
cloistered exclusiveness and monkish gossip has waned away and belongs
to the past.
It will not now be difficult to understand that it is precisely this
external previous or primary inwardly arriving energy, expressing the On-
* Tliere could be but little doubt existing, that this regular but hitherto unknown
motion, and which in the insl since of the earth would be qf the length of the moon’s
orbit motion or a month’s duration, constitute (among other causes of conflict and
deviation from uniform path) one of the features by Lagrange observed ; when he
found that “the elements of the planetary orbits are in a state of perpetual change.”


ward advancement of the whole system and forcing—in the first instance—
all matter against the axis of its rotation, which, by ancient and modern
investigators of nature alike, has been thought to be a force existing in,
and, as if being lodged with centralised visible orbs ; and by astronomers
termed the force of gravitation, and the force of attraction, and so on ;
perceiving, namely, the apparent relationship which visible substances
hold with centres. The whole thing consisting—as a liypothesy—of
merest optical delusion, pure ocular deception. Quite probable it be, that
from employing the term —body—indicating animation of some sort,
some speculators conceive of their being lodged with these centralized
“bodies” some sort of animate life rendering them capable of moving
and “ turning upon their axis ” in an independent way, as it were l
for we hear doctrinal philosophers speak of the planets in such like
strains, as, their “ being imbued with,” or “ animated with ” such
and such motion! An externally transmitted inward arriving energy
being among the things difficult of conceiving and impossible of
demonstrating from the standpoint of a thought immobile solar system ;
and, with a mind pledged to believe in the prevalence of empty spaces and
vacuums abroad, the difficulty appeared greatly intensified. And the
reader is now in the secret and enabled to realise to his mind the true
wherewithal and the real consistence of the Newtonian celestial attraction
or universal gravitation prodigy ! and in this manner do the authors
explain a most abstruse, and, heretofore unsolved great physical problem.
Previous to the closing of this chapter—one for the present form of
publication somewhat protracted—treating, briefly and rhapsodical!y, on
the history of events leading up to discovery of source (in its transmitted
and consecutive form of growth) of celestial force of such energetic and
formidable kind as of which previous philosophy knew naught, and, as
proving to be wholly distinct from those imagined sources of force as were
promulgated by Newton in the 17tli century, it may (without assumed
hypocrisy on our part) be observed, -that those individuals proving either
intellectually unable to fathom the nature of this kind of force with the
authors here pointed out, or, else, are themselves materially interested in
the preservation of the orthodox astronomical ones extant and in vogue-
teaching, namely, attraction and repulsion of particles of matter, and, as
being the cause direct of celestial motion in general,—are, of course, at
perfect liberty to still adhere to these kind of forces and believe in their
efficacy as long as they can find any audiences willing to listen and believe
likewise. No amount of human belief, to this end or the other, affects 01
in any way alters Nature’s pathways. Only, the authors thought it
incumbent upon them, and to be, even, a moral duty owing to
minds in search of superior light and sounder bases of reasonings to show
that such fresh light and stauncher bases are obtainable ; but that it is a
question of departing from the orthodox view ; and, envolving besides, the
question of mastering comprehension of new knowledge ; one, moreover, of
an exact and precise character! Mechanics!... where you cannot perceive
nor yet handle the hooks, the levers or the tackle ; mechanics, among and
amidst invisible gasif orm material! what could well be more baffling and
perplexing ? is it longer a wonder our savans of book-knowledge went astiaj
E 1


and prove shy of that theme if Doubtlessly, our great masterminds, in
general mechanics, have been abashed confronting the determinations of
our philosophic heroes upon their own field of labor ; and, from purely
worldly considerations, hesitated coming to the rescue 1 ... .
Lpon the Newtonian view and version of Nature’s economy,you have
a separate and distinct motive power situate in every centralised portion
of creation; and, hence, a perfect bewilderment and disorder; such,
namely, as indicated by the term—chaos! whereas, from this our standpoint
of view, universal firmamental creation (to the comprehension of man?)
unites itself into that order indicative of A SUBLIMELY HAR-
MONIOUS WHOLE.


CHAPTER IV.
DEMONSTRATION OF CELESTIAL SECONDARILY
GENERATED CENTRIFUGAL FORCE AND ITS
CONSISTENCY, WITH FURTHER COMPARATIVE
ANALYSIS OF MATHEMATICAL AND MECHANICAL
ORDER OF FORCE.
In view of the foregoing, it will now be apprehended by our readers,
that in this our advanced expositions —transferring consideration of source
of force from the visible objects and matter over to the invisible trans-
parent atomic gasiform material—the authors endeavour, in a preliminary
form, to inaugurate a great “Mechanical” system of physics ; one, namely,
from which the present “Mathematical” system of physics will henceforth
prove to have been the mere time-serving outcome and derivation in toto.
The world has heard a deal of objection, and even sneer, thrown out
respecting the application of the term —mechanical—to nature abroad !
as a rule, closet speculators dislike to recognise its legitimacy; for obvious
reasons, these men prefer their favorite paper efforts—mathematics—with
its exclusive, occult and irreducible elements ; it purporting to bespeak of
intellectual effort and mental energy. However, what the world has not till
now heard of, is such a system of celestial “ Mechanics” as demonstrates the
prevalence of a force universal in its order, and, proceeds to explain—upon
recognisable mechanical principles—surrounding physical phenomena from
the standpoint of an exteriorly exerted-z nergy or force, Single in its Kind.
It is not until, comparatively speaking, recent times that astronomers and
physicists in general have realised to themselves the significant fact, that,
in all instances of celestial motion, extended orbit movements are performed
in the mode and manner of diminutive ones! an all-wisely ordained
principle of economy this; not alone thus accounting for prolonged expiry
of lapse of interval of celestial journeys, but becoming suggestive of
other significant intents and purposes.
In its aspect as an original, unique, and, distinct pathway of science,
the present system of knowledge, as our interested readers have now learned
to understand, bases itself upon and is, so to say, derived from out of the
astronomically demonstrable (and now well recognised) fact of the solar
system—in form, as aforesaid, of an immense volumed and transparent
gaseous mass—being subjected to perpetual translation in the vast heavens,
and that its velocity or rate of advancement is identical with that of the
earth’s motion in its orbit about the sun. And, as previously alluded to,
that, simultaneous with consideration of the manifold and various results
and sequences necessarily following and accompanying such constant dis-
placement of the entire mass, dawns, also, discovery of such tangible and


substantial energetic force, as, not alone, become immediate material cause
of such ultramundane phenomena as are manifested to our sense of vision
in the celestial spheres, but, besides, likewise and also become immediate
material cause of such mundanely manifested physical phenomena as are
observable in and about our more immediate surroundings, and of the kind
usually termed Nature’s Laws, Nature’s Forces, and so on ; all of which
akin prove themselves likewise to be but so many additional direct results
and offshoots following upon transplacement of the Solar Vortices System
on its great journey in the firmament.
The whole mass, in its two-fold motions of advancement and rotation,
engenders in this mode nearly that whole circuit of phenomena having
heretofore proven so baffling of rational and plausible explanation to all
astute minds alike in pursuit of solution of Nature’s profound secrets ;
and such, because, of all investigators having hitherto for explanation of
“ origin of force” or cause of motion referred to local sources alone , and
believed forces to preside in and emanated with the several concrete masses
composing the globes and with visible particles of matter in general ; a
notion which (in virtue of an emancipated mind) our readers will now
fain admit to be the mere outcome of infant philosophy; one founded upon
abject superstition and mental benightedness solely; and, a dark conjecture
wherefrom, not alone, no knowledge is obtainable, but stands as a fearfully
precarious barrier to all intellectual and moral advancement of mankind.
And since discovery of a translatory solar system is, comparatively
speaking, a recent achievement by the observant science and performed
subsequent to the promulgation by Sir Isaac Newton of the extraordinary
theory entertained by physicists and scientists in general,—and, inasmuch
as it only becomes a question of being generally known and understood
how, why and by what means it comes to pass or to be that the twofold
movements of the planets, as the mere discernible occupants of secondarily
and ternarily generated mediums revolving about the solar focus (inclusive
of their respective satellite systems), are wholly and simply due to the
twofold movements and forces pervading their common primary medium,
the solar vortex itself, namely,—it will, accordingly, be no difficult thing
to at once apprehend how and why it be that the whole subject, forming the
so-called Newtonian Gravitation System, must needs prove itself incorrect
and unreliable on account of it having been framed from out of too
primitive and immature material ; nor is it longer difficult descrying the
various reasons why that system of philosophy with its too premature bases
of derivation has hitherto shown itself so perplexing of comprehension, so
baffling and altogether nugatory. Although it be true, that it is only and
alone from experiencing effects of pernicious things that we are taught to
look for, and, brought to appreciate better things ; still, posterity will
discover for itself that it is this self-same absurd attraction and matter-
force philosophy, so preached about, which plays so well into the hands of
all scoffers at mans’ sacred religious convictions ; whatsoever these prove
to be.
Along, therefore, with discovery of continued displacement of the
immense mass of matter—in the mode pointed out and in view of which
all observation and phenomena only and alone accord and are associable


—we are, as aforesaid, at once put in possession of means towards com-
prehension and rational explanation of those very forces the sources,
generation and sustentation of which so baffles all mere gravitation
philosophy ! but, as our interested readers must needs now discern, are
neither so locally originated or created, nor yet (by the mere matter itself)
sustained, as having hitherto been erroneously thought and taught; and,
the fallacious idea of which it is having given rise to that curious and
mystifying branch of mathematics purporting to treat on and explain the
nature, consistency and substance of the so-called central force, centripetal
force, origin of force, and such other similar hallucinations with which
closet speculations and cloister knowledge in general is beset.
The direct source of all expressed energy or force (in its first place
and at its seat) we know not; nor, for the sake of mere science itself, is
it at all needful that we should know it. That subject and theme lies
quite outside and beyond all reach of human science, we fairly opine ; and
such because of science being simply confined within boundary and certain
encompassments ; consisting, namely, in mere discrimination and inter-
pretation of mode and manner of delivery or expression of such exterior
energy or force ; and, in considering the various effects exerted, by such
exterior energy, upon all kinds of substances in their envolved con-
finement within volumed masses and exhibited to us mentally or sensibly
alike. Beyond this, science cannot go. At least, for ourselves we utterly
fail to see how and in what manner science can possibly exceed that land
mark! One towards which it has not, till now, made so much as one
single step. This great goal, this great field, lying completely unexplored
by science, in truth.
In counterview of the Newtonian gravitation system of philosophy,
that, as by the present authors here propounded and advanced, depicts and
describes the vast firmament above, below and around us, to consist of
countless structures of transparent gasiform material or elemental con-
sistency and having (as majors and minors relatively and respectively)
such interwoven connection and relationship with each other as to form,
manifestly, one stupendous whole.
From what having now been gathered of the foregoing explanations,
it will be sufficiently simple to understand by this time, that in the onward
advancement of the whole primary media-mass forming the solar vortices
system itself, and as being executed in the mode and method of rotation
about itself upon an axis,—this axis being indicated by the location, in
its vicinity, of the luminous solar orb, —we have now, in this rotatory
movement of the whole, an intelligible understanding and explanation
conferred upon us respecting the sustentative cause of that self-same
centrifugal “movement or force” of which we hear Sir Isaac Newton speak
and allude to ; and, likewise, hear all other subsequent speculators on
Nature appropriate as a force by itself and discuss generally in the light
of a causational phenomenon ; but, the origin or sustentative means and
principles of which all physicists alike have hitherto completely failed to
explain either to their own understanding or to that of others; or to science
in general! If not for the wonderful transparency and state of
attenuation of the elemental atomic bodies, we should not have been


enabled to behold the varied movements of the distant celestial orbs; and
the consequence of which would have been that we should have kno/vn less
of Nature’s economy abroad than what now (taking to consideration the
fact) we do enable ourselves to learn after all.
Accordingly, simultaneous with rendering satisfactory and tangible
explanation of planetary orbit motion throughout; this self-same prodigy
in question (a translatory rotating gaseous vortices system) also informs
us of the consistency of that immediate material cause which, at once,
engenders and sustains that very remarkable centrifugal energy (or
so-called “force”) itself, and without which there could not possibly be any
access towards solution and truthful reliable explanation of the several
difficult problems in question. Manifested effects may guide us and lead
towards discovery of their causes, but do not themselves —as effects—con-
stitute cause of their prevalence. And since planetary revolution is
synonymous with and expresses rotation of the gaseous medium compos-
ing the solar vortex itself, it follows, that the centrifugal “movement” of
which we hear our mathematicians speak, and, associate with a conception
of—and appropriate as if constituting —a force, is quite an unwarrantable
and foundationless speculation.
Whence it will be perceived then, that planetary orbit motion and
and (locally generated) centrifugal force —as taking rise with circulation
about an axis of all the ingredients envolved within and composing the
volumed medium — are identical with each other , and all but convertible
things and as one ; both akin, nevertheless, merely expressing (in a
secondary method) effect and sequence of previously exerted and expended
motive energy or effort subjecting the mass to displacement through the
means and instrumentality of rotative movement upon an axis ! This
we must bear in mind ! In another aspect we have it this way; that, the
previous external or primary incoming centrifugal force—as expressing
transplacement of the media-mass as a whole—expends its energy in that
secondaiy manner; engendering, namely,local centrifugal force; and thus
showing us the method in which the previous incoming energy reacts from
centralised concentration in diminutive orbit motions and exhausts itself
outward, and engendering all these physical manifestations everywhere
locally displayed. The whole series of phenomena taking place within the
bosom of the greater media-eddy being all owing to its continued transla-
tory motion, in fact. One media-mass— in virtue of its displacement—
becoming, namely, as the propelling motive force to another and its minor
or secondary. And nearly all phenomena observable to us are such
effects and offshoots manifested by the internally situate minor masses
floating within the bosom of their common major medium. Man being
located within its midst and viewing all things from within!
Unable to mentally realise the wondrous bearings of the whole, and,
perceiving the several planets circulate about a common centre or focus,
speculators—in this observed phenomenon—suggested a “ centrifugal
movement as they adroitly enough term it; and in assuming same to be
in itself and by itself a force , stole a march upon this manifestation and
appropriated the prodigy to serve the ends of their crude and quaint
speculations. And here crops up additional light exposing the substance,


character and consistence of our mathematicians’ .celestial forces ! these
kind of forces hitherto having been thought so efficacious and all potent
just because of their never having been understood by either master or
disciple.
Indeed, wheresoever we turn our eyes, the Newtonian philosophy
proves itself to refer to merest expressed visible results and effects of de-
livered energy and forthwith believes same to constitute themselves— in such
states — source itself of force ! and, everywhere, pure offshoot and sequence of
hurling motion is made out to be causes proper. Thus stands all through-
out this extraordinary philosophy. It not reaching far enough.
Since centrifugal force being of an outgoing character, and having a
tendency to throw off, it accordingly became necessary to be possessed of
an indrawing or attractive force wherewith to counteract the effect of the
other ; so, as having previously been pointed out, the commonly known
property or attribute accompanying all kinds of ponderable matter and as
understood by its “weightiness” was caught hold of ; and, under the
changed appellations of gravity, force of gravity, gravitation, &c., pressed
conveniently into service. In the absence of better and superior knowledge
these were now thought adequate and sufficient proof, at the time, of there
really being such a “Law” as propounded by Newton, and that the motive
energy displayed in surrounding physical nature really consisted of the
visible material substances and particles it contained, along with their
known properties of weights, as mass to mass considered ; and decreasing
in potency with increase of distance intervening, as we have heard. The
Solar System being thought to be immobile and stationary, but its visible
contents removed from centre being noted to continually revolve about the
thought seat of all force in the system—the solar globe, namely—the con-
ception of L a universal gravitation force, seemed, amid darkness, to imply
something feasible, indicate something suggestive of knowledge ; and, as
aforesaid, in the absence of better data leading to a more correct conception
of things, the hypothesy was accepted as, aye, denoting something of the
highest order of abstract science. Sir Isaac Newton, presumably, not
dreaming of knowledge ever arriving superior to and disturbing his theory.
Some people seem to think that in conferring an appellation or mere
name to any given phenomenon, the explanation of the consistence of the
phenomenon in question follows along with such name as a matter of
course! With the ancients, terms and phrases were evidently everything ;
and they were adepts in the art as nomenclators. But beyond the bare
name of a thing, little followed. Thus, the remote ancients invented the
term “ gravitation,” leaving however the phenomenon itself, its meaning,
true consistency, all things in fact short of its name, to be supplied and
explained by posterity.
So let it thus be understood, that whilst this our mechanical system of
physics recognises and demands the absolute necessity for, and, moreover,
demonstrates the actual existence or prevalence of, a constantly expressed
enerqetic hind of force, —one for evermore transmitted towards , and, thus
resupplied and replenished to the solar system and its ramifications from
outside sources and regions, namely ; —a mere mathematical system of
physics, on the other hand, we behold to content itself in contemplation of
F


being possessed of a somewhat inanimate and inactive one ; such, namely,
as to be neither renewed, replenished, supported or sustained from any-
where, or, from any direction or source of activity ; and, indeed, as far at
least as our stretch of discernment goes, one altogether assimilating itself
to these kind of grotesque efforts, on the part of some people, endeavouring
namely, to erect those so-called “ perpetual motion” pieces of mechanism !
such as were destined to go by themselves and by their own momentum,
driven by weight so sagely adjusted as to require no other motive or
propelling force ! Could it possibly be that, on the heavens, the mind of
the mathematically speculative element and portion of science is still
lingering in that primitive stage characterising such misguided energy ?
Pity it is, nevertheless, that so much otherwise sterling talent should have
vainly wasted itself in pursuit of such merest phantoms.
In concluding this chapter we should finally state, that precisely as
it has now been pointed out, that the twofold energies pervading the primary
or solar medium are wholly and solely due to its translatory motion ; so,
in a like manner, is it, again, that the several internal secondarily generated
(planetary and satellite,) mediums have their respective twofold energies or
forces sustained in virtue of their orbital motions about their common
primary media-axis (as indicated by the solar focus); and such, namely, as
determine stability and movements of the several orbs located within each.
For, as having been before alluded to, the primary planets perform small
orbit motions about their relative media-axis ; analogous to the more
extended or enlarged ones of their several satellites ; revolving, as these
orbs do, at a still more increased distance from their common local foci.


CHAPTER V.
FURTHER COMMENTS & GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
“ There is therefore a necessary and unceasing drain on the vis viva of such a
system. Everything which constitutes an event, whatever its nature, exhausts
some portion of the original stock. Such a system has no vitality. It feeds
upon itself, and has no restorative power. All relative motion in it tends
rapidly to decay, or at all events to a final state, when there will be no more
collision, i.e., when phenomena cease altogether; when the minimum of vis viva
consistent with the conservation of momentum is attained; and nothing
remains but either a single caput mortuum, journeying through space, or a
multiple of such, travelling different ways; having parted company never to
meet again.” —Sir John Herschel on “The Origin of Force.”
Previous to proceeding further with our expositions—and for to enable
the reader to better follow the authors upon this their wholly original
pathway of knowledge—it would be well at this stage to state that, in
view of correct interpretation and reading of Nature’s manifestations and
general economy, we have, first and foremost, to consider—unconditionally—
the indispensable necessity existing for an unreserved recognition of the
absolute need of there being in the background of creation (or, in its
midst, who shall tell ?) an all potent, governing energetic power or force.
Next this, we have to consider the mode and manner in which that energy
transmits itself from system to system, through the instrumentality of the
attenuated and transparent gaseous elements ; and, its swaying effects and
influences upon these atomic ingredients, in their native and unconverted,
and, therefore, directly invisible states ; and such, namely, as the authors
have labored in showing to their readers ; all of which, accordingly, remain
to the sensual vision hidden and shrouded ; baffling, in toto, all so-called
astronomical “ocular demonstration.” Nor until this (in its first place)
wondrous “ virtual” motive energy is observed to assert its dominion upon
visible substances or ingredients (ponderable matter ?) in general, do we,
it must here be noted, find the astronomical observant science come to
the front and—be it viewed in the light either of practice or precept—
display itself ? that Science and its followers, avowedly and systematically,
considering and recognising naught else but that which shows visible material
Form, substantially sensible Lines, Figure, Dimension, Magnitude, &c.:
From here Observation, Record and Computation takes rise ; substantially
visible matter being noted to conform to regular movement and continued
displacement, speculation as to how and why —becoming rife!—The
conception formed of the prodigy of celestial “ Motion” being confounded
with external impelling Motive Energy itself, and matter in motion , we
find, to be confusedly mingled up with force of prior causal order and,


forsooth, made out to be one and the same thing. And it is this distorted
rendering and reading of things which chiefly comprise that extraordinary
and monstrous structure of anciently descended gossip and confabulation,
by the Moderns being looked upon as constituting Learning, and as under-
stood by the imposing term—Mathematics—teaching its credulous pupils
that figures, arithmetic, use and force of Algebraic Signs, and so forth, are
the formidable elements whereupon all Nature is erected ; and, without the
perfect mastery of which the student will not be in the secret of Nature’s
doings and mysteries. This is the string all scholastic modern Philosophy
harps on. What can it possibly imply, we ask ? wisdom or benightedness ?
probable it be that those in the secret would here be found mentally
muttering, “ neither the one nor the other ?”
As having ere this been stated, from appearances and indications to
judge, followers of Philosophy and cultivators of Celestial Science have evi-
dently not as yet rose to anything like an approximately fair conception
and appreciation of that which really constitutes the impelling motive energy
or power with its all-important office and function in the scheme of things
mechanical, —of all things purporting to be founded upon and related to
Mechanical Method and Principle, in short:—closet speculation proving
itself wholly forgetful of the irrefutable fact, that, though we may be
possessed of perfect and suitable mechanical contrivance wherewith
to convey and transmit force toward any purpose from place to place, yet,
it is patent enough, that without a veritable and actively energetic motive
or propelling Force, of some sort or kind, wherewith to act upon our
ingeneously contrived mechanism—towards a given purpose or definite
object namely—the mere contrivance (destined to convey its impulse)
remains a futile and useless thing in our hands; and, in the absence of such
moving power, stands absolutely nil.
It would fully appear that, from never having properly apprehended
and realised this simple axiom to themselves, some of our greatest minds
and profoundest thinkers have lived, searched and died admitting of com-
prehending, after all, little or naught in connection with nature’s majestic,
yet, withal, simple mode of procedure. For, the above irrefutable axiom
applies, indeed, with equal force to ultramundane nature, phenomena and
things, as to those in their mundane character, and as in general mechanics,
more familiar to us. Nature seems myterious and difficult of comprehension,
rather from ill-reading, misconstruction and misinterpretation on our own
part than aught else : primitive philosophers having (from incorrect and
premature data) been led astray, and, their inverted and miscarried views
and determinations having been suffered to be retained and accepted as
being reliable and truthful by conservative science and philosophy during
advance of tim e y fully explains the grounds and reasons of the prevailing
darkness respecting Nature’s pathways. Such now appear as plain and
manifest as anything could possible stand forth. As no real source of
celestial Motive Force proper was ever known—either anterior to or con-
temporary with—the time of Sir Isaac Newton, so, that philosopher simply
conjectured or invented some of his own; and, doubtlessly, uprightly
believed same to be Nature’s own genuine and veritable ones. That sub-
sequent philosophers—to whom a mobile system were among the things


known— continued to adhere to the erroneous version, is, by far, the more
reprehensible and worse thing, and convincingly enough showing us, that
the subjectanent “Motive Force” and its belongings, is one all but totally
foreign to the Philosophic Schools of the day ; in fact, in recognition and
study wholly neglected.
Now, although no sane mind—at all conversant with exact mechanical
method and principle—would so far commit itself and believe it possible
that a piece of mechanism, once set in motion, would continue afterwards
on its own accord to go by itself and move henceforth by its own momentum ?
still—in having adopted and pledged itself to the gravitation system of
reasoning (erected, as that structure is, upon the gratuituous supposition
of a stationary or immobile solarfsystem)—modern philosophy and the
astronomical science in general, nevertheless, virtually believes in this
extravagant idea, and teaches that the heavenly mechanism (the visible
globes and matter) do so move by itself and on its own accord ; and, that,
the motions of the celestial orbs having once for all been “imbued”? to
them are now sustained by their own momentum ! . . . . Motion being
thought maintained by their (gravity ?) weights, or force of gravitation, namely.
And it is precisely here where the great error lies ; an error too which
has frequently been pointed out by previous astute and discriminating
minds ; who, notwithstanding, have failed proving themselves equal to
the opportunity detecting such other bases of reasonings as should prove
strong enough supplanting and rendering obsolete a system once having
taken so firm a hold on science in general and upon the human mind at
large ; and, therefore, have commanded but little attention ; their protests
having generally been met with that peculiar assurance and opinionativeness
for ever characterising absence of mental judgment and faculty to dis-
criminate betwixt what really constitute precise and reliable knowledge,
and the reverse of same. For it is a remarkably curious fact that, it is
precisely upon such very subjects about the wherewithal of which the
individual mind knows the least and proving itself less conversant of all
things, that the greater obstinacy and bigotry exists. No sane mortal
being could well say, or was ever hnown to say, that he understood the
grotesque subjects forming the so-called gravitation system of science ?
and yet, learned and unlearned are, all akin, positively assured of its
truthfulness and reliability ! so much so, that many people are found disposed
to scout and deride any one disinclined to accept its teaching as reliable.
This philosophy having adroitly ensconsed its science behind the formidable
barrier of sanctity ; and its association with things sacred to man in general,
is, truly, marvellously astute ; but is the only and sole thing clever about
it. To superficial and to untutored minds, there seems to be some-
thing fascinating and akin, as it were, in hearing people professing to
know, or, being thought to know a great deal, yet, admitting of their not
knowing anything! and which to the multitude seems to be the best reasons
and grounds for faith and trustworthiness in anything such persons may
have to say to them with a grave air or mien ! hence, it would seem, the
reason of zeal and bigotry in any direction! hence, probably, the secret of
that great influence and power exercised by some minds over those of the
great multitude ?


It having previously been stated that with a stationary system, it
became impossible to speculate upon and successfully explain celestial
mechanism and phenomena with but one kind of force at disposal, so two
distinct ones were called into action as requisite. The sun—as the thought
prime mover of all discernable particles of matter within the confines of
the system—was presumed to have a rotatory movement imparted to it
from the outset of things and at the time of creation ; which motion, in
enduring, caused planetary circulation and centrifugal force generally.
Such solar rotative movement—by telescopic aid and means of observa-
tion-being subsequently affirmed* was thought additional testimony in
support of the correctness and trustworthiness of the theory, which being
now looked upon as fully verified, demonstrated and reliable. Solar rota-
tion, engendering an outgoing energy, in conjunction with the anciently
inherited subject of gravitation,—-the conception of which being thought
to have been further improved upon by Descartes and Galileo, and, per-
fected by Newton, made now the structure complete ; such two separate
and distinct forces were now held to pervade all nature ; it being indis-
pensable accounting for and explaining the various manifestations observed
to take place within what was believed to be an immobile system : until the
elder Herschel showed to the contrary, and discovered that the sun had a
motion among the stars. This important ascertainment—as now, in a
brief and preliminary manner, shown to the reader—entirely changes the
aspect of things and becomes, at length, the means whereby being enabled
to deduce and extract an infinitely superior structure wherewith to supercede
the woeful, barbarous and humiliating one in vogue. The significant
discovery in question, we repeat, changes aspect of things, so much so and
so utterly, that, with a mobile or translatory system, Nature’s manifesta-
tions are, not alone, interpretable and recognisable from the standpoint of
but one kind of force transmitting itself from system to system and
generating others of its own kind, but, and what is infinitely more, we
plainly perceive now, that, only and alone from the standpoint of but one
sole kind of force pervading universal Nature is it at all possible to arrive at
an understanding of Nature’s marvels and render phenomena interpretable.
The momentous truth of this seems quite to have eluded all thinkers on
Nature and its resources since detection by Herschel of solar translation in
the heavens ! and, in the demonstration and exposition of which it is the
really vast distinction lies between the present and previous versions and
theories anent Nature’s economy. Upon the field of prevalence of but one
kind of force, phenomena renders themselves interpretable only.
For to ensure a fair comprehension, by other minds, of so wide and
difficult a subject as this at present engaged in, reiteration and continued
reference becomes, in a measure, unavoidable. Continuing, therefore we
should observe that, similar to multifarious other things and subjects
attached to this our new pathway of knowledge, the question of rendering
a successful intelligible description—having for object of showing to the
* Although it has since been found to be only the external luminous and
gaseous envelope surrounding the solar orb itself which is noted to rotate ; and such
too, at different rates of velocity in different localities or regions. Of the time of
rotation of the internally situate globe itself nothing is known.


understanding of other persons how and in what manner it becomes
possible for but one sole hind of expressed energy to so combine and
connect itself together as to render explainable former abstruse phenomena
—proves, by far, the greater difficulty of all to overcome, and, all but
surpassing the mental efforts leading up to the wondrous series of dis-
coveries themselves ; the more so considering the necessity of circumscribing
the wide and profuse theme into such narrow compass as these limited pages
renders it incumbent upon us to do. Nevertheless, however great the
difficulties were with which the authors had to contend—reducing the whole
into harmony and concord—when once intelligibly described, the subject
appears easy enough of comprehension ; and, they opine, much less difficult
and abstruse than what at first would be thought: impediments arise from
the consciousness of the topic presenting itself in the form as something
new and startling to the mind, rather, than from aught else. The
demonstration of celestial phenomena from the standpoint of hut One
universally expressed Kind of force—rendering full explanation of the
cause of the varied directions of motions of the heavenly orbs—becomes
the Great Criterion for the correctness and reliability of the present
expositions. Simultaneous with initiation into Nature’s manifold
mysteries, and, with recognition of phenomena—in a measure and to an
extent such as at no time before having been mastered—we enable our-
selves to descry that, it is precisely on account of deviating from this very
view, and, in resorting to more than one kind of force for explanation of
celestial manifestations, that previous exponents have rendered to us so
anomalously, so irreconcilable, and, utterly unintelligible versions of Lofty,
yet, withal Simple Mother-Nature.
It has been said by some modern Writer on philosophy that: “It has
often been found, in philosophising, that the prime difficulty lay in
bringing down the mind to sufficiently simple conceptions. The many
soar and mystify, and come to nothing ; to few is it given to find truth
where truth lies, amongst the things most familiar Now there could
be no doubt these were apt, applicable and correct sentences ; sometimes
it happens, however, ( in the estimation , at least, of the less versed
and initiated) that some people do, after all, come to great things by
dint of merest soaring, merest mystification ! behold, in proof, the success
and fame of the propounder of the erroneous, untenable and precarious
theory and teaching in vogue ? . . . . Yet, we opine, if alive now !
Newton would have corrected his errors and modified his philosophy.
Once again, then, we should point out that, precisely in the same
measure as the primary media-mass—or solar vortices system as a com-
bined whole— become in virtue of its continued displacement as the motive
and propelling power to its several internal gaseous eddies composing the
distinct planetary (satellite) vortex systems, so, in a like measure, the
vaster media-mass (major to the solar) by dint again of its displacement
in the firmament becomes, in its turn, as the motive and propelling force
to the entire solar vortices system ; and so on in the endless : one system
transmitting its own borrowed force towards those of secondary growth to
itself, and such as are engendered within its confines and sustained by con-
stant onward movement. Hence we behold the reason and cause of solar


translation among the stars. Upon this aspect of firmamental Nature,
phenomena traceable throughout, become akin, at once intelligible to the
mind.
And thus comes it to pass that, with this comprehensive view of the
Construction and Mechanism of the Sublime Universe, we enable ourselves
to discern at length, the various correct and true grounds and reasons
why Astronomy—in so far as concerns time-measure, and, wherefrom
reliable computation obtain—proves itself an exact and precise Science! !
A marvel, which no other philosophy, not in the secret of that wonderful
mechanism, so much as dared to attempt explaining to you.
*f§tesg©}>


CHAPTER VI.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS of TERRESTRIALLY and
CELESTIALLY MANIFESTED FORCE - EVOLUTION,
with CONSIDERATIONS on their ANALOGOUS CIR-
CUMSTANCES.
“ But it is with the sun itself that we are now concerned. What I am going to say
about the sun will consist of a series of statements so enormous in all their
proportions, that I dai*e say, before I have done, some of my hearers will almost
think me mad, or intending to palm on them a string of rhodomontades, like
some of the mythical stories of the Hindus Were the sun simply
extinguished , the planets would all continue to circulate round it as they do
at present, only in cold and darkness; but were it annihilated, each would
from that moment set forth on a journey into infinite space in the direction in
which it happened then to be moving; wander on centuries after centuries,
lost in that awful abyss which separates us from the stars, and without making
any sensible approach even to the nearest of them in many hundreds or even
thousands of years.”— ■“ Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects.” Sib
John Hebschel.
Sir Richard Phillips informs us that, “ Colonel Reed maintains, by
laborious observation, that in hurricanes the wind is carried in a vortex,
and hence is in contrary directions in opposite parts of a circle. Mr. Espy,
of Philadelphia, by another series of observations, determines that the
wind in hurricanes proceeds as from the periphery of a circle to its centre.”
And, in view of which, Sir Richard Phillips comments, stating that “ both
of which points to some more general disturbance than the theory of rare-
faction can account for. Even common storms seem to have connection
with some disturbance in the equilibrium of the Earth’s motions, which
disturbance first shows itself in the parts most sensible of motion. . . .
The West India hurricanes are vortexes, as appear by the varied direction
of the trees which they prostrate They affect at once as an
immense whirlwind a space of from 100 to 500 miles in diameter, . . .
but their force is not in the direction of their progress. They commence
with wind, .... and end .... at places in the centre or
axis of the hurricane or whirlwind. The barometer sinks at the com-
mencement and rises at the close. The sea swells around the track of
their centre.”
Now whilst we would remind the reader, stating, that it would scarcely
be well and correct to believe that it is only in West India that hurri-
canes are vortexes, we should add that, that the misgiving exhibited by
Sir R. Phillips respecting atmospheric disturbance as being due to that
solar radiation, in influence and effect, termed “ rarefaction,” is quite a
justifiable and well-founded one ! This theory is but exhibitive of one
other instance of misconstruction on the part of primitive speculating
minds.


As little as the sun itself—in the form of a globe or aggregation of
a vast amount of “ particles of matter”—is the mover, or moving agent,
of the other surrounding planets; as little, again, has that orb anything to
do with any of those atmospheric manifestations or aerial disturbances
occurring in our sphere, and such as to us are known by the appellations of
hurricanes, whirlwinds, cyclones, or wind in general and in any form. The
whole theme forming this so-called rarefaction theory is but one other
fearful mistake made by early exponents having read physical phenomena,
throughout, from the erroneous standpoint of a stationary sun or immobile
system : With our forefathers the great luminary was standing stationary
and serenely developing all perceptible phenomena. The fact being this,
that in the above quoted subject we have a fair clue, and, possess a key
towards an intelligent comprehension of such principles of economy per-
vading those prodigious celestial structures to which the authors have
here drawn the attention of all interested and unprejudiced thinking minds ;
and, as oft repeated, upon aspect of which celestial phenomena alone
become possible of interpretation and recognition. It be on a large, or it
be on a minute scale, Nature everywhere repeats, and, remain staunchly
true to herself.
Speaking of whirlwinds, we have heard Sir U. Phillips remark, “ but,
their force is not in the direction of their progress.” When we now come
to consider the simple fact of the volumed gaseous medium, forming the
whirlwind, advancing onward in the mode of rotation upon an axis, (as
the only possible mode of locomotion of the structure), and, as in its flow
being obstructed by protruding solid substance forming the terrestrial
surface over and above the smooth ocean—and the friction therefrom
accruing being experienced in such affected localities resulting in the
phenomenon of the said whirlwind—expending its energy (engendered and
sustained in virtue of the onward movement) in a secondary and outward-
going manner ; this observation by Sir R. Phillips appears, accordingly, of
a somewhat diverting nature !
Thus it is that in the above recounted terrestrial or mundane mani-
festations, we behold (in small proportions and upon minute scales)
examples of mode of procedure, or, evidence of progress and pathways of
those mightier and more prodigious volumed mediums of the vast firma-
ment, and as constituting those great celestial vortices systems to our
understanding faintly manifested and conceived by the expression of
“universes,” or encompassed “systems!” encompassed, because, of
envolvement of all their contents in twofold motions upon axes, analogous
to terrestrial whirlwinds. These latter phenomena, however, transpire on
account of the rugged and protruding parts of the surface of the globe
arresting the inward (in the first instance) to axis flowing energy pervading
the volumed medium composing the Terro-Lunar vortex itself.
Precisely as our readers have now heard it having by various investi-
gators been ascertained, that the wind in hurricanes proceeds as from the
periphery of a circle and to its centre, —and, it would be the most difficult
thing (if not altogether impossible) to at all conceive of the force acting, or
arriving, in any other mode, —so likewise, from times immemorial,
astronomers have labored to much the same purpose upon the field of the


expansive heavens, and (without, however, having themselves perceived
and realised the sublime and portentous fact) substantially proven by
results of their accumulated labours and observations, nevertheless, that
the force pervading all celestial systems also, and, likewise, “ proceeds as
from the periphery of a circle to its centre .” Such we shall presently
more distinctly show to the reader to really be the grand sum total of all
the labours of observant astronomy from times past. But, an obstinate
belief to the totally opposite and contrary effect—and as being grounded
upon merest deceptive ocular instruction —having most fatuituously clung
to the followers of the science, has effectually precluded all possibility of
arriving at a better understanding and correcter appreciation of the lofty
subject.
The causes at work effecting translation of the mass lying outside
of itself and external to its own confines, it comes to pass, and absolutely
follows, that in revolving about itself—as the simple mechanical means
and method whereby continued displacement is effected —the force must
needs arrive (in a spiraloid form) from peripheral regions ; and, in going
at once from all directions towards centres or foci of mediums, expends
its energy in a secondary manner (reacting and reflecting itself back from
awes upon the ingredients of the rotating mass) thus engendering local
outgoing centrifugal force. The energy in its first instance being necessarily
of an incoming order, simply expresses the effect and result of the translatory
movement ; and, the locally generated centrifugal energy, on the other
hand, indicates mode of expenditure of force following upon that effort,
or as continually accompanying it.* Hence, whenever being viewed from
centralised regions of any one structure in question, the force pervading
same and as firstly manifested in its previous or primary form, must needs
everywhere be of an incoming character.. Whenever being viewed in
connection with an external relative secondarily generated border structure,
on the other hand, then the self-same force appear to the beholder as if
being of an outgoing order in opposition to that of its relative primary or
major centre wherefrom viewed ; and such simply, because, of the locally
engendered centrifugal energy—as the continuation of the previous con-
stantly inward arriving one— seehing points for its exhaustion ; and in
concentracting itself into such points, these now become the axis of otliei
and secondary border mediums ; and, to centralised observation of which
such force is now afresh of an incoming order. All force proper being
sustained at the bachground of creation, these structures prove therefore
permanent in their continued displacement. As viewed in relation to
their several previous or primary—whether solar or planetary (satellite ?)
mediums, such secondarily generated structures become to each in turn
what is commonly known as u cometary masses, and revolve aoout theii
boundaries edgewise. Of the depths (laterally viewed) of such celestial
mediums, no data or clues exists. .
Similar to whirlwinds in their gaseous compositions expressing in
their rotations about axes their onward movement, so, also, the more pro-
* Whilst the matter and ingredients acted upon by the energy merely points to
and denotes circular motion-eSec[,, the energy itself constitute centrifugal force
proper. In mathematics the moving matter is made out to be the force, and to
constitute the direct local motive energy itself. G- *


digious celestial vortices structures likewise in their turn expresses in
rotative movements about axes their translatory motions in the great and
illimitable firmament ; and, in thus revolving about themselves, engenders
and sustains that circular motion-effect, unfitly termed centrifugal force; and
which exhibits or manifests its effects and influence upon all substances
and ingredients composing any one volumed media-mass. As above stated,
in arriving at the borders or peripheral regions of the mass, the force or
energy itself- —from being in search of termination—resolves itself into
narrow compass or points, thereby extending itself beyond the actual boun-
daries of the transparent mass. We ought always to recollect viewing these
mediums in their hurled on, and onwardly precipitated states. None of
these wonders related would take place with immobile or stationary
gaseous mediums. It is in their states of subjection to constant motion
and displacement that celestial gaseous masses throughout present these
series of manifestations ; by gravitation science interpreted as constituting
“ Nature’s laws,” “ Nature’s forces,” astronomical “ laws ” and so on.
But it is of no avail referring to locally manifested phenomena
within the confines of such structures for explanation of the cause of
movement of their contents, and such as physicists persist in doing. That
cause lies outside and external to each ramification. Thus, the sun does
not move its surrounding medium ; it is, on the contrary, the surrounding
medium (set in motion by exterior agency) which in its state of motion
becomes instrumental in moving the sun. And all solar properties, whatever
they so be, is, of course, derived from and being wholly due to the in-
wardly arriving energy consequent upon translation of the whole mass.
What in the world else could it consist of, and wherefrom else could it
possibly come, we ask ? Is it not the most proper direction for all energy
to emanate, and also renovate itself!!.... In its state of trans-
lation onward, one celestial media-mass becomes as the motive force to
another. Hence, the philosophy of the Astronomical Science, consists,
therefore, in correct reading and discrimination of the various results and
effects arising—and exhibited upon all kinds of matter—from subjection
to hurling motions.
Now we have heard it being stated by Sir R. Phillips that “the West
India hurricanes are vortexes, as appear by the varied direction of the
trees which they prostrate.” And in view of which we should say, that
precisely as the trees, in their prostrate conditions, prove the direction of
force-fow in the instance of terrestrial hurricanes, so the directions of
rotations of the several primary planets/ in corresponding with their
common direction of orbit motions, likewise in the instances of celestial
vortex motion, distinctly prove the force under which they all suffer to be
of an incoming order, and to “ proceed as from the periphery of a circle
and to its centre” ; for in revolving, and, also rotating from west to east,
the globes—much like the trees above recounted—lie like prostrate patients
under the influence of the previous and predominant incoming centrifugal
energy. And with this, we may rely upon it, we have arrived at knowledge.
* With the exception of Uranus and Neptune. These orbs being the occupants
of mediums of their own, sustained by the locally generated centrifugal energy of
the primary mass or solar vortex as a whole, and are therefore to same what the
so-called “ cometary masses” are to each internal planetary media-mass.


It not being among the things possible for science, with a “ Central Force
Theory” for its base, to ever succeed explaining—upon mechanical principles
—these remarkable concurrence of motions in question. That marvel was
left for a system of knowledge based upon a “ Peripheral Force”—universal
in character and kind— to alone explain ; and such as with the present
authors now promulgated.
Since, by misguided (and optically deceived) science, the reader has
been taught to believe, that, whenever observed, a comet moves about the
sun in an orbit of its own', and, inasmuch, as upon this different aspect of
things it now appears that, except in revolving about and in following
along with their respective media-masses, the comets do not so revolve
round the sun in orbits of their own where and whenever observed, it
naturally enough follows that the reader require some explanation of this
untoward circumstance ! demands to know, namely, how physicists have
arrived at the conclusion that comets did really round the solar orb when-
ever appearing 1 ... . Well, it seems to be a mere jumping at
conclusions, as the saying goes ; and a quite unwarrantable manner of
leaping too.
Sir John Herschel, in his “ Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects,”
writes to say: “ I believe it was Tycho Brahe, a celebrated Danish
astronomer, who first rose to the conception that comets are beyond the
moon, and not mere exhalations. The appearance of a great comet in
1577 set him thinking about it, and he was led by his observations and
reasonings on them to a certain knowledge of the fact of its being much
more remote than our satellite ; and he was therefore led to conjecture
that the motions of comets had reference rather to the sun as their centre
than the earth ” Now beyond this, and some other very much
similar kind of knowledge, nothing is .positively known in modern
astronomy respecting this class of phenomena ; nothing whatsoever, we
say. Orbit motions, locations, intervening distances, &c., all alike remain
as a sealed book to our physicists, despite all assurance to the contrary.
Whatever obtains, exists only in belief; and has been jumped at on the
strength of a false theory abetted and assisted by pure optical deception
and illusion. Doctrinal astronomers protest and assure us that they have
—thanks to the sublime theory of gravitation—almost entirely solved the
difficult problem of cometary motion and their general economy ; but, such
is only in their belief of having so enabled themselves ; not in reality, by
no means !
We now find, that in conceiving comets to move “ beyond the
moon,” Tycho Brahe was right and perfectly sound. But, between inter-
vening distance from our globe to the moon, and, from the earth to the
sun, —a vast and great difference exists ! As little, however, as the
planetary orbit pathways were realised by Tycho Brahe to be of elliptical
or elongated forms, as little, again, did that celebrated observer of the
heavens suspect the possibility (or reason upon the probability) of there
being such things, after all, in the vast firmament, as peripheral regions ;
or distinct transparent gaseous mediums with boundaries wherewith to
accommodate comets ; and thus making it possible for these masses to
move at a distance considerably beyond the moon, and still (in comparison


to the enormous distance of the sun) being located, so to say, quite near
the earth. Tycho Brahe being unaware of the sun’s motion among
the stars.
In a future edition the authors shall have much and many things
more to say of comets. It so happening that, of all physical pheno-
mena, the motions and everything else known about these celestial
objects prove—better than aught else —the truthfulness and reliability of
these our expositions. Our limited space here precludes us from enlarg-
ing upon this subject further, however. In view of these “ marvels of the
sky ” it may be mentioned that, men behold and wonder, but not one out
of a thousand trouble themselves reasoning; and the consequence of which
being this, that determinations arrived at are, as often as not, of the most
flimsy and superficial character. Experimental science, in common with
observation, may at times succeed in disclosing certain facts or things
which nevertheless, on account of their frequently deceiving aspects, are in
themselves merest blank ascertainments until reasoning faculties, assisted
by comparative analytical enquiries, are brought to bear upon, and, make
things come out in their true light and recognisable conditions.
When advancing towards perihelia, all these gaseous mediums alike
contract with the decreasing room existing in that region, and gradually
expand again when approaching aphelia regions with the expanded room
prevailing in that region. Hence the observed alternate expansion and
contraction of .cometary masses. Having to maintain a uniform velocity
(that of solar progression) all throughout orbit motions about the sun, it
comes to pass that, in diminishing volume, increase in rotative movement
sets in, and particles are hurled further out in consequence of such
accelerated rotative velocity. Hence cause and reason of the moon, accord-
ing to Sir Richard Phillips, being “ twenty-four minutes longer in perform-
ing her orbit, when the Earth is in its perihelion than its aphelion.” With
increase in rotative movement a corresponding amount of centrifugal
energy sets in ; the moon under its influence getting hurled slightly further
out from central regions—its orbit thereby getting that much enlarged—it
comes to pass of the moon taking that much longer time completing its
orbit motions when the Terro-lunar vortex moves in its perihelion. And
we now begin to understand something about the proscribed and ill-
understood subject of “ causes ” of physical phenomena ? and our readers
have begun apprising themselves of the truthfulness of our statement, that
man’s knowledge to the construction and mechanism of the wide universe, is
barely emerging from its crudest and most primitive stages! !
The comets, it will now be understood, revolve at a distance from the
earth considerably beyond that of the moon. Their rapid rates of velocity
ought to have convinced philosophers of their comparative proximity to
the point of observation ; the earth, namely. Comets of “ retrograde”
orbit motions belong to the adjacent planetary vortices ; such as these of
Venus, Mars, &c., and about the boundaries of which they revolve
in a direction akin from west to east , but rotating from east to
west or contrary to planetary rotative motion in general! Analo-
gous in fact to the motions distinguishing the two orbs known as
Uranus and Neptune. The rotative movements of these distinct border


systems are all contrary to those of their relative primary mediums ;
because, of having their motions sustained (edgewise) from their respective
interior masses about the borders of which they revolve. Their orbit
motions are however identical ; and from west to east.
In the theory recently propounded by M. Faye, the border-masses of
the primary medium or of the solar vortex itself as a great whole—
accommodating the orbs known as Uranus and Neptune respectively
—comprise the region of the so-called “ Rings”; as by that theorist, con-
ceived. M. Faye believes, however, that they are formed by dint of
gravitation ! and move, also, in virtue of that mathematically conjured kind
of force ! As yet, science has not proven itself equal to opportunity of
discriminating between the moved visible matter, and, the exterior moving
invisible energy imparting motion to all matter.
To centralised regions of such border vortices, the outgoing force of
their relative primary structures become now as if of an incoming order ;
and, from, their subjection also to circulation about axes of rotations, fresh
locally generated centrifugal energy arise within the confines of these
masses likewise. But such circular motion-effects appertains only to the
enrolved maPer, of whatever its consistency be : So that, whilst the force
or energy itself seeks continually outward, the affected ingredients and
matter envolved continue, on the other hand, to revolve in orbit motions,
or, circulate about the local axis. As we have stated, their rotatory
motions vary, according to circumstances.
In speaking of “ Comets,” Sir Richard Phillips states: “ In-
creasing rotation as they approach the solar plane of equatorial
force,” ?(perihelion) “and decreasing rotation in aphelia, would explain
nearly the whole of their orbit phenomena Cometary rotatory motion
is “ retrograde” in character, although not as yet by observers directly
ascertained and affirmed. Direction of spirals —as indicating direction of
force-flow—points, however, distinctly towards their directions of rotations.
In proof of a celestial energy perpetually proceeding in a direction
from west to east, it has, by dint of prolonged inquiry and observation,
been ascertained that “ the normal direction of the wind all over the earth
is westerly “ ( going towards the east) ;” for it is found in the Southern
Hemisphere below 40 deg. where but little land exists to interfere with
any normal current, that it blows strongly and regularly from the west at
all seasons of the year, except when temporarily disturbed by cyclonic
movement.” Meteorologists believe, however, that clouds produce the
wind !
If we were now to inquire into such like recorded terrestrial atmos-
pheric disturbances as, for example, the great and disastrous Cyclone of
18th April, 1880, in the United States ; and—from its effects and destruc-
tion at places distant from each other —trace the construction and general
outline of its structure ; and then compare account of our astronomers anent
the construction and general outline of the Solar Vortices System, in its
distinct ramifications together composing a Whole ; and—as indicated by
* The feature in question may be supposed to describe all what by observation
is known about comets, but we utterly fail to apprehend how that observed feature
can possibly in itself and by itself explhin aught ?


the various arrangements of the several orbs confihed within same—consider
locations, directions of motions and other pervading features : and next,
turn our attention towards The Heavens with its portentously manifested
Structures consisting of “ Star Clusters,” Constellations,” “Nebube,” &c.,
and peruse the accounts as rendered to us by assiduous observers of such
like Celestial Objects as, for example, n Argus, and the Nebula of Orion,
(with decided evidences of change and transformation going continually on
within same); we should then enable ourselves to perceive a most remark-
able analogy pervading among the Whole, and, trace such wonderful and
most striking similitude existing, as ought to convince any reflecting mind,
that, at length, we have landed on the sole true pathway leading to diffusion
of correct ideas of the Construction and Mechanism of the Sublime
Universe.
Upon a future occasion, and in a more complete edition, the authors
intend to pursue the above grand subject in a more detailed manner and
place things more circumstantially before the mind’s eye of the reader.
In the mean time, it will be seen from the foregone that science has not as
yet arrived at, or, rose to, a fair conception of the true Grandeur of Nature.
Scholastic Science would seem to consist of merest guile, artifice and
patclied-up ancient Book-knowledge: and is altogether yet in that stage of
mental darkness by Comte spoken of as “ The Supernatural Stage and
from which it has yet to emancipate itself. We now perceive how
“ Mother-Nature,” throughout, proves most admirably and beautifully true
to herself; and distinctly observe how, now, that when intelligently inter-
preted, Nature conforms and concurs in the most beautiful manner every-
where ! Whether Celestially or Terrestrially viewed, manifested evolution
of force, associate agreeably and harmoniously together. False theory with
its misleading teachings, not alone, severing and disassociating facts, but
worse, rendering discoveries in any direction completely neutral and
nugatory.
In terminating the present chapter, it may be further observed, that
in the ascertained reverse rotatory motions of the orbs Uranus and Neptune
with their respective satellite systems, we possess direct conclusive proof
of their several mediums rotating contrariwise to their relative major
medium, the solar, namely ; and remain, therefore, as substantial standing
proofs of the whereabout of the boundary or limit of the whole gaseous
solar vortices system : analogous, in fact, to the cometary masses ; indi-
cating, as they in their turn do, the boundaries or limits of the several
internal secondarily generated planetary (satellite) Mediums.
From this it will be understood, that the apparent distance, which at
the time of discovery of Neptune was found to intervene between it and
Uranus, is precisely the same now at the present day as it was found to be
then ! Because, of both being, in their respective locations, situate at an
equal and uniform distance from the solar focus, and, moving with equal
and uniform velocities. Many Others (of the same region) remain yet to
be detected. Doubtless, it is only in their Perihelia Passages that this class
of Orbs become telescopically discoverable.


CHAPTER VII.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS AND COMMENTS.
" For, let it be considered further, that on the extent of our views respecting the
universal kingdom of God, depends our conceptions of the majesty and glory
of the Creator himself. We become acquainted with the nature of God only
in so far as He has manifested himself to us by eiternal operations. If we
conceive His empire as included within the bounds of eighty or ninety thousand
miles, our conceptions of the Sovereign of that empire will be circumscribed
within nearly the same limits. The mind of every reasonable man must
indeed admit the abstract proposition, ‘ That the Divine Being is infinite, and
consequently fills all space with His presence.’ But this infinity, in our view,
is nothing more than a vague conception of empty space, extending a little
beyond the sphere of His visible operations." — Thomas Dick, L.L.D.
We have then, at length, enabled ourselves to perceive how and in what
manner it comes to pass that, in transmitting itself from structure to
structure, One Sole Kind of force yields and begets others afresh of its own
kind ; and the reader begins to apprise himself of the real consistence and
nature of these astronomically conceived central, centripetal or gravitating
forces ; and, again, its invented centrifugal, repelling or levitating ones !
All of which having been conjured forth and called into use and action
with the reading of the various manifestations of Nature from off the
platform of a conceived immobile system ; but which now, in their totallity,
prove themselves to be the misconstrued outcome and direct consequences
of a Translatory and Mobile System ; a system discovered and confirmed
to be subjected to continual displacement in the vast Firmament in fact ;
and in virtue of which, such veritable energetic Motive Force is made com-
prehensible to the human mind to accrue as wherewith— -for explanation of
Physical Phenomena—to refer to in a legitimate manner and upon a
positive method.
Such being the evident and obvious fact, we arrive accordingly at the
stage defining that science which we term the “ Philosophy of Observant
Astronomy,” to consist of, “ study of the various and multifarious Effects
and Results exhibited upon all kinds of matter subjected—by Divinely
delivered and expressed force upon the heavens—to twofold hurling
motions within the confinement of encompassed Volumes or Masses ! . . .
Such like thing, the present authors gravely maintain to be the great
(but heretofore hidden) Secret! and. if so disposed, it now behoves Worsliip-
pers of superficial science of the day, and misguided discomfited Materialists
in general, to come forward and show the world to the contrary, if so enabled ;
and, for the further ventilation of the subject, we modestly and patiently
await the arrival of worthy adversaries upon this new battle-field of Science


and Intellect... We fancy perceiving, that whilst mere brute force
fights the battles of the flesh with its time-serving temporal associations; that
of the intellect, on the other hand, would fain contest those of the mind ;
and, such as affecting the Fortunes and Destiny of Posterity rather. It
would also appear, that Science with its investigations respecting Nature
at large, has arrived at the perilous stage where it fathoms a little but not
enough.
If we were now to regard the entire immense volumed media-mass—
from its state of Diffusedness and Transparency not directly discriminable
in Form to the sensual vision—composing the solar vortices system, to form,
either, such an internal secondary gaseous eddy—analogous to the planetary
(satellite) ones within the bosom of the solar medium—and, similar to
these latter ones, revolving within the confines of a major mass ; or, other-
wise, to consist of an outside and border mass—revolving about the boundary
of such still more prodigious volumed medium primary to itself—and, in
the mode and manner, namely, of the several vortices systems—indicated by
the presence within same—of the two globes known by the names of Uranus
and Neptune respectively ; and then take to consideration its relationship
with adjoining mediums with their prevailing force-capacities ; we shall
then be able to satisfactorily explain to ourselves the whole series of
physical phenomena presented to us in our sphere and from our standpoint
of observation ; the earth, namely: that is to say, we enable ourselves to
understand the true causes effecting Planetary Stability within these
mediums ; and, also, comprehend the correct reason and cause of their
varied motions ; the cause at work fixing the globes in certain maintained
positions, polarly or equatorially viewed ; &c. All of which, for to fathom,
one must needs be in the secret of the mechanism ! and, also, be in the
secret of derivation—and mode of evolution—of energetic motive force.
Among the things foremost in importance, we should enable ourselves
—from this stand-point of view—to mentally descry, that, whilst (the
locally viewed) primarily inwardly arriving energy—in conjunction with
the likewise primarily locally generated outgoing energy—determines the
question of location (and thereby effecting the stabilities) of the secondary
internal planetary (satellite) media-masses themselves ; the very analogous
twofold centrifugal forces transmitted towards — and pervading these
secondarily generated vortices systems—determine, on the other hand,
the question of location within same (and thereby effects the stabilities )
of the several compact visible masses themselves, and such as form the
planets with their respective accompanying satellites, namely ; and, as
having previously been stated, which revolve about (more or less distanced
from) their relative common media-axis ; proving, as we have stated, to be
an unrealised or unrecognised third principal planetary movement.
That is to say, in its might of pressure against the point of resistance
and confinement of force, (the axis of the medium, namely,) the relative
primary incoming energy impels the medium with all its gaseous or con-
crete ingredients against this axis, and—from all directions at once —forcing
the substances inward; whilst, again, in arriving at, or, near that axis, the
force (with some transient circulation about that axis) now taking the
form of a locally generated centrifugal one—seeking eventually out, and


thus assuming the form of an outward-going energy—reacts, accordingly,
upon the whole, and holds the contents perpetually (fluctuatingly) sus-
pended between its own effort and that of the other and constantly inwardly
arriving energy—engendered and sustained by the continued translation of
the mass; —the axes becoming the points of resistance of the force and where-
from it reacts. It will thus be seen how these twofold hurling energies—in
being both akin sustained by and expressing the onward motion of the mass—
perpetually renovate and restore themselves through each others instru-
mentality and vitality, as it were ; and the effects and results of which
being made manifest to us through the agency of our vision—viewing the
suffering visible contents in their many and various forms and conditions.
Now it should be noted that, since having at no one time mastered a
fair comprehension of either invisible principle of construction, or equally
invisible method of mechanism of the surrounding material universe in
which man is placed; so the antiquated system of speculative science in
vogue—so enrapturing to professionally interested scientists—has at all
times thought proper associating the subject—turning upon the question of
creation and its “ development" —with astronomy and its philosophy in
general; in so far, at least, as concerns definition and interpretation of
Nature’s pathways.
Doubtlessly, our more discerning readers have by this time perceived
the difference in this respect existing between the present expositions of
Nature—as here laid before the mind’s eye of the reader—and that of the
baseless theory in vogue, or of previous renderings of Nature !... As we
have observed, the present authors prefer to treat on, and, deal with Nature
as we find her to be now before us at this our present day; leaving the
question of creation and its development to our “ mingling up ” and be-
wildered gravitation scientists to determine. among themselves, as best
they may. In this respect, the present authors hazards deviating, some-
what, from the old grooves.
“ Nature as we find her now before us,” is the aim and
purport of this our philosophy to investigate and determine! Not what
she has once been, or might have been. The former is a legitimate and
fruit-bearing subject for our consideration ; not so the latter ; a theme on
which we may conjecture and muse, but not likely to know anything about.
Probably it be, that, this astute “ knack”—on the part of practisers
of ancient philosophic secret art—to mingle up the knowable with the
ostensibly unknowable , has been adroitly resorted to as presenting a ser-
viceable barrier against encroachment and innovation on the part of
uninitiated inquisitiveness ? That, most of all things, by oracular science
dreaded ! . . . .
Anyway, since gravitation did not , after all, contrive developing
creation , —as by Laplace and hosts of other modem mystics, amusingly
enough, believed ; —we might list in silence to the grotesque notions
propagated by these philosophic master-minds, if it were not for the great
mischief wrought by their erroneous and puny theories ; erected—as these
are—out of pure chimera and hotch-potch determinations.
Our scholastic savans seems to know a little, but not enough ! yet,
withal, more than what prove to be good for themselves. For everywhere
we hear the schoolmen bewail and lament. h i


The “veil” which so screens Nature’s “mysteries” from their eyes, is
one which doctrinally pledged learned persists in covering up their own
mental vision with, and thereby obscuring the sensual; distorting its
instructions....
It will not be difficult at this stage to perceive, that if attraction and
repulsion have really an existence in the scheme of things celestial , such
manifestations are most certainly not of that really primordially causal
order such as by materialistic science of the day believed ; but could
merely, and at best, prevail in the form as of secondarily generated
characters!...
It would, also, now fully appear that in speculating with pure effect
and sequence, and, of a character such as exhibited upon all kinds of
matter, more or less, subjected—in states of confinement within volumed
masses—to twofold hurling motions, and shown in the mode and manner
of “strain” during sufferance of alternate contraction and expansion,
Sir Isaac Newton thought, and, doubtless, seriously believed he had dis-
covered the causes which effected and produced these very manifes-
tations themselves ? these identical phenomena following upon translation
of all matter, namely ; laboring, evidently, under the conviction that
these transmitted properties were imparted to the substances enabling them
so to exhibit and exercise same ! We have heard him say that, “I am
induced by many reasons to suspect that they” (phenomena) “may all
depend upon certain forces by which the particles of bodies, are either
mutually impelled towards each other, and cohere in regular figures, or
are repelled and recede from each other &c. Newton next laid down a
“ Law,” as we are aware, and which law, in the opinion of the
cult, now became the “ force of gravitation” ; and, in the philo-
sophy of which it were henceforth to appear in the form of
“ weight”—exercising its influence upon other substance of weight—and
decreasing in power with increase of intervening distance ? Hence we
perceive that these varied manifestations, as above alluded to, following
upon all displaced matter suffering under the influence—and, in condition
capable of displaying —such affection, was by Newton conjectured to embrace
and contain the force itself. To his mind the energy was lodged with the
substances themselves, and consisted in their property of weight, and
exerted in proportion to mass and distance.
On account of their wonderful elastic properties, the gaseous atomic
elements—when subjected to hurling motions—assume—in common with
all other elastic and pliable substances—an alternate state of contraction
and expansion taking the form as of strain, and indicating affection and
sympathy with other liberated ingredients likewise swayed ; and it is this
very affection and sympathy which culminate in such like abstruse pheno-
mena as, for example, Terrestrial Magnetism and Electricity, Chemical
Affinity, Cohesion, Adhesion, &c.
Such like mundanely manifested tokens of exterior influence and sway
upon the particles adjoining the surface of the globe we live on—and as ex-
hibited upon the Atmospheres, Ocean’s, Tides, &c., —Newton and subsequent
philosophers mistook for causal forces with which all matter was indued ;
enabling ingredients of attracting and repelling each other in virtue of such
inherent efficacy, namely, and in conformity to the “ Law” or in the mode


therein alluded to ! and—as we have heard it stated —purporting thus to
render comprehensible the cause direct of local planetary movement and
celestial motion generally !!... These were, obviously, Newton’s Ideas.
Says, Amedee Guillemin in his work ‘ The Heavens.’ “ If, then, the
Earth exercises its action on bodies situate at whatever distances in space,
it ought to act on the Moon, and its action should be precisely equal to
that which we have just calculated. Such is the question which the
genius of Newton put to him, and which he solved, when he showed that
the Moon, in its circular orbit, falls towards our Earth that very quantity
in a second. It is this incessant fall, combined with the centrifugal move-
ment, which if left to itself, would impel the Moon into space, which pro-
duces the elliptical movement of our satellite in her orbit.
Such is the bold generalisation which served as a point of departure
to the great geometer whom we have just named.
He went farther ; he penetrated more profoundly into the secrets of
the sublime mechanism which rule the celestial bodies. He extended to
all the bodies of our Solar System this law, which is sometimes called
«the law of attraction,” but more correctly, “ the law of gravitation.”
And here we have landed the reader amid the“ mysteries” comprising
anciently descended (and modernly applauded) philosophic Secret Art.
Says, the above quoted author, “ at a distance sixty times as great as
the radius of the Earth, the Moon falls the one-twentieth part of an inch
towards our Earth in a second ?” and, he adds : “ It is this incessant fall ,
combined with the centrifugal movement ? which, if left to itself, would
impel the Moon into space ? which produce the elliptical movement of our
satellite in her orbit ? ”
Now, unless our readers should prove exceedingly much prejudiced, it
should be at once conceded that the renderings—advanced by the present
authors—comes to the rescue here ; for, verily, the whole account, given by
Guillemin, stands abjectedly unintelligible. Evidently, this author proves
himself to furnish us with one other instance of mind—taking for granted
to be correct and true—things, surpassing its understanding.
From the foregoing quotation the reader will observe that, in not
comprehending the import of a mobile system, and, in not drawing to
account the great light which this portentous discovery confers upon the
path of philosophy,—and indeed, we may say upon the destinies, morally and
socially, of the whole human race ; —philosophers continue, even in this our
day, as we see, in the mad attempt endeavouring, regardless of all ascer-
tainments, to explain the cause of Lunar motion about the Earth in that
barbarous mode witnessed ? That a faulty reading should first find ingress,
—one can well understand. Long time has elapsed since the important dis-
covery, however ! Yet, we hear our modern Authorities deeply absorbed in
admiration of mere time-serving abnormal Theory.
Not being in the secret of the lofty mechanism pervading the heavenly
structures, nor yet possessed of Force Proper wherewith legitimately to refer
to for explanation of celestial motion, the Moon, we observe, is made to
fall through “ empty space ” towards the earth at the rate of one-twentieth
part of an inch in a second / . and, we are gravely told, “it is
this incessant fall, combined with the centrifugal movement, which produce


the elliptical movement of our satellite in her orbit! . . . . Thus
goes the account of our philosophers’ celestial “ Perpetual Motion ”
Mechanism.
Now, we seriously enquire, what are we to think of all these? We
have heard of Sir John Herschel suspecting his audience of holding an
amount of incredulity ? and well might he indeed remark, “ that I dare
say, before I have done, some of my hearers will almost think me mad, or
intending to palm on them a string of rhodomontades, like some of the
mythical stories of the Hindus,” for truly, it is a most erratic philosophy,
this, and one unconscious of its destination.
In the circulation of the Terro-Lunar Medium about an axis,—the
Moon following along with the medium and consequently circulating about
the Earth situate near that common media-axis of revolution, — being thus
noted to circulate about the earth ; the moon, we are now told, is possessed
of a “ centrifugal movement! ” enabling her, we take it, to hurl herself
away from the earth ; and in this adroit mode, succeed in counteracting
the one-twentieth part of an inch fall in a second towards the earth ! all
of which, we have been told, “ produce the elliptical movement of our
satellite in her orbit !” the outcome of which amounts to this, that, as the
moon is found to move, so moves it ; and, namely, that its movement
produces its movement! a highly philosophical way of cutting the
gordian knot ? No one, but, adepts in the secret Art, could well do it.
In this superficial manner our scholastic learned skips over difficul-
ties ; resting contented believing that solution of great problems have been
attained; whilst, all the while, not a semblance of real knowledge obtain.
It would seem, that, from some sort of “ law ” promulgated by
Galileo, purporting to give the rate of acceleration of “ falling bodies,”
Newton set to speculating, for object of associating same with his formed
scheme of celestially “ falling bodiesafter much closet labor and
reckonings, Sir Isaac Newton succeeded, at length, in finding an arithme-
tical set of figures agreeing with the “ law ” of Galileo anent falling ter-
restrial bodies from certain heights and onto the ground; and, as accelerat-
ing continually in their motions. Now, as far as we are able to descry, it
would appear that, in this assimilation of reckoning , on the part of Newton,
in this anxiously sought for coincidence —by subsequent credulous
scientists being thought and accepted to imply an important ])hysical
discovery —the fortunes of the gravitation system, and the fame of its
founder, would seem to be chiefly resting. The forces of our mathema-
tacians’ Celestial Mechanics consisting wholly of “ Laws of Arithmetic,”
“ Laws of Geometry,” Use and Force of “ Algebraic Signs,” Figures, and so
forth ! These are the dazzling and overawing elements wherewith our
modern mystics sways and governs “ the sublime mechanism which rule
the celestial bodies ,” as we have been told Newton “ penetrated more pro-
foundly into the secrets of.” Thus we behold the artifice ; built up, step
by step, on purely gratuitous and assumed knowledge. In the estimation
of this extraordinary philosophy—so prematurely and baselessly con-
structed —the visibly Heavenly Objects represent so many perpetually
“falling bodies.”


And the reader is at length in the real secret of that Theme having so
aroused the profoundest intellectual veneration and admiration of the
greatest Minds and Thinkers of Modern Age ; the subject of the so-called
Universal Gravitation, namely : a topic, till now, having at no time by
either propounder or disciple been understood, or— previous to knowledge
of a mobile solar system obtaining—but so much as having remained
possible of rational and intelligible comprehension in any mode or way :
This phenomenon alone becoming capable of explaining that abstruse subject.
Thus it will be seen, that even the tallest minds amongst us, —trained
and tutored in the best schools, they be, —are yet apt to admire and applaud
that which they do not themselves comprehend. The whole theme is but
so much more standing proof of the great mistake committed in so
pledging the mind to believe to be true and infallible, that, which has really
at no time been shown in a condition fit and proper to be safely re-
lied upon.
The mischief becoming the greater, since credulity, thus, erects a barrier
against advance of such better scientific knowledge destined to lead to further
light perfecting our acquaintance to surrounding physical nature.
Despite their life-long pursuit in search of light, Newton, Humboldt,
and other well-known students of Mother-Nature, have, in their last
moments, been obliged to candidly admit that they understood little or
nothing of Secrets and Pathways, after all ! And the dis-
appointment and defeat in this respect—on the part of these great
thinkers on Nature—could only be ascribable to the fact of these men, one
and all, taking unconditionally for granted the extraordinary versions ren-
dered of Nature by Ancient Explorers ; and, in unreservedly accepting the
bases proffered by primitive and unversed exponents for to be of so truthful
and reliable a character as to exclude all thought of doubt: an example
of which we drew the reader’s attention to at the outset of our treatise, and
instanced, very forcibly, in the case of the great J. S. Mill. Himself, a
perfect modern exemplification of this fatal mistake.
In imitating, and, in looking towards the ancients for cues, clues and
bases for knowledge—in persistently continuing so to do—the Modems, we
think, make themselves rather small, and, thereby admitting of making no
advance improving upon the knowledge transmitted to them. As did the
Ancients, so do the Moderns : viz. continuing to ignore the prevalence of a
Great Universal Motive Energy in Creation.
In view of Nature and Nature's truths, at least, —to confidently
rely upon same —we must needs be possessed of stauncher bases for our
reasoning faculties than those which a mere mathematical “ Gravitation
System” of Philosophy supply us with, or is itself possessed of ; it severs, to
wit, the sublime Governing Power from its Creation; and is, therefore, an
unserviceable and nugatory system, unworthy the name of “Science.”
Such, doubtless, the intelligent reader now perceives to be among the things
quite certain and correct.
Since it being on record, that once upon a time “ Alphonso, King of
Castile, was so puzzled by the intricacies and anomalies of the Ptolemaic
system, that he gave vent to the remark, that if he had been consulted at
the time of the creation of the universe he would have managed things far


better and much more simple” ; so, again—from the utterings to judge
issuing forth from our modern scientists taking the gravitation system for
it—theoretical science, of our own day, proves itself to be left in much the
same plight and perplexing state as of yore ; and such too, notwithstanding
all triumphant boast to the contrary coming from some other quarters, and,
from some of the more credulous disciples of the science ; from persons,
whom would fain make us believe that knowledge of a precise character
obtain in our day, and such as of which the ancients knew not.
But, the “ Fortnightly Review” reports Professor Tyndal to have
said that: “If asked whether science has solved or is likely in our day to
solve the problem of the universe, I must shake my head in doubt.
Behind and above and around us the real mystery of the universe lies un-
solved, and, as far as we are concerned is incapable of solution....”
If we now exclude from consideration such subjects, as “ development of
Creation,” the question of the mysteries of animate Life in the scheme of
things, with its Origin, Purport and Intent, the question of Soul, Destiny of
Man and his Future Life, &c., &c., and such as with which all these men
confusedly mingle up the theme of Construction, Mechanism and, in short,
Physical Nature's Mysteries —if we now but leave such unknowable things
aside and separate—then, we say, in the above recounted remarks by
Tyndal, we find the most outspoken language freely admitting of, and
assuring us, that mere gravitation science proves itself inadequate and
incapable of solving the great problem of the construction, mechanism and
general economy pervading physical nature. Because of the founder of
the system not going far enough enabling him to trace previous source of
Force, and—from being misled by the transparent property of the stamina
of all physical nature, the gaseous bodies, namely—that philosopher did
not fathom the marvellous yet simple Principle of mechanism pervading the
celestial structures.
Things which we fail in comprehending seems mysterious to us. Any
intensely intricate piece of mechanism—even though constructed from out
of solid material—appears mysterious and baffling to the unversed mind ;
and must needs be more so where nothing substantial intervene to guide the
eye between the parts ; as is the case in the instances of the Majestic and
Divinely Designed Celestial Mechanical Contrivances of Wide Nature.
We should learn to properly understand, and—always recollect—that
a vast difference exists between mere discrimination of principles pervading
among a once established order of things ; and, the creation of these things;
with the unsearchable or undefinable power having once adjusted and
established such order of things! Your gravity scientists however—in
confounding, and in confusedly mingling up the one with the other—would
fain make you believe that no such difference existed, and that the one was
simply synonymous with the other.
Nor should it be overlooked, that in these present expositions the
reader merely beholds a slight extension , so to say, in our knowledge to the
economy obtaining abroad : a step in advance of the Newtonian gravitation
conception and view, namely : that scientific concept and precept proving
inutile ; and such on account of its architect having been so circumstanced
as to be obliged resorting to such kind of Motive Forces as were of his own


invention : and, moreover—for at all to make himself understood under the
hapless circumstances, and render his system acceptable—thought it a
necessary thing to indicate, to science pursuers, what these forces consisted
of; and, so that they could see for themselves, that they were really of some
tangible and visibly substantial character ; such as of visible particles of
matter with their adjunct of “ weightiness,” namely.
It will be understood, then, that whilst the Newtonian Forces were
such as of the kinds conjured forth by the ingenuity of their Inventor, and
in their character wholly such as would emanate with human concept and
thought; the Force, pointed to by the present authors, and as referred to
for explanation of surrounding physical phenomena, is, on the contrary—
in its universality of kind—of a character such as could emanate from only
Divine Source of All Power ; of that order, subjecting universes to perpetual
advancement in the vast firmament! a task, performed in the most wonder-
ful of order, regularity and precision, we must never forget; and one,
which your “ falling bodies,” “ weight of matter force,” “ attraction and
repulsion forces,” —and the rest of the paraphernalia attached to this modern
system of philosophism—is abjectedly incapable of accounting for.
A translatory system being among the things unknown, and, probably,
wholly unsuspected by the Propounder of the philosophy in vogue ; whom,
we are told, resorted to such like terrestrially manifested occurrence as
falling apples from trees on to the ground ; and from thence conceived an
attractive force as being lodged within the earth's centre drawing the apples
down to the ground; and thinking it a physical discovery, propounded,
therefrom, a tmiversal gravitation system, where weight of matter now became
as (or represented) the great motive energy pervading physical nature at
large ;as we have seen and heard. Thus goes that philosophic story.
And, as long as the reader can be made to believe in it, the story is a true
one, but no further. It was a primitive account, this !—for its time—the best
of acquaintance to Nature. A first account and early rendering of difficult
things, is sure to be erroneous, or more or less defective.
Unable to explain to his mind the simple reasons why of the fall of
an apple from a tree on to the ground, Newton, in the circumstance, saw a
force at work emanating from the centre of weight of the earth, and exerting
its influence upon the apple bringing it down to the ground : and super-
ficiality and superstition, generally, endorsed it. Credulity is always ready
to affirm and grant; it being easiest.
Although it might, at any time, prove a somewhat difficult thing to
succeed in making, an even inexperienced child, believe that an object slung
at it by another and unseen person, had been attracted towards it by some
power inherent in its body! yet, Newton, and other Philosophers, found
no difficulty believing that the earth attracted the “ falling apples” by dint
of some imaginary power lodged in its centre.
Evidently enough, up to his time, particles of matter—such as in the
form of Steam, terrestrial Vapours, Clouds, Balloons, &c. —were not
known or observed to ascend into the air, or move away from the myste-
riously terrestrial centralised power ? All things, indiscriminately, descended
at Newton’s time, and were always attracted to the earth by dint of this
said mysterious force lodged in' its centre.... No doubt, if this


philosopher had witnessed the ascension of a balloon, or, ever had ventured
forth far enough from his closet applications to witness vapours ascending,
he would have told us that such untoward phenomena were due to “ repul-
sion,” to some counteracting and mysterious repelling energy, also lodged
with the earth and with matter in general ; and which would explain it !
For, the reader must know, the system of Philosophism rampant at our
Time and Day “ knows,” and, “ knows not,” at one and the same time ;it
being a most convenient circumstance this; and although equivocal,
exceedingly serviceable.
In view of replying to the several subjects contained within these
quotations with which, from the outset, the authors thought proper to open
up their wide Theme, they might readily have advanced additional testimony
of character equally as striking and cogent as the limited few above re-
counted ; and, going towards showing, namely, that in the opinion of various
—and well-known pledged-^ authorities it fully appears, that beyond pur-
porting to render (presumably) a feasible explanation (one, however, of a
mere outwardly and apparitional kind) of some hitherto occult and un-
accountable manifestations of merest terrestrial association, the system of
knowledge extant, explains absolutely nought respecting majestic Nature
Abroad. That system, containing no knowledge either as regards Con-
struction,! ;Meclianism, Force-Source, Force-Evolution, or Economy in
general, of the perceptible Physical Universe.
Indoctrinated Physicists informs us of the fact, themselves ; and dis-
tinctly shows and tells us, that nothing better or superior is known now-a-
days, respecting these named things, than were either known at the time of
Alphonso, king of Castile, or, at the still more remote and earlier stages
of scientific investigation with its dawn of speculation. Such, in essence
and sum total, is indeed told you everywhere.
We have heard Compte assure us, “that the elements of this
system ” (the solar) “ are certainly not disposed in the most advantageous
manner, and that science permits us easily to conceive a happier arrange-
ment...” The gravitation Science, mark, it is, which affords all these !...
The Arrangement and Principle of distribution of the Planets, does
not come up to the mark of Conception lodged with the Great
Intellects of the Gravitation School of Philosophers: those great
Geometers and Mathematicians, namely!... Similar to Alphonso, all
these folks could do better and greater things, if but consulted?...
That is to say, always provided you making your mind up believing it.
For, otherwise, none of these men could well be expected being able
doing these things.
In would appear that, among other ancient astronomers, Pythagoras,
for one, knew very near as much as do the Moderns—respecting the correct
principle of planetary Movement and Location ;—and that philosopher
understood and taught the correct complex motions of the Orbs within the
system ; and such as at our day further confirmed.
The difference being this, that, whilst nought—in the light of causa-
tion—appears to have formerly obtained deserving serious consideration ;
in indicating something, ostensibly, plausible to the understanding and to
the status of scientific conception prevailing at the time, the Gravitation


Theory supplied the astronomical cult with something, which at all events,
were preferable to the harrassing darkness and blank heretofore pervading
the science ; and which, it was thought, should give to the speculative
branch of it the appearance of precision ; and, lie the foundation to future
accurate knowledge.
In view of this, the Propounder of the theory next resorted to the
science of Geometry for further assistance ; and the system of curves
known as “ Conic Sections” were thought capable of conferring new and
additional light demonstrating, especially, the orbit pathways or forms of
orbit motions pursued by a class of heretofore unintelligible celestial objects
and of occasional curiosity and wonderment to observers ; the so-called
Comets, namely ; and, so that it should seem as if dimension of Orbit
Pathways, Situations, Distances, &c., in the scheme of things of these
wandering and wonder-awakening objects, were among acquirable and pre-
dicable things. The subject of the nature of the comets, remaining as
yet in the domain of the incomprehensible, the impenetrable ; it was
admitted.*
Be it at this stage observed, that notwithstanding subsequent ascer-
tainments—by the celebrated J. L. Lagrange—to the direct effect of the
planetary orbits undergoing a perpetual state of change , gravitation philo-
sophism—having of recent ages swayed, and, led the human mind astray
—disliking to part with its once embraced notions and theories, has
pertinaciously clung to the belief, and persisted in regarding the orbit path-
ways of the heavenly orbs, as if being of so strictly stable and permanent
a character as to enable physicists to assimilate and compare orbit motions
of same with their grotesque system of curves, ingeniously contrived upon
paper ; so as to lie claim to being able of determining cometary indi-
viduality and appearance, namely !... credulously believing that, as a comet
moves once, so, in that manner, will it continue to move.... Their “ Conic
Sections” tells them so, and determines the question—our indoctrinated
theorisers maintain?
For, upon the theory submitted by Newton, and to the effect namely,
of the celestial globes being capable of moving one another by dint of
their weights—and as mass to mass opposed and in proportion to inter-
vening distances —the temptation for entertaining such belief took so firm
a hold upon the minds of masters and pupils alike, that we hear of the
science persistently engaging itself in the pursuit of this will-o’-the-wisp;
despite all lessons of discovery and ascertainment to the contrary effect.
Ascertain we, then, how it comes to pass, that the efforts of astro-
nomers—engaging themselves discriminating between and attempting
distinguishing cometary individuality—prove a fruitless and futile one;
* In his Lecture on Comets, Sir John Herschel states : “The fact is, that,
though much is certainly known about comets, there is a great deal more about which
our theories are quite at fault; and, in short, that it is a subject rather calculated to
show us the extent of our ignorance than to make us vain of our knowledge, and to
cause us to exclaim with Hamlet, ‘ There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
than are dreamt of in our philosophy.’” "And to which the authors adds, that, what-
ever is (little or much) “ certainly known about comets,” are such things as have been
gathered from merest observation, wholly .and solely. In that light only, some things
are known ; but nothing is understood.


depending upon assimilation and comparison of geometrical curves for
such distinguishment and discrimination, namely ; and such as these men
are found to do.
In intercepting and passing each other on their orbital course about
the solar focus— the interior mediums (moving in diminished orbits) achieve
or complete orbit motions sooner than the exterior mediums (since being
further removed from the common focus, moving in enlarged or more
extended orbits,) —these several planetary mediums which accommodate the
adjoining planets,—and, as upon the boundaries (edgewise) of each the
cometary masses move—continually and repeatedly trespass upon each
others precincts , to a more or less extent, during performance of orbits
about their mutual focus ; and whereby that certain conflict arise resulting
in such disturbances and deviations setting in between each affected and in-
volved medium, individually, (reflected back upon the visible orbs within) as
indicated by the globes deviating from their regular and otherwise uniform
course ; and, the remarkable sequence of which become what in astronomy
is understood by the term of “ Perturbation ! ” It is by dint of such
repeated conflict of their respective media-masses, that the globes—involved
and located within each— deviate from such kind of orbit curve or pathway
as—contingent upon each one moving on undisturbed and unaffected—
would otherwise have been pursued and described.
Adjacent mediums affects each others contour the more, during con-
flicts ; and, more distant ones, disturbs each other less.
From hence occur one other and additional reason why of these “dis-
turbances” continually taking place in the planetary orbit motions, such as
by Joseph Luis de Lagrange ascertained....
This, we repeat, is one of the true and correct causes and grounds, ac-
counting for the planetary orbits undergoing a perpetual state of change :
and not because of the globes, among themselves, being capable of mutually
attracting and repelling each other ; as upon the trite and idle theory in
vogue being thought and taught. Such conclusion, to arrive at—one might
imagine—to characterise infantile, rather, than astute philosophic minds.
That the folly and hollowness of the whole fabric—forming these
attraction and repulsion speculations—begins, by slow degrees, to tell even
among committed science itself, in its ensconced strongholds, is sufficiently
evinced in the following forwarded subject headed—“ Planets as Non-Dis-
turbers !—. ... At a recent meeting of the astronomical section of the
Minnesota Historical Society, Mr. S. J. Corrigan read a sensible paper
showing that the near approach of several of the great planets to the sun
and earth, cannot produce any unusual disturbance. The principal law is
that all radiant forces diminish in intensity as the square of the distances
through which they are exerted increases, and vice versa.* When Jupiter
* Here the reader once more apprises himself of the credulous mode in which
men take for granted, as being religiously truthful, the law laid down by Newton ; and,
as being founded upon misconstruction and chimera. It need hardly be necessary to
state, therefore, that all this talk about “ radiant forces ” and their “ laws,” amounts
but to so much idle cloister confabulation. Gravitation science never possessed any
other forces than such as existed in the fertile imagination of its adherents. At no
time did that system of philosophy demonstrate Force Proper.


is in perihelion, once in twelve years, and in conjunction with the earth, he
is 23,000,000 of miles nearer to the sun and to us than when he is at his
average distance. Saturn once in nearly thirty years, is, under similar
circumstances, 50,000,000 of miles nearer than his average distance. These
approaches may seem great enough to produce considerable effects, but, they
are in both cases only one-twentieth part of the average distances of these
planets.
The intensity of Jupiter’s disturbing action when he is 13,000,000 of
miles nearer to us will be found by the above law to be only one-tenth
greater than the average force that he exerts, and it is only this increase
that can produce disturbance ; the average force cannot, as it is constant.
Whether an increase of only 10 per cent, will affect the earth depends
upon the intensity of Jupiter’s average force.* But it can be shown that
his whole force is inappreciable. Once in each year the earth approaches
to and recedes from Jupiter by about 185,000,000 of miles, or about eight
times the distance by which Jupiter approaches us, at its perihelion, once
in twelve years. Therefore, according to the law above given, we should
have disturbances due to Jupiter, every year, sixty-four times as great as
those which seem to occur every twelve years and are attributed to that
planet. . . .”
The whole Theory, being simply, a sad mistake ; as the reader will have
perceived : it follows that, like elsewhere; so, also, in the instance of Jupiter;
that Orb merely happens to appear in that place simultaneous with certain
periodical disturbances, caused by exterior agency, and conveyed by the instru-
mentality of the stamen of physical nature—the diffused gaseous elements,
namely ; —but the fact of that Globe being seen, there and then— in that
place—leads superficial observers to imagine, that the noted disturbances
are caused by its nearer situation ? And this is the woeful way our savans
have got it, all along the lines.
Nevertheless, it will be observed, that Mr. S. J. Corrigan is on the
track, unmasking anciently “descended” and modernly “practiced” philo-
sophic Secret Art, for us !... And we must hail and admire that spirit of
his !... For, but Few are They Whom durst stand up, dauntless and fear-
less, pointing out the errors and fallacies of our largely patronised and
influential philosophic Teachers.
It is a long, long story, Mr. Corrigan ; rely on it :—and there is an
abundance of tricks hid elsewhere. But although, presumably, the present
Authors seems to be in possession of them all; it is, for all that, quite a de-
lightful relief—and a break in the monotony of things—to descry kindred
spirits elsewhere, and, also on the scent.
And, we have heard the Publisher of Mr. S. J. Corrigan’s valuable
exposition, speak of same, as being a “ sensible paper.”
* The planet Jupiter, in common with the other planets, being observed to
advance and recede alternately to and fro the sun and the earth, —and such, of course,
by dint of force exterior to, and, exerted upon the globe itself; —but, from the fore-
going it will be seen, that Jupiter’s coming and going, to and fro, constitute —in the
estimation of our book-learned philosophers—“the force” itself! And here we
have additional examplification of our Mathematicians’ ideas of Force and its Con-
sistency P... Nothing could be more crude and undigested.


But for to revert to our subject afresh, we should say, that, since from
the causes described (the orbit pathways of celestial orbs being more or less
of a fluctuating nature) it follows that the application of a certain system
of curves—drawn upon papers, and wherewith our astronomers resort,
attempting to demonstrate the individuality and pretend to recognise
comets, namely—must needs prove futile, unreliable and wholly unservice-
able : because, of a now evident made possibility of the same comet
moving with variable and distinct curves of motion whenever detected !
and, because, of a now , almost , evident made impossibility for any comet
to move with invariable and identical curves of motion whenever observed.
For, although, curves— once draivn on paper —do, in form, remain the
same ; such is yet no reason, whatever, why the orbs—moving, as they do, in
a transparent and attenuated gaseous medium, continually subjected to en-
croachment, fluctuation and disturbance—should also retain a once traced
or ascertained curve of motion : such notion is as absurd as it is well
possible for anything to be. We may safely rely on it, that the heavenly
orbs do not obey our “conic sections,” or paper curves ; but move indepen-
dent of all that trammel, and just according to surrounding circumstances.
In case of cometary- masses, such deviation and fluctuation become the
greater ; because, on account of their moving on the very outskirts and
borders of their respective primary mediums ; and in those places or
localities where disturbances first occur , and accordingly, intensify them-
selves.
In his Work—“ Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects”—Sir John
Herschel, in speaking to the subject of Comets, states : “ When we look
through Nature and observe the manifest indications of design which every
point of it exhibits, it would be very presumptuous in us to assert that
comets are of no use, and serve no purpose in our system. Hitherto, how-
ever, no one has been able to assign any single point in which we should be
a bit better or worse off, materially speaking, if there was no such thing as
comets. Persons, even thinking persons, have busied themselves with
conjectures : such as that they may serve for fuel for the sun (into which,
however, they never fall) ” Now seeing that Sir Richard
Phillips, in his “ Million of Facts,” informs us that, Sir Isaac Newton, him-
self, “ to the last, taught that Comets were fuel to the Sun,” our knighted
cognoscenti would thus seem to rail at one another, upon this their favorite
field of action. Newton was a “ thinking person.”
We opine, that our astronomers are not worse off, “materially
speaking,” for the presence of comets in the scheme of things ? For, these
intermittent and wonder-awakening Visitors, affords no despicable adjuncts,
working the modernised Oracle. If always visible on the heavens, these
Objects would remain as unnoticed by the heedless multitude as are the
Stars, Clouds, Rainbows, or anything else presented frequently to the
gaze. Sir R. Phillips further states that, “ Newton made no observa-
tions,” but “ derived all that he used from Flamstead.”
Respecting the subject of comets, —and of which phenomena, in the
scheme of things, nothing among astronomers is understood ; —our readers
have now learned, that these border mediums (in concentrating their energy)
express that further extension of locally-generated centrifugal force of their


relative primary media-masses ; and which, again, become tantamount to,
and exhibitive, of termination of that incessantly inward arriving energy,
accruing from the whole mass together being subject to continued displace-
ment. In first seeking in towards the axis, that energy expends itself
going outward, acting anew upon the material ingredients —of whatever
be their consistency, visible or invisible, —making same perpetually revolve
about the axis in orbit motions ; and which constitute what is generally
conceived by the term “centrifugal force” : the consistency of which how-
ever, is, naught more nor less, than the substantial sign and token of ex-
penditure of previously exerted Motive Energy, and such as expresses
itself effecting the translatory movements of Mediums.
Hence it will be seen, that although according to Herschel “ no one
has hitherto been able to assign any single point in which we should be a
bit better or worse off, materially speaking, &c.,” some points have now
been assigned, and, the authors trusts, made so far intelligible to their
readers, as to show to their understanding the Portends of these Celestial
Objects; and, their Signification in the Scheme of Grand and Sublime Things
Abroad ; and that, in the light of expressed Results and Effects, they are as
much of indispensable Adjuncts of the Construction and Mechanism of
the Heavenly Structures, as is the existence of the Globe we live upon
for the necessities and requirements of Human Kind, or all other living
Creatures.
As we have before stated, so do we repeat once more and with confi-
dence, that wheresoever we look, in whatever direction we turn our mind’s
eye, Nature’s Manifestations, doings and actions, accord most harmoniously
with this our advanced views and expositions throughout. The limited
space at present at our command, precludes us however pursuing the various
subjects in anything like a detailed and circumstantial manner. But, we
should say, if such now prove to really represent the Mechanism and Con-
struction of the Universe —and proofs, as irrefragable as irresistible, do
point towards that end—it inevitably follows, that your Materialists—
relying upon the so-accepted and termed “ Nature’s Laws” for Bases of
Reasonings—along, also, with your gravitation-science Propagandists,
have, all akin, alas, reckoned without their host, as the saying goes ; and in
wrecking their fortunes together, become hopelessly defunct. From a purely
and strictly scientific point of view, such, at least, would now appear to be
the case.
Some people might now be found, whom, in their chagrin at finding
themselves victimised by a hollow science, would fain argue that “ our kind,
of scientific principles are of one, as yet, unknown and unappreciable order ;
requiring endorsement by our savans in council assembled,” and so forth.
But it should be noted, that nought less than such fresh and heretofore
unknown Bases of Reasonings coming to the front, would suffice pointing
out our errors, and show us that we were on the wrong track altogether!
... In thus early speaking, the authors merely anticipate some cer-
tain decision which your Sages, In Council Assembled, are sure to
proclaim to the world at large some day or other, when convenient to
themselves....


And now that we have alighted among our self-elected philosophic
Tutors, ascertain we now—by way of a break in the monotony of things—how
and in what manner our Teachers handle their own subjects, and interpret
such kind of phenomena as are of a more direct determinable character, and
as being altogether removed from that more difficult erudition and study
whereupon Science of Generalisation depends.
Under the heading “ The Sun,” Sir John Herschel, in his “ Familiar
Lectures on Scientific Subjects,” speaks of the Moon, saying : “ Such a
frost exists, no doubt, over the dark half of the moon, which has no
atmosphere, neither air nor vapour,* and in all probability quite as violent
an extreme of heat, a boiling temperature at least, over the bright half; so
that we may pretty well make up our minds as to that half of the moon
at least which we see, being uninhabited Now this will be found to
serve us a twofold purpose : it is a fair sample of that erudition distin-
guishing our modern book-learned savans. Nine hundred and ninety-nine
persons out of every thousand, would take for granted that the above was
correct text, and never think of inquiring into its substance : it coming
from the Seat of Learning. Woe, however, be to it, when subjected to
analysis.
Just preceding the above extracted quotation, Herschel informs us
that : “ Professor Tyndall has quite recently shown that it is entirely to
the moisture existing in the air that our atmosphere owes its power of
confining , and cherishing as it were the heat which is always endeavouring
to radiate away from the earth’s surface into space?"] Now if such be
the case in our sphere, it seems remarkably strange, on the part of
Sir John Herschel, to arrive at the conclusion that “ in all probability quite
as violent an extreme of heat, a boiling temperature at least exists over
the bright half of the moon, which has no atmosphere, neither air
nor vapour ,” according to this authority?... If the phenomena of
“ heat” depends upon air with its moisture for display and retention, how
can we, then, understand heat to exist on the lunar globe “ which has no
atmosphere, neither air nor vapour ?” J
Now, senseless and devoid of knowledge, as this is, it is nevertheless
very mild, in comparison to other meaningless things attached to the same
subject and by Herschel rendered.
Whilst every tyro in astronomy is well aware that the moon invariably
present the same hemisphere to the earth—or, more correctly, towards the
axis region of the Terro-Lunar Vortex; — from the language and expositions
of phenomena to judge, it would seem, however, as if Sir John Herschel
was really not himself aware of such being the fact ; shocking as this
sounds. For, according to his version and description of things, instead
of having one side always exhibited towards the earth; the moon, on the
* And here, our readers will observe, how that orb is made out to be moving
in a vacuum!...
f In another and forthcoming Edition, the authors further substantiate the
correctness of Professor Tyndall’s determinations to the said effect.
J And from whence we extract the paradoxical information, that at the same
time as the moon is made out to more in a vacuum, it comes to pass of the moon
not moving in a racuum after all ? Sometimes it does, and sometimes it does not:
according as it suits our philosophers.


contrary, continually displays one of its hemispheres towards the sun.
If his utterances implies anything at all, it certainly means that, and
nothing less. For, he distinctly tells us that, “such a frost exists, no
doubt, over the dark half,"... (opposite the sun!) “and in all probability
quite as violent an extreme of heat, a boiling temperature at least, over
the bright half"... (towards the sun?) “so that we may pretty well
make up. our minds as to that half of the moon at least which we see,
being uninhabited.”... * And this, *we are to believe, despite the obvious
fact of the moon, during its revolutions about the earth, receiving the
sun’s heat and light (alternately in localities) everytvhere whilst so
revolving ? Herschel believed, evidently, that the half of the moon,
unseen by us, was always in darkness and cold! and the one invariably
presented to us, being always lit up and hot.
When summed up, the reason of these blunderings seems—as usual—
to be the fruits of mingling up and confusing things. The fact of the
moon always exhibiting the same hemisphere to the earth, is here confounded
with its continually altered lit up surface localities in its revolution
about the earth: these—along with consequent relative variation of heat
and cold —proves itself too much for the faculties, not alone of the Author
in question, but for the entire scholastic Fraternity : or else, in duty bound-
fame and prestige in general being at stake, —some one or other, would,
betimes , have pointed out the damaging errors ; one should naturally think ?
Make we now here an amendment in the language, employed by Her-
schel, and say, that “such a frost exists, no doubt, alternately and pro-
gressively over that part of the moon longest (at any one time) excluded
from the suns rays and light, . . . and, in all probability, quite as
violent an extreme of heat, a boiling temperature at least, over that part
of its surface the longest (at any one time) exposed to the sun’s rays ! ”
and then, we fancy, one extracts some sense out of the subject. But, pheno-
mena being misunderstood , deductions arrived at from contemplation of
such misinterpreted phenomena, are, in consequence, nil and worthless.
The question being with Herschel that, “of a probable suitableness for
human habitation in lunar regions,” the aspect of that question vastly
changes in our effecting the above amendment. The Moon receives an
atmosphere, then 1 ... .
Of such thoughtless and superficial investigation, scholastic learning
abound in all directions ; and such kind of woeful blunderings, distinguishes
our Mathematicians “ Mechanical Philosophy.”
On account of being similarly misconstrued, the subjects anent
Terrestrial Heat and Light—in their relationship to solar Transmitted
Rays—are, also, utterly misunderstood.
In due proportion as the solar rays are arrested , or intercepted , by
more or less of impenetrable substances , so Light and Heat accrue, and
manifests itself upon such substances ; away from these, neither Heat
nor Light exists.
* And wherefrom it will be clearly observed, that Herschel takes the position
of the earth to the moon, to he the position of the sun to the lunar globe!... and
thus confounds the latter with the former.


The above are specimens of that effeminate gravitation science extant.
That philosophy, namely, which its materially interested faculty would fain
make us believe to be of so sacred and religious a nature ; to be, aye, even
of a heaven-bom order! And thus armed, our philosophers venture
abroad, lecturing for illiterate and uninitiated audiences.
When now so very simple, and, comparatively speaking, trifling pro-
blems in astronomy, as these above discussed, are—by the language of an
accredited great authority (possessed of all the secret arts cultivated by the
brotherhood) —found and proven never to have been understood or solved,
what possible credit could well be attached, then, to the views and opinions of
these book-learned men elsewhere ; and upon fields more difficult to tread ?
Whatever can we think of the worth of a supposed mastered knowledge
in other directions ? .. it may be well worth our while to reflect and ask
ourselves these questions.
The whole structure consists of little else than such like idle and
effeminate arguments. The matter reads and sounds well: but very little
will stand the light of day, or the test of scrutinising inquiry.
Alas, for the world at large, expectantly and confidingly looking
towards the superior light supposed to be vested in, and emanate forth from
our pledged Astronomical Luminaries—solving momentous questions for
us? Verily, the credulity of mankind is something astounding.
Previous to submitting (in brief forms) some few of the more impor-
tant determinations arrived at and deduced from out of this our new path-
way of knowledge, and of a character such as may reasonably be thought
to interest the general reader the more—retaining for future forthcoming
publications such fuller accounts and more detailed description of themes
and subjects, generally, as may interest students of science and followers
of philosophy in general—it may, at this stage, be proper to once
again remind the reader of the fact, that, the procedure which has been
resorted to by the present authors—culminating in their having reached
hitherto unknown truths in the path of philosophy—has, to all intents
and purposes, been the mode by Sir Isaac Newton, himself, enjoined and
urged on ; that is to say, in so far, at least, as by his utterings we can
gather the subject having, by himself, been understood, or remained intelli-
gible to his mind, from his own standpoint of view and conception of
things.
If Newton had proven himself equal to the occasion, and had rose to
the conception, of the vast firmament comprising an illimitable ocean of
rarefied gasiform substances (atmospheres co-extensively diffused), and
being so divided and further sub-divided, in the endless, as to compose such
relative structures as with the present authors here traced and crudely de-
picted ;in such case then, and—if having been aware of solar progression—
a formula or proposition to the effect, that:—from directions of revolu-
tions, and from directions of rotative motions of celestial globes—con-
sidei'ed together —we shall learn to know the directions of force-flow or
evolution of energy pervading the several mediums wherein these orbs are
located :—such like proposition, then, would really have “ afforded light
to some truer method of philosophy” than that submitted by himself;


and, as being deduced from out of incomplete astronomical ascertainments,
in conjunction with mere imperfect and unmatured acquaintance to
mechanical method and principle. . .
Are we right, or are we wrong, then, in drawing the attention .of
seriously interested mankind to the flimsy and perverted manner in which
our spell-bound and misguided scholastic learned persists interpreting, and,
continue misconstruing, sublimely simple Nature throughout : despite all
present available great light-conferring data at their disposal? ... «
Evidently, no committed Disciple would ever dare to attempt correcting
these fearful errors.
Indoctrinated Mathematicians are lavish in their admiration of
exalted Mother-Nature, as read from their standpoint of view ! But, it
will not be difficult for our more discerning readers to descry, that—not-
withstanding all profuse poetic outbursts of our closet-speculators-
Nature proves herself, after all, infinitely more majestic, and loftier by
far, than ever did our train of gravitation philosophers conceive or
dream of.


CHAPTER VIII.
ABRIDGEMENTS and EXTRACTS from the GREAT VORTICES
DEMONSTRATION of NATURE ; with INFERENTIAL
EXEMPLIFICATIONS, ELUCIDATIONS, TESTIMONY,
&c., &c.
“ There is a certain principle of selfishness which pervades the minds of many pro-
fessed religionists, which leads them to conclude that, if they can but secure
their own personal salvation, they need give themselves no trouble about the
glory and extent of the kingdom of the Most High It forms but
a very slender evidence of their possessing any spark of Christianity at all, if
they wish to rest satisfied with the most vague and grovelling conceptions, and
if they do not ardently aspire after a more enlarged view of the attributes of
G-od, . ... We have often been astonished at the opinions of some of
those who move in a higher sphere of intelligence, who seem to consider it as
a matter of pure indifference whether or not Christians should attain to the
highest conception in power of the God whom they worship, and of his bound-
less dominions ; because they conceive that such views are not essentially con-
nected with salvation! But we would ask such persons how they come to
know that such views are not connected with salvation ! Though they may
not have been essential to the salvation of men in the dark ages that are past,
or to obscure tribes of people at present, who have no access to the proper
sources of information, yet since God, in the course of his providence, which
guides all human inventions and discoveries, has disclosed to us a far more
expansive view of the “ glory of his kingdom” than former ages could obtain,
for the purpose of illustrating the revelations of His word, who will dare to
assert that the man who has access, by his studious efforts, to contemplate this
wond’rous scene, and to display its grandeur to others, and yet wilfully shuts
his eyes on the Divine glory therein displayed, does not thereby hazard the
Divine displeasure ?”— Thomas Dick, L.L.D.
This system of science, then, points out to its readers, how, the diverse
and opposed directions of movements—orbital and rotative—of the heavenly
orbs, (in their locations within respective transparent and volumed mediums)
distinctly prove for us, that the movements, of any one media-mass at any
one time considered, is directly derived from its previous relative major
or primary media-mass ; and that, that the one sole, great, causal and
universally motive energy, transmits itself, in that manner , from one
vortices system to another throughout firmamental creation.
Likewise, also pointing out the momentous fact, that, as are the direc-
tions of rotations of all primary planets, so, also, are the directions of
orbit motions of their respective satellites. A fact, in itself, sufficient
to convince any rational being, that the several globes are patients to the
self-same one governing force displayed within, and swaying their relative
local mediums ; and, therefore, in this manner intimating to the human
mind distinctly enough, that, with an intelligent enquiry into the complex


media-combinations and their economy in general, lies hid the clues to com-
prehension and acquaintance respecting cause of the varied movements
exhibited by the globes, located within their respective mediums ; and such
as having heretofore puzzled all investigators explaining, and completely
defied and baffled all such kind of science as prove to rely chiefly upon
merest sensual vision, or ocular ascertainment, for light and clues towards
solution of such like profound questions as these of principle of mechanism
and construction of the Physical Universe.
Thus, for example ; satellites, adjacent to their primaries, completes
orbit motions, about same, sooner than others located more distant from the
primary ; and such, on account, of their being situate so much nearer their
common focus or local media-axis, and, consequently, having so much less
ground or space to travel over. But, in no instance do any such ad-
jacent satellites perform orbit motions about their respective primaries in
less time than that required for the primary to revolve about itself, or
rotate upon its axis.
As little as ever it could be found, that a satellite, or system of satel-
lites, revolves in a direction opposite to the direction of rotative movement
of the local primary planet ; as little, again, could it ever be found, that a
satellite—however nigh its primary—completes orbit motions about same
in less time than that required for the primary to revolve about itself.
Since the planets are to the sun just what the satellites are to the
planets, it follows, that the same equally apply to the primary planets them-
selves, in view of the sun.
Such being the fact, we accordingly arrive at that positive land of
knowledge, informing us that, so far from it being the globes themselves
either moving each other, or moving their surrounding mediums ; it proves,
on the contrary, to be the surrounding locally encompassed mediums
(intervening between and connecting each) which are instrumental in
conferring the diverse movements to the globes located within their bosoms.
And such, coming to pass by dint of that force-capacity (translatory
energy) transmitted to, and, pervading the mediums. Newton and
others, as we have seen, thought these forces were inherent in the matter,
and, as if having been imparted to same by Divine Omniscience once for
all; the prodigy now being interpreted as constituting “ Nature’s Law.”
But, whatever of force-capacities by ingredients being displayed, are wholly
owing to their constant subjection to variable strain consequent upon
continued displacement. From being constantly swayed, the ingredients
—composing these celestial mediums—display energy and power ; and
which consists in an incessant part-separation, and, restoration, of the
gaseous atoms, in their perpetual response to that alternate expansion
and contraction of the medium, and which accrue from subjection of the
masses to varying and fluctuating influences of hurling motions.
Accordingly, this system of science, exhibits to its readers, the mode
and manner in which the astronomical observant science proves for us (in
the way above recounted), that the Earth, in common with all other celestial
orbs, floats within its local minor ocean of transparent and gaseous
substance, and, follows along with same, on its orbital course about the
solar focus.


In contradistinction, and—in opposition to astronomical hypothetical
belief and teaching—thus pointing out, how the observant science, in the
manner described, distinctly and positively shows us, that the Earth,
after all, does not either “go through,” nor yet travel or fall through
empty “ space,” as falaciously believed, and persistently taught, in modern
schools of anciently descended and preserved erroneous learning.
The fortunes of worlds do not hang on such slender threads, as your
gravity propagandists would fain make you believe from their feeble and
effeminate theories. The Globes are well secured, we may rely on it!
and eminently better sustained than if visibly solid substance should
intervene between and connect them. These latter kind of material would
not answer the lofty purpose ; nor yet serve conveying the mighty force
along.
This system of science shows its readers, how primitive thinkers
and early exploring minds —speculating upon the resources of Nature and
phenomena—in viewing the important function which (as the mere instru-
ment towards Divinely destined purposes) the solar orb performed in the
scheme of things,—assisting in rearing, developing and sustaining organic
life in its various forms, namely;—also, thought proper referring to that
centralised and luminous globe, as if being, by itself, capable of also causing
planetary motion; and that, in some hidden way or other, that powerful
agent of heat-generation and light-evolution, also held, itself, efficacy
adequate for the purpose of moving and turning about itself , and, so effecting
movement to the remoter distanced planets with their respective satellite
systems ; seeing that they continue to circulate about that vast centralised
object, namely. And since solar influence, evidently, developed germs 1 so,
that orb, it was thought, might also generate and create organic germs ;
and inorganic ones, as well ? produce , in fact, celestial “ bodies ”as well
as terrestrial animate “ life ” itself! and thus, at once, account for all things ?
The remnants, of such primitive ideas, do yet pervade modern physical
science. The authors have, themselves, in their own day, heard “ scientific
Lecturers” being given to the extravagant notion of the Sun comprising the
probable and likely future Heaven or Paradise of Humanity. Freethinkers,
and others, have been known to regard the sun as the great seat and source of
« Magnetism,”—that bugbear, so solemnly awe-inspiring to worthy Ma-
terialism of the day.—Some of these people believe that, where magnetism
abundantly prevail (in other spheres !) Beings, (animate, and much re-
sembling human) might, under its influence, be endowed with powers
enabling them to createl... There are no bounds to the soarings of
superstition and mental benightedness.*
Superficial Science, and narrow-minded Speculation, seems to connect
all physical phenomena with The Sun, and its power and influence ; and in
view of that subject, misconstruction and superstition reigns supreme :
and is the direct outcome of our philosopher’s “ heaven-horn” Gravitation
Science! To it, hangs all sorts of credulousness, superstition and
darkness. Obnoxious, barren and negative, as that hypothesy is.
* In a lecture by Professor W. Grylls Adams, recently published, “En-
gineering,” says,... “Professor Adams assumes the sun to be a magnet. . . . ”


This system of inductive science—by inferential reasonings—further
shows the reader, how identical directions of the twofold motions charac-
terising all these internal primary planets as are located within the con-
fines proper of the solar vortices system,—in conjunction also with the
analogous and similar directions of movements distinguishing the several
satellite systems, —* distinctly and positively indicates and proves, that,
the impulse of force, conferring and sustaining movement to the whole,
arrives from circumference regions in all directions, and proceeds towards
the axe's of the several mediums. In this manner, forcibly pointed out,
therefore, how—from its visibly suffering contents—manifestations of
physical nature, everywhere and in all directions, most significantly re-
pudiate and rejects the astronomically invented theory, known as the
doctrine of “ Central Force ; ” and which has been conjured forth and
conceived to prevail, on the strength, of phenomena, at large, having been
read from the standpoint of contemplation of an imagined stationary
solar system.
Thus pointing out the satisfactorily precise manner, and, equally
positive method, in which the questions of for and against the truth of the
doctrine of Central Forces, are susceptible of solution in the readiest, the
most direct and immediate manner ; and, hence, becoming removable from
the category of the doubtful and from all further controversy. All the
Great Truths happens to lie in the totally opposite direction to that
referred to for light and explanation ; as now, at length, our readers perceive.
Scholastic Philosophy however, prefers doubt and uncertainty for realisable
truth and precise knowledge, upon this field at least.
If it had so been, that the astronomically imagined gravitation and
centrifugal forces—inclusive of circulation of matter in general—originated
with centres, and had impetus sustained from Centralised regions ; then, in
such case, the planets—though revolving in a similar direction alike—
would yet have been found to rotate contrariwise, or in the opposite direc-
tion to that of their advancement in orbit motions ; and such as in the
instances of the orbs known as Uranus and Neptune is witnessed, namely ;
the surrounding mediums of these orbs, have their directions of movements
imparted and sustained to them from their common relative inner primary
medium—the mean solar, —and rotate, accordingly, in that “ retrograde ”
mode, and such as which (upon a central force theory) the other group of
internally situate planets ought to, and—provided central forces obtained
—would have shown themselves likewise conforming to. But proving them-
selves to rotate in the same direction as that in which they revolve, (or
perform orbit motions from west to east, namely), the planets thereby
indicate their relative mediums to have their directions of motions imparted
and sustained to them from circumfei\ence regions of that medium primary
to them all ; and, thus, distinctly pointing out to us, that the force
pervading their several local mediums is of an incoming order, in the first
instance.
The translatory movement, of the. whole solar vortices system, perpetually
engenders certain phenomena, manifestable (optically) at the axes of media-
* Excepting, as previously mentioned, those of Uranus and Neptune.


masses more than elsewhere; and which tokens and manifestations have by
philosophers —to whom the motion of the system was unknown—been
referred to as proof of the truth of the existence of “ central forces” in the
scheme of things celestial.
Accordingly, we thus supplant and displace a primitive central force-
conception, with a fair reading of the necessary consequences accruing from,
and, following with, a mobile solar system ; and, in this manner, substitute
the one for the other in fact.
It may be needful to state, that little doubt could exist about the fact,
that, away and apart from the existence of such purely gaseous elemental
mediums as here treated on—and in the volumed states of which the
heavenly orbs are involved, —globes, of the class known as “primaries”—and
which rotate upon axes, or revolve about themselves—have, besides, a local
medium immediately surrounding them, and such as are identical with
these more dense gaseous “ envelopes”—by physicists termed their
“ atmospheres !”—Such said denser portion of Atmospherical Envelopes,
we plainly behold indicated in the instances of the “ appendage” surrounding
the planet Saturn ; the “belts” surrounding Jupiter ; the varying aspects
accompanying Cometary Masses ; and, again, in the instance of the
Earth, where—in the forms of the Zodiacal and Anticrepuscular Lights—
the same thing manifests itself.
In its more vapourous (and therefore denser) state, atmospheres
imply, then, a certain kind of state intermediate between purely ele-
mental gasiforms, and that of fluids! inclusive, also, of terrestrial effluvia
in general.
Now, in revolving about themselves, the primary planets thus
compose (in view of their more extensive local mediums) liberated
masses, as it were ; and are, to such exterior surrounding mediums, like so
many compact and solid vortexes themselves, as it were. These more
dense (atmospherical) envelopes, of which we have spoken, would—on
account of their sympathy and relation to the substances composing the
globes—continually follow same in their rotative movements, and, so to
say, form part and parcel of the compact masses composing the orbs ; and
such as we perceive to be the case in the instance of the Earth, with its
immediately adjoining denser atmospheres. The mighty pressure in all
directions about the Globes from without, would, then, sufficiently account
for, and explain, the whole circuit of phenomena terrestrially manifested ;
and such, namely, as from whence the conception of a central force or
power being lodged within the interior of the Earth is deiived ; since
from the observed tendency of all falling objects to alight on the ground
in a vertical direction, the origin of the astronomical conception of “ Cen-
tral Force” is chiefly due.
These denser, and immediately surrounding elastic gaseous envelopes,
appears, then, to be the formidable intermediate or intervening means
whereby exteriorly evolved force effects the rotative movements of the
planets !!
And the reader now understand the reason why the surrounding ter-
restrial atmospheres accompany the Earth on its twofold motions, and


wliy it comes to pass that they are not dissipated during its rapid advance-
ment onward.
With a fulness and plenitude of atomic ingredients pervading firma-
mental structures, an inwardly arriving energy, fully explains all celestial
phenomena. Resorting to central forces for explanation of celestial
phenomenon, indicates shallow reasoning and superficial investigation.
Says, Amedee.Guillemin—in his work “The Heavens”—“ Is, then,
the velocity of a planet’s motion always the same in the different parts of
its orbit ? No. The movement is by so much the more rapid, as the planet
is nearer the Sun. Kepler’s second law shows us how this velocity varies.”
Having ascertained the nature of the reply issuing forth from the
mathematical student of Nature ; ascertain we next, what be the replies
presented by Nature herself, in her mechanical aspect ; inclusive, also, of
consideration of effects accompanying “ Perspective.”
Since it comes to pass, that, in their perpetual advancement to, and
retirement from, the solar focus, the planets appear to the vision of th«
beholder to move with variable velocities ; they thereby (actually and
virtually) prove themselves to really move with perfectly regular and
uniform velocities ! . . . Now, until explained, this seems paradoxical,
and difficult of understanding ? so much so, that the circumstance has
proven itself too much for our mathematicians to unravel, and completely
eluded our master-minds, collectively, since the dawn of all speculation
on the heavens.
Many are the simple things, hard to understand, until being unravelled
and intelligibly explained. The present subject is one such instance.
Since, inasmuch, as if with continual increase of intervening
distances, the planets should appear to the vision of the observer to
still retain equable motions —notwithstanding their moving away from
the point of observation—then, in such case, the circulating planets
would thereby prove themselves to really move with continually varying
velocities ! Because, for to the distant observer to appear to move regular
and uniform, when receding, then—simultaneous with gradual increase of
intervening distance— actual increase in velocity of the planets must needs
in proportion set in, and follow ? This is as clear as anything can well be !
And, again, simultaneous with decrease of intervening distance, a propor-
tional amount of actual decrease in velocity of a planet should take
place and follow ? This, again, is alike clear and irrefutable!
For, according to intervening varying distance of uniformly moving
objects—viewed from any given point of observation—so, at all times,
appears to the vision of the beholder—at any such given point of obser-
vation—to be the rate of speed, motion or velocity, of such uniformly
moving—but continually variably distanced —objects.
Such, namely, being the correct, undistorted, and, self-evident effects,
following and accompanying “ Perspective.”
Much uncertainty, and unsettled opinion—respecting the consistency
of “ Truth” and its reliabilities—pervades metaphysics ; but it may be said,
that although realisation of truths, require, at all times, more or less of de-
veloped mental discernment; yet, nought could well be reliable—or truthful
in the proper sense—but such things, only, as—when first intelligibly ex-


plained and described—are fathomable to all minds alike ; and, as coming
within the recognisably self-supporting, there and then, and once for all.
Such class of truths, lapse of time affects not : and of such kind
and character, the above, consists. And, we simply enquire, can any
sane man be found inclined to either gainsay, or doubt, these manifest
results of “ Perspective ?” But, 10, this trifling determination, alone, leaves
you, minus, your masterly contrived “ Theory.” . . . And such portion of
our readers, as are not in the Secret, would here wonder, doubtless, how, such
an apparently unimportant circumstance, could possibly upset our astrono-
mers’ worshipful theory! how its fate could hang upon so insignificant a
theme? Well, the reason “ why” of all human wisdom on the heavens, should
have so elected, and clioosen that point, as its great pillar of faith, —we
really cannot tell you ; it appears equally difficult for ourselves to understand.
Now it seems a rather extraordinary thing, that the very items
by our astronomers brought forward in form of proof of truthfulness of a
certain concocted “ Law ” or “ Theory,” turns out, in the end, to consti-
tute so much positive damaging evidence of the worthlessness of the law—
so much convictive testimony of the utter folly of that theory—in fact.
Since we are informed by all modern astronomical authorities that,
simultaneous with increase of intervening distance—and as the planets
recede and move away towards aphelia region— they appear to the
vision of observers to diminish their rate of motions or decrease in
velocities ; and further, when decreasing their intervening distances—and
when approaching their common perihelia region—the planets appear to
the observers to increase in velocities or accelerate their movements ; it fol-
lows, that, in these facts, we have our astronomers’ own observations before us
—as evidence of the most conclusive and satisfactory description we could
well wish for—distinctly showing, as these facts does, that notwithstanding
our misled astronomers’ belief and reading to the contrary, the planets do
really move with equable and not variable velocities in different parts of
their orbits. The whole combined manifestation, we gravely repeat, be-
comes in reality but so much confirmative evidence —so much irrefragable
testimony—showing and proving to our understanding, that planetary
motion is of a most remarkably uniform character —and as being beauti-
fully and regularly maintained throughout their revolutions about the
solar focus.—
Since planetary intervening distances continually vary to the point
of observation, it comes to pass, that, if their motions did not appear
to the vision of the observer to also continually vary, planetary motions
mould actually and really vary!... And this is the solution of,
perhaps, the greatest paradox, at any past or present time, having
challenged the human mind ; a problem, in fact, which was left to be
unravelled by that calibre of mind alone, interpreting Majestic Nature’s
Pathways from a mechanical standpoint of view, and recognising the
reign of an exteriorly exerted Universal Motive Energy.
In due proportions as the apparent dimensions of the planets—at
theiri mean and extreme distances f rom the Earth —are observed to vary
(owing, of course, to continually varying decrease and increase in their


intervening distances from the Earth), so in a corresponding degree with
such alternate apparent increase and decrease of their sizes, ( according to
intervening distance) their respective velocities must needs also and like-
wise accord, —and to the vision of the observer— appear as if continually
undergoing change and vary in the different parts of their orbits. A fact,
which, as aforesaid, when once intelligibly described and pointed out , is
quite incontrovertible in its order and beyond all gainsay.
Facts, of these kinds, seems as if wholly new to philosophy ; and
altogether appear to ellude minds setting out on the difficult errand of
discovery and detection of Nature’s profound secrets. Secrets, of Nature’s,
are hid to us, often, because of our minds not proving lucid and penetrating
enough.
Thus it goes (with the above recounted theme as, indeed, with so many
others) when first shown and apprehended, these simple data—so soon as
being pointed out —at once relieves the mind from that quaint and mysti-
fying nonsense composing these so-called “ Astronomical Laws” propounded
by Kepler in the beginning of the Seventeenth Century ; besides, becoming
explanative of numerous other relative and important things and subjects
at no time in philosophy understood.
On account, also, of their remoter distance from point of observation,
the more distant—or exterior planets— appear to move slower than the interior
or more adjacent ones: thereby, proving themselves to really move
uniformly with the latter. For, if—in their more distant situations—they
should appear to move as rapid as the more approximate planets, they would,
then— in that way—distinctly inform us of their actual increased rate of mo-
tions ; and that, to wit, that they moved with different and distinct velocities.
One Sole Universal Motive Energy, one sole direction of orbit
motion (of all things celestial), one uniform rate of advance or velocity of
all matter (celestial)... are among the chief axioms of this our advanced
philosophy. We say “Axioms,” and they are such ! only—not as hereto-
fore—by science recognised or apprehended so to be. In their nature, these
latter are, nevertheless, quite as axiomatic as are the former upon which
the authors have expounded. Because, they are the direct instigators of
same ; and, without which, celestial uniform motion could not obtain in the
scheme of things.
In speaking to the subject of Kepler’s “ Laws,” Amedee Guillemin,
in his work “ The Heavens,” says : “ Thus, we need only know the time
of revolution of the planets to deduce their major axes, and, as a conse-
quence, their mean distances from the Sun. And as we know the absolute
value of one of these, we know the absolute value of all. Thus, the
knowledge of the relative distances of the different bodies of the system
depends upon the knowledge of one only—that of the Earth, for example.”
And from which it will be observed then, that, in its speculations—
random as they are—the mathematical mind approximates, in a manner,
our above discussed axioms and mechanical verifications. We hear it
stated, that “the knowledge of the relative distances of the different bodies
of the system depends upon the knowledge of one only—that of the Earth.' 1
And wherefrom the reader will perceive, that our theorising Astronomers
(without realising the fact to themselves) have “ rose to the gratuitous


conception” that the planets all move with identical velocities ? since
without a uniform rate of motion being granted to pervade the system,
these deductions would amount to nil, and astronomers would not be one
whit the wiser respecting knowledge to relative intervening distances among
the several planets. If one moved faster or slower than another, (as really
by astronomers believed ) expiry of time of the Earth’s orbit motion, would,
indeed, prove a very frail standard measuring intervening distance of other
planets,—completing orbit motions of their own in either more or less
lapse of time in proportion to ground having to be gone over.—
Provided the planets, akin, prove to proceed at a uniform and identical
mean rate of motion, Kepler’s proposition remains true and correct, only ! in
nowise else. But, for to convince us, that, this principle of arriving at
knowledge to intervening instances, is a correct and legitimate one, it first
and foremost behoves our savans to show us the method whereby having
arrived at the knowledge—or conviction—that the planets do move with such
identical and uniform mean motions—enabling them, to reliably compute
distances intervening —in virtue of the Earth's time of revolution ! This
it is, which, above all things, is required to be shown. What did
John Kepler—or any other subsequent astronomical magnate—show
toward this purport ? what is there to prove that the said proposition is
reliable ? talk, is easy enough, and so are assertions ; but Kepler only
guessed, and advanced no knowledge respecting why and how.
At a previous stage we made a statement to the effect, that out of
Nature’s own mechanical system, our mathematicians had extracted their
so-termed mathematical system of physics ! And in the above discussed
subject the reader behold our statement amply verified.
Precisely as we have heard it being stated, that Sir Isaac Newton
“derived all what he used from Flamstead” ; so, in turn, Kepler, also,
derived all what he used from his master; the celebrated Danish astronomer,
Tycho Brahe.
Both these men, Newton and Kepler, were ambitious speculators on
Nature ; but were only faintly acquainted with elements forming legitimate
science of “ Generalisation” : that kind of erudition, namely, which stands
abreast of, and, towers above all other kind of science. And such, because,
of it being the one wherefrom all sound instruction is derivable. The various
expositions here laid before the reader, are specimens of such pre-eminent
character of science : and, within which, all previously advanced astrono-
mical theory and speculation become absorbed.
But for to revert to our subject again, we should here state that, on
account of every part and parcel—every minute fraction —of any celestial
medium—in all localities and situations— describing, in distinct and diver-
sified (small or large) orbit motions (celestial mediums consisting of
gasiform , and not solid material) about the local axis, the onward advance-
ment (translation, revolution,) in more extended orbits of the whole mass,
on this account, it comes to pass, that, the planets advance in their orbit
motions, about the solar focus, with that precise uniform rate of velocity of
which we have heard the mathematically speculative mind of John Kepler
assume and gratuitously appropriate! In this manner, our reader
enable himself to perceive how mere random conjectures and guesses are


hazarded by our mathematicians, and palmed off among them, mutually,
and accepted as constituting “ demonstrations ! ” And the world looking
on, confidingly : relying upon the determinations by these men, as if
being so sacredly correct and truthful as to obviate all doubt and enquiry ?
Now, it was this, which John Kepler should have shown and demon-
strated — previous to enunciation to the world of science—of his “ Third Law.’
For, it is obvious enough, that, “the knowledge of the relative distances of
the different bodies of the system, depends upon the knowledge “to the
principle of construction and mechanism pervading the ramifications of
the solar system ; enabling us, namely, to confidently rely upon the
motions of "the several orbs being of that strictly uniform and equable
character, as, whereupon, determination of intervening distances—by measure
of lapse of time of the Earth’s orbit motion— depends.
Thus it is, that, whilst this present system of knowledge exhibits the
solar vortices system —in its combination, construction and interwoven
mechanism—to consist of a veritable Structure —possessed of an active
and energetic kind of motive energy for ever supplied and transmitted to it—
except tiie visibly moving orbs, themselves, (and to which physicists refer
for explanation of everything,) our mathematicians, on the contrary, are left
absolutely with naught ! Your gravitationists own no such structure to
refer to : vacuums intervene between their conceived parts—the “ bodies ”
—they maintain, and say. And so anomalously have those folks placed
themselves in the scheme of things, that they have virtually deprived and
bereft themselves of the indispensable means, even, wherewith to convey
their precarious illusionary force from place to place! These men would
have it so. Happily, their contorted versions rendered, have no other
existence than in their own curious and lively imaginations ; and in that of
others, credulous enough, to believe in these effeminate Cloister Theories,
these concocted “ Laws.” As did the Ancients, so do the Moderns ; viz.,
talk of an “ Ether.”
Since the authors write for enlightening the layman and general
reader, they refrain from cringing and pandering to anybody or to anyone.
Whilst deeply venerating the subject , they are independent of exponents.
Seeing that our scholastic savans so disconnect and sever the diverse
ramifications of the system, we may well wonder indeed, how it possibly
comes to pass of their being possessed of any celestial mechanics at all ?
These men, among themselves, seems to—or pretend—to comprehend the
circumstance. For our part, we never did.
We have now—in the instance of Kepler, with his “ Laws”—observed
how speculative astronomers obtain the several expressed results and out-
come of mechanical Principle, and endeavor, adroitly, appropriating same as
if constituting causalty of celestial motion ! . . . Their numerical calcula-
tions, being put forward, as if representing physical discoveries: and loom-
ing rows of figures—advanced under the awe-inspiring term “ computation”
—constitute, in toto, the forces of that quaint Philosophy. Deprive our
philosophers of their figures, and then see where they are : behind these glow-
ing rows, much ignorance is conveniently sheltered. In place of know-
ledge to Nature, these baubles are passed off, purporting to be explanative
of positive science, and demonstrative of precise acquaintance ! ! . . .


Ascertain we next, how and by what means—from this our standpoint
of view—we become enabled to readily understand the simple, yet, grand
principle which determines situation or locality (within the confines of a
medium) of any one celestial globe in question.
Wheresoever located, any celestial orb—with its relative adjuncts or
properties of weight and bulk (or, what amounts to the same thing, state
of denseness and state of diffusedness) together considered —is equal to (and
precisely corresponding with) that energetic elemental pressure, existing,
co-relatively, with such equal amount of room or space of the hurled medium,
as that described, or owned, by the compact mass forming the Globe : and
which occupied, space, become tantamount to so much weight-carrying
capacity being displaced by the presence of the compact mass, in that place.
Hence, the presence of such orb—at any time and place in any one
such space or room of the swayed media-mass—becomes, merely and simply,
expressive of that certain amount of energy or pressure which previously
existed within, or pervaded, that now displaced and occupied space or room
of the hurled medium.
lii this manner, showing the reader, that, whether it be a conspicuous
compact mass of matter (in the form of a globe) occupying the space or
room of the medium, or, it be the transparent and directly invisible ele-
mental substances themselves holding possession of the room in question,
it comes precisely to the same thing. Since neither of the two preponderate
or outweigh each other, —as proven by the stabilities of all celestial globes
—it follows, accordingly, that the precise place of location of any one
globe—situate within the confines of any one volumed medium under con-
sideration — directly and correctly indicate to us its weightiness and bulk
comparatively ! or, in other words, the state of denseness of the orb—in due
accordance with and in proportion to —its actual dimension, voluminousness,
or state of diffusedness, co-relatively.
We hear of theorising physicists professing being able—in virtue of
their sublime theory of gravitation— to weigh the heavenly bodies for us !
and such despite absence of scales, through intervening vacuums, and all!
but.—as the mere derivation from out of a gratuitously conceived and
prematurely constructed theory—these, are mere idle gossip, and containing
no knowledge. Within the confines of hurled volumed mediums, the
heavenly orbs, alone, are really weighed.
When correctly understood and intelligibly described, then—the above
order of determinations—constitute Science Proper ; because of their
being, purely, of intellectual characters ; and, comprehensible and realisable
to the mind’s eye, alone . We are precluded from (experimentally)
directly ascertaining their virtuality and truthfulness. They are, withal,
yet—subordinate and inferior in order—to Science of Generalisation.
In passing, we may here mention, that, the adjunct—attribute or pro-
perty—known as “ weightiness,” with which the heavenly orbs—in common
with all kinds of matter—is necessarily accompanied ; associates itself with,
and, so to say, express, at all times, celestial previous or primary incoming
centrifugal energy : whilst, on the other hand, the locally generated outgoing
centrifugal energy, associates itself with, and express bulk, diffusedness,
volume, &c. The arrangements of the several planets of the solar system,


and, also, that, of the satellites of the several planetary systems (within the
solar) do, distinctly, in their common concurrence, denote this fact. The
more diminutive globes ( heaviest for their bulks) being found to occupy
the more forwardly precipitated (centrally situate) locations ; whilst the
more voluminous and larger one ( lighter for their bulks) are retarded, as it
were, and swayed outward. The primary globes, alone—in occupying the
more centralised situations of any medium —thus, prove themselves to be
weighty or heavy for their proportionately larger bulks or dimensions.
In view of Nature’s phenomena, at least, it is of no avail discussing
weight away and apart from consideration of bulk or volume.
Since we must needs possess volume (of some kind or other) before it
becomes possible to consider and speculate on actual weightiness of sub-
stances—and, whereas, the latter phenomenon spring forth from out of
the former —it follows, that, weightiness, of matter, is a subordinate and
secondary phenomenon, consequent upon and following that of volume
or bulk.
Physicists proceed however regardless of this ; so much so, that, that
which in reality constitute centre of volume of a globe, or of any other
mass of compact solid material, is invariably referred to as constituting
its “ centre of gravity.” To the mathematically speculative mind, no
difference between the two seems to exist.
It is a great fact, nevertheless, that in view of the questions of stability,
situation, —or location of a globe within its medium—the centre of volume
of its mass, plays the more prominent part than, does that, of its centre
of weight.
In connection with the subjects of weight —in its associated modifica-
tions —such as weightiness, heaviness, denseness, &c., in conjunction with
these of lightness, state of volatility, levitation, &c., as opposed to the
subjects of compactness —and state of diff usedness of any volumed mass of
matter ; —connected, we say, with these various elements, much confusion,
commingling and undecidedness, exists in science.
So utterly unresolved, and, so little understood, all these things appear
to be, that we actually hear of our indoctrinated speculative astronomers
astutely forwarding messages from one celestial globe to another—inter-
vening vacuums notwithstanding,—purporting to communicate to each other
(in the form of tall sums and formidable rows of figures) their respective
individual weights , as great masses of particles of matter ? and which con-
stantly suspended messages the heavenly “ bodies ” are supposed to obey !
it being, in fact, our philosophers all potent froce itself this ; these array
of numbers being thought an adequate amount of force-capacity in itself,
and such as wherewith to move and control the motions of the heavenly orbs.
In some desperate endeavor at illustration of force — and — applica-
bility on the heavens—of anciently descended (and modernly practised)
Philosophic Secret Art, Sir John Herschel, in his “ Familiar Lectures on
Scientific Subjects”—speaking of the “Sun’s Strength,” says: “This,
then, one thirty-seventh part of a grain, is the force which the earth, placed
where the sun is, would exert on our lump of lead. But we have seen that to
retain such a lump in such an orbit requires a pull of 1 lb. 6 ozs. 51 grs. Of
course, then, the earth, so placed, would be quite inadequate to retain it from


flying off. To do this would require as many earths to pull it as there are
thirty-seventh parts of a grain in 1 lb. 6 ozs. 51 grs.; that is to say, by an
easy sum in arithmetic, 356,929 ; or in round numbers, 360,000. Now, this
is equivalent to saying, that to do the work which the sun does upon each
individual ton of matter which the earth consists of, it must pull it as if
(mind I say ns if) it were made up of 360,000 earths. And this is
what is meant by saying, that the mass or quantity of gravitating matter
constituting the sun is 360,000 times as great as the mass or quantity of
such matter in the earth. Thus, now, you see, we have weighed as well
as measured the sun ; ” ... . adds this philosopher, sagaciously to his
audience! and, adds, the authors, “thus, now, you see, how the scientific
homilies goes : as propounded by this our Nineteenth Century Scholastic
Philosophers.
Forget not that, if troubled with arrays of figures in this our little
volume anywhere ? they are not ours ; but belongs exclusively to mathema-
ticians, herein quoted ; to those people, namely, practising anciently
descended (and modernly retained) astute philosophic Secret Arts. The
authors deal not in figures, nor in mathematical problems or other har-
assing and mystifying subjects. They treat on things and themes with
object o f explaining same, and in nowise for to pose, impose or mystify
the reader with things that cannot, in themselves, possibly account for or
explain anything. We shall presently proceed to point out what these
things, alone, implies.
The above recounted arguments by Herschel, are the outcome of con-
siderations, belonging, entirely, to the conception and idea of an immobile
solar system ! and such, as wherefrom, that puerile theory in vogue among
astronomers has been deduced or based ; and, as having led to these kind
of grotesque outpourings—on the part of pledged but deceived followers of
science—as in the foregoing instance witnessed.
Thus, it will be seen that, being absolutely unable to explain aught
anywhere, gravitation philosophers comes before their audiences with their
mere acquired school knowledge ; such, to wit, as is brought to bear in record-
ing observed celestial phenomena, and as constituting the mere indispensable
tools and elements wherewith to register , calculate—and demonstrate
recurrence —of such observed phenomena! . . . Secretly conscious of know-
ing nothing explanative of anything, these set of machinery is now put for-
ward purporting to explain Nature’s Phenomena ; —the paraphernalia, we
say, is advanced as a substitute for knowledge to Nature’s Pathways, and,
in itself, thought efficiently capable of so overawing uninitiated outside
genius, as to effectively silence all innovation and inquiry.
Charles Tomlinson—a lecturer on Natural Science—is found to state :
“ There is, however, a language used by the privileged classes, called
Mathematics, which it is of the greatest importance to know, since the
best letters of introduction will not admit a visitor into good society unless
he is acquainted with at least the rudiments of this language : far less can
he hope without it to understand the state secrets which, although unknown
to the crowd, extend their influence over the whole of society.” Sir Richard
Phillips, again, in also appearing upon the scene of action, solemnly
informs us that: “ Without a familiar acquaintance with arithmetic, with


the use and force of algebraic signs, and some acquaintance with geometry
and its uses, a man does not belong to the intelligent classes of society,
and supposed difficulty indicates a mind of superficial character.” Comte,
in his turn, harps on the same string ; and taking one case with another,
this dictum may be said to comprise the chief burden of the favorite lay of
the entire school of mathematicians ; and, in fact, constitute the coy means
wherewith our closet-speculators and patched up Book-learned in general,
adroitly works their modernised Oracle “ Gravitation.” The authors have
oft been set mused and amused, in contemplation of these idle ejaculations.
Except it should be, that the “ Secret Language,” above alluded to, and the
mastery of which, necessarily envolves the interesting little question of
command (and liberal expenditure ) of “Mighty Dollars”—going, presumably,
towards supporting the body of Book-learned people snugly lodged within
the inclosures of our modern cloisters of antiquated learning—unless, we re-
peat, it be something of this kind, (an indirect or disguised appeal to
wealth, and to want of wealth, on the part of followers of occult and secret
science ; a pandering to the one, and, a defiance and admonition to the
other, in fact) one is otherwise much at a loss to understand the great
importance of this said “ Language” in the scheme of things? If this
talk does really mean such like things ; why, we can well understand,
and, aye, even sympathise! . . . . But why not, then, state it, straight
out? At the best, this “Bugbear,” so truculently held out by your
mathematicians before you, comprise, after all, mere acquirable School-
knowledge. But, it should be remembered, that such mere available
information or acquirable knowledge does not in itself constitute Science
Proper.
We now distinctly perceive, however, how these toys—these various
school elements of imposing secret science—are thrust forward as a ser-
viceable substitute for knowledge ; serving to hide absence of knowledge,
rather, to Nature’s lofty pathways ; and thus purposely intended to beguile
the credulous pupil (along, also, with the unversed confiding multitude at
large) into the belief, that, with acquaintance to, and in the mastery of
these above-named subjects and things, lies altogether the knowledge itself;
and, that, with it is the key deposited—opening up to the gaze of the student
—all Nature’s profound mysteries !... if language implies aught, then, for-
sooth, the homilies resorted to by cultivators of antiquated philosophic
Secret Art, implies this. Such is precisely the way our deluded scholastic
savans have got it ; and until being pointed out and corrected from outside
independent source of learning, such is precisely the way our philosophers
and self-elected tutors would fain persist in always having it.
In any other path, or avocation, these foibles might, perhaps,
remain as something diverting and harmless ; not so, however, in the path
at present engaging our attention: that, to wit, the purport and
philosophy of that most important of all sciences—Astronomy. We
cannot well afford to have the teachings and great lessons of this
science rendered to us in so inverted, perverted and abused forms.
Now, what were we to think, if, for example, one should require
a domicile erected ; and after having given order to such effect, the Con-


tractor—mustering up with his workmen, tools and material—and, in
pointing towards these various materials and tools, would persist in the
attempt making us believe, that, in these things, we really possessed all
what we required—a home—to wit?... Such would be madness, of
course, and not at all adequate. And yet, this is very much resembling
the mode pursued by our doctrinal physicists in regard to Nature's “ Struc-
tures.” But whilst the present authors exhibits to the mind’s eye of the
reader the veritable “ Structure ,” itself; our mathematicians, on the contrary,
regard only, and behold merely, the several pieces of tools and machinery
wherewith the structure (to the comprehension of the human mind) were
erected ; and, amusingly enough, teach that, these instruments and things,
compose the structure itself ?
And thus, we deem, our readers apprehend better, and more correctly,
the true function in the scheme of things of our mathematicians’ “ Struc-
ture ” —with its set of imposing machinery and mechanics.
Probably it be, that some of our more sensitively reasoning readers
would now complain and urge, that this brings the lofty science down from
the heavens to the earth, in a somewhat unanticipated and abrupt mode?...
But, remember, your philosophers would have it so ! and would, them-
selves, fain have done it if ever it had been in them so to do. Your self-
elected indoctrinated cognoscenti , are always found to bewail and lament
of their knowing so little. It now remains to be seen, whether this
system of science and reasoning—as with the present authors here
introduced— prove —in the estimation and judgement of the schoolmen—
to he that kind of precise knowledge (as derived from the cognitive
and analogous) which our philosophers have been in quest of ? . . . and,
it further remains to be seen, whether their kind of positive knowledge to
the physical heavens, proves itself staunch and adequate enough to endure
with lapse of time and survive.
For, so far from this our advanced system of science, in any way,
proving itself to either await for, or—having to rely upon—further arriving
physical disclosures ; or, otherwise, having anything to fear from either
mundane or ultramundane physical discoveries to come—as being likely to
either affect or upset its teachings ; all such future ascertainments in
surrounding Nature—whatever their character so may be—will, on the
contrary, only be found to further substantiate and verify same. Such,
the authors, quite confidently state.
Since being obliged to terminate this our little preliminary treatise, we
would observe, that, whilst it being amongst the things hid and shrouded—
and, doubtless, for ever impossible for us—to explain or demonstrate the
Cause at work, or the force in operation, effecting the constantly (in a certain
given direction) maintained elliptical contour of the gaseous mass com-
posing the entire solar vortex—and to the identical direction of which all
the internal and secondarily generated planetary (satellite) mediums, akin,
likewise respond,—it yet (upon this aspect of firmamental nature) comes
within the possibility of tracing the directions and sources of forces asserting
their varying and fluctuating influences upon these globes, with their con-
tents, as are located within the confines of the common solar vortices


system ; taking astronomical ascertainments and records collected upon
that we live upon for it.
Thus, for examples ; the cause in operation, effecting that slow retro-
grade movement of the equinoctical points from east to west, and in
astronomy termed “ Precession of the Equinoxes,” (discovered or observed
by Hipparchus of Rhodes about 128 b.c.) must be ascribed to the influ-
ence of force pervading that celestial vortices system major to the solar in
the third degree. The cause at work, again, culminating in effecting that
movement known as the Earth’s “ Nutation,” must, on the other hand, be
ascribed to the influence of force pervading that celestial vortices system,
Avliich is major to our local solar, in the second degree.
The period of the former is supposed to be completed in about 26,000
years ;* whilst that of the latter is performed in 18§ years, and con-
sists, merely, of a to and fro (“ nodding”) movement of the axis of our
globe, within the above-named more extended or prolonged “ nodding”
motion!
To each of these movements, terrestrial tides (of such duration)
periodically respond ; maximum and minimum, taking place alternately,
intermediate between equatorial and (north and south) polar regions.
Tides, in general, are synonymous with alternate atmospheric contraction
and expansion (compression and liberation) of the elements ; and ex-
presses (like gigantic barometers) such locally recurring fluctuations.
These kind of tides as above alluded to, are in science vaguely understood
by the terms of “ Annual ” and “ Astral ” Tides.
Solar tides, on the other hand, are of a wholly local description ; and
are therefore, in their small periods, of dual characters. One of these tides
express the previous or primary incoming force ; and, as such, is related to
the axis regions of the solar vortex : thus lending that appearance which
have led astronomers to the belief, that it is the centrally situate globe
(the sun) that causes these tides!— attracts the waters—as these deluded
folk’s say. The other and opposite tide, on the contrary, express the
reacting and outgoing —previously incoming —(locally generated centrifugal)
energy ; and which exerts its influence upon and expands the elements
in the direction of circumference regions ; and, whereby, the elastic fluid
particles of oceans seeks to follow , and likewise expands in their bulks.
Of such expansion or upheaval of the waters—from alternate increase and
decrease of atmospheric pressure in localities—tides, in general consists.
Lunar tides, also, have locally generated force for their sustentation.
In thus describing the cause of solar tides, we have, therewith, also
rendered explanation of the cause of lunar tides. For, that phenomenon
is, ,in truth, a repetition on a smaller, though (in its locally displayed
effect) more intensified scale, than that of the above recounted one. From
* In Speaking of the “ Precession of the Equinoxes,” Beeton observes : “ Even
Sir Isaac Newton was unsuccessful in solving the problem in a perfectly satis*
factory manner; more modern astronomers, however, such as D’Alembert, Euler,
Laplace, and Simpson, have succeeded in it.”... And to which the authors reply,
that, such is only in the vain beliefs of .these explorers, and such as fostered by
deluded scientists in general. Prom the standpoint of view, of an immobile solar
system, the cause at work effecting these phenomena, is not of a demonstrable order.


analogy we might legitimately infer and conclude, that all the other
planets of the system—circumstanced similarly to the earth—exhibits
alternately, and by turns, such like tokens of sufferings—from influence
of externally exerted force—as in our own sphere witnessed : and such as
whereof “ Tides ” are some of the more prominent offspring.
Hence, it will be noted by our readers that, thus far and remote, be-
comes it needful for us to penetrate and trace source of force in its trans-
mitted and consecutive form of growth ; enabling us to successfully and
correctly account for, and explain to our mind’s eye, the diverse causes in
operation effecting these several and various physical manifestations ex-
hibited to us in our more immediate and confined surroundings.
In this recounted mode and manner, then, do the authors account
for causes of phenomena manifested to the senses of man in surrounding
established physical Nature.... A mere interpretation , be it observed,
of principles pervading amidst established order of Things.
Upon this thought-trend, then, we behold wide Nature, or Firma-
mental Creation at large, to be composed of “Vast Chains,” (figuratively
speaking)... of Universes, Within Universes —in series of growths or
generations—and composing, so to say, “ the Globules in the Blood ”
running in its Mighty Veins and Arteries ! Thus, for example, upon
this aspect of economy of things celestial , our readers behold the entire
Solar Vortices System represented (in comparison to its more gigantic
Major Systems) as if constituting, itself, the merest diminutive “ Seed-
Bud,” if we may so use a familiar term, (in form, namely, of what we
term a Celestial “Nebula”) and, as floating in one of the minor streams
of that mighty and illimitable Ocean of Gases, which, manifestly, com-
pose and comprise the Great Physical Heavens or Firmamental Creation
at large. And, in the foregoing now narrated manner and method,
do the authors of the present pages draw to account that greatest and
most momentous of celestial discoveries in modern times ; the trans-
latory movement of the solar system, namely ; ascertained by the elder
Herschel; and which discovery was subsequently confirmed by Sir William
Herschel, Strave, Argelander, and others : the great sum total of which,
it will now be understood, constitute therefore, so much incontrovertible
and overwhelming scientific evidence of “ Divine Direct Omnipresence”
in Physical Nature ! ! . . . resulting, in fact, in the advancement to the
front, of so much diversified and multifarious direct tangible testimony in
vindication of the obvious fact, to wit, of an indispensable necessity
existing for unreserved recognition by Man, of the immediate and direct
intervention of a Divine Omnipotence in Nature ; and whose constant
dispensation of power and exerted energy, thus, expresses itself in sur-
rounding mundane and ultra-mundane creation!... In opposition to the
monstrously erroneous teaching (propagated by a system of dark-minded
and materialistic science) to the effect, namely, of Physical Nature at large
—subsequent to its creation— being abandoned, and is now governed by
certain sets of “ Laws.”
Similar to the monks of old—taking charge of the human mind—so,
in a like manner, a certain class of people arrogate to themselves identical
powers ; viz. , taking charge of Nature ; and making her out to be some-


thing convenient and suitable to themselves. Divine Providence may be
permitted to stand in direct communication and relationship with “ Man ”
and his concerns ; but, says our worthy savans, not in such like direct con-
nection or relationship with “ Nature : ” that cannot be, because, we have
our “ Laws ” which are, in themselves, adequate governing all Nature ! . . .
Such are the unscrupulous and gross dicta of arrogant Astro-Philosophy.
That the reader may better comprehend us here ; revert we then, in
this place, to one more—and for the present, final—lllustration.
“ When we contemplate the operations and movements that are going
forward in this lower world, and particularly when we consider the motions
and phenomena of the celestial orbs, we must necessarily conclude that an
immaterial principle at first formed and set in motion those vast bodies and
incessantly conducts and superintends them in all their movements. And this
spiritual agent is no other than the self-existent and eternal Jehova, whose
power is omnipotent, whose wisdom is unsearchable, and whose kingdom
ruletli over all. ...” Thus writes a great, and thoughtful, disciple of
science ; viz., Thomas Dick, L.L.D., Author of “ The Philosophy of Re-
ligion,” “ The Philosophy of a Future State,” “ Diffusion of Knowledge,”
“Moral Improvement of Mankind,” &c. And here, the reader shall
perceive, we have arrived at what may, justifiably enough, be looked
upon as constituting the very “Root” itself, of that evil, which has
been inherited from the anciently descended erroneous method of reason-
ing—and way of thinking—of the great “Creative and Sustaining
Power ” of all Creation ; and such as having been fraught with so much
moral, intellectual and social distress and convulsion, among the human
family !
In passing, we might draw the attention of our readers towards a
not slightly significant circumstance : that, of the fact namely, of all which
—to our Physicists and Metaphysicians alike—appears directly invisible
to the sensual sight , is, invariably, confusedly mingled up with the subject,
or conception of things, held to be of the nature of the “ Immaterial! ”
Thus, in Physics, as in Metaphysics, (and, in view of consideration
of “ Nature’s” Phenomena, the two are blended together,) the gaseous
invisible atmospheres, the atomic bodies or elements, the air—in its pro-
pelled onward motion—(winds), &c., all these, are, akin to science, as
“ Immaterial” in their consistencies, as is the directly invisible mind,
intelligence, soul, &c.: having no solid or sensible form to either view or
feel; these are, accordingly, indiscriminately made out to be alike
“ Immaterial.” And this is the way, indeed, that all our suave
“Immortalised” savans have always thought proper interpreting these
subjects ; and, we deem, will for evermore continue to render them
to US.
Now, whilst leaving the reader to judge for himself of the true worth
of that intellectual discernment and logic—distinguishing our philosophic
teachers on this path of science ; it remains to be said, that, whilst gravely-
demurring to the employment of the term “Agent”—to the aim and
purport by that authority obviously intended; in the above quoted
utterings, the present authors nevertheless, otherwise, recognise the very
gist and sum total of their own conceptions and contentions.


The point of distinctive difference existing, being this, only—main-
taining as we do—that, the self-same “ Immaterial Principle which at
first formed and set in motion those vast bodies,” also, and likewise, ever
since—and at present time and day— sustains their forms and motions, in,
doubtlessly, much the very identical mode, and direct measure, under which
they were “formed and set in motion”:... and not by the intervention, or
through the agency, of so-called “ Natural Laws,” “Astronomical Laws,”
“ Gravitation Forces,” &c., and such as in doctrinal science of the day
(merest philosophism) erroneously and superstitiously believed, and
cunningly taught.
It would truly appear, that, if our deceived closet-speculators and
exploring philosophers could but have descried some sort of ocularly visible
substantial means of connection between the heavenly orbs, then—in view,
at least, of this instance of celestial prodigy and “ mystery”—the world would
have heard naught about these advanced “ Laws of Nature as put
forth by baffled acumen !... a phrase, ostensibly enough, conveniently
adopted by frustrated and disconcerted science, and behind which, to hide
lack of penetration, bad reading, and absence of knowledge in any direction.
It will thus be noted, that, to the astro-philosophic mind, the concep-
tion of “ The Universe” centres itself chiefly, if not wholly, in and about the
visible celestial globes alone ; and beyond which it descries and fathoms
little or naught. Hence it is, that, from inability to intellectually descry the
optically invisible (but, to our readers—now, mentally made —discernible)
mode and manner in which this “Immaterial? Principle” (Jehova) —at the
first place and seat —asserts its all potent dominion in Physical Nature
and governs the Motions of the Bodies, along with that of all other
matter in surrounding Creation ; from such inability, it were, that, in com-
mon with all other Book-learned Speculators and Writers—taking their
clues and cues from ancient thinkers—the above quoted earnest philo-
sopher—in his stress of explanation —finds himself obliged to fall back
upon some monstrous doctrine, which—under the guise of comprising
and containing “science”—having up till present time and day adroitly
succeeded in entrapping—and almost completely blinding—even, so other-
wise enlightened stamps of minds, as that of the highly philosophic Author
quoted. In view of the heavenly bodies, “Jehova”—we are told by the
writer in question—“incessantly conducts and superintends their move-
ments ;” but, at the same time we are also informed that, such must
needs only be—and, could but take place—in the manner and method
—and through the agency —of so-called “Laws!” And such, solely,
because, of some primitive exponents, unfortunately enough, having mis-
construed Nature—and interpreted her majestic pathways and method of
procedure—in a pitiously inverted mode and manner, and arrived at such
fatuous conclusion in consequence. For, we simply enquire, from whence,
otherwise, did this fatal teaching emanate ? Or, with whom else, did these
extraordinary notions originate ?
11l this measure, do the authors—meet with and dispose—of “ The
Boot” of a great evil. Except under the aspect—and in the light—of
manifested offshoots and sequences of subjection of all matter—in states of


confinement within volumed masses— to hurling motions; no governable
laws, whatsoever, exists in surrounding Physical Nature. Of this much,
we may be quite sure. No other kind of laws prevails.
Once again we point out to the reader, that— in its own onward or
translatory state—one media-mass becomes as the motive force or power to
its internal and relative minor mediums, and thus imparting or transmit-
ting towards such secondary generated structures— in that abovenamed
method—that veritable energy manifesting itself upon the differently con-
stituted particles and ingredients envolved within same. And it is pre-
cisely this manifested energy which effects—among and upon the revolving
substances—certain tokens, bearing that aspect as of “design” and “order,”
which our gravitation philosophers continue to misconstrue and persists
interpreting as if constituting the governable “ Laws of Nature !”... and
for to understand and explain which, many superficial and benighted
minds would require and demand of us, to first show them the material
(ocularly direct visible) consistence itself of the Divine Author of all
things ! and that, that comprehension of (optical direct invisible) Principle
of Mechanism and Construction of Celestial Structures, must needs first
be contingent upon that effort by man ! ! . . . Such like protestations and
reasonings, do, verily, distinguish many worldly, conceitful and shallow
minds.
With many hardened and somewhat mercenary (but not, otherwise,
necessarily bad) minds, it becomes—for to serve worldly ends—part of
their inner individual polity to endeavor overcoming certain conscientious
scruples, and such as at times being troubled with in the battle of life.
With such people, a temptation to ignore all conception of a Divine
Omniscience, in the scheme of things, stands promiently forth ; and such
kind of minds console themselves and pacify their troubled hearts in con-
templation of the consciousness, that no man is capable of confronting
them with the Great Providence Itself, or otherwise able of directly show-
ing them its material Form ; and such as may be seen and felt, measured
and estimated. To these effeminate and benighted minds, much anxiety
and misery among men is distinctly traceable. Still, even these kind of
individuals are serviceable in the scheme of things ! For, unless somebody
were found to doubt, and thought justified in entertaining misgivings ; no
one would have ground for venturing forth, trying to dissipate doubts and
misgivings. Now seeing the fact, that the human mind and its reasoning
faculty, is of that self same directly materially invisible character itself; it
is, we deem, a somewhat remarkable circumstance, that these very class of
obdurate and hardened people should yet, notwithstanding, be found crediting
themselves with being possessed of precisely such kind of invisible substance
as that composing their own dubious minds ! . . . .
Now it is obrious enough—to all unbiased minds, at least—that, if
these be the outcome of our departure from the irrelevant Newtonian
Version of the Universe, if these be the samples of rare intellectual gems
obtainable upon these our fresh advanced Bases of Scientific Reasonings ; it
is quite worth anyone’s while to halt, and consider ; quite worth the time
and trouble to reflect and think a while ? For, great and momentous
things, are , truly , at stake ! ! ...


In. conclusion, the Authors would fain intimate to the interested
reader, how—now that we enable ourselves to intelligently recognise sur-
rounding Nature, and trace the correct grounds (and true reasons why) of
that wondrously manifest stability and order existing amidst so complex
and intricate character of celestial movements—the efforts of the ob-
servant and practical branch of the astronomical science (unconscious
though it be of the reasons how and why) appear, in its diverse and
various paths, to be of a truly high order ; nay, considering all things,
absolutely imposing and justly deserving of our admiration !
For, although it would now appear, that by dint of intelligent and
careful enquiry into the several phenomena exhibited in our more
immediate surroundings—and of characters such as are of well-known
periodical recurrence—as, for examples, the phenomenon of terrestrial
“ Tides,” “ Oscillations ” of the Barometer with change of seasons,
(and as indicating variations of atmospheric pressure in the different
localities of the globe,) the variable “ Orbit ” Motions of the different
Planets, and Lunar Phenomena in general, &c.; we say, by dint of study-
ing and considering such like kindred subjects together ; it would then
fully appear, that these diverse elements would in themselves adequately
suffice demonstrating to our understanding the entire circuit of exposi-
tions ; and such, as a slight portion of which has now here preliminarily
been revealed to the mind’s eye of the reader. Although difficult to per-
form, such knowledge would yet be quite possible to deduce from out of
these mentioned more familiar occurrences alone we maintain: away
altogether, and apart from any other astronomical extraneous research, or
extra-mundane manifestations. The important point of difference being
this, that, except for the unremitting labors and patient observations of
the observant and practical astronomer—remitting to us isolated and pre-
extraneous facts—we should not, otherwise, have been in possession of
such data, and other wherewithal, with which to satisfactorily verify, sub-
stantiate—and thus prove the reliability and trustworthiness—of our series
of expositions.
In the mode herein depicted—and in the manner thus described—do,
to the best of their abilities, the Authors (to the comprehension , merely,
by the human mind !) extend “The Footprints ” (metaphorically speak-
ing)—on the Majestic Physical Heavens — Of the Great and Mighty
Creator.
THE END.
CHAS. TBOEDEL AND CO., PBINTEBB, COLLINS STBEET EAST, MELBOURNE.


INAUGURATION
A MECHANICAL SYSTEM OF PHYSICS!
EXPLANATION OF NATURE’S PHENOMENA
FROM THE STANDPOINT OF VIEW OF
PREVALEN OE
—IN FIRMAMENTAD CREATION —OF
BUT ONE SOLE KIND OF FORCE,
EXTENSION of SCIENCE PROPER; with DETECTION of
MISSED LINKS in the CHAIN of MAN’S KNOW-
LEDGE to the PHYSICAL HEAVENS.
Discovery OF SOURCE of Celostial ENERGETIC MOTIVE Force
Proper, in its TRANSMITTED and CONSECUTIVE form of GROWTH I
An Intelligible and Comprehensive Descrip-
tion of the Combined Veritable Causes in
operation at work, effecting SOLAR TRANSLATION,
PLANETARY STABILITY, PLANETARY TWOFOLD MO-
TIONS, SATELLITE MOVEMENTS and Celestial Com-
plex Motion in general I Also, explaining the
various correct grounds and reason of the
Phenomena of PLANETARY ‘‘PERTURBATIONthe
reason how and why it be of the rotative move-
ments of the orbs known as URANUS and NEPTUNE
are of a “Retrograde” character! likewise,
rendering correct explanation of the Nature and
Consistence of COMETARY MASSES, means and
principle of their STABILITIES, precise LOCATIONS,
ORBIT MOTIONS, &c,- —in the scheme of things
celestial.
