

THE LONDON
CONVICT MAID.
Charlotte W -> the subject of this
laarrativ®', is- a native ©f London, born of
honest parents, she was- early taught the
value and importance of honesty and
virtue; hot- nahapSy w® her attaining
the- age of maturity,, her youthful a-ffec-
Hons- wese- placed on &> young Tradesman,
and te raise- money 4@ marry Iter lover,
she yielded to the tefflftatim to sub» her
master, sad Ms- property being fouisdi in
her possession* she- was immediately ap-
pr else tided, tried at the - €M.<l Bailey Ses-
sions* ceovkted, and sentenced to seven
years transportation* €to hi arrival at
Ifobsrt seat he® mother a very
affecting and pathetic letter* hour which
the following verses have- been composed,
and they aie here published by particu-
lar desire,in the confident hope- that this
account of her snffsrmgfi will serve as an
-example-to deter other females. from si-
milar practices*
YE. London 'maids attend t©> m»„
W' bile I relate my misery,
Thro' London Streets-1 ofthavestvayM,
But now 1 am a Convict Maid.
In innocence I ©nee did live.
In all 111® Joy that peace could give.
But sin my youthful heart betrayed#
And now I am a Convict Maid.
To wed my lover 1 did try,
To take my master's property,
So all my guilt was soon displayed*
And I became a Convict Maid.
Then 1 was soon to prison sent.
To wait in fear my punishment,
When at the bar 1 stood dismayed,
Since doomed to be a Convict Maid,
At length the Judge did me address,
Which filled with pain my aching breast
To Botany Bay you will fee conveyed.
For seve® years a Convict Maid.
For seven years- oh, how I sighed,
While- my poor mother loudly cried,
My lover wept, and tfcas he said.
May Cod be with my Convict Maid.
To yot* that fear soy mournful late;,
i cannot half my grief reveal,
No sorrow yet has- been pevrt rayed*
Like fiat of the poor Convict MaM,
Far frees my friends and home so dear,
My pnnishment is most severe,
My woe- is great and I'm afraid,.
That I shall die a Convict Maid,
I toil each day in grief and pain,
And sleepless through the night veraam.
My constant toils are- unrepatd,
And wretched is the Convict Maid.
Oh could 1 but ©nee more- be free,
I'd again a captive be,
But I would seek some honest trade,
And ne'er become is Convict MaiA.
BIRT, Printer, 39, Great St. Andrew Street, Seven Dials.
