

THE VOYAGE OF THE
73rd REGIMENT OF FOOT.




On the sth May, 1809 the 73rd Regiment of Foot received the rout
to march from Coil-well Barracks, Isle of Wight, to Yarmouth, there to
embark on His Majesty's Store Ships, the "Hindostan" of 50 guns and the
"Dromedary" of 38 guns. The 7th being the day fixed for the embarca-
tion, the Regiment marched from Collwell Barracks at 5 in the morning
and arrived at Yarmouth at 7, where they found the boats waiting for
them. The Grenadier Company with the Band and the Colours went in the
first boat. When the boat began to move off from, the shore the men of
the Regiment gave three cheers, the Band struck up "God save the King".
The morning was fine so that the whole Regiment was embarked in less
than an hour. The numbers so embarked on the "Dromedary" were Soldiers
368, Women 54, Children 41, Officers 10, The Sailors and Ships Officers
numbered 102, On the "Hindostan" 602 soldiers embarked. These two
ships were to be the home of the 73rd until Ist January 1810, when the
Regiment landed at Government Wharf, Sydney,
For an account of the voyage of the 73rd we are Indebted to a
junior officer of the Regiment, Ensign Alexander Huey, who maintained a
daily journal. Many of the entries merely record the day's run, latitude
and remarks about the weather, but the journal as a whole affords a live-
ly picture of the conditions under which British Sea Power enabled
Britain, while engaged in a life and death struggle with Napoleon, to
maintain control of her distant possessions. Ensign Huey, after a short
service with the 73rd, retired to bee one a painter of miniature portraits,
and the descriptions of scenes and incidents recorded indicate the ob-
servant eye and light touch of the painter.
We will allow Ensign Huey to tell the story of the voyage ih his
own words, so far as may be possible, preserving in every case his own
spelling.
All Officers were required to take a copy of Ships Standing Orders
and it may be of interest to quote these: "Ist, Every Officer in the
ship is particularly requested to take a Copy of the following Orders
"2nd, The Deck never to be left without the Officer of the Watch - who
is by no means to quit the Deck without being relieved,
"3rd, First watch, second master; in the Harbour or at Anchor to be
kept by Mr, Gray, second watch the Gunner, in his absence, Mr, Martin
who has charge of the lower deck; third watch Mr, Worthington, in his
absence Mr, Sullivan Signal Officer or Mr. Heard,
"4th. The Upper Deck at sea to be washed at Day light, as soon as the
sails are trimmed and we can see any distance,
"sth, At seven Bells the Hammocks to be piped up, the seamens Hammocks
to be stowed on the Quarter Deck and the starboard Gangway; all the other
nettings to be filled with soldiers Beds, the remainder of the soldiers
beds to be stowed on the booms between the boats.
"6th. At 8 o'clock pipe to breakfast, at 12 o'clock to dinner, the
Grog always to be served at 1 o'clock and at half past 4 in the evenings;
half-an-hour to Breakfast and a full hour to dinner, the people never to
be disturbed at these meals if possible to avoid it.


"7th, When the Hands are turned up after Breakfast the Decks are to be
cleaned, the loiter deck under the inspection of Mr. Martin and the subal-
tern officer of the Guard; the Gun deck under the inspection of the
Officer of the Morning Watch - when clean to be reported to me and the
commanding officer of the Troops that they may be inspected by both, all
the Decks to be swept after every meal,
"Bth, The Ship's Company, or soldiers are never to be allowed to wash
below or clean their mess utensils in any place except the Geliy, Upper
Deck or Head,
"9th, No Cloaths to be hung up to dry in the Rigging, but Ropes to be
kept for that purpose fore and aft between Ihe fore and main masts,
"10th, The Keys of all the Store rooms are to be taken out of ity cabin
by a young Gentleman, who is to see them returned and report all the
lights out, no naked light under any circumstance to be taken into a store
room; any officer seeing one out of a lanthcrn are positively ordered to
report it to me,
"11th, The Warrant Officers are never to convert or expend any stores,
not even a nail, without first obtaining my consent whether the stores
are in charge or not,
"12th, The Ship's Company and soldiers are to be mustered at Quarters,
every evening at sunset, and everything ready for action to prevent
being surprised in the night,
"13th, The Fires always to -be put out when the cabin Dinners are carried
aft, except two stoves, to boil tea kettles for the officers, all fires
and lights to be put out at 8 o'clock except officers and their attend-
ants,
"14th. The watches at sea to be mustered, sailors by the officers and
soldiers by the sergeants - the sergeant to report to the officer of the
watch the absentees - and the officer to me. The officer of the watch
to report to me the absent sailors. No man to be struck in the night
under any circumstances but put in Irons if obstreperous and me made
acquainted with it immediately,
"15th, I am to be called at all times night and day on the smallest
change of weather or wind, or appearance of a squall, strange sail or any
signal by the commander,
"16th, The Well to be sounded at anchor every morning and evening by the
Carpenters; at sea, every half-hour and report it to the officer of the
watch, by the carpenters mates of the watch,
"17th, That the troops divide themselves into messes".
After lying two days at anchor at Yarmouth we sailed to Spithead
where we lay waiting for Governor McQuarrie for near a fortnight, during
which time nothing material happened except a disorder of the eyes which
broke out among the soldiers. On the 21st morning we weighed anchor and
sailed through the harbour expecting the Governor every moment. He at
length came at A in the afternoon, attended by Colonel O'Connell and
Captain Pasco and Mr, Bent, Judge Advocate General, We received him in
all the state circumstances would allow; the Guard consisting of 40 men,
was drawn up on the Quarter deck and the Band was stationed on the Poop,


The moment the Governor came on the Quarter deck the Band struck up, the
Guard presented arms and the officers took off their hats. After lying
at anchor for 24 hours at St, Helens, the wind being against us, we got
up our anchor and beat up to round the Isle of Wight but were obliged to
corns to again, the "Hindostan" having broke the main top gallant yard,
Next morning we got under way again and, the wind becoming fair, we soon
saw the Isle of Wight like a blue cloud in the distance.
The same day we gave chase to two vessels who hoisted Swedish
colours; just as we came up with them the Commodore made signal to give
up the chase, which we did very unwillingly, being very suspicious of
them.
In two days more we got into the Bay of Biscay and we had scarce
entered it when we encountered a very heavy gale of wind, which made the
ship labour greatly.
On ttie 27th it began to blow fresh about 9 o'clock in the morning
and continued increasing till night in so much that we could carry no
more than close reefed main topsail. The Gun room (the place we slept
in), was ankle deep in water which rushed in through the rudder case
every minute. Our trunks not being cleated, were dashed about in every
direction by the rolling of the ship. In ibis pickle we slept or rather
continued awake all night. At 6 in the morning when every officer, ex-
cept myself, had left the gun room and gone on deck, the thick rope which
held the tiller broke. On it the whole management of the vessel depends,
for when it has gene the helm is of no use. Instantly the tiller began
to fly like lightning from side to side of the gun room. The remains of
the rope that held it, acting as a whip-lash, scoured the gunroom from
end to end. It lashed twice over my cott where I was lying and carried
away nearly all my blankets, I jumped out, naked as I was, dragged my
cloaths after me and got into Mr. Ovens's cott which hung up safe in a
comer. In a moment 10 or 12 sailors came running in with a lanthron,
and having got hold of the tiller and cleated on the relieving tackle,
began to splice the broken rope. Three of them who held the tackle,
without asking any questions, jumped into my cott where they sat at
their ease, chewing tobacco and singing songs. After having spliced
the tiller rope, they all went away and left me in darkness. About 3
o'clock the gale began to abate and before night it was quite moderate.
The following day we -were chased for 10 hours by a line of battle-
ship and a frigate.
On the 29th about 1 o'clock a strange sail appeared standing N.W,
The Commodore having made signal for us to give chase, we made all sail
after her and came up -with her about 6 in the evening. She did not
heave to until we fired three shot at her. She was a Swedish vessel
and had been 5 days in the possession of the French and was therefore
lawful prize. She carried about 400 tons and was laden with rice and
cotton. We computed her cargo to be worth about JE45»000, Captain Pasco


put a lieutenant \vith a party of sailors on board of the prize and sent
her to England the next day. The wind being quite fair for England, I
an sure she must have had a speedy passage.
While we were still in the Bay of Biscay it blew a most tremendous
gale of wind which lasted about 24 hours and carried away three stay
sails for the "Hindostan",
Nothing remarkable happened until 4th June, when we were off Cape
Pinistre about 70 miles from land. At 10 in the morning it began to
blow hard with much rain and we struck our top Gallant Masts Yards, At
11 o’clock we cane in sight of the Magiciene Frigate with a convoy of
Indianen and transports bound for the Brazils, The Magician having made
signal for the "Hindostan" to come within hail, we bore down on her,but
found it impossible to come close enough without danger of running foul .
of her. The"Magician"made signal for the "Hindostan" to send a boat on
board, and Captain Pasco accordingly lowered the jolly boat with nine
men, but a thick squall coming on, she was swamped in an instant. The
long boat was immediately lowered, but three of the men were drowned.
One of the poor fellows who had Just been saved, seeing two of his
comrades drowning exclaimed "Damn my eyesj They shall drink grog with
me in Plymouth yet" and immediately Jumped into the sea again and rescued
them both at the risk of his own life, A subscription was immediately
set on foot on board the "Hindostan" to reward the poor fellow for his
courage, which amounted to £3O,
All this tire we had a scene of a very different nature on board
the "Dromedary", Captain Pritchard, being determined to celebrate the
King’s birthday in as great a style as possible, ordered the Band tip to
play "God save the King" on the Quarter Deck, but they had scarce played
the first half of the tune when the ship gave a lurch which sent them all
rolling to the lee side, to the great amusement of the sailors.
The gale continued to increase so greatly that at night we were
obliged to lay to under bare poles, I slept all night on the ward room
floor, the gun room being in a shocking state with trunks and barrels
rolling about, and water rushing in at the rudder case.
When I came on deck in the morning, the first object that caught my
eye was a large frigate with a signal of distress flying. The sea was
still running very high, although the storm was considerably abated, I
had not been five minutes on deck when the Quarter-master brought some-
thing stowed up in a hammock and laid it down on the gangway, I Immedi-
ately recollected it was the body of the Ship’s Tailor who had died the
day before. Captain Pritchard, having advanced with a Bible in his
hands, read a verse or two and the Quarter-master launched the body over-
board, Such is the burial of a sailor. Before night it wae quite
moderate but there was still a heavy swell, so that we could get nothing
put to rights till next day. On 10th we came in sight of the island of


Porto Santo, It is very high land and can be seen at 9 leagues distance.
Soon after we saw the island of Madeira and we stood all night between
Madeira and the Desertas,
On 11th June we came to anchor in Funchal Roads and saluted the
Portuguese with 15 guns, which they returned, Nothing can be more beauti-
ful than the appearance of Funchal from the sea. It is built on the shore
at the foot of a ridge of very high mountains, which are covered almost
up to the summit with vineyards, orangeries, gentlemen's seats and
convents. The houses are all whitewashed. The appearance of Funchal is
as singular by night as it is beautiful by day, the lights rising one
above the other up to the mountain Chapel. I went with a party of
officers to visit the Cathedral Church which we entered while Grand Mass
was being celebrated, it being the feast of San Antonio, The walls are
covered with paintings and hung with scarlet tapestry fringed with gold:
there are several images of Christ and the Virgin of pure gold or silver:
the floor was strewn with sweet smelling flowers and leaves and the
building was lighted with at least 500 wax tapers. After service was
over we were taken into the Sanctum Sanctorum and shown a golden image
of Christ on the Cross, After seeing all that we could in the Church,
a party of us set out to have a walk up the mountain. The view from
there is very grand and extensive, the town, the men of war in the roads,
and the Desertas appearing all in distant prospect.
The weather, while we lay at Funchal, was very hot, the thermome-
ter standing commonly at 75 and rising to 86 where exposed to the sun.
The common people of the island are of a tawny complexion and tolerably
well made, having all fine black eyes. Their dress consists of a coarse
shirt, a pair of linen breeches which tye at the knee and are made very
wide, a pair of slippers and a blue cloth Cap, The women wear the same
dress as those of their rank in England,
The inhabitants of the town are not near so healthy looking as the
country people. The men wear their deaths made in the French fashion,
which look as if they had been bought at a pawn-brokers. Many of them'
wear cocked hats and it is said that they all wear a stiletto concealed
in their bosom.
The stones and rocks on the island are all black and look as if
they had been in the fire. The tops of the mountains inland are said to
be covered with snow all the year round. Many streams come down from
the hills in deep glens which separate various parts of the island.
They have plenty of excellent potatoes and they sometimes sow wheat and
barley. The enclosures of the vineyards and fields of wheat consist of
walls about 2 ft, high and hedges of prickly pear, pomgranates, apricots
and peaches. The great produce of Madeira is the vine from which it
has acquired fame and support. Where the soil, exposure and supply of
water will admit the vine is cultivated. One or more walks about a yard


or two wide intersect each vineyard and are enclosed by a wall 2ft. high.
Along these walks, which are arched over with laths about 7ft. high, they
erect wooden pillars at regular distances to support a lattice-work of
bamboos which slope down on each side of the walk till it is only a foot-
and-a-half or 2ft, high, at which elevation it extends over the whole
vineyard. The vines in this manner are supported from the ground and the
people have room to root up the weeds which spring up among them. In the
season of the vintage they creep under this lattice work, cut off the
grapes and lay them into baskets. Some bunches of these grapes weigh six
pounds and upwards. Ripening the grapes in the shade contributes to give
the Madeira wines that excellent flavour and body for which they are so
remarkable.
There are no snakes in Madeira but all the houses, vineyards and
gardens swarm with lizards.
On the 18th the Commodore fired a gun and hoisted the Blue Peter,
On the morning of the 19th we weighed anchor and took leave of this fine
island. Next day we got into the N,E, Trades. On 23rd we came in sight
of Palma, one of the Canary Islands, This day we saw numbers of flying
fish and bonnettas. The flying fish rose commonly at the head of the
vessel and skimmed along the water like swallows.
Oh 24th at 4,00 in the morning we saw a strange sail close under
our bow, boarded her and found her to be a schooner from Madeira bound to
Vera Cruz, Early in the morning we entered the tropic of Cancer and had
the sun vertical at 12,00 o'clock. Notwithstanding this it was sis cool
as the month of July in Britain,
On 28th we discovered the island of Sal, one of the Gape Vend
islands, bearing west, A few hours after Bonavista hove in sight. We
stood on our course all night and next rooming found ourselves near Mayo,
passed within 4 miles of the shore and saw some cocoa nut trees growing
and a boat close under the rocks. The island of Mayo is low, sandy and
barren, with very few trees. It is chiefly inhabited by monkeys. There
is a kind of harbour at the S,E, end of it where brigs and sloops some-
times lie. This morning a flying fish flew into the fore chains and was
caught by Black Tom, the Captain's servant.
The wind since our departure from Madeira had been quite fair and
our passage had hitherto been very pleasant. The band performed on the
Quarter Deck every evening at 6,00 o'clock. At 8,00 the drums and fifes
began to play and the soldiers and sailors danced till 10,00,
On the 30th at 2,00 o'clock in the forenoon we came to anchor in
Porto Praya Bay and saluted the Port with 13 guns which they returned.
The appearance of the town is fejywretched. There is nothing to be seen
but barren rocks and sand and a few huts scattered up and down. It is
defended by two or three batteries which are manned by negroes. All the
inhabitants of Porto Praya, the Governor and a few of his officers ex-
cepted, are negroes. The island of St. lago rises into a high rugged


peak in the middle. As -we sailed olose along the shore we could see a
village situated in a deep valley and the natives walking with long
sticks in their hands, which we supposed to be fishing rods. The natives
of St. lago are all black, tall and well made. They go almost naked.
Their dress in general consists of a pair of drawers or an apron. Some
of the women wear a kind of white frock and a white turban. I went ashore
at 6 o'clock in the morning in the Captain's boat. We found it very
difficult to land by reason of the great surf. Two negroes met us the
moment we landed. They were dressed in old, torn breeches and cocked
hats. In a short time we perceived two negroes riding towards us on
asses. Their whole dress consisted of an old blue jacket, a ragged pair
of breeches and a miserable cocked hat. We knew they belonged to the
Cavalry by the cross belts xvhich they wore. When we arrived at the town,
which is half-a-mile from the landing place, we found plenty of pine-
apples, coconuts, plantains and pumpkins for sale. The town is composed
of two rows of huts, each row about half-a-mile long. The Governor has
about 400 men in arms. Few of them have any deaths. Some have cocked
hats, others round hats and most of them no hats at all. Those who do
not belong to this corps go almost naked. They are a quiet, peaceable
set of people and not unlike the hottentots.
Mr. Mclntosh, our Quarter Master, paid a visit to the Portuguese
Governor, He is a man of family and wears a star in his breast with the
sign of the Sancta Croix. He seems inclined to favour the French,
The soil close to the town of Porto Praya is all rocks and sand,
but two or three miles inland the country is beautiful, producing
oranges, lemons, limes, cocoa nuts, bananas, pineapples and mamme apples
in the greatest abundance. Poultry is so plentiful here that for an old
cocked hat or belt you will get 20 turkeys or hens, A pair of monkeys
sell here for l/- or an old hat. One of our officers went up a mile or
two into the country and shot a beautiful bird, something like a
parroquett.
While I remained in the town, asses and mules came in from the
woods every minute with fruit which they carried in cow skin baskets
laid across the animal's back, A very pretty negro girl requested to
go and live with Lieut, Scotton and be his slave. Another black girl
threw her arras round Mr, Bose's neck and kissed him, I went into one of
the huts and saw an old woman and two or three children sitting on their
hams round a fire of sticks, roasting mamme apples and plantains.
The thermometer stood at 80° while we lay at Porto Praya, Many of
the natives in the Portuguese Service would come up to our officers and
shake hands with them or paw their belt and say "You tenante me tenante"
that is "You are a lieutenant and so am I", or"I am a lieutenant as
well as you". When any of them met us they never failed to tabs off
the ir hats,


Took on board 13 bullocks for the use of the Ship’s Company and
soldiers. After laying in a sufficient stock of fresh beef and veget**
ables we weighed anchor and set sail for Rio Janeiro, The wind con-
tinued pretty fair until we got within 10° of the line. It then fell
calm and continued so for a week with frequent squalls of wind accompani-
ed by vivid flashes of lightning and heavy rain, A gentle breeze sprung
up as we approached the line, which carried us along at the rate of 40
or 50 miles a day.
Two days after we left St, lago a large ship appeared on our star-
board quarter bearing down upon us with studding sails set. The Commodore
held on his course and made signal for the "Dromedary" to lay to for her
and see what she was, We hauled our wind, cleared for action and beat to
Quarters, At dusk of the evening she got up with us and hoisted American
colours. It was well for her she did so, for we were just going to pour
a broadside into her. She was a vessel of about 700 tons.
July we crossed the Equinoctial line about 7.00 o’clock in
the evening. At this time the "Hindostan’s sick list increased to an
alarming degree. It amounted to no less than 50 men.
On 25th the Commodore made signal to send Dr, Carter on board. He
went and found the "Hindostan’s sick list increased to 59 soldiers, 20
sailors, 5 women and 2 children. Most of'them were ill of the flux, 20
were unable to rise out of their hammocks, the rest were convalescent.
The same day he cut off the leg of a boy below the knee. While the
doctor was on board the "Hindostan" a heavy squall came on, accompanied
with rain, which carried away or mizen stay sail and split the main
topsail.
Oh 29th the Commodore made signal that the boy whose leg had been
cut off, had died of a lockjaw.
On Ist August a strange sail appeared right ahead, coming down
before the wind. When she got pretty near us we changed our tack and
boarded her and found her to be a Portuguese schooner bound from Buenos
Ayeres to St, 'Salvadore, and laden with hides and tallow,
_At 8 o'clock next morning a strange sail hove in sight right ahead,
standing on the same course as ourselves. The Commodore mads signal for
the "Dromedary" to give chase. The wind being right aft we set studding
sails and royals. The breeze freshening re went at the rate of 8 miles
an hour. At 1 o'clock we saw another sail standing on the same course
as the first. We could plainly perceive the first to be a brig. At 2
o'clock we caffiewithin gun shot of her and fired three shots at her which
brought her to. Sent Mr. Cleveland on board her in the jolly boat. She
proved to be a Portuguese slave ship with 540 female slaves on board
from Benguela in Africa bound for Rio Janeiro, 50 of the slaves had
died since they left the coast of Africa. The Portuguese Captain told
Cleveland that when a slave took ill he had him thrown overboard


immediately lest the disorder should spread.
At 7 o’clock next morning the Commodore took it into his head
he saw land and began to make signals accordingly, but it proved to be
Cape Ply away,
August sth, Latitude 22,37. At sunset discovered land right
ahead, with three large sail standing off. Lay to all night on the lar-
board tack,
August 6th (Sunday), At 12 o’clock we were abreast of Gape Prio
about 60 miles from the harbour of Rio Janeiro,
Next morning found ourselves close by the mouth of the Harbour,
After sunset we got in and came to anchor in the midst of the British
Squadron which conveyed the Prince Regent from Portugal, A Lieutenant
was Immediately sent on board us by Admiral De Oourcey to know who we
were. After settling the business for which he was sent, he informed us
of the loss of His Majesty’s Ship "Agamemnon" of 64 guns in the mouth of
the River Plate, He likewise informed us that the "Caroline" frigate
had been taken by the "Cannonin'' French frigate.
Next day when everything ms settled on board, and the ship moored,
Governor MoQuarrie went on shore and paid a visit to the Prince Regent,
He then went to Admiral de Courcey and applied for a transport to carry
the sick to the Cape of Good Hope, A ship of about 400 tons was immed-
iately appointed,
August 10th, I went on shore at 11 o’clock in the forenoon with a
party of our officers. While we were walking up and down the palace
square we observed all the Portuguese take off their hats. We could not
comprehend the meaning of this until an English Gentleman came up and
told us the Prince Regent was standing on the Balcony right over our
heads. We immediately took off our hats and looked up and he smiled and
nodded at us. In a few minutes the Prince of Spain and the infant of
Portugal appeared on the Balcony. The Prince of Spain is an ill looking
fellow of about 20 years of age. He is Lord High Admiral of the
Portuguese Navy, It is said he arouses himself every day by riding on a
stick, a very pretty amusement for a Lord High Admiral, The infant of
Portugal is a good looking boy of about 12 years of age. When I saw him
he was dressed in a Green Coat, a yellowish pair of pantaloons and an
old pair of Boots, The Portuguese troops, both horse and foot, are
dressed in blue turned up with red, and look exactly life a Corps of
Irish Yeoman,
The evening after we arrived in Rio we dropped down and anchored
astern of the "Elizabeth 74" about 20 yards distance. Our anchor was
scarcely dropped when Captain Cozans sent a Lieutenant on board us with
orders to get out of his way. Captain Pritchard desired the Lieutenant
to tell Captain Cozans "that he could not get out of his way that night
as the men were wet and fatigued, but would do it early next morning".


Oapt Cozans sent the Lieutenant back to tell us we must get out of his
way directly by G-d, so we were obliged to obey this bird of paradise
and weigh anchor in the midst of heavy rain and lightning. The same
night I kept watch from 12 to 4,
August 10th, I went with Capt, Antill and Mr. Crane to visit a
large Monastery situated on a hill above the town. When we arrived at
the Gates two Monks met us and very politely took us through the whole
place, even into the Sanctum Sanctorum. When we were going away these
good old men shook hands with us and promised to come and see us on
board the "Dromedary".
August 15th, Lieut, Crane and Ensign McLain went ashore in their
kilts, to the great wonder and admiration of the Portuguese, who flocked
from all quarters to see them.
Everything in Rio Janeiro is done by the slaves. Many of these
poor creatures have Rings of Iron and Chains round their necks. It is
very common to see ten or twelve of them yoked to a cart and drag it
along, singing "Yoo, long. Era Ba diong". The Prince Regent has twelve
slaves chained together who draw water for the use of the palace. They
are attended by a negro driver with a long stick, who cuts as many
capers as a Drum Major,
On the evening of the 17th a slave hid himself in the fore sheets
of our launch (which was coming on board laden with water casks) and
by that means £pt on board, but we sent him on shore when we were leaving
Rio,
Oranges are so cheap at Rio that you can get a hundred for two
pence, and if we had taken the trouble of sending a boat to the other
side of the harbour we might have got a cargo for nothing. While we lay
at Rio the ship's Company and soldiers were supplied with fresh provi-
sions and oranges every day at the Prince Regent's expense.
While we lay at Rio Janeiro two soldiers who were prisoners on the
poop made their escape during the night in the jolly boat which was
then lying astern. They got ashore at the west end of the harbour, and
made into the interior of the country, but the boat was brought back
next morning by two black fellows. One day as Lieut. Shotton and I
were walking behind the palace one of the princesses came out cn the
balcony. We looked up and saw her legs as far up as the thigh, she had
no stockings on.
On our arrival we found a ship from New South Wales on her way to
England, She was 10 weeks from Sidney Cove, and came round Cape Horn,
The passengers on board her were - Lieut, Colonel Jonson, Dr. Jamison,
Surgeon-general of the Colony, and Dr. Harris of the 102nd Regiment,
Everything was quiet when they left the country.


One day when I was going ashore in the launch we passed a boat
with 6 Portuguese on board her, who sung a song keeping tine with their
oars.
Sir James Gambier, the English Consul, gave a ball, to which all
our officers were invited.
Admiral de Gourcy came on board us to pay a visit to the Governor.
We turned out a Guard to receive him, the Band played "God Save the King",
The same day Captain Gozans of the "Elizabeth 74", Captain Too of the
"Confianoe" sloop of War and the Captain of the "Bedford 74" came on
board us to visit the Governor,
The American Indians brought canoes alongside every day laden with
bananas and oranges, which they sold very cheap. Oranges 6d, the hundred,
bananas l/- the stalk or bunch. Some of our officers got the jolly boat
and sailed round the harbour. They landed on several little islands which
lay far up the Harbour and found them covered with lime and orange trees.
The day before we sailed we took on board 15 live oxen for the use
of the ship's company and soldiers. One of the largest of them was no
sooner hoisted in than he broke the rope that held him and cleared the
deck in an instant. He threw down a sailor who attempted to catch him,
and was returning to gore him with his horns when the sailor escaped his
fury by creeping through a port which was (fortunately for him) open at
the time, and getting into the main chain. The animal inent to the gang-
way and after hesitating for a few moments, ttirew himself down into the
launch which was lying alongside, a height of 25 feet, and broke his legs.
He was again hoisted in and killed immediately.
On August 22nd at 8 o’clock in the morning the Commodore hoisted the
Blue Peter and fired a gun.
Early on the morning of 23rd we weighed anchor and stood out from
the harbour with a gentle breeze fpom the N,E, For several days nothing
occurred worthy of note. We saw a number of albatross and pintados
flying round the ship and fired some shots at them.
On 30th we exercised the men at the Great Guns and dried a quantity
of Cartridge paper in the sun. The Governor issued an order that the
men should be exercised every day at the Great Guns in future, as it was
very probable that we should fall in with the "Cannonin' 1 French frigate
before we reached the Gape,
On Ist September at 3 o'clock noon our Carpenter Mate fell over-
board and was drowned. Both ships lowered their boats to save him but
all to no purpose. He remained 20 minutes above water and just as the
boats returned and were hoisted in a very heavy squall came on which
would have certainly sunk them, had they been one minute later. The
weather was now beginning to get colder.


On 3rd- September Mr, Sullivan, our Signal Faster, fell overboard
at the poop -while two large sharks were swimming round the ship, but
saved himself by swimming to the gangway.
On 10th September we had Divine Service performed on the Quarter
Deck by the Judge Advocate, This day Captain Pritchard thinking, from
the unusual number of birds flying about the ship, that there might be
a rock or shoal not far distant, placed a sailor at the mast head to
look out. Next day in the rooming we spoke the Commodore and found all
well on board him. At 2 o'clock in the morning the Commodore fired a
musket at us to make us keep off, as we were coming too close.
On September 14th after parade, a general search was made through
the soldiers and sailors chests. Three soldiers were confined. Next
day at 11 o'clock two of the prisoners were flogged. Between 5 and 6
in the evening, when we were at quarters, a large sea snake appeared on the
water opposite our larboard side. He jumped out of the water 10 or 12
times to the height of about 14- feet, and swam veiy quick, He was cbas-
ing some grampuses when we saw him.
Nothing of note occurred until September 23rd, At 6 o'clock the
Commodore, being about one mile ahead, made signal for land but we could
not discover it until 8 o'clock although we had a man stationed on the
fore top Gallant mast to look out. ¥e held on our course till 9 o'clock
when, the sky clearing up, we plainly saw the Lion's Rump about 25 miles
distant on our lee beam. The Commodore immediately bore away for it and
set top gallant sails and studding sails. At 12 we were close in by the
shore and in a quarter-of-an-hour we came to anchor in Table Bay oppo-
site the town. The moment our anchor was dropped the Table Cloth was
spread on Table Mountain and a heavy squall of wind and rain came on.
September 25th, Pine weather. Thermometer at 68, The Cape of
Good Hope was formerly called Cap de tormentos, or Cape of Storms, from
the difficulty the first navigator experienced in doubling it, and
though it is seldom passed by our ships without their meeting gales of
wind in its vicinity, yet we had pleasant weather and smooth water all
the time it was in sight. The Table Mountain rises above the level of
Table Bay to the height of 3,582 feet, as determined by Gapt. Bridges
of the Royal Engineers, The height of the Lion's Head is 3»315 feet
and the height of the Devil's Mountain, 2,160 feet. The Devil's moun-
tain is broken into irregular points, but the upper part of the Lion's
Head is a solid mass of stone rounded and fashioned like a work of art.
These three mountains are composed of rocky strata piled on each
other in large tabular masses; their exact horizontal position denote
the origins to be neptunean and not volcanic. In the summer season,
when that well-known appearance of the fleecy cloud (not inaptly termed
the Table Cloth) covers the summit of the mountain, the inhabitants of
the Cape town are sure of a gale of wind from the South East,


While we lay at the Cape the ’ thermometer ranged from 65 to 70. The
public Garden is in length about 1,000 yards and contains about 40 acres
of rich land. The public walk runs up the middle, and is well shaded with
oak trees. It is well stocked with all the curious animals of Africa,
Within the garden is the Government House, a neat and convenient building
without any appearance of grandeur. Under the porch at the front of the
house is the skin of a Cameleo paradilis stuffed and standing erect, I
believe it is the only one that has ever been caught. Fire wood is so
scarce here that a single cart load of it sells in the town for 7 Rix
Dollars, In most families a slave is kept for the express purpose of
collecting fire wood; he goes out in the morning, ascends the mountains
and returns at night with two small Bundles of faggotts, the produce of
six or eight hours hard labour, swinging at two ends of a Bamboo carried
across his shoulder.
The general officers here are Lord Caledon, Governor, General
Hitherow and General Gray, The 24th, 72nd and 93rd Regiments with the 21st
Dragoons are Quartered at Cape Town,- the 83rd and 87th Regts, are Quartered
at Stillengbush, Simmons town, the Hottentot Corps are quartered at Wine
Berg, The shipping is commanded by Admiral Bertie, who has hoisted his
flag on board the "Hindostan",
While we lay here it blew so hard for two days, that we could not
send a boat on shore.
The following is a list of the Birds and Beasts to be seen in the
public Gardens,;
( an Ostrich
Birds ( a bird called the Adjutant
( a bird called the Secretary,
( a Lion and Lioness
Beasts £ a Gnu
( Two Antelopes
( a Tiger.
While we lay at the Cape fresh bread and mutton was served out to
the men every day. Some of the sheeps tails weighed 16 pounds. They
were all fat.
Three miles out of town some of our officers went to see a Hotten-
tot woman who wore the celebrated apron. She was an enormous, fat woman.
The apron was simply a prolongation of the nyraphae.
While we lay at the Cape of Good Hope two ambassadors arrived from
the King of the Gaffrees, They wore rings on their arms made of the
teeth of the elephants which they had killed. They were dressed in the
Gompleat Caffri style, with tiger skins on their shoulders and buskins,
armed with asagays and shields. They performed some of their war
manoeuvres in presence of Governor McQuarrie and Lord Caledon, An
officer belonging to the Hottentot corps at Winberg had his horse eaten


up by the wolves while we lay at the Cape. Sometime before we arrived
a oentinel was carried away from his post and devoured by these animals
A tiger was shot by some officers.-
On 4th October fresh gales and squalls and showers of rain. We
struck lower yards and sent top gallant masts on deck and braced the
yards to the wind. At this time a considerable quantity of snow fell
on ttre mountains inland. One morning early I saw a little on Table
Mountain, but as the sun rose it melted away,
.Oaptain Antill and Mr. Shippin went to the top of the table
Mountain. It took three hours to ascend and two hours and a half to
descend. Near the summit of the mountain large baboons appeared among
stones at them. The summit is a rocky flat full of
little pools of water.
On October 11th at 8 o'clock in the morning the"Hindostan" fired
a gun and hoisted the Blue Peter.
On Friday the 13th at 9 o'clock in the morning the Governor came
on board. At 2we got under way with very little wind and lay a stretch
across the Bay. At 4 a breeze sprang up from the south which carried us
along at the rate of 3 miles an hour. The Commodore made signal to go
out, on the starboard side of Robins Island. At 10 o'clock Post Meridian
we were 5 Leagues distant from Table Bay and saw fires burning on the
Hottentot mountains. The wind fell during the night, and continued calm
most of the next day.
. 4.u in the morning, there being very little wind
and the ships drifting fast in towards the shore, the Commodore hailed
us, and desired us to get out our boats and tow the ships head off the
land. This day was so hot that it was almost impossible to remain on
deck above half an hour. We hove the lead and found a bottom of Coral
at 35 fathom. At 2 O'clock it being quite calm and the ships being
a ou 3 miles distant from the shore, ire saw a smoke rising among the
craggy rocks near the summit of Table Mountain. This we supposed to be
•he Hottentcts burning their dead. This evening the setting sun appeared
in the shape of a Goblet, a Smith's Anvil, etc. It was a fine night and
e moon was up. At 2in the morning a smart breeze sprang up from the
0.0. L. which carried us along at 7 knotts an hour.
October 15th. Stiff breezes and cloudy. Went 7 knotts an hour.
Course S,West. This day a sailor was stationed at the fore top Gallant
mast head to look out for strange sails, having received orders from
Admira! Bertie to board every vessel we met, -but especially to look out
tor the Cannonin'', which was now fitted out as a store ship and was
laden 'kh® Property of the principal merchants in the Isle
of Prance, At 11 o'clock the Commodore made signal for us to keep at
a distance from him and look out for strange sails. At 1 he made signal
to recall us, &


At 2 a strange sail appeared on. our lee Bow, The Commodore bore
away and set all sail -we did the same. At 3 coming up with her,
Corrmodore made signal - strange sail suspicious - at A could plainly
perceive her to be a large sail standing from us with studding sails
set. Commodore made signal to prepare for battle. Captain Pritchard
ordered all Chests down into the hold and the powder horns and buckets
to be served out to each gun. The Governor ordered all the officers
to prepare themselves to go to Quarters Immediately,
At swe were within 12 miles of the "Chace", At sunset nearly
lost sight of the Commodore, 10 miles distant from the "Chace", At 8
o’clock we could not see the Commodore, At this time some of our men
imagined they saw the ’’Chace’ 1 right ahead. At 11 the Commodore made
signal to us by sky rockets ■which we answered and gave up the "Chace",
16th, At 9 in the morning we were within 1 mile of the
Commodore and standing East by South, to double the Cape of Good Hope
a third time - having been 18 miles beyond it when we saw the strange
sail and having run 70 miles back again, in pursuit of her. Stiff
breezes from the South, Went 8 miles an hour at 12 o’clock we saw the
Table Mountain 27 miles distant on our weather bow. Commodore made
signal to rendezvous at Port Phillip in Van Deimen’s land - shortly
after he made signal to wear ship. Course W,S, West,
17th, At 2,00 in the morning it blew very hard. At 4,00 the
wind came round to E,S,E, and we changed our Course of W.S.West, Moder-
ate and cloudy with a heavy swell. Saw a few plntadoes and albatrosses.
At 2 lowered the jolly boat and shot 6 albatrosses. We weighed two of
the largest of them and found them to be 18 and 19 pounds each. Their
wings extend 10 feet, 5 inches from tip to tip. They lived some hours
after we brought them on board, and would snap at everything we pre-
sented to them. When they were put close together they would bite one
another and make a strange noise something like the bass drone of a
bagpipe.
For several days there was little to record. On Sunday, October
22nd,, when we wore at parade, a heavy squall of wind came on. Before
we had time to let go the topsail haliards our weather mizen topsail
sheet was carried away. The "Hindostan" had her weather topsail sheet
carried away and her mizen top gallant sheet. Close reefed the topsails.
At 12 a very stiff breeze from the S,W, Went 9 and 10 knotts an hour.
At 2 took in every sail except the fore topsail which was close reefed.
The Commodore has his top gallant sail set and jib. The ship was roll-
ing very much.
On October 24th fresh provisions were served out to the men for
the last time, our 120 sheep being consumed since we left Cape Town,
At 2 o’clock a squall carried away our fore topsail sheets. We
immediately clewed up our fore topsail and scudded under our main top-
sail close reefed. Between 4 and 5 o'clock afternoon we had the heaviest


squall of wind and rain had met with since we left England. It last-
ed half-an-hour and roared through the rigging with utmost fury. We lost
sight of the "Hindostan" during the squall. When it cleared up we saw
her 6 miles astern. When it began to blow 4 men were sent down to the
relieving tackle and the dead lights were shut in. The sea was very high.
(This day I was appointed to act with Captain Gray's Company).
Next day there was little or no wind, but a prodigious swell which
made the ship labour very much and work open the seams of the spar deck
so that there was not a sailor on the gun deck had a dry berth to sleep
in. At this time the gun deck was always knee deep in water and the
orlop deck nearly as bad. Our sick list at this time was 27 soldiers
and sailors with 2 or 3 women, 2 men, 1 woman and 3 children had died
since we left England, We had only one case of fever on board ship and
the principal disorders were colds and bruises from falling down the
hatchways.
We continued for several days to have a very heavy swell from the
North, the ship rolling heavily from not having a sufficient quantity of
sail to keep her steady. The gun deck and orlop deck knee deep in water,
which came in at the ports every minute. There were 3 feet and 4 inches
of water in the hold. The regimental chests and hen coops on the poop
broke their cheating and were dashed about from side to side. The cow
was rolled out of her berth and nearly killed. We got Mr. McCreevy's
cott and put her into it. She swung like a pendulum. At 10 in the
morning we set more sail, which kept the ship steady so that we got
everything put to rights. Numbers of our men were hurt by the rolling of
the ship. One man got the sinews of his leg cut by a broken bottle
which was floating about in the water between the decks. The 4 arm
chests were taken off the poop and stuck down in the cable ties. Their
weight had injured the poop very much and almost shook it to pieces.
At 6 in the evening we lay to to let the Commodore go ahead.
Punished two soldiers for fighting, with a dozen lashes each. The
Commodore passed close under our stem and hailed us.; "How is the
Governor and Mrs. McQuarrie?" "The Governor is very well. The rolling
of the vessel this morning from the want of sail has made Mrs McQuarrie
worse", "If the Governor wishes to part company he is very welcome",
"We wish to keep company as long as it can be done with safety".
After this the weather greatly improved. There was very little
swell, the ship sailing quietly. We got the gun room ports open, which
was very pleasant after living a week in darkness.
On 30th October we had an inspection of arms and accoutrements.
The band performed on the poop. At 6in the evening while we were reef-
ing top sails, a sailor fell down from the fore top upon the forecastle
and -was killed. He was immediately carried down to the Doctor's cabin
where I was sitting with Dr. Craigie. Hartshorn was applied to his
temple and Dr. Craigie attempted to bleed him but could bring no blood.


He breathed two or three times and fell asleep, never to wake again.
Dr, Garter laid open the scalp and found the skull fractured in a most
dreadful manner. It was a most interesting scene to observe the
countenances of the tars whocame in to see their dead messmate. Some
of the poor fellows shed tears while they held him by the hands.
On 2nd November we had only 150 tons of water remaining. We ex-
pended 2 tons a day. Allowance of fresh water was one quart a day for
each man. No water to be taken from the scuttle butts unless for the
Sick Bay and the Officers and that before sunset. At 12 o'clock fore-
noon the Commodore made signal that a slight bowel complaint had broken
out among his men occasioned, he supposed, by the use of Cape Wine which
was served out to the men instead of grog. Soon after we passed within
hail of him and found that he had 23 seamen and 30 soldiers on the sick
list. We had only 2 or 3, He seemed determined to go through Basses
Straights, He offered to go through with the "Hindostan" and let the
"Dromedary” go by Van Deimen's Land. At this time we had 51 children
on board, having started the voyage with 41. The weather now was
pleasant. We scudded along at 5 and 6 knotts.
On November 6th we we re put on short allowance of fresh water,
only one pint a day to each man, having only 50 days water on board and
being near 4,000 miles from our destination.
On November Bth we were struck by a squall. Towards evening the
wind increased so much that we could only carry a main topsail close
reefed. At 8 o'clock in the evening a sea came in on the Quarter Deck
which swept Mr, McLaine from the weather side to the Gapsten, At this
time the water came into our beds in the gun room through the seams of
the gun deck, which had been worked open by the constant rolling of the
sea. The water came in at the scuttles of the orlop deck every sea that
came and the seams of the gun deck were so open that few of Captain
Gray's company could sleep dry. This evening a sailor was put in irons
for drunkenness and irregular conduct. On November 10th the prisoners
were punished with two dozen lashes each. At 2 o'clock we sent a boat
on board the Commodore with a barrel of coals for Captain Pasco. Captain
Pasco sent a letter back with the boat to Captain Pritchard mentioning
that all his firewood was expended, the purser not having laid in a
sufficient stock of it,- that it was his intention to touch at St, Paul's
if the gather would permit - that his sick list was reduced from 39 to
18, This evening one of our men caught a Cape Hen with hook and line
which was allowed to trail astern. This day a man died on board the
"Hindostan",
On November 12th, while the men were reefing the top sails to get
the top gallant masts down, the main topsail split into rags. We un-
bent him and got up a new one. Dreary, unpleasant weather. The
Commodore made signal to steer S,E, X E, to keep clear of the island of
St, Paul's, Next day we had strong gales with rain. In the evening
the Commodore carried away his fore top gallant mast while he was
getting it up.


November 17th, At 11 o'clock the Commodore made signal to pass
within hail. Hailed us and desired us to send him some fuel and lime
juice, as he stood much in need of it. This day we had 120 tons of
water on board. Lime jtaice was served out to the soldiers.
For several days there was little of importance to record. One
day when we were close to the Commodore's ship we could see Captain
Pasco amusing himself shooting albatrosses from the poop of the "Hindostan'.’
We bore away for fear some of his shot would come aboard us. The weather
was variable.
On 21st we saw two new birds. We supposed them to be from New
Holland, In the afternoon the weather became quite moderate, so we got
the soldiers hammocks piped up and the deck scraped and cleaned.
The Commodore hailed us and enquired after the Governor's health
and demanded firewood. This evening one of the sailors struck a por-
poise with the harpoon, but the ship having great way through the
water and the fish being very strong, the tackle broke and the fish got
off with the iron sticking in his back.
On 24-th the soldiers paraded in their new cloathing and were
inspected by the Governor. This day we were 2,900 miles from Sidney,
On 25th Mr, Bent, the Judge Advocate was bled a third time. The
Commodore made a signal to know how the Judge Advocate was. Numbers of
strange birds were flying round the ship. To-day we were 2,020 miles
from Governor King's Island in Van Deimen's Land,
On 28th white trousers were served out to the soldiers.
On 29th the Commodore made signal "How is Mr. Bent? lam afraid it
will fall calm, Gan you spare me any more firewood?" To which we made
answer; "Mr, Bent is better. I can spare you no more firewood and
Captain Pritchard is very ill".
On December Ist our sick list was 37 soldiers. Captain Pritchard
and the Judge Advocate. At 10,00 in the morning the Commodore came on
board to see Captain Pritchard and Mir, Bent and stayed until half-past
eleven. On December 3rd we were 1,300 miles from Sidney Gove. To-day
we made signal: "Captain Pritchard is better but not yet able to get
out of bed". This day we began to live on salt provisions, our stock
of sheep and pigs being all consumed.
On 4-th December we were 785 miles from Governor King's Island in
Basses Straits,
December 6th we made signal to the Commodore; "Captain Pritchard
not able to get out of his bed, Mr. Bent is better". The Commodore
made signal to heave to and try for soundings. We sounded at 100
fathoms and found no bottom.


On ?th December at 5 o'clock in the morning Captain Pritchard took
it into his head that he was worse. He called Mr. Sullivan, the Officer
of the Watch, into his cabin and addressed him thus: "Make signal to the
Commodore for medical assistance directly. Damn my eyes they have been
kicking me about this fortnight with swipes and a cup of chicken broth.
By God I keep as good a table as any man in these seas, I know that
damned well". At 10.00 Captain Pasco came on board with Captain Arnold
to see Captain Pritchard ands tayed till 11.00,
December 9th, 150 miles from Governor King's Island, Very little
wind. At 4.00 this morning made all sail and went ahead to look for
land. At 10.00 Commodore 10 miles astern. At 4.00 lowered a jolly boat
to sound. Sounded with 166 fathoms no bottom. Lost three leads and
three lines. Lay to from 2.00 o'clock till 7.00 to let the Commodore
get-up with us. At 7.00 he passed close under our stern and hailed us:
• Ln^ oa **ry sail all night, I did not expect to see land to-day
although I sent you ahead to look for it. You are to go ahead to-morrow
morning early". We replied; "Very well, sir". On 10th December the
Commodore sent a boat on board us with his Clerk and a Midshipman for a
puncheon of rum and 10 days cocoa. At 7.00 the Commodore passed within
hail of our starboard quarter. Hailed us: "How is the Governor and his
lady?' "All very well, sir", "How is-Mr. Bent?" "Better, sir. Do you
intend during the night, sir?" "No, I hope and think we shall
have a fair wind by the morning".
On 11th December we were 100 miles from Governor King's Island,
A little past noon we saw something very like land to the eastward.
Made signal to the Commodore, who answered: "I have seen the same
appearance, but am doubtful". At 7.00 in the morning lost sight of the
At 9.00 we fired a gun. The Commodore answered it. Thick
fog. We fired guns every y-hour to let the Commodore know where we were.
At 11,00 a number of whales and grampuses were seen blowing at some
distance on our starboard quarter. Towards evening the mist cleared and
176 saw the Commodore on our larboard bow. He made signal; "Rendezvous
at Oyster Bay in Van Deimen's Land". This day Captain Pritchard was able
to get up and valk in his cabin.
On December 14th at 11,00 a large whale rose close under our stem
and rubbed his sides against the ship. His back was covered with
barnacles and other shells. At noon we found ourselves 38 miles to the
southward of Van Deiman's Land, At this time two or three midshipmen
imagined they saw the land from the Mast Head, At 2.00 we all saw the
looming of the land.
On December 15th at 10 minutes past 10 we saw the land plainly,
Mew Stone bearing North and D,Witts Islands bearing N. West by N. At
11.00 we sounded 80 fathoms. Coral bottom. At 1,00 we saw the rock of
Pedro Blanco about 4 leagues distant. It appeared exactly like two
strange sails. At half-past-one saw the Eddystone Rock which is about
2 leagues to the Eastward of Pedro Blanco, The Commodore being about
4 miles astern, we could see him run up in the wind and back his sails.


lower a boat and hoist the signal for a man overboard, We asked the
Commodore by signal if he had lost a man. He answered; "I am sorry to
say I have lost one of ray best men". At 8,00 we sounded 80 fathoms,
coral bottom. The Commodore hailed us and asked if it was the
Governor’s wish to go into Oyster Bay, We answered "No, if the wind
continued fair, but in case of a calm or foul wind the Governor wished
to have communication". The joy felt by everyone on seeing land was
damped by the "Hindostan's" unfortunately losing a man overboard,
N.B, The appearance of Pedro Blanco when bearing N.E. at a distance of
6 leagues is that of a brig lying on the starboard tack. The Eddystone
at the same time appears as a small rock, but when distant about 12
miles bearing N.W, it is an exact representation of the lighthouse whose
name it bears,
December l6th. This morning at 5.00 o'clock we made Tasman's
Head, At 8,00 saw Gape Pillar about 6 miles distant. This day there
was a fall of snow.
On December 17th at 10,00 o'clock the soldiers were paraded on
deck. Captain Pritchard still unable to leave his cabin, confined to
bed. The Judge able to walk about. 40 days water remaining. Flocks
of Mother Carey's chickens flying round the ship. At noon we were 590
miles from Port Jackson. At 3.00 a pigeon flew three times across the
ship. The third time he perched on the anchor stock. One of the
sailors attempted to catch him but only got a few feathers out of his
tail,
December 18th, To-day it was calm with constant rain. At 10,00
o'clock the Commodore sent a boat with a Midshipman on board us for
firewood and rum. Soon after Colonel O'Connell came aboapd us and
stayed till noon. We were under the necessity of cutting up a new
anchor stock and sending the half of it to the Commodore for ■ firewood.
The anchor stock was worth £5O, Our sick list to-day was 4 sailors,
12 soldiers and women. Not a single case of fever on board. This day
Captain Pritchard was able to get up and work the ship's reckoning.
The Judge took a constitutional walk on the Quarter Deck, He looked as
wan •. as an ensign on half pay.
On December 20th we had sunshine for the first tine since we saw
Pedro Blanco, This night one of the soldier's wives brought forth a
boy.
On December 21st at 10,00 the Commodore made signal for land on
our larboard bow. At half-past-ten we saw the Ram's Head very plain
and Gape Howe a little beyond it. The Band performed on the poop. The
"Hindostan "' ranged up within pistol shot to hear the music. Could see.
Captain Pasco strutting up and down the poop with a large spy glass
under his arm and our officers leaning over the hammock nettings
listening to the Band, Soldiers were busily employed cleaning their
arms and accoutrements. This day we got the Colours of the Regiment
out and aired them in the sun. Captain Pritchard and the Judge Advocate
were walking about.


Next day, 22nd, it -was almost dead calm. We got the lower part
of the gun-room ports opened and all the scuttles on the orlop deck.
At s*oo we sent the jolly boat to try the current. Pound there was very
little current, and that in our favour.
On 23rd we were 165 miles from Port Jackson, Close hauld standing
N.J, directly towards Cape Dromedary, In the evening, when 3 leagues
distant from Gape Dromedary, we tacked ship and stood off shore. Next
day we saw smoke rising in several places along the shore, and could
distinguish trees by the help of a spy glass.
On December 25th we got an observation and found ourselves 42 miles
South of Port Jackson, 30 miles out in our latitude. We attributed this
to the Commodore steering so much to the Eastward during the night and a
strong current setting against us. This day the soldiers were paraded
with their new clothing, arras and accoutrements complete. They made a
very fine appearance and gave great satisfaction to the Commanding Officer.
At 2,00 o’clock the Commodore hailed us; "You are to go ahead to-morrow
morning. Look out for the South Head and make signal for a pilot, Xdo
not know the South Head except by the Flagstaff. If we are close in shore
to-morrow and Lieut, Purchass knows the South Head, will you be so good
as to make signal how it bears?" We answered "Yes", This day a sea came
into the Gunroom Port and wet all our clothes.
On 26th at 8,00 o’clock Point Jervis bore South from us 2 leagues
distant. Red Point N,W, 8 leagues. The land before us was covered with
trees and grass. We could see the natives walking on the white sandy
beach and the smoke of their fires rising among the trees. At 12.00
o’clock this day the Commodore took an observation with a sextant and
made us 60 miles from Port Jackson, We could not get an observation
because the land was too near to get the sun down to the horizon. Sent
a boat on board the Commodore with caps for the soldiers of the 73rd.
This day the thermometer rose to 75 in the shade.
On 27th we found ourselves 28 miles South of Port Jackson and 17
miles South of Botany Bay, At 1,00 we were close in with the land, which
was very high and completely covered with wood. Tacked ship and stood
off. Saw the South Head at the entrance of Port Jackson and the Southern
extremity of Botany Bay, Sounded with 50 fathoms, no bottom.
We lay to from midnight till break of day and then held on our
Course, We saw the South Head of Port Jackson on Flagstaff point 8 or
9 miles distant. The Commodore fired a gun and hoisted the Red Ensign,
At 8,00 hoisted our number and then signalled for a pilot, running as
before about Ig" miles from the land, which had a very barren and rocky
appearance. Saw two guns fired at the Signal Post and two flags flying.
The"Hindostan" hauled down her number. At 9,00 o'clock a boat cane
to each ship with two pilots. There was a native in the boat which came
to us. At half-past-nine we were obliged to drop anchor at the entrance


of Port Jackson, the wind being against us. After lying two or three
days at anchor at the entrance, the wind came fair. We weighed anchor
on Sunday and sailed up the harbour. Arrived in Sydney Cove at 3.00
o’clock, A number of people were assembled on the shore and the wharf.
It was quite calm. The water was as smooth as a mill pond. We dropped
anchor in about 5 fathom of water about 12 yards from the shore. The
band played some of our favourite tunes-. A party of natives, about 16
in number, assembled round a fire on the shore and danced. At 11 o'clock
at night we could see the natives round the fire and hear them distinctly
singing songs and beating time on a shield.
This day, Sunday 31st December, the Governor landed. The 73rd
Regiment was drawn up in marching order on board the diips. The yards
were manned. Captain Pasco and Colonel O'Connell came on board the
"Dromedary" to accompany His Excellency on shore. When his Excellency
came out of his cabin to get into the boat, the Regiment presented aros,
the Colours dropped and the jolly tars gave three cheers. When the
boats shoved off, the ships fired a salute of 15 guns each. The 102nd
Regiment formed a street to receive His Excellency when he went ashore.
This day the natives assembled from the Hawksbury and many miles round
and fought a regular battle in honour of the new Governor. I saw three
of the natives who had come from a distant part of the country just
before the battle began, and spoke to them. They said they were going
to fight when the sur> was two hours down.
On Monday, Ist January 1810, the 73rd Regiment landed at the
Government Wharf, Sydney, at 10,00 in the morning and marched up to the
Barracks, where the 102nd was drawn, up. They saluted us as we marched
past them. Both Regiments formed a hollow square. After standing at
attention for near half—an—hour the Governor and his lady came into the
square, attended by Colonel Patterson, Colonel Povoeux, Captain
of^ His Majesty's Ship "Hindostan", Captain Pritchard of His Majesty's
Ship "Dromedary", Ellis Bent, Esq., Judge Advocate and his lady, John
Thomas Campbell, Esq,, Secretary to His Excellency, Captain Cleveland,
Major of Brigade, Captain Antill, aid de Camp and the Principal Gentle-
men of the Colony, The Regiments gave a general salute, which was
repeated after the Commission was read. The Governor addressed the
troops _and the inhabitants, in a short and able speech. The 73rd wheeled
into line and marched off to Grose Parra Camp about three miles from
Sydney. When they arrived at 2,00 o'clock, found all the tents ready
pitched. Nothing to eat this day but potatoes. We had a large mess
tent pitched and. a kind of mess established. Our breakfast in general
consisted of potatoes and water. However, we got on by degrees and in
the course of a 7/eek we could procure bread and coffee or tea. Bread
was very dear -l/- for a 2d loaf. Killed a centepede in the mess tent.
Two large snakes were killed in the camp. The ■uhole regiment was busily
employed burning the stumps of trees which prevented the regiment drilling.
On 6th January Lieut, Gunning, Captain Murray and Ensign Campbell
went with a detachment to Parramatta,
Por the next week there was little to record, save that it was


very hot during the day and there was frequent heavy rain and thunder.
We were occupied going through manual and platoon exercises.
On the evening of Saturday, 13th, the Governor came to see our
encampment,
On Sunday, 14th, the Regiment paraded and we had Divine Service
performed by the Chaplain of the Colony. This day a ship from India
arrived laden with wheat and India goods,
On 17th Commodore Bligh arrived in His Majesty’s Ship "Porpoise",
The 102nd was drawn up on the wharf to receive him, but he refused to
come on shore and said he would not be received by those who had so
lately threatened to cut his throat.
The following day at 11,00 in the forenoon Commodore Bligh came on
shore and was received by our flank companies, who had marched into
Sidney for that purpose. The ships fired a salute of 15 guns each, which
was answered by the batteries on shore. At 12.00 His Excellency Governor
McQuarrie and his lady, with Commodore Bligh, Captain Pasco of His
Majesty's Ship "Hindostan" and Captain Porteus of His Majesty’s Ship
"Porpoise", with a numerous retinue of hangers-on, came out to our camp.
The 73rd saluted and fired three volleys. After the parade was over we
walked down to where His Excellency and Commodore Bligh were standing.
His Excellency introduced us all to the Commodore, who addressed us in
the following words: "Gentlemen, I congratulate you on your safe
arrival. This is a very fine climate, I hope you will all be happy".
On 27th Major Gordon, Captain Renny and Lieut. Rose embarked with
a detachment of 60 men for Port Dalrymple in Van Deimen's Land, Lieut,
Crane with a detachment of 28 men embarked for Norfolk Island to act
as Commandant until further orders.
Another brig arrived from India laden with spirits, tea, and other
Indian goods. She brought intelligence that everything was quiet in
that country when she left.
There were now no less than 6 vessels in Sydney Cove, 3 of them
from India and 1 from China,
At the beginning of February the weather began to get very cold
and there was frequent rain. On the night of the 12th it rained in-
cessantly. The water came through our tents in torrents. Not a man of
the Regiment but was all wet. Those who had not trenches dug through
round their tents were completely overflowed.
On 18th I saw a murry cat or murry oaoraboy for the first time.
On the evening of 20th the natives had a fight at Sydney to
punish Bluis for killing a woman. This ms the third battle since we
arrived.


24th, This day Colonel O'Connell returned from Colonial duty
and resumed the command of the regiment. It rained without ceasing
from 8,00 o’clock this evening till 9.00 o’clock on 25th, when it cleared
up and the weather became fine.
On 28th the "Ann" came in from England with Captain MoLaine’s de-
tachment of 50 men belonging to 73rd, She had 200 convicts on board,
Lieut, Durix, Lieut, Purcell and Dr, Martin came as passengers In her.
Lieut. Purcell had. been under arrest since their departure from Rio
Janeiro in consequence of some misunderstanding between him and Captain
McLaine,
On March 6th the natives had a desperate fight at Cable’s Parra,
about a mile from camp. They had been assembling for some days before
this time and had formed a kind of camp of bark huts. The battle
commenced with spears and ended with clubs, Mooroor fought with a
hatchet and felled 4 or 5 of his enemies to the ground In a few moments.
This fight was for the punishment of Burra Wurra, who had killed a man.
On March Bth at 4.00 o’clock a fire was discovered on board the
"Dromedary", It broke out in the breadroora and burned until 10,00 at
night.
On 10th April the New South Wales corps embarked on board His
Majesty's Ships "Hindostan" and" Dromedary", Two or three days later
the 73rd broke up the camp at Grose Farm and marched to Brickfields
where the left wing encamped and the right wing marched into the
barracks at Sydney, ' A few/ days later His Majesty's Ships "Hindostan"*.
"Dromedary" and "Porpoise" sailed for England,
A few days later the left wing of the 73rd marched into the
Barracks at Sydney, their tents being all rotten with the incessant
rain which had fallen at Grose Farm Camp, Eight or nine of them were
blown dow/n and tom to pieces with the wind.
Diary ends.
Here ends the first part of Ensign Huey's Diary, but, in a little more
than six months time, this young officer iras chosen to carry home
Dispatches from the Governor, and the Diary re-opens on October 29th to
describe the journey home, via New Zealand and Cape Horn, Unfortunately
the final portion of the Diary has been lost, and we take leave of the
Ensign and his ship in Latitude 24 S after rounding Cape Horn,


Monday, October 29th. 1810. At 11.00 o’clock forenoon received
the publick dispatches from Governor McQuarrie, at the same time read
my final instructions. At 12,00 vent on board in the naval officer’s
boat.
Tuesday, October 30th. 1810. At 5 o'clock in the morning fired a
gun and got under weigh, Dropt down towards the heads. Light airs and
Clear sky, at 1,00 o'clock noon the pilot left us. Set an sail, stand-
ing towards New Zealand, going at the rate of 4 and 5 knotts an hour.
Wednesday, October 31st, 1810, Moderate breezes and clear. Out
of sight of land,
Thursday, November Ist, 1816, sth day of the moon. Fresh breezes
and hazy. Went at 4 and 5 knotts. Very sea sick. Heavy tumbling sea.
At 10,00 o'clock at night Mr, Lamb the first mate being on watch observed
the vessel to roll very deep, and suspecting that she had sprung a leak
sounded the well, and to his great astonishment found ten feet water in
the hold. He immediately called out for axes to cut away the masts.
Captain Morris ran upon deck in his shirt and got all hands to the pumps.
At the same time ordering the boats to be lowered away to save the crew,
if the leak could not be got under. But after pumping for some time with
all our might, we found that the leak did not gain upon us. Turned the
ship's head towards Port Jackson,
By 12 o'clock we gained so far on the leak that the veil sounded
only 3 feet, and "before daylight we sucked the pumps dry. At 6,00 in
the morning found that one man could keep the leak under. Held on our
course for New Zealand, with the intention of coming to anchor in Queen
Charlotte's Sound in Cook's Straights, At this time the decks were so
slippery with the Gurry or drippings of the oil casks, that had been
pumped out with the v®,ter, that it was impossible to move without getting
a fall.
For the next week there was little to record. We had favourable
breezes and went at between 4 and 6 knotts.
On November Bth we were 336 miles from Mount Egmont in New Zealand.
We then had 2 days of strong gales and squally and had to lie to under
close reefed main topsail. We saw several spermaceti whales on our lee
quarter. On November 12th we saw some numbers of land birds and some sea-
weed, On 14th at half—past-eleven o'clock we saw the summit of Mount
Egmont in New Zealand right ahead about 17 leagues distant. It was
covered with snow. At 6,00 o'clock in the evening we were within 7
leagues of the Mount. During the night we stood S.S.W. On 15th we had
fresh breezes and a clear sky and scudded along at 7 knotts. At 10.00
in the morning Admiralty Islands bore S 3 leagues distant. We carried a
press of sail going at 8 knotts and at 12,00 noon we were within 6 miles
of Admiralty Islands, We could see the waves breaking on the rock at
the entrance of Queen Charlotte Sound. At 1.00 got within 1 mile of the


rock, going at 8 knotts with a press of sail. Blowing very hard, smooth
water. Ran within pistol shot of the rock which just appeared above
water. Kept an anxious look out. After we cleared the rock it became
very squally. As we ran in, several very violent squalls came off the
hills, which almost blew the boat that hung on the quarter, in board.
Got the anchor ready just at the nack of time, and came too in a cove
about 2" a mile beyond Cannibal Cove, where Captain Pumeaux's people
were eaten by the New Zealanders, Lowered down the new whale boats,
the Captain and I went on shore in one to shoot, the other went to fill
the water casks. We anchored our boats close under a rock and caught
a few fish, the captain shot a red bill and a shagg. While we were on
shore we saw numbers of organ birds but could not shoot any of them.
The natives must have been at the cove shortly before us for we saw the
remains of their fires and the shell fish which they had been roasting.
As we sailed past the entrance of Cannibal Cove on our way in we
saw about a dozen old huts close to the beach on the very spot where
Captain Pumeaux's people were eaten. Some of the men on board imagined
they saw natives in the huts but for my part I could see none. We did
not wish to see the gentlemen at all, knowing they were cannibals and
would serve us in the same way as they did the "Boyd" if it lay in their
power.
The land about Queen Charlotte's Sound is very high and is covered
with trees and brushwood to the very summit. The New Zealand Flax grows
in great quantities along the shore and on the hills. We found plenty
of greens, celery and parsley, which Captain Cook had sown while he lay
in the Sound, In several coves we found the remains of huts and burnt
sticks, the natives must have been there but a short time before.
The weather while we lay here was very squally, sudden gusts came
off the land in every direction, enough to blow a boat out of the water.
Shot a large bronze necked pigeon and a black bird, like a crow with
two orange gills.
Friday, 16th November, 1810. Fresh breezes and heavy squalls ,
Went ashore at 8 o'clock in the morning and staid until dinner time.
Took the boat round to several coves, found plenty of fresh water in
all of them. Shot some birds in the woods. Saw 6 shaggs nests on one
tree at the shore, it is a rare thing to see an aquatic bird build on
a tree. This day we got all the water casks hoisted up out of the fore
castle and stowed them in the cable till. The cables we put forward
in the place the casks occupied. This brought the Brig a good deal
down by the stem and made her steer much better.
This day at 11,00 o'clock a squall came off the hills which laid
the ship nearly on her beam ends. Busily employed filling water casks.
Saw a wild dog among the bushes while we were shooting cm shore. Took
down the fore top gallant mast, got up a short main top Gallant mast.
Got some greens and turnip tops from the shore and likewise some rausles.
Caught some fish.


Saturday, 17th November, 1810. Light winds and clear weather.
Sent the boats on shore to cut wood and fill the -water casks. Saw the
wild dog. The boat went round to Cannibal Cove and caught some fish,
Sunday, November 18th, 1810. Light winds and fine dear sky. Went
ashore in the morning to shoot and cut timber. Got the rigging set up.
Went in the afternoon to Long Island and found 10 or 12 huts which the
natives had but lately left. Got plenty of greens. Saw numbers of
organ birds and parrotts. Sent the boat to fish, got a skate and some
small cod,
Monday, 19th November, 1810, At daylight in the morning got up
our anchor and stood out of the sound, but the wind coming right ahead
we could not get out of the sound until 10, Sent a whale boat to the
rocks to fish and bring some eggs. She brought about 2 dozen young
codling and 6 or 7 eggs.
Drifted down with the tide beyond ship Island when a stiff breeze
sprung up which carried us along at 5 or 6 knotts an hour. Passed close
to the two rocks where the boat was fishing, took her on board, and
sailed between the Brothers and the head of Queen Charlotte's Sound, a
thing never done by any vessel except the "Dart", a south sea man.
Passed pretty close to the Rock off the head of Cloudy Bay, discovered
a new rock further out which has never been taken notice of by any person.
Saw Cape Campbell on one side and Cape Qeerawitte on the other. Soon
after saw Cape Pallisin, at 6,00 in the evening we were clear of the land,
November 20th, 1810. Moderate breezes and fine clear sky. All
sail sett. Going 5 and 6 knotts. Towards evening it fell calm,
November 22nd. Fresh breezes and hazy. Going 7 knotts. Towards
noon the wind increased considerably. We reefed the topsail and lowered
the spanker, A cross sea running. Thousands of seal birds flying in
every direction. We were standing EX N,
For the next few days we had strong gales and heavy squalls with
hail with a heavy cross sea. At 3*oo o'clock in the morning of November
23rd a sea came and dashed the whale boat that hung on the larboard
quarter in two halves. Got the remainder of her in on deck at 7,00 in
the morning. Got the starboard boat fore and aft on the quarter deck.
Several seas came down into the cabin and wet everything. Not a man on
board from the Captain to the Cook had a dry place to sleep in. Every
wave that came over the deck came down in streams into our beds. We lay
too all night under close reefed main topsail. At daylight on 24th we
were about 60 miles from Chatham Island, Strong gales and squally with
a heavy cross sea continued. The sea broke over the deck every moment.
We were going 4 knotts with close reefed main topsail and fore sail.
At 4,00 p.ra, saw the Sugar Loaf rock at the south side of Chatham Island
16 or 18 miles distant on our lee beam bearing Nby W. We saw likewise
a part of the island. Strong Breezes and squally and heavy sea
continued. Dismal -leather.


On November 26th the gales had abated and there was a moderate
breeze and hazy. All sails set going at 4 knotts. We saw albatrosses
and petrels. At 3.00 in the afternoon we saw two fin back whales and
soon after a shoal of porpoises came alongside. Threw the harpoon at
them several tines but could not strike by reason of their swift motion.
On 27th, after a calm morning, at night it became very squally.
Very heavy squalls- came during the first watch. Toward morning the
weather cleared up.
Next day we got the sails out of the sail room and spread them on
deck to dry. Saw numbers of petrels and other land birds. In the after-
noon we saw something very like land to the N.E., but a heavy cloud
passing over the place, we lost sight of it. At the same time some sea-
weed floated past us. On the evening of 29th a sea hen flew round the
vessel 3 or 4 times and several pieces of seaweed floated past us, ’From
the number of land, birds which we were seeing everyday and the the sea-
weed which had floated past us, we were convinced that we could not be
far distant from some unknown land.
For the next 2 or 3 days we were employed repairing the sails. At
5.00 o’clock 6n the afternoon of December 2nd a grampus or small fin
back whale was seen playing round the vessel. Got a lance ready to strike
him, but he would not come close enough. On December 4th we saw something
very like land on our weather beam. Several pieces of seaweed floated
past and numbers of petrels were seen. Grew employed repairing the stay
sails and studding sails, while the carpenter was preparing studding
sail booms. At 3,00 in the afternoon we got up the starboard main top-
mast studding sail; went 6 and 7 knotts all the evening; carried the
studding sails all night; going 7 knotts.
On December sth at 11,00 the starboard main tack gave way. Clewed
up the sail. Got the starboard lower fore studding sails set. Towards
evening the -wind altered 2 points to the westward. It -was cold and dreary,
December 6th at noon 160 miles on the board. Saw flocks of petrels
or ice birds. In the forenoon carried away the weather fore topsail
brace. Towards the afternoon it became thick and hazy with small rain.
Crew employed mending main top mast stay sail; cold and dreary,
December 7th. Fresh gales and hazy. Between 12,00 and 1,00 o'clock
this morning a squall came which sent the vessel along at the rate of 10
knotts and upwards. Took in the studding sails and top gallant sail. At
30. ,00 in the forenoon set the starboard fore lower studding sail. Went 7
and 8 knotts an hour. Heavy swell from the southward. Ran the distance
of 170 miles within the last 24 hours. It was cold and dismal and no
observation could be taken. Under single reefed topsail, spanker and
starboard lower fore studding sails, we were going at 8 knotts in a long
heavy sea.
On December 9th we were going 6 and 7 knotts with a fresh wind
Wby N, At 11,00 in the forenoon a wind came round all at once from the
S,E, and took the vessel aback. The Larboard dead light being open, the


t-vater oame rushing into the cabin carrying the window along with it.
For the next few days the weather was variable, between moderate
wind with clear sky almost calm and squally winds with a prodigious long
swell from the westward. For several days similar conditions prevailed.
On December 14th morning it was calm with a heavy swell which the
vessel^ roll very much. In the evening the wind sprang up again, bitter
cold wind with squalls and rain. At 8,00 in the evening a sea came down
into the cabin. During the nightsono snow fell.
On December 15th it was calm from 8,00 to 12,00 in the forenoon.
Later a breeze sprang up and we set the studding sails. We saw a number
of birds and albatrosses. Towards evening the wind increased and we
were going at 7 knotts with showers of sleet and hail.
On December 16th there was a fresh wind and the weather was hazy.
We^ were going 6or 7 knotts with all sails set. At noon we shifted the
main top mast studding sail from the starboard to the larboard side.
Saw flocks of albatrosses and ice birds. The wind freshened and at 6,00
in the evening we were making 9 knotts,
December 17th, The wind continued strong. During the past 24
hours we ran the distance of 180 miles. We were this day 1,400 miles
distant from terra de Fuego, We saw thousands of ice birds and a few
albatrosses.
For the next few days the weather was moderate and there was little
to record. On 19th we got a lunar observation at 6,00 in the morning
and found our position 1,200 miles from Cape Horn.
On the 20th evening it became squally. Took in the studding sails
and jib and spanker. Going 7 and 8 knotts. At 10.00 o'clock at night
shipped a sea on the larboard side. About half-a-ton of water came down
into the cabin and gave it a clean wash. On December 22nd in foggy
weather we saw something very like land on the starboard bow. We stood
east and found it to be a fog bank. There was a prodigious swell from
the west. Saw a shear water to-day. At this time we had scarcely any
night at all. As soon as daylight left the sky the sun rose. The
weather continued cold and dreary writh drizzling rain and a great swell
from the westward. There was a heavy tumbling sea which came over the
vessel in every direction.
On 24th December we were 680 miles from Diego Ramirez, There was
very little wind this morning and we were making only 2 knotts an hour,
but towrards night it came on to blow so hard iiiat we were obliged to
take in the studding sails and topgallant sails. The wrind increased
and blew very hard all night. The sea washed over the decks as usual
and came down into our beds. At 4«00 in the morning we double reefed the
topsails. It was blowing a gale of wind. The sea came down into the
cabin two or three times. Gales continued and we double reefed top


sails and fore sail. Bitter cold. Several seas continued to come down
into the cabin with a quantity of about half-a-ton each time, A great
deal of water was shipped at the main and fore hatchways which kept us
continually at the pumps. No part of the -vessel was dry and water came
pouring down through the decks into our beds. The cook took ill of the
cramp in his stomach being continually exposed to the wet,
December 25th, We had fresh breezes end some sunshine. At 9*oo
o’clock set the studding sails but in the afternoon it became squally
again and we took in the studding sails. Towards evening there were
brisk gales and heavy squalls. We were under single reefed topsails
and courses. Going 8 knotts clean off. There was a heavy sea. During
the night there were very heavy squalls with snow and sleet. We shipped
a great many seas.
On December 26th at half-past-eight in the morning a tremendous
heavy sea came on board of us which stove in the sides of the gamboose
and carried away a great part of the bulwarks on the starboard side.
About half-a-ton of it came down into the cabin and gave it a clean
wash. We were carrying on very hard to get round the Cape, The salt
water came pouring down through the decks into our beds and soaked our
blankets completely, Mr, Gillespie the second mate and Walker, one of
the men, took ill being continually exposed to the wet. Not a man on
board for 3 weeks past had slept dry. The water which came down the
hatches and into the cabin kept the punps going every £ hour. We were
steering E.N.E, and E, by N under a great press of sail to get out of
the bad weather. Wind on our quarter with a heavy tumbling sea. We
expect to see Gape Horn tomorrow.
On 27th the wind moderated slightly and the sky cleared up. We
saw numbers of petrels and shear waters. In the evening the water turn-
ed green.
On December 28th there were strong winds and cloudy. Set the main
top gallant sail and starboard fore topmast studding sail. Going 7 knotts.
At 8,00 in the morning we saw the islands of Diego Ramirez bearing N.E,
by compass, distant 7 leagues. At 3.00 o’clock afternoon we saw terra
del Puego and a t 4,00 we saw Gape Horn 8 leagues distant N.E, At 8,00
o’clock in the evening we were abreast of Cape Horn which bore N X W 2
leagues distant. Scudding under top sails and studding sails at the
rate of . 7 knotts. As we sailed along the shore of terra del Puego we
could see puffs of smoke rising from the hills not unlike the firing
of cannon.
On December 29th at 12,00 noon we saw Staten Island 18 leagues
distant, bearing N.N.E. In the evening the wind increased and became
squally. Took in the studding sails and main top gallant sail. Stand-
ing up towards the Falkland Islands, Saw a shoal of spermaceti whales.
At 9,00 in the evening saw the S,W. Cape of Staten Island 6 or 7 miles
distant. At 10,00 the wind increased to a strong gale and a terrible


heavy sea rose up in the space of 10 minutes. At 11,00 double reefed
the topsails, going 8 knotts, Cross, high sea which broke over the
vessel on all sides,
December 30th, At 7»00 this morning a sea came on board which
filled the deck fore and aft. Later the weather moderated, the sea fell
greatly and use shook a reef out of the main topsail. At 6,00 in the
evening set the larboard lower fore studding sail,
3lst, Fresh wind and fine clear weather. All sails set.
Studding sails aloft and alow. Going 6 and 7 knotts. At half-past—
seven in the morning saw the Isle de Beauohenes right ahead 8 or 9
leagues distant. At 10,00 we were close up to it standing Nby W to go
between^ it and the main, but a heavy swell setting dead on shore and the
wind dying away, we ■vrere obliged to keep away to leeward of it for fear
of being driven on the rocks. The island is covered with seals and
there are millions of albatross larger than the largest eagle. It must
be very difficult to land by reason of the surf which breaks in some
places 50 feet high. At 2,00 o'clock afternoon we saw the island
Merinos. Leones on the larboard beam 5 or 6 miles distant. At 4,00 saw
the Isle le soledad right’ahead 14 leagues. At 2,00 next morning we
saw Capo St, Felipe ahead. Stood in for the land with a stiff breeze,
January Ist, 1811. At 4,00 o'clock in the morning close in with
Cape St, Felipe, Passed within gunshot of the rooks. At half-past-
five passed between the rocks at the head of Aoaron Bay and the main.
Saw thousands of seal sitting on the rocks as we sailed past. The
main land has a very barren aspect. At 8,00 we were standing into
Berkeleys Sound close hauled, wind against us. Made several boards to
gain distance. At 11,00 got close up to the low green island at the
head of the Sound. Saw some houses on the main, A boat full of men
came out to meet us with Spanish colours flying. They also hoisted
Spanish colours at the houses on shore. When we got within \ mile of
the boat she turned and rowed in again. We stood right after her,
supposing she kept the mid channel. Sounded with 7 and 6 fathoms.
Stood on after the boat towards the houses. Observed a schooner hove
down in a snug cove. Sounded 4i" fathoms. Let go the anchor and un-
furled the sails. Got a boat ready and went ashore. Found that the
whole colony consisted of about 50 men, who had come from the River of
Plate a year before in the schooner which we saw on the shore. The
Governor of the place was extremely civil to Captain Morris and the
boat crew. He offered us as many bullocks as we chose for nothing and
sent abundance of fresh bread and fish to the boat to be t aken on
board. The whole of the inhabitants were as hospitable as their
Governor, They took the boats crew from house to house pressing them
to eat and drink. They had not seen a ship since their arrival from
the River Plate which was 12 months. They were, of course, in want of
many things. Their stock of sugar was reduced to 12 pounds,
January 2nd, This day the Governor, the Doctor and the Padre came
on board the "Atalanta" to breakfast. After breakfast we all went ashore


to go to dine with the Governor, The dinner consisted of at least
13 courses of fish, flesh and fowl. The Governor sent half a bullock
on board for the use of the men,
Thursday, January 3rd. This day the Spanish Governor sent men
into the country to drive in some wild cattle to let us see the method
in vhich the cattle were caught. He likewise sent out three men to
catch fish for us,
January 4th. This day we went ashore to see the wild cattle
caught. Dined with the Governor, At 4,00 in the morning the Governor
had come on board in his launch to let us know the cattle were arrived.
He killed a large pig to make sausages for us to carry to sea and made
us a present of three pigs besides, although his whole stock consisted
of only 18 or 19,
January sth. Fresh gales and cloud. Got two cows on board for
the use of the men. This day the Governor sent out 2 men to shoot wild
geese for us and likewise 2 men to gather wild greens and celery,
January 6th« Got all the beef on board 5 cows slaughtered and
2 calves alive. The Governor came on board with the Doctor and the
Padre to spend the evening. At 10,00 o'clock they went ashore half
seas over. This day the Governor sent on board fresh bread in abundance
and sweet milk,
January 7th. This day we went on shore to take our final leave
of these hospitable Spaniards, We assured them we should never forget
the kindness and hospitality which we had experienced at Port le
Solidad, They said -they were sorry it was not in their power to give
us more assistance, but hoped they would meet us again in some part of
the world where it was more in their power to show us kindness. They
made Captain Morris a present of a fine Wolverine dog and me a present
of another. They were much affected at taking leave of us and stood
on the shore waving their hats to us as we rowed from them.
At 5.00 o'clock afternoon got under way and sailed down the
Harbour. At 7.00 got clear of the Heads, At 8,00 stowed the anchors.
At 9.00 lost sight of the land.
Several days to had light airs and cloudy weather. At one time
we were making only 1 knott. Spent the time repairing the main top
gallant sail. On 10th at 5.00 o'clock afternoon two large fin back
whales came close alongside the vessel and remained spouting and play-
ing round until a musket shot was fired at one of them, which lodged
in his back. They both up flukes and got out of our reach.
For several days we continued to have light or moderate winds,
¥e could now perceive the weather getting warmer and could go with our
coats unbuttoned. We were steering N.N.E. to make the Isle de Grande.


Small numbers of fin back whales spouting on all sides and thousands of
birds flying round the ship.
On January l6th the wind increased and we had strong gales and
squalls, with a very heavy sea which filled the decks fore and aft. We
were now under double reefed main- topsail and fore sail. Wind N,W, on
our beam; ship rolling very heavy. At 4,00 o'clock afternoon heavy gales
with showers of hail and sleet. We lay too under a close reefed main top-
sail, the sea running mountains high. There was an ugly cross sea. At
5,00 in the evening a sea struck the vessel on tire larboard side and
carried away a great part of the bulwark. We shipped a great deal of
water. Several seas came down into the cabin.
On January 17th at 9,00 in the morning we saw the Isle de Grande
bearing N,W, distant 14 leagues. Hauled to the wind and stood up towards
it. For a short time we had fine and pleasant weather, but at 10,00
o'clock at night fresh gales started and we took in the fore topsail and
close reefed main topsail. Several seas came down into the cabin,
January 18th, Strong gales continued and we lay too under close
reefed main topsail. Ship rolling very heavily. At 2,00 in the after-
noon the gale began to abate and before the finish we set the fore sail
and let a reef out of the main topsail. There was a cross heavy sea which
came over the decks and down into the cabin.
On January 20th we sailed through a large bed of spawn which had
exactly the appearance of blood. Millions of ice birds were feasting on
it. The wind now moderated. We continued to have constant rain. Whales
spouting in every direction.
After several days in similar weather, on January 24th the weather
improved. We had gentle breezes and were scudding along at the rate of 4
knotts. For the next few days we continued to have a moderate breeze with
very heavy rain. We rigged a machine to get rain water.
On January 30th the wind Increased, We were under single reefed
topsails and foresail. Close hauled with a cross heavy sea. At 11,00 the
wind Increased so much that we were obliged to t ake in the main sail and
main topsail stay sail. By the afternoon the wind increased to gale force.
The weather for several days continued variable, light airs inclinable to
calm varied with squalls and heavy rain. We again rigged a machine to
catch water. We caught about a barrel of water.
On February 2nd from 1,00 till 2,00 the rain fell in such torrents
that we caught 120 gallons of water. The r ain poured without inter-
mission, It came down into our beds in streams and soaked our blankets
and mattresses through and through.
For the next week or so weather conditions remained similar.
Moderate breezes varying with strong winds and squalls. At 3.00


o’clock on the afternoon of 11th we aaw a ship ahead of us standing on
the same course as ourselves. At 7*oo this day a tremendous squall came
with heavy rain. Double reefed the topsails and took in jib, spanker
and main s ail. Frequent flashes of forked lightning.
For the next 2or 3.days we had strong winds and squalls. On
February 13th the weather moderated. On February 14th when we were in
latitude of 26,S and long, 32,W we got up the guns and mounted them.
For several days we had delightful weather. We saw the fish
called by the sailors "Portuguese Men of War".
On February 18th at 1,00 o'clock afternoon saw a strange sail on
our weather bow. At half-past-one could perceive her to be a ship bear-
ing down upon us with royals and studding sails set. Got the guns all
ready and the decks cleared. Took in the top gallant sails and courses
and lay by with our main topsail aback. At 3.00 she got within hail of
us and proved to be the "Duchess of York" from London bound to Puenos
Ayres, She had been only 6 weeks from Portsmouth and had been driven in-
to 7 fathoms of water at Cape de Roque, We learned from her that the
Princess Amelia was dead and that His Majesty was not expected to live,
and that Sir Francis Burdet had been released from his confine Trent in
the tower.
The next few days we had rough weather. On 20th there were strong
gales with a very heavy sea, which made the ship roll the gunwale under
water every wave.
On February 21st we continued to have strong gales. At 10,00 we
wore ship and stood N,W, Set the fore topsail double reefed. Going
2 s knotts an hour making 2-g- points of leeway under a great press of
sail to no purpose. We continued to have strong gales and a heavy
tumbling sea and made little progress. This day we were in latitude
24.30 S.




