

Final Report
SECRET
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
MINISTRY OF AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION




FEEDEN MISSION REPORT
SECTION 6
Assigned to
Address
Copy No. .
Date of issue :
This report contains confidential information, and must
therefore be treated accordingly by the person to whom this copy
is issued. Anything contained in this report must only be
communicated to approved and accredited executives of Government
departments or firms undertaking the manufacture of aircraft or
accessories for His Majesty's Government; and must not be published
or disclosed to unauthorised persons.
There is a considerable amount of detailed information in
this report which may only be of interest to those specialising on
the particular problem. In order, therefore, to assist executives,
this report has been so framed that at the beginning of each Part a
special coloured page has been provided which sets out as shortly
as possible the broad policy conclusions of the Mission on this
particular subject, including the action that is advised.
By this means it is hoped that those concerned with policy
may have as concise a picture as possible of what is considered
should be done to put into effect the work of the Mission.
The purpose of the Mission was to learn what American
methods could be introduced into this country to improve our output,
and to investigate certain technical problems and new developments
in America. The report is therefore mainly concerned with those
aspects in which the American industry is ahead of ours, and with
promising technical developments. No emphasis has been laid on
points where the Mission consider that British production methods
or technical development are ahead of American.
S.T.A.M.
Cook*s Building,
40 Stratton Street, W.l.
June, 1943»


This report is issued in seven separately bound Sections, as follows:
SECTION 1 CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY AND GENERAL
CONCLUSIONS OP THE MISSION
" 2 AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
" 3 AIRCRAFT DESIGN
" 4 ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
" 5 ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
" 6 EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
** 7 POST-WAR PROBLEMS
Each Section is divided into two or more Parts, and a list of
contents appears at the beginning of each Part. The Parts in a
section are lettered A, B, C etc.
Each Part is divided into Chapters, the first of which (on a
coloured page) gives the broad policy conclusions for the Part. The
Chapters are made up of Items, and each Item has a number indicating
the Chapter to which it belongs and its position within the Chapter.
For example:
2.03 indicates the third item of Chapter 2
5.12 " " twelfth * " " 5
For specifying completely any item, it is also necessary to
quote the Section and Part, and in the text, at the beginning of
each Item, its complete reference is given.
For example:
3A - 2.03 indicates Section 3> Part A, Chapter 2, third item.
ifC - 5*12 indicates Section 4-, Part C, Chapter 5> twelfth item.


CONTENTS OF THE WHOLE REPORT
SECTION 1 - CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY AND GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
PART A - OBJECTS OF THE MISSION, PERSONNEL AND ITINERARY
Chapter 1 Scope, object and general survey of the Mission
” 2 Itinerary, December 1942 to March 1943
M 3 Broad policy conclusions
" 4 Future policy in regard to Missions to America
PART B - AMERICAN NATIONAL AIRCRAFT ORGANISATIONS
Chapter 1 General
" 2 Army Air Force
” 3 Navy Department
w 4 War Production Board
H 5 Joint Aircraft Committee
H 6 Office of Scientific Research and Development
SECTION 2 - AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
PART A - ORGANISATION
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
M 2 Engineering departments
M 3 Factory layout
" 4 General notes on organisation of airframe factories
M 3 Boeing Aircraft, Seattle
M 6 Consolidated Aircraft, San Diego
” 7 North American Aviation, Inglewood
" 8 Bell Aircraft, Buffalo
” 9 Curtiss Wright
" 10 Other aircraft firms
" 11 Data on American airframe factories
" 12 Canadian aircraft industry
PART B - FACTORY LAYOUT AND PROCESSES
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Special applications of lofting
" 3 Economy of floor space
M 4 Conveyors
" 3 Drop hammer
w 6 Rubber die press
" 7 Mechanical press
” 8 Stretcher
" 9 Special tools
" 10 Pamum rolls
M 11 Rivet sorting
" 12 Finishing and painting
M 13 Extrusion manipulation
M 14 Pipe bending
** 13 Glenn Martin skin stretching process
H 16 Plaster moulds for light alloy casting
" 17 Powder metallurgy
” 18 Riveting
" 19 Spot welding
20 Flash welding of undercarriages and engine mountings
" 21 Heliarc welding
M 22 Cyeleweld


SECTION 3 - AIRCRAFT DESIGN
PART A - GENERAL DESIGN TECHNIQUE
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
H 2 Scope and organisation of engineering departments
M 3 Weight analysis
M 4 Factors and design requirements
M 5 American stressing technique
” 6 Aerodynamic design
" 7 Aerodynamic controls
M 8 Stressed skin construction
" 9 Pressure cabins
M 10 Undercarriage design
* 11 Materials
" 12 Processes 5 /
" 13 Aircraft testing procedure
PART B - REVIEW OF AMERICAN AIRCRAFT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Description of new North American P.31
" 3 Descritpion of Curtiss P.60
” 4 Description of Bell P.63
M 5 Description of Douglas A. 26
M 6 The Boeing B. 29 and Consolidated B. 32
tt 7 Current fighters in production
M 8 Current heavy bombers in production
** 9 Transport types
M 10 Wooden aircraft
M 11 Flying boats
H 12 Tailless aircraft
w 13 Tabulated data
PART C - PHOTO LOFTING
Chapter 1 Board policy conclusions
” 2 Technical summary
" 3 Layout procedure
M 4 Alternative reproduction processes
** 5 Camera procedure
" 6 Miscellaneous
PART D - SELF SEALING- FUEL TANKS, OIL TANKS AND FUEL HOSE
Chapter 1 Broad conclusions
M 2 Technical summary
" 3 Fuel tanks - American practice
M 4 Hose - American practice
SECTION 4 - ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
PART A - PRODUCTION
Chapter 1 Broad Policy conclusions
" 2 General design and production notes on firms visited
" 3 Organisation and output
M 4 Engine and propeller production processes and equipment
PART B - DESIGN
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Technical review of American engine developments
” 3 Propeller design
* 4 Power plant policy and installation
" 5 Specific technical items


PART C - REGENERATIVE ENGINE TESTING PLANT
Chapter 1 Broad, policy conclusions
M 2 Technical summary
M 3 Methods of absorbing engine power
M 4 Speed control
" 5 Relative merits of testing plant and methods
" 6 The Buick arrangements at Melrose Park, Chicago
PART D - FUEL AND OIL
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Fuel
" 3 Oil
SECTION 3 “ ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PART A - ELECTRIC WIRING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Summary and conclusions
“ 3 Principles underlying American methods
" 4 American wiring practice
" 5 Maintenance and repair aspect
** 6 Comparative appraisement of British aid American
practice
M 7 Developments in relation to alternating current
M 8 Application to British development and production
PART B - AIRCRAFT, ELECTRICS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
n 2 Conclusions
M 3 Present use of low pressure direct current
” 4 Effect of operating conditions on choice of system
" 5 Review of electrical services in relation to hydraulics
” 6 Manuals on installations
" 7 Design and production of electrical equipment
" 8 New developments in aircraft electrics
” 9 Approval and standardisation of equipment
H 10 Liaison with America on electrics
PART C - INSTRUMENTS AND RADIO INSTALLATIONS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
M 2 Aircraft instruments
" 3 Radio installations
PART D - AIRCRAFT VIBRATION TESTING- AND EQUIETONT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Summary and conclusions
" 3 Introduction
n 4 Equipment
” 5 Application
" 6 Scope of activities
M 7 Review of technique
n 8 Equipment ordered for M»A.P.
M 9 Application to British development


PART E - INSTRUMENTATION Off TEST FLIGHTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
M 2 Summary and conclusions
M 3 Introduction
" 4 Outline of installations
M 5 Organisation
M 6 Equipment
*' 7 Review of technique
" 8 Application to British development
SECTION 6 - EDUCATION AM) RESEARCH
PART A - ENGINEERING- STAFF
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
rt 2 Economical use of present aircraft engineering
staff
” 3 American publications and engineering propaganda
" 4 Manuals prepared by firms for instruction of
drawing office staff etc.
” 5 Manuals prepared by firms to explain administration
and define duties
” 6 Standardisation
PART B - INDUSTRIAL AND SERVICE TRAINING-
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Technical manuals for part time study
H 3 Schools for training industrial and service personnel
H 4 Instruction manuals prepared by firms on their products
” 5 Instructional films
PART C - UNIVERSITY EDUCATION OP AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
M 2 American education
PART D - RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
n 2 Need for increased research equipment in Britain
" 3 Langley Field
" 4 Canadian National Research Council
3 American wind tunnels
H 6 Engine research
SECTION 7 - POST WAR PROBLEMS
Chapter 1 Review of the civil aviation position in America
M 2 Training aircraft


EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
PART A ENGINEERING- STAFF
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item 1.01 Retention of experienced clerical staff
M 1*02 Training of engineers
M 1.03 Economical use of engineers
” 1* 04 Preparation of manuals
CHAPTER 2 - ECONOMICAL USE OF PRESENT AIRCRAFT ENGINEERING
STAFF
CHAPTER 3 - AMERICAN PUBLICATIONS AND ENGINEERING PROPAGANDA
CHAPTER k - MANUALS PREPARED BY FIRMS FOR INSTRUCTION OF
DRAWING- OFFICE STAFF ETC.
CHAPTER 5 ~ MANUALS • PREPARED 3Y FIRMS TO EXPLAIN ADMINISTRATION
AND DEFINE DUTIES
CHAPTER 6 - STANDARDISATION




CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSION'S
6A-1.01 Retention of experienced clerical staff. As a result of
their visit to America, the Mission are so impressed with the
necessity of conserving the Engineering and Design Departments
of this country that they consider M.A.P. should take the
strongest possible line in pressing for the retention of all
experienced clerical staff on design, specification and order-
ing matters, and the general retention of all technical design
staff of any experience whatsoever; otherwise there will be
inadequate technical development on aircraft in the next year
or two.
6A-1.02 Training of engineers. M.A.P. should arrange for further
training of aeronautical engineers from the earliest possible
date. This is a longer term project, and is the subject of
Part C of this section.
6A-1 • 03 Economical use of engineers. T/hile the training of further
engineers is coming to fruition, we should employ our engineer-
ing personnel to the utmost advantage. The Mission consider
that the completion of new aircraft designs could be expedited
if arrangements were made for those firms carrying a heavy load
to borrow suitably trained staff from concerns in the industry
that are less heavily loaded.
6A-1.04 Preparation of manuals. M.A.P. should select some body to
prepare the various manuals that are wanted to assist the
aircraft design industry. To do this, industry must be
prepared to give say a dozen suitable men and a carefully
selected leader, to see this work put through and brought to
a rapid and satisfactory conclusion. The Mission recommend
that the S.B.A.C. should do this work, but emphasise that it
is only possible if the necessary leader and technical staff
are released to the S.B.A.C. forthwith for this job.




CHAPTER 2 - ECONOMICAL USE OF PRESENT AIRCRAFT BNGBI5ERING STAFF
6A-2.01 It will "be noted from the various comments in other parts of the report
that all sections of the Mission were impressed by the size, scope and
constitution of the engineering departments of the American aircraft
industry. The expansion has come about largely during the last three
years, and they are now at least five times greater in capacity than the
corresponding departments in this country, even though, contrary to the
generally accepted opinion, the engineering groups in America do not include
the planning, jigging and tooling force, which is not as a rule under the
Chief Engineer, or Chief Designer of the Company, but is controlled by the
Production Organisation.
The Mission have returned convinced that something ought to be done to
improve the position of our engineering staffs at home if we are going to
maintain our present high standard on new designs. It is not suggested
that the engineering staffs of our companies should be increased to
anything like the proportions existing in America to-day, but the Mission
are of the opinion that the staffs of the main design firms should be
materially Increased as soon as possible, in order to tackle new prototypes
satisfactorily and in such a way that they are got out more rapidly. The
first thing to be done is to conserve the existing staff, keep them from
being taken for the forces and in particular ensure the retention of the
statistical portion of the engineering staff, which is responsible for
scheduling material specifications etc., and is now wrongly called clerical,
but which are as important as the draughtsmen. The second thing is for all
concerned to up-grade as many of their technical staff as possible and to
supplement these by bringing in suitable recruits from the shops and outside.
The Mission feel that the necessary work of design of a few new types,
for example, at least one new fighter, a new heavy bomber and a new
transport 'plane, can only be accomplished sufficiently rapidly by unselfish
collaboration on the part of the industry, by the loaning of some of the
design staff of other companies to certain firms selected by the Ministry
to undertake the new designs. It is felt that in order to complete designs
quickly enough a considerably bigger complement of men is wanted on a few
types, and that this is the only solution to this problem for the immediate
future.
There are other adjuncts to helping design, which the Mission feel
should be tackled immediately. In some quarters, it is felt that this is
out of the question at the present time, but just as it would have paid us,
when the infiltration of women and unskilled labour began in 1940> to set
aside a nucleus of skilled trainers, so now we feel convinced that it would
pay for the industry to release perhaps a dozen or so men, to prepare manuals
of standardisation, materials, lofting, weight saving, etc. If this work
can be accomplished quickly and practically, it is believed that new design
work will go forward more rapidly.
The B.A.O. Washington, we understand at the request of M.A.P., communicated
with our Mission and asked that certain members should attend a conference on
standardisation at Washington. The Mission were interested to note the
constitution of the American members of this conference, the weight of the
people present, and the power of action given to them to make decisions.
Dr. Edward Warner and Mr. T.P. Wright are on this job, also other senior
officials of high rank from the Army and Navy. The functions of the various
standardisation authorities in America are given in Chapter 6 of this Part.
It is felt by the Mission that the right solution is for both the prepar-
ation of manuals and the work of standardisation to be deputed by M.A.P. to
the S.B.A.C., but that this will not work unless the industry are prepared to
to release to the S.B.A.C. a sufficiently strong nucleus, with a suitable
technical leader who would be acceptable to the industry, to woik out these
matters, obtain prompt decisions, and deal adequately with the opposite
numbers in America.


CHAPTER 3 - AMERICAN PUBLICATIONS AND ENGINEERING PROPAGANDA.
6A-3*01 The American nation as a whole are becoming very engineering conscious
and it is undoubtedly a policy of the country to maintain aviation as a big
industry. Public interest is created by a mass of reference to aviation
in the press and this interest has led to a desire on the part of the
general public for elementary engineering knowledge; this is well catered
for by the numerous pseudo-technical handbooks which are available.
The practice of reporting technical matters and coupling these reports
with numerous illustrations has spread considerably in America and is a
feature of almost every type of publication right down from the monthly
"Fortune” to the ordinary weekly periodical and the daily press.
The infomation contained in these articles is not highly technical
but is presented in an attractive and straightforward manner so that it
can be absorbed by all and sundry. The press make considerable use of
charts, tabulations and diagrams to illustrate their points and the habit
of using charts etc., has percolated throughout America to a great extent.
The American industry are by our standards extravagant in the personnel
employed on this type of work and it is not suggested that this country can
provide anything like the same time and labour at this stage of the war.
There is no doubt in fact that the American firms themselves will have to
relinquish quite a lot of the staff who now prepare this infoxmation.
The ready availability of tabulated data of all sorts from American
firms and Government departments was most impressive however, and the fact
that the automobile industry, who are hard-headed in the extreme, consider
such a procedure to be worth while is noteworthy. It has been argued that
the present time is not the right one to divert any of our effort into the
preparation of charts, instruction books, etc., but this argument is
considered to be erroneous, since it has been established in America that
if this work is carried out well and in moderation it can introduce an actual
saving in labour.
* '• . ( - I
CHAPTER 4 - MANUALS PREPARED BY FIRMS FOR INSTRUCTION OF DRAWING OFFICE
STAFF ETC! ~
6a-4«01 The size of the engineering departments commonly met in American firms
has demonstrated clearly the value of instruction manuals so that information
can be widely distributed.
The principal advantage of these films’ manuals is that they ensure
greater uniformity of engineering drawings and layouts. Every possible
aspect of drawing technique is dealt with and there is in consequence
little chance of information reaching the shops in anything but the desired
uniform standard.
The manuals have considerable educational value to a new member of the
firms' engineering departments. After he has studied them he is not only
able to make his work match against that of other members of the department,
but he has also broadened his knowledge on tte subject.
The free interchange of these manuals between firms will undoubtedly
be of value as time goes on in providing a degree of standardisation.
In most cases drawing office manuals etc., have started in quite an
unassuming way, and have been built up over a period of years to provide a
volume which plays a big part in maintaining the established technique of
the company.
The Mission appreciates that all such aids must be tempered by intelli-
gent application and by the idea of maintaining individuality; nevertheless
with the extremely rapid expansion of the American aircraft industry, it
would be impossible for newcomers to find their feet with reference to the


general procedure and organisation of the firm without some specific
instructions of this kind.
It is the hope of -the Mission that M.A.P. will make arrangements for
standard forms of manuals to be introduced, which will be of value to all
firms in the industry, and it is therefore hoped that the examples which
have been brought back from America will be of value.
CHAPTER 5 ~ MANUALS PREPARED BY FIRMS TO EXPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND
DEFINE DUTIES —-
6a-5*01 Great emphasis is laid in America on organisation charts and the clear
definition of the duties of the various departments and executives. The
charts of the national organisations and organisations of the Army, Navy
etc., which appear in section 1 of the report are good examples; most of
these charts were already available in the various departments etc., and
were readily available to the Mission, although one or two of them have
been prepared since their return.
The best example of this type of work is provided by Boeing, who have
gone to great lengths in producing a volume of many hundred pages, which
includes not only charts showing the chain of responsibility but also
detailed write-ups on the scope and functions of individuals. Although
it is not suggested that any English firm should go to this length, it is
considered that the Boeing book warrants study.
* y
\
CHAPTER 6 - STANDARDISATION
6A—6*01 Some members of the Mission were invited to attend a conference in
Washington at which the foundation was laid for full liaison between
British and American Standardisation Committees, and it is understood that,
as a result, two English representatives have just been sent over to America,
Mr. Goodinge of the S.B.A.C. and Mr. Gemmell, Director of Standardisation at
M.A.P., and it is hoped that sufficient weight will be put behind this whole
question.
The functions of the various Standardisation bodies in America are as
follows:-
1 • N.A.S.C. (National Aircraft Standards Committee). This is a
manufacturers' committee, recognised by the W.P.B. (War Production Board)
to deal with all standardisation matters affecting airframes (except
materials). The committee consists of representatives of 29 airframe
companies. The main committee is split into Eastern and Western divisions,
each of which meets once per month, with national meetings every six months.
2. S.A.E. (Society of Automotive Engineers). This, again, is a
manufacturers' committee, recognised by the W.P.B., to deal with all
standardisation matters affecting engines, propellers and accessories and
also with materials both for engines and airframes.
Mr. Arthur Nutt of Wright Aeronautical is chairman of the Aeronautics
Committee, which has sub-committees on the following subjects; specialist
engineers being assigned to these.
(a) Engine dimensional standardisation
V
(b) Propeller dimensional standardisation
(c) Accessory and equipment dimensional standardisation
(d) Materials for the above and for airframes


Where engine installations are concerned, there is overlapping
membership of N.A.S.C. and S.A.E. representatives.
3* A.S.A. (American Standards Association). The A. S.A. is equivalent
to our B.S.I. and handies standards on a broad basis for all industries;
although it is doing good work for general engineering, it has contributed
little original work towards aircraft standardisation. As in this country,
many N.A.S.G. and S.A.E. standards which are of interest to other industries
eventually becomes A.S.A. standards.
4* Chamber of Commerce. The Chamber of Commerce has airframes and
engine technical committees, consisting of the chief engineers of the various
firms, but these committeess do no standardisation work and leave the
N.A.S.C. and the S.A.E. to transact all normal business. The secretary of
the N.A.S.C. is paid from chamber funds.
A t N. (Army-Navy Joint Action Committee). The Army and Navy, through
the working committees of the Aeronautics Board, deals with standardisation
as it affects their military requirements. The A.N.C. (Amy-Navy-Civil)
represents the product of the Army-Navy-Civil Committee work.


EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
PART B INDUSTRIAL AND SERVICE TRAINING
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCISIONS
Item 1*01 and service personnel
tt 1.02 Instruction manuals and films
CHAPTER 2 - TECHNICAL HANUAIS FOR PART TIME STUDY
CHAPTER 3 - SCHOOLS FOR TRAINING- INDUSTRIAL AND
SERVICE PERSONNEL
CHAPTER 4 - INSTRUCTION MANUALS PREPARED BY FIRMS
ON THEIR PRODUCTS
CHAPTER 5 - INSTRUCTIONAL FIBS
APPENDIX - LIST OF MANUALS BROUGHT PROM AMERICA




CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
6B-1.01 Schools for training Industrial and Service Personnel. During the
course of the tour in America many opportunities were given to discuss
and inspect the scope of training of both men and women for the new indust-
rial plants and also for the services, and it was illuminating to see the
scale upon which these problems have been tackled. In making any comments
on this subject due consideration has been given to the difference in the
manpower of Great Britain and America, the fact that for a long period we
alone were fighting the Axis Powers, and that this country has for almost
four years been in the grips of war and has had to face the difficulties of
bombing, dispersal, blackout, etc. Nevertheless it is felt that certain
aspects of the training methods employed in America at the present time are
worthy of consideration.
One of the chief lessons which it is felt can be learned from America,
is the acceptance of the policy that the lesser the number of skilled people
there are available, the more it is necessary to segregate a portion of
that skilled personnel, to Specialise upon the organising and training of
unskilled labour. It is also policy to provide this personnel with all
the necessary equipment, and carry this training out in the most efficient
way possible. Without this outlook it would not have been possible for
some of the American aircraft factories to increase their size in the
spectacular way which has been accomplished and which is enabling the
American aircraft output to progress so rapidly during the present year.
Almost without exception all operators go through a training period
before being allowed to go into the shop. Generally speaking it is felt
that the training is on the elaborate side, and at such places as Ford's
for instance, women who were going on as operators on such jobs as riveting
were put through a course which was considered to be unnecessarily advancedo
American philosophy is that it is not necessary to have mechanically minded
people provided there is sufficient equipment and personnel to do the
necessary training of the unskilled men and women before these go into the
shop, this being necessary as some of the best supervisors on production
work may not be the most patient, ani so may not be suitable for putting
absolutely raw operators through the first and most simple movements of a
machine tool.
The same remarks apply to service personnel. Camps were visited,
where large numbers of Army and Navy mechanics were going through extended
courses of training, and they were supplied with the most excellent equipment
for this purpose.
6B-1.02 Instruction manuals and films. Another interesting sidelight on training
in America is the way the Public Relations departments, Technical Publication
firms and film companies have been drawn in and encouraged to apply their
specialised knowledge to producing text-books, diagrams and films; there are
a whole host of such companies operating at the present time, turning out a
varied selection of most up to date and intelligently planned material.
For instance a course of books has been published by the C.A.A. for
school children between the ages of 12 and 15 on aeronautical matters;
this is a subject which the Mission feel has been excellently tackled and
it would like to see thousands of these books distributed throughout our
schools.
It is felt that much would be learnt by closer liaison between the
two countries on this whole subject.




CHAPTER 2 - TECHNICAL MANUALS FOR FART TIME STUDY
• \
6B-2.01 For maiy years, America has provided an elementary type of training for
masses of people through correspondence courses and these are of course,
well known in this country too.
Most of these courses include a series of manuals which differ greatly
in value. The Mission were invited on several occasions to examine
the work of industrial institutions dealing with specific subjects, e.g.
plastics, and some of the manuals from these institutions have been brought
back and are available to anyone who is interested. This method of training
suffers definite limitations, but has a place in enabling factory workers to
use their spare time to improve their knowledge.
CHAPTER 3 - SCHOOLS FOR TRAINING INDUSTRIAL AND SERVICE PERSONNEL
6B-3 • 01 Over the past two or three years, special departments have been formed in
the American factories, generally known as Industrial Training or Educational
divisions, to co-ordinate the entire training programme of the Company. With
the help of the local technical schools and colleges, courses have been
developed for all grades of employees from the Junior requiring pre-employment
training (during which time he receives remuneration) to the training of
Supervisors or Foremen. It is also the responsibility of this division to
provide for the training of U.S. Army Air Corps mechanics; although some of
the courses were too elaborate and too long it is considered that the results
obtained in America have had a beneficial effect on the industry, and it is
suggested that consideration should be given to enlarging the scope of such
departments in this country. The many courses which have been introduced
cover such items as:-
(a) Pre-employment training for both shops and offices,
including drafting, process planning, etc.
(b) In plant, up-grading courses.
(c) Apprentice training as aircraft electricians, machinists, etc.
(d) Supervisory training.
(e) Training of inspection.
(f) Training of U.S. Aray Air Corps mechanics.
Some of the courses are taken by employees in their own time, others for an
hour or so a day, during the working time, and it was found that in many of
the factories visited, approximately of the total employees were taking
advantage of these training facilities.
Consolidated Aircraft have one of the largest training organisations
seen and it is working very smoothly. This seotion is responsible for the
training of 600 men per month for the Arny Air Corps in addition to their own
operators. Courses have been instituted for all classes of labour from the
trainee to the supervisor and cover both tuition during working hours and at
home. It was understood that the cost of running the school was 88,800 dollars
per year exclusive of the wages paid to the trainees, and that approximately
4,800 employees were taking the opportunity afforded by these facilities.
There were extensive class rooms and machines were set up in the open,
some of these being sectioned to demonstrate the operation of undercarriages,
flaps, etc.
Douglas employees who were taking courses of training were sent to a
Training School and material was being supplied by the Douglas Aircraft Company.
All good parts produced by the trainees are delivered to the Finished Parts
Stores and used for production purposes.
The normal practice for training new employees at Ix>ckheed was to give
class room tuition for one hour each day and for the remainder of the time to
be spent with a skilled operator in the shop.


Another interesting example is provided by Boeing who are fitting up a
batch of long trailer trucks to demonstrate hydraulic systems, electrical
systems, landing gear, propeller operation, turbo operation etc. A conplete
pilot’s cockpit is provided in one truck. The equipment includes charts
and diagrams and all the special tools which are required. Suitable
instructors are in charge of each of these trucks, which tour service aerodromes
to instruct their personnel.
CHAPTER 4 ~ INSTRUCTION MANUALS PREPARED BY FIRMS ON THEIR PRODUCTS
6b-4<*01 The American service manuals on airframes, repair and maintenance,
pilots* instructions, spare part lists, etc., are generally similar to our
own, but are somewhat more comprehensive and as a rule their preparation is
looked upon as a more important part of the organisation than is sometimes
the case in British factories.
The preparation of these manuals forms part of the contract both for
prototype and production aircraft. In the case of a prototype aircraft 5
copies are generally submitted one month in advance of the delivery of the
first machine. The information required by the Army and Navy is considerable
and quite a large number of engineers, draughtsmen, and text writers are
required to carry out the work. In a large organisation anything between 80
and 150 people may be engaged on this work; these are all specialised and a
high standard is maintained. The final issue of the manuals contain elaborate
air-brush sectional drawings, etc., and are very clearly laid out so that they
can be understood by inexpert ground crews etc.
In the case of the Boeing B.29 an average of 50 men with a peak of about
80 were employed for 7 or 8 months on the preparation of the prototype and
production manuals and the total cost was of the order of £50,000.
CHAPTER 5 - INSTRUCTIONAL FILMS
6b-5»01 A visit was made to Walt Disney’s studios which are now largely given
over to the preparation of instructional films. 33 of these films have now
been issued and the Mission brought back some samples,which have been combined
into one 30 minute film showing some of the more interesting production
processes. Several of the films are now available at M.A.P. and a complete
set is being collected. These films are supplemented by a series of handbooks
on each subject which are clearly written and well illustrated and there is no
doubt of the value of this system for such purposes as the education of firms
who are not experienced in aircraft construction.
At Boeings, 3 colour talkie films were seen which had been prepared for
the instruction of ground staff, etc., in the operation of the B.17 Portress.
The actual films which were seen were:-
(a) Starting
(b) 25 hour inspection, and
(o) Ground handling and hoisting.
The quality of the films was comparable with similar productions in England,
but considerable effort had been made to make the subject interesting and to
encourage pride in the particular aeroplane.
General Carrol allowed the Mission to bring back a film of the first flights
of the Boeing B* 2% which is available at M.A.P., and should be seen by those
interested in future Bomber development.


APPENDIX - LIST OP MANUALS BROUGHT PROM AMERICA
1 "Drafting Room Manual” - Boeing Aircraft Company.
2 "Engineering Manual” - Curtiss-Wright Corporation.
3 "Engineering Manual" - Curtiss-Wright Corporation.
4 "Loft Manual" - North American Aviation Inc.
5 "Engineering Manual” - Curtiss-Wright Corporation.
6 "Engineering Manual" - Curtiss-Wright Corporation.
7 "Brief Outline of Engineering Procedure" - North American Aviation-
Inc.
8 "Engineering Loft Manual" - Consolidated Aircraft Corp.
9 "Drafting Room Manual" - Lockheed Aircraft Inc.
10 "Loft Handbook" - Lockheed Aircraft Inc.
11 "Reproduction of Drawings and Templates with Eastman Matte Transfer
Paper" - Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, N.Y.
12 "Drafting Room Manual" - Bell Aircraft Corp.
13 "Hioto Process Manual" - Douglas Aircraft Co. Inc.
14 "Engineering Releases of Sales Orders etc." - Curtiss-Wright Corp.
15 Various short Reports on Metal Drafting and X-Ray Reproduction -
North American Aviation Inc.
1 6 "Lofting Problems of Streamline Bodies" - Carter M. Hartley,
North American Inc.
17 "Dimensional Integrity; Reduction of non-standard Assembly Operations" -
Lockheed Airoraft Corp.
18 "Mold Loft" - Bell Aircraft Corp.
19 "Structure Repair Manual" - Boeing.
20 Aero. Industries Technical Institute Lessons - Vols. 1 to 3*
21 Plastics Industries Technical Institute Lessons - Vols. 1 to 3»




EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
PART C UNIVERSITY EDUCATION Off AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERS
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item 1.t)1 General
M I*o2 Organisation
" 1003 Program*
CHAPTER 2 - AMERICAN EDUCATION
Item 2*ol Statistics
2»02 Main differences between American and British training
” 2*03 Necessity for sound basic training
" 2# 02*. Post-graduate courses
" 2*05 Co-operative courses
” 2*06 Relations with industry
" 2*07 Scope of research
” 2*oB Grades of education
M 2.09 Cost of University training
APPENDIX - UST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA




CHAPTER 1 - BRQAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
6C—1.01 General. One of* the outstanding things that impressed the
Mission was the size, scope and experience of* the senior executive
staffs of the Army, Navy and firms' technical and engineering
departments. The Army and Navy have a number of senior technical
and procurement executives with great experience and a long stand-
ing aircraft engineering background. These men for the most part
have held their positions for a number of years without interrup-
tion before and during the American expansion period. Similar
remarks apply to the general quality of the executive staff of
the firms, and whereas they may not have had the benefit of a few
outstanding personalities that have existed in this country, the
general grade of technical staff is of a high order.
The whole standard of training of aeronautical engineers was
so impressive that, in spite of the volume of the Mission's work,
some time was spent in investigating the position, and considerable
assistance was rendered by Dr. Edward Warner, Professor Hunsaker,
Professor Clark Milligan, Dr. Evan Graham, etc.
The results of the investigation are recorded in Chapter 2,
and the conclusion reached by the Mission is that an immediate
start should be taken to increase our educational facilities.
The Mission have not reviewed this matter at any great length
since their return to England, but they have talked it over with
certain authorities in this country and put forward the following
suggestions: -
6C-1.02 Organisation. That a capable organiser be selected to guide the
whole programme, who would fulfil the same functions as
Professor Hunsaker in America; this man would require not only a
wide knowledge of university curricula, training and research
equipment, but also the personality and drive to organise this
whole matter, and deal with all the authorities, Educational,
Treasury, etc.
That whoever is chosen should have a small committee drawn
from representatives of the Ministry, educational authorities and
the industry to work out the details of the programme. The main
functions of this board would be:-
(a) To formulate a policy for advancing aeronautical engineering
training.
(b) To reconmend grants of money for research equipment etc., to
universities and other selected institutions.
(c) To advise on courses of study.
(d) To collaborate with the A.R.C. in the allocation of research
work from Government establishments and the industry to the
various universities.


6C-1.03 Programme« It is suggested that the following should he taken as an
outline of the main programme of re-construction: -
(a) A number of technical colleges should he provided with
improved facilities and encouraged and helped hy the
central hoard.
(h) Several major universities should set up chairs of
aeronautics and he provided with guidance and finance
for greater research facilities.
(c) One major university should he chosen to he the main
seat of learning in aeronautics and to provide not only
ordinary graduate courses hut also post-graduate courses.
In order to achieve the necessary standard it will he
necessary to expend a considerable amount of money on
this university. The space necessary for wind tunnels
etc., will have to he taken into account in deciding the
location, and it would he an advantage to have it
adjacent to an aerodrome.


CHAPTER 2 - AMERICAN EDUCATION
6C-2.01 Statistics. In the immediate pre-war years, some 14*000 students
graduated annually from the Engineering Schools of American universities,
of whom about 10 per cent were specialist aeronautical engineers. In
1942, over 1,400 students took aeronautical degrees in America.
At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology alone, there are
normally 2,400 undergraduates, composed of about 600 in each class plus
about 600 taking post-graduate courses. About 10 per cent of these are
mechanical engineers.
About 30 students per year are enrolled for post-graduate courses at
the California Institute of Technology, and a Master*s degree is granted
to these students after the successful' conclusion of one year at the
institute. Some of the students continue for a second year, while about
5 men per year remain for a further year to get their Doctor's degree.
Similar courses at other institutes, for instance Stanford, give a
specialised post-graduate course to a further 50 or 60 aeronautical
engineers making a total of about 100 per year in the United States;
i.e. about 8 per cent of the annual total of 1,200 to 1,400 graduates
in aeronautical engineering.
In the college of engineers at New York University, there are over
1,000 undergraduates and, in addition to this, over 12,000 people undergo
evening class training.
6C-2.02 Main differences between American and British training. Although the
large number of trainees from "mass production" institutions are in part
responsible for the large total of university graduates in America, there
are about 15 well known universities which provide a really sound
education to a considerable number of aeronautical engineers. In search-
ing for the reason for the extent of this first rate aeronautical training,
it is apparent that it was considerably influenced by Guggenheim. A
large number of the aeronautical schools attached to the universities were
financed and endowed by the- Guggenheim Foundation, which was set up to
distribute money for this purpose, and was disbanded in 1930 when their
work was completed.
Whereas in England a large number of artisans are trained by the
apprenticeship system, and some of these are given a fair theoretical
training through evening classes and possibly one day’s study per week,
America has no such system and trains few artisans. In university
training, however, the scope of the undertaking is greater than in this
country, even allowing for the difference in total population.
Although the evening school in America is not so well developed as in
this country, there are a number of universities which provide for this
class of training and also for special wartime short courses. The evening
classes at New York University which were mentioned previously are one
example, while at M.I.T. an experiment was made last year giving a
three months specialist course in aeronautics to 20 women university
graduates who had mathematical training. The main subjects were aero-
dynamics and machanics and the course was considered to be a great success.
The California Institute of Technology provides night classes for women,
and since the war it has provided some special services, such as a course
last summer for 120 engineers from Lockheed.


The Army and Navy also send a number of trained engineers yearly to
one or other of the well known post-graduate universities.
6C-2.03 Necessity for sound basic training. In putting forward the necessity
for degrees in aeronautical engineering, it is not suggested that there
should be any relaxation in the standard of basic engineering instruction.
This point is appreciated at most of the foremost American universities,
where at least the first two years of a four years’ course in aeronautical
engineering comprises the standard basic engineering courses; only the
last one or two years include specialised aeronautical subjects.
At New York University, for instance, students in the first and
second years of an aeronautical engineering degree course undergo the
standard training for all engineering students. In the third and
fourth years, however, they can specialise either in technical aeronautical
engineering, in the commercial operation of aircraft, or in aircraft
production.
Because of the large number of applicants for the specialised
courses, enrolment is selective and there is keen competition.
Notwithstanding the foregoing it is considered essential for
university courses to be drawn up in relation to the requirements of the
industry and in this connection the following tabulation prepared by
one of the American aircraft companies, may be of interest.
AIRCRAFT ENGINEERING OCCUPATIONAL OPPORTUNITY STUDY
Item
■ .
No. of
Men
Rough
Equiv.
Percent-
age
I
Preliminary Design and Development
27
2
II
Aerodynamics
22
2
III
Stress Analysis and Structural Design
65
6
IV
Weight Analysis and Control
40
3
v
Production Design, Drafting and Checking
453
40
VI
Tracing, Blueprint and Record ¥ork
313
27
711
Administration, Supervision and Liaison
235
20
\
TOTAL
1155
100
In analysing this tabulation the firm in question state that they
consider that items I to V requxre university graduates, i.e. that about
50 per cent of the personnel of a design department should be professional


engineers*
6C-2.04 Post-graduate Courses* Undoubtedly the ideal training for the higher
type of professional engineer is a 3 years undergraduate course in general
engineering followed by 1 to 3 years post-graduate training; this period
depending on the ability of the student and the type of work which he
proposes to take up. The California Institute of Technology, for instance
does not cater for normal graduate courses in any branch as they consider
this to be adequately covered by other colleges, such as M.I.T., Michigan
and Minnesota. The Institute sets out to give specialised post-graduate
training to a small number of selected men who must already have Bachelor
degrees, preferably in engineering or science.
In the graduate school at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
•emphasis is again laid on individual study and research, and in a number
of* cases students specialise on some particular aspect of the aeronautical
field,such as aerodynamics, design, instrumentation, structures or power
plant.
60-2.05 Co-operative Courses. Although not universally applicable, these courses
have a definite place in the general scheme of technical education. At
the University of Cincinnati for instance, students who plan to enter the
aero-engineering courses sire enrolled in mechanical engineering during
the first two years. Upon the satisfactory completion of this work, they
embark on the co-operative 2 year aeronautical engineering course which is
made up of 7 week periods alternately in the university and in aircraft
factories. During the periods in aircraft factories they earn a wage
which assists in paying for the course.
Co-operative courses in mechanical engineering are also given by the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. This course is of 5 years
duration of which the first two years are identical with the standard
mechanical engineering course.
6C-2.06 Relations with Industry. The opinion was gained in America that the
day has passed when universities can expect large endowments from individuals
In the future therefore, the universities can only maintain their place
and fulfil their obligations by close co-operation with industry; this is
being tackled in two main ways:-
(i) Professors are encouraged to undertake consulting work for the
industry and it is considered that professors of engineering
(as opposed to mathematics, physics, etc.) must do this in
order to keep up to date. Dr. Klyne of the California
Institute of Technology, for instance, devotes about half
his time to consulting work for the Douglas Company.
(ii) Research work undertaken by universities is financed by contracts
given to the institutes by Government departments and firms.
A special board has been set up in Washington for the
wartime allocation of contracts to the various universities.
In peace time the work undertaken is normally of a pure
research nature, but war conditions have necessitated more
attention towards problems of immediate practical application.
Dr. Milligan of the California Institute of Technology, as an
example, devotes about half his time to research work on the
Institute * a wind tunnel.
Research work undertaken by universities result in two main advantages
Firstly finance is provided both by the Government and by the industry for
specific work, and the equipment thus made available is then of permanent
value to the institute. As an example of this the California Institute
of Technology has designed a 12 ft. pressure tunnel which is briefly
described later in this report.
The second advantage gained by universities undertaking large scale
research work, is that it keeps all concerned in touch with the latest
developments and latest practice. In most cases the research work is
done by the professors and permanent assistants and not by students,
although at some universities the students are raid for research work done


in their spare time; this system is adopted both by the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and by the California Institute of Technology,
the work by students being done normally between 6 p. ra. and midnight,
and on Sundays.
Quite apart from the benefit to the professors and permanent staff,
the students, although they may not themselves take part in the research
work, are enabled to grow up in an atmosphere of modern research which
broadens their outlook and gives them a picture of the practical
application of the work they are doing.
Although this research is important for all universities, it is
considered to be of paramount importance for post-graduate courses.
Scope of Research. No attempt will be made to give a complete catalogue
of the equipment of the various universities, but some pertinent examples
are quoted.
-CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE ON TECHNOLOGY
New Twelve-foot Wind Tunnel. A 12-foot pressure tunnel has been
designed at the Institute. One of these tunnels is being built by Curtiss-
Wright while a second is to be built at the Institute as a co-operative
venture; one-third of the cost of over two million dollars being borne each
by Douglas and Consolidated and one-sixth each by Lockheed and Northrop.
It is planned that these firms will eventually give the tunnel to the
institute.
The design was started a year ago and it is expected that half the
total of 1500 tons of steel will be delivered for the "Cal Tech” tunnel
by February; construction is scheduled to be completed by the end of 1943.
The tunnel is powered by a 12,000 h.p. motor driving a 32-blade fan
in two units of 16 blades, one unit of which can be feathered. The
tunnel will work up to a pressure of 4 atmospheres 1 Reynolds numbers of
15 million and Mach numbers up to nearly 1. An interesting design
feature is that pressure tight doors are provided, providing a de-compression
sphere, to isolate the working chamber so that the pressure in the
remainder of the tunnel need not be reduced on entering the chamber to
make adjustments. The whole mounting for the aircraft, or power plant
model, is quickly detachable and can be replaced by duplicate mountings
on which other models have been installed, thus reducing the idle time of
the tunnel. A copper finned water radiator section is planned to give a
temperature drop of 35°F to the air.
-s Supersonic Tunnel. A tunnel is under construction to give a velocity
up to twice the speed of sound for use in ballistic experiments. The
tunnel was being worked at a pressure of two atmospheres at the entry end
and 1 lb. absolute behind the throat. The throat was some 4” wide and
3/4” deep at the narrowest point in the venturi. Balances were still in
course of design and the tunnel has not yet been in practical operation.
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY.
Aero Engine Laboratory. Most of the work is done on standard C.F.R. units
and two of these are devoted entirely to the demonstrations of basic
principles to students. Amongst other specialequipment the following was
noted:-
(a) Cyclone single cylinder unit being used for volumetric
efficiency tests.
(b) Lycoming single cylinder unit being used for research into bore-
stroke ratios - different crankshafts are being used and the
results co-related on the basis of like piston speeds.
(o) C.F.R. unit with cylinder liner mounted on springs in order to
measure piston friction. This unit has been run up to very
high speeds and is mounted on a 19,000 lb. cast iron bed plate
which is attached to the floor by means of rubber mountings.


(d) Air cooled single cylinders with variable timing and variable
lift valves for volumetric efficiency tests*
All the engines are supplied with boost and exhaust evacuation (up to
20,000 ft*) by a central system* A cyclone blower is now being installed
in series with the normal system to increase this altitude for the (Cyclone
single cylinder to over 30,000 ft.
Instrumentation - Two particular points were noted as follows:-
»
(a) The use of a modified Famborough Indicator made up into &
very compact form by the "American Instrument Company”j this
is used in conjunction with a very compact cylinder unit built
into a standard spark plug body*
(b) The universal use of synchronous stroboscopes for the accurate
recording of H.P.M*
As an example of the type of work done, the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology have produced a bibliography covering 65 papers and 2 books
published as a result of original research at the Institute and this is
listed in the Appendix*
6C-2.08 .Grades of Education* Most of the foregoing has dealt with the higher
education of the engineers, but it is realised that it is impossible to
bring forward people with the required background for higher education,
without providing the necessary backing for technical schools and
universities of all types* Otherwise a brilliant man at one technical
school may be deprived of the privilege of advancing his knowledge because
the basic education in this technical school is not sufficiently good to
allow him to enter one of the major universities.
6C " 2 * 09 Uoat University Training. In order to make the best possible use of
the country’s resources in the way of potential engineering brains, it is
considered essential that provision should be made for financial assistance
to suitable candidates who cannot themselves afford the cost of a normal
engineering degree course.
In America, students can earn money themselves in a number of ways 1 '
and two examples follow: -
(i) At the California Institute of Technology students can earn
as research assistants in their spare time.
(ii) At the University of Cincinnati, students taking the co-operative
course are paid by the firms for whom they work*
These instances and others are applicable in their own place but
cannot be regarded as superseding the scholarship scheme, which must be
highly developed in all grades of engineering education*


APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA
1* Educational Directory 1941-1942 Part IV,
2. Booklet - U.S. Office of Education 1941-42 Part III
Colleges and Universities.
3* Journal of Engineering Education - Several oopies
containing articles on education.
4. New York University Bulletin February 1942 College
of Engineering, including the Daniel Guggenheim School
of Aeronautics.
5. Manual - Massachusetts Institute of Technology Bulletin
Catalogue Issue June 1942.
4
6. University of Cincinnati Bulletin Co-operative courses,
College of Engineering and Commerce 1943-1944,
7. Booklet - Thirty years of Educational Pioneering.
The Philosophy of the Co-operative System and its
Practical Test. University of Cincinnati.
8. Booklet- College of Engineering and Commerce School of
Applied Arts. University of Cincinnati 1942-43*


EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
PART D RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item 1.01 American research equipment
1.02 Need for increased research equipment in Britain
M 1.03 Organisation
CHAPTER 2 - NEED FOR INCREASED RESEARCH IN BRITAIN
CHAPTER 3 ~ LANGLEY FIELD
Item 3*ol General description
" 3*02 Description of structures laboratory
" 3.03 Particular items of structural research
” 3.04 Recommendations
CHAPTER 4 ~ CANADIAN NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
Item 4.01 General description
0 4.02 Particular items of research
" 4*03 Recommendations
CHAPTER 3 ~ AMERICAN WIND TUNNELS
Item 5.01 General
w 5.02 Large high speed tunnels
" 5»03 Large slow speed tunnels
w 5.04 Special tunnels
" 5*05 Concluding comments
CHAPTER 6 - ENGINE RESEARCH
Item 6.01 20 foot tunnel at Wright Field
° 6.02 10 foot tunnel at Wright Field
n 6.03 N.A.C.A. Engine research laboratory at Cleveland
" 6.04 Naval aircraft factory at Philadelphia
APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCOMSNTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA




CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY COHCLQSIQNS
6D-1.01 American research equipment. It will be noted that frequent
reference is made in this report to new developments which are
taking place in America, on aircraft, accessories and power
plant, and the excellent development and research equipment
that has been set up during the last few years in America for
rapid realisation of this new work.
This includes wind tunnels, material structure testing
departments, engine testing and research laboratories, fuel and
oil laboratories, vibration testing departments, etc. The
Government departments have been divided into several sections
and the universities have been supplied with modem and up to
date equipment. With the ever increasing demands on aircraft
technique, higher speeds, and the necessity for carefully planned
research before new types sire entered upon, equipment and facili-
ties of this kind will place any country so constituted far ahead
of one in which their aircraft designers and engineers must of
necessity design as an art rather than an applied science.
6D-1.02 Need for increased research equipment in Britain. This country,
which has been entirely devoted to the war effort during the last
four years, has been forced for that period to put its major effort
into ad hoc development rather than pure research, but in view of
the increasing complexity of modem aircraft, it is suggested that
the time has now come to lay down a more ambitious forward programme,
which will have to be backed by a considerable expenditure on
research equipment.
6D-1.03 Organisation. With the aid of practical research men, who are
able to look at the problem as a Managing Director rather than a
research experimenter, this new equipment could be planned and used
to the best advantage, on a strictly businesslike basis to realise
certain results within a given time. It is felt that a suitable
proportion of the research equipment should be invested with
industry and also in the universities, rather than allow all
research to be undertaken by Government departments. Some of the
bigger and more basic questions must be dealt with nationally, but
the Mission are in favour of giving as much of the research work
as is practical to the industry and the universities.




CHAPTER 2 - NEED FOR INCREASED RESEARCH IN BRITAIN
6D-2.01 Whereas the first charge of the Mission was to review the prospects
of improving British production during the next 24 months, and to talk over
with the American authorities and firms certain specific technical problems,
the tour was not half completed before the members became deeply impressed
with the remarkable grip that aviation has got on the whole country during
the last two or three years, and the bold, and what might possibly appear*
rash, expenditure on development and research which was going on in all
matters relating to aviation throughout the country.
In a separate part of this section, the question of the numbers and
quality of trained aircraft engineers that exist, both amongst the
technical personnel of the Army and Navy, and amongst the aircraft firms
themselves, has been commented on, and a corollary to this state of
affairs is the lavish expenditure both in Government departments and the
firms themselves on research equipment, which has been set up recently
and which will be able to be operated to full advantage by this ever
growing force of trained aeronautical engineers.
It was felt by the members of the Mission that these developments
were so important and will provide America with so much valuable informa-
tion in regard to new types of aircraft, that an effort should be made to
investigate these matters in some detail, and to endeavour to get a clear
cut picture of what the research facilities are iifc America at the present
time.
It need not be emphasised in this report, which will be read by
executive members of M.A.P. and the industry, how vital research equipment
is in the art of developing aircraft; that every day it is becoming more
of a necessity rather than a luxury, and that the excellent family of
military aircraft which have been doing such outstanding work in the hands
of the allied air forces during the last three years, cannot be repeated
in modern form with the same methods of artistry that were sufficient to
meet the situation 7 or 8 years ago. In America, research equipment has
been wisely spread over several Government departments as well as a
number of private firms. It would appear that the division of this
equipment is of the order of about 60 to k&7o in favour of the Government
departments.
i
As regards Government research laboratories, these have been split up
into half a dozen different centres and there has been no attempt to group
them all in one or two locations. v
Well planned research programmes are cleared annually for all the
important constructors, and one of the major firms is expending as much
as a million dollars per month in research and development. The Mission
were unable to ascertain the expenditure that has been made over recent
years on research and equipment for aircraft and aircraft subsidiaries,
but it is estimated by them that it must be of the order of 30 to 40
million pounds.
Our enemies have given great attention to this question of research
equipment before the war, and now the Mission are thankful to find our
Allies have planned most wisely in regard to adequate research equipment
and long term research experimental work.
The past history of this country has been built up by the Navy and the
quality of its equipment, and in this new sphere of flying, which demands
so much higher technical quality and long term development, it would be
suicidal for us to fall behind.
It is suggested that such questions as bringing our tunnel development
up to date, providing an altitude tunnel for engine testing, providing suit-
able laboratories for fuel and oil testing, etc., should be given considera-
tion. Suitable laboratories for developing the electrical testing technique
for aircraft structures which has been so highly developed over the last two
or three years in America, should also be tackled. The Mission sincerely
hope that an adequate amount of research will be put with private concerns


leaving the Government departments to do the really big work, entailing
an item such as the high altitude engine tunnel.
CHAPTER 3 - LANGLEY FIELD
(With special reference to the structural work in progress)
6D-3.01 General Description. The National Advisory Council for Aeronautics is
appointed by, and is directly responsible to, the President, and its
members are drawn from the Army, Navy and Civil Aeronautics Administration.
Dr. Lewis is Chief Executive and the Council’s main function is to administer
the Government's grants for aeronautics, and to decide what research is to
be carried out at the Government laboratories at Langley Field (Virginia),
Moffat Field (California) and the engine research station at Cleveland.
The last named only came into being quite recently, but it is already of
first rate importance and will soon be the centre for all engine testing
and development. Moffat Field, which is also recent, is a duplication
of the Aerodynamics Division at Langley Field. Its object is to help
the West Coast firms with wind tunnel work.
At Langley Field, Mr. Reid is in charge of Research, and the follow-
ing are the most important technical divisions.
(a) Aerodynamics Division. This is under Mr. Miller and includes all
wind tunnels and the structures laboratory under Mr. Lundquist.
(b) Hydrodynamics Division. This is under Mr. Truscott and embraces
all the work done in the two seaplane tanks.
(c) Physical Research Division. This is under Mr. Theordorsen and is
concerned with flutter and problems of an essentially theoretical
or mathematical character.
(d) Power Plant Division. This is under Mr. Kemper and is in process
of being transferred to Cleveland.
As the visit to Langley Field was almost entirely confined to seeing
the structural work in progress, the statements made in the following
sections refer only to the structures unit.
6d-3»02 Description of Structures Laboratory. At present the Structures
Laboratory is part of the Aerodynamics Division, but it is probable that
this situation will soon be changed. It is due to the rapid growth of
the Unit which three years ago numbered only 6, but which now has 35
University trained engineers and 15 assistants. The actual test laboratory
is large but not yet fully equipped, as Mr. Lundquist has worked on the
principle of only procuring machines for which there is a definite need.
The work on hand and the method of approach to it have a strongly
scientific flavour, and there is little in progress of an ad hoc nature
which has originated direct from the industry. Work of this kind, to
which an answer is required at once, is not encouraged, as it is felt that
it is much better done on the spot by the firms themselves.
Such an arrangement has the obvious advantage that work of a more
fundamental and long term character - such as finding the best type of
structure for maintaining wing surface smoothness - can proceed without
interruption, but there is always the danger that such work will become
academic owing to lack of liaison with the firms. To meet this danger by
trying to foresee what fresh structural problems are likely to arise in
the future, a system is now being tried whereby one or two members of the
staff make a periodical tour of the industry. This scheme is considered
by the firms to be excellent, as they feel that in the past much of the
structural work of the N.A. C.A. was in danger of being either irrelevant
or too highbrow. While it is clear that more use is made of the structural
work done at Langley Field than most firms are willing to admit, this
attitude does emphasise the large gap which exists between the basic
research done by the N.A.C.A., and what the firms themselves are prepared
to use.


The work in progress is mainly experimental, and the ratio of the
time spent by the Unit as a whole on experiment and theory is in the
neighbourhood of three to one. This is partly caused by lack of
theoretical ability on behalf of the more recently recruited members of the
staff, but is mainly due to the definite policy of not publishing theoretical,
results without experimental evidence to back them.
Concerning theoretical research, it is felt that the need at the
moment is rather to re-write existing work in a more readily understandable
form, than to launch out on new developments. Great interest is being
taken in the production of A.N.C.4* > & handbook on stressing methods, and
it is anticipated that Messrs. Lundquist and Kuhn will together be
responsible for some of the more advanced chapters.
Apart from the Royal Aeronautical Society data sheets, of which there
is a fairly complete set, the knowledge which Langley Field possesses of
the structural research which is in progress over here, is most meagre.
Many reports from the R.A.E. or N.P.L. are never seen at all, and this is
no doubt the reason why so little reference is made in American reports to
similar work which is being done in Britain. Such lack of liaison is
unfortunate and should be remedied. The amount and quality of the research
in progress is impressive, and the following is a brief account of some of
the items.
6D-3.03 Particular Items of Structural Research. The main items on which
structural research is proceeding at Langley Field are the following: -
1 • Structure for Smooth Wings. The drag of a number of wing
sections embodying various types of construction have been found in a
wind tunnel, and these same sections are now being tested structurally.
The loading is pure compression and the object of the tests is to examine
the effect on wing surface smoothness of
a single loading,
(b) repeated loadings.
A bulletin entitled "A Preliminary study of the effect of compressive load
on the fairness of a low drag wing specimen with Z section stiffeners"
January 1943> has already been issued, and more are to follow. The types
of construction being investigated include
(a) Front spar well aft, no span-wise stiffeners, close rib
spacing.
(b) Front spar well aft, span-wise stiffeners and conventional rib
spacing.
(c) Box with front spar well forward, spanwise stiffeners and
conventional rib spacing.
In the course Of discussion, Mr. Abbott suggested that for obtaining
the necessary wing surface smoothness the following conditions were
certainly desirable and probably essential. When using aluminium alloy
the skin should be 0.08 in. or more thick. If possible span-wise
stiffeners should be avoided and the material thus saved should be put
into the skin. Where this is impracticable, care must be taken to smooth
off protruding rivet heads (by the tool specially developed by the N.A.C.A.
for the purpose), and to fill up the dents with some filling material.
The portion of the wing aft of 70fi of the chord is not particularly
important, and in that region the use of a thinner skin is quite permissible.
Since smoothness is especially important over the front part of the wing,
and since it is difficult to make a smooth joint between the cover and spar,
the front spar should be at least h&fo of the chord aft of the leading edge.
2- Panel Tests. With the object of providing data that might be of
use in low drag wing design, a large number of panel tests are in progress.
Special attention is being paid to the initial buckling stress and to the
average stress developed at maximum load, as it is felt that for a smooth
wing surface buckling may have to be delayed until the attaining of two


thirds of the maximum average stress. The specimens being tested comprise
two groups. The first contains 500 panels with 6 2 section stiffeners of
24 ST; the second comprises 1,000 panels with 4 Z or top hat stiffeners
• made from stretched and artificially aged 24 ST.
Compression Stress Strain Curves. Ways of obtaining compression stress
curves are being improved and three methods are in use or in progress of
development. The first is to form a pack by cyclewelding together a
number of specimens. The second is by means of a single strip fixture with
closely spaced roller supports. In the third the specimen is supported
between two well lubricated plates. One or two tests have been carried
out with the cycleweld process and the method looks promising.
Stress concentration round small holes in aluminium alloy sheet. When
stressing an area with small holes, "firms take into account the reduction
in area, but not always the effects of stress concentration. The justifi-
cation for this procedure is being investigated, and preliminary results
indicate that a 5 to 10 per cent reduction in allowable stress in the net
section will effectively cover any stress concentration for maximum
strength calculation.
Shear Lag and Shear Diffusion. Three main pieces of work on this
subject are at present in progress.
1 * A wing test for the purpose of verifying the recent theoretical
work of Messrs. Kuhn and Chiarito on shear lag.
2. An experiment on a flat sheet with longitudinal and transverse
reinforcement for the purpose of finding the stress distribution
round various sizes of rectangular cut-out.
%
3» A series of tests on reinforced circular cylinders, having as
their main object the investigation of the post-buckling
behaviour of curved panels in shear.
The effect of normal pressure on the buckling of curved panels. This
problem has arisen through the increasing importance of maintaining wing
surface smoothness, and the need for estimating the effect of air loads
on the stability of the skin. Experimental work is in progress, and
provisional results indicate that owing to air loads, the stress at which
buckling would otherwise take place will be considerably increased and
under certain circumstances may be almost doubled.
Strain Gauges. Extensive use is made of standard electrical resist-
ance strain gauges, and one or two hundred may be used on a test. The
performance of the gauges is considered satisfactory, and efforts are now
being made to reduce the time of recording.
6D-3-04 Re commendations.
(i) In Britain long term structural research has been reduced and it
is suggested that the position should be reviewed.
(ii) The N.A. C. A.» Yflright Field and the Navy Bureau should automatically
receive a copy of all British reports which come up before the A.R.C.
CHAPTER 4 - CANADIAN NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
6d-4*01 General Description. A brief visit was paid to the Aeronautics Department
of the N.R.C., and the opportunity was taken to consider the relationship of
the work of the Aeronautics Department with that of other bodies, and to
discuss a number of particular items of research. The N.R.C. was started
by General McNaughton about ten years ago, but until 1939 the personnel and
equipment in the Aeronautics Department was very restricted, and it was not
until 1 940 that the department was able to occupy their new laboratory some
four miles outside Ottawa.


The Aeronautics Department is sub-divided into the sections shown in
the adjoining chart and is an institution of quality rather than quantity.
The total staff number 500, of whom about a quarter are university graduates,
and the remainder are in workshops or engaged in administrative duties.
The ability of the staff is of a high standard, and the equipment is good
but limited.
The work done comprises a number of specialised items and is confined
where possible to Canadian problems. The quality of the work is high but
unfortunately suffers from lack of contact with the industry or an
operational theatre of war. The senior members of the staff are well
aware of the difficulties of their position - that they are infinitesimally
small compared with other similar establishments (c.f. Wright Field with
23,000 employees) and that their geographical position entails working on
long term work of low priority. This latter point makes it difficult to
retain junior staff who feel remote from the war effort.
$hile the smallness of the staff and the -geographical position are
not matters which can be remedied, it was felt that much could be done to
enhance the value of the work in progress. The closest possible liaison
between British establishments and the N.R.C. would be highly beneficial,
and ah annual interchange of staff of intermediate grades would be an
experiment well worth trying. Probably an exchange of five or six men a
year would be of the right order. Further, the work which the N.R.C. is
doing should be periodically reviewed by representatives of British research
bodies so as to avoid duplication of effort and experiments of academic
interest only.
To conclude, it was felt that the full value of the N.R.C. would only
be realised if its efforts were closely co-ordinated with the work of British
establishments. As these sure so heavily engaged on short term work of an
ad hoc nature, it should be possible to arrange for the N.R.C. to do some of
the more fundamental research which in Britain has almost lapsed. Every
effort should therefore be made to effect a real liaison of the kind exist-
ing between N.P.L., R.A.E. and the Flight Testing establishments.
6d-4»02 Particular Items of Research
panel Testing. The N.R.C., with the help of Professor Jackson of
Toronto University, have Just completed an excellent set of tests on the
behaviour of flat and curved panels in compression. The panels tested
were 20 ins. long; 4, 6 or 8 ins. wide; 24 ins. radius, 48 ins. radius
or flat; and were of one or other of three standard gauges. Moreover
four specimens were tested for each combination of width, thickness and
curvature. Great attention was paid to the effect of repeated loadings
and it was found that if the load at which initial buckling occurred on
the first loading was immediately reduced, then the load at which buckling
first occurred on the next loading was not much altered. Tjftiereas if the
load at which initial buckling occurred on the first loading was increased
before ultimate removal, then the load at which buckling first occurred on
the next loading was reduced. J ’


The method adopted for measuring the amplitude of the buckles was
ingenious and is illustrated in Pig. 1.
A wire grid was placed in front of the
panel, and a bright light (a) threw a
shadow of the grid on to the panel. As
soon as buckling occurred, the shadows
of the wires were displaced, and the
magnitude of the displacements were
recorded by the camera (b). The cali-
bration involved was considerable, but
the accuracy of the method made it
possible to measure normal deflections
to the nearest thousandth of an inch.
FIG. 1.
The N.R, C. are now proposing to repeat the whole series of tests with
the following improvements in the edge conditions* -
(a) The two curved edges are being fitted into 1/4" deep grooves
(of the appropriate curvature) instead of into Wood's metal
which invariably caused local distortion of the panel.
(b) Instead of confining the two straight edges in a series of
closely spaced notches, (a form of constraint which after
buckling sometimes amounted to complete fixing), they are
being attached to closely spaced arms which are free to
move along but not normal to the panel.
In view of the excellent results obtained from the first series (now in
process of being written up) and since some part at least of the additional
series of tests is most unlikely to yield information of value to designers,
it was felt that the A.R.C. should have the opportunity to study the results
of the first series before the start of the second. It was felt that on
future tests electrical strain gauges could be used to advantage, and that
a further development of value would be to carry out a similar series of
tests for panels in shear.
Moulded plywood. This and the panel testing constitutes the main work
of the structures unit. They have a laboratory complete with two ovens for
making moulded plywood parts, and at present they are engaged on a small
production order for plywood rear fuselages for Harvards. This, it was felt,
was a waste of time, as the tests involve little research or development and
are a job which could well be done by a wooden aircraft firm. In the course
of this work satisfactory results have been obtained with either urea or
phenolic glues. The latter are preferred on account of their water resistant
qualities, but owing to the higher temperatures required for gluing, and the
consequently shortened life of the rubber bags, only urea glues are now being
used.
It appears that this laboratory might well be employed in keeping abreast
with some of the recent new developments in America, such as application of
glass cloth, cyclewelding, etc.
De-icing. A considerable amount of de-icing work is in progress and,
except for limitations on flight testing facilities, proceeding well. The
following are the views expressed by the head of the de-icing section on
certain current problems.
(a) Wind screen de-icing. To prevent frosting, misting and icing,
it is bes-fc to have a double screen and to blow hot air between
the two portions. This had been tried out on a Hudson and had
been found satisfactory.
00 Propeller de-icing. To counteract icing an electrical resistance
method had been developed. It had been satisfactorily tried out
in both America and Canada and it was hoped that it would be
taken up by the Services.


. (c) Wing de-icing* For this it was felt that heat de-icing was by
far the most effective method available. There was still some
doubt as to what was the best type of muff, but tests indicated
that to pass the exhaust through a number of tubes, e.g. 16
1/2 in. tubes, was a satisfactory compromise. While the back
pressure due to the tubes was a disadvantage, they improved the
flame damping.
Wind tunnels. Two new wind tunnels are nearly ready for use. One is
a horizontal closed jet tunnel with a 2,000 h.p. motor and with a speed of
350 m.p.h. (estimated) at the working section. This section is elliptical,
measuring 10' x 6*8”. A six component balance with automatic recording is
employed. The other tunnel is a vertical spinning tunnel, similar to that
at R.A.E., 15* in diameter and capable of testing models of 3* span. The
controls in the model can be operated electro-magnetically. The N.H.C.
hopes to collaborate with Britain in the use of these tunnels. This seems
a very logical step and the spinning tunnel should make it possible to
double the output of British work on model spinning tests. The Canadian
industry will certainly not provide sufficient work to occupy these tunnels.
6D-4« 03 Recommendations.
(i) The liaison between British research establishments and the N.R.C.
should be improved, so that the work of the N.R.C. can be closely
co-ordinated with similar work in progress over here. As an aid
to achieving this it is suggested that an interchange of staff
be considered.
(ii) The panel tests made by the N.R.C. should be reviewed immediately
by the Aeronautical Research Committee.
(iii) Proposals should be made for better employment of the plywood
laboratory.
(iv) Plans should be developed, if not already in existence, for
collaborating with the N.R.C. in the use of their new wind tunnels.
CHAPTER 5 - AMERICAN WIND TUNNELS
6D-5. 01 General. In the United States there are some thirty good sized tunnels
in use and a further ten under design or construction. Although the
majority of existing tunnels are in official establishments, over 25/
will be owned by aircraft firms and universities when the new tunnels are
completed; and the effort which is being made by firms to have large
high speed tunnels of their own, (e.g. Boeing, Curtiss, North American)
is striking.
6D-5*02 Large High Speed Tunnels. In Table I a list of modern high speed
tunnels is given. Present day conditions call for speeds of 600 m.p.h.
The R.A.E. tunnel, the Langley Field 8 ft. tunnel and the Moffat Field
16 ft. tunnel all fulfil this requirement. It will also be noticed
that there axe three tunnels under construction in U. S. with speeds
estimated to be well above 600 m.p.h. The most significant feature of
the information of Table I is the sheer scale of the U.S. equipment.
Measuring in terms of power, the American tunnels listed use 186,000 h.p.
*
A striking example of the equipment being built by the firms them-
selves is offered by the Curtiss fright tunnel, for which leading
particulars are given in Table I, and which is illustrated in Fig. 2.
This tunnel, which is virtually identical with one being built co-
operatively by several Yifest Coast firms, is costing little over
2,000,000 dollars.


LARGE HIGH SPEED TUNNELS
TABLE I
Location
Size
Speed
m. p. h.
Pressure
Power
Jet
Remarks
Wright Field
20* circ.
450
(closed
Jet)
Approx. A
40,000
Closed
or open
M It
10* circ.
685
Down to a/8
40,000
Closed
Contracts placed.
Langley Field
19' circ.
310 at A
220 at 2^A
2.5A
8,000
Closed
« if
16' circ.
470
Approx. A
16,000
Closed
tt tv
8' circ.
600
A/2
8,000
Closed
Moffat Field
16* circ.
600
Approx. A
27,000
Closed
Curtiss Wright
12' x 8&'
750 at
A/4
A/4 to 4A
12,000
Closed
Under Construction.
West Coast
Corporation
tt
tt
tt
tt
tl
ii n
M.I.T.
10* x 7i'
396 at
A/4
A/4 to 4A
2,000
tt
Boeing
12' X 8*
500
-
-
-
Project
North American
11* x 7-1'
327
Approx. A
3,030
Closed
-
Cleveland
20' circ.
500
Equiv. to
50,000'
18,000
Closed
LARGS SIZE SLOW SPEED TUNNELS TABLE II
Location
Size
Speed
M.P.H.
Pressure
Power
Jet
Remarks
Langley Field
Moffat Field
30’ x 60'
80' x 2*j0*
100
150
A
A
8,000
20,000
Open
Closed
Project
SPECIAL TUNNELS
TABLE III
location
Duty
Size
Speed
m. p. h.
Pressure
Power
Jet
Remarks
Langley Field
Spinning
20' circ.
65
A
hoo
Closed
tl — »»
t»
15' circ.
40
A
150
ft
t» »*
Stability
6' x 6'
230
A
600
tl
Possibly converting
to high speed tunnel
»f tl
Two Dimen-
sional
7i' x y
130 at 10A
10A
2000
»!
Usually operated at
4 atmospheres
ft ft
Free Flight
12’ circ.
60
2A
400
ft
t» «l
High Speed
2' x 0.33'
M = 1.0
A
Induced
Flow
ft
tl ft
High Speed
2' circ.
g
ii
p
VO
A
»t
tl
Cal. Tech.
High Speed
1* x I’ard
2* x 2'
M = 3-0
-
3000
ft
Project (twin jets)


FIG. 2. CURTISS WRIGHT TUNNEL.
6D-5-03 Large slow speed tunnels (Table II). Apparently the U.S. consider this
class of tunnel is still of value in view of their proposal to build a new
and enlarged version at Moffat Field.
6d~3• 04 Special tunnels (Table III). The most interesting development is the
proposal to construct at Cal. Tech, a small tunnel giving speeds equal
to three times the speed of sound. The other point to note from Table III
is the American inclination towards exploring new avenues of research,
without weighing the cost too heavily. The "Stability Tunnel" and the
"Free Flight Tunnel" are illustrative of this.
6D- 5.05 Concluding comment. Without entering into the question of whether the
American equipment is technically superior to that in Britain, it is
evident that the U.S. has taken wind tunnel equipment very seriously.
- N i
CHAPTER 6 - ENGINE RESEARCH,
6D-6.01 20 foot tunnel at Wright Field. At the time of the Mission’s visit this
tunnel had been running only a few weeks. It was designed under the
direction of Dr. F.L. Wattendorf, who is in charge of the new department,
which also includes the 10 foot high altitude tunnel at present under
construction.
The purpose of the 20 foot tunnel is to test models and full scale
nacelles of military aircraft in order to expedite improvements in design
and performance. It is primarily useful main types of applied
tests; tests of complete aeroplane models on a six-component overhead
balance, and cooling tests on full-scale engine nacelle assemblies,
utilising a floor mounted drag balance.
The tunnel is provided with three interchangeable throat configura-
tions; closed throat, 20 foot open jet and 30 foot open jet. The maximum
performance in the closed throat condition is as follows:-


True air speed 452 m.p.h.
Speed of fan 300 r.p.rn.
Pan shaft horsepower 32,900 h.p.
Energy ratio 5
Mach number 0.6
Dynamic pressure 455 lb. per sq. ft.
Density altitude 7,000 ft.
With a nacelle in the tunnel and the 20 foot gap, the maximum
airspeed is about 380 to 400 m.p.h., and with the 30 foot gap the speed
becomes about 350 m.p.h.
of ’k unne l is shown in Pig. 3 and consists essentially
(i) A closed return steel tube, 616 feet long, having a circular
cross section varying in diameter from a maximum of 45 feet
to 20 feet at the test section,
(ii) A test chamber building,
(iii) A power house building and sub-station,
(iv) A workshop and office building, situated in front of the test
chamber but not shown in Pig. 3.
The shop portion will be used for making modifications to the models,
nacelles etc., and preparing them for the tests and the office portion will
be J US^. f ° r 117121(1 tunnel data computations, in addition to the administrative
and office work in connection with the operation of the tunnel.
A contract for preliminary design studies of the tunnel was awarded
on May 10th, 1939 and subsequently contracts were placed for the
construction of the test chamber building; tunnel duct structure; power
building; power and control equipment; and the six-component balance.
The fan motor of 40,000 horsepower is of especial interest, being
probably the largest ever built. It was tendered for by the General
Company and by Messrs. Westinghouse - the contract being awarded
to Westinghouse, who also did the power and control equipment.
All the essential items were completed by May 1st, 1942 and the first
operation of the tunnel took place on May 11th, 1942.
The total cost of the buildings and tunnel was about two and a half
million dollars - approximately £500,000 at par or £620,000 at the present
rate of exchange. Of this amount about one million dollars represents
the cost of the Pan Motor and Control
The staff to operate the tunnel consists of a Supervisor and two
operators in the power building; and a chief operator, two assistants and
two observers in the Control Room. No staff is required in the balance
room since the six-component balance is remotely controlled and records
automatically on a printing unit in the control room. Mr. Jacobs is the
chief operator and was responsible for the instrumentation.
An experienced staff of aerodynamic specialists is also available to
plan the work and to analyse and report the results.
The tunnel tube itself is built of welded rolled steel plate with nine
expansion Joints and appropriate structural members as shown in Pigs. 4, 5,
b and 7. It is powered by the 40,000 horsepower wound rotor induction
motor provided with smooth speed control from 37 to 300 r.p.rn.
The fan drive system consists of two tandem fans 40 feet in diameter
each having 16 spruce blades. Pro-rotation vanes are used for producing
uniform axial flow behind the fan. F &


FIG. 3. GENERAL LAYOUT OF 20 FOOT WIND TUNNEL WRIGHT FIELD DAYTON OHIO


FIG. 4 WRIGHT FIELD 20 FOOT WIND TUNNEL. GENERAL VIEW — LOOKING NORTHWEST.
FIG. 5. WRIGHT FIELD 20 FOOT WIND TUNNEL. LOOKING NORTHWEST AT SHOP AND OFFICE BUILDlNG.
FIG. 6. WRIGHT FIELD 20 FOOT WIND TUNNEL. PLAN VIEW.
FIG. 7 WRIGHT FIELD 20 FOOT WIND TUNNEL. LEFT : POWER HOUSE. RIGHT : TEST CHAMBER.


FIG. 8. WRIGHT FIELD 20 WIND
TUNNEL. INSIDE POWER BUILDING:
ASSEMBLY OPERATIONS OF 40,000
H.P. FAN MOTOR. MOTOR ROTOR
RESTING IN ITS BEARINGS IN FINAL
ASSEMBLY LOCATION.
FIG. 9. WRIGHT FIELD 20 FOOT WIND TUNNEL. INTERIOR
OF TEST CHAMBER SHOWING CONTROLS.
FIG. 10. WRIGHT FIELD 20 FOOT WIND TUNNEL. GENERAL VIEW IN THE CONTROL ROOM,
SHOWING TUNNEL CONTROLS, PRINTER AND ENGINE CONTROLS.


A conventional system of cascades of aerofoil section, having
flexibly adjustable trailing edges, is used at each right angle bend of the
tunnel and a large mesh honeycomb is provided at the last bend before the
expansion chamber. The test section can be varied in length as stated
aboye by removal of the closed throat section and collector bell section.
An air exchanger is incorporated in the tunnel just upstream of the
fan and results in continuous induction of about of fresh air. This
serves not only to cool the tunnel but to prevent excessive exhaust gas
concentration during engine tests. Other methods were investigated, such
as water spray on the shell and refrigeration cooling, but these would
have been too costly. It is said that direct air mixing is the cheapest
and best, and the throat temperature never exceeds 90°P.
Opposite the fan and outside the tunnel there are foundations and
facilities for a crane suitable for removing the fans and shafting for
inspection or overhaul.
The tunnel can handle a 3,000 h.p. engine for cooling tests. Fire risk
is localised by having the main petrol tank outside the building and feeding
a small auxiliary tank placed higher than the engine. Carbon monoxide
indicators are installed at various points round the tunnel as a precautionary
measure, but there is no trouble with exhaust gas contamination.
The test chamber unit is reinforced concrete structure 106 feet by
60 feet set athwart and surrounding the tunnel gap, the centre line of which
is 20 feet above the main floor. A stairway leads from the main floor to an
observation floor 17 feet above and it is possible to observe the model or
nacelle in the gap from a distance of about 20 feet.
In view of the reduced pressure in the working section of the tunnel
when running, an appropriate airlock door system connects the observation
floor with the control room, which is adequately ventilated and sound proofed.
The shop and office building accommodation on the upper floor will serve the
staffs of both the completed 20 foot and the future 10 foot high speed tunnel.
The power house is situated on the north end of the tunnel and is 112|
feet long by 51 A feet wide and 65 feet high. The 40,000 h.p. variable
frequency motor is on a raised platform, and is coupled by shafting through
the wall to the dual fans in the tunnel. The assembly operations on the
motor are shown in Fig. 8, which incidentally gives a good idea of the size '
of the rotor. Two motor-generators AC/DC and DC/AC respectively are
arranged to form the speed regulation equipment for the main motor by provid-
ing a variable frequency input, and automatic control to a pre-determined
speed is provided.
A separate substation takes power from a line at 66,000 volts and feeds
at 6,600 volts to the main control switchboard in the power house.
The test section of the tunnel is provided with a six-component, two
parameter, electrically damped balance system for making tests on aeroplane
models up to 16 feet in span. This balance is installed in a framework which
can be traversed on overhead rails into position over the gao as shown in
Fig. 9.
Above the balance and on the same framework is the balance room contain-
ing the observer’s control board for the balance behind which is situated the
balance integrator. This panel contains the selsyn actuated dials for the
3 axes force and moment components and other variables. Two lower dials on
the board are a clock and the fan speed indicator reading up to 300 r.p.m.
The balance is completely automatic with a duplicate set of dials situa-
ted in the tunnel control room as shown in Fig. 10. The forces on the balance
units act on steel yard scales the floating aims of which operate make-and-
break relays to control electric motors which move the jockey weights. Spring
hinges are used for the balance pivots to avoid friction.


Pig. 10 also illustrates the printing unit
on which permanent recording of results is done.
It can be seen immediately to the left of the
main control table, and it produces a typed
sheet, about 30 inches wide, of the balance
readings printed in column order against time
and date.
A sample portion of such a record is given
in Pig. 11; as this was taken when the balance
was inactive, each column shows the same readings
repeated.
The overhead balance is at present locked
for engine tests, but a fuselage balance is
under construction which will enable tests to
be made on full scale nacelles with running
propellers.
The engine controls and instruments can be
seen in the left side of Pig. 10, behind the
balance printing unit, the apparatus including
a Brown 144 point recording thermocouple poten-
tiometer, which is used for engine cylinder
temperatures and for general observations, and
which is described in detail in Section 5
Part E. This instrument types the readings
automatically at 2 second intervals as shown
in Pig. 12 which is a sample record. There
is also a panel of the usual engine running
instruments and a fuel flowmeter. During
the visit of the Mission a 2,000 h.p. Wright
3350 cubic inch engine was being calibrated.
It was stated that the tunnel was in general
use for 5 hours a day - this is probably made
possible by the 2 shift system which is in
operation throughout the Establishment, the
division of hours being 7.30 a.m. - 4.0 p.m.
and 3*o p.m. - 11 p.m. with a staggered
change over system.
6D-6.02 10 foot tunnel at Wrifftit Field. In
addition to the 20 foot tunnel the Air Force
authorities realised the need for a tunnel
giving all the conditions of flight at altit-
ude, and they have therefore approved the
construction of another unit incorporating
refrigeration. This is known as the 10 foot
high altitude wind tunnel and construction
has begun on a site directly alongside the
20 foot unit.
The purpose of this tunnel is to provide
means for investigating applied aerodynamic
problems of military aircraft models and
component parts, especially under altitude
conditions up to 50,000 feet and air speeds
approaching the speed of sound. For air
speeds in the compressibility range, modifica-
tions to aircraft such as addition of armament
or changes in cowling have a direct influence
on the critical speed and the change in
associated aerodynamic characteristics.
Since a large percentage of modifications to
military aircraft originates at the Materiel
Centre, the existence of the new high speed tun-
nel will enable the effect on performance of
FIG. 11.


proposed modifications to be tested at the source. In addition the large
refrigerating plant associated with the tunnel will allow icing tests and
applied heat transfer Investigations to be made.
Up to December 1942 contracts have been placed for the cold chamber
building, tunnel duct structure, refrigeration equipment, control equipment,
six-component balance and other principal items. The main contracts call
for completion in one year.
The tunnel will be capable of evacuation at least to one-eighth
atmosphere to simulate pressure conditions at 50,000 feet altitude.
A storage type of refrigeration system will make possible a throat
temperature of -67°P at air speeds above 600 m.p.h. Preliminary model
tests have shown speeds of nine-tenths the speed of sound to be attainable
without change of throat. The tunnel will have sufficient reserve power
to attain still higher speeds with suitable throat modifications.
Associated with the tunnel in a separate building housing the refrigerating
equipment there will be a cold chamber for testing equipment under
temperature conditions down to -67°P.
FIG. 12.


The 10 foot high altitude wind tunnel is of the closed return type
having a circular cross section varying from a maximum of 40 feet to
10 feet at the test section. The overall length of the tube is
586 feet and it will be built in steel plate varying in thickness from
3/8" to 1.1/4".
Two counter rotating fans 19 feet in diameter will be driven by
two 20,000 h.p. electric motors which will make use of the speed
control equipment already provided for the 20 foot tunnel.
Fig 13 shows, in a plan view of both tunnels, how the layout Has
been economically planned to make use of a common workshop and office
building and control equipment.
FIG. 13.


6D-6.03 N.A.C.A,. Engine Research Laboratory at Cleveland. 'The laboratory as a
whole - in initial conception and execution - is due chiefly to the fore-
sight and persistence of Dr. Lewis, Chief Executive of the N.A.C.A., who
has been responsible for carrying through to Congress the arguments in
favour of such a comprehensive policy for engine research.
The estimated cost of the whole plant was 18,000,000 dollars or
approximately 4i million pounds at the present rate of exchange. The
site chosen for the laboratory comprises 200 acres on the boundary of the
Cleveland Airport and has a city park at the rear so that there is anple
room for expansion. Among the chief factors in this choice of site and
district was the relative proximity of the chief engine firms which are
located in the Detroit and Nast Coast areas, and also that airport facilities
are essential for the flight research work that will form so important a
part of the whole programme.
The laboratory is at present in course of construction and about half
the available area has already been laid out. The whole scheme has been
under construction for about 21 months and the members of the Mission were
the first foreigners to have the privilege of inspecting the progress to
date. Already more than half is completed, the offices, machine shops,
and several test departments are in full operation.
The present plans have catered for an administrative office building;
engine research laboratory; fuel and lubricants laboratory; flight
research hangar; engine research tunnel and an icing tunnel; propeller
research building; workshops and stores; power sub-stations totalling
some 70,000 K.V.A. etc.
The administrative building is an office block from which the general
administration of the entire laboratory will be carried out. It contains
on an upper floor a well-lighted and equipped drawing office.
The engine research laboratory comprises a well equipped fitting shop
with a number of smaller laboratories and engine test beds surrounding it.
/
There are in all some 40 single cylinder test cubicles, 24 of which
are adjacent to the small laboratories.
In addition to the conprehensive array of single cylinder units
engaged on the various phases of engine research there are four full scale
test beds which can deal with engines up to 8,000 h.p. To permit altitude
conditions to be applied to all the beds there is an up to date altitude
plant capable of running an 8,000 h.p. engine at 50,000 feet intake and -
exhaust pressures and -67°P intake temperature.
There are also gear driven and turbo driven supercharger test rigs,
and blowers for engine work capable of supplying air at pressures up to
60 lb. per sq. inch.
In the basement is housed the equipment for supercharging air, exhaust
extraction and refrigeration and these services are piped to the various
cubicles and are remotely controlled from a central control room over-
looking the plant.
Fuel is stored in remote fireproof rooms and fed to the various
cubicles by means of submerged pumps. Most of the single cylinder stands
are provided with eddy current dynamometers and ultimately will have
electronic speed control.
The small '"icing" tunnel is intended for the study of engine icing
problems which, in spite of much investigatory work already elsewhere, are
not yet near ideal solution.


The fuel and lubricant laboratory is on two floors, the upper
comprising a long corridor and a number of "2 men” laboratories leading
off it in cubicle form. America is generally much more “fire conscious”
than Britain and the fuel and oil laboratories are a particularly good
example of careful provision of fire fighting equipment - chemical
extinguishers, fireproof blankets and water spray booths being provided
in each cubicle.
Overall the accommodation provides for well equipped Analytical,
Fuel Synthesis and Reactor Laboratories, the reactors and stills having
a potential output of 15 gallon batches of special fuels refined from
rough stocks and appropriately blended. Xn the basement there are many
test engines, among them being: -
(1) A G.F.R. high speed unit on which a piezo electric crystal
indicator is used, giving a pressure time diagram and its
first derivative enabling knock-intensity and rate of
pressure rise to be recorded on the cathode ray tube.
(2) A C.F.R. general purpose unit.
(3) A spherical head unit; small bore, high speed 3,600 r.p.m.
17*6 cubic inch capacity and supercharged; supplied by
Mr. Heron of Ethyl Gas Corporation for fuel research.
♦
(4) A C.F.R. unit for instrument research on knock-meters;
indicators etc.
All these C.F.R. engines were built by the Waukesha Motor Co., and it
was interesting to observe that four of them were running on direct fuel
injection.
The flight research hangar is large enough to house a B.19 aircraft
and is provided with its own engine maintenance shops etc. It is being
appropriately equipped with instrumental and other apparatus.
A department is concentrating on the development of instruments
among which were noted:-
A device for photographic tabulation of a multitude of differential
pressures across cowl entries, baffles, etc., and a galvanometer modified
for photographic flight recording of 100 thermocouple readings within
one minute.
Complete modem machine shops, sheet metal and pattern shop
facilities are provided and considerable attention is paid to the
adequacy of these services for the rapid handling of the research projects
as they develop.
The most important feature of this laboratory is a high altitude test
bed consisting of a closed circuit wind tunnel 20 feet in diameter in
which a complete nacelle with engine and flight propeller can be mounted.
The tunnel is cooled by a mechanically refrigerated system working with a
finned tube heat exchanger located in the tunnel air stream at the largest
diameter. The refrigerating system is designed to test a 3,000 h.p.
engine at 30,000’ altitude and a corresponding temperature. Wind speeds
up to 500 m.p.h. can be achieved at 30,000’ and the motor power correspond-
ing to this speed and altitude is 18,000 h.p.
The tunnel structure is designed to provide for tests to be made at an
altitude of 50,000 feet and the equipment will normally be used for testing
actual service engine installations from ground level to 30,000 feet with
provisions for a continuous operation at the appropriate pressure and
temperature for each altitude.
The cost of the evacuating pumps and refrigerating system made up a
large proportion of the total cost of the tunnel.


6D-6.04 Naval Aircraft Factory at Philadelphia. This establishment is the Naval
equivalent of Wright Field, which is purely an Army Air Force organisation.
It is located within the Navy Yard, and out of a total personnel of
50,000 there are 11,000 people employed on aircraft work. Some actual
aircraft production is carried out, and there are departments similar to
ours at the R. A.E. for handling development work.
There is a very well equipped engine department capable of carrying
out any development job, although but little new work is initiated there
as such research is sponsored and carried out by the N.A. C.A. The Navy
opinion is that engines of 5,000 h.p. will soon be required, and in
anticipation of this they are constructing a new test cell and dynamometer
room to absorb 6,000 h.p., or 3,000 h.p. at 40,000 feet with intake air
down to -67°F. The test bed will have both single and contra-rotating
drives. The Navy at the present time, use air cooled engines only; it
was stated that although the Navy developed the best liquid cooled engine
in the States, they deliberately chose afterwards not to use it. The engine
referred to was the Lycoming 2740 cu.in. which in their hands has developed
1.2 h.p. per cu.in., or over 3,000 h.p. This project was carried through
because the Navy wanted first hand experience of liquid cooling in case the
exigencies of war forced them to adopt it in order to maintain performance.
The equipment of the engine department also included -
Propellers. Complete vibration equipment for propellers using carbon
strain gauges.
Fuels and Oils Laboratory.
Ignition Harness and Magneto Developments including high frequency.
Test beds. There are six dynamometer rooms and 8 test cells for
propeller running. There is one control room for each pair of beds. All
six test beds have altitude exhaust and intake pressures and cold air supply
with automatic control of the plant. Of the 8 propeller test cells two
can be run under altitude conditions.
There is also a test stand for turbo supercharging experiments and
turbo supercharged engine installations can be type tested. A new
carburettor laboratory and fuel pump room has recently been added.
APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA
Reports of Canadian National Research Council:
1. Plight Tests of Intake Air Heater Muff Installed on Lockheed
Hudson Mark 111 * Aircraft, Report Nol MD-21 - November, 1942.
2» A Summary of Replies to the National Research Council
Questionnaire on Aircraft De-icing, Report No. MD-24 -
October, 1942.
3- Air Heated Windsection Preliminary Results of Plight Tests,
Report No. MD-26 - November, 1942.
Miscellaneous photographs of Wright Field 20 foot tunnel.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




