

FRED.T.WH ITCROFT.


1 <y ;
WU
7
V
j||fyERGUSON COLLECTIOI^\W
f
P




!/ . ' j ' BT.tVMTCf/OFr
1 DOING A LINE!!
("Behind ifie Line")
I
ft


f : : " '' 7 " " ' ' V'1
j THE PRODIGAL SUN j
. 1 V I
I # I
j Homeward Ho!
ON H.M.A.T. j
1 IN CHRONICLE AND CARICATURE |


ti
CORPORAL E. FOX (Editor)
PRIVATE S. G. BRAMELD
PRIVATE A. A. JAMES
DRIVER F. T. WHITCROFT
SAPPER G. C. ALLEN
PRIVATE R. T. HOAR


Contents and Illustrations
Frontispiece Doing a Line! ("behind the Line") - 2
Title 3
Illustration Editorial Staff ----- 4
Editorial ....... 6
Homeward Ho! - - - - - - 7, 8
Homeward Bound ...... 8
Illustration The Last Offensive - 9
Happy Homes (with illustration) 10
Illustration An Artist's Memories - - - - 11
Dream Girls (illustrated) - - - - - 12
01' Cloes ------- 13
Illustration— Coming Home ----- 13
Illustration Good-bye-e-es ..... 14
Personalities (illustrated) ..... 15-17
Saloonosities (illustrated) - - - - - 18, 19
"Me Cobber Bill" (with illustration) 20
*
Andy on the "Tote" (illustrated) 21
Homing -------- 22
Illustration— Lest We Forget ----- 23
The Surrender of " Spider McGluck" 24
Illustration On the Boulevard 25
Armentieres (illustrated) ----- 26
The Sunken Submarine ----- 27
A.P.M. (illustrated) ------ 28
Jottin's fer "Ginger" ------ 29
Imaginary Interviews (illustrated) - 30-32
Illustration — Some "Victors'" Crowns 33
'Flu Furfies, &c. ------ 34
Illustration A Hammock Rush 34
" Diggerisms" (illustrated) - - - - - 35, 36
"Mahia" Sport and Sportsmen (illustrated) - - 37-39
Illustration H.M.A.T■ "Mahia" and Officers - - 40
Nominal Roll ------- 41-48
. J


f 1
EDITORIAL I
I 1
w E have all colleded Souvenirs. Now that we have 1
reached our final objedive and resumed "civvies"
again, this will be the last for the colledion. J|
M We thank all who have contributed items to the fjj
fjf Magazine. The valuable assistance of Privates A. A. James 'jj|
and S. G. Brameld, and the artistic work of Driver
?> F. Whitcroft, have been mainly responsible for its success. *
As Honorary Secretary and Treasurer, Lieutenant
Sutherland has been untiring in his efforts, and the
| Committee has given its unstinted support. j
Cheerio, Dig ! If in the years to come they ask you
|jr the old question, "What did you do in the Great War?"
you can refer to "The Prodigal Sun," for the "report" on the
last part of the stunt anyhow,
g THE EDITOR. J§
Jill


From Blighty, Round the Cape
Hillocks of coal and tenacious battleships formed a drab
background as we formed up on Devonport's coal-dusted
wharf that momentous Wednesday, 4th June, 1919.
But, above and beyond those, Plymouth City undulated in
the sunshine, with that peculiarly English charm we then ex-
perienced for perhaps the last time.
However, there was little time for gazing about for those
of us first to ascend Ihe gangway of the "Mahia," and our
interest was soon absorbed by the spacious decks and accom-
modation of our comparatively new 11,000-ton vessel.
What a contrast with the mean, makeshift quarters we had
sometimes endured on troopships!
It was difficult to realise that, after a strenuous sojourn
of three years in France and England, we were at length
voyaging homewards to our far, yet ever-near, Australia.
Linking our war days to an Aussie future, that 24 hours was
a fragile time-thread, broken as we steamed out of Plymouth
Harbour on the morning of sth June.
We answered cheer for cheer with the crowds on wharf
and warships who bade us a long farewell.
Neptune, in kindly mood, evidently remembering that Dig-
gers are prone to mal-de-mer, made the ocean gentle in our
path, so that few meals were lost. The sun, too, came far
over the seas to welcome us back to his favoured land—our
home, Australia.
Few bodies of home-going troops have enjoyed entertain-
ment in more varied form than our Thirty-third Quota of
the Second Divvy. Our concert party was composed largely
of members of the "Dinkum Diamond" and Seventh Brigade
concert parties. The "Blue Diamond" orchestra became the
"Mahia" orchestra, and our Thirty-third Quota band was
equal to the best.
Sports, concerts, competitions, lectures, and debates were
so well organised that there was neither crowding nor con-
flict, yet almost every waking hour had its occupation, diver-
sion, or instruction.
One clear, moonless night we sighted the Canary Islands.
In a bright arc, ribbed to the lines of the streets, the lights
of Santa Cruz shimmered across the sea. Other lights ap-
peared like bright stars far up the mountain side. But the
outline of the Isle of Teneriffe was barely discernible
against the dusky cloud-bank massed on the horizon.
Capetown, so soon'? But the "Mahia," as transports go,
boasted speed as well as comfort. Those who hammocked
on deck, and those adeck with the dawn of 2 Ith June, saw
the palest, most distant outline of Table Mountain grow ever
more distinct in the clear morning air.
The breeze was brisk, and the sun shone as we ran easily
past the picturesque suburb of Camps Bay, and rounded
Table Bay, until we directly faced the famous tableland, with
the two sentry peaks on either side.
Some of us had before mingled with the cosmopolitanism
of Capetown. Others for some reason or other debarred
the shore (for military transport is not always the most in-
dulgent touring), had gazed on the town in its unrivalled
setting from anchorage in the bay. But this time, at any-
rate, military dispensation was propitious, and by midday
most of our 1200 khaki-clads were making Capetown their
own.
Where else on earth can be found such a perplexing diver-
sity of race, colour, and language? Where else are concen-
trated such a maze of acute political and racial problems?
All official notices and documents are duplicated in Dutch
and English. Malay, Kaffir, Hindoo, Chinese, Japanese, and
unplaceable nationalities tread the streets in procession with
Jew and Gentile.
How grateful one felt for the simplicity and whiteness of
our Australia.
The Capetown residents welcomed and entertained us, as
they had unselfishly and consistently brightened the stay of
all Aussies who had remained for a while with them. Ap-
preciation can never repay their kindness. Were that pos-
sible, the Diggers had repaid it a hundredfold.
We were motored that wonderful drive to Hout Bay, and
back the mountain way, through the valleys of the Con-
stantia.
We visited and admired the quaint old Dutch architecture
of the historic home of Cecil Rhodes at Groote Schur.
We gossiped with Cape men and women, and flirted, some-
times not too discreetly, with maidens, select or otherwise,
according to tastes.
At times, we confess, the cheering cup was filled and
emptied too often, but we were mostly, judged by Digger
standards, a sober lot.


Homeward Ho / continued.
We cricketed with Capetonians, and gave a bumper con-
cert in their City Hall, where, as someone said, "The Gover-
nor and 'Governess' were present."
We idled at the Cape for four line, long, hut all too short,
days. Then on Saturday, 28th June, the "Mahia" resumed
her voyage.
Passing the Cape of Good Hope in the evening, we saw,
faintly, Table Mountain, 40 miles away in the distance. Then
we steamed across the mouth of False Bay into the night and
the Indian Ocean.
To experience some emotions is almost worth a long exile;
we felt that as we set out on the last lap of Homeward Ho!
South-east from the Cape we drove into cold weather,
and, for a few days, through a drenching fog. Yet, withal,
the sea remained calm, and progress was good. The decks
were almost deserted, as we sought the warmest corners
below.
Then the fog cleared, the wind strengthened, and the
crockery played hide-and-seek about the troop decks as the
ship rolled to the swell.
Overcoated figures appeared on deck to promenade in the
bracing breeze, 46 degrees south.
In spite of cold, and some discomfort, our spirits rose with
each succeeding day. We looked forward to Aussie freedom
and civvies, and found the prospect good.
So drew to an end an enjoyable six weeks of good-fellow-
ship amongst all. Ever closer came the inevitable sunder-
ing of strong comradeship and reunion with "our ain folk,"
who, in truth, are nearest and dearest.
Was there an unmoved heart in all the joyful "Mahia"
fraternity, when, on 17th July, till!), the cliffs of Queenscliff,
familiar portals of the homeland, beckoned us through the
narrow heads of Port Phillip?
A. A. ,T.
The Oceanic Oxford!
The educational service flourishes.
From one end of the ship to the other Diggers are im-
mersed in high-brow profundities.
"Crown and Anchor" boards languish.
"Housey Housey" cards, bought in large quantities in
Blighty, haven't yet a pencil mark.
This phenomenal success of education is most disconcert-
ing to sports, concert, and band managers.
The Diggers have lost their ear for music. They are no
longer affected by "Good-bye-e-e."
Boxing gloves are mournfully awaiting stoush which will
not strip off.
The "Mahia" is the centre of learning. This Diggers' Uni-
versity threatens the prestige of recognised Aussie stewing-
shops.
The sublime Squeers responsible are humanity's most price-
less asset.
This has been recognised. One raft has been monopolised
for their sole use, so that, should the "Mahia" founder, these
at least shall not be lost.
Up-hill Work.
A knot of Diggers were studying the chart posted to show
the position of the "Mahia" on the ocean. Evidently the
bulge on the earth, in a straight line between the Cape and
Australia, is greater than that a few degrees south, so the
trade route dips a long way to the southwards, and those
who know say that 400 miles is thereby saved. Out from
the Cape we made good progress.
"Going down hill," remarked a Digger, studying the map.
"But we will lose ground climbing up to Melbourne," he
observed further.
A fast run the last few days, however, has upset all his old
ideas about up-hill and down-hill speeds. He is looking for
a new philosophy.
The Concert Party sing at length about a "Dig" who spent
"One day's leave," "Two days' leave," and so on to "Ten days'
leave." "Thank God he didn't get an extension of another
'Ten days!'" exclaimed a bored listener!!!
HOMEWARD BOUND.
Slowly glides our Home-bound Transport, close to grand old Plymouth Hoe,
Past where Drake's hard-bitten sea dogs played their games so long ago,
Out into the open ocean where the untamed rollers roam,
Breasting free the path unbroken, running round the world to Home.
Four long years in yon grey kingdom, dreamed we ever of the South—
Fierce, yet kindly, as we knew her, with her floods and fire and drouth.
Thoughts had wings, and flew right swiftly ever to that olden mark;
Ever seemed she as a Mother calling to us in the dark.
Now each day-dawn brings her nearer, new horizons greet each morn,
And we dream new visions daily of the land where we were born.
Speed the day that, in the distance, looms again our native shore;
Strikes the south wind in our faces, we shall ask of Fate no more.
—W.H.E.


f►
tfuigert/jeiy ((jofe 7btan Sec/or)
ll\ (^


Happy Homes ~AXE Family
TTA VING established such a delightful system of regulation in the A.I.F. (Slates a "Mahia" wireless),
J- J- the Federal Government contemplate extending military methods to the control of families. Large
communal dwellings, to be eredted, will enable as many as 100 families to live together in happy
peacefulness. Each "House Community" is to be under the control of a "Household Commander,"
whose manifold chits will be, doubtless, on the following lines: —
Household Routine Orders.
Mrs. Alice Bloggs
Mrs. Martha Munk
Mrs. Elizabeth Bean
Orderly Housewife
Orderly Housewife (for Tuesday)
For Duty i/c General Nursery
687. Discipline.—The Household Commander, at his
weekly inspection, noticed with regret that the standard pat-
tern of dress, as laid down by him in orders, was not strictly
adhered to by all the wives in families under his command.
This practice must cease forthwith.
582. Board.—A board, composed as under, will assemble,
at a time and place to be notified by the Household Com-
mander, to inquire how the following articles—
Bottles (feeding, infant, glass) .. ..6
Rattles (infant, for the amusement of) .. 4
—became unserviceable, and by whom the cost of replace-
ment should be borne.
209. Strength.—Mrs. Katherine Sphinx, having presented
the Household with infants (male, 2) on the 16th inst., said
infants are taken on strength accordingly. They are al-
lotted the numbers I.M. 25 and I.M. 26, and are granted the
names of George Tertius and William Secundus Sphinx
respectively.
210. Honours and Rewards.—As the average cost per head
of the Household has been kept below 3s. a day for one
year, "The Star of Economy" is bestowed on Mrs. (First-class
Housekeeper) Jane Jones.
727. Transfers.—The following, having attained the age of
eight years during the current month, will be transferred to
the District State Boarding School on the 30th inst., and
struck off strength accordingly:—
I.M. 7—BLOGGS, William John
LF. 9—MUNK, Margaret.
The Household Commander trusts that there will be no
sentimental, unseemly, and noisy partings between the above-
mentioned and the wives responsible for bringing them into
this establishment. It is again pointed out that all children
after the age of seven are the property of the State, and not
of individuals.
Memorandum to Mrs. Clinker, Wife i/c.
Housekeeping.—You will report in writing, for the informa-
tion of the Household Commander, why, on the 18th inst., at
2.300 hours, when he returned to the Household after duty,
Bottles beer (Bass, 2),
were not available for his consumption, as laid down in
Standing Order No. 9.
906. To Head Wife i/c Nursery.—Your recent application
for the number of "toys" on charge in the Nursery to be in-
creased is not sanctioned. It is regretted that these ex-
cessive demands for expensive toys should continue to be
made. Amusement to children can always be given by
simple playthings, if sufficient ingenuity is exercised, and the
provision of costly and easily-damaged mechanical or other
toys is unnecessary.
CAPT. V. BOSDET.
1044. To Wife i/c Clothing Stores.—With reference to
your No. C.S.Q. 15, indenting for
Shoes, infants', sizes assorted, pairs 100.
This demand is considered excessive, and sanction can only
be given for "pairs 50," or left-foot shoes, 100.
CAPT. V. BOSDET (SHELLBACK).
Our contributors have answered the call from all parts of
the ship. Some of them are known to us, and some other-
wise. Each and all of them have sworn by all that is holy
that they themselves authored their screeds. For our-
selves (I, the Editorial "We") have aimed at the very highest
literary and artistic quality, and now abandon the infant to
the mercy of publishers and critics.


Irgilj J1111 II111" 11 • 111 ■ I ■ I ■ 111111111 •( II11111 11111 II111111 ■ 111 II l ll III 11 Nil II1 11111 ■ 1111111111111111 II1111111111111111111111111 II Ill II .1, III mil II 11 II11111 III IIII llllll III 11 llli 1111111111111II11111111111111111 IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIMIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIUIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIMIIIIIIIIIIIIIIll 'lgl|
P s
ARTISTS
W M | T iq t I


/ // /I / ■' Soft hammock, swinging, while // \ .—
/ / ) // / /' 'Neath a starry sky \ V
/"A C' / / y O'er his face flits a smile / / \
/ j / As the dream-thoughts fly. \ "• ;
i / O'er the blue Atlantic wide V \: ;
I I Wave-tops flecked to foam, \ ;■ <
/ I S Voyaging the great Divide
/ I / 'Twixt the girls on Blighty side •' / .• ••
(tV . „ .. ( %})
\ n. Dream Digger, Blighty leave, Dream changes — Sleeping face, ,•
\ J Girl with laughing eyes, Whence the fervent flush ?
__—. Arms entwined—don't deceive ; Soft brunette of darker race, : / /'
/ \ / / Spoil her not with lies. Lacy frills that crush;
/ / Purest bud of innocence, Dream of wild abandonment,
j I Springtime English rose — Lips that dream a kiss.
1 Bruised rose, what could recompense ? Ah! the thrills that Mam'selle sent; ■-
J S Little knew 'twas all pretence ; Heated breath that came and went. /wjKk
[yj y/ Now he knows—he knows. Crimson, naughty Miss. f JjjlHy
\ Dream Digger, night is long. Dream Digger, lightly play
yK Dublin in the Spring; With the fairy curl, /vfftsWlB
V f / ( Irish voice, lilting song, Years ago, Coogee way, w?P- —-
\ / Irish-hearted thing. Of an Aussie girl. 7~jT ~^T
J Flimsy blouse with tempting swell, War-time flames burnt out of sight; j '''
/ — Haunting, madd'ning tease. Gone for evermore— > I //fr JV/ r I
I /" "N/") Digger, would you cast a spell? Left behind in homeward flight, ( ' ].■ / / C r ' ' //
V/ _/ I All your fancy stories tell ? Followed by a vision bright: : ■ // Js ' y.'
Then, defeated, freeze. Girls before the war.
WHIT. ID.


- — n -
cc ssi> r i i **
1)1 CJoes
Ol' does,
Ol' does;
Who will buy 01' does,
Duds of Diggers,
Plain and fancy
Fit all figures,
Slipshod, swanky?
01' does."
A Colonel's complete outfit! London tailor-made; uni-
form hardly worn! Dinkum sale; Colonel going out of busi-
ness! Yes, most unfortunate; a good officer (£2 I'm offered),
hid services no longer required. . . .
Clothes do not make the man. He was not a Colonel be-
cause he wore the clothes, hut wore the clothes because he
was a Colonel. They are now to be scrapped.
The officer, too, will be scrapped. Once more he starts
off scratch to be clothed in accordance with the civil station
he can attain.
"Who will bid for ol' does? 01' does?
"Any further bid on £2? The last time! Going! Gone!
to the theatricals."
Selling is dull. Soldiers' clothes are not in demand. Sol-
diers are a drug on the market, and will remain so until the
next war.
In five years of army life the lesser have been raised up,
and the great in civvie life are often still bottom-rung Dig-
gers. Now all are to be levelled up—or down. The five
years of army life lead nowhere; they are an end in them-
selves.
Out of the war emerge simply—Old clothes, old learning,
old trade tricks, mostly to fall into disuse, and, in time, be
forgotten; squad drill, platoon drill, extended order, mus-
ketry, nine-pounders, all the miscellaneous mental trappings
of war; sergeants, subalterns, majors; the brief authority,
all—
"01' does! 01' does!
None to buy our ol' does?
Well-trained war-craft
In all branches,
Drill and re-draft,
Art in trenches,
Ol' does."
For naked we came into the war,
And naked we go out from the war,
Our minds seared with fire,
Our souls marked with death,
Our bodies marred with steel,
Each year a lifetime.
We shed our ol' does, the fabrics which clad us, the crafts
of our hands, and the science of our brains.
We shall turn to the trades of peace.
But the war claimed us, has kneaded us to its purpose. The
years ahead are a dream.
Our spirits belong to the war.
A. A. J.




£ »
r i
1 jg§
gk §|
i /
i'X^^'XX'
LIEUT.-COLONEL MULLEN, D.S.O.
Though Victorian by birth, Colonel Mullen has resided
long enough in the Apple Isle to be Tasmanian in sentiment.
He saw service in South Africa, and in the more recent dis-
turbance left Australia with a commission in the famous
12th Battalion; was in the landing, and has had continuous
service in Gallipoli, Egypt, and France. Commanded the
9th from 1916 till the end of the war, and annexed a D.5.0.,
Belgian Croix de Guerre, and Brevet Majority for his ser-
vices. Firm and kindly in his methods, he went far towards
making the "Mahia" the happiest transport that ever took the
homeward track. He is a sport in every sense of the word,
and "avant la guerre" was a compiler of mighty scores in the
cricket field, a topping footballer, and a sprint runner who
made fast times.
LIEUT.-COL. MULLEN, D.5.0.,
C.O. of H.M.A.T. "Mahia."
MAJOR W. H. ELLWOOD.
Second in command; enlisted 13th January, 1915; was
pipped at Broadmeadows; embarked 26th August, in charge
of the 3rd Reinforcements, 24th Battalion; was on Gallipoli
from the end of September until the evacuation; then
sampled France, and was a major when the Armistice
cleared the air.
On the "Mahia" he appeared reserved and studious. He
poetises, debates with a quiet logical skill; is fluent and accu-
rate in speech; is of the neither young nor old clean-shaven
age, with a smooth, well-groomed exterior. He does not
run to humour, but is a good judge of it, and sometimes per-
petrates it in a quiet, satirical sort of way. His ideas are
his own, and as he judges a proposition on its merits, he is
often found on the unpopular side.
LIEUT. H. W. GARTRELL.
The Professor, the real dinkum scholastic from Adelaide
University, the "Mahia" Education Officer. Clear-headed
and critical, but rather nervous, he does not impose his great-
ness on others. As a mining engineer he was well qualified
for the Tunnellers; has seen life in the Arizona mines; gave
a comprehensive and thoughtful lecture on the U.S.A. during
the voyage.
CAPT. W. J. GROSSMAN (PADRE).
It was something to have as a Padre an ex-Digger, who, in
1915, left his church in Sydney and enlisted in the early 13th
Battalion and stayed there until 'l6, when he transferred to
the A.M.C. There was then some talk of chaplainising him,
MAJOR ELLWOOD, M.C.
hut he was made a Lance-Jack instead, and did not abandon
the physical for the spiritual rapier until after the Armistice.
PTE. A. A. JAMES, M.L.A.
Journalist, lecturer, poet, Pte. James has tilled many roles
on the ship for the instruction and entertainment of the Dig-
ger, and has filled them all with conspicuous success. He
is an indefatigable worker, and has a wide range of know-
ledge and an immense grip of detail. His mind is untainted
by unwholesome dogmatism, and he can always see two sides
to a case. He claims to be a materialist, but is suspected of
having a large lump of idealism in his composition. He is
a member of the Queensland Legislative Assembly. A leader
of the best thought, he believes in Australia. Watch for his
name in the near future.


LIEUT. H. SUTHERLAND,
Sports Officer.
Personalities — continued.
LIEUT. A. SUTHERLAND (SPORTS OFFICER)
This magazine does not laud officers because of their stars,
hut gives due recognition to merit. For hard, enthusiastic
work, untiring attention to details, and general cheeriness,
Lieut. Sutherland would be hard to beat. The Diggers pro-
claimed that long before it was penned.
His military past:—Enlisted in June, 1915, and went to the
Peninsula as a Digger; stayed there until the evacuation.
Wounded in France, and later, as an N.C.0., went to Officers'
Cadet School at the Isle of Wight. Previously in the 19th
Battalion, he rejoined the 20th, which included a section of
the old 19th. He is as fit to-day as when he enlisted
MIL J. P. DOBBIE,
Chief Steward.
"Give the boys anything they want."
PTE. S. G. BRAMELD.
"Bram," "Our Bram," Mr. Brameld, Sam, is of medium
height, fair complexioned, wears a beatific smile, and, in front
of his partial baldness, a small tuft of hair, which he wishes
would disappear—to save combing. He practises knee-drill
every night, and is admired for it by the troops; has a cold
shower every morning, even in the Antarctic zone.
Brain's language is truly eloquent. He will talk about
almost any subject, discovering the element of truth and
beauty on what, on the surface, appears untruthful and un-
beautiful. As a parsonic substitute on Sunday nights, he
excels, hut is in his glory when revelling in old romantic
history, as in his lecture on "The New Map of Europe." He
runs to dreams, understands the frailties of man, and has a
wide charity. When the troops have £lOO to be safeguarded
and returned on demand, they leave it with S. G. Brameld.


Personalities — continued.
CORPORAL FOX.
Editor of the "Prodigal Sun." A general and licensed re-
tailer of the news of the ship. One had a feeling, when, in
debate, his .clean-cut profile and curling, close-cropped hair
appeared above the tribune, that a Roman Senator had re-
turned to earth, an impression which his invariable brevity
tended to intensify. Not an eloquent man, perhaps, but cer-
tainly a useful one; the possessor of a charming personality
—a man beloved.
R. T. HOAR (LIBRARIAN)
Indignant Diggers considered his library queer, but there
was nothing half so wonderful in the whole of it as was the
Librarian himself. He loved to polish up a joke, and as a
y'V'.THE"
fIIBEERIAN
PTE. R. T. HOAR.
connoisseur of stories he was unrivalled. Guy de Maupas-
sant had an interpreter of worth in Richard. But, most of
all, he revelled in verse, and sometimes wrote it—with
power. Who that has seen will ever forget the uplifted
hand, the flashing eyes, the voice trembling with passion,
almost with tears, Dickie, in his rotundity, re*citing the old
Greek songs.
LT.-COLONEL POWER (R.C. PADRE).
This old soldier is a Malvernian (delightful suburb of the
Yarra), whose popularity is not confined to Australians, hav-
ing won Springboks also to his heart. He is a devotee of
the bath, as also of the Diggers' hat, which he has never been
known to discard, even when under the shower. Does he
during those brief moments of ablution dream of that other
hat—the scarlet one from Rome? More power to his elbow!
OUR ARTIST, FRED. WHITCROFT.
Excepting when he is sleeping off the effects of continued
high art, he squats in his appointed place, hour in and hour
out, in wholesale production of fantasy and realism in black
and white. Our problem is how far we can swell the
artist's head without making another hat issue necessary.
We all have affection for true artists, apart from their
work. There is something in the creation of the beautiful
for its own sake that catches the imagination. We feel a
kinship for the creator, because he interprets the thoughts
and feelings that, in us, are vague and unexpressed.
It has been the "Mahia's" happy lot Jo return home an
artist who, for delicacy of conception and execution, would
not easily be surpassed.
LIEUT. J. S. KERR.
A Queenslander, who believes that Brisbane is the hub of
the Commonwealth, and the 26th the best battalion that ever
left its shores. Knows a little about a lot of things and a
lot about his present job. A bustling, cheerful, able Ad-
jutant. An optimist, he calls 110 trumps on two aces and a
LIEUT. J. KERR, Adjutant.
Jack, and believes the*tot:Hsator will usher in the millen-
nium. Was baptised James, but an'jvers to the name of
"Joe." He is probably the most popular officer on the good
ship "Yack-ee-hick-a-dool-ah."
The hospital hands complain to the Editor about the "dull
times." How these "profeshes" hanker for a " 'flu" epidemic,
an outbreak of mumps, or even a civil war on the troop deck,
with a few casualties!!!
The Terrible Turk.
There's a bloke on our table, who is
In a "terrible Turk" sort of "biz";
You can soon pick him out
(It is easy, no doubt);
You can tell by the fez on his "phiz."


'Saloonosities
Scene: Officers' Mess Kitchen.
The Chief Washer-up (to his off-sider): "Oo's that there
flash-lookin' guy wot struts along the decks like e' was
Pontius Pilate or Lloyd George?"
The Off-sider: "Blime! Doncherknow oo that he? That
be the Kurnel bloke, the Ho-C. o' this 'ere punt."
C.W.: "'E don't arf like 'isself, do 'e?"
0.: "An' so 'e orter. Look wot 'e's done for the troops.
W'y, it was 'im as isshered th' order for the decks to be
swilled with a 'ose every dye, the objec' bein' to keep 'em wet
so as to pervent the men eatchin' colds."
C.W.: "Garn! 'Ow can wet decks pervent men eatchin'
colds?"
().: "Gee! If you aint arf stoopid! W'y, donchersee that
if that there trechrus little germ thing wot gives colds wiv 'is
sting come aboard 'e'd catch a cold 'isself, and peg out afore
'e could get 'is stings in. See!"
C.W.: "I never thort o' that."
0.: "Oh, didn't yer? Well, don't be so 'asty in judgin'
people in futcher."
Scene: "Coo's" Cabin
Smart Young Sub (entering Ceo's cabin): "Pardon my in-
trusion, sir, but I want to show you a few snaps of the box-
ing contest which took place yesterday. Don't you think
them very good?" (laying them on the table before his chief).
Ceo: "They're very good indeed. Who's the artist?"
S.Y.S.: "Oh, it's my work, sir. It's no trouble to me to
take photographs. I'd like to do you a copy of those, sir;
in fact, I'd like to give you a little photographic souvenir of
all the important events of the trip."
Ceo.: "That's splendid of you. I should very much like
to have them, if it wouldn't be too much trouble."
S.Y.S.: "Oh, no trouble, sir, that is—er—only——'
Ceo: "Only what?"
S.Y.S.: "You admit, sir, the snaps are good, but how much
better I could do this work were I able to devote all my
genius to it, and—er—Do you follow me, sir?"
Ceo: "No, I don't; but go on."
S.Y.S.: "Well, sir, what is genius without time; and I can-
not find the time."
Ceo: "What rot, man, what rot! Why not?"
S.Y.S.: "Well, you see, sir, I am second in command of a
company. . .
Ceo: "Tut, tut! I could soon fix that up. Now, look here,
young man, if I were to make you official photographer,
would you take a photograph of myself playing quoits?"
S.Y.S.: "I should be delighted, sir.'
(Further conversation could not be heard owing to the
noise made by the ship's syren, which burst forth at this
moment.)
Scene: No. 5 Table—Officers' Mess.
One Saloonatic: "Isn't Mr. B. nice-looking? I think him
quite the handsomest boy on the ship."
Saloonastic and Saloonologicai
Another Saloonatic: "Oh, really! Now, 1 think that
honour belongs to me."
The One: "Why, you haven't even Mr. B.'s wonderful hair,
and "
The Other (rudely interrupting): "There are certainly
some points that I lack—for instance, I do not, as you so
kindly point out,.possess the hirsute adornment of Mr. 8., a
defect which 'blunts' somewhat my bare-headed aspect; nor
yet, when wearing my hat, am I able to produce that strik-
ing 'chin-strap' effect, which is the peculiar trick of one man,
and one man only, in the whole of the A.LP. Take into
consideration my beautiful eyes, with their drooping lashes;
my full, rounded cheeks, with their ever-present pinky glow;
CAPT. F. TINKLER, 0.8. E., M.C.


Saloonossities — continued.
my charming voice; my delicately-shaped mouth, with its
bewitching smile, surmounted by the neatest of neatly-
trimmed moustaches; you must admit my claim.
"And have you noticed what a topper I am when attired in
that wonder of creations—my nice light suit, with its
polished buckle, and unique collar badges'?
"Why, man, the ladies simply dote on me. They consider
it an honour to be seen in my company."
The One: "What about the lady I saw you with at the con-
cert at Capetown? She didn't seem very proud of your com-
pany."
GIVE US THIS DA/ OUHDAILJBREAD !
s s nan"*.
"Ceo at once set out in search of this man, and the
moment he set eyes on me he was greatly impressed—in fact,
he remarked, 'There's my man; I can see by his features that
he "nose" a lot.'
"After a brief conversation with me he was heard to say:
'He (meaning me) possesses all the qualities I desire—such
a kind and gentle manner; such a sweet and refined voice;
and I feel sure he would do all my work for me without
complaining, and would never by any chance harass my
men.'
"I anticipate trouble during the voyage, further, said Cleo,
when the Education Officer makes a request for tables for
his students, and I want a man who will deal with the ques-
tion tactfully, and not play the part of the domineering
tyrant, which marks the conduct of so many of our young
officers. Kerr-Adj. is my man."
K. N. W.
Diggers' Debates.
The Diggers dearly love a debate. Much arguing over the
sins of their fellows, in dugout and in trench has tended to
perfect what at all times was a natural propensity. The
"Mahia" Debating Club went well from the first. From its
clouds of oratory faces emerge, like pictures seen in the fire;
some shadowy, like Pte. Crosswell, who appeared at the first
debate, uttered a maiden speech, and so subsided; others
again of a solider cast, not easily forgotten.
A slight, fragile man, with a clever face, a gentle manner,
and a bitter tongue, such, in brief, was Lieut. Kennedy, our
Club's President. He participated in every debate but one,
and contrived to raise a storm whenever he spoke. In soft,
dulcet tones, such as a bishop might use, he would make his
point, and with the pained expression of a puzzled child, he
would wait while the speaker thundered rebuke, and "the
House" was filled with clamour.
And then there were—but why prolong the list, as its
titular chief, the Education Officer, said in dismissing it
from the popular memory, "its meetings were amusing if not
instructive." Could it fairly ask for more, and might it not
consider that that was better than some services we wot of,
which are neither instructive nor amusing.
The Other: "Now, I shall tell you something in the strictest
confidence. That lady afterwards told me that she simply
couldn't talk, she was spellbound; she had never before seen
anything like me." (And the writer doesn't think she had.)
(The conversation was at this stage interrupted by the ap-
proach of three or four other saloonatics.)
"Some are Born Great."
The appointment of our Kerr-Adjutant has been a mystery
to many of "Mahia's" patrons ever since sailing from Blighty.
The following monologue (overheard in the saloon) may, per-
haps, throw some light on the matter:—
Kerr-Adj.: "When the great Ceo was appointed to the com-
mand of 33 Quota he was informed by 'Mony' that it would
be necessary for him to procure an Adjutant with a sound
military knowledge.
I have never fished for lish, but am known as the "Com-
pleat Angler." Apples and bananas are my quarry. Instead
of a line, from the end of my rod projects a long needle. J
spear apples in the most inaccessible places. So many a
night have our Bohemian circle supped on the sinful' fruit of
Eden.
Why did the Librarian send to the hospital patient with the
bloody head a book entitled "The Drunkard'"? Had he not
suffered enough?
Strayed Officer's Cap.
Thy feelings mask.
O mighty one;
Caps disappear,
For troops who bask
In the great sun
Must souvenir.


/3-^
t- S \
yry,
"He Cobber Bill"
Did I ever tell yeh about me cobber Bill? Well, Bill and
me 'listed together, sailed away together, and fought together.
The only thing we didn't do together was to git married in
Blighty.
Bill did get married—and on his first Blighty leave at that.
It was all beer and skittles at first, but latterly skittles was
forgotten altogether. The wife turned out to be a reg'lar
tartar, and used ter go orf pop at Bill somethink frightful.
Night after night Bill used ter come 'ome (without skittles).
The wife swore as 'ow she'd frighten' 'im into giving up 'is
evenin's amusement. What a hopeless job! Anyway, she
draped herself in a white sheet and waited behind the door
for 'im.
In due course Bill arrives. She flings the door wide open,
throws 'er arms about, and screams in a terror-laden voice,
"I am the Devil!"
"You're what?" says Bill.
"I am the Devil!"
"Well," says Bill, offering his hand, "put it there ole man!
I'm your brother-in-law!"
One day Bill and me found ourselves at Hurdcott for a
three months' spell consequent on ole Fritz's attentions.
There was a dance at Wilton on Tuesday for Diggers, and as
Bill said it was high time he had some amusement as com-
pensation for the nasty trick 'is missus had tried to serve 'im,
we decided to go.
It would have been all gay if we 'adn't visited a certain
soldiers' institoot before closing time. But nothing hap-
pened at the dance save Bill getting lost in the Alberts and
nearly gittin' in holts with the M.C.
On the road home Bill got talkative.
"Fine night, Jim," he said.
"Yes."
"Beau'ful moon, ole feller."
"That's not the moon, you idiot! That's electric light."
"Look 'ere, Jim! We've been cobbers for many years, and
I don't like to call you a liar, but if you say that's not the
moon y' are one!" '
"I say it is 'lectric light!"
"And I say it's moon!"
"Well, 'ere's 'nother bloke comin' down the road. Ask
him!"
So Bill stopped the other Digger and bought him in too.
"Look 'ere, 'e says, "Jim and me 'ave been 'aving li'l frien'ly
'scussion, see! Li'l arg'ment! Compre arg'ment? (Stand
still, can't yer?) He says tha's 'lectric light! I say tha's
moon!" (pointing upward). "What d' you say?"
The stranger looked up, not too steadily, and murmured,
"Which one?"
Just then I saw the military police looming in the distance.
1 says to Bill, "Hey! Look over there. 'Jack,' Bill!"
Bill just smiled.
"Don't talk to me about M.P.'s. I don't give a for
the lot of them! In fact, I'll (hie!) hypnotise him. Watch
me!"
So Bill goes up to the Jack, makes a few passes with 'is
'ands and says, "Shoosh!"
The Jack went away! (lame back again. With another
one!!
I says, "Bill, we've done it now! We'll spend the night
under cover."
{
-1 u!\
Hfllpin \ \
wifh I \
Refrcsf)ments II | \
|V< (
'Rubbish!" says Bill, "it's all the shame to me!"
He waddled over to where they stood, made passes, urged
them to "shoosh," and they shooshed! You'd hardly believe
it! Well, I began to think there was something uncanny
about Bill! Suppose we'd had a row over the moon!
Well, I looks over, and hang me if there wasn't four of 'em
there this time! I says to Bill, "Look! Four of 'em, Bill!"
Bill threw out his chest. "Tha's nothin'," he said. "One,
two, four, six, dozen, 's all the shame to me!"
He went over, and this time I followed him. Same busi-
ness. Same result! They went away!! We went with
'em!!!


T/ze Lion 0/ rte "Totalisator" Debate on 1st July was ./j /
Lieutenant J. ("Andy") Kerr.
Our Adjutant spoke on the " Tote."
Ah! Logic in chunks that he flung,
With eloquence, thund'rous—remote.
Rare subject, and passionate tongue! Jy
"Tote!" Marvellous betting device! I / /y\fj£ \\
Would you for silver have gold ? I fj \ \
See! Quidlets are tens in a trice, / //,
And tens, too, are hundreds untold! f \U *
Unbeaten! Now as in the past, y\'j
A century back of B.C., \ '
When francs by fast Froggies were cast \ 1
On gold-coining "totes" in Paree! \ |
Got that! Then the perfect machine ; 1 j
The ticket in tune with the horse! \li
Feel! Flimsies the fingers between! 1j
Gome! Cart home your wins from the course! |j j
We listen —spellbound —in a trance. [V I
Men rise with a rapturous cheer! \\ \
Dread line of the speaker's advance, \
With word-corpses strewn far and near!
Three talkers essay his defeat —
Mad daring to venture so far —
Their words are the Adjutant's meat, y\
Death claims those who reach for his star. (
And now on the top decks at night, / I j
Strange whisperings everywhere float; \ J J
Fond mermaids, enamoured, recite / I
How "Andy" Kerr won on the "Tote." ™ 1
fIND/rME^TOTE


Homing
Of Some who Went to the War, and Some who Returned
Could we but place ourselves in some highest aeroplane,
and behold the four oceans within the compass of an eye, we
should see ocean routes, white with the ships that are bring-
ing hack to Homeland and to Home the victorious Digger.
What an army his has been! God never put such an one
together before—boundary riders and station hands, miners
of Western Australia and sugar-planters of Queensland,
hunters of pearls and growers of apples. Peacefully they
had pursued the tenor of their way—some profanity over ex-
cessive sunshine always permitted—when war broke out.
And factory and farm, mine and orchard, fishery and wide-
rolling down were deserted—the Digger had gone to the war.
Not a sideline of human destructiveness could escape his
catholic tastes—Light Horse and Tunneller, Aeroplane and
Submarine, Artillery and Machine Gun, Siege Battery and
plain Infantry of the line—so long as the prospect of stoush
was good, he cheerfully supported them all. And as his
weapons were diverse, so also were his battle-fronts. Never
more than 300,000 of him, he fought in Egypt, Gallipoli, and
Palestine, Salonica and Serbia, Italy, France, and Russia; in
truth, he was übiquitous.
Trained in the free life of the newest of the democracies,
he came to the Old World visibly as a portent. He
reverenced nothing, and outraged custom simply because he
could not understand it. Brass hats of highest authority,
buildings of most sacred association, were nothing to him.
With equal readiness he would put his hat on a pinnacle of
Westminster Abbey, or the head of Majesty itself. Why not,
indeed? He had a church in Woolloomooloo, and a king, too,
of sorts —Billy Hughes.
As he was absolutely without reverence, so in all things he
was most casual. An Australian contingent going up the
line was a sight for men and angels. Be assured that the
rations would all be there; not a jar of rum would be for-
gotten. But arms and ammunition would depend upon the
feelings of the individual Digger. With arms or without,
what did it matter, when there were always dumps of "amo"
and arms you could salve—whether meant for you or not
being quite matterless? With this stolen material a "possy"
would be held, and held against all the powers of earth and
hell.
Was it strange that Authority looked askance, and audibly
wondered if courage could take the place of discipline?
Then came the fateful days of March, when the Allies'
combinations melted like wax, and ruin, utter and complete,
yawned wide as the mouth of hell. The whole line was
in deliquium of ruin—save for a corner where the Digger
was entrenched. Around him the German hordes surged
like an incoming sea. But he never faltered. That he could
beat Fritz he never doubted. Had he not rounded up his
father's cattle? It was a nuisance, but it must be done.
And he did it. He held when everything else was breaking,
and his resistance saved the world.
Criticism died in those days of peril, never to reappear.
Authority was as far from understanding the Digger as ever,
but it could appreciate what it could not understand. The
Digger's sins, which were many, were all forgiven—"he had
earned his immortality by a single hour, and could not die."
And now he's coming home. To do—what? History
tells of a Roman emperor who abandoned his task of ruling
and returned to his old home—and grew cabbages. Will the
Diggers return to the mine, and the fishery, the orchard,
station, and farm? And what will the past have done for
him? Ruined villages and derelict trenches, Hell-fire Cor-
ner, and Mametz Wood, blood and lire, and shrieking shell—
for what do they stand in the background of his life? As-
suredly not for the minutiae of military discipline. The
meticulous salute, the punctilious attention, "the left fore-
finger in line with the seam of the trousers," these things are
both dead and damned; but brotherhood and the fellowship
which in the hour of danger bore men through—it is this
which has been discovered. Brotherhood with the 55,00(1,
sleeping where the poppies bloom; brotherhood of the living,
with those who strive on field and farm. Brotherhood, just
that; but is not this the germ of all? What more can home
and Aussie give to these homing ones?
S. G. B.
When We Get Back.
"When we get—back—
When we get—back—
To our home in Ors-tral-yah,"
hoarsed a throaty Digger.
Some people care a great deal about the Digger's welfare on
his return home; but there are a great many who don't care
at all, provided the shop windows in Swanston-street or
Bourke-street are left alone. So Mr. Digger, as usual, will
have to push his own barrow.
On his efforts will depend the keeping open of promised
jobs, and, in the same way, the guarantee of a fair deal all
round will depend on the combined action of all returned sol-
diers.
But is there need to think only of the jobs left before the
war? Are years of army experience to count for nothing?
The Aussie Digger is a bigger and more capable man than
when he left Australia, and it will not add to his unrivalled
reputation if he is content to remain on the bottom rung.
The Australian soldier has been credited with brains and
initiative. But brains, like engines, must be well geared and
oiled. Some of us, who don't like getting down to brass tacks,
before long find someone with half the brain-power running
the business we are "thinking" of running.
The returned soldier has his opportunity both individually
and in the mass. He can prove that he can outdo the man
who stayed at home. In the mass the ex-Diggers can stick
together and wield a big influence on the future of Australia.
He is the man for the job.
Before long we will know more about the R.S.A. than we
know now. But do not forget that the soldiers' association is
good or bad, as we make it so.


WE
= FORGET!


The Surrender of 6€ Spider McGluck 199
Study of a
Those of you who were in No. 13 Platoon of the old bat-
talion will remember Spider M'Gluck, who was afflicted with
a permanent and incurable grouch against the world in
general. Nothing ever pleased Spider. He was never heard
to utter an expression of satisfaction, not even when he got
that lovely blighty going up to the attack at Broodseinde
Ridge, or when the broken and disillusioned enemy signed
the Armistice.
He looked at the whole world with a jaundiced eye,
anyone in the garb of constituted authority was anathema to
him. Even the good-natured and easy-going old Sergeant
Pewter unsuspectingly came under the lash of his invective,
and the appearance of Lieut. Cassidy, the platoon commander,
was always the signal for "sotto-voce" denunciations of all
heads, and subdued grumblings expressive of disapproval.
Orders, Spider considered, were devised solely for the pur-
pose of harassing the long-suffering private, and he looked
on all officers and N.C.O.'s as an expensive anomaly in an
otherwise democratic army. They showed such flagrant dis-
regard of the feelings of the private soldier, he was wont to
remark, by ordering attacks when everybody was fed up
with the whole business, and, in development of his argu-
ment, went on to say that he could not call to mind a single
hop-over, when the zero was not fixed at such an absurdly
early hour that it necessitated being awake all the previous
night.
But Spider's genius undoubtedly reached its high-water
mark during the return journey to Australia. On the morn-
ing of our departure he saw lit to condemn vehemently the
all too common military practice of early rising, which he
considered was not justified by military necessity. He even
hinted that the trains were malignantly arranged at an early
hour by that coterie known as "the heads," in pursuance of
their well-established policy of creating universal irritation
and discomfiture.
His choler in no wise abated during the march to the
station, and a slight delay at the ship's side served but to
intensify it. When shown his bunk he expressed lively dis-
approval, and complained of the lack of ventilation and the
general crudeness of the arrangements. In fact, during the
whole voyage not a day passed in which he was not the for-
tunate possessor of a grievance. The porridge was either
too hot or too cold, or there wasn't enough milk in it, or too
much milk. On one occasion, with a fierce expression, he
demanded of us why the devil we were forced to attend deck
parades now that the war was won. He supposed that the
sole reason for the same was to furnish a little spice of
variety to the existence of some of the officers, who were be-
coming blase under the influence of a perpetual round of
jackpots.
" Grouch"
I happened to be standing by Spider when the ship hit Port
Melbourne. He was in the midst of a critical discourse on
the slowness of the authorities in proceeding with the disem-
barkation, when I saw him stop short in the midst of his
tirade and grow markedly paler. 1 followed the direction
of his gaze, and saw a stout and aggressive-looking female,
evidently his wife, who waved an umbrella at him with a
gesture that was at once a welcome and a menace. Spider's
volubility collapsed like a Hun sausage balloon pricked by
one of our airmen. When his turn came to leave the boat, he
bade us a subdued good-bye and filed slowly down the gang-
way with the air of one passing to his martyrdom.
We felt mournfully that his total eclipse had come, that the
brilliant genius that had so long entertained us would scintil-
late no more. The fine, free humour that had emerged like
a moth from the chrysalis four years ago would be again
pent up in the prison-house of enforced silence, and the
world would be the poorer. At the bottom of the gangway
Spider was seized by his female captor. We heard a pene-
trating voice exclaim, "What did you mean by sneakin'
away?" . . . The voice failed in the general din, but
we saw our friend led away, meek and protesting. We
looked at one another, and understood the reason for those
four years.
W. H. E
Who said we were colour blind? In Capetown we proved
ourselves authorities on colour.
"What are you standing up there, sitting down doing
nothing for?" was the Bosun's preliminary to hosing down
decks—and Diggers.
What price the Thespian Corner on the aft deck? Why
so much merriment? Is it too Bohemian for the Diggers?
I have heard that there is another name for this crowd, but I
have forgotten—perhaps it is better so.
"Six weeks since we were in Blighty," sighed "Gertie."
"I wonder what we will be doing in another six weeks?"
"Wishing to we were back in the army," retorted
"Fat."
Bill barraged the Quartermaster-Sergeant for a pair of sox,
and after half-an-hour went away barefooted.
Jim meanwhile was so interested in "getting" the sox that
he forgot all about the Q.M.S.
The Scriptures exalt the despised and rejected, so do some
Aussies. It was hard lines for the Digger and his exalted
to be ejected from the Cape City Hall; but "Aussies don't
care."
It has been said that the Diggers' dance makes easy a re-
turn to the amenities of civvy life. We saw one chap last
night offering chocolates to his partner, so there must be
something in it after all.


IIIIIII IIIIIIIIII MILL mi in I muni inn 11111 HI inn in mm unm MM


- 4A © Xonel\> Ibontcs !
/ Where pour beiti3ens all loquacious ?
Where tbe young men, where tbe matbens?
'jjSWp •.••;• x Where tbe fathers, toil experiences* ?
' ill' tlK cbil&ren '
0 Shatters bovver!
fTell of tbe masses offereb often;
I el1 of t,5e curc olc> an& venerable;
Cl1 0t t[;)e tocsin=t>el1, now ' ala5 ' silent '
iijf S B- i Hub broken altar.
p a © Silent Streets!
IIP vjf;| ©nee filleb with a people gay anb vivacious;
® ncc tl:,e scene ot i°£° u s carousal;
* ©itce tbe mark of a people's prosperity,
"" anC) rural Pti^c.
- IS* 0 Uiiyin!
©ive back tbe fathers anb tbe young sons;
4 4 . iwf
f \ \Ji iIf ® ive assuagement to wife anb mother;
™ A1 1 Tf&l//
A ?M ®ive peace to tbe byiitg—
1RC5t t0 tl:>c &et)aitec> '
!$} I ill c/?n Impression, April 1916.
' v *"i Dickie Hoar, 27th Batt.
F.l w 19


ay j gy f ®
xhe Sunken Submarine
Our Skipper as Storyteller
The Skipper of the "Mahia" was out on his own as a yarn
spinner. He carried conviction. The hearer often found
it difficult to reconcile the Captain's gravity with the quite
apparent fact that he was not always an eye-witness of the
occurrences related. For instance, the "Submarine"
story:—
"Stark horror! That alone will describe the sinking of a
German submarine after striking a mine.
"She left Zeebrugge a few days before that nest was sealed
by the British bloekships, and she was commanded by one of
the most successful of the pirates—a man on whom decora-
lions had been showered by the Kaiser since the beginning
of the war.
"Without warning," continued the Skipper after a pro-
longed pull at his cigar, "an external explosion shook the
submarine. It was not enough to blast her to fragments, but
sent her staggering downwards, stern first.
"The engineer's effort to bring the U-boat on to an even
keel failed, until, as a last resource, the crew were ordered
to rush forward in a body. Then her bows came down, and
she settled evenly on the bottom of the ocean.
"Water was oozing in growing quantities through plates
at the stern which had been strained by the explosion. While
some men tried to stop the leaks, others worked like demons
to get the engines started again to at least take her to the sur-
face. All attempts failed, and she lay motionless 20 fathoms
deep. The pressure at that depth was so great that neither
conning tower nor torpedo hatches could be opened, and the
imprisoned men were denied even the chance of drowning
or reaching the surface.
"The water steadily mounted in the interior, and eventually
soaked into the accumulators, and, mixing with the chemi-
cals, began to generate poison gas. The men were crowded
forward, shrieking to their comrades to hurry and open the
hatches. The water lapped over their ankles and crept re-
lentlessly up their legs. The air became dense; it was used
up and impregnated with poisonous fumes. The water
reached their knees.
"The men who were fighting with the hatches dropped
back exhausted, their hands maimed and bleeding from their
frenzied exertions. They clung to any foothold above the
swirling water that crept remorselessly up and ever up."
The Skipper's cigar had burnt out. He very deliberately
lighted another as if to mock our impatience. Then he went
on: "An hour had gone by since that fateful explosion. Even
if the hatches could have been opened, none could survive
the awful pressure of the water at that depth. The mad-
dened crew cared nothing for that 'Open! Open!' they
screamed, and the horrible panic grew.
"One man suddenly stuffed some cotton wool up his nos-
trils, and thing himself face down in (he three feet of oily
water that swirled uneasily beneath the paling lights. His
example was quickly followed. One man after another
sought the relief of death from the awful oppression of life.
"By a strange freak of the brain, one man who feared to
drown sought to shoot himself, but the pistol missed fire;
with an oath he hurled it into the pool of death, and flung
himself after it.
"At that moment the edge of a plate gave way; water
poured in, equalising the pressure inside and out, and burst-
ing open one of the torpedo hatches. The enormous air
pressure, suddenly released, shot out the living and the
already dead together—only the dead were the happier. The
pressure burst the lungs of the living as they were flung up-
wards, and they shot through the surface of the water shriek-
ing in horrible death agonies.
"A British trawler was close by, and never in all the
strange months of war had men seen such things as they
saw in those few dreadful seconds.
"Two only of all the submarine crew were living among
the bodies that were taken on board the trawler, and their
awful sufferings were an epitome of all the rest."
The Skipper threw overboard the butt of his cigar.
Advt.: The barbers have established themselves in the clink
—to be exact, in No. (i Cell. Patrons can be shampooed,
singed, or shaved, at the shortest notice. Other means to tor-
ture are to be installed.
Ah, the Marquis! Now and then the shadow flits—the
gorgeous dressing-gown. Does it enclothe a man or a super-
man? What godliness might it not conceal? Some say the
Adjutant, or may it be just gown without substance—the
ghost of the Marquis?
The Canteen Sergeant's first order, first day out, was for—
"1 cake disinsected sope, 2 tins each deserved peaches, 1 cake
toylet sope, 1 bottle Henos Froot Soils, 3 packits Three Kars-
leairs, 2 packits Kapstins, 1 tube Tooth Paist, with a request
for the change in 'Epsom Salts' for the coppers, Sarjint."
Picture the feelings of a "windy officer" in charge of a
patrol somewhere out in No Man's Land close to the Hun's
wire, when a wag for his benefit whispers through the dark-
ness, "Who's got a match; I've lost a franc." No wonder the
windy one made the "Mahia" community superstitious with
his bad dreams.
Who is the gentleman on No. f)B Mess, who was seen very
early in the pitch "on his first day's leave" promenading the
principal streets of Capetown, carrying on his arm a piece
of "black velvet" measuring 1} yards long by 1 yard wide?
Was he a living demonstration of that popular song, "Aussies
Don't Care," or a walking advertisement for "Crown and
Anchor—Murder on the ole jam tart"?


n
I Bfe
■•-TV
m%MtJ Fr '
4 fk 4 Ar
III? ? TTn
THE A.P.M.
I am the majesty of law
Personified, and sans a flaw.
I rope them in, upon my Sam ;
The military sleuth I am.
I have consideration scant
For any "sub" recalcitrant;
For any Digger who may take
The crooked path, a faux pas make
From my strong hands the lines are cast
That hold our armies firm and fast.
They may not strive to break their chains;
They clank the louder for their pains.
From my black brows the bolts of wrath
Are hurled upon the sinner's path.
Unscathed they cannot take their way ;
I wreck their dreams —their hopes I slay.
And, in the ways remote and rare,
My henchmen lurk to trap and snare
A.W.L's, and drunks are meat
They garner as their daily treat.
Though recognition scant is mine,
It pains me not —I hold the line.
To none I'll bow my head or yield:
I've won the war —I'll hold the field.
—W.H.E.


/ 7i ' f f €€ r f**a ® »
Jottin s fer hmger
As Sed by 'n Admirin' Anzac
"Soovuneers?" remarked Bill, admirin' the wait uv me kit
bag. I expecktorates over the rail on to the warf.
"Wee," says F. So I lumps the ishoo down below. Noticin'
the bag rather damp on won side, I investigates; finds the
kork worked a bit loose; droves it 'ome an' puts the soovu-
neer back for safty.
By-by, Blity," I waves to the recedin' sliaws (were I 'ad
the pleshur uv chewin' up sevral Jacks), as I took me way
ome sweet ome, were 1 suppose the slooths is waitin' for me
in Bris. I listed jus' in time to escape misforchun, an' lives
in 'opes that the Dees will not reckernise me, 'avin' fort for
me king an' country.
I gets a good possy under the 'atchway for fresh air, an' were
I 'njoys a quite game of owsy without disterbin' the blan-
kits, uv wich I 'as 4 (for the informashun uv reeders not in
the no, we is ishood with too an' the other too we ishoos
usselves). Befor 1 forgets I intends to crack that bosun
one to remin' 'im that salt water baths is inadvisable before I
'as ris from me slumbers.
One mornin' the kernel komes up an' remins me uv ol' times.
1 gives 'im me mit wen "e 'as saluted an' enquires 'ow things
is pergressin'; 'e akceps a fag, says things is goin' on all rite,
an' requests me assistence in won or too matters uv im-
portance, which I obliginly complys with.
Fus' Mundy I lines ter perade like a good soljer, an' kom-
ments on the orders uv the day; then our too star artist an-
nounces the meshurs 'e will take for the 'elth uv the troops.
Jerk one, says 'e, jerk too, as the troops attends to there 'elth.
I regards this eksersise as mos' benefishal, but as me 'elth is
good, I soon retires so as to give more deck space to them as
'as more need. 1 continue to akt up to this principle.
Bein' a pertickler friend uv the R.S.M., I is made comfert-
able, an' 'as no fateeges eksept peelin' a few pertaters now
an' then jus' to give them an 'and, an' sometimes assistin'
the cook in the orticers' galley. Wen I wus there I works
me nut, and now me an' me cobbers slings in a few bob, an'
'as all the speshel pervisuns usual for orficers.
I was very interested in the Cape, as I 'ad 'eard uv the gor-
gus seenry, an' I wus also desirus uv replenishin' me soovu-
neer llask. So I barges along to the buckshee tee an' cake
joint an' enkwires perlitely in respek ter the different places
uv interest. But fus' day I didn't get ferther than Adderley-
street, were I called fer lite refreshment, an' managed to
spend me time 'njoyerbly without bein' unable to find me
way back to the boat.
Rit Down by 'is Cobber Bill
1 also patrenised the King's Own, the Rorin' Lion, an'
sevral other establishments jooring my visit, but was mos'
comfertable at the Kliney Castle, were a respeckable young
lady, mosly white, favered me with 'er affections. I con-
sidered it me jooty to giv' 'er a ring, for wich 1 invested too
quid.
After leavin' the Cape we wus mos uncomfertable owin' to
the inclemensbus whether. 1 'ad to shift me possy from
under the 'atchway, were I 'ad slep' through the voyage, owin'
to the dampness of the canvas, not wishin' to get roomatiks;
but threw the kind orlices uv won uv the crew, who I 'ad met
at Crown an' Anchor, I wus able to dig in in the mos' com-
fertible korters, were I wus able ter sleep mos' uv the day,
an', after all, I will not 'av to be too seveer on the orderley
orficer who expecks gentlemen to ris' before 8 o'clock. This
is a distinck releef.
So, as usual, I 'as made the mos' uv me time, an' me mili-
tery eksperience should proove very benefishal when I re-
sooms me perfeshunal career in Brisbane.
A. A. J.
We have heard of kisses being given, also stolen, but there
was a dear old Digger in the Anzac Lounge who made efforts
to sell them to the young ladies. Things in demand generally
command their price.
As the Padre passed a crowd of Diggers on his way to hold
a lantern service, one of them said: "Come down to the
Movies, Blue; there's the Lead Kindly Light bloke just
passed."
Usual Diggerish comment iirst day out: "This old hooker
will do me for the trip home." Then they started to weigh
up the heads.
Education goes homeless, uncared for, and unsung. Will
no one take the stranger in, harbour it in a cosy corner, so that
it be not hustled from pillar to post, the weary butt of Digger
wit? Always in a "Mess"—and a different "Mess" every day.
The "Ossifers" seem to have had no fun in Capetown; we
did not see them about. The starry regions are cold, and
the crowned heads so lonely. Base innuendoes about hidden
officereal hilarity are not worthy of consideration.
A Sympathy Strike.
Five minutes after the wireless report of the coal strike was
received, a sympathy strike broke out on the "Mahia," and
caused considerable damage—to a bystander's face. The em-
ployers' barracker made a fistic drive at the strike supporter,
hut succeeded only in laying out the community, as repre-
sented by a passing Digger, who did not even know there was
a strike on.


BKf m, m
Ki - s -J* tMHBf |HraH| ,..
■L \ \ ,rjf 3 « g -•&-
* * JijNIOfcQlli *- •:?s M »-
■R — MgmgHBI^^pL^
~ W,«\ ' £ 1">,'lj||| *" ~
j« *. Jmt ■
.. Afc. <ir 3L mr
jpy
jHhk -
-
, . •- jJf • " f "'■'*^■■1
BHKj3BhjMfcfL.l: .. / JgT.
Imaginary Interviews
Now that the unhappy hour is in sight when that galaxy of
talent, Our Concert Party, which throughout the voyage has
been such a source of enduring joy, shall be disbanded, we
bethought us that some measure of the lustre of the artists'
personalities might be preserved, in the pages of this volume,
as well as in our hearts and memories.
But, alas! the best intentions often are barren of fruition.
The proverbial modesty of the dramatic profession, it will be
CONCERT PARTY.
BACK Row (left to right) : G. VV. Dickinson (Sketch Artist), E. M'Donald
(Vocalist), F. Whitcroft (Scenic Artist), H. Wright (Prop. Master).
MIDDLE ROW: J. Romaine (Comedian and Producer). J. Aiken (Female
Impersonator), A Loveless (Barytone).
FRONT ROW: G. Goldsworthy (Monolog'St), F. Jarvis (Comedian*.
readily understood, would allow no wile of ours to persuade
any of this august company to contemplate, for one moment,
appearing in any limelight save their own.
Not to be daunted by this laudable timidity, so becoming
in the Great, we propose giving our readers the opportunity
of penetrating the sacred presence of these immortals, there
to wring, peradventure, some sublimity, some oracle, that in
the days to come may serve to remind us that for a space our
feet were planted, not on land, nor on sea, but upon the
sacred slopes of Parnassus.
A feu) of our Concert Stars
THE ORCHESTRA.
BACK ROW (left to right): S. Haisman J. T. M'Kenzie, R. T. Bedson,
R. W. Short, S. D. Alder.
SITTING : G. H. Ellis, P. W. Smith, Sgt. R. Cleary (Cond.), G. Shapespear.
FRONT ROW: R. T. Gaves.
Sergeant Cleary: Conductor.
What knee tremblings assail us as we enter the presence
of the Maestro! Absently he waves us to a seat (basket,
rickety, "props" for the use of), demanding our purpose.
Timidly we state it—timidly, for intrude we not upon the
(ireat One in the agonies of composition?
Tremulously rising, we peer over his shoulder. What is
it we behold? The familiar black-lined manuscript destined
to bear upon its virgin sheets some sonata before which Beet-
hoven will become as a dream that is past; an opera or sym-
phony, banishing for ever Wagner and Schubert to the
shades.
Nor opera—nor symphony—nor sonata! What then gazes
he upon with glittering eyes, with lingers tumbling, again and
again, those Titan-tinted locks about his marble brows?
Our pianist is studying a draft of the new Polish Republic,
drawn up by its first President —Paderewski!
Silently we vanish.
BAND.
BACK ROW (left to right): J. D. Webster, W. O. Overson, S. Haisman.
C. E. Smith, F. A. Hooker, L. Sieben.
SECOND ROW : E. F. Saunders. W. G. Thorpe, A. L. Holder, S. M. Britton.
G. R. Barrington, E. Holder, A. G. Eastern, P. C. Gogler.
SITTING: C. J. Sturgis, H. Godber, Sgt. J. S. Jackson (Bandmaster).
J. L. Ballagh, W. E. Grothers.
FRONT ROW: W. W. Wilson, E. P. Harry.


Imaginary Interviews — continued.
Our Barytone is a busy man. His vocal efforts are eon-
lined to no one particular organisation—concert party, Y.M.
gatherings, or padre's musical afternoons. It was a matter
of difficulty to entertain any hope of finding him altogether
disengaged. We deemed ourselves fortunate, therefore, in
being able to catch such pearls as fell from these musical lips
in intervals of his rehearsing a song, the exact burthen of
which we cannot at this moment recall, save, perhaps, thai
it contained some reference to the soul and the captaincy
thereof.
The Corporal is Bohemian in his attire, though some
semblance of the conventional has been attained since the
memorable Charleroi days. So much for the alchemy of
Cupid's dart.
He is, we discovered, a fatalist—a master of his fate.
It would have been impertinent to expect any further grant
of time from one so much in demand; indeed, at that moment
a wireless arrived containing offer of an engagement for our
Barytone to sing at the forthcoming Seventh Grand Conven-
tion of the Australian Calithumpian Society (Melbourne
branchl!
Jimmy Romaine.
This breezy comedian was run to earth in Young and
Jackson's famous hostelry shortly, very shortly, after disem-
barkation.
On the mat, one Hugh 1). Mackintosh patiently waited
Jimmy's pleasure, doubtless on some trivial business con-
nected with a ten years' Tivoli contract. As Mac was enter-
ing, Jimmy waved him aside, and motioned us in.
Jimmy named his drink and accepted one of our cigarettes.
In his capacity of Director of our Concert Party, it was to
be expected that Jimmy would be able to supply interesting
biographical particulars regarding its personnel since its
inception in 1918. This he may have done—we have for-
gotten—no matter! More vivid in our memory is the vision
we have of his account of the triumphs of the great Romaine.
Who would desire more?
In Jimmy is found that rare combination—author and
comedian. Mentioning again his favourite beverage and
spoiling us of one of our best Egyptians, he proceeded to re-
count such songs, sketches, parodies, and medlies of his own
composition in which he and other artists have appeared.
We discovered in this Apostle of Humour one independent
of that tiresome convention of the stage—the rehearsal. What
true spontaneity—the "compleat gagger"!
' Why be bound," asks this descendant of Leno and Lauri
"by the cramping confines of a mere author?"
Condescending once more to name a particular brand, and
borrowing our matchbox, Jimmy intimated that perhaps the
Tivoli magnate on the doorstep might be glad to bring him-
self and contracts in out of the rain.
Modestly we withdrew. Flinging one last parting glance
at the comedian, we observed him luxuriating in the perfume
of one of Mac's "Coronas," again addressing himself to the
barmaid's request.
Jarvis—"Rag" Merchant.
Potsnitz, as he is known, was putting a final touch to those
"retreat-from-Mons" buttons on our arrival.
He interrupted all our attempts to draw him into conversa-
tion with the query, "Have you seen May?" We assured
him we had not.


Imaginary Interviews — continued.
Can it be that he, like the immortal Mrs. Gamp, is launch-
ing upon a credulous world another creation of dreams—a
second Mrs. 'Arris? Mayhap she is his bride-to-be, what
time he returns to civil life and employment.
We inquired whether, on arrival in Aussie, he would con-
tinue his career as a comedian. From his reply it was
gathered that he has one pet aversion—bricks!!! Before the
war these he laid; since, they have ofttimes laid him—some
audiences, unlike those of the "Mahia," are so inconsiderate
in the tokens of esteem they are wont to bestow upon their
favourites.
His songs cover a wide range. We are taken from Georgia
to Petticoat Lane.
The soul of romance is disclosed in these burning songs of
passion. Can it be that "Potsnitz" hides but another alias,
and that our artist is indeed—Cyrano de Bergerac?
Who said Nose?
Ellis! Violist!
All that could be gleaned from this artist was his inability
to understand the want of appreciation, especially among the
more musically-minded of his friends. It is a matter for
regret so little opportunity has been given to this so able a
performer.
Do we entertain in our midst, unawares, a master of that
form of futurist tone-production—the soundless sound?
R. T. Caves (F.C.S.), Jazz Artist.
Our peregrinations brought us next to him who is, perhaps,
the most popular member of the party.
Certainly no other artist can tickle the Digger's palate like
this Fellow of the Corybantic Society (see above).
No Eastern band boasts so tine or varied an assortment
of instruments of "musick."
All the old favourites are here—dulcimers and psalteries,
high-sounding cymbals, and our old friend the sackbutt.
Even the well-known shawm is included. (What is a
shawm? Our religious Editor fails us in this extremity.)
What an oversight, on the part of the authorities, that this
genius was not sent as a separate unit to Palestine, there to
emulate that estimable commander who in ancient days
achieved his success before Jericho solely with the aid of
rams' horns!
Jimmy Aiken ("Our Anne.")
It was in a corner of "her" dressingroom we found that
peerless star, at once the pride and delight of the "Mahian"
Digger—Our Anne! Smilingly she greeted us. What ten-
der beams radiated from her liquid eyes, those wells of
allurement, which rake with such deadly fire the Digger's
heart.
The curtain being about to rise, a short time was all she
could grant us, which, in view of our susceptibility to charm
wherever found, not to mention Mrs. Grundy, was perhaps as
well. Swiftly we applied the acid, angling for her favourite
role. But Anne would not commit herself, though betraying
a desire to essay the emotions of Juliet. "After all," she ex-
claimed, sinking with abandon upon a divan, "is not this the
ambition of all really great artistes?"
Adding deft touches to slightly dishevelled curls, she ini-
tiated us into some of the secrets of a female "impostor's"
wardrobe. This prompted us, once for all, to settle lhat
mystery which hedges about female impersonators and
kilties alike. Anne very delicately reassured us on this
point. "Why, of course we do," said she; "how else should
we carry on—and in such a climate?" (Quelle affaire!)
The orderly-room staff, it appears, consider the recent Cape-
town expenditure on lingerie unnecessary and extravagant.
(These people, running a war, would refuse to issue a hop-
over, or, being Bosuns, begrudge one a squirt. But we
digress.) In Capetown Anne received the attention of a
Parisian corsetiere. We are thus ensured against any re-
currence of that annoying misadventure to her toilet, which
early in the trjp was the occasion of a Digger exclaiming,
from the stalls: "... !" (Censored.) Anne's spare
parts are now well in control.
Toying lightly with the famous pearls, her classic chin
poised forward at that angle so familiar, Anne was on the
point of divulging even further intimacies when "we" were
ignominiously ejected—the arrival of a rival!
B. T. 11.
Is the leader of the orchestra, Sergeant Cleary, trying to
imitate the world's greatest tinkler of the ivories? Throw
a look at his curls.


IIJ" "" '""" 1 """" mill.111.mi, mi
I
! CROWDS j
* *" § =


H ... !^I
IANMOCK
RU5H -
Green™ Talks on the Green Sea
"And did everything look green?" we asked him.
"No, I don't see green, not even with the 'flu," he retorted.
We smiled a secret sort of smile, to suggest that he had been
diddled out of his rightful, but awful symptoms.
"He" was always to be found on the aft troop-deck. He was
rarely silent; he never lacked an audience. He was big, and
sheepish-looking, but with a wit sharper than his looks.
" 'Flu" was "Longun's" long suit.
"Yours must have been quite a small affair," dryly remarked
a Dig. with classical features and red dungarees. "Now,
when I had it, everything looked the greenest sort of green.
.Most extraordinary! The sky, the porridge, the Peace terms,
the bacon, the babies—all green—as green as grass. You
must have had a very mild attack. Now 1 had the real thing,
the one and only patented, genuine Dago 'Flu, imported
direct from the Old Castile, with a fac-simile of King
Alfonso's signature on the corner of every packet."
"Well," said Longun, with contempt, "I suppose mine was
only a bit of a cold. Certainly 1 didn't catch any limelight
effects. Nothing looked green that I can remember, though
things might have been a bit blue at times." He rolled his
eyes heavily, "No, nothing green about it."
"I was unconscious when they put me to bed," he pro-
claimed solemnly, a gleam of fire in his sheepish eyes as if
to challenge contradiction. A long pause—then, "I was
afraid I was going to die, and for another space I was afraid
I wasn't —but I did NOT see green." Witheringly: "A mere
chill, I suppose, Snow?" to the classical Digger.
"That night I lay in my downy nest, which had just
been plowed—they left the plow in the middle. There
came to me two Horseferry-road heads and 300 sappers, all
with spiked tails and red-hot feet. And one head said,
"Build an aerodrome in the small of his back!"
"Then the sappers brought trench tools, crowbars, picks,
and guncotton, and set to work. First they dug a deep foun-
dation in the lumbago regions, and put in red-hot drain-pipes.
Then some laid a light railway down my spinal column, and
ran ammunition waggons over it, while others prized my
joints open with crowbars, very slowly, knocking off for din-
ner every ten minutes. Having got my legs off, they blew
out six of my vertebrae ('One of your words, Snow,' he said
to the classical Digger) with guncotton, and lit a lire in the
hole.
"Half-an-hour later two more Horseferry-road star artists
came in, looked at the excavations, and said, 'That's no good
for an aerodrome. Fill it up, and start again somewhere
else. Any old where will do!
"Then the doctor came—one of those big, ever-bright doe-
tors, and said, 'Um!' and he said, 'Ah!' and 'Well! what have
you been doing?' Then he thought for a long time."
Longun rolled his sheep's eyes all over "Snow" and con-
tinued, "The quack said at last, 'Does everything look green
to you?'
"Oh, no! It wasn't Dago 'Flu, just a mere chill caught
through drinking out of a damp glass."
No one noticed that the classical Digger had started to read
a book. Anyhow, just then someone inquired, "Do you think
Bananalanders will be held up in Sydney because of the new
'flu epidemic?"
And the argument became heated at once.
CAPT. V. BOSDET.


€( 9 9 99
Lhggertsma
We gladly hear that the ambulance chaps in the isolation
joint are well "comforted" in their lonely quarters. If they
have anything left over any time, the troops are partial to
canned fruits.
A Digger, when asked to sign his demobilisation paper, re-
fused to divulge his regimental number and name. Can it
be "Little Willie" travelling incog.?
When a certain jazz band practised after "lights out," the
Where did the Artillery get their souvenirs? Judging from ...
objection of certain Diggers who sleep on deck was directed,
the weight ol their kit bags, this has been some war.
not so much against the hour, as the air.
Is it the thing for boxers to wear their hair so long? Ally-
m..J xi uiv ii" i7u.\i,i n ivj vv vui in*, ii iiciii tuug : niiy-
"the Librarian considers no time so suitable for conning
how, rumour has it that some of them do contemplate pound- ~,, „ ,
L.8.8. s Sonnets of the Portuguese as when fatigues are
ing pianos instead of pugs.
juggling hook boxes all around him.
Who was the officer who put his boots outside the cabin
door? Did he think he was back at the Waldorf?
Why did the S.M. take his shirt off at the Diggers' dance?
Did he think of taking a plunge in the dark?
Australian more than held its own above the din of many
languages spoken at once on top of a Cape tram.
What are the words of the song that "Looking Class Joe"
sings to the mirror at least six times a day when performing
his toilet in the Sergeant's mess-joint? Is it, "Oh, darling
girl who turned me down" or "Wait till my wife gets hold
of me"?
Our band believes in contrasts. After blowing bravely
to the music of the ship's waterworks (aft deck), they blew
beautifully in full glory at Capetown's flashest hall.
Diggers were found, not on Table Top, but under the table
at closing time in 1) street, Capetown.
The "Housey Housey" chap was hard hit when the crowd
sat out a buckshee half-dollar game, but would not part up a
"zack" a time for another card.
The kiss casual and the kiss lingering may be unnoticed,
but the kiss permanent is likely to cause re-mark. It can't
be painted out.
The last kit inspection was reminiscent of "Combien Alley,"
Charleroi; the aft deck resembled Petticoat Lane on Sunday
morning, or the Chinese Labour Battalion on the move.
Diggers are not particular. They grace equally the "gods,"
the circle, and the stalls. When the C.O. looked so detached,
at the Cape City Hall, the Diggers sympathetically surged in
to share the glare and the stare of 2000 eyes.
Will the girls keep their promises and write to us?
Dead 'Uns.
I walked along a winding way—
The dead lay all around;
Why should death mar a perfect day,
And sully rustic ground?
I raised one still form from the green,
But threw it down—a "dead marine."
Is it a fact that since a mess orderly somewhere in "A"
troop deck has taken on the job, the other members of the
mess have had to take in an extra hole in their belts?
A literary clique wandered round culling the cream of
Cape libraries. Even dreamers combine business with
pleasure.
A careless movement at the Cape concert raised grave sus-
picions as to whether our Anne was really a lady.


* Jj
<5.vy.0tcK • r* So fA
" Diggerisms "■ — continued.
Those Cow Cockies
When t-he weather's hot and sultry, as
It often is just now,
"Our standard is HIGH," said the Editor to a would-be con-
tributor.
The atmosphere between the decks
Would suffocate a cow.
"Nothing strange about that," was the retort, "considering
the price.'
Now, up on deck it's different, and
The troops all like to be
It was a very pleasant change to see the Editorial staff of
this paper for once use the mops and brooms with telling
effect. For the lirst time silence reigned in this otherwise
talkative department.
Up there, to get the benefit
Of breezes from the sea.
And so they sleep, until at three,
Or thereabouts each morn,
An ultimatum at last:—The Sergeants at No. 6 table have
refused to pass anything more to the S.M.! "Pass it," as they
call him in the mess, will now have to pass for himself.
They hear a sound of voices like
The crows among the corn.
For that's the hour, apparently,
Of all the twenty-four
Who is the officer who insists on men rising at 7.30 a.m
Is the war still on?
When these cow cockies from the West
Must exercise their jaw.
Now, Diggers, I would like to know
What is the best to do
Have 4B Mess orderlies a marine license to pick up "dead
marines" on the "Mahia"? How civvy habits stick!
With these disturbers?—but I think
I'll leave all that to you.
Why no repetition of the I a.m. gramaphone concert?
F. N. W
THE DIGGERS' DANCE.


v r , -
. ':w$> ' ' ' • x
66 jg y jj o 11 v~/ y
mama bpoti mm bpmismm
'-pWELVE HUNDRED men, Australians all, will never be at a loss to provide
themselves with diversion, no matter how limited the vessel. Everything,
however, was in our favour. Ample deck space and plentiful Y.M.C.A.
athletic requisites gave the Sports Officer and his second any amount of scope.
"Mahia" Boxers.
Williams—Heavyweight.
When young, Spr. Williams learned how Samson was
shorn of his hair and lost his strength, so his front hair is
so well grown that, if brushed down in front, reaches well
below his chin, on the principle: Long hair—great strength.
He is very proud of his raven locks, and plaits them care-
fully before entering the ring, to save his eyesight, but
usually has them well combed out at the end of the bout.
Williams is the real boxer build—slight, with very powerful
shoulders. He is one of those better-class pugs who use
their brains as much as their fists. His first fight he won
in two hits. The second, six rounds against Place, was
given him on points. The third fight was a ten-round go
with Place, hut concluded in the seventh round owing to
Williams' wrist. But the fight was Place's anyway.
BOXING.
BACK HOW (Trainers): F. Lewis, E. Hutchinson, A. Williai
SITTING: 1.. Williams, W. Place, P. Bruce, J. Lindsay.
FRONT HOW: G. Russell.
Place—Heavyweight,
Big hefty son of a gun, with the head movements of a frill
lizard, Place can put his opponent wherever desired in the
ring. He has a good deal of science, and can stand a lot of
knocking about. It is said that he never lost a fight before
meeting Williams.
BLINDFOLD BOXING.
He fought three fights on board. His first was against
Kent, who threw in the towel in the third and last round.
His second and third fights were with Williams. A six-
round contest, lost on points, led to another event of ten
rounds, for £lO 10s., put up by the Officers' Mess. The men
were well matched, and odds were even until the fifth round,
when Place warmed up, hoed in and put it all over Williams,
whose mishap in the seventh round ended the fight. The
original ten guineas was then liberally added to by Diggers
from the ringside.
Bruce—Lightweight.
Bruce was a keen little lighter—another pretty boy with
long hair. He had a very clever style that made things
awkward for his opponent. Lack of training and disinclina-
tion to spoil his beauty were his chief drawbacks. He
fought one fight against Lindsay, lost, but put up a really
good showing.
Lindsay-—Lightweight.
Lindsay is the son of a wealthy squatter (so the Blighty
tarts say), a good fellow, and always eager to help in any-
way. He fought and won three fights, and gave a spirited
exhibition spar with Symon Jack.
Watson—Lightweight.
Watson wanted to try his mettle again after being knocked
out by Williams in two hits. He had another go with Cpl.
Jones, a much lighter man, and won on points.


_ J- __ "' " ,:
"Mahia" Sport and Sportsmen continued.
Side Shows of Ship's Sport.
Tug-of-War.
The Artillery regard the tug-of-war triumph as their
greatest victories on land or sea. After defeating, in turn,
the other three companies, they challenged the ship, and
again won. Is it a fact, as rumour suggests, that the two
officers selected in the team against the Artillery were so soft
in the hands that they could not even win a game of handies
in the moonlight? The wind caused by the Artillery bar-
rackers' language gave that team a strong advantage.
CRICKET TEAM.
BACK ROW (left to right): Pte. A. E. Moore, Sgt. D.V. M'Kinlay,
Sgt. P. H. Te Bay, Gnr. F. M. Garnsey, Gnr. O. D. Mears.
SITTING: Capt. S. L. Germon, Lt.-Col. L. M. Mullen, D.5.0.,
Sgt. F. A. O'Keeffe, Lieut. G. W. Martin, Dvr. M. J. Lawson.
FRONT ROW: Gnr. F. V. Flood, Gnr. V. J. Stevens.
ABSKNT : Sgt. W. F. Driver, Pte. A.J. Thompson, Lt. A. Harnett,
Lt. F. Crane.
Pillows—and a Greasy Pole.
A canvas bath was placed under a horizontal greasy pole,
and the troops were invited to ascend and pound each other
with pillows until the water received one or both combatants.
Our Sports' Officer regarded this as both sanitary and amus-
ing. The Diggers, however, found the grease from the pole
to interfere with the dirt-removing process down below.
The galley cook is much concerned about the wastage of
"priceless" (Editor's expression) fat. Private Pearson has
arranged to repay some of the cost out of prize-money, owing
to the excessive greasing of the person due to his habit of
hanging underneath the pole by his legs and pounding his
opponents from there. He considers that the fat should be
converted into soap before being applied to the pole.
Perpetual Motion.
The crowd on board knew of Pte. Broughton only as a skip-
per who skipped as long as the rope lasted. But some re-
member him as the sharp-featured, keen-eyed chap with a
smile, who cross-examined everyone, down to the ship's cat,
about the wearing properties of the deck, and then started to
skip. After continuing over several days, only a quarter of
an inch of deck was left where he skipped.
WEAK HORSES.
'Roos and Wreckage.
Our high jumpers—from outback—kangaroos, or rather
steers, judging by the way some of them crashed through the
bar instead of over it. A few, however, established kinship
to the Too. Sgt. Brady, a very straightforward, upstanding
"Old Man," very serious as becomes a sergeant, having cleared
1 feet 111 inches, successfully tossed for the prize with Pte.
Kirk, who had accomplished the same height.
Whenever the bar was raised Pte. Kirk muttered, "I can do
that," and had it gone up to 12 feet he would have said the
same. Gunner Kent made a wild, wallaby leap, landed on
his feet, and somersaulted along the deck until stopped by
the railing from rolling overboard. Early in the trip he
fought Cpl. Place, since when he has fought no other.
Boots to the Rear.
The most interesting things about the standing jumps were
the long distance negotiated (10 feet 4 inches) and the casual-
ties among the crowd caused by—boots. These were used
as hand-weights, and the flying Diggers, as they went for-
ward, hurled them backwards, hitting any old place or per-
son in the rear. How thankful were the A.M.C. for a little
employment.
HIGH JUMPING.


/ j^y/
"Mahia" Sport and Sportsmen — continued.
Excitement!
Quoits! Our most exciting stunt. No part of the deck so
smelt of embrocation as the training quarters of the quoit
experts. A team from the forward troop-deck were stil!
offering everyone else out when they landed at Port Mel-
bourne.
Football on Board.
This was rushed. But, of the 80 entries, only a very few
were able to punt the ball through the goal posts, 18 inches
apart, and under the bar 3 feet high. Rugbyites and Vic-
torians thought to settle their differences, but as they scored
equally, the wool of the rival sections is now flying faster
than ever.
Bun and Treacle.
"Have a go yourself!" yelled a dag, as the Sports Officer
attached well-treacled buns to a cross rope. The officer's
answer, immediate and practical, proved that his tunic
COULD be taken off, that his face was very attractive when
adorned with a little treacle, and that his well-cut slacks
WOULD bend sufficiently for him to kneel down on deck and
devour buns on all fours. As many Diggers did likewise, the
bun and treacle competitions were most diverting.
Successful Sack Racing.
Pte. Ryan (machine-gunner) showed that speed was easy
to attain in a sack race, and Gnr. Martin, who came second,
gave evidence that it can be made very picturesque. The
A.I.F. authorities, convinced at last that people can get along
much better and amusingly with their legs in a sack than
separate, are issuing a Routine Order imposing this artistic
and practicable means of progression on all troops. The
old-time feature of sack racing needs no further comment.
Racing in Ragtime.
Foot runners soon overcame the limitations the ship placed
on distance races by contriving relay events. These were
anything from 20 yards to the length of the vessel. The
full distance from stern to bow and back, up and downstairs,
gangways, around and over all sorts of obstacles, as a test
of endurance and agility was equal to anything provided on
land. Humour and casualties were both plentiful during
collisions, or a too rapid descent of gangways, or when
competitors slithered around the grease spots in the vicinity
of the butcher's shop.
J. W. KERR-DAVIDSON.
There was always keen competition between Nos. 1 and 4
Companies. Both had their share of wins, and handed out
scarcely an occasional second to the other Companies. I'tc.
Ryan, 24th Bat., was a commanding figure at all times. Hav-
ing a reputation as a retired pug, he had no difficulty in lead-
ing No. 4 Company, and was always keen to win. Now,
was it a fair go when his side lost? His one stoush up was
when acting as a second to Baddock in one of the first boxing
contests. How Kerr-Davidson got up against Ryan is a
mystery, but stoush was all there until K. D. considered that
his opponent was too heavy for him.
The relay races were more interesting than any other ex-
cursions about the ship, except those led by Hardman, White
and Co. each .morning for inspection. These were simply a
scream of humour. A. A. .1.


m %
H.M.A.T. "MAHIA."
m — m a m
~ ~ ~«wp*#
■. S-P ■ U
W/'f:f.' r .'y\. i ; '■ ' V-; N
•y / / / A .■/:- ■■• \ v \ v
/. / / .- ' I
THE SHIP'S OFFICERS.


Nominal Roll of Officers and Other Ranks who returned
per H.M.A.T. "MAHIA."
SHIP'S STAFF. Nursing Staff — continued.
O.C. Troops—Lieut.-Col. Mullen, D.5.0., Leslie N. (9th Butt.). 10th Fid. Amb. .. .. 12199 S. Sgt. Casson, Vincent Harry
Second in Command —Major Ellwood, M.C., William Henry (24th Batt.)
Adjutant—Lieut. Kerr, James S. (26th Batt.).
S.M.O.—Capt. Germon, Samuel L. (A.A.M.C., att. 44th Batt.).
Medical Officer—Capt. Veech, Bryan A. (14tli F. Amb., A.A.M.C.).
Quartermaster —Capt. Blackmail, Gordon W. J. (2nd Div. Train).
Education Officer—Lieut. Gartrell, Herbert W. (Gen. List Educ. Serv.).
Sports Officer—Lieut. Sutherland, Harry James (20th Batt.).
Chaplain—Rev. Grossman, William J. (Chap. Dept.).
Chaplain—Rev. Power, Thomas S. (Chap. Dept., 8.C.).
Y.M.C.A.—H. Lieut. Green, S. G. E.
Ship's Sergeant-Major—R.S.M. Hullett, Arthur Leslie (27th Batt., 5782).
Ship's O.R. Sergeant—Sgt. Falconer, Stanley A. (6th Bde. Hqrs., 5938).
Ship's Q.M. Sergeant—R.Q.M.S. Cameron, Archie G. (27th Batt., 6222).
A.I.F. Headquarters .. 927 Pte. Geddes, Clifford M.
(late 3rd Battalion)
A.I.F. Headquarters . . 24361 Sgt. Blanchard, Sydney C.
(late 3rd D.A.C.)
A.I.F. Headquarters . . 1315 Sgt. Blackwood, Alexander F.
(late Ist Battalion)
A.I.F. Headquarters . . 19715 Spr. Varley, Roy W.
(late 3rd 1). Sig. C.)
A.I.F. Headquarters .. 29164 Dvr. Swane, Edgar N.
(late 2nd F.A.8.)
Postal Corps . . . . 67 Sgt. Ferguson, Donald MT
2nd Pioneer Battalion . . 3896 Sgt. Robinson, Herbert F.
67 Sgt. Ferguson, Donald M'B.
PAY STAFF.
A.A. Pay Corps . . , . . . Major Blansliard, Ernest G.
1 Ist I). Art. .. . . .. .. Lieut. Taylor, Ernest C.
A.A. Pay Corps . . . . 1614 S. Sgt. Archer, Valentine G.
„ . . . . 3194 Sgt. Ballingall, Alexander G.
„ „ .. 12254 Sgt. Burgess, Herbert .T.
„ „ .. .. 85665 Sgt. Douglas, William
A.A. Pay Corps Att. .. 3781 Sgt. M'Namara, Joseph M.
(late sth Engys.)
A.A. Pay Corps .. . . 85674 Sgt. Ogg, James M. H.
„ „ .. .. 29170 Sgt. West, Donald V.
(late Ist D.A.C.)
DENTAL STAFF.
A.A.D.C. Alt C.T.I). P. House .. Lieut. M'Nair, Gilbert B.
Dent. Serv. .. .. . . 2273 S. Sgt. Blackledge, George E.
2078 Pte. Guthridge, M.M., John G.
„ .. .. .. 17059 S. Sgt. Julefe, Garnet 14. C.
NURSING STAFF.
Ist Fid. Amh. . . . . 14714 Pte. Golbourne, Frederick
~ „ . . . . 14717 1.. Cpl. Kelleher, Edward
„ .. .. 12558 Pte. Norris, Harry George Owen
2nd Fid. Amb. .. .. 1729 W.O. Carson, William
1729 W.O. Carson, William
1926 Pte. Mailer, Roy Stephen
„ . . .. 5285 Pte. Pearce, Frederick Hurtle
„ „ .. .. 5516 Pte. Stafford, John Joseph
4th Fid. Amb. . . 13269 L. Cpl. Clark, William
sth Fid. Amb. .. .. 16179 Pte. Wilson, Jack Wormald
6th Fid. Amb. . . . . 10068 Sgt. Hickey, John Michael
.. 13682 Pte. Peters, William
7th Fid. Amb 13948 Pte. Gardner, Regius
„ „ .. .. jaeoz rie. rerers, William
7th Fid. Amb. . . . . 13948 Pte. Gardner, Reginald George
„ „ . . . . 284 Pte. Kyte, Ambrose Hugh
9052 Pte. M'Laughlin, M.M., Robert Georgt
9095 Pte. Newland, Alfred Frederick
„ „ .. .. 13653 Pte. Smith, Robert Stewart
Bth Fid. Amb. . . .. 13582 Pte. Annat, David
„ „ .. . . 13585 Pte. Bailey, John Greenlialgh
„ „ .. . . 15861 Pte. Cole, Geoffrey Livesey
„ „ .. .. 13560 1.. Cpl. Ewing, Alexander Campbell
„ ~ . . . . 15545 Pte. Simister, George
9th Fid. Amh 14815 L. Cpl. Allan, John Douglas
14815 L. Cpl. Allan, John Douglas
„ .. .. 11922 Pte. Campbell, James Stuart
11925 Pte. Carroll, Edward George
11998 Sgt. Kirkham, Phillip Fitzroy
12012 Pte. Martin, Archibald Andrew
. . 12024 Cpl. Monk, Leslie Clark
„ „ .. .. 13834 Pte. Reid, Henry
„ ~ . . . . 12067 Pte. Sneddon, Henry James
„ „ . . . . 13100 Pte. Syvertsen, John Gordon
„ „ . . . . 14487 Pte. Harber, George Thomas
. . 12367 W.O. O'Keefe, D.G.M. and Bar, David
„ „ .. .. 12341 L. Cpl. Mackay, Norman Findlay
10th Battalion . . . . 11251 Pte. Tombs, Percival (diaries James
„ „ .. .. 15795 Pte. Whiting, Leonard Chatham
11th Fid. Amb. .. .. 12700 Pte. Bond, John Alexander
„ „ . . . . 9726 Pte. Joy, Alfred Ernest Newland
„ „ .. .. 72 L. Cpl. Mason, William Edward
„ „ .. .. 12792 Pte. Wood, Thomas Beal
12th Fid. Amb. .. .. 13594 L. Cpl. Boyes, John Charles
„ . . .. 8981 Cpl. Cameron, John James
1810 Pte. Cotterell, Leslie
„ ~ .. .. 8069 Sgt. Galbraith, William Shakespeare
13th Fid. Amb. .. .. 14712 Pte. Callaghan, Patrick Joseph
„ „ . . . . 3086 L. Sgt. Milne, Robert Ernest
„ „ .. .. 15872 Pte. Verey, Roland Frederick
14th Fid. Amb 13584 Pte. Acworth, M.M., Walter C<
13584 Pte. Acworth, M.M., Walter Cornelius
„ „ . . . . 2019 Pte. Springbett, Edward Herbert
15th Fid. Amb. . . . . 10447 Pte. Godfrey, Edward
Ist A.D.H. .. .. .. 9126 Sgt. Blackburn, Joseph
„ . . .. .. 3668 Pte. Robinson, George
2nd A.G.H. . . .. .. 13615 Pte. Hossack, Archibald
„ .. .. .. 22012 Pte. Medhurst, Thomas William
11863 Pte. Tuffin, Frederick Robert
7Bl L. Cpl. Webb, John Edgar
3rd A.G.FI ... . . . . 9414 Pte. Down, Ernest
13667 Pte. Weir, Albert John
„ .. .. .. 5045 L. Cpl. Breach, Arthur Henry John
„ .. .. .. 5415 L. Cpl. Hood, Edward James
A.I.F. Dep. ill U.K. .. 13849 Pte. Seaton, C. P.
2nd San. Sect. .. .. 12964 Pte. Inglis, William Walker
3rd San. Sect. .. .. 12953 L. Cpl. M'Bride, William
.. 12957 L. Cpl. Scott, Edwin
2nd C.C.S. . . . . . . 7461 L. Cpl. Hards, Edwin George
7321 L. Sgt. M'Kenzie, Harry Gabriel
3rd C.C.S. . . .. .. 9234 Pte. Shepard, Owen George
A.M.C. Details .. .. 13947 Sgt. Fraser, Archie William
426 Cpl. Stafford, M.M., Michael
OFFICERS.
26th Battalion .. .. Lieut. Harry, M.C., M.M. and Bar, Gilbert
6th F.A.B. . . . . . . Lieut. Mac George, Horace Stanley
2nd D.S.C. . . . . . . Capt. Tinkler, M.C., Frederick Asher John
2nd Tun. Coy. . . . . Capt. Phippard, Frederick George
A.A.N.C. .. . . . . Capt. Finney, William Henry
13th L. Horse .. .. Lieut. Vallence, Packington Joseph
17th Battalion . . . . Lieut. Ford, Robert Paul
18th Battalion . . . . Lieut. Belcher, M.C., Edmund
20th Battalion . . Lieut. Elkington, M.C., Walter Howard
26th Battalion . . . . Lieut. Biden, Harold Ernest
„ „ .. .. Lieut. Milner, Ernest
„ „ . . . . Lieut. Solomon, Harold Isaac
4th F.A.B. .. .. .. Lieut. Martin, Geoffrey William
7th F.A.B. . . . . . . Lieut. Crowley, M.M., Brian Hurtle
„ .. . . . . Lieut. Crane, Frank Leslie
„ . . . . . . Lieut. Harnett, Allan Maurice
„ . . . . .. Lieut. Williams, D.C.M., John
2nd D.A.C. .. . . .. Lieut. Anstey, Alexander Gidley li.
„ . . .. .. Lieut. Kelsall, Arthur Gordon
Ist S. Bat. (36th H.A.8.) . . Lieut. M'Master, Alroy Fisher
A. Cyc. Battalion . , .. Lieut. Ward, William Joseph
2nd Div. Train .. .. Lieut. Cox, M.C., Edward Richard
2nd A.F.C. .. .. .. Lieut. Johnson, Alfred William
„ .. .. .. Lieut. Mackenzie, Charles Roy
2nd Pioneer Battalion . . Lieut. Ride, M.C., John
2nd D.S.C. . . . . . . Lieut. Blunt, Harry Stephen
„ .. . . . . Lieut. Price, M.C., Jack Cedric
„ . . . . . . Lieut. Price, Thomas Malcolm
18th Battalion . . . . Lieut. Sutton, Cecil Lorainne
24th Battalion . . . . Lieut. Klaus, Max William
„ „ . . . . Lieut. Peck, Archer
26th Battalion . . .. Lieut. Kennedy, Wil
Lieut. Kennedy, William Nicholas
Lieut. Fairlie, Eric Wilfred
„ „ .. .. Lieut. Concannon, John Thomas
4th F.A.B. .. .. .. Lieut. Rosengarten, Leo. Jubille Gersham
7th F.A.B. .. . . . . Lieut. Browning, Francis Bernard
27th Battalion . . . . Lieut. Sells, Miles Francis De Grave
P.S.L. . . . . . . Capt. Edmonds, Ernest John Leslie


3rd Battalion
stli Battalion
10th Battalion
12th Battalion
17th Battalion
11 11
11 11
18th Battalion
11 11
11 11
ii :i
ii ii
ii ii
20th Battalion
11 ii
11 11
NOMINAL
DIVISION INFANTRY.
65765 Pte. Ilutt, Stanley William
6886 Pte. Smith, Rupert Jack
7468 Pte. Dawe, Alfred Blair
7504 Cpl. Jacob, Robert Cooper
6232 Pte. Baker, Robert
4683 Pte. Brown, Walter Benjamin
4359 Cpl. Barringham, Horace
2334 Pte. Bellew, Thomas Christopher
4676 Pte. Carter, William Henry
1685 Pte. Crotliers, Warwick Erie
5560 Pte. Dailies, Harry Charles
6012 Cpl. Endicott, Eli
5815 Cpl. Fox, Eric
6657 Pte. Hilton, Alexander
59052 Pte. Jesson. John Frederick
4759 Pte. Ivnust, Sidney Arthur
5371 Pte. Lamprell, Samuel
59083 Pte. M'Kcnzie, Norman.
7167 Pte. M'Callum, Leslie
6843 L. Cpl. Mott, Harold Angus
5671 L. Cpl. Murray, Stanley
5381 Pte. Mullins, Robb James
1063 I'te. M'Lean, William Bethel
59086 Pte. O'Hehir, Emanuel John
7091 Pte. O'Brien, Charles
6849 Pte. Phillips, Laurie Allan
5387 Pte. Quinn, James Arthur
5625 Pte. Rose, William Arthur
5313 L. Cpl. Rollan, Alexander Beach
6813 Pte. Spring, Gerald Arthur
5646 Pte. Taylor, Albert George Victor
5432 Pte. Williams, John
5107 Pte. White, Charles Edward
6875 Pte. White, Sydney John
4776 Pte. Allen, Harry
3794 Sgt. Butt, Edwin Frank
4622 Pte. Chinnock, Thomas
1 Sgt. Chapman, John
6920 Pte. Deans, George Rutherford
4786 Cpl. Dennis, Roy
4603 I'te. Donohue, M.M., Thomas Arthur
4412 Pte. Donohue, Patrick Albert
4117 Pte. Enright, John Thomas
5452 Pte. Gilchrist, Douglas Gordon
4841 Pte. Horton, Leslie Oliver Stanley
4796 Pte. Hopwood, William
5815 Cpl. Jones, M.M., William Myles
6707 Pte. M'Gowan, Alfred Charles
6356 Pte. Mercer, George James
4498 Pte. M'Kenzie, Kenneth
5671 Dvr. Putland, George Reginald
4808 Pte. Russell, George Victor Thomas
3585 Pte. Rundle, Cyril
1040 Pte. Ringrose, William Harold
59277 Pte. Solway, Frederick Reubin
6391 Pte. Scott, Frederick Bailey
4766 Pte. Sayle, Albert George
3951 Pte. Stevenson, Walter Hunter
7152 Pte. Williams, Ellas
5119 Pte. Walker, Harry William George
6057 Pte. Butler, William Yeoman
5536 Pte. Bass, Frederick John
1683 L. Cpl. Crawford, James
5566 L. Cpl. Cousins, Atlial Young
5551 Pte. Chin, Henry James
5320 I'te. Cameron, William Angus Stanley
842 Pte. M'Lean, Thomas William
5808 L. Cpl. Chauncy, Oliver Curtis
5328 Pte. Dean, William Joseph
6082 Pte. Davis, Stanley Edward
5330 Pte. Dickerson, William Lee
6334 Pte. Ewer, Henry Joseph
5033 Pte. Garner, William Harold Claude
4554 Pte. Hayr, Thomas James
4457 Pte. Hayes, George
1055 Cpl. Jones, Sydney Alfred Burgess
5044 Pte. Kennedy, John James
947 Pte. Lake, Robert Ashley
1305 Pte. M'Mahon, Martin Francis
2204 Pte. Milne, William
152 Pte. Pearson, Wilfred John
6600 Pte. Power, Robert
2970 Cpl. Ross, M.M., Chas. Joseph Leslie
5055 Pte. Rae, Ronald Thomas
6578 Pte. Shawman, Frederick James
ROLL — con tinned.
Ist Division Infantry— continued.
20th Battalion . . .. 5087 Pte. Stutsel, James
4775 Pte. Serry, John Charles
„ .. 4//0 lie. deny, aoiin i.uanes
„ . . , . 690 Pte. Thompson, John Cyril
„ . . , . ran i-ie. mompson, jonu i.yrn
„ . . 6943 Pte. Taylor, Thomas Fred. Septimus
„ „ .. .. ra-m me. layior, 1 nomas rn
„ , . . . . 6666 L. Cpl. Waghorn, Joseph
„ , .. .. noon i.. i..pi. wagnorn, aosepn
„ „ . . .. 5422 Pte. Wiseman, William Fletcher
21st Battalion . . 5874 Pte. Magrath, John Joseph
685 Pte. Stuart, Harry
~ yy . . . . 00«7 J It. ijllull lidlt J
„ „ . . .. 2400 Pte. Toohey, Harold William
22nd Battalion . . . . 4973 Pte. Allen, Robert George
50009 Pte. llowcr, William John Albert
~ yy . . . . llt/UUI/ 1 It. DUWtI, VV J. 111 Cl 1 11 t) U
„ „ . . 4984 Cpl. Bodeworth, Lionel
~ ~ .. .. v .pi. DUUKwm ui, mi
„ „ . . . 4982 Pte. Black, Herbert
„ ~ . . . . +VOZ I'll'. OlilClY, lICIHI'I I
„ „ .. A 3276 Pte. Berry, Michael
„ . . Ai)£io i'ie. r>eny, ivucnaei
„ „ . . .. 4370 Cpl. Bohn, Andrew
5450 Pte. Cleary, James Joseph
~ ~ . . . . ti-riiu i ie. Viieaiy, eictiiico dusi.|iii
„ . . . . 5448 Pte. Charlesworth, Thos. Hammond
„ „ .. .. O-t-FO l ie. Vrllt'l UI 111, 111173. Hill
„ ~ . . .. 4687 Pte. Capuano, Francis Harold
„ . . . . 400/ i'te. napuano, ri.
„ „ . . .. 4424 Dvr. Evans, Eric
i „ „ . . .. 4424 Dvr. Evans, Eric
„ „ . . 61853 Pte. Foord, Herbert Wallace
4449 Cpl. Gregory, Percival Thomas
yy yy .. .. 44451 l<pi. VJ JLC gUJ. J, J llllv cl 1 1 llUillii
(R.T.A. "Rio Negro")
„ „ . . . . A 3306 Pte. Greenway, John Saunders
yy . , . . AtluVll i iv. viivvnwuj, uduricivi .
„ „ . . . . 4362 Pte. Hanks, Frederick Norris
„ „ . . 4723 Cpl. Hughes, William Edward
5123 Pte. Hawkswortli, James
yy yy .. . . .) I 2..) 1 11. 11 (1 VV 1\ SVI O 1 111.,
(R.T.A. "Rio Negro")
„ ~ . . 51403 Pte. Linguist, Charles Edward
„ . . .. 4479 Pte. Ladd, Alfred Henry
(R.T.A. "Rio Negro")
51405 Pte. Lewis, Edward
yy yy . . . . 51405 Pte. Lewis, Edward
„ . . . . 50098 Pte. M'Leod, John Bedford
~ . . . . tIURi/O I 11« .VI IjvUUf <ll4llll 1 11 U
„ .. .. 5395 Cpl. M'Donald, Ronald
~ ~ . . . . «)<7«7«) I. 1 7 I . iVJ 171 /1 I< I 111, ItDlulltl
(R.T.A. "Rio Negro")
„ „ . . . . 5391 Pte. Murphy, William Frank
„ ~ .. .. I PIC. iVllil J4liy, VVJ 1 I 11( 11 1 lld
„ „ . . . . 5403 Pte. Reeds, Percy Robert
„ ~ . . . . illUi) I If. I\UI7U3, I fill IlDDfl I
„ „ . . . . 4547 Sgt. Sturrock, Frank M'Donald
~ „ . . . . 4.44 / Ot;i. Ol 111 1 17L1V, 11(11111
„ „ . . . . 4546 Sgt. Sturrock, Arthur
„ .. .. 4;)4i> ogi. oiiurocK, muiui
„ . . . . 5096 Pte. Tait, William Alexander
~ . . . . «)U540 I If. J. (I 11, VV 1111(1111 .lllAdl
... 50184 Pte. White, John George
5434 Pte. Weatherall, George Reginald
, ~ . . . . .44.44 1 If. Wfillllfltlll, VICDlgf llf-j
„ ~ . . . . 4799 Sgt. West, F'rancis Stephen
(R.T.A. "Rio Negro")
23rd Battalion . . .. 6772 Pte. Brookman, Richard
4668 Pte. Brown, Robert
„ .. .. anno i if. DUIHII, nuuii i
„ . . . . 4665 Pte. Brooks, Willie
~ ~ . . . . 4014.4 I 11. 1)117\71\3, VV II I 1 1.
„ „ . . 5007 Pte. Dickson, Frederick
~ „ . . .. 4394 Pte. Eriksson, Cecil
5036 Pte. Howell, Walter Francis
~ „ .. .. ouoo i'ie. noweij, wane. ri.nii.ia
„ ~ . . . . 4713 Pte. Haverfleld, Louis Tunstall
~ „ .. .. 4711 Sgt. Harris, Harry Arthur
„ „ . . . . 6852 Pte. Healey, Norman Stanley Parker
5614 Pte. Hunt, Harold Chas. Percival
4114 Pte. Horton, Arthur Edward
„ „ . .. A 6877 Pte. Jukes, Frank Richard
4719 Pte. Johnstone, John Alexander
yy ~ . . . . 41 It/ 1 11. II'JIIIIMOIII,
.. .. 6841 Pte. Lee, Albert
.. 61896 Pte. Muir, Robert Kitchener
„ .. .. oaouo | U'. iviuir, nuii.i i imilhuiu
„ . . . 6453 Pte. Milward, Herbert Leslie
5144 Pte. May, Arthur Sidford
„ .. .. ui-w- i'te. iviay, manor oiuioru
~ .. 5118 L. Cpl. Matthews, Frank Leonard
~ . , . • ») 110 Jj. |)l. iVI dlllll \V Is, I I cl 11 Iv Dlt
„ „ . . . . 5062 Pte. M'Kenzie, Mark George
„ „ . . . . i'te. ivi iwiizic, ivizu iv c
„ . . . . A 6927 Pte. Phelan, Raymond
yy ~ .. .. .-vuy,<s/ i'ie. i iieiaii, i\ay inuiiu
~ „ . . . . 5073 Pte. Parker, M.M., Charles Harling
yy . . . . ou/o i'ie. rariver, ivi.ivi.,
„ . . . . 6880 Pte. Rusk, George
„ „ . . . . noon i'ie. lausiv, ueoige
„ , . . . . 4766 Pte. Rodgers, Herbert Leslie
4765 Pte. Rayner, James
„ „ . . . . 4763 Cpl. Romaine-Twyford, James
4550 Pte. Rogers, George
yy .y . . . • *T «7t 7 W 1 ll ■ 1\ I) I- 13, HID' I
„ „ .. .. A 4511 Pte. Tweedle, William Henry
~ „ .. .. miaii i'ie. iweeuie, vvniuun riciuj
„ „ . . .. 61945 Pte. Williams, Raymond Harvey
7329 Pte. Wright, Alan
„ „ .. .. oiza me. wriguc, man
„ „ .. .. 3964 Pte. Wyllie, Edwin John
24th Battalion . . 4292 Cpl. Artis, John
4292 Cpl. Artis, John
.. A 6778 Pte. Bayne, John
„ „ .. .. .VO//0 i'ie. nayne, jouu
„ „ . . . 6778 Pte. Batson, James
„ „ . . . Of IO J LC. DtllbUil, ddllllh
„ „ . . 6767 Pte. Barnett, David
„ „ . . o/n/ i'ie. jDarneii, uiivm
6286 Pte. Burns, Robert Albert Williams
„ .. .. 02:00 i'ie. oiuiib, nuHi-i 1 niDt i t vviii
„ „ . . .. 5966 L. Cpl. Bisney, Percival Robert
yy .. .. «)t7OO nllvj , 1 vlflDll 111/l/VI 1
„ „ . . .. 5551 Pte. Bedson, Reginald Thomas
„ „ . . . . 0001 l ie. Dfiibuu, ncgniti
„ . . .. 5123 Pte. Barry, Charles
yy yy . . - . «) 1£ « J 1 If. D(HI J, LIIUU US
„ „ . . . . 4664 Pte. Brown, Thomas
~ ~ . . . . -100-F I If. DIDWII, lliuilld
„ . . .. 3760 Pte. Bolton, Frank
~ .. .. D/OU rif. ouiiuii, i lIDHV
~ . . .. 5572 Pte. Donnellan, Edward James
yy yy , , . . <7(7 / I ll • 1717 111 IVII Ij J VIV* (( I Vt. fl (
~ . . .. 4096 Pte. Davis, Joseph Albert


NOMINAL ROLL — continued.
Ist Division Infantry— continued. Ist Division Inlantry— continued.
24th Battalion .. .. 5019 Pte. Fleming, David Alexander 26th Battalion .. .. 2700 Cpl. Mackay, Arthur William
4690 Pte. Foster, Lawrence Edwin
. . A 7232 Pte. Goodall, Archibald
7233 Pte. Gosling, Fred.
3820 Pte. Godber, Herbert Alfred
„ „ . . . . ,)oeu rie. uoaner, nernerr -Allreu
„ ~ . . . . 6828 Pte. Hansen, Ova Carl John
5833 Pte. Haisman, Stephen
„ „ . . . . lie. ilaisnul ll, orepneu
„ „ .. .. 5151 L. Cpl. Hermon, Lancelot
5123 Sgt. Hoyle, D.C.M., Samuel
5032 Pte. Hollis, Arthur Edward
4438 Pte. Holloway, Norman Thomas
„ „ .. .. *-±oo vie. rioiiowity, ANUIIUCUI niu
„ ~ .. . . 470 Pte. Holyhead, Charles Eric
3851 Pte. Johnston, Robert Martin
5859 Cpl. Loveless, Albert Richard
4751 Pte. Love, John
„ . . . . 4/;>i vie. lxove, joiin
„ , . .. 4578 Pte. Leslie, Joseph
„ , . . . -K)/o vie. vesiie, aosepii
~ . . .. 6866 Pte. M'Donald, Wallace Robert
~ . . . . 0000 i LC. ivi jjonaiu, vvauace rumen
~ . . .. 5379 Pte. Masenhelder, Ernest George
4733 Pte. Mills, Percy Cyril
\2921 Cpl. Moore, M.M., Walter John
„ „ . . .\ juji (.pi. Moore, ivi.ivi., waiier jonn
„ „ .. 2404 Dvr. Mitchell, Kenneth George ltobt.
6867 Pte. Osborne, Joseph
. . A 6873 Pte. Pounsett, Alfred John
„ „ . . . . .( no/ A me. I'ouuseii, iiiuvu a
„ „ 6076 Pte. Plunkett, Thomas
„ „ ou/o nc. 1 1 1111KCL1, (111
„ „ ■ . . . 4501 Pte. Pitts, Joseph
„ .. .. ioni me. mils, aosepn
~ . . . . 4495 Pte. Parsons, Harry
5687 Pte. Read, John William
„ „ .. .. ono/ l ie. neau, .JUIIII vvxiiiaiii
~ .. .. 5414 Pte. Ryan, John David James
" r ' > • «-»-■ xxjiui, wvxxx.i ' xv*
5413 Pte. Ryan, Gordon Douglas Duncan
5686 Sgt. Stafford, James Agnen
5086 Pte. Soundry, William John
„ „ .. .. dUou vie. ouumiiy, vviiiiam .JUIIII
„ „ . . .. 4802 Pte. Stewart, Ormonde Houison
„ „ .. .. oouz i ll . otewail, wniioiiue n
„ ~ . . 4525 Pte. Seholefield, Richard
5919 Pte. Tweedle, Henri
4783 Pte. Twycross, Samuel Alfred
„ „ .. .. vie. lwycross,
„ ~ .. .. 5113 Pte. Wood, John
~ „ .. .. ALIO vie. W uuu, -JUIIII
„ „ . . . . 5104 Pte. Webster, Hubert Horatio
536 Pte. West, William John
„ „ .. uao i'ie. wen, wiiiiaiu jonn
25th Battalion . . . . 2261 Cpl. Holt, Charles Herbert
5073 Pte. Stevens, James Henry
„ ~ . . . . OU it) I lv. OILVAIIO, ddlllLS riciii^
26th Battalion . . . . 5892 L. Cpl. Adams, D.C.M., David James
5528 Pte. Allen, George
„ . . . . OOISO J'le. Alien, vrcurge
„ . . .. 4972 Pte. Anderson, Edmund Lamington
„ „ . . . . z vie. Aiiuersoii, vauiuiia liciiiiinyi
„ , .. .. 6524 L. Cpl. Brown, Frederick Horace
~ „ ... 6042 Pte. Baxter, John
„ .. .. 5799 Pte. Bulled, John Vearcombe
4673 Pte. Brumpton, Arthur Herbert
4366 C.Q.M.S. Brown, Stuart Gordon
4083 Pte. Riddle, Leslie Herbert
2775 Pte. Barrett, William Joseph
, „ .. .. ///;) vie. varreii, winiam .10
, . .. 2459 Pte. Batterworth, Frank
1621 Pte. Bellingham, William Dennis
6233 Pte. Carver, Frank James
~ .. D2M t'te. r.arver, r rauK .jarr
~ .. 6055 Pte. Charteris, Thomas
„ .. .. ouoo vie. onariens, 1 nomas
„ .. .. 5814 Pte. Carrie, Henry Waxen
5812 Pte. Crawley, Walter Bede
5560 Pte. Connole, M.M., Patrick Joseph
5557 Pte. Cuddy, William Martin
4712 Dvr. Clark, Frederick John
.. 4407 Pte. Cokley, John
.. C 3623 Sgt. Chase, Charles Harold
1001 Pte. Caves, Raymond Thomas
503 Pte. Gorbett, Reginald James
5011 Pte. Duguid, William Lorimer
„ .. .. oUiJ nte. uuguia, wuiiam Lonmcr
. . A 2777 Pte. Davies, M.M., Walter Percy
508 Dvr. Drury, David
„ „ . . . ouo uvr. mrui \, uavni
„ ~ .. .. 6813 Pte. Godfrey, Ray Hamleton
6072 Pte. Goodhew, William George
660 Pte. Geeves, Robert Charles
5607 Pte. Haupt, Ernest
5349 Pte. Heathcote, Albert
„ . . . . osty l ie. neaincoie, wineri
„ .. .. 6446 Pte. Johnson, Walter Joseph
„ . . . . ivrro me. .lonnson, waiter viosepn
„ .. .. 5360 Pte. Johnstone, Lawrence Leo
„ „ . . . . ooou 1 le. iionnsione, LAWRENCE LCU
„ . . . . 4811 Pte. Jackson, William Alexander
4724 Pte. Johnson, Frederick
896 Pte. Johnson, Thomas
~ „ .. .. ouo vie. joiinsoii, 1 nomas
„ „ . .. 5363 Cpl. Kent, Reuben Henry
„ „ . . . 0000 1-pi. iveni, aeiiDen nenry
„ ~ .. 6168 Pte. Lace, Walter Edward Morrison
6101 Pte. Llewellyn, Thomas Arthur
„ . . . . oiui vie. Liiewenyn, inomas mm
„ .. . . 5670 Pte. Liddell, Reginald Inglis
919 Pte. Lynch, Horace Stanton
„ „ .. .. »iy rie. nyncn, norace .vianron
„ „ .. . . 4064 C.S.M. M'Grcgor, Wallace Neil
~ ~ . . . . 4Uo*i ix.o.ivi. ivi ijiegoi, vv ciuace i\en
„ „ . . . . 4183 Sgt. M'Allan, M.M., John Thomas
5876 Pte. M'Cur ran, Thomas Patrick
99 99
99 99
99 99
730 Pte. Malartic, Armand
2699 Pte. Mills, William John
3711 Dvr. Maloney, Michael
" .. .. 3974 Pte. Matthews, Moses
" " .. .. 4172 Pte. Magner, Joseph Edward
„ . . . . HcLIA A AC. X»ACIi-,IICA, ouovirii w«ru
5044 Pte. Murrin, George Lawrence
~ „ . . . . outt A to. mtuiiii, J
5865 Pte. Maloney, Joseph
„ . . . dOUd A LC• iIICIACJACJ, unovini
.. 6623 Pte. Nugent, Matthew
~ „ .. .. A It, iUlftClil., XTACIVVA
„ , . . . . 6355 Pte. Nibbs, Albert
" ,' .. .. 4857 Sgt. Oldham, Gilbert John
. . . . tOd/ Civixxciiii, uuue. i «vixxx»
5095 Pte. Pilcher, Arthur Gladstone
99 . . . . dUdil A lA. A iIAUVI, uiuuoiviiv
.. A 6184 Pte. Schotield, Frederick James
" . . . . 5918 Pte. Surawski, Bernard Joseph
ff .. ~ UUAO A LC. OIAA Cl W olAl, lJAlxuuu u vx.
5910 L. Cpl. Shaw, John Melton
„ „ . • • • d»IU Ax. UjJl. OAACIW, OUllll iliwryii
„ . . .. 5447 Pte. Stuart, Henry Arthur
.)■*-*/ 1 LC. dllUUl, 41AU1J
4201 Pte. Sorley, Stanley Arthur
99 ~ . , . . A 1V... OVAAACJ, uvcmi^j
.. C 3770 Pte. Scandrett, John Thomas
99 . . . . CiO/ IV A LC. JAailUlVll., f villi inoinn
9 [ 99 .. .. 2989 Pte. Straker, Herbert Walter
~ „ . . . . iii/Gd A LL. JllillVAl, lli/llliii I? UIIVJ.
5531 Pte. Thomason, Charles Elkington
. . . . dddJ A LA. llivuiaoviii, niuuivo
5110 Pte. Thorn, Montague Manning
4525 Pte. Thompson, Robert William
3 , . . . . tOAO A AA. A 11V111J[10V111,' XIVIXXXKXV »T .
5089 Cpl. Usher, Ralph Richard
„ „ •• .lUO V La-jaala, ■ L.VW.IAAA.
. . A 4244 Pte. Uridge, Henry Stephen
"■ .. 7129 Pte. Wilson, Eric Cowley
. . . 6399 Pte. Weidon, Patrick James
„ .. .. 5693 Pte. Warren, ueorge
5580 Pte. Wragge, George Stanley
~ .. .. ddOH J LC. VV UlggA, VACVAI.S'- DUlll IVJ
5429 Pte. Westbrook, Albert Charles Amos
4909 Pte. Wall, John Airly
„ „ . . . . *VMV A LC. VV CIIA, UUAlll iAUIJ
4557 Sgt. Williamson, William Edward
, 9 ~ . . . . tdd I OtjL. il lAlKllllovii, " Jiiiuiu
„ „ . . .. 4249 Cpl. Wotherspoon, Hubert
27th"Battalion . . . . 6521 Sgt. Aldersey, Ralph Mortimer
5416 Dvr. Attrill, Short Stirling
" " . . . . 5548 Sgt. Agars, Robert Franklin
1504 Pte. Barry, William Henry
aoo. TU 1> 14 All 1- IT A...
6221 Pte. Burzacott, Albert Edward
< . , . 1 A LA. A» II 1 X/tIAV 11, ixiiivi A "Cl w n
5561 Pte. Burke, Michael Gregory
9t . . . . 00\) I A LC. II All IV V , IHIVIICIAI vxxv.^vxxj
4387 Pte. Bryant, Frederick Wm.
6218 Pte. Brand, Harry
~ „ •• • too/ A LA. AXIJIIIIV, XlLVll-xi^lv
6218 Pte. Brand, Harry
" " . . .. 5312 Pte. Bishop, Ernest Edward Robinson
. . . . 0016 J LC. IAI»11UJA, 151 LLAOL J^VIVTCXAV
5541 Pte. Barrington, Glen Roy
. . . . .).)•+! A LC. Utll 1 lII.SLUII, VIAU 11UJ
" .. 1672 Cpl. Chappel, John Henry
„ . . . . IMI4 Villi. AiXliipilVl, vi 1111
' „ . ■ • • 5325 Cpl. Coat, Charles
99 99 . . . . ddZd ViJ[J 1. VlUcll, VillllLlAO
6230 Pte. Craven, Albert Henry
99 99 . . . . 1 LV . VHILV AII, /IH'AAL A
6056 Cpl. Crocker, Claude
~ ~ .. 0000 Vipi. ViAMAIWI, VAACIUVIV-
„ .. . . 5330 Cpl. Dawe, M.M., Albert Leslie
4418 Pte. Ellis, Robert Clarence Richard
99 . . . . -I-110 I LC. AVDIJAI L VllCl
2140 Sgt. Eldridge, Ernest
~ . . . . I 5 1"TO i)f,L. li'Vll id lIAOL
5985 Pte. Eagle, Franklyn Horace
99 „ . . . . OVOO A LV7. A Aillin
5440 Pte. Forgie, John
99 , . , . «!•*-*U A LV'. A til I,IA, '' VIAIII
5337 Pte. Feder, Adolf John
99 . . .. 000 l I LC. 1 CVICA, a'VVIVA 1 A .1111111
4712 Pte. Fuller, Broughton Ruel
99 99 . . . . -t I 1 A LA. A LIAIAI , 111 illl^iiiuii
4122 Pte. Gully, Arthur Henry Thomas
99 99 . . . . -1 A LC. VA II 1A J , All 111 111 i"
, „ . . .. 5580 Pte. Griffey, Patrick
„ „ . . . . dilOl; A LC. UIIIICJ, A 4111 'vxv
5581 Pte. Griffin, Martin Joseph
99 99 . . . . .A.JO 1 A LC. VA A IXXXII, XTXCIXI.I.I
4715 Sgt. Giddiugs, Valentine Ray
„ .. .. tl 111 VAfeL. VAIUUXIIftO, »»XVI.L
2414 Pte. Gaskin, Royden
I IV. VI ct SIVI 11, ALVAJ VACIA
| . . . . 62316 Pte. Hutchinson, Ernest Edmund
99 .. .. OASOiO 1 LC. AA LLLCAII II JUII, x
2469 Pte. Hoar, Richard Terry
99 ~ . , . . a4Di7 A LC. AAVAcII, AIIAAHU u Aex 1J
5591 Pte. Hill, James Beaumont
5353 Pte. Harrison, James Henry
„ . .. 0000 l li. lidiiiauu, i'vuij
A 1737 Dvr. Harcourt, George Henry
„ .. .. .41/0/ AAV I. AAlll CULIX A, vl A\7X o
6258 Cpl. Hall, Wm. Gifford
99 99 . . . . Vj|R . AAclAl, \\ All. VA 111 VAX VI
5324 L. Cpl. Jones, William Rossiter
5595 L. Cpl. Jewell, Rupert George
.. .. \J> VupA. UU)^ll
403 Pte. M'Queen, Joseph
99 99 . . , . TU.) V LA. Nx vt uoovjin
6532 L. Cpl. M'Cormick, John
~ „ . ■ • - 000-i (.. V 'l'l. -O '. ' MI K i\, -I "111J
.. 4743 Pte. Manuel, Alfred Ernest
„ „ .. .. I/IO A
, . . .. 6289 Pte. Marsh, Charles
~ . . . . I >_oo A LV.. " 1 v.
1680 Pte. Matthews, George James
~ „ .. .. AOOU ALVA. HA.ILLAAV.WO, .l .AI 11 V O
5442 Pte. Montgomerie, M.M., H. Leonard
„ • • • • 0446 A LC. UIDIH.SUIIIV.XXV, ITX.XTX., XX. 11l
5385 Cpl. Moore, Leonard Frederick
99 ~ . . . . dOOe) Aixuuxv, nvuiuuvu X XVAVIV^AXV.
2438 Sgt. Murphy, James Andrew
„ ~ . . . . iTOO D5l. Nx ux pxxj , ""uxvo iiimivvi
5054 Pte. Moore, William Donald
99 . . . . OUU4: L LC. aXXVAVAXv., tt XXXICIXXX x
6306 Pte. Newberry, Harry
, , , . . OOUl) A LC. ItCViDCII J, XIiUX j
5910 Cpl. Owen, Harold Hugh
„ „ . . . . OUIU CJJA. v/vvcii, liiuuiu xxvi&xx
5126 C.Q.M.S. Pearson, Joseph Archibald
~ .. .. ,)UO VA.y.iU.vJ. a cell nun, -luov!
5637 Pte. Read,. Hurtle John
„ „ .. .. 000/ A LC. IVCCA.VI,. A A VIA VIV OUIIU
5400 Cpl. Stephens, Philip Leslie West
. . . . ,)4:OU VAIAI. U VCJALLCLLO, A 1111141 HVOLLV
6643 Pte. Smith, Percival George
~ . . . . 0010 A VL. LAAIAA AAA, A LAVHU. V^^V.LV,L.
6021 L. Cpl. Smith, Wilfred Gordon
62360 Pte. Smith, Cyril Emanuel
4225 Pte. Teakle, John Alfred
„ .. .. iZZJ LLC. IA.A L\ I A . -J V.l t I I
5412 Pte. Wood, Harry
• . A Tlt'l) VAJ,L.ITX A 1 llall, UIAIUA, IJUIIII lliuillua ~ ~ . " •• I/.. 7 .
5638 Pte. M'Cormack, Francis James i „ .. •• 4545 Pte. Wharton, John Emanuel Kean
5876 Pte. M'Curran, Thomas Patrick 28th Battalion .. .. 5632 Sgt. Monger, Wesley Edward
50642 Pte. Sherwood, Charles .Tas. Wm. C.
4058 Sgt. Ford, Robert
5632 Sgt. Monger, Wesley Edward


NOMINAL
DIVISION INFANTRY.
7251 Pte. Hardman, John Joseph
2335 Pte. Hedger, Alfred William
2549 Pte. Clark, Albert Edward
61885 Pte. Kerr-Davidson, James William
DIVISION INFANTRY.
A 3778 Pte. Howell, Claude Cootc
DIVISION INFANTRY.
57585 Pte. Buhner, Escott Gordon
1675 Pte. Hollands, Frederick Arthur
7302 Pte. Wright, Stanley Bryant
ARTILLERY.
33912 Bdr. Rice, George Mulholland
27533 Gnr. Ainslie, George Mills
30702 Gnr. Bell, Kenneth David
11564 B.Q.M.S. Broomfield, Harry
1766 Dvr. Blair, Richard
12858 Dvr. Brooks, Frederick Roy
32987 Dvr. Cairow, Arthur Oakley
6245 Gnr. Christie, Ernest
30241 Dvr. Gornwell, Horace Fred. Samuel
34727 Cpl. Groxon, Francis Allan
2009 Dvr. Daldry, George Alfred William
6332 Gnr. Davies, Edward Stanley
31232 Dvr. Davy, Thomas William
1835 Dvr. Doubleday, William George
10152 Gnr. Evcringham, Cecil Grant
28737 Dvr. Fatchen, Leonard John
11843 Gnr. Gemmell, Roy Beaumont
2012 Dvr. Gooey, William
32336 Cpl. Green, George Claridge
32910 Dvr. Harvey, Thomas Henry
34755 Gnr. Henderson, Robert
35524 Gnr. Howard, James Colin
17152 Bdr. Jackel, Arthur Gordon
25609 Dvr. James, Harry
29300 Dvr. Johnson, Herbert Albert
53345 Dvr. Junor, William Richmond
26373 Gnr. King, Vincent John
30024 Dvr. Klippel, Clarence Llewelyn
31373 Gnr. Larard, Thomas Walton
26416 Dvr. Lawson, Maxwell James
27897 Gnr. Marshall, Herbert Clarence
30801 Gnr. Miller, John Thomas
22385 Bdr. Mollineaux, Douglas
15092 Gnr. Molloy, Patrick John
29323 Dvr. Mulhall, Noel
29983 Sgt. M'Nally, Frederick John
11588 Gnr. M'Pherson, Alexander
33530 Gnr. M'Rae, Harry
28571 Gnr. Oakes, Reginald Noel
6565 Gnr. Peck, Eliel Harold Huntingdon
27951 Gnr. Phillips, James Graham
29342 Gnr. Rabbidge, Rupert Cecil
30624 L. Bdr. Smith, Oliver Clarence Sid.
7002 Dvr. Stevens, Francis John
12409 Dvr. Stevens, John Charles
26440 Gnr. Tate, William John
29804 Dvr. White, Ernest
28289 Dvr. Wildish, Claude John Robert
456 Gnr. Williams, Ronald Robert Wm.
27523 Gnr. Worle, Harry
28762 Gnr. Allen, Thomas Joseph
27140 Bdr. Andrew, Maxwell
29242 Cpl. S.S. Armstrong, Henry Thomas
10952 S. Smith Bailey, Leslie Charles
8775 Dvr. Bell, Herbert Francis
32948 Gnr. Bowyer, Henry William
27646 Cpl. Brown, Rupert Calhoun
30556 Gnr. Cameron, Gordon Samuel Hill
26699 Bdr. Chapman, M.M., Chas. Barnard
29259 Cpl. Croarer, Richard Hawthorne
29063 Sgt. Daly, Lucien James
26442 Gnr. Dubos, Henry Lewis
25605 Dvr. Everingham, Henry Gliffe
27344 Bdr. Farrell, Thomas
25577 Dvr. Fisher, Stanley
30734 Dvr. Fogarty, Leslie John
28398 Gnr. Franck, Conrad Frederick Jas.
29276 Gnr. Franklin, Paul
30086 Bdr. Frederiksen, John
4786 Dvr. Gardiner, Charles Edward
29277 Dvr. Garnsey, Frank
26456 Dvr. Hamilton, James Kenneth W.
ROLL — continued.
Artillery— continued.
5 F.A.B 30255 Bdr. Hansard, Frank
3003 Gnr. Herrod, Samuel
15583 Gnr. Hider, Frederick George
12714 Dvr. Hourigan, Charles Walter
„ .. . . . . 29291 Sgt. Howard, Cicil Herbert
„ .. . .. 29738 Gnr. Jamieson, Richard Henry
„ .. . . .. 29298 Gnr. Jarvis, Frederick
„ .. .. .. 29299 Bdr. Johns, David Rupert
28149 Gnr. Johnson, Percy John
29302 Dvr. Kelly, Brian James
3007 Gnr. Mason, Clifton Glendennia
~ . . . . . . 12393 Dvr. Mather, Selbv Edward John
29316 Gnr. Meares, Stuart (). Devenish
„ .. .. .. 29110 Dvr. M'Loughlin, John Joseph
„ .. .. . . 15647 Gnr. Nott, Wilfred Ernest
„ .. . . .. 29337 Cpl. Pike, Errol Cathcart
„ .. . . . . 29341 Cpl. Quinn, Hugh
~ . . . . . . 28033 Dvr. Rankin, Robert
„ .. . . .. 26465 Cpl. Raymond, C. de G., Edward
29353 Dvr. Shapespear, Clement Edwin
„ .. .. .. 30005 Dvr. Sims, William Henry
29358 Gnr. Smith, Stuart Lance
6171 Dvr. Spilsbury, Norman Leslie
1851 Gnr. Starkey, William Thompson
29362 Dvr. Stevens, Vincent Joseph
~ .. .. .. 16133 Gnr. Townsend, Victor Roslyn
„ .. . . . . 28907 Dvr. Walsh, Douglas Norbert
„ .. . . . . 15626 Sgt. Waring, John Benedict
7 F.A.B. .. .. .. 19030 Bdr. Allen, Robin Albert George
30455 Dvr. Allum, Alfred Charles
„ .. .. .. 19032 Gnr. Anderson, James
„ . . . . . . 21495 Dvr. Anderson, John
~ . . . . . . 21916 Gnr. Andrews, M.M., Kenneth M'K. A
19038 Gnr. Barclay, David
21305 Dvr. Bell, Edward Charles
„ .. . . . . 19043 Dvr. Bragg, Ronald Clivc
~ .. .. .. 31689 Gnr. Brindal, Sydney Gordon
„ .. . . 22036 S. Smith Brook, John Herbert
„ .. . . . . 19042 Gnr. Buttsworth, Reginald Roy B.
2881 Dvr. Cain, John
„ .. .. . . 26519 Dvr. Carter, Frank Wallace
„ .. .. . . 19056 Dvr. Creech, Jack John
„ .. .. . . 19272 Bdr. Darragh, Thomas Frederick
„ .. .. .. 18557 Bdr. Deacon, Alfred James
~ .. . . . . 18558 Gnr. Deacon, Arthur Ernest
„ .. .. .. 19269 Sgt. Driver, Walter Frederick
~ .. .. .. 17144 Gnr. Gasnier, William John
„ .. .. .. 18462 Cpl. Gillon, Bertie Clarkson
„ .. .. .. 22010 Sgt. Griffin, George Maurice
„ .. . . . . 25361 Dvr. Hanson, Neils
„ .. . . . . 22277 Dvr. Hardy, Leslie Staince
19290 Dvr. Hiatt, Frank Edward
24464 Gnr. Hunter, James Arthur Carr
22258 Gnr. James, Clifford
34761 Dvr. Johnson, Bernard Frederick
22350 S.S. Cpl. Marshall, Bcn.j. Jennings
31930 Dvr. M'Gregor, Alexander Roberts-oil
32159 Dvr. M'Leod, Norman
19324 Bdr. M'Pherson, William
„ .. .. .. 18913 Sgt. O'Keefe, Francis Aloysius Jos.
32814 Dvr. Palmer, Walter Percy
22264 Gnr. Ramsey, Herbert Louis
19145 F. Sgt. Simpson, David
25380 Dvr. Smith, Aubrey John
18749 Sdl. Sgt. Tebay, Percy Herbert
~ .. . . . . 19370 Sgt. Thorn, Edwin Joseph
22299 Sgt. Venville, Archibald Joseph
38284 Sgt. Williams, Frank Norman Victor
„ .. . . . . 25571 Dvr. Wilson, Alan Hollier
8 F.A.B. .. .. .. 22111 S. Smith Adams, William
33851 Dvr. Arnold, John
14601 Dvr. Boulter, Walter John
20064 Gnr. Bristow, Leslie Luriel
20274 Dvr. Byron, Herbert Stanley
19965 Bdr. Carter, Howard Robert
34613 Gnr. Cooper, Richard
22121 Gnr. Dawson, Harry Templeton
20079 Sgt. Finlay, Robert Gordon
22127 Bdr. Frederick, Lambert
„ .. . . . . 20244 Gnr. Furrer, Frederick William
„ .. . . . . 20130 Sgt. Gathercole, William Robert
„ .. . . .. 29519 Gnr. Gogler, Philip Carl Alwyn
~ .. .. .. 22236 Gnr. Green, Lionel Hardwieke W.
„ . . . . . . 14638 Dvr. Hannah, Thomas Walker
~ .. .. .. 28297 Dvr. Hay, Rockie Bodget Julian
„ .. .. .. 20254 Gnr. Hyne, Percival Conrad
„ .. . .. 22939 Gnr. Jenman, Frank Bryant


NOMINAL ROLL — continued.
Artillery — continued.
Artillery— continued.
19707 Gnr. Liddle, James Harold
22169 Gnr. Male, Frederick
16043 Dvr. Miles, A uson Clyde
26363 Gnr. M'Kell, Edward Vaughan
19810 cp|. M < K i
nnon, Norman M'Leod
20186 s s Cpl. M'Laren, James Clarence
19576 Dvr. Neal, Albert William
33680 D vr. Pope, Harold
22096 Gnr. Ray, Francis Lynton
22215 Dvr. Rice, Henry Thomas
33961 Gnr. Roche, Vivian
19936 Dvr. Smith, Henry George
19824 Cpl. Smith, Sydney David
t}.? Dvr. Spencer, George Harold
22462 Swanton, William Edward
19942 ])vr. Watson, John Edwin
19943 Dvr. Watts, Aubrey William
19699 Dvr. White, Albert Christopher
33945 Gnr. Williams, Frederick
1987,) Sgt. Williams, John Roy
33894 Gnr. B rocker, Norman Shenstone
11935 Gnr. Cribbs, Matthew
Gnr. Maguire, Charles Robert
37733 Gnr. Jacques, George Charles
28581 Dvr. Allen, George Leslie
288.)! Dvr. Atkinson, John Gordon
29702 Dvr. Austin, Albert
Dvr. Bravery, George
t 677;> Dvr. Bravery, James Andrew
214,>2 Dvr. Brockman, Jack
2997 Bdr. Bucknall, Percy
Dvr. Campbell, Neil
12375 sgt. Coleman, Henry David
t Sgt. Cos stick, Philip Charles
22060 Bdr. Crawford, Hiram Allen
32926 Gnr. Crosbie, Joseph
28290 Dvr. Davison, Reginald William
10016 Gnr. Farmer, Percival Gilmore
26434 Gnr. Flood, Francis Vincent
18866 Gnr. Gates, Clement Hanlon
t 3750 Dvr. Giles, Bernard
28399 Dvr. Gordon, Howard Thomas
264;>3 Gnr. Gray, Jack Fraser
25895 Dvr. Heggen, Robert
-1550 Spr. Jamieson, William Wilson
27302 Gnr. Johnson, Stuart Amphlett
26501 Bdr. Kain, William John
33434 Dvr. Kent, Herbert
26683 Dvr. Kirk, Henry Clyde
3106 Bdr. Lake, Stanley Gordon
25409 Dvr. Lowe, William Arthur
29745 Bdr. MTntosh, Theodore Glen
33419 Dvr. Martin, Cedric Edward
26303 Gnr. Mayhew, Robert Henry
29752 Gnr. Miles, Keith Lyttleton
12392 Sgt. Mollineaux, Eric
195 Dvr. Moorhouse, George Frederick
26463 Bdr. M'Cusker, John
28889 Dvr. Owen, Philip
28532 Dvr. Peace, Charles Andrew
30199 Gnr. Rea, Charles Francis Laing
27134 Dvr. Iligg, Douglas J a mes
33002 Gnr. Robertson, Norman Howard
63785 Gnr. Ryan, William Partington
28586 Dvr. Sharp, William
22963 Gnr. Shears, Archibald Robert
1425 Gnr. Sherriff, Ernest James
20346 Dvr. Smith, Albert Walter
29786 Gnr. Stewart, Edgar Lindsay
8271 Dvr. Trudgian, Leslie John
27524 Dvr. Underwood, James Augustine
27249 Gnr. Wales, George Firth
25553 I)vr. Wallbaok, John Thomas
31040 Gnr. Warne, George Herbert
32328 Dvr. Wilson, John MTvor
28814 Gnr. Woods, John Kennedy
28913 Dvr. Wynd, Charles Frederick
28911 Gnr. Wynne, Stanley Darvel
15652 Dvr. Baker, Wilfred
20944 Dvr. Findlay, Hugh
20806 Gnr. Hebron, Joseph
1616 I)vr. Lewis, George Albion
34783 Dvr. Murrell, Arthur Alexander
3909 Gnr. Turvcy, John Cecil
27403 Gnr. Wall, Walter Edward
26663 Dvr. Whitcroft, Frederick Thomas
26665 Dvr. Wright, Cyril William Charles
3rd D.A.G. .. . . .. 25663 Dvr. Hartley, Horace Frederick
„ . . . . . . 21238 Dvr. Jacklyn, Clifford John
24408 Dvr. Jolly, Charles
„ .. .. .. 24530 Dvr. Logan, Bruce Leslie
„ .. .. .. 24515 S. Smith Maidment, ltobert John
„ .. .. .. 30618 Dvr. Martin, Afric Simon
„ .. .. .. 4838 Dvr. M'Manus, Charles
„ .. .. .. 21388 Gnr. O'Gonnell, Charles
„ .. . . . . 21963 Gnr. Penhalluriack, William George
3113 Gnr. Williams, James
„ .. .. .. 24617 Dvr. Woods, Laurence Glover
sth D.A.C. .. .. .. 11753 Btir. Owen, Walter Transton
36th H.A.B. .. .. . . 1383 Gnr. Gooch, Kenneth Richman
1455 Gnr. Ives, Arthur James
2nd A.B.A.C. .. .. 14981 Dvr. M.T. Maddern, Walter
2nd D.A.H.Q 11468 Gnr. Driscoll, Harold Elwell
Artillery Details .. .. 59011 Gnr. Clarke, Joseph Samuel
59011 Gnr. Clarke, Joseph Samuel
TRENCH MORTAR BATTERIES.
Bth L.T.M.B.
2nd Div. M.T.M.B.
3376 Cpl. Hillier, Ernest
28975 Gnr. Barker, George
1910 Gnr. Skidmore, Gordon Leslie
28195 Gnr. Chidgey, David
>9 »
3rd Div. A.M.T.M.B
5795 Bdr. Heath, Wilfred James
23075 Cpl. Miller, James Philp
28980 Gnr. Sykes, Charles William
7th A.L.T.M.Is"
1121 Pte. Bassett, James
5559 Pte. Benton, Win. Henry Albert Les,
6053 Cpl. Brouse. Albert Edward
1829 Pte. Burnett, Oscar
0166 Pte. Tiver, Noel Goss
PIONEERS.
2nd Pioneer Battalion
1149 Pte. Britton, Sidney Melbourne
2078 Pte. Bra she, Martin
2324 Pte. Ballagh, James Lewis
3475 Sgt. Betts, Charles Alfred
2319 Pte. Barnes, Arthur Frederick
1683 L. Cpl. Curran, Henry
2591 Pte. Chenerv, Frederick Burt
A 2342 Pte. Chandler, Frederick
2338 Pte. Carriek, James Andrew
2082 Sgt. Carlon, John Patrick
1676 Pte. Collins, Cecil
1678 L. Cpl. Conroy, Phillip Michael
1779 Pte. Cooney, William Thomas
122 C.S.M. Dickinson, George Whittle
1685 Pte. Davies, George
1686 Pte. Davies, Thomas Leslie
1687 L. Cpl. Davis, Alfred Henry
2203 Pie. Dowling, Henry John
1695 Pte. Easton, Alfred
2103 Pte. Evans, William Charles
2104 Pte. Edmonds, Edwin Charles
3503 Pte. Eldridge, Victor Theo. Norton
2368 Pte. Fitzgerald, Wallace Roy
2614 Pie. Field, Hamilton Sloan
2113 Pte. Foreman, Alexander James
2108 !.. Cpl. Fortune, Alexander
2107 Pte. Fortune, Walter David
1699 L. Cpl. Finemore, George
3462 Pte. Ford, Michael
1706 Pte. Guthridge, Thomas Quintan
2120 Pte. Gosling, Matthew James
1720 Pte. Horkings, Henry
4573 Pte. Holder, Arthur Lyle
2123 Pte. Harry, Edward Rces
1819 Pte. Hargreaves, John Yates
A 1721 Pte. Howell, Walter David
716 Pte. Holder, Edward Alfred Fred.
3361 Pte. Hooker, Frederick Alfred
3570 Pte. Harrison, Charles Henry
2758 Pte. Harkins, Colin Maxwell
2382 Pte. Jones, Ivor
1729 Pte. Johnson, George Henry
3547 Sgt. Jackson, James Stewart
2385 Pte. Ivemp, George Henry
A 1735 Pte. Kerr, Ernest Charles
3139 Pte. Lyon, Rothwell
1745 Pte. Little, Albert Ernest.
A 3229 Pte. M'Cofmick, James Francis
2669 Pte. Martin, James Henry
2400 Pte. Marston, Arthur George
1754 Pte. Moore, Maurice Francis
1764 Pte. M'Phail, Hugh
2144 Pte. M'Milliam, Claude Alexander


NOMINAL ROLL — continued.
Pioneers— con I in ued. Tunnellers— con I in ued.
2nd Pioneer Battalion .. 2139 L. Cpl. Molloy, Leslie M'Donald 2nd Tun. Company.. .. 529 Spr. Deeble, William Stanley
~ „ .. 2213 Pte. Mewha, Hugh Johnston „ „ .. .. 7247 Spr. Carrington, John Roderick
„ .. 2407 Pte. M'Donald, Alexander „ „ .. .. 7055 Spr. Calliford, William Hewitson
„ .. 2408 Pte. M'Paul, Robert Linden „ „ .. .. 4028 Dvr. H.T. Cash, Arthur Lancelot
„ „ .. 2082 Pte. Neal, John William „ „ .. .. 3927 L. Cpl. Collins, Edward
„ „ .. 3604 Pte. Overson, Walter Crash „ „ . . •. 808 Spr. Clarke, James Steven
„ „ .. 4780 Cpl. O'Dwyer, John Hogan „ „ . .. 7356 Spr. Dempsey, John Joseph
„ „ .. 2422 Pte. Plunkett, Patrick Francis „ „ .. •• 5725 Spr. Dillon, William Patrick
„ „ .. 2218 Dvr. Parker, George Footc „ „ .. .. 4040 S. Sgt. Davies, William Stanislaus 't
„ .. 3891 Sgt. Prior, Owen Clinten „ 3948 Spr. Flukes, Samuel
it „ .. 2426 Pte. Quinn, Morris Richard « ■>, • • • • 8040 Spr. Green, Alfred
„ „ .. 5254 Pte. Rayner, Burton Leonard „ • • • • 5346 Spr. Hickey, Edward
„ „ .. A 9450 Pte. Saunders, Emmanuel Frederick „ „ .. .. 4763 Spr. Herbert, Daniel Arthur
3642 Pte. Sturgess, Cecil John „ „ .. . . 7948 Spr. Heysed, Frank James
~ „ . . 2165 Pte. Stewart, William „ „ •. • • 7617 Spr. Hunt, Mitchell
„ „ .. 2173 Pte. Todd, Frederick Leslie „ „ .. .. 5754 Spr. Hitchcock, William Thomas
„ „ .. 2201 Pte. Thorpe, Stanley Walter George „ ~ . . . . 2827 Spr. Hogg, Albert Leslie
„ „ .. 2172 Sgt. Thorpe, Ben jamin Allan „ „ .. .. 599 S. Sgt. Hurst, Frederick Archibald
„ ~ .. 2169 Pte. Todd, John Stanley „ „ .. .. 7060 Spr. Jones, James
~ „ . . 1802 Pte. Thompson, George Norman „ ~ . . . . 4020 Sgt. Le Lessurier, Frederick Alfred
„ „ .. 3549 Sgt. Ullman, John Frederick „ „ .. .. 3986 Spr. Moss, William Ernest
„ „ .. 2176 Pte. Umbers, Alexander „ „ .. .. 7797 Spr. Mullen, Edwin Charles
„ „ .. 3444 Pte. Watts, Archibald „ „ .. . . 4148 Spr. Ockcndcn, Stanley Leslie
„ „ .. 3211 Pte. Webster, John Duncan „ „ .. .. 6041 Spr. Piggin, Ernest Scwell
„ „ .. 2186 Pte. Williams, Stanley Reuben „ „ .. .. 12383 Spr. Purcell, William Henry
„ „ .. 1815 Pte. Wilson, William „ „ .. .. 7065 Spr. Quintrell, Stanley
„ ~ .. 5222 Pte. West, William „ „ .. .. 6130 Spr. Rowe, Alexander Anderson
„ „ .. 4041 Pte. Whitburn, Henry George „ „ .. .. 4111 Spr. Rymer, Leslie Charles
4th Pioneer Battalion .. 9314 C.Q.M.S. Lyall, John „ „ .. .. 5625 Spr. Stephens, Michael
„ „ .. .. 5418 Spr. Shaw, Harry James
ENGINEERS. •> •» • • • ■ Spr. Tynan, Daere
_ , . „ „ .. .. 6066 Spr. Thompson, Oliver August
sth F - c - E 19898 Dvr - Aitchison, Roy Stuart (> _ 5636 Spr _ Tl i tman , John Andrew
198 ,>? Spr. Burton, Henry 3rd Tun. Company.. .. 5252 Spr. Collins, Henry Joseph
„ .. .. . . 298/ Dvr. Craig, Reuben
„ .. . . .. 14860 Spr. Hughes, Dudley Jack
„ .. .. 16211 Spr. Maxwell, Frank RAILWAY UNI IS.
3084 L. Cpl. M'Donald, Ernest Frederick j 4th A.8.G.R.0.C 1490 Spr. Pimm, Alfred George
9958 Spr. Ross, Thomas Roderick sth A.8.G.R.0.C 1092 Spr. Duffy, Francis Herbert
14038 Spr. Watson, George William I „ „ .... 2934 Spr. M'Mahon, John Guilford
8873 Spr. Zimmerman, Victor Gordon A.R.O.D. Details .. .. 2855 Spr. Brown, William Joseph
6th F.C.E. .. .. .. 16189 Spr. Collis, Henry Franklin
„ .. .. .. 7417 Dvr. Cottam, Cyril George
16532 Spr. Early, William Henry ARMY SERVICE CORPS.
JO2B Sgt. Brady Leslie William 15th A.S.C 6684 Dvr. Ash, George Leslie
Spr. Nhcholls, falter Ernest 2;f77 p te . Brock, William Joseph
8251 L. Cpl. Smith, W llloughby Connor „ 822-1 Dvr. Gherashc, Albert James
Spr. Symons, Herbert ,5,09 Dvr. Gunn, Wilfred Fayle
44834 Cpl. Symons, William John 4508 L . ( ; p i. Quinn , Herbert Martin
... ", p Spr. Watts, Victor John „ 6687 Sgt. Smith, Albert Edward
' UI 1821 Spr. Coysn, Ernest 3504 D vr. Thorne, Cecil John
2782 Cpl. Coysh, William George 201h A.S.C 2567 Cpl. Appleby, John
4^ 39 Vl '' £° rde "' W ? l4e [ , „ ABBl9 Cpl. Benjamin, Aubrey
8 923 I)vr. Ella, Ernest Edward 5137 pte Bou ,. 11C; WaUer Henry
B9 b? Spr. Fernee, Leonard Douglas 8836 Dvr. Campbell, William Rowan
9 B?;> Holland, Richard Henry „ 6091 Dvr. Cunvnghame, Oswald Rowland
44349 ( ' I,L ■lohansson Emar 722;! ptc _ DU , j h
}f a 'l 8 » r ; MerreH- Aibert Frank • 4787 Pte . Dowling, Jack
„ . . c . '• '• Jroa? Dvr. Olson, Chailen Edwaid 4724 P te. Farrow, Victor Albert
2nd Div. Signallers .. 15931 Spr. A len, Clement Charles 1808 Pte . Goodwin, Arthur Claude
' • ? pi ;- lder ' SId,ICJ ; Dnv,d „ 4798 Pte. Kelly, Montague James
•' i CP • Croese Charies 8(i83 L . Cpl. Mann, Charles Albert
'• 1 Cpl. Cleary, Reginald 7081 Pte . Morris, Percv Earl
Jara Dvr. Emery, Joseph James 9480 L. Cpl. Oxenham, Harold James
•' ?863 Spr. Ellis, Cyril Charles Henry 8946 Dvr Peachey , Arthur George Cum.
'' «? g P ''- rT' f, r, iq, i '• 8947 Cfl - Heachey, Edward Isaac
'' Spr. Geldsworthy, Clement Stanley ; ;j 9{|25 , )vr Richar ds, Henry
'■ 6S7fi T P r eS ' Anns ., Alfred r i „ 12416 Dvr. Smith, Alexander
" -aro L. Cp . Mprrow, Alexander George 5n7 Pte . Smith, William Arthur
'■ 7889 L. Cpl.M Kinlay, Douglas I-enton A.S.C. Details .. 15071 Dvr. H. Little, James Elliott
•• I r± Spr. M Lean, Stanley Charles „ 2614 Dvr. M'Donald, Edwin
'• 5383 Spr. Pegler, Percival R123 Uvr R Frederick
'• 4938 Spr. Sieben, Leonard Ambrose Btli A.D.U.S 63743 Gnr. Gidd'ings, Francis William
'■ , 349 ' S p r. Strahan, Robert Henry 24th A.D.U.S 63759 Pte. Keane, Harold Vivian
~ ," . '• 9393 Spr. Vonthethoff, Harold William 15248 Cpl. Thorburn, Charles Wm. Nairne
3rd D.v. Signallers .. 19560 Spr. Henderson Hugh Walter Lylc 2nd Field Bakery . . .. 9902 Pte. Short, Percival William
•• 2,233 Spr. Iggulden, George Edward 4th Field Bakery .. .. 3687 Pte. Barron, John
•' 9344 Spr. Hmnore, Leslie Ralph 6th Brigade A.F.A.P.S. .. 6843 Pte. Renehan, Francis Stephen
•' ] 8738 L. Cpl. Smith, Herbert England Ist Div. Train .. .. 9366 Dvr. Bale, James Albert Thomas
•• Spr. Storey, Thomas Leslie , „ .... 10188 Pte. Fletcher, James Harrison
•• 20758 Dvr. Walker, Thomas Burgess i 874); Pu -. Latimer, Hugh William
TITMMFIT PRC! .... •• •• 7317 I)vr. Sandwell, M.M., Leslie Fred.
1 UNJNELLEKb. „ „ .. .. 9730 Pte. Smith, John Vernon
2nd Tun. Company.. .. 5707 Spr. Blek, Enoch „ .. .. .. 1802 Pte. Sullivan, Patrick James
„ „ .. .. 3835 Spr. Bradfield, John Alfred 2nd Div. Train .. .. 4189 Dvr. Nicholls, George Oliver
„ . . .. 837 Cpl. Boyd, John Young „ „ . . . . 14796 Dvr. O'Shannessy, William Martin
„ „ . . .. 491 Spr. Binger, Maxwell „ „ . . . . 8266 Dvr. Walker, William Wallace


NOMINAL ROLL — continued.
Army Service Corps— continued. -
3rd I)iv. Train .. .. 772 Dvr. Cees, Lewis 2nd M.G.B.
„ „ .. .. A 5063 Dvr. Curran, William Henry n
„ „ .. . . 9978 Dvr. Norman, William George Arthur
4th Div. Train .. .. 60194 Pte. Curtis, Arthur William
„ „ .. . . 5075 Dvr. Dickens, Robert James
„ „ .. .. 1504 Dvr. Fahy, Clarence Wilfred
„ „ .. .. 60231 Pte. Howes, Leon
„ .. .. 65792 Pte. Mills, Walter "
„ .. . . 9521 Dvr. Richards, George Edward
„ „ .. .. 1572 Dvr. Slattery, Michael
„ .. .. 20907 Pte. Williams, Louis "
sth Div. Train . . . . 10301 Dvr. Boardrnan, Ernest Victor
„ „ .. .. 1492 Dvr. King, Gordon Alexander
„ .. . . 6729 Dvr. Leckie, James "
„ „ . . . . 6163 Pte. Pigg, John J
„ .. .. 2284 Dvr. Rogers, Harold William
» .. . . 7961 Sgt. Trask, Cecil Adrian
Ist M.T.C. .. .. .. 5082 Dvr. ALT. Falahey, George Lawrence
» . . . . . . 14254 Dvr. M.T. Le Messurier, Henry James
»> • • .. .. 2721 Dvr. M.T. Palliser, Alfred Tasman
2nd M.T.C. .. .. .. 4091 Dvr. M.T. Anderson, William
7824 Dvr. M.T. Bushell, Tom
6206 Dvr. M.T. Bluck, Eric Nelmes
„... . . . 2007 Pte. Baker, George
„ .. . . . . 22918 Pte. Seemens, William
2021 Sgt. Cue, William ]]
„ .. .. .. 14012 Art. Denny, William George
„ .. .. .. 2027 Pte. Dent, Thomas Rowland
„ .. .. . . 8848 Dvr. M.T. Fitzwalter, Claude Neville
„ .. .. . . 1867 Dvr. M.T. Fitzpatrick, Patrick
7820 Dvr. M.T. Gershon, Harry
„ .. .. . . 9033 Pte. Henderson, Arthur Norman
„ .. .. .. ABBl4 Dvr. M.T. Hicks, Arthur Wellesly
„ . . . . 13067 Dvr. M.T. Ivempster, Thomas Fred.
3545 Dvr. M.T. King, Harold Virgo
3546 Dvr. M.T. King, Leslie Hugh "
„ .. .. .. 2058 Dvr. M.T. Lavercombe, Thomas
3479 Dvr. M.T. Moore, Charles Edward B.
„ . . .. .. 2785 Dvr. M.T. Mackenzie, Roderick
„ . . . . . . 9346 Cpl. M'Tiglie, Thomas Francis
„ .. .. .. 4198 Pte. M'Donald, Cecil Duncan
„ .. .. .. 4575 Pte. Purches, Albert
„ .. .. .. 9476 Cpl. Sticpeivich, Joseph Edward
.. . . . 13043 Dvr. M.T. Watkins, Harry Frank "
„ . . . . . . 3280 Cpl. Wintle, John
3rd M.T.C. .. .. .. 11725 Sgt. Ferrier, David Oliver
11904 Dvr. M.T. Sheehan, Albert
4th M.T.C. .. .. . . 2777 Dvr. M.T. Welshman, Arthur Jas. B.
6th M.T.C 5864 Dvr. M.T. Mills, Alfred
13246 Dvr. M.T. Halls, Clifford Robert "
sth M.T.C. .. .. .. 13521 Dvr. M.T. Parker, Ernest Hurley
A.M.T.S 2558 Art. Webster, David * "
» .. .. . . 3023 Art. Gillinghain, Andrew
A.A.M.C.
sth Field Ambulance .. 16691 Pte. Aiken, James Robertson
6th Field Ambulance .. 17957 Cpl. M'Nally, Leslie Kintore „
»» „ .. .. 12557 Pte. Menzies, Charles „
„ . . . 6571 Dvr. Woodlev, William Thomas „
7th Field Ambulance . . 10016 Pte. Buff, William „
„ „ .. .. 53 Pte. Forster, George Alfred „
„ „ .. .. 18171 Pte. Mitchell, Joseph „
9th Field Ambulance .. 11993 L. Cpl. Jamieson, M.M., Edward Roy „
Den. Service .. .. 12331 Sgt. Johnstone, Bruce „
MACHINE GUN BATTALIONS.
2nd M.G.B. .. . .. 278 Dvr. Armistead, Walter James „
„ •. • • •. A 321 Pte. Alderson, Alfred John „
~ •• •• .. 413 Pte. Anderson, Thomas Hector N. „
~ • • • • .. A 390 Pte. Amiet, Charles „
„ • • • • • • 5536 Pte. Anderson, Roy William „
„ • • • • • • 5472 Pte. Abbs, James Henry „
„ • • •. • • 2030 Pte. Arandale, Victor Maurice „
• • • • • • 276 Pte. Ballantyne, William „
„ . . • • • • 8290 Pte. Berriman, Joseph Charles „
« • • • • • • 291 Pte. Birch, William Arthur „
„ .. .. . • 569 Pte. Bain, Andrew Wilson „
•, . • • • • • 368 Dvr. Burow, Ernest William „
6213 Pte. Backhouse, Cecil Vivian „
M .. . • . . 6042 Pte. Bell, Isaac S. „
„ .. .. . . 5785 Pte. Barnes, Charles „
» . • .. .. 5559 Pte. Brameld, Samuel George „
5317 Pte. Bouden, Frank 3rd M.G.B.
4OBO Cpl. Bailey, Walter William 4th M.G.B.
»•... • • 6000 Pte. Chapman, Alfred sth M.G.B.
•» • • • • • • 322 Cpl. Coy, Tom John Macli. Gun
398 Dvr. Colebrook, Owen M.G.B. Det:
Machine Gun Battalions — continued.
2nd M.G.B. .. .. .. -172 Pte. Craig, Harry William
>» .. .. .. A 368 Pte. Cole, Harold George
»» .. .. .. 5557 Pte. Clark, Frank William Leslie
j» .. .. .. 5315 Pte. Corn, George Percy
» .. .. .. 3785 Pte. Cox, Reginald Lionel
» .. .. .. 3121 Pte. Casey, John
1904 Pte. Clarke, Richard M.
„ .. .. .. 8369 Pte. Daniel, Leslie
>» .. . . .. 3809 Pte. Dun stall, Roy
» .. .. .. 5329 Pte. Donnelly, James
• • • • .. 1092 Pte. Deirk, Alfred Alexander
« • • • • . . 387 Pte. Emonson, Herbert Henry John
» • • •. .. A 283 Dvr. Fairley, Norman I).
•> • • .. .. 320 Pte. Fraser, Alex. John
» • • • • .. 3878 Pte. Featherstone, Norman Samuel
5330 Pte. Firkin, Cecil
» • • • • . . 5020 Pte. Francis, Norman Philip
» • • • • .. 1834 Pte. Fidoek, Alexander Thomas
» • • •. . . 815 Pte. Franklin, Frederick O'Brien
» • • • • . . 5337 Pte. Giddens, John Joseph
>» • • • • .. 5035 Pte. Green, Isaac Abraham
»» • • • • . . 280 Pte. Geddes, Albert Henry
» •• •• .. 315 Pte. Gahan, John Thomas
A335 Pte. Griffiths, Cyril
» •• •• •• 0571 Pte. Home, Frank Edwin James
»» .. .. .. 5030 Pte. Healy, Terence
» • • • • • • 913 Pte. Hughes, Herbert Norman
» •• •• •• A 290 Pte. Hill, Francis O'Connell
" . • .. .. C 390 Cpl. Higson, John Aaron
» .. .. .. A 557 Pte. Jack, Simon
» .. .. .. E3BO Sgt. Jones, Ebenezer
»» • • • . . . 373 Pte. Jones, Frank Hickin
»» .. .. .. 0209 Pte. Jones, Bruce
»» • • • • . . 3845 Pte. Kendall, Victor Ernest R.
M . . . . . . 290 Cpl. Kidgell, Philip Henshaw
» •• .. .. G3BO Pte. Kiernan, Harry William John
M .. .. .. 82920 Pte. Lawton, George
*» • • • • . . 0050 Pte. Lamb, William Andrew
>» .. . . . . 5704 Pte. Love, Victor John
. . .. .. 5008 Dvr. Lawrence, Albert Oliver
>» • • .. . . 3130 Pte. Lean, Arthur
" • • • • •. 333 L. Cpl. Legge, Oswald Floyd
» • • • • .. A 239 Dvr. Matheson, George Kenneth P.
»» . • .. .. 241 L. Cpl. Millar, Thomas
» .. • • .. 290 Pte. M'Millan, James Malcolm
v • • • • . . 321 Pte. Martin, Vivian Charles E.
3BO Pte. M'Nabb, John
•.» . • •. .. 377 Cpl. M'Kenzic, James Taylor
»» •. .. .. 5370 L. Cpl. Mitchell, Frederick Arthur
„ .. .. . . 288 Pte. Norman, Walter Leslie
243 Sgt. O'Reilly, William
» • • .. . . 240 L. Cpl. Olsson, Kenneth Antonius
„ .. .. . . 2954 Pte. Pomroy, Leslie John
« • • .. .. 5392 Pte. Pettigrew, Matthew Fesbit
« •. .. .. 5003 Pte. Payne, Fred.
075 Dvr. Peacock, Ernest William
« .. .. .. 389 Dvr. Parish, George Edward
„ .. .. .. A3Bl Pte. Penny, Samuel
>» .. . . .. A 378 Pte. Pickering, Albert Henry
« .. .. .. 5910 L. Cpl. Ryan, Edward Victor
.. .. .. 5185 Pte. Roberts, George Henry
„ .. .. .. 295 Pte. Raeburn, George
„ . . . . . . 338 Dvr. Rawson, Hugh William
•. .. .. 298 Pte. Steen, William Gordon
5 » .. .. .. 381 Pte. Shell, Charles Francis
„ . . .. .. 400 Cpl. Smith, Henry
„ .. .. .. 0099 Pte. Sleatli, William Peter
„ .. .. .. 5675 Pte. Saunders, John
„ . . .. .. 2150 Cpl. Smart, Eric George
» 2143 Pte. Singline, Gordon Talbot
« .. .. .. 5425 Pte. Turnbull, Wallace Cameron
• . .. . . 2496 Pte. Tonkin, Richard Madron
„ .. .. . . 2489 Pte. Taylor, Leonard
„ .. .. .. A3BO Dvr. Taylor, William
„ .. .. .. 0407 Pie. Wright, Harold Sydney
5970 Pte. Whitmore, John William
„ .. .. . . 5678 Pte. Walsh, John William
„ .. .. .. 5088 Pte. Watts, Lawrence Mervyn
„ .. .. .. 2508 Pte. Walker, Arthur Searle
„ .. .. .. C 297 Pte. Wallace, Ernest William
„ . . .. .. A 328 Pte. Ward, Joseph
„ .. .. . . 8385 Cpl. Wegner, Johann Willielm
3rd M.G.B. . . .... 102 L. Cpl. Smith, Norman Cecil
4th M.G.B. . . .. . . 2805 Pte. Bowditch, George Bonwick
sth M.G.B. . . .. .. 810 Pte. Ross, John Crossland
Mach. Gun Cps. Details .. 50033 Pte. Cooper, Edward Martin Rocke
M.G.B. Details . , .. 50155 Pte. Sexton, Thomas


NOMINAL ROLL— continued.
A.A.V.C. Miscellaneous— continued.
A.A. Vet. Corps .. .. 6758 Pte. Hope, Daniel Bertie A.C.C. Battalion .. .. 4763 Pte. Burton, George Edward
..... . r., . , 1 . ,1 I 71!') IH.. I_> I i: .1-
A.V.H. Al7OO Tpr. Aops, John Arthur „ „ • • ■ • 4762 Pte. Burton, Frank Newton
2929 S. Smith Ball, Thomas „ „ • • • • 4735 Pte. Beveridge, James Denis
in n __ i 1 . Cl ...I 1 7h\l Cunniiwfllom 1 111 n 111
„ .. .. .. . . 4256 Pte. Barton, Clyde Stanley
„ .. .. .. .. 3052 Pte. Conlson, Edwin Hugh
„ .. .. . . .. 2883 Tpr. Dawson, Leslie William
„ .. .. . . .. 1281 S. Sgt. Duff, John Charles
„ .. .. .. .. 3138 Pte. Field, Joseph George
„ .. .. . . .. 626 Cpl. Glasson, William Henry
„ .. .. .. .. 2680 Pte. Gunn, John Oliver
„ .. .. .. . . 1723 S. Smith Cpl. Jarrett, Richard
„ . . . . . . . . 922 Sgt. Jeffkins, William
„ . . . . . . .. 957 Sgt. Kidd, Frank Herbert
„ .. .. . . .. 958 Sgt. M'lvellar, Duncan John
„ .. .. .. .. 4760 S. Smith Cpl. M'Williams, Henry
„ . . . . . . . . 663 Pte. Nixon, R. C.
„ .. .. 1690 S. Smith Cpl. Roberts, Robt. Oswald
„ .. .. .. . . 2841 Tpr. Rowe, Norman M'l.
3789 L. Cpl. Cunningham, William
3784 Ptc. Cook, Lee Gordon
A 3780 Pte. Clark, James
4089 Pte. Cork, Harry
4086 Pte. Cowen, Frederick Bewley
42 pte. Gullen, John Luke A
4453 Pte. Carrick, James William
2028 pte. Daniels, Charles
3796 Pte. Dickason, William
4093 Pte. Dawes, Walter
379 Pte. Damm, Hedley Gordon
4099 pte. Davis, Oscar Harry
4094 pte. Date, Thomas Henry
4114 l>te. Ferguson, William Henry
4780 pte. Foots, George Jamieson
»» »»
>» »
5»
1908 Tpr. Simmons, Charles Herbert ] „ „ .... 4488 Pte. Fotheringham, Kenneth
99 , . . . . . . 1 171 JO 1 |H . Ol 11I111UIIS, VdUllßo 1R.11.111 99 *.l •• • • J. TV/, 1 univi "iijinnin)
„ . . .. .. . . 5083 Pte. Wade, Edward Charles I „ „ .... 4108 pte. Fishwick, James Henry
„ .. .. .. . . 37 Sgt. Williams, Joseph George A. ~ „ . . • • 561 pte. Gurney, Thomas Leonard
A.V.Ii.S. .. .. . . 7252 Sgt. Shepherd, M.S.M., N. A.
„ . . . . . . 4234 Pte. Tunbridg'e, E.
2nd M.V.S. . . . . . . 3676 Pte. Anderson, H. J. D.
„ .. . . .. 5788 Pte. Buchanan, D. J.
„ . . . . .. 2191 Pte. Johnston, W. H.
12399 Pte. Peters, J. 11.
924 Sgt. Thomson, H. R.
A.A.V.C. Details .. .. 923 V. Sgt. Thomson, W. E.
560 pte. Graham, Leslie Stewart
4479 pte. Groves, William
1873 Sgt. George, R. L.
459 pte. Harris, Leslie Frederick
4141 pte. Hobcroft, Huntle Horace
4809 pte. Hockley, George Edmund
4517 pte. Humphries, Daniel Dean
.V.C. Details .. .. 923 V. Sgt. Thomson, W. E. „ ~ .. 0 .. 4810 Pte. Hockley, Ephrain William
„ „ .. .. 3747 V. Sgt. Faulkner, Thomas Stephen „ 99 • • • • 3858 pte. Iveegan, John Barrett
„ „ ... 4917 Sgt. Symons, John Christopher
MISCELLANEOUS.
13th L.H.lt. .. .. .. 1763 Tpr. Anderson, Edwin James
„ .... .. 1767 Tpr. Blennerhasset, Thomas
„ .. .. .. 1884 Tpr. Button, Elton Harman
4504 pte. Kelton, Montreal Hall
4826 pte. Kenyon, Edwin Lewis
658 pte. Lynch, Reginald Frederick (
495 pte. Londrigan, Percy John
3863 pte. Lockyer, Albert Andrew
3861 pte. Langmead, James Arthur
611 Sgt. Brasher, George Thomas ,> » 4828 pte. Lloyd, George Allen
2828 s! Smith Cox, Edwin John B. „ .... 3851 pte. Maher, Joseph Bernard
.. A 1707 L. Cpl. Clark, Eric », » • • ■ • 2192 Dvr. Mills, Clive
.. A 10057 Dvr. Douglas, Stephen Henry „ •, •• •• 484.) pte. Mansell, William
„ .. .. .. .-iiuoui 1) \ r. riuugius, oiepiieu lie
„ . . . . .. 1237 Cpl. Elliott, Frank Edgar
~ .. .. .. 2172 Sgt. Flannagan, Austin
4258 pte. Mercer, Sidney
4523 pte. Mitchell, Leslie Richard
4162 pte. M'Caughey, Matthew Robert
481 pte. Osborne, Alfred
439 pte. O'Dojmell, Albert
3252 Cpl. Poole, Robert Gordon
484 pte. Robinson, Edward James
485 pte. Rogers, Leslie George
584 pte. Row, Philip Stanley
2074 pte. Randall, Rowland Arthur
442 pte. Richards, Robert Norman
443 pte. Roder, Otto Edward
491 pte. Sutherland, Donald Bell
3904 pte. Smith, Herbert Arnold S.
3911 pte. Sedgwick, Victor Robin
4910 pte. Sinclair, James
4216 Pte. Smith, James Seaton S.
4224 pte. Smith, Frederick Hubert
449 pte. Stanbury, Thomas Albert
4661 Pte. Southwell, Rupert Niven
2218 pte. Terry, William Thomas
4907 pte. Thomson, John
4242 pte. Talbot, Benjamin John
1633 Pte. Watson, John
4948 pte. York, Charles Webb
3930 C.S.M. Ward, Harold Hilsdon
400 pte. White, Donald
1370 Tpr. Jolly, Peter M'Culloch
„ .. .. .. 1717 Tpr. Kelly, Matthew Leo
~ .. . . .. 6018 Tpr. Lindsay, James
„ .. . . .. 2836 Tpr. Lee, Leslie Francis J.
„ .. .. .. 2838 Tpr. Mellington, John Gregory
„ .. . . .. 2846 Tpr. Martin, George
~ .. .. . . 1620 Tpr. M'Carthy, Charles Frederick
2364 Tpr. M'Neill, John William
»» "
»♦ J»
„ .. .. .. 1725 L. Cpl. Norris, Robert
„ .. .. .. 4774 L. Cpl. Owen, William Owen
~ . . . . .. 21050 Sad. Sgt. O'Hare, Cyril Barnard
„ . . .. . . 1728 Tpr. Tooley, William Thomas
„ .. . . .. 506 Tpr. West, Charles
„ .. .. .. 1438 L. Cpl. Williams, Arthur Victor
„ .. .. .. 2234 Tpr. Wilson, John William
„ .. .. .. 2391 Dvr. Walsh, Harry Christopher
A. Post C. . . .. 5194 Pte. Callander, Thomas John
3745 Pte. Christie, Edwin
„ .. .. .. 25954 Dvr. Reid, Walter Gordon
A.F.G. .. . . . . 3503 Pte. James, Alfred Arthur
A.W.R.S. .. . . • • 5294 Pte. Baddocl:, Donald Melville
„ . . . . .. 28161 Cpl. Coveny, Hilary Ambrose
A.I.F. H.Q. (late 24th Butt.) 5363 Pte. Jones, Thomas Edward
A.I.F. H.Q. (late 18th Batt.) 6632 Pte. Smith, Arthur John
A.I.F. H.Q. (late 4th F.A.8.) 2233 Gnr. Warren, Kenneth Harold
il .A . A • Ai . Till A tAA • y VI in « *' i-» I • , V ~. . v. w.. » **• * ...V, ,7 ,
6th A.1.8 6812 Pte. Field, Edmund David „ „ •• •• 5961 Pte. Winter, James Herbert
A. Prov. C 2096 Cpl. Place, Walter Westley A.A.O.C 5493 Pte. M'Bain, James Henry
A. Prov. C. .. .. .. 2096 Cpl. Place, Walter West
2nd D. Sal. C. .. .. 4367 Pie. Broughton, Stanley
4367 Pte. Broughton, Stanley " „ 6590 W.O. O'Mullane, Harry
4382 Pte. Browning, Norman Alfred 2nd Div. Traffic C 2657 Pte. Garner, George Joseph
99 .. . . -FOOiS 1 IC. 131 U Will 111,, xNUllUttll A-VlllCbl M-J Av • amiiiu yi. .. .. . , A v.. vminvi, " V V/A v uoovpji
„ „ .. .. 4414 Pte. Castle, Henry Fisher 99 99 • • • JBl2 Pte. Hart, John
„ „ .. .. 5965 Pte. Gilbert, Louis John „ •• •• 1605 Pte. Hughes, Albert Alfred E.
99 „ .. .. 1 LC . uruijoii, LUUIS UUIIII -9 9> •• •• *AAI LN .IV.., .A......YY«
4126 Pte. Grant, William „ „ • • • • 7)673 Cpl. Rice, Eric Phillip
. . 25596 Bdr. Nagle, Robert Marshall 2nd Div. Hdqrs 5872 Pte. Moore, Arthur Elderslie
„ „ .. .. 5426 Pte. Woodforth, Robert „ ■ • ■ ■ 24458 Gnr. Maudsley, Leslie Alexander
sth A.1.8.H.Q 4790 Cpl. Dvr. M'Garthy, Thomas Justin „ • • • • 5692 Dvr. Whitmore, Charles James
„ „ .. .. 6375 Pte. Piggott, Ronald Thomas A.G.B.D. Staff .. . . 22017 Spr. Bruce, Robert Roy
A.C.C. Battalion !. .. 460 Pte. Adams,' Thomas Charles 6th A.1.8.f1.Q 4974 Pte. Anderson, William Colin
' ' ' " .. 4051 Pte. Alsford, William „ • ■ • • 4714 Dvr. Fraser, Donald
' „ .. .. 3756 Sgt. Anderson, Jack 7th A.LB .H.Q A 2339 Pte. Junner, James Andrew
. . . . I OgL. rvi 3VMI, ' v' » • »• ' •*' •* » -w. • • ■ ■ • ' ' - •
462 Pte. Beath, Lawrence Fountain A.I.F. Dep. U.K 33079 Sgt. Caiman, John Robert H.
" " !! !! 2151 Pte. Burnett, Henry William „ „ • • •• 7150 Pte. Miller, William George
1849 C.S.M. Bennett, E. M. A. Ord. C 106 Arm. Sgt. Wilsushan, George Alex,
1849 C.S.M. Bennett, E. M.
A.B.D.H.Q. .. .. •• 6113 Cpl. M'Gregor, Donald Gordon
4075 Pte. Bristow, John West
4073 Dvr. Bell, Ernest Wilson
A.I.F. Kit Store .. .. 5546 Pte. Barker, Henry James
Wholly Set Up and Printed in Australia by MASON", FIRTH
M'CUTCHEOX PTY. LTD., Bank Place, Collins Street, Melbourne.




I
II
a
. t v •• • ' ' ■ > • - ■ ' : ,7-SV . ■ • ■•■■ 'v.y.;:-.- ' r " " lU ■ ; '
