

I wmm \ ■ i a
GRASS LANDS
OF VICTORIA.
O ■ •
FRANK MADDEN.
■
MELBOURNE :
MELVILLE, MULLEN & SLADE, 262 & 264 Collins Street;
12 Ludgate Square, London, E.C.
1895.




FUl6£>
GRASS LARDS
OF VICTORIA
FRANK MADDEN.
MELBOURNE:
MELVILLE, MULLEN & SLADE, 262 & 264 Collins Street;
12 Ludgate Square, London, E.C.




GRASS LANDS OF VICTORIA.
It should be the laudable desire and ambition of every
stockowner and farmer to increase the quantity and quality
of the produce of his land.
There are two methods by which this aim may be
accomplished. One by improving the stock, and the other
by improving the pasture. There is no country in the
world where so much has been done to improve the quality
of the sheep as Australia, and it is difficult to see in what
direction such sheep as those recently exhibited at the Sheep-
breeders’ Association and the Agricultural Show could be
improved. They seemed to carry wool everywhere over their
fine frames except on their teeth. So long as that standard
is maintained nothing further can be done in the direction
of the sheep. But I contend that it is possible to make
two such sheep grow where only one grew before by
improving the pastures, and this is a matter to which too
little attention has been paid in the past. Indeed, in
many instances the first step towards improvement of the
present pastures would be to restore them to what they
were many years ago. Very little, if anything, has been
M 33>55


done to maintain the pastures we found on the great plains
of Australia, which are the homes of the Merino. We
have stocked those plains heavily; we have been com-
pelled to leave stock on them in periods of drought;
great fires have swept across them in seasons of plenty,
and nothing has been done to repair the damage arising
from these various causes. Year by year they are eaten
bare, and seldom know what it is to have a rest, to say
nothing of assistance to restore their natural carrying power.
I know plain lands which are not now nearly so good
as they were thirty years ago. Many of the best native
grasses have disappeared altogether. The grass sward
has become thin and patchy, and useless weeds have taken
possession of the ground. These plains are for the most
part light loamy land which we dare not plough, as once
the first sward is destroyed it is very difficult to establish
another. But there are many methods which may be
employed with great advantage to improve such pastures.
The first of these is rest. If plain land be rested for a
spring and summer, and well harrowed and rolled in the
autumn, it is wonderful what an improvement is effected
even without the sowing of any extraneous seeds at all.
But if in addition a few suitable seeds are sown, the effect
is such as to astonish the grazier to whom the operation is
new.
Now I need not point out to the practical sheepbreeders
of Australia that to have sheep light on the points or weak
in shoulder covering, or bare on the belly, is a disgrace to
any man who pretends to know his business. Let the
grazier apply the same rule to his paddocks, and never


rest while a bare spot is to be found, and the result will be
that the sheep, the land, and the bank account will all
materially improve.
In 1893 I wrote a series of letters to the Australasian,
dealing with grass lands which could be improved by
cultivation, and at the request of many friends I have
decided to republish them in this form.
It may seem presumption in me to write on the
cultivation of grass and grass lands, who am neither a
botanist nor a practical farmer, but as those better qualified
do not seem inclined to do so, I will risk being told to
“ teach my grandmother to suck eggs,” and give the result
of my observations on the subject. When I say lam not
a practical farmer I do not intend to convey that I am
without experience in the matter, as I have studied and
experimented with grass for many years. Owing to the
price of labour in Victoria the improvement of pasture
lands must form the larger part of farming for a long time
to come. The wonderful success of the dairying industry
has induced, and will continue to induce, many farmers
and selectors to clear and improve land for pasture, and
it is in the hope that I may benefit some of my fellow
colonists, if only by having my opinions contradicted and
discussed, that I put these opinions in writing. We must
not be misled by the present success of the export of
butter. “ Festina lente ” is a good motto, but “ make hay
while the sun shines” is more applicable to this particular
branch of farming in Victoria. The English farmer is
slow to learn, but he does learn, and in course of time will


find, if he has not already done so, he cannot successfully
compete in growing corn, on a soil so weakened by constant
cropping for many hundreds of years as to require constant
and liberal manuring, with the American, the Australasian,
the Indian, and other farmers, who have either the
advantage of a practically virgin soil at a nominal or no
rent, or such a command of cheap labour as enables them
to produce wheat, and better wheat also, at a rate far
below what would pay the English farmer to grow it at,
even if his rent was reduced to a third of what he now pays.
When the English farmer realises this, he will naturally
look round for the best means of holding his own,
and he will find it will pay him better to grow
butter than corn, and Victoria may find that she cannot
possibly obtain equal prices for her butter in England
with what that produced on the spot is worth. Then you
ask me why I write to urge farmers to improve their
pastures when I am of opinion that the present market
for their principal produce is to some extent a temporary
one, and in reply I say, while we cannot expect to obtain
the top prices in the English market for very long, yet we
may secure such prices as will pay us well, and the right
way to be sure of such a price is to produce a good article,
and plenty of it, and to do this we must improve our
pastures. Besides, we have the example of New Zealand
before us, and know what wonderful results have been
obtained there by the cultivation of grass and the produc-
tion of mutton for English and foreign markets. Pessi-
mists tell us that New Zealand has oversupplied the
market; but while any meat is sold in England at from
Bd. to Is, per lb., the market is not supplied.


What has to be done is to produce the best article, and
by proper means to prove to the public in England and
elsewhere that Australian grass-fed meat is as good, if not
better than any other, and so prevent butchers buying
our meat at their own prices and selling it as prime
English at three times what they give for it. But these
are matters which must strike any farmer who thinks at
all, and who realises that in Victoria we have practically no
market for what we could and should produce. Now, in the
natural inquiries I have made to see how the grass question
is understood in Victoria, I have found a vast amount of
ignorance among farmers, not only on the varieties of grass
and fodder plants suitable for cultivation, but also on the
method of cultivation. There is hardly any land so poor
but that it will produce some grass or fodder plant of
value, but by far the bulk of Victorian farmers know only
three grasses, viz., English Grass (as they designate Rye-
grass), Cocksfoot and Clover ; and many of them sow these
grasses, or a mixture of them, on their land, without ever
considering if their land is suitable for them or any of
them. The result too often is failure —first of the grass,
and then of the farmer. Another common cause of failure
is that very few of our farmers cultivate for grass at all, and
some of the few who do plough before sowing grass merely
do sufficient of the necessary work to ensure failure. I
remember a well-intentioned neighbour, a countryman of
my own, who came to me, and informed me I was making
a mistake in trying to grow English Grass on Curdie’s
River. I asked him why, and if he had tried it ? He told
me he had, to his sorrow, “ but that the grass won’t stand,
and will die out after a season or two.” Having seen


something of the methods in the forest I said to him: —
“Mr. M , I have never seen your farm, but I will come
out to-morrow, and show you why your grass failed.” I
well remember his look of astonishment as he replied :
“Be Gor, if you do that you’re better nor a witch.” I
went to his place, and he showed me the paddock in which
he had sown Rye-grass, and there certainly was none to be
seen. I asked for a spade and, pressing it lightly, passed
it through the three or four inches of soil he-had turned
up with his plough, and showed him the original sod which
he had turned down on the subsoil, with its face still well
marked and unbroken. He had by turning the sod on
the hard subsoil, created a vacuum between the two, and
he had merely harrowed in the grass seed, and had
not rolled it at all. The result was that his grass
grew through the few inches of soil, and when the summer
came the heat got between the sod and subsoil, and of
course the grass died. I can hear many practical men
say:—“ But why did he plough at all ? We have obtained
a splendid sole of grass without ploughing, and by merely
sowing our grass seed on the ashes after a burn of scrub or
other natural vegetation, which we had previously cut for
the purpose.” Granted. A good sole of grass can be so
produced, but that is not by any means the end of the
matter. What I want to show is how the best sole of
nutritious grass can be produced, and I unhesitatingly say
that to procure this result the land must be ploughed
at least twice, and sufficiently harrowed and rolled to
make the seed bed, as Mr. Martin J. Sutton (the best
living authority on grass) recommends “ fine, firm, and
level.”


I have observed closely paddocks where a magnificent
show of grass had been produced by sowing on the ashes
without disturbing the surface, and have invariably found
that large patches of the grass, which look splendid to the
eye, are completely neglected by the cattle, but that
where a fire heap stood, or a big log had been burned, the
grass was kept as close and low as the stock could keep
it, and that until they were driven by necessity they
did not touch the luxuriant patches which were grow-
ing on the unsweetened land. Where a quantity of timber
has been burned the land has been thoroughly sweeten-
ed, and will grow the best of grass, but the burning of
even a heavy coating of scrub is not sufficient to sweeten
the land for more than an inch or two in depth. Now,
since the days of Tubal Cain, it has been known that the
action of sun, wind, and atmosphere on upturned lands
tends to sweeten and improve it, and although a good
many of us in Australia think we know better than our
progenitors, yet this fact remains, and has to be learned
by many Victorian farmers. When I first went a-farming,
a large and wealthy land owner spoke to me on this
subject, and said—“ Whatever you do with grass land in
Victoria, don’t plough it.” He was a man who sends
many fat beeves to Melbourne every year, and his advice
was by no means to be despised, so I decided that I would
give his theory a trial. I had a paddock of 200 acres
cleared, of which I ploughed and laid down one-half, leav-
ing the surface of the balance unbroken, but sowed the
same mixture of seed over the whole. When the grass
came away, I was surprised to find that it grew more
luxuriantly on the unploughed than on the cultivated land,


and was strongly of opinion that my friend was right.
But when I put the stock in they very soon showed me he
was wrong, as they never left the cultivated portion, and
the grass in the rest of the paddock went absolutely to
waste, so that I was glad enough to break it up and treat
it as I had done the rest of the paddock. Another point
in favour of cultivation is that no matter how you may
burn a paddock there will always remain a certain quantity
of rubbish which fire will not kill, and this, having a foot-
ing, gets a start of your grass, and so prevents your land
from carrying the weight of stock it should do. But
observe a cultivated paddock which has been properly laid
down, and you will see that it has been grazed as evenly
as a billiard table, and that every ounce of vegetation it
has produced has been turned to profit by the stock.
Being satisfied that land is vastly improved for pasture
by ploughing and cultivation, the next important point in
my opinion is to sow the right mixture of grasses, so as to
obtain the greatest benefit from the land both in weight of
herbage and in the length of time that herbage can be
kept in prime condition to support stock. Many of the
very best grasses have very short roots, therefore avail
themselves as a feeding ground of only a few inches of the
top soil, and being near the surface last but a short time in
the heat. Others have longer roots, and can obtain
nourishment at from 1 foot to 2 feet, while there are other
valuable fodder plants which seek moisture and nourish-
ment at from 10 feet to 20 feet, and it is by judiciously
mixing many of such plants that we obtain the full benefit
of the land for the time being.


In addition there are other and important questions
which should guide us in selecting the component parts of
our mixture of grass seeds. To extend what is colloquially
known as “ the flush of grass” for even a couple of months
in the year would be a very substantial gain for either the
dairy-farmer or grazier. More than this can undoubtedly
be done by selecting grasses which come into flower (when
they are generally at their best) in succession, and so
ensure some prime grass for at least nine months of the
twelve. It is wonderful how far a little green bite of good
stuff will help grasses that are past their prime to keep stock
in good condition. Many farmers will tell you—“ If I can
only get Rye-grass and Clover to stand, lam content; I don’t
want anything better.” This is simply because they do not
know any better. Would anyone believe that a man could
do as well on the best beef and the best bread only as he
would if he had a judicious mixture of many kinds of good
food. Besides Nature shows us that in the grass lands she
has prepared for us there are multitudes of varieties of
plants, all or nearly all of which are eaten by stock. And
have we not all observed that as the natural pastures were
overstocked, and the choice varieties of grasses eaten out,
how the carrying capacity of the land decreased accord-
ingly? It should, therefore, be our constant study to find
out the capabilities of our land, and to grow on it as many
varieties of valuable fodder plants as it is qualified to carry
with advantage. This can only be done by experiment
and observation. I have the greatest respect for the
teachings of science, and consider it advisable to find out
by analysis of the soil what it is likely to produce; but I
have a far greater respect for the opinion of the stock on


the question of herbage, and would always prefer to plant
largely of a grass which they “hung to” than of a grass
which grew and looked well, but which they neglect. I
always admit stock to my experimental patches to obtain
the benefit of their opinion, and I find it is to my advan-
tage to do so. There are many grasses highly recom-
mended by English writers which I find stock do not
touch if they be planted in competition with sweeter
herbage, and it is of no use, in my opinion, cumbering the
lands with plants that may look ever so well, but which
are of no value for the purpose required. As an example
of what I mean, I have always found Cow-grass neglected
in pastures. It is no doubt a good Clover to grow for
stable-fed stock who have not other green meat, but as a
component part of a mixture for permanent pasture I
never would recommend it.
What’s in a name? Shakespeare wrote. A very great
deal, I say; and this is a fact our shrewd friends in
America have long recognised. There is nothing which
prevents the cultivation of any grass so much as the lack
of a familiar name. If the famous Poa pratensis had
no other name, it would have remained as much unknown
as the equally valuable Paspaiurn dilatatum is now.
But Poa pratensis was re-christened Kentucky Blue
Grass in America, and Smooth-stalked Meadow Grass in
England, and every farmer soon learned its value and
planted it accordingly. The other grass I mentioned,
Paspaiurn dilatatum, is a most valuable grass for dry
country, but what chance has it with such a name? It
will remain green and succulent in the hottest summer,


but its botanical description destroys it utterly. If the
worthy Baron von Mueller, when he introduced it, had
invented a popular name for it, such as “Drought Grass,”
it would by this time have been planted over a large part
of Australia, but it is too much to expect from a leading
scientist to invent vulgar names, no matter what their
value might be. But what the Baron did say of it may
well be quoted here ;
“ Paspalum dilatatum —perennial, of excellent quality
for fodder; keeps green during the hottest summer time.
Mr, Bacchus found it hardy up to a height of 2000 feet in
Victoria. It grew feet in a little more than two months
in New South Wales after drought was followed by heavy
rains. Introduced into Australia by the writer (Baron von
Mueller) with many other fodder grasses.”
I had a few plants of this grass planted in the poorest
and hottest part of my garden in Studley Park. They kept
quite green through the last summer, dry as it was; with-
out any artificial watering whatever, and seeded freely. In
the autumn after I had gathered the seed I cut the grass
and gave it to the cow. She ate it greedily, although she
had plenty of green feed at the time. I should therefore
take this to be a most desirable grass, and if sown with
Birdsfoot Trefoil ( Lotus corniculntus) would keep a green
sward through the hottest weather.
I mentioned the Americans at the beginning of this
letter as having recognised the value of familiar names as
against botanical names. They know their leading grasses


by such names as “ Timothy,” “ Randall Grass,” “ Orchard
Grass,” and “ Red Top,” all valuable grasses, and
well known under these designations in America, but we
have paid too little attention to this subject, and the bulk
of the public do not know our valuable native grasses
at all.
I now propose to describe how, in my opinion, a farmer
should set about obtaining a perfect sward on land which
is rich enough to be improved by cultivation.
The first operation necessary in cultivating for grass is
to clear the land if it be timbered; and when I use the
word “ clear,” I mean it. To enable the farmer to plough
his land properly he must have all the trees grubbed out,
except those which, if he is wise, he will preserve for shade
and ornament. He should never lose sight of the purpose
for which he is preparing his land, and should remember
that while it takes little or no time to kill a tree, it takes
the best part of a lifetime to grow one suitable to give
much shelter to stock. It has often grieved me to see
magnificent blackwood and other shady trees ringbarked
and killed by a foolish or ignorant selector.
Having picked out and marked such young trees as, from
their position and nature, it will be advantageous to keep,
he should ringbark, and, when sufficiently dry, grub out the
remainder.
Some farmers are more favourably situated for clearing
their land to advantage than others. One may be near a


market for split posts, rails, or mining timber. Another
may find it pay him to send firewood away. These men
will clear their land at less cost than the men in the
forests, who must burn up and destroy all the dead timber.
But whether the timber is to be turned to advantage or
not, it should be properly grubbed. That is to say, the
roots should be run to at least a depth of 15 inches
from the surface, so as to be well out of the way of any
farming operations, and also because a decaying gum-tree
root has anything but a sweetening effect on the soil, as
anyone may prove by taking a piece of it and putting it to
his nose. It costs no more to follow roots 15 inches than
it does to follow them 10 inches, because if there is more
digging in the former case there is less chopping in the
latter, as the root is always getting smaller. In pulling
trees, the powerful lever known as the Forest Devil, worked
with a horse, should be used.
The trees, being down, should be pulled together into
heaps no larger than is necessary to ensure most of the
logs being burned, as the greater number of heaps the more
land is improved, and if a few logs and butts are left they
can be pulled into a fresh fire and so got rid of.
When the land is clear, if happily it does not require
drainage, the next operation is to plough. This ploughing
should be at least five inches deep, and be done with a
strong single furrow plough and with plenty of power either
in horses or bullocks. A man with an axe should accom-
pany the ploughman, for be sure in ploughing forest
country for the first time, many a stump and root will be


met with which cannot be seen, and all these should be
grubbed out just as the trees were. The rougher the land
can be turned up the better, and if possible it should be
left so through the winter and following summer. In the
autumn the land should be cross ploughed, and cultivated
with suitable harrows until a fine tilth to the whole of the
depth ploughed is produced, and then rolled, if possible,
twice —one rolling at right angles to the other. If time
and labour can be spared, it will pay well to run over the
land with a horse rake, so as to gather up the light rubbish,
which should be burnt. If this be done we have what Mr.
J. Sutton recommends, “ a fine, firm, level seedbed.”
Now, carefully consider the best mixture of grass for
your land and buy your seeds from the most reliable man
you can find, and sow and harrow the seed in with a chain
harrow and roll again, and so soon as the young grass is an
inch high roll once more, and whenever you are in want of
a job roll the grass again.
Now why is all this rolling an advantage? Grass is
intended to carry heavy stock, and Nature has therefore
ordained that it will grow best in consolidated land. By
our cultural operations we have disturbed the land in order
to obtain sweetness. We must now consolidate in order to
enable it to grow grass to perfection and bear the tread of
cattle, and this consolidation can best be obtained by roll-
ing. Do we not often see what a beautiful sward there is
on the side of a road where the herbage is kept closely
cropped and the soil trodden hard by the many cattle which
graze and travel on it ?


Many a farmer will say : —“ It’s all very well to plough
one autumn and let the land lie fallow for a year before
sowing, but I can’t afford to do it.” Well, it’s a pity; but
I know in many cases it is true, and while I am confident
the bare fallow is best for new land we must consider what
is the next best if this cannot be afforded, and I consider a
crop of potatoes—early ones if possible—is the next best
preparation to the bare fallow. In cultivating for the
potatoes the land is, or should be, well worked, and the
digging of the crop is in itself a cultural operation of no
mean value. When the potatoes are off the rest of the pre-
paration for grass is the same as where the land was fallowed.
The grass having been sown in the manner I have
described, may well be left to take care of itself, and all it
will require beyond cutting thistles, &c., will be to see that
stock are not put on it too soon. If the land be light,
damage may be done by the stock pulling the grass out by
the roots ; but if it be good strong clay land this need not
be feared. If the farmer finds his grass has not a sufficient
hold it will pay him to take a crop of meadow hay or
ensilage off it and roll it again before putting stock on.
But if the farmer decides to mow his grass he should do so
early in the spring, so that the young grass should not be
laid bare to too hot a sun.
In dealing with land in Victoria, it would be equally
unwise to adopt all the methods and experiences of the
Old Country, as to despise or undervalue them. What the
wise farmer should do is to weigh and consider how far the
English methods are suitable for the conditions under
which he is farming, and so far to adopt them, but not


to blindly follow the advice of English authorities who
write of conditions entirely different to those pertaining
here. For instance, it is a common practice in laying
down land in England to sow the grass seeds with a light
corn crop, as it is found the growing corn shelters and
protects the young grass, and when the corn is ripe it may
be reaped without injury to the pasture. This is because
it takes all the short summer to ripen grain in England,
and it is not reaped until the autumn when the burning
heat of the summer is past. If we sowed our grass with
corn here, what would be the result when we cut the corn
for hay in November and December ? Every delicate
grass plant would be killed by the sun when the protection
of the corn was removed.
There is one other cultural operation I would recom-
mend, and that is to harrow in the autumn, when the grass
has stood about a year, and if there be then any places in
the paddock where the grass is thin, sow a few seeds there
and roll again. Indeed, a harrowing every autumn is a
benefit, as it opens the pores in the surface and allows air
and rain to descend into the ground. It also scatters the
manure, and prevents the grass growing into unsightly and
useless tussocks round the cattle droppings, and improves
land grazed by cattle almost as much as if it had been
grazed by sheep. The scattering of the droppings might go
on all the year with advantage, as the manure would thus
be more evenly distributed, and the cowpats would cease to be
a harbour for slugs, crickets, caterpillars, and other vermin.
Having written how, in my opinion, the land should be
prepared for grass, I now come to the question of vital


importance—What grass to sow ? On this subject I can
only give my own experience and observation of grasses,
and leave every farmer to weigh the conditions of his
pasture lands and decide for himself what mixture of
grasses is likely to do best with him. Before I say
anything of grasses themselves I would like to say a few
words on those who sell grass seeds. There is no business
in which so much permanent damage can be done to a
customer’s land by fraudulent dealing than that of a
seedsman. Many a poor selector who has striven hard to
clear a portion of his block, and has borne all the misery
which only selectors in the forest know, has been ruined
by a dishonest seedsman selling him annual grass seeds
instead of perennial. We all know that Nature does not
waste energy, and that an annual plant almost invariably
produces more seed than a perennial of the same species.
This induces dishonest seedsmen to sell the easily-produced
and abundant annual seed for the more costly perennial,
with disastrous results to the purchaser. When a farmer
or selector has had the misfortune to be so taken in he
does not readily become aware of the fact, for the annual
grass in the first year produces a larger crop than
perennial grass would do, and he is accordingly flattered,
and thinks the soil of his property the best in the
world. But when the following spring comes, he finds
the grass plants are thinner on the ground and grow
weakly, and the next year they are gone altogether,
except the Yorkshire Fog and other worthless grasses,
of which, be sure, he has had an ample share. Even
then the true cause of his failure does not dawn on him.
He blames the ground, and says English Grass won’t stand


on it. Then, as a general rule, he becomes a humbug in
order that he may sell his land, and, as he thinks, take in
a simpleton from some other part of the colony. When a
buyer comes to inspect the selection, he is shown the
wonderful soil, the blackwood and white gum trees, and
the hazel and other scrubs, all of which indicate good land.
If he innocently asks the selector why he has not sown
English Grass, he is told at once he (the selector) was too
poor, and could not buy the seed, or some other specious
lie. If he buys, many of the farmers in the neighbourhood
who have had similar experiences as to grass-seed will look
on the newcomer as a fool, and will try to sell him their
lands; and if the purchaser has money he may acquire a
nice estate of good land at small cost through the dis-
honesty of the seedsman and the ignorance of those who
broke their hearts to clear the land. Therefore, I say,
when you go to buy seed go to the best man you know,
and, if possible, take a friend with you who knows some-
thing of the matter.
Last year a gentleman sent me from the Wimmera a
bag of rye-grass seed of a new variety, which he considered
greatly improved the carrying capacity of his farm and
from which he hoped for great results. When I saw the
seed I had doubts about its being perennial, and soon
proved it to be a very common annual grass which would
ruin anybody who depended upon it to form a pasture.
I will now proceed to describe the various grasses of
which I approve, and my reasons for such approval, but
before doing so I wish to draw special attention to an herb


which I believe will do more good for the dry pasture lands
of Australia than any of the grasses.
Birdsfoot Trefoil (Lotus Corniculatus) . —This valuable
fodder plant will, in my opinion, increase the carrying
capacity of many of our farms and stations in a material
degree. It is well and favourably known throughout
Europe, but its great value is hardly understood by
farmers there, as they so seldom suffer from drought as we
know it. Birdsfoot Trefoil sends its strong penetrating
roots down 12 to 13 feet into the subsoil, and this renders
the plant practically independent of weather, and it there-
fore keeps green through the hottest summer. All stock
eat it greedily, and do well on it, as it is a saline plant.
It covers the ground densely with its radiating branches
and dark-green foliage. It gives a larger crop than any
other clover, and will grow in poor heathy land where
better-known clovers would not live. I believe this herb
will take the place of Saltbush, and from the fact that it
cannot be eaten out will cause our squatters to cease their
regrets for the extinction of the native fodder. I recom-
mend its inclusion in every prescription of grass seeds, and
on poor sandy and heathy lands it should, with Crested
Dogstail and Sheep’s Fescue, form the larger part of the
seeds sown. Unfortunately there is very little of the seed
of Birdsfoot Trefoil to be had in Victoria, but it can be
easily obtained from England. Its price there is apparently
a high one, namely, 2s. per lb., but, as the seed is very
minute, a pound would go a very long way in a mixture.
Meadow Fescue,— This is one of the very finest grasses
in cultivation, and I have proved it to be most suitable for


pasture lands in Victoria. It gives as good a crop as
rye-grass, is thoroughly perennial in character, stands the
heat better, and keeps green longer than most other
grasses, and as a consequence of its vitality responds more
quickly to summer rain. It flowers in December, and is
therefore coming on just as Rye-grass is commencing to go
off. It is highly appreciated by all stock, and I should
recommend it as an ingredient in all prescriptions of grass
seed, except for very poor, dry land. On good flats and
chocolate banks it is a splendid grass. It takes at least
two years to come to its best. Strange to say many
people are under the impression that Meadow Fescue and
Yorkshire Fog are identical. There could not be a greater
mistake. Meadow fescue is one of the most valuable
grasses in cultivation, and Yorkshire Fog is worthless and
a pestilence in a pasture. Unfortunately the true character
of the latter grass was not understood in the early days of
the colony, and it was sown on some of our best pastures
where it has taken such a hold that it is almost impossible
to obtain colonial seed without some Fog in it.
Meadow Foxtail is an early spring grass of great value,
gives a fair crop of most nutritious fodder, and all stock eat
it close. It flowers in October. Its complete permanency
is well established, as I have seen it on estates in Victoria
where it has stood without re-sowing for over twenty years.
It likes good land, and should be liberally sown on such
land.
Rye-grass.— On the merits of Rye-grass I need not dilate.
It is so well and favourably known that I need say no


more than when you go to buy Rye-grass seed see that you
get perennial seed of a good strain. There is no grass seed
in which fraud is more easily perpetrated than Rye-grass, as
there are several annual varieties, all of which seed freely.
Timothy. —We certainly must consider this grass as a
most valuable addition to our pastures, for although it
provides a good bite of leafy herbage in the spring, it does
not flower until the end of January when Rye-grass is gone
and Cocksfoot and Fescue are past their best. Its seed
heads when ripe are as palatable and more nutritious than
the ripe Rye-grass. This latter quality is a distinct advan-
tage over Cocksfoot, whose harsh unpalatable seed heads no
stock will touch. But a paddock containing much Timothy
may be let stand far into the autumn, and will be improving
all the time. It produces a great bulk of herbage, and we
have it on the best authority that it is one of the most
nutritious grasses in cultivation. It is not particular as to
soil, and will grow on poorish loams, but it certainly does
best (as do most of the strong grasses) on rich river flats
and chocolate banks. It is thoroughly permanent in
character, and takes two years at least to come to its best.
Smooth-Stalked Meadow Grass ( Poa pratensis).—Unfor-
tunately I have no ground suitable for this grass, which
likes a very friable soil, and it has not done as well with
me as I would wish. It is creeping in habit like Couch
Grass, and has a bad name in New Zealand on account of
its being so difficult to get rid of if once in a pasture. It is
a highly nutritious grass, and is identical with the famous
“ Kentucky Blue Grass.” It is at its best in midsummer.


Prairie Grass is by far the most valuable winter grass in
cultivation, and is, I believe, one of the greatest favourites
with stock. Indeed, if it be sown by itself they will eat it
right out unless great care be taken. It is good in any
shape, and as hay or ensilage it has no superior. It gives
a great crop of leafy herbage right through the winter, and
unless the summer be very hot and dry it remains in
evidence until after Christmas. It has one fault —that
it ripens its seed unequally, and the seed when ripe readily
sheds. Hence growers of seed cut it when on the green
side to save it from shaking out. The result of this is
that the bulk of the grain, being immature, will not grow.
The seed, when good, is bright and solid. Prairie Grass
likes well-cultivated land, and it is well worth while taking
trouble in that direction if for this grass only. When once
established in a pasture it will seed freely itself, and so
maintain its permanent character. It has been urged
against Prairie Grass that stock eat it out, and if allowed to
do so they undoubtedly will. Naturally, it grows in
tussocks, with a vast multitude of roots, which have a
tendency to push the centre of the plant high out of the
ground. If cattle are allowed to eat out the centre great
damage is done to the plant. But if after the first good
rain in autumn the Prairie Grass is well rolled, and the
centre of the tussock driven down into the ground, the
grass may be safely grazed during the following winte r
and spring without any damage at all to the plant.
Crested Dogstail. —A very fine short grass, suitable for
lands which are intended chiefly for sheep. It makes
a fine velvety sward, giving a short bite. Owing to its


deep roots it stands the summer well, and is suitable for
growing on the loamy plains with other sheep grasses. It
is very nutritious, and all stock eat it readily. Some
should be sown in all mixtures, as it forms a good bottom
among taller-growing varieties. Its character as a fatten-
ing grass is unsurpassed.
Sheep’s Fescue. — Another sheep grass of great value.
It is a very deep-rooting grass, suitable for poor and sandy
soils, and is thrown away if sown on rich land. It will
give good results where the larger growing grasses would
not stand a season. It is a highly fattening grass for
sheep, but other stock do not care for it.
Cocksfoot. — An excellent grass on suitable soil, but a
dangerous grass to sow on the best lands. Stock do not
like Cocksfoot as well as many other grasses, and will not
touch its flower heads anywhere. Hence, if it be allowed
into the mixture for the best lands it grows rankly, seeds
copiously, and, as it is a masterful grass, soon overpowers
and runs out the other and more valuable grasses. But on
banks and loams, and in second-class country, it is in its
right place, and being less rankly grown stock eat it well.
It comes later and stands the summer better than rye-
grass, but I do not think it is to be compared with that
grass in fattening properties. It is a good grass for forest
country as it grows in the shade of trees.
Lucerne.— This well-known fodder plant is rapidly
coming into favour in Australia, but I should advise
farmers to consider well before planting it largely or by


itself. If the farmer’s purpose be to grow horses or wool I
doubt if he can obtain a larger crop of fodder from his
land than Lucerne will give him. But I would hesitate
before sowing Lucerne in any quantity in a fattening
paddock. The milk of cows fed largely on Lucerne is
tainted and useless, and I fear that the flesh of animals
fattened on the same herb will be found to be fishy in
flavour, soft in texture, and will not keep so well as the
flesh of animals fed on a good mixture of grasses. The
fat produced by Lucerne contains more oil than stearine,
and therefore wastes more readily than the fat produced by
grass pasture in which the proportion of these ingredients
is reversed. Dodder is more often introduced with Lucerne
than with any other seed, and I have seen it carried
from a Lucerne field into an adjoining Clover field
where it fixed immediately in the Clover plants, and
would no doubt have done infinite harm, had it not been
observed and stopped in time. On dry paddocks either
Sanfoin or Birdsfoot Trefoil are much safer and more gene-
rally useful than Lucerne. But, if used discreetly and in
its proper place, Lucerne is a most valuable summer plant,
as there never was a summer too hot for it. It requires to
be grazed carefully, for, if it be alone in a paddock, stock
will injure it so much in grazing that they may kill it out-
right. I do not at all recommend it to be sown in a
mixture of grasses, as I find that stock neglect it utterly if
they have a choice between it and a suitable mixture of
grass.
Tall Oat-grass is better known in Germany than in
England and is a very valuable grass here. It comes in


the spring, and gives a great crop. It is slightly bitter,
and when planted by itself stock neglect it for a little time,
but once they acquire a taste for it they eat it down closely.
When planted in a mixture they do not notice its bitter-
ness. It is evidently a tonic, and should be included in
every mixture for good land. It stands heat fairly well.
While I should hesitate to say it is actually perennial, I
believe it will stand in good soil from three to five years.
Sanfoin.— This valuable herb is too little known in
Victoria. It requires lime, and unless there is a fair
supply of it in the soil Sanfoin will not do at all. In suit-
able land it is a grand fodder plant. Stock like it almost
too well, and if grazed on a Sanfoin paddock and turned
out of it on to grass adjoining, will stand all day with their
heads over the fence longing to get back. Its reputation in
England is that stock grazing on Sanfoin are never sick or
sorry. It gives a great crop and will grow on banks where
Lucerne would not. It makes good hay when carefully
handled. Owing to its obtaining nitrogen elsewhere than
from the soil, it leaves the ground richer than before it was
sown. This is so well understood in England that an out-
going tenant is always allowed compensation for any
Sanfoin root he leaves on the farm. There are two kinds—
one perennial, which gives a somewhat smaller crop than
the other, which lasts from two to four years, according to
circumstances. The latter is a splendid preparation for
land intended to be broken up for wheat. Indeed, when
the wheat lands of Victoria have to be farmed instead
of despoiled as they are now, Sanfoin will be found one of
the farmer’s best friends.


Black Medick.— An annual clover known in England
under many different names, and very highly thought of
there. It is practically independent of soil, so long as
there is some lime present in it. Poor sandy or heathy
land is quite good enough for Medick, and it seeds itself so
freely that its annual renewal is not noticed. It is not so
rich a fodder as some of the other clovers, but it thrives
where they would not live. Stock are very fond of it. It
should form part of the mixture on all inferior land except
such as is absolutely devoid of lime.
White Clover.— As with Rye-grass, I do not intend to
say much of so well-known a plant as White Clover.
Although it does not do everywhere, it should always
be included in a mixture (except on land where it has
been proved to have failed before), as it sometimes does
well in most unexpected localities. It is more of a fatten-
ing grass than a milk-producer, but no farmer objects to it
whether his object be butter or beef.
Alsike Clover.— This grand fodder is not as widely sown
as its merits warrant. It has all the good qualities of the
Red Clovers and Cow-grass and none of their drawbacks.
Stock are quite as fond of it as they are of White Clover,
and it gives a better crop. It also stands the heat longer
and comes after rain sooner than White Clover. If the
grass has to be cut for hay the Alsike will give greater bulk
to the crop, as it stands well up to the scythe, while from
its creeping habit White Clover does not contribute much to
the return of hay. It is trully perennial in character, and
on suitable land should have an equal place in every
mixture with White Clover.


Strawberry Clover.— To Mr, Black, of the Tarwin,
belongs the credit of introducing this most valuable fodder
to Victoria, and I am glad to say that he has lived to see a
practical result of his experiment, as his fat cattle usually
top the Melbourne market, and Strawberry Clover is the
chief ingredient in his fattening paddocks. This clover
likes moist meadows and grows well on clay and on good
land near the sea. Stock are as fond of this clover as they
are of Prairie Grass, but the two would not do together, as
the land suitable for Strawberry Clover would be altogether
too wet for Prairie in the winter. It grows so densely,
where it grows at all, as to bind the land and prevent its
cracking in the summer. It stands drought well, providing
it gets a proper soaking in the winter. In sowing Strawberry
Clover care should be taken not to break the woolly
envelope which contains the seeds. It requires no cultiva-
tion, and seems to grow quite well when simply sown on
the sward of grass and trodden in by the stock. On suit-
able land it gives a grand crop, and once it is established
on a property it may be left to take care of itself, as the
stock will spread it over every part of the land which is
suitable for its growth.
Yarrow or Millfoil.— This plant is a valuable addi-
tion to sheep pastures, as, in spite of its astringent flavour,
sheep eat it readily. It makes a good bottom to the
grass land, and as it grows on poor sandy lands and
stands drought well, it is bound, some day, to be largely
planted by our sheep farmers. It is believed to have
medicinal qualities of great service in keeping sheep
healthy.


Paspalum dilatatum I have mentioned above, and I need
not repeat my observations here.
There are many other and valuable grasses in cultivation
in Europe, but I have only selected those which my
experiments have shown to be of special value in Victoria,
and if what I have written will only induce a few farmers
to experiment, observe, and improve their pastures, I shall
be more than satisfied. lam aware that my letters have
caused some discussion amongst farmers, and some of them
hold strongly that I am wrong in many of my opinions.
Very likely I am, but I shall be glad to defend my opinions
if those who differ from me will write and state in what
they differ.
I have often heard farmers complain that many of our
good-looking red or chocolate hills are inferior in quality,
and that English grasses will not stand on them. I know
many such hills which have been ploughed and laid down
with grass where but little grass is now to be seen, but
where the Flat Dandelion ( Hypochaeris radinta ) reigns
triumphant and almost alone.
This is not the fault of the hills, but of the farmers.
The soil on these hills is for the most part of a very
tenacious character, well suited for growing crops of various
kinds, but, from the steepness of the hills, difficult and
expensive to work. Therefore the farmer who cultivates
such hills for grass is usually content with ploughing once,
taking a crop off, and harrowing grass seeds in on the
stubbles in the autumn. Bad as such farming is on most


lands, it is simply fatal on such hills, and no sward of
grass can be expected from such treatment. But for
Thistles, Flatweed Docks, and Sorrel, the cultivation is amply
sufficient. All they require is that the original surface be
broken so as to make a seed bed for them, and their strong
penetrating roots, which it is next to impossible to kill,
will do the rest.
If a farmer desires to convert red hills into valuable
grass land he must cultivate thoroughly, and, if possible,
take several crops off the hills before laying them away to
grass. As their soil is generally extremely rich, they will
stand such cropping, and be the better for it. If such
crops be taken, the farmer will find that the whole
character of the soil will be changed. Instead of the
tough sticky soil which he turned over with difficulty at
the first ploughing, he will find that he has a loose friable
soil, easily w T orked, and full of fibre, and that where he has
had to work with the turnwrest or hillside plough in
the first instance, he can now go up and down the hills
with his double-furrow without unduly pressing his horses.
When he has brought the soil on his hills into this
condition by cultivation, he may safely prepare to sow his
grass seeds. If he has taken several crops, and the land
has been cultivated for each, I would recommend that the
first preparation for the grass seed would be to roll the
stubbles. I would not recommend that the stubbled sur-
face be broken with the plough, as, from the alteration in
the character of the soil, and from its being on a hillside
more or less steep, it would be apt to roll downwards if


disturbed for the grass after the last crop. It is better,
therefore, to harrow and roll the stubbles so as to get an
even firm surface and then sow the seed. On the seed sow
2 cwt. of good bonedust or bonemeal. Harrow the seeds
and then roll them. A brake on the roller on such hills
is a great advantage, as the horses will not have to pole-up
to resist the roller so much, and will not, therefore, dig
their feet in so deeply going down hill, and this is a
consideration where the land has been rendered workable
by cultivation.
Now you will ask why do I recommend using bonedust
on rich land. My answer is because I find it pays. It
gives the grass on the surface a start of the strong-rooting
weeds, and so eventually to beat them, and, once the
ground is covered with a sward of grass, the floating seeds
of thistles and dandelion have much less chance of reaching
the soil than they had when the ground was bare.
If the farmer can do with a crop of meadow hay or
ensilage it will pay him much better to mow the hills in
the first season of the grass rather than to graze them, as
by this moans the land will have more time to become
solid and the grass roots to penetrate deeper and become
more numerous, and so hold the soil from slipping on the
hillside when cattle or sheep are put on to graze.
If it be within the farmer’s power, sheep should always
be put to graze such hills first, as although they may mark
XT
the hillside with tracks, they will tread out less grass and
do less injury than heavier cattle would.


The hill farmer must expect that more grass will be
pulled out by grazing in the first year or two than would
happen on the flat land, as by the slipping of the cattle
grass will become loosened, and so be more easily pulled
out by the teeth. This is but a temporary drawback, and
as the hills become solid again will entirely cease.;
it is on such hills that Prairie Grass, Cocksfoot, and
Timothy show what they can do, and when mixed with
suitable bottom grasses and clovers make the landscape
beautiful and the farmer’s heart glad. The farmer who
establishes a sward on such hills, if the water supply be
good, has perfect sheep country, and his stock will not
suffer from fluke, footrot, or many other diseases which
affect them on the flats, but will return the best wool and
mutton that can be produced.
While I am writing on hill subjects, there is one matter
of great importance to which sufficient attention is not
paid, and on which I would like to say a few words—that
is, fencing on a hillside. How often do we see new fences
put up with the posts leaning with the hill thus :


This is quite wrong, as the fence is always thrusting
down hill, and its life is therefore shortened by many
years. Such a fence is generally the result of employing a
lazy or careless fencer. The posts should be perfectly
upright, so that there shall be no thrust down hill, but
they should be morticed and bored on the slant, parallel
to the slant of the hill, so that the full width of the rails
may be inserted in the mortice holes and fill them, and
make each panel bear its own weight and no more, and so
that the wire may be in a continuous line parallel to the
surface of the hill, and be easily and safely strained in that
position. If upright posts be bored straight through, the
wire will be checked and bent at every post, and, instead
of being in a straight line it will be in a series of angles
which will cause an unnecessary strain on every panel,
which must have the effect of pulling the fence out of line,
and of breaking the wire long before it should be worn out.
The diagram A shows upright posts morticed and bored
straight hrough. We here see how the end of the rail
has to be cut away to be inserted in the mortice-hole at


all, and how little of it remains to keep the rail in position,
and, worse than all, the vacuum that is left in every
instance. We also see how the wire is bent into angles at
every post, and how impossible it would be to properly
strain a wire for which the posts were so bored.
Diagram B, on the contrary, shows that, with the slant-
ing mortice, the whole width of the rail can be inserted,
leaving no vacuum, and the slanting bore allows the wire
to be in a straight line without angle or impediment, and
it needs no explanation to show which is the better fence.
Where rails are used their position should be reversed
from that usually adopted ; that is to say, the sharp edge
of the rail should be uppermost. This style of building a
rail has many advantages. Rails so placed allow the rain
water to run off more quickly, and therefore absorb less
than rails fitted in the ordinary way. They are also more
exposed to the sun, and so will dry more quickly and
lastly, they have a great advantage in saving your and


your neighbour’s time, as when he comes to see you he
will not sit nearly so long on the fence if the feather edge
of the rail be uppermost.
What shall I do to improve my little paddock? is a
question I have been so often asked that I am convinced a
word or two on the subject will meet a want.
I write chiefly of the paddocks of from half-an-acre to
five or six acres in extent which are attached to dwellings
round Melbourne. The soil of these paddocks is for the
most part poor, and to the north and east of the city is very
stiff; but the treatment I advocate may, with only slight
modification, be applied as well to the sands of Caulfield
and Brighton as to the stiff clays of Northcote and Haw-
thorn.
My readers will remember I do not pretend to say that
what I suggest here would pay to do on a farm, but if a
gentleman of means, living on a piece of land worth from
£3OO to £lOOO per acre, wants to see that land carrying a
perfect sole of grass he must adopt some such course as I
propose, and it will pay him to do so, as the large bulk
of fodder which his land will produce in the process will
amply repay him for his outlay.
We will suppose the land has been sufficiently cleared
to be ploughed, and has been laid down in the imperfect
way we see so many paddocks in Victoria. The first pro-
cess is to drain the whole paddock with agricultural drain
pipes. The main drains should not be more than 40 feet


apart and should run across the slope of the hill (if the
paddock be not level), so as to catch the soakage. The
herring-bone drains should not be more than 20 feet apart
and should join the main drains at an angle of about 45
degrees, so that the water flowing in them should not lose
momentum as it enters the main drain. All the drains
should be well down into the clay, and, when laid, should
have a layer of brushwood placed over them before the
trenches are filled in. The drainage is much better done
in the summer than at any other time. As the further
process I advocate takes two years to complete, and as the
whole of the paddock, as a rule, cannot be spared for
so long, I would suggest that a part be done at a time.
The first cultural operation is to break the surface with a
plough in summer, and then to dig in a heavy dressing of
well-rotted stable manure, which should be obtainable in
the neighbourhood at about 3s. per load. Early in autumn
part of the land should be sown with Barley and Vetches
to provide feed for the cows in early winter. When this
crop is well up it should be rolled. Other parts should be
sown with Drum-head Cabbages for late winter use. These
would, of course, be transplanted from the seed bed so as
to save some months’ time. If vegetables for the kitchen,
such as Cauliflowers, Cabbages, Brussels Sprouts, &c., are
required, they will grow well in the newly-turned land,
and have better flavour than similar vegetables grown in an
old kitchen garden.
The Barley and Vetches sown in April will be ready for
use in June, and should then be fed to the cows. Imme-
diately the ground is cleared of this crop it should again be


turned up and resown with Barley and Vetches, To this
crop a little bone-dust or guano would be a very great
help, and would by no means be thrown away.
By October the whole of the ground should be cleared,
as at that time of year the paddock not under cultivation
will keep the cows. Another good dressing of manure
should now be given, and the land deeply dug for the two
final crops before the grass.
These summer crops should be Maize (or some similar
summer fodder, such as Broom-corn or Sorghum, according
to taste) and Mangels.
The Maize will yield a very heavy crop for summer feed,
and if Broom-corn be sown it will give at least two good
crops of fodder, every bit of which the cows will consume.
The Mangels will do best if sown where they are to
stand, and care has to be taken to secure a good strain of
seed. When the ground intended for Mangels has been
dug, top-dress to the acre 1 cwt. of superphosphate and
cwt. of kainit, and scarify these in; then sow the seeds
24 inches between the rows, and 18 inches between the
sets. Dibble the seeds in, taking care not to sow them
more than half-an-inch deep, and drop two seeds into each
dibble hole. Cover the seeds with back of rake, and roll
the whole patch. When the plants are well up, single
them out so that no two plants shall be growing together
(this is best done by cutting off the surplus plant, so as not
to disturb the other), and hoe in 1 cwt. of salt to the acre.


This will kill the weeds, and materially help the Mangels.
When plants are well forward, top-dress again with 1 cwt.
of superphosphates, -J cwt. of kainit, and 1 cwt. of salt,
and work the surface well through the summer, remember-
ing that by working you are not only saving water, but
are largely increasing the yield of Mangels, and are doing
the best for the permanent crop of grass you started to
obtain.
If liquid manure can be obtained (even house-slops), the
Mangels will be thankful for it, and yield accordingly. I
may seem to dwell lovingly over the cultivation of Mangels,
but I know the satisfaction it is to have a handsome, even
crop, yielding from 80 to 40 tons to the acre of food,
which in the bitter months of July and August will keep
the cows in full profit and good condition.
It is well understood that crops grown in the hot weather
and stored, such as Mangels, Potatoes, or Ensilage, are of
more value to cattle than any crops grown in the winter, as
the latter are cold and watery. By the middle of April
the Mangels will be ready to pull, and the tops should be cut
off not too close, and the Mangels carted under cover with
as little bruising as possible. They should not be fed' to
the cattle for at least six weeks after being stored, as they
are improving all that time, and it is from the middle of
June to the middle of August they will be of most value in
keeping up the supply of milk.
The Mangels and Maize being cleared off, if a few loads
of spent lime from the tan yard can be obtained so much


the better, and let it and the hair mixed with it be spread
on the land.
We now have to finally dig the land for the grass, and
this should be most carefully done. No pointing, but deep
honest digging, and any manure that is to be seen in
the ground should be carefully mixed with the soil. The
whole depth dug should be thoroughly pulverised, which is
easily done at that season, and the surface should be
worked as fine as possible and then rolled. No time will
be lost by leaving the ground to lie for a few weeks,
as it will be settling firm all that time, and any weed
seeds that may be on the surface will germinate. A
slight stroke of the harrows or cultivator will kill these,
and leave the surface in perfect order for sowing the
grass.
A suitable mixture being decided on, the seed should be
carefully sown and covered with a brush harrowing, and
again rolled. The grass may be left without any further
operation until it commences to make its spring growth,
when it should be lightly topped with a scythe (but it
should by no means be cut close), and, if possible, should
be again rolled and laid by for a crop of meadow hay. The
hay should be cut before the weather gets too hot, and if a
top-dressing from the compost heap can be then spared for
the young grass the job will be done, and so much of the
paddock will be properly laid down in grass. So soon as
there is a good bite available the cattle may be admitted,
and they will soon show how they appreciate the grass on
the cultivated patch.


If you have plenty of water free you can irrigate with
advantage all the summer, but if you have to buy water
it will you to keep it on the grass in the spring until
about Christmas, according to the season. After that,
when the great heat of summer causes such tremendous
evaporation it is better to let the grass ripen and gradually
die off. But when most advantage is to be got out of Yan
Yean or other purchased water is in the autumn, when
once the nights begin to lengthen and the dews to fall
(about the Ist of April) do not wait for rain, but use the
water freely. You will thus take advantage of the growing
weather, and not only thicken and improve the pasture but
also procure a wealth of feed for the winter. The grass
grown at this period is of far greater value, pound for
pound, than any grass that is grown in the winter without
sunshine. Besides, if you depend on any small rain that
may fall in March or April, the seed which had ripened
in the summer and fallen on the pastures will germinate,
but if it be not kept supplied with moisture will certainly
malt and perish. Of course if heavy rains fall in March,
followed by nice mild moist growing weather, you need not
spend money in water, but if heat follows the rain the
water must be put on and kept on to secure the best
results. By this expenditure of water for a month or six
weeks you will do more for your pastures than by any
other of the minor operations.
The careful farmer never ceases to observe his pastures,
but will go constantly over them and see where by a little
attention they may be improved. Some agricultural
writers tell us that grass lands receive no benefit from


tillage. This is a mistake. Grass lands should be
harrowed and cultivated every autumn after the fall of the
first heavy rains, and if possible should be top-dressed
with any suitable manure the farmer can provide. We
need not fear that the grass dragged out by the harrows
will be lost, for the subsequent rolling which will be
necessary to complete the operation will reset the disturbed
grass. If the sward is not close and even, a few pounds of
suitable grass and Clover-seed will help the pastures won-
derfully. Very little thought will show how beneficial
such treatment is to grass land. The harrows break the
congested soil and allow the rains of winter to descend
into the soil, and the cultivated soil retains the welcome
nitrogen which these rains contain ; and if in addition the
land be top-dressed, the elements of fertility are restored
which have become diminished by the meat, milk, or wool
which were sold or consumed off the land.
It is not sufficiently understood that the top few inches
of surface soil are the great laboratory and store-house for
the land, and that by far the greatest part of Nature’s
work is done in those few inches. If they be kept properly
tilled and open they grasp all the valuable substances
supplied by manure, air, rain, sunshine, and frost; and
from the surface these substances' gradually descend and
supply the plants with their food as required. No doubt
many deep-rooting plants bring up valuable elements from
great depths, and, if allowed to do so, deposit these on the
surface to the enrichment of the whole soil. It is well to
give an object lesson which will explain my meaning as to
the operations carried on in the surface soil better than


any description can do. Take as an example a post of
a fence that has stood in position for twenty years, and
you will find that, as a general rule, the butt of the post
which has been 2 feet 6 inches in the earth all that time is
in a fair state of preservation, but where the post has
decayed and failed is “ between wind and water,” as the
sailors say, or in the first few inches of soil where Nature
has been doing her best to convert the wood of the post
into plant food. It is therefore the more advisable to keep
the surface of the land in such condition by tillage that it
may readily absorb the valuable elements deposited in it by
dew and rain.
Rain, as is well known, brings nitrogen from the atmo-
sphere ; but rain-water which has passed through the top
soil contains no nitrogen—so with sewage. All the
manurial elements of sewage when poured on to the land,
in proper condition, are retained by the earth, and the
water which flows away is clear and bright and contains
no trace of the offensive but valuable matter it contained
when in the sewer.
Nature seems to point out by some of her operations the
benefit to be derived from the breaking of the soil in grass
lands. We all know the small annual poa which grows so
readily in gardens and paddocks after the first autumn
rains. During the autumn and winter this little grass
gives a fair bite to stock and keeps a good hold of the soil;
but in the very early spring, just as it matures its seeds,
it seems to have but a very poor hold of the ground, and
stock pull it up easily and leave the paddock in such an
ugly uprooted condition that some people think the “ take


■;7>6o GRASS LANDS OF VICTORIA.
COji 1
all” has been to work on their grass. But those who
observe know that when the annual poa has been pulled
up freely by this stock, the better grasses will come more
strongly and luxuriantly than where no poa was disturbed,
thus showing that the loosening of the surface, caused by
this grass being uprooted, allowed the beneficial effects
of the spring rains to take effect on the permanent grass.
Of course weeds will have to be dealt with so far as
it will pay to do so. The watchful farmer never allows a
dangerous weed to spread, but, unfortunately, we have had
some weeds imported into the colony, such as Cape weed,
Flat weed, and others with which it would be impossible to
cope on a large property. But where a farmer’s pasture is
all under his own eye he can do a great deal to prevent the
spread of objectionable weeds. He will often observe that
a great Wild Raspberry has entered into partnership with a
long-armed Dock, several Ferns, and a patch of Yorkshire
Fog, and the whole make together an unsightly tuft into
which the stock will not venture, as there is not much to
go for and what there is is not worth the trouble of
contending with the tangle. Put the fern-hook through
such tufts at once and the stock will consume most of the
tangle when it is wilted and better herbage will take its
place in the field.
I regret I have not more time to devote to this pamphlet,
as I am well aware the subject is worthy of greater con-
sideration than I have been able to bestow upon it, but in
the hope that it will induce others to give attention to the
improvement of pasture lands I place my views before the
public in the present form. d~v^
F
McCarron. Bird & Co., Printers, 479 Collins Stre/f
- NOVJ992
