

THE PRESBYTERIAN
Hostel for Girls
"DUNMORE"
32 TUPPER STREET
MARRICKVILLE
SYDNEY


NOTE.
The proceeds from the sale of these booklets
at 1/- each will go towards the Building Fund ;
£ 1 80 being yet necessary before the recreation
room can be opened free of debt.


"DUNMORE.”


The Presbyterion Hostel for
Girls
“DUNMORE”
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
RUSSELL SINCLAIR, Esq., 0.8. E. (Chairman).
Miss SADIE ■ PEIRCE, ‘ ‘ Fair-mount, ’ ’ Albert Street, Petersham,
(Hon. Secretary).
B. C. WALMSLEY, Esq., Bank of New Zealand Chambers, George
and Wynyard Streets, Sydney (Hon. Treasurer).
ERIC SINCLAIR, Esq., M.D. (Vice-Chairman).
Mrs. T. MORGAN (Convener of House Committee).
Rev. V. C. BELL.
Mrs. A. DAVIDSON.
Mrs. H. W. FELL.
Miss FENWICK.
Mrs. J. A. FERGUSON.
Mrs. A. FLEMING.
Mrs. J. H. GOODLET.
Miss MARGARET HARRIS.
Dr. A. HARPER.
Dr. MARGARET HARPER.
Miss M. KILLEN.
Colonel MURDOCH, 0.8. E.
Miss R. McDIABMID.
Mrs. S. ROBERTSON.
Mrs. A. BOSS.
Mrs. SMAIL.
Miss E. THOMSON.
Miss WADE.
Miss WATSON.


THE PRESBYTERIAN HOSTEL
FOR GIRLS.
AIMS.
“Dunmore” has been established by the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales as a hostel for girls, the
object of the Social Service Committee being to provide
a quiet, refined home in close proximity to the University
and Teachers’ Training College for girls, who are com-
pelled, for educational reasons, to reside in the city.
Here, parents of country girls may rest assured that every-
thing will be done to promote the health, comfort, and
spiritual wellbeing of their daughters. It is generally felt
that no branch of the work of the Social Service Commit-
tee of our Church is more important than this, and the
General Assembly has heartily commended it to the gen-
erous support of our Presbyterian people.
OPENING CEREMONY.
The project of establishing a Girls’ Hostel was first
discussed in committees of the Church in the years 1917
and 1918, but strenuous canvass for subscriptions was


A corner of the Sitting Room.


hecessary before the purchase of any property could he
risked. After very strenuous work on the part of the Rev.
F. A. Darling, as Chairman of Committee, in August, 1920,
the present property, which was deemed a most suitable
one, was transferred to the Committee. By the beginning
of September, 1922, the building was ready for occupation,
and on September 22nd a large and enthusiastic gather-
ing assembled at the entrance of the Hostel for the open-
ing ceremony, which was performed by Her Excellency
Lady Forster.
SITUATION,
The Hostel stands on a block of ground having a
frontage of 125 feet to Tupper Street, with a fine depth
running through to Alma Avenue. There is ample space
for future extension. The site is close to the Stanmore
Road, very near to the Enmore tram terminus, and thus
within easy walking distance of the University, being
barely one tram section distant, and two sections from the
City. The neighbourhood is quiet and retired, being
almost exclusively residential.
From a health point of view, the site is unsurpassed.
The house, being set upon an elevation, commands exten-
sive views of the surrounding country. Tupper Street is
for postal purposes in Marrickville, but the Hostel is
practically in Stanmore.
The Rev. Alex. Fleming, the minister of Stanmore,
has the Hostel in his pastoral care.


One of the Cubicles.


THE HOUSE BUILDING.
“Dunmore” is a substantially built family mansion,
standing in large grounds. Upon its acquisition by the
Church, it was entirely remodelled—under the able
supervision of Mr. T. J. Darling, A.l.A.—suitably to the
special purposes in view. The result is comfortable ac-
commodation for twenty-two students, together with the
Lady Superintendent and her staff.
The desire has been to provide the nearest approach
possible to a real home. Each girl has her own bed-sitting
room, and every room has its own direct light and ven-
tilation. Ample lavatory accommodation has been pro-
vided, with hot and cold water. The sitting room and the
dining room are attractive and ensure opportunities for
social intercourse and a cheerful home life.
As a result of a recent effort on the part of the Com-
mittee, the sum of £250 has been collected towards the
renovation and alteration of a substantial building at the
rear of the Hostel, for the purpose of providing a recrea-
tion room Avhere the students may enjoy their leisure
hours without the risk of disturbing girls who may be
engaged in studying,
CONDITIONS OF ADMISSION.
A “House Committee,” appointed by the Presby-
terian Hostel Council, along with the Superintendent, has
immediate control of all admissions and internal arrange-
ments.


In the Hostel Garden.


Preference for admission is granted to members of
Presbyterian families and to girls whose homes are in the
country against those whose homes are in the suburbs or
city. Terms- 30/- per week. One double cubicle is avail-
able for two girls at 25/- per week each.
At holiday seasons accommodation is available for
lady visitors to Sydney at £2/2/- per week.
Application forms for admission as residents are pro-
curable either from the Superintendent at the Hostel, or
from the Church Offices, 23 York Street, Sydney.
REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTS.
1. The tariff shall be 30/- per week, except in the case of
a small cubicle, which will be 25/-, and 25/- per week
where two share a room.
2. No reduction will be made for temporary absence
under a week. A week’s notice is required from all
residents before they vacate their rooms. Residents
intending to be absent for an extended period may, at
the discretion of the Superintendent, retain their
room, provided the arrangement is made with the
Superintendent at the time of leaving; the charge for
this will be 2/6 per week.
3. Preference for admission shall be made to members of
Presbyterian families, and to girls whose homes are in
the country, as against those whose homes are in the
suburbs.


4. No afternoon tea or supper is provided for residents.
There is a kitchenette specially fitted for residents
where they may prepare such for themselves.
5. On application to the Superintendent, lunch will be
provided for residents unable to return at mid-day.
6. Each resident is expected to make her own bed, and
to keep her room tidy, and is responsible for any dam-
age done by her. A housemaid will sweep out and
wash rooms as required.
7. Laundry accommodation is provided where residents
can do their own washing.
8. Lights shall be “ switched,off ”at 11 p.m. Residents
must be in the Hostel each night by 11 p.m. Any de-
parture from this regulation will only be permitted
after special arrangements with the Superintendent.
9. Lach resident will be allowed one guest at one meal
each fortnight. Guests entertained beyond that num-
ber shall be subject to the approval of the Superin-
tendent, and shall be paid for at the rate of one shil-
ling per meal.
10. Family prayers shall be held every morning before
breakfast, and residents are expected to attend as
regularly as possible.
11. Residents are expected by the Council to attend
Church each Sunday and observe the day quietly.


MAINTENANCE AND EXTENSION.
To purchase and renovate the Hostel property a largo
liability was incurred by the Social Service Committee.
To liquidate this debt and to provide for necessary exten-
sions the most generous support is needed. Other hostels
must be provided as the work develops. Current ex-
penses are met from current income, but an earnest appeal
is made for subscriptiohs;..to be sent to the Honorary
Treasurer: B. C. Walmsley, Esq., Bank of New Zealand
Chambers, Oeorge and Wynyard Streets, Sydney.
It is suggested that this work among the young
women of the Church might be sympathetically remem-
bered by our people in making testamentary dispositions
of their substance.
Wholly sot up and printed in Australia hy D. S. Ford,
48-o0 Keservoir St., Sydney.
