

19U,
VICTOUIA.
DEPARTMENT OF MINES.
BULLETINS
OF THE
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF VICTORIA
(H. HERMAN, 8.C.E., M.M.E., F.G.S., Director),
ISSUED BY
W. DICKSON, SECRETARY FOR MINES, UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF
THE HON. J. DRYSDALE BROWN, M.L.C., MINISTER OF MINES.
NO. 32.
THE MOUNT WILLIAM OR M ALL 1(1 NO
GOLH-FIELI),
WITH GEOLOGK’AL MAP,
BY
R. A. F. MURRAY.
lij; r.ultjoiUji;
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
7916. —Prick 6d.




THE MAFEKING OR MOUNT WILLIAM
GOLD-FIELD.
The recently completed geological map of the Mafeking gold-field
represents an area of 9 square miles in a square block, 3 miles north
and south, by 3 miles east and west, comprising portions of the parishes
of Hekeeya and Moyston West, counties of Ripon and Borung, in the
Western District of Victoria, about 19 miles west-south-west from
Ararat.
In the latter portion of 1900, a few weeks after the beginning of
the rush, Mr. H. Herman, then Acting Government Geologist, visited
the new field, and furnished a report* upon it, accompanied by a sketch
plan, which, in the then state of development, was necessarily lacking
in detail, though the general conclusions were unmistakably sound as
regards the substance of the report.
Later mining developments have enabled me to show somewhat more
detail on the plan as regards the topographical and geological features,
and to acquire a somewhat further insight with respect to the field from
a mining point of view.
Physical Features.
The physical features of the area mapped, in conjunction with the
geological conditions, furnish much material for research as regards
the past geological history of the country, both within and far beyond
the limits of the survey.
About the north-west corner of the area is the bluff, precipitous
point of a lofty range trending from Mt. William —some miles to the
northward —and forming portion of the Main Divide of Victoria, or
the watershed line between the waters flowing towards the Murray
valley, on the north, and those flowing towards the southern coast-line.
The point referred to (often erroneously taken for Mt. William itself)
is about 3,500 feet in elevation above sea level, Mt. William, to the
north, being over 3,800 feet. The connecting ridge shows rugged escarp-
ments and cliffs facing the east towards the head of the Little Wimmera
(a Murray valley affluent), and a more even and gentler slope west-
ward towards the head waters of the Wannon, which trends to the
south coast. From the bluff point above mentioned, the Main Divide
trends easterly through the northern part of the sheet for about a mile
and a half, falling to a saddle of about 2,300 feet in elevation at the
head of the Little Wimmera, rising again to a point of about 2,700 feet,
and then deflecting northerly again towards Moyston on a descending
grade. A spur from here goes eastward, falling to a saddle of 1,800 feet,
then rising to a steep point known as Sugar Loaf, nearly 3,000 feet in
elevation, and thence descending south along the eastern boundary of
the sheet to the plain country, which is here from 900 feet to 1,000 feet
above sea level.
• Report on the Mount William Gold-field- Spec- Kept., Dept. Mines, 1900, pp. 7, map and section.


From the bluff point in the north-west corner of the sheet, there
descends southerly a spur forming the watershed between Jimmy’s Creek
and its tributary, Saw Mill Creek, flowing to the Waunon on the west,
and the drainage area of Mason’s Creek and its tributaries in the
central and south-eastern portion of the area surveyed. This water-
shed descends to a broad range or plateau decreasing in altitude south-
ward from 1,700 feet in the central portion to 1,350 feet above sea level
at. the south-west corner of the map, and from this plateau descend
abrupt spurs between the various branches of Mason’s Gully and jSTeild’s
Creek, trending south and eastward to the flat country.
There are thus three main physical features in the area under notice;
the lofty, horseshoe-shaped range, with its eastern and western arms
falling southward; the plateau partly encircled on the north by this
range; and the gullies and minor spurs descending from the plateau to
the flat country in the south-east of the sheet. These features are
described somewhat at length, on account of their relation to the geo-
logical formations and the evidence they afford as to' the geological
history of the area.
Geological Features.
The main geological formations represented in the area mapped are
four in number—the granodiorite, forming the bedrock of the area;
the Grampian sandstones, occupying the northern margin, and forming
the loftiest portion of the range; the Tertiary gravels, clays, &c., con-
stituting'the surface of the plateau and resting on the granodiorite;
and the Post-Tertiary gravels, sands, clays, &c., occupying the beds of
gullies and creeks, and forming the wide flats where the latter discharge.
The Granodiorite. —In the nomenclature of plutonic rocks generally,
and particularly those of granitic character, a multitude of designations
have been adopted according to the character, proportions, and mode
of arrangement of the minerals composing them, and not infrequently
many of these varieties are found occurring in the same mass, so that
for all practical purposes, outside of minute petrological researches,
some general term suffices. With respect to the Mt. William field,
Mr. Herman in his report adopted the term “ quartz mica diorite ”
(from a microscopic determination by the late Hr. A. W. Howitt*),
shortened for convenience to plain “ diorite,” which serves the purpose,
and is recognised and used by the local miners. Generally the rock,
where undecomposed, is medium to finely granitic in character, and to
the eye appears to be composed mainly of felspar, with finely granular
quartz and some hornblende and mica. Decomposed, it forms a soft,
friable, kaolinised rock, with fine quartz grit, easily acted on by water,
and the decomposition extends to various depths where the rock has
been covered and protected by other deposits; but, where such protection
does not exist, atmospheric action seems to have removed decomposed
surfaces as soon as formed, leaving exposed the hard underlying portion
in the form of projecting rounded masses and tors at the surface,
passing downward into a solid body below. The rock is much jointed
laterally and vertically, and hence the tendency to decompose along the
joint planes, leaving the blocks to weather into rounded and egg-shaped
masses, and gradually to exfoliate under atmospheric action.
*■ See Herman, op. eit. The more modern term granodiorite Is used In this report.


Where protected from erosion by overlying deposits, the decomposed
granodiorite contains many of these masses of the more resistant kind
of rock, often mistaken for waterworn boulders, though in reality only
the harder masses that have so far remained unaffected by decomposi-
tion. These masses become more numerous and closer together down-
wards till the limits of decomposition are reached, and the rock is
uniformly solid, though still maintaining the jointed structure.
The Grampian Sandstones. —These rocks constitute the main mass
of the great group of ranges known as the Grampians, the Serra, the
Victoria, and the Black ranges, occupying an area of some 1,500 square
miles roughly, and forming a series of mountainous, rugged tracts,
separated by deep valleys, and affording much picturesque scenery.
Mr. Herman, in the report above referred to, classifies the Grampian
sandstones (provisionally) as Carboniferous, though, so far, no
palceontological evidence has been found to determine their true posi-
tion.* They present a certain resemblance to the Avon sandstones of
Gippsland, regarded as either Upper Devonian or Lower Carboniferous
on the evidence of their fossil flora.
Mr. A. R. C. Sehvyn (formerly Government Geologist) classed both
eastern and western groups under the general provisional term, Upper
Palaeozoic.
In the area under notice, the Grampian sandstones occupy its
northern portion, the boundary between them and the underlying grano-
diorite running easterly across the sheet at an elevation, approximately,
of 1,700 to 1,900 feet above the sea along the southern slope of the
main range. Owing to the great accumulation of surface rubble, no
section could he obtained of the actual junction of the sandstones and
the granodiorite, and their relation to each other is not clear.
The lowest visible beds of this group consist here of fine to medium
grained, hard, siliceous, white sandstone, approaching quartzite in
character; these extend up to nearly 3,000 feet at the foot of the steepest
portion of the cliff escarpment in the north-west corner of the sheet,
from which level to the summit are layers of hard, brown, siliceous sand-
stone, thick-bedded to flaggy in character, which prevail northward
along the precipitous escarpment facing east and overlooking the Little
Wimmera, and. westward towards the Wannon. The beds have an
inclination westward, and the surface of the slope of the range in that
direction conforms to their dip. So far as could be seen, the white
quartzites appear to rest directly on the granodiorite, and their water-
worn fragments, with a less proportion of those from the upper beds,
constitute the hulk of the material composing the Tertiary gravels.
Tertiary. —The Tertiary deposits in this locality consist mostly of
gravels composed, as above stated, mainly of waterworn boulders and
pebbles of the quartzites and sandstones of the Grampian series, with
some layers of clay, silt, and sand derived from erosion of the grano-
diorite, pebbles or boulders of which are rare, owing to its decomposable
nature. The deposit, broken in one or two places by the erosion of
recent creeks and gullies,' extends from westward of Tern Creek (the
easternmost branch of Mason’s), westward by the heads of Malay,
Battery, and Emmett’s Creeks, thence it forms the surface of the
plateau bounded by Saw Mill Creek on the west and the heads of
• Since this report was written, fossils have been found by Mr. W. H. Ferguson which prove the
Grampian sandstones to be Carboniferous. Mr. Ferguson’s report will be published in Eec Geol. Surv.,
Viet., Vol. 111., Pt. 4.


other branches of Mason’s on the east, and slopes south-westerly into
the drainage area of the Wannon. About 1,700 feet above sea level
appears to be the highest elevation, where these deposits flank the grano-
diorite along their northern boundary, and the plateau—about a mile
in width—slopes to an elevation of 1,300 feet on the western boundary
of the area mapped. As far as can be learned from mining,excavations
and borings, the thickness of the Tertiary gravels varies up to 80 feet,
though there may he deeper ground in the central part of the plateau
adjacent to Jimmy’s Creek, and from either edge there is an inward
incline of the surface of the granodiorite beneath the gravels. The spurs
of exposed granodiorite jutting eastward between the tributaries of
Mason’s and Ucild’s Creeks have a somewhat higher elevation than the
granodiorite surface under the gravels of the plateau, and the same is
observable as regards the granodiorite exposures along Jimmy’s and Saw
Mill Creeks on the west.
The Tertiary gravels and associated deposits do not give one the
idea of their being due to fluviatile action; they suggest rather the pos-
sibility of marine action —an inlet from the ocean wearing a trough in
the granodiorite and eating into the base of the overlying sandstones,
detaching, rounding, and carrying seaward the fragments of harder rock,
and reducing the softer to clays and sands. True, no marine fossils
have been found to substantiate the supposition; hut the preservation
of such vestiges could hardly be expected in rough gravels on a wave-
beaten coast. Although rightly classed as Tertiary in respect of their
latest stage of development, no one can say how far back in the Tertiary
era, or even further back still into the Mesozoic, the erosive action may
have begun of which these gravels are the products; but there can he
no doubt that the containing granodiorite ranges on either side were
once far higher above the surface of the gravels than now, and have
been worn down and denuded until the creeks and gullies of the present
day were eroded to a deeper level than the floor of the old gravels.
Post-Tertiary. —The Post-Tertiary or Recent deposits are simply
those in the beds of the creeks and gullies, and in the wider flats into
which these tributaries empty. They consist of gravels and sandy
deposits made up of materials derived from the denudation of the
edges of the Tertiary gravels and the deeper erosion of the granodiorite.
In the upper portions of the gullies, where the fall is not very steep,
they occupy varying widths, seldom exceeding 100 feet or so; but, lower
down towards the flats, the fall becomes steeper, and the gullies are
nearly rock-hound, everything having been swept away to the bare rock
and carried down to the flats, where the deposits consist of clays more
or less intermixed with granitic detritus and gravelly deposits in the
deeper ground.
It seems pretty clear that the erosive action which scooped out the
various gullies trending into the fiats of Mason’s and jSTeild’s creeks on
the east, and Saw Mill Creek on the west, ate hack into and lowered the
surface of the granodiorite, and encroached upon the edges of the Ter-
tiary gravels, in some places breaking the continuity of the latter.
The Gold "Workings.
This little field presents somewhat different conditions to those pre-
vailing in most other Victorian gold-fields, the bedrock and matrix-
bearer being the granodiorite only, and there being no representatives


of the Ordovician or Silurian rocks with which (sometimes in conjunc-
tion with granites, &c.), all the other fields in the State are associated.
At the same time, as pointed out by Mr. Herman in his report previously
referred to, there is nothing in the field that is foreign to geological
and mining experience elsewhere, and the mode of occurrence of the
gold here upsets no previously conceived geological theory whatever.
Except a few detached outside auriferous patches of no special
importance, all the workings of the Mafeking or Mt. William field,
as developed so far, are contained within an area of little over one
square mile, and, of course, the actually productive portions would aggre-
gate very much less; hut, nevertheless, it would appear, from such
records as can be obtained, that the value of the total yield up to now
has exceeded £IOO,OOO, the hulk of which was won from the creeks and
gullies above where they enter the flats, and up to the boundary of the
Tertiary gravels.* During the last seven years an average of about
twenty men have made a living during the winter months by sluicing.
The easternmost gully in the sheet (known as Fern Gully) empty-
ing into Mason’s Flat, seems to have yielded little or no payable gold;
but Mason’s Gully itself, and all its tributaries, Golden, Poverty,
Emmett’s, Battery, Malay, German, Bristol, and other gullies, have
been worked, and in many places were moderately rich. In some
places many ounces to the dish were obtained from mere soil and thin
rubble on the nearly bare granodiorite, the gold having remained while
other materials had been swept away. The gold on this field is all
very fine, no pieces exceeding 1 dwt. being recorded. It is also, for
the most part, very little waterworn, showing its proximity to local
matrices. Similarly, Neild’s Gully and its northern branches, Slaughter
Yard, Holly’s, and Chirnside’s gullies, were good as far as followed into
the deep ground of the flats. Where the heads of these gullies extend
above and over, but do not cut into, the edge of the Tertiary gravels,
they cease to he in themselves gold-bearing, though the gravels beneath
them, which rest on the granodiorite, are so. The Tertiary gravels
themselves are auriferous, and there is a run or lead of good value
proved along their eastern margin on the inward slope of the grano-
diorite bedrock. Some of the recent gullies have cut back into, and in
two cases (Malay and Emmett’s) through, this lead, and redistributed
its gold in concentrated form in their beds; but the general course,
starting from the Dry Lead, between Fern and Malay gullies, is for a
short distance westward to the westward of the break caused by Emmett’s
Gully, thence south-south-westerly under the upper portion of Poverty
Gully to the north end of the surveyed township of Mafeking dSTaram
iSTaram on the Crown lands plan), thence southerly down the township
survey to the head of Golden Gully, thence south-westerly past the
head of Holly’s Gully and under the upper portion of Slaughter Yard
Gully, whence its course has not been actually proved by mining, though
it must necessarily go south-south-westerly under Jimmy’s Creek, and
between that creek and Saw Mill Creek, conformably to the general
trend of the Tertiary gravel plateau and the exposed granodiorite
boundaries on either side thereof.
Much of this lead, from Emmett’s down to the head of Golden
Gully, was partly worked in the early days of the field by means of
sinking and driving, and good yields are reported; hut the ground
was very wet, and the mining methods were inefficient, so that much
* There are no official statistics available.


gold was left behind. Since then, the ground lias been extensively
worked by hydraulic sluicing, all the Tertiary deposit from surface to
bedrock to as much as 50 feet in thickness having been worked into
from the gullies, forming huge chasms eating into the gravel face, and
also into the underlying decomposed granodiorite bedrock. From .what
could be learned, it appears that the whole thickness of gravel contains
a little gold, though the best is naturally near the bedrock, and the
inward or westerly incline of the bedrock renders difficult a further
advance in that direction, unless more level be gained, which means
deeper tail-races in the granodiorite, and, where that becomes hard,
much cost is involved in cutting them.
The shallow gullies of the field may be regarded as practically
worked out, whatever may he obtainable for years to come by fossicking,
re-sluicing, &c.; hut the Tertiary gravel area offers a promising and
long-lasting field for further enterprise. There is much gold left in the
proved but partially-worked portions, and, as yet, no western limit has
been established to the lead or run of auriferous ground; so there is
no telling what may exist under the wide expanse of gravels westward
and south-westward from the township. Gold, however, has been found
on the western margin of the gravels between Jimmy’s and Saw Mill
Creeks, and it is quite likely that patches and “ runs ” of payable ground
may be found under any part of the untried gravel area. I would not
anticipate such rich yields as were obtained in the shallow gullies, for
they were re-concentrates; but it would be reasonable to expect a low
to medium, hut payable, yield, if proper appliances be adopted.
Sources of the Gold. —All the available evidence tends to warrant
the view, already expressed by Mr. Herman in his report, that the
alluvial gold was derived from the erosion and disintegration of aurifer-
ous veins in the granodiorite, and during my examination I could detect
no other probable matrix. It is just possible that the Grampian sand-
stones may contain gold—l have known such an occurrence in similar
rocks in Gippsland—but, as far as we know, it has not yet been found
under conditions directly indicating them as the source. Certainly
these sandstones are sedimentary deposits resting directly upon the gold-
bearing granodiorite, and it is not unlikely that their lower beds may
contain detrital gold derived from the abrasion of the granodiorite, and
that the degradation in turn of these beds may have contributed to the
supply in the Teritary gravels, though in small proportion compared
with that obtained direct from the granodiorite during the formation of
the gravels.*
It seems beyond dispute, therefore, that the granodiorite has been,
and is, the matrix-bearing rock of the field; that the Tertiary gravels
derived their gold from its denudation; and that the Recent alluvial
gully deposits are concentrates, partly obtained from the redistribution
of portions of the Tertiary gravels, and partly from further direct
erosion of the granodiorite and its contained auriferous veins. There
are, however, some of the gullies, such as Bristol Gully, and one or
two other’s east of Mason’s Creek (Chirnside’s Gully and some of the
branches of Xeild’s Gully) that do not appear to have touched the
Tertiary gravels at all, but have obtained their gold supply direct from
local matrices in the granodiorite. There are, also, several patches of
surfacing on hill slopes, evidently of similar origin, and probably many
• Since this report was prepared, an examination of the Grampians by- Mr. W. H. Fcrgnson has
suggested that the giunodiorite may be intrusive into the sandstone.


more as yet undiscovered. Even on the south boundary of the sheet a
small surface patch yielding a few ounces was found, but no continua-
tion was traced; and another was worked in a gully running into Saw
Mill Creek.
All the evidence tends to show that the granodiorite bedrock through-
out the field is more or less intersected by auriferous veins, and mostly
so, as far as has been proved, in the area traversed by the rich gullies
or overlaid by the worked gravel deposits. None of these veins attain
the character of reefs or lodes; their directions vary, and in thickness
they range from mere films up to half-an-inch or so, consisting of gritty,
ferruginous, and magnesian material, with little quartz. One vein in
the fall to Emmett’s Gully attains in places a thickness of 4 inches of
quartz, the more mineralized portions of which have yielded on assay
up to 6 oz. of gold per ton. In the granodiorite under the gravels near
the head of Poverty Gully is a small vein which yields good dish pros-
pects; but the quartz is glassy in appearance, and the gold seems to be
confined to the ferruginous casing which is probably decomposed
pyrites.
Crossing from Malay Gully to the west of Emmett’s, the great
chasms that have been sluiced out show a great number of ferruginous
veins, having an approximate E.N.E. and W.S.W. trend. One claim-
holder has in his ground over seventy of these, small but rich; so much
so, that, after working out the surface alluvium, the decomposed grano-
diorite has been sluiced down time after time to as much as 30 feet,
or as deep as tail-race fall was available, and there still seems to he
much left for future treatment when such fall can be deepened. But, as
the limits of decomposition are reached, the granodiorite becomes hard,
and the veins, though continuous, become pyritous, and the formation
is no longer amenable to concentration by sluicing.
It will he a question for the future whether the veins are sufficiently
numerous, close enough together, and of sufficient value, to pay for
downward mining in the solid granodiorite. In other parts of the area
small, rich veins have been opened, and also on the eastern side of the
Sugar Loaf; but, taking all things into consideration, there is not much
ground for hope in the reefing prospects of the field, though there is as
regards the alluvial in the case of the Teritary gravels should it turn
out that the granodiorite beneath them contains, as in the instances
above mentioned, auriferous veins, whence gold supplies have been
obtained during past denudation.
NOTES ON THE PLAN.
The following notes refer to plana marked with a corresponding
number on the geological map: —
(1) Precipitous escarpments facing south and cast. Brown and
drab, thick-bedded, siliceous sandstones, having a dip to the westward, to
which the slope of the surface of the plateau conforms.
(2) The boundary between the sandstones and the granodiorite is
everywhere indistinct, being obscured by surface overburden; the lowest
beds exposed of the Grampian sandstones here consist of thick-bedded,
white quartzites several hundred feet in thickness.
(3) Small auriferous ferruginous veins in granodiorite.
7916. u


(4) This ground, partly Tertiary gravel and partly the underlying
decomposed granodiorite, has been sluiced down to as much as 50 feet
below the original surface. The granodiorite is intersected by numerous
small ferruginous veins containing gold in sufficient quantity to make
the treatment of the bulk payable where decomposed and friable.
(5) Tertiary gravel mostly composed of worn fragments of the Gram-
pian sandstones and quartzites. This gravel is regarded as highly pay-
able were sufficient water supply available. The gold has probably
been derived from veins in the underlying granodiorite.
(6) A number of holes in surface rubble overlying decomposed
granodiorite. Some gold is said to have been found.
(7) Eastward of this locality there are reported to be auriferous
veins in the granodiorite.
(8) Small auriferous veins in decomposed granodiorite; there is a
little quartz, but the gold seems confined to the ferruginous casing.
(9) Heavy gravel and boulder deposit.
(10) Richly auriferous ground is reported as having been worked
from this shaft, but it was abandoned on account of inefficient drainage.
The trend of the lead appears to be to the west and south-west.
(11a and 11b) Small auriferous pyritous and ferruginous quartz
veins.
(12) The two small patches to the north and south are simply
auriferous surface soil and detritus resting on the granodiorite.
(13) A little gold is reported to have been obtained at this point.
(14) A number of holes in this locality show gravel to a thickness
of about 30 feet resting on the granodiorite. Gold is reported to have
been found in small quantity. The gravelly area to the IST.IST.E. and
S.S.W. is worthy of being prospected.
(15) Small auriferous patch; surfacing on granodiorite.
(30.12.11.)
By Authority : Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne


THE
MAFEKING (MOUNT WILLIAM) GOLDFIELD
Scale,-20 Chains to One Inch.
