





THE UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
The
Boundaries of Queensland
with Special Reference to
The Maritime Boundary and the “Territorial Waters
Jurisdiction Act, 1878.”
By
F. W. S. CUMBRAE-STEWART, K.C., D.C.L.,
Garrick Protestor of Law in the University of Queensland.
Anthony James Camming, Government Printer, Brisbane
1930.
A Paper read before the Australasian Association (or the Advancement
of Science, Section E—History, at Brisbane, 29th May, 1930.




The
BOUNDARIES OF QUEENSLAND
with Special Reference to
The Maritime Boundary and the "Territorial Waters
Jurisdiction Act, 1878.”
If justification for the inclusion of my subject in the
work of the Historical Section were required, it would be
found in the existence of the conception of boundaries at
a period when history commences. There is evidence
that primitive man was fully conscious of the existence
of limits to the area within which the groups of kinsmen
Were able to pursue the chase with impunity. If it be
conceded that the first inhabitants of this part of the world
reproduce the ideas and customs of palaeolithic man, then
it may be affirmed that boundaries were known and
respected in the old Stone Age; for the most learned of
Australian jurists has told ns that the boundaries of
Australian Tribe Lands are as carefully marked out as the
boundaries of any English gentleman’s estate. 1
Younger by some centuries, perhaps by some ages, is
the word commonly used to denote the area contained
within the boundaries of the land of the body politic. This
word, ‘ ‘ Territory, ’ ’ is the English form of the Latin Terri-
torium, originally meaning the land lying round the
Ancient City-State, devoted to agriculture and the pas-
turing of stock. To-day its denotation has extended to
the area subject to the powers of government exercised by
the modern State. At the same time, by a peculiar inver-
sion due to the framers of the American Constitution and
their imitators, the term is applied to areas outside political
divisions not completely organised. So that in this sense
a Territory is something which is not a State. But, what-
1 Hearn: The Aryan Household, p. 412.


soever bo the origin or the ambiguities of the term, a
Territory must of necessity have limits or boundaries, be
it large or small, a world empire or a town allotment.
To tne conception of the modern State, the possession
of territory is essential, and within its territory the modern
State has absolute jurisdiction, except in the cases of
foreign rulers and certain of their servants; and of express
rights of extra-territoriality, based upon treaty or capitula-
tion. The extent of the territory is determined by historical
events. It has very considerable influence on the political
character and importance of the State, and it is closely
connected with several important legal and international
questions. These in many cases turn upon questions of
boundaries.
It cannot be said that much history has been made
by Queensland boundaries. But their origin and growth
are worthy of something more than a mere chronicle of
events. In dealing with them lam not attempting to force
the claims of history to a part of the territory of pre-
history, for the boundaries of Queensland belong to the
lifetime of living men; but I do assert the right of history
to present facts so that they shall not merely be recorded
but interpreted for the profit of the present and the future.
The colony of Queensland was separated from the
colony of New South Wales and erected into a separate
colony in the year 1859. The boundaries of Queensland
are determined, therefore, by reference to the boundaries
of New South Wales. The original formal act of possession
which made Australia part of the Empire took place at
Possession Island, lying off Cape York, in Queensland, on
22nd August, 1770.
The entry in the official log of Lieut. James Cook, R.N.,
H.M. bark “Endeavour,” is as follows:
“at 6, possession was taken of this countiy in His
‘Majesty’s name and under his conlonrs; fired several
‘volleys of small arms on the occasion and cheered
‘three times, which was answered from the ship.”


In the edition of Cook’s voyage made by Hawkesworth,
i.ais entry appears in a more expanded form as—
“l now took possession of the whole Eastern Coast
■from Latitude 38 to this place, latitude 101 South
‘in right of His Majesty King George 111. . . .
‘with all the Bays, harbours, rivers and islands
‘situated on it.”
This act of occupation was followed up some sixteen years
later by official acts preliminary to the making of it effec-
tive, and the establishing of settled government.
On the appointment of Captain Arthur Phillip, E.N.,
as Governor of the Territory of New South Wales, the
limits of his jurisdiction were defined as “extending from
the northern cape or extremity of the coast called Cape
T ork, in the latitude of 10° 37' South to the southern
extremity of the said Territory of New South Wales or
South Cape, in the latitude of 43° 39' South, and of all
the country inland to the westward as far as the one
hundred and thirty-fifth degree of Longitude, reckoning
from the Meridian of Greenwich, including all the islands
adjacent in the Pacific Ocean, within the latitude afore-
said of 10° 37’ south and 43° 39' south.” 2
Governor Phillip was appointed Governor in the first
commission, and Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief in
the second. In the first, he was also appointed Governor of
all towns, &c., in “the said territory.” In the second com-
mission this was extended to “. ... in the said terri-
tory or any of the said islands.”
The King’s Instructions to Governor Phillip, issued on
25th April, 1787, defined the limits of his jurisdiction in
the same terms as the second commission. By these
instructions he was directed to colonise Norfolk Island
‘ ‘ to secure the same to ns and to prevent it being occupied
by the subject of any other European power.” 3
2 See first and second Commissions issued to Governor Phillip,
12th October, 1786, and 2nd April, 1787. Hist. Records of Australia,
series 1, vol. 1, pp. 1-8.
• lb. p. 13.


Under Orders in Council of 6th December, 1786, the
transportation of offenders was to be made to the eastern
coast of New South Wales, or some one or other of the
islands adjacent. This appears in the recitals to the Act
27 George 111. c. 2, establishing a Criminal Court in New
South Wales.
In 1794, the Act 34 George 111. c. 45 established a
Criminal Court at Norfolk Island, “being one of the said
islands adjacent to the said eastern coast of New South
Wales.” It is therefore clear that a very extended meaning
was given to the words “islands adjacent.”
The meridian of Norfolk Island passes through the
South Island of New Zealand, and Governor Macquarie
appointed Mr. Kendal, grandfather of the poet, as a justice
of the peace for the Bay of Islands, in the North Island of
New Zealand. 4 Governor King had previously treated
Tahiti as within the limits of his jurisdiction as Governor
of New South Wales. There is not, however, as far as I
can ascertain, any authoritative pronouncement as to the
limits of the islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean.
Governor Phillip’s instructions to secure Norfolk Island
and prevent its being occupied by the subjects of any other
European power would not, it is submitted, have authorised
him in treating any island in the Pacific within the lati-
tudes mentioned, in the same vray. The Commission issued
to Governor Darling on 18th July, 1825, extended the
western or inland boundary of New South Wales to the
129th degree of east longitude, but otherwise made no
change in the boundaries as far as Queensland is con-
cerned. 5
Queensland was formed by Letters Patent issued
pursuant to “The New South Wales Constitution Act,
1855,” sec. 7. 6 The Letters Patent (6th June, 1859) 7 erect
into a separate colony so much of New South Wales as lies
northward of a line commencing on the sea-coast at Point
‘See “The Beginnings of Government in Australia.” Fac-
simile of Kendal’s Commission.
1 H.E.A. 1, xii., 99-100.
* Queensland Statutes, vol. v., pp. 4538-4540.
7 Queensland Statutes, vol. v., pp. 4552-4555.


Danger in latitude about 28° 8' south and following the
range thence which divides the waters of the Tweed,
Clarence, and Richmond Rivers from those of the Logan
and Brisbane Rivers westerly to the Great Dividing Range
between the waters falling to the east coast and those
of the River Murray, following the Great Dividing Range
southerly to the range dividing the waters of Tenterfield
Creek from those of the main head of the Dumaresq
River, following that range westerly to the Dumaresq
River, and following that river, which is locally known as
the Severn, downward to its confluence with the Macintyr?
River, then following the Macintyre River, which lower
down becomes the Barwan, downward to the 29th parallel
of south latitude, and following that parallel westerly to
the 141st meridian of cast longitude, which is the eastern
boundary of South Australia, together with all and every
the adjacent islands, their members and appurtenances,
in the Pacific Ocean.
The founding of the new colony led to the occupation
of pastoral lands in the mors distant parts, and the success
achieved by the unfortunate explorers, Burke and Wills,
in crossing the continent, followed by the expeditions sent
out in search of them, directed public attention to the
north-w estern portion of Queensland and the lands of New
South Wales lying beyond and bordering on the Gulf of
Carpentaria. These had been examined by Captain Stokes
in H.M.S. “Beagle” in 1839, and had been named by
him “The Plains of Promise.” Subsequent examination
did not confirm their right to that name, but it was thought
in 1861 that the boundaries of Queensland should be
extended to include these lands which, in their situation,
were of little or no use to New South Wales.
Representations were accordingly made to the Colonial
Office, and a request for a, more western boundary was
preferred. No objection was raised to this, and by
Letters Patent dated 13th March, 1862, the territory of
Queensland was increased by the annexation to it of so
much of the colony of New South Wales as then lay to
the northward of the 26th parallel of south latitude and


between the 141st and 138th meridian of east longitude,
together with all and every the adjacent islands, their
members and appurtenances, in the Gulf of Carpentaria. 8
The laud boundaries which begin at Point Danger
and end on the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria have
given little trouble. It may be noted, however, that Point
Danger is not the Point Danger seen and named by
Captain Cook, but a headland some three miles north of
that point. The delimitations of the boundary along the
29th parallel were the ivork of New- South Wales and
Queensland official surveyors. The western boundary
involved the co-operation of South Australia and Queens-
land surveyors.
One case came up for the decision of the Queensland
Courts in relation to the western boundary. This involved
a successful claim for the return of money paid for a run
named Livia, sold as being in Queensland but which was,
if anywhere, on the South Australian side of the western
boundary. 9 This was a matter of private and not of public
law. The boundaries between New South Wales and Vic-
toria, and between Victoria and South Australia on the
other hand, were the subject of disputes between the
colonies concerned. The case of Pental Island in the River
Murray was settled by a reference to the Privy Council
in 1872. The boundary between Victoria and South
Australia was the subject-matter of proceedings in the
High Court of Australia in 1911. 10
The maritime boundary of Queensland, on the con-
trary, is not so simple a matter as the land boundary. It
is comparatively extensive. The modern coastline stretches
from Point Danger on the northern boundary of New
South Wales to Cape York, and round Cape York to the
Gulf of Carpentaria, the shores of which it follows as far
as the 138th meridian east of Greenwich. Near that
meridian and from 15 to 100 miles from the coast lie the
islands of the Wellesley Group.
8 Queensland Votes and Proceedings, Ist sess. 1863, p. 547.
“Richardson v. White (1891), 4 Q.L.J., p. 80.
10 The State of South Australia v. the State of Victoria, 12 C.L.E.,
667.


At some remote geological period the eastern coast-
line lay many miles 10 seaward of the present mainland.
Remains of this older coastline can be traced in numerous
islands, coral reefs, and shoals lying off the eastern and
northern coasts, at distances of from 15 to 160 miles.
These form the Great Barrier Reef, which extends from
the Swain Reefs lying north of Breaksea Spit, in latitude
21° 30' south, to within a few miles of the New guinea,
coast, a distance of 1,200 miles. Farther eastward are
smaller islands, shoals, and reefs, such as Willi- Island,
Wreck Island, the Cato Reef, and the Chesterford Reefs,
adjacent to New Caledonia. The question of the maritime
boundaries involved the question of the ownership of these
islands, as between New South Wales and Queensland.
The territorial sovereignty over the coast and islands
raised a further question as to the rights of Queensland
over the waters lying between the Barrier Reef and the
modern coastline. I propose to deal with the first question
—the onwnership of the islands adjacent to the Queensland
coast.
The construction placed upon the Letters Patent of
6th June, 1859, reduced to narrow limits the “adjacent
islands, their members and appurtenances, in the Pacific
Ocean,” while the Letters Patent did not purport to deal
with the islands of the Wellesley Group, in the Gulf of
Carpentaria. These, as we have seen, were annexed by the
Letters Patent of 13th March, 1862. Thus, there was
nothing to show what islands had passed to Queensland,
and New South Wales was free to urge that all islands
adjacent to her original coastline had not been abandoned,
The position of New South Wales was strengthened in the
year 1863, by the issue of a commission under the Great
Seal, dated 22nd August, 1863, to the Governor of New
South Wales authorising him to lease certain islands for
the purpose of working guano deposits. Under this
authority, the Governor of New South Wales granted on
lease dated 22nd August, 1865, Raine Island, lying on the
outside of the Barrier Beef about 60 miles from the Queens-
land coast, to Mr. W. L. Crowther, of Tasmania, for sever:
B


years. This lease was afterwards transferred to the Anglo-
Australian Guano Company.
On 10th June, 1868, a further Commission in the form
of Letters Patent under the Great Seal, authorising the
Governor of New South Wales to lease islands belonging
to the Crown, which might be discovered, not within the
jurisdiction of any colonial government, where guano or
other fertilising substances might be found, and give
license for the removal of the guano from them. It is of
interest to note the limits of the islands were fixed by
these Letters Patent as between 10 degrees south and the
Antarctic Circle, and between 75 and 170 degrees east.
The Letters Patent were not construed as applying to
islands to be discovered, since Raine Island had been
known for many years. In 1844, Captain Blackwood,
H.M.S. “Ply,” with assistance from the New South Wales
Government, had placed on it a circular tower, 64 feet
high, built of stone quarried in the island —which still
remains in all respects a sufficient sea-mark. 11
The grant by New South Wales of a lease of an island
so far from her own boundaries and so close to those of
Queensland were made the subject-matter of a despatch by
Lord Normanby, then Governor of Queensland, to Lord
Kimberley, then Secretary of State for the Colonies, on
26th December, 1871, in which was made, in substance, a
request for an extension of the boundaries of Queensland
to include islands not within the original limits of the
colony but lying within 60 miles of the coast. Lord
Kimberley’s decision was favourable. In a despatch
dated sth June, 1872, he informed Lord Normanby of this,
and forwarded Letters Patent dated 30th May, 1872,
appointing the Governor of Queensland to he Governor of
all the islands within 60 miles of that colony and autho-
rising the annexation of the islands. Copies of charts
prepared by the Admiralty, showing what islands were
actually included, were sent with the despatch. Copies
of the Commissions of 1863 and 1868 to the Governor of
New South Wales were also sent, and it was intimated that
11 Australian Pilot, vol. iii., 1916, pp. 150-151.


these Commissions included the islands referred to in
the Letters Patent of !10th May, 1572, and that the power
to deal with them would cease upon their coming within
the jurisdiction of Queensland.
The Letters Patent declared that, if at any time there-
after the Legislative Council and Assembly should by
resolution or otherwise request the Governor to transfer
the islands to Queensland for the purpose of being annexed
to that colony, the Governor was to effect the transfer,
which was to be completed by Proclamation. 52 The neces-
sary Resolutions were passed in August 1872, and on 24th
August the Proclamation and a Deed Poll transferring to
the colony the islands within 60 miles of the coast were
■gazetted. 53
A further extension of the territory of Queensland
became necessary in consequence of expansion in the
north, and the growing importance of the settlement in
Torres Strait. Islands within the GO-mile limit fixed by
the Proclamation and Deed of Transfer of 22nd August,
1572, were part of Queensland, but those outside that limit
were in no-man’s land. They were inhabited, but the
inhabitants had no protection against violence, white or
native, or against the attacks from outside of Papuan
savages. At the same time, the islands formed excellent
bases for attack on Queensland Revenue and Immigration
Laws. The difficulty was met by annexing the islands.
This necessitated a new line of demarcation.
On 31th October, 1878, Letters Patent were issued
authorising the Government of Queensland to annex the
islands by Proclamation, in the event of the Legislature of
Queensland passing an Act providing that on the issue of
the Proclamation the islands should become part of the
colony. 14 In June 1879 the Queensland Legislature passed
” Copies of the Despatch and the Letters Patent will be found
in Legislative Council Journals, vol. xx., sesa. 2 of 1872, pp. 883-885,
and in Votes and Proceedings, 1872, pp. 537-539.
“Copies of the Proclamation and the Deed Poll appeared in the
Queensland Government Gazette of 24th August, 1872, pp. 1325-1326.
“The Proclamation appeared in the Queensland Government
Gazette of 21st July, 1879, p. 141.


the required Act. and on ana after Ist August, 1879, uot
only the islands of Torres Strait outside the dU-miie limit
already annexed, but all the islands of the Barrier Reef,
became part of Queensland.
The limits within which these islands lie is fixed by
the Schedule to the Act (“The Queensland Coast Islands
Act of 1879,“ 13 Viet. No. I) 15 as in Torres Strait and
lying between the continent of Australia and island of
New Guinea—that is to say, all islands included in a line
drawn from Sandy Capo northward to the south-eastern
limit of the Great Barrier Reefs, thence following the
line of the reefs to their north-eastern extremity near the
latitude of 9| degrees south, thence in a north-easterly
direction embracing East Anchor and Bramble Bays, then
from Bramble Bay in a line west by south (south 79
degrees west) embracing Warrior Reef, Saibai and Tuan
Islands, thence diverging in a north-westerly direction so
as to embrace the group known as the Talbot Islands,
thence to and embracing the Deliverance Islands, and
onwards in a west by south direction (true) to the meridian
of 138 degrees east longitude. The Schedule adheres to
the wording of the Letters Patent of 10th October, 1878.
The matter of the maritime boundary and the ownership
of the islands adjacent to it was thus settled in 1879.
The rise of the pearl and beche-de-mer fishery in
Torres Strait brought fresh problems to the surface.
Queensland could legislate for her own territory and waters
including the islands which had been annexed, but the
fishing was carried on at sea and not on land. Therefore
it was necessary to seek aid from the Imperial Parliament.
In 1885, the Federal Council of Australia Act (48 &
49 Viet, c. 50) was passed empowering the Federal Council
to legislate in respect of fisheries in Australasian waters
beyond territorial limits. In pursuance of this Act, the
Federal Council dealt with the fisheries by “The Queens-
land Pearl Shell and Beche-de-mer Fisheries {Extra-terri-
torial) Act of 1888.” The circumstances in which the
Act was passed are stated in the recitals, which set out
15 Queensland Statutes, vol, i., p. 330.


that the Queensland Parliament had made provision for
regulating the fisheries in territorial waters, but that, by
reason of the geographical position of many of the islands
forming portion of Queensland, vessels employed in the
fisheries were sometimes within and sometimes beyond the
territorial jurisdiction of Queensland, and that it was
expedient that the provision of the Queensland Act should
extend and apply to such vessels during all the time they
were so employed, and for that purpose the Queensland
Act, so far as applicable to extra-territorial waters, should
extend to sueh waters.
The Act applies to Australasian waters adjacent to
Queensland, which are defined by section 2 as “all Aus-
tralasian waters within the limits described in the Schedule,
exclusive of territorial waters within the Territorial Juris-
diction of Queensland.” In the Schedule these are
described in the words of the Letters Patent of 10th
October, 1878, and of “The Queensland Coast Islands Act,
1879,” substituting for the words “all islands included”
the words “all waters included.” 16
A power to legislate for fisheries in Australian waters
beyond territorial limits was conferred upon the Parlia-
ment of the Commonwealth by “The Commonwealth of
Australia Constitution Act” (63 & 64 Viet. c. 12, sec. 51
(x.)). This Act preserves the operations of the Act of
the Federal Council dealing with the fisheries.
It is quite clear, therefore, that there is nothing to
differentiate the position of Queensland from that of any
other portion of the British Empire possessing a coastline
with islands lying off it, nor to prevent the ordinary
rules of law from applying to her maritime boundary and
to her ability to legislate outside of her territory.
As has been said, the question of the maritime boundary
was settled in 1879. But it was unsettled as an untoward
consequence of the passing of the Imperial Act 63 & 64
Viet. c. 12 (“Commonwealth of Australia Constitution
Act”). This Act rendered necessary the issue of a fresh
Commission to the Governor of Queensland, and accord-
ingly Letters Patent for the purpose passed the Seal on
M Queensland Statutes, vol. iii., p. 3625.


29th October, 1900. They, however, contained no recital
of the Letters Patent of 10th October, 1878, the founda-
tion of the whole position as to the maritime boundary.
This omission was regarded as of material importance,
pince it might have been used to base an argument in
favour of the repeal of those Letters Patent and the con-
sequent re-establishment of the 60-mile limit. To place the
matter beyond doubt, on 10th June, 1925, a fresh Commis-
sion was issued to the then Governor of Queensland, Sir
Matthew Nathan, repairing the omission. 17 The result is
that the maritime boundary of Queensland is the coastline
from Point Danger to the 138th meridian in the Gulf of
Carpentaria, together with the islands within the outer
edge of the Barrier Reef and within a line drawn from the
north-western point of the reef to the spot mentioned in the
Gulf of Carpentaria.
I have now completed my statement of the facts con-
nected with the delimitation of the maritime boundary as
far as the ownership of the islands adjacent to the coast
is affected. It would seem that islands not within the
limits I have mentioned, if belonging to the Crown and
not within the jurisdiction of any Colonial Government,
may be dealt with by the Governor of New South Wales.
I shall now consider the question as to the rights of
Queensland over the waters within the Barrier Reef. The
subject of Territorial Waters must be approached with a
considerable amount of caution in view of the fact that it
is engaging the attention of a Committee of the Council of
the League of Nations, which is dealing with the codifica-
tion of International Law, and until the new law is laid
down the only thing that can be known with certainty is
that we shall have to change a good many of our ideas on
the subject. Sovereignty has been described as “a con-
ception than which there has been no greater hindrance
to the development of a Commonwealth of Nations,” and
in its place we are to have submission to external pressure,
administered through the medium of arbitration Awards,
the Permanent Court of International Justice, and the
boycott. This, of course, is not force; it is persuasion,
either moral or economic.
17 Queensland Statutes, sess. vol. 1925, p. 11262.


I shall, however, deal with the rights to Territorial
Waters as our Courts and Legislatures have defined them,
and as I believe any international tribunal dealing with
international rules as they stand at present would decide.
There is still a widespread popular belief that the neigh-
bouring seas form part of the country which owns the
shore. This supposed right to the sea was asserted until
the end of the 17th century. In its extreme form it was
a claim that the whole of the North Sea and the English
Channel were as completely part of the King’s Dominions
as the territory of England itself. It appears to have
been abandoned by King James 11. as a traditional and
popular error of most dangerous tendency. In more
moderate form it was a claim that the territory extended
to a marine league from the coast. The Common Law rule
that the territory ended at low-water mark was estab-
lished in R. v. Keyn (2 Ex. Div. 63) in 1876, by a majority
of seven judges out of a court comprised of thirteen. This
led to the passing of the “Territorial Waters Jurisdiction
Act, 1878,” which applies to all the King’s Dominions.
This Act was passed to regulate the law relating to
the trial of offences committed on the sea within a certain
distance of the coast of the King’s Dominions. It affirmed
that the jurisdiction extends, and had always extended,
over the open seas adjacent to the coast, to such a distance
as is necessary for the defence and security of the dominion,
and that it was expedient that offences committed on
the open sea within a certain distance, by whomsoever com-
mitted, should be dealt with according to law, and it
defined “Territorial Waters of the King’s Dominions”
as meaning, in reference to the sea, such part of the sea
adjacent to the coast as is deemed by international law to
be within the territorial sovereignty; and, for the main
purpose of the Act with regard to offences, any part of the
sea within one marine league of the coast measured from
low-water mark shall be deemed to be open sea within the
territorial waters of His Majesty’s Dominions.
It should be noted that this is a claim to jurisdiction
over offences committed within a certain distance of the


coast and to nothing more. The distance is to be decided
by international law. But it is not clear what exactly
international law has to say on the matter of the distance,
or of the nature of the sway of the littoral States.
The Privy Council declined to deal with the latter
point in 1914, in a Canadian appeal, A.G. for British
Columbia v. A.G. for Canada (1914), A.C. p. 153, sug-
gesting that it was a matter for the Powers at a Conference.
There is an exception to the rule of law regarding
the 3-mile limit in the case of enclosed areas of sea more
than 6 miles across, whether bays or estuaries. These
are known as “The King’s Chambers.” They are taken
to be within and part of the territory, the 3-mile limit
being treated as outside the headlands, or fauces terrce.
The recent ease of the “Fagernes” [1927], P. 311, is
interesting as showing the limit of territorial waters.
The “Fagernes” was an Italian ship which came into
collision with a British ship in the Bristol Channel. At
the place where the collision occurred the Channel was
20 miles wide, the exact spot being 10-J to 12J miles from
the English coast and 9J to miles from the Welsh
coast. In the circumstances it became necessary to decide
whether the collision took place inside or outside British
territorial waters. The judge at the trial held that the
waters were inter fauces terrce and therefore within the
jurisdiction.
The owners of the “Fagernes” appealed, and on the
appeal the Lords Justices of Appeal thought it raised
questions on which the Crown might desire to he repre-
sented. Accordingly, the Attorney-General appeared and
argued in favour of the view that the high seas should he
as wide as possible, the modern tendency being to narrow
the limit of national waters. At the conclusion of the
argument, he was asked by the Court whether he was in a
position to state whether the Crown did or did not claim
the spot where the collision occurred as within the realm
of England. He replied that the Home Secretary
instructed him to say that it was not within the limits to
which the territorial sovereignty of His Majesty extends.


If the Bristol Channel is not Territorial Waters, out-
side the 3-mile limit, can any waters outside that limit in
any of the King’s Dominions be territorial except in the
ease of a King’s Chamber?
I have been led to make the investigations, the results
of which are embodied in this paper, because of the appear-
ance in journals of standing, dealing with international
law, of statements such as, “It is quite clear to my mind
that everything inside it (i.e., the Great Barrier Reef) is
territorial waters, and that the 3-mile limit should be
measured from the reef outwards” (Transactions of the
Grotius Society, vol. 13, p. 76) ; and “The claim to terri-
torial jurisdiction by Queensland over the waters lying
within the Great Barrier Reef, to which no exception has
been taken by foreign powers” (British Year Book of
International Law, 1928, p. 123).
I have been unable to find any record of such a claim
by Queensland. But I am able to refer to three reported
decisions of the Supreme Court of Queensland in which
the claim might have been put forward and was not
mentioned.
In 1875 a prisoner was charged with piracy on the
high seas, committed on board a British ship lying in
a bay at Palm Island, which is about 9 miles from the coast
and well within the 60-mile limit fixed by the Proclamation
of 22nd August, 1872. The Crown set out to prove that
the bay at Palm Island was not in Queensland waters
but on the high seas. The prisoner did not rest his defence
on the ground that no part of the water for 50 miles
round Palm Island was anything but Queensland waters,
but on the narrower ground that the bay was really part
of Palm Island, as lying within the jaws of the land. He
was successful. 18
In 18S0 there was a murder on Possession Island
1-|- miles from the mainland, clearly within the 3-mile limit
and also within the limits of annexation under the Letters
Patent of 10th October, 1878. Nothing whatever was said
18 E. v. Jimmy, Qd. Sup. Ct. Eeports, 130.


about Territorial Waters, and the case turned upon whether
or not Possession Island was part of the colony. 19
The loss of the schooner “Dancing Wave” in 1914
gave rise to a claim for compensation for the death of a
seaman. This turned upon whether the schooner had
been lost in Queensland waters. The fate of the vessel
was not known. She had been last seen at anchor to
the north of Fitzroy Island, about 2\ miles from the
coast and within the Barrier Reef. Both sides treated the
deciding factor as being whether she was lost within the
3-mile limit or not. Neither the Court nor the parties
suggested that all the waters lying within the Barrier
Reef were Territorial Waters of Queensland. 20
The statements which I have mentioned regarding
Queensland’s alleged rights to the open sea inside the
Barrier Reef seem to be ill-founded. It is well that it
should be known that Queensland has never made any
claim to the waters of the Barrier Reef as Territorial
Waters. To the islands (which include everything which
shows above the surface of the sea) of the reef she has
admitted right, in defence of which she can with confidence
approach, if necessary, the Permanent Court of Inter-
national Justice, and she could with equal success resist
any demand made for breach of neutrality in respect of
those waters by belligerents.
The position regarding her rights, or the rights of
the Australian Federal Government, to regulate or control
the use of the waters of the Barrier Reef should be made
clear, as has been done by agreement between Great Britain
and Russia in regard to the Arctic Sea fisheries. Failure
to agree may lead at least to international friction.
19 E. v. Gomez, 5 Qd. Sup. Ct. Eeports, 189.
20 Chapman & Co. Ltd. v. Eose (19X4), St. E. Qd., 302.


A. J. CAMMING, Government Printer, Brisbane.


State Map No.4a
Printed, al the Govt. Printing OfHce, Brisbane,


