



THE JOURNAL OF A JOURNEY
from
NEW SOUTH WALES
to
ADELAIDE


Joseph Hawdon


THE JOURNAL
of a
JOURNEY
from
NEW SOUTH WALES
to
ADELAIDE
[The Capital of South Australia }
Performed in 1838 by
Mr. JOSEPH HAWDON
GEORGIAN HOUSE MELBOURNE


Wholly set up and printed in Australia for
Georgian House Pty. Ltd., 431 Bourke Street, Melbourne,
by The Advertiser Printing Office, Adelaide, and
registered at G.P.0., Melbourne, for transmission by post
as a book.
Published 1952


ILLUSTRATIONS
Joseph Hawdon Frontispiece
Charles Bonney a i e 6
Government House, Adelaide, 1838
Page 5 of the S.A. Archives’ copy of the Journal
First page of the Account of Adelaide, from the Between pages
Mitchell Library copy - - - - 28 an d 29
Letter from Hawdon to the Colonial Secretary,
Adelaide ,
Announcement of a Public Dinner in Hawdon’s
honour ------- Page 63
Map of the Route, prepared by the S.A. Archives en^
of volume




INTRODUCTION
Joseph Hawdon’s Journal of a Journey to Adelaide in 1838
has never before been published in book form. The pub-
lishers received a typed copy of the Journal with the infor-
mation that the original was in the South Australian Archives,
Adelaide. This copy was compared with the so-called
original, which turned out to be not in Hawdon’s hand-
writing, having been presented to the Adelaide Public
Library in 1906 by a Mrs. Chambers, of St. Kilda, Victoria.
The comparison revealed a number of variations which led
to the belief that there was another copy of the Journal some-
where, and one was discovered in the Mitchell Library,
Sydney, during 1951. The Mitchell Library copy, also not
in Hawdon’s handwriting, came into the possession of the
Public Library of New South Wales in 1886, when the
Trustees purchased the Colonial Library of Henry Field
Gurner, first town clerk of Melbourne, who died in 1883. It
was contained in a bound volume of various manuscripts,
"New South Wales and Victoria, Miscellaneous Papers,
1817-1873”, and the entry in Gurner’s Catalogue of Books
on the Colonies and Colonial Publications is dated 1877.
The South Australian Archives contains a letter from
Hawdon offering a number of horses for sale to the Govern-
ment of South Australia, and this letter is reproduced in this
volume, together with pages of both the South Australian
Archives and Mitchell Library copies of the Journal.
In his introductory remarks Hawdon gives some account
of his early life in Australia, which is supplemented here. He
was born at Walkerfield, Durham, England, in 1813. One
account says he was born in 1801, but this is generally be


lieved to have been the birth year of his brother, John
Hawdon, who preceded him to Australia. He settled in New
South Wales in 1834, and, accompanied by John Gardiner
and Captain Hepburn, brought the first cattle overland from
N.S.W. to Port Phillip in 1836. He settled in the Port Phillip
district, having stations at Dandenong and in the vicinity of
Western Port. In the year following the expedition described
in this journal Hawdon, accompanied by Captain Mundy,
drove tandem from Melbourne to Adelaide by a more direct
route.
Hawdon raised sheep and cattle in Victoria until 1858,
when he went to New Zealand, taking up land at Craigieburn
in the Canterbury province, where the Hawdon River and
Lake Hawdon bear his name. He was a member of the New
Zealand Legislative Council from 1866 until his death on
April 12th, 1871. Near the great west door of Christ Church
Cathedral, Christchurch, there is a window and tablet to his
memory. His first wife was a Miss Outhwaite, of Melbourne,
who died in Sydney, and is buried in the Camperdown
Cemetery, Newtown. Hawdon married again in New
Zealand, his second wife, Sarah Elizabeth Barker, being
regarded as the first European child born in Christchurch.
Charles Bonney, Hawdon’s companion on the journey
described in this journal, was born on October 13th, 1813,
at Sandon in Staffordshire, England. He arrived in New
South Wales in December, 1834, having been appointed
clerk to a judge in Sydney. In 1836 he explored a route for
taking sheep overland from New South Wales to Port
Phillip, along the track previously made by Hawdon bring-
ing cattle, which afterwards became known as the Sydney
Road. In 1839-40 Bonney entered into partnership with
Edward J. Eyre, the explorer, in a squatting enterprise. He


was the first South Australian Commissioner of Crown
Lands, 1842-56; first mayor of Kensington and Norwood,
S.A., 1853-8; Member of the South Australian House of
Assembly, 1857-8; after occupying a number of other official
positions in South Australia he left the civil service in 1880,
and went to live in New South Wales, where he died on
March 15 th, 1897.
Further references to both Hawdon and Bonney may be
found in the South Australian Archives.
Mrs. Madeline Buck had prepared the journal for publi-
cation before her death in 1950, and her material has been
drawn upon for some of the information contained in this
introduction. Other contributions have been made by her
sister, Mrs. W. G. Woolnough. Hawdon was the great-uncle
of both Mrs. Buck and Mrs. Woolnough. The publishers are
also grateful for details regarding Hawdon’s life in Christ-
church supplied by the Christchurch Press.
All of the illustrations in this volume are made available
through the courtesy and co-operation of the South Australian
Archives. A microfilm of the Mitchell Library copy of the
journal was kindly supplied by the Mitchell Librarian, Miss
Mander Jones, to whom the publishers are grateful. This
microfilm has been presented to the South Australian
Archives, who have provided the publishers with enlarge-
ments of the 161 pages of the Mitchell Library copy for
checking purposes. There are minor variations in phrasing
in the two copies, and where these have any important bearing
on the narrative a footnote is provided.
The account of Adelaide at the end of this volume is re-
printed from the Mitchell Library copy, as the copy in the
South Australian Archives lacks some of the concluding
pages.




THE JOURNAL OF A JOURNEY
from NEW SOUTH WALES
to ADELAIDE
THE CAPITAL OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Performed in 1838 by Mr. JOSEPH HAWDON
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS
I have arrived in Sydney, New South Wales, in the Brig
Children, Captain Durochier, in November, 1834, having
been induced to emigrate in consequence of the favourable
report that had been forwarded to me of the advantages for
the investment of capital in grazing pursuits by my brother,
Mr. John Hawdon, J.P., of Burgalia, near Batemans Bay,
based upon his experience of six years as an extensive agri-
culturalist and stock proprietor.
Towards the close of the year 1836 I travelled overland
from the Murrumbidgee River to the new Settlement of Port
Phillip, taking with me a herd of upwards of three hundred
head of cattle, being the first expedition of the kind ever per-
formed between that Settlement and the parent Colony. The
distance I travelled over that portion of the country which
was uninhabited was rather more than three hundred miles,
which I accomplished in three weeks and five days, arriving
with the stock in perfect safety.
Port Phillip was then of very recent formation, the first
Commandant, Captain Lonsdale of the Fourth or Queen’s
Own Regiment, having proceeded from Sydney by sea about
the time I performed this first journey by land. The example
of my success led the way to so extensive an emigration from
the elder districts of the Colony, that within the last eighteen


months there have been taken overland about five thousand
head of horned cattle and about one hundred and fifty thous-
and sheep. The value of land within the new Settlement has
consequently risen at a rapid rate, having realized at a Gov-
ernment sale on the 12th of the present month (September,
1838) an average of thirteen shillings per acre; at this rate
39,748 acres were sold, the whole amount received, including
the sums paid for Town Allotments, being £35,359/3/-.
Soon after my arrival at Port Phillip, I formed a cattle
station midway between that Settlement and Western Port,
consisting of extensive plains of rich black loam, covered
with rib-grass, one of the most nourishing grasses found in
Australia, possessing a fine fresh water stream winding along
the border of the plains and discharging itself into Port
Phillip.
In this climate, so irregular in its supplies of rain, a running
stream is to the grazier of inestimable value, contributing
most effectually to the fattening of his herds. The Port
Phillip portion of the Colony is, however, less subject to
droughts than the earlier occupied districts to the North-
wards, its proximity to the Southern Ocean and its higher
latitude render showers more frequent, which will shortly
make this part of the territory of great agricultural
importance.
Towards the end of last year (1837) I determined on
making the arduous experiment of driving Cattle, for the
first time since the colonization of New Holland, from
Eastern to Southern Australia, an undertaking which, for a
private Individual relying upon his own resources, was
generally considered rash and Quixotic. But so strongly was
I impressed with the conviction of the inestimable advan-
tages which an overland intercourse must secure to both


Colonies, that I resolved to brave the toil and danger, for-
midable as they appeared, of ascertaining whether such an
intercourse was practicable.
I accordingly made the necessary arrangements for carry-
ing the undertaking into effect, the expenses of the adventure
being borne equally between my brother John Hawdon of
Burgalia and myself, hiring my servants to accompany me,
at the rate of twenty shillings each per week. The tenour of
our agreement was, on my part, that their wages should not
be payable until our arrival at Adelaide, the Capital of South
Australia, however long the period might be, and on theirs,
that they should accompany me through any part of the terri-
tory which I might deem it necessary to traverse in pursuit
of that destination.
It was amusing to witness the solemnity with which the
men signed the Articles: it seemed as if they were signing
away their very lives! The distribution of their labours was
determined thus: Four of them were to drive the cattle (con-
sisting of 340 head); two to drive the drays; one to have
charge of the horses; one to cook, and one to act as my body
servant, having the care of my tent and its appurtenances.
Each man was armed with a carabine, a pair of pistols, and a
bayonet.
With these preliminary remarks I now proceed with my
Journal
1837 November 10th. Left Sydney.*
November 20th. LeftElderslie*
1838 January Ist. I left the cattle station before men-
tioned near Western Port for Melbourne, the Capital of Port
Phillip, a distance of 17 miles. After crossing a small range
* These two entries occur in the M.L. copy, but not in the S.A. Archives copy,


of hills, wooded with stringy-bark, the rest of the journey
was through an open forest well covered with grass and
admirably calculated for sheep pasturage.
The site of Melbourne is beautiful, well adapted for the
chief purposes of a capital, being seated on the banks of a
fresh water river, the Yarra Yarra, about twenty yards wide,
whilst the waters of Port Phillip flow nearly into the centre
of the township, where they are met by a picturesque cascade
of the river: the waters from this point cease to be fresh. The
bason which is thus formed is sufficient to admit small vessels
of about eighty tons burthen, which can discharge their car-
goes with every convenience, whilst those of a larger tonage
can anchor in the Bay at a distance, in a direct line, of about
two miles, although the river is so circuitous as to describe
a course of about twelve miles.
The scenery around Melbourne is not surpassed by any in
New South Wales. From an eminence at the south-west end
of the town, called Bateman’s (Batman’s) Hill, a natural
lawn, beautiful in verdure, slopes to the extent of three or
four miles, encircling a small salt water lake, that is generally
covered with swans and wildfowl, and on its brink are
scattered clumps of the Shea-oak, which give the whole the
appearance of an extensive English Park.
January 2nd. Breakfasted with Captain Lonsdale, the
Police Magistrate of the Settlement, who kindly lent me one
of his drays to proceed as far as the Goulburn River, where
my own were appointed to meet me. At 3 o’clock in the
afternoon, my drayman moved off, having a full supply of
stores for the expedition. It was dark before I could complete
my own arrangements for starting, when I commenced my
journey in company with the Postman, who was on his way


to Yass, the intermediate post station between Melbourne
and Sydney. This was the first postman who had passed
overland from Port Phillip with a mail for the capital, the
experiment of conveying letters between Melbourne and
Yass, a distance of 400 miles, once a fortnight for twelve
months, having been recently undertaken by myself in con-
tract with the Government for the sum of £1,200. The risk
is considerable, for the journey has to be performed for at
least two hundred miles through a country inhabited only by
native savages; the advantage to the public if the scheme suc-
ceeds will, however, be great, both now and hereafter.
On leaving Melbourne I was saluted by the Inhabitants
with three times three. A stage of three miles brought us to
the place where my drays were waiting. I found my tent
pitched, and a comfortable bed prepared, which I enjoyed
the more for the uncomfortable style of my sleeping accom-
modations during my nine days’ sojourn at Melbourne, an
inconvenience, however, which will soon be remedied as
two very large Inns are now in the course of erection.
January 3rd. Four of my Oxen having strayed away from
my encampment, and not being brought back until evening,
having wandered eight miles on the route to their old station,
I made this a day of rest.
January 4th. After seeing the drays start, I rode on with
the Post Boy through the beautiful open downs of Port
Phillip, by way of Mercer’s Vale; a great portion of the
country through which we passed being good, covered with
a thick coating of grass, but poorly watered. We halted at
the rich and well-watered stock station of Messrs. Bonney*
♦ Spelt throughout the manuscript diary as Bonnie.


and Burton, thirty-six miles northward of Melbourne. Mr.
Bonney having just given up sheep farming, I proposed to
him to accompany me on my journey to Adelaide to which he
readily acceded. He proved to be a pleasant gentlemanly
companion and well fitted for so rough an expedition.
January 3th. We left the last station within the limits of
the Port Phillip settlement, and, travelling over a hilly forest
country, arrived at the Goulbourn River. Here we dined and
took tea on the river-bank.
The Goulbourn is a fine rapid river fringed on either side
with Mimosas, and about 30 yards in width. At this season
it is just fordable. Some plains adjoin it, but the land is not
good. After dinner we rode thirty miles further through a
box tree forest, barren and badly watered; and stopped for
the night at a well-watered creek, surrounded with good
grass. Our stage this day was seventy miles, rather too long
for the horses, considering the baggage they carry. Wrapping
myself in my cloak, I soon fell fast asleep. During the night
the Post-boy awoke me by asking if I had not spoken to him,
someone having, as he thought, called him in a loud voice
to attend to the horses. Although this interruption to his
slumbers was caused only by his own dreams, the horses were
in reality found to have strayed away, and it took us two hours
by moonlight to recover them.
January 6th. w e travelled sixty miles principally through
a poor country, arriving in the evening at the Ovens River,
which we forded. It is about twenty-five yards broad; its
banks abound with beautiful grass, which afforded a much-
needed supper for our horses. In the afternoon we met with
two travellers, Mr. Darlot and Mr. Hack, proceeding with


Charles Bonney


stock, attended by a full complement of men, etc., to Portland
Bay to the westward of Port Phillip. So fatigued were the
Post-boy and myself that scarcely had we finished our supper
before we both fell fast asleep, nor did we awake until the
morning sun was shining through the trees, when we were
aroused by the howling of a pack of native dogs that had
surrounded us, astonished, no doubt, to behold such unusual
visitors.
The country on the right bank of the Ovens is well adapted
for grazing stock. Down the river are extensive plains about
ten miles in length, more adapted for grazing sheep; but
above these the land is more moist and of better quality. At
the part where we slept the Ovens is joined by a small tribu-
tary called "The King”, which falls into it on the left bank.
On my first expedition to Melbourne thirteen months ago it
was with considerable difficulty that my party crossed the
river. On that occasion we here fell in with a large tribe of
Aborigines, of which I have this time not seen a single
individual.-
January 7th. Travelled over a pretty good forest country
until, at noon, we arrived at my brother’s cattle station on
the River Hume. We hailed the Stockmen to send over a
canoe, but not being able to make them hear, I was obliged
to swim across. The river is here about a hundred yards wide
wide with a strong current.
Our distance to-day has been thirty-one miles; we have,
therefore, journeyed upwards of one hundred and eighty
miles in three days and a half, which, considering that our
horses have had to carry our provisions and baggage, besides
the heavy mail-bags in charge of the Post-boy, may be called
good travelling.


At this station I found the Post-boy with the mail from
Yass, and received my letters and papers from Sydney, prov-
ing to me the advantage of this new inland post. My Post-
boys exchanged their mail bags, one returning to Melbourne,
the other to Yass; from the latter place they were forwarded
by the mail coach to Sydney, a distance of 180 miles. The
immediate banks of the Hume are well adapted for grazing
stock, at least on the flats, and around the broad lagoons that
join the river, some of which extend as much as three miles.
Here also is a large plain, nine miles broad, called by the
natives "Oolong”; the Cattle appear to be very fond of
grazing upon it, although the land is not good, and the grass
not so rich as that nearer the river. The country is much
superior about thirty miles further up the river, a great pro-
portion of which is good arable and grazing land, which is
at present covered with the lofty gum tree, and appears in
some places liable to be flooded. Game is plentiful —Quails,
Wild-ducks of every variety, and black Swans. Last year
there were abundance of Emus, but in this visit I have not
seen any. The banks of the river swarm with Musquitoes,
which in the spring months are so virulent as to render it
scarcely possible to live here.
January 13th. The cattle intended for the expedition
having been selected from the herd which my Brother and
myself keep at this station, we, with some difficulty, and with
no small risk of losing the greater part of them, made them
swim across the river, and got them all safely over. I then
commenced my return to the River Goulbourn, the point at
which I had agreed with Mr. Bonney to meet him with the
dray.


January 14th. One of my men getting blinded with what
is termed the land blight, I was obliged to send him back to
the station. This disease, which appears to be infectious, is
very prevalent on the banks of the Hume, and frequently con-
tinues exceedingly painful for fourteen days. From this
accident I was under the necessity of sending only one man
forward with the Cattle. About noon, the heat being most
intense, we halted for an hour; but on attempting to proceed
the Cattle would not move. The wind began to blow with
great violence, and was perfectly hot. Mounting our horses
and driving the spare ones before us, we started in search of
water. Our Kangaroo dogs began howling and could not be
induced to follow. Fortunately for me, I was riding my
favorite horse, which in twenty minutes carried me six miles,
when I came to a water-hole. Short as the ride was, the heat
and violence of the gale made it truly dreadful; it was like
riding through a furnace; and so intolerable was my thirst
that if I had had to go half a mile further, I certainly must
have fallen from my horse. In a quarter of an hour after my
arrival at the water-hole, Mr. Weatherall (who started with
me from my brother’s station on the Hume) came up with the
man, when we made some tea, and rested for a couple of
hours. The man went perfectly blind owing, I presume, to
the intensity of the heat; we therefore placed him in a hollow
tree, the best place of shelter we could find, whilst Mr.
Weatherall and I rode back to bring up the Cattle. We found
them in the position in which they had been left with the
exception of one, which, being too fat to bear the heat, had
dropped dead. After giving the dogs a little water which we
had brought back with us in a small tin vessel, Mr. Weatherall
cut off a few steaks from the beast, for fear the men should
not have arrived with the light cart and tent supplies. It was


now quite cool, with every appearance of a coming thunder-
storm; we had arrived within a quarter of a mile from the
water-hole where we had left the blinded man, when a
tremendous peal of thunder burst over our heads. The electric
fluid passed along my head, causing me to feel as though
struck with a heavy bludgeon. Two of the bullocks, within
four yards of us, were killed on the spot, one of them standing
stiff and dead some seconds before he fell. I exclaimed,
"That beast is standing up after he is dead”, but on looking
round for Mr. Weatherall I saw him supporting his head with
his hands. He also had felt the shock, but more severely than
myself. A second peal roared and crashed around us, killing
another beast about fifteen yards from where I stood. To
prevent the whole herd from being killed we galloped among
them to scatter them in various directions. One fell struck
with the electric fluid whilst I was on the point of striking it.
We dismounted for the purpose of bleeding those that had
fallen, and while so employed, the tree under which I stood
was shivered to pieces. The thunder continued rattling
around us, resembling a constant fire of cannon, branches and
limbs of trees falling in all directions. We re-mounted our
horses which stood trembling with terror, that we might the
better view the surrounding scene. Two hundred of the
Cattle had huddled closely together, each trying under an
instinctive sense of danger, to screen himself behind his
neighbour; the rest, in separate groups of thirty and forty,
were flying over the ground in the wildest state of alarm, now
running towards us, then bounding away again, as each suc-
cessive peal of thunder burst.
During this awful tempest I could not help remarking
that the guardian hand of Providence was with us, for,
though surrounded by death in its most appalling terrors,


we were kept unhurt, except the slight accident to my hand,
which was lacerated either by the electric current or by a
splinter. When the storm had subsided, it was fearful to see
the traces of its power left in all parts of the forest: the noblest
trees shattered to fragments, or uprooted and hurled prostrate
on the ground. Three of the cattle which we had thought
dead were restored by bleeding; three others were quite dead,
and in half an hour were very much swollen. Collecting the
Cattle while the rain fell in torrents, we proceeded to the
hollow tree, where we found William, the blinded man,
frightened almost to death. Two miles beyond this we came
to the River Ovens, but still seeing no signs of the men with
my tent, we kindled a fire and, spreading our Cloaks upon the
ground, placing our saddles on our heads as the best means
we could devise of sheltering ourselves from the heavy and
continued rain, in this comfortable plight we passed the
night. I slept soundly, but upon waking in the morning I
found myself bent double with the weight of my canopy.
January 13th. The morning was beautiful; I therefore
determined to halt here for the day in the hope that my men
would arrive. I rode up the river, however, for some distance
when I had an excellent chase after a Kangaroo, but was not
fortunate enough to kill him. The grass looked rich and
green. Extensive lagoons spread out from the river for a
distance of two miles, when they are joined by a broad creek
or water-course, the banks of which are well covered with
grass forming a first-rate stock station.
January 16th. About two miles of our journey were over
the scene where the hurricane of the 13th [l4th] had raged
with the greatest violence. Every tree was levelled with the


ground. Had we been passing at the time our loss of life
must have been severe.
January 17th. Early in the morning we fell in with the
men with the cart and tent. They had been delayed a week
by the loss of their horses, which they eventually found at a
distance of twenty miles from their encampment.
Mr. Weatherall left me on his return to the "Oolong” in
company with a gentleman bound for Sydney.
With the men in charge of the Cart there came up three
blacks, an old man and his two sons, the latter about 14 years
of age. It appeared that about twelve months ago they had
followed some gentlemen travelling with stock to the Port
Phillip district, with whom they had been subsequently re-
siding. The old man was now returning to his home on the
River Hume, for the purpose of getting his boys inducted
into manhood, according to the general custom of the New
Hollanders, by the knocking-out of one of the front teeth, a
grand corroboree being shortly to be held in that part of the
country. He told me that after this operation he should send
his sons back to the white men, which intention I did not give
him credit for.
Leaving the men to come on with the stock at their leisure,
I rode forward to the Goulbourn River, where I found Mr.
Bonney waiting for me with a large encampment of men and
1,200* sheep, and also my supplies from Port Phillip. Dis-
covering that part of the supplies had been left at a station
35 miles behind us, I despatched three men and a dray drawn
by bullocks to fetch them. The dray left us on the 18th and
returned on the 19th, an instance of expedition which, for a
bullock team, may be deemed very remarkable. The Cattle
* Manuscript says 12,000, with final nought crossed out in pencil.


and sheep crossed the river by swimming, the team of eight
bullocks also swam across, dragging the dray behind them,
the driver swimming his horse alongside, performing his
difficult task with admirable dexterity. In the evening my
servant, Harry Benson, arrived from the River Hume, a
distance of 115 miles, which, though he was still nearly blind,
he had travelled on horseback without a guide.
My tent was pitched and our encampment formed for the
night. Mr. Bonney and I sat at the tent door, comfortably
taking our chocolate, and admiring the novel scene around
us. At a distance of thirty yards the men had formed a circle
round a large blazing fire, and were amicably discussing the
chances of our rather hazardous expedition. The cook, to
contribute to the general amusement, had mounted a box by
way of stage, and was dancing a hornpipe in capital style, to
the music of a fife played by another of the party. At the
conclusion of each dance he was warmly cheered by his
companions, whose plaudits causing a rush among the sheep,
the bells of the flock tinkled in romantic concord. Within
five yards of the merry group was the fold, enclosing twelve
hundred sheep, and a little to the left was a herd of between
300 and 400 cattle, gazing in mute astonishment at the jocund
performance round the fire. The men were certainly a fine
set of fellows, well qualified for the undertaking, full of
spirit, and all in good health except one, who had received a
slight injury by being dashed against a tree in consequence
of his horse taking fright.
January 20th. Being Sunday we halted for the day.
January 22nd. This morning I commenced the most
serious part of our journey, entering upon the entirely new
country, hitherto untrodden by the foot of civilized man.


Our position was Lat. 36 : 50 Long. 155 : 20,* the distance
from Melbourne 80 miles, from Sydney 500 miles. At
8 o’clock the van of my party, headed by Mr. Bonney moved
off in rude procession. First went the light dray drawn by
six bullocks, then the heavy dray drawn by eight bullocks,
laden with nearly two tons of stores; each team had a driver
with the first of whom walked the cook, and with the second
the servant of my tent; behind the drays went a man driving
a few sheep for our supplies of fresh mutton; then came the
whole herd of cattle, driven by four horsemen, each rider
having a spare horse, and last of all followed the dogs. When
this first party had disappeared among the trees I despatched
three men with a dray and 1,200 sheep for Port Phillip
(which were belonging to my Brother and myself that we
were sending there for sale; these sheep had been brought
from near Bateman’s Bay all safe in charge of one free man
and two prisoners), and another man with a horse and cart
to wind his solitary way back to the station on the Hume,
distance 115 miles, armed with a musket and accompanied
only by a bull-dog. After remaining an hour to arrange some
business connected with the Mail with Mr. Clarke, who had?
just arrived at the River with the intention of residing here,
I galloped forward and overtook the party. Keeping a course
north and by west, we went about 13 miles from a box tree
forest, hilly and barren, where we encamped on the banks of
the river, which have a pretty appearance, but no extent of
good land. The man who, as I before mentioned, had been
hurt by his horse, here suffered so severely from pain in his
breast that I took twelve ounces of blood from him, which
afforded immediate relief.
* Subsequent note in manuscript corrects to 145 ; 20.


January 23rd. I Started this morning at half past 6, and
encamped at 3, quite ready for dinner. For 16 miles our
course was due North, but finding no water, and the broken
ranges continuing on our left, and the Cattle suffering so
severely from heat and thirst, we veered to the East, and,
pursuing that course a couple of miles, came to the river,
where we encamped. The Country was much similar to that
passed through on the previous day, except that we were in
sight of a plain of some two miles in breadth. During the
day, whilst riding at some distance from the party, in quest
of water, I surprised an old black occupied in catching an
opossum in a hollow tree. Having come close behind him
before he saw me, he was in a great fright. I spoke friendly
to him, but he only repeated every word I uttered, at the same
time throwing his spear to the ground; so that I was obliged
to leave him without gaining any information. His head
was plastered with a coat of white clay, which is the mode
in which these tribes wear mourning for their dead. On
returning to my party I heard a "Coo-ee”* which I promptly
answered, when six Blacks made their appearance, all with-
out weapons. They at first approached me cautiously, but
shortly one of them came running up to me at full speed and
shook hands with me. I had met with him about six months
before when on my way to Port Phillip. He and his com-
panions went with me as far as the drays, when they bade me
farewell. In the evening we amused ourselves with bathing,
and fishing for cod, which very much resembles the English
fish of that name, except that on the back the former has a
sharp fin. Those we caught generally weighed from 6 to 15
pounds, but they were sometimes caught weighing 30 pounds.
* The sound used in the bush of Australia as a loud call to persons at a distance.


January 24th. Our course, for ten miles, was due north,
through the same barren kind of country with box trees
growing on white clay, but no grass. Meeting an angle of
the River we halted to water our Cattle and to dine; and then
proceeding N. half E. for about five miles we again came to
the river, and encamped for the night. The Lagoons here
begin to extend to a greater distance from the river, and are
studded with very lofty flooded gum-trees, with good grass
between them; but the flat box-tree forest still continues. The
temperature very oppressive, and a hot wind blowing all
day.
I saw three emus that appeared of a different kind from
those I have usually killed; they were of inferior size, their
legs shorter, and their bodies of a very light colour. My dogs
not being with me at the time, I could not further decide the
question.
January 26th. The hot wind again prevailed all day. So
fiery was the air that the oxen in the dray frequently fell
down, and after travelling 13 miles I was obliged to halt for
the day. Kangaroos and emus are here plentiful amongst the
lagoons. On pursuing them with my dogs they immediately
took refuge in the thick box forest, and thus spoilt my sport.
One of my kangaroo dogs to-day disappeared, and never
afterwards joined our party, but after my return to the Colony
I heard of his having found his way back to our station on the
Hume nearly dead with hunger and fatigue. In the evening
we caught, with hooks and lines, as many cod as would have
supplied a hearty meal for five times our number.
7 anuary 27th. The course of the river obliged us to travel
two miles southwards; we then proceeded due west, across
extensive plains which, though of poor soil, afforded a great


relief to the eye after travelling five days through a mono-
tonous box-tree forest. A march of 17 miles brought us again
upon the river. We passed the fires of a native encampment,
but met with none of the natives; it was evident, however,
from the heap of muscle shell we saw piled on the banks of
the river, and from the number of trees that have been
"barked” that about here they must be rather numerous.
January 28th. Sunday. Rested all day. Reeds and Grasses
plentiful among the lagoons. I rode five miles along a water-
course running south, bounded upon the eastern side by a
sand-berg covered with small pine-trees, and at length bend-
ing back towards the river. On ascending a tree at the edge
of an extensive plain, I discovered some hills on the southern
horizon, the intermediate country appearing perfectly flat.
I was prevented from getting a perfect view by a thick haze
caused by the heat, which had now become very great.
January 29th. After proceeding nine miles on a westerly
course we came upon the river, much discoloured, and three
times its original size; I felt convinced it must have been
joined by the Hume. Leaving the men to water the stock, Mr.
Bonney and I rode back about a mile when we found the
junction of the Hume with the Goulbourn, the former flow-
ing from the north-east and the latter from the east. This
junction occurs in about Lat. 36 and Long. 145. The country
is quite flat, and heavily timbered, and this part of it evidently
much resorted to by the Aborigines. Having cut my name
upon a tree, I returned to the party who, during my absence,
had suffered one of the Oxen to get drowned. It appears that
being devoured with thirst, the brutes rushed into the river


before the men had time to unyoke them, and two of the men
had a narrow escape of their lives while trying to disentangle
them. Seven miles further we came upon a very deep creek*
with deep reaches of water in it. In wet seasons a considerable
body of water must run in its bed. This was the first water-
course coming into the river that I had crossed. We here fell
in with a tribe of Natives, consisting principally of old men,
women and children; they were much alarmed on seeing us,
but as open plains were on both sides of the creek they could
not easily make their escape. Observing a flock of white
macaws, I shot one of them and gave it to one of the old men,
who received it gladly, but still repeating the word "Yanika”
(Go away). Proceeding to the Creek to a crossing-place, I
there found a lame old man collecting bulbous roots on the
plain. He shook his stick at the men and poured forth a
volley of angry language, much to their amusement, but kept
gradually limping out of our way to join his tribe.
January 50th. At daylight thirteen stout black men came
and sat down about two hundred yards from my tent. I went
up to them, and gave one of them a piece of bread, of which
he appeared to understand the value. I observed in the hands
of one of them a piece of iron shaped into a rough sort of
tomahawk. They did not attempt to follow us. We pro-
ceeded two miles further up the creek, where we had to cut
away the bank with pickaxes before we could get the drays
over, and even then we were obliged to unload and carry up
the goods by hand. After passing for fifteen miles across
extensive plains, we again fell in with the river, the banks of
which were 90 feet high and the reaches exceedingly fine,
* In the Mitchell Library copy the word "Campaspe” is inserted in parenthesis.
—Ed.


being about a quarter of a mile in length and about a hundred
yards in width. In bathing I found the water about seven feet
deep, and the current very strong. The appearance of the
country is perfectly level, there being a succession of plains,
here and there intersected with a narrow belt of pine trees.
Very little Grass grows upon them, but they are covered with
salsuginous plants. The heat here was most intense, and the
Cattle, panting with thirst, no sooner smelled the water than
they rushed headlong towards the river, where from the
steepness of the banks we had several narrow escapes from
serious accidents.
]amary 31st. Travelled nineteen miles over plains of the
same description as those crossed on the previous day. They
have a great number of bushes similar to those found on the
sea coast, with a juicy and rather a salt-tasted leaf, of which
the cattle appeared very fond. The Emus must subsist upon
these leaves, for I could see nothing else for them to eat, and
they seemed pretty numerous, and so remarkably swift that
with two days’ hard chasing, I could not succeed in catching
even one. On ascending a pine-tree I saw in the distance two
hills, one of them having a sugar-loaf appearance, and bear-
ing west by south. This was the "Mount Hope” of Major
Mitchell, seen by him on his way to Cape Northumberland
in the year 1836. We could now scarcely find scarcely suffi-
cient grass for the stock, but the reeds answered every pur-
pose, and I think they are the best food for Cattle whilst
travelling. On coming upon the river, amongst a few sand
hillocks, Kangaroos appeared in great numbers, skipping
away in flocks of ten or a dozen. Unless they can be got out
on the plains they are scarcely worth chasing, as we never eat
them but when no better meat can be obtained. I remember


the time, however, when in travelling amongst the mountains
on the eastern coast, near Mount Dromedary, I considered
even a Kangaroo-rat most excellent food.
February 1 St. After travelling eight miles through a scrub
and amongst lagoons and water-courses, formed by the river
during times of flood, we came upon a rather deep channel
running out of the river. Here one of our drays gave way in
consequence of a bolt having been abstracted by someone
before our leaving the Goulbourn; I therefore halted for the
day to make the necessary repairs. Taking with me one of
my men, I went in search of the traces of Major Mitchell
when on his southward journey in 1836. Passing along the
edge of this watercourse, I surprised some Blacks, old men
and women, dragging their fishing nets in a small reach.
They did not observe me until I was on the bank within ten
yards of them, and, on my speaking to them, it was laughable
to see the amazement depicted on their faces; they stood per-
fectly petrified, gazing on our horses in blank astonishment.
At length they took to their heels and were soon out of sight,
except one poor old fellow who was lame, and who, as he
hobbled away, abused us with such vehemence that he
actually foamed at the mouth!
We proceeded along this water-course for eight miles,
when we came to the spot where Major Mitchell encamped
for the last time before he turned to the south. The weather
must have been very wet, every impression left oil the ground
being still so distinct. To this place I brought up my party,
determining to proceed southward to the river Yarane,*
whose course was laid down by Major Mitchell in his de-
spatch to His Excellency, Sir Richard Bourke, as bearing to
♦ The Loddon.


the westward. I was led to this decision by three distinct
considerations —First: The danger we were likely to incur in
watering the Stock at so large a river as the Hume. Secondly:
The reported hostility of the natives on the Murray. Thirdly:
My supposition that the Yarane should prove to be a branch
of the Lindsey of Captain Sturt, which he observed entering
the River Murray.
FcbYUdTy 3yd. At sunrise we started to cross the dry
country towards the River Yarane. Our first eight miles were
through a thick bushy scrub, full of a small description of
Kangaroos and Emus; after which we again entered upon
extensive plains. We then passed a high rocky hill, and four
miles further went close under “Mount Hope”, also high and
rocky, and of sugar-loaf shape. Mr. Bonney and I ascended
to its summit, which terminated in a pinnacle of rocky granite.
From this eminence we had a most extensive view: to the
Eastward plains spread out as far as the horizon; to the South-
ward also more immense plains, here and there intersected by
belts of trees, which in wet seasons mark the water-courses,
and skirted on the horizon by a small and barely discernible
range of hills; to the Westward we again beheld boundless
plains; and to the Northward a dead-level of black forest.
Altogether the scenery was of an imposing character. The
land, however, of the worst description; the plains have a
thin sprinkling of small tufts of grass, but are for the most
part covered with the salsuginous plant vulgarly called "Pig’s
face”.
Our party had got so far ahead of us whilst we were on
the hill that we could discern them winding over the plains,
in size looking like a flock of sheep. In descending, Mr.
Bonney was nearly precipitated down a chasm of forty feet


depth. He was sliding down a sloping rock when he was
carried within a hair’s breadth of the brink of its perpen-
dicular side; I reached out to him the muzzle of my gun, and,
laying hold of it, he was thus brought back to sure footing.
This hill appears to be inhabited by a small Kangaroo of a
fawn colour, with a most beautiful head, and about the size
of an English hare. I shot one, and preserved its skin. In the
evening we encamped without water, and the stock, having
travelled thirty miles to-day, many of the working bullocks
were dreadfully jaded. White macaws with crimson heads
fly about these plains in such numerous flocks that sometimes
as they passed screaming over our heads they almost dark-
ened the air. I shot a few of them. Their upper bill is hooked,
and much larger than the lower one. Their maws were full
of small bulbous roots, which they dig out of the plains with
their bills.
February 4th. Seven miles further on the plains we came
to a little water in a creek, apparently produced by a late
thunder storm, but sufficient to water the stock. In three
miles more we came to the "Yarane” of Major Mitchell at
the point where he crossed it. He gives its Lat. as 36 and its
Long. 144. Part of his bridge was still standing. We found
scarcely sufficient water in its bed to supply the wants of our
party. My flattering anticipations of travelling down the
course of a pretty river with beautiful grassy banks were
totally disappointed. I had, indeed, on the previous day,
from the view I took from the pinnacle of Mount Hope, de-
cided the question in my own mind as my subsequent ex-
perience proved to be right.
No dividing land being in sight to throw the waters of
the Yarane to the westward, I concluded that it must, as a
matter of course, run directly into the River Hume.


February 3th. Being hardly able to obtain sufficient food
for our cattle, and as in the hot season to be a day without
water would exhaust them, Mr. Bonney proceeded with the
Stock along the Yarane, whose course, instead of west, as I
expected, was north by west, whilst I rode out on a fresh horse
to the westward. Finding the Country terminate in sand and
scrub, and not the slightest appearance of a range to the west
as far as the eye could reach, I determined to follow its course
back to the Hume, as without water it was not advisable to
venture amongst the sand, on which I saw no appearance of
grass. On my return to the party, I found Mr. Bonney had
fallen in with a tribe of Blacks; when I came up, the old men
regularly introduced me to their sons and grand-children
(the croaking of the old men and chuckling of the young
ones —a peculiar sound made when they wish to express their
surprise),* and their wild grimaces and contortions as they
expressed their surprise and admiration, the scene far sur-
passed any ideal representation of demons I had ever beheld.
February 7th. Pursued the course of the Yarane, which
was perfectly dried up, except that every seven or ten miles
we saw a little water in its bed. The country continued gener-
ally to be of the same description as on the previous two days;
in some places, however, the soil was light, and appeared to
have been deposited by the Yarane, or, more probably by an
entire inundation of the country in rainy seasons; the dray
wheels sometimes sunk in it up to the axles. There was here
nothing else worthy of observation except a number of snake
skins which I saw hanging upon the small bushes scattered
over the plains. The snakes here annually cast their skins,
* The passage in parenthesis is not in the manuscript journal in the S.A. Archives,
but occurs in a typescript in the possession of Hawdon’s descendants.


which they accomplish by coiling around a bush and tearing
themselves out of their old coats, leaving even the scale which
covers the eye, perfect in the cast-off skin. Fifteen Blacks
made their appearance, and after a little enticement on our
part they came up to us. While we were at dinner, one of
their number, a tall good-looking fellow, managed to steal
my stirrup-iron; he strongly denied having taken it, but on
my taking out a pistol and putting it to his head he called to
one of his companions, who forthwith pulled it from beneath
a log, where they had hidden it away. On this they all left
me, but in the evening one of them came back accompanied
by some strangers, and encamped close by my tent. One of
their party was very anxious to get a tomahawk, and offered
me in exchange one of his spears, his boomerang, or his old
opossum-cloak, or the whole of them together; but finding
these insufficient, he at last offered to go and bring his wife,
and make her over to me in exchange for the desired im-
plement! I regretted it was not in my power to gratify his
wish. He then attempted to pilfer some spoons, but was de-
tected and sent off.
Our journey to-day with the drays was only 13 miles,
though I rode three times that distance out to the westward,
where I saw the dry beds of some circular lakes. In the even-
ing we encamped by the belt of some Cypress trees.
February Bth. Having passed ten miles further down the
course of the Yarane, the country becoming rather scrubby,
I crossed its channel, which was hardly perceptible, and pro-
ceeded twelve miles westward over plains, where I again fell
upon a creek, or branch, which flows out of the River Hume.
Here I once more discovered the track of Major Mitchell’s
expedition in 1836. We suffered to-day severely for want of


water, but after considerable riding in search of it I found
sufficient for our use. The plains we crossed were of rather
a better description than usual, but still of a very inferior soil.
Both Mr. Bonney and myself were in great bodily pain,
caused, I think, by eating some juicy berries which we
gathered off a low bush.
February 9th. The native dogs which had been howling
around us all night, this morning drove the sheep out of their
fold into a thick bush on the opposite side of the creek. The
whole of my party were employed throughout the day in
searching for them; but although for six miles around not an
Emu or a Kangaroo escaped our eyes, we could find no traces
of the sheep except in two places, where we could perceive
they had been pursued by the Warrigals. I afterwards found,
on my return from this expedition, that these sheep had
travelled back over the whole of the country we had passed,
and arrived safe at Mr. Clarke’s, the point from which I took
my departure on the Goulbourn River.
February 1 Oth. The drays and Stock went off at daylight,
whilst I waited behind for two of the horsemen who had gone
in search of my hacks that were astray. By noon they were
recovered when we proceeded onward, and, after a gallop of
16 miles, overtook the drays on a branch of the Hume, a little
below where it leaves the main channel. Here we encamped
on a reedy flat, but had much difficulty in collecting sufficient
wood for the purposes of cooking. The grass on these plains
is similar to that on Manaroo Downs, growing in large tufts.
A stock station might be formed here, and it is the first
situation worthy of a grazier’s notice that I have seen since
leaving (the Depot at the Goulbourn River) .* On the plains
♦ Inserted in pencil in Adelaide copy.


appear semi-circular ridges crowned with clumps of the
Cypress Pine-tree. The sheep being gone we killed a heifer
for our use, salting what was left for future consumption.
February 11th. Being Sunday, I purposed resting, but as
no wood could be found for our fires, we passed on twelve
miles, and at a place where this branch of the Hume again
joins the main channel we encamped under a small hill on our
left, covered on its sides with clumps of pine. This is the
"Swan Hill” of Major Mitchell, being as laid down by him
in Lat. 35 deg. and Long. 133 deg. In the morning, passing
through a large flat, we went between two lakes, called by
Major Mitchell "Lake Boree”. The south one is encircled by
a grassy ridge, and as we approached it we saw about thirty
Blacks running to and fro, and threatening us with their
spears. I was at the time riding with Mr. Bonney, about half-
a-mile ahead of the party. As we drew nearer a few of them
were seen falling back towards the high reeds surrounding
the lake, whilst one, a fine tall fellow, about six feet in hight,
was actually foaming with eagerness to get his tribe to stand
their ground, but on my putting my horse into a gallop to go
up the hill to him, he also thought proper to retreat amongst
the reeds, shaking his spear at me as he disappeared. By
degrees I induced some of them to come to the edge of the
reeds, but they would not allow a nearer approach than forty
or fifty yards. This lake was covered with thousands of birds
of various descriptions. On the water and by its margin were
seen Emus, Native Companions (the Cigrus of India) in
hundreds, wild turkeys (the Indian Bustard), Black Swans,
Pelicans, and ducks of every variety, with great numbers of
the rose-coloured parrots. I shot some beautiful small parro-
quetts; their tail, breast and belly were yellow, their wings


light blue, their back green, and around the fore-part of the
head, immediately above the bill, was a circle of crimson;
altogether forming one of the most beautiful birds I ever
beheld. In the evening some of the Blacks came to Swan
Hill, where we were encamped. After holding a little con-
versation with us across the river, they swam over to us. They
were fine, well-made men about five feet eleven inches in
height. Their faces were nearly all marked with smallpox,
but otherwise their features were pleasing. The warrior who
had in the morning shewn himself so bold was a powerful
and elegantly-formed man. In return for a triflng present
which I made him, he gave me his belt of opossum down
which he wore round his waist. They appeared much amused
to see the white skin of my men as they were bathing in the
river. At dusk they left us to return to Lake Boree, where
their women and children were encamped.
February 12th. To-day we travelled seventeen miles, the
Country pretty, undulating and rather well coated with Doro-
thona grass, the plains varigated with clumps of pine-trees;
and the river floating through the centre of a field of reeds
extending from four to six miles. In this neighbourhood
there are about a hundred thousand acres which at a small
expense might be flooded. Although at present producing
only reeds, the soil is well adapted for wheat, and is beauti-
fully situated for the experiment of growing rice. The heat
at this season is here very great, and actually pealed off the
skin on my nose. Passing through a country similar to that of
the previous day, we encountered another tribe of Blacks,
about 40 in number, including women and children. We
were at the moment going through a thick brush; they at first
stood at a distance of about a hundred yards to our right, but


as we passed on, the men fell back to the rear of our party,
raising a loud shout, which was answered by other Blacks
hidden from our view by the scrub. Supposing it to be a
sudden attempt to attack by surprise, my men closed together
with their firearms. As I came up out of the scrub the Blacks
were standing opposite to my men with their spears all
stripped, and threatening to throw them, and one old hoary-
headed savage was on the very point of darting his spear at
one of my party, who in return had his musket levelled at his
assailant and in four seconds more would have fired. I had
just time to ride between them, and prevent what might have
proved the commencement of hostilities through the re-
mainder of our journey. On my first interference the old
Black lowered his spear, but instantly raising it again, I dis-
charged my gun close over his head, which had the desired
effect of causing him and the whole tribe to fall back while
we passed forward to our encamping ground.
We were then joined by 52 black men, accompanied by
women and children; amongst them were a few of those
whom we had seen earlier in the day, and also one of those
who were with us at Swan Hill the day before. The latter
having, no doubt, told them of our peaceable intentions, they
were in very good humour with us. On my showing them my
watch and other articles about my person, they raised a loud
shout of amazement, in which they were joined by many who
did not see the objects.
They were not a good-looking set of men; many of them
were very little, and blind in one eye.
They were exceedingly noisy and inquisitive. The man
from Swan Hill had come after us as a sort of ambassador,
bringing with him as a present two curious nets, very neatly
made of twine manufactured from the wild flax which grows


In centre :— G OVERNMENT HOUSE, Adelaide, about 1838 . — Looking South from the Northern bank of the
River Torrens. —In the foreground is shown a typical water cart by means of which fresh water was purveyed
at Adelaide.
After a sketch made by Mary Hindmarsh.


Page 5 of the S.A. Archives’ copy of Hawdon’s Journal.


First page of the Account of Adelaide from the Mitchell Library copy of the Journal


Letter from Hawdon to the Colonial Secretary, Adelaide.


in small quantities near the river. I gave him in return an iron
tomahawk, in which he was perfectly enraptured, leaping in
the air with delight, and scarcely able to believe his senses
that he was the master of such a treasure. (A European re-
ceiving an unexpected fortune could not have been more
completely overjoyed.) * With the tomahawk he would be
enabled to cut out the opossums and other animals living in
hollow trees, which constitute a great portion of their food.
This work they frequently perform with an instrument made
of stone, but it is only certain kinds of trees that they can thus
cut into. During the night our Black visitors made such an
intolerable noise with their chatter that Mr. Bonney got up
and requested them to move a few hundred yards further
away from my tent, with which they readily complied, carry-
ing their fires along with them.
February 13th. During the night our Cattle got scattered
amongst the high reeds growing on the river flats, to which
my men were obliged to set fire before they could get the
beasts to come out. Whilst riding among these reeds I found
a great number of spears, placed there by the natives to be
in readiness should they have found us harshly disposed. We
this day travelled seventeen miles, principally over the dry
beds of lagoons into which the river flows in times of floods.
On the outside of these lagoons the country appeared rather
thickly covered with Cyprus and low brush wood. We en-
camped in the evening on a small creek running out of the
river. The land was exceedingly barren, affording scarcely
sufficient grass or reeds for our horses and cattle. Whilst out
from the party I surprised some Blacks fishing in the lagoon,
but could not persuade them to come to me. They were
♦ This passage in parenthesis occurs only in the M.L. copy.


dragging a net, and from the quantity of bream lying on the
bank they appeared to have had good sport. This was the
first cool and cloudy day we had experienced, the sky having
previously presented only one vault of deep blue, unvaried
by a single cloud.
February 14th. After we had advanced about five miles,
one of our double-barreled guns was missed; I sent two of
my horsemen back in search of it, and on arriving at the place
where we encamped last night, they found about a dozen
Blacks standing at the fires, who no sooner saw the men
approaching than they ran off, fortunately leaving the gun
behind them. After travelling fifteen miles through a thickly-
timbered forest of Box tree, on poor soil, we encamped op-
posite the junction of a branch of the river which I had
previously observed leaving the main channel. On the op-
posite bank appeared a considerable tribe of Natives, waving
green boughs to us as a token of peace; but although they
often came to the edge of the water, apparently with the
intention of swimming across, they would not venture to
come to us. Mr. Bonney gave them a few tunes from his flute,
which they often requested him by signs to repeat.
February 15th. Finding very little food here for the stock,
we moved away at daylight, and encamped 12 miles further
on, a mile below the junction of the Murrumbidgee with the
River Hume. From this junction the river is called by Captain
Sturt the Murray until it empties itself into Lake Alexandrina.
Where the two rivers join and form the Murray, the Murrum-
bidgee is not one-third the size of the Hume; after the junc-
tion the Murray is not above 130 yards wide, though in the
current 7 feet deep, which in this dry season is rather great;


but it appears from the water-mark to be sometimes 12 feet
deeper.
In the evening 43 Blacks came up to my tent, with an Emu
which they had just speared. Their usual method of killing
this large bird, is by climbing up a tree beneath which they
know the Emu to be in the habit of coming, and when they
have their prey immediately below them, they pierce him
with a heavy spear about twelve feet long, kept for the pur-
pose. Sometimes, however, whilst the Emu is drinking at
the river, they kill him with a light spear, which they dis-
charge by throwing it from a stick about three feet in length,
having at the extremity a hook which slips into the end of the
spear, both instruments being held in the right hand.
These Blacks were bad-looking fellows; a good many of
them were blind of one eye, caused I think by disease. They
offered us nets in abundance for tomahawks, or, as they called
them "Mundabongs”, which showed that the news of my
having such an exchange on the 12th inst. had reached them.
After catching for them a few fish with a hook and line, I
made one of them a present of a shirt, and he told Mr. Bonney,
as a great secret, that after dark the Blacks intended to spear
us. We laughed at him, and told him that if they came near
us for such a purpose, we would kill them all with our guns.
I think the scamp only wanted to try whether we should be
frightened.
February 16th. We travelled fifteen miles through some
very bushy and sandy land, and encamped on a small branch
of the river which flows only in times of flood. We passed a
tribe of Blacks to whom I was regularly introduced each time
we met; they always came forward towards us, waving green
boughs, using the words, "80, Bo; Marwood, Marwood!”
meaning, "Go on, go on; we are friendly, we are friendly.”


February 17th. After seventeen miles we halted on the
banks of the river where I had some good shooting amongst
the bronzed-winged crested pigeons. This is a sport not un-
like that of partridge shooting in England; for when on the
wing these pigeons fly in exactly the same style as partridges.
The country we were now traversing consisted of ridges
covered with thick brush, the soil of a red sandy description.
Some high and thick brush, which we passed through during
the day, was perfectly full of the Natives, most of whom were
yelling and shouting behind the Cattle, trying to imitate the
cries of the Stockmen. Whilst we were at dinner, on the
banks of the river, about 150 of them sat in rows, about 100
yards off, nearly everyone having his spear leaning against his
shoulder. As they seemed determined to close around the
drays I thought it prudent to show them the bayonets on our
muskets, in the hope of intimidating them. One old chief
asked me where I intended to sleep; I told him when he gave
me a rude push with his staff, pointing for me to return to my
party; an impertinence which I resented with the butt end
of my pistol, when Mr. Bonney came forward, and by passing
a few cheerful jokes put some of them into good humour,
whilst others remained doggedly sulky. Whether their in-
tentions were really for war or peace, we did not much care,
I saw to-day on a sandhill a small burial place, where the
remains of three natives appeared to have been interred.
Over each grave was a low pile of thick sticks, enclosed and
covered with a small house of a conical shape, thatched with
dry reeds, and the whole was surrounded by three distinct
and very neat paths, describing a sort of oval thus:


In the evening at dusk the Blacks were about us in great
numbers and set fire to the small patch of grass which I had
selected for the stock to feed on. My men turned out, under
arms, to extinguish the fire, upon which the Blacks took to
the river, swimming over in clusters of 30 or 40 together. As
their black heads were dimly seen in the dark above the water
some carrying a bundle of spears, and others waving a fire-
brand in the left hand, they presented a romantic and im-
posing scene. When they landed on the opposite bank they
raised a shout, or rather a yell of defiance and set fire to the
few reeds growing along the margin of the water.
From the eighteenth to the twentieth of February the drays
travelled forty-two miles of country similar to that on the
17th. The stock had scarcely anything to eat, the Natives
having set fire to everything in the shape of food that would
burn. Very few of them approached us closely, at which I
was well pleased, as it gave me the opportunity of quietly
riding out about 15 miles south of the river. The country I
saw was of a sandy nature, the ridges of sandy soil in some
places attaining an elevation of about 100 feet. I noticed in
the river some remarkable islands formed of rock, being the
first stone of any description I had seen since leaving Mount
Hope at the Yarane River, with the exception of a single
instance near the junction of the Murrumbidgee.
The river at these islands was about 200 yards wide; at one
place, whilst bathing I walked across, the water not being
more than four feet deep.
February 21st. The drays travelled twenty miles to-day.
Not liking to keep too near the river, on account of the deep
water-courses and heavy sands which much impeded the
drays I, in the morning, followed up the channel of a water


course which I found was taking us south-west from the river.
Whilst the party were halting for dinner, I rode off with a
man to trace its course more minutely, and found it termi-
nating in the dry beds of some extensive lakes which were
bordered by the flooded gum. Sending my man off to the
south side of the lakes, that he might ascertain whether an
outlet existed at that point, where I had observed a thick
group of gum-trees, I rode myself to the westward. I found
the extent of the lakes too great to be surveyed in one day,
and therefore returned to the party, when I found that the
man who had started with me had lost himself. Accompanied
by two men I went in search of him, and shortly falling upon
his trail, we soon run him down. He had missed the party,
and was galloping off to the westward and would most prob-
ably have been lost, at least for several days, had we not gone
in pursuit of him so soon. Turning north-west, we again came
upon the river, our route being through a thick brush growing
upon a loose sand. Both men and cattle were perfectly jaded
with the fatigue of travelling through such a country. For six
miles before our approach to the river, so dense was the brush
that it was impossible to see each other five yards off. In such
a situation we were in great danger of losing the cattle, and it
was only by the help of our sagacious dogs that we managed
to keep them at all together. Whilst riding amongst this
scrub in search of a path for the drays, I alternately encoun-
tered, in the confusion of the place, my own men and groups
of natives. I was much amused in the course of the day with
the simplicity of four or five Blacks, who were standing
together whilst a number of the cattle were walking towards
the spot they occupied, snorting as they cautiously drew
nearer to their black observers. It was quite evident that the
natives looked upon the Oxen as rational beings, as they


gravely saluted them with their usual friendly exclamation,
"80, bo, Marwood!”, and waving green boughs at them in
token of peace. The cattle not at all appreciating these marks
of respect, continued to move onwards, when the poor fellows
were obliged to run off, not daring to await a nearer approach
of visitors so rude and unceremonious.
February 22nd. Early in the morning the opposite bank
of the river appeared covered with the dusky forms of the
Natives. Not less than eighty-seven others sat on the side on
which we were encamped, about one hundred yards from the
drays. To one old chief, a fine good-humoured looking
fellow, I gave an iron tomahawk; I had frequently encoun-
tered him, in the course of the previous day, during my
rambles amongst the bush, and every time we met he greeted
me with a friendly nod of his head.
It was noon before the horses were collected. We then
moved off three miles further to a bend of the river, which
had plenty of reeds for the stock. About a mile before we
encamped I saw a number of aboriginal women and children,
being the first I had seen for a long time. On the opposite
bank of the river in front of our tent, were a tribe of Blacks
having their bodies painted in white streaks. They would not
come across, but held up their shields and shook their spears
at me in bravado. To show them our power, I fired a ball into
the bush, near which I saw a black fellow cutting capers of
defiance. A few small branches were torn off by the shot, and
the boaster was instantly cut short in his grimaces, and a
dead silence continued for a length of time.
Four of their number swam across to us with green boughs
in their hands. I think this must have been part of the tribe
that attacked Major Mitchell in 1836.


February 23rd. The natives wanted me to cross the river
with them, and appeared very anxious about it. I could not
understand what could be their object, yet they seemed
earnestly desirous of explaining the reason for their request.
We then travelled on 12 miles and then encamped on a
lagoon, where we got some teal, very fat and of excellent
flavour, and also plenty of pigeons, which served me with a
pigeon pie. The last three miles were over steep sand ridges,
sometimes through a belt of small pine-trees which in places
had to be cleared away with the axe before the drays could
be got through. The sand being very loose, it frequently
required twelve bullocks to pull a dray over the ridges. I
rode out to-day five miles, in a direct line from the river, to
a high white sandhill, from the top of which I beheld, as far
as the eye could reach in a southerly direction, one vast desert
of sand, rendering this part of the country quite useless for
the purposes of a civilized life.
Even on the flats of the river there is scarcely a blade of
grass, and very few reeds. Had our route lain much longer
over such a region as this, the working oxen must have
perished from fatigue and famine.
February 24th. We made an excellent journey, princi-
pally over barren flooded flats; the last seven miles over a
plain of firm sand —much firmer than any we had previously
crossed. Whilst I was out hunting with my man Harry, we
started a Cock Emu, which after a hard gallop of about seven
miles, fairly beat us, our only success being a mouthful of
feathers plucked out of his tail by my greyhound bitch! As
I could not but admire the amazing velocity of his move-
ments, I had the curiosity to measure some of his strides when
at full speed, as shown by his footsteps on the sand. In


credible as it may seem, each step measured nine feet six
inches! I was to-day introduced to a new tribe of about thirty
Blacks, by two ambassadors who had come forward from the
tribes seen yesterday. The Chief of those now encountered
sent on two of his own people to the tribe we should fall in
with next, to give them notice of our coming. The women
and children came up to us with the men —the first instance
of the kind I had seen since travelling on the Murray.
February 23th. The drays went on four miles, to a spot
on the brink of the river where was some food for the cattle,
being the only food I could find after a ride of at least twenty
miles. On the previous day I saw in the middle of the river
an island of rocks, forming a half-circle stretching from this
side to within 40 yards of the opposite bank, which was of
sand. Within this small space the river was running rapidly.
I supposed from the diminished quantity of water in the
river to-day, that part of it must have been absorbed in the
sand.
February 26th. Travelled seventeen miles, the sandhills
frequently terminating in extensive flats. On one of these
plains, by way of variety, being well mounted, I ran down an
Emu.
February 27th. I caught a species of Kangaroo I had
never before seen. Its head and fur were similar to those of
a hare, with hairy hind feet about the size of a rabbit.
The stock were to-day getting rather weak from the in-
sufficiency of their food, especially the working oxen, which
of late have had every day to drag the drays over difficult
sand-ridges, steep, and generally composed of loose sand.


We saw to-day about twenty poor-looking Natives; I gave
them the body of a large Kangaroo which our dogs had
killed, reserving the tail, which weighed about twenty
pounds for our own soup.
February 28th. A bank of sand stretching across the
Murray. I determined to cross over to the right bank of the
river, marking a course for the drays through the water by
means of stakes. Having got all safely over, we found a good
supply of water grass and reeds, and halted for the day to
refresh the stock. Thus one of the greatest of my expected
difficulties, that of getting the Cattle over the River Murray,
had been surmounted without much trouble. I supposed the
river was much larger at this point than I found it to be.
March Ist. We had travelled only three miles, when we
came upon the "River Darling”, just at the point where it
joins the Murray. On the trunk of a tree that stands on the
neck of land forming the junction, I read the words cut in
large letters "Dig Under”. The direction was instantly
obeyed, when we dug up a small phial in which was de-
posited a slip of paper written by Major Mitchell, dated 3rd
January 1836, and stating that from this point he commenced
his return from the Darling; that he was surrounded by
hostile tribes, and was very anxious about the safety of his
party at the depot near the junction of the Murrumbidgee,
and giving the names of eleven persons then with him. I
again buried the phial in the same spot, after taking a copy
of the Major’s memorandum, and adding to it another of
my own, to the effect that I had arrived at this point in safety,
and with a fair prospect of my having a prosperous journey
to St. Vincent’s Gulph, should I only find sufficient food to
keep alive my stock.


The Cattle and drays now forded the Darling, whilst one
wheel was in the dark turbid water of the Darling, the other
was in the dark clear waters of the Murray, passing down the
stream in this manner for about 300 yards. We then turned
short out on the right bank of the latter river. At this season
the water running out of the Darling was more than equal
to one-fifth of the size of the Murray. Proceeding seven miles
further, we encamped on the banks of a creek. The country
here consists of plains of poor soil, without timber occasion-
ally sprinkled with small bushes, but with scarcely any ap-
pearance of grass. The sandhills did not appear, though we
here and there crossed the ridge of pine-trees. I shot a new
kind of Owl, which abounds amongst these bushes, with its
maw full of beetles. The crested pigeons were also numerous,
rising up in coveys of 6 or 8 at a time. These with the wild
ducks afforded a pleasant variety to our diet of beef, bread
and tea.
March 2nd. Early in the morning we encountered a tribe
of stout, powerfully-made Blacks. I counted about 100 men,
with the same number of women and children behind them.
The men stood threatening us with their spears, and motion-
ing to us to go away. Not being in a humour to hold con-
versation with them we passed on, crossing two broad and
deep channels, which I am rather inclined to think are, in
times of great flood, outlets from the Darling into the
Murray. Here we saw a tribe of Natives equal in number
to those passed in the morning. They carried their spears
and were a very important set of fellows. In spite of all my
threats and warnings they would close around the stockmen.
One of them asked me in perfect seriousness whether the
heifers, pointing to the cattle, were our wives! This sage


question so amused my fancy that I called to Mr. Bonney,
telling him what the Black had said, and we both of us in-
dulged in a hearty laugh, on which the old fellow turned
away, seeming quite ashamed of his ridiculous blunder.
Some of the others began to get rather troublesome, and one
was nearly shot by Brian, one of my men, who saw him raise
his spear at me while my back was turned. They gathered in
such numbers close around the stock, that the Cattle got
alarmed and wheeled about among them, two of the beasts
charging the Blacks right and left, who saved themselves
from being gored only by their extreme agility. It is astonish-
ing that although on the course of our journey we passed
through so many tribes, yet on every approach of a new tribe,
the whole herd of Cattle were so agitated as to become nearly
unmanageable. Long before they could catch sight of the
Blacks they evidently knew of their approach by the smell,
and would carry their heads erect in the air, and snort aloud.
The present tribe followed us no further, but while crossing
an extensive plain we saw another large tribe sitting on the
brow of a hill, in rows one above the other. The last party
were painted with white stripes, these with red. At first I
suspected there was some mischief brewing from our having
seen so many Natives within the last two hours; but I soon
perceived, to my satisfaction, that the upper lines consisted
of women and children. When we got opposite to them about
forty of the men came after us without their spears, led by a
fine old chief, and evidently desirous of being on friendly
terms with us. Most of them followed us to the place where
we encamped, on a high bank. Their chief was one of the
most sensible men I ever met with among the savages of New
Holland, and appeared to have his men in great order and
perfectly under his command. He was anxious to have the


use of everything explained. It was a long time before he
could be made to comprehend how it was that the wheels of
the Drays were able to pass round. I gave him an iron toma-
hawk with which he was delighted.
Taking my hand, he placed it on his breast, and pointing to
a little boy, his son, and gradually raising his hand above the
boy’s head to the height of a man’s stature, he by these signs
gave me to understand that he would keep this tomahawk for
him and give it to him when grown up, to hunt opossums
with, at the same time imitating the manner in which these
animals were taken and killed. He described to me an ex-
tensive Lake that lay to the northward, and produced a piece
of flint that had been picked up in its neighbourhood. It is
therefore not impossible that ranges might still be met with,
forming a back to this vast continent. If so good land would
be sure to be found in their vicinity. My impression was that
the sandy country I had been crossing commenced from the
south of Lake Alexandrina, and would most likely terminate
to the north, a little higher than our present position, as the
country in that direction appeared to be of a rather more
elevated character. The old man went out with me to shoot
ducks while his people went to catch fish for their supper.
Fish is their principal article of food and they procure it in
great abundance. They also catch the Emu and different
species of kangaroo, from the large-sized one, weighing 100
pounds, to the small Kangaroo rat. I have even seen a mouse
of the Kangaroo tribe. The food of their women and children
consists chiefly of roots of different kinds, wild Yams, fresh
water muscles, and the Tortoise. The latter is about the size
of a dinner plate, and is found in the river in great numbers.
The men sometimes catch ducks with a net, which, as they
ascend from the lagoon, come in contact with the net, and get


entangled in its meshes. The Kangaroo is also caught in
nearly a similar way, except that on his running against the
net he is instantly speared.
March 3rd. The old chief came at daylight to breakfast
with me on some of the ducks we had shot together on the
previous evening. He was anxious to know when we should
return, and at parting he sent forward two of his men as am-
bassadors to announce our coming to the tribe in advance.
We passed over plains covered with bushes and salsuginous
plants, to a creek in whose channel there must flow a consider-
able body of water in times of flood. Following up its course
until an hour after sunset, we encamped for the night, but
found very few reeds for our cattle. The journey performed
by the drays to-day was 19 miles.
March 4th. Passed three miles further, when the food for
the stock became more plentiful. Here we encamped for the
day being Sunday. I rode out with one of my men about five
miles to the north, to the summit of a rather lofty sandhill,
on reaching which I was perfectly startled with the view.
Beneath me lay a beautiful Lake, about thirty or forty miles
in circumference, with a line of gum trees scattered along its
edge. This was indeed a delightful change from the flat,
dreary region of sand I had been crossing for many a day.
The bed of the lake was composed of a white clay, the water
deliciously fresh and cool, and not a reed growing in it. We
rode our horses into its waters for about 300 yards, which we
found not deeper than two feet. In returning, my dogs ran
down a Kangaroo, which they chased into the encampment.


March 3th. Following this Creek, or rather branch of the
river, for seven miles, we came upon a river of discoloured
water, running out of the lake discovered yesterday. It was
deep, and about 30 yards in width. This is the River Rufus,
seen by Captain Sturt entering the Murray. It must take its
rise from springs out of this Lake, as I rode nearly all around
to see if it had a tributary. I could not perceive one; Mr.
Bonney meanwhile took the party into the Lake, fording it
round to the right bank of the Rufus, just where it leaves the
Lake. The scenery is very pleasing, and the air is perfumed
by a sweet odour from the herbs and flowers growing on the
margin of the Lake. To this splendid Lake, of which I had
the pleasure of being the first European discoverer, I gave the
name of "Lake Victoria” in honour of our most gracious
Queen.
Each Individual of my party testified his loyal respect for
the august personage whose name I had selected, by drinking
Her Majesty’s health in a glass of brandy, following the toast
with loud and hearty huzzas; the first time, I should suppose
Her Majesty’s health was ever drunk by any of her subjects
so many hundreds of miles from the haunts of civilized life.
Taking a fresh horse I rode to the north of the Lake, and
in the evening overtook my party encamped on the banks of
the Murray, whose waters were now discoloured by those of
the Rufus. We here found plenty of reeds for our live stock
to feed upon.
Whilst returning to-day along the high banks of the
Murray in search of my party, I saw in the valley immediately
beneath me a tribe of Aborigines seated on a beautiful plot
of moss by the river side, eating roasted tortoises and broiled
fish. They appeared a perfect group of content and happi-
ness. I sat watching them for some time, and at length gave


a loud "Tally-Ho!” They all turned round with amazement
and, taking either me or my horse for some supernatural
being, the young women commenced a dance, waving their
arms wildly in the air. An old, withered-looking hag then
came forward, making a noise without using any sort of
language whatever, but only a senseless gibberish. I told her
in broad English to hold her tongue, whereupon, thinking,
no doubt, that I understood her, she raised a shout of delight,
which she repeated again and again, pausing between each
cry for my answer. As I kept silence two of the men came up
the bank out of the valley, and soon acquired sufficient con-
fidence to advance within twenty yards of my horse. I pointed
out to them in the distance, beyond the plains, a cloud of dust
arising from the ground, caused by the movements of our
cattle and drays. Such an incident having no precedent in
their traditions, they were dreadfully alarmed, not knowing
what this novel spectacle could mean, and left me to meet the
party on their arrival at the river. In the evening a fatal
accident had nearly put an end to my travels, and to my career
in this world. Having singled out a fat bullock with a view
to having it slaughtered for the use of the party, I fired a ball
at him, which entered near the eye, but the shot not having
the expected effect of bringing him down, he made a rush
towards the river. Two of my men seized hold of his tail to
keep him back, but in vain. Another man was standing close
by the river bank in the direct line the bullock was taking,
and a tree growing upon the water’s edge prevented the
possibility of his moving in time out of the enraged animal’s
way. Seeing the danger the man was in, I also seized hold of
the beast’s tail, for the purpose of checking his career; but
the man suddenly perceiving his own danger, without a
chance of escape, snatched a horse pistol out of his belt and


fired at the bullock’s head. The ball missed the beast, and
grazed along my own breast! I at first thought from the sen-
sation I felt, that I was shot through, but though the pain
continued rather severe for some time, the injury was not
serious. I had, however, a hair-breadth escape of my life.
We at length managed to shoot the bullock effectually. The
whole of this scene was witnessed by a tribe of about 50
Blacks, who sat watching our proceedings with intent in-
terest, and, apparently, with much terror. One of them, an
old hoary-headed man, grew very merry by drinking a little
sugar and water.
March 6th. The drays passed on 12 miles, and again en-
camped on the river. While out alone to-day I met a very
large Kangaroo bounding over the plains. I gave him chase,
and although I was mounted on my horse "Rob Roy”, one of
the fleetest of foot I ever rode, the Kangaroo kept me in pur-
suit for full four miles, when, coming within gun shot, I
fired and wounded him, but my gun happened to be loaded
with small shot the damage was not much; I therefore dis-
charged both my pistols at him, and throwing the last at his
head, I was fain to give up the chase perfectly parched with
thirst after so hard a gallop over these arid plains. I returned
towards the river, retracing my horse’s footsteps on the sand
to pick up my gun, hat and pistol, thrown away during the
chace. On arriving at the river, I immediately descended into
its bed to enjoy a draught of its delicious water. On arising
from the ground after stooping to drink, I was somewhat
alarmed to see five Blacks standing on the bank, leaning on
their spears not 15 yards above me. Not liking the indication
of their serious council, I commenced a dance, as a little
merriment will at any time drive all hostility from their


minds. I then got hold of my firearms, which I had in-
cautiously left on the side of the bank; and once having these
in my possession, I had nothing more to fear.
Mounting my horse I made him jump up the bank to the
spot where the Blacks stood gazing at me: a manoeuver
which caused them to be alarmed and more anxious to escape
from me than I was a few seconds before to get clear of them.
It was dark before I again found my party. Mr. Bonney was
playing a few sweet airs on his flute by the river side for the
amusement of a listening group of about forty Blacks,
pleasant, good-humoured looking fellows, some of them
fervent admirers. I have often noticed that the finest-looking
men are fondest of hearing the music. Mr. Bonney told me
that the working oxen had become quite jaded by the heavy
drag over the loose soil of these plains.
March 7th. Travelled 12 miles over a sandy soil. From
the summit of a high hill of sand which overlooks the river,
I had a very extensive view. The elevation of the river’s bank
was about 300 feet, and of a soft description of cream-
coloured limestone. The flooded flats, or valley of the
Murray, here extend about six miles wide, the country beyond
being of the same sandy character as that which we had now
been travelling over for some time.
March Bth. Travelled 14 miles over barren river flats.
These flats appeared to be annually flooded, and, although
the soil is composed of the deposits of the river, yet no grass
was seen growing upon them. We encamped in the evening
on a creek near a running salt water spring. The water was
as salt as the waters of the sea, and there was on the ground
near it a quantity of pure well-flavoured salt, formed by solar


evaporation. Four Blacks who had followed us in the cap-
acity of ambassadors from the last tribe, brought a new tribe
of about fifty to our encampment to look at us.
They were very good-looking men, and on the whole well
behaved, though I detected one of them stealing a Knife and
Fork. It is astonishing how soon these savages become
familiar with us, considering that only a few hours before
they were not aware that such a race of animals as white men
were in existence.
March 9th. Having travelled 13 miles over barren flooded
flats, we encamped between two waterholes, in one of which
the water was quite salt, while in the other it was perfectly
fresh and good. Some repairs being required to one of the
dray wheels the tire was obliged to be made red hot, and, on
its being suddenly plunged into the water for the purpose of
cooling it, thirty of the Blacks, who had been watching our
operations very intently, became so alarmed at the hissing
sound that they took to flight.
March 1 Oth. After proceeding 16 miles over similar flats,
and being frequently thrown out of a straight line by the
deep water-courses, which the drays had to cross, we again
encamped on the river bank. The food for our Cattle still
continues the same kind, but more plentiful, consisting of
water, grass and reeds, feeding on which the stock keep up
their condition. Being Saturday night, and having arrived
within the province of South Australia, we drank the health
of His Excellency Governor Hindmarsh.


March 11th. Sunday. We halted for the day. I rode
out to the north, to the top of a high ridge covered with sand
and scrub. The view of the river was extensive, the flooded
flats through which it flowed appeared to be about seven
miles in width. A good portion of these flats, say about one-
fourth, is adapted for agriculture, but the sand on the outer
bank still continues of the same unprofitable description. A
tribe of Blacks, in all about ninety, remained most of the day
about 200 yards from my tent. They appeared anxious to
drive a bargain with the men for their women, of whose
favours they appeared to be not at all jealous; but finding
that such overtures were not in request, their principal man
attempted to pilfer, on which I huddled him off, and the
others shortly followed him.
March 12th. After having proceeded a few miles we
found the river running up against the perpendicular outer
bank, consisting of limestone, and had some difficulty to find
a pass through which to get the drays out of the valley. From
this point I steered due west all day, through thick brush of
Eucalyptus bushes about ten feet high, the land consisting
of loose sand. At sunset we opened on plains, sprinkled with
tufts of grass. I discovered a fine lake of fresh water, about
thirty miles in circumference, and on its margin we en-
camped. Kangaroos appeared to be rather numerous here.
The Blacks were encamped further along the Lake, and from
the noise they made, we knew they must have noticed our
arrival. It was a beautiful moonlight night, and I strolled out
along the edge of the lake to shoot some ducks which were
seen on the water in thousands. On discharging our guns,
the echo of the report rolled along the water magnificently;


one would have supposed that a hundred shots had been fired
at the same moment. As the reports died away the lake be-
came perfectly alive with the myriads of live fowl in motion
on its surface screaming and cackling with alarm at the novel
sound.
Gradually the flapping of their wings and the splashes as
they alighted in the water ceased, and they again settled upon
the Lake in solemn stillness. The wild, sweet, musical note
of the swans was heard over our heads, as they returned to
rest upon the bosom of the Lake, after feeding during the
day amongst the reeds on the river. As we lay enjoying this
delightful scene, we could now and then catch the distant
noises of a tribe of Natives as they were disputing, with much
emotion about this our extraordinary inroad upon their terri-
tory. The native name for this fine Lake is "Nookamka”, but
in virtue of my privilege as its first European discoverer, I
named it Lake Bonney, after my friend and fellow traveller,
Mr. M. C. Bonney, whose company contributed so much to
the pleasure of my expedition.
March 13th. At daybreak two of our men went back to
the place where we depastured the stock yesterday, to bring
up a heifer that had been left behind, and after galloping the
whole way there and back, they rejoined us about noon. They
told me that, on arriving at the place, they found the Blacks
approaching the heifer with their spears, with the intention,
as was supposed, of killing her; but no sooner did they catch
sight of the men galloping up the hill towards them than they
took to their heels and soon disappeared.
On the edge of Lake Bonney I collected a quantity of nitre.
The water has rather a sweet taste, but not unpleasantly so.
After a good deal of ceremony the Natives were induced to


approach our tent, accompanied by their women and children.
I counted in all one hundred and sixty-three. They informed
me that most of their men were gone to a fight, at a Lake to
the northward; amongst these who were left to protect the
women and children, there were not more than thirty able
men. They afforded us a good deal of amusement during our
halt. Our dogs did not like to see so much familiarity between
us and the Blacks, but although they did not interfere so long
as the Natives kept a respectful distance, yet whenever one
of the tribe laid his hands upon a single article belonging to
us, one or other of our canine friends would be sure to catch
him by the heels; and when the fellow, on recovering himself,
lifted up his spear and in his rage endeavoured to kill the dog,
two or three of his companions would promptly interfere,
and hold his arms until his passion had cooled down. On the
plains around this Lake, the grass is rather more plentiful
though still very thinly scattered.
March 14th. Travelled fourteen miles on the top of the
outer bank of the river. This bank is about three hundred
feet high, its sides generally perpendicular; the formation is
of soft cream-coloured limestone and clay, the river running
in the valley below, wending about alternately against these
natural walls, dividing the valley, as it were, into so many
small farms. I think the tide must, some centuries ago, have
run up this far; for in some places I saw large heaps of very
old oyster-shells; in a cave overhanging the valley, there was
a heap of these shells, evidently left there at some distant
period by the Natives. During the journey I saw, every day,
when on the river, similar heaps of fresh water muscle-shells,
which are daily piled there by the present generation of
Blacks. Whilst riding down in the valley, during the day, in


search of a pass through which to bring the Cattle down to
water and feed, I tasted the water in many of the holes and
found it perfectly salt. Three Blacks passed me on their way
to acquaint the next tribe of our approach. They carried a
small net full of muscles slung across their shoulders on a
spear. As they passed me, trotting along their native path,
they saluted me with a laugh and their native "Menera”: We
are friends. The language of these tribes is different from
that of the tribes near the junction of the Murrumbidgee, and
the people are of a much milder and more friendly dis-
position. Encamping on the top of the outer bank, my men
found a pass, and got the stock down to the river to water,
and to feed on such herbage as the valley produces.
March 13th. Performed fifteen miles. The country did
not vary, the valley and banks of the Murray still exhibiting
the same singular scenery. The ground on the top of the outer
bank was composed of sandhills, difficult for the drays to
surmount. In the evening the ambassadors came to us, bring-
ing with them three old men. One of the latter described to
me the course of the river, by drawing his finger on the sand;
and also imitated the sea rolling on the beach. On the
previous day we had been obliged to leave behind us a fine
large Cow, quite exhausted from travelling so far without
rest; I now pointed her out to one of the Blacks, and requested
him to take care of her until the white men should return to
take her away. Parrots now appeared more numerous,
Rosellas and others, similar to those on the Eastern coast. The
only bird here that is not common on the other side of the
Continent is the Crested Pigeon.


March 16th. Travelled over a country of the same des-
cription. The sand being heavy for our drays, we descended
through a pass into the valley, and proceeded on the firm
surface of the flooded flats, but the river running up against
the north bank, the dray was obliged to reascend through a
steep rocky pass to the top of the outer bank. I found, when
in the valley, a great quantity of crystallized lime, or gypsum.
It was in masses of some tons weight. We procured also a
great number of singular sea shells and fossils embedded in
the bank. The natives who were with us at the time, told me
they burn these shells in the fire, and then make them into a
plaster with which they painted themselves white when going
to fight or hold a Karobbory. On the 11th March, I saw some
caps made of this plaster. Their shape was that of a scull,
and inside was network made of twine. I suppose they were
worn by the Natives during their funeral services. I saw them
inside a rough round house made of the limbs of trees, rather
neatly thatched with reeds. Within this building someone
appeared to have been buried. In each burial ground there
were about thirty graves, each of which was surmounted with
a pile of sticks; those in which there had been recent inter-
ments were surrounded by an oval footpath evidently kept
with much care and in neat order. While I was examining
these burial-grounds, the Blacks kept aloof, looking very
solemn, but without uttering a word, and manifestly dis-
approving of my curiosity. It is rather singular that they
should make better houses for the dead than for the living,
the latter being composed merely of sheets of bark. Whilst
the drays were ploughing through the sand I ascended a high
sand-ridge to select a pass for them, when the delightful sight
of a high range to the W.S.W. broke upon my view. This of
course is what may be considered the sea-coast range, in


dicating to us a speedy and safe termination to our journey,
and giving promise of that better sort of country of which
high land is always a mark.
March 17th. Travelled eight miles over the same descrip-
tion of country. The men were scattered all day in search of
the Cattle.
March 18th. I went back with three Stockmen to our pre-
vious night’s encamping ground, in search of some stray
stock, and having recovered them, we returned to the party,
and found that fresh bullocks had been yoked out of the herd,
the regular working oxen being jaded, and unable to continue
in draught. We proceeded eight miles, and encamped on the
edge of the perpendicular cliffs that here overhang the river.
The Stock were put down into the valley by a narrow rocky
pass, the only one to be found, and as only one beast at a time
could go through, it was a long while before the whole herd,
upwards of 300 in number, arrived at the bottom. In the
mean time the men not engaged with the Cattle were em-
ployed in repairing one of the wheels, the tire of which had
come off during the day. This was done by lowering it over
the cliffs, about 200 feet high, with a whale line; and then
after heating the tire red hot, and placing small pieces of
leather between each spoke, it was quickly cooled in the river
and again raised up quite fit for use.
March 19th. In the morning whilst the cattle Were being
brought up out of the valley, one. of our best working oxen
unfortunately broke his leg in coming up the path and was
unavoidably left behind. To-day we got round that bend
where the Murray ceases flowing to the West, and suddenly


turns round to the S.S.W., which course it pursues until it
enters "Lake Aiexandrina”. We now appeared to be done
with the loose sandy country, entering one consisting of open
plains thinly sprinkled over with bushes, and producing more
grass than I had seen on the journey, except at Swan Hill; but
it is a very thin coat, though in the valley of the river there
is a good portion of alluvial land for cultivation. In the
afternoon we were cheered by the footprints of horses, the
sight of which raised the spirits of the whole party. Taking
two horsemen with me, I followed these footprints to a place
where it was plain there had been an encampment of Euro-
peans. There was the mark of a man’s shoe, some feathers
that had been plucked off ducks; and the ground on which
the horses had been tethered. After sleeping here, we tracked
the party steering away from the river, a West by South
course, I supposed for Adelaide. At sunset we overtook Mr.
Bonney encamped on the river with about 30 Blacks near him,
one of whom, a very facetious character, described four horse-
men who had been there a short time before, and who were
the first Europeans they had ever seen. He made us under-
stand that while he was himself concealed amongst the reeds,
he saw them strike a light with a lucifer match; that one of
them smoked a Cigar, and that another wore spectacles. I
afterwards learned that they were four Gentlemen from Ade-
laide who had been out in search of the Murray River.
March 20th . The drays went forward in the morning four
miles and then halted; the Cattle did not come up until sun-
set, delay having been caused by some of them getting astray.
The lagoons were here covered with ducks, geese and swans;
the grass and reeds are also much more plentiful on the river
flats.


Two good-looking Natives named “Roncur” and “Maski”
accompanied us, and encamped close beside the tents. 1 shot
some Cockatoos and pigeons for their supper, and they were
so well pleased with us that they promised to go two days’
stage in our company.
March 21st, We travelled sixteen miles over a country
similar to that crossed on the previous day, sometimes de-
scending with the drays into the valley, which was here not
enclosed by such perpendicular walls as those mentioned
under former dates. A slight shower of rain fell to-day, being
the first we had had during the nine weeks of travelling in a
journey of a thousand miles. I shot a brace of ducks, two
cockatoos, two cranes, a crow, and two shags. The two
Blacks, Roncur and Maski, ate the whole of these at one meal,
and then appeared quite ready for a second course. In the
evening about thirty Blacks came to see us, crossing the river
in their canoes, which are made of a sheet of bark cut from a
tree with a slight bend in its trunk, thus giving the rude shape
of a boat. On Mr. Bonney firing into the water, they were
much alarmed to see the balls dipping along the water, until
lost sight of in the distance.
March 22nd. Travelled eleven miles, principally in the
valley, where the feed for the stock was very good. On meet-
ing a tribe of Blacks our old friends Roncur and Maski turned
back, and left us so suddenly that, to my great regret, they
went without a tomahawk which I had promised them.
March 23rd. I took my departure from the River Murray,
which had been at such excellent service to my expedition.
From what I observed of the country, when riding out from


the river, I am satisfied that it would have been impossible
to cross the interior anywhere near the same parallel of lati-
tude otherwise than by following the course of that friendly
river; yet I think a practical route will be found by keeping
near the sea coast from the Grampian Hills to Lake Alexan-
drina. Steering a course due west, for the purpose of arriving
at the nearest point of the ranges in view, knowing that water
would be found only in their vicinity, we passed for twenty
miles through a thick scrub of small eucalyptus. The drays
had great difficulty in forcing their way. In the evening we
halted, but without having found water for the stock, the
ranges being still two miles beyond us. We tied all the horses
to gum-trees, made fires all round the Cattle, and, for the first
time throughout the journey, set a watch to keep the beasts
from straying in search of water. A simple circumstance
occurred during the night, a man on watch having detected
two dogs going off in quest of water, each having a tin pot
in his mouth, one a pint, the other a quart! The pint pot
adventurer was arrested on his outset, but his companion
with the quart, a large bull-dog, got clear off and never re-
turned to us more.
March 24th. At daybreak I went off with two men, in
search of water. On arriving at the ranges, each of us took a
different course, for the more certain attainment of our object.
These ranges, generally, run north and south. Little or no
timber grows upon them, but their sides, and the small valleys
I rode over were beautifully covered with grass. They would
make excellent sheep pasturage. From a high point of the
range I saw a water-course, indicated by the line of flooded
gum-trees, at a distance of eight miles further along the
ranges to the southward. On again joining the drays I found


the men had returned from the north without finding any
water; we therefore proceeded to the spot I had described,
and there found not only sufficient water (rather sweetish in
its taste), but beautiful grass for our Cattle to revel in, both
of which the poor animals greatly needed.
March 25th. Sunday. Halted for this day amidst the
abundance of fine grass. A good stock station might be
formed here. Mr. Bonney strolled out with me to the highest
part of the ranges, whence we saw a succession of high hills
and valleys stretching to the southwards.
Between us and the river was a flat country thickly covered
with brush, such as we crossed on the previous day; and be-
yond this we could just perceive the plains on either side of
the river. I found an Emu that had been speared, but none of
the Blacks were seen by us to-day.
March 26th. The stock started late in the morning, having
been much astray. After travelling ten miles we encamped,
having but very little water and that brackish.
March 27th. Had rather a severe day’s ride among the
mountains. I passed over some well-grassed valleys, but the
water was perfectly salt. I again crossed the ranges to the
eastern side and then encamped, the party turning the Cattle
up a ravine where there was plenty of grass and a little water,
still impregnated with salt.
March 28th, The ranges becoming rather broken and less
elevated, I changed our course from south to west, the drays
winding up in the best way they could. On the top of these
ranges we found the ground so rugged, and so abounding


with thick scrub and interwoven vines that we found it all but
impossible to get the drays along. Crossing a high range, we
commenced descending into a deep valley about four miles
wide, well covered with grass, and exhibiting a water-course
running down its middle, in which we found deep pools of
water. Our day’s progress with the drays was seventeen miles.
M cLYch 29th. The drays travelled fourteen miles. In the
morning we commenced ascending an open, well-grassed
country, sprinkled over with the acacia. Immense masses of
gum acacia could be collected, hanging from the trees. We
halted to dine on a creek of excellent water with most luxu-
riant grass growing in the valley. This creek is immediately
on the west side of Mount Barker, to the top of which I rode
and had a most magnificent view of the beautiful Country
around. The full extent of Lake Alexandrina lay before me,
at a distance of twenty miles. It is an immense sheet of water.
The drays passed around the north end of the Mount and
encamped on a beautiful creek of running water. The country
around consists of land of the best description, and was
covered with the most luxuriant grass. The scenery also was
beautiful, the open plains being skirted with a thin forest of
large gum trees, clothed in their silvery bark, and not a de-
cayed branch to be seen on one of them. The Cattle, too,
presented a pleasing object, as they grazed on these verdant
plains, so different from anything I had seen before in the
whole course of our journey.
March 30th. Keeping a westerly course, we crossed a
high range, and again descended into a valley, well watered
and richly grassed. Here the water joined that of another
stream, which, running into a rocky ravine, prevented our


any longer following its course with the drays; we therefore
halted on the edge of the mountain, leaving the cattle to gme
on the fine pasturage in the valley.
March 31st. The men were again delayed in searching
for the Cattle, which had been constantly straying since we
left the Country where the Natives were plentiful. We now
commenced our ascent up one of the steepest and most
scrubby mountains that ever drays passed over, and having
accomplished the Herculian task, I kept along the leading
ridge of this range to its south-west termination, where the
Eastern Ocean, or St. Vincent’s Gulf suddenly lay open to our
view, appearing close underneath, although its distance was
at least fifteen miles. This was truly a sight to be enjoyed, for
here the labours of our journey were over and the possibility
of travelling by land from one coast to the other clearly estab-
lished. After a little difficulty and some danger, the drays
descended from the mountains into a valley with a small
running stream and plenty of good grass.
April Ist. The ranges being difficult to cross, we to-day
made but small progress, not more than six miles, winding
about wherever a pass could be found. In one place the
descent was at least 900 feet, and as nearly perpendicular as
it was possible for a dray to pass down. In the afternoon we
encamped in an open and well-grassed country on a stream
called by the natives "Onkaparinga”. Kangaroos were here
in great abundance, some of the large ones would weigh 150
pounds. Nearly all the timber consists of the bluegum-tree
and the mimosa. On the high range traversed the previous
day I observed an inferior description of the Stringy bark
trees.


April 2nd. After going about 5 miles, on descending the
open grassy ranges towards the sea, our course was arrested
by their nearly perpendicular termination. Mr. Bonney and
I rode off in seperate directions to look for a pass, he going to
the south, while I, accompanied by Harry Benson one of my
men, went north. On coming to the sea shore* we observed
the fresh print of a horse’s hoof, and following the tract thus
obtained, we came upon a tent and hut, in which were re-
siding three young men, who were just commencing a settler’s
life, their chief occupation at this time was the hunting of
Kangaroos for the Adelaide market, which they disposed of
at a shilling per pound. On my first appearing before them
they were at a loss what to make of me; but on my telling them
that I had come across the vast wilderness of the interior, they
shewed me every possible attention and hospitality.
After dinner I despatched Harry to Mr. Bonney, and the
tent and livestock were forthwith brought on to this place,
being just fifteen miles to the south of Adelaide.
April 3rd. It was nearly evening before I started on horse-
back for Adelaide, one of the young hunters kindly going
with me as a guide. About an hour after dark I entered that
infant metropolis and enjoyed a most hearty welcome at
Hotel, where I once more enjoyed the bustle of civilized
life.
A pril 4th, I dined and spent a pleasant evening with His
Excellency, Governor Hindmarsh, who expressed himself
highly delighted at my arrival, and with the advantages
which my arrival with stock would, both immediately, and
in its future consequences, entail upon the new Colony.
* "Noarlunga" is here written in the margin of the M.L. copy.


SOME ACCOUNT OF ADELAIDE
Adelaide, the Capital of the new province of South Aus-
tralia, is seated in a beautiful and healthy situation. The
Township is laid out on both sides of a very small stream of
excellent water, to which has been given the name of the
River Torrens. In the summer season this stream is found
running only for a short distance below the Town, where it
disappears beneath its gravelly bed. Such being the general
character of all the small streams I have seen on the Eastern
Coast of this Continent. Even the great Murray in some
places during my Journey appeared to have lost above a third
of its waters. The Township comprises above a thousand
acres divided into allotments of one acre each. Parks and
sites for public buildings have been judiciously reserved.
The scenery around is very pleasing. Towards the sea it con-
sists of plains studded and intersected with belts of trees.
The Mount Lofty Range distant about two miles to the east-
ward, presents a beautiful picturesque appearance, with its
various and sloping sides variegating by its shadow the luxu-
riant grass to every shade of green, or when the clouds hang
over it, to perfect blackness.
The Port where the shipping ride is six miles distant, the
intermediate country being a perfectly level plain. The road
to Holdfast Bay is the same distance running at right-angles
with that going to the Port.
The Port of Adelaide is formed by an inlet of the sea, from
Gulf St. Vincent in which the ships ride in perfect security.
During my stay I saw upwards of twenty large vessels, from
England and the neighbouring Colonies, unloading their
cargoes.


The Canton, a barque of tons burden, was the largest.
Stores have been already erected to receive goods as they are
landed. Such goods are at present carried from the landing
stages to Adelaide in drays drawn by oxen, but it is in con-
templation to lay down a Railroad between those increasing
important points of communication. The iron plates requisite
for that purpose have (I believe but am not certain) been
already ordered out from England.
The site of the town is certainly in the best position that
under existing circumstances could possibly have been
selected. It can always command a supply of good water,
so essential to the health and comfort of its inhabitants. The
plains crossed in passing between the town and the harbour
although very beautiful to the eye, are not of good soil, but
on either side of the River Torrens, and also along the foot of
the Ranges, both to the North and to the South, and on the
side of the different watercourses, running thence towards
the gulf, there are many thousand acres of rich alluvial soil
covered with fine herbage and well adapted to agricultural
purposes.
During my stay of two months in the province I rode over
nearly all the Country from the sea, round by Lake Alexan-
dria to Mount Lofty, and passed over a great portion of rich
and beautiful land, fit for either agriculture or sheep farming.
Its fattening qualities were sufficiently proved by the stock
I brought overland. The whole of them had got perfectly fat,
many of them equal to the prize cattle in England.
There were in the settlement when I was there nearly
twenty thousand fine-wooled sheep which had been im-
ported by sea principally from Launceston in Van Diemen’s
Land, and which appeared to thrive uncommonly well. The
stock of cattle rather exceeded one thousand, and of horses
two hundred.


PUBLIC
DINNER
M HAWDON
A number of persons having expressed
a desire to testify their sense of the spirited
and enterprizing conduct of Mr, HAWDON
in bringing CATTLE overland from New
South ales to Adelaide , it is proposed
THAT A
PUBLIC DINNER
Shalt be given to that gentleman, and that a
PIECE OF PLATE
Shall be presented to him in commemoration
of the event, and as a Testimony of the
feeling of the Colonists.
Persons desirous of evincing their sen-
timents are invited to record their Names in
a paper left for this purpose at the POST
OFFICE.
N. B. An early day will be fixed for the DINNER, of which due
notice will be given.
Adelaide, 4th May, 1838.
Printed at the office of the Southern Australian
Announcement of a Public Dinner in Hawdon’s honour.


The population was about three thousand souls. When it
is considered that the Colony had been formed only two
years, its state of rapid advancement was truly wonderful.
The settlers had just got their preliminary sections of one
hundred and sixty acres each, and on these many had already
commenced agricultural operations, but for the present nearly
the whole population resided in the Township. There were
many very neat brick buildings, especially that of the Aus-
tralasian Bank, The timber for building and fencing pur-
poses is brought from the Mount Lofty Ranges, where it
grows in great abundance and of excellent quality. That
principally used is a kind of stringy bark, similar to what is
found in Mount Macedon near Port Phillip.
The people of South Australia appear perfectly satisfied
with the country, and evinced the settled feeling of having
quite made it their adopted home.
I shall ever cherish a proud remembrance of the friendly
and flattering reception that I met with during my stay among
them. It was their study to manifest the high feeling of satis-
faction with which they regarded the success of my experi-
ment to establish overland communication between their
province and New South Wales. I was honoured with a
public dinner, whilst those who could not join in it, displayed
their sympathy in the general joy, by roasting a bullock
whole, and regaling themselves in the true spirit of Good Old
England.
Although it will be seen by my Journal that I crossed a
desert of sand, which forms a boundary between the two
colonies of New South Wales and South Australia, yet in-
dependent of the fine country which I traversed after leaving
the Murray River until my arrival at Adelaide there are in the
Valley of the Murray many thousands of acres of alluvial


land which will hereafter form the large granary of the
Capital. The River is navigable for a distance of one hundred
miles, into the Lake Alexandrina through which it is possible
a passage may be found to within seven miles of Encounter
Bay, at which place there are now three prosperous whaling
companies established from Adelaide. The passage out of
the lake to the sea is, under peculiar circumstances or the state
of the wind, impracticable even for boats on account of the
heavy surf falling over the sandbar at its outlet.


HAWDON’S ROUTE
(see dotted line)
Compiled at the South Australian Archives from facts
recorded in Hawdon’s diary.
