

The "Ki-M agi" System.
A
SCIENCE
Which
Reveals
The
CHARACTERS,
LIVES,
and
NATURES
of
MEN and WOMEN.
[?]Companion Treatise to [?] 51
[?]nd the Transmission of Th[?]
[?]ed by[?]
51 to 58
[?]SCIENCES, G[?]


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. In Medias Res.
. . PAGE.
Divine in Man The Forming Spirit We Build Our-
selves Predatory Creatures Abstract Qualities Lives
Compared Character through Form - - - 9to 14
CHAPTER 11. A Study of Animal Forms.
Form the Revealer——Geological Epochs Ideal Man
Stages of Evolution Zoological Studies The
Human Zoo Mr. Fox Tigers, Dogs, Wolves, Horses,
Roosters, Hawks Miss Swan, Spaniel, Terrier, Rabbit,
Parrot, Magpie, Duck - - - . . - 14 to 25
CHAPTER HI. A Study of Temperaments.
From Generals to Particulars Number of Tempera-
ments Classification The Heart King Mental Tem-
perament Best Temperament - - - - 25 to 37
CHAPTER IV. Quality and Activity.
Fine and Coarse Signs of Activity - - 37 to 42
CHAPTER V. A Study of Heads.
Attacks on Phrenology The “ Bump” Theory—■—Four-
storey Foreheads Sizes of Heads Scapel Studies v.
Phrenological Methods - - - - . - 42 to 48
CHAPTER VI. Skulls.
O. W. Holmes Wonderful Structure Figuier
Thickness of Skulls Operations - - - - 48 to 51
CHAPTER VII. Phrenological Readings.
Grouping Comparative Phrenology Great Divisions
of Brain Structure Mental Action Readings, not
Gropings - ... 51 to 58


CHAPTER VIII. Geometrical Phrenology.
tag a
New Mode of Comparing Heads Observing in Silence
Facial Angle Weak and Bad Minimising Crime
Parents can Study Weights of Brain - - - 58 to 06
CHAPTER IX. Studies and Examples.
The Ego What is Faculty? Assemblages—Local
Celebrities - - * * " ' 06 to li
CHAPTER X. Facts about Faces.
The Honest Face -Weakness of Character Lighted
Faces - - - - - ' * - 74 to 79
CHAPTER Xa. How we Reveal Ourselves.
Walking Tetter and Pum Walks for Faculties
Gaol Studies Cassell’s Characters of Feet - - - 79 to 8a
CHAPTER XI. Hands.
The Underlying Principle Chirognomy Comparisons
Dutch and Yankee Temperament as Shewn m
the Hand - - 85 to 88
CHAPTER XII. Voice and Laughter.
Tones and Tone Producers Qualities of Voice V hat
Influences Voice Climatic Conditions- Vowel Laughter
Morals of Laughter - - - ' 88 to 92
CHAPTER XIII. A Chat about Chins.
Chins and Thumbs Runaway Chins Signs in the
Chin Too Much Chin - - - ' 92 to 97
CHAPTER XIV. Health Signs.
Facial Poles Constitutions Attention to Signs
Herbert Spencer • * • ’ * - 97 to 101


HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.
CHAPTER I.
IN MEDIAS RES.
And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them
nave dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over tin
sa.tt.le, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the
earth. So God created man in His own image, in the image of God created He
"| m j m , al l a ? d female created he them. . . . And the Lord God formed man oi
the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life : and man
became a living soul.”
Man being made in the Divine image there must be something
of the Divine in him. Something of the Creator’s identity goes
into all created work. A maker is only a sub-creator, but he can
be identified by his work, whatever that may be. A maker of
horseshoes puts so much of himself into his work that he will
recognise it as his when nigh worn out a month later. He puts
into his work so much of his style—in other words, his individuality,
himself—that another man in the same trade will frequently tell
where the horse has been shod and who made the shoes.
We stamp our work with the impress of ourselves. No one else
can do it just as we do ; the work has taken with it something of
our identity, of our time and life. So with Divine work, however
it may be done, and no matter how little we know of the way in
which it is done, it must reveal the Divinity that did it, although
it does at the same time conceal Him. In “Faust” we find the
universe described as “ the living visible Garment of God.”
In being’s floods, in Action’s storm,
I walk and work, above, beneath—
Work and weave in endless motion.
Birth and Death,
An infinite ocean ;
A seizing and giving
The fire of living :
'Tis thus at the roaring Loom of Time I ply,
And weave for God the Garment thou seest Him by.
Thus sings the Earth Spirit in the language of Germany’s
greatest poet. He works for ever building up forms that reveal
the spirit which lies behind the form. Hence, we have appearances
representing qualities—things looking like what they are. Hard
stones look hard; soft stones look soft. The same is true of
woods—and of men.
Certain chemical elements will combine in certain ways, and in


no other way ; they will crystallise into certain forms, and into no
other forms. Chemicals reveal their characters when certain tests
are applied with mathematical precision. In chemistry a certain
quality takes on a certain form and acts in a given manner, and so
becomes known.
This is true in plant life. A something not visible to the micro-
scope is involved in the seed of the poplar, and in that of the oak.
This, in due course, is evolved by the growth of the tree. The life
spirit of each tree is in the seed, and this spirit never makes a
mistake. The oak, as if knowing its strength, from the first throws
out its branches horizontally, defying gravitation to drag it down.
The slender and weak but graceful poplar causes its branches to
grow almost perpendicularly, so that there may be the smallest
amount of strain upon them.
The shipbuilder knows the strength of the wood by the form of
the tree, if by nothing else; and, wanting strong wood, he selects
neither the willow that droops earthward nor the poplar that
shoots heavenward or skyward, but the sturdy oak, with its hori-
zontal branches and its broad foliage, that defies the winds to tear
it down or gravitation to break its mighty arms. The life of the
tree is in the acorn, and with it the plan of its growth and archi-
tectural design. What corresponds to spirit in man is in the tree
in all stages of its life and growth from the acorn onward.
The oak may become a stunted tree. It may be gnarled, and
twisted, and a very poor oak, owing to many causes; or the
circumstances of its life may be favourable, so that it becomes
a complete tree, the ideal oak. So it may be with an animal,
or even a man. No matter what happens to it, however, so
long as it lives, what there is of it is oak; the oak spirit clothes
itself in oak form.
Animals May be Said to Form Themselves on the plan of
their being. A certain kind of life must organise itself on the plan
of its life. Fishes and birds are possessed of the swimming or flying
idea, and they form fins and wings. The spirit of each creature
needs certain organs or tools for its manifestation and use, and
during embryonic and the early stages of life it clothes itself with
a form containing these tools or organs. Hence, when we see the
claw, we know that tearing teeth accompany that claw, and that
carnivorous appetites and destructive natures are represented by the
claw and teeth. These signs have others invariably accompanying
them. The curved, pointed, hooked, fang-like teeth would be no
use in a long and weak jaw. Such teeth imply a short, strong,
broad jaw; a low, wide head; a brain form in which the
destructive elements preponderate. These, in turn, necessitate
great muscles about the head, neck, and shoulders, and strength
and springiness of the whole form.
The carnivorous spirit that builds for itself a tooth and a retractile
claw must make the whole form to correspond* the move-
ments must correspond with the form. Therefore, if we could
know the attributes of an unclothed carnivorous spirit, we could


buiM up from our experience the idea of its form when clothed;
and when we see a carnivorous form we know that a certain spirit
lies behind it.
Predatory Creatures of Earth, air, and sea have some
characteristics in common. One is a savage and repellant appear-
ance, and another is a gliding and stealthy mode of motion. The
tiger, the Lion, anu the Cat steal with velvet padded paws upon
their prey, or watch until it is in reach of the final spring. The
Eagle and the Hawk soar with scarce a movement of the wing
over the fluttering prey, and drop like a bolt from heaven upon it.
Even the Shark is in the habit of taking its prey by dropping upon
it from above, its dorsal fin enabling it to dive swiftly. °
Some of us have read of the merciful provision that compels a
shark to turn upon its back before it can grasp its victim. Would
such be a “merciful provision” for the shark? If so, how is it
that _ the shark alone is crippled in getting its dinner by such
provision ? We may be sure that the shark is so organised that it
can get its food in the handiest fashion; that it swoops down upon
its prey with its mighty jaws extended, and kills it with the
minimum of suffering. The shark turns on his back when his
prey happens to oe above him—a rare case; for fishes, not men, are
the natural food of sharks.
We all know what is natural to this kind of animal or that.
Mark Twain’s study of the cow-catcher on some American railway
lines becomes extremely comical when he suggests that the engine
is never likely to go fast enough to catch a cow, so that there is no
need for that piece_ of mechanism in front; and more laughable
sulf when he puts it at the back, lest a cow should catch a train
and bite a passenger—the idea of the cow biting being almost
enough to make the cow itself laugh.
We cannot easily make studies of the faces of insects, but their
mo^es , of motion, and the sounds produced by them are
sufficient to indicate their characters. The mosquito is truly a
beast of prey, and its flight is a gliding, soaring motion, entirely
different from that of the house-fly or moth. The gadfly’s motion
is similar, and its sound is simply a bass to the mosquito’s treble.
Ihe dragon fly, the ultimate of insect life—occupying in the insect
world the position held by the eagle and lion in their respective
spheres—has remarkable ease and swiftness of motion; stealing
along with its four great wings outspread, and never making a
flutter m the air. The non-deadly insects sufficiently distinguish
themselves from the deadly ones to satisfy our eyes. We may be
sure that the savage insects look horrible enough to the eyes of the
insects they prey upon. This will apply to the denizens of the
deep, and even to the microscopic animalcules found in a drop of
stagnant water. 1
In all spheres of being our foes reveal themselves by their physi-
- o —winy.
A while ago the potato-growers of Englana were trouoied in
their minds by the appearance of the Colorado beetle. It haci


managed, in spite of all precautions, to cross the Atlantic, and
was commencing the devastation of the English fields. A local
naturalist, partly informed on the subject, pronounced the new
St to be the deadly beetle. A London naturalist of some
repute was sent for. He went and saw the insect and studied it,
coming to the conclusion that it was harmless. It was a new
insect to the naturalist, but he came to his conclusion on the
ground that it did not resemble the beetle, but did resemble several
other harmless insects. He was right. We apply the same rules
in all the sciences. We act on the hypothesis that foim and
character correspond. Form gives the special combination
Things may be composed of the same elements, and yet differ
very widely-so widely, indeed, that one of the combinations shall
be a nourishing food, and another a deadly poison.
The Abstract Qualities of Things are parts of them just as
surely as the material qualities are; they are formed together
and found together, and one represents the other everywhere. In
the abstract, man is of Divine origin and Divine form, but he is to
some extent a free agent in the world full of agencies outside of
himself—agencies to which he must submit, or which he i st
learn to master and use. His life is a constant strugg e t
mastery over the forces of nature, and also over person,3lmd
animais around him; and while he is engaged m.this* J *™Rg} e
ia ever liable to undergo some changes himself, either lor the
better or for the worse. ,
Why this is the case we do not know. We can see benefits
arising from this condition of things. We can see that by
mastering the forces of nature and making them obey our 1
that we are working for the Creator. We can also see that, by
working and obeying the Divine within us, we grow more God-like
in spirit and in form. “ God is forming man ” might be read m
place of “God formed man.” Creation is going on to-day all
around us, and we are helping with the creative work, or ought to
be. We are making ourselves, too. In a certain sense, we aio
developing the embryonic rudiments that the Divine Creator gives
to each of us, and as we develop them we show their actual
presence in our forms. . ~
The great work of life is reformation, literally re-formation
making anew—forming character on the Divine plan. And, con-
sciously or unconsciously, we look at each other to find out how
each is going on with the great work. We trust the good they
look good; the Divine in them shows through the human, our
souls go out in confidence to the good and true. _
The Greatest Thinkers of our Day are coming to the_ con-
clusion that there has been a series of creative acts. Man is no
longer a supreme development of a protoplasm. When this is
admitted by science we will turn back to Genesis and read the head
of this chapter, and believe man to have been a special work of
God, animated by the “ breath of hte” from a source Dmne. ”
shall see that man is so formed as to receive the greatest amount


of the Divine Spirit, and to represent the Divinity of creatures
below himself. To all inferior creatures man is an incarnation of
the Divine being.
What plan the Creator adopted in producing us matters very
little. If He involved in cosmic dust or cosmic gas all that
creation has unfolded or will unfold He is just as much the Creator
as if each sepaiate thing had been put together by his special
handicraft. It does not even make any difference to our place in
creation; we are at the head of animate existence so far as we
know it; nearer to the Divine than any visible creature of earth-
man is an ultimate of creation.
Plant Life has its Head in the Ground, and expands its
extremities in the air and sun. Reptiles, fishes, birds, and animals
carry their heads horizontally, as a rule, and expand their
extremities outward and downward. Man reverses the condition
of the plant, and improves much upon that of the animals; he
declares himself to be a child of the sun by carrying his head
upwaid. In sleep earth claims him; he becomes an animal, a
vegetable; yields himself to mother earth, and lies prone upon her
lap, but when he wakes again he claims his relationship with
something higher than earth.
Many animals seem to try to assume the erect position, and
animal intelligence appears to be proportionate to their success
in this effort.
Reptiles lie flat and look from below upward; the same is true
of many kinds of fish. Most of the mammals have an eye on
each side, and have but a poor outlook in front. Mammals,
however, with flexible necks, and ability to lift the head and
look around and below them, are far higher in the scale of being
than the thick-necked and stiff-necked hog and rhinoceros. Even
amongst men, the more intelligent are generally the more
flexible and mobile. We do not expect high intelligence from
persons who have wooden forms and thick, short necks.
We are now right in the middle of our subject. We see that
the plan of creation is a plan of revelation; that forms are related
to qualities, and even in inanimate and non-organised structures
they frequently are the outcomes of chemical combination.
We see that plants are by the nature of things bound to take on
from the elements around them a characteristic bodily form; that
animals have to build up around them forms that enable them to
manifest their own capabilities and live their own life; that men
m the same way form themselves according to their breed, colour,
and general heritage.
We see that creative work is still going on, and that men are
gi owing collectively better and wiser, and approaching ever nearer
the Divine ideal the Man that God is making. If retrogression
is going on in some minds and forms, that only shows that progres-
sion must have preceded it, and what has preceded may follow.
If it does not follow, civilisation is not thereby much hindered ; for
the branch of humanity that tries to sink below the human level


perishes out of life and knowledge. Those unfitted by their vice
to propagate useful members of society lose the power of pro-
creation. Nature will have none of their assistance.
Even Birth does not Ensure Continuance. —Those unfit to
stand the strain of life die in infancy. If we grasp firmly the
general principle that form is an outgrowth of the quality or
qualities that lie behind; a representation of the character, dis-
position, and capabilities of each creature, we shall hold in our
hands the key by which all objects of creation will become intel-
ligible to our minds as we unlock the portals of knowledge.
Study character through form, and form through character,
and we hold the cypher in which Nature’s secrets are ever
written —the cypher by which the human face divine, in
language of its own, tells of its relationship to the divinity
behind it; tells of its progress heavenward or otherward; tells
of its condition with regard to its fellow-creatures; tells even
its passing thoughts. Those who have this key and this cypher
are the favoured mortals who can read men as open books.
CHAPTER II.
A STUDY OF ANIMAL FORMS.
“ For sonl is form and dotli the body make.”
Form reveals soul in every department of life. The fact that
form and character correspond is everywhere admitted; denial
ie impossible. Take away this and there can be no knowledge.
Let this fact cease to be an actuality of creation and chaos is here
again. “ And the Earth was without form and void” will be the
vigorous expression of a modern state of things, instead of the
commencement of a very ancient narrative. The “waste and
void” of the new version does not appear so expressive as the
“ without form” of the old one. Without form is almost, if not
quite, inconceivable; it seems to suggest without idea and without
word! From the time that the “ Spirit of God” moved upon the
waters” until now the forming process has been going on, and
higher soul life and greater capacity has ever been manifested
through higher forms. ,
Each Great Geological Epoch has had its master ideal
form. At (ne time the fishes were kings of what then might be
called earth, the shifting, unformed lands not yet being fit to
contain life. Uncounted ages rolled on, and then came the
reptillian era. Reptiles floundered in the warm mud, wobbled
through slimy swamps, fed on the rank vegetation, flew through
the murky, pestiferous air. Wallowing amphibians fed on fellow
reptiles on the earth and on fishes in the muddy, shallow seas:
reptiles were kings of earth and air—of air, as we know it, there was
none. Had the reptiles been sentient creatures and capable of
thought they would have regarded themselves as ultimates of
creation, nor could they have conceived of any higher form in
which the Creator could embody himself.


Ages and ages more, during which the great tropical forests—
tropical in all regions then—became masses of coal, and these
sank under the seas for some score of centuries, and reappeared
and grew other forests, repeating the process again and again,
until the air contained oxygen enough to support warm-blooded
life, and mammals began to contend with the great reptiles for
the supremacy in the earth. Before the new creatures the reptiles
shrank, and from being gigantic, earth-shaking monsters, dwindled
to frogs, toads, snakes, and lizards.
And now man is king, ruler at once in form and soul; his
head in the air, his person erect; his fore feet set free from the
meaner service of bodily support, and made into that wonder of
Divine Architecture, the human hand.
Is this the end ? Can there be no higher form than the human ?
We know not. Man may become much higher. He is an ultimate
of the mammals, but no one will dare to say that he has already
reached his own ultimate of development.
Imagine a being strong as the strongest, swift as the swiftest,
beautiful, strong, glowing with health and life; give to that being
ail ancient and modern skill and lore; let him have all the
philosophy of ancient Greece and modern Europe ; give him the
artistic and inventive skill of all the ages ; let him be a Bacon, a
Solon, an Aristotle, a Plato, a Ptolemy, a Copernicus, a Newton, a
Kepler, a Phidias, an Angelo, a West, or a Hunt; lift him above
the petty vices of humanity, make him perfectly happy and
perfectly good, and what will he be ? The possible man, the man of
the future, the man that God is busy making; and the woman
who mates with him will be his peer and in every sense his equal.
We have not, however, to wait for the possible man; we have
rather to help him to appear in the fulness of time by making the
best and most of the existing men and women. He who comes
into the world and falls out with it because it is not yet all that it
can be and may be, because its men have not yet reached the ideal
standard, because all its women are not fair and good, is not the
kind of man who will make it better.
The True Reformer uses all the good that is as a stepping-
stone by which he progresses to better things. The good that is
is the foundation on which he lays his stone of the mighty temple
we are all building. Granted that man is not yet all that he may
be, he is, nevertheless, much that he was not some ages ago. If
the hypercritical man turns his back on us at the end of the nine-
teenth century, and says we are not what we might or ought to
be, what would he have done had he been born a few aeons
earlier ? What would he have said had he been introduced to the
prehistoric man of the rough stone age ? What would he have
thought of human life in the preglacial epoch ? How would he
have liked the great, black, hairy, naked limbs of his mother and
father ? What would he have cared for the guttural thunders of
their uninflected speech ? What would he think of a few untanned
skins as hi« only swaddling clothes—of a draughty cavern as his


only roof —of raw or half-burnt flesh as his only food—and that
only obtained by the daily peril of his life at the hands of his
neighbouring enemy, or from the tusks, horns, or fangs of the wild
creatures he pursues ?
The human beings of the present day, though still far from per-
fect, are almost angelic compared with the cave-dwellers who were
contemporaries of the Mammoth, yet these were human and our
ancestors.
The Study of Form includes most of what we have to study
in these pages. Certain forms of body suggest the forms of certain
animals, and, when persons have a general resemblance to any
animal in form and movement, their mentality and their moral
qualities have a general resemblance. “ Look at that fox,” says a
disciple of Lavater to a friend.
“ Fox! I did not think you knew him ; I’ll introduce you.”
“ I didn’t speak of any Mr. Fox. I spoke of that fox.”
‘‘Well, that is Mr. Fox.”
“ Then he must be Fox by name and fox by nature ?”
“ Truly that he is. He is a most cunning man—a lawyer and
money lender. He is only invited to go out with the hounds
because he is too powerful to be offended Half the men here
would be glad if he broke his neck before night, only they are sure
that that would make matters still worse for them.”
We may study Human Science in any Zoological Garden. There
are men and women who resemble, more or less, almost any animal
to be found there. Who has not seen thick, fleshy, bearish-looking
men, who are just as bearish as they look ? Who has not seen
ox-eyed, bull-necked, heavy-shouldered men, with deep booming
voices, and the appearance and something of the temper of the
buffalo ?
Can we not call to mind many men with large heads, broad and
powerful features, heavy jaws, thick necks, and with masses of
curly hair and beard, the whole reminding us of nothing less than
the South African lion ? What are the characteristics of these
lion men ? Are they quiet and easily put upon ? Are their voices
sweet and soft ? their manners gentle and kind? Nothing of the
sort. They are strong and rugged; their voices are deep and pene-
trating ; there is a deep under-current of r-r-r-r mingled with their
tones; and you have no particular desire to provoke their
antagonism. Such men are fond of hunting and active sports, and
when they rest, they rest, and work no more until they must.
There are to be met now and then short, compact, active, grizzly
little men —men who are always fussing about doing something, or
thinking they are doing something. They have round eyes, short
faces, full but short and curly beards. They look right up at you,
and speak in short, snappy, high-keyed tones, that remind you of
nothing but a tan terrier busy hunting rats.
Is any Lady Reader mated to a smooth-haired, soft-footed,
low-voiced, purring, gliding man—one who has stolen his way into
her good graces—hidden his selfishness and his sensualism: one


who is, on the whole, good-tempered when he is well fed and kept
warm and comfortable; one who is smooth enough in the pres-
ence of his peers, but mean, cruel, and savage at home, and of
terrible temper when anything goes wrong ? He does not like
hard work or close application; he is a merchant who takes
unusual risks, and a man of low commercial principles; he likes to
speculate with other people’s money; he is a broker with doubtful
reputation, a bookmaker, a gambler. While successful he dresses
with much care, has clothes of faultless cut, the whitest and finest
linen; he may overdo the jewellery department a little, for he is
fond of personal effects; he dines at the best hotels, knows wines
and soups, and gets much animal enjoyment out of his life, but
allows his wife little enjoyment of any kind. When angry an evil
gleam comes into his eyes, and his stroke is sudden, treacherous,
and terrible, for he is simply a human tiger. Yes, a tiger ; there
are other signs of this relationship. He is wide in the region of the
cheek bones, and has thick, temporal muscles; he has a trick of
silent watching with half-shut eyes, and taking pleasure in what is
manifestly painful—the agonised sigh of his broken-hearted wife,
for instance; his face is broad and short, his head is low and
broad and round; the mastoido-sterno muscles of his neck are
strong and prominent; his jaws are short from front to back, and
yet wide and strong, and give great capacity of mouth; his teeth
are firmly set, and the corner ones are prominent; his limbs are
tapering and lissom, and his movements lithe, springy, and elastic.
Who with eyes to see can fail to recognise the royal tiger when he
appears amongst men ?
Hogs we may meet at any street comer: the thin-faced, long-
necked greyhound there will shoot away from you with long, quick
strides, covering his hundred yards in ten seconds or so, and
seeming little the worse for the effort. That rough-haired, steady-
eyed collie will do your bidding, and be true and faithful when many
of your friends have left you. That short-faced, snub-nosed pug
has enough conceit in him for a dozen dogs—or men—and if you
speak to him he will sny up his significant snub and proceed to
convince you of his own importance and your own insignificance.
Ho not get angry with him ; it is not worth your while. Every-
body knows him.* His Maker, some thousands of generations
removed, puts up with him and gives him his chance: you may
do the same.
There is a deal of difference between recognising animal types
in men, and falling out with them because we see those types.
While we are looking and seeing what we see, he may be looking
also and coming to his own conclusions. He may see something
of the man in us, and also something of the animal. What we
have to do is to learn what we can of him, and use the knowledge
gained for his benefit and our own. The Pug, the Collie, and the
Greyhound we have just been looking at are all harmless dogs.
We have no quarrel with them, and perhaps we had better not
quarrel with the Lion, Tiger, or Buffalo if we value our own skins.


Wolves, Jackals, Hyaenas abound amongst the roughs, hood
lems, or larrikins of any city or country. How they run in packs
and hunt in company. The larrikins and roughs are as cowardly
when alone as wolves are when met singly, and they are just as
savage, senseless, and bloodthirsty or destructive when they form
part of an infuriated or salacious crowd ; a street mob or prowling
gang taking advantage of female helplessness. Listen to the talk
they indulge in ; the interlarding with obscene utterance, with
profane expletive, with sanguinary adjective; the coarseness, the
vulgarity, even the indecency of their manners. How like the
howling of wolves their “ barracking” cries ; how like the laugh of
the untamable hyaena is the ring of their rude mirth. What mean
animals they represent. How tar such as these are from the
stateliness, strength, and nobility of some types of animals ; how
far above them are the horse, mastiff, bloodhound, Newfoundland,
lion, and elephant; how nearly are they allied to coyotes, foxes,
skunks, rats, and ill-fed, unowned tom-cats.
Lounging at street corners, or slouching about with a short pip«
in his mouth, we may often see the human prototype of the bull-
dog. His face is about as broad as long, and rather flat; his head
is short, low, and broad; his eyes open roundly, and are placed far
apart; his nose is driven into his face, or in some other way dis-
torted ; his lips are firmly closed; his mouth long and wide. When
he has his “ bull purp” with him you are compelled to see the
truth of the old adage :—“ Birds of a feather flock together.” Suc-
cessful pugilists—men who make pugilism a profession—are
generally men of the hardy, enduring bull-dog type The dog
takes his punishment without a cry or a sign, and so does the man.
A dash of the bull-dog in a man is not always a thing to be
deplored. It gives tenacity and energy; it tells of holding-on
qualities ; it is especially useful in a fighting age.
Horses are Pretty Common Amongst Us.—A hard, inflexible
hand, with finger ends close together, and all working at once;
fingers curved inward, never straightening right out, owing to
their stiffness; strong, slow-moving limbs; face long and hard,
jaws long and coming well forward, hair stiff, ears long from top
to bottom and narrow and pointed, movements slow, temper
calm; not given to speech, but to sober, plodding action—human
horses these —strong, slow, good-tempered Clydesdales—as men
well worthy of all confidence and respect, not prepossessing in
appearance, not brilliant and clever as members of society; rather
dull company for playful and talkative wives, poor wooers, not
much to say for themselves at any time ; but how patient, how
steadfast and good, how true and honest; and at bottom, below
the deep silence of their nature, how sympathetic and L*nd, how
willing to put up with inconveniences, and work on behalf of those
whom they love. Barkis, the wooer, who sent his short message
to Peggotty —“ Barkis is willin’,” was one of these characters.
Your human Tiger maybe sleek, and handsome, and winning ; bus
if you want a happy married life with a man who will plod, aaJ


work, and save, and place your benefit before his own, you had
oetter look for a human horse. He, at any rate, will produce
more than he consumes, and leave the world richer than he found
it. The Tiger will do just the reverse, and will have bis enjoy-
ment, no matter what it costs.
There are a Few Bantam Roosters to be met with now and
then. They hide their hands under their coat tails, and strut and
crow, and assert themselves at every opportunity. They are
always little men, but they make the most of the inches nature has
given them, and usually carry a tall, bell-top hat to bring themselves
into notice. They are vastly swelled with self-importance ; are
easily put upon their dignity ; are very testy and tetchy. They
sometimes generate large ideas; they are generally buoyant and
sanguine; when allied with longer fibred and more sagacious
men they are useful members of society. They are not, as a
rule, bad men ; they are sometimes over-sanguine, and land them-
selves and others into difficulties. They ought to marry wives
who possess but a small modicum of speech, for one of these little
bantams will talk enough for two or three.
If you want to borrow money think twice before you have any
transaction with a hawk. You will know him when you see him.
His eyes are small, bright, black, beady, and placed too near
together. There is no danger of them coming into contact at their
inner corners, for they will not be able to climb over the sharp,
high, hooked, Himalaya range of the face—the hawk’s beak. The
remainder of the face is thin and sharp, the lips thin, and the
mouth closes firmly. If the hawk has attained middle age the chin
has begun to make some attempts to fraternise with the nose. If you
happen to belong to the social, bappy, easy-going, kindly, plump, well-
rounded type; if, in other words, you are a dove, a partridge, or a
duck, you had better turn round and go away than have anything
to say to the hawk—better call a meeting of your creditors and
boldly state your position, for if the human hawk gets you in hand
he will not let you go until he has picked your bones by the ancient
and modern process of “ shent per shent.”
In looking round amongst our fellow-creatures, we find ourselves
in a human Zoo most surely. The difficulty is not that of finding
people who more or less resemble some animal or bird, but that of
finding people who do not. There are respectable members of
society, and men of business who resemble elephants and
rhinoceroses ; heavy, slow, thick-limbed men, whose flesh appears
to lie in folds; broad-faced, thick-skinned men; all their
movements are heavy and powerful They charge right forward
to the end they seek to attain; you cannot turn them, cannot make
them feel, cannot get at their hearts or consciences; the arrows
you shoot at them have no more effect than had those of the people
of Lilliput on Gulliver. What they want they will get if the getting
is possible ; and what they get they will keep, no matter how much
shame sticks to the object attained. If you want to hit the fatal
spot in one of these pachydermatous men, aim not at the brain,


your bullet would only flatten on the skull; waste not your time and
skill in trying to hit the heart, the creature is not conscious of
possessing one; it ignores that organ just as it does conscience
and sense of reputation—aim at the pocket, that is the sensitive
part of the animal, it can feel there. It is sometimes found in
parliamentary, and sometimes in judicial positions. Ere now it has
waded to such positions through blood; even to-day it will wade
to them through mud.
Even our Lady Companions and Friends help to fill the Zoo.
Their forms, motions, and manners very frequently suggest
relationships which must strike the eye of any keen observer.
There on that low easy-chair sits Miss Spaniel. Make a short
study of her—she is worth it. Look at her round, dimpled chin;
her plump, red lips; her full, rosy cheeks; her short, saucy, tip-
tilted nose; her now smiling, now pouting mouth ; her broad, low
brow, and thickly-pencilled eyebrows; her large, round, liquid-
looking, dark eyes—eyes equally ready for tears or laughter—eyes
that ask for caressing sympathy and smiles ; look at the short,
low, round head and its masses of glossy, curling hair. Can you
possibly mistake her for Miss Swan, or, indeed, for any other lady
present in this Zoo ? She is a very winning little woman.
Unless you mean to marry her you had better not enjoy too much
of her company ; she has a trick of nestling into your bosom and
your heart, and defying you to turn her out. If you do mean
business you may as well know what the business means. Miss
Spaniel is a capital household pet, but if you do not understand
her and manage her rightly she will prove herself a pest. She
will be very fond of you, and will, in her way, do the very best she
can for you; in return, however, she wants your company and
wants you to be in a kindly and caressing mood. She is a very
jealous person ; do not praise any other lady in her presence. Be
very kind to her ; surround her comfortably ; do not put too much
hard work on her shoulders; and during the earlier part of your
married life do not expect much of self-denying and energetic
action from her. She mends as she grows older; becomes more
sensible; and her children gradually cause her to outgrow her
self-indulgent form of selfishness. If you are cold, and hard, and
unsympathetic, you had better not introduce her to male friends
who have more winning qualities; the results of such introduction
may not be entirely satisfactory.
Look at that animated and lively young lady in conversation
with your friend, Mr. Brown-Bear. Her name is Miss English-
Terrier. She is one of the smooth-haired dogesses; has a high,
round forehead; a quick, intelligent look; all her answers are
ready. She appears to be well informed, but if you question her a
little, and try to carry the subject beyond her depth, she turns it
cleverly and leads up to some other topic, or in her light, hopping
manner trots quickly off to some other acquaintance whom she
suddenly perceives in another part of the room. Of acquaintances
she has a great number. She is an inveterate gossip. She is


trotting about all day putting her nose into all kinds of unexpected
corners, and trotting off after a sniff and a look have satisfied her
mind. Her nose seems to have a movable point. It is, as a
general thing, long and sharp, but sometimes it appears to point
right out, and at others it turns up a little She is always asking
some little question, and if you are a trifle sore about anything,
she will just touch the sore as if with a light lick, letting you feel
that she knows of its existence and could make you smart. Like
Miss Spaniel, she has large, dark eyes ; but in this case they are
shallower, have less feeling in them, do not attract you so much,
or cause you to desire to caress the owner of them. Miss Spaniel
will sit at your feet, with her head in your lap, for hours. Miss
English-Terrier will slip away from you and go trotting from room
to room. Her voice is rather sharp and thin. If she gets angry
it is disagreeably so; and if she has a rival in your affections she
will find out who in a very short time, and make matters
unpleasant for all concerned. If she marries Mr. Brown-Bear,
with whom she is still keeping up the conversation, she will teach
him to dance and lead him out more than he has been in the habit
of going for some time. She will be a very watchful and attentive
wife ; will not take up much room in the house, but she will be in
all parts of it, will know all that is said in it, and almost all that is
thought. She will be affectionate and true, and, if your cause will
be advanced by social life, she will make some kind of social circle
for you. She is not strong, nor very hard-working. She likes to
dress well, and ought to marry a man who has a liberal income.
You will identify her when you see her again.
Look at little Miss Rabbit sitting there with her feet well drawn
under her, so that she can get up and run at a moment’s notice.
She always sits so that no one can get behind her. If you speak
to her from one side she will turn and face you as if to see that
you have no designs upon her She has a pert, bright, interested,
and attentive manner, but you can easily see that she is nervous,
and inclined to start and take fright. She has large eyes and well
arched eyebrows, has narrow jaws and a runaway chin; her fore-
head is full in the lower and central parts; her mouth is conical
in shape, drawn back, and a little down at the corners; the upper
lip slightly overhangs, but is very weak, and has many nervous,
twitching movements—can hardly be kept still if the lady is feeling
any emotion whatever At the dinner table Miss Rabbit nibbles a
little of this and a bite or two of that. She never seems to eat a
good, solid meal. The form and motion of her mouth and jaw’s
tells of nibbling and gnawing rather than tearing or grinding. She
is a fussy, inefficient little person, consequential, affected. She is
really very timid, but puts on at times an air of boldness that
startles no one more than herself. If she marries early she
generally has a large family in the shortest possible period of time.
She has a singular fondness for the church. When she wants a
husband she makes warm slippers for the feet of the curate. She
is very affectionate, highly proper in her conduct, full of wise little


saws and maxims that she has learned from her elders. Her life
is little and shallow; it is full of details and attention to babies.
She is apt to lose health and become querulous and irritable. She
would tire out the patience of any other man but the pale, poor
curate, whose social interests she has never been able to advance.
The constant tepid bath of her affection kills love; still her
patient husband dutifully adheres to her, makes excuses for her
inefficiency, her little jealousies, the want of foresight and tact by
which she offends those who might have given him a lift into
preferment, and accepts gratefully her annual present of another
rabbit to nibble up the slender stores of the family.
There, in the centre of the room, talking incessantly to everyone
within the range of her voice, is the well-known society lady, Miss
Parrot. She has round, shallow-looking eyes, that look off one
side of her face as well as out at the front; her features are all
sharp and thin; her nose is long, and slightly hooked at the point,
and prominent at the bridge ; the upper lip is short, and almost
disappears when she smiles; the lower lip projects a little, and has
a small-pointed, peaked chin just below it. Miss Parrot has any
amount of power of utterance combined with the smallest amount
of thinking capacity. Talking is her pleasure ; and that princi-
pally consists of repeating what has been said not long before, and
echoing what she now hears. If you have sufficient patience to listen
to her for an hour you will hear her uttering sentiments and opinions
entirely opposed to each other, and will see by her manner that
she is utterly unconscious of any self-contradiction. She seeks for
admiration, and if she is a “pretty poll” she will get it from the
danglers who surround any bright object in the social zoo, but if
you buy her and put her in your own cage, you must not expect
her nature to undergo any serious change by the change in her
position and circumstances. She will hop about on the gilded
wires (if you can afford to gild them) all her life, crying “pretty
poll,” and uttering her round of commonplaces. Do not expect
depth of feeling, sympathy, and soul companionship from her;
do not imagine that she can go down with you into the valley and
the shadow, or with you take a place amongst the starry souls of
the universe. Her life is little and commonplace ; her virtues and
faults are of the everyday order. She spent her time at school in
learning how to repeat what she heard; her lessons had none but
superficial meanings; she could never generalise, and so never
progressed. If she has any sons she preaches to them the doctrine
of the commonplace until they are nearly daft.
Miss Magpie does not like Miss Parrot, and that dislike is
reciprocated. Both ladies are loud-voiced. They are both con-
stant talkers ; they are both fond of admiration. If you will study
their voices, you will observe that Miss Parrot dwells on the
vowels, while Miss Magpie is fonder of the hard consonants.
One says, “ Oh, look,” and the other says, “ Just fancy.” Miss
Parrot is often tall and graceful in movement, and is called
handsome. She has long feet and hands that have just the
22
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


faintest indication of being claw-tipped. Miss Magpie is never
tall In one case, the nose is always hooked; in the other, it is
sharp, and stands out on the face in two straight lines, meeting at
the point. From the eyebrow the nose does not run perpendi-
cularly down, but shoots almost straight out. The result is that
the nose point goes first everywhere, and digs into everything.
She is a pert and impudent lady; her features tell of pugnacity
and impudence. She has cheek enough for anything, and is very
fond of presents ; likes things that glitter; can scarcely pass a
jeweller s window. She also likes high colours and sharp contrasts
in dress. If you have any special business that you do not wish
all your neighbours to talk about, you will kindly not tell it to
Miss Magpie. She is a bright little person, and has always plenty
to say for herself. She is a flirt and a gossip, too. Still she has
been known to become a good housewife and to be very fond of her
husband and family.
That littie, short person—the lady who seems to be trimming the
lace about her throat and wrists as if it were feathers, and°whc
speaks in such cooing terms—is Miss Dove. She is not always so
quiet as now ; she is a jealous lady, and has a temper of her own.
She has not the talent of Miss Nightingale, whose little brown head
is waving about while her voice fills the room with rippling tones
of music, but she has several of the useful domestic virtues. She
is full of affection; still, if she becomes a widow she can console
herself with number two very soon. In these respects she
resembles Miss Duck yonder.
Oh! you wish to be introduced to that rather striking personage,
do you ? Yes, she is, as you see, very tall, and moves with a slow,
easy grace ; her neck is long and slender; her face has not much
gesture nor movement in it; she appears to like walking about
slowly ; you never hear the fall of her foot. Nearly everyone she
meets turns to admire something about her; probably her easy
motion. She is not a vivacious person, nor is she noted for
brilliancy of intellect; her name is Miss Swan. There is not time
to make full studies of all the people here. can, however, at
any time come into the Zoo and look at a few more specimens.
Little Miss Sparrow will be hopping and twittering about when we
come again; Master Monkey, that boy whose face never appears
twice the same shape, will be climbing his pole just as usual;
Miss Owl will be found blinking in her quiet corner; and Mr!
Hog will be rooting up the ground, and trying to find something to
eat, just as now. Everyone knows a few social hogs. They have
poor heads; corrugated and wedge-shaped, little foreheads; bristly
eyebrows ; little, mean eyes, too close together ; shapeless, baggy
ears; full cheeks, hanging down on the sides of the face ; short
necks; loose, large lips, the upper one over-hanging. They eat and
drink, and drink and eat again. They waddle in their walk, and
have a perpetual grunt in their voices.
They are all men and women, after all. That there is somethin*
of the animal in each of us we all well know. We have to make


the best of this, and work to enhance and increase the humanity
and the divinity within us “till the beast within us die.” There
is some advantage in knowing which animal we resemble, for we
then know the worst side of our nature. Better have the com-
paratively clumsy head, hands, and feet of the ass than the claws
of a tiger. If you see what animal I resemble you see what is the
possible worst of me. Each may say:—“ lam a man, or woman,
with some mixture of the animal in my nature. If you study me
carefully you will find out which animal I resemble, and, therefore,
which animal’s vices are likely to be mine. If lam a Dove, the
harmlessness of the dove is mine; if I am a Falcon, I may rend
and tear ; if I belong to the destructive classes of animals, I have
all the more need to know myself and contend with the animal
within me.”
We are all Animals in One Sense, and in another sense all
divine incarnations. All forms of life have their place in the
microcosm man. The life of the rocks is seen in the bony system ;
that of plants in the unconscious labours of growth and repair;
that of animals in the moving, feeling, muscular, and animal
activities; and that of all life above him, Divine life included, in
his spiritual nature. In physical structure man is entirely animal.
All his movements are performed by animal means of locomotion;
all his vital and reproductive functions are animal; and all the
lower portions of his brain, and all the functions connected there-
with, are animal. His senses and instincts, too, are animal. He is
born as an animal, grows as one, and, to all appearance, frequently
lives and dies as one.
Still he is not animal only. He differs from animals in erect-
ness of form; in the possession of a real face and a real hand; in
the relative prominence of the cerebrum or large brain. These
constitute the external differences; and the psychological ones
corresponding therewith, and shown principally in face and brain
forms, are superior reasoning ability; greater constructive and
inventive faculty ; power to conceive abstract ideas; desire to
forward the interests of others as well as our own; love of beauty
and aspiration towards the ideal; conception of Divinity and desire
to worship. In the possession of language, memory of the long
past, hope for the far future, and last, but not least, man is more
than an animal in having a Sense of Personal Responsibility to a
Power Outside of and Superior to himself, and in the possession
of Conscience and Will.
In the lower stories of his being he reflects and reciprocates all
the material and animal forces and activities of the universe of
matter; in the higher ones he is a living Soul, and reflects and
reciprocates all the Soul Forces and activities of the Universe of
mind. He is the first perfect Microcosm or Universe in miniature—
the first creature on this planet who has a higher nature super-
imposed upon a lower one ; therefore, we need not be surprised to
find the animal and human struggling for ascendancy both in the
faces and forms of human beings, and the common consciousness


of all who have risen high enough to see that there is a human
meal to attain and an animal nature to curb and repress. Pone
states his position well in the lines:—
Placed on this isthmus of a middle state,
A being darkly wise, and rudely great;
W ith too much knowledge for the sceptic side,
With too much weakness for the stoic’s pride
He hangs between ; in doubt to act or rest:
!□ doubt to deem himself a god, or beast.
CHAPTER III.
A STUDY OF TEMPERAMENTS.
is u the “°? t vivacious, next the sanguine, then the bilious while
the lymphatic is characterised by proneness to inaction.”— Geo. Combe. '
Anyone who wants to know his fellow-men, who wants to be able
to read them as open books, must take the trouble to study
temperaments. A person who wishes to be master of this useful,
beautiful, and intricate science—master of the art of reading
character—will not regard any branch of the subject as trouble"
some or wearying. Some men devote their lives to the study of
beetles. They are not wearied. Surely we shall not grow weary
of studying the more important subject—man. J
The student of beetles has to catch his beetle; the student of
men has subjects always at hand. It is not possible for a student
of human science to spend an hour in the streets of a large city
without seeing persons who are not fit to be at large-persons
whom it would be a kindness to deprive of all liberty of action.
Ihere stands one at that corner—low, slouch hat, coloured kerchief
tied on his neck in a manner suggestive of the hangman’s knot—a
curious trick that one class of criminals have—that of wearing
something round the neck that almost asks you to take and
strangle them on the spot and save the State coffers by and by.
Hus one is at large, but his brutalised countenance; his little
angry-lookmg, sensual, and piggish eyes ; his bad, broken mouth ;
the evil depressed look on each of his features, singly and all
collectively ; the sag of his shoulders, the pocketed hands, the
manner and attitude, all tell of the sneak thief that may help in
any burglary or crime, but cannot plan one.
It is well to be able to tell at a glance whom to trust, whom to
avoid ; well to have a chance of finding virtue and truth in some
unexpected guise. Those who would have this knowledge and
this power must study temperaments, for from the temperament
be°predicated in ° f ° haractcr ’ talents > and disposition may
,- A , m f an ~ a stranger—walks into your presence ; he puts down
ins hat and stick, and takes a seat, you watching him and his
movements. If you are a reader of character you have taken
some hundreds of observations, and come to an equal number of
-onclusions whilf he has made the few movements named. P>y


the time he is ready to state his business you have a good idea o 4
what it is likely to be, and how he will state it. You have caught
some half-dozen glimpses of his naked soul, and know more of
him than he will ever tell you with his tongue. If you have not
taken the measure of your man by your first few glances you are
not yet a reader of character.
The reader has seen the man, and can now answer your questions
for the next half-hour. He knows his height to a fraction, his
weight, his general build and proportion, his quality, and colour.
He knows which portion of the system preponderates, and what
each preponderance means. He knows much about the activity
and strength of the man; knows something of his moral status,
his mental activity and strength, his intelligence, his social
qualities, and whether he is an educated or an uneducated man.
If he is a highly-trained student of men he also knows something
of the breed of the man who has just come into his presence. He
has learned to read men little by little, line by line. Each reader
of this manual can do the same to a greater or less extent by
following the instructions given in these chapters and by constant
observation.
In studying men we have to begin with generals and go down to
details. Broad, bold outlines first, details second, shading and
colouring third and fourth. Begin by a study of the whole, the
general appearance and form of the man, proceed to study parts
and their relationship to the whole, finish by a detailed and
careful study of head, face, and hands, leaving no hair nor line
unnoticed.
This manual is written on the plan of the preceding paragraph.
If the student will take note of each lesson in its turn, and verify
its truth by studying his friends and neighbours, he will have no
small amount of valuable knowledge and experience by the time
Ire has read the book.
What are the principal parts of the human structure ? Bones,
muscles, brain and nerves, stomach and intestines, heart and lungs.
When a part preponderates in the formation we are apt to desig-
nate the man by the preponderating part; to call him a bony,
muscular, nervous, or fat man, as the case may be. From this
tendency to recognise peculiarities of structure by name comes a
classification of temperaments. For a long time this classification
was not by any means a scientific one. It only becomes scientific
when we recognise the groundwork of each temperament, and
study the relationship of one temperament to another, and the
results of various combinations of temperaments.
The word has been used by some writers with great latitude.
Burns, of London, makes out a case for the possession of about
seventeen temperaments ; and in everyday literature we commonly
read of artistic, musical, poetical, mechanical, and amorous
temperaments. If the word has to be used in this sense we shall
have as many temperaments as faculties, or even as many as
combinations of facilities —a practically infinite number. A


temperament is a_ condition of body which is at once fundamental,
specific, and distinct. Bones are fundamental; they are in all
animal structures; they have a specific task to perform, that of
supporting the body ; they are distinct, not being liable to be
mistaken for anything else. Therefore, a man may be said to be
of the bony constitution or temperament if his bones are a promi-
nent part of his body. The same remark will apply to the muscles,
to the nutritive system, the vascular system, the brain and nervous
system. Each of these is a bodily condition, fundamental, specific,
and distinct, and therefore the basis of a temperament.
This question of temperament is so vastly important both to
students and general readers who wish to know something of
themselves and their
neighbours that it
cannot be left with-
out a few illustra-
tions and some fur-
ther consideration.
“ He is a man of a
sluggish tempera-
ment” is an expres-
sion now and then
heard. It is not cor-
rect, because slug-
gishness is not a
natural condition,
Mr. Jennings, the
fat man of Tasmania,
weighing, as he does,
thirty-two and a half
stones, may be slug-
gish. He is so heavy
that to move must
tax his muscles in
no small degree, but
this cannot be re-
garded as a normal
condition; hence, it
is not a tempera-
ment. There can
be a sluggish per-
2.—MR. JENNINGS.
son, but there cannot be a sluggish temperament. As a~ matter of
tact, the gentleman, whose illustration is here given (2), is not a
sluggish character. Considering how much he has to carry about
with him, he is pretty active. A proper course of hygienic treat-
ment would restore his normal proportions. He would then be a
strong and well-built man. Dr. Cheyne, of New York, was heavier
still He weighed 518 pounds, and had a special carriage built to
enable him to visit his patients, but he took SOOlbs. off his weight
by dietetic measures without suffering a single dav’s sickness


Medical Men and the Older Phrenologists for a long time
had. an artificial classification of the temperaments. They spoke
of men as being of the Bilions, Nervous, Sanguine, and Lym
phatic temperaments. Modern Phrenologists have adopted a more
natural classification. They speak of the Vital, Motive, and
Mental temperaments; for an easily and workable
classification, this is good. Its objection is brevity. Two well-
marked temperaments —the Nutritive and the Vascular are
included in the term Vital, and two others —the Osseous and the
Muscular —are included in the term Motive.
In “ Physiognomy Made Easy,” a small work published some
months since, the former classification was adopted. For that
brief pamphlet it is sufficient, but here we must go a little further,
still keeping, however, to a simple study; to deal with the tem-
peraments in their compounds would take up too much space.
Baron Von Liebig, the great German chemist, is a sample of the
Motive or working temperament of the old classing, and also of
the Osseous and Muscular in the new. In classing men by
temperament we mention first the most prominent, second the
next so, &c. The most prominent gives the key, the principal clue
to the character. All the temperaments are of necessity present in
each form. In this case the classing would be, in a scale of Ito 7:
Osseous, 6; Mental, 6; Muscular, 5; Vascular, 5; Nutritive, 4. Of
such a man, no matter where you saw him nor under what circum-
stances, if you were a student of Human Science, you would, say
“ This man has an abundance of working power ; with brain and
hand he will always be busy ; idleness to him would be worse than
death.” And noticing the relative deficiency of the Nutritive
temperament, you would warn him against overwork, and tell
him to take plenty of food and rest. A plump, rosy woman,
with short, round limbs, and broad, smiling face, if married to
a man of this type (and men of this type are not scarce), will
find it to her advantage to tempt her husband’s appetite with
a variety of nutritious foods ; will give him soups, eggs, milk,
fish, and plenty of farinaceous porridges and puddings.
By this means she will make him stouter, and more com-
fortable in appearance and temper, and she will materially prolong
his useful, hard-working existence. Such men care too little about
what they eat and about warmth and personal comforts generally.
They need someone to care for them. They are very enduring
and enterprising; they never know when they are beaten, and go
on slogging away at their opponents, and their diffi-
culties, until they conquer at last every obstacle to their progress.
They verify the old adage—“A lean horse for a long pull.” They
are the pioneers, explorers, and the founders of new empires. If
the stout wives of such men take the soft, semi-fluid, foods the
soups, the gravies, and the puddings —and give to their husbands
the dry', lean meat, the lentils, and the bread, they will grow
fatter and their husbands leaner to the end of the chapter the
early widowhood which they are unconsciously bringing on. The


3.—BARON VON LIEBIG.


study of temperament, therefore, has its practical use in the every
day life of all sensible people. . .
In Norman M‘Leod (4) we have a sample of the Nutritive tem-
perament, combined with the Vascular and Mental. Such men as
this do not like hard work with the hands, but they are excellent
men of business; are very practical. They can manage affairs and
men, and keep well abrea tof their own times. Such men, if in
the church, wield a great amount of influence; if financial and
commercial matters engross their attention, they lead in these-
labours also. They live in and for their own generation; their
question is—“ What is the good of it ?” They do not think, nor
invent, nor philosophise, still they frequently give practical shape
to the thoughts of thinkers, and commercial value to inventions.
They enjoy life on the physical plane; they eat, drink, and are
merry ; they are social and domestic; they have many friends,
and frequently gain much political influence. Their bellies are
bigger than their brains, but they do not appear to be any worse off
oiTthat account. By their weight and mass they appear to push
competitors aside, and leave them in the rear. Their heads aie full
and wide in the base; the animal and selfish propensities are well
developed in all these men. They are not of necessity bad. If the
brain is high, like that of (4), they keep the animal feelings and
desires within the bounds of legitimate gratification. Such men
ought to live differently from the type of (8). If they take life
easily, and feed and drink freely, they will burden themselves with
a load of useless fat. They enjoy eating, and can digest more than
can be worked off by any labours they are likely to undertake ,
their adipose tissues get enlarged and filled with fat, cushions of
fat form between the muscles, and sheets of fat line the skin ,
masses of fat fill up the greater and lesser omentum, and the
abdomen protrudes, and thick layers hang in the cheeks. Movement
becomes difficult, and fat, not being worked off, becomes old, until,
at last, the man mountain is ready to cry out “ Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death ?” If the man ha.d only
studied temperament, and adapted his food to his organisation,
all this trouble might have been avoided. People in whom the
Nutritive temperament preponderates ought to take dry foods con-
taining but a reasonable share of fluids and heat-givers. _
The presiding genius of the Nutritive temperament is the
stomach. Some people worship their stomachs; at least, they
sacrifice to that god—no other. The stomach is aided by all the
viscera below the diaphragm in its work of providing nourishment.
When this, the abdominal region, is large, the Nutritive tempera-
ment is prominent. .
The Heart is King of the Vascular System.— This falls the
upper part of the trunk. People who have large hearts and lungs
can seriate and circulate blood. In the lungs the blood gets the-
vitalising oxygen, and returns to the heart, thence to be pumped
through °the vascular system to every part of the body. The
Vascular temperament is active, the Nutritive passive; the two


4.—NORMAN M'LEOD.


combined givt, the life-making and life-carrying temperament—the
Vital. A manvffth a large chest and comparatively small abdomen
will be incalculably more active than one who has a large abdomen
and relatively small chest. Still, if the abdomen is too smaJ there
is not enough nutrition and little staying power. If an employer
of labour wants work done, he will see that he gets men about him
who have large chests. Even large bones and muscles count for
little if the chest is poor.- Sir G. Wolseley, in giving orders to his
recruiting sergeants not long ago, recommended them to pick
youths with large chests, whether their heads were large or not.
He had found out that large chests were necessary to endurance.
Mothers who have the interests of their sons deeply at heart—
and what mother worthy of the sacred name has not ?—will see
that they develop their chests, that they work and play freely in
the open air, and have well-ventilated sleeping rooms. Coop a child
up in a warm room, and induce it to keep still, and it will surely
die of consumption of the lungs. A good vascular system is shown
by fulness of the face in the regions of “ healing,” “enjoyment,”
“ health,” “ vitality;” and a good nutritive system is shown in the
regions of “eating,” “digestion,” “warmth,” and general fulness
of the lower face. These temperaments may all be discovered in
the hand also For twenty years the author has found the hand a
ready means of ascertaining temperament. Chirognomy is no new
science.
The value of such a knowledge of the temperaments as any
sensible man or woman can acquire by reading such a work as
this, and noticing people about, cannot be over-estimated. A
father who studies the ways and habits of his children cannot fail
to see what temperaments they are developing. There is active Tom,
with his thin, sharp face, his constant movement, his indifference
to food and rest. That boy is developing the mental and vascular
temperaments at the expense of the nutritive. If you mean to keep
Tom you will have to send him to bed soon, and encourage him to
eat and drink plenty and be a little more passive.
Lazy Dick there, with his fat, red cheeks, never misses a meal;
and if you send him on an errand he comes back some time.
When you give him any work to do he takes so long about it that
you prefer to do it yourself. His thick, round limbs and full paunch
tell of plenty of the nutritive temperament. He will take a double
help from each dish and never cry, “ Hold ! enough.” His treat-
ment must be opposite of that which you apply to active Tom.
You may drive Dick, may work him as hard as you like either
bodily or mentally, you cannot overwork him and drive him to an
early grave; he will take care of that. Charley will pore over
books from morning till night if you will let him. He is of the
mental temperament, like Cardinal Manning. His brain is too big
for his body. You have to get him out of doors and make him
work and play and breathe freely. You have also to
encourage in him an appetite, something like that naturally
owned by Lazy Dick. In this way you will prevent tempera


merits from running to extremes. You will not make
people all alike—that would be a calamity—but will make
them more harmonious. A man is only as strong as his weakest
temperament.
The Mental Temperament is the one in which the brain is
the most prominent. When it leads the features are fine ; the face
pyraforrn; the limbs small and flexible; the eyes free moving, bright,
and generally prominent; the hair fine, soft, and generally abund-
ant —it may be of any colour, but is frequently light. The cheeks
are thin, the forehead high and large, and there is a marked absence
of fleshiness, and no tendency to abdominal fulness.
The brain is generally narrower than it is in the motive, and
always narrower than in the nutritive and vascular. In Cardinal
Manning (5) the mental temperament is the leading one. It is so
in the majority of mental workers. It is prominent in poets,
musicians, artists, and in many classes of literary workers, in
imaginative persons, and in precocious children.
The presiding genius of the mental temperament is the brain,
and more particularly the cerebrum or large brain—the brain that
fills up the front, top, and sides of the head. The cerebellum lies
between the ears, and fills up the lower parts of the back of the
head. Signs of temperament as seen in the head and face will be
incidentally mentioned in future chapters.
Temperament is a Condition that affects every faculty of the
mind. A large and fine brain—fine in form as well as in quality
—if found on a pulpy and heavy man, would not display one tithe
of the activity that it would on one in whom the mental or motive
temperaments took the lead. Large benevolence in a fat and idle
man would mean a genial and kindly disposition; it would not
lead to effort and self-sacrifice. Some people are good-natured
and compliant because too lazy to make any fuss, and others are
moral because too idle to sin.
When the nutritive and vascular systems are prominent, the
virtues are apt to be negative. The man does not do this or that
wrong because he does not like the trouble. He cannot be a burglar
or an active criminal; for that kind of crime would take him out of
his bed at improper hours, and be a worrying and wearying kind of
life. He does not quarrel with anyone, because he might have to
fight, and would run the risk of getting hurt. He is hospitable and
kindly, because it wouldbe troublesome to be otherwise. Many plump,
easy-going men and women get quite a good reputation by looking
pleasant, smiling, and being tolerant. They have no angles—fat
has rounded them off; their wheels are oiled, and never creak;
they use the oiled feather to their hinges.
The Best Temperaments are the Most Harmonious. —General
Garfield (6) is a capital specimen of the well-balanced temperament.
He rose to his high position by force of character. He does not
appear to have been a particularly brilliant man ; but he had the
all-round completeness of character that goes with harmony of
temperaments. This is much better than genius. A .genius has


5.—CARDINAL MANNING.


6.—PRESIDENT GARFIELD.


too much of something or other, and too little of some other quality
quite as useful. He is frequently short of the governing qualities.
Sometimes his morality is an unknown quantity. He is often
devoid of business capability, and his energy is generally inter-
mittent., The harmonious man, on the contrary, moves evenly
and steadily. He rises in the world quietly and without fuss ;he
makes good every step as he takes it; he is not unnaturally elated
to-day and down to-morrow. Circumstances do not control him;
he controls circumstances by making the best of each condition
they present. If you see a man uniformly successful, or not cast
down by some temporary failure, you may be sure that such a
man is well balanced.
A man or woman is well harmonised if it is difficult to tell which
temperament preponderates. In such there are bones, muscles,
abdomen, chest, and brain, and yet you cannot see that one takes
the lead of the rest. The whole figure is compact and rounded;
no part appears to attract attention more than the rest. The bony
structure has no undue prominence ; the muscles do not stand out
in bosses; the chest is large enough, but not too large; the
abdomen is neither drawn in nor bulged out; and the head does
not strike you as being either too large or too small for the body.
Well-balanced people may be either large or small. They are
generally neither. The world’s greatest men have been of medium
size. Garfield (6) was a little over medium size. A study of his
face will show harmony. The lower face tells of good nutritive and
vascular qualities; the middle face tells of good working and
business energies; and the upper face, the forehead, tells of plenty
of mental power and of ripe judgment.
Such men have every kind of power at command ; they usually
attain to good positions and live long. They can be seen any day
in their offices and warehouses. Life appears to be easy and pros-
perous for them; they always have some force in reserve.
The Harmonious Temperament is the one that nature is always
trying to produce. Individual life cannot be well maintained by
persons who have an abnormal development of any one class of
organs. Too much fat, too much bone, even too much brain—any
lack of harmony, tends to hold one back in the life race. The
strength of a chain is that of its weakest link. Let a man be
ever so muscular he dies when his heart gives out; no matter
how good his brain is the thinking capacity is eventually
measured by his ability to digest his dinner. A phrenologist
who understands his work has to tell thousands of young men
what they may attempt and what is unsafe. Every living man
«?r woman profits by learning what is his or her weakest tempera-
ment, and setting to work to add strength to that temperament.
In childhood the modification of temperaments is easy, and it is
possible, to a greater or less extent, all our lives. If we fail to find
out and strengthen the weak part any testing will find it out for us
Life is full of such struggles, and the men who turn out weak go to the
wall. This means that well-balanced people are more likely than


the rest to survive in the long run, and that ill-balanced ones must
take a second place, and eventually be civilised off the earth.
Nature is ever trying to produce harmony of temperaments by
the well-recognised process of marital selection.
In selecting husbands and wives we are attracted by one of two
features : —l. Harmony, beauty, and physical perfections; 2.
Power in some other direction which we lack and admire in
another. The primal attraction is, of course, the great difference
of sex. Even in friendships there is something of attraction for
opposites. A weak man will seek for the companionship of a
strong one ; a high intelligence finds his friends in lower ranks ol
intellect. Like qualities sometimes lead to friendship, but unlike
ones far more frequently.
An attraction towards opposite and different qualities tends to
produce harmony of temperament—if not in this generation, at
least in the next. For fuller treatment of the question of tempera-
ment in marriage, see “ Husbands: How to Select Them; How
to Manage Them ; How to Keep Them,” by the same author.
All persons ought to study temperament as shown in themselves and
their children, in order that they may bring to bear such modifying
influences as are available.
CHAPTER IV.
QUALITY AND ACTIVITY.
“ For often fineness compensated size.”— Tennyson.
There are Fine Men and Coarse Ones. —In some men every-
thing is hard, rough, and coarse. The skin is rough ; the features
just chopped out of the hard material of the face; the hands knuckley,
rough, strong, stiff, and evidently unfit for fine manipulations. The
voice growls harshly. The movements are heavy and without grace.
The hair is bristly, and each one, when cut short, asserts its indi-
vidual existence by its erectness ; the whole head is like a pretty
stiff brush. These are men of low quality.
In others everything is reversed. All is pliant, fine, smooth, well
finished. The skin is thin, and glows with every change of feeling,
for the blood gets to the surface easily ; the features are finely
chiselled, and you can see just where one begins and the other
ends; the hands are fine and very flexible, you can see that they
are fitted for delicate manipulations; the voice is musical and
clear; every movement is easy and graceful; the hair is as soft as
so much silk, and lies in delicate ringlets on and around the head.
Fine quality may be found accompanying any size or any tempera-
ment. It is most frequently found in conjunction with the mental
and the vital-mental temperaments. The bony and muscular tem-
peraments are generally the coarser ones.
Is Anything Pertaining to Character Revealed Here ?
Yes. Fine hair means fine bones and muscles and a sensitive and
delicate nervous structure; an organisation that will enjoy and


suffer more than the coarse and the common. The coarser man
can enjoy a life of hardships, labours, and privations that the finer
could not endure. Rugged coarseness smooths the way for
delicate fineness that comes after, and develops art, music, and
beauty. These two classes of people have each their uses, but one
could not change places with the other.
To one the pains and pleasures of life are very tangible and real,
and their causes are perceptible. The other has quivering nerves
that vibrate with the slightest impression from within or without.
If the coarser nature is well fed, clothed, and its animal wants are
attended to, it is comfortable and happy ; the other needs sym-
pathy, tenderness, beauty, poetry, and art —needs to have the
soul’s aspirations gratified. It lives not by bread alone. The
extremely fine are apt to have day-dreams; are inclined to be
aesthetic ; to shut themselves away from the wear, tear, and worry
of the work-a-day world and its sins, sufferings, and privations;
and to build up an ideal world for themselves. They may almost
“Die of a rose in aromatic pain.”
Caligula (7)- is a sample of the coarse in its worst form—the
vicious and sensual. If a coarse man is also a bad man he will be
guilty of the grossest forms of
vice and sensualism. A low
mode of life tends to degrada-
tion of quality, and to the
building up of the lower part
of each organ of the body.
Gross living makes the cheeks
hang; it fills out the lower
viscera ; it degrades and drags
down the form at every point.
It lowers and enlarges the
cerebellum ; fills out the lower
ear-lobes and lowers the ear
itself in relationship to the
eye ; makes the man approach
the hippopotamus in his form.
Caligula, in youth, had fine
features, and was well shapen.
The picture here given repre-
sents what he was a little
before his crimes led to his
assassination. If a man is too
fine he can harden himself by
taking more interest in every-
7. —CALIGULA.
day life and hard work; if he is too coarse he can become finer bv
changing his habits and pursuits—by trying to be less boorish—by
cultivating pure habits and feelings—by exercising the moral and
religious feelings—by improving intellect and exercising the higher
faculties generally.
38
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


Between the Extremely Fink and its Opposite there are all
shades of quality. These are approximately estimated in the
marking of the phrenological register. In considering character
and talents it is necessary to pay particular attention to this as a
basic condition. It affects every faculty. A man of fine quality
will differ in thought, feeling, modes of worship, emotions, affec-
tions, artistic conceptions, and in all ways from a coarse one. A
coarse man wants his religion hot and strong. A brass band is
scarcely enough to move him. Loud shoutings and gesticulations
are to him natural and necessary modes of expression.
His conscience can only be reached by material appeals. He
wants a blazing hell, an angry Deity, a pleasant place of abode as
a reward. He spiritualises nothing. A man of finer fibre shrinks
from all this noise and blare, and worships in subdued murmurs.
The two classes quarrel about their respective modes of worship,
and call each other “ Banters ” or “ Ritualists,” according to their
style. Why do so ? Both may be in earnest; both may be
striving after truth ; both are worshipping the same Divinity. The
difference may be in temperament and quality more than in spirit.
We have to learn to make allowance for one another. We must
not blame a coarse man for speaking plainly and directly, and
giving direct and vigorous utterance to his thought and feeling.
Such is his nature.
A coarse man will exercise his benevolence by direct giving, and
inflict pain by the manner of the act; a fine one will press a
trifling loan with delicacy and tact, leaving no sting and no
humiliation. Both are actuated by the same spirit, and it is only
fair to judge them by the spirit of the action—the motive rather
than the manner.
Proneness to Activity is Indicated by Sharpness of outline
and feature. A sharp, thin nose and prominent features tell of
activity. Where the features are sunk into the face, and seem to
run into one another, do not expect a great degree of activity.
Illustrations 4 and 5 show great activity, while 2 and 7, especially
the latter, show the opposite. 3 and 6 are reasonably active;
their activity will be sufficient to push forward their enterprises
and keep them in health, but is not the kind that ruins their con-
stitutions.
In some the nose runs into the cheeks, and the face is flat and
broad, and the features small in proportion to the face. The eye
is dull and slow-moving, and has but little expression, and the
forehead is bulging. Such people are slow. Many people expect
much from their children because they have large foreheads; and
some phrenologists, a little short of experience and knowledge, are
apt to promise intellectual pre-eminence to such children, and to
lead parents into making undue and useless efforts to make their
big-brained boys into lawyers and literary and professional workers.
This is the reoult of not taking all conditions into consideration.
Slow boys may come to the front, but, as a rule, they are late in
doing so. Parents ought to be very sure that a slow boy has


talent that will develop some time, before they persist in keeping
him at school for the purpose of making a capable scholar of him.
These slow people are often thoughtful and good-natured. Quicker
and finer men and women are more excitable and are more
irritable. Sir John Hall (8), a New Zealand statesman, and
ex-Premier of that colony, presents a picture of fineness and
activity. The artist has managed to blunt his nose a little, and
thereby has toned down the whole face.
Activity is shown also in length and slenderness of form and
feature. Mere sharpness and thinness, when not accompanied by
length, indicate excitability and intensity of nerve action, rather
than the ease of movement of activity. The fussiness of excitability,
when not controlled by activity and mental promptness, is some-
times laughable. Fussy people are apt to get panic-stricken in the
presence of danger. The most active forms are those that have
bone and muscle enough to give them freedom of movement,
together with nerve enough to give quickness.
Short and Stocky Structures Give the Idea of Sturdiness
and strength. The strongest form in the universe is the sphere.
When the sphere is beaten into a cylinder it is less capable of
resistance along certain lines, and when the cylinder becomes a
rod it is weaker still. In gaining length and slenderness it has lost
in resistance.
Speed and strength are in inverse ratio one to the other. Given
two arms of equal strength, the shorter one will hold at arm’s
length a greater weight, while the longer one will move its weight
—a lighter one in proportion to its length—through a greater arc of
space in the same time. These are mathematical certainties, and
mathematical laws control all movements and all masses every-
where.
Hence solidity and stockiness of form indicates strength, while
length indicates speed and activity. Still we cannot go far before
compensating clauses and limitations begin to operate. When the
limbs get too long the weight gets too far from the power, and time
is lost in transmitting the force. Therefore, while length is a sign
of activity, the extremely tall and slender are not the most active.
They have passed the point where length is an advantage. Giants
are almost always ungainly and slow. In fables and folk-lore
giants are sometimes strong and cruel; but they are rarely, if ever,
quick of movement, brilliant, or clever. They fall a prey to the
simplest devices of the cunning ones who slay them. Harmony of
parts is the great essential. Thickness and shortness become
podginess and inefficiency when too apparent.
The truth of these remarks may be proved by the study of
mechanics, or by a visit to a locomotive factory. Where a given
amount of steam has to drive an express engine at high rate, the
piston rods are long, and the driving wheels of great diameter;
where the same steam has to drive a heavy goods engine slowly,
the rods are shorter, the wheels of less diameter, and all else pro-
portionate. We have now learned something of the study of forms


8.—SIR JOHN HALL.


as a whole, of animal forms and their human prototypes, ot tem-
peraments, of quality, activity, excitability. We will now proceed
to details, beginning with the most important one —the head.
CHAPTER V.
A STUDY OF HEADS.
*• Large head, little wit.
Small head, ne’er a bit,”
(1) Animal Propensities.
(2) Selfish Propensities.
(3) Domestic and Social Pro-
pensities.
(4) Designing and Perfecting.
(5) Perceptive Intellect.
(6) Mnemonical Intellect.
(7) Reasoning Intellect.
(8) Aspiring Sentiments.
(9) Intuitive Intellect.
(10) Moral and Religious Sen-
timents.
No student of Human Science needs to be told that the study of
heads involves the study of brains, which is Hence
the man who studies brains is in a sense a phrenologist, .even
though he pretends that there is no such thing as a science of
Phrenology. The name of the science comes from the Greek
equivalents of brain and word —Phren and Logus.
In spite of all that has been done by teachers, writers, and
lecturers on this science there yet remains much misapprehension
in the public mind regarding Phrenology. It exists both in lay
minds and those that ought to be better informed. It takes all
shapes, and in turn makes the student of Phrenology figure as a
bump-groping charlatan, an atheist, a fatalist, a materialist, and
what not. From time to time Phrenology is attacked in news-
papers and magazines, and utterly demolished to the satisfaction
of the attacking writer, who is frequently a student of surgery and
medicine, fresh from a course of clinical lectures, and not yet trusted
with the lives and limbs of patients. Strangely enough,
Phrenology seems to require a vast amount of killing. Within a
short period it has been shot by the London Graphic and pin-
pricked by a Melbourne morning paper, and still it is alive. A


email work on Human Science, written by the present writer, has
sold at the rate of five hundred copies a month ever since it was
published. This, too, in spite of the disadvantage of being sold
mostly at one store. Phrenological descriptions of public men are
more eagerly read in all parts of the world to-day than they were
in the time of Gall, Spurzheim, and Combe.
The attacking writers almost invariably display a crass ignorance
of the subject attacked. They usually build A Phrenology of
their own — a thing weak enough, and not recognisable by phre-
nologists—and knock it down at their leisure. If they did not
knock it down it would tumble by its own clumsiness and lack of
cohesion. They attack at best an old dead image of Phrenology,
about as much like the science, as practised, as an eggshell is like
the chick hatched from it. As well attack the medicine of barber
surgeons and apothecaries, the medicine and surgery of three
centuries ago, and think that the Royal College of Surgeons would
thereby come to grief.
These pot-boiling writers generally air their ignorance by
dragging up theories that have been abandoned by the phrenologists
themselves some forty or fifty years ago. One of the best text-
books of modern phrenology is Carpenter’s “ Mental Physiology.”*
The writer regards himself as an anti-phrenologist; he even speaks
somewhat disparagingly of the phrenologists in his book, and yet
he advocates a system of mental philosophy and psychology
exactly identical with what we have taught for more than twenty
years. This is not a scientific work. Carpenter cannot be quoted
here. He is worthy of all respect, and his work will live. No
one will rank him amongst the magazine critics just mentioned—
men who usually show themselves (1) ignorant of phrenology
itself; (2) ignorant of its most common literature
Space and time will not allow more than a passing mention of
these writers. Facts refute them. Phrenology is livelier and
stronger to-day than ever. It has more teachers, more writers,
more readers ; a higher place in general literature. Its terms
have become the nomenclature of the mental faculties all the
world over ; its principles are expounded in thousands of pulpits
and on thousands of platforms. Novelists make use of it in
explaining their characters ; poets in touching human sympathies ;
physicians in diagnosis of cases; teachers in instructing the
young; merchants and bankers in selecting their assistants. In
short, it has permeated through every stratum of society, and this,
too, in spite of the crudeness of many of its teachers and the
prevalance of silly ideas regarding good and evil bumps, and the
fatalism which uneducated persons suppose it to favour.
No Phrenologist of Standing endorses the bump theory. To
talk about bumps on the skull as indicative of talents and traits
of character is to air ignorance, or vulgarity, or a mixture of both.
Phrenologists study the shape of the head; they find out the
*W. B. Carr i t<r Ket'an, Paul, Treuch and Co. 737 pp. 1? . 6d.


relative quantity of brain in certain positions. Quality and activity
have been discovered by studies alluded to in previous chapters.
The phrenological method of study is the natural one. At
the head of this chapter (cut 9) the natural development oi
brain is shown pretty plainly, and for the first time.
That illustration is entirely new, and has been drawn by
the writer especially for this work. It shows growth upward
from spinal centres to the top of the head. The region of brain
between the ears is common to men and animals, and is named
“animal propensities.” Built upon this we have the “selfish
propensities,” still common to men and animals, but in men this
group includes the business qualities and energies that save
means and provide for the activity of the “ designing and per-
fecting” group. This, again, is not an entirely human group of
faculties. Bees, wasps, spiders, birds, beavers, moles, ants, and
many other creatures design and construct things that men can
at best but poorly imitate. Even in size his largest buildings,
cities; and pyramids appear small beside the coral islands built by
myriads of aquatic workers in Southern .seas.
Behind these, filling out the back of the head, is the region of
brain devoted to the “ social and domestic propensities.” This,
again-, is common to men and animals. The hen who gathers its
chickens under its wings is much more a mother than the woman
who abandons her child to death or to the mercy of strangers.
Above all ,these, in the posterior coronal region, we have the
“ aspiring sentiment,” for the first time so called. These are
mostly human, although many animals are sensitive to praise and
censure, and have something akin to vanity and pride in their
structure.
In the Forehead there are Four Stories, so to speak. The
lowest of these is “ perceptive intellect.” This is common to man
and animals. In direct observation animals are frequently
superior to man. Of measures, qualities, and values they are
doubtless ignorant, but of things themselves they frequently have
keener perceptions. The keener perceptives of dogs are frequently
employed to aid men in hunting, tracing fugitives, &c.
The second story, “ mnemonical intellect,” is also common.
Most animals and birds, and many insects, remember places;
many of them remember seasons, if not actual dates. Pigeons
travel home from long distances; bees make the known “ bee
line birds make for their own nests. People speak of distances
“as the crow flies.” Dogs, cats, horses can find their way about
better than men under some circumstances. Men turn animal
faculties to human use. A sea captain, engaged in intercolonial
trade, has a house in the N.Z. bush. When he calls at a certain
port he finds his horse waiting at a stable. That horse carries
him to his bush home. If compelled to travel at night the captain
is apt to get off the track. Not so his horse. In any case of doubt
the captain drops the bridle on the horse’s neck, and lets it pick-
the wav. This is an instance of human and animal action of a


faculty; the animal may be superior to the man so long as its
faculty acts simply and directly. The horse can be trained to find
its bush road, but it could never be trained to steer a ship. Your
dog will remember the smell of your person and the sound of your
voice. It could not remember the latter if it had not tune; but
it has not tune enough to remember either a psalm tune or a
movement in an opera.
The third story, “reflective intellect,” is almost entirely human.
It is possible to show that sagacious animals have some rudiments
of the reasoning faculties ; indeed, both in moral conduct and
what appears to be rational action animals behave better than the
criminals and idiots of our own species.
“ Intuitive intellect,” the crowning portion of the brow, is
barely present in many men. It is the reverse of the “ perceptive
intellect.” One is fed from the material side of us, from below;
the other from the spiritual side, from above. If ideas can flow
into the human mind from superhuman sources they flow in here.
In Geo. Combe (10), the great phrenologist, and author of
“Constitution of Man,” we have a good example of “intuitive
intellect,” and of the “moral and religious sentiments”—the
region of brain farthest removed from the “animal propensities,”
and least necessary for our mere animal well-being. The brain,
judged by the position of phrenological regions, is an evolution by
growth upward and forward and upward and backward, When
animals begin to care for their young they cease to be entirely
selfish. A hungry sparrow will carry a grub in its bill to feed its
young. The sparrow takes a step towards humanity, or divinity if
you will, when its love for its little ones sends it hurrying about to
bring them food.
Fig. 9 gives the correct idea —that of a series of brains
growing one upon another. A study of the comparative anatomy
of brains shows a gradual evolution from a ganglionic knot of
nerve matter to the complex brain of the higher mammals and
man. The Chimpanzee has a small brain and a large one —
Cerebellum and Cerebrum. It includes regions 1,2, 3,5, and
part of Nos. 6 and 8. See head of chapter.
Fig. 11 is a comparison of three skulls—(l) that of an intelli-
gent Chimpanzee; (2) that of a man of average ability; (8) that of
a highly moral and intelligent man. There is room for any
number of variations of form between these lines. Some idiots
have brains but little superior to that of the Chimpanzee. An idiot
has been known to have a brain weighing only ten ounces. The
average brain of the full-grown Englishman is 48 ounces. Scotch
and German brains average a little higher ; those of Southern
Europe lower Some idiots have very large heads. In such cases
the brain is usually diseased.
Never Judge Either Child or Adult by size of head alone.
A big head may be like an uncultivated swamp. Its only product
may be malaria. A boy phrenologically pronounced clever was
brought to the writer some time ago. He had a wide, square


forehead, and a large brain. A moment’s study of the case
served to show that the upper half of the brain was barely alive;
that the boy was all but devoid of intelligence; that education ol
any kind was scarce possible, and that death might be expected any
day. In six months the boy was dead. Had he lived he would
have been a perfectly useless imbecile.
Little is gained by the study of heads with knife and scalpel. A
number of vivisectionists have of late been trying to discover a
phrenology of their own by removing portions of the skull and apply-
ing electrodes to the naked brain, and watching what movements
result from touching certain parts. So far as
they have gone the experiments of Hitzig and
Fritsch, Ecker and Ferrier, have proved the
statements of the phrenologists. They have
discovered by their cruel experiments that the
region of brain about the ears is somehow con-
nected with animal movements, and have
deduced, as can be proved by their own books
and illustrations, that the upper and front brain
is used for the manifestation of the moral and
intellectual faculties. They have begun to think
what we have long known.
11.
They could not very well Make Experiments on Human
Beings, for human subjects are not likely to submit themselves as
martyrs of science. The highest animals are devoid of the purely
human faculties, and also of the brain centres through which these
become conscious. Even in surgical cases, where naked human
brains are exposed, many difficulties arise ; one is that the brain
cannot act under abnormal conditions. The pressure caused by a
clot of blood, a brain tumor, an indented skull-plate, causes
unconsciousness; and if an electrode could stimulate a centre—say
that of Reason —how would reason express its conclusions without
language and the vocal powers ? or draw them without facts
supplied by the mnemonical or perceptive centres ? In short, the
proper activity of any faculty can only be attained as a result of
wakefulness and health of all faculties. The incoherence of
dreams is caused by partial wakefulness; that of insanity by
derangement of portions of brain. At best electrodes could only
make a man act as if half asleep or half insane.
Therefore, we cannot trust much to the results gained by the
vivisectionist’s mode of investigation. Their whole system of
investigation is open to question. It is far more uncertain than
the phrenological one, for {a) it renders the conditions abnormal
by its cuttings and electrodes; (b) it stimulates from outside
instead of inside ; (c) it arouses single centres, although it is known
that centres do not act singly; ( d ) it concludes that, because &
movement of certain muscles is caused by the application of an
electrode to a certain centre, and that such morement is not made
when that centre is removed, such centre has no business to perform
but that of moving that muscle. As well might we suppose that


because the hand of a sleeping man will grasp when something is
put in it, and will not grasp after being cut off, that the only
purpose of the hand is grasping.
10. —GEO. COMBE.
Phrenology ( a) Studies Normal Conditions ; (6) studies
faculties as exhibited in the action and passion of every-day life,
and sees that intensity and power in certain directions are accom-
panied by certain forms of brain; (c) analyses motives and finds in
action a resultant of several forces working in various directions ;
{d) sees that any faculty can have the direction and intensity of
action, though not the kind of action modified by each or all of
the other faculties. For instance, constructiveness always con-
structs. It builds cities, makes garments, roads, bridges, railways,
steamships, to aid civilisation and travel. It makes pens and
paper for the writer, instruments for the musician, and, anon,
cannon, rifles, swords, and bayonets for destructive warfare. The
phrenological method is natural, and free from cruelty; that of
the vivisectionist is unnatural and cruel. We give the latter
credit for honesty of intention, and thank him for what he has
done in anatomical and histological research. We hope that he
may make, further discoveries by the study of pathological cases
and by dissection. In these lines the phrenologists have been fore-
most ever since the days of Dr. Gall. They have ever been willing to
give and receive suggestions, and only claim for themselves and their
modes of investigation the freedom and fair play they give to others.
47
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


In many cases the discoveries of anatomists and physiologists
have been anticipated by the phrenologists. As a case in point,
Dr. Luys has found out that the corpus callosum is composed of
fibres, which connect homogeneous portions of the two hemispheres
of the brain. The phrenologists have known this since the days
of Dr. Gall.
CHAPTER VI.
SKULLS.
“ Now get you to my lady’s tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to
this favour she must come ; make her laugh at that.”
The majority of people care little about skulls. Some shudder
when they see them, perhaps not thinking for the moment that
their own brains are
packed in one of these
wonderful and beau-
tiful boxes of living
bone. Oliver W.
Holmes speaks of the
brain as a seventy-
years’ clock, which
Nature winds up
once, and then gives
the key to the Angel
of the Resurrection.
We can only get at
the works of this
clock indirectly. We
can make it go now
a little faster, now a
little slower, while
the seventy years, a
little more or less, are
beaten out; but all
meddling with the
12.—A GOOD SKULL.
rate of this horologue is poor work, and in the long run does not
pay. Alcohol and opium, the fierce excitements of gambling and
fast living —the brain avenges itself upon us for all these things.
The Skull is a Wonderful Structure. It is evidently
intended to protect something of supreme importance. The
stomach and abdominal viscera are important parts of the body ;
we could not live long without them. But they are not protected
with a bony case. The heart and lungs are more important; life
ceases instantly if these are seriously injured. Still they are only
partly protected with bone—a sternum in front, a pair of shoulder
blades behind, and the ribs—a kind of cage in all—for protection
of these organs. The brain, so carefully protected, must be more
valuable still; the cloven sphere that it enshrines must be of more
importance than the heart. And so it is; for the heart ceases to
beat just as soon as the brain ceases to send its messages com-
48
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


manding it so to do. Of all organs in the body the brain is
crowned king. Other organs hold a tributary kingship, each in its
own domain, but the brain is emperor, and controls the whole.
“ Mark the cloven sphere that holds
All thought in its mysterious folds,
That feels sensation’s faintest thrill,
And flashes forth the sovereign will;
Think on the stormy world that dwells
Locked in its dim and clustering cells 1
The lightening gleams of power it sheds
Along its hollow, glassy threads.”— Holmes.
The Skull is Moulded upon the Brain. It is a certain
shape and size because the brain inside the skull is of that shape
and size. Says Louis Figuier, the great French naturalist: —
“ The brain is moulded by the soul into conformity with its proper
aptitudes, its required faculties. Then the bony covering of the
skull, which moulds itself upon the cerebral substance within its
cavity, reproduces and gives expression to our predominant
faculties.” . . . . “ When Gall’s theory is applied to animals
the evidences in its favour are astonishing. In the case of
man, facts are almost always confirmatory of the theory. It is
certain that the skull of an assassin does exhibit the abnormal
developments indicated by Gall, and that, according to the doctrine
of the German anatomist, the sentiments of affection, love,
cupidity, discernment, etc., may be recognised externally by the
form of the skull. It rarely happens that the phrenologist, on
examining the skull of a Troppman or a Papavoine, fails to trace
the hideous indications of evil passions and brutality.”
Opponents of Phrenology think they score a point by speaking
of thickenings of the skull as presenting an obstacle to the phre-
nologist. These might, in some instances, puzzle a bump-groper—
a man who feels over the surface of the head for little elevations
and depressions of skull, and from these pretends to draw certain
deductions, which he gives forth in oracular sentences that may be
made to mean anything. The true phrenologist is never puzzled
bj these. He knows where they are, and has means of finding
out any extra prominence of bony process. He draws deductions
from size of brain from certain centres, its depth and form.
Fig. 12 is that of a well-formed Caucasian skull, such as can
only be found amongst highly-civilised people. A comparison of
skulls of different races, and of different types of character in the
same race, shows that the differences of form are far greater than
could be accounted for by differences in thickness of skull, and by
any number of excrescences on skull surface. The phrenologist
sees in an instant who has a thick skull and who a thin one.
“ The blow that scarce would move a horse
Would kill a sound divine.”
A thick skull is an advantage under some circumstances.
“ Numb-skull,” “ Thick-head,” “ Block-head” are terms used to
denote stupidity and intellectual dulness. A thick-skulled man,
49
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


however, is not of necessity a dunce. A man in whom the bony
system is prominent will have a thick skull, and his menta]
labours will be performed slowly, but they are not of necessity
poor. Many great men have written slowly. Macaulay was 9
slow writer, and so was Darwin ; but who will have the temerity to
say that either of these men did poor mental work ? Books that live
have frequently been written by men who gained in turn each of the
above appellations. The mental temperament is often thin-skulled.
The Thickness of the Skull is pretty uniform, and its thicker
and thinner places are well known. The Designer of the skull has
provided a thick portion of skull at the back, and one on each side,
and a hollow chamber at the root of the nose. These are
protections in part, and they serve other purposes. The amateur
gropers sometimes mistake the mastoid process for “executiveness,”
and the occipitus spinalis for “love of children,” and an extra
fulness of the frontal sinus for “ object” and “locality.” The skull
is thin under the zygomatic arch and the temporal muscles. It is
sometimes thinned by brain diseases that cause monomania.
Victims of Satyrasis and Nymphomania have skulls thinned in
the region of “ amativeness.” Something can be learned regarding
the kind of life a man has lived by putting a candle in his skull.
The bone is thinnest in the regions of greatest activity. Even during
life excessive activity of portions of the brain may be discovered by
heat and other symptoms. The form of skull does something to-
wards telling the kind of mania towards which each subject may lean.
A person with narrow head is not likely to become a kleptomaniac.
The general coincidence of internal and external skull plates
is shown in Fig. 13. It need scarcely be said that the brain fills
up the whole cavity of
the skull. We cannot
shake our brains up and
rattle them about. A
severe blow on the head
indents the skull and
produces unconscious-
ness. A concussion,
caused by a fall or
shock, produces the same
effect. Until the normal
condition is restored con-
sciousness cannot be re-
gained.
A seaman, while being
chased by a middy on
board one of our old
wooden men-of-war, fell
to the deck, and was
seriously injured on the
13.— SECTION OF SKULL.
head. He could take food, and so was brought to England alive,
but unconscious, and put in one of the London hospitals. Sir
50
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


Astley Cooper examined him, and performed the operation of tre-
panning. As soon as the piece of bone was raised from the
man’s brain he looked around excitedly, saying : “ Where is he ?”
He had regained consciousness just where he had lost it; he was
again in the rigging from whence he had fallen three months
before. All the time after was a blank ; he had not even remem-
bered striking the deck Such experiences are very common. It
is a merciful provision of Nature that creatures suddenly killed
never know what has hurt them.
Here we have Four Skulls. The first is that of the polecat,
called by our American cousins the skunk (see D, Fig. 14); the
second (C) is that
of the domestic
cat; the third (B)
the Chimpanzee;
and the fourth (A)
is an average
human skull.
These four are
actually sections
drawn to scale.
The point (G) is
the opening of the
ear—a point com-
mon to the four—
and the develop-
ment upward and
forward must re-
FIG. 14.
mind the reader of the super-position of brain on brain—the
higher on the lower —shown in Illustration 9 heading the last
chapter. Evidently the superior creature has a superior form of
skull to make room for its larger and more complex brain.
The few fossil skulls that have been found are, as a rule, low in
development, but distinctly human. There are heads walking up
and down our streets to-day quite as poor as the Neanderthal
and Borrowly skulls. Hitherto, there has been found no trace of
the “missing link,” the ancestor common to monkeys and men.
That man has undergone, and is undergoing, a process of evo-
lution cannot reasonably be doubted, but, so far, that evolution
appears to have been from a lower human to a higher human—
from an animal human to a full-orb’d Divine Human, the perfect
work of creation—and not from some lower animal into a human.
CHAPTER VII.
PHRENOLOGICAL READINGS.
“So phrenology may be justly conceded the grand merit of having forced the
inductive method of inquiry into mental philosophy, and thus laid the permanent
foundations of a true mental science.” —Encyclopedia Britannica, Bth Ed.
It is time to give a few phrenological illustrations and their
meanings. Students who have followed these pages so far, and


who have studied men around them, are ready to observe heads
and gather up practical information on this most important branch
of Human Science.
Illustration 9 shows the newest and most natural mode of
classifying or grouping phrenological divisions, and the accom-
panying illustration (15) is the old
mode of dividing into seven groups.
For the purpose of practically study-
ing character by form of head and
quantity of brain in position both
are useful. So far as it goes Fig. 18
gives the truth, but Fig. 9 gives the
truth in a more evolved form. Phre-
nology is a growing science. Thinkers,
observers, investigators are always
finding something out. The student
will see that fresh discoveries do not
disturb the order of phrenological
arrangement. No one finds an
animal organ in the moral group,
nor a feeling in the forehead. If
anything of the kind does appear to
FIG. 15.
be discovered we soon find out the error. In a physiognomical
chart published not long ago in New York parental lovei s located
in the upper part of the forehead. This physiognomical discovery
is manifestly absurd, for there are many people with very large
and full upper foreheads who are almost devoid of parental love ;
many, again, with full upper foreheads wh have an abundance of
the same faculty. This being true, we cannot regard the fulness
or otherwise of the upper forehead as indicative of the presence or
absence of this faculty. Again, there are many men and women
who have no forehead worth naming who are yet passionately fond
of children, and also many animals devoid of face and forehead
who are very fond of offspring. We cannot, then, trust the
physiognomist who makes and prints a discovery so entirely out
of harmony with established truth.
A Student of Comparative Phrenology cannot fail to see
that the brain is a growth from a few ganglionic centres —upward
and forward; that some creatures have only the parts of brain
that manifest the selfish and self-protective faculties; that others
have domestic propensities, and still others desire for praise, the
perceptives, and some mechanical ability. In some he finds the
powers of memory developed in high degree, and some rudimentary
perception of causes, and a tendency to reason. In man alone he
finds a full unfolding of the moral sentiments and the reasoning
and intuitive faculties.
Growth of brain implies growing from the lower to the higher,
from the animal towards the human. The fact that faculties least
animal in their activity have their organs furthest removed from
the animal centres goes far to prove Phrenology. If we found
52
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


benevolence mixed up with the selfish propensities we might
reasonably doubt the scientific value of our discovery. This, how-
ever, is never so; the organs least necessary for the maintenance
of animal existence are furthest removed from animal centres.
A higher form of brain is always more complex than a lower one.
A simple brain goes with simple mental action, while complexity
of brain goes side by side with complexity of mental action.
Higher thoughts and aspirations require higher brain forms through
which to manifest themselves. When the men of any race are
growing more human their brains fill out and widen in the upper
parts; when the reverse process is going on the brain is also
reverting to the barbarian or savage type. These processes show
themselves in a limited degree in individuals, and in the brief
span of one short lifetime. Several great Englishmen have sub-
mitted themselves several times to phrenological manipulation and
a careful series of measurements, and it has been found that their
heads have grown both as a whole, and, in certain directions, as a
result of certain kinds of brain action. Many cases of this kind
have come under the writer’s own notice. Changes of brain form,
perceptible enough to be registered with a tape measure, have
taken place in less than two years in fully-matured men and women.
A Study of the Relative Great Divisions of the brain will
show us which group of faculties is likely to preponderate in our
friends and neighbours ; will enable us to see which are naturally
business men, which
mechanics, which ob-
servers, and which
philosophers; will tell
us which man is
likely to be moral and
religious, and which is
likely to let his feelings
have undue sway.
Phrenological read-
ings of character and
talents are a continual
series of studies of
brain depths and dis-
tances from a certain
centre (A) in Figs. 16
and 17. These two are
ideal sections of brains.
The brain, though
composed of fibrous
and grey, jelly-like
material, presents no
appearance such as
this. A thousand fibres
would not occupy the
FIG. 16.
space enclosed in any two of these lines. Histological research has
53
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


plainly shown that brain fibres connect one hemisphere of the
brain with the other, and also the outer surface of the brain
with the centres of the various senses. This is no longer a
matter of doubt; the first microscopists in the world are agreed
upon it. We know that nerve fibres are used for the trans-
mission of sensation and force in all parts of the body, and may
infer that the millions of nerve fibres that compose the fibrous
portion of the brain have their uses. We may assume that each
one has its own use. This being the case, the presence of a great
number of fibres running between the central brain and the
surface of the large brain would imply much activity of that pan.
Fibres and cells are multiplied in regions much used, and these
increase brain mass in certain regions, and the skull—a living
structure —has to adapt itself to the form of the brain it enfolds.
When we see telegraph posts laden with a great number of
wires etween two centres of population we conclude that there is
much telegraphic communication
between those centres, and when
we see by size and form of brain
that there are a great number of
nerve fibres running to certain
parts we conclude that there is
much exercise of those parts.
The external senses communi-
cate with little inner brains, upon
which the outer brain is built.
These little brains in turn trans-
mit their impressions through
fibres, nerve-threads, mental tele-
graph wires, to the. cellular
structure of the large brain, where
impressions are transmuted into
thoughts, feelings, sentiments,
emotions, and lead to certain
decisions. The results of these
decisions are sent back to the
motor centres of the brain, and
FIG. 17.
from thence, by many channels, to the various muscles which
contract and expand, and produce actions appropriate to the
thought, feeling, etc., that sets them going. These various pro-
cesses, that take so many movements of the pen to describe, often
take place in the twinkling of an eye. Millions and millions must
be made in the course of a waking day, and even during sleep
automatic nerve movements by millions must be made, or there
would be no waking to this world’s life.
These two illustrations, then, give us some idea of the fibrous
structure of the brain, and of the vast amount of telegraphy that
goes on between centres and surfaces, and back again. They also
show us why mass of brain in certain parts indicate power in
certain directions.
54
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


We Listen to a Few Chords of Music. This is a very
simple act to all appearance, but a moment’s consideration will
show us how far it is from simple. A few air waves strike the
tympanium of the ear. Only a few waves, mind. Just the few
that are caught by the vestibule, which is an almost circular opening,
some three-sixteenths of an inch in diameter. The sound waves
actually strike the walls, ceilings, and floors quite as hard as they
strike the tympanium. If all the sound produced by the hum of a
blow-fly could be poured into the ear for a second that ear would
never hear another sound. The roar of a cannon would be silence
compared with the hum of the fly. These few sound waves make
the tympanium vibrate ; these vibrations are communicated by a
nice adjustment of little bones and muscles to an inner ear-drum,
where water becomes the conductor of sound vibrations. Here the
walls are lined with nerve-threads of varying lengths, the apparent
use of which is to catch the shorter or longer waves, produced by
deeper or shriller tones; another set of nerves carry these to a
central ganglion, where they become an impression. This
impression is sent along special fibres to where tune is a conscious
faculty, and selects the harmonious sounds, distinguishing between
them and discords.
Many steps have been purposely omitted in this description.
Nothing has been said of the action of the labyrinth in detecting
timbre, nor of the ear-drums in detecting loudness; nor has any-
thing been said of the communion between tune and other faculties
although such communion must exist—for one kind of music will
make us pray, another make us laugh, and so on through the
gamut of the faculties. If the one who listens to the chords of
music is also the player of them the action of brain and mind
becomes more complex still. The human brain is evidently the
most wondrous structure on earth. Its physical and psychical
activities present an awe-inspiring problem to the mind.
Phrenological Readings are not the Results of Groping
or feeling over the head. When the main distances from the
centre are ascertained the hand may be passed lightly over the
different regions to feel if there are any irregularities of form, not
in sharply-defined, lumpy protuberances, but in the rounding up
of various sub-regions. Brain activity can be felt by the touch.
A dull-brained man has a soft, leathery kind of scalp, in which the
fingers will sink a little; an active man, on the contrary, has thin
and fine skull coverings, drawn more tightly over the bone, making
the head hard to the touch.
A well-trained practitioner will frequently describe after a single
glance at the general contour of the head, and will only need to
take measurements and use his hands when he wishes to make a
very careful analysis.
The four heads built on this face give a grand lesson in Phre-
nology, and also show the folly of fingering about in order to find
out the main outlines of character. Little thickenings of the
skull: a slight developing and sharpening of phrenological
55
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


organs will not account
for such differences in
skull form as are here
depicted. The differences
in form are radical, and
so are the characters.
Evidently, it is intended
that we should be able to
detect brain forms by a
glance. If we could only
read men by a careful
manipulation most of the
rogues would get off scot-
free. To make the study
of human science popular
and useful we must show
how the main outlines
of character correspond
with, and can be ascer-
tained by, a study of the
main outlines of form.
Look again at Fig. 18.
The heads, though differ-
FIG. 18.
ing widely in shape, are about equally smooth. There are no bumps.
We have to study forms of head, not bumps. No. I—the1 —the thick, dark
line—is an outline of the head of Pope Alexander VI., of infamous
memory. What intellect he had was mostly cunning, of the low,
intriguing kind. He had great force and energy, and a vast
amount of knowledge of the secrets of most Italian families. He
had great wealth. All his powers were used to push his own
interests and those of the Borgia family. Selfish, vile, guilty of
about as many kinds of crime as any one man ever committed, he
presents a history that quite corresponds with the low brain in the
illustration. He died in 1508, poisoned, it is said, by mistake—
some wine prepared for one of his guests being handed to him.
Many horrible stories are told of him—they cannot be repeated
here. Geo. Combe sa_ys that his head is despicable in the eyes of a
phrenologist. It has one redeeming feature. The social region is
prominent He liked social gatherings, and fed well the guest
whom he meant to finish with the wine after dinner. He strove
hard to give to his son, Caesar, political power. Many of his
murders were committed with that aim in view He appears to
have been fonder still of Lucretia. These were his son and
daughter by a Roman lady, named Yanozza. They had several
other children, and were actually living together when Alexander
bribed and intrigued his way to the Popedom. Even his social feelings,
not being controlled by higher ones, failed to redeem his character.
The Thin, Continuous Line is a Profile of Zeno, a Grecian
philosopher, born about 355 b.c. He founded the school of Ston s
lived a very exemplary life, and was held in such honour that his
56
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


fellow-citizens gave him the key of their citadel. lie was a
remarkably thoughtful and consistent man, and, though of delicate
constitution, he presided over his school for 58 years, and lived to
be 98 His great aim was to teach people to reason rightly, and to
live virtuous lives. He struggled to arrest the decay that he saw
even then working at the root of Greek civilisation. Phreno-
logically considered, his reasoning faculties were remarkably strong,
and well supported by high moral qualities. He is much above Alex-
ander VI. in these regions, and is as much below him in the develop-
ment of the animal and basilar brain. The differences are so great that
no mere thickening of skull could account for a tenth part of them.
No. B (Fig. 18) —the thin, dotted line—is the finest form of the
four. It is the profile of Father Oberlin, Protestant pastor of the
Ban de la Roche. In 1767 he settled at Waldbach, and com-
menced his labours as pastor of the Ban, “He carried on with
the utmost zeal, discretion, and perseverance the arduous task
begun by his predecessor in that office, of civilising, humanising,
and Christianising the half-barbarous people of his district. Road-
making, planting of timber and fruit trees, agriculture, and various
manufacturing employments were introduced by his influence and
example. Opposition of ignorance and stupidity gave way before
the mild force of his teaching and deeds, and the waste became
fruitful, and the people industrious and instructed. He did all and
got all done religiously, embodying in his life the truth that ‘ work
is worship.’ His services were rewarded with the affection and
gratitude of his people, and also with honours of another kind—
the Cross of the Legion of Honour, and a gold medal of the Royal
Agricultural Society of Paris.”
He was a Christian philosopher and philanthropist of the highest
order. In the region of the religious feelings his brain rises higher
than that of Zeno, but in the reasoning qualities he is not so fully
marked as the ancient Greek.
The Fourth Head of this Series is that of Phillip 11. of Spain
—a man whose whole life was spent in opposing the spread of civil
and religious liberty. He was a tyrant and a bigot. He married
Queen Mary of England, but the air of England did not long agree
with him. His action caused the final revolt of the Netherlands.
The cruelties of the Church gave him a grim pleasure ; he attended
on one occasion an auto-da-fe, where forty heretics perished. He
was not vile in the same sense as Alexander VI.; the evil of his
character lay principally in desire for unlimited power over the
bodies and souls of men. He was a despot of the most tyrannical
order. Hence the towering crown; the head long backward, but
deficient in the regions of respect, benevolence, and intellect.
How different are these heads in form and size in various
directions, and how the differences harmonise with the known
differences in character and capacity.
The student who notes these things in his family and amongst
his friends soon begins to form clear conceptions of character, and
to know what kind of conduct to expect from this person or that.
57
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


Ho has no need to feel heads; he sees them, and notes their
greater excesses and deficiencies. Indeed, Phrenology would be of
little use to mankind if none but gropers could make use of it.
Generally speaking, persons who have to grope over heads for their
deductions are still very much in the dark as to phrenological truth.
When they have to grope in one sense they are groping in another.
FIG. 19.— PHRENOMETER.
FIG. 20.
CHAPTER VIII.
GEOMETRICAL PHRENOLOGY.
“ A measure to reach even unto you.”
This is a chapter introducing a great subject that cannot be
fully treated in a popular work.
The two illustrations (Figs. 19 and 20) are a front and a side view
of the Phrenometer, an instrument invented by the writer for
measuring brain depths from a common centre, a point midway
between the openings of the ears.
No. 1 (Figs. 19 and 20) is an arc of brass large enough to span
the largest human head, and wide enough to move freely from
back to front; 2, 2 are pivots capable of being pushed inward or
withdrawn to adapt the blunt points to ear-openings placed wider
or less apart, the circular plate (5) preventing the pivots from
entering too deeply into the vestibule of the ear; 3is a quadrant
screwed to the side of the arc to enable the operator to measure
the facial angle; and 4 is a sliding rod marked in inches and
tenths to give certainty in measuring. Its use enables the
operator to take the depths of brain along the mesial line and com-
58
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


pare them with those of a certain standard, the result of a long
series of observations on better class heads.
The Mode of Comparing a Head with the normal one is
illustrated by Figs. 21 to 26. The outlines dotted in these
figures are those of the subject under consideration as taken with
a strip of soft metal; the continuous outlines are those of the
normal head. The Phrenometer supplies the straight lines as
shown in all the six
figures. The central
point is represented
by A in all these
figures, but, owing to
Figures 22 and 25
being horizontal sec-
tions running round
about where a hatter
would fit a con-
formitor (see dotted
horizontal lines in 21
and 23), the point A
in those sections is
Fig. 21.—Elevated Section of Mesial above the same
Line of Head. P ol ? fc ln Sectlons 21
and 23. A m 22
would be at Bin 21. The relative positions are, however, ascer-
tained with a brief calculation, the basis of which must not burden
these pages.
Figs. 21, 22, and 23 are three sections of the same head. The
dotted line from 1 to 7 is from the occipital spine to the root of the
nose. It runs outside the normal
line in two places, but, with a few
exceptions, presents a good outline.
In the section showm in Fig. 22, F
is the front, and the dotted lines,
running mostly just inside the
normal line, gives a good outline
again. The same remark applies
to Fig. 23. It rarely happens that
a head coincides so nearly with the
standard; heads are generally un-
symmetrical and uneven in develop-
ment. The skulls of the most
active mental workers present the
greatest irregularity of form ; and
that is just what might be expected
on the phrenological hypothesis,
for active mental workers are
generally specialists, and developed
in one direction more than in any
other, and the brain form alters in
FIG. 22. —HAT SECTION.


the direction of its use. The great mechanician’s brain g™*
wider, the thinker’s longer, and so on. ihe difficulty which has
so far presented itself to the observer has been that of finding oi.t
which way the lengthening of the skull has come about, whether
by growth backward or forward. This question the Phrenometei
settles by measuring exactly the depth m all directions. It can
also register changes. Although the instrument has only been m
use since 1879 some re-measurements have already been made,
and the results have gone towards proving that brains are con-
tinually changing in form, and skulls changing with them.
The head shown in Figs. 24, 25, and 26 is very much wider and
lower than the one previously considered. The crown is low m
the regions of Self-Esteem, Firmness, Continuity, Veneration, and
Benevolence; the head bulges forward in the upper forehead, but
is sadly deficient in the central forehead. The owner of this head
would be Amorous, Selfish, Dogmatic, short of memory and
expressiveness, short of charity
and religious feeling, Cautious,
Secretive, but manifest plenty of
energy, and be a good business
manager and mechanical worker.
Sections 25 and 26 show the same
head running outside of the
normal lines in the sides and at
the back. A comparison of out-
lines 21 and 24 will prove highly
instructive to the student it ho
will remember that the portions
of outline that enclose spaces 1
to 7 are—(l) Domestic and
Social Feelings, (2) Love ofHome
_ „ -n and Continuity, (B) Self-Esteem
Fig. 2d.— Section over Firmness, (4) Veneration and
Benevolence, (5) Human Nature and Intuitive Intellect, (6)
Practical Intellect and
Memory, (7) the Ob-
serving Powers. It may
also be borne in mind
that deficiencies are
usually regional; that
a dip in any of these
directions is usually
accompanied by a cor-
responding lateral de-
ficiency.
Study Fig. 18 with
this New Light
thrown upon it, and it
will be seen that No. 3
in that illustration is
FIG. 24. —ELEVATION, No 2.


the one that would be most harmonious; that 1 would come far
below the normal line, and bulge out behind; that 2 would pass
outside in the region of the intellect; that 4 would be inside in the
intellectual region, and overweeningly large in that of Self-Esteem
and Firmness. It is also wise to study outlines of the thousands
of living heads seen in social and other gatherings, and, where
possible, to verify deductions from brain form by observations of
character as manifested in every-day life.
A Wise Student will Observe in Silence. Few characters
are more objectionable than those who are always talking about
head forms and facial signs; their presence is irritating to all
sensitive persons. They are generally ignorant, usually vulgar,
and when they talk they flatter or arouse anger, or both. They
frequently crown their misdoing by talking about “bumps,” thus
in a word proclaiming their lack of knowledge of, and lack of
respect for, the subject of which they talk so glibly.
FIG. 26. —OVER EARS, NO. 2.
FIG. 25. —HAT SECTION, NO. 2.
The Facial Angle, indicated by the Phrenometer, is a useful
adjunct in the study of Geometrical Phrenology. In Fig. 27 the
angle is 26°, and the head form, so far as the angle can indicate it.
a good one.
It is not safe to say of a man who has a large angle that he is
oad, and of one whose angle is normal or small that he is good.
All that may safely be said is that the animal propensities and
animal forces are strongly marked. Whether these forces are
likely to be properly directed can only be ascertained by a full
study of the whole brain. Joseph Cook, the Boston lecturer, says
that a man may have a tempest in his lower face if
he has a hurricane in the upper face. He is right. And
61
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


FIG. 27. — A GOOD FACIAL ANGLE.
Fig. 28. —A Weak Head.
their tombstones should be inscribed :
“ Here lies a man who did no good,
And had he lived he never would ;
Where he has gone, and how he fares,
Nobody knows and nobody cares.”
what is true of the
face is true of the
brain. The larger and
stronger the lower
brain the more efficient
the man; efficient
for good if the
controlling faculties
are strong, efficient for
evil if the passions and
impulses bolt like wild
horses carrying their
load to tain and the
grave. The lower
brain gives the steam,
the propelling power ;
the upper brain guides
and controls. Har-
mony between them
is most likely to be
found where the facial
angle itself is har-
monious.
In Fig. 28 the
angle is only 17
degrees. The open-
ing of the ear is
nearly opposite that
of the eye, and the
character is of the
good and weak
sort. Some men
are good because
they have not power
enough to be any-
thing else. They
are born tired, and
are indifferent speci-
mens of humanity.
They have thin,
squeaking voices,
and lack vir. Such
should try to culti-
vate energy, and to
be manly, lest on


Fig. 29 is that of a
man having too large
a facial angle. Here
there is basilar force
enough and too little
top brain. Such men
as these will yield to
every impulse and
passion, and, owing
to this lack of con-
trol, they become
murderers. There is
no such thing as a
murderous skull. No
one can say of this
man or that —“ You
will commit a mur-
der.” Nevertheless,
some men are so
prone to crime that
society is quite justi-
fied in taking pre-
FIG. 29. —A BAD ANGLE.
cautionary measures, and it would not be altogether impolitic to
take some criminals and treat them as moral idiots.
Such Men Lurch Along. They have the gaol roll in their walk;
their carriage is mean and skulking; they like to lurk around in
narrow, back streets; they smoke and sleep away the daylight
hours and assemble at street corners at night. Here they pour
forth from their foul mouths streams of obscenity and profanity,
together with tobacco smoke and expectoration, which they eject
upon any decently-dressed lady who may -be passing. They have
fashions of their own in dress. Boots with abnormally high heels;
bell-shaped pants ; frogged coats ; slouch hats ; and something red
and flaring round the neck. Would society lose much by taking
charge of a few hundred of these hyena-like evildoers and making
them work under forced conditions for the good of the State ? Are
they not law-breakers ? Gan we see a gang of half-a-dozen any
day who have not some gaol-birds amongst them ? Are not these
just the kind of people who make a police force a necessity ? Are
not burglars, pickpockets, spielers, thieves, and street robbers being
continually developed amongst these gangs ? Have they not a
physiognomy of their own by which they are identifiable any-
where ? See them where you will, and you find them with large
facial angles and with a marked disproportion between top brain
and basilar brain, The geometrical proportions of the brain, the
large facial angle, and the low position of the ears stamp them as
criminally inclined. They are frequently born with a strong bias
towards criminality, and their companions and surrounding are
such as make the most and worst of that bias. The children that
have the misfortune to be born amongst this class, and of this


parentage, ought to be treated as neglected children, and cared for
by the State, so that, perchance, early training may eradicate some
of the evil tendencies'born with them.
In these Two Ways we may Minimise Crime. First —Taking
charge of and boarding out amongst respectable people the children
of the criminal and pauper classes, that they may be brought up
to sobriety and industry. Second —Inflicting a life sentence upon
a man who has twice previously been convicted of serious crimes
against property and persons. Men who are likely to make a
certain use of their liberty as soon as they get it ought not again
and again to be turned loose upon society. They ought not to
have the opportunity of committing new crimes, nor that of pro-
creating their kind. Some criminals can be reformed ; others are
simply human wild beasts. Men who have studied Human
Science —Geometrical Phrenology included—can tell in a moment
the difference between the habitual criminal and the reformable
one. A man naturally good may be overtaken in a fault, and
receive punishment. Such a one will make use of his liberty, when
regained, to work out his salvation, while the ingrained criminal will
only look out for fresh opportunities of committing crime, and add
cunning to cunning, and violence to violence, in order to escape
detection and arrest. A capable Government Phrenologist would
sift these two classes from each other, and make prison life
profitable and beneficial to one class and strictly punitive to the
other.
Parents can Make Use of these Instructions. If a boy
has low ears and a large basilar brain they ought to repress
destructive tendencies and impulses, and to rule that boy with
great firmness, only giving liberty gradually, and restricting it
again if abused. Some children need such rule from the cradle.
Firmness in such cases is the only kindness possible. Such boys
regard any other kindness as weakness, and proceed to take
advantage of it. Give them an inch and they take an ell. Let
them out one evening and they will go every evening, and will
gravitate to the street-corner nurseries for criminals. Other boys
are just the reverse. They have thin necks, small lower faces, not
much brain about the ears; the facial angle is small, and the ears
are placed high. These boys are weak in propensity and impulse ;
they have to be taught to stand up for their rights, and sent to
play the rougher games that tend to develop basilar energies. The
Duke of Wellington knew something of human nature when he
said that Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton —the
fields where the otherwise sybaritish sons of England’s aristocracy
have to fight their own battles and to quit them like men in the
rough sports of that democratic schoolboy world.
There are many other phases of the geometry of Phrenology
that might claim more or less attention were this meant merely as
a manual for students. Here we have to deal with matters useful
to all readers, and so shall not show the methods adopted by
i-arioi>s investigators to find out the sizes of brains. Students mav
64
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


be referred to the works of Bain, Bastian, Buys, Carpenter, Hitzig,
Ecker, Ferrier, and others for fuller information on this subject.
The average measurements of heads ought to be generally
known, and something of brain weights may not be out of place in
a manual for the millions. The average measurement of a fully-
grown man’s head around its greatest circumference (see dotted
line Bin Fig. 21) is 22 inches. The measurements from tragos to
tragos,* over the head, from point A, same illustration, to the
similar point on the other side, are, along line 2, Fig. 21, 12 inches ;
8 ditto, 14 inches ; 4, inches; 5, 14 inches ; 6, inches;
7, 12 inches. These measurements can be taken with a common
tape. The writer uses a steel tape of the ordinary kind. A
deficiency or excess in any of these directions must be considered
in estimating native talent and disposition. The student, finding
such divergence from the normal standard, needs to note which
way it leaves the normal, and whether an excess is caused by
height or width.
Say No. 4 measurement is 15 inches. It may be caused by
excess of “ Cautiousness,” over which the tape passes, or by
extreme height of “ Firmness” and “ Conscience.” It may be
caused by a large facial angle and low ears. Deformity of skull
plates, congenital defects sometimes upset all modes of measure-
ment. These things, however, are exceptional, and very rare,
especially the latter; for few children survive whose skull plates
are seriously misshapen by the ordeal of birth. The measurements
here given refer to average cases. Flathead Indians crush the
skulls of infants by binding a board tightly on their heads.
Chinese mothers turn the toes of their female infants under their
feet. They produce deformities. We do not take as models the
feet of Chinese aristocrats nor the heads of Flathead Indians.
The Measurements taken by the Phrenometer (Figs. 19
and 20) find the actual depths of brain from centre to surface, and
are very useful. They, again, are illustrated in Fig. 21. Line 2
is usually 4.4 inches; line 8, 5 inches ; line 4, 5.4 inches ; line 5,
5 inches ; line 6, 4.7 inches ; line 7, 4.4 inches. A divergence in
any of these shows an actual deficiency or excess of organs lying
on the mesial line. The tape measurement along this line, from
root of nose to occiput, is, in normal heads, about the same as from
tragos to tragos.
Regarding capacity of skull and weight of brain authorities
differ, some making the average higher than others. They agree,
however, on one point—that of finding civilised brains larger and
heavier than savage ones. The average European brain (male) is
about 47 ounces. The German brain is a little heavier than the
Southern ones; and the Scottish brain, again, heavier than that of
the south of England. The average female brain is about four
ounces less than that of the male. This, as we shall shortly see,
does not of necessity confer upon men an intellectual advantage,
• The traerns ia the little mound in front of the opening of the ear The centre
of this mounii i- th« point A.
65
EOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


for generally women have less basilar brains than men, and are
weaker in the regions of appetite and passion.
Some investigators have tried to find a relationship between
mere skull capacity and intelligence. They have failed to do so.
Some great men have had very heavy brains; other great men
have had brains of average size; other men, again, with uncom-
monly large brains, have not been noted for special mental
capacity. This is just what a phrenologist would expect. Cuvier’s
brain weighed 64£ ounces; Abercrombie’s, 63 ounces; and a day
labourer, with no pretension to intelligence beyond the common,
leaves a brain heavier than either. In the two former cases the brain
was large in front and top —massively large in the whole frontal
region ; in the latter case the brain was large in the lower regions.
Size of Brain is an Important Factor; but, as previous
chapters have explained, it is only one factor. Bain says :—“ The
concomitance of size of nervous system with mental power
throughout the animal series is sufficiently admitted for the
purpose of our general argument.” The brains of idiots are
notably deficient in size, except in cases of water on the brain,
when the head is larger than common.
Dr. W. B. Carpenter, commenting on size of brain, says:—
“ There is a marked diversity in respect of size between the Brains
of different Eaces of men; those of the most civilised stocks,
whose powers have been cultivated and improved by Education
through a long series of generations being, for the most part, con-
siderably larger than those of Savage tribes, or of the least
advanced amongst our own peasantry. So far as can be judged
from the few cases which have furnished adequate materials for
the determination, the brains of those earliest races of men, which
(like the old ‘ flint-folk’) had made but a very slight advance in the
arts of life, were extremely small. . . . On the other hand,
those who have obtained most influence over the understandings
of others have generally been large-brained persons of strong
Intellectual and Volitional powers, whose Emotional tendencies
have been subordinated to their Eeason and Will, and who have
devoted their whole energy to the particular objects of their
pursuit.” Dr. Carpenter wrote the above, and did not know that
he was a phrenologist of first rank. Indeed, he was entirely
indifferent to what he supposed to be Phrenology, and at times
spoke against the science, of which he was, unconsciously, one of
the foremost teachers of his century.
CHAPTER IX.
STUDIES AND EXAMPLES.
“ In the soul a-e mauy faculties, of which reason is chief
What is a faculty ? An attribute or power of mind. What is
an organ ? A tool, by and through which the faculty manifests
itself. We have the faculty of seeing, and the eye is the tool used
in seeing. So with hearing and the rest. Our bodies are made to
66
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


respond to the spiritual from within, and to the material from
without. The brain, as head of the nervous system, is the special
home of the spirit, the ego, that retains identity while the material
structure is continually worn down and replaced. The brain is the
least durable of bodily structures; each thought or emotion wears
down some of the brain cells. In discharging their duty the cells
perish. Materialists say that the brain evolves mind; that the
brain retains impressions. Were that the case the brain would
need to be the most durable of structures instead of the least so.
The Man of Eighty Remembers being the Boy of five, and
yet he has worn out some hundreds of brains in the meantime.
He retains the scar resulting from the wound in babyhood. True ;
but who can think of all memories as brain-scars ? ' And, if so,
what property in matter transmits the scar to the new particles ?
Until Materialism makes its position more tenable we retain the
words faculty and organ —the tool-user and the tool used. Many
young phrenologists confuse the two, and say one when they mean
the other.
What constitutes a faculty ? (1) It is found in one animal and
not in another. (2) It varies in the sexes of the same species.
(3) It varies in proportion to other faculties in the same individual.
(4) It appears at an earlier or a later period of life than other
faculties. (5) It may act singly or rest while others work.
(6) It can be inherited in weaker or stronger degree. (7) It may
singly preserve its sanity or become deranged.
A Faculty is Related to Something it has to work upon,
and related to something it has to work with. The faculty of
flying implies a resisting medium—air to fly in, and a pair of
wings to fly with. The faculty of reasoning implies some subject
on which to reason, and a portion of brain substance—a definite set
of nerves and cells —to reason with. We may rest assured that
there is no more mixing of functions in the inner senses than in
the outer ones. When an org§,n is gone the function ceases just as
surely as the man’s sight departs when the eyes are destroyed.
So it comes that we infer the presence of a faculty when we see
its organ. The fin tells of swimming, the wing of flying, and the
forehead of knowing and of thinking. A grand old anatomist
wisely says of the brain:—“ This is the organ of the internal senses.”
The idiot (80) has not the
organs of reason; indeed, he
has not much brain of any
kind; is more helpless than his
four-footed neighbours. The
thinker (31) has these organs
in rich abundance, the great
upper forehead being a perfect
dome of thought. Such ex-
tremes are not met every day.
There are many gradations
between these two. By study-
30.—IDIOT.
31.—THINKER.
67
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


ing extremes, however, we learn to study means, and learn to dis-
tinguish between the average forehead and the slightly superior or
inferior one.
A large .forehead means intellect. But which part is largest ?
The forehead is a four-storey house. Which story is the widest,
fullest, deepest, most roomy ? (See Fig. 9.) The man uses most
the part most prominent.
Combe and Lavater were both students of Human Science;
both eminent writers —one on Phrenology, the other on
Physiognomy. Combe’s
studies were mostly philo-
sophical and theoretical.
His “ Constitution of Man”
has been translated into
several Continental lan-
guages, and has had a
phenomenal circulation
amongst English-speaking
peoples. It is a marvel o {
close reasoning. His works
on “ Education,” “ Moral
Philosophy,” “ Science and
Religion” are all highly
phil )sophical... They must
have emanated from a
philosophical mind —one
that would use most the
ipper stories of the fore-
tead. His teachings have
dso a highly moral ten-
dency, and must have been
written by a man whose
brain is high in the moral
region.
Lavacer’s work in this
field is widelv different from
FIG. 82.—LAVATER.
that of Combe. Lavater observes, idealises, moralises. His tone
is re’igious, poetical, brilliant. He rarely reasons. He almost
fails to generalise; his “Fragments” are never woven together by
general principles.
One man uses the perceptives, ideality, and the religious
emotions; the other uses the reasoning and intuitive brain an d
the moral sentiments.
Compare the Two Heads 10 and 82, and see how the phre-
nological contour agrees with their mode of work and of expression.
Lavater was always predicating character from form of face.
Combe but rarely did so from form of head. Indeed, Combe never
practised Phrenology as a profession ;he lectured on it as a science,
tending to simplify psychology and metaphysics. Lavater wanted
to see ; Combe to think. Lavater sought facts; Combe principles.
68
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


One observed; the other thought. The foreheads and features
correspond, and both agree with the lasting productions ol these
two great minds.
33. —PRIDE.
Look again at No. 9. The
aspiring sentiments are located
in the back part of the crown
of the head. In Illustrations
33 and 34 we have a contrast —
an excess and a deficiency ol
this region. The figures are
good ones, conveying three
lessons, if not four. First —
They present a sharp phre-
nological contrast, enabling
84.—HUMILITY.
readers to judge of their friends from this standpoint. Second
The physiognomy is true to Nature, an expression of contempt and
a sneer being visible on one face, and entirely absent on the other.
A sneering, contemptuous, proud look will make enemies anywhere
and everywhere. The face of 33 is hateful, and will stir up anger ,
that of 34 is respectful, devout, thoughtful, and humble. Third—
The attitude is true. In one stiff-necked defiance, with its head
thrown back, carried on high as if not deigning to look upon any-
thing beneath it; in the other the slight bend of philosophies I
humility—not an abasing of self so much as a tendency to charity
and recognition of the rights and virtues of others. A fourth
lesson may be deduced from the shallow front brain of one, and the
large reasoning organs of the other. The head inclines in
accordance with its form. It is easy to hold up a head that has no
weight in front, and very easy to toss an empty one. Indeed, the
head that settles a dispute with a toss is not weighted either with
brains or ideas.
35. —PERCEPTIVES
AND MEMORIES.
Here we have Another
Pair of Illustrations,
showing two more forms of
foreheads. In Fig. 35 the
two lower stories are the
leading ones the Per-
ceptive and Mnemonical
intellects lead. In the other
(36) the Reflective and
Intuitive are the most
prominent. The first ob-
serves, gathers knowledge,
36. —REFLECT VES
AMD INTUITIVE.
remembers; the second reasons, theorises, speculates, philosophises,
and deducts. The artist has not been careful about the physiognomy
Gallileo had not his ear quite so near the top of his head. .
Any Special Assemblage of Men and Women will furnish
a type of head and face. A gathering of medical men and
scientists does not look like a synod, a presbytery or a conference.
A trades’ association puts before us a style of head that diners


materially from the one that meets to see a dog fight or a
pugilistic encounter. The gang that gathers round a cockpit
would have some difficulty in persuading any sane person that
the object of their meeting was prayer, praise, or scientific
instruction.
Men with certain propensities will be attracted by certain per-
formances which they will enjoy or share, as the case may be.
High-brained people will not care for pugilistic and similar
encounters. Low-brained ones will not care for instructive
lectures, or for sermons that appeal to moral and religious faculties.
Each faculty seeks its own food. When high-brained men do fight
it is for liberty or some moral principle. They then become terrible
antagonists, for their whole moral nature adds its force to the
blow. For the finest assemblage of fighting faces belonging to
modern history see the bas-reliefs on the monument of the Franco-
Prussian war in Berlin. There are the men who led the con-
quering armies of Germany to Paris; and the faces are all the
strong Teutonic ones, with wide heads and large, firm chins.
Such men flock to battle ; their music is the roar of the cannon.
In the Rev. Be. Bond (87)
and in Sullivan, the American
pugilist (38), we have two distinct
types of men. The animal pro-
pensities and the selfish pro-
pensities (see Fig. 9) are very
prominent in Sullivan, and just
the reverse in Dr. Bond. In a
scale of 1 to 7 these would be
marked 3 to 4 in one, 6 to 7 in
the other. In this case the illus-
37. —BOND.
38.—SULLIVAN.
trations are in every sense true to life—in form of face, and even
in expression. They are, therefore, physiognomical studies as well
as phrenological ones. One face is kind, thoughtful, mild, intelli-
gent ; the other is stern, pitiless, selfish, brutal, and yet possessing
the tenacity and endurance of the bull-dog. A young maiden who
wants a kind and sympathetic husband will see that she never
encourages the addresses of a man who is unduly wide about the
ears, or whose ears are too low. Both of these signs of force and
cruelty exist in Sullivan.
The Rev. J. E. Channing furnishes a good example of high
intellectual capacity of the literary kind. The moral brain also is
high, wide, and rounded. He made his mark as a preacher and
writer. He ministered to one congregation for nearly forty years.
No man in Boston was more widely known or better liked.
Senator Sumner said of him:—“ No man has exerted, since his
time, so great an influence on his fellow men.” And Baron
Bunsen:—“ The influence of Channing on the Continent of
Europe is greater than that of any author, living or dead. If he be
not a prophet of God’s presence in humanity I know of none such.”
His writings are now translated into nearly every European
70
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


39.-J. E. CHANNING, D.D,


language. How well this corresponds with the fine, thoughtful
face, and the grand brain, depicted in Fig. 39.
The plan of putting in one man to represent the fullness of one
organ and another to represent the deficiency of the same is adopted
by many phrenological writers. It is not adopted A popular
grouping of organs suits this manual better, and will give the kind
of instruction most needed. The student who learns by glance of
eye to measure brain regions, and estimate men by the mode here
taught, will never become a groper of heads ; he will have a better
way of arriving at his conclusions. Channing might be placed as a
representative of Language, both written and spoken. The eye is
large, expressive, and is not cramped for room. It is a“ speaking eye.”
Illustration 40 —Arnold of Rugby—presents another example of
high moral brain. He, again, has the eye and features of the
scholar and writer. During his short reign at Rugby he did much
for the moral tone of young England. Unfortunately, he died
early of angina pectoris, a terrible affection of the heart.
He knew each boy in that great school, and studied his history
and character ; and by treating the boys as gentlemen he did
much towards making them into such. He abhorred falsehood,
and took it for granted that what a boy said was true, until the
lads, for very shame, told him the truth. “ I cannot tell a lie to
Mr. Arnold, for he believes me,” says a Rugby boy, who has since
become famous.
There are many local men well worthy of notice. The practical
philanthropist and well-known preacher whose picture forms
illustration 41 is one of these. He is not an eloquent man; he
does not try to take a leading political or social position; and,
thotagh both rational and studious, he does not claim notice either
as a scholar or a thinker. Yet he is one of the men of his time,
and works without ceasing for the benefit of destitute children, and
for elderly ladies whose means have failed them and who are no
longer able to earn their living.
The Rev. C. M. Cherbury is no dogmatist; he belongs to no
church organisation; he teaches no special formula nor creed. He
tells people to worship God in their own way; to obey the laws ;
to pay their way; to live honestly, sensibly, temperately; to be
good husbands and wives, sons and daughters, and to be loving
and forbearing. He is eminently practical, and is well understood
and much loved and respected by a large congregation and a
numerous circle of friends. ■ _
The Home of Hope for destitute children is supported entirely
by voluntary and unsolicited subscriptions. It lives by faith, and
flourishes ; succeeds in its good work by the same faith, and much
tangible work. The practical business brain of Mr. Cherbury so
managing it that nothing is frittered away. Fifteen pounds a year
for each child, paying board, residence, clothing, salaries, and
tuition. For his work as centre and circumference of this institu-
tion Mr. Cherbury has never received a farthing, and yet his labours
must have saved the State Purse thousands of pounds.
72
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


y a phrenological study note the wide head, indicating practical
sense, business ability, energy; the full top-brain, indicating the
moral and religious qualities ; the large lower forehead, telling of
perceptive and mnemonical intellect. Had this man gone into a
business he could have made a “pile;” possibly he is making
something better and more enduring.
Here we have another practical philanthropist—Forster, founder
of the Herald boys’ “ Try Excelsior Class.” (See Illustration 42).
This is a good face and head. The top-brain is wide and full both
at the crown and the forehead. The forehead tells of thought and
practical intellect; its squareness and width indicating mechanical
ability. The height of the front tells of benevolence, suavity,
imitation, and the combination of faculties that give tact, persua-
siveness, and ability to understand character and adapt proper
means in teaching and managing either boys or men. Mr. Forster’s
success has been phenomenal in two ways. In catching and train-
ing half-wild boys and making them into responsible and law-
abiding citizens, and in interesting capitalists, merchants, and
others sufficiently to cause much slackening of purse-strings, and
giving of goods and money for the benefit of these same boys.
He is cautious and sensitive naturally; would never think of
asking for a favour on his own account; still, on behalf of
his Herald boys and his Toorak Try Class he will beard any
financial lion in his den and use his persuasive powers to the
uttermost.
The width of brain about the ears tells of courage and business
capacity, and indeed Mr. Forster is remarkably courageous and
helpful. His institutions are managed with great economy, and
tie boys are taught to save their money and help themselves,
ihe real value of the work done by this unassuming and sensitive
man can scarcely be appreciated by his contemporaries. The face
is a firm one, but very sympathetic and expressive. A wood-cut
at best can only give a recognisable outline.
The Earl of Aberdeen (see Illustration 43) is a good Human
bcience study. The illustration here given is a fairly good one. It
shows the high brain and large upper forehead. The moral’ and
religious qualities are well represented. Nothing but harmonious
living and a standard of moral excellence can be expected
from a man having this kind of brain. Some time ago, in a
description sent to the Melbourne Hera Id, the writer said: “If
ever integrity and honour were stamped on a human face," they
are stamped on this one. A white and delicate face, but fine and
firm, not a weak though not one that tells of muscularity,
n or e\en of robust vitality ; fine featured, clear ; nothing murky
nor doubtful about it. Such a man would not blench if called upon
to face a hail of hurtling shot and shell; it is a face that would
confront anything in the discharge of duty.”
Look at the regions of brain in Fig. 9, and compare with this
head (43). Regions 1 and 2 are deficient; there is but little
animality and selfishness. Region 3 is fully marl ed ; so is 4.


The lower storeys
of the forehead are
not full (5 and 6).
No phrenologist
would expect the
Earl to shine as a
man of science.
All the upper re-
gions (7, 8,9, and
10) are very promi-
nent ; hence the
moral and intel-
lectual powers have
full sway in his
life. Our students
who note these pe-
culiarities of brain
form cannot fail
to become good
judges of the
general character,
even though they
never learn the
details of phreno-
-l og-
40. —ARNOLD OF RUGBY.
CHAPTER X.
FACTS ABOUT FACES.
Each one of us has got a face. That is fact the first. Each
face reveals something of the soul that lies behind it. Fact the
second. Each face records the history of its owner; tells of
growth upward or downward. Fact the third, and a very solemn
one to ponder over. Facts about faces are so numerous that we
cannot count them; each new face presents some new problem for
solution. There are long faces and short ones; broad faces and
narrow ones ; fat faces and lean ones ; coarse faces and fine ones ,
pale faces and ruddy ones; healthy faces and sickly ones. Each
reader can extend this list as far as he or she likes.
Said a young man in the writer’s office the other day—“ People
tell me that I have got an honest face; is that so ?” The answer
be received was—“ Your face has never been honest since you have
been able to steal; you have been a thief and a knave all your
li‘e, and have never been held back from sin by any moral con-
sideration. Your face is hard —hard as brass; you can lie to
people and look them right in the eyes; but as lor honesty of face,
there are no traces of honesty or innocence about it. And your
head matches vour face. It is about the worst that ever came


41.—REV. C. M. CHERBURY.


under my notice, either amongst free men or the prisoners in the
numerous gaols I have visited.” .
He promised to amend his ways and go to sea for a time, but did
not keep that promise ; for he was soon arrested for his old crime
—burglary —and the list of previous convictions being a long one,
he was sent to Pentridge for several years.
An honest face has clear, well-opened eyes ; and yet such eyes
are frequently seen in the faces of Cats, owls, and tigers
have eyes clear enough ; but where is their honesty ? It cannot
be said of any feature that anything about it is a sure sign of
knavery or honesty. A knave is selfish, and his head and face
will incline to the form of selfish animals. A broad face and low,
broad head indicate selfishness, and when the rein is given to this
cast of mind it becomes greedy enough to covet the possessions of
others. And yet there are many broad-headed men who are
honest; they are wise enough to see that honesty pays best.
The clerks and salesmen that form a great proportion of our gaol
population are not broad-headed. Acquisitiveness is not large
amongst them. They have not, as a rule, been careful enough to
live inside their incomes; they have drunk, gambled, speculated,
got into difficulties, and taken sums of money entrusted to them
intending to get out of present difficulties, win back their losses, and
restore. °Alas! they have not acquiring power enough to gain or
retain, and the stolen money goes after the rest and more follows,
until the end comes. General weakness of character is more to
blame in many cases than selfishness or innate dishonesty. The
real knaves prey upon these fools until they are picked clean and
sent to gaol. Gaols, as at present constituted, are scarcely the
places for these men. If they were put to paid work, and charged
for their keep, and allowed to pay off their debt by their labour, it
might be bettei»for society : punishment and restitution would then
go hand in hand. . . ,
The honest face is longer than its width ; its eyes are not ot the
hard, staring sort; it is firm and calm ; is fuller in the upper
regions than in the lower and central ones. It is sometimes convex
generally straight, rarely concave. A concave face is
almost invariably a mean one. Selfishness and Miserliness are
connected with the sunken eye, the in-drawn mouth, the thin
cheeks and other forms of concavity. A concave face always looks
hungry. .
The virtues and vices as shown in the face are indicated quite as
much by expression as by form. Mud in the character puts mud
into the complexion, and especially into the eye. Shame blackens
the face. Surprise or pleasure causes a alight Slackening of the
nerves that control the arterial circulation - result, a rush of red
blood and a rosy blush. Shame causes a tightening of the nerves
that control the venous circulation, and the result is ». purplish dark
blush, accompanied by self-consciousness, heat, and partial asphyxia.
This blush fades away slowly, and is painful. Let selfish feeling
preponderate and evil desires have sway in our inner consciousness


and the face will grow thick, turgid, and impure. Waat we do in
the inner closets of our being shows itself from the housetops of
our faces.
People speak of the “ Human Face Divine.” They easily utter
t,he words, but do they understand the meaning ? It is the face as
Ood meant it to be : The face made in His Image and Likeness,
the perfected face free from sin-clouds, never drawn by pain, free
from lines cut by sorrow and care. It is a face illumined by a light
from beyond sun and sky, a light that will remain bright when the
sun has become a mass of cold slag, the dead centre of a dead
planetary system. In some faces we see patches of this light even
now ; a c’ear soul shines from the eyes and renders the features
mobile and sympathetic. Under the rush of our highest feelings
and emotions our faces now and then become partly transfigured
and our eyes emit light. The generous action and unselfish play of
■our highest faculties, reasoning, intuitive, and moral transform us;
we be -ome angels of light.
There are men and
women who can see the
play of magnetic lights
about the heads and faces
of people in the supreme
moments of mental ac-
tivity. The halo placed
around the heads of saints
’s an exaggeration of these
lights, but the idea of the
halo is based upon actual
observation. Storms of
unman passion will mani-
fest themselves by their
own lurid and baleful
lights issuing from basilar
•egions of the brain and
from the lower face. The
Divine human face is one
n which there is a full
ncarnation of divinity.
Such a face must be sur-
nounted with a full-orbed
brain, it must have be-
hind it a sense of perfect
rightness of life, perfect
freedom from sense of sin
and shame ; it must be
happy and full of faith and
confidence; such a face
reveals a soul in har-
mony with itself and
with all the forces of the
42 .—FORSTER, THE BOYS' FRIEND.


universe, call them by what name we will. Of such a face Dante
says:—
“ She smiled so joyously
That God seemed in her countenance to rejoice.”
Says Joseph Cook “ But what is to be said of the light that
beams from the forehead, and from the cheeks, and seems to be
capable of beaming from the whole exterior of our mysterious
form ? That radiance does beam from the forehead ;it does beam
from the cheeks; and why might it not, if this capacity to shine
were once put into full action, beam from the whole man ?” And
again :—“ It is uncontrovertible that a very peculiar, commanding
light is brought into the face by the activity of the upper faculties
in man. We are to explain this light and its effects by studying
man as an organic multiplex. The light is there, and you know it
is there. We see it. It is a physical fact.” Evidently Joseph
Cook has seen this light; the writer has observed it from his boy-
hood. He has seen it playing about the brows of orators ;be has
frequently seen it in the faces of good women ;an elderly Quaker
lady got up to address a meeting to which he was taken when a
boy with a face shining as if it had been fine porcelain with a
brilliant lamp inside it.
46.—ABERDEEN.
Science does not yet
explain this Divine
light in die face ; there
are many eyes that do
no': see it and many—
„oo many —faces so
opaoue and selfish that
were any light be
hind them it could
not struggle through.
Enough, however, has
been seen to convince
us that the transfigur-
ing and illuminating o
faces and bodies men-
tioned in our Scrip-
tures is a mere state-
ment of observed facts.
A lesson on faces is
of necessity a moral
lesson. It is an incen-
tive to virtuous action
to know that pure
thoughts and good ac-
tions stamp their im-
press upon the face.
We are restrained from
vice when we know
that each sin writes


its marie. A weak back shows itself in the face; so does a wea'i
stomach, liver, heart, or lungs. And a lack of moral backbone is
jnst as visible as the rest. Study the frontispiece., and its
explanation; or even the great divisions marked in type.
These tell their story, and so far as they go they have been
carefully verified by long observation. Let a man lose
“Health,” “Vitality,” “Digestion,” “ Eepose,” and his face falls
in at the points indicated ; let him regain these qualities, and the
face fills out again ; and so with other qualities. There is much
in a face. Some complain that the writer’s facial maps have too
many figures upon them ; the truth is there are not sufficient. A
physiognomist must know ten times as much as a facial map can
show ; for there are wrinkles, colours, slight movements and
changes by the thousand that have to be observed and read.
When all is done, the greatest and last lesson the student of human
science can learn is the cultivation of virtue. Knowledge gives
power and expands the brow : Will elevates the crown and makes
the face a tower of strength; Affections play in the eyes and
mobilise the mouth and lips ; Emotions have each their facial
pole ; but the Virtues, the result of moral and religious self-culture,
shine above all, and their light rules all lesser lights in the
countenance.
As a supplement to this chapter read “ Physiognomy Made
Easy,” by the same author.
HOW WE REVEAL OURSELVES.
As we walk and work; as we pass along the streets; as we
smile and laugh; as we speak, shake hands, use the tools of our
various trades; even as we eat and sleep, we reveal our innermost
selves. We cannot help this. A man may school his face, but his
hands will speak for him. He may keep his hands in his pockets,
then his whole body will reveal him.
Some People Walk with a Tetter; they go up and down
several inches with each step. These have majiy ups and downs
in life. They are buoyant and soaring to-day—all their geese are
coming out swans ; to-morrow all is over—life is not worth living.
Other people waddle as they walk. These have something of the
duck in them. They are social and domestic; lovers of home;
they care for things real and tangible; plenty to eat, warm
clothing, good surroundings; they do not aspire; their charities
begin at home, and end there. If they have souls they are scarce
conscious of such possessions; they live in the day and for the
day, and their bodies are more important than their minds.
Some go Pum, Pum, with a heavy foot thrown upon the floor,
the weight of foot frequently disproportionate to size of body—a
boy of twelve with this walk making more noise and commotion
than a twelve-stone man. Persons having this kind of walk may
79
HOW TO SEAD MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


be straightforward and honest; they have generally nothing to
conceal. Usually they are good workers, and, in their blunt way,
kindly and generous. But they are devoid of tact, and, without
evil intention, frequently hurt the tender susceptibilities of then
neighbours. It is a walk that indicates ignorance and lack of
physical and mental training and culture.
Some Walk Poddle, Pod, Poddle, Pod. These are by nature
small-minded and selfish people. They go by little steps along
their own way, treading mincingly, keeping out of the mire.
There is nothing broad, free, or generous about the development of
a poddling walker. He makes a fuss about nothing, is easily
angered, will make the slightest action of yours into an excuse for
urging claims, withdrawing favours, etc.; he is a little-souled
autocrat. He does not walk on the earth as if he had a right to
be there; he balances on his feet, and they carry him to and fro,
but V>e does not take hold of the world with them.
Many just Wriggle Along ; there is no free movement of
their limbs. Perhaps this is sometimes caused in part by the
“ tie-backs” invented by dressmakers ; but it is frequently natural,
for there are men who wriggle and knock their knees and heels
together, and wear out their pants at the ankles. These, too, are
not worthy of unlimited confidence. Ten to one you will find a
moral wriggle—an evasive and procrastinating nature, and general
meanness of character.
There are those who shuffle along. Their feet are not lifted clear
from the ground. Every third or fourth step the foot catches the
path, and is pushed forward. Such are apt to stumble in more
senses than one They lack aspiration; they are of the earth
earthy. A high-brained, clear-faced person never walks with a shuffle.
Some Throw Out Their Legs before them, and drop on their
heels. These have always to lift the body forward with the leg
that is left behind. Here is a waste of force to begin with; be
sure it is followed up by more waste. Persons who move this way
take action before they are ready. They are leggy, sprawling
people, who are very apt to “put their foot in it;” to get to where
they have no business to be ; to act incautiously ; to grasp more
than they can hold.
The opposite type are the cautious men, who carry the body well
forward, its whole weight being on the leg that is foremost. These
see just where they will place the next foot before they bring it
forward. As their walk, so their actions. They look well to the
front and all round. When they cannot see their way they feel it.
They are prudent men, conservative, saving in money matters,
reserved in speech
Each Set of Faculties Has Its Own Walk. Ambition
turns the toes slightly outward, and gives a free, swinging move-
ment to the limbs, and a high carriage to the head. Little, flint-
skinning, penny-wise, peddling people turn the toes inward, and wear
off the inner part of the boot heel the first. More generous natures
throw their weight outward, and wear off the outer side of the boot.


Some phases of Approbativeness give a sirutt to the walk.
Vanity throws the shoulders back, and displays linen and
jewellery. A vain man walks as if he had some effect to produce;
he is self-conscious, and the eyes of the world are upon him. His
step is short, and there is a kind of bounce in it. His very walk
irritates his neighbours, and makes them inclined to take him
down a peg. Self-Esteem throws the head back and the chin up.
Large Self-Esteem might tumble over a wheelbarrow. Benevolence
and the religious feelings throw the head forward, the neck and
shoulders going with it; while the cogitating faculties throw the
head forward, leaving the body erect. The favourite attitude of
Napoleon, when planning his strategies, was standing with body
erect and head thrown sideway and forward. He was once
betrayed by his attitude at a masked ball.
The firm man, especially if he has a due share of conscience and
dignity, walks erect, with an easy stride. His foot comes to the
ground all at once, the weight falling along the central line of the
foot—neither inside nor outside, neither on heel nor toe. The
movement of the leg is not of the hip, knee, or ankle specially, but
is evenly distributed along the limb. A person with this walk can
go a long way without much fatigue. The easiest walk goes with
the most useful character.
The Governor of Auckland Gaol, some years ago, asked the
writer what kind of crime this or the other man would be likely to
commit. The answers in every instance proved satisfactory.
“ Can you tell anything of a man without seeing his face ?” asked the
governor. “In many instances, yes,” answered the writer. “ What
is this man in for?” The man alluded to was about thirty paces ahead,
“Most likely for wife-beating, or crimes of violence.” “Eight,”
answered the governor; “he has been here twice for murderous
assaults, and even here he is a most irritable and dangerous man.”
The answer in this case was arrived at by study of form, back
view, and especially by the legs and the walk. How does a tiger
walk ? It puts its foot down gently, and lifts it with a twitch
inward that would throw mud upon the other leg if walking in
mud. It is narrow about the hips, and twitches its posterior from
side to side with each step. The narrowness, the movement of
the posterior, the twitch of the feet were all perceptible in this
man ; hence the deduction. Hot-tempered people may be known
by the way they attach mud to their pants and underclothing.
A Gliding Walk reveals a secretive, sly nature. The person
who moves thus is much more likely to surprise your secret than
to reveal his own. American Indians and Asiatic Thugs have this
walk. It is also the walk of carnivorous animals. It is a kind of
stealing along on the balls of the feet. For this purpose many
animals have padded feet. The subject of walking is a very wide
one, and much may be learned by studying it. A writer in
Cassell'B Magazine contributes a brief article on “Characters of
Feet” so appropriate, and having in it so much truth, that it ; s
well worth quoting in full:—-


“ The use of feet is more characteristic than the feet themselves.
Of course there is some character even in the shape. There is the
common and careless flat foot, and the neat foot, and the vain
foot, and the quick foot. In Herrick’s old poem the whole portrait
of a dainty, white-slippered girl is suggested by the words—
Like mice, beneath her petticoat,
Her little feet went in and out.
“ But the distinctions of character are not seen really in the
feet themselves, but in what their owner does with them. Some-
times it is significant
that their owner does not
know what to do with
them. He is vulgarly,
defiantly self-sufficient,
and despises ceremony,
so when he smokes a
cigar he puts his feet on
the mantelpiece, out of
the way. Or he is a
country bumpkin, pain-
fully self-conscious, so he
stands on one foot, and
THE FOP.
then on the other, and shifts them about, perplexed what to do with
them, as ill-bred folks, when they sit idle and sociable, are per-
plexed by possessing a pair of hands. Oh the contrary, the fop—
whose feet are clad without spot or spec, and regardless of
expense —knows very well what to do with them; they are part of
an exhibition which is his constant care. In general, it is a sign of
vanity to thrust forward habitually a neat foot when one is at rest.
A conceited man nurses a leg and admires a foot, which he
twitches and twirls beneath his delighted eyes—quite uncon-
sciously, and in a different manner from the fop; for the vain man
thinks of the effect produced upon other people, but the conceited
man is satisfied with himself, without any regard to the world of
ordinary mortals who may chance to be observing him.
“Very different is the
generous mind of the philan-
thropist, who thinks con-
stantly of the rest of the
world, and not of himself.
There is nothing cramped
about any of his ideas or of
his possessions. He forgets
such small matters as fashion
and details of appearance.
Except on state occasions,
he considers nearness to be
a hindrance; everything
PHILANTHROIC.
about him is large—from his benevolent schemes down to his
well-worn shoes.


“ His stand is not alert, but patient, well set on the ground ; 'he
is ready and steady; he waits to give what he can, and to do what
he can, and, while he thinks of weighty matters, personal details
are forgotten. He may walk flat-footed in old shoes ; insteps and
HOBNAILS.
boots go more contentedly.
heels are infinitely beneath
his consideration. So his foot
is not of the type that the
dancing-master believes to be
the one thing necessary for a
gentleman; but he has al-
ready flattened injustice under
his feet, and the horror of
the dancing-master can never
reach his ears.
“ This philanthropic man
has done a great deal to
widen and smooth life’s roads
for crowds of feet of another
type. On the roads he has
improved the hob-nailed
“They (the ‘hobnails’) are strong, and rather defiant; for
instance, they have a defiant way of turning up. They stand
straight together, just as their owners as a class stand shoulder to
shoulder. Their size and
weight are suggestive of
possible bad kicks; but
their bulk and hard-
worn bend are also sug-
gestive of work done,
and the country could
not thrive, nor the com-
munity exist, without
the feet that wear hob-
nailed shoes.
“ The firm foot is the
ordinary type in men.
A firm walk is a sign of
self-control as well as of
FIRM.
power. WTen the shoe thickens so obstinately that the foot cannot
bend it, and when the walker does not care what noise he makes,
the firmness and power are developing to a degree that may incon-
venience weaker or more sensitive folk.
“ The weak foot is very common. The stand suggests a knock-
kneed body and a mind not strong enough to make the best of life
—one might almost say, altogether, a knock-kneed character that
is always stepping crooked and going its way with an uncertain
gait.
“This is not to be confounded with the weak walk of the
man who is always in a hurry and absent-minded, because he


is hurrying up some plans of future work. The hurrying walk
is apt to he weak, but it does not betoken a weak character.
On the contrary, hurry-
ing feet, whether they
walk firmly or irregu-
larly, are always a sign
of strong character. The
weak-footed hurry often
belongs to the man whose
work is mental; the
hurrying man whose call-
ing demands physical
activity is more likely to
be firm, as well as brisk.
“An indolent' walk is
frequently a sign of
WEAK.
empty mind and weak character. A gliding, pausing, foot-bending,
stealthy gait betrays finesse, or strategy, or calculation, or cunning,
or—as the last degree—the sneak.
“ In conclusion, it is remarkable that modern habits of dress
have altered the shape of the foot.
The feet of savages are mostly
flat. The heel of the shoe seems
to have formed the instep. Of
course, the arch is over-developed,
and the foot destroyed, by the too
high heel—against which the
doctors have long protested.
Again, in the antique the front of
the foot is loose and broad, and
the great toe parts from the others
with a division as decided (though,
of course, not as broad) as the
parting of the thumb from the
fingers of the hand,. This division
was used for the strap of the
sandal. If we take the antique for
our type of beauty, a pointed shoe
THE SNEAK.
is utterly unnatural. Very rare is the fine form of a foot that has
kept straight on the inner side not bent by efforts to be cramped
to a point. Perhaps this straight foot that has never been distorted
ought to be taken as a sign of common sense; for, if one judges
rightly, the distortion caused by a craze for pointed toes is as
bad in kind though not in degi c- —as the malformation of the
foot which Chinese ladies allow their children to suffer in infancy,
so that they may grow up to have a proper Chinese deportment—
supported by a maid, or a stick, or a friendly wall.”


CHAPTER XI.
HANDS.
The hand has always been more or less studied as a revealer of
character. Fresh impetus has of late been given to this study by
some French and English writers. These, however, seem to follow
each other’s lead rather than to observe for themselves. For
twenty years your writer has closely studied hands ; each client—
male or female, young or old—has to present the back of the hand
for inspection.
Long_ Study has Brought to Light .many things not men-
tioned in any of the manuals. Health, temperament, breed,
relative proportions of body, warmth or coldness of affections,
predisposition to certain diseases, general form of brain, and
talents in this or that direction, are easily discovered in the hand.
For many years the writer has been in the habit of giving public
descriptions of the main outlines ot character of persons by a study
of the form of hand alone, the rest of the body being hidden,
several subjects being put behind a screen in the writer’s
absence.
The Great Principle that Underlies the study of hands
is homogeneity. What the body is the hand is. Is the body
short and stout ? The hand will not be long and slim. Is the
wrist thick ? The neck will probably be thick in proportion.
Are the fingers long ? Is the palm small ? Then the limbs are
long and the trunk relatively small. But these items of form are
nothing compared to what the hand reveals. It is not the writer’s
intention to more than outline the subject in this brief chapter.
Illustrations are being gradually acquired for an original work
upon Hands, in which all the writer’s experience will be
embodied for the benefit of the general public. Palmistry, or
Chiromancy, may tell something of our past or our future;
but, if so, the language in which it is uttered must be vague
and difficult, for a dozen Palmists give you a dozen different
fortunes.
Chirognomy : Studying Hands by form—looking at the back
rather than the front —is capable of being developed into a science
that can lend valuable aid to the phrenologist and physiognomist.
The hand has more character in it than all the organs of the body
put together, except the face and head. Parisian glovemakers
produce a special glove for the Yankee—not for the American—
for the lean, bony, wiry, active, nasal-speaking production of some
eastern States. The gloves for these men have long fingers and
small palms, and if we compare hands and bodies we find that, as
the hand runs to fingers, the body runs to limbs. The body has
but little trunk, the hand but little palm. Catarrh is a common
complaint; pulmonary diseases and dyspepsia carry off more
than half the community.
The Dutch are the opposite of the Yankees. Dry cold and dry


heat produces the lean, wrinkled, and active type. The Dutchman
lives below sea level in his Hollowland; he has plenty of rain and
a moist air; he stays at home and minds his business. He grows
a la-ge trunk and thick, short limbs; he has plenty of abdominal
viscera; can eat plenty, drink plenty, and digest his food; he can
sit down without thinking about a cushion; and, if we look at his
hands, we find the,palms thick and large, and the fingers relatively
rounded and short.
By such Comparisons we Learn how to study form and
character by form of hand. The lean, knotty, deeply cleft, long-
fingered hand is that of a lean, wiry, and active man ; while the
thick, short-fingered, Dutch hand is that of the plodding, home-
loving, sleepjr, but shrewd Hollander. The short, thick hand is
conservative, selfish, averse to travel and change. Hence the
Dutch concentrate and give us a greater population to the square
mile than is found in any other part of Europe. Th 6 Yankee hand
is radical, frequently liberal, fond of travel and adventure, will
migrate and spread, and cover the earth with gaudy-looking clocks,
wooden nutmegs, pine hams, and gimcrack novelties. The Dutch-
man remembers the past and hopes for the future. The Yankee
has no past and no future; he is as sharp as a needle; he looks
well about him, and lives for to-day. Some writers on the hand
make out that the knuckley hand is philosophical; if so, how is it
that the Dutchman is so much more philosophical than the Yankee ?
A knuckley, bony hand is that of the Motive (Osseous) tempera-
ment. and is much more likely to be the hand of a worker than a
thinker.
A Soft Hand, with
Small fingers and
thumbs indicates a
weak mind and a
character that can be
influenced in any direc-
tion. If, in addition,
the hand is short and
podgy, the owner of
the hand will probably
be sensual and fond of
good living.
50. —MOTIVE HAND.
Firm and fibrous _ fingers, with the knuckle lines distinctly
marked, belong to decided, active, and energetic characters, to men
and women who know their own minds and live their own lives.
hen, in such instances, the thumb is large, the will power and
intellect are relatively stronger. There is a recognition of the
thumb as a sign of controlling power in the words “ under my
thumb.”
A firm, cool, well-formed hand, a good hand for cooking and
making butter and confectionery, tells of efficiency and longevity ■
a moist, clammy hand, too hot or too cold, has the opposite stor^
86
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


to tell. Young men and women selecting partners in life will do
well in noting each other’s hands. There are hands so positively
unhealthy that we shrink from their touch; they remind us of
reptiles; the exhalation from the palms have a foul odour. The
idea of eating food prepared and handled by such hands is disgust-
ing. It is dreadful to think of being linked in matrimony to the
owner of hands of this kind.
Anyone who has a pair of fishy or reptillian hands ought to
attend to medical and hygienic treatment until improvement in
general health makes the hands normal again. The unfortunates
in whom this condition is chronic ought to touch no food except
what they eat, and ought not to think of married life.
The Things that First Demand Attention in the study of
hands are size, proportion of parts, hardness or softness, quality,
flexibility. Some hands are like claws, and the last joints scarcely
bend ; intelligence and mental quickness ought not to be expected
from such hands. They are useful mostly in productive labour.
The axe and the plough are their tools ; theirs is frequently the
hand of the motive temperaments, the Osseous and Muscular (see
Illustration 50). The rounded
hands, full and fleshy, with
thick and large palms, belong to
the vital temperaments. Vascu-
lar and Abdominal. When we
see such hands we connect them
with the temperament to which
they belong, and know what to
expect from them. If we
expect them to do much hard
51.—VITAL HAND.
work we shall meet with disappointment.
Fig. 51 presents the fleshy hand of the vital temperaments. If
it is thick and wide in the muscular portions of the back of the
hand the chest and shoulders will be large, and the vascular
temperament the leading one ; if the fleshiness is in the thumb,
balls and the palms, and between the joints of the fingers, the
abdominal region predominates. From a careful study of the
hand the proportions of the body can generally be estimated.
A large hand is sometimes found
attached to a small body, and a
small hand to a large body ; these
are rare cases. In the former
case there has been some arrest of
levelopment; the small man is a
member of a large-sized family,
only he did not grow. When the
hand is small in proportion to the
body, the owner of the hand is
52.—MENTAL HAND.
generally a member of a degenerating family. A large hand is
more useful than a small one, and manifests more character and
87
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


power; no one need be proud of a small hand. One might as well
be proud of a small head.
Fig. 52 is the delicately-formed hand of the mental temperament.
It is thin, light, active ; generally plastic and artistic; sometimes,
however, the fingers are thin and pointed. The owner of the
hand is a poetical day-dreamer rather than a worker. When this
hand is firm and clearly cut, when it is highly flexible, and yet
strong for its size, it is the hand of a very capable person—a leader
in society and a useful worker in some capacity. We might be
justified in thinking that the smallest hands would do the finest
work. This is contrary to experience ; for large hands perform
the most delicate manipulations in all trades. Small hands break
what large hands make. Delicate machinery and fragile pottery,
and all other things liable to be crushed, damaged, put out of
order, and broken, are safer in large hands than small ones. A
stumpy-fingered, undeveloped hand is frequently found connected
with a destructive and careless nature.
There is no Part of the Hand that does not tell something
of character. A study of thumbs is almost as good as a study of
heads. The thumb is placed in opposition to all the fingers.
Human beings are the only owners of real thumbs. The monkey
hooks on with its hand; it cannot grasp. The hand is an ultimate
of the hoof, a final development of the claw. The monkey’s
hand has fairly good fingers, but they are not independent of each
other. Indeed, in human beings the fingers have to be trained to
act independently of each other—as in manipulating strings and
keys of musical instruments, for instance.
The thumb is naturally independent; we can close the hand
without bending the thumb even if we have had no manual train-
ing. A little thumb goes with a poor intellect and weak character;
a large and well-formed one tells of power. Constructive workers
have thumbs of a certain shape; so have artists, and so, too,
literary men. By the nails, and especially the thumb nails, the
shape of brain may be determined ; indeed, the study of the hand
requires a volume of its own; a chapter in a popular manual can
only introduce it.
“It is a profound study. No instrument devised by man com-
pares with it for completion. It is a hammer, a vyce, a forceps, a
hook, a spring, a weight; it pushes, draws in, and the fingers alone
contains elements of chisels, gouges, and all the tools a sculptor
requires in modelling. From the elbow to the digital extremities
its movemefits are produced by nearly fifty muscles. So compli-
cated is the cordage of a human hand that an expert anatomist can
hardly keep in remembrance its intricate mechanism. With it all
the emotions of the mind can be both manifested and intensified.
How would a Frenchman talk without his hand ? The hand is the
prime minister of the brain; it is the soul’s agent in the accom-
plishment of its designs; it is a wonder of wonders.”— Anon.


CHAPTER XII.
VOICE AND LAUGHTER.
The majority of living creatures produce some kind of tone;
some sound by which they are recognised.
“The grand eternal bars in nature’s anthem,” is sung by the
ocean on many shores, and the other parts of the music are not
wanting. All nature is more or less vocal. “ Mute as a fish,” we
say sometimes ; are we sure that fishes are mute ? Water conveys
sound more rapidly than air; possibly the fish, mute in air, can
easily enough make itself heard in water. Generally speaking, a
creature that produces a sound tells something of its character
thereby. The roar of the lion differs widely from the low of the
heifer ; the howl of the wolf is a more terrible sound than the bleat
of the lamb; so is the hoarse cry of the hawk compared with the
cluck of the hen. The laughter of the hyena suggests at once an
untamable nature. The sharp hum of a hive of angry bees is a
note of warning to some ears. The wasp, mosquito, and gadfly
have unattractive voices, and so has the serpent. We seek the
companionship of some of the charming members of the feathered
tribe solely on account of their vocal powers, either as singers or
imitators of speech.
A voice is a good guide to character. When the voice is strong
there is some other kind of power behind it. When the voice is
clear there is some other kind ol clearness behind it. Says
Socrates to a boy whom his mother had taken that the philosopher
should estimate his character—“ Speak, my son, that I may see
thee.”
While a man is silent he may be a wise man or a fool, but when
he speaks he soon tells which he is. This, too, not so much by
what he says as by the way he speaks, and the sound of his voice.
Some voices dwell on the “ S” so much that the speech is a con-
tinual ses-es-es-z. Scandal-mongers and economisers of truth
frequently have this hissing voice. Some dwell on the “R,” and
their speech r-r-rar. These are combative voices, fond of argu-
ment, rough, rugged, ready for a dispute at short notice, willing
to wrangle or to fight.
There are Three Qualities About a Voice ; pitch, timbre,
and loudness. In human beings the average pitch of the voice
corresponds with the height of the brain; the timbre with the
affectional and emotional character; the loudness or fulness with
the physical force. The boy’s voice is shrill and hard until the
advent of manhood, when the voice breaks, and afterwards
becomes deeper and fuller, owing to the added activity of the
basilar brain and the forces of manhood. The girl’s voice does not
break; but its timbre changes, and it softens, rounds, fills, and
sweetens as womanhood comes on, and touches chords of human
feeling that it could not reach before. A grand thing in a woman
is a low, rich-toned, musical voice. The woman who has such a


voice can charm, and ought to; for a voice of that kind accom-
panies and indicates charming qualities, sympathy, affection, and
a cultivated mind.
A high pitched voice goes with a high brain and good moral
qualities very frequently. But sometimes the owner of such
qualities is too exacting in her demands, and tries to become
conscience-keeper for all her family; she needs to cultivate the
sympathetic qualities, lest she become a scold. Scolding is gene-
rally done in a high key. The real, sharp, thin-toned, penetrating,
scolding voice is a very unpleasant one, and ought never to be
cultivated. It is quite as bad as the r-r-rar voice in a man, or its
equally unpleasant n-n-ning voice. A voice too highly pitched or
too loud is not the voice that makes life pleasant for its owner or
others. A man’s voice, if too deep, always in a rolling bass tells of
strong passions, much animal feeling, and selfishness. It may be
accompanied by great energy of character; but we want something
else in our friends besides energy—sympathy and kindly feeling,
for instance. A woman in selecting a husband, and considering
voice as one factor, ought to listen for middle tones. If these pre-
dominate the man is fairly harmonious. When the voice of a man
is too high in pitch and too thin in timbre, the owner of the voice
is weak in character; he has not enough force. He may strutt
and fume; may get on his dignity; may even talk a good deal
about what he will do; but he is like the shrill voice bantam
cock, or the weak, yelping terrier —he cannot do much when his
qualities come to be tested.
The Voice is Influenced Primarily by the general character,
and secondarily by present state of mind. We have no need to
understand a man’s language in order to know what mental
faculties are expressing themselves. Love, anger, warning, argu-
ment, pleading, mirth, song, business, and command have each
their tones, and these are common to all languages. Gestures and
tones form a universal speech. A man acquires a voice in accord
with his most active faculties. The auctioneer puts his “ Going,
going, gone,” into an after-dinner speech. The logician and
mathematician expresses himself by dimensions and sequences,
and makes each syllable a step towards the final demonstration;
his tones are those of the lecture-room; he talks as if writing
every sentence. The Soldier, Physician, Lawyer, and Preacher
have each their voice and manner, proclaiming their respective
professions. The soldier’s words strike like bullets—his utterances
are few and to the point; the physician’s words are cautious,
reserved, non-committal —they are uttered in an oracular tone, and
may cover much knowledge or a wealth of ignorance; the lawyer’s
words are numerous and more fluent—they enwrap his subject
matter in many folds of verbosity, and are uttered in confident
tones; the preacher is apt to drop into a sacerdotal drawl and
breathe upon his words as if they were written upon tissue paper,
and had to be blown to where they will stick—his tones are the
exact opposite of those of the soldier.


Voices are Influenced by Climatic Conditions and by the
laboriousness or otherwise of life. Chronic catarrh makes tire
tones of the down east Yankee nasal. The languages spoken by
northern peoples, who have to contend with frost and snow, and
wring a livelihood out of an unwilling earth, are full of consonants
and hard in sound; those spoken by southern and semi-tropical
peoples are sweet, song-like, full of vowels, melodious. Mr.
Froud, when in Australia, said to the writer that the first thing
that struck him was the melodious voices of the children. The
reason for this is not far out of sight. Life is easy in Australia ;
there is nothing to harden the tones. The air is mild, and people
dare open their mouths. Hence the rising generation speaks with
its lips and palate, while the elder people, who have faced harder
conditions, speak more with the throat and teeth, laying more
stress on the consonants. When a northern nation sends emi-
grants to southern and warmer climates, the language of the
emigrants softens materially in two generations. With the
softening of the speech, however, there is a rounding and soften-
ing of the framework of the body, accompanied by a love of sport
and play, and a dislike for close application and hard work. Hard
workers have generally some ruggedness of speech, some angu-
larity of form. It will not pay to become too soft either in voice
or anything else. The North'beats the South in the battle-field
and in the labour market.
We reveal much of our real selves by smiling and laughing.
When we are at ease and in the society of our families and friends,
and the subject of conversation is agreeable, we are off
guard, and in smiling and laughing we are natural, having nothing
to conceal. Hence laughter reveals the soul perhaps more than
speech does. What we are must display itself in one way or
another; if not in one way more strongly in another. If the face
may not tell the truth the hands and feet will; if the tongue lies
the laugh contradicts it. The face may be taught to wear a
diplomatic smile, but the eyes shine out above such a smile and
declare it to be a thing assumed.
We Laugh in all the Vowels. The boisterous “ha, ha,” the
full “ ho, ho,” the snickering “eh, eh,” and the grunting “ugh,
ugh” may all be heard in the streets and taverns of any city or
village, where people have time to laugh. The laugh that shows the
teeth and throws the head back is free, honest, open, and tells of gene-
rous and social nature; it is the “ ha” or the “ ho.” The internal
cachinnation “ eh” is secretive and conservative; it may be envious
and bitter; it is always unpleasant, and the reverse of generous
and free. _ The throat laugh, the “ugh,” is the kind tha°t a Red
Indian might utter when he had stolen upon his foe, murdered him
in his sleep, and attached his bleeding scalp to his belt. In the
laughter of some low loungers and criminals there is a hard,
jarring tone, that arouses antagonism in the hearer and reminds
the zoologist of the cry of the jackal, the bark of the dingo, or
the laugh of the hyena.


If there is Something Disagreeable about the smile or
laugh, there is also something equally disagreeable about the
character. There is the cynical smile, the contemptuous smile,
the envious smile ; the sharkish smile may be seen now and then
—it is very different from the sheepish simper. It is far easier to
understand a smile than to describe one. A smile is a movement
of the Orbicularis Oris muscle. This movement lengthens the
lips, and generally turns them a little outward, showing a larger
lip surface. A mirthful smile draws the lips up at the corners; a
silly smile draws them up too much; a friendly smile elongates
both lips about equally, and draws them neither up nor down at
the corners; a loving smile fills out the lower lip more than the
upper one; a contemptuous smile shoots out the upper lip. The
smiles that draw the lips down at the corners are none of them
good. The smiles of treachery, cunning, envy, jealousy, are all
accompanied by a down-draw of the corners; and the smiles of
cruelty and selfishness by an indraw of the lips, making them into
a thin, curved line. A real smile lights up the whole face ; it
springs into the eyes, smooths out the eyebrows, ripples down the
cheeks, expands the lips, draws up the chin, and enlarges the
whole body, and lightens every movement. It is the reverse of a
frown, which contracts and draws down every feature of the face.
The frown is a sign of pain, and pain contracts ; the smile is a sign
of pleasure, and pleasure expands. Smiles and laughter conduce
to health, pleasure, and virtue in ourselves and others ; frowns
and harsh tones tend to shorten life, and to make it less worth
living. Carlyle speaks plainly on the morals of laughter in
“ Sartor Resartus.” Says he, describing the Professor’s laugh :
“ Gradually a light kindled in our Professor’s eyes and face—a
beaming, mantling, loveliest light; through those murky features
a radiant, ever-young Apollo looked; and he burst forth like the
neighing of all Tattersall’s —tears streaming down his cheeks,
pipe held aloft, foot clutched into the air—loud,
uncontrollable, a laugh not of the face and diaphragm only, but of
the whole man from head to heel.” And again—“ No man who
has once heartily and wholly laughed can be altogether irreclaim-
ably bad. How"much lies in laughter, the cipher-key wherewith
we decipher the whole man! Some men wear an everlasting
barren simper ; in the smile of others lies a cold glitter, as of
ice. The fewest are able to laugh what can be called laughing,
but only sniff, and titter, and snigger from the throat outwards,
or, at best, produce some whiffling, husky cachinnation, as if they
were laughing through wool. Of none such comes good. Th©
man who cannot laugh is not only fit for treasons, stratagems,
and spoils, but his whole life is already a treason and a strata-
gem.”
CHAPTER XIII.
A CHAT ABOUT CHINS.
From any point of view the chin is an important feature of th©
face. It is like the thumb to the hand; the moving feature in


opposition to the fixed ones. Indeed, to a student of comparative
anatomy there is a marked resemblance between the termination
of the wrist in a hand and the termination of the neck in a head
and face. Where the hand is only a paw the head is far below
the human stage, and there is no chin. Nature seems to promise
chins and thumbs at about the same stage of the ascending
scale of creation, but she does not really give either one or the
other to any creature below the human. She seems to have
laboured through countless ages, and through myriads of forms,
before perfecting her ultimate design in producing a creature with
a real hand, a real face, and a perfect brain ; and even yet,
amongst humans, she has not fully realised her ideal. There are
few people who are perfect in form of head, face, and hand.
Some People have Runaway Chins. There is nothing to
support the lower lip, and it sags down ; the upper teeth, too,
overhang the lower, and give the face a weak appearance. Fig. 2
in Illustration 54 is a weak chin of the kind named. We have not
far to go in any street before we see some weak-chinned person.
Sometimes the forehead, too, is flat, and receding also, the face being
weak both top and bottom.
5 3.— GRADES OF POWER.
A weak chin denotes lack of courage, and frequently lack of
moral courage; and a weak forehead tells of lack of intelligence ;
we must not, then, expect too much from a person who has both
these signs of weakness. Illustration 53 shows a gradual decline
of power from the Caucasian to the Negroid forms of face. A
slightly convex face, one in which chin and forehead both recede
a little, may belong to a person who is good for a spurt, active in
body, and brilliant and clever in mind; but when staying power
and endurance are required look out for a firm chin; and when
depth and solidity of mental attainments are needed the forehead
must not slope backward too rapidly.
Scandinavians, Germans, Russians, and Scotch have, as a
rule, strong chins, while the inhabitants of Southern Europe have


weaker and softer ones. Even the English appear to be losing
squareness and solidity of chin. The percentage of strong faces
seen in any crowd is not so great as it was twenty years ago. Our
youth grow larger bodies, and the average duration of life is
greater, but the hardihood and courage which used to characterise
the British cannot be regarded as an increasing quantity. In any
struggle for racial supremacy, whether by battle or by industrial
efforts, the stronger chinned race will take the lead. Our children,
then, girls as well as boys, ought to be taught to close their mouths
firmly and to develop the energy and courage that forms a good
chin, and the kind of character indicated by such a chin. While
forming character we are also building up the signs that indicate it.
Many qualities are seen in the chin besides those shown in the
frontispiece in Nos. 129 to 152. There are loving chins, hoping
chins; Shakespeare speaks of an “ amorous chin.” There are
mean and miserly chins, hard, upturning, as if going to meet the
hooked, avaricious nose which overhangs the lean, indrawn lips.
See 3in Illustration 64; and chins contrasted, Fig. 58. There
are chins that concentrate and
idealise, and yearn for perfect
love and other perfections to
match. These come to small
rounded points, giving the face
the appearance of an inverted
] yramid. These are not the
ciiins to endure hardness, but
they often belong to refined,
artistic, and good people : to
men, and especially to women,
whom the world can ill spare.
Channing, 39, has a chin ap-
54.
proaching this type, and Fig. 55 has it. Women having this chin
idealise their loves. They ascribe all possible and impossible
virtues to their sweethearts; even
marriage does not entirely dispel their
sweet illusions, and if they become
widows they again think of the virtues
and endearing qualities of the much
loved departed.
A chin like 4 in Fig. 54, or like 2
and 4 in Fig. 57, can easily form new
attachments, and love as heartily a
second time as the first. M‘Leod,
Fig. 3, had a grand chin for real and
practical life ; Manning, Fig. 5, has a
fine, square-pointed chin, denoting
both fineness of structure and endur-
ance, both a high ideal and much
capacity to work for its attainment.
55 .—CONCENTRATION.
Lie big, "Fig. 4, had a resolute chin, a jaw that almost forms a right


angle by its projections downward and outward. Fig. 56 shows
this form of chin very plainly. These two boys differ widely in
type, and are fitted for occupations of an
entirely different nature. 55 ought to become
a scholar and a literary or artistic worker; 56
needs a stirring life calling the commercial
and executive faculties into play. One is
peaceful and patient; the other is ready for
adventure, exploration, and warlike exploits.
The Loves and the Energies Contend
for Mastery in the chin. The former are
shown mostly in the fleshy parts ; the latter
in the bony parts. In a large chin there
must be both flesh and bone. When there is
too much flesh—a series of baggy folds, as in
the chin of Caligula, Fig. 7 —there is a ten-
dency to sensualism and gluttony. An en-
larging and doubling of the chin, filling out
its shape, as in 4, Fig. 54, is a sign of abundant
56 .— RESOLUTENESS.
vitality and warm affection. These signs frequently appear
in wholesome matrons as they approach middle life ; they
then suggest good cookery, domestic management, economy.
The doubling of the round chin, as in 4, Fig. 57, is a mark
of economy, but not of meanness ; of wise management
and desire to make people comfortable. As the chin widens
the range of the affections appears to widen also. The small
chin, with rounded tip, desires to be loved, and idealises
and concentrates its affection. The wide chin, 1, in Fig. 57,
desires to love, and if one object fails it will seek another. The
little chin thinks of love in a cottage and domestic enjoyment;
the large one wants a social circle, and to minister to the enjoy-
ment of many guests. The wide double chin is hospitable : is a
good sign in host or hostess. People having poor chins are not as
a rule good providers and caterers.
Economy, Independence, Subservience are shown in the
region of the chin. The signs o# economy —a little fold under the
chin (see 4in Fig. 54) —is easily recognised; the signs of sub-
servience are on each side of this sign. They are small folds of
flesh connecting the chin and neck, and hanging under each side
of the lower jaw.
Comparing small masses with large, they are like the “ dewlap ”
of a cow hanging to neck and chin. In youth there is no such
formation under the chin. The sign of independence, a prominence
of Adam’s Apple, is more marked in youth. As we advance in
years, and find out that we are not masters of the universe, we
become more willing to be used and less self-assertive, and the
signs of that change show in the chin. The change is really caused
by a slackening of the superficial muscle, the Platisma Myodes,
It is no longer tightened up by the chin being perked forward or
thrown up with pride or conceit, and so sags and forms the folds.


A diplomatic chin has bone enough to give strength and purpose-
fulness, but under and around there is flesh enough, and many a
fold and wrinkle. Chin 2in Fig. 57 is a chin for state-craft and
war-craft. Men who have this kind of chin are not easily over-
reached in a bargain or mastered in a battle. Lord Beaconsfield
had a remarkable chin of the kind named, and Prince von Bismarck
has another on a larger and more powerful scale. There are many
wrinkles in the chin of Gladstone, but they are not of the curved
and cunning sort.
The chin 1 in Fig. 54 is a fighting and enduring chin. It is lean,
hard, angular. Many noted pugilists have this form of the feature.
57.
58 .—A CONTRAST.
It goes with the Osseous temperament; you may bruise your hands
upon such a chin and scarcely hurt the feature. In selecting
men for exploring expeditions, and hard, trying labours, em-
ployers ought to pay particular attention to the chin. A round,
soft chin will not work hard, and a poor, weak one, however willing,
cannot endure hardness.
In Fig. 58 we have two types of chin widely differing. The first
is shrewd, commercial; more than that, it is cunning and ready
for fraud. The second is weak, but belongs to a man who fancies
he “ knows a thing or two.” Suppose the second has some money,
and the first has a fund of experience, and the two go into
partnership ; how long will it be before the conditions are reversed,
viz.—before the first has the money and the second the experience ?
Wolves eat lambs everywhere.
Not Long Ago a New Arrival from the West of England,
a farmer, who had some capital, called upon the writer for a
phrenological consultation and advice. In his written notes he was
warned to be careful; to put his money in a bank for a while ;to
work, and get to know something about the colony before entering
upon any enterprise involving the investment of his funds. “ For,”
was written, “amongst some sections of the mercantile community
of Melbourne you will be like a sheep amongst wolves.” Alas!
the sheep did not take the advice; a wolf swallowed his thousands,
and he is now in gaol for the crime. Even such poor satisfaction
is rarely obtained by a financial sheep; the wolf keeping safe
inside certain fences called laws.
In the chin Nature writes her signs of longevity. A poor chin
tells of a weak heart, poor circulation and digestion, lack of


buoyancy and endurance. We may, then, easily infer that a chin
denoting the prominence of these qualities is a sign of longevity.
Even the projecting chin that inclines towards the nose (see 3,
Fig. 54) —tells of the toughness that keeps life in the body. Little
old people, whose bodies have shrunk to less than one hundred
pounds weight, and who are yet cheerful and active, have
frequently this form of chin. Mrs. H. B. Stowe, at over eighty
years of age, is vivacious and cheerful, though not larger or heavier
than a girl of twelve. The Beechers for three generations have
had good chins; even the dyspeptic Lyman Beecher had a firm,
square, enduring chin.
It is Possible to Have Too Much of a Good Thing. The
chin is conservative ; heavy chinned men do not advance with the
times. Fig. 59 shows an autocratic and high-tempered chin. This
man will not be interfered with, will manage his own affairs ; his
word is law, he must be
approached hat in hand.
Fig. 60 is a despot; he is
not amenable to reason. If
he has not power over the
lives of his subjects and
servants, it is because he is
living too late. He is not
at home in a free and
civilised community. He is
an atavism. Although the
bull-dog has no proper chin,
59.—AUTOCRATIC.
60 .—DESPOTIC.
he has a very strong lower jaw, and his human prototype and com-
panion is usually a strong-jawed and chinny mortal. Fig. 61 does
not seriously caricature the human associate
of prize-fighting bull-dogs. Birds of a feather
flock together; noble dogs associate with noble
men. If a good dog gets into bad human com-
pany, it is not long in feeling ashamed, and
acquiring a sidelong and unhappy look. Tell
me what kind of company you keep, what kind
of dogs you like, and I will tell you what you
are. A Deerhound, a Newfoundland, an
English Mastiff, a St. Bernard would not be
at home with a cane and eye-glass masher,
61 .— CHINNY.
nor with an out-at-elbows Poverty Corner lounger.
CHAPTER XIV.
HEALTH SIGNS.
It will not be fair to conclude this manual without giving a few
of the health poles of the face. Some of the health signs will be
gathered from the frontispiece, but Fig. 62 gives them in a more
definite form. The frontispiece treats mostly on character signs;
the final illustration is meant to bring out the health signs as a


separate study. A depression of the nervous system in the region
of the stomach, or a chronic inflammation of the solar plexus, will
be shown in the face by a falling-in of the face in the regions of
“ Health” and “ Vitality” (see frontispiece). But this depression
is apt to specially affect one organ more than another. A study
of Fig. 62 enables the physician to see which of the great organs
is weakest, and which is likely to suffer or has actually become
affected.
The region of N, Fig. 62, is that in which a failure of nutrition is
first apt to show itself. If behind the ears and round about and
below them gets white or grey, there is defective nutrition and
something seriously wrong in the body. People advanced in con-
sumption get thin and deadly white hereabout; so long as the
ears are a good colour, and the region behind and below them has
a natural appearance, there is no immediate danger of losing
life. Parents ought to keep an eye on this region in all delicate
cases, and physicians ought not to neglect it in diagnosis.
Some Medical Men Have an Eye to Constitutional pecu-
liarities. Said one, when invited to a dinner party, “I have
fifteen cases to visit to-night, and so cannot stay the evening.”
The party proved more attractive than the patients, and later on in
the evening the doctor said—“ I ought to have visited fifteen
patients this evening, but will now leave them until morning.
My doing so can do no real harm, for nine of these no physician on
earth can cure, and six of them will defy the medical profession to
kill them.” That physician knew something about constitutional
symptoms as well as diagnosis of special and temporary con-
ditions. From time to time members of the medical profession
have taken lessons with the writer on this subject. For want of
such knowledge grievous blunders are frequently made.
The point V, Fig. 62,
just behind the bony knob
called the “ Mastoid Pro-
cess,” is the phrenological
organ of Vitativeness, or
Love of Life; and its
fulness or otherwise ought
to.- be considered in a
diagnosis. There are
some thin and worn men
who appear as if they had
not much time to live,
and yet they keep on
living in a most un-
accountable manner. To
all appearance they ought
to die, but they do not.
A study of these men
would reveal the pre-
sence of this organ, and
62 .—HEALTH POLES.
98
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


organ implies faculty. There are other men who appear strong
and well, and yet when anything ails them they die almost without
warning. In these cases love of life is weak. To understand
men, to understand ourselves even, to know whether or not we
are likely to make a good struggle for life, we ought to study this
phase.
The point A, still further back than V, is Amativeness. This
shows the relation between the Recuperative and Reproductive
faculties. Both are located where we might expect to find them—
in the very seat of life.
R, in the same figure, is the pole of the kidneys and renal
system. It is just behind the Alveolar Process, and slightly below
it. The letter covers more space than is occupied by the facial
pole named. When the face falls in here there is a tendency to
sluggishness and disease of the renal system. G indicates the
gastric region. The faces of dyspeptics almost invariably flatten
in this part, while a roundness and fulness of cheek tells of an
abundance of saliva and gastric juice. The Parotid Gland is just
under this pole. Probably it becomes less as the digestive power
decreases, hence the flattening of this region.
The Liver has its Facial Pole in the Region of H. Hepatic
difficulties leave their mark in this region. C and P represent the
Cardiac and Pulmonary poles. When the heart and lungs get
weak there is a flattening of these two regions. We know that a
healthy face is generally a full one, and we see, by the study of
health signs, why this is the case. By this means we also get a
clue to which organ has actually gone wrong, and which is most
likely to go wrong. A careful delineator of character and con-
ditions will always warn his subjects of their bodily weaknesses,
and tell them how to avoid disease. The writer never gives a
description without making such a diagnosis; in many instances
the modification of physical conditions is more necessary than
anything else.
Frequently, too, people have formed entirely erroneous ideas of
life and duty. Sometimes a pale and sickly man wants to know
how he must push on with studies, and make his brain do more
work, when really what the man wants is complete nerve rest;
failures in memory being caused by overwork and nervous
debility. The man who would be benefited by a course of study
spends his spare time in football; while the one who needs active
exercise in the open air spends his time in reading and study. The
brain is just as liable to morbid conditions as the body ; a mental
dyspepsia frequently shows itself by a morbid mental appetite. If
the Vital Poles of a face are falling in, or if they are flat to begin
with, there is no force to spare for dissipation of any kind, and the
dissipation of a hard course of study is frequently the worst
possible.
For Want of Knowledge of and Attention to these facial
signs the lives of thousands of children are sacrificed annually.
The child who ought to study the least is almost invariably the one
99
HOW TO READ MEN AS OPEN BOOKS.


who studies most, while the chubby-faced dunce, whom brain
work could never injure, will dread mental exercise as a certain
nameless person is said to dread or church music. The
facial signs tell of two things from each other—
viz., of weakness of an organ and actual disease of that organ.
Weakness precedes disease. Disease ever attacks the weakest part,
never the strongest. If parents, on account of their children, and
young people on their own account, would find out from facial
study or competent diagnosis what are their physical defects, which
are their weak organs, they would have a chance of taking protec-
tive measures. They would be warned in time, and might then
take steps to strengthen the weak heart, stomach, or whichever
organ is affected, or likely to be so; and might also avoid putting
undue strain upon such organ. There are young men who train
for athletic performances without knowing the state of the heart.
A man whose chin is weak, and whose cardiac poles are flattened,
ought to gradually increase heart power by gentle exercises at first,
taking more severe ones as he proceeds, but never going to the
extreme of trying to perform great feats. Most athletes break
down early in life, owing to a breakdown of some great vital
organ; few reach old age. Those w T ho try to become athletes and
fail, owing to some organic weakness of which they ought to have
been warned, are very numerous. Some of them die right out
of inflammation of the lungs, or of peritonitis; others get ruptured,
contract anuerism, or drop into chronic debility, out of which they
never emerge.
How little the majority of people know about health and health
signs is all too apparent. And yet knowledge upon these subjects
can easily be acquired. In a few hours, or, at most, a few day s, a good
general knowledge of physiology may be obtained, and in a few
more the laws of health and health signs may be learned. We
may spend more time in learning a musical scale or a Latin
declension than the above important studies would require. On
this subject Herbert Spencer speaks most strongly. He says:—
“ If anyone doubts the importance of an acquaintance with the
principles of physiology as a means of complete living, let him
look around and see how many men and women he can find in
middle or latter life who are thoroughly well. Only occasionally
do we meet with an example of vigorous health continued to
old age; hourly we meet with examples of acute disorder, chronic
ailments, general debility, premature decrepitude. Scarcely is
there one to whom you put the question who has not, in the
course of his life, brought upon himself illnesses which a little
information would have saved him from. Here is a case of heart
disease consequent on a rheumatic fever that followed reckless
exposure. There is a case of eyes spoiled for life by overstudy.
Yesterday the account was of one whose long-continued lameness
was brought on by continuing, spite of pain, to use a knee after it
had been slightly injured. And to-day we are told of another
who has to lie by for years, because he did not know that the palpi


tation he suffered under resulted from overtaxed brain Now we
hear of some irremediable injury which followed some silly feat of
strength; and again, of a constitution that has never recovered
trom the effects of excessive work needlessly undertaken.”
[The End.]


