

0 Splitting Comcbn in (time
H 26 Little Collins Street East.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
&5
!
A
V
Crack in the Wall
PARSON M?N IN NY
AND THE BUBBLE FAMILY
A. li. MASSINA & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS.


I 1
i
.
I
i
I
I
!
i
i
? ' j
i
mi
?


Crack in the Wall
PARSON M?NINNY
AND THE BUBBLE FAMILY
% Sibt-SpHHmg Comctm iit tbbm i|tts.
W. H. R.
A. H. MASSINA & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
26 Little Collins Street East.


.
?
%
?


CHARACTERS:
Eeveeend Mb. M'Ninny.
Sir Bounceable Bubble.
Duncbable Bubble, his Son.
John Bloodlesnubs.
Willie Hazeldeen, in love with Henrietta.
Geoedie
Charlie /? Young Bubbles.
Willie '
Lady Bubble.
Henrietta \
Louisa I Young Bubbles.
Sissy /
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs.
First Woman.
Second Woman.
Servant.


?
I
I
?


The Crack in the Wall;
PARSON M'NINNY AND THE BUBBLE FAMILY,
A COMEDY IN THREE ACTS
ACT I.
SCENE I.?Rev. M'Ninny?s Study,
Enter M?Ninny, singing and dancing fantastically.
M'Ninny. With Tyndall and Huxley I think
That a man?s but immortal in body,
And but in this life he will drink
The eternal good cheer of good toddy;
But when he dies down he must sink,
Like a spark that goes out in ground muddy ;
And when he is on the grave?s brink,
To die like a man he must study.
I find that there are other nations
Have Bibles their people believe are
Jehovah?s divine revelations,
But which, when we read, we receive, ah !
So few really true illustrations
That Nature?s true God might not grieve for
And this makes me quite out of patience
At teaching what?s from my belief far.
But the pay is exceedingly fine,
And it is such an easy, sweet billet;
Although there are lies in the line,
There is not a trade but they fill it.
Then this elegant villa is mine,
And I may as well have it until it
Gets too hot to appear a divine,
When the people, as folly, will will it.
No ! as my billet is an easy one, I will stick at it. The pay?s
a noble one, and my respectability is, in ignorant eyes, very high.
I have for my every-day wear a long-tailed coat of the very best
cloth. I have access to the parlors of my wealthiest neighbours.
Then power in the State is unquestioned. I can pocket a
Conservative fee, and influence my adherents to vote for those
who support Bible instruction in schools, and the shutting of


libraries and museums on Sundays. My work is not difficult; and
the little conscience I have is only slightly affected by the lies I
have to support by argument. By practice the mask of piety is
easily assumed, and for that matter a well-shaved face is better
than a bearded one ; but if I could only escape from my Sunday
sermons, and use the salary after my own fashion, I would be
more content. I would not have to bother my brains explaining
how the sun stood still in Gibeon, or how a man could possibly
live three days in a whale?s belly. I would escape that, as some
of our English parsons do, by leaving to the curates the duty of
mouthing their lies. Science, and sense, and Thomas Paine are
insinuating battering-rams, and the creed castles totter. But the
society, and the possibility of showing oneself off in a church. Its
disposition for showing off Sunday best suits and silks, jewellery
and millinery, still fills the collecting plate. Mothers and maids
fill the pews, consequently the parson?s salary is safe. Yes! I
will stick to my billet as long as I am able to keep the people
too ignorant to question the absurdity of the things I teach. If I
only had a mouthpiece, though, to do the dirty work! thought
would not trouble me !
Enter a, Servant.
Servant. O, sir ! here comes the greatest Bubble of all the
Bubbles, Sir Bounceable Bubble, of Bubble Park House !
M?Ninny. Show him in. The church is full of these Bubbles,
and I cannot but receive well this the father of them all.
Servant. His youngest son is with him!
M?Ninny. Show them both up.
[Exit Servant.
They have me at a disadvantage !
My cheeks and chin are rough to-day
As is a field of stubble;
It takes the look devout away,
But this is but a Bubble.
In church I sometimes nonsense say,
Which he as sense doth gobble ;
But such men no attention pay,
I think, and save their trouble.
These Bubbles are empty people; but they give weight to the
collections generally, and that is all I require. It is just as well
such people are not taught to think, else we parsons would soon
lose our billets. Hey! dey! Here they come! How thankful
ought we to be ?
{Enter Sir Bounceable Bubble and Dunceable)
to the Lawd for His mercies ! Oh! my good Sir Bounceable
Bubble and Mr. Dunceable, did you really come round to see me
at last ? How are you, my good sir, and how are you ? Sit?sit
down.
Bubble. I hope, Reverend Sir, we do not intrude upon your
meditations.


M?Ninny. My meditations, good sir, are not so deep as not
to be so pleasantly broken; on the contrary, I am delighted at
this visit. This Blessed 800k ?although than it there is none
other so sweet and so true ?I shut with pleasure when there is
such a real pleasure to be had as your kind company. How is.
Lady Bubble and all the dear little Bubbles ? It is really an age
since I was at Bubble Park House.
Bubble. It is very kind of you, Reverend Sir, to take such an
interest in our family, and I am sure Lady Bubble and the little
Bubbles, who are, by the blessing of the Lad, full of health, will
be pleased when they hear of your inquiries. But it is of my son,,
sir, that I intend to talk about.
M?Ninny. What! of Mr. Dunoeable ?
Bubble. Yes, Mr. M'Ninny, I would like my son to have a
trade or profession. His other brothers are in the army, navy,
and merchants? offices, and Dunoeable ?one of the younger ones ?I
would like to put to something now, and of that I would ask your
advice.
M?Ninny. But does not Dunoeable himself know what he
would like to be ?
Bubble. He says he would like to be a jockey or a bullock-
driver.
M?Ninny. What! That is a profane and wicked calling.
Bubble. So I say ?so I say.
M'Ninny. A damnable calling!
Bubble. So I say?so I say.
M?Ninny. Oh! Fie!
Bubble. So I say.
M'Ninny. Do you not know, Dunoeable, that when you say
Whoa! to a team of bullocks you must add DAMN you ?
Dunceable. Of course, damn you! I know that.
Bubble. Dunoeable!
Dunoeable. Damn you ! What?s the _ harm in that ? Don?t
you say yourself, sir, to the congregation that they will be
damned, and go to hell and blazes, and all that ?
M'Ninny. Certainly. But I speak of a certainty vouched for
in this Book of Books. The are legalised there for my
pronunciation; it is a clergyman?s privilege. It is but a swear in
a church for the minister to say these words, but for anyone else
it is a fearful oath. Oh! there is no calling so profane, Dunce-
able, as a bullock-driver. Don?t be that; don?t be a jockey neither
Dunoeable. Jockeys are terrible tobaoco-chewers and low fellows
all, Sir Bounceable.
Bubble. So I say?so I say to him!


M?Ninny. And swearers!
Bubble. I told him so.
M?Ninny. Always talking of blood animals, D Y is added in
a passion, and there you have that dreadful word, bloody. How
profane!
Dunceable. Is it wicked to say a bloody nose when your
nose bleeds ?
Bubble. Fie, Dunceable! Fie !
M?Ninny. You should say I bleed at the nose. Oh ! do not
allow yourself to be a bullook-driver or a jockey, Dunceable.
. , Dunceable. Well, what shall I be ? I hate anything that
isn?t simpk. I like riding, or cracking a whip at something.
What can I be ? �
Bubble. Ah! that?s it! What can he be ?
M?Ninny. I will tell you.
Bubble. There, you see! Ah! sir, you can tell his disposi-
tion and abilities.
M?Ninny. The simplest and best calling for the idle son of
tne lamily is, to my belief, a clergyman.
Bubble. So say I?so say I!
Dunceable. A clergyman! I couldn?t be a clergyman. I
?couldn?t look sweet and pious, and make a woman of myself!
Bubble. Dunceable!
Dunceable. I would have to learn prayers and write
sermons!
Bubble. Dunceable! Reverend Sir, excuse
Dunceable. I would have to turn neither to the right nor to
the left if I met the young ladies. I would have to sit sedate
in their company, and say the grace at every house I visited, or
pray, and make everyone sad and quiet?make everyone wait
and wish me away before they had their dance.
M? Ninny. That must be according to the ignorance or
knowledge of the people.
Dunceable. I can?t go to the theatre, nor to a ball, and I
like the theatre and the jollification of a dance; but everything
Ido must be Bible! Bible this, and -Bible that!
Bubble. Dunceable! Dunceable!
M Ninny. My dear Sir Bounoeable, if you will be so good as
to leave us together for a moment I will soon convince Dunceable
how fine a.thing it is to be a parson. Just step into the parlour
over the passage.


Bubble. Oh, certainly, certainly! It you would only make a
minister of him I would be delighted.
M'Ninny. So I will. [Exit Bubble.
It wouldn?t do for him to know how I work the oracles. Now,
Dunceable, all this, you see, is according to the ignorance or
knowlege of the people you happen to visit. To the ignorant you
must wear the inspired look of authority ; ignorant people then
have a certain awfulness in your presence. You have a power
over them, and can ? twist and twine them even sobut, on the
other hand, if there is learning in the house you visit, and a
smell of science somewhere, then it will be no harm to suit your-
self to the company. It will be best, indeed, in such a place to
forget you are religious, for if you allow them to batter you with
science and sense you will have no ground to stand upon. If
there is drink on the table, refuse nothing; if there is a dance in
the other chamber, take your partner; if there is euchre, or whist,
or out-throat going on, take your cards; if there is a flirt of a
daughter, take her into a corner. Accommodate yourself to the
disposition of those in whose company you find yourself. If the
party be religious, be so with that party ; if the party be not
religious, say nothing about it, and act like anyone else. If you
want to swear, or flog anything, swear in the pulpit, and flog the
Book ; is anything more simple ?
Dunceable. Oh! then you parsons only appear to be pious ?
M?Ninny. To the vulgar eye, Dunceable. The more knowing
ones may see through the mask we put on; but we make it a
rule to say nothing about the worldly transactions of these people
?that is to say, we wink at their rogueries, and they wink back
again.
Dunceable. And can this piety be put on ?
M?Ninny. Easily.
Dunceable. Could I learn the way ?
M?Ninny. In a few minutes. You should practise The Lawd
before the looking-glass. I have done so with satisfaction. The
Lawd. You see, when I say Lawd, I draw my cheeks in, and let
my lower jaws fall; Lawd.
Dunceable. Lawd ! Yes ! Lawd ! Lawd ! I am getting into
it. Lawd!
M'Ninny. It gives a most solemn look to the minister. The
eyes, as you will perceive, open in a wonderful awe-inspiring way.
Dunceable. The Lawd ! The Lawd ! So they do ; how nice.
I wish I had known it was so easy to make a preacher of me.
The Lawd!
M'Ninny. It?s very simple. The whole thing is in wearing
a solemn face, and making everybody believe you are in earnest.
The half of us, although we seem so, are not in earnest; but the
outside mimicked piety?s so well paid for, ?tis worth one?s while to
learn to wear the mask.


Dunceable. Oh, this is a nice business!
M'Ninny. Will you study under me ?
Dunceable. I will.
M?Ninny. Let us call your father. Sir Bounceable!
[Enter Bubble)
Dunceable will be a clergyman.
Bubble. So you have convinced him. Ah ! Reverend Sir, it
is just as I wished. What thanks we owe you!
M'Ninny. Tut, tut! If we place ourselves in the hands of
Providence everything will be for our good.
Dunceable. The Lawd! The Lawd!
M'Ninny. I was giving him a lesson.
Bubble. Indeed!
M'Ninny. He need not study anything. Let him come and
read the sermons and prayers for me, and you will very soon see
him appear in his gown and white choker.
Bubble. We are under such great obligations to you, my dear
Reverend Sir, that
. M'Ninny. Tut, tut! Will you have a little brandy or
whisky, Sir Bounceable ?
Bubble. Thank you, a little whisky. Thanks.
M'Ninny. And you, Dunceable ?
Dunceable. Are the people of the house religious though ?
Bubble. Fie ! Dunceable !
M'Ninny. Oh, let him. He has well studied the little lesson
I gave him. Come, Dunceable.
Dunceable. If there is drink on the table, refuse nothing.
M'Ninny. Ha ! ha!
Bubble. Ha! ha! ha! But I would wish Dunceable would
be a little more respectful. I am quite delighted at the happy
change for the best you have made in our son, Mr. M?Ninny. We
will not intrude any further on your time.
M'Ninny. Wherefore this hurry away!
Bubble. How can I stay, so full of news ! Our son was such
a swearer, and was so fond of riding and flogging everything, that
we were ashamed of him; but you have prevailed upon him to
become a clergyman. Come and see Lady Bubble, will you, and
all the Bubbles ? We will be delighted.


M'Ninny. Oh, I must. Look here, Sir Bounoeable, if you
let your son remain with me, he and I will go home to _ Bubble
House in the evening. I have a certain thing to entrust him with
which will surprise you.
Bubble. Make use of us, Reverend Sir, in everything. Make
use of us. Think for us. Everything that?s good for us can
only come from your thinking. As for me, the most I can do is
to sit fishing by the river or play bowls on the green. Ha! ha!
Good-bye; we will expect you at night.
M?Ninny. Good-bye!
[Exit Bubble.
Ei-too-rill-100-rill-100,
Ei-too-rill-100-rill-laddy !
This is the thing we do,
With the fiddle, diddle, daddy,
Dunceable ! Sweet youth ! The heavens be praised for this! Thou
wilt be an honour to the gown. Here is a surprise now for your
enemies and friends. I have a sermon I am weary of; wilt thou
mount the pulpit on Sunday morning and deliver it ?
Dunceable. Well, as far as that goes, your reverence, I
think I am capable of any dashed piece of folly and nonsense.
What is the sermon on?
M?Ninny. ? The rib of Adam and the fault of Eve ?
A fault for which her children?s children grieve ;
A fiery hell, a vengeful Deity,
A devil loosed to tempt man readily;
A Virgin Mother and a Holy Ghost,
And Son and Father. Three as one supposed.
And, that a prophecy might be fulfilled,
The Son, who is the Father, must be killed.
The Father, satisfied, Himself is slain,
Is pleased, and rises the third day again.-
All who believe are saved and in heaven crammed,
But all who don?t believe are surely damned.?
Such, Dunceable, are the heads of the discourse. It is necessary
occasionally to give a sermon on the foundations of the religion,
that the congregation might not forget what they believe. Will
you deliver it ?
Dunceable. I don?t understand it, but I will spout it like an
orator.
M?Ninny. It is an excellent sermon for one who appears for
the first time. I have no doubt but you will deliver it famously.
Come into the study and read it over. [ Exeunt.


ACT 11.
SCENE I.? Grand Drawing-room at Bubble House.
Lady Bubble, Henrietta, Louisa, Sissy, Charlie, Geordie,
Willie.
Lady Bubble. Yon really must not play with these dirty
children about. We are in a higher position. Your pa has
obtained Sir to his name, and you all must be young ladies and
young gentlemen. You have a brother a real harmy lieutenant
horhoer, a brother a midshipman, and a brother a clerk in a
merchant?s office, and you should really have this always in your
minds. Your father, on account of his wealth, is superior to our
neighbours, and, on account of that, you must learn to look down
upon them. Our children must not associate with the children of
workpeople. Henrietta!
Henrietta. Yes, ma!
Lady Bubble. Dunoeable is to be brought up a minister
under Mr M Ninny?s care. Another thing mind, children, that
you must hold up your heads about. But, Henrietta!
Henrietta. Yes, ma.
Lady Bubble. Who was that young man I saw you speaking
to at the stile where the honeysuckles are ?
Henrietta. Willie Hazeldeen.
Lady Bubble. Son of those people over the way ?
Henrietta. Yes.
Lady Bubble. Did I not tell you not to be familiar or speak
to these low people?the father a carpenter, the son?what is he ?
Henrietta. A printer.
Lady Bubble. A printer ! Is it proper for you to be speaking
to a common printer? You must not do so again. I am ashamed
ot the eldest daughter of the Bubbles having a mind so low
Never do so again. Get your Bible and read the history of Josenh
over to Louisa. 1
Louisa. Oh, ma! you just mind me. When Mr. M?Ninny
was reading about Joseph to us in church last Sunday he skipped
a lot of verses about Potiphar?s wife. Let us just have a look at
that part, Henrietta. I wonder why he skipped it ?
Lady Bubble. Girls, you may be sure it was for a wise
purpose. There are people who think of things and talk of things
they know nothing about, and who make bad out of everything
they know not the meaning of. Dear Mr. M?Ninny knew this,
and as his discourse was not particularly upon Potiphar?s wife, he
lelt that part out. Potiphar?s wife may appear wicked to you,
but, as she was an instrument in the hands of the Lord, by
which Joseph?s _ future- greatness was promoted, her actions
'Certainly, for their good result, are pardonable and praiseworthy.


When read in this spirit everything in that Book will be found*
good and glorious, and worthy imitation. Charlie! Geordie!
Willie! run out now and don?t let anyone see you. Slip along-
by the honeysuckle hedge. Open the latch softly of Bloodlesnubs?
garden gate, and let in those fowls and chickens. They have a
lot of costly plants and seeds set. Bun away, but mind you
don?t let them see you.
[Exit Chaelie, Geoedie, and Willie.
I would like to aggravate those Bloodlesnubs. The lady herself
puts airs upon her, setting herself up to be equal with us. If the
fowls would only tear up her garden it would aggravate her..
Sissy, see who that is.
Sissy. It?s pa!
Enter Bubble,
Bubble. Oh, Lisbeth ! Sissy ! Louisa ! Henrietta ! Boys t
Boys ! Where are they ?
Lady Bubble. What, Sir Bounoeable, is all this jollification,
about ?
Bubble. I?ve sold the shares ; I?ve sold the Australian Coal
Mining Company?s shares. I?ve gulled Bloodlesnubs. Hi diddle
diddle, the cat and the fiddle?
Lady Bubble. The cow jumped over the moon ! Well, that
is lucky. And he didn?t know a word about the impending failure
of the company ?
Bubble. Not a word. He was running through the town,
breathless, asking everybody for shares?for shares. I took him
by the button-hole, and says I, ? Splendid affair that Coal Company,
Bloodlesnubs. Keport splendid. Abundance of first-class coal.?
? Yes,? said he, ? I am looking everywhere for shares. Got any ??
I took the bundle of worthless paper from my pocket and showed
them to him. The thousand shares. Of course, I made him
believe I couldn?t part with them; but he pressed me for them
so, that he gave me a cheque, and I had them transferred to
him. Ha ! ha !
Lady Bubble. And you are sure they are useless ?
Bubble. As useless as a pack of cards. Are we not fortu-
nate ? I am knighted for giving a nice sum to erect a college;
our young Dunoeable is to be a parson; and, before the certain
smash of the company, I have got rid of my shares at the
highest cost. Oh! higgledy piggledy, my black hen! we have
gulled the Bloodlesnubs !
Lady Bubble. And I have sent the boys to let the fowls
into their garden !
Bubble. But, Lisbeth, it won?t do for them to be seen,
Lady Bubble. They slipt along by the honeysuckle hedge.
Bubble. They have dreadful gossiping tongues, the Bloodle-
snubs. But how lucky we are !


Sissy. Here comes Charlie, Willie, and Geordie.
Enter Charlie, Willie, and Geordie.
Geordie, We druv in all the big hens and iokle chickles.
Lady Bubble. Did anyone see you ?
Boys. Nobudy!
Lady Bubble. Are you all sure ?
Charlie. ?Es, I am.
Willie. So?m I.
Geordie. We crawled ?longside the sunnyhuokles, for we
heard Johnny Subblesbubs whistle. Then we peeps, but saw
nuffin? nowhere. Will slips then, and flung open the gate. It
wouldn?t stick, and Charlie tied it with a tallicar rag; then we
druv in the hens and iokle chickles, and pigs, and nannies.
Nobudy seed!
Lady Bubble. I hope not. Now, get your catechisms and
look over them with Sissy. Mr. M'Ninny is coming this evening,
and I will get him to hear you. I?ll go and sit down in the
Sweet-briar Bower and see what occurs over the way through the
crack in the wall. [Exit Lady Bubble
Bubble. Henrietta and Louisa, what have you to giggle at
there ? Isn?t that the Bible ?
Louisa. He ! he! he! Stop, Etta !
Henrietta. He! he ! he ! It?s you that?s tickling me !
Louisa. It?s you.
Henrietta. It?s you.
Bubble, What were you reading, Henrietta?
Louisa. Oh, Hen ! He ! he! he !
Henrietta. Oh, Lou ! He ! he ! he !
Bubble. Shut the Book. It?s very wicked to make fun and
giggle over the sacred page. There is nothing should be touched
with greater reverence or respect.
Louisa, What a chapter!
Henrietta. What a chapter!
Sissy. Father, here comes old Bloodlesnubs ; here comes old
Bloodlesnubs !
Bubble. Say I?m not in ! Say I?m out! Say I?m not in!
[Exit Bubble and Sissie.
Geordie. Have a look at him.
Charlie. Ooh! yes.


Willie. Ooh! yes. [Exit Charlie, Geordie, and Willie.
Henrietta. What made you giggle ?
Louisa. You giggled first. But it?s no wonder, is it, that
Mr. M'Ninny skips that part when he reads about Joseph.
Henrietta. Anyone would be ashamed to read it out. I?m
sure I would. There are many chapters in the Book worse than
that even, Lou!
Louisa. Only fancy!?
Henrietta. But, oh ! Louisa, isn?t it a shame ?I was to meet
Willie Hazeldeen in the Sweet-briar Bower half an hour ago, and
I am sure he will be vexed.
Louisa. He?s poor, though, and hardly good enough, don?t you
think ?
Henrietta. Poor though he is, he is good enough for a princess.
Let us take a walk in the garden.
Louisa. But don?t go near ma! She will be at the crack in
the wall. [Exeunt.
SCENE ll.? Both Sides of the Wall Seen.
Bloodlesnubs ? gate is seen open, and Lady Bubble is found seated
inside a shady bower, inside her wall, with her eye to a
crach in the wall. There is a gate seen on her side also.
Lady Bubble. The crack is only wide enough for one eye, but
I can see the gate of the Bloodlesnubs. It is wide open.
The garden is full of nanny-goats, pigs, fowls, and chickens.
The fowls and chicks are scraping and picking up the seeds.
The goats are eating the plants, and the pigs are ploughing
up everything with their snouts. He! he he! ?l well may
enjoy a silent giggle. I wouldn?t spit on Mrs. Bloodlesnubs
if her clothes caught fire. I could look and laugh through
this crack to hear her bones crackling. I hate her. She must
be everything we be ?must sit opposite to us in church, and
have a whole pew to herself because we have a whole pew. If I
come out in a new bonnet, she must have another like it, or she
must dress her children in the same style. She makes herself out
to be so very pious, so Christian-like, and so unpretending, and so
sweet when she bows or she smiles. And everywhere she goes she
does nothing else but speak about us, and call me a filthy, idle
thing. Me a filthy, idle thing! lam sure I never trouble myself
about her. I wouldn?t for the world notice her?her and her stuck
up nose and little ferret eyes. Hist! here?s somebody!
Enter two Women ? outside.
First Woman. Yes, that?s where the Bubbles live. If anybody
is a Christian, they are. They attend church regularly : take the
sacrament; and, in fact, I believe they are the principal support
of the church.
Second Woman. Axe they ? Well! well


First Woman. Oh! they are indeed.
Second Woman. There?s a good large family ?
First Woman. Ten children.
Second Woman. Bless me ! Alive ?
First Woman. Alive. Seven boys and three girls; and, as I
have heard, all well acquainted with the Bible.
Second Woman. Do you tell me that ?
First Woman. Oh ! they know it from end to end.
Second Woman. How well brought up they are to be sure !
First Woman. Yes, for you know children so brought up
cannot .be otherwise than moral and well-behaved. So Mr.
M?Ninny tells me. He said to me, unless children read the Bible
when young, and get it knocked into them as the only Book in the
world that contains enough for them to know, the churches would
get to be empty nowadays, and he would very shortly be out at
elbows and knees. He ! he!
Second Woman. Oh! Aye!
First Woman. Now, that would be a very sad thing for us
all ?that a clergyman should, for want of believers, be threadbare
and naked, and made a laughter of and a scorn.
Second Woman. And this would be because children have
not had the Bible drilled into them when the mind is capable of
believing anything that is told to it seriously?
First Woman. The very words M?Ninny said to me; and he
said also, ? You know, I suppose, Mrs. Chioklethorpe, what an
experimental fact is?? ?Yes,? said I. ?An experimental fact is a
thing in astronomy, chemistry, or mathematics, or geology, that can
be proved by experiment.? ? Exactly so,? said he. ? Well, if chil-
dren are taught these things before they study the Scriptures, a habit
of thought is given to them. A very wicked habit, Mrs. Chickle-
thorpe, for children thus grow up to think about what they read, and,
for want of listening to better information explained by us clergymen,
they hastily conclude that the Bible, being found irreconcilable with
the known laws of Nature, it cannot consequently be the inspired
word of Nature?s interior Divine Mind; since, if so, that interior
Divine Mind?a name they have for the Almighty?is found in the
Book to be altogether ignorant of His own works. Here is the
folly, you see, Mrs. Chioklethorpe, of teaching children science
first and Bible after; their understandings are made too clearly
critical, and lam made to cut a ridiculous figure. If this secular
system of education goes on, I won?t be able to get a living.? This
is what the minister said.
Second Woman. M?Ninny is a good man.
First Woman. Oh! and a rare. The Bubbles are a specimen
of what the Bible and he can do. Go, no matter where you will,
everybody will tell you the same. Everybody has a good word


about the Bubbles. As supports of the church, and as illustrations
in their lives, and in the lives of their children, of what the Bible
and the preachings of the Eeverend Mr. M'Ninny can do.
Lady Bubble. That is a nice woman! I like that woman!
Second Woman. Good gracious ! Look at the goats and fowls
and pigs in that garden. And, see, the gate is tied open. Here
has been a nasty trick !
First Woman. Let us go and But, stand aside, Mrs.
Bloodlesnubs is driving them out.
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. My pretty flowers, and my seeds !
Lady Bubble. Now, now, here she comes!
Enter Mas. Bloodlesnubs, driving out of her gate nanny-goats,
fowls, and pigs.
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. After being so careful and going to such
expense with the plants ! Oh! if I could only kill you, you thief
of a pig. Get out, you goat, get out! Get out! Did you ever
see such a trick!
First Woman. Never. This was nasty, indeed, to do!
Second Woman. It was a bad trick.
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. After having everything so nice?so well
arranged.
First Woman. Just fancy!
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. Everything?s spoiled, everything; and see
how the gate has been tied. Here?s a fowl I killed. There it goes
over their wall. I blame them with it all. The bad, wicked
Bubbles, nobody else but they did it.
[She flings the dead fowl over the wall into Lady Bubble's lap.\
Lady Bubble. Oh, the wretch! I could tear your eyes out!
First Woman. But, Mrs. Bloodlesnubs, you are mistaken,
surely ?
Second Woman. Surely the Bubbles would never do such
thing.
First Woman. The Bubbles are such good people !
Lady Bubble. I like that woman.
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. I tell you the Bubbles and nobody else
would be so mean as to do such a mean thing. They are all
whitewashed hypocrites. I know what they are. She herself is
an idle, filthy thing. Her children are troublesome brats!
Lady Bubble. I?ll fling the dead hen at your head!
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. I caught them, yesterday, climbing over
my garden wall to plunder our apple trees. Her grown daughters,
too, Henrietta and Louisa, are no better than larrikinesses,


Lady Bubble. If those other women were away I would!?
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. Bold things, who giggle at your back and
pass insulting remarks!
Lady Bubble. Oh ! the ugly, fat wretch !
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. And then what would kill one is, they are
so religious ! So full of the Bible! So great in the church ! The
support of the church! So pious and sweet-smiling in public! So
constant at the sacrament! So constant at prayer meeting!
First Woman. Why, I never heard the like !
Second Woman. Nor I!
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. If I buy a new bonnet, the good old lady
herself must come out with a grander!
Lady Bubble. Was there ever such a liar ?
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. They are as jealous of us as cats and
dogs!
Lady Bubble. You beast of a woman !
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. And, to crown all, my husband?who, I
must say, though he would harm nobody, yet is a man rash and
venturesome ?was grossly cheated by the head of the Bubble
House !
First Woman. Well, this is news !
Lady Bubble. The old babbler!
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. My husband, thinking by the report that
the Australian Coal Company was a success, must rush everywhere
for shares; and who does he meet but your pious Sir Bounoeable
Bubble, who, well knowing that the thing was a failure, praises it
to the nines to Bloodlesnubs. Bloodlesnubs, deeming such a
Presbyterian as Bubble as honest as he is represented to be pious,
buys Bubble?s shares. Aye! buys Bubble?s shares to the amount
of five hundred pounds, and m an hour afterwards finds them
valueless !
First Woman. Did you ever hear the like ?
Second Woman. Did you ever ?
Mrs. Bloodlesnubs. Bloodlesnubs went to ask an explanation
off Bubble. Here he comes now.
Enter Bloodlesnubs.
Well, John! I suppose he was entirely ignorant?
Bloodlesnubs. Come inside, and don?t make shows of our-
selves as well as dupes and asses. Come in, and don?t bother me !
[Bloodlesnubs and Mbs. Bloodlesnubs go within their gate
and shut it hard.]
First Woman, Well, this beats all the tales ever I heard!


Second Woman. I never heard the like !
First Woman. Why, bless me, nobody would believe it!
[Lady Bubble opens her gate, and appears to the two women
with the dead hen in her hand. ]
Lady Bubble. My good friends, did either of you see anyone
throw this dead hen over into my garden ?
First Woman. Yes; this party in here, Lady Bubble.
Second Woman. This neighbour opposite.
Lady Bubble. Indeed! It is very unneighbourly now, isn?t
it ? If it is Mrs. Bloodlesnubs, I am sure I can?t tell for what
she is spited at in us. Do you both live in the neighbourhood?
First Woman. I live a little down that way; but this is
friend newly arrived from the old country.
Lady Bubble. Oh, indeed! lam glad to become acquainted
with you both. If you can find time next week, some afternoon,
I would be glad if you would come in and see me. I will show
you over our garden.
First Woman. Oh, thank you! We will be very glad to
come.
Second Woman. It is kind, indeed, of you to ask us.
Lady Bubble. This was not very Christian-like, was it? The
Bloodlesnubs go to church, and take their sacrament. But to
throw a dead hen over our wall doesn?t show that they love their
neighbours as they love themselves, does it ?
First Woman. No; it was very nasty of them, and of her!
Second Woman. The very aggravation she had does not for-
give her, for she accused without proof.
Lady Bubble. It is very unneighbourly; but come and see
First Woman. Oh ! we will.
Second Woman. We will.
Lady Bubble. Good-evening.
Women. Good-evening; good-evening, Lady Bubble.
[Exit Lady Bubble through her own gate. She goes to
the crack.
First Woman. A good, kind lady!
'Second Woman. And a nice 1
First Woman. And a pleasant, too. I like her,
Second Woman. She isn?t proud in the least?she is
Christian!


Both Women, What bad neighbours the Bloodlesnubs are!
We will tell everybody! [ Exeunt.
Lady Bubble. There go two honest old gossips; and I have
well served the stinMng old Bloodlesnubs. Who comes now ?
Enter, on the outside, Willie Hazeldeen.
It?s that young printer fellow. I?ll teach him something now.
I?ll teach him his position. I?ll teach him to come after our
daughter. I will make him believe I?m Henrietta, and then tell
him to come inside, and what a fright he will have. He will
think there is no end to my tongue. Listen!
Hazeldeen. I suppose ?tis because I am not a bank clerk or
in the civil service; because I am not every day dressed like a
gentleman. These people do not look at your worth as a man,
nor at your cultivation as a scholar. Outside appearance is
everything, and, if you can?t afford to keep up to their notions of
respectability, you are not to associate with them, or come after their
daughter. They forget how they commenced life themselves; and
being up in the world now, their daughters have instilled into them
the like proud notions. And the consequence is a worthy young
fellow ?whether shopman, or printer, or tradesman?is, if he dare
pay attentions to one of them, treated with disdain. It is thus,
1 am sure, Henrietta?s parents treat me, since, if I ever see her,
it is only to look upon her at a distance in church of a Sunday;
and if I ever speak to her, it has only been, as yet, through this
crack in the wall. But as for Henrietta?sweet, laughter-loving,
dear little Henrietta?l know she favours me. Oh! Henrietta,
are you there now?
[He speaks to the orach in the wall.]
Lady Bubble. Is it you, Willie ?
Hazeldeen. Sweet Henrietta ! were you prevented from coming
at the appointed time ?
Lady Bubble. Yes, Willie. But, oh! I can?t believe, some-
how, that you care anything for me!
Enter softly, at the bach of Lady Bubble, Sie Bounoeable
Bubble, unnoticed. '
Hazeldeen. Oh, how can you say so ! I have told you over
and over again that there is nothing in this world makes life so
sweet to me as to be near you. I sit down at this crack in the
wall even when I know you are far from it, but I love this
crack in the wall so for your own sweet sake; and it makes me
happy to know that here you place your eye, that here you place
your dear lips and speak so sweetly.
Bubble (aside). Damn me! Is this my wife making love
through a crack in the wall ?
Lady Bubble. But, oh! it is so dangerous for you and for
me to be found together.
Bubble (aside). Am I in a dream? Do my eyes really see?
Are my ears really hearing ? What ?
Hazeldeen. It is your constant apprehension of this danger,
my love, that distresses me most ?the distress you would suffer
at being discovered; but if you could only manage for once to do
one thing I would be happy.


Bubble. Shall I allow more of this blasted folly?
[Bubble takes off his coat, hut still keeps aside, eager to hear
more.]
Lady Bubble. What one thing would make you happy,
sweet ?
Hazeldeen. To have you come a walk with me up the green
alley, love, or sit beside you there in the Sweet-briar Bower.
Lady Bubble. Well, so you may.
Hazeldeen. What ? Sit beside you in the sheltered bower ?
Lady Bubble. Yes. The night about us doth her mantle
spread, and there is no one nigh. Open the gate.
Bubble. I?ll beat his eyes in when he opens it,
Lady Bubble. I will sit still until he finds me out, and,
when he does, he will get the length of my tongue.
[Before Hazeldeen gets round to the gate it flies open, and
in steps the Reverend Mb. M'Ninny, who is knocked down
immediately by Sir Bounceable, who does not recognise
M? Ninny at first.]
Bubble. You will crack about love, will you, to my wife
through a crack in the wall! You will say sweet things to my
wife, will you, through a crack in the wall!
Lady Bubble. There! my husband has heard everything.
He is always sneaking about; but, alack! who do I see ? Mr.
M?Ninny! Oh, father! Sir Bounceable, you are pommelling the
Reverend Mr. M'Ninny ! Bubble! Bubble!
[She endeavours to drag him off M?Ninny.]
Bubble. You will make love, will you, to my wife through a
crack in the wall!
M?Ninny. I assure?you ?I am ignorant?
Lady Bubble. It?s the minister you have got under you.
(Enter Ddnoeable)
Oh, Dunceable! run outside and bring in Willie Hazeldeen.
Bubble, you have made a mistake. It was this young man I
(Enter Dunceable and Willie Hazeldeen)
spoke to. I pretended I was our daughter Henrietta. I
intended to entice him in to give him a dreadful talking to for
coming after our daughter.
Bubble. What the devil am I to believe ? Did I not hear
you cracking about love things through the crack in the wall ?
Lady Bubble. Yes; but I did it for a purpose of punish-
ment. Ask Willie Hazeldeen. Ask Henrietta. Here she is. Ask
them if there was not an appointment between them at the crack
in the wall. Was it not so, Willie ? Was it not so, Henrietta ?
Come, don?t be.shame-faced here!
Enter Louisa and Henrietta.
Hazeldeen. It was I, sir, spoke through the crack, but I
was under the impression I was speaking to your daughter.


Bubble. It looks an honest enough story, upon my word,
but it has brought me into a pretty position?l an elder of the
church, too ! You have had a great deal to do, young man, and
you have escaped what you deserved. Begone, sir! Henrietta,
go into the house. Wicked hussey! to bring such a disgrace upon
me. Eeverend sir, you see how the case stands. As an elder
of the church, I confess I was wrong to give way to my passion.
It grieves me to see you are hurt.
[Exit Hazbldeen by the gate, looking sadly after Henrietta,
who, with Louisa, retires to the house.
M?Ninny. I fear my eyes are blackened. It is thus we
poor parsons are beginning to become the laughter and the scorn
of the wicked world. T will not be presentable in the pulpit for
a month.
Bubble. Oh, Lisbeth ! do you see how this comes about ?
Lady Bubble. Do you see what your passionate nature does ?
M?Ninny. But Dunceable can preach for me. I have given
him some lessons. The best thing to do in such a case as this
?as in all cases of nose-bleeding, toothache, headache, corns,
chilblains, and, as some say, indeed, flea-bite?is to pray, pray,
pray, pray without ceasing for a heavenly protection and speedy
cure!
Lady Bubble. Oh, Mr. M?Ninny, how roughly handled you
have been! Come to the house. Here, take my arm. Come,
Bubble, and come, Dunceable. You should pray to have this rash
spirit rooted out of you, Bubble!
Bubble. Yes, my dear; but that depends upon your not
deceiving me again by making love through the crack in the wall!
[Exeunt.


ACT 111.
SCENE I.? Grand Drawing-room at Bubble House,
Beverend M?Ninny alone.
M?Ninny. The hardest thing to hide is one?s temper. It is
easy, when everyone respects you and uses you delicately, to wear
a pious smile, but in a scuffle, where a pair of black eyes are given,
it is a difficult thing to keep down the curses and oaths that
inwardly arise. I could have swallowed this Bubble at the gate,
but Lady Bubble was there; and it would have been ruination to
me, as it will be to all parsons, if they chance to estrange from
them the favours of the fair sex. It is the women secure to us
our bread and butter. It is the women fill our churches, and it is
for women that the Christian religion has become what it is. It
was well I did not forget myself, for these Bubbles are the best
supports of the church. They have been brought up under its
influence from father to son, and they are as the Bible and my
teaching has made them. They have the greatest faith in me, and
think I believe in what I teach, and suppose, if they leave their
future salvation to me, it will be all right, and I will get them
through. Think always so, my dear, hoodwinked Bubbles ! Let
yourselves be chained to such a fancy, for I benefit by it, and
so do all my reverend brothers; and so do all the men of vast
estates, princes, queens, and kings. For such purposes Bible
passages are artfully twisted to correspond with discoveries of the
day. _ The correspondence may be very obscure to the thinker,
but it is clear enough to those who do not think at all, and
these latter are the people who fill the churches?the Bubbles
and such like. I know that the meanings these passages are
twisted to suit are lies and suppositions of my own coinage, but
they serve to keep my adherents in the dark, and thus my salary
is safe. For, with such a knowledge as Tyndall or Huxley gives
me, I find it better to live easy and comfortable on a pack of
lies, than live and die an eternal death by fair means and hard
work.
(Enter Geordie, Willie, Charlie, Sissy, Louisa, and Henrietta)
I must teach these future props of the church their duty. Are
you good little boys ?
Louisa. Take your fingers out of your mouths.
M'Ninny. Of course you are all good little boys. What?s
your name ?
Geordie. Geordie.
Ninny. Oh! Geordie. And what must you do when
Sunday comes, Geordie ?
Geordie. I mustn?t laugh loud on Sunday, or play hoop or
ball. I mustn?t run round the garden neither, nor look at the
pictures of that novel book Henrietta reads every other day. I
would like to run a-gavering wild flowers in the meadow, but
father says no, and gives me a slap if I tickle Charlie to make
him larf. Must be quiet all of a Sunday.


M'Ninny. Good boy. In this way you will grow up to
reverence the Sabbath day and keep it holy. What is your
name ?
Willie. Willie.
M?Ninny. Well, Willie ! what must you do when Sunday
comes ?
Willie. Sit in the parlour and look all through dad?s picture
Bible, but I durs?n?t laugh at the bid men?s bare legs, or I get a
thump. Then I goes to the winder, and have a look at the
butterflies and bees going about the flowers. Or I sneaks into
the pantry sometimes, and Charlie, Geordje, and I have a jolly
feed of jam, and nobudy knows.
M'Ninny. Oh! but that is naughty?to steal jam
Willie. But we wants a little fun.
M'Ninny. But that is what the other days are for. You
must be a good boy, like Geordie, on Sunday; mind that, Willie !
And what do they call you ?
Charlie. Charlie.
M'Ninny. You are a big boy. You know what Sunday is
for?
Charlie. Sunday is a day of rest. Nobody must work on
Sunday, only the minister. It was made for the minster, for the
Lord likes a good man like a minister; and He made that day
for him alone, that he might get a little of people?s money, and
live in a nice house. It is for that purpose that every person
should go to church on Sunday. I go now, and always put a
threepenny bit on the plate.
Louisa. Oh, Charlie!
Henrietta. You have a long tongue !
Charlie. What?s the harm if I speaks the trufe ? Dad tells
me, and dad knows!
M'Ninny. You are a good boy, and you have told the very
truth. And what do they call you?
Sissy. Sissy.
M'Ninny. And what, my dear Sissy, must you do on Sunday?
Sissy. Do nuffin? at all. Dad reads Bible and says prayers.
Louisa and Henrietta sing ?Washed in ?Manuel?s Blood.? I do
nullin? at all. Ma snores frightful on the sofa. But we durs?n?t
laugh; durs?n?t tease cat even; durs?n?t do nullin? at all.
M'Ninny. That?s a good Sissy. This is the way to grow up
good, useful men and women. In this way your belief in the
Bible will become so firm that nothing will shake it; and you
will be a strong opposition to the spread of the new-fangled tales
of the times, such as Spiritualism and Breethought. Being brought
up this way, you will keep the pews of the churches full, and be
strong in,the belief of what the minister tells you. Give yourselves
no thought, or the trouble of thought, about it. What the minister
thinks will be sufficient for you to know, he having the complete
knowledge of spiritual things. You should always bear in mind,
my dear little friends, that you cannot get to Heaven when you


die unless it be through the doors of the church. You can?t get
there by any other way. A great fiery Hell will burn you up for
everlasting if you don?t come to church. A big devil will run after
you through Hell and roar dreadful at you, and open his mouth
and show the teeth with which he will eat you, if you don?t come
to church.
Oeordie. I haven?t been to church yet; but, s?pose I die, will
they put me there ?
M'Ninny. Oh ! it?s big people, Geordie, I am speaking of?-
big people who don?t go to church. Now, mind that, all of you
?like a good girl and good little boys ! Go and play.
[Exeunt Boys and Girls.
{Enter Dunceable.)
Dunceable, are the points of that sermon sufficiently clear to you ?
Dunceable. Oh! don?t be afraid. I know where to lay the
stress. But, dash me! you have a pair of eyes !
M'Ninny. Much swollen ?
Dunceable. My word! they are so! By Christopher! but
you did get a hammering ! Do you feel it much ?
M'Ninny. Much, Dunceable, much !
Enter Lady Bubble,
Lady Bubble. Here is a cooling wash, dear, prepared out
of our receipt book, for bruises and black eyes. Allow me to
dabble your eyes with saturated linen. What an unfortunate
mistake it was ! I have cried ever since at it.
[Wipes her eyes.
M'Ninny. My dear Lady Bubble, it is nothing. I don?t feel
it at all. All lam put about at is to-morrow?s sermon !
Dunceable. Dash me ! I have that by heart!
M'Ninny. But the evening one, Dunceable ? You will have
to do that.
Dunceable. Well, so I will. Damn it! don?t let that fret
Lady Bubble. Is that cooling?
M'Ninny. Oh, very! You are very charitable and kind!
Enter Bubble.
Bubble. I have here a sticking plaster that will draw off the
inflammation. When you have done, Lisbeth, with the saturation*
I will put the plaster on.
M'Ninny. My Christian friends !
Lady Bubble. I think that will do now !
M'Ninny. This is sweet of you both.
Lady Bubble. There now, dear, you can place the plaster on.
Bubble. I have cut holes in the plaster for the eyes, see!
There, my dear Eeverend Sir, if I could do more for you, if I
could only suffer instead of you! But Ido suffer internally; if you
only felt the pain at my heart. I trust you will forgive me.


was rash; made myself ridiculous ; made all of us ridiculous. But
you will think over the circumstances, I trust, and I hope you
will find, upon reasoning upon the squabble, that, although I
did blacken your eyes for you, I was, in my ignorance at the
..time, perfectly justified in doing so.
M'Ninny. Enough! Enough ! Don?t think about it. Now,
Duneeable, let me read to you a part of your sermon.
Bubble. _ Ah! Sir, see how we have rewarded you for making
our son a minister !
Lady Bubble. How the Bloodlesnubs will look, and the
Smiths, and the Browns, and the MTutoshes! How good of you,
Mr. M'Ninny!
Bubble. Come! this is a glass of the best Campbelltown.
M?Ninny. Peace be upon you all, dear friends ! Hark!
Duneeable, to the manner in which I emphasize these points.
This is the concluding peroration : Thus, my beloved, you will
perceive how necessary it is to keep the seventh day a holy
day?a day of tribulation, humility, and rest. And you will
perceive, also, my beloved, the necessity for closing libraries and
museums, gardens and pleasure grounds, especially during the fore
part of the day. People then, having no other places open for
them but the church, help, instead of wandering through picture
galleries or gardens, to fill the pews, and add to the "benefit of
humanity and goodness by patronising the plate. You will
perceive, then, my beloved, the necessity for teaching the Bible
during the days of the week, in school hours, to the children.
Secular education estranges them from the Bible, destroys the
very saoredness of the Book, makes it less and less an instru-
ment to keep the lower classes in subjection to the higher.
Secular education, without the Bible, breaks ranks and titles" up,
and makes poor men and women, who are well acquainted with
the sciences, feel themselves to be equal with lords and ladies;
and thus is revolutionised the good old settled state of things.
In the good old times, when the Bible was the principal
book of instruction, and everything was thought to be settled
in its place, the poor were contented with their lot?did
not want to know more than that which the clergyman
said was good for them. They did not grumble at those
who, having plenty of land and gold, sat in Parliament and
gave the church support. The Bible did all that. It kept people
in their places, from father to sou, from generation to generation.
And so it would do now but for the expulsion of the Bible from
the schools. And do you not, my beloved, already notice the
difference? People must now cry out everywhere for an equal
distribution of taxes. The levelling process of secular education
is pulling kings from their thrones, the clergy from their respecta-
bility, and the lands out of the hands of the wealthy. After the
Bible _ arranging these classes so nicely, and making everything
keep in its place, and fixing what, we had hoped were everlasting
laws and everlasting conditions, 10, and behold! the hurtful secular
system has upset all. Young minds, instead of imbibing Bible
first, are made to imbibe science first. And these are the effects:
instead of the clergy thinking and ordering all things, men and
women, and even children, are beginning to be so profane 'as to
think for themselves ! and to exercise their reason?so far, too,


wickedly to exercise their reason as to deny everything upon
which the foundation of our religious system is built, except
such points as miracles or magical events, which they have
the foolishness to say?some of them, at least?are the only true
revelations worth studying in the book, such as the rising of the
ghost of Samuel at the command of the Witch of Endor, the writing
on the wall at Belshazzar?s feast, and the rest. Such ridiculous
revelations, they say, are even to-day equalled by the manifestations
of Spiritualism. These Spiritualists claim to be inquirers into the
secrets of nature, made so by secular education. This is the folly,
you see, of teaching science first and Bible after. Oh! think of
it, beloved! Have the old times back again, if you love your
church, if ye love your minister, if ye love order and respecta-
bility, piety and sacredness, and a quiet, uncomplaining state,
where the humble will be humble, and every man know his place
and keep it. Agitate ! agitate ! Cling to the Bible as ye cling to
your lives, and say you will have it taught in the schools! This
is the latter part of the evening sermon; and thus, Dunoeable,
you will read it, for thus I would have delivered it had it not been
for these blackened eyes.
Bubble. All because of that unhappy love affair !
All. Through that unfortunate crack in the wall!
[The End.]
A. H. Massina & Co., Printers, 26 Little Collins-street East, Melbourne.


: ? n
'W
i*
,
y-. . >
.
-
spii
*
�
rtv . ' ' - . ' '
'
?
r ,
i
