

r i~j o o
THE
IPdbra Mater Stopljr:
THE CAUSES OF ITS DETERIORATION
AND THE REMEDY.
IBnr SlTX)3Sr!Hjir G-lIBBOIsrS,
F. 0.5., P.E.M.S., &c.
Reprinted, by permission, from the Herald.
Published eoe, the Author:


•f • •
« ]'- ; !


THE
MELBOURNE WATER SUPPLY.
N account of
the unnat-
tractive ap-
pearance
and unpa-
latable taste
of the Mel-
bourne
water sup-
ply, and of
the apprehensions entertained by many people
lest behind those unfavourable symptoms some
dangerous contamination should lurk, I have
been commissioned by the conductors of
The Herald to make an Investigation into
the state and quality of the water now
supplied to the city of Melbourne and its
suburbs, with a view to determining whether
its unsatisfactory appearance and flavor in*
eluded any deleterious conditions. It may be
remembered that 1 reported some years since
very strongly and unfavorably on the culpable
carelessness with which the gathering ground
was allowed to be occupied by settlers and
depastured by cattle. In company with the
City Health Officer and Dr Eichardson I ex*


•mined the ground, and traced the course of
the various channels, and found that the whole
of the drainage of Whittiesea and its neigh-
borhood was beading for the reservoir; and
that unless some energetic steps were taken to
prevent ail this filth of men and beasts from
reaching the latter, that magnificent work
would one day be destroyed by the gradual
deterioration and ultimate poisoning of the
water. The catastrophe was remote, but the
annoyance and the prejudicial effects on
health would tell on ourselves. My
friend the Government analyst did not
think as strongly as I did on this point; but
we are quite agreed ss to another source of in-
jury to the water closer at hand, and from the
effects of which we are now suffering. It is
the accidental or injudicious admission into
the reservoir of unsuitable water —storm water,
for example. When tbe waterworks were
opened, tbe water had a slight turbidity, ow-
ing to dissolved and suspended vegetable and
earthy substances derived from tbe new
ground. I then declared that this condition
was harmless and would cure itself. It did so.
Year by year the character of the water Im-
proved, owing partly to the effect of time, and
partly to the multiplication of the fisb, etc., tbe
introduction of which I bad counselled from
the first. But within the last year or two, and
especially since changes have taken place in the
administration, the water has sensibly deterio-
rated. It will be remembered that unusual
vicies’tudes of climate caused the level
of the lake to fall so far below its usual range,
that apprehensions were felt for the supply of
the ensuing season. Flood rains, however, fol-
lowed, and storm water charged with impuri-


lies discolored and nnpurified entered the re*er>
voir. Formerly, the first washings of flood
waters were always allowed to pass nntil they
became clear ; but this precaution would seem
to have been superseded by the anxiety to
recruit the (ailing supply. I am aware
that some particulars of Mr Johnson’s
announcement of this fact were traversed at the
time of publication, but the fact itself remains.
And now, instead of the bright sweet water
that we ought to have, and should have bad
but for this accident, or blunder, we have a
turbid appearance, aid a taste of the earth,
earthy.
The question which I have now to address to
myself may tins bes‘a‘ed:ls the impurity con*
spiouons in the Yan Yean waters attributable
to the first or the second of the injurious causes
cited; is it bemuddled by the washings of the
ground or poisoned by sewage ? That it is not
now pleasant to eye or palate,even I, who have
watched it with so much interest for a quarter
of a century,* and have maintained its many
good qualities, must admit; but in view of
what I myself observed a 1: Wbittlesea and in
the neighborhood, I confess to having felt some
anxiety about the manifest and serious dete.
notations. Fortunately, experience brings the
consoling knowledge that appearance goes for
lees in judgment of water thaa is that of many
other things—of course in some it is para*
mount; but an ill-looking water may be sweet
• Any reader who is curious enough to search
the back volumes of The Herald to learn the
history of our water supply, will find, in Novem-
ber, 1851, ray description of the work then in pro-
gress ; and. about three years later, contributions
on the character of the water, including my official
report, with several analyses.


and wholesome; while a brilliant, cool, and
sparkling one may bring typhoid In the
draught.
Before going into the special inquiries it will
be well to not?, for record and reference, the
present physical characters of the water, and
a qualitative and quant tative statement of its
constitutions.
Ghabactbbs.— lt is dull and turbid, of a
greenishbrown color, transparent only at sboit,
distances, translucent at nine inches, but then
opaque to large print. Its taste is list,
earthy, and somewhat peaty; and it las no
refreshing edge on the palate. These objec-
tionable features are enhanced by its softness,
which, however, is a great point of excellence
for all operations in which the defects men-
tioned are either immaterial.or removed in the
process s,such as washing,brewing,tea-making,
etc. In fact it would be difficult to find a
water surpassing it in the merit of softness, as
its hardness only reaches 2'o deg. of Clark’s
sca'e.
Specific) Geavity.— Here the singular
anomaly presents itself of water laving
a less density than water. That it may
be heavier by reason of substances in
solution is simple enough, but a check
weighing against distilled water helps to
the phenomenon. It holds a con-
siderable amount of air and gas in solution, and
these together reduce its density from 1000 to
999 475 in the fresh stat?, and 999711 after
standing some hours.
Reaction. —Acid, while fresh, from free car-
bonio acid in solution. This proceeds mainly
from the decomposition of vegetal matter -
When we come to the subject of purification


Total colids, ptr gallon ... „
13.40 grains.
Organic and volatile matter ..
3.30
Total ino/gantc ma ter
(9.10)
Alkaline salts (sulphatts and
cnloiides) ..
2.08
Silica _
8 47
Iron and alumina .. „
2.89
Lime as carbonate ..
.63
Magnesia, do. and envr
.03
the presence of this gas will be found to facili-
tate the operation, which, indeed, is no more
than fair, as it is the principal factor in the mis-
chief ; as it not only maintains the clay in
solution, but prevents the action of the tannin
present, Which would otherwise precipitate the
alumina.
CoNSTiTtmoN.-— lts constituents by weight
•re
The constituents in detail are chlorine, sul-
phuric acid, carbonic acid, sods, potash, lime,
magnesia, iron, alumina, silics, tannin and other
vegetal substances in solution and suspen-
sion, and some minute animal life. All these
Inorganic matters are perfectly natural con-
stituents of a good palatable water, so long as
they are not disproportionate or excessive, and
the same remark will apply to the organic
bodies, with a reservation as to their kind and
condition, which will have to be discussed at
length hereafter. Such of these constituents
as require special consideration will be dealt
with separately.
Salt. —Common salt is a constituent of all
natural waters and of all organisms. It has*
nevertheless, a very important bearing on the
wholesomeneea of a water, as its presence in
excessive quantities is a factor that may help*
to reveal a dark phase in its history. In
snch a case it would awaken the suspicion, and
the occurrence with it of certain other matterh


characteristic o! animal excreta would help to
condemn a sample as unfit foe consumption.
There is here no such excess. These other
substances are nitrogen, sulphur and phos-
phorus.
Nitbogen.— This may be present in three
forms —ammonia and nitric and nitrous acids.
Ammonia generally occurs in rain water, which
dissolves it out of the air, and it may therefore
often be found in lake or river waters fed by
rain. A merely detectable trace,which is all tbia
is to be found here,is no fault. But it may arise
from other sources, and be produced by the
decomposition of matters too offensive to be
needlessly detailed. Fortunately it is possible
to discriminate all these, and I have the satis-
faction to say that they are not to be found
here. The other nitrogen compounds which
occur are nitrates and nitrites, and have a
similar origin. Their absence, therefore, is a
matter for gratulation.
Phosphobds and its compounds also proceed
from animal decomposition, of which in a
water they are characteristic. An experiment
capable of revealing less than could be ex-
pressed in figures failed to elicit a trace.
Sulfhub alone remains of this group, and
like the rest is absent, at least in its
objectionable forms.
Thesa subdanoes, being of such vital lm»
portanoe, were sought both in the original
liquid and in special distillates, which latter
in all cases came out pure, rave the trace of
normal ammonia mentioned in its place.
There are, therefore, no volatile imparities,
and thus no sewage contamination. Whittle*
sea drainage seems then to be only yet on
its way.


The turbidity and flatness of the water
are due to earthy and vegetal matters.
The earthy matters concerned consist of
portions of the silica, a umina, and iron in the
form of clay, which in the colloid (soluble
gelatinous) form is readily taken up by water,
especially on new ground, and obstinately re-
sists attempts to separate it; subside it will
not, and it passe* through many filters.
The other inorganic substances are inert.
Before proceeding to the consideration of
the organic matters, tt will be instructive to
refer to the early history of the Yan Yean
water. In my report to the Water Commis-
sion in Ju'y, 1853, are analyses of several
samples, from which I now quote, in order to
compare them with the present. I find that
in the early part of 1838, when the reservoir
had been agitated by storms (I have seen a
very respectable sea on in it) the water con-
tained—Total solid*, 15.84 ; and the same
alter simple subsidence, 13.20 . and toe house-
hold service, at aootber time, 11.86. Organic
matter in the same order of campling was
3.80, 3.60, and 2.82; and the total earthy sub-
stance (that which concerns us most now),
5.85, 4 20, and 4.26, so that after having im-
proved, as I always maintained that it would,
dnriog the succeeding ytars, it has now retro-
graded to almost exactly the same state that
it was in when the work was new and
the ground trodden; and when the pipes
were gradually having the acoumul*ted
dirt of the roadsides gradually washed
out of them, and charged against the water.
In June, 1868, the total solids bad declined to
8.736 grains, while the whole inorganic matter*


only amounted to as much as the oby a'cne
formerly did.
Organic Matter may bf considered as to its
kind—animal and vegetable ; and ss to the
eondit’on of each, viz., living and dead. Be-
sides these divisions there is a very important
grouping as to character or morale, it liray
borrow the word; for there is some analogy to
justify the use of it. as seme animalcules and.
some plants, just like some men, prefer bad
Company, while others cannot tolerate it. Now
this difference ot habits is very marked in the
ease of many organisms familiar to those mioro-
•oopists who effect this field of enquiry, for
which I have a special relish, mait tuning, as I
do, that in these minute forms nay often be
read the history of a water. I have always
recognised tie importance of observing the
relation between the organisms in water and
its wbolesomeness. Hassall, in 1877, examined
London waters microscopically, but he re-
garded all organisms and tissues merely as
impurities, I have always discriminated be-
tween tiem according to their habits ; and
now all weter analysts who are micro*
aoopiets do the tame. And while, know-
ing its character as I do, I prefer to drink
the Yan Yean water unfiltered, I should
reject, even when boiled and filtered, a water
In which I found organisms of the low type or
determined the absence of the higher kind.
Now for the reverse of this condition. Those
which revel in a pure sweet water and die out
as it becomes contaminated abound in the Yan
Yean; while those which require for their
nutriment substances that would be noxious in
a water are not to be found. In fact, the
only questionable characters are a few of the


minuter animalcule?, about the border line,
and germs that have m t attained a condition
In which they can be identified. In the
healthy group are conspicuous animals,
rotifers and entomcstraca, and vegetal?,
desmidise (those exquisitely beautiful forms,
which when they are in full season give
a green tinge to masses of water, and are
deposited on filters ) Examples of objection*
able plants and animals are acari, fungi of all
kinds, vibrios, bacteria, and the larger ciliated
Infusoria. There is another class of objects
that always giv e adverse evidence, viz., tissues
recognisable ss having belonged to food sub.
stances or to manufactured articles, such as
fibres of clothing material. Thtse may have
come innocently, but their presence in any*
thing more than a casual instance awakes
grave suspicion. For example, in a whole
night spent over this branch of the investiga*
Hon, I found one fibre of blue-dyed wool, one
of white cotton, and one of hair, none of them
visible by the naked eye. Had these sub*
stances appeared many times, they would
have been a bad omen, but the wind may be
responsible for so trivial an indication as
tbi?.
For the information and amusement of any
readers who are interested in Micrology, or
whom I may attract to a pursuit as fascina*
ting as it is useful, I append a list of
some of my trouvailles.
Desmids. —Stanrastrum gracile and murlca*
tarn, closterium Disuse lunula and sttaceum,
cosmarium, desmidium, two varieties, xantbi-
dium armstum, arthrodesmus, spbserozosma,
etc; these abounded.


Fig. I.—Deamidi*, that give the green tinge to
the Yan Yean water.
Conferva—Several varieties, and sporan-
gia, melostra, cooooohloris, costoo, spirogyra.
Diatoms.—Discs, several varieties,nitz-sohia,
eoooonois, surirella, synedra, diatoma, navi*
nla.
Infusoria.—Bacteria, (few except in one
obs r»atioD,but there numerous,therefore, pro-
bably an importation), monads, various and
numerous, traohelomonss.
Kotatobia —Enkysted, rotifera, lively; and
one anguillula.
Various.—Fibres, wool dyed, whits cotton,
hair, once ; spicules, vegettl tissues, tand>
■pores, and sporangia, various, and amar-
pbons matter.
Absent.—Acari, fungi, vibrios, and large
ciliated infusoria.
Purification.—l have designedly re-
served this material point to the last,
which is its natural sequence. Now
that we know what is to be removed,
can proceed more rationally and with


Fig 2.—Animalcule, &c., in Melbourne sewage
water degraded by contamination.
greater promise of success. The imparl*
tics, speaking in a chemical sense, as of
foreign matters only, for we have seen that
there is nothing noxious present, are only clay
and decayed vegetal mat'era, unless we in*
elude the miecroeopic organisms in order to
satisfy people who object to swallow any
living thing smaller than an oyster, or any
fresh salad than mustard and cress. For my
own part (to show bow satisfied I am of tbeir
innooency), after spending four hours in the
examination of them, I drew a long draught
from the tap.
They may, however, be easily separated with
the rest. Filters will not always do it, as may
be seen in the Exhibition; but precipitation is
easier and quicker. Alum is very commonly
recommended. My strong advice is to have
nothing to do with it. The difficulty of
ascertaining the exact proportion to use is con-
siderable. Besides that, the proportion itself Is
variable, and even if success were achieved in
this, a medicinal salt, amcunting to one-fifth


of the whole,remains in solution,and can never
be separated. If excess is added (de-
fioiency, ot course, will not produce the desired
effect) a decidedly injurious ingredient is
Introduced, for alum is a slow poison, cumu-
lative in its effects, and calculated to produce,
among other disorders, indigestion and
constipation—the parents of half the diseases
existing.
The next advice I have to offer is, do not
have recourse to any quack nostrums, unless
you have a fancy to pay a shilling or more for
a hap’orth of alum water, or worse.
My remedy is Limb. I have been so long in
the habit of prescribing it as to believe
that I was the first to use it for this purpose.
Be that as it may, it was original.* The merit
of the process is that any excess separates
itself by natural reactions. For example, if a
large excess of lime is stirred into a tank of
water, the bulk of it will go to the bottom at
once, and stop there. The part that does the
work combines with the impurities, and
presently goes down too, taking everything
solid down with it. Only a small quantity
can be dissolved, barely ten grains to the pint,
at the present temperature, and in practise
the amount dissolved will be nominal and
immaterial. But on expomre to the air
it undergoes a change, takes up carbonic acid,
and becomes carbonate of lime (artificial
chalk) which is absolutely insoluble, and is
precipitated if abundant; but, if only in traces,
• Mr. Johnson informs me tbat he and Mr.
Foord discovered this reaction of lime, in 1858,
•while investigating the action of the water on
lead. I cannot fix any date, but my independent
discovery was made in a different way—viz,,
while working directly on the purification »f
water.


remains on the surface, forming a thin whits
pellicle.* The water may then be either decanted
or strained. If the receptacle bai a tap an inch
or two (according to its size) above the bottom,
it may be drawn off bright without any
farther ceremony. And if there is provision
for drawing off the mad from the bottom,
and s ime projection to keep it falling into the
tap as it descends,all needs are supplied. The
convenience of a second tank, in which the
next day’s supply may be settling while the
other is in us 3 , may be recommended. If my
directions are complied with, a filter will be
a superfluity. But to those who have a weak-
ness for filters, I have a word or two to tay.
Avoid animal oharooa'. Its action is uncer-
tain, aod it contributes very undesirable addi-
sions t > the water. The beat filter, and tbe
only everlasting and satisfactory one, is the
Dripstone. Partly because there is no inside
to it, and it is easily kept clean ; and partly
because it is tbe only one in which the water
is properly aerated —a very essential matter.
The flatn ss and vapidity of most filtered water
are caused by its'having lost its air. But of late
some filters have been made of oolitic limestone.
These are bad, and apt to taint the water.
Yet one t>pic remains, viz,, the quantity of
lime to be used. This matters very little, for,
as 1 have shown, it balances itself in time:
only if there is not enough bright sees will not
be produced; and if there is too much the sub-
sidence will occupy longer time. But ss I
* Its first action is to neutralize the carbonic
acid. The precipitate of carbonate of lime thus
formed falls and carries with it the constituents of
the clay, now no longer in the soluble condition
after the removal of the acid. The tannin is now
at liberty to act on the alumina, and the whole
mass in its descent forms a web that entangles
any other matters that are in suspension.


have made a series of experimerta In this
natter the reader may as well have the benefit
of them. I will mention five j;of them.
Of course, if the lime is already
dissolved, as lime water, tbe actions will
be more rapid, the mixture is complete,
and every particle dees its work, so that much
less will suffice. So I first tried a minimum
dose, at the rate of one fluid ounce, containing
1.8 grains lime, to the gallon. This was cot
enough, and very little effect was produced.
In all tbe other experiments I pursued the
plan which I recommend for general adoption.
I triturated the dose of lime in a mortar with
a little of the water to a fine and smooth
cream; poured that into the vessel, gave it a
■tlr round, and left it. In a few hours, more
or less according to the dose, the impurities
bad subsided, and tbe water was colorless and
brilliant. With two grains to the gallon, used
in tbe same way, separation was effected, bat
the combined particles remained long in sus-
pension. After a day or two, however, they
settled completely, and tbe absence of a pel-
licle on the surface showed that no excess of
lime had been dissolved. I then used
separately four and eight grains with perfect
enccess. With four grains perfect brightness
was produced in less than twenty-four hours;:
and with eight tbe water was clear in six
hours, but took a little longer for the mud to
collect. Of course if the lime is added in tbe
form of dry powder a little more will be
needed.*
Faraday House, East Melbourne,
18th January.
• I find, from subsequent experiments, that a
less quantity—say, two to three grains—will suffice
under favourable conditions of agitation and
exposure.
