

THE HOME TRAIL
I Cm
HOME TRAIL
\. . :■*■■ £Eh^£<^~!
H.M.T. "A 30."
AUSTRALIAN "D 28."
OCT., NOV., DEC.,
AT SEA. 1918.




FOREWORD.
On presenting the " HOME TRAIL " to our readers, it is desired to
impress upon them chat the main wish of those concerned in compiling this
small volume is to place on record a suitable Souvenir of our return voyage to
our <?wn cherished Iand—AUSTRALIA.
Plow many of us have earnestly longed for the hour when fortune's
wheel would decide that our turn to see the homefolk should arrive, and
thanks to Providence that inexpressible joy should eventuate ere many weeks
have passed.
After the hard though burning days of Gallipoli, and the fateful
years in France spent amidst a life of mud, "hop-overs," "Blighties,"
leaves, etc., the thought of home has stood out as the one great shrine of every
man, and to-day as we return with victory and peace in sight, we should
indeed realise that Providence has handed us our just reward.
All the contributions have been supplied by those on board, and
give you the impressions gained in the multifarious avenues, which the
response to the cajl to the manhood oi Australia opened up.
EDITOR.


How Pitt beat his Pacifists first and the Enemy afterward
onerr)y afterCoards.
A FEW FACTS FOR 73-YEAR-OLD STATESMEN.
BY THE EDITOR.
The chariots of war roll by the ramparts of Castle Doubting and
from the highest tower the stone is cast.
No small boy is here to cry " Ha, ha!" and to run away. Possibly
it is an elderly gentleman whom the burden of years has tired. \\ ar is
so dreadful a thing. Men must die and women must weep. Cakes and
ale have begun to grow scarce in Castle Doubting. Age falters, and
there is genuine feeling for the boys who must do and dare. Hem' shall
these tremulous steps carry us to victory—with what eyes shall three
score and ten look out over the stricken fields Y We need the young
men's courage. We have always needed it.
* * « * *
That great and good patriots should take refuge for a moment in
Castle Doubting is. no new thing. They did so long years ago, when
Napoleon threatened to over-run Europe and carried spell-bound France
in his train. Above the storm and tempest of a thunderous Parliament
stood the figure of the younger Pitt, like some adamantine lighthouse in
an angry sea. His perception was clear: his purpose unfailing. If
you could set him in the House of to-day, you would need to
change but few of his words to indict our pacifists, if not to shame them.
Then, as now, the problem appeared to be one of the national existence.
Civilisation had been caught in the maelstrom of arms and threatened
to go under. The wisest saw that by the sword alone could we win sal-
vation The faint hearts spoke of compromise, permitting themselves
to look upon the faces of the dead and weep. If this slaughter could
but cease. If there were but a way out! Pitt alone declared that the
only way lay in victory. Either we smashed Napoleon or he smashed
us. It was vain to talk of negotiation.
Hear him at the very beginning of the momentous years. It was
in 1793, and Prance had astounded Europe by cutting off the head of a
King. A League of Nations was formed to avenge so dastardly a crime.
Austria, Prussia, Spain, Holland and England set out to punish the
regicides. How little they knew upon what undertaking they had
embarked! We sent ten thousand men under the Duke of York to march
up the hill and down again, and but for young Wellesley—afterwards
the Duke of Wellington —a poor enough figure they would have cut.
Driven from pillar to post, soundly rattled at Boxtel, the lot got off
by the skin of their teeth at Emden, and came home with their tails
between their legs. What an opportunity for Charles .Tames lox.
"Peace!" he thundered in the House. "Let us have peace at the
earliest moment; let no measures be neglected."
To him the great statesman replied. Possibly he saw the meaning
if not the magnitude of the coming issue even then. He was to die later
on exclaiming, as some say, "My country—how I leave my country!"
Others declare that the word should be " love " —but love or leave, he


knew by instinct that a new France had arisen and that we must cope
with her.
* * * * *
" This motion," he says, in answer to Fox, " is only calculated to
amuse and debauch people by holding out to them a possibility of peace,
when in reality peace is impossible, and thus serving to create ground-
less discontents and dissatisfaction with the present situation of affairs.
It would be a principle somewhat new if, when unjustly attacked and
forced into a war, we should think proper to cease from all .hostilities
as soon as the enemy should be unwilling to support the attack and go
on with the conquest. The question, then, is whether we should now
court calamity, whether we shall, after a most successful commence-
ment, voluntarily submit to all the most direful consequences of failure
and defeat. Shall we, with the the means of doing ourselves justice,
pass by the most repeated and aggravated injuries and grant peace to
those whose unprovoked aggressionalone compelled us to arm in our own
defence?"
To-day the House of Commons would say a hearty " Amen " to this.
If the story of the people be but a cycle, as history teaches, surely the
Napoleonic wars should be a lesson for all time to our tenants of Castle
Doubting. Do theyno t resemble this war as one drop of water resembles
another? The armaments, the multitudes of Buonaparte! The over-
throw of small nations! The threats of invasion ! England watching
the white cliffs of France with awakened eyes! Are they coming, Sister
Anne? A loud beating of the war drums and the gathering of our hosts.
Then long and weary years and defeats in the Peninsula—Sir John
Moore going to his grave to the booming of cannon—Parliament red-
eyed with the weeping of its faint hearts—muddle and confusion. Pitt
dead and Percival assassinated, and all the while Wellington hoping
and praying while his men lay dying.
Upon what a far horizon Paris lay then. " Get there!" cried the
pacifists of that day, " you might as well try to get to the moon." Yet
long ago Pitt had spoken of " sufficient security and reparation," as
Mr. Lloyd George might speak of them to-day.
" Could they be bound," he asked, speaking of the Buonapartists,
" by engagements more solemn than those to which they had pledged
themselves in return for our neutrality? What new engagements could
be more binding, or from what part of the character of the leaders, or
what change in the principles of action can we expect greater good faith
or stricter attention to engagements than was exhibited by their prede-
cessors? To make a truce with them would only be to afford them an
opportunity of breaking it off before it was finished or violating it at the
very commencement."
Say this of the Germans to-day, and you answer the pacifists and all
their kind. Pitt answered those of his days often, and always with a
lofty eloquence. He defeated Fox again and again, and Castle Doubt-
ing used up all its stones. Yet Fox was not easily tired, and in 1794
we find him again rising to crave that peace.which certainly would have
passed all reasonable understanding. To him Pitt replies with that fine
sense of patriotism bv which he was ever moved.
% * * * *
" In the present circumstances," he said, " I have no hesitation to
declare that I would rather choose to persevere in the war, even amid
the worst disasters, and should deem such conduct much more safe and


honourable than to conclude a peace with the ruling powers In France
on their present system."
Later on he adds :
"We are called upon in a present age to witness the political and
the moral phenomenon of a mighty and civilised people formed into an
artificial system of bandits, throwing off all the restraints which have
influenced men in social life, displaying a savage valour directed by a
sanguinary spirit, forming rapine and destruction into a system, per-
verting to their detestable purposes all the talent and ingenuity which
they derive from their advanced stage of civilisation. In this state can
there be any question but to resist, when resistance alone can be effectual,
until such time as by the blessing of Providence we shall have secured
the independence of our country "
There could be but one answer to such an appeal, as thefe is but one
answer now. Asked to lay down our arms before the enemy with a cord
about our throats, when we hadnot felt the self-reproach of wfong-cloing;
to renounce and abjure our recorded professions and receive a sentence
as severe as undeserved—"that," says the great statesman, "would be
to renounce our character as Britons."
A hundred years or more have passed since these words were
uttered, but the truth of them remains. The enemy has stooped to every
outrage upon humanity that science can teach him: he has talked of
invasion: he has ravished and pillaged and murdered and burnt. Shall
we shake his bloody hand because a stone is thrown from Castle Doubt-
ing? For God's sake, men, say "No!"
As our forefathers answered Pitt, so shall we answer our pacifists.
"On to the end!" For we have stood upon thefield of Waterloo, and
we know.
The prize was almost in Wellington's grasp when he conquered in
Portugal, and Parliament mocked him. A hundred bellowed " Peace !"
then, and the stones fell like hail. But the great man merely drew his
cloak about him and passed on.
May the spirit of our race inspire us to follow in his footsteps.
Mother
You that wend your way homeward, to the home and Mother you left,
Spare, 'mid your exuberance, a thought for her beret;.
She who lost the son she bore -—the boy she loved and prized :
The Mother who gave her treasured gift should be immortalised.
She who is stricken in anguish, she who must suffer the loss;
Bowed and bent in affliction, silently bearing her cross.
Life for her has a blank file now, things are not as they were,
With so many sons returning, alas! there's none for her.
God console and cheer her —'tis beyond human aid—
For the joy-bells that are ringing, open the wound has laid;
And when you recount what your pals did, of battles fought and won,
Stint not your praise, she deserves it all-—the Mother who gave her son.
PTE. PARKER.


The Home Trail
\\ hilst we re on the long Home Trail,
Far from the raging battle, on a calm and placid sea,
Where Britain's wondrous Navy doth prevail,
Our kinsmen in the trenches answer Victory.
Vv e've offered and succeeded, our deeds of valour known
The Union Jack still flies and shall prevail;
io crush Germanic arrogance we left our sunny Home,
And, with victory assured, we're on the dear Home Trail.
PTE. PARKER.
Overheard among the Diggers.
An admiring: audience were listening to the more or less humorous
reminiscences of the speaker, and had favourably received the many
deeds o± questionable valour and doubtful moral character. His very
excellent memory xor detail finally led him to the subject of card-
playmg, when he ieiivered himself of the following:
i- happened :o be invited to the house of a man who was ' well-in.'
A was a buck party, and all the others were well ' ribbed-up,' too. A
game of poker was started after we had had a ' bonsor spread.' I hadn't
been going very long when I struck a ' full ' pat, and of course I ' opened
her out.' One bloke ' dragged with me,' and I tumbled that he bad
something good, so I called him.• He raid he had four 'tens,' and I
said, Let's have a look at them.' The host broke in straight away, ' I
would like you to understand that we are all gentlemen here, and among
gentlemen it is customary to take each other's word.' "
The roar of laughter which followed his naive confession, "I never
lost a single hand after that all night," could have been heard by Fritz
miles away, and was evidently responsible for the order of " strict
silence " after sunset.
The idea that the Australian soldier is subversive of discipline is
now such ail exploded theory that if anyone is heard advancing this
threadbare theory he should be struck on the forehead with a wooden
hammer. It would he found that a dull echo would result. Probably
the idea originated in the irrepressible faculty for seeing the humorous
under the most trying conditions. Officialdom has never been able to
thoroughly overawe the wearer of the " Rising Sun," and the solemnity
of the occasion has *ot prevented him from exercising his ready wit even
on those in high ph-.ces.
At Locre, on one occasion, a Brigadier-General was engaged in the
apparently to him congenial task of distributing medals to a couple of
deserving cases.' He had the two unfortunates providing the amusement
in front of him, under the admiring gazemf the parade of their com-
rades, and during his eulogy of their behaviour which had earned the
distinctions conferred upon them, he held the medals in his right hand.
.During the display of oratory he turned over the medals once or twice,
gnd the proceedings were interrupted by a general burst of laughter


when one of "the hoys in the ranks, probably as the result of a misspent
youth, yelled, " A bob he heads 'em."
This faculty for seeing tlie bright side of everything lias probably
been responsible for the good opinion of the fighting qualities of the
Anzacs held by our latest Ally, as the following would appear to evi-
dence. A Tommy " officer encountered an American officer in
M axim's, proceeded to twit him with, " Hullo, America.
Come over here to win the war?" "No," was the ready response;
" we're over here to help the Australians finish the war."
Among a community as large as that in which we ard just now liv-
ing, the provisioning of the inner man is of the most vital importance,
and it may fairly be admitted that the grumblers are but few and far-
between, especially when the conditions obtaining here are contrasted
with those under which we lately lived on active service.
Here, to the meat-eating Australian, the question of what substitute
he will have for his favourite food at the next meal does not interfere
with the popular pastime of gazing fixedly at a blanket spread on the
deck and then excitedly bursting forth into a medley of jargon, unin-
telligible to the man not acquainted with the inner mysteries of
".two-up."
All of us who have been in similar circumstances can appreciate the
outburst by the Digger on leave who was'witnessing a performance of
"Tlie Merchant of Venice." TV hen Shylock produced the knife and
demanded his pound of flesh, this Ahzac shouted: "What about your
meat coupon?"
- -The versatility of the Australian soldier in the face of -the-, enemy,
or-in combatting conditions altogether novel, has been so often referred
to in eulogistic terms that to quote any further instances would be
merely stressing the point.
In the lighter sphere of love, the gallantry of tlie lads from Aussie
has never been questioned, and very often he has proved the old adage,
" Love will find a way."
Placed as he was «t the beginning of the operations of the Anzacs
in a foreign country, he has nevertheless conquered any antipathy that
might have been felt for a stranger, and his initiative has enabled him
to overcome such mere trifles as the language and customs.
One of our gallant soldiers who had been thrown in the society of
a young French demoiselle, had gone so far as to lose his heart to her.
The attachment was mutual, but was likely to be seevrely tried when
the operations of our friend the enemy caused a retirement on the part
of the inhabitants of that particular sector. The interchange of the
French and English lessons consequently suffered an interruption. Love
laughs at such little obstacles, and in response to a very ardent letter
the following epistle reached him at the end of the more or less weari-
some wait imposed by the postal regulations in the Field:
" Marchenoir, the 14/8/ IT.
Dear Ileg,
Many thanks for your charming letter, who my fact one
very joy.
" If I no yon ai no to answer rather he sont the circumstance
present who into sonl cause,


I hope like you are promised being enough amiable from
to correct the fault whom I in my writing too trom sending the
verb in English therefore always I you grateful.
I no you writing no more length for with out the verb he
excess difficult.
To accept dear lieg my better sensation kindness.
Thus whom ail the family.
M y, Q UE RITE.
P-S. My sister east party for Paris near her Aunt. The
sending your, letter."
The foregoing, vduch might seem like a Chinese puzzle to most,
presented no insuperable obstacle to our ardent lover, for not-long after-
wards he obtained leave to Paris and played second fiddle at that cere-
mony at which the woman chiefly interested out shines her competitors
m the race for a mate.
The Army
BY PRIVATE PARKER.
That they do some strange things in the Army,
I think that you all will agree;
Some of them seem perfectly balmy—
At least it appears so to me.
When leaving the line for a billet and rest,
They march at a pace that is forced;
And when you have marched till you're done, I'm blessed
If the Colonel doesn't find that you're lost.
Then he calls up a halt and studies the map,
Whilst the Major his error keeps showing;
Doesn't know where he is, the silly old chap,
How the hell can he know where's he's going?
The start of a move is before break of day,
When it's dark, and you can't find your boots;
You march to the billet that furthest away,
Then retrace your steps—the Galoots!
The li.Q.M.'s store is found miles away,
And your rations don't come till too late;
'Tis reported the A.S.C. can't find the way,
And your blankets are left, in mistake.
'Tis eleven o'clock when you get into bod,
And warned to be tip sharp at four;
You're more tired than ever, and wish you were dead,
And your feet are both blistered and sore.
There are hours set apart for a man to be ill,
And the times on a board are displayed;


You're committing a crime if you ask for a pill-
Told to wait for the day's Sick Parade.
When you go for your board, you are asked what is wrong,
"What on earth is the use of the Quack?
He has drawn Major's pay for ever so long,
And expects information like that.
It is Orderly Itoom at 9 a.m. each day,
And you're up —the result of a booze;
'' Guilty or Not?" is the first thing they say
But it don't matter which, you must lose.
There are all sorts of things in a war to amuse,.
If you search for the humour and fun.;
We can laugh at the things'that once we'd abuse
Now the trouble is over and done.
Morning Stunt
The Flight Commander, awakened at the hour so dear to tne nearx
of the way-back farmer, 4 a.m., asked the guard what the weather was
like, and was^ answered: " Fairly good, sir, but I think there's a bit of
a f °tfo l crawling out of his warm bed and donning a living suit, he had
a look at the weather. The mist was apparently only a local ground one,
and the guard was instructed to warn the rest ol the pilots.
' Ordinary offensive patrol," yelled the Flight Commander, and
lav vour eo-o'3 when I do, unless you see a good target beiore.
7 We"carefully strapped ourselves in. "Contact, sir," from the
mechanics, and aLy the engines roared. The chocks were pulled away
at a signal from the Flight Commander. . . » .•
We placed ourselves in our respective positions m the lormaaon
relative to the leader, and, at a given signal, all sis; machines i«usiied
aloim- the ground together and took the air. Climbing m a southe y
direction for about a quarter of an hour, we turned back again and con-
tinued to rise to 16,000 feet. The leader then made for Arras, which
was soon below us, and the patrol flew east, crossing the hue and follow-
illg - ArchTes 6 " were up early, and the leader was soon made aware of
the fact by a " Wouff, wouff, wouff," all around him. lhe blighte
had his height 0.K., and as no second warning was needed, he changed
his direction, side slipped, climbed, then lost height, to disconcert the
""XUftitk ™ no»ai, .„d further over on the right, Cum-
brai. The leader suddenly turned north, lhe Archies had given
' f UP We could see*'two Hun aerodromes under us, hut no signs of activity,
so we decided to give them a few eggs. As the bombs were small and
our height heiim over 16,000 feet, it was very hard to observe direct hits.
The dropping of bombs was a signal for " Archie batteries o
and the same old "wouff, wouff " commenced around us, with dirty black
blotches.


We spotted some tiny black specks over Lille. Huns, for a cert.,
and simultaneously the leader rocked his machine sideways—the pre-
arranged signal for Huns about. We immediately started to climb and
manoeuvre for a better position.
There were eight of them, and the leader turned to make sure that
we were there. Ail keeping up, climbing and turning for ten minutes.
We manoeuvred above the enemy and got between him and the sun.
" Archies," as usual, gave our position away, so it was a case of now
or never.
The leader's machine rocked again, and down he goes, followed by
three, of the flight, each one choosing his own prey. When about 4U
yards from the Bosche leader, our Flight Commander let loose both his
\ ickers guns, using both tracer and ordinary bullets, which got the Hun.
He immediately " zoomed " up, did a quick climbing turn, and his
victim crashed to earth, followed by a streak of fire and smoke. The
rest of the Huns were putting up a good scrap; the other pilot, who re-
mained above in case of necessity, now chipped in.
"Archies" discontinued during this performance, for he was as
liable to hit his own machines as ours. Down went our leader again on
a Hun, who had been scrapping one of ours for a time, but our pilot
came out under his enemy and fired a few sharp bursts up under his tail.
The Hun 1 ' zoomed '' up, stalled, then dived towards earth, his wings
buckled, fell off, and floated down. By this time the rest of the Huns
had manoeuvred out of the fight and made for home, gaining speed all
the time. One of our machines fired a green light, denoting engine
trouble, so the patrol picked him up and he returned with us safely to
the aerodrome.
Whose move next?
What a lot of alterations are daily taking place
Among the kings and rulers of the globe;
And what a jolly lot of thein retired in disgrace,
No more to don the flowing kingly robe.
Let me numerate the swine: There was Portugal's King first;
Then 'Tino, King of Greece, soon followed suit;
The retinue of Pasha the Turks have now dispersed;
And Austrian Carl has followed at the foot.
The poor old Czar of Russia had to disappear,
The Russians didn't do the thing by halves;
With all the kings being taken, makes the thing appear,
They huff them off their thrones, like playing draughts.
Then T'oxey from Bulgaria cut the German bond,
Saying, " No more Bethmann-Holweg kid for me,
The reading of the war news now makes us all despond,
And I'll get out whilst I can, don't you see?"
Now comes the most important, which makes it better still,
Is the news the " Great I Am " will disappear ;
" Abdominal Crash " for big and little Will,
When they thought a world-wide conquest was so near,


That the news is elevating there isn't any doubt,
And with our mission done, and going back,
We have one consolation —they won't kick Edward out,
There's unity beneath the Union Jack.
§uppose.
The Bridish Cidizen, or Apres la Guerre
BY THE EDITOR.
I vas a Bridish cidizen,
Of yust TOUT years or so;
Mem babers dey was all 0.K.,
I dell you—so you know.
Mein bruders, dey haf' gone to vight
For Deutschland o'er der sea,
'Sist gut vor dem —ah, ja—but den
Bis Bridain's besdt vor me,
Back to Austral's sunny isle, where the daily sunbeams dance;
Away from devastation and ruin, the heart-breaking sights of France.
Back to a clime that is warmer, back where Peace reigns supreme—
Have you in your comfort there given a thought what Peace to France
will mean?
God! how they've sacrificed cheerfully; fought like devils, not men;
Claiming a victory sometimes, taking a knock now and then;
Leaving their women and loved ones, perhaps the Hun insults to face,
Where ravage, rape and murder, the advance of the Boche you could
trace.
Do you wonder our hearts are uplifted, our spirits are buoyant and
bright? _ .
Expecting the same in Australia, should we be defeated m fight.
Do you wonder we're merry and cheerful, with Yictory looming in sight,.
With the Allies dictating the peace terms —the wrongs of the world set
right ?
The Germans ignored all their treaties, dispensing their ruin in showers;
Expecting indemnities, offering terms —now they must listen to ours.
Thank God that our Isle's unaffected, our land and homes still intact—
But what if the Boche were victorious and his ruinous terms could exact ?
You women, who've offered your mankind, have more than your duty
Itewarded now by being triumphant, re-echoing the cry of "We've won."
And some that are bowed in sorrow, we know just how great is your loss,
But yours is the greater glory who gave to a noble cause.
And now, as the peace bells are ringing, Australia still happy and free,
Consider yourselves, just how different the rule of the Eagle would be;
And the festive season of Christmas, and the news all adds to your joys,
Just picture yourself under Germany's rule—and see what you owe to
the Boys.


I lofe mein goot old England veil,
Her gountry of der vree,
Vot veicomes every Kultur man
Bat comes from Shermany.
"V ot vor tarn goots dose Englander
Who hate der alien so,
Yen Government it lofe me veil
TJnd helb me too, ja, so.
Tor insdance, ven I slipit in vace
Of Bridish vighting man,
He knock me down—l bring a gaso
Vor Justice all I can.
Her magistrate he say at vonce
Her law vas all vor me;
Hey bunish dat tarn Englander,
And I vas go skot vree.
I'm yust so vree as never vas,
I go vere'er I vill;
It madders not to dese vool volk,
I vas a Sherman shtill.
Her Kaiser und der Yaterland,
I helb dem ef'ery vay
To bring aboudt der aim dey haf—-
Her goming of " Her Hay."
Und ven I vould live oudt of town,
Here's no blace now, dey say;
Ach! Dat is vor der Bridisher,
Yor me, I can veil pay.
So I soon scheme ein haus to get,
Und look me roundt aboudt,
I offer double brice to buy,
Und turn der tenant oudt.
Und ven main gountrymen dey take,
As brisoners of var,
Vot vor a dime in dis goodt landt,
Mit ineadt und trink galore ?
Her English vomen of der besdt,
Bey do so much dey can,
Mit chocolades und cigarettes
For Sherman shentleman.
Her Yitehall beoble alvays like
Goot Sherman names aboudt,
Bey'd rader see Karl Schmidt pudt in
Und Brown or Jones pudt out.
So ven I dirk how goot dey vas
To me, the Sherman man,
I tank mem Kaiser's Sherman Gott
I vas no Englishman.


TJnd ven dis var is over, ja,
Und beace at last vill be,
Mit efery Sherman gonfidence
I look goodt dimes to see.
Den Fritz und all mein bruders true,
So many as dey can,
Shall gome again across del' sea
To oudst der Bridish man.
When School is in
You may talk of Monte Carlo, and the sights you ve seen abroad,
The (iippos, with their constant roar and din,
But you've never heard a clatter like you do here aboard,
"When the Crown and Anchor, Two-up, crowds begin.
Heads a Deaner in one corner; I bet a quid he Micks 'em;
Then they crane their necks to see the fellow spin.
The interchange of coin, and the joy of him who picks em,
All help to add a quota to the din.
Whilst in another corner the Crown and Anchor sport
Is yelling " What about the Hi and Hook?"
His game is quite illegal, he knows he didn't ought,
And the C.O. reckons that the game is crook.
What about the Club and Heart, the Diamond Hook and Spade?
Come along, my lucky lads, bet where you chcose."
His glance keeps wandering nervously, he's really half afraid
That the whole of his equipment he may lose.
A crowd of half a dozen round a game of poker gaze,
" Your bob and up another," you will hear;
" I'll see you for a shilling " —and then the loser pays,
'Mid the sympathy of those who're standing near.
And then we come to Murphy, who owns a racing train,
His odds are very fair, though, I'll admit,
From even money Shepherd King to ten to one Refrain,
His gamble proved a most decided hit.
Of course I'm only judging by the roll lie caries round,
How his patrons fare I'm not prepared to say, _
But what a lot of truth in the saying I have found,
There's a Mug born every minute of the day.
And then there is the Housey, too, the bloming noisy swine,
With its legs eleven, Kelly's eye and all,
Eyes down for the check, full house or single line,
Whilst a cobber gives a hand, repeats them all.
Now picture all this babel and add a little noise
For the crowd round the piano, who will roar;
Just take a stroll to D deck, and I will bet you boys
That you'll never laugh at Gippos any more.


The somewhat aggressive cheerfulness of the Australian soldier has
given rise to the idea that he wears his heart on his sleeve and is nothing
but a shallow, easily " discoverable." This is far from being the case.
Many a time the Australian adopts the camouflage of a boisterous ex-
terior to conceal his real feelings. He " senses " the truth of the
drench proverb: " There is that within the heart of every man which,
if known, would make his truest friend hate him." Inquisitive himself,
he prefers by a sharp retort to throw the seeker after knowledge off the
scent as far as he is concerned.
A Padre, seeing a digger painfully limping along the road leading
to an advanced dressing station, asked: "Have you been wounded?"
" No," was the response, " I've been bitten by a rabbit." •
Even when admitted to the Field Dressing Station he refrained
from disclosing his exact condition. As the surgeon was overhauling
him he found several wounds other than those the wounded warrior
pointed out.
"What! another one?" he exclaimed. "Yes, they're like the
chats, Doctor, the more you look the more you'll find," replied the
digger.
Good-Bye, Piccadilly.
One could hardly help but notice how quietly the returning troops
watched Blighty fade away from sight. What thoughts occupied each
mind? Looking back to many a hardship, awkward moments, the bad
times and the good, mates left behind—some still " going strong,"
others gone west... That was one side of our mind's picture. ' The other
is the thought of home. How we have looked forward to this day, won-
dering would it ever come, and now that it is an actual fact It over-
whelms us. No wonder we are quiet. It is almost unbelievable, even
now, three weeks on our way, and seems almost a dream.
But it is a fact, and having, it is to be hoped, successfully " run the
gauntlet " and reached safer waters, we have only to wait with patience
for the few weeks to pass when there will dawn, let us hope, a warmer
Christmas welcome than lias been our lot for years and years and years.
Lankie
Poor old Lankie ! Yes, spelt with a capital L and ending with ie,
not y, for he was anything but lanky, being below the average height,
but he came from Lancashire, which we abbreviated to Lankie. He was
not poor or old, but the name was used by his comrades in the convales-
cent hospital as a term of endearment, for we all liked him for the cheer-
ful disposition he had. Many a time did he raise our spirits when we
were a trifle down-hearted, or were prone to look on the solemn side of
things. Well do I remember my tirst few days in the same tent he lived
in. Just fresh from experience in more than my share of Jerry's gas,
I felt more than ever a stranger in "Blighty."" I was an "Aussie,"
and without a friend in the whole land. The other eleven occupants of
the tent seemed to me to be all old friends, as they clustered at one end
of it, laughing heartily at some remarks that one of their number had
just made.


Arriving late in the afternoon, I spent the remainder of it in study-
ing the men who were to be my companions for the next four weeks—
the period generally allowed for a SICK or wounded man to recuperate in
a convalescent hospital. I soon found myself laughing at Lankie's
eccentricities, and by the following morning 1 was also one of the friends,
being irresistibly drawn into the circle. Lankie's principal thought
seemed to he the cheering up of his more or less glum comrades, and he
invariably succeeded, for he was a born comedian. He could both give
and take a joke, and laughed as heartily as any of us when a successful
trick was piayed upon him. Some of the men at times thoughtlessly
teased him about tlie partial baldness of his head—a sore subject with
him, brought on by contracting fever in the trenches at Gallipoli.
He was one of the original volunteers to be sent to that Hades of a
place. He felt the allusions very much, but very soon recovered him-
self. AY hen I last saw him he was also recovering the bald spot. Some-
times his jokes also hit hard, but he was always manly enough to show
his regret for wounding the susceptibilities of his comrades. He was
responsible for getting our No. 2 tent a bad name on account of the
noise therein. Sisters and Nurses, eventhe Commandant, would occa-
sionally enter our tent at the double, and, after vainly trying to assume
an austere expression for a few moments, generally retired convulsed
with laughter, which they had perforce to give vent to. The reason
being that upon their entrance eleven men were presumably asleep while
Lankie was to be seen sitting up in bed and engaged in some drollery,
seemingly oblivious to all else excepting the work that he was perform-
ing, and the expression on his face was such that it would soften more
hardened onlookers than the Hospital Nursing Staff. He did not pos-
sess the voice of a Melba, but he frequently indulged in singing (?). I
say singing, for the want of a more enlightened term. Not all the cat-
calls or dog-yelps would cause him to desist until he had iinished his
song- to his own satisfaction. The Matron at times would come to the
entrance of the tent and say, " Private —is very low-spirited to-
day, I wish that you would go and cheer him up." Lankie always went
and invariably succeeded, in other ways, also, he was always to the
fore in helping', for when, as often happened, the men's short supply of
cash gave out, it was he that always placed his own limited funds at
their disposal,and when stress of work compelled the hard-worked nurses
to look for volunteers to help them, again Lankie was found, with a
number of his comrades, placing himself and party at the disposal of
the Sister. Poor old Lankie, the last that I heard of him, he had
finished with Prance and was marked permanently unfit and to remain
in Blighty for good, and not one who knows him but will say he deserves
it, and good luck to him. May he live for many years to continue hi 3
cheerful disposition, helping others to look on the bright side of every-
thing.
After Dark
AA"e were enjoying the fresh air on the promenade deck the other
evening, and drifted into conversation with a digger obviously engaged
in contemplation.
" It's close to.-night." AVe turned, and so far as we could see him
he appeared the average type of Billjim. " Think we will get out of
the danger zone to-day?" No, we thought not, and for a time there
was silence.


You know a man cannot realise yet that he is finished with shells,
gas and mud. Talking about mud reminds me of something in 191(5,
on the Somme." We scented a story, something perhaps worth listening
to, so we waited.
"In November, 1916," he said, after a pause, "we had been mak-
ing roads around Montauban, Bernafay and Longueville and those
places, and were playing ducks and cursing and swearing in the mud.
Nice sloppy, easy, oozy mud it was, too, the stuff that got in your hair
and got down your back. We had three long weeks of mud, and I swear
we ate, drank, slept and washed in the stuff. When the country round
was something near a flypaper on a large scale, we were ordered up to
the line. Well, I have done a few trips up before and after that, but
I. am dashed if I ever saw anything like it. An Aussie A.S.C. officer
riding back in a fresh Bond-street uniform, mounted on a beautiful
chestnut, gracefully took a header into about five feet of the stuff, as his
nag slid into a real ' beaut.' of a shell hole. His remarks as he scraped
the mud out of his mouth, eyes and ears astonished even the diggers.
(My heavens !—Ed.)
We were moving up in gum hoots. Why the Lord ever allowed
these darned things to be created lam blessed if I know. When we
turned off later into the sap we learnt more of their absolute uselessness.
Up the communication sap the sides of the trench were falling in where
one of Fritz's shells had created a 'crump,' and the mud there was like
soft glue or putty. It took us two hours to do a mile. In one place a
man who used to be a Salvation Army leader at Wagga got bogged up
to his neck, and we had to leave him there until we could dig him out
later. _ His language bit the night air all round. Poor old Steve couldn't
beat him. He was not the only one left like that. Half the hoys had
to remain helpless until later.
" Well, we reached a point where it was impossible to go further,
so the Sergeant decided to go over the top and chance being bogged in
shell holes in the dark. It was some job pulling the hoys up out of the
trench, but somehow we managed to do it all right until we came to old
Alf. Poor old Alf was a little beggar and over fifty years old. We
tugged like h to get him up, but he only stuck more'. ' 'Alf a mo,'
says he, ' I'll undo these hoots.' Then we had another
go, hut no luck.
" By this time old Alf's cusses were all used, and the fresh words
he invented were enough to make your hair curl. We kept pulling, hut
at last the old chap says, ' Hold on, hoys, I'll have to undo me braces.'
Then we had another go, and in a few minutes Alf stood oil the top in
his socks and shirt tails. The old chap held his breath for a minute,
then burst out with, ' ! ! ? p mud!
Come on, boys.' We got to our outpost five hours late, and Alf carried
on till a whizzbang passed him West-"
Yes, that was some mud. We thought of some similar experiences
for a few minutes in silence.
r Our moonlight acquaintance broke in again. " Mud," ho said.
"Mud. . . . Good night."


The Greatest Hoax of the War
" Allow me to introduce to you Lieut. Jones, Y.C."
The speaker was a famous London journalist. He was in the office
of a well-known financier, a man known throughout the length and
breadth of. the kingdom for the daring of his enterprises.
The company to which he was introducing the extremely young
V.C. was composed of financiers, soldiers and journalists, all of them
men of the world, but all interested in a man who had won the greatest
reward bravery can gain.
The Y.C. was a modest-looking youth, clad in civilian clothes, with
the crimson ribbon of the Y.C. and the violet and white of the M.C.
pinned on his waistcoat. Short, pale of face, and wearing a slightly
distrait appearance, he tallied well with his statement that he was suf-
fering from nerves and, was undergoing a rest cure.
It required considerable persuasion on the part of the company be-
fore Jones would tell the story of his deeds. He made light of his
' luck," as he called it, and not until everybody insisted did he com-
mence his story.
" I had been serving in France for about ten months," he said,
" and had gone ' over the top ' several times —so often, indeed, that I
was beginning to get fed up. I suggested to my C.O. that I should like
to transfer to the Royal Air Force. I was getting tired of floundering
about in the mud, and envied the men able to fly in the comparative
healthiness of the sky. Like the good sport he was, my C.O. immedi-
ately consented to use his influence to enable me to take on this work,
and about a fortnight later I bade farewell to my regiment and took my
departure for England to undergo my course of instrnction.
Having a very good knowledge of engineering, I very quickly be-
came proficient, and long before the time most beginners qualify for
their 'wings' I was doing 'solo' flights without mishap. Inside of
three months I returned to France—fijung this time. I was attached
to a famous squadron, the leader of which was Lieut. Leefe Robinson,
who, as you all know, gained his Y.C. for bringing down a Zepp at
Cuffley two years ago. Naturally, I felt a good deal honoured, and
when the time came for me to go over the German lines I was firmly
resolved to do honour to the squadron.
" Early one morning I started off on my first flight over the German
lines. My heart was going pit-a-pat, for we were going in fighting
formation, and I knew what that meant. Robinson led the way, and I
was on the outside left, flying a magnificent machine, and knew that,
whatever might happen, the machine would not fail me. We passed
over the British lines towards L , and I could see the lines of trenches
and was idly speculating over the lot of the infantryman, when ' crash!'
the first 'archie' burst right above me, and I realised I was under fire
in the air for the first time. Shell after shell burst in my vicinity and
the sky became dotted with fleecy little puffs of shrapnel, which burst
with a deafening noise and sent pieces of shell whizzing and whining all
round me.
" Suddenly, coming through the clouds, I saw a squadron of Alba-
tross Scouts making straight for us.
" Robinson was the first to be attacked. He had gone flying steadily
ahead, while I, perhaps, had steered a rather erratic course in m;y


anxiety to escape tlie 'bursting' shells. Machine guns commenced to tap,
tap, tap, and 1 could hear the bullets whining through the air.
" Then, to my horror, L saw Robinson's machine turn over. Down
and down he went, until I saw him in the far distance land with a crash
well behind the German lines.
" i came to the conclusion that it was time for me to try and get
back, the other machines of our flight having spread and taken up indi-
vidual fights with the enemy. Just as I was about to do this I heard
the buzzing of an enemy plane, and to my horror a German flew along-
side me. His was a faster machine than mine, and without any ap-
parent effort he flew abreast of me wing to wing. I could see his face!
He was a rosy-cheeked, fair boy and was making a desperate effort to
turn his machine gun on ine. Like a flash an inspiration came to me,
and I picked up the Yerey pistol charged with a blue light, and, point-
ing it at my opponent's face, I fired point blank. The cartridge hit him
full in the face and burst into a blue flare. It fell into the bottom of
his machine and he leant down making desperate efforts to pick it up.
'' Side by side we still flew, but a cloud of smoke began to rise from
myopponent's machine. Suddenly his whole machine seemed to leap
into flame, and before I had time to realise what had actually happened
his machine went plunging to earth, the smoke trailing behind him.
" My earnest hope that I had done with the Germans for the time
being failed to materialise. Just as I was turning homeward, the hum
of another engine betrayed the approach of a foe, and a big double-seater
scouting machine came right across the sights of my Lewis gun.
" This time my luck was right in. I had a new drum of ammuni-
tion on my gun, and let fly a stream of bullets straight into my oppo-
nents. Their machine turned, then, in apparently aimless circles,
headed slowly earthwards.
"As if that were not enough for one day, I was then attacked by
another German. It was fully ten -minutes before this fight was con-
cluded. At last my third opponent, whose machine was not equal to
mine for speed, was soon at my mercy. I quickly manoeuvred, and,
getting under and slightly to the rear of him, I emptied my drum into
him. Down below * the German anti-aircraft guns had been silent
throughout the fight, but as soon as the gunners saw their own machine
crash they began firing, and I judged it was time' to go home, and
managed to do so safely.
After some little trouble in picking up my position I made my
aerodrome safely, and you may judge of my dismay when, shortly after-
wards, I was sent for by my C.Q. to explain why I had not reported to
the Orderly Room immediately upon my arrival. However, my ex-
planation was accepted and afterwards confirmed from the O.P.'s, and
about a week later I was informed that I had been awarded the Victoria
Cross.
•" I kept on flying for some months after, bringing down eight other
German machines, and also getting the Military Cross.
" I had more than completed the required number of war flying
hours, and my nerves were responsible for some very bad landings. The
C.O. thought that I should return to England for a spell and carry on
home service.
" The Medical Board stated that I was not fit for active service, and
I am leaving in a few days as an instructor at an American flying school
at P
♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ .#


The scene was a celebrated-West End restaurant,
te De^tinv 1 y ,r U f ' ana was , Paying - that alluring waltz
cnipfv inrl * l:a ner parties around the tables were buzzing with
gaiety and gossip. Lieut. Jones, -V.C., with a party of newlv made
friends was dining, and telling how a few days previously, in a Phot
1 y hotel, the foreign stall' had insulted him by asking how he dared
to walk upstairs when he was not staying at the hotel.
plainTd'toleA ted the part where the hotel manager had com-
plained to the A .P.M., when he said, • I think they are looking for me "
Apparently the manager of the restaurant had heard rumours to
die same effect, lor he came up to Lieut. Jones, V.C., and be°-°-ed him
Pdno lTr Ur tu nt T e T e th ? f an d created arcene.
• t , , a > t-e lieutenant declined the suggestion and went on
with his luxurious dinner. Out in the foyer of the restaurant an
°f- Cer y. atcllec } ike dinner party with anxious eyes. Then
apparently, his patience became exhausted. He walked into the room'
tapped Lieut. Jones, Y.L. on the shoulder, and said very quietly "Had
HTwS d r hi ot C °Th UOW r / ihe lieUteiiaut -cquiesced^hhout' words
He wiped his mouth with his serviette and, without a word to hh
friends, followed the officer out.
badlv Lle V t ' Jones ' V - C -> iLC -> was a bogus hero and was
badly wanted by our Government. He was a spy, and as such shortly
aftei being captured met his doom at " The Tower."
Faith, Hope, and Charity
BY PRIVATE PARKER.
It is really marvellous how retrospective a soldier becomes while
ymg on a sick bed. How the little events of the past right throS
h nto H MOWn V* and feelin S as important as Marshal
j ' , Ne , ollcd 11 to ™ recruiting office, occur to us. seem to
have ehipsed since that date yet at most it is a matter of fou? years It
uas n one o. the moments of mmd wandering that thi s subiect sufi-c-eHed
iHclf. One of those nights of sleeplessness that most oTus W ex-
P lenced, that causes one to remember the days, that seem vears a»o
oamH dungaree pants and military hat and boots, we mounted'our
m e ! r I" 11 s l ie ' , How important we felt, how dubious as to
ability to distinguish whether the approaching fioure was a Staff
bergeant-Major or an officer; how careful not to tSrnto thlTefiabout
Tffil i C i >V ?? Wlthin ourselves that we would accomplish the task
Ihe feelings of seifassurance when the much-envied and desired uniform
i as issued were the first seeds sown towards which the Australian Armv
cmes its present name as fighters. It was the babyhood of a future that
1 T oommand respect from both friend and foe. It was FAITH
a reuUhLrw hh^urrT man, whose military career has become
J- •, • , s surr °undmgs and environments are altered Thi*
°°4 tio mv T* ?'V »mew£t dffc rrat and
Of fflnri 1 1S ° n B " aard 111 tlle front line of mud and slidi
of /landers His keen, earnest gaze is concentrated on no-man's land
certainty the whole A " * f* ™ aß ' inary movements seem almost a
perlainty the vhoJe Army is relying on that vigilance The watch
faithfully kept. Everything still as death; a man holdin°- the lives of
c °mrades m his hands, yet theyarc content to sleep while the wearv


watch is kept. Time drags heavily during the darkness, and as the first
rays oi daylight are faintly discernible o.er the adjacent hiii tops, the
feeling of the sentry .is one of relief. 'Tis the dawn he has been longing
for and the certainty that his vigil would not he surprised, with danger
to his comrades, mis has been, his night's Hofh.
A"ext. w6 find the same man lying m a hospital bed suffering with
ravages of battle. An operation has been skiliully performed and the
patient carefully tended. 'Tis night again, but the surroundings are.
more congenial. A cool, firm, reassuring hand on a throbbing brow.pro-
duces immediate relief, and a kind, sympathetic, word seems to case the
pain. Behind a screen in the ward a c.im light burns, and he who has
suffered knowst hat his least movement will attract the attention of t.ho
Night Sister.
Every wish seems divined by this embodiment of the best traits of
womanhood, whose noble example of devotion, love and care is surely
CHARITY beyond compare.
A quiet couple of days on a T.B.D.
The destroyer lying at the buoy has an anxious wait before receiving
the signal from H.Q. to take charge of a certain convoy in an hour and
a halx from, the time of its "receipt.
The. outer harbour is entered just as the leading ship is heaving up
anchor, andthe convoy proceeds in line until reaching the '''open,"
when, at a given time, it breaks up into a formation of " line abreast."
.. The position of our destroyer, travelling' at 15 knots, is on the port
side of this " eleven knot " convoy, where she acts as a screen. The
night is dark, andthe shapes of the vessels can be but dimly observed
from the destroyer, as no lights are permitted.
While the weather remains pleasant, the life of the crew calls for
no special sympathy, but " W hen her deck knocks Hell and her keel
ploughs Heaven," the conditions are the reverse of comfortable. Green
seas sweep the vessel's length, making even the for'ard gun unworkable
for the lime b<:x>g, and the destroyer is buffeted about like a jork tor
addition, the pace at which the little ship is obliged to travel every now
and then makes her jump and tremble in a nerve-racking fashion, and
those not on duty have to crawl through a man-hole to reach their rather
restricted quarters. Even in the ward-room, where one expects a little
comfort, there is the perpetual reek of oil, and the throbbing of the en-
gines prevents one taking the rest so urgently needed.
At daylight it is noticed that a couple ox ships have lost their
"station" and are well astern. We receive orders to round tliem up,
and our speed increases to 25 knots until we reach and signal them to
put on full speed to fall into line again.
On one of the vessels —a transport —a number of men are hanging
their legs over the rails, and a signal has to be sent to stop this dan-
gerous practice.
The glass is "dropping," and there is every sign of had weather.
Shortly after the wind shifts to the sou-west and increases in velocity.
The sea rises, hut beyond shipping a little water the convoy proceeds
serenely on its way. But what about the destroyer? She must main-
tain hef speed and position, and in doing so ships heavy water. She
shivers like a stricken, living thing, and to. get along the decks, swept


e\eiy moment by green seas, is an art known only to the men who " g-o
down to the sea in ships."
ihe next day finds us in the neighbourhood of the spot marked on
trie chart referred to in " orders, ' and, after exchanging a few farewell
messages, we leave the outgoing convoy.
Hie senior ship now orders us to take up a position in line ahead
and to proceedto a certain spot, where next morning we are to nick up
an incoming convoy, homeward bound.
„ T Easy speed is the order all night, and at daybreak the signal comes,
.Line abreast to starboard—3 nules." We take up our positions as
oicleied, and then sweep the seas in search of the expected convoy. Pre-
seiitly we see the vessels approaching, and having had "orders " to each
escort our own vessel, we finally single out our ship and signal her to
proceed at top speed.
IS ow that we are running lief ore the weather things are much more
comfortable. We soon lose the other vessels of the convoy, and the
weather moderates. A break in the surface of the sea excites our sus-
P lc ™ s i ana telegraphs are rung at " full," and instantly we arc racing
at 3D knots. This may happen a dozen times in a day, but no chance is
thrown away. We are now approaching port and will soon part com-
pany with our charge.
An ominous looking ripple is noticed on the starboard beam—un-
doubtedly periscope. "Hard a'port, full speed," is given, and our
charge is immediately put on the alert. The submarine discharges her
torpedo, and as the ship in our charge swings in response to her -helm
being put hard oyer, we watch it rapidly approaching her. A sensation
of relief is experienced by everyone as the dreaded tin fish passes 10 feet
or so astern, and although a close thing, still, it is a " miss." We rush
to the spot where the periscope was last seen, and away go our depth
charges. A few seconds later our little craft almost jumps right out of
the sea, and a column of water fully 200 feet in height is shot up astern
of us. We put our helm, over, turn round rapidly a3id drop more depth
charges in the original spot. By this time the vessel we had been con-
voying is well out of reach, as she has fled for her life.
Presently the submarine breaks surface, having been compelled to
rise. First her how appears, then her gun, and finally her conning
tower. We instantly open fire with every gun and things happen very
quickly. The crew of the submarine jump overboard, the Tlnterseeboot
breaks in the middle and sinks out of sight.
We rescue any survivors who may be swimming around, and at the
same, time signal the glad tidings to our "charge," instructing her to
resume her course. It is not now a far cry to her destination, and we
bid her farewell, as we have received orders to return to our base. 25
knots soon brings ns home. We go alongside the oiler, refuel, and then
move over and make fast to our buoy.
In case anyone may be led to believe that shore leave is granted, it
might be added that we are still on the " One and a half hour's " notice,
as our merchant service is still in a very healthy condition, in spite of
Fritz's efforts at sapping our vitality by means of the submarine warfare.
A certain Army Corps order in France reads:
"No officers or other ranks are allowed to Bathe in the
Zonnebeke Lake, as the water is to be conserved for drinking
purposes. Severe disciplinary action will be taken against
anyone disobeying this order."


Now I ask you, coulcl the Zonnebeke water be fit for consumption?
There were umpteen dead dogs, borses, cows, donks and otber hoojars
iymg in a watery grave.
What hope for a nice cool, bigbly-flavoured drink!
. y- s co . bathing well, the sbelis were falling about fifteen a minute.
\\ nat a nice batb for a digger, especially one wbo frequented Manly in
pre-war days. J
The piker's Lament.
By ONE OF 'EM
We are going back to Aussie,
To its gorgeous sun and stars;
We've finished as past students
At the school of Fritz and Mars;
We've left behind the danger zone
And its high explosive jars,
But they're deuced high jokes
For digger blokes,
Compared to Aussie Ma's.
Overheard at the battle of The Wazza:
Gyppo: What for you interfere with my fire hose?
Aussie: What the did you interfere with my fire for?
ADVERTISEMENTS.
MISSING.
A man named Digger, believed to have gone to Australia. Any information
welcome, Mrs. Digger, ' The Prom," Weymouth.
SITUATION VACANT.
A va cancy on board for a Transport Driver, must have thorough knowledge
ot Sea Horses and know the right of the road. Apply, Orderly Room
, . "SNATCH-A-GEN."
jL nn. wonderful tonic, makes young men old and old men foolish. Supplied
m large and small quantities in bottles at the Transport Dispensary
Y _ ~ THE "AUTO-CUT" SAFETY RAZOR.
| i ough tercut, but will it. You never worry re-sharpening the blades.
(LOMMANCUNO ©FNCCR—Major F. L. DAWSON.
H.Jijataitf— Capt. C. D. LEAKE.
SHFLB,©. —Major L. G. KERR.
2£Dl tor —Sgt. A. G. MULINDER,
SUIKEOTTOR —Sgt. F. H. VAN BRACKKEL.
Contributors;
Cant. N. L. PETCHLER, A.F.C.
Lt. G. HUTCHISON, R.N.A.R.
W.O. F.C. ROBERTS.
Sgt. A. G. MULINDER.
Sgt. VAN BRACKKEL.
Sgt. EVANS.
Pte. PARKER,


TERMS OF THE ARMISTICE.
CLAUSES RELATING TO WESTERN FRONT.
1- —Cessation of operations by land and in the air six hours after the signature of the
Armistice.
2. —Immediate evacuation of invaded countries of Belgium, France, Alsace-Lorraine,
Luxembourg, so ordered as to be completed within fourteen days from the signature of the
Armistice. German troops which have not left the above-mentioned territories within the
period fixed will become prisoners of war. Occupation by the Allied and United States
forces jointly will keep pace with evacuation in these areas. All movements of evacuation
and occupation (2) will be regulated in accordance with a Note (Annexure 1).
3. —Repatriation; beginning at once, to be completed within fourteen days' of all
inhabitants of the countries above enumerated (including hostages, and prrsons under trial
or convicted).
4. —Surrender in good condition by the German Armies of the following equipment :
5,000 guns (2,500 heavy, 2,500 field); 30,000 machine guns; 3,000 minenwerfer; 2,000
aeroplanes (fighters, bombers, firstly D. 7. S. and night-bombing machines). The above to
be delivered in situ to the Allied and United States troops in accordance with the detailed
conditions laid down in the Note (Annexure 1).
5. —Evacuation by the German Armies of the countries on the left bank of the Rhine.
These countries on the left bank of the Rhine shall be administered by the local authorities
under the control of the Allied and United States Armies of occupation. The occupation of
these territories will be carried out by Allied and United States garrisons holding the
principal crossings of the Rhine (Mayence, Coblenz, Cologne), together with bridgeheads at
these points of a thirty-kilometre radius on the right bank and by garrisons similarly holding
the stragetic points of the regions. A neutral zone shall be set up on the right bank of the
Rhine, between the river and a line drawn ten kilometres distant, starting from the Dutch
frontier to the Swiss frontier
In the case of the inhabitants, no person shall be prosecuted for having taken part in any
military measures previous to the signing of the Armistice. No .measure of a general or
official character shall be taken which would have as a consequence the depreciation of in-
dustrial establishments or a reduction of their personnel. Evacuation by the enemy of the
Rhinelands shall be so ordered as to be completed within a further period of eleven days, in
all 25 days after the signature of the Armistice. All movements of evacuation and occupation
will be regulated according to the Note (Annexure 1).
6. —In all territories evacuated by the enemy, there shall be no evacuation of inhabitants ;
no damage or harm shall be done to the persons or property of the inhabitants. No de-
struction of any kind to be committed. Military establishments of all kinds shall be delivered
intact, as well as military stores of food and munitions. Equipment not removed during the
periods fixed for evacuation, stores of food of ail kinds for the civil population, cattle, etc.,
shall be left in situ. Industrial establishments shall not be impaired in any way and their
personnel shall not be moved.
7. —Roads and means of communication of every kind, railroads, waterways, main roads,
bridges, telegraphs, telephones, shall be in no manner impaired. All civil and military
personnel at present employed on them shall remain. Five thousand locomotives, 150,000
wagons, and 5,000 motor lorries in good working order, with all the necessary spare parts
and fittings, shall be delivered to the Associated Powers within the period fixed for the
evacuation of Belgium and Luxembourg. The railways of Alsace-Lorraine shall be handed
over within the same period together with all pre-war personnel and material. Further,
material necessary for the working of railways in the country on the left bank of the Rhine
shall be left in situ. All stores of coal and material for the upkeep of the permanent way,
signals, and repair shops, shall be left in situ and kept, as far as the means of communication
are concerned, in an efficient state by Germany during the whole period of the Armistice.
All barges taken from the Allies shall be restored to them. The Note appended as Annexure
2 regulates the detail of these measures.
8. —The German Command shall be responsible for revealing all mines or delay action
fuses disposed on territory evacuated by the German troops and shall assist in their discovery
and destruction. The German Command shall also reveal all destructive measures that may
have been taken —such as the poisoning or pollution of springs, wells, etc. —under penalty of
reprisals.
9. —The right of requisition shall be exercised by the Allied and the United States armies
in all occupied territory, save for the settlement of accounts with authorised persons ; the
upkeep of the troops of occupation in the Rhineland—excluding Alsace-Lorraine —shall be
charged to the German Government.


10.-—'The immediate repatriation without reciprocity according to detailed conditions
which shall be fixed, of all Allied and United States prisoners of war; the Allied Powers and
the United States of America shall be able to dispose of these prisoners as they wish.
However, the return of German prisoners of war interned in Holland and Switzerland shall
continue as heretofore The return of German prisoners of war shall be settled at the Peace
preliminaries
11. —Sick and wounded who cannot be removed from the evacuated territory will be
cared for by the German personnel who will be left on the spot with the medical material
required.
CLAUSES RELATING TO EASTERN FRONTIERS OF GERMANY.
12. —All German troops at present in any territory, which before the war belonged to
Russia, Roumania, or Turkey, shall withdraw within the frontiers of Germany, as they
existed on August Ist, 1914. And all German troops at present in territories which before
the war formed part of Russia must likewise return to within the frontiers of Germany, as
above defined, as soon as the Allies shall think the moment suitable having regard to the
imernal situation of these territories.
13. —Evacuation by German troops to begin at once ; and all German instructors,
prisoners, and civilians as well as military agents, now on the territory of Russia—as defined
on August Ist, 1914 —to be recalled.
14. German troops to cease at once all requisitions and seizures and any other under-
taking with a view to obtaining supplies intended for Germany in Roumania and Russia, as
defined on August Ist, 1914.
15. —The abandonment of the Treaties of Bukharest and Brest Litovsk and of the
supplementary Treaties.
16. —The Allies shall have free access to the territories evacuated by the Germans on
their Eastern frontier, either through Dantzig, or by the Vistula, in order to convey supplies
to the populations of these territories, or for the purpose of maintaining order.
CLAUSES RELATING TO EAST AFRICA.
17. —tlnconoitionaLevacuation. of all German forces operating in East Africa within one
month.
GENERAL CLAUSES.
18.—Repatriation, without reciprocity, with n a maximum period of one month, in
accordance with detailed conditions hereafter to be fixed, of all civilians interned or deported
who may be citizens of other Allied or Associated States than those mentioned in Clause 3.
■ 19.- —With the reservation that any future claims and demands of the Allies and United
States of America remain unaffected, the following financial conditions are required :
Reparation for damage done.
While the Armistice lasts, no public securities shall be removed by the enemy which can
serve as a pledge to the Allies for the recovery of, or reparation for, war losses. Immediate
restitution of the cash deposit in the National Bank of Belgium and in general, immediate
return of all documents, specie, stock, shares, paper money together with plant for the issue
thereof, touching public or private interests in the invaded countries. Restitution of the
Russian and Roumanian gold yielded to Germany or taken by that Power. This gold to be
delivered in trust to the Allies until the signature of Peace.
NAVAL CONDITIONS.
20.-—lmmediate cessation of all hostilities at sea and definite information to be given as
to the location and movements of all German ships. Notification to be given to neutrals
that freedom of navigation in all territorial waters is given to the naval and mercantile
marines of the Allied and Associated Powers, all questions of neutrality being waived.
21. —All naval and mercantile marine prisoners of war of the Allied and Associated
Powers in German hands to be returned without reciprocity.
22. —The handing over to the Allies and to the United States of all submarines (includ-
ing all submarine cruisers and minelayers), which are present .at the. moment with full,
complement, in the ports specified by the Allies and the United States. Those that cannot
put to sea to be deprived of crews and supplies and shall remain under the supervision of the
Allies and the United States. Submarines ready to put to sea shall be prepared to leave
German ports immediately on receipt of a wireless order to sail to the port of surrender, the
remainder to follow as early as possible. The conditions of this Article shall be carried out
within 14 days after the signing of the Armistice.


23.—The following German surface warships, which shall be designated by the Allies
and the United States of America, shall forthwith be disarmed and thereafter interned in
neutral ports, or, failing them. Allied ports, to be designated by the Allies and the United
States of America, and placed under the surveillance of the Allies and the United States of
America, only caretakers being left on board, namely; Six battle cruisers, ten battleships,
eight light cruisers (including two minelayers), fifty destroyers of the most modern tvpes.
(NOTE.—A declaration lias been signed by the Aided delegates and handed to'the
German delegates to the effect that in the event of ships not being handed over owing to the
mutinous state of the fleet, the Allies reserve the right to occupy Heligoland as an advanced
base to enable them to enforce the terms of armistice. The German delegates have on their
own responsibility signed a declaration that they will recommend the Chancellor to accept
this.) v
All other surface warships—including rivercraft —are lo be concentrated in German
naval bases to be designated by the Allies and the United States of America and are to be
paid off and completely disarmed and placed under the supervision of the Allies and the
United States of America. All vessels of the auxiliary fleet—trawlers, motor vessels, &c. —
are to be disarmed. AH vessels specified for internment shall i e ready to leave German
ports seven days after the signing of the Armistice. Directions for voyage shall be given by
wireless. " J
24.—The Allies and United States of America shall have (lie right to sweep up all mine-
fields and obstructions laid by Germany outside German territorial waters, and the positions
of these are to be indicated.
25. —Freedom of access to and from the Baltic to be given to the naval and mercantile
marines of the Allied and Associated Powers. To secure this the Allies and the United
States of America shall be empowered to occupy all German forts, fortifications, batieries,
an i defence works of all kinds in all the entrances from the Cattegat into the Baltic, and to
sweep up all mines and obstructions within and without German territorial waters' without
any questions of neutrality being raised and the positions of all such mines and obstructions
are to be indicated.
26. Die existing b'ockade conditions set up by the Allied and Associated Powers are to
remain unchanged, and all German merchant ships found at sea are to remain liable to
capture. The Allies and the United Stales contemplate the provisioning of Germany during
the Armistice as shall be found necessary.
27 —All naval aircraft are to be concentrated and immobilised in German bases to be
specified by the Allies and the United States of America.
28. —In evacuating the Belgian coasts and peris, Germany shall abandon all merchant
ships, tugs, lighters, cranes, and ail other harbour material, all material for inland naviga-
tion, all aircraft and air materials and stores, all arms and armaments, and all stores and
apparatus of all kinds.
29. - All Black Sea ports are to .be evacuated by Germany ; all Russian warships of all
descriptions seized by Germany in the Black Sea are to be handed over to the Allies and the
United States of America ; nil neutral merchant ships seized are to be released ; all warlike
and other materials of all kinds seized in those ports are to be returned and German materials
as specified in Clause 28 are to be abandoned.
30.—A1l merchant ships in German hands belonging to the Allied and Associated Powers
are to he restored in ports to be specified by the Allies and United States of America without
reciprocity.
31. —No destruction of ships or materials is to be permitted.
32.-The German Government shall formally notify the neutral Governments of the
world, and particularly the Governments of Norway. Sweden, Denmark, and Holland that
all restrictions placed on the trading of their vessels with the Allied and Associated countries
whether by the German Government or by private German interests, and whether in return
for specific concessions such as the export of shipbuilding materials cr not, are immediately
cancelled. J
33. —No transfers of German merchant shipping of any description to any neutral Sa"
are to take place after the signature of the Armistice.
DURATION OF ARMISTICE.
34.—The duration of the armistice is to be 36 davs, with option to extend During this
period, on failure of execution of any of the above clauses, the Armistice may be denounced
by one of the contracting parties, on 48 hours previous notice.
TIME LIMIT FOR REPLY.
35. This Armistice to be accepted or refused by Germany within 72 hpurs of notification.




