

IMPORTANT TO BONA FIDE SELECTORS.
THE CASE
JSam. Ipatgitjor, |lattlr &
VERSUS
'|)at. §ritt, Elector,
DECIDED BY
THE HONOURABLE J. J. CASEY, MINISTER OF LANDS,
On OCTOBER 28th, 1873.
MELBOURNE :
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKiLLOP'ST. *
(off 56 BOURKE STREET WEST).
IS75.




About this time Mr. Sam. Macgregor told me that I was fast
getting into his debt, but that he would be able to extend my
credit very considerably if I would join some of my neighbours
[having first class allotments too] in a trip to Melbourne for the
purpose of endeavouring to induce the Hon. J. M. Grant, the then
President of the Board of Land and Works, to legalize a mortgage
on my selection. We went to Melbourne at an expense to me of
upwards of thirteen pounds, but 1 did not inquire what expense
my companions were at, or who paid it. After many unsuccessful
attempts we at last obtained an interview with the President, who
received us as kindly as if we were his children [we were all well
selected for gullibility], and he promised to do his best for us, and
after a few days’ further delay, we received the following letter, and
returned home triumphant:—
“ Office of Lands and Survey, Melbourne,
Ist December, 1871.
“Gentlemen, — With reference to your representation that you
are placed in the position of either abandoning your selections, or,
what is tantamount thereto, of raising money at a ruinous rate of
interest, and to your request that the Lands Department will
consent to your obtaining advances from a bank on the security of
your cultivation and improvements bond fide, I am directed by
Mr. Grant to inform you that the Lands Department will, as far as
possible, sanction the proposed arrangement; it will waive any
right to forfeiture in respect thereto, and approve of any proper
security which the bank may submit for their approval.—l have
the honour to be, Gentlemen,
“JOHN L. LEWIS.”
“To Messrs. Patk. Britt, Thos. Walsh, Jas. Hyland, Wm.
“ Eogers.”
On arriving in Warrnambool I found Mr. Grant’s letter was not
at all satisfactory, because the banks only were to have a monopoly
of the loans, and Mr. Sam. Macgregor got my signature to the
following letter to the Hon. M. O’Grady, which was also signed by
many others.
“ Warrnambool, February 10th, 1872.
“ Sir, —We have the honour to hand you a copy of a letter
received from the office of Lands and Survey, in reply to a petition
forwarded to the President of the Board of Lands and Works,
praying for facilities to obtain advances on the security of our
selections. You will observe that the Land Deparment, is disposed,
so far as possible, to comply with our request.
“ We therefore request that you will be good enough to use your
influence with your colleagues to obtain, at an early date, the intro-
duction of a short bill making it legal to obtain advances on selected
laud on deposit of license and certificate of improvements, and
rendering the license transferrable in the event of non-fulfilment of
terms of loan. —We have the honour to be, &c., &c.,
“ PATK. BEITT, &c., &c.”


After all the expense and trouble T went to, nothing came of the
above, and most, fortunate it was so, for if the contrivance succeeded,
three-fourths of the selections in the colony would be now in the
hands of speculators. I little thought at the time when I was
induced to take a prominent interest in this foxy stratagem, that I
might be the first victim to it myself.
The result of my cattle dealing with Mr. Sam. Macgregor was to
sink me deeper in debt with him and others, which I was very
desirous then of paying otf with as little delay as possible. I had
seen by the newspapers that he had twenty thousand pounds to
lend on reasonable interest. I applied to him and found that the
twenty thousand was just at the moment already invested, but he
said he could procure the loan I required from the Australian
Alliance Assurance Company. While tho negotiation for the loan
was pending I contracted a few small debts in addition to what I
already owed, with the hope [for I was still hopeful] that I could
repay them when the loan would be obtained. I inquired frequently
from Mr. Sam. Macgregor and at his office about the loan, and was
answered that it had not arrived, but was daily expected. After
some months had elapsed, and as I believed the negotiation for the
loan must have failed, I entered into the following correspondence
with him.
“ Garvoc, May 6th, 1872.
“ Mr. Sam. Macgregor, "Warrnambool.
“ Dear Sir, —I request you will let me have, at your earliest con-
venience, the particulars and the amount in which I am indebted to
you. —I remain, dear sir, your obliged servant,
(Signed) “P. BRITT.”
Document No. 64.
“ Warrnambool, May 11th, 1872.
“ Mr. P. Britt, Garvoc.
“ Dear Sir, —Referring to your letter of the 6th inst., I enclose
herewith your account as requested.—Yours truly,
(Signed) “SAM. MACGREGOR.”
Warrnambool, Bth May, 1872.
Mr. P. Britt.
1871.
Dec. 16. To balance ... ... £lBO 3 1
Eeb. 26. By Alliance Comp. ... £499 7 6
To Charges paid ditto ... 14 14 0
„ Commission —5 per cent. 25 0 0
„ Rent paid ... ... 15 12 0
„ Hepburn and Leonard ... 256 5 0
„ Commission ditto—2| p. cent. 4 8 0
By balance ... .. 3 5 5
£499 7 6 £499 7 6


“ Mr. 8. Macgbeooe, Warrnambool,
“ Garvoc, May 18th, 1872.
“ Sir,—Yours of the Bth inst., enclosing account, is to hand.
Please let me have the particulars ot the first item, £lBO 3s. I .
Yours truly.
(Signed) “ P- BRITT.”
“Mr. S. Macgregor, Warrnambool,
“ Gavoc, June 4th, 1872.
<< Sir j wrote to you on the 18th last month, requesting you
would let me have the particulars of the £lBO 3s. Id., which you
charge me with in your account ot the Bth May last. i
regret that you have not complied with my request 1 never
received the particulars of the item referred to. if I had, there
could be no reason in my asking a second account to be furnished.
I beg that you will also let me know the particulars of the third item
£l4 14s. 1 think it very hard to charge me £25 commission on the
Assurance transaction, which entirely originated with yourself for
the purpose of paying yourself an account which I am as yet ignor-
ant of its correctness ; and further, charging me additionally 2j per
cent, on the same money, for paying Hepburn and Leonard. 1
hone you will re-consider those matters, lor I am not certain they
will bear the strict examination which they are certain to undergo.
« you will please forward to me the license of 32 Garvoc, which
you obtained from me, and all other documents connected with that
allotment, or otherwise belonging to me, which can be of no use to
you and which you have no right to hold, especially as I owe you
nothing according to your own account. I have notified to the
Land Department that you have no longer any right to act for me,
and that any documents purporting to be signed by me heretofore,
if presented, are not to be attended to by the Department, i
anxiously beg that you may promptly and fairly place me in a
position, by giving the explanation 1 request, to enable me to give a
truthful account of my dealings to my creditors.—l our obedient
SerTaDt ’ (Signed) “ P- BRITT.”
The following is a verbatim copy of Mr. Macregor s reply, being
in his own handwriting ;
“ Mr. P. Britt, Garvoc,
“ Warrnambool, 11th June, 1872.
« sir,—l have your note of the 4th June and now forward here-
with the particulars of my acct. against you for £lBO 3s. Id. You
had this acct. before, and it has been fully explained to you in this
office. The £l4 14s. is charges by the Insurance Company tor
Premiums, Policy, & the particulars has not been furnished to me.


1871.
June 3. To Sale Account
£7
18
0
10. >) j> >>
16
15
0
15. By „
£51
1
0
Aug. 5. To Cash
5
6
17. „ Cheques Dishonoured ...
36
5
9
P ]S T
38
5
6
„ Interest and Expenses ...
1
0
0
By Balance
49
8
9
£100
9
9
£100
9
9
To Balance
49
8
9
I cannot see how you can ask me to foregoe, in the whole or even
in part, the commission [£2s] charged on affecting the insurance.
It was with great trouble difficulty and personal responsibility on
my part that I could arrange the transaction, while the negociations
were going on, I had to be responsible to Messrs. Hepburn and
Leonard, otherwise they would have taken action against you, which
would not have resulted in your favor, nor to your comfort, similar
action to what they intended should have been taken by me on your
mode of obtaining signatures being first ascertained, I regret now
to have to refer to these things, but the tone of your letter is such
that I must take exception to, With regard to returning the lease
of your allotment 32 Garvoc, I decline to do this, it is held as
security for the money advanced on your account, and should it be
found that you have in any way have interfered with the vallidity
of that lease or other documents given by you to me, depend upon
it, proceedings of a very unpleasent character will at once be taken
and which I would rather avoid, Your adviser, or rather the writer
of your letter cannot be aware of all the facts connected with your
indebtedness to Messrs. Hepburn and Leonard and myself—Should
you require any further information I will be glad to give to you
here.”—l am yours &c.
(Signed) S. MACGREGOR.”
With the foregoing letter Mr. Macgregor sent the following
particulars of bis claim of £lBO 3s. Id., and for some reason he
made out the account on five detached bills, which certainly do not
add to its simplicity. [Nos. 48, 58, 60, 61, 62].
No. 48.
Warrnambool, 24th August, 1871.
Mr. P. Britt, to Sam. Macgregor, Dr.


No. .60.
Warrnambool, 16th Sep., 1871
Mr. P. Britt, to Sam. Macgregor, Dr.
1871.
Aug. 24. To balance account rendered £49 8 9
„ Cheque 15th July ... 51 1 0
By Sale account ...
To Cheque ... ... 32 19 0
19. Bv Sale account ...
28
» )) » ••• •••
„ To Interest ... ... 1 15 7
£B2 19 0
40 17 0
0 9 6
balance
60 18 10
£lB5 4 4 £135 4 4
To balance
60 18 10
No. 58.
Warrnambool, 24th Nov., 1871
Mr. P. Britt, to Sam. Macgregor, Dr.
1871
Sep. 16 Tobalanceof accountrendered £6O 18 10
~ Interest 3 months ... 1 10 0
By P. N. due 27th Dec.
£62 8 10
£62 810 £62 810
No. 61.
Warrnambool, 16th Dec., 1871.
Mr. P. Britt, to Sam. Macgregor, Dk.
1871.
Sep. 16 To Account rendered
„ Interest
By, P. N. due 27th Dec.
To P. N. due 9th Oct.
„ Bank Notices
„ Interest
Nov. 4. By Cash
11. To Sale Account .
■ By „
18* » n »
5> » JJ
£6O 18 10
1 10 0
55 10 0
0 5 0
0 11 0
5 13 0
£62 8 10
48 0 0
2 17 0
2 11 6
4 15 0
30 5 3
forward £124 7 10 £l5O 17 7


Whirrnambool, 16th Dec., Ls7l.
Mu. P. Britt, to Sav. Macureoor, Dr.
1871. forward ... £l2l 710 £l5O 17 7
Nov. By Sale account ... ... 20 4 0
To P. N., due 1 Ith Die. ... 195 4 0
By Fogarty’s bill, due 20th
October ... ... 92 12 0
To Interest and Commission 4 12 (5
„ P. N., due 17th Dec.
„ Do. do., 25th Dec.
62 8 10
68 4 0
180 3 1
balance
£449 17 2 £449 17 2
To balance due
180 3 1
I may here remark that my dealings with Mr. S. MacGregor
commenced in Sept. 1870, and ended in Nov. 1871. I bought
cattle from him during that time to the amount of £791 95., and he
sold cattle for me to the amount of £614 9s. I was always
furnished with the usual account-sales, which, with all other
documents, I carefully preserved. Those documents I have
classified and numbered consecutively from 1 to 81, both numbers
inclusive.
The foregoing accounts include only the last few months of my
dealings with Mr. Sam, Macgregor: and as I was not able to
understand them sufficiently, I obtained competent assistance to
unravel, if possible, the intricacies of the accounts furnished me
from first to last. It appeared then that the balance which I fairly
owed, instead of being £lBO 3s. Id., was but £9O 4s. 6d, not
including the many heavy fines for want of punctuality in making
payments, (I was indeed seldom punctual,) and not including any
interest charged over fourteen per cent.
I found by Mr. Sam. Macgregor’s account, No. 64, that he had
obtained a loan for me of £5OO, (he states it to be £499 7s. 6d.,) in
February 1871, though up to May following I was informed no loan
had been obtained ; and, subsequently, I learned from the Australian
Alliance Assurance Co. that the loan was to be repaid within two
years by quarterly payments, ranging in amount from £63 12s. 6d.
to £42 14s. 2d, the interest amounting to £145 7s. As it was
utterly impossible that I could fulfil those terms, I had no
alternative but file my Schedule, and with it the affidavit No. 79.
Bv a glance at the account, No. 64, it will be seen how effectually
the £5OO was disposed of, leaving me only £3 5s 5d to settle with
my other creditors, not one of which but had a juster claim to be
paid than those who were fictitiously represented to have been
paid. I may state that I never received even the £3 ss. sd.


No. 79,
“In the matter of Patrick Britt, of Garvoc,
in the colony of Victoria, farmer.
“ I Patrick Britt, of Gfarvoc, in the colony of Victoria, farmer, the
above-named insolvent, make oath and say—
“ Ist. That three months have elapsed since the date of order
sequestrating my estate.
“2nd. That my estate will not pay seven shillings in the pound
to the creditors who have proved, for the following reasons:
“3rd. That in the month of June, 1870, 1 became licensee of 312
acres of land in Gfarvoc, which, being grass land, 1 was encouraged
to buy cattle, principally at auction, from 8. Macgregor, of Warr-
nambool, and continued to deal in cattle until the month of Novem-
ber in the following year.
“4th. That having only a small capital to carry on the business
of cattle-dealing, 1 became involved in difficulties occasioned by the
cattle not realizing as much as I expected, and also from the loss
by death of live head and the straying of fourteen head of cattle,
which were never recovered.
“ sth. That the said 8. Macgregor undertook to procure a loan
for me, which, by his account, he effected in February, 1872, but
did not inform me of it until the month of May following, when I
found that the terms of payment were such that 1 could not pos-
sibly fulfil, and from the loss which 1 had sustained, and the charges
of commission, guarantees, and fines which I was subjected to, I
was ultimately compelled to file my schedule, executions having
been taken out against me to satisfy which I had no means what-
ever.
“6th. That on or about the sixth day of July last, and long after
I had given notice to 8. Macgregor that he was not in future to act
as my agent, he pressed me to sign some documents, and offered to
give me further credit to the amount of one hundred pounds, which
credit I refused to accept.
“ 7th. That my dealings in business were principally with said
S. Macgregor, and my Josses arose in connection with such dealings
and the arrangements made for me by him.
(Signed) “PATHICK BRITT.
“ Sworn at Belfast, in the colony of Victoria,')
this Ist day of February, 1873.
Before me “E. Gf. York, (Signed) !
“ A commissioner of the Supreme Court f
of the colony of Victoria for taking j
affidavits.” J
I subsequently applied twice to the Insolvent Court for a certifi-
cate of discharge, and was on each occasion opposed only by Mr.
Sam. Macgregor, and solely on the grounds that the estate had not
paid seven shillings in the pound.
My license expired in April, 1873, and the Lands Department
offered me a lease if the required improvements had been effected;
but as this had not been done, the lease did not issue.


On the 25th October, 1873, I received a summons from the Lands
Department to appear on the 28th to show cause wiiy my selection
should not be forfeited, for having assigned my license to S.
Macgregor and therefore violated the conditions ot it. The Lands
Department apparently was moved to take this step by a letter
written by Mr. Sam. Macgregor to the Minister of Lands, of which
the following are extracts.
Melbourne, October 7th, 1873.
“ The Honourable the Minister of Lands,
“ Sir, —1. Some time ago a person named Patrick Britt obtained
a selection of land in the parish of G-arvoc, which he partially
improved immediately after selecting; he then bought several small
bits of cattle from me, which he paid for, he afterwards purchased a
larger lot amounting to about £3OO, which he was to pay me by a
bill of exchange at three months.
“ 2. Previous to my bill having matured, Pat. Britt also purchased
a lot of cattle from Messrs. Hepburn and Leonard, which were
settled for under false representations but never paid.
“ 3. Patrick placed his lease in my hands, and I agreed to assist
him with his improvements and pay Ids rents; this I have done, but
he behaved so badly in disposing of cattle, and misusing the pro-
ceeds, that I declined to advance any further sum beyond payment
of the rents, he then became insolvent show ing assets nil.
“4. Messrs. Hepburn and Leonard and myself proved in the
estate for £694 55,,* believing that the Official Assignee (Mr. Simson)
would obtain tbe land, and in due coui’se it could be sold and the
proceeds divided amongst the creditors.
“5. Pat. Britt (the selector) has thrown every obstruction he
possibly could to prevent this by getting farmers to re-select and
otherwise ; at present the land stands in his name, the rents have
been duly paid, improvements has been put on the ground to the
value of about £2OO. Britt assured me that he had improved the
land to the extent of £4OO.
“6. Under the foregoing circumstances I trust that you will take
the whole matter into favourable consideration, and either transfer
the lease to the Official Assignee, or sell it by auction, placing such
a. value on the improvements as will protect the creditors as tar as
possible. I have the honour, &c.
(Signed) “ SAM. MACGREGOR”
As I had only two clear days from receiving the summons, and
having some doubts of being able to reach Melbourne in time, I
forwarded the following hasty, and perhaps, not too well-tempered
statement to the Minister of Lands.
“ Garvoc, October 25th, 1873.
“The Honourable the Minister of Lands, Melbourne.
“ Sir, —I have the honour to acknowledge a letter dated the 18th
inst., received this day, from the Surveyor-General, enclosing a
copy of a letter from Sam. Macgregor, dated the 7th inst., and
calling on me to show cause on Tuesday next why my selection 32
Garvoc should not be forfeited.


if I acted improperly in declining to place a higher value on them
than I did. I never assured Mr. Macgregor that I had made
improvements to the value of £4OO. There were few weeks passed
that he had not an opportunity of seeing the improvements; and
even if he had not, there can be little doubt that he was accurately
informed of my movements. I could hardly imagine that he could be
altogether so simple as to be persuaded by me that I had expended
scores of pounds on my improvements in excess of the amount I was
bound by Jaw to do; and to do so at a time, too, when he well knew
I was struggling hard for a bare existence. I did not get any
farmer or other person to select or re-select my allotment. I cannot
conceive any reason I could have for doing so. I knew the land
could not be open for selection until you gave orders to that effect;
and as I was still allowed to be in possession, this was the utmost
advantage I could expect under my circumstances. To endeavour
to transfer it to another by a trick, even if I had the power, would
be the act of a maniac.
“During my dealings with Mr. Macgregor I got the impression
that he wished me to attend his sales, and buy cattle which he could
not otherwise dispose of, feed them until in condition, and return
them to him to dispose of as he thought fit. By doing this I would
become practically his dummy, receive rations from him, and tell the
public he was only my agent. Had I been made of moderately
squeezable materials, and assisted to mislead you with false Declara-
tions, my selection would pass, as a matter of course, into the safe
keeping of the Official Assignee, and my principal creditor, or one
of his many nominees, might become the purchaser for a sum not
exceeding what would probably pay my other creditors one penny
in the pound. If I acted satisfactory in my dummy position, I
might then be afforded a few pounds, and be at liberty to with-
draw to Eiverina, there to hide my mortification and shame; or,
with a letter of recommendation in my pocket to some dummy
employer, commence again the cursed career of dummy, deception,
and dodgery.
“ In conclusion, I beg respectfully to refer you to my memorial
of August 31st, 1872, and to the documents accompanying it; also,
to my letter to the Assistant Commissioner, dated June 16, 1873.
I have the honour to be, &c., &c.,
[Signed] P. BRITT.
When the case was called on before the Minister of Lands, Mr.
Dwyer appeared for me, but, having only a few minutes’ notice, he
had to choose between a case he had in the Supreme Court and my
case at the Lands Department. He decided, as he always has done,
to help the poor man. I had the benefit of his advocacy, and was
successful. Mr, Macgregor made a lengthened statement in support
of his application, specially re-asserting that my improvements were
made, and my rents paid, with his money. Mr. Dwyer, in a few
words showed, “that by Mr. Macgregor’s own accounts the improve-
ments were in t made, or the rents paid, with any part of his money,
tha. instead of asset ng me, he used llie inosi effectual means to


ruin me, whether intentionally or not, it was then for the Minister
to decide —that if the law and justice of this remarkable case were
more closely inquired into, Mr. Macgregor might find it difficult to
avoid being placed in an unpleasant position ! ”
The Minister of Lands said, Mr. Macgregor did not come before
him with clean hands; if he had, or could have shown that the
improvements were made with his, or the other creditors’ money,
there might be some reason for giving the application further con-
sideration. There was no evidence however to corroborate Mr.
Macgregor’s statement, but there appeared to be unanswerable
evidence contradicting it. The application would therefore be dis-
allowed.
It would not probably serve any useful public purpose to give
further details of this singular case. That, although I may have
been thoughtless, and even reckless, yet enough may have been
elicited to show my creditors that I had difficulties of no ordinary
kind to contend with, and that my youth and inexperience were too
heavily weighted by my handicapper. My case, however, may
convince honajide selectors how undesirable it is to be entangled in
the cunning stratagems of dexterous land speculators. —That, in
their difficulties, it might be better for selectors to depend upon the
now well-known disposition of the. Minister of Lands to make
reasonable allowance for those who strive to win a little freehold,
and who prefer hard labour, with the hope ultimately of being
independent, rather than be those unclean things, dummies, crawling
through a few years of idleness, dissipation, and scheming, to be
then, perhaps, thrown off contemptuously, or sent to a distant
corner of the colony under another name, to pursue a similar
disreputable life.
Mr. Casey’s Land Bill, recently passed by the Legislative
Assembly, but wantonly thrown out by the Legislative Council,
would, if it had become law, have secured the honest selector from
many frauds to which he is now subjected. In the reports of the
proceedings of the late sessions of Parliament, it is stated that “a
somewhat leng'thy discussion ensued, in the course of which a num-
ber of honourable members expressed themselves favourable to any
system that would protect the selectors from the designs of dummy-
mongers, land-jobbers, and money-lenders.” Mr. Woods designated
one bank that carried on operations*in this direction as no better
than a “ low pawnshop.” It is also reported that at the hearing of
a case the present Minister of Lands said, “ If the law declared that
a promissory note or bill of exchange was no security, and if, after
such declaration, a person took a note or bill as security, w r ould it
not be reasonable to conclude that such person had some other
motive for taking it besides an honest one? ” This is applicable to
those over-sharp persons who take selectors’ licenses as security on
one pretence or another.
(Signed) P. BEITT.
