

THE
NEW DON JUAN
BEING THE
LOST AND LAST CANTO
OF THE
ORIGINAL DON JUAN
FROM THE PAPERS OP THE
COUNTESS GUICCIOLLI
GEORGE LORD BYRON.
NEVER BEFORE PUBLISHED.
LONDON: E. HEAD, 10. RED-LION-COURT; FLEET-STREET. E.C.
MELBOURNE ; THE AMERICAN NEWS CO., EASTERN ARCADE,
SYDNEY: D. KIN NEAR BROWN, HUNTER STREET,




DON JUAN.
THE LOST AND LAST CANTO.
LEFT AMONGST THE PAPERS OP THE COUNTESS GUICCIOLLI.
AND NEVER BEFORE PUBLISHED,
**r-- -
L
Thi cowl had fallen backward from her head,
The robe clung gracefully around her form.
Her velvet cheeks glowed richly, deeply red.
Her liquid eyes were flashing soft and warm.
And some low words she softly murmured.
And he, having now forgot his first alarm.
Began at once to gratefully express
His sorrow at being there in his undress,
11.
A dangerous woman, at a dangerous stage—
Plump, soft, and tall, a trifle under forty—
Could talk philosophy like any sage.
And look so sweetly, innocently naughty.
Her placid temper never showed her rage,
And Juan was quite willing to be taught—ho
Saw she was beautiful, past all believing,
Beyond conception—not beyond conceiving.
111.
St. Anthony was worried by the devils.
And many a man is ruined by his leman.
I know if I’d the choice of these two evils,
I should, like Juan, choose, I think the women.
A life of love and wine, and maddening revels.
As dear to man as is the sea to seamen.
For if we must dance in the place below.
Let’s do our share of fun before we go.
IV.
Meanwhile her Grace and Juan spoke as though
They neither knew exactly what to say.
Her Grace seemed not as though she wished to go.
And Juan’s thoughts had wandered that same way;
Their words came thick in broken murmurs low,
’Tis strange what passions shake our mortal clay.
Then Juan, unresisted, quenched the light.
And then, and then, and then, and then good night.


V.
Passion and superstition, those strange twins
That come with night and disappear with dawn;
I think the moon should answer for our sins.
We never think of them till she is gone—
Ah ! that is when our suffering begins,
When men are sad, and maidens all forlorn.
But Juan was a most inveterate sinner.
And his remorse had vanished before dinner.
VI.
We read—l think it’s in the book of Moses—
Of how a certain fair Egyptian dame
Conceives a passion for a man who shows his
Provoking virtue, though the story’s lame.
As though a man could calm the natural throes his
Breast would feel! You would’nt be so to blame
As Joseph was with lady fair; I wot if her
Case were with you like his with Mrs. Potiphar.
VII.
'Twas strange, but since the events I've told occurred.
The ghost was neither seen, nor heard, nor felt.
At least as far as went the general word ;
Thou how her Grace with her cher ami dealt
As yet will not be told, nor yet be heard ;
Enough to say they both in Melrose dwelt,
The friar’s grey-robed ghost in peace was laid.
To Juan’s satisfaction, be it said.
vm.
Missing
IX.
I don't see why their love should interest her.
Unless it was she feared the duchess might
Of some of her own fair influence divest her.
Which Lady Caroline did not think was right.
She felt a sort of warm protective zest; her
Woman’s heart had set it in that light
For Juan’s welfare, and she did not wish
To see too many fingers in the dish.
X.
And each new day but made the interest warmer.
But Juan noticed not her studied kindness.
And his abstracted ways 'gan to alarm her;
She sought in vain the motive for his blindness.
Each day her friendship’s warmth increased its clamour.
As each new day saw him for mirth inclined less;
Her warm attention served but to confuse him.
And all her arts failed even to amuse him.


XL
The truth was Juan’s heart and mind were lost
Deep in the soft blue eyes of fair Aurora
And this was bad, but this was not the worst;
She did not seem to dream his passion for her.
But kept her way, all heedless of the cost.
Not caring who might hate or who adore her,
Perhaps in her heart there lurked— but never mind.
There’s more to come, for more remains behind.
XII.
A woman’s love is strange and soft; I’ve tried
To pierce the mystic veil which doth conceal
The fire the pale cold face doth often hide.
Or burns beneath the calm, blue eye of steel;
their own breasts have
Missing.
XIII.
Missing,
XIV.
Whether Aurora loved him I don’t know.
At least as yet, therefore I cannot tell,
I have my own ideas, but time will show
The truth to me and unto you as well.
But for the present we must onward go.
And see the next misfortune which befell
Our hero and a certain lovely dame.
Though I regret that I must breathe her name.
XV.
Don Juan sank still deeper in his lassitude.
Much to Lady Caroline’s grieved surprise.
Who still increased her more than kind solicitude :
I really wish that she had been more wise.
She had no wish —well, so she said—to intrude,
And here she blushed, and then cast down her eyes;
But if ’twas ought that she could say or do.
She’d do her best, that is, if she but knew.
XVI.
Here Juan looked so sad, she took his hand
In both her own soft palms, and pressed it close.
And asked the cause that made him so despond ;
She here suppressed her bosom’s gentle throes,
And gave a glance half anxious and half fond.
So Juan thought at last he’d tell his woes.
He sighed so deep and said love was to blame.
But he forgot to speak the lady’s name.


- .... . xm
H l Baid j 0 feared his case was hopless quite,
• T l h ® lady , Waa 80 beautiful and proud.
And though he had found favor in her sight,
To I tell h h? s T t da f d r and here he S roand aloud—
10.t01,1 his love, for fear it was not right.
Although unto her ladyship he vowed
Me worshipped, nay, adored her more than life.
And would give much could she have been his Wife.
XVIII
Poor lady Caroline, though almost a prude,
herself had loved the stranger,
Hissing.
XIX.
' Missing.
xx.
KOTpretty head was resting on his shoulder.
Her heart against his breast was beating high.
Her bps were bold perhaps his eyes were bolder.
And each gave kiss for kiss and sigh for sigh;
T wu lODg lovod . rau *ht. don't make a man feel colder
When warmth is unreproved and no one’s nigh *
Life was a dream, a chaos loved and blest—
We 11 draw the veil of darkness o’er the rest.
XXL
Tisstrange that men should lose all self-control.
When once desire hath seized upon the sense.
And makes them risk position, life, and soul
>rr f °^l° Te 8 yild, brief, ecstatic recompense;
Tw strange, but true, for man is but a coal
Which woman lights, though at her own expense-
That is, unless she’s at the alter sold; V
ihen lust is legal, lore is uncontrolled.
XXII.
A bond, we know, of course is indispensable.
Jsut that bond need not be a solemn farce.
I have no doubt my thoughts are indefensible.
-Dut love is not the love that once it was,
reason may seem reprehensible
The change is due to those unholy laws
Which bind two lives for bettter or for worse
And this turns love into a weary curse.


xxm.
The bond of wedlock seems to me to break
That tender, soft devotion which we feel
For woman, when we love for love s own sake.
And our heart’s depth enshrines the pure ideal.
And the light barque floats o’er a fairy lake
Of depthless beauty, calm, yet not unreal.
Then life is full of joy, of love, of light,
Serene and holy as an eastern night.
XXIV.
jj u t to break that soul
Missing.
XXV.
Missing.
In which they do perform as they engage.
Only ’tis sometimes on a different stage.
XXXVI.
Too much familiarity breeds satiety.
And leaves no play for the imagination.
And then they seek for freshness in variety—
Some people term it vice and dissapation;
And so with wine and women doth run riot he.
While she is last in virtuous indignation.
A love or two is then her next resource,
And he a mistress gets, and a divorce.
XXVII.
So goes the tale from witnesses to reporter*,
And thence unto the Times and Mortfimg Post;
And then ’tis read by wives and virgin daughters—
They like to read these cases and the cost —
And then 'tis canvassed o’er in fashion’s quarters.
And not one word or incident is lost
By Eve’s fair daughters’ morbid curiosity.
Which seems to me a sort of mild ferocity.
XXVIII.
But to return once more unto my tale:
I didn’t intend to preach so long a sermon.
But if on that stream I once set my sail
I am sure to founder on the shoal of women.
And yet ’tis not for me at them to rail.
For man must take his share of blame with them, in
Their sins and weakness, slips and escapades,
For women rarely falls till man persuades.


XXIX.
Juan was wrong the lady to betray;
He thought so, too, but then it was too late ;
Besides, in truth, she had met him half-way,
So he resigned himself unto his fate.
Which seemed to doom him oft to go astray;
Not on her grief did Caroline long dilate.
And, as she knew her sin would bring repentance.
Thought ere it came she would deserve her sentence.
XXX.
Between the Lady Caroline and the duchess.
Our hero found he had enough to do;
But as in all these things the ease it such is.
Each thought unto herself his love was true.
’Twas delicate ground for him, as quite as much as
With all his keen finesse he could get through.
He felt all would be lost, past all recovery.
Should either of the other make discovery.
XXXI.
He had that sort of reckless reputation,
Whieh is to female hearts a dangerous charm.
Expressed in half reproachful admiration.
And blended with a sort of pleased alarm.
Such men are sought with lingering hesitation.
The gentlemen don’t in them see any harm.
Until a wife or sister’s brought to ruin.
And then they shoot him for the base undoing.
XXXII.
Sir Harry rather liked the son of Seville,
For he was courteous, calm, yet unassuming;
He little thought Juan had played the devil
With his own wife, or could be so presuming;
So he to him was courteous, too, and civil.
Not thinking of the shadow that was looming
Through Juan’s presence on his sacred hearth.
For had he have known it had woke sateless wrath.
XXXIII.
For, like most men who wear an outward calm.
Wrapt in their dream of greatness or ambition
He never dreamed of aught to mar his arm.
Or sully his proud rank or high position,
Though seeming cold his heart was tender, warm.
Yet of tiis love he made no exhibition.
He trusted to his wife’s descent and pride,
TPia honor, and he cared for nought beside.
XXXIV.
Implicit trust in love is most delightful;
I like to see a man who thus confides
His love and trust to his possession rightful.
But wives will long for fervid love besides;
They pant for that until the heart is quite full
Of passionate longing, then —then what betides j
Is what both wives and husbands much deplore.
And marvel they’d not thought of it before.


XXXV.
Sir Henry, still confiding, unsuspecting.
Went on the even tenour of his way.
His home much for the ministry, neglecting.
And thus to his own virtue fell a prey.
The season’s close drew near, the guests expecting
The court to break, began to wend their way.
And left Sir-Henry and his lady to.
The choice selection of a favoured few.
XXXVI.
Of these Juan was one, her Grace another.
The fair Aurora Raby was the third—
And last I think —at least there was no other,
Whose name as visitors who stayed we heard ;
Therefore we have no need to follow further.
The fate of those who went, but what occurred
To those who stayed, to each and every one
I will impart before this canto’s done.
XXXVII.
The duchess and the lady’s sweet coercion.
Our Juan’s heart began at last to tire;
It was at best with him a mere diversion.
Which scarcely veiled the unextinguished fire,
Which to his heart clung like a fever tertian
For gentle Raby’t was a feeling higher.
More like his love for his own love-lost Haidee
Than what he felt for Fitzfulke, or the lady.
XXXVIII.
Tet in her conduct there was a little difference.
If aught she felt as yet ’twas unexprest.
He saw no slightest sign to leave an inference
That she felt more than usual interest;
Perhaps it was she saw her calm indifference
Made his attention warm increase in zest.
Or perhaps, and here I shall end this surmising.
It was some caprice ladies are so wise in.
XXXIX.
Whate’er it was it seemed to trouble Juan,
For he grew pensive, sad and melancholy.
It seems most strange, he was by no means new in
These love affairs, and perhaps may look like folly
But he this time was quite sincere and true in
His passion pure and deep, and almost holy,
So he almost forgot the ladies two.
Though several hints at times they gently threw.
XL.
But he grew sad, although with love they strove
• To bring the dawn of gladness to his breast.
Yet failed “the rooted sorrow” to remove.
They did not know it was the heart opprest;
Nor did they dream he pined in silent love,
Or they, perchance, had left him little rest.
And so they tried to find the cause, and couldn’t.
Because, the more they would the more he wouldn’t


XLI.
It must to you seem strange that Jaun, who
Had all the soldier’s heart and courtier’s grace.
Could not find words to speak his passion true.
When, with the fair Aurora face to face.
His heart was by her beauty closely drew;
Yet oft his words expired in a grimace.
And all he wished to say he left unsaid.
Yet “fools rush in where angles fear to tread.”
XLII.
But he, not being an angel or a fool.
Did not rush in, and perhaps to tread he feared;
Her manner was so kind, and yet so cool.
That though he wished to speak he had not dared.
Her presence held him in a sort of thrall.
So all his love as yet was undeclared.
And he began to get quite thin and pale.
And lady Caroline to despair and wail.
XLIIL
His health and spirits got at last so bad.
Her ladyship advised him change of air.
She felt to part with him was very sad.
But still a lover, always in despair,
Don’t seem to give the pleasure once he had.
When strong in vigorous health and beauty fair.
They for their mistress seem to lose their eyes.
And when they wish for kisses give them sighs.
XLIY.
Aurora seemed a little touched at last
By Juan’s unexplained indisposition ;
He rarely drank, and scarcely broke his fast.
So that between his love and inanition.
He looked almost a being of the past;
And she began to feel for his condition.
She pitied him his illness, not his grief.
Therefore it didn’t bring his mind relief.
XLY.
So he prepared at once to start for Spain,
Or else return unto the court of Eussia,
He did not wish to go back there again
To be confronted by the Imperial crusher.
Who might perhaps, have asked him to explain
His absence, and though rash yet she was rasher.
And though to love her heart was always willing,
To faithless swains her love was sometimes killing.
XLYI.
She had a noble, fine, majestic form.
And grace most splendid, but she was not young;
Her love was like the ocean in a storm,
Her eyes in hate a thousand terrors sprung.
And Juan’s heart to such was never warm ;
His fancy to the graceful slender clung—
The form of pliant grace and latent fire,
Instinct with clinging love and soft desire.


XL VII.
Our hero sal within his room alone.
And pondered on the chequered life he'd passed;
The changes strange and various he had known
Since he beheld his native country last.
His mind assumed a sad and dreamy tone.
He thought of those he’d loved and those he’d lost;
They came back sadly to his recollection
In that involuntary retrospection.
XLYIII.
The dark-eyed Julia, by her love consigned.
In youth and beauty, to the convent’s cloister;
The memory of their love passed through his mind.
And his large mournful eyes now swam in moisture;
And here the current of his thought inclined
Him to regret that he had ever lost her.
But then you see his spirits were cast down.
And, as it were, his heart was not his own.
XLIX.
Then came the time when he was wrecked at sea*
And all the lingering horrors of that hour;
The awful scenes now came back vividly.
And urged their records with resistless power.
Then came the memory of his loved Haidee,
His cherished, gentle, fragile island-flower ;
And here his wild deep pathos rent his breast.
Forgotten in his grief were all the rest.
L.
His dark eye gleamed in fire as he recalled
Old Larabro’s unrelenting stern decree.
Cast to a fate that had strong men appaled,
A captive prisoned on the boundless sea.
His leaves of fate seemed strangely to unfold.
From love consigned to chains and slavery;
Then to the harem, whence he’d gladly ’scap’d.
And to war his restless footsteps shap’d.
LI.
Then came the memory of the field of blood,
Where he had fought and gained a hero’s fame,
Where he the ruthless foemen had withstood.
The little Leilia’s life to well reclaim.
Then o’er his present fate he seemed to brood
And pleasure, strangely blended with some shame.
He thought of Leilia’s love with pride and sorrow.
Then of his own love for the fair Aurora.
Lir.
The lovely Leilia’s beauty seemed to tell
; "h" could scarcely now be called a child.
For s e was graceful as a young gazelle,
A s free and daring, beauteous unbeguiled,
A sweet and gentle oriental belle.
Her love for Juan gushing pure and wild.
He was her love, her fa ith, the only one
Whose love she scugM, r nd him she loved alone.


LIU.
His care for her was what we sometimes feel
Unto some cherished, costly, fragile treasure.
And scarcely e’en to our own hearts reveal.
The vague and yet absorbing dreamy pleasure.
So strangely true, ’tis almost an ideal,
Defineless in its depth, or in its measure.
His love was deeply locked within his breast,
A crystal gem apart from all the rest.
LIY.
She was an orphan thrown upon his care
And he had guarded well his tender charge;
His heart was fond and true, at least to her.
Whate’er he was unto the world at large.
The thought that they must part he could not bear.
And felt that her wild grief he could not ’suage.
Yet for her sake he knew it must be done
Because she could not go with him alone.
LV.
The world is apt to put a wrong construction
Upon those ties that have no kindred blood.
And those pure thoughts of Plato’s introduction
Are in these days but poorly understood,
Platonic love is at a great reduction.
Some people say it never comes to good;
But that I think’s the fault of their own vice.
If they were better they would be more wise.
LYI.
'Twas midnight, and the lamp’s subdued light
Diffused a softened radience o’er the room.
The curtains barely veiled the silv’ry night
And Luna’s opal rays most softly came.
The hour seemed strange to Juan’s ear and eight.
And lent to him a solemn gentle gloom ;
And Juan’s heart—it felt no actual fear.
But something undefined and very near.
LVII.
The sky was almost starless and the wind
Swept softly past the casement as he sat.
With some strange shadow resting on his mind;
’Twas neither fear nor dread, he knew not what;
He tried to read, but he felt not inclined.
And then to write, but he could not do that.
Was that a sound?—no—yes—he strained his ear
And though the tempered darkness tried to peer.
LYIII.
It was a sound, a soft, slow, gliding move,
And coming nearer, nearer to his door !
In vain, with his now rising dread, he strove;
His breath was hushed in still and speechless awe.
What could it be, and oh ! what might it prove ?
He heard the movement, yet he nothing saw ;
He won dered much, but ere he could decide
The footstep stopp’d at his door—just outside.


LIX.
The door was opening slowly, and a form
Of seraph beauty, rob’d in spotless white.
Advanced with noisless steps into the room.
As lovely as the visioned form of night.
There, like a spirit ’midst a hallowed gloom.
She moved, and he stood still in hushed delight;
He gave one long-drawn sigh, profound and deep,
It was Aurora Raby, fast asleep.
LX.
Her soft blue eyes were fixed in their gaze.
Her golden tresses clustered o’er her neck.
As though to hide ’neath their luxuriant maze.
The treasures that her beauteous form did deck
He gazed, lost in his heart’s ecstatic daze.
His mind a chaos, and his thoughts a wreck.
His flashing eyes, in joy, deep, rich, and sweet.
Watching the graceful motion of her feet.
LXI.
The white, soft, clinging robe of night she wore
Veiled, but could not conceal, her matchless form.
And seemed to hide, but to enhance the more.
Her fine full limbs, fair, moulded perfect, warm.
The marble shoulders, round and smooth, he saw,
Her heaving breast, soft, white, yet high and firm—
A living glowing statue, veiled in part.
Yet lightly draped as by a soulptur’s art.
LXII.
The moon through Juan’s crimson curtains shed,
A softened radiance o’er the silent room;
The halo hovered palely o’er the head.
Of her who sweetly seemed to court her doom ;
Wrapped in the spell which had impelled her tread
To take her trusting heart and maiden form.
Unto the one who held her heart enthralled.
In love, tho’ unconfessed yet uncontrolled.
LXIII.
She had kept her secret well from human sight.
Though from the first her heart for him had yearned,
And it had been her heart’s most keen delight.
To see her love by his was well returned;
She was too proud and modest to invite.
Or give one sign by which he might have learned
The passionate thought that brought her in that hour,
Entranced, alone, and helpless in his power.
LXIV.
People had said he was a libertine.
Yet, though his heart burned in its deepest fire,
He had her form of grace half nude thus seen;
Without one single throb of rude desire.
He watched in silence still her beauteous mien.
Slowly, and gradually, drew a little nigber :
And fearing he might break the spell that bound her,
He gently, softly, twined his arm around her.


LXV.
Then gently raising her—lest she should wake—
He placed her softly on a velvet couch.
And lud with delicate thought, for her sweet sake.
The lovely form he scarce had dared to touch ;
And then, though here his heart gave one wild quake*
He kissed her lily hand—it was not much—
Then as she might arouse from out her dream.
He pressed his lips to hers, lest she should scream.
LXVI.
And kneeling by her side he gazed with deep
And fervent passion on her as she lay
Calm, fair, and pure, locked in mystic sleep;
Seeming too beauteous far for mortal clay.
He felt he could in very fondness weep.
And his deep sighs expressed what he would say.
Till one long, clinging kiss her slumbers broke.
She gave a startled cry, and then awoke.
LXVIII.
Awoke to find her lover’s arms around her.
His noble head bent fondly o’er her brow.
While he explained away her timid wonder;
In love’s own dulcet voice so rich and low.
In gentle tones, now xeassui ■ g fonder.
Told her all her young heax „ could wish to know.
And listlning thus to what he had to tell.
Both quite forgot they were f * en dishabille.”
LXYII.
He drew her unresisting to his breast.
It was too late for coyness or to chide.
And their hearts’ mutual beatings told the rest.
Her maiden modesty, his lover’s pride.
They were alone, both young and each caressed
The other very much, and then she cried j
So Juan, ever gentle, did not press her.
But drew her to his heart, and more caressed her.
LXIX.
Although his blood was up, his brain on fire.
He gently kissed away her glistening tears.
But her soft eyes now flashed in warm desire j
And in her new-found longing lost her fears;
Her lips sought his, her breast was beating higher*
They blended kisses all that love endears.
Her lithe form thrilled in joy acute and deep.
And shortly afterwards they went to sleep.
LXX.
The angels might have wept at such a fall.
But if they weep at such they often may,
I don’t think that they ought to look at all.
Or if they still weep turn another way.
But if such people they do sinners call.
The major part of men had better pray.
So had the ladies —stop—that half line odd is,
I mean for masculine souls and not their bodies


LXXI.
Now let us raise the curtain and look down
On those fond lovers, locked in one embrace.
In rapture such as only love hath known.
When life seems made of love, of joy, and grace.
Their arms around each other’s necks were thrown.
Her velvet cheek pressed close to Juan’s face.
His crime was great, I know her sin was deep.
But both were fond, and happy, and asleep.
LXXII.
The gentle reader will, no doubt be shocked
When I tell him—or her —her Grace had been
To Juan’s chamber-door and found it locked.
And though she wanted sadly to go in.
She dared not make a noise or would have knocked
So to her room she returned again,
Though rather vicious, grave, and melancholy.
And vowing vengeance deep for Juan’s folly.
LXXIII.
And he, enfolded in Aurora’s arms.
Lay all unconscious of her Grace’s visit;
Their senses wrapt in sleep’s enthralling calms.
Their love as boundless as it was illicit.
His soul absorbed in her most beauteous charms.
Her trust unto his love was most implicit;
They lay just like the children in the wood,
And quite as loving, though not quite as good.
LXXIV.
How the heart pants in these long dreamy hours.
With powerful love and deep delirious joy.
When the warm blood is thick with passion’s flowers.
And e’en possession’s bounty doth not cloy.
And o'er our dream of bliss no darkness lowers.
Life seems a golden sea without alloy,
A long delirious sleep from which we wake
To see our vision strike the earth—and break.
LXXY.
Then back to dust, to moulder and decay.
The throbbing heart, the wild, majestic brain,
To mingle with the cold and soulless clay.
Never to live, to love, to ache again.
Our depth of knowledge is that death one day
Will end our dreams, ambition, joy, and pain.
Then comes the mystery dark of where we go.
And till we get there no one seems to know.
LXXVI.
Unless you enter into the spirit land.
Where spirit knuckles rap, but you must tip
A guinea into the medium’s delicate hand.
Then into the past or future you may dip.
Whate’er you wish to know you will find planned
Beneath the table if the foot don’t slip.
The purse you’ve missed, or wife, if you have lost her.
You may regain by going to Mr. Foster,


LXXVII.
If you prefer a lady, Mrs. Marshall
Will do as much and charge you something less;
But let your heart be first in faith impartial.
And be prepared your disgust to suppress.
When you see what the ages dark surpass shall.
Yet they would fain as sober truth impress.
Their impious, puerile, worthless, barefaced sham.
With which as mediums they the people cram.
LXXYIII.
The poor old wretch who, with the mystic card.
Reveals the fates unto the housemaid Mary,
Is sent to prison, perhaps with labour hard.
Yet noble dames, of their high blood so chary.
Are not from their wise wizard thus debarred.
Though I don’t see the difference, very clearly.
Between the charlatan whom rank supports.
And those who prowl areas and in courts.
LXXIX.
Our hero’s health improved with every day,
Hia tread as firm as ever, his eyes as bright.
He seemed inclined his journey to delay,
The Lady Caroline saw this with delight.
His melancholy, too, had passed away.
His grief appeared to he forgotten quite.
His spirits were as joyous as of yore,
His voice as rich and tender as before.
LXXX.
Where ignorance is bliss —you know the rest.
They did not know the cause nor did they think.
Although her Grace had several doubts exprest.
His safety hung but by a tender link.
There being no proof she did not dare molest.
But yet he stood upon a dangerous brink.
For, lost in love, he had begun already.
Much to neglect the duchess and the lady.
LXXXI.
A woman will bear much, but when a lover
Forgets to pay the attention she expects,
A deep and jealous rage is sure to move her.
When she find both their love and honour wrecked.
AM save inconstancy they can look over.
Forgetting their own conduct to dissect;
Their husband’s trust and their own virtue lost—
But lovers must be true, or pay the cost.
LXXXII.
The Lady Caroline thought perhaps her Grace
For Juan’s coldness to her was to blame,
And in her dire intention found solace.
If she should find her frail, to blast her name.
While on her part if she should find a trace,
Fitzfulke’s sweet resolutions were the same;
Yet they in smiles their mutual hate did smother,
1 hough each did each suspect and watch the other-


LXXXIII.
At length, by careful watching, they found out
.bach other’s love for Juan, and so far
They went, as set suspicion past a doubt,
f And placed their power to ignore on a par,
1 hough their wish for revenge was most devout,
-they had not yet broke into open war.
But cherished in their hearts their vengeance deep.
Determined to pay all " at one fell sweep” P
LXXXIV.
It should be “swoop” only that would not do
. rhyme with deep, so I the other put.
1 his verse is rather tiresome to get through,
lis sometimes hard to get a word to suit.
1 7p. , I s ’ P oe^s want language new ;
a °j & ’ S USed U P’ e . ver y branch and root.
And often ideas cross the imagination
lo which mere words can scarce give explanation.
LXXXY.
® a ,?k kept the secret for her own dear sake.
And Juan did not know that either knew it •
never , cared at all « a scene” to make.
But if they liked to, why, he let them do it.
1 A 7 /w him a most dreadful rake.
And hated him, but did not like to show it
iShJOffi.T S iT ge ’ *>?t there may be a cause:
Perhaps they had shown him too much as it was.
LXXXVI.
The mind, however pure, is prone to pleasure,
a pleasure s keenest touch is found in vice •
Ard when you once have drank the smallest measure,
Ihe soul yields softly to the heart’s advice ;
I hough tis at best a sort of phantom treasure—■
iis sad experience maketh me thus wise
But when the heart is thrilled in love’s sensation.
We are blind unto our soul’s most deep damnation.
LXXXYII.
*Twas thus with Juan, seeming lost to all
1 he world, in his last deep and fervent love.
And in the present cared not to recall
Ihe many hearts that he had caused to move
in love s most honeyed path or bitter gall;
His mind as yet had not begun to rove
He was contented—happy— and Aurora
Was happy, too—and perhaps a little more-a.
LXXXVIII.
There is a thrilling, deep, ecstatic joy
In living lost to all the world but one.
When pleasure’s chalice drained hath no alloy.
And each new dawn is but a dream be<mn : *
A dream of sateless love that doth not cloy.
Of deep and burning passions, only known
By those whose life seems drawn but with one breath;
When love is more than life and more than death.


LXXXIX.
The bright, fair dream of pure, unsullied youth.
When boyhood’s heart is full of gushing faith.
And woman seems all loveliness and truth.
Till the rude world dispels the fairy wreath.
And manhood gradual brings the dawning growth
Of passion, almost lust, that strenghtens with
The legal tie—then love goes to its grave.
And man the master turns—woman the slave.
XC.
Some linger on for years in their full dream
Of sensual joy, unsated by possession.
Until the love of lust at last doth seem
A custom, with the zest of repetition.
At length they use them, ay, without a gleam
Of joy—all sense destroyed by sheer repletion;
And love’s pure link becomes an iron fetter—
That matters not, they’re wed—for worse or better.
XCI.
Her Grace Fitzfulke at last was growing warm
In jealousy, in finding Juan colder.
At length she broke into a perfect storm
Of rage with Lady Caroline, and she told her
Of what she knew, and threatened to do harm;
And Lady Caroline grew incensed and bolder.
And words on words in fire and wrath arose.
Until at last they parted—mortal foes.
XCII.
Had it not been for their fierce passion’s heat.
They weuld have seen they were not quite alone.
But poor Sir Henry’s ears had been thus greet
With tidings such as he had never known.
The words that came from their raised voices sweet.
Seemed now to turn his tortured heart to stone;
And when at length they parted, and were gone.
He felt himself wronged, stricken, and forlorn.
XCIII.
•A lion raging hungrily for blood,
A panther bound, and panting to be tree,
A tyrant king, who sees his power withstood.
Is not more fierce or dangerous than he
Whose honour being the rock on which lie stood,
Finds it engulphed in foul dishonour s sea.
Thus felt Sir Henry, as he stood alone.
His proud name wrecked, his life-dream broken gone.
XCIV.
His blood was roused, and he wished to slay
His guilty wife and her as guilty lover;
But pride and etiquette stood in his way.
So with his friends he calmly talked it over.
They said that as his wife could thus betray
Her husband’s love, and thus unworthy prove her,
He’d better sue at once for a divorce,
And shoot her lover, as the proper course.


xcy.
Sis friend Lord Clyde agreed to be his second.
And to our hero took an invitation.
Polite and terse, the terms precise and reckoned.
To be responded without hesitation;
To have his journey to the next world quickened.
By this unplesant mode of recreation;
And have a bullet put into his head.
Unless he sent one through Ms foe instead,
XCVI.
The meeting-place arranged was “ Wormwood Scrubs,’ 1
Where Juan was to pay for his detraction.
And have a bullet perforate his “subs”
A most delightful mode of satisfaction;
And then be food for little nasty grubs :
It was, in short, a rather sweet attraction.
But ’tis the way of life—the rise and wane
The pleasure first, and then the damned pain
XCVII.
Poor Juan, when he saw the case was known.
Had taken leave of his most grieved Aurora,
And posted off with his best speed to town.
While she, poor girl, was lost in tender sorrow;
Her love, though she knew all, no less had grown,
And she prepared to follow on the morrow.
But " morrow, and to-morrow goes away,”
,r So creeps this petty pace from day to day.”
XCVIII.
That's a quotation. How I like to quote—
It seems to come so pat and apropos;
How thankful we should be that Shakespeare wrote.
Or any other author that we know;
Because they help us out, and may denote
The meaning clear that we might fail to show.
In me the poets have had ardent passenger,
I've been through Congreve, Otway, Colman, Massinger.
XCIX.
Our hero saw at once that he was " cut,”
It don’t take long to see a friend is cool;
He did not care for that an atom, but
The gentlemen had called him worse than fool.
The ladies called him wretch, and her a slut.
And kindness was th’ exception, not the rule
Society was closed to him, but he
Oared not a straw for all society.
C.
He took things with the usual nonchalance.
He dined with gusto, and enjoyed his port.
Then went into the opera, saw the dance,
And there was for a moment rather caught
By one fair demoiselle of la belle France,
And really felt much warmer than he ought;
But then they dance so graceful, dress so light.
And look so charming, that—eh ! well—all right.


CL
The “ Ballet ” is a dangerous institution,
For who the demon can observe unmoved ?
Each lithe, agile, and bounding evolution
Of forms a sculptor might have carved and loved.
Without a sort of inward revolution.
Which can’t be helped though it must be reproved.
The beauties rich their style of dress exposes.
Would rouse the devil in the heart of Moses.
OIL
Even in the private ball, or select dance.
There is a fasination sweet and vicious,
The sense seems lost in vague and dreamy trance.
The contact is delightful and delicious.
The music and the motion but enhance
The thrilling pleasure that is half suspicious ;
While the heart glows with thoughts it does not form.
Or else, perhaps ’twould lead us into harm.
t cm.
Perhaps the ladies feel the same as we do,
I only say “ perhaps,” but this I know.
There is such grace in everything that they do.
We must forgive them, though they bring us woe
And waltzing, blushing, sinning, loving may do,
There is no saying what it prompts us to.
And though I blame I like to take my chance in
The pleasures and the sins that come of dancing.
CIV.
But to return—our hero took the cartel
And with his friend, Fred Clinton, of the Guards,
Who was a gentleman and soldier martial.
The time arriving, they set off towards
The “ Scrubs,” and there they met in terms impartial.
Polite and polished in their kind regards.
The ground was measured and they took their places.
Then turned and looked into each other’s faces
CV.
Each held a fatal weapon in his hand;
Sir Henry levelled his at Juan’s heart.
Who did erect and graceful calmly stand.
As though there were no cause for fear to start;
But cool, and with his usual self-command,
Prepared to go through his allotted part.
Both paused, and of their seconds took farewell j
Each fired at word, and Juan reeled and fell.
CVI.
A moment since, and he had stood erect
In youthful beauty hope, and glowing life;
Then, ere the brain could think or recollect.
An instant’s space—the shaft of mortal strife
Had dashed him like a helpless vessel wrecked.
While yet his heart with life and love was rife.
He lay there still and pallid on the sod.
And Clinton said, “ He’s hit; he’s hit—by God !


CVII.
Sir Henry gazed upon him aa he lay,
With mournful sternness blended in his look.
As the rich tide of life flowed fast away;
Then knelt, and Juan’s hand he gently took.
And said, “ It was a debc you had to pay ;
I did notseek it, and I could not brook
The deep dishonor you to me have done.
For which no blood of yours could e’er atone.”
CVIIL
“ I had one thought—my honor and my pride,
’Twas all I cared for, and ’twas all I knew.
I loved and cherished well my chosen bride,
And doubted not that she at least was true.
Nor did I dream such ill could e’er betide
The sin—my wrong—her crime was shared by you ;
Yet had your bullet pierced my tortured brain.
It were not racked, as now, with endless pain.
CIX.
" What now is left me whither can T turn.
Where now my pride, ambition, pomp, or state ?
The damning thought, that gaping fools must learn
The shadow which hath fallen on my fate.
Seems like a thousand horrors here to burn
In agony that time can never sate.
All now is wrecked, and here I stand, alone.
My proud name blasted, and my life-dream gone,**
CX.
He ceased, and pale with sorrows strode away.
In bitterness and stern regret to brood.
Leaving our hero senseless on the clay.
Were Clinton and Lord Glyde much puzzled stood;
Until at length Fred Clinton said, “ I say,
I don’t think standing here is any good;
This poor fellow lies here upon the heath,
Insensible and bleeding fast to death.
CXI.
** Let's take him to some cottage near at hand;
I’ll bind his wound up j slightly raise his head.
That s right. I hope he’s not gone to the land
Of promise; no—by Jove, he’s nearly dead.
I wish we had some damned enchanter’s wand.
Which would direct us where to turn our tread.”
" There is an inn,” said Glyde. Said Cfinton, “Where P
All right; now raise him gently; that’s it—there.’*
CXII.
No mother moves her babe more tenderly
Than these two men of fashion did the form
Of Juan, to t e inn that stood close by,
For they had hearts of gold and feeling warm.
Though much their outward seeming might bely.
And Juan’s suffering acted like a charm.
The inn was reached with slow and cautious tread.
And Juan was disrobed, and put toJ»ed.


cxm.
A surgeon then was sent for, and he came.
And felt our hero’s pulse, and shook his head—
(His own, not Juan’s,) and Clinton did the same.
The doctor looked mysterious, then he said
The case was much too serious to name.
And not much hope, and everything to dread.
He scanned the wound, and then looked wondrous wisCj
And said, “If that ball don’t come out, he dies.”
CXIY.
“ Well,” said Fred Clinton, “ Why the devil don’t you.
Extract it, now, and not delay about it P”
*' Ah !” said the surg’on, sagely, “ that won’t do;
He is so weak, the issue I much doubt it.
I will with caution first his symptoms view.
And see what by his pulse may be denoted.
And if I find his strength will take him through it.
Though ’tis a serious matter, I will do it.”
cxv.
The surgeon really was a man of skill.
And had a most extensive reputation;
More patients he’d been known to cure than kill.
He knew his science, and each variation
In all the record vast of human ill.
And could perform a marvellous operation.
So after some brief time for thought and rest.
He rose, prepared to mangle Juan’s breast.
CXVL
The ball had lodged just under Juan’s shoulder,
Two inches and a quarter from his heart.
Or else he had not lived to be much older.
For it was nearly in a vital part.
Here Juan’s face grew several phases colder.
As neath the probe he seemed to writhe and smart.
The doctor calm his agony did view.
And said it was a sign of coming to.
CXVII.
The perspiraJon stood on Juan’s brow.
As once or twice the bullet slightly shifted;
He felt the pain, yet scarcely seemed to know
What they were doing, as his head was lifted
And once he murmured something very low.
It was a name, (so said the doctor gifted).
And tliat name was “ Aurora,” without doubt.
And here he drew the bullet safely out.
CXYIII.
Her Grace had heard with deep and fervent sorrow,
The work of mischief in which she’d a share;
But as she got a lover on the morrow.
Beyond the scandal, she had nought to care.
The case was not so light to fair Aurora ;
She heard the tidings in a hush’d despair.
And in his danger thought not of the rest.
But longed to lay his head upon her breast


CXIX.
He’d erred, ’twas true, but ’twas not hers to blame.
Forgotten in her love was all her wrong;
Her heart clung to her lover still the same.
Each moment’s absence seemed a year too long.
She dreamed no sin, and saw no cause for shame.
Her love was deep —her pure devotion strong;
He was her lover, she his promised bride.
And the next day saw her by Juan’s side.
cxx.
It was her hand that soothed his restless pillow.
Her warm love-lips that kissed his fevered brow.
Her fragile barque was cast on his life’s billow,
She never knew her depth of love till now.
She clung to him e’en as the sapling willow
Clings to the root from whence its branches grow.
Her soul was his; her life hung on his breath.
He was her faith, and stronger far than death.
CXXI
The world might blame, and slander’s venomed tongue
Would seek in vain to pierce her gentle breast;
His danger was the pain her heart that wrung.
So that he lived she cared not for the rest.
As clings the ivy to the oak she clung.
His love her only hope, her one request;
And he was faithful now, dear, fervent, true,
’Twas all she wished to know, and all she knew.
CXXII.
Her lover rallied slowly and apace;
She saw him growing stronger day by day.
She watched the life come back into his face.
And oft would for his safety kneel and pray.
It seemed to bring her heart a calm solace,
And raise a gentle, sweet, and hopeful ray,
Add oft she would in fondness o’er him weep.
And wateh with depthless love our hero’s sleep.
CXXIII.
If e’er his heart had glowed with grateful love.
It was while watching her fair, graceful form.
And inwardly he vowed as kind to prove.
As he had found her pure devotion warm.
Their hearts were blended, closely interwove.
There in the stillness of that silent room.
Where to restore him back to life she’d striven.
With all the love he gave, and all she’d given.
CXXIV.
He’d lie for hours, watching her sweet face.
And listen to her low and gentle voice,
While every look seemed to reveal some grace.
Some feature winning, or expression choice;
Or else locked closely in a fond embrace.
While their hearts would with mutual love rejoice.
Until—and perhaps he was to be commended —
He liked being ill, because she there attended.


cxxv.
How sweet to gaze into the soft blue eye
Whose gentle love-light beams for thee alone.
And press the dewy lips so tenderly.
Or dream the happy hours that have flown,
When love’s low voice has told eloquently
Of depthless soul devotion all your own.
’Tis such long love-dreams that the heart does glad;
I have known such and don’t you wish you had ?
CXXVI.
Now, whether ’twas the doctor, nurse, or what
The influence may have been, I do not know
But Juan was recovering, and got
Beyond all danger, while the usual flow
Of happy spirits was returned, and not
A trace seemed left of sickness or of woe;
And wonder not, for in indisposition,
There’s nought like lady love for a physician
CXXVII.
Now to the Lady Caroline. She had lost
Home, husband, name, in her mistaken love;
A sweet indulgence, hut a fearful cost;
For suffering so near to crime doth move.
That when the pleasure’s much the pain is most.
The pleasure’s brief, and then the heart is clove
By agonized remorse —but all too late;
Such is the stern decree of earthly fate.
CXXVIII.
Her husband’s pride had spared her the deep shame
Of being dragged before the tribunal
Of public trial, for he held his name.
Though slurred, to sacred thus too brand her fall;
But rather let her after life reclaim
The error that was now beyond recall.
He left his native land afar to roam,
And she returned unto her parent’s home.
CXXIX.
He lived in weary solitude alone.
No tender love to sooth his life’s decline;
A heart like his could only beat for one.
And that one lost, the love-light ceased to shine;
The glorious fabric of his life was gone —
The one rude shock broke down the golden line.
And now he lived as though accursed of fate.
Soul-crushed and spirit-broken, desolate.
cxxx
A voluntary exile from the land
Where wealth and high position were his own.
Thus, yielding kindred, friends, and State command.
To keep his name and misery unknown.
Afar from fashion’s shallow, heartless band.
Who seemed with gall his o’erfull cup to crown.
By their slow, torturing pity, which doth seem
A tedious mockery to a shattered dream.


CXXXI.
This all the dire effect of one false move,
A manhood’s broken life, a woman’s shame.
Thus withered by the fire of lawless love.
And nearly ending Juan’s life and name.
The cause his graceful form and bearing sauve.
Which often brought him bliss and spiteful blame.
And having got bo far we’ll say farewell
Of all save Juan, who was now quite well,
CXXXIL
Save Juan, and those with whom he has to do.
I like to let the story softly flow.
And keep it clear and lucid unto you;
Though sometimes I from out the track may go,
’Tis only when I feel it is your due.
To tell you that which you may wish to knoT^
And then to moralise is my forte—
&c., &c., and e.t.c.
cxxxm.
Aurora Kaby was an orphan ward.
Her special guardian was the Chancellor
(To which I think he added “High”, and "Lord) ;**
An unctious, hot, and plausible old fellow.
Who seized a chance whene’er a chance occured.
To sell a favour where he might be seller;
He held Aurora’s fortune in his keeping.
And from the interest something sweet was reaping,
cxxxiy.
He’d several friends, and several friends of others.
Who had been watching sweet Aurora’s age.
Some fortune hunters, and intriguing mothers.
Who tried her hand and fortune to engage.
As something good for heirs and younger brothers.
Their needy pomp and creditors to suage ;
And all these cursed Hon Juan and their fate.
When thus they saw that they had come too late.
cxxxv.
Our hero to the Chancellor applied.
To grant Aurora Raby’s band in marriage;
His lordship nearly went, with rage, beside
Himself, and posted down with speed in carriage.
To Juan and his fair unwedded bride;
And then a war of words began to wage.
For Juan told his lordship, without doubt.
If he would not consent they’d do without.
CXXXVI.
His lordship swore and threatened, but in vain;
Juan was firm, and would not yield one jot.
He said he’d take Aurora off to Spain,
The Chancellor swore as loudly he should not.
And bullied at our hero might and main.
Until he saw he had a Tartar got.
For Juan said that if the only cause
Was want of age, he’d keep her till she was.


CXXXYII.
The Chancellor was puzzled for he saw
Juan was firm, and would not let her go.
Her person was not governed by the law.
So what to do he really didn’t know.
He saw that she was gliding from his maw.
Which made his lordship’s spirits rather low,
80 he entreated ; Juan would not waver.
Although her guardian said he should not have her.
cxxxvin.
And left our hero in a towering heat.
Who did a hearty laugh behind his back.
And watched his lordship’s carriage down the street.
Then orders gave his luggage all to pac^
And made arrangements for departure fleet.
Unto his native land, once more to track ;
Because has name in Albion was too hot.
For he’d a shocking reputation got.
CXXXIX.
You know, with very little variation.
We are a people chaste, and moral, too—
A virtuous, pious, model, Christian nation—
That is, if all that we are told is true.
Yet sometimes there’s a deal of consternation.
When things come into light that people do.
Then e'rpvyhody throw s 3 a mighty stone.
Forgetting they’ve a glass house of their own.
CXL.
And then, you see—well, never mind at present i
’Twill be in introduction, next canto.
This one is now becoming evanescent.
Because there’s nothing more for me to do.
Until our hero should have reached the crescent.
Or street, or square where 1 have sent him to.
Then Juan’a strange career will on again.
Beneath the glowing sky of sunny Spain:
CSLI.
The land of love, and warm impulsive grace.
Of wild and lonely valleys, and of knives j
The land of splendid form, and starlit face.
Where maidenhood is scarce, and few are wives;
Where love goes at a most alarming pace.
And mistresses are dearer far than lives.
The land of lovely limb and thrilling breast; —
Bat these are topics I must not molest.
CXLII.
Oh, why were we like Otway’s Jaffeir bom.
With soul of love, and heart of wild desire?
Yet live beneath a veil that must be worn,
To hide the deep and quenchless, ardent fire.
That never will, while heart doth beat, be tom;
But let us rather by its heat expire.
Then keep our hearts' wild throbbings hushed and still,
For we must love or die, and love we will.


CXLIII.
The heart will leap to see the flashing eye.
And pant to press the form of pliant grace.
In thrilling fervour, deep, yet tenderly.
Or revel on a bright and winning face.
Soft, glowing with the passion they deny.
Whilst lingering fondly in a long embrace.
When heart to heart doth beat, and closely lie
In joy so deep, ’tis almost agony.
CXLIV.
Don Juan sailed away from Albion’s shore j
He’d had enough of England for a time.
And with Aurora he returned, once more
Unto his native land, whose genial clime
’Twas suited better to such hearts as were
Too warm with Britian’s sombre sky to chime ?
And while the gallant barque doth onward steer.
We will prepare to follow his career.
CXLV.
He’d borne away a record, sweet and sad.
And longing hearts thought of his graceful form.
And while they somewhat blamed him, wished they had
A share in his heart’s wild impulses, warm.
And tender liquid eyes shone, softened, glad.
While musing o’er the strange, magnetic charm.
That seemed to draw them on as with a spell.
And some sweet ladies wished they’d more to tell.
CXLYI.
The memory of the absent hath a strange.
And soft, subduing influence on the soul.
And lingers e’en amid the weary change
Of time’s slow tread, and silent, onward roll.
And so felt Juan’s friends, whose thoughts would range
Back to the winsome stranger’s gentle thrall.
He’d done some wrong —some work most sad—and yet
They could not think of him without regret.
FINIS.


