

HUn* :
fr
THE
\
H?TH VPrrA
J X-
'�lX
CONSTITUTION
OF THE
UNIVERSE
PEOFESSOR TYNDALL.
Reprinted from the Fortnightly Review for ist December, 1865,
Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge.
MELBOURNE:
STILLWELL & KNIGHT,' PRINTERS, 78 COLLINS STREET EAST.
? M
_r.i~r~.~~- sii




THE
CONSTITUTION
OF THE
UNIVERSE
BY
J y
PROFESSOR TYNDALL.
Reprinted from the Fortnightly Review for ist December, 1865,
Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge.
. MELBOURNE :
STILLWELL & KNIGHT, PRINTERS, 78 COLLINS STREET EAST.
1869.




CONSTITUTION Of THE UNIVERSE.
We cannot think of space as finite, for wherever in
imagination we erect a boundary we are compelled
to think of space as existing beyond that boundary.
Thus by the incessant dissolution of limits we arrive
at a more or less adequate idea of the infinity of
space. But though compelled to think of space as
unbounded, there is no mental necessity to compel
us to think of it either as filled or as empty ; whether
it is filled or empty must be decided by experiment
and observation. That it is not entirely void, the
starry heavens declare; but the question still remains
are the stars themselves hung in vacuo ? Are the
vast regions which surround them, and across which
their light is propagated, absolutely empty ? A
century ago the answer to this question would be,
?No, for particles of light are incessantly shot
through space.? The reply of modern science is
also negative, but on a somewhat different ground.
It has the best possible reasons for rejecting the idea
of luminiferous particles ; but in support of the con-
clusion that the celestial spaces are occupied by
matter, it is able to offer proofs almost as cogent as
those which can be adduced for the existence of an
atmosphere round the earth. Men?s minds, indeed,
rose to a conception of the celestial and universal


atmosphere through the study of the terrestrial and
local one. From the phenomena of sound as dis-
played in the air, they ascended to the phenomena
of light as displayed in the ether; which is the
name given to the interstellar medium.
The notion of this medium must not be considered
as a vague or fanciful conception on the part of
scientific men. Of its reality most of them are as
convinced as they are of the existence of the sun and
planets. The luminiferous ether has definite
mechanical properties. It is almost infinitely more
attenuated than any gas, but its properties are those
of a solid rather than of a gas. It resembles jelly
rather than air. A body thus constituted may have
its boundaries ; but, although the ether may not be
co-extensive with space, we at all events know that
it extends as far as the most distant stars which the
telescope reveals to us. In fact, it is the vehicle of
their light, and without it they could not be seen.
This all-pervading substance takes up their mole-
cular tremors, and conveys them with inconceivable
rapidity to our organs of vision. The splendour of
the firmament at night is due to its vibration. It is
the transported shiver of bodies countless millions of
miles distant which translates itself in human
consciousness into the aspect of the stars.
If the ether have a boundary, masses of
ponderable matter might be conceived to exist beyond
it, but they could emit no light. There, dark suns
might burn ; there, under proper conditions, com-
bustion might be carried on ; fuel might consume
unseen, and metals be heated to fusion in invisible


furnaces. A body, moreover, once heated there,
would continue for ever heated ; a sun or planet
once molten, would continue for ever molten For
the loss of heat being simply the abstraction of mole-
cular motion by the ether, where this medium is
absent no cooling could occur. A sentient being,
on approaching a heated body in this region, would
be conscious of no augmentation of temperature.
The gradations of warmth dependent on the laws of
radiation would not exist, and actual contact would
first reveal the temperature of an extra ethereal sun.
Imagine a paddle-wheel placed in water and
caused to rotate. From it as a centre waves would
issue in all directions, and a wader as he approached
the place of disturbance would be met by stronger
and stronger waves. This gradual augmentation of
the impressions made upon the wader?s body is
exactly analogous to the augmentation of light when
we approach a luminous source. They are both
motions. For the apprehension of the one the
coarse common nerves of the body suffice; for the
apprehension of the other we must have the finer
optic nerve. But suppose the water withdrawn ; the
action at a distance would then cease, and as far as
the sense of touch is concerned, the wader would be
first rendered conscious of the motion of the wheel
by the actual blow of the paddles. The transference
of motion from the paddles to the water is mechan-
ically similar to the transference of molecular motion
from a heated body to the ether ; and the propa-
gation of waves through the liquid is mechanically
similar to the propagation of light and radiant heat.


Whether the ether he bounded or unbounded does
not, however, at present concern us, and the fore-
going considerations have been introduced simply to
impart as definite an image as possible of this
mysterious substance. As far as our knowledge of
space extends, we are to conceive it as the holder ot
the luminiferous ether, through which is inter-
spersed, at enormous distances apart, the ponderous
nuclei of the fixed stars. Associated with the star
that most concerns us we have a group of dark
planetary masses revolving at various distances
round it, each again rotating on its own axis ; and
finally associated with these planets we have, in
some instances, v dark bodies of minor note ?the
moons. Whether the other fixed stars have similar
planetary companions or not is to us a matter of
pure conjecture, which may or may not enter into
our conception of the universe. But probably every
well-informed person believes, with regard to those
distant suns, that there is in space something besides
ourselves on which they shine.
Having thus obtained a general view of the pre-
sent condition of space, and of the bodies contained
in it, we may inquire whether things were so created
at the beginning. Was space furnished at once, by
the fiat of Omnipotence, with these burning orbs ?
To this question the man of science, if he confine
himself within his own limits, will give no answer,
though it must be remarked that in the formation
of an opinion he has better materials to guide him
than anybody else. He can clearly show, however,
that the present state of things may be derivative.


He can perhaps assign reasons which render it prob-
able that it is derivative. At all events, he can
prove that out of common non-luminous matter the
whole of this pomp of stars might have been evolved.
The law of gravitation enunciated by Newton is,
that every particle of matter in the universe attracts
every other particle with a force which diminishes as
the square of the distance increases. Thus the sun
and the earth mutually pull each other; thus the
earth and the moon are kept in company ; the force
which holds every respective pair of masses together
being the integrated force of their component par-
ticles.
Under the operation of this force,a stone falls to
the ground and is warmed by the shock ; under its
operation meteors plunge into our atmosphere and
rise to incandescence ; showers of such doubtless fill
incessantly upon the sun. And were it stopped in
its orbit to-morrow under the operation of this force,
the earth would rush towards the sun and finally
combine with it. Heat would also be developed by
this collision, and the experiments of Mr. Joule en-
able us to calculate its exact amount. The calcula-
tion has been made by Mayer, Helmholtz, and
Thomson. It would equal that produced by the
combustion of more than 5,000 worlds of solid coal,
all this heat being generated at the instant of colli-
sion. In the attraction of gravity, therefore, acting
upon non-lummous matter, we have a source of heat
more powerful than could be derived from any terres-
trial combustion. And were the substance of the
universe cast in cold detached fragments into space,


and there abandoned to the mutual gravitation of
its own parts, the collision of the fragments would
in the end produce the spangled heavens.
The action of gravity upon matter originally cold
may, in fact, be the origin of all light and heat, and
also the proximate source of such other natural
agents as may be generated by light and heat. But
we have now to inquire what is the light and what
is the heat thus produced ? This question has al-
ready been answered in a general way. Both light
and heat are modes of motion. Two planets clash
and come to rest; their motion, considered as masses,
is destroyed, but it is really continued as a motion of
their ultimate particles. It is this motion, taken up
by the ether, and propagated through it with a velo-
city of 192,000 miles in a second, that comes to us
as the light and heat of suns and stars. The atoms
of a hot body swing with inconceivable rapidity, but
this power of vibration necessarily implies the opera-
tion of forces between the atoms themselves. It
reveals to us that while they are held together by
one force, they are kept asunder by another, their
position at any moment depending on the equilibrium
of attraction and repulsion. The atoms are, in fact,
virtually connected by elastic springs, which oppose
at the same time their approach and their retreat,
but which, when they are disturbed, permit of their
vibration. Such a disturbance occurs when two
bodies drawn together by the force of gravity strike
each other, the intensity of the ultimate vibration,
or, in other words, the amount of heat generated,
being proportional to the moving force possessed by


the two masses at the moment of collision. The
molecular motion once set up is instantly shared with
the ether, and diffused by it throughout the uni-
verse.
We on the earth?s surface live night and day in
the midst of ethereal commotion. The medium is
never still. The cloud canopy above us may be
thick enough to shut oui the light of the stars, but
this canopy is itself warm, and, as a warm body,
radiates its motion through the ether. The earth
also is warm, and sends its heat-pulses incessantly
forth. It is the waste of its molecular motion in
space that chills the earth upon a clear night ; it is
the return of its motion from the clouds which pre-
vents the earth?s temperature on a cloudy night from
falling so low. Could we see the motion of the
ether?had we organs fine enough to observe its
waves, we should notice this thrilling of pulses to
and fro whenever a cloud appears. The waves
emitted by the earth are incompetent to excite vision,
and such ineffectual waves actually constitute the
greater part of the emission, even of the most in-
tensely luminous bodies. It is not the size of a
wave which determines its power of producing light;
it is, broadly speaking, the fitness of the wave to the
retina. The ethereal pulses must follow each other
with a certain rapidity of succession before they can
produce light, and if their rapidity exceed a certain
limit they also fail to produce light. The retina is
attuned, if I may 'use the term, to a certain range
of vibrations, beyond which, in both directions, it
ceases to be of use.


The best experiments with which I am acquainted
make the strength of the sun?s invisible radiation
about twice that of the visible. In the case of the
terrestrial source of light which most nearly ap-
proaches the sun in brilliancy, the electric light, the
energy of the invisible rays is about eight times that
of the visible. That is to say, if all the rays were
converted into their mechanical equivalents, the in
visible ones would be found competent to f>erform
eight times the work of the visible ones. Speaking,
then, teleologically, it is not to serve the purposes of
vision alone that radiation was established, but far
more for the purposes of warmth. As regards other
terrestrial sources, the non-luminous waves constitute
only a very small portion of the total radiation.
Fully ninety-five per cent, of the emission of our
brightest street lamps is obscure, less than one-
twentieth being suited to the purposes of vision. 1
To the conception of space being filled, we must
now add the conception of its being in a state of in-
cessant tremor. The sources of vibration are the
ponderable masses of the universe Let us take a
sample of these and examine it in detail. When we
look to our planet we find it to be an aggregate of
solids, liquids, and gases. When we look at any one
of these, we generally find it composed of still more
elementary parts. We learn, for example, that the
(1) The powerful calorific effects obtainable with perfectly dark
rays form the subject of a paper recently presented to the Royal
Society. In the ? Rede Lecture? for the present year (published by
Longmans), a mode of filtering the visible from the invisible rays is
described ; and the power of the latter to effect combustion and
incandescence is variously illustrated.


water of our rivers is formed by the union, in definite
proportions, of two gases, oxygen and hydrogen.
We know how to bring these constituents together,
and to cause them to form water : we also know how
to analyse the water, and recover from it its two
constituents. So, likewise, as regards the solid pro-
portions of the earth. Our chalk hills, for example,
are formed by a combination of carbon, oxygen, and
calcium. These are elements the union of which, in
definite proportions, has resulted in the formation
of chalk. The flints within the chalk we know to be
a compound of oxygen and silicium. The compound
is called silica; and our ordinary clay is, for the most
part, formed by the union of silicium, oxygen, and
the now well-known light metal, aluminium. By
far the greater portion of the earth?s crust is com-
pounded of the elementary substances mentioned in
these few lines.
The principle of gravitation has been already
described as an attraction which every particle of
matter, however small, has for every other particle.
With gravity there is no selection; no particular
atoms choose, by preference, other particular atoms
as objects of attraction ; the attraction of gravitation
is proportional to the quantity of the attracting
matter, regardless of its quality. But in the mole-
cular world which we have now entered matters are
otherwise arranged. Here we have atoms between
which a strong attraction is exercised, and also atoms
between which a weak attraction is exercised. One
atom can jostle another out of its place in virtue of a
superior force of attraction. But though the amount


of force exerted varies thus from atom to atom, it is
still an attraction of the same mechanical quality,
if I may use the term, as that of gravity itself. Its
intensity might be measured m the same way,
namely, by the amount of motion which it can impart
in a certain time. Thus the attraction of gravity at
the earth?s surface is expressed by the number 'VZ,
because when acting freely on a body for a second
time, it imparts to the body a velocity of thirty-two
feet a second. In like manner the mutual attraction
of oxygen and hydrogen might be measured by the
velocity imparted to the atoms in their rushing to-
gether to form water. Of course such a unit of time
as a second is not here to be thought of, the whole
interval required by the atoms to cross the minute
spaces which separate them not amounting probably
to more than an inconceivably small fraction of a
second.
It has been stated that when a body falls to the
earth it is warmed by the shock. Here we have
what we may call a mechanical combination of the
earth and the falling body. Suffer the falling body
and the earth to dwindle in imagination to the size
of atoms, and for the attraction of gravity substitute
that of chemical affinity, which is the name given to
the mo ecular attraction, we have then what is called
a chemical combination. The effect of the union in
this case also is the development of heat, and from
the amount of heat generated we can infer the
intensity of the atomic attraction. Measured by
ordinary mechanical standards, this is enormous.
Mix eight pounds of oxygen with one of hydrogen,


and pass a spark through the mixture; the gases
instantly combine, their atoms rushing over the little
distances between them. Take a weight of 47,000
pounds to an elevation of 1,000 feet above the earth?s
surface, and let it fall ; the mechanical energy with
which it would strike the earth would not exceed
that of the above-mentioned eight pounds of oxygen
atoms, and one pound of hydrogen atoms, when they
dash together to form water.
It is sometimes stated that the force of gravity is
distinguished from all other forces by the fact of its
resisting conversion into any other. Chemical
affinity, it is said, can be converted into heat and
light, and these again into magnetism and electricity.
But gravity refuses to be so converted ; it is a force
which maintains itself under all circumstances, and is
not capable of disappearing to give place to another.
If by this is meant that a particle of matter can
never be deprived of its weight, the assertion is
correct; but the law which affirms the convertibility
of natural forces was never meant, in the minds of
those who understood it, to affirm that such a con-
version as that here implied occurs in any case what-
ever. As regards convertibility into heat, gravity
and chemical affinity stand on precisely the same
footing. The attraction in the one case is as inde-
structible as in the other. Nobody affirms that when
a stone rests upon the surface of the earth the mutual
attraction of the earth and stone is abolished ; nobody
means to affirm that the mutual attraction of oxygen
for hydrogen ceases after the atoms have combined
to form water. What is meant in the case of


chemical affinity is, that the pull of that affinity,
acting through a certain space, imparts a motion of
translation of the one atom towards the other. This
motion of translation is not heat, nor is the force
that produces it heat. But when the atoms strike and
recoil, the motion of translation is converted into a
motion of vibration, and this latter motion is heat.
But the vibration, so far from causing the extinction
of the original attraction, is in part carried on by
that attraction. The atoms recoil in virtue of the
elastic force which opposes actual contact, and in the
recoil they are driven too far back. The original
attraction then triumphs over the force of recoil, and
urges the atoms once more together ; and thus, like
a pendulum, they oscillate, until their motion is
imparted to the surrounding ether; or, in other words,
until their heat becomes radiant heat.
In this sense, and in this sense only, is chemical
affinity converted into heat. There is, first of all,
the attraction between the atoms; there is, secondly,
space between them. Across this space the attraction
urges them. They collide, they recoil, they oscillate.
There is a change in the form of the motion, but
there is no real loss. It is so with the attraction of
gravity. To produce motion here space must also
intervene between the attracting bodies; when they
strike, motion is apparently destroyed, but in reality
there is no destruction. By the shock the atoms of
the bodies are suddenly urged together; by their
own perfect elasticity they recoil; and thus is set up
the molecular oscillation which announces itself to
the nerves as heat.


It was formerly universally supposed that by the
collision of unelastic bodies force was destroyed.
Men saw, for example, when two spheres of clay, or
painter?s putty, or lead, were urged together, that
the motion possessed by the masses prior to impact
was more or less annihilated. They believed in an
absolute destruction of the force of impact. Until
recent times, indeed, no difficulty was experienced in
believing this, whereas, at present, the ideas of force
and its destruction refuse to be united in most
philosophic minds. In the collision of elastic bodies,
on the contrary, it was observed that the motion
with which they clashed together was in great part
restored by the resiliency of the masses, the more
perfect the elasticity the more complete being the
restitution. This led to the idea of perfectly elastic
bodies?bodies competent to restore by their recoil
the whole of the motion which they possessed before
impact. Hence the idea of the conservation of force,
as opposed to the destruction of force, which was
supposed to occur when inelastic bodies met in
collision. We now believe that the principle of con-
servation holds equally good with elastic and unelastic
bodies. Perfectly elastic bodies develope no heat on
collision. They retain their motion afterwards,
though its direction may be changed ; and it is only
when sensible motion is in whole or in part de-
stroyed that heat is generated. This always occurs
in unelastic collision, the heat developed being the
exact equivalent to the motion extinguished. This
heat virtually declares that the property of elasticity,
denied to the masses, exists among their atoms, and


by their recoil and oscillation restitution is secured
and the principle of conservation vindicated.
But ambiguity in the use of the term ? force ? has
been for some time creeping upon us unawares. We
called the attraction of gravity a force without any
reference to motion. A body resting on a shelf is as
much pulled by gravity as when after having been
pushed off the shelf it falls towards the earth. We
applied the term force also to that molecular
attraction which we called chemical affinity. When,
however, we spoke of the conservation of force in the
case of elastic collision, we meant neither a pull nor
a push, which, as just indicated, might be exerted
upon inert matter, but we meant the moving force, if
I may use the term, of the colliding masses.
What I have called moving force has a definite
mechanical measure in the amount of work that it can
perform. The simplest form of work is the raising of a
weight. A man walking up-hill or up-stairs with a
pound weight in his hand, to an elevation say of sixteen
feet, performs a certain amount of work over and
above the lifting of his own body. If he ascend to
a height of thirty-two feet he does twice the work ;
if to a height of forty-eight feet, he does three times
the work ; if to sixty-four feet, he does four times
the work, and so on. If, moreover, he carries up
two pounds instead of one, other things being equal,
he does twice the work; if three, four, or five pounds,
he does three, four, or five times the work. In fact
it is plain that the work performed depends on two
factors, the weight raised and the height to which it
is raised. It is expressed by the product of these
two factors.


But a body may be caused to reach a certain
elevation in opposition to the force of gravity, with-
out being actually carried up to the elevation. If a
hodman, for example, wished to land a brick at an
elevation of sixteen feet above the place where he
stands, he would probably pitch it up to the brick-
layer. He would thus impart by a sudden effort a
velocity to the brick sufficient to raise it to the
required height; the work accomplished by that
effort being precisely the same as if he had slowly
carried up the brick. The initial velocity which
must be imparted in the case here assumed is well
known. To reach a height of sixteen feet the brick
must quit the man?s hand with a velocity of thirty-
two feet a second. It is needless to say that a body
starting with any velocity would, if wholly unopposed
or unaided, continue to move for ever with the same
velocity. But when, in the case before us, the body
is thrown upwards, it moves in opposition to gravity,
which incessantly retards its motion, and finally brings
it to rest at an elevation of sixteen feet. If not here
caught by the bricklayer, it would return to the hod-
man with an accelerated motion, and reach his hand
with the precise velocity it possessed on quitting it.
Supposing the man competent to impart to the
brick, at starting, a speed of sixty-four feet a second,
or twice its former speed, would the amount of work
performed in this effort be twice what it was in the
first instance? No; it would be four times that
quantity. A body starting with twice the velocity
of another will rise to four times the height; in like
manner, a three-fold velocity will give a nine-fold


elevation, a four-fold velocity will give a sixteen-fold
elevation, and so on. The height attained, then, is
not proportional to the velocity, but to the square of
the velocity. As before, the work done is also pro-
portional to the weight elevated. Hence the work
which moving masses are competent to perform in
virtue of the motion which they at any moment
possess, is jointly proportional to the weight and the
square of the velocity. Here then we have a second
measure of work, in which we simply translate the
idea of height into its equivalent idea of motion.
In mechanics the product of the mass of a moving
body into the square of its velocity is called vis viva ,
or living force. It expresses what is called the
? mechanical effect,? If, for example, we point a
cannon upwards, and start a ball with twice the
velocity imparted by a second cannon, the ball will
rise to four times the height. The speedier ball,
if directed against a bastion, will also do four times
the execution. Hence the importance of imparting
a high velocity to projectiles in war. Having thus
cleared our way to a perfectly clear conception of the
vis viva of moving masses, we are prepared for the
announcement that the heat generated by the
collision of a falling body against the earth is pro-
portional to the vis viva annihilated. In point of
fact it is not an annihilation, but a transference of
vis viva. The heat developed is the vis viva of the
ultimate particles of the falling body, and this, as we
now learn, is proportional to the square of the velo-
city. If of two cannon balls of equal weight one
strike a target with twice the velocity of the other


it will generate four times the heat upon collision ; if
with three times the velocity it will generate nine
times the heat, and so on.
Mr. Joule has shown that in falling from a height
of 772 feet, a body will generate an amount of heat
sufficient to raise its own weight of water one degree
Fahrenheit in temperature. We have here the
mechanical equivalent of heat. Now, a body falling
from a height of 772 feet has, upon striking the earth,
a velocity of 223 feet a second; and if this velocity
were imparted to a body by any means whatever,
the quantity of heat generated by the stoppage of its
motion would be that stated above. Six times that
velocity, or 1,338 feet, would not be an inordinate
one for a cannon ball as it quits the gun; but if
animated by six times the velocity, thirty six times
the heat will be generated by the stoppage of its
motion. Hence a cannon ball moving with a
velocity of 1,338 feet a second would, by collision,
generate an amount of heat competent to raise its
own weight of water 36 degrees Fahrenheit in
temperature. If composed of iron, and if all the
heat generated were concentrated in the ball itself,
its temperature would be raised about 360 degrees
Fahrenheit ; because one degree in the case of water
is equivalent to about ten degrees in the case of iron.
In artillery practice the heat generated is usually
concentrated upon the front of the bolt, and on the
portion of the target first struck. By this concen-
tration the heat developed becomes sufficiently
intense to raise the dust of the metal to incandes-
cence, a flash of light often accompanying collision
with the target.


Let us now fix our attention for a moment on the
gunpowder which urges the cannon hall. This is
composed of combustible matter, which if burnt in
the open air would yield a certain amount of heat.
It will not yield this amount if it performs the work
of urging a ball. The heat then generated by the
gunpower will fall short of that produced in the open
air, by an amount equivalent to the vis viva of the
ball; and this exact amount is restored by the ball
on its collision with the target. If sensible motion
be produced by heat, a portion of the heat is always
annihilated. This is true even of muscular foice.
In <c putting ? a stone, for example, an amount of
heat is consumed within the muscles exactly
equivalent to the vis viva of the stone, and as in the
case of the cannon ball, this heat is reproduced by
the stone on the stoppage of its motion.
The principle of the conservation of force, broadly
enunciated, asserts that the quantity of force in the
universe, is as unalterable as the quantity of matter;
that it is alike impossible to create force and to
annihilate it. . In what sense are we to understand
the assertion that the quantity of force is a constant
quantity ? It is manifestly inapplicable to the force
of gravity as Newton defined it ; for this is a force
varying inversely as the square of the distance, and it
would be self-contradictory to affirm the constancy of
a varying force. Yet, when the matter is propeily
understood, gravity forms no exception to the law of
conservation. Following Helmholtz I will heie
attempt an elementary exposition of this law, which
though destined, in its applications, to produce


momentous changes in human thought, is not difficult
of comprehension.
For the sake of simplicity we will consider a
particle of matter, which we shall call f, to be
perfectly fixed, and a second movable particle, n,
placed at a distance from f. We will assume that
these two particles attract each other according to
the Newtonian law. At a certain distance the
attraction is of a certain definite amount, which
might be determined by means of a spring balance.
At half this distance the attraction would be
augmented four times ; at a third of the distance it
would be augmented nine times : at one-fourth of the
O J
distance sixteen times, and so on. In every case the
attraction might be measured by determining, with
the spring balance, the amount of tension which is
just sufficient to prevent d from moving towards f.
Thus far we have nothing whatever to do with
motion; we deal with statics, not with dynamics.
We simply take into account the distance of n from
f, and the pull exerted by gravity at that distance.
It is customary in mechanics to represent the
magnitude of a force by a line of a certain length, a
force of double magnitude being represented by a
line of double length, and so on. Placing then the
particle d at a distance from f, we can in imagination
draw a straight line from d to f, and at n erect a
O 7
perpendicular to this line, which shall represent
the amount of the attraction exerted on n in this
position. If d be at a very great distance from f
the attraction will be very small, and the perpen-
dicular consequently very short. Let us now suppose


that at every point in the line joining f and d a per-
pendicular is erected proportional in length to the
attraction exerted at that point; we should thus
obtain an infinite number of perpendiculars of
gradually increasing length as d approaches f.
Uniting the ends of all these perpendiculars, we
should obtain a curve, and between this curve and
the straight line joining f and d we should have
an area made up, as it were, of all the perpendiculars
placed side by side along the straight line. The area
just referred to, represents the sum of all the pulls
or tensions which would be exerted upon the particle
n, during its passage from its first position up to f.
This area, therefore, gives us a perfectly definite
image of the sum total of gravitating force existing
within the assumed limits.
It can scarcely be too often repeated that we are
here dealing with pulls or tensions only, and do not
include the idea of any motion produced by these
tensions. Up to the present point vis viva, or living
force, which involves the idea of motion, has been
entirely foreign to our contemplations. Let us now
suppose n placed at a? practically infinite distance
from f ; here the pull of gravity would be nothing,
and the perpendicular representing it would dwindle
to a point. In this position the sum of the tensions
capable of being exerted on n would be a maximum.
Let n now begin to move in obedience to the
attraction exerted upon it. Motion being once set
up, the idea of vis viva arises. In moving towards f
the particle d consumes, as it were, its tensions. Let
us fix our attention on d at any point of the path


over which it is moving. Between that point and f
there is a quantity of unused tensions ; beyond that
point the tensions have been all consumed, but
we have in their place a quantity of vis viva. After
d has passed any point, the tension previously in
store at that point disappears, but not without
adding, during the infinitely small duration of its
action, its due amount of motion to that previously
possessed by d. The nearer d approaches to f, the
smaller is the sum of the tensions remaining, but the
greater is the living force ; the farther d is from f,
the greater is the sum of the unconsumed tensions,
and the less is the living force. Now the principle
of conservation affirms not the constancy of the
tensions of gravity, nor the constancy of the vis viva ,
taken separately, but the absolute constancy of the
sum of both. Take the particle dat any point of
its path, multiply its mass by the square of the
velocity which it possesses at that point, add this
product to the numerical area of the space repre-
senting the tensions still remaining between d and f ;
then the sum of these two quantities, whatever be
the position of d chosen, is invariable. At the
beginning the vis viva was zero and the tension area
was a maximum ; close to r the vis viva is a maximum,
while the tension area is zero. At every other point
the work-producing power of the particle d consists
in part of vis viva and in part of tensions.
if gravity, instead of being attraction, were
repulsion, the sum of the tensions between two
material particles d and F would be a maximum, and
the vis viva zero, when the particles are in contact.


But the moment d, in obedience to the repulsion,
moves away from r, vis viva is generated ; and the
farther n retreats from f the greater is its vis viva,
and the less the amount of tension still available for
producing motion. Taking repulsion into account as
well as attraction, the principle of the conservation of
force affirms that the sum of the tensions and vires
vivce of the material universe is a constant quantity.
The considerations that we have here applied to
gravity apply equally to chemical affinity. In a
mixture of oxygen and hydrogen the atoms exist
apart, but by the application of proper means they may
be caused to rush together across the space that
separates them. While this space exists, and as
long as the atoms have not begun to move towards
each other, we have tensions, and nothing else.
During their motion towards each other the tensions,
as in the case of gravity, are converted into vis viva.
After they clash we have still vis viva, but in
another form. It was translation, it is vibration.
It was molecular transfer, it is heat. The same con-
siderations apply to a mixture of hydrogen and
chlorine. When these gases are mingled in the dark
they remain separate, but if a sunbeam fall upon the
mixture the atoms rush together with detonation.
Here also we have tension converted into molecular
translation, and molecular translation into heat. In all
such cases, according to the principle of conservation,
the quantity of force remains unaltered. Integrating,
as in the case of gravity, the tensions, from the
starting point up to the actual collision of the atoms,
this sum, expressed numerically, is equal to the final


vis viva. At any intermediate point of their course
the force of the atoms consists in part of tension and
in part of vis viva, and the sum of both is always the
same.
It is quite possible to reverse those processes, to
unlock the embrace of the atoms and to replace them
in their first positions. But to accomplish this as
much heat would be required as was generated by
their union. Such reversals occur daily and hourly
in nature. By the solar rays, the oxygen of water
is divorced from its hydrogen in the leaves of plants,
a portion of these rays being consumed in the process.
As molecular vis viva the rays have disappeared, but
in so doing they have re-conferred tension on the
atoms of oxygen and hydrogen. These atoms are
thus enabled to re-combine, and when they do so
the precise amount of heat consumed in their sepa-
ration is restored. The same remarks apply to
the compound of carbon and oxygen, called carbonic
acid, which is exhaled from our lungs, produced by
our fires, and found sparingly diffused everywhere
throughout the air. The sunbeams also wrench
these atoms asunder in the leaves of plants, and
sacrifice themselves in the act; but when the plants
are burnt the amount of heat consumed in their
production is restored.
This, then, is the rhythmic play of nature as
regards her forces. Throughout all her regions she
oscillates from tension to vis viva, from vis viva to
tension. We have the same play in the planetary
system. The earth?s orbit is an ellipse, one of the
foci of which is occupied by the sun. Imagine the


earth at the most distant part of the orbit. Her
motion, and consequently her vis viva, is then a
minimum. The planet rounds the curve and begins
to approach the sun. She has in front of her a
store of tensions, which is gradually consumed, an
equivalent amount of vis viva being generated.
When nearest to the sun her motion, and conse-
quently her vis viva, is a maximum. But here
her available tensions are used up. She rounds this
portion of the curve and retreats from the sun.
Tensions are now stored up, but vis viva is lost, to be
again restored at the expense of the complementary
force on the opposite side of the curve. Thus beats
the heart of creation, but without increase or dim-
inution of its total stock of force.
I have thus far tried to steer clear amid confusion
and to neutralise the effects of a bad terminology by
fixing the mind of the reader upon things rather than
upon names. But good names are essential; and
here, as yet, we are not provided with such. We
have had the force of gravity and living force?two
utterly distinct things. We have had pulls and
tensions; and we might have had the force of heat,
the force of light, the force of magnetism, or the
force of electricity ?all of which terms have been
employed more or less loosely by writers on physics.
This confusion in the application of the term ? force ?
is happily avoided by the introduction of the term
? energy,? embracing under that term both tension
and vis viva. Energy is possessed by bodies already
in motion ; it is then actual, and we agree with Mr.
Rankine to call it actual or dynamic energy. It is


our old vis viva. On the other hand, energy is
possible to bodies not in motion, but which, in virtue
of attraction or repulsion, possess a power of motion
which would realise itself if all hindrances were
removed. Looking, for example, at gravity, a body
on the earth?s surface in a position from which it
cannot fall to a lower one possesses no energy. It
has neither motion nor power of motion. But the
same body suspended at a height above the earth
has a power of motion though it may not have exer-
cised it. Energy is possible to such a body, and we
agree to call this 'possible or potential energy. It
answers to our old tensions. We, moreover, speak
of the conservation of energy instead of the conser-
vation of force; and this principle, expressed in the
new terminology, is, that the sum of the potential
and dynamic energies of the material universe is a
constant quantity.
A body cast upwards consumes the actual energy
of projection, and lays up potential energy. When
it reaches its utmost height all its actual energy is
consumed, its potential energy being then a maxi-
mum. When it returns, there is a re-conversion of
the potential into the actual. A pendulum at the
limit of its swing possesses potential energy ; at
the lowest point of its arc its energy is all actual.
A patch of snow resting on a mountain slope has
potential energy; loosened, and shooting down as an
avalanche, it possesses dynamic energy. The pine-
trees growing on the Alps have potential energy ;
but rushing down the Ilolzrinne of the woodcutters
they possess actual energy. The same is true of the


mountains themselves. As Ion*? as the rocks which
O
compose them can fall to a lower level, they possess
potential energy, which is converted into actual when
the frost ruptures their cohesion and hands them
over to the action of gravity. The hammer of the
great bell of when raised before strik-
ing, possesses potential energy; when it falls, the
energy becomes dynamic ; and after the stroke, we
have the rhythmic play of potential and dynamic in
the vibrations of the bell. The same holds good for
the molecular oscillations of a heated body. An
atom is pressed against its neighbour, and recoils.
Its motion is now dynamic ; but the ultimate ampli-
tude of the recoil is soon attained, the motion of the
atom in that direction is checked, and for an instant
its energy is all potential. It is then drawn towards
its neighbour with accelerated speed, thus converting
its potential into dynamic energy. Its motion in
this direction is also finally checked, and, for an in-
stant, again its energy is all potential. It again re-
treats, converting its potential into dynamic energy,
till the latter attains a maximum, after which it is
again changed into potential energy. Thus, what is
true of the earth, as she swings to and fro in her
yearly journey round the sun, is also true of her
minutest atom. We have wheels within wheels, and
rhythm within rhythm.
When a body is heated, a change of molecular ar-
rangement always occurs, and to produce this change
heat is consumed. Hence, a portion only of the
heat communicated to the body remains as dy-
namic energy. Looking back on some of the state-


ments made at the beginning of this article, now
that our knowledge is more extensive, we see the
necessity of qualifying them. When, for example,
two bodies clash, heat is generated ; but the heat,
or molecular dynamic energy, developed at the
moment of collision, is not the equivalent of the sen -
sible dynamic energy destroyed. The true equiva-
lent is this heat, plus the potential energy conferred
upon the molecules by the placing of greater dis-
tances between them. This molecular potential
energy is on the cooling of the body,
converted into heat.
Wherever two atoms capable of uniting together
by their mutual attractions exist separately, they
form a store ot potential energy. . Thus our woods,
forests, and coal-fields on the one hand, and our at-
mospheric oxygen on the other, constitute a vast store
of energy of this kind?vast, but far from infinite.
We have, besides our coal fields, bodies in the me-
tallic condition more or less sparsely distributed in
the earth?s crust. These bodies can be oxydised,
and hence are, so far as they go, stores of potential
energy. But the attractions of the great mass of the
earth?s crust are already satisfied, and from them no
further energy can possibly be obtained. Ages ago
the elementary constituents of our rocks clashed to-
gether and produced the motion of heat, which was
taken up by the ether and carried away through
stellar space. It is lost for ever as far as we are
concerned. In those ages the hot conflict of carbon,
oxygen, and calcium produced the chalk and lime-
stone hills which are now cold ; and from this car-


bon, oxygen, and calcium no further energy can be
derived. And so it is with almost all the other con-
stituents of the earth?s crust. They took their pre-
sent form in obedience to molecular force; they
turned their potential energy into dynamic, and gave
it to the universe ages before man appeared upon
this planet. For him a residue of potential energy
remains, vast truly in relation to the life and wants
of an individual, but exceedingly minute in com-
parison with the earth?s primitive store.
We know no more of the origin of force than of
the origin of matter ; where matter is, force is, for
we only know matter through its forces. All that
philosoj)hy can do is to classify the materials given
to man, and show their mutual relations. It will
depend, in some measure, upon previous habits of
thought, whether the terms potential and dynamic
energy are acceptable. They are, however, all but
universally accepted and employed by the scientific
men of the present day ? in whose case the concep-
tion of the material universe would be as much
maimed by the omission of the idea of potential
energy as by the omission of the idea of vis viva.
These ideas are complementary and co-equal. They
are applicable to all natural powers?to gravity, light,
heat, magnetism, electricity, and chemical affinity.
Before the ideas which the terms potential and actual
energy represent were introduced, when motion dis-
appeared, we knew not what became of it; when
work was executed we knew not at what cost. We
did not know that when a steam-engine turned a
wheel, or lifted a weight, heat was destroyed. We


did not know that the same was true of muscular
force ; that we could not raise an arm, or walk up-
stairs, except by the extinction of a certain amount
of heat. We now know not only that the extinction
takes place, but that it is an extinction of form only.
At the stair top we possess, as potential energy, the
equivalent of the heat lost during the ascent; and
we have only to jump to the bottom to reproduce
the heat. It is from this point of view that we are
enabled to affirm that the energy of the universe is
as constant as its matter. This may be compelled to
change its form ; a solid stick of sealing-wax may be
converted into an invisible gas, but there is no loss
of matter in the process. As surely as this is the
case, so sure it is that where energy disappears it
changes its form merely ; and that if we are intelli-
gent enough to follow it, we shall find it somewhere,
unaltered in amount, though, perhaps, with an en-
tirely new face.
One word in conclusion, on a topic of public in-
terest. A miracle is strictly defined as an invasion
of the law of the conservation of energy. To create
or annihilate matter would be deemed on all hands
a miracle; the creation or annihilation of energy
would be equally a miracle to those who understand
the principle of conservation. Hence arises the
scepticism of scientific men when called upon to join
in national prayer for changes in the economy of
nature. Those who devise such prayers admit that
the age of miracles is past, and in the same breath
they petition for the performance of miracles. They
ask for fair weather and for rain, but they do not


ask that water may flow up-hill; while the man of
science clearly sees that the granting of the one peti-
tion would be just as much an infringement of the law
of conservation as the granting of the other. Holding
this law to be permanent, he prays for neither. But
this does not close his eyes to the fact, that while
prayer is thus impotent in external nature, it may
react with beneficent power upon the human mind.
That prayer produces its effect, benign or otherwise,
upon him who prays, is not only as indubitable as
the law of conservation itself, but it will probably
be found to illustrate that law in its ultimate expan-
sions. And if our spiritual authorities could only
devise a form in which the heart might express it-
self without putting the intellect to shame, they
might utilise a power which they now waste, and
make prayer, instead of a butt to the scorner, the
potent inner supplement of noble outward life.
John Tyndall.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.




i
