

try
Outridge Printing Coy., Brisbane, Queensland.


Nominated Passe no ers Permanent residents in Queensland wishing to obtain passages for their
7 " " friends or relatives in the United Kingdom or the Continent of Europe
may do so under the provisions of the Immigration Act, by making payments to the Immigration Agent in Brisbane,
or the Assistant Immigration Agents, Maryborough, Bundaberg, Rockhampton, Mackay or Townsville, or to the Clerks
of Petty Sessions at any other town in the Colony upon the following scale :
MALES between one and twelve years, £2 ; between twelve and forty, £\ ; over forty and under fifty-five, £B.
FEMALES between one and twelve, £1 ; between twelve and forty. £2 ; over forty and under fifty-five, £B.
MALES or FEMALES—fifty-five and upwards, the full passage money, £l3 13s.
Assisted Passenqers. Agent-General for Queensland (whose address is Westminster
Chambers, No. 1 Victoria Street, London, S.W.), will entertain applica-
tions for some assistance towards the total cost of passage from small capitalist Farmers, Market Gardeners, Dairymen
and Orchardists —especially in the case of those having families. Full particulars as to the occupations of the head
and members of the family, their available Capital and intentions as to pursuit on landing, etc., should be forwarded
with the application and each case will be con-
sidered on its merits. Whatever money con-
tributions it may be decided to grant towards
the cost of passage may apply to the case of
persons wishing to proceed to the colony either
as second-class or as steerage passengers.
Immigration Office and Depot, Brisbane.
be thoroughly satisfied with the character and bona fidcs of each applicant. The only outlay to be incurred by the
Emigrant will be the cost of transit from his place of residence to the port of embarkation, and also the charge for
“ ship kit,” viz, £l.
Reception in the Colony. All Emigrants, as enumerated above, will be accommodated, Free
~of all Expense, at the Immigration Depot at the port of arrival
for 14 days, or such period as may enable them to complete their arrangements, and they will further be entitled to
receive a Free Pass to any part of the Colony where a railway line exists.
Full-Paying Passengers.
Any person whose application for an assisted
passage cannot be entertained may, as hereto-
fore, avail himself of the third-class passenger
rate namely, 13s. (including “ ship kit ”)
granted by the British-India Company’s direct
line of Steamers from London to Queensland.
Free Passengers. female
Domestic
Servants and Farm Labourers will be granted
Free Passages to Queensland upon the ap-
proval of the Agent-General for Queensland in
London (whose address is Westminster Cham-
bers, NO. 1 Victoria Street, London, S.W.),
and forms of application setting forth the terms
and conditions upon which such passages will
be granted may be obtained by communication
with the office of the Agent-General, who must
Queensland as a Home. The Climate is healthy and entirely free from rigorous extremes.
* The Soil in many pan s is Rich and Productive and equal to anything
to be found in the world. A Splendid System of National Education prevails throughout the Colony which is
absolutely free to all classes. Freehold Farms of from 160 acres to 640 acres, according to quality of soil and distance
from market, can be bought at the rate of 2s. fid. per Acie, the purchase money being payable in yearly instalments of
fid. per acre, and extending over a period of Ten Years.
WAGES.— Farm Servants command from £35 to £5O per annum. Married Couples command up to £BO per
annum. Female Domestic Servants (including Cooks, Housemaids, General Servants and Dairymaids), from Bs. to
255. per week. (In all above cases “ Board and Lodging ”is found.)
Immigration Office, Brisbane, 6th March, 1899. J. O’N. BRENAN, Immigration Agent.


WA_LKERS
MARYBOROUGH, QUEENSLAND,
Engineers, Iron and Brass Founders, Boilermakers, Coppersmiths,
Shipbuilders, Bridge Builders, Etc,, Etc.
Scottish Gympie Battery
Mimufactur-ers of
MINING and GOLD-SAVING MACHINERY.
ENGINES and BOILERS (Land and Marine)
t PUMPS and PUMPING MACHINERY.
LOCOMOTIVES and RAILWAY ROLLING
LOCOMOTIVES and RAILWAY ROLLING STOCK.
SUGAR MILLS (Modern).
MEAT WORKS MACHINERY.
Main Works = == = = Bowen Street,
Shipbuilding and Boiler Yards = Kent Street (Riverside),
Maryborough, Queensland


Emigi
®> ® g
Nominated Passenqers. f™'"'?
ai mends or rela
may do so under the provisions of the Immigration Act, by m;
or the Assistant Immigration Agents, Maryborough, Bundaberg,
of Petty Sessions at any other town in the Colony upon the foil
MALES between one and twelve years, £2 ; between tweb
FEMALES between one and twelve, £1 ; between twelve ;
MALES or FEMALES—fifty-five and upwards, the full ]
Assisted Passenqers. IJ 16 Agent-Gen
— ai Chambers, No. 1
tions for some assistance towards the total cost of passage from
and Orchardis'ts—especially in the case of those having familu
and members of the family, their available Capital and intent!
with the application and each case will be con-
sidered on its merits. Whatever money con-
tributions it may be decided to grant towards
the cost of passage may apply to the case of
persons wishing to proceed to the colony either
as second-class or as sieerage passengers.
Full-Paying Passengers.
Any person whose application for an assisted
passage cannot be entertained may, as hereto-
fore, avail himself of the third-class passenger
rate namely, £l3 13s. (including “ ship kit ”)
granted by the British-India Company’s direct
line of Steamers from London to Queensland.
Free Passengers. female
ai Domestic
Servants and Farm Labourers will be granted
Free Passages to Queensland upon the ap-
proval of the Agent-General for Queensland in
London (whose address is Westminster Cham-
bers, No. 1 Victoria Street, London, S.W.),
and forms of application setting forth the terms
and conditions upon which such passages will
be granted may be obtained by communication
with the office of the Agent-General, who must
Immigration Office and Depot, Brisbane.
be thoroughly satisfied with the character and bona fidcs of each applicant. The only outlay to be incurred by the
Emigrant will be the cost of transit from his place of residence to the port of embarkation, and also the charge for
“ ship kit,” viz, £l.
Reception in the Colony. All Emigrants, as enumerated above, will be accommodated, Free
- of all Expense, at the Immigration Depot at the port of arrival
for 14 days, or such period as may enable them to complete their arrangements, and they will further be entitled to
receive a Free Pass to any part of the Colony where a railway line exists.
Queensland as a Home. The Climate is healthy and entirely free from rigorous extremes.
: The Soil in many pans is Rich and Productive and equal to anythin"
to be found in the world. A Splendid System of National Education prevails throughout the Colony which is
absolutely free to all classes, freehold Farms of from 160 acres to 640 acres, according to quality of soil and distance
from market, can be bought at the rate of 2s. 6d. per Acre, the purchase money being payable in yearly instalments of
3d. per acre, and extending over a period of Ten Years.
WAGES. —Farm Servants command from £35 to £5O per annum. Married Couples command up to £BO per
annum. Female Domestic Servants (including Cooks, Housemaids, General Servants and Dairymaids), from Bs. to
255. per week. (In all above cases “ Board and Lodging ” is found.)
Immigration Office, Brisbane, 6th March, 1899.
J. O N. BRENAN, Immigration Agent,


WALKERS Limited,
MARYBOROUGH, QUEENSLAND,
EngineerSj Iron and Brass Founders, Boilermakers, Coppersmiths,
Shipbuilders, Bridge Builders, Etc,, Etc.
Scottish Gympie Battery,
MINING and GOLD-SAVING MACHINERY.
anufacturers of
ENGINES and BOILERS (Land and Marine).
t PUMPS and PUMPING MACHINERY.
LOCOMOTIVES and RAILWAY ROLLING
LOCOMOTIVES and RAILWAY ROLLING STOCK.
SUGAR MILLS (Modern).
MEAT WORKS MACHINERY.
Main Works = Bowen Street,
Shipbuilding- and Boiler Yards = Kent Street (Riverside),
Maryborough, Queensland


fl if gg gg u rfj* mgmgm gm highest prices paid for
mM %m %m mm <SP m gm mm mm auriferous concen-
trates AND PYRITES.
Smelting Coy.,
LIMITED,
Aldershot Smelting Works, Maryborough, Queensland
Buyers ant) Smelters of . . .
Also 0f... Gold, Silver, Lead
CYANIDE SLAGS.
Copper and other ©res
SPECIAL RATES GIVEN FOR ARGENTIFEROUS LEAD ORES
IN QUANTITIES.
SAMPLING AND PURCHASING DEPOTS AND AGENCIES AT MEL-
BOURNE, ZEEHAN, AND EMU BAY, TASMANIA,
UNDER COMPETENT ASSAYERS.
Works: Aldershot. Queensland.
For Tariffs and Full Particulars, apply at the Works, Aldershot, Maryborough, Qld.,
and all Agencies. MELBOURNE AGENCY: 52 Market Street.
Registered Head Office: W. H. CLARK, Local Secretary.
54 OLD BROAD STREET, LONDON, E.C. T. J. DYASON, Manager.


Fried, tap Grusonwerk.
MAGDEBURG-BUCKAU
(GERMANY),
COMPLETE PLANTS FOR TREATING GOLD
COPPER, LEAD, TIN, ZING ORES, ETC.
, , SPECIALITY:
Of which we supplied 27
SdEgtr PATENT BALL MILLS
(FOR DRY CRUSHING).
KRUPP STEEL SHOES AND DIES.
Sole Agents: HOYER, TIEGS & Co.,Elizabeth St., Brisbane
JOHN W. JAFFRAY,
on application. Engineer and Machinery Merchant.
ALL LATEST INVENTIONS IN MINING and
GOLD SAVING MACHINERY
Rock Drills and Air Compressors, Hoists, Pumps, Crush-
ENGLISH and ing, Sizing and Concentrating, Stamp, Chlorination, and
AMERICAN SAW MILL and Cyanide Mills, Furnaces, Etc.
WOOD WORKING • • •
MACHINERY. ENGINES, ANY SIZE, OF FINEST TYPES, ENGLISH
•• • •
Jaffray’s _ —-a
AND AMERICAN.
“Machinery Register.”
Sole Agent:
The most Popular Medium in Australia for every
description of New and Second-hand Machinery.
Penman & Co , Glasgow, New Patent Water Tube
Steam Boilers
The “TRIUMPH” Alluvial Puddler, Concentrator,
and Gold Winner. Treats 10 tons per hour, and
saves 95 per cent, of the gold.
Established Twelve Years.
Cundall's Patent Oil Engine. All sizes ; the simplest,
most reliable, and cheapest.
• •••
Petrie’s Famous Wool Scouring Machinery.
HEAD OFFICE:
EQUITABLE BUILDINGS, 350 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY.


McLennan & Go.,
ALICE and ALBERT STREETS,
.. . QUEENSLAND AGENTS FOE ; S * BRISBANE.
WOBTHIN6TOH
Duplet Steam Pumps
For every service. Supplied to every Mining
Field in the world.
TRUSTY OIL ENGINES
STOCKPORT GAS ENGINES
Worthington Steam Pump.
MARSHALL, SONS & CO., LIMITED, GAINSBOROUGH,
Portable and Fixed Engines and Boilers,
HIGH-CLASS VERTICAL AND HORI-
ZONTAL ENGINES FOR ELECTRIC
LIGHTING, AND ALL PURPOSES.
VERTICAL CROSS TUBE
OF ALL SIZES
BOILERS,
HAULING GEAR, &c.
Marshall sfiimgmes.
LARGE STOCKS OF:
Engineers’ and Blacksmiths’
Tools, Shafting, Pulleys,
Belting, Rubber, Engine Pac-
king, Oils, Lloyd & Lloyd’s
Tubes and Fittings, Br ss-
ware, Bar Iron, Steel, Cop-
per, Tin, Lead, &c.
MINING
REQUISITES
Of every description, including
CYANIDE AND ASSAYING APPLIANCES
SHOVELS, PICKS
STEEL, HAMMERS.
B. BROWN & CO.'S
SPECIAL QUALITY
STEEL WIRE ROPES.


BULLIVANTS’
Specially Selected Quality
for . . .
SHAFT WINDING, HAULING
TRAMWAYS, ETC.
ONE UNIFORM QUALITY!
BEST WORKING RESULTS!
LARGE STOCKS!
PROMPT DESPATCH!
Agents in every Mining
Centre.
STEEL
WIRE ROPES
Head Depot:
331 KENT ST., SYDNEY.
VICTORIA (Melbourne): N. GUTHRIOGE.
Q’LAND. (Brisbane): J. W. HENDERSON.
WESTINGHOUSE
FOR LIGHTING, TRACTION, __ _
ELECTRICAL
Westinghouse
Simple and /g Q /ft £R Y f
Callender Cables ! JMtJiii—i—uiih
Mannesmann Tubes!
AGENTS FOR:
WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC AND MANUFACTURING CO.
FRIED. KRUPP, ESSEN.
Cyanide of
98/100% Potassium!
CALLENDER’S CABLE AND CONSTRUCTION CO, ETC.
Noyes Brothers,
Telegraphic Address:
31 O’CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY.
17 QUEEN ST., MELBOURNE.
“NOYES,” Sydney.


...AND AT
Sydney, Mslhourne, and London.
telephone, Ko-
LIMITED ,
OIL MERCHANTS AND ENGINEERS’ FURNISHERS
Lubricating Oils, Asbestos Goods, India=
Rubber Goods, Boiler and Pipe Coverings,
Engine Packings, “Hercules” Leather
Packings, “Hercules” Leather
Belting
and Balata Belting, Lubricators,
Valves, Cocks, Boiler Fluids, Cotton
Waste, &c., <&c.
Sole agents for:
PARSONS’ STEAM TURBINES. TURBO-DYNAMOS. &c.
REEVES’ FEED WATER FILTERS, GRAVITY FILTERS, &c
STONE’S PATENT BRONZE FOR BEARINGS. &c.
E.P.S. CO.’S STORAGE BATTERIES.
MAGNOLIA ANTI-FRICTION METAL.
ALLEN EVERITT & SONS’ BRASS AND COPPER TUBES, &c
GRESHAM & CRAVEN’S INJECTORS.
SHULTZ PATENT SABLE RAW HIDE BELTING.
EAGLE ST., BRISBANE.


XTbe (Bolbfielbs of (Slueenslanb.
CROYDON
AND THE
ETHEHIDGE GOIiDpIELDS
By Wm, LEES,
AUTHOR OF “ PICTURESQUE QUEENSLAND,” ETC.
Mitb flftaps anb plana.
QUEENSLAND:
OUTRIDGE PRINTING COMPANY, LTD., QUEEN ST., BRISBANE.
i 8 9 9-


KNOWLES’
“Palmer” Sinking Pump.
CATALOGUES FREE ON APPLICATION
Frue Vanner
&c. &c.
Agents for
(All Sizes)
Parke & Lacv Co.
LIMITED,
SYDNEY) N.S.W.,
Mining Machinery, Engines
and Boilers.
Sole Licensees for the Manufacture and Sale of
THE ROPP STRAIGHT-LINE FURNACE (por Roasting,
HOLTOFF-WETHEY FURNACE, with Cooling Hearth-
WETHEY MULTIPLE DECK CALCINING FURNACE i isin S ° res
ALSO
IMPROVED HUNTINGTON CENTRIFUGAL QUARTZ MILL.
PATENTEES OF:
The Roger Roll Dodge Rockbreaker
“James” Ore Feeder
Challenge Ore Feeder
New Bartlett Concentrator
Californian Feed Wate; Heater
INGERSOLL SERGEANT ROCK DRILLS AND AIR
COMPRESSORS
Knowles’ Patent Pumps
(Pumps of all kinds in stock)
GATES ROCKBREAKERS WESTINGHOUSE ENGINES
“GARDNER” GOVERNORS “OSTER” STOCKS and DIES
BAKER BLOWERS CONNERSVILLE BLOWERS
BUFFALO BLOWERS and EXHAUST FANS
“PROSPECTOR” BATTERIES
HORIZONTAL and VERTICAL ENGINES and BOILERS
HORSE WHIMS, ORE CARS, SKIPS, BUCKETS, ELECTRO
PLATES, RETORTS, MOULDS, &c.
ALL KINDS OF ENGINEER S TOOLS AND FITTINGS.


PREFACE
The Mining Districts of Queensland which have in times past succeeded in arousing
public interest the most of any —and from which, perhaps, the greatest things are
expected—lie away to the north of the Colony, across that great belt of country west of
Townsville, Cairns and Cooktown, between the east coast and the Gulf of Capentaria,
a distance of about 400 miles. The discoveries of the past in this enormous area are
to all prospectors but a tithe of its undeveloped wealth, and the rich gold won from
Ravenswood, Charters Towers, the Cape, Palmer, Hodgkinson, Herberton, Watsonville,
Etheridge, and Croydon is but a fraction of what will ultimately be obtained from these
districts.
The two fields—Croydon and Etheridge—dealt with in this small volume are
great in extent and possibilities, and, given capital and good management, with the best
scientific methods for treatment of the vast lodes which lie almost unworked, the mines
at the various centres will rapidly win for themselves foremost names on the world’s
stock exchanges.
That this brochure will aid jn the general advancement of the district, and draw
increased attention to these goldfields, is the earnest wish of
THE PUBLISHERS
Croydon Goldfield .. .. .. .. 1
Geology of Croydon Goldfield .. .. 8
Croydon Reefs .. .. .. .. .. 1 x
Reefs in the Granite Area .. .. ~ 12
True Blue .. ~ .. .. ~ 14
Golden Gate .. .. .. .. .. 14
Croydon King .. .. .. ~ 15
Reefs in the Feldsite Area .. .. .. 16
The Mountain Maid .. .. .. .. i£
The Homeward Bound .. ~ .. 17
Tabletop .. .. .. .. .. ..18
Golden Valley .. .. . • .. .. 19
The Waratah G.M. Co. .. .. ..21
The Croydon Consols .. .. .. .. 22
The Croydon Goldfields G.M. Co. .. .. 23
List of Companies, Croydon .. .. .. 23
Estimated Yield of Gold, Croydon Goldfield 25
The Etheridge Goldfield .. .. .. 26
Mining Centres from Georgetown .. .. 29
Estimated Yield of Gold .. .. .. 31
The Twelve-Mile .. .. .. ..17


H H I ■ If 1 - I We are SOLE AGENTS for Messrs
Machine belting!!
O PIONEER
RAW HIDE BELTING AND LACES
IMPORTERS OF HAIR, RUBBER, COTTON AND
BALATA BELTING AND FASTENERS OF
EVERY DESCRIPTION.
at short notice.
We have full stocks of all the above lines always on hand.
Full PRICE LISTS mailed to any address. Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
I A!|. We are Sole Agents for Messrs. W. P. FULLER
I II II PS P Si IS 11 I i & CO., of San Francisco and New York, and
LHP I IlldlllllS Ullw are proprietors of the Registered Trade Mark
| I ~. “Star Brand” Lubricating Oils.
These oils are recognised to he of a standard and uniform quality, and we shall be pleased
to mail samples and quotations FREE to any address.
@ @ Q
IMPORTERS of Tuck’s Packings, Core and Asbestos of every description, I.R. Valv.s.
I.R. Insertion, Hose, Asbestos, Millboards, Cotton Waste, Oil Cans, Gauge Glasses, ai d
all Machinery requisites ; also House’s Steam Jointing Cement, Flange and Joint Packing,
Boiler Fluid, Boiler and Pipe Covering Composition, and many other lines.
Note. —Special Belts made to order
ffHf when required, any length, any width.
Send to us for Catalogues and Price Lists.
PHILIP FRANKIL 8 GO., EDWARD STREET, BRISBANE.
Mpphanipal I pathm Tm LSsxS£sS‘«ss&<Ss
mUll IB (111 111 (IB kUdlllUlU Engineers’leathers made to order
NOW ISSUED !
“The Goldfields of Queensland **
THE FOLLOWING ART WORKS UPON
Companion Works to the Croydon and the Etheridge Goldfields
(FULLY ILLUSTRATED) ;
GYMPIE GOLDFIELD
WITH THREE MAPS AND PLANS.
ROCKHAMPTON, MOUNT MORGAN and CLERMONT
WITH PLANS AND MAPS.
CHILLAGOE and HERBERTON MINERAL FIELDS
AND THE
HODQKINSON GOLDFIELD
WITH LARGE PLANS AND MAPS.
CHARTERS TOWERS and RAVENSWOOD
WITH PLANS AND MAPS.
THE SMALLER FIELDS OF QUEENSLAND
WITH PLANS, AND LARGE MAP OF THE MINERAL FIELDS OF QUEENSLAND, IN COLOURS
TO BE OBTAINED OF ALL BOOKSELLERS, or
THE OUTRIDGE PRINTING CO., LTD., PRINTERS ADD PUBLISHERS, QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.




Miners Working on the Reef Underground.


T H from the stormless shores
°f the Gulf over which the old
Dutch general, Carpenter,
sailed two and a-half centuries ago (1628),
and which now bears his time-honoured
name, lies the rich mining district of Croydon,
some 82 miles in a direct line from the port
of Normanton, with which it is connected
by rail/ The town of Croydon lies in lati-
tude 18 deg. 12 min. S. and longitude 142
degs. 14 min. E., on the eastern tributaries
of the Norman River.
Normanton, the port for the Croydon
Goldfield, is a municipal town with a
population of about 1,250; it is situated on
the left bank of the Norman River, 32 feet
above sea level, about 25 miles in a direct
line from the mouth, but 50 miles by the
river. It is the chief port of the Gulf of
Carpentaria, and is the outlet for the pastoral
lands of the Flinders and Leichhardt rivers,
as well as for the rich mineral area on the
Cloncurry River, The town is built for
the most part on slightly-elevated gravelly
ridges, the municipality having an area
of over five square miles; upwards of
has been expended upon the well
laid out streets. From here the railway
line is constructed to Croydon, 94 miles in
length, there being an ample train service
daily. From Normanton to Glenmore
station, where the Norman River is crossed,
the country is very flat and sandy. Good
Croydon B
Croydon Goldfield.
pastoral land is entered upon after crossing
the river, and continues to within a short
distance of Croydon, when the broken
country in which the numerous gold-
bearing reefs are situated, occurs. Near
Creen Creek Railway station, 76 miles
from Normanton, the telegraph line
branches from the Croydon telegraph line,
and after following the Carron or Creen
Creek crosses the Gilbert River and Ether-
idge Goldfield and on to the eastern coast
of Queensland, 400 miles away. An
hour’s run from Creen Creek, past the
mining centre known as the Golden Gate,
with numerous signs of the busy life of a
mining field on either hand, and the town-
ship of Croydon is reached.
As with all the goldfield areas of Queens-
land, and almost of all Australia, the dis-
trict was first occupied by squatters, who,
following upon the intrepid
footsteps of the early ex-
plorers, held the surround-
ing country under occu-
pation . licenses from the
Crown, and over the broken
ridges and gullies which now
constitute the goldfield for
L. E. D. TOWNER, 0
Warden, years wandered the Croydon
Croydon Goidikid. gf. a ti on cattle, undisturbed
by the rattle of the battery, or the great
mining operations which have since
brought the district into the front rank


of the gold-producing regions of Queens-
land.
The discovery of the auriferous nature
of the country was made by Mr. W. C.
Brown, the late owner of Croydon Station,
who, with two brothers named Aldridge,
then in his employ, shared the £l,OOO
reward paid by the Government for the
discovery of the field. In December, 1881,
Mr. Brown took up back country to the
east of Vena Park run, and in the month
of April, 1882, started for stock, pur-
chased it, and arrived at the Gilbert River
Brown commenced mustering, and, while
riding among the ranges hereabout, noticed
the innumerable quartz reefs on the ridges,
but was unable to find any gold-bearing
stone. Later on he put on four men —two
Woolgar and two Charters Towers miners
—to sink a well, and the first colour of
gold found on Croydon was obtained by
them, the gold being washed out of a blue
sort of wash-dirt. Nothing, however, was
done, chiefly owing to station matters
requiring every attention. But, in the
latter part of 1883, two brothers, James
SAMWELL STREET, CROYDON.
telegraph station on the return trip at the and W alter Aldridge— old Etheridge
latter end of September. Leaving the miners—obtained work upon the station,
cattle at this point, in company with the and, while ringbarking the horse paddock,
overseer, they struck across the country for found a leader of quartz carrying gold ;
Vena Park, intending to select a suitable but again nothing resulted. It is to be
site for a home station. noted that during the previous twelve
After looking over the new country they months a number of miners had been
decided to make the head station on Bel- backwards and forwards from the Etheridge
more Creek, and arrived with 2,7oo»head looking for work, and on nearly every
of cattle in November. During a visit to occasion walking or riding over what is
Normanton the blacks disturbed the cattle now one of the best reefs on Croydon—
very much, and upon his return Mr. the Golden Gate. The road to the Ether-


idge and Green Creek crosses over this
reef. In fact no one ever came from
Croydon in that direction without crossing
the Golden Gate line of reef, well defined
and cropping on the surface for 300 yards
in a sand flat. After a visit south Walter
Aldridge returned, bringing with him
another brother named Dick—an old
fossicker and miner—and commenced work
erecting sheds. In August, 1885, Mr.
Brown visited Cloncurry, and noted the
resemblance to Croydon of the country
between the Cloncurry Copper Mine and
the Gilded Rose Gold Mine, and voiced
the opinion both
there and at Nor-
manton, that there
would be a rich gold
discovery at Croy-
don. While in Nor-
manton he instructed
the overseer to give
the Aldridges a pros-
pectors’ outfit, and
named Tabletop as a
likely locality, know-
ing the reefs were
larger and more plen-
tiful in that direction. During his absence,
however, the Aldridges, when out shooting
one Sunday morning, found quartz carry-
ing gold in the same reef which Walter
Aldridge and his brother James used to
cross over every morning going to work
at a stockyard two years previously, now
known as the Lady Mary Reef. Walter
Aldridge then sent Mr. Brown a wire,
saying he had found a good reef and
wanted to see him. When Mr. Brown
returned, he sent all hands out mustering,
and when all was clear went out himself
to see the new find. From what he saw
THE ENTERPRISE MILL.
he was convinced that gold existed in the
reefs, and took the Aldridge Brothers to
what is now known as the Iguana Hill.
They did nothing else, from that date till
the date of reporting the discovery, but
find new reefs carrying payable gold, dis-
covering in all twenty payable lines.
Matters now began to get too risky to
continue prospecting further, so they con-
cluded to report the discovery. This was
in October, 1885, In January, 1886, the
field was proclaimed a goldfield and came
under the administration of the Mines
Department.
The vicissitudes of life, which apparently
come in a greater degree to the discoverers
of mineral wealth in the colonies, did not
pass by the leading spirit in the discovery
of Croydon, for after passing through a
period of prosperity such as comes
to few men—due chiefly to the rich
returns from the Lady Mary Claim—a
series of misfortunes succeeded each other,
and the work of an ordinary labourer has
now fallen to the lot of one who, twelve or
more years ago, was envied and respected
by all on Croydon, yet who would now be
scarcely recognised in the bent, weary-


looking man driving one of the drays of showing that they who have led the
the Croydon Divisional Board. Gympie s and through all the hardships of pioneer-
discoverer, Nash, after possessing thousands ing have been pver foremost in the silence
and visiting the leading European capitals, and solitude of the new land, have not
eventually came to holding a small Govern- always gained the independence that they
ment position as keeper of the powder desired - and suffered to gain. Money
magazine upon the field he discovered, was easily earned and as freely spent.
Gordon, who first led the Morgans to the The feeling of good comradeship which
Queensland “ mountain of gold ” that now existed in them all, caused those miners
bears their name, had no share in the pros- who had plenty of money to lend to their
perity that came to the succeeding owners, less fortunate, but not always honest,
Mollard, the finder of the great copper mates. Extravagance, ill-luck, or mis-
mine at Peak Downs, which gave its thou- fortune in their succeeding mining ven-
sands to the subsequent owners, eventu- tures rapidly depleted their pockets, and
after a few years ren-
dered the early lucky
ones sometimes worse
portunities.
Croydon laboured
under for a consider-
able time were un-
doubtedly the chief
cause of its slow pro-
gress. During the first
\ | \ off than in the days
I w , : before their rich op-
The difficulties that
ST. PATRICK’S BLOCK MINE AND CROYDON QUARTZ CRUSHING ar Q £ history,
company’s machine. y J ’
most of the miners
ally found a home at the refuge for the dollied out the stone by pestle and mortar;
aged at Dunwich. Mosman, Fraser and but this could only be used for small
Clarke, the discoverers of Charters parcels of stone; the larger quantities had
Towers, are a further instance of our to be carted to the crushing mills at
assertion. Mosman, it is true, attained an Georgetown, 100 miles away. Many of
independence and a seat in the Legislative the miners, unable to go to this expense,
Council of the colony, but Frazer died and won by the glamour of the prospects
of fever in the early Palmer goldfield in Western Australia, departed for the
days, and Clarke, one of Queensland’s newly - discovered Kimberley Goldfield,
best prospectors, fills a grave on the living to rue most bitterly the failure to
road to Mambare Goldfield, New Guinea. which they had gone. Gradually, how-
Many other instances from the long ever, Croydon came into prominence.
roll of goldfield pioneers could be cited, The stone that had been carted to George-


town yielded as high as 6 ozs. of gold per
ton, and the tents which had been used for
bank, store, and house alike, slowly gave
place to the more pretentious galvanised
iron structure. The first of these, erected
by Mr. John Temple, was a very moderate
sized building, the roof of which covered
the only hotel, Warden’s office, post office,
and the only store on the field. This
building gave place to an excellent two-
storied building in 1888, and Temple’s
corner became the chief meeting place of
Croydon. As a recent writer says : —“ At
listeners that “the bloomin’reef’s bound
to dip this way, and we’ll cut it at 60 feet
on the underlay, and she’ll go 40 bally
ounces to the ton.” The great fire of
May 30th, 1897, however, swept this side
of the street, taking in its devastating
course this landmark of Croydon’s history,
and resulting in great loss to the owner,
who had been one of the first and greatest
aids to mining on Croydon. Mr. Temple
did much towards the development of the
field by backing various parties of pros-
pectors, and giving long credit for stores
THE WARATAH MINE AND ID-STAMPER BATTERY.
that corner mostly all the election ad-
dresses were delivered.” A branch of the
Australian Miners’ Association of -Victoria
was inaugurated here. Under its roof were
the offices of the leading brokers, and it
was here that the mining business was
done. Here, too, the Croydon resident
fraternised with the visitor from the south.
At this corner in the early days used to sit
groups of men in the middle of the road,
drawing with forefinger in the dust, lines
by which they sought to convince their
to miners who were in need. Mr. H. F.
Morgan, first mayor of Croydon, erected
two tents as the first offices of the Golden
Age newspaper —the residence and editor’s
room being in one, the larger room being
the machine-room. The stock of white
“ news ” in the long flood weather of 1887
gave out, and the subscribers were startled
by the variety of the paper used in its
production. The first company promoted
in Croydon was for the purpose of erecting
a ten-head battery, called the Croydon


Quartz Company, which venture proved
highly profitable. Other batteries were
quickly erected, and as the high results of
the crushings became known a rush set in,
and in a short time upwards of 7,000
people reached the field. The township
had been early surveyed, and with the
THE CATHERINE MILL, TABLETOP.
celerity which distinguishes a new field,
stores, hotels, and business premises were
quickly erected, a vast change being made
in a few months. Still, but few of the
comforts of civilisation were available on
Croydon in that year. Early in 1887 that
portion of the colony was visited with a
record flood, and for upwards of ten weeks
Croydon was a world to itself, left in the
soak as it were, without communication
with either Georgetown or Normanton;
and with the large population then on the
field, the cost of provisions rapidly in-
creased, and great hardships were endured,
especially by the miners
isolated on some far-off
mining centre. When the
crossing at the Norman River
was again passable, the jour-
ney between Normanton and
Croydon, that is now done
in a few hours by train, took
the carriers ten or twelve days
to make. The scarcity of pro-
visions was such that, when
a team of pack-horses ar-
rived, sales would be held in
the main street, the ruling
prices being—-sugar, 2s. fid.
per pound ; flour, 2s. Bd. per
pound, and an absolute con-
dition of the sales was that
no purchaser should be al-
lowed more than solbs. of
the latter. One pound tins
of jam reached 2s. fid., while
common blucher boots
reached as high as 40s. per
pair. Whisky —an almost
prime necessity with many
hard citizens —was charged
at 2s. fid. per nip, and other
things at proportional rates. The following
year, however, things altered, and with the
extension of the railway in September,
1891, a recurrence of such times was
rendered impossible. Now, in flood or in
drought, the field is in an excellent position
for personal comforts, while machinery


can be landed upon the field at small
cost.
Originally, under the control of the
Croydon Divisional Board, the town of
Croydon was formed into a municipality
in 1892, with an area of one square mile.
The divisional board, which have their
offices in the town, have control of up-
wards of 14,300 square miles of the sur-
rounding country. The Municipal Coun-
cil consists of ten members. The popu-
lation of Croydon is about 4,000, of whom
THE IGUANA EXTENDED BLOCK.
miners total 580, general mining hands
690, merchants, etc., about 300, and women
and children some 2,200 more. Chinese
and other aliens total about 290.
The township is well laid out, and has
every advantage of a social and intellectual
nature, and with the progressive spirit of
the townspeople, bids fair to equal in im-
portance the older and more prominent
fields of the colony. There are several
State schools, and the Church of England,
Roman Catholic, Wesleyan, and other de-
nominations have excellent buildings.
Branches of the principal Queensland
banks are located here, while racing, lawn
tennis, rifle, cricket, and football clubs are
well supported. There are two ably con-
ducted newspapers upon the field —The
Golden Age and Mining Register under the
able editorship of Mr. H. Leonard, and
the Mining News from the facile pen of
Mr.W. S. Murphy. The many goldfields of
Queensland are under the control and
supervision of some of the ablest
men in Queensland, who unite
long experience in the colony’s
service with a legal knowledge
well fitting the judicial position
they occupy. This is well exem-
plified in Croydon. The field
was first under the jurisdiction of
Mr. Samwell, then police magis-
trate and warden at Normanton,
to whom the discovery of gold
f”j at Croydon had been notified,
and who acted as visiting Warden
of the field for some time. Mr.
Pillbrow was Mining Registrar
upon the field ; later, Mr. Macar-
thur, P.M. at Burketown, came
to the field as Warden and Police
Magistrate. Mr. J. A. Archibald
succeeded Mr. Macarthur, followed by the
late Mr. Benjamin Cribb ; Mr. L. E. D.
Towner succeeded Mr. Cribb, and was
Warden of the field from 1887 to 1892 ;
he had as Mining Registrar Mr. Kelly
Cusack, now Warden at Ravenswood.
Mr. Towner is now Warden, and can
well be termed one of Queensland’s best
mining wardens. Mr. W- W. Alder is
Mining Registrar, succeeding Mr. W. M.
Lee-Bryce, now at Charters Towers.


The following notes on the geological for-
mation of the Croydon Goldfield are con-
densed from the able report of Mr. W. H.
Rands, Assistant Government Geologist,
1896, and will be of interest as showing the
formation of the adjacent country.
“ The following are the formations in
order of geological age which are met with
on the Croydon Goldfield :
1 Recent superficial deposits
2 Desert Sandstone
3 Feldsites and porphyries
4 Granite
5 Metamorphic granite
The firstnamed cover a very large area to
the west, south, and south-east of Croydon.
In no place apparently of any considerable
thickness, and in many places the older
rocks appear through them, a fact which
permitted Mr. Rands to map the approxi-
mate boundary line between the sandstones
and the granites lying
beneath them. This
line runs through the
Archer lease, along
south of the racecourse,
through the hospital
grounds, along Slaugh-
ter-yard Creek, across
the True Blue road;
bending round again to
the west to the True
Blue Hill, and from
thence across the rail-
way line to the back of
Belmore Ridge. The Desert Sandstone
formation is represented chiefly by outliers
of sandstone, which now form isolated hills
Geology of Croydon Goldfield.
THE CROYDON CONSOLS, GOLDEN GATE.
preaching quartzite. Interbedded with
these sandstones are bands of red, yellow
and white clay.
or ridges, but which formerly formed an
extensive and continuous sandstone plateau.
These hills are the remnants saved from
the wreckage caused by denudation. The
principal hills are : —The True Blue, some
isolated hills SE. of the Mountain Maid and
north of Belmore Creek, Mount Angus
(near the Elsie reef), hills near Cork-tree
Creek, Mount Richmond, the Pyramids,
and a long ridge in the vicinity of Flanagan’s
and the Springs, On most of these hills
the upper bed consists of a hardened
vitreous .sandstone, and the lower beds of a
coarse and more friable sandstone. The
sandstone also crops out in places through
the superficial deposits on the flat country,
filling up hollows in the old surface of the
granite country. This series consists for
the most part of a somewhat coarse brownish
yellow gritty sandstone, which often passes
into a white quasi-vitreous sandstone ap-






The feldsites and porphyries occupy a
large area to the N. and NE. of Croydon,
and form a marked feature in the land-
scape, as their boundary marks the passage
between the flat granite country and the
rough broken ridgy country, and, with the
GOLD-SAVING MACHINERY WARATAH MILL.
exception of True Blue Hill and Mount
Crescent, they form the first rising country
seen on the journey from Normanton to
Croydon. These rocks vary considerably
in outward appearance ; the most common
form is a hard, compact, dark coloured
vitreous rock, with blebs of quartz through-
out it, and minute indistinct crystals of
feldspar. It possesses a conchoidal
fracture, and is a typical quartz feldsite.
Granite.— ln and about the township of
Croydon there may be seen masses and
numerous rounded knobs of a hard granite.
Of these there appear two main bodies,
both of which run roughly in a NW. and
SE. direction. The one appears to run
south of the town, through the racecourse
and hospital grounds; the other near the
Highland Mary, through the town near the
Lady Mary, and on by the Iguana Hill.
These knobs of granite crop out in the
otherwise flat country. The granite is
a hard, compact rock, consisting almost
entirely of quartz and feldspar, with a little
soft greenish decomposed mineral.
T he Metamorphic Granite is the oldest
rock upon the field. It is generally a soft,
somewhat coarse-
grained, and much
decomposed rock,
with numerous
bunches of graphite,
and often contains
coarse pyrites. The
granite is in places
full of boulders,
pointing to the fact
that this portion of
it was originally a
conglomerate.
In many places the
granite was in dis-
tinct layers, each having an entirely
different grain. These facts all point con-
clusively to its metamorphic origin. It is
bounded by the feldsites on the north, and
runs under the sandstone series to the
south, and extends right away from beyond
the Golden Gate on the NW. to Flanagan’s
on the SE. This is the rock in which the
most payable reefs on Croydon have so far
been found.
The field is singularly free from dykes.
In the Ophir Block a dyke of feldsite runs
in a NNE. direction through the mine, but
it has apparently no effect on the gold-
bearing character of the reef. At the
Homeward Bound, a dyke of dolerite
occurs in one of the Pride of the Hills
claims, and at Tabletop, long straight out-
crops can be seen, giving one the idea of
dykes of feldsite in the feldsites, but there is
no lithological difference in the two rocks.


There are no important faults upon the
field, the largest being apparently in the
No. 3 North Homeward Bound, which runs
NE. and dips ’ NW., throwing the reef
down a distance of 40 feet to the NW.
Smaller faults also occur in many of the
mines.
The auriferous area at Croydon extends
for many miles on the sides of the town —
on the north to Tabletop and Golden
Valley, south to the Croydon King and
Moonstone, while east and west for several
miles rich auriferous reefs abound. It is
computed that over 100 reefs have been
tested, the principal being Iguana, High-
land Mary, Lady Mary, Harp of Erin, &c.
Iguana Hill furnishes a striking view of
this gold-yielding territory. The plain
immediately at the base gives place to
ridges and hillocks, mine-dotted, extending
northward and eastward to the Etheridge
Goldfield, and to the
auriferous country of
the Einasleigh River
basin, and southward
to the more continuous ■. •
' • if
Gregory Range, and ,' lV > *" r *v*.
the broken country of *'T\ , *
the Woolgar Gold- X * - WVgfe,
field.
Away to the south-
west, over fine pas-
toral country, across
the Clara, Saxby, and
Flinders waters, and
up the Cloncurry
River, a tributary of the Flinders, lies the
immense mineral region of the Cloncurry,
more than 250 miles distant, where are
copper and iron deposits of enormous value.
Valuable gold reefs have also been worked
there, and many precious stones found.
THE JUBILEE CONSOLS.
Croydon is steadily progressing by reason
of the valuable discoveries made as the
shafts are sunk to still greater depths, and
is fast obtaining pre-eminence over older
mining towns. The proclaimed goldfield
extends south from near the confluence of
the Gilbert and Einasleigh rivers,-along the
Gregory Range and the north-westerly
watershed of the Woolgar River, across to
the junction of the Esmeralda Creek with
the Yappon River, and then in a northern
direction to near Creen Creek telegraph
station, a territory of about 150 miles in
length NNW., with an average breadth of
about 25 miles ENE., in all 3,873 square
miles in area.
The chief centres of mining are : —The
Golden Gate, 6 miles NW. of Croydon ;
True Blue, if miles NW. of Croydon;
Iguana Hill, adjacent to the town ; Croy-
don King, 6 miles SE. ; the Moonstone, g
miles SE.; the Mountain Maid, 2\ miles
north of the town ; Homeward Bound, on
Waterfall Creek ; the Twelve Mile, 6 miles
north of Croydon ; Tabletop, miles from
Twelve Mile; Golden Valley, i2milesNNE.;
and Mulligan’s Camp, 6| miles NW.”


The Croydon Reefs.
Very little alluvial gold has been found on
the Croydon Goldfield. Surface workings
occur on the Caledonian and Highland
Mary leases, and a little alluvial was
obtained at the Springs, about 10 miles
SE. of Croydon, and also in a gully near
the C. D. Rowe reef; but, altogether, the
gold obtained from these workings has
been small, and, with these few exceptions,
the whole of the gold produced upon Croy-
don is obtained from the reefs. These latter
occur in two distinct series of rocks—the
metamorphic granite and the feldsites. The
principal reefs in the first-named series are
the Golden Gate, Nancy Lee, Content,
True Blue, Iguana, Queen of Croydon,
Highland Mary, Croydon King, &c., &c.
Nearly all the reefs run in a NNW. by
NW. direction, and underlie flatly to the
NE. As a rule the “formations” are
large, the formation rock consisting of
IN THE JUBILEE MILL.
granite containing graphite. Ihe gold
from these reefs contains a large amount of
silver, and is of a poor quality. This is
especially the case in the Queen of Croy-
don reef, where the gold has a very silvery
appearance, and the melted bars of gold
resemble bars of pure silver. The average
value of the gold from these reefs, as given
by the assayers upon the field, is about
■jP 2 4s. per ounce, but as some of the larger
crushings have produced a poorer quality
of gold, it is probably considerably over
this figure. The reefs in the granite were
the first to be discovered, and have pro-
duced by far the largest quantity of gold.
As a rule they are not rich in gold where
they contain large percentages of pyrites,
and very poor returns are obtained from a
great deal of the quartz, of a character from
which, on Charters Towers, good returns
would be expected.
The principal mining centres, where the
reefs occur in the feldsites, are the Mountain
Maid, Homeward Bound, Twelve Mile,
Tabletop, Golden Val-
ley, the Carron, Mul-
ligan’s, Mark Twain,
and Flanagan’s. The
|•" reefs have a general
iT bearing of north and
south, and as a rule
are vertical, or dip at
a very steep angle,
though a few of them
underlie flatly, and,
with the exception of
some of those at the
Tabletop, are not so
large as those reefs which occur in the
granite, and so far as the work done upon
them shows, they have been more patchy,


but, as most of them have been worked by
small parties of miners, they have not had
the chance of being prospected to the extent
of the reefs nearer to Croydon, most of
which have been worked by companies or
syndicates. These reefs show a marked
difference in the value
of the gold they pro-
duce to those in the
granite, being about
£3 5 s - P er oz. The
average value of the
total quantity of gold
produced on the field
is thus about £ 2/11/6
per ounce. The num-
ber of reefs upon the
field is something like
250, though many
bearing different
names are but continuations of the same
reef, and the auriferous area is so
large, and the number of reefs so great,
that there must be a continuation of the
large output of gold for many years to come,
even from comparatively shallow depths.
REEFS IN THE GRANITE AREA.
—None of the reefs in the immediate
vicinity of the town, which were discovered
in the early days of the field, are now being
worked. The principal reefs hereabouts
are the Lady Mary, Sovereign, Post Hole,
Just-in-Time, Sir Walter, and the Better
Luck. Some of these, though bearing
different names, are undoubtedly the same
reef. The Lady Mary, on which the first
mine on Croydon was opened, is situated
in the town, appearing in the centre of one
of the streets; it bears NNW., and dips
ENE., and varies in width from 3ms. to
sft. It has yielded upwards of 15,200 ozs.,
THE TRUE BLUE CAMP.
from 7,480 tons of stone. The Sir Walter,
close by, runs ENE., dipping NNW., and
has yielded 3,853 ozs, of gold, from 1,328
tons of stone. The Post Hole reef crosses
the main street (Sircom street), and runs
NW. and SE., underlying to the NE. at
30 degrees ; it has yielded 792 ozs., from
101 tons of stone. The Sovereign reef
overlies the Post Hole reef about 35 feet,
and underlies to the NE. at 20 degrees ;
about 163 tons yielded 906 ozs. of gold.
On the south side of the town is the Better
Luck reef, running almost east and west,
and has produced 1,960 ozs. of gold, from
827 tons of stone. The Highland Mary,
about a mile east of the town, one time the
premier reef on the field, has been worked
upon for a mile in length, and the P.C.,
No. 1 and No. 2 South, the Caledonian,
Sir Garnet, Archer, and Glengarry, have
yielded 93,756 ozs. of gold, from 42,246
tons of stone. The average value of the
gold was about £2 Bs. per ounce. The
reef runs in a SE. direction, and underlies
towards the NE. The Caledonia reef,
adjoining, runs in an ENE. direction, and
dips steeply to the SE., but at a
depth it runs WSW., and in the


Caledonian P.C. it was discovered that
it made a bend and eventually joined
the Highland Mary reef in the Highland
Mary P.C., being apparently a continuation
of the latter reef gives off at a different angle.
The Bradlaugh reef runs parallel to the
Caledonia a short distance north, and the
• P.C. claim yielded 2,070 ozs., from 177 tons
of stone. The Highland Mary, Glengarry,
inches to 6 feet of crushing stuff was
obtained in the stopes. The Iguana reef
was followed down on the underlie through
the Iguana P.C., and for some distance
through the Ophir Block, underlying NE.
for a distance of nearly 560 feet. The
Chance reef junctions with the Iguana in
the old St. Patrick Block mine. A few
chains NW. is the Lady Norah, a vertical
and Sir Garnet are parts of the same reef,
as also apparently is the Caledonia. The
Archer reef is a little SE. of the Highland
Mary, and has a general dip NE.
The Iguana Hill is situated immediately
to the NW. of the town. It is merely low
rising ground, but forms quite a conspicuous
feature in the flat country surrounding
Croydon. The principal reef here is the
reef which gave some rich specimen stone
on the surface.
The Croydon Queen runs for a distance
of about three miles, passing close to the
NE. side of the town, and has been traced
almost continuously from the True Blue to
some distance south of the Waratah. In
that distance the reef has been known
under several names —The Queen, Silver
Prince, Silver King, Black Snake, Miner’s
Right, Silver Queen, and the Waratah.
The reef runs NE. and SW., and underlies
flatly to the NE. The value of the gold
Iguana, which has produced 83,481 ozs. of
gold. The chief workings have been upon
the Iguana reef. This reef runs NW.,
underlying in an NE. direction. From 12


obtained from this reef is very low, owing
to the presence of silver, sometimes even
reaching the low point of 15s. per ounce.
Some of the crushings, however, are very
high. At 422 feet down the underlie shaft
of the Waratah, very good stone was
obtained, which assayed as high as 10 ozs.
15 dwts. of gold, and 409 ozs. 6 dwts. of
silver, value 18s. yd. per ton of ore.
THE GOLDEN GATE.
TRUE BLUE is about miles
NW. from Croydon, the road to the Golden
Gate passing through the settlement. Its
chief feature is what is known as True
Blue Hill, which consists of horizontal
Desert Sandstone. This latter overlies the
granite in which the reefs occur, and in
some places the True Blue reef can be seen
cropping out immediately below the sand-
stone. This reef was one of the first
worked upon Croydon, and bears NW. and
SE., underlying flatly to the NE. The
Lady Isabelle runs in a similar direction
further to the NW., and is probably a con-
tinuation of the True Blue reef; parallel to
the Lady Isabelle is the Blue Peter reef.
The True Blue came into great prominence
in 1890, and the succeeding years, owing
to the magnificent stone raised from the
True Blue reef, and has held a premier
position upon the field from that time.
The Content reef lies a short distance from
the west of the Isabelle, and
is probably a continuation of
the latter. It bears NW., and
underlies flatly to the NE.,
and has been worked on and
off since 1887. The Sunset
and Sunny South reefs are on
the south side of the railway
line, after crossing Belmore
Creek from the Golden Gate,
and bear about NW. Several
reefs have been opened up on
Belmore Ridge, further south
the principal mining has
been on the Grace Parnell reef,
though only in a desultory way.
GOLDEN GATE.
The township of Golden Gate, appro-
priately named, is situated six miles NV\ .
of Croydon, adjoining the railway line, on
flat, sandy country, lying to the SE. of the
feldsite ridges, and is in the belt of meta-
morphic granite mentioned in the geological
notes; owing to the developments in the
mines during recent years, it is now the
chief mining centre of Croydon. The
principal reefs hereabout are: —The Golden


Gate, Nancy Lee, Banner of Freedom,
and the Winning Post. The outcrops of
the reefs cannot be easily traced along the
surface, owing to its being covered with
recent superficial deposits, and it is a matter
of conjecture whether the Golden Gate and
Nancy Lee, or the Golden Gate and Banner
of Freedom are one and the same reef;
each bears NNW. The Golden Gate
reef underlies flatly ENE. South-east
from Croydon, after passing the Waratah,
is the Harp of Erin reef, which was
opened in 1887, and has been worked con-
tinuously, giving some excellent returns.
The reef runs NE. and SW., dipping flatly
to the SE. The Elsie reef is about a mile
to the north, on a hill known as Mount
Angus, which rises out of the surrounding
flat country. Like
True Blue Hill, it is
capped with hori- M
zontal Desert Sand-
stone. The Con- ■BKle
naught Range is also nSf* i
here, but is not now |iy IS
worked. The Rock- Jr
ton Mystery, Good Ip
Friday, and other » !
reefs are to the west I ; Wr
of the Harp of Erin,
trending in a NNW.
direction; on the
east are several un-
developed reefs, and
a short distance along
the Croydon road is the Hidden Treasure
reef. At Gorge Creek desultory mining is
carried on, chiefly on the Baal Gammon reef,
which is situated on the creek, about a mile
from the crossing.
CROYDON KING is situated about six
miles SE. from Croydon, along the George-
IN THE WARATAH MILL.
town road. The Croydon King reef was
the most remunerative reef known in the
early days of the field, yielding, between
the years 1886 and 1895, 15,105 ounces,
from 6,280 tons of stone. At the lower
levels the reef did not prove so rich, and
apparently cut out, but there has not been
sufficient money invested to carry out pros-
pecting work in a legitimate manner. The
Emperor reef adjoins the King, on the west,
but has not given good returns. The Pack
Saddle reef is about i|- miles SW., while
the Richmond, in a similar formation to
the True Blue, lies about miles ENE.
of the King. The Morning Light reef is
about 2 miles from the King, along the
Georgetown road. A centre which is coming
into greater prominence is the Moonstone,
situated about 10 miles SE. of Croydon,
and three miles from the King, on the south
side of Moonlight Creek. The Moonstone
reef runs ENE., and dips north, while the
City of London, a short distance west,
bears north and south. This latter is almost
vertical, underlying slightly to the west.


To the north of the Croydon King, beyond
Richmond Hill, are the Pyramids, where
are situated several reefs that have proved
auriferous—the Pyramid reef, Crocodile,
and Demon of the Cap. All the reefs
referred to so far are situated in the meta-
morphic granite area, to which reference
has been made.
' THE REEFS IN THE FELD SITE
AREA come under the following notes,
and, like those mentioned previously, are
of quartz and “formation.” A short dis-
tance east is the General Grant reef, bearing
north qdegs. west, with a dip slightly west,
about a foot to iBins. wide, the quartz con-
taining in places a considerable amount of
iron. The Lord Nelson reef is a small
reef to - the north and west of the General
Gordon, but appears too small to pay, as
does a parallel reef a little further west.
On the north side of Belmore Creek is the
May Day reef, nearly vertical, with a slight
underlie to the west, and has yielded well,
SIRCOM STREET, 1597.
scattered over a very large area of country.
These reefs show a marked difference in
the value of the gold they produce to those
in the granite, the average being about
£3 4s. per ounce.
North from Croydon, along the Twelve
Mile road about three-quarters of a mile,
east of the road and just south of Belmore
Creek, are several reefs which have given
a total crushing of 246 tons having produced
492 ounces of gold, worth £3 ss. per ounce.
THE MOUNTAIN MAID lies about
*i\ miles north of Croydon, and at one time
was a very busy centre, work being carried
on chiefly on the Mountain Maid reef,
which bears slightly west of north. The
reef was big, going from ißins. to as high
as 7ft., and has been worked to some extent
for a distance of three-quarters of a mile,
the quartz occurring in bunches, mullock
(decomposed feldsite and quartz) coming in
and taking its place. The country rock is
fair returns. The General Gordon bears
north and south, and dips steeply to the
west. The width of the reef is about ißins.,
and at times consists entirely of quartz,
with specks of pyrites and galena, at others






quartz feldsite. The Babe reef is a parallel
reef a little to the west of the Mountain
Maid, and underlies to the east at 3ydegs.
The walls of the feldsite are well defined, the
reef being up to 4ft. in places, and crushings
have yielded from to 3odwts. per ton.
Following the road towards the Twelve
Mile, across O’Brien’s Creek, are the
Phoenix and Rainbow reefs, which have
yielded small crushings.
THE HOMEWARD BOUND Reef
is situated about miles up Waterfall
Creek from the Twelve Mile
road, and about five miles
NNE. of Croydon. The reef
is on the summit of a ridge,
and has been traced under
different names—Homeward
Bound, Waterfall, &c., for a
distance of 1 miles. It bears
slightly west of north, and
has a flat underlie to the east,
dipping at an average of about
16 degrees. The reef is about
2ft. wide, and has given good
returns all along the line.
This reef at a depth in the
block claims is well worth prospecting, and
will no doubt yield equally as rich returns
as the frontage mines. The Waterfall
reef is a continuation of the Homeward
Bound reef, and in this claim has yielded
as high as 4 ozs. per ton. Adjoining is the
Pride of the Hills; little work has been done.
THE TWEI , VE MILE is situated about
6 miles N. of Croydon, on the Twelve Mile or
Chalmers creek. There are a number of
reefs here —the area has not received the
attention it well deserves —and, with the
exception of the Jubilee reef, have been
Croydon C
NEAR TABLETOP
little worked upon. This last reef is north
of Jubilee Creek, a branch of Chalmers
Creek, and bears NE. and SW., underlying
35 degrees to the SE., and is from 2ft. to
12ft. in width. The country rock is feldsite,
the reef being white quartz, in parts
extremely cellular, the gold value being as
high as Bs. par ounce. It has been
traced for ii miles across Jubilee Creek.
The Lady Lottie reef bears NNE., and is
almost perpendicular, and has given as
high as 4ft. of solid quartz. There are old
workings on this line, from Chalmers Creek
south to the Jubilee reef
north. The Apex reef ad-
joins, and runs NNE. A
cross reef runs from this reef
east to the Lady Lottie, but
little work has been done
upon it. The President reef
is a few chains eastward of
the Apex, the full width of
the reef being about 4 feet,
giving up to yodwts. per ton,
the gold value being 3 6/6
per ounce. The May Belle,
a short distance east again,
runs north and south, dipping
east at 22 degrees, the reef being from pin.
to 2ft. 6in. wide, crushing up to ijr ozs. to
the ton. The Colleen Bawn lies to the
south of the May Belle, the third lease
taken up on this field being on this reef.
It runs north and south, and underlies east.
The output was only 688 ounces, the reef
then being abandoned. East of this reef is
the Golden Fleece, a fair sized vertical reef
bearing north and south. East of the
Golden Fleece is the Ross-shire, a large
reef bearing north 20 degrees east, and
underlying east 20 degrees, south at 45
degrees, and has yielded 984 ozs., from 638


tons of stone. North-east of the Jubilee
is the Golden Spur reef, and its continuation,
the Copenhagen and Rising Sun reefs, and
runs NE. and SW., dipping east at 10
degrees, south at 20 degrees. Below the
Golden Spur is another almost vertical reef,
HIGHLAND MARY MILL, CROYDON.
18 inches, which comes up but does not pass
through the flat reef. The vertical reef pros-
pects well, the reef near the north of the
underlie being about 3ft. wide. The Rising
Sun reef goes from iBin. to 3ft. in the levels.
The Oriental and Gem reef is about a
quarter of a mile south of Chalmers Creek ;
the reef is bunchy, and quartz runs
through the serpentine in small vemlets and
in detached masses ; some of the veins were
very rich in gold, while others did not
contain a colour.
TABLETOP. —The township of Table-
top is situated about miles in a direct
line from the Twelve Mile township, and
is the centre of the reefs in the neighbour-
hood. The reefs have a general north and
south trend, and underlie generally in an
easterly direction. Some of the reefs are
very large. The stone is poor, going about
i2dwts. per ton, but with such large reefs
would pay well if worked on a large scale.
Until lately they have been worked by
small parties of men, with often only a
windlass to raise the stone, and who have
to pay large amounts for cartage. Large
batteries connected directly with the mines
by tramlines are necessary to work these
reefs in a proper way. The reefs here, in
addition to pyrites and galena, often contain
pyromorphite (phosphate of lead) and
carbonate and oxide of lead. The principal
reefs are: —The Federation, on Federation
Creek; Day Dawn, east of the Federation ;
Mount Morgan, or Mount Morgan Ridge
(the outcrop of this reef is an immense
body of white quartz, and forms the cap of


the ridge); the Bobby Dazzler, half a-mile
east of the township, giving up to 10 feet
of quartz ; the Happy Jack, a mile NW. of
the township, with a formation up to 8 feet
wide; the Rising Sun, and the Ace of
Hearts, the latter being right in the town-
ship. There are a number of other reefs
adjacent, well worth systematic workings,
such as the Last Chance, Surprise, Ida,
Break of Day, Hope, Black Diamond,
Comet, Great Eastern, Confidence, Inde-
pendence, Glencoe, Flying Pig, and Rose
of Denmark.
THE GOLDEN VALLEY
is situated about 12 miles in a direct line
NNE. of Croydon and about 31 miles
NE. of Tabletop. By road, via Table-
top, it is about 17 miles from Croydon
township. The reefs are large and
well-defined, and have a general
north and south strike, and are
either perpendicular, or dip steeply
to the east. Those which have been
proved are:—The Australian
Beauty, about 25 chains east of the
township ; the Isabella, a few
chains south, on the south side of
the creek ; the Grace Leigh, east
of the Golden Valley Mill ; and the
King of Wallabadah, a little over
a mile SE. of the township.
The Carron is about miles
NNE. of the Golden Valley, The
reefs here, like those at Tabletop and the
Valley, are situated in the feldsites, but there
is one curious fact that the gold from there
is of a much poorer quality than that from
the other reefs in the feldsite. While gold
from the Golden Valley reefs averages
about £3 1 os. per ounce, that from the
Carron averages from £2 Bs. to £2 10s.
per ounce, with one exception—the Jumbo
Reef—the gold from which is worth £t >
per ounce. The chief reefs are the Gilded
Rose, which dips flatly to the south ; the
Jumbo, half a-mile SW. of the Gilded
Rose and Sarnia Gem.
Mulligan’s Camp is about 5 miles SSW.
of Tabletop, on Mulligan’s Creek, a tribu-
tary of the Carron River. The reefs here
are the McArthur, a 3-foot reef running
N. and S. and dipping east about 33 degs ;
the Amazon and Black Eagle—but little
mining is now being done here; the Mark
Twain, miles SW. of Mulligan’s, is also
languishing. There are a number of
proved reefs in this district.—the chief
being the Mark Twain, which is a perpen-
dicular reef running nearly north and
south ; along its northern extension it is
NEAR THE CONNAUGHT RANGE
known as the Premier and Magenta ; the
Ironclad, a foot reef about a mile NW. of
the MarkTwain,running NW. and SE. near
its northern end, and further south, bends
round and runs in a southerly direction.


The Problem is a district about 7 miles
NE. of Croydon and 5 miles NE. of The
Gorge—the principal reefs here being the
Problem, Boomerang, Liliputian, Elgin,
Ancient Briton, and Ryan’s.
Flanagan’s is situated about 11 miles
SE. of Croydon, at which place there are
a number of reefs—the principal being the
C. D. Roe, which can be traced for over a
mile along the surface. This reef bears
NW. and SE., and dips steeply to the
The Eureka is situated about miles
from Flanagan’s Hotel and runs NW. and
SE., and dips flatly to the NE. The reef
formation is very large, and has been
chiefly worked by open cuts, and has |
yielded as high as 30 dwts. of gold per
ton, valued at £3 3s. per ounce. Near
here are also the King of the Springs,
Democrat, and the Wild Irishman reefs,
which have been worked upon with fair
results.
THE JUBILEE CAMP.
NE., and from the Duke Claim yielded
384 tons for 599 ozs. of gold. A little
alluvial was obtained in a gully running
, into Parnell Creek below this claim. A
mile and a-half NE., up Parnell Creek, is
the Wanderer, which is a small reef and
bears E. and W., with a dip N. 1 in 4.
This reef has produced 1,451 ozs. of gold
from 518 tons; the gold was valued at
£3 Bs. 6d. per ounce. Near this reef is
the Parnell, which produced from 208 tons
434 ozs. of gold.
Esmeralda is a reefing locality about 70
miles S. from Croydon. The reefs, which
are large and well-defined, are the Huon,
Esmeralda, the Ada and others. The
drought does not interfere with the pros-
pects of this locality, there being plenty of
water in Rifle Creek, handy to the reefs
and this district. When proper appliances
are upon the ground for efficient treatment
of the bodies of ore it should come well to
the front. In all the localities dealt with
above the introduction of capital is neces-


sary to develop and prospect these reefs at
a depth. With the exception of the Mark
Twain, Mountain Maid, Homeward
Bound, Golden Gate, Federation, and a
few others, the reefs have only been
worked at very shallow levels. They have
been worked chiefly by small parties of
men and not by companies or syndicates.
There are so many reefs, all of which are
auriferous, that the miners have not up to
the present found out the necessity of proper
development, for at any time there is a
fresh place to go to, where shallow or
surface workings can be carried on. The
gradual development of the mines, and the
placing of such properties on the market
as hold out good prospects of success, will
bring about the confidence necessary for
outside investors to step in and develop
the is all that is required to
insure the prosperity of the Croydon Gold-
field.
How much surface scratching is carried
on in Croydon can best be judged by
reference to the crushings of last year. In
1898 crushings were taken from 227 mines,
of which number only 53 had crushings
aggregating 100 tons and over. One or
two men shows, who without sufficient
means at their command to erect large
machinery to work the mines, contentedly
or discontentedly, as the returns came in,
raised a few tons of stone from their
holdings. Other mines better equipped
raised considerably more stone, but in all,
considering the high returns from this
field, the attention paid to the field by
mining investors has been very small.
THE WAR AT AH GOLD MINING
COMPANY, LIMITED, control a group
of mines at Tabletop, and much interest
is centred round their development. There
are The Bobby Dazzler, Day Dawn, The
\\aratah, Federation, and the appropriately
named Mount Morgan Mines, all adjacent to
Tabletop. The principal ones are the Federa-
tion and Mount Morgan, upon each of which
excellent developmental work is proceeding.
Ihe effort of this Company is toward the
wholesale treatment of low-grade ore at a
low rate, and it will be the commencement
of a great and permanent future for Table-
TOWER ROCK, NEAR MAREEBA.
top district if the efforts of the Company
are successful; and once it is proved that
such bodies of stone treated in a scientific
manner can be made payable, the Great
Eastern, Confidence, Independence, Glen-
coe and other reefs extending for miles
away to the Golden Valley—immense
bodies of low-grade ore—will he opened
up in the thorough manner they deserve.
The discovery of the Bobby Dazzler is
worth a note. It was a very dry season,
and the man who first discovered it, after


chipping pieces from the outcrop that
literally blazed with gold, lay waterless
and delirious for days within sight of the
El Dorado, helpless to return and impart
the good news to his mate. When he was
discovered by some fellow-prospectors, he
ON THE GILBERT RIVER.
was in a dying condition, with scarcely a
vestige of clothing, it having been taken
off during the agony of thirst, an ever-
present incident in all such terrible ex-
periences. The Waratah Gold Mines
Company, Limited, is an English com-
pany with a share capital of in
118,600 shares, all of which are issued as
paid up to 7s. The local director is Mr.
H. F. Morgan, who floated the company
in London; with him is associated Mr.
H. Dawes as general manager of the
mines. The Federation Mine is sur-
rounded by a chain of low ranges, which
form the divide between Tabletop and
Station Creek watershed. The Mount
Morgan adjoins the Federation ; the Day
Dawn is also adjacent, while the Bobby
Dazzler is about miles east. The
Waratah is not being worked. The Com-
pany’s machinery was first on the Waratah
and True Blue mines, but this has all
been moved to the Mount Morgan Lease,
and consists of a 30-head battery, winding
and pumping plant, with 40 h.p. engine,
and a tramway for the conveyance of the
ore to the mill. A dam capable of
holding 3,500,000 cubic feet of
water has just been completed,
y W Altogether this company has ex-
pended in improvements upwards
EM of and should contribute
largely towards the yield of 1899.
THE CROYDON CONSOLS
is a 25-acre lease, and was origin-
ally the old No. 8 Golden Gate. It
has a share capital of £l OO,OOO, in
400,000 ss. shares, of which 50,000
were issued as paid up, and 350,000
as paid to 4s. 6d. The present
Co. have crushed 9,215 tons for
35,899 ozs., and have paid in
dividends ; the previous owners obtaining
8,389 ozs. from 3,671 tons, and received
£1 5,000 in dividends. The present shaft
is down 410 feet, but owing to the influx
of water sinking is suspended. The heavy
water on the Golden Gate line of reef has
greatly retarded the progress of mining
here, and heavy pumping appliances from
Messrs. Walkers Limited, Maryborough,
are being erected. When the water diffi-
culty is overcome, deep sinking will be
continued.
At the North Croydon Consol No. 10
Golden Gate Mine, a straight shaft is
down 300 feet, and is being continued to
cut the Croydon Consols Reef. The com-
pany has a share capital of in
144,000 shares of ss. each.


THE CROYDON GOLDFIELDS
G.M. CO., LIMITED, are holding their
True Blue Block Claim, but the heavy
water met with precludes further work
until more powerful pumping appliances
are procured, which it has been decided to
obtain. A grant of £"537 was made last
year from the deep-sinking vote for aiding
in continuing the Rogers Golden Gate
Extended Block, being at the rate of £T
for each £T the owners expended; 239
feet was sunk and timbered—the owners
then obtained exemption owing to funds
running short. The work will probably be
LIST OF COMPANIES
COMPANY.
Companies Operating—
La Reine d’Or Gold Mining Co., Ltd.
Croydon Consols, Ltd.
Golden Gate Consols, Ltd
Waratah Gold Mines, Ltd.
Iguana Deep Sinking Gold Mining Co., Ltd.
Jubilee Consols, Ltd.
Golden Gate United Gold Mining Co., Ltd.
7 North Golden Gate Gold Mining Co., Ltd
Croydon Goldfields, Ltd.
Golden Gate 5 and 6 South Block G.M, Co
Companies Idle—
True Blue Block Gold Mining Co., Ltd.
True Blue 3 and 4 South Amalgamated, Ltd.
King of Croydon r N. and P.C. Amal. (No Liability)
Companies Reconstructing—
Rogers’ Golden Gate Gold Mining Co., Ltd.
Golden Gate Block Gold Mining Co., Ltd.
Jubilee Consols, Ltd.
North Croydon Consols, Ltd.
Croydon Goldfields, Ltd.
Note.—There are also three other
resumed shortly. (£975 was granted to
the owners of the Sovereign and Sir
Walter, and £”250 from the same vote to
the Isabella P.C. Extended, Golden
Valley, but no special discovery has been
made). On the Ophir Block a shaft is
now down 323 feet from the surface. Al-
together there are twenty-four mining
companies on the Register of the gold-
field, representing 3,017,950 shares. The
nominal capital is £904,975 —of this
£■666,410 is paid up. In the Warden’s
report for 1898 the companies are given as
follows:
REGISTERED
ON CROYDON.
Shares. Capital. Subscribed.
No ■ £ £ s. d.
90.000 90,000 76,500 o o
400.000 j 100,000 100,000 o o
48.000 I 12,000 6.700 O O
118,600 | 59.3°° 59.300 o o
150 3,000 1,200 O O
360.000 90,000 64,000 o o
40.000 ( 10,000 187 10 o
40.000 5,000 2,191 13 4
500.000 125,000 80,000 o o
48.000 12,000 250 O O
100.000 25,000 5,000 o o
24.000 12,000 4,888 7 o
60.000 15,000 12,812 10 O
60.000 30,000 20,000 O O
48.000 48,000 5.666 13 4
320.000 80,000 80,000 o o
144.000 36,000 28,800 o o
360.000 90,000 72,000 o o
Companies in Liquidation


The principal crushings of merit on
Croydon for 1898 were as follows ;
Tons. Ounces.
Banner of Freedom io South.. 140 .. 363
Croydon Consols .. .. 124 .. 298
City of London .. .. .. 106 .. 359
Diamond Jubilee .. .. 161 .. 528
Gilded Rose .. .. .. 213 .. 493
Gladstone P.C. .. .. .. 223 .. 233
Golden Crest .. .. .. 78 209
3,208 OUNCES OF GOLD
No. 7 North G
No. i North Golden Gate .. 7,082 .. 8,845
Nos. 5 and 6 North Golden Gate 356 .. 1,675
Nos. 3 and 4 South Golden Gale 617 .. 918
No. 7 North Golden Gate
i,075 •• 7°75i
No. 8 West Golden Gate
I 3& .. 222^
No. 10 West Golden Gate
144 ... 170
No. 5 South Golden Gate
288 .. I,OIIJ
Harp of Erin .. .. .. 107 .. 264
Grace Leigh P.C. .. .. 410 .. 341
Highland Mary United .. 256 .. 263
Homeward Bound P.C
11l .. 124
Iguana P.C. .. .. .. 800 .. 719
Iguana No. 2 West .. .. 627 .. 1,215
FROM 320 TONS OF STONE
dden Gate, Croydon.
Nancy Lee Extended .. .. 66
CRUSHINGS — Continued. Tons. Ounces,
Iguana Nos. 3 and 4 West .. 2,175 •• 1.543
Iron Duke and Nancy Lee .. 50 .. 171
King of Wallabadah .. .. 522 .. 500
Klondyke .. .. .. ~ 233 .. 699 J
Lady Isabelle P.C. .. .. 749 .. 513
Lady Mary P.C. .. .. 342 .. 222 J
Little Jumbo Nos. 1 and 2E. .. 55 .. 148
Moonstone .. .. .. 215 .. 3x6
Moonstone 1 South .. .. 139 .. 814
Richmond P.C. .. .. .. 413 .. 1,043
Sarnia Gem .. .. .. 58 144
Spiers and party .. .. 65 .. 172
Sunset Block .. .. .. 427 .. 705
Sunset 1 West .. .. .. 80 139
In addition to these there were several
mines operating upon large bodies of low
grade ore, w r hich, though not giving equal
returns per ton as the above, still owing to the
economical working of the ore, was, perhaps,
of almost equal value to the stone obtained






from those mines which, owing to smaller
shoots, stone could not be mined so easily.
ESTIMATED YIELD of GOLD from the
CROYDON GOLDFIELD, 1886-1898.
During 1886 .. .. 2,144
1887 .. .. 31,788
188 S .. .. 44,862
1889 .. .. 52,541
1890 .. .. 60,368
1891 .. .. 65,892
1892 .. .. 64,316
1893 .. .. 71,121
1894 •• •• 81,208
1895 .. .. 69,742
1896 .. ~. 85.955
1897 .. .. 75,477
!BgB .. .. 55,275
760,689 ozs.
Dav Dawn Winding Engine, Charters Towers.—Manufactured by Walkers, Ltd.,
Maryborough.
1 here are 1,554 quartz claims upon the
Register ; 20 machine areas, embracing 78
acres; 5 dam rights, 10 water rights, 5
water races, and a number of prospecting
and garden areas. The gold mining leases
and applications in force on December
31st, 1898, equalled an area of acres,
or 63 acres more than was held in 1897 ;
the total revenue derived from the field being
from all sources. Of this amount
was derived from gold mining leases,
/~3 2 1 from miners’ rights, and from
stamp collections. The banks’ purchases
of gold in 1898 were of a total value of
;£" 12 4>758 ros, 2d. ; of this, 42,378 ozs.,
valued at an average of £2 Bs., came from
tons of quartz, and 14,321 ozs.,
of an average value of 16s. from
cyanide works.


*f©4- —
Etheridge Goldfield lies be-
tween the Einasleigh and the
Gilbert rivers, between the
Croydon Goldfield and the Walsh and
Tinaroo mining district, and has an area of
upwards of g,ooo
square miles. Dis-
i covered early in 1873,
it has seen many vicis-
situdes, but through-
out the whole of the
intervening time it has
always shown good
crushing returns from
the 1,000 reefs that lie
in this immense terri-
MR. T. H. BODDINGTON, , ~T „ .
... . „ ... ~ tory. W asteful ex-
Warden , Etheridge Goldfield.
travagance at the time
of the great Etheridge boom did much to
discount the value
of the field and x' -
undoubtedly re- /
tarded its progress,
but with the ad- !
vent of better com- 1
munication the !MPs V
great bodies of ore
awaiting more
economical treat- ;
ment will be oper-
ated upon, and the
field will, as it
deserves, stand
well in the front
THE QUEENSLANDER MINE.
The Etheridge Goldfields.
line of the gold-producing districts of
Queensland.
Georgetown, the main centre of the field,
is situated upon the west bank of the
Etheridge River, near its confluence with
the Delaney. It is reached by rail from
Cairns to Mareeba and thence per coach
about 216 miles ; or from Croydon, a jour-
ney by coach of about 100 miles. The
population is about 500, and business in its
every variety is well represented. The
newspaper of the Etheridge field is
issued from here, called the Mundic Miner ,
under the proprietorship of Messrs, Cramb
& Phair. St. George Street, a fine broad
avenue, is the principal street of the town,
is well macadamised and as level as possi-
ble. Georgetown and 16,000 square miles
of the surrounding country is under control


of the Einasleigh Divisional Board, with a hospital is situated near the town under
population of about 1,800 people. The the control of Dr. George Knowles, M.B.
The climate
of the Ether-
Im ' ■ | idge can
scarcely be
'~7_ I excelled for
—/ • - . salubrity,and
V : E ‘ “'• - ' , . ;y: : f t >
** . T ■- _ /• fT. *•' *■ lca 1 tI P
pears to have
THE gUEENSLANDER MILL,
chairman of the Board is Mr. J. Lacy ; the
warden and police magistrate was, until
lately, Mr. F. J. Parkinson, an old experi-
enced and much respected officer in the
Mines Department service. This Warden
has been transfejrgdHo the control of the
Gympie Goldfield, and Mr. T. H. Bodding-
ton, for many years at Cloncurry district, is
now in charge of the Etheridge.
The Min-
GEORGETOWN IN 1880.
far as Gilberton. Upwards of 500 square
no other
effect than temporary inconvenience.
The nights are invariably cool and in-
vigorating, particularly upon the high
lands at the southern end of this enormous
goldfield. At Castleton, Mount Hogan,
and Gilberton ice and sharp frosts occur
during the winter months. The height of
Georgetown above sea level is 961 feet, the
country rising very rapidly to the south as
ing Registrar
and C.P.S. is I
Mr. P. M. I
Hishorn,with
Sergeant
Brady as
chief police
officer ; Mr.
C. J. Leeson,
an old North
Queensland
resident is
post and telegraph master,
A Masonic lodge is held every month, miles of magnificent agricultural land exists
No. 2,366, E.C., and a well appointed upon the Gilbert, Etheridge, and Little


rivers. Some 500 acres are in a high state are obtainable. The district can easily
of cultivation, the farmers principally grow- support a population equal to that already
THE CUMBERLAND G.M. CO.’S CYANIDE WORKS
existing in the whole of the colony,
and the present mining operations
carried on can only be described as
in proportion to a few pin-holes in a
sheet of foolscap, so vast is the
auriferous country lying waste.
About Gilberton numerous lodes of
silver, silver lead ores, copper, and
other minerals exist, but are too
remote to be worked in an economi-
cal manner. On the Percy River
rich bismuth ore is found in the
gullies formerly worked for alluvial
ing maize, potatoes, and pumpkins. Chinese
residents have some tine orchards and some
of the orange trees have yielded a return of
per tree. There are also extensive
vineyards, and grapes, lemons, oranges,
bananas, and other tropical fruits grow
luxuriantly. There are also several dairies,
and the district is eminently attractive,
both by its mineral and agricultural
possibilities.
The miners and their families upon most
mining fields are among the most warm
hearted in the colonies, assisting toward
the success of
gold, carrying up to 70 per cent, of bismuth
with a small percentage of gold and silver.
Silver lead ore galena, with a high percen-
tage of gold and silver and pure galena, and
bismuth, bismuth and copper, copper, silver
and copper with lead and sulphur silver,
silver and antimony, and other mineral
lodes have been opened up upon. Some
of the lodes are of great width and can be
traced for miles along the surface of the
ground. Tin and copper mines have also
been worked to the east of the Einasleigh
River. Precious stones have been found
GEORGETOWN —lBBO.
ever, is de-
ficient in tim-
ber suitable
for mines,and
the goldfield
being so far
inland suffers
greatly from
want of communication with the coast, in the creeks flowing from the Conglomer-
where ample supplies of this commodity ate Ranges into the Gilbert River. Agates


of varied hues and beauty are in abundance
on Agate Creek, while rubies, sapphires,
diamonds, and other stones have also been
unearthed in that vast extent of country
known as the Conglomerate Tableland.
-*►©4- —
Mining Centres from Georgetown.
Donnybrook is a small mining township
about eight miles S. of Georgetown, with a
Provisional school and a population of
about 100. Messrs. Shaffort Bros, own a
10-head battery here. From the Wexford
SHOP AND OFFICES.
THE CUMBERLAND CO.’S DAM, WITH 20-STAMPER BATTERY, ASSAY ROOMS, BLACKSMITH’S
P.C. a parcel of 7 tons of picked stone sent
to the Aldershot Smelting W r orks, Mary-
borough, realised 7 ozs. per ton, the gold
value being per oz. The Brandy
Smash is owned by the Georgetown Gold-
field Co., Ltd., a local company, the mine
being situated about two miles from Donny-
brook. A 2 feet body of good ore is being
worked upon.
The Durham, so named from the old
Durham G.M. Co., lies about seven miles
W. of Georgetown and numerous rich reefs
exist hereabout ownerless.
The Cumberland, about 11 miles fur-
ther west is the centre of a good deal of
mining activity, the gold being worth £3
ns. per oz. The Cumberland Cyanide
W orks, under the management of Mr. J.
Williamson, have a 5-head battery here.
d he Lighthouse is situated about 12
miles S. from Georgetown and derives its
name from a lofty ridge-shaped mountain,
over the top of which runs -a rather exten-
sive and rugged outcrop of white quartz.
This mountain, seen for miles around, shin-
ing white in the tropic sun, becomes a
noted landmark, appropriately named The
Lighthouse. It is a geological curiosity,
for all the gold-bearing reefs in its imme-
diate vicinity apparently branch out from
its base like an opened fan towards the
west.
Talbot Creek, a one time famous allu-
vial diggings, runs from the Newcastle
Range westerly, passing the Lighthouse
Mountain about seven miles south of it
and entering the Delaney’s River about
four miles south of the township. The
creek has been worked the whole distance,
but only rich deposits were unearthed in
the upper reaches as the creek cuts its way
through deep valleys and gorges.
Western Creek, about 14 miles W.
from Delaney’s, a tributary of the Gilbert
River, was also a rich alluvial centre, and
at the head of Sandy Creek rich deposits
were found.


Charleston lies about 35 miles S. of
Georgetown and has in its vicinity large
bodies of auriferous quartz, but of a refrac-
tory nature. These large masses of aurifer-
ous quartz are a peculiar feature of the
Etheridge Goldfield. The district is very
healthy and in many ways interesting.
The volcanic nature of the country, with
lofty cliffs and peaks, the sides covered with
magnificent Cyprus pine, and the remains
as of ancient craters jutting up, or portion
of their massive sides standing out in bold
magnificence, gives a picturesque charm to
THE GEORGETOWN MILL.
the scenery. SW. from here, about 16
miles, is Goldsmith’s Creek, a one time
centre of mining activity. The Queens-
lander Claim at Charleston is working on a
face of stone in their claim going up to 5
feet wide.
Gilberton, the centre of a rich aurifer-
ous area, lies 116 miles S. of Georgetown.
This township can be reached from Pent-
land on the Townsville Railway line, a
journey of 230 miles.
Mount Hogan is another rich centre,
about 90 miles S. of Georgetown. Percy-
ville, on the Percy River, 75 miles S. of
Georgetown, is a small township with good
mining plant, including a 15-head battery
and Berdan pans, the property of Mr. W.
Suhle. Oakville is another centre, 15
miles less distant from Georgetown, as also
is Sandy Grant, 10 miles W. of Percyville.
Numerous reefs exist at Christmas Hill,
10 miles E. of Mount Hogan.
The Aurora is seven miles SW. of The
Durham. It is the small mining centre
which is coming into much notice owing to
some rich stone that lately went through
the 5-head battery there from the Aurora
Claim, and also the Old Man. Twenty-
three miles N. of Georgetown is Lane’s
Creek, from which at its opening in 1888
some splendid specimen stone was obtained.
A 10-head battery (Mr. P. Munzen) is
crushing stone from the adjacent Calliope,
Cosmopolitan, National, Sir W. Alfred and
Brilliant reefs.
Green Hills, from which some rich
alluvial gold has been obtained. Western
Creek and Mount MacDonald lie about
twenty miles to the SSW. of Georgetown
and give employment to about 50 men,
while there are a number of centres at the


Georgetown at which reefs are being During 1890
ozs. Upwards of 330 miners were em-
THE NIL DESPERANDUM MILL AND BATTERY.
plants that are at various centres. and the possibilities -of the future :
different points of the compass from Ounces.
24,580
worked. 1 ” 1891 " " r 7-9°B
1892 .. .. 22,111
From these different centres in 1898 lBg3 29385
16,197 tons of quartz were raised for a yield ~ 1894 •• •• 25,105
of 16,429 ozs., an additional 3,355 ozs. from 1895 .. .. 25,460
cyanide. In addition 1,807 ozs. of alluvial ” 1896 " •* 26,865
1897 .. .. 23,430
gold was obtained, making a total of 21,592 ” 197 " ” 23,430
TT , { ~ 1898 .. 21,592
ployed quartz reefing and 223 alluvial Total .. .. 600,947
mining. The value of the machinery on In Warden Parkinson’s able report for
the field being estimated at of this 1898 on this field he voices the following
is to be credited to the six cyanide opinion regarding the past year’s operations
“ In no part of this large and extensive
ESTIMATED YIELD OF GOLD FROM THE . , , . . ,
„ „ _ _ held can it be said that development work
ETHERIDGE AND WOOLGAR GOLD- . F
FIEI DS of an yfhi n g a progressive nature has
Ounces. been carried on. A large amount of what
To the end of 1877 .. .. 143,000 may be termed surface prospecting has
During 1878 .. .. 7, 396 been done, which eventually may lead to
15,498 fr oo d results, but in the matter of sinking
1880 .. .. 20,368 b ’ ... 6
1881 23 Q2O and proper systematic mining on a broad
!88 2 .. .. 18,431 and enlightened scale, the results are far
1883 .. .. 18 967 from satisfactory. A chief cause of this is,
188 4 •• •• 19. 886 no doubt, due to the resources of the popu-
1885 " ” 28,348 lation being taxed to their utmost in
25,629 . .
2i endeavouring to make a daily existence
24 647 under the present methods of mining, and
18,285 their means will not allow more to be done.


If this goldfield is to progress it must look
for outside capital to develop its rich
resources, and better communication is
necessary with the seaboard. To show
the extent of prospecting carried on all over
the field during the year no less than 196
of 9,000 square miles) and providing that
the expenditure w r as under the control of
experienced men, there is little doubt but
that the Etheridge Goldfield would take
its place and rank with the successful fields
of Charters Towers and Gympie.
ST. GEORGE STREET, GEORGETOWN
applications for claims were lodged and 42
prospecting areas were granted, and gold
was obtained in 228 different holdings,
the total value of the gold produced on
the field being
Given, say for development
of mining on the field (an auriferous area
There is here practically an open field
for investments, and now that the labour
conditions have been lightened, areas
increased, security of title strengthened,
and a permanent railway survey almost
completed, the field offers every induce-
ment for the investment of capital.”


With
This Gazetteer, Directory, Government and Mercantile Vade Mecurn
of Queensland has grown with the development of the Colony. The 1899
Edition, to keep pace with this progress, has been enlarged to almost twice
the number of pages of the 1888 Edition, and the size of page considerably
enlarged. In addition, Plans of the Chief Towns of the Colony, in
colours, have been added. The work contains over 600 items of interest
and value to all connected with the Colony of Queensland, either at home
or abroad.
Coloured Plans oralnad - =^—
-)((- Publication of'queensland PUGH’S ALMANAC, 1899.
Of 32 of the Chief Towns wce-cioth, 7 ,e; Paper, e/-.
With Plans of the Chief Towns of the Colony and Large Map of Queensland, both in colours.
of the Colony.
PUBLISHED BY GORDON & GOTCH, and 1 QUEEN STREET,
PRINTED BY THE OUTRIDGE PRINTING CO. ■* BRISBANE


