

The
Liberal Catholic Church
Statement of Principles
Summary of Doctrine
and
Table of the Apostolic Succession
ST. ALBAN PRESS
Los Angeles—London—Sydney
1926




The Liberal Catolic Church
Statement of Principles
Summary of Doctrine
and
CTable of the Apostolic Succession
ST. ALBAN PRESS C
Lo« Angelea—London—Sydney
1926


These documents are authorised as an
official publication of the Liberal
Catholic Church.
On behalf of the General Episcopal
Synod,
C. W. LEADBEATER,
Presiding Bishop
Sydney, Whitsunday, 1926.


STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES
The Liberal Catholic Church exists to forward the work ol
her Master—Christ —in the world, and to feed His flock.
It is an independent and autonomous body, in no way
dependent upon the see of Rome, or upon any other see or
authority outside its own administration. It is neither Roman
Catholic nor Protestant—but Catholic. It is called Liberal
Catholic because its outlook is both liberal and Catholic. Catholic
means universal, but the word has also come to stand for the
outlook and practice of the historical Church as distinct from that
of the later sects. The Liberal Catholic Church allies itself with
this historical tradition. It aims at combining the Catholic form
of worship—its stately ritual, its deep mysticism and its abiding
witness to the reality of sacramental grace—with the widest
measure of intellectual liberty and respect for the individual
conscience.
The Liberal Catholic Church came into existence as the result
of a complete re-organisation in 1915-16 of the Old Catholic
movement in Great Britain upon a more liberal basis. This
Church derived its Orders from the mother-see of the Old Catholic
movement, the ancient archiepiscopal see of Utrecht in Holland
(see pp. 17-19). The Liberal Catholic Church has carefully pre-
served this succession of Orders, but took its present name for a
variety of reasons. The name of “Old Catholic” labours, especi-
ally in newer countries, under the constant and serious disadvan-
tage of being confused with “Roman Catholic.” Further, the
religious and doctrinal outlook of historical Old Catholicism is
not that of the Liberal Catholic Church, which has nothing to do
with the policy or organisation of the Continental Old Catholic
Churches and does not wish that there should be imputed to them
principles of liberalism in religion which would still be distasteful
to the Church of Utrecht and the majority of the Churches in
communion with her. If it describes itself as “Old Catholic,” it
does so to indicate the source of its Orders and its organic unity
with the historical Church.
5


DOCTRINE
The Liberal Catholic Church draws the central inspiration
of its work from an intense faith in the Living Christ, believing
that the vitality of a Church gains in proportion as its members
not only commemorate a Christ Who lived two thousand years
ago, but strive also to serve as a vehicle for the Eternal Christ,*
Who ever lives as a mighty spiritual Presence in the world, guiding
and sustaining His people. It accepts in the plain and literal
sense the marvellous promise of Christ when on earth: “Lo, I
am with you alway, even unto the consummation of the age”
(St. Matthew xxviii., 20); or again: “Where two or three are
gathered together in My Name, there am I in the midst of them”
(St. Matthew xviii., 20).
It regards this promise as validating all Christian worship,
of whatever kind, so long as it be earnest and true. But it further
holds that while the promise of the Presence with individual
believers is thus effective, our Lord also appointed certain rites
or Sacraments (called “Mysteries” in the Eastern Church) for the
greater helping of His people, to be handed down in His Church
as especial channels of His power and blessing. Through these
“means of grace” He is ever present with His Church, giving to
His people the wonderful privilege of fellowship and communion
with Him, guiding and protecting them at every stage from the
cradle to the grave.
The Liberal Catholic Church recognises seven fundamental
Sacraments, which it enumerates as follows: Baptism, Con-
firmation, the Holy Eucharist, Absolution, Holy Unction, Holy
Matrimony, Holy Orders. To ensure their efficacy to the wor-
shipper, it guards with the most jealous care the administration
of all sacramental rites, and has preserved an episcopal succession
which is “negotiable,” i.e., acknowledged as valid, throughout
the whole of those Churches of Christendom which maintain the
Apostolic Succession of Orders as a tenet of their faith.
Besides perpetuating these sacramental rites, Christ’s imme-
diate followers handed down in His Church a body of doctrine
and certain principles of ethics. Much of this original teaching
of the Christ has no doubt been lost; some of it has been
obscured by the accretions of the ages. What remains is a price-
less heritage, to be guarded with loving care and reverence.
The Liberal Catholic Church regards the Holy Scriptures,
the Creeds, and other Traditions of the Church as the vehicle
in which this teaching of the Christ has been handed down to
• "Before Abraham was, I am." (St. John vxii., 58.)
6


His followers. It does not invest them with any idea of literal
infallibility—nor in view of their contents and their historical
career does it see how any other Church can logically do so.
It deduces from them certain principles of belief and conduct,
which it regards as fundamental, true and (while not exhaustive)
sufficient as a basis of right understanding and right conduct.
In the formulation of this body of doctrine and ethics the
Liberal Catholic Church takes what in some respects is a distinc-
tive position among the Churches of Christendom. The Christian
Church has always contained within itself different schools of
thought. The mediaeval Schoolmen who systematized theology in
the Western Church followed the method of Aristotle, but the
earliest among the Church Fathers of Philosophic bent were
Platonists; and the Liberal Catholic Church, whilst not under-
valuing the clarity and precision of the scholastic theology, has
much in common with the Platonic and Neo-Platonic school of
Christian tradition. It holds that a theology can only justify itself
and be of permanent value in so far as it partakes of the
character of a theosophy. That is to say, that while certain of
its higher teachings remain within the category of revelation, be-
cause they are far beyond our grasp and attainment, others less
remote are capable of re-verification, and even of development, by
those who have unfolded within themselves the necessary spiritual
faculties. Man being in essence divine can ultimately know the
Deity Whose Life he shares, and by gradually unfolding the divine
powers that are latent in him can grow into knowledge and
mastery of the universe, which is all the expression of that divine
Life. This method of approach to divine Truth has often been
called Theosophy since the time of Ammonius Saccas in the third
Century, A.D. It is identical with the ancient Para-Brahmavidya
of the Hindu Upanishads. It finds complete justification, of
course, in Scripture; and Theosophy has constantly appeared in
the religious thought of both East and West, denoting not only
mysticism, but also an eclectic philosophy underlying religion,
which accepts as Truth that which commends itself universally to
religious experience, wherever it is to be found and under what-
ever form. Its fullest and most living presentation in these
modern days is to be found in the literature of the Theosophical
Society.
Following these principles, the Liberal Catholic Church
believes that there is a body of doctrine and mystical experience
common to all the great religions of the world and which cannot
be claimed as the exclusive possession of any. Moving within
the orbit of Christianity and regarding itself as a distinctively
Christian Church, it nevertheless holds that the other great


religions of the world are divinely inspired and that all proceed
from a common source, though different religions stress different
aspects of this teaching and some aspects may even temporarily
drop out of recognition. These teachings, as facts in Nature, rest
on their own intrinsic merit. They form that true Catholic Faith,
which is Catholic, because it is the statement of universal prin-
ciples in Nature. Well did St. Augustine say; “The identical thing
that we now call the Christian Religion existed among the ancients
and has not been lacking from the beginnings of the human race
until the coming of Christ in the flesh, from which moment on the
true religion, which already existed, began to be called Christian.”
(Retract 1., xiii., 3.) And the same principle was in reality in-
volved in the well-known declaration of St. Vincent of Lerins:
Id teneamns quod übique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus
creditum est; hoc etenim vere proprieque calholicum.*
The Liberal Catholic Church, therefore, does not seek to
convert people from one religion to another. In 1925, ten years
after coming into existence as a liberalist form of Old Catholicism,
it entered the “Fellowship of the World-Religion,” accepting the
general statement of the “Basic Truths of Religion” subscribed
to by the various organizations within that Fellowship, but
retaining its own autonomy and the inherent right to expound and
amplify that statement in accordance with its own distinctive
Christian principles.
FREEDOM OF THOUGHT
Membership of most of the Christian Churches rests on the
acceptance of a common belief.* There is often wide discrepancy
between the real belief of a thoughtful individual and the official
profession that is expected of him. This leads to suppressed dis-
belief, to say nothing of insincerity, and tends to check the free
exercise of the mind.
The Liberal Catholic Church permits to its lay members
(though not, of course, to its clergy) entire freedom in the inter-
pretation of Creeds, Scriptures and Tradition, and of its Liturgy
and Summary of Doctrine. It asks only that difference of inter-
pretation shall be courteously expressed. It takes this attitude
not from any indifference to truth or revelation, but because it
has so high a regard for truth. It holds strongly that “belief
•’’That do we hold which everywhere, always and by all has been believed;
for that is rightly and truly catholic.*’ (Commonitorium, ch. 2 [4].)
• This is well illustrated in the baptismal service of the Church of
England. The infant who is brought to be baptized has to affirm through
the mouth of his sponsors that he steadfastly believes the articles of the
Creed. The Roman Catholic service is similar.
8


should be the result of individual study or intuition, not its ante-
cedent.” A truth is not a truth for a man, nor Revelation a reve-
lation, until he sees it to be true for himself. As a man grows
into spirituality, so will he grow into the perception of truth. No
mere lip profession or superficial assent of the mind can take
the place of this growth, and to ask anything less than this is a
sacrilege. Christ very surely meant His religion to be one of love
and freedom, which should help people at their many different
stages along the path of this spiritual growth; He did not mean
it in God’s Name to dictate formulae whose literal acceptance
should be a condition of salvation. The consequence of being
unable to recognise a truth is simply to lose the help that the
knowledge of that truth would give.
The Liberal Catholic Church considers, therefore, that it acts
in accordance with the spirit of its Master in welcoming gladly
into its ranks those who are still seeking for truth. While it
presents certain doctrinal statements to its members, it does not
exact from them the acceptance of any dogmatic standards. As
a working basis of fellowship, it asks of its members not the
profession of a common belief, but their willingness to worship
corporately through a common ritual. It aims at helping them to
discover truth for themselves by providing them with opportunities
for spiritual growth and explaining to them the ancient science
of unfolding the divine potentialities which exist in every man.
It asks of them sincerity, purity of motive, tolerance, breadth of
mind, courtesy of expression, willingness to work and a constant
pursuit of high ideals—confident, above all, that the power of the
Blessed Sacrament of Christ’s love may well be trusted to work
God’s own true purpose in their souls.
ETHICS
The Liberal Catholic Church lays great stress on the
corporate aspect of Christian life and worship, believing that
as a system of ethics, philosophy and worship, Christianity was
chiefly intended to help men to grow into the love of Christ,
and in so doing to solve the many difficulties which beset the
path of human brotherhood—that brotherhood which must be
the corner-stone of all truly religious life. Without mutual good-
will, no system of social organisation, whether democratic or not,
can be other than chaotic.
TERMS OF COMMUNION
The Liberal Catholic Church welcomes to its altars all who
reverently and sincerely approach them. It looks upon the
9


Christian Church as a great brotherhood of all who turn to Christ
as the inspirer of their spiritual life, their Master and Friend,
and it offers the Blessed Sacrament of His love to any member
of the brotherhood who reverently desires it.
Candidates are admitted to the Liberal Catholic Church by
Baptism, or (if that has been duly performed) by Confirmation.
If the candidate has received both Baptism and Confirmation in
complete form, then a simple form of admission is used, in which
a blessing is invoked on the religious aspirations of the candidate.
The essentials of its baptismal rite are: The proper use of
water (by process of ablution at least) and the usual Trinitarian
formula, together with the application of the Oil of Catechumens
and Chrism.
Those of its Confirmation rite are: The imposition of the
Bishop’s hand with proper formula, and the use of Chrism.
When persons who wish to join the Liberal Catholic Church
have received these Sacraments according to any less complete
form it is usual to repeat them “conditionally.”
ITS RELATION TO OTHER CHURCHES
The Liberal Catholic Church is not a new sect; it is a con-
stituent part of the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church—
that historical Church which is truly One, despite its many out-
ward divisions both in east and west, because the One Life of
Christ animates and sustains it through the Sacraments He insti-
tuted. The Liberal Catholic Church has preserved these Sacra-
ments in their integrity and plenitude, and believes its doctrine
to be in conformity with the teaching of Christ and freed from
the corruption of later ages. Moreover, it regards the Catholic,
or universal. Church of Christ as consisting of "the blessed com-
pany of all faithful people,” that is of "all those who profess
and call themselves Christians,” the different Churches (no matter
whether they be “historical” or new) receiving His blessing in
proportion to the earnestness of their members, and the extent
to which they retain the sacramental channels of His grace and
reflect what He intended His Church to be.
The Liberal Catholic Church therefore seeks to work in
amity with all other Christian denominations. It has no wish
to proselytise from among the adherents of any other Church,
and as an earnest of this welcomes all to regular and full partici-
pation in its Services without asking or expecting them to leave
10


their original Church. On the other hand, if members of other
Churches are attracted by the distinctive features of its work, no
obstacle is placed in the way of their uniting with itself, so long
as they are clearly animated by a sincere and worthy aim. But
its chief appeal is addressed to the thousands who in these days
of materialism and religious ineptitude stand outside the existing
Church organisations and religious societies, and are bereft of
the help they could otherwise receive. Its congregations are
mainly composed of men and women who had ceased to attend
Church.
It is at all times ready to establish relations of inter-
communion between itself and other Churches upon the friendliest
possible basis, so far as those principles are concerned upon which
both parties are agreed. For example, it would be far from deny-
ing to the non-episcopal bodies the charismatic ministry, or
prophetic ministry of preaching and inspiration, while at the
same time not conceding to them the Catholic priesthood, which
they themselves do not claim, and which, in the Catholic view,
depends for its efficacy and validity upon the transmission of the
episcopal succession. Accordingly, where both parties are willing,
it permits its clergy to exchange pulpits with ministers of non-
episcopal Churches, but does not invite the latter to officiate at
its altars.
It finds no adequate reason to deny the validity of Anglican
Orders,* and its clergy—free to think as they please on the
matter —almost without exception recognise their validity, some
upon historical grounds, some upon the pragmatic basis of their
own spiritual experience of Anglican ministrations. They appre-
ciate the powerful aid rendered to the religious life of many
countries by the Anglican Church, even though some may feel
that by the excision of the distinctively sacrificial marks of the
Eucharist, as well as the anointings, the signing of the cross, and
other characteristics of the ancient Catholic rites, its liturgy has
been shorn of much of its efficacy as a vehicle of spiritual power.
Priests of the Anglican Church who may desire to enter the
Liberal Catholic Ministry are required to pass through a form
of conditional re-ordination to the Priesthood, preceded by
Baptism,t Confirmation and the earlier grades of the ministry,
namely, Cleric, Doorkeeper, Reader, Exorcist, Acolyte, Sub-
• At the same time the historical data bearing on the subject are
confused and ambiguous, and therefore difficult to estimate aright.
t Unless they can produce indubitable proof of a previous valid bap-
tism. All candidates for Holy Orders in the Liberal Catholic Church must
produce such proof.
11


deacon and Deacon, such rites being also administered sub
conditioned
LITURGY
The Liberal Catholic Church uses a revised Liturgy in
the vernacular, wherein the essential features of the various
sacramental forms are preserved with scrupulous care, but the
prevailing tone is one of devotional and joyous aspiration. The
endeavour has been throughout to place no sentiment on the
lips of priest or congregation which they cannot honestly and
sincerely mean, or reasonably be expected to carry out in practice.
The fear of God and His wrath, imprecations of the heathen, the
attitude of servile cringing and abject self-abasement, the oft-
repeated appeals for mercy and naive attempts to bargain with
God, and other crude survivals mainly of the Judaistic era,
together with the haunting fear of everlasting hell—all these have
been eliminated from the ritual as derogatory alike to the idea
of a Loving Father and to the men whom He has created in His
own image. For while the essential truths of religion are change-
less, the presentation and setting of those truths must vary as the
races advance into fuller enlightenment. Aspirational utterances
and forms of petition which suited agricultural communities in
Asia Minor in the earliest centuries of the Christian era can in
no way give adequate expression to present-day sentiments of
worship. The same may be said of mediaeval forms.
THE SCRIPTURES
The Liberal Catholic Church does not leach that the Scrip-
tures are either verbally or uniformly inspired, but in a general
sense only. It considers that they contain much that is truly
the product of divine inspiration, but that with things literally
true are mingled other things to be allegorically and spiritually
understood (as Origen taught), and again passages that are
fanciful or even positively disedifying. It recognises that the
books of the Old Testament are of very unequal value.
It would further suggest that there are evidences of the
highest inspiration in other Scriptures of the world. Indeed,
the knowledge of Eastern religions and psychology, which has
become increasingly available during recent years, has thrown
a great flood of light on the interpretation of Christian doctrine.
t This course is prescribed in accordance with well-established theo-
logical principles ad majorem cautelam, largely with a view to safe-
guarding the position of the Liberal Catholic Church with those other
Apostolic bodies who do not recognise Anglican Orders.
12


INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY
The clergy of the Liberal Catholic Church make no claim
to spiritual or temporal domination over those who adhere to
its rite. In common with the priesthood of other Churches, they
hold Christ’s commission to teach (St. Matthew xxviii., 18-20),
but the clergy claim no authority over the individual conscience;
rather stress is laid upon their function as ministers of the Divine
Sacraments, “stewards of the Mysteries of God,” ready to place
themselves in all ways reasonable at the disposal of those who
may ask their help.
CONFESSION
Auricular Confession is entirely optional, and is not required
as a preliminary to the reception of Holy Communion. Its fre-
quent and systematic practice is not encouraged, as tending to
defeat the true value of the Sacrament in the spiritual life of
the individual. Believing, nevertheless, that the grace of
Absolution is one of the gifts of Christ to His people (St. John
xx., 23), the Church offers this aid to those who desire it,
whether by the auricular method or in the public Services. Such
absolution from the burden of sin is not to be regarded as enabling
a man to escape the consequences of his wrong doing, but rather
as a reheartening of the man, a restoration of that inner harmony
of nature which has been disturbed by his wrong-doing, a bring-
ing of the man once more into tune with the Divine power which
flows through him and of which he is to be the true expression.
CELIBACY
The Liberal Catholic Church neither enjoins nor forbids the
marriage of its clergy.
FINANCE
No fee may be exacted for administering the Sacraments or
for other spiritual work.
The Church places the administration of its finances
wherever practicable in the hands of its laity.
POLITICS
The Liberal Catholic Church does not, as a body, enter
into politics or sociology. It feels that it should rather make
itself a motive power behind social and political amelioration,
by inspiring its members with the love of humanity and the
desire to serve their fellows, while leaving them free to select
13


their own aims and methods, providing these are consistent with
morality.
ART
It believes art to be one of the highest factors in the moral
upliftment of man, and will strive to give practical recognition
to the truth that the training and refining of the emotions by the
influence of art is as necessary as that of the mind by science
and philosophy. To worship Beauty is to worship Goodness, and
if people were beautiful within, they would necessarily be good.
Beauty is one of the crying needs of our present utilitarian
civilisation. This is especially the case among the masses who
have so little of the spiritualising influence of beauty in their
lives. Art has been called the handmaid of religion, but truly
it is an essential part of religion.
HEALING
Special attention will be given to the question of healing.
Although phenomena of healing appear to have been frequent
in the time of the Apostles (St. Luke ix., 1; I Corinthians xii.;
St. James v., 14-16), we are not justified in assuming that the
power to heal is conferred at ordination or that the “gift of
healing” is other than a charismatic gift. But in the great
revivifying power of the Holy Spirit, the grace of Absolution,
the Sacred Oil for the Sick and the Sacrament of Holy Com-
munion, the Church has means of grace which should immeasure-
ably fortify the methods of the newer medicine. The time has
surely come when the healing and priestly functions may be seen
to be in a measure complementary the one to the other, for on
all hands there is a growing recognition that bodily ailments are
in many instances the outcome of inner maladies of the soul, and
in any case can best be remedied when the soul is at peace. The
Church will endeavour to restore these ministrations of healing to
their rightful place in the economy of life.
MYSTICISM AND MODERN THOUGHT
Yet another special feature of the work of this movement
is to bring into alliance with the worship of the Church all
that is true and good in the modern renaissance of thought,
which is finding expression in the newer “borderland" science,
mysticism, new thought, psychical research, and other kindred
movements. Believing as this Church does that the ancient
rites for the administration of the Sacraments are based in their
essentials on the wisdom of the Christ Himself, it considers that
14


these must be essentially scientific. Although little attempt has
been made to study the rationale of the spiritual changes they
effect in the nature of man, there is no reason to suppose that
such studies are beyond our ken.
“Where there is no vision, the people perish” (Proverbs
xxix., 18). In the early days of every Church there are men
of vision who, having first-hand knowledge of spiritual truth, are
able to speak with the only authority that is worth anything,
the authority of knowledge. Spiritual truths are at all times
capable of discovery or re-verification by spiritually developed
men. As a Church ceases to produce men of knowledge, so do
its teachings become narrowed down and hardened, its theology
grows legalistic and mechanical, and its priesthood—unable to
impart knowledge by process of inner illumination—seeks to
impose it by outer authority and persecutes those who resist its
will. The Liberal Catholic Church aims at being a Gnostic
Church, not in the sense of reproducing certain extravagances of
early Christianity, but in the sense of aiding its members to reach
for themselves this certainty of knowledge—the true Gnosis, of
which St. Clement of Alexandria wrote so fervently. The ancient
Paths of Purification, Illumination and Union, which in olden
times brought the candidate to this certainty, are still open
for his treading. Those who approach by the traditional path
may still hope to attain to discipleship, or the direct communion
with the Master, that should be the aim of every earnest Christian.
For the “Way of the Cross” means the progressive unfoldment
of the Christ-Spirit within man, and to this end are the Sacraments
of His Holy Church appointed.
The Liberal Catholic Church is a living Christian Church
—“modernist," in that in maintains that the forms of religion
should keep pace with human growth and enlightenment; “his-
torical,” in that it holds that the Church has handed down a
very precious heritage from the Christ Himself.
It is proposed to discuss various matters arising out of
the above Statement , as well as certain distinctive features
of the work of the Liberal Catholic Church, in a series of
pamphlets, which will form, it is hoped, a useful contribu-
tion to current religious thought. To permit of greater
freedom and individuality of treatment than is possible in
a representative official document, the writers of these
pamphlets will alone be responsible for their contents.


SUMMARY OF DOCTRINE
1. The existence of God, infinite, eternal, transcendent and
immanent. He is the One Existence from which all other exist-
ences are derived. “In Him we live and move and have our
being” (Acts xvii., 28).
2. The manifestation of God in the universe under a
triplicity, called in the Christian religion Father, Son and Holy
Spirit: three Persons in One God, co-equal, co-eternal; the Son
“alone-born” of the Father, the Spirit proceeding from the Father
and the Son; the Father, the Source of all; the Son, “The Word
Who was made flesh and dwelt among us”; the Holy Spirit, the
Life-Giver, the Inspirer and Sanctifier.
3. Man, made in the Image of God, is himself divine in
essence—a Spark of the divine Fire. Sharing God’s nature, he
cannot cease to exist; therefore he is eternal, and his future is
one whose glory and splendour have no limit. The divinity that
was fully manifest in Jesus Christ is being gradually unfolded in
man, until he shall come “unto a perfect man, unto the measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ.” (Eph. iv., 13.)
4. Jesus the Christ was a manifestation in the outer world
of a great being in the inner worlds, sometimes called the World-
Teacher, Who is the special epiphany and embodiment of the
Second Person of the ever blessed Trinity, Who, “although He
be God and Man, yet He is not two, but one Christ—One, not
by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by the taking of the
manhood into God.” The term World-Teacher connotes an office
in the hierarchy of those “just men made perfect” Who form
the spiritual government of our world, part of His especial work
being the teaching and enlightenment of the occupants of the
world. He Who in Christianity is called the Christ is thus the
Head of all Faiths, ever pouring out His blessing upon the world
for its helping and upliftmenl, and coming out into the world
in each successive age or dispensation to re-proclaim the essential


truths of religion and morality in a form suited to the age. The
state of the world is such that His near advent may confidently be
expected.
5. The world is the theatre of an ordered Plan, according
to which the Spirit of man by repeatedly expressing himself in
varying conditions of life and experience on this earth continually
unfolds his powers. That evolution, or spiritual unfoldment, takes
place under an inviolable law of cause and effect. “Whatsoever
a man soweth, that shall he also reap” (Gal. vi., 7). His doings
in physical incarnation largely determine his experience after
death in the intermediate world (or world of purgation) and the
heavenly world. Man is a link in a vast chain of lives leading
from the Highest to the lowest. As he helps those below him, so
also is he helped by Those who stand above him on the ladder
of lives, receiving thus a “free gift of grace.” There is a “com-
munion of Saints” or Holy Ones, who help mankind; also a
ministry of Angels.
6. Man has ethical duties to himself and to others. “Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy
soul and with all thy mind and with all thy strength. This is
the first and great commandment; and the second is like unto it.
Thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two com-
mandments hang all the law and the prophets.”
It is the duty of man to learn to discern the divine Light
in himself and others—that Light “which lighteth every man
that cometh into the world” (St. John i., 9). : Because men
are sons of God they are brothers and inseparably linked together.
That which harms one harms the entire brotherhood. Hence a
man owes it as a duty to the God within himself and others;
first, to endeavour constantly to live up to the highest that is in
him, thereby enabling that God within himself to become more
perfectly manifest; and, secondly, to recognise the fact of the
brotherhood by constant effort towards unselfishness, love, con-
sideration and service to his fellows. Service of humanity and
the sacrifice of the lower self to the higher are laws of spiritual
growth.
7. Christ instituted various Sacraments in which “an inward
and spiritual grace” is given unto us through “an outward and
visible sign.” There are seven of these rites which may be
ranked as Sacraments; namely. Baptism, Confirmation, the Holy
Eucharist, Absolution, Holy Unction, Holy Matrimony, Holy
Orders. The doctrine of these Sacraments is sufficiently set forth
in the authorised Liturgy of the Liberal Catholic Church. Christ,
17


the Kving Head of the Church which He founded, is the true
minister of all Sacraments.
Inasmuch as the Liberal Catholic Church welcomes to its
membership all who are seeking truth, it does not require its lay
members to accept this statement of doctrine; but the statement
is to be regarded as embodying the distinctive contribution of
the Liberal Catholic Church to Christian thought, and the Bishops
of the Church are prepared to accept as candidates for ordination
only those who find themselves in general agreement with it.


TABLE OF APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION
IN THE
LIBERAL CATHOLIC CHURCH
The Apostolic Succession in the Liberal Catholic Church
is derived from the ancient Church of Holland, sometimes called
“Jansenist.” With characteristic hospitality the Dutch people had
given sanctuary to many unfortunate Jansenist refugees who had
fled from France and Belgium to escape Jesuit persecution. As
a result, the Dutch Church was itself accused of complicity in the
Jansenist heresy (an accusation of which it claims repeatedly to
have cleared itself), and its Archbishop, Peter Codde, was deposed
in 1704. An attempt to impose upon them a successor from out-
side confirmed the Dutch clergy in their attitude of resistance
to Rome, whose interference they regarded as unlawful, and the
Church has ever since maintained this position of independence.
Eventually one of their number was raised to the episcopate
by a certain Bishop Varlet. The latter had been consecrated as
Bishop of Ascalon in partibus infidelinm and coadjutor to the
Bishop of Babylon. On the evening of his consecration he
received intelligence of the death of the Bishop of Babylon, whom
he therefore succeeded in that see. On his way out to Babylon
he passed through Holland, and as an act of Christian charity
administered Confirmation there to several hundred candidates
who, in the absence of a bishop, were awaiting the Sacrament.
Having incurred the Pope’s displeasure by this act, he returned
to Holland and spent the remainder of his days there. Bishop
Varlet then came to the aid of the Dutch Church and consecrated
for it four Archbishops of Utrecht in succession, the first three
dying without conferring the episcopate. Varlet had himself
been consecrated at Paris in 1719 by Bishop de Matignon, who
in his turn had been consecrated in 1693 by the famous Jacques
Benigne Bossuet, the “Eagle of Meaux.” Bossuet traced his


episcopal lineage through Archbishop le Tellier, son of the Grand
Chancellor of France, to Cardinal Antonio Barberini, nephew of
Pope Urban VIII.
The validity of the consecration conferred by Bishop Varlet
was, of course, unquestionable, and, in consequence, the Orders
of the so-called Dutch Jansenist Church are everywhere acknow-
ledged as valid.
When the Vatican Council of 1870 decreed the infallibility
of the Pope, a number of the leading scholars of the Continent
of Europe, headed by Dr. von Dollinger, the foremost ecclesiastical
historian of the day, refused to accept so serious an innovation
in doctrine. Independent congregations were formed, who took
the title of “Old Catholic” in contra-distinction to the new
Catholicism of Rome, and this movement was able to secure the
episcopal succession from the Dutch Church, which presently
united with it. The Old Catholic Church is therefore a Catholic
Church, independent of Rome, having indisputably valid Orders.
TABLE OF SUCCESSION
1. DOMINICUS MARIE VARLET.
2. PETRUS JOHANNES MEINDAARTS. Consecrated by the
above in 1 739 as Archbishop of Utrecht. Abp. Mein-
daarts had been ordained priest by Luke Fagin, Bishop
of Meath and afterwards Archbishop of Dublin, who
was favourable to the Dutch cause.
3. JOHANNES van STIPHOUT. Consecrated by the above
in 1743 as Bishop of Haarlem.
A. GUALTHERUS MICHAEL van NIEUWENHUIZEN. Con-
secrated by the above in 1768 as Archbishop of Utrecht.
5. JOHANNES BROEKMAN. Consecrated by the above in
1778 as Bishop of Haarlem.
6. JOHANNES JACOBUS van RHIJN. Consecrated by the
above in 1797 as Archbishop of Utrecht.
7. GIJSBERTUS CORNELIUS de JONG. Consecrated by
the above in 1803 as Bishop of Deventer.
20


8. WILLIBRORDUS van OS. Consecrated by the above in
1814 as Arcbbisbop oT Utrecht.
9. JOHANNES BON. Consecrated by the above in 1819 as
Bishop of Haarlem.
10. JOHANNES van SANTEN. Consecrated by the above in
1825 as Archbishop of Utrecht.
11. HERMANUS HEIJKAMP. Consecrated by the above in
1853 as Bishop of Deventer.
12. CASPARUS JOHANNES RINKEL. Consecrated by the
above in 1873 as Bishop of Haarlem.
13. GERARDUS GUL. Consecrated by the above in 1892 as
Archbishop of Utrecht.
14. ARNOLD HARRIS MATHEW. D.D., de jure Earl of
Llandaff of Thomastown. Consecrated by the above
at Utrecht on 28th April, 1908, as Bishop for Great
Britain and Ireland; elected Archbishop 1911; repudi-
ated Old Catholicism and offered his submission to the
Roman Obedience, 1915, from which time the move-
ment had no further connection with him; died 1919.
Formerly priest in Roman Catholic Orders.
Abp. Mathew, having consecrated various Auxiliary
Bishops (all of whom eventually allied themselves with
other Churches), consecrated the following as Bishop-
Auxiliary “to safeguard the succession’.’:
15. FREDERICK SAMUEL WILLOUGHBY. M.A. (Cantab.).
Consecrated by Abp. Mathew at Bromley on 28th
October, 1914. Formerly priest in Anglican Orders,
re-ordained conditionally by Abp. Mathew. Bishop
Willoughby, prior to his reception into the communion
of the Roman Catholic Church in 1916, perpetuated
the succession for those clergy who continued the
movement after the withdrawal of Abp. Mathew by
consecrating the three following bishops:
16. RUPERT GAUNTLETT. Consecrated by Bishop Willoughby
at London on 26th September, 1915. Ordained priest
by Abp. Mathew. The resignation of this Bishop was
accepted by the Episcopal Synod of the Liberal
Catholic Church on March 14th, 1924.
21


17. ROBERT KING. Consecrated by Bishop Willoughby at
London on 26th September, 1915. Ordained priest by
Abp. Mathew. Appointed Assistant Bishop in Province
of Great Britain in 1924.
18. JAMES INGALL WEDGWOOD. Elected 1915; conse-
crated as Presiding Bishop by Bishop' Willoughby,
assisted by Bishops King and Gauntlett, at London, on
13th February, 1916. Ordained priest by Abp. Mathew.
Resigned the office of Presiding Bishop in March, 1923.
Appointed Regionary Bishop for parts of Europe in
1926.
19. CHARLES WEBSTER LEADBEATER. Consecrated •by
Bishop Wedgwood at Sydney, N.S.W., on 22nd July,
1916, as Bishop for Australasia. Formerly priest in
Anglican Orders, re-ordained conditionally by Bishop
Wedgwood. Elected to the office of Presiding Bishop
in March, 1923.
20. The Jonkheer JULIAN ADRIAN MAZEL. Consecrated by
Bishop Wedgwood, assisted by Bishop Leadbeater, at
Sydney, on 24th June, 1917, as Bishop-Auxiliary for
Australasia. Ordained priest by Bishop Leadbeater.
Appointed Regionary Bishop for the Netherlands and
for the Netherlands-Indies in 1924.
21. IRVING STEIGER COOPER. Consecrated by Bishop
Wedgwood, assisted by Bishops Leadbeater and Mazel,
at Sydney, on 13th July, 1919, as Bishop for the
United States of America. Ordained priest by Bishop
Leadbeater.
22. FRANK WATERS PIGOTT, M.A. Consecrated by Bishop
Leadbeater, assisted by Bishops Mazel and Cooper, at
Sydney, on 9th March, 1924, as Bishop for Great
Britain and Ireland. Formerly priest in Anglican
Orders, re-ordained conditionally by Bishop Wedgwood.
23. JOHN ROSS THOMSON. Consecrated by Bishop Lead-
beater, assisted by Bishops Cooper and Pigotl, at Syd-
ney, on 18th May, 1924, as Bishop-Suffragan for New
Zealand. Ordained priest by Bishop Wedgwood.
24. JOHN WALKER. Consecrated by Bishop Leadbeater,
assisted by Bishops Cooper and Pigott, at Sydney, on
22


29th June, 1924, as Bishop-Suffragan for South Africa.
Ordained priest by Bishop Wedgwood.
25. GEORGE SYDNEY ARUNDALE. Consecrated by Bishop
Wedgwood, assisted by Bishops Mazel and Pigott, on
4th August, 1925, at Huizen, N. Holland; Ordained
priest by Bishop Wedgwood. Appointed Regionary
Bishop for India in 1926.
26. JOHN MOYNIHAN TETTEMER. Consecrated by Bishop
Leadbeater, assisted by Bishops Cooper and Arundale,
at Sydney, on 23rd May, 1926, as Auxiliary Bishop
for the United States of America. Ordained priest by
Cardinal Respighi.
27. EDWIN BURT BECKWITH. Consecrated by Bishop
Wedgwood, assisted by Bishops Cooper and Pigott,
on 18th July, 1926, at Huizen, N. Holland, as Bishop-
Suffragan for the United States of America. Ordained
priest by Bishop Wedgwood.
Extract from A Catholic Dictionary by Addis and Arnold
(1897 edition), bearing the imprimatur of Cardinal Vaughan.
Referring to the Dutch so-called Jansenist Church: “They remain
just where they were on their separation from Rome. They have
retained valid Orders
It will be seen that the Dutch succession traces back to a
consecration performed by a single Bishop (Varlet). The
validity of such consecration has been recognised from the
earliest times in the Church and repeatedly re-affirmed. St,
Augustine, for example, acted thus as sole consecralor, and the
practice is sanctioned at this day by the Roman Catholic Church
in missionary countries. The early directions that three or more
bishops should consecrate did not involve the question of validity,
but were directed against clandestine or partisan consecrations.
23


ST. ALBAN PRESS
Los Angeles—London—Sydney
1926
