

THE STORY
OF THE
DROUGHT.
THROUGH THE -
NORTH AND NORTH-EAST.
By E. WHITINGTON.
Reprinted from The South Australian Register.
Adelaide:
W. It. Thomas <t Co,, Printers, Grenfell Street
1807


THE STORY
OF THE
DROUGHT.
THROUGH THE -
NORTH AND NORTH-EAST.
By E. WHITINGTON.
Reprinted from The South Australian Register.
Adelaide:
W, K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street
1597




No. I.—THROUGH THE NORTH-EAST.
The prosecution of pastoral pursuits prac-
tically moans the detailed exploration of our
country; and, if only because this important
staple industry is the forerunner of all others,
every one should readily admit its great
importance. But of course it requires some-
thing much more practical than such an
admission. It needs assistance and encourage-
ment. It is unfortunate that those who live
in the city are not brought into touch with
pastoral development, so that they could the
better understand the vital importance of
applying to it a consistently helpful Parlia-
mentary policy. It will be a grand thing for
the country—because a grand thing for the
industry itself —when the people shall be
brought into full practical sympathy with
both pastoral and agricultural pursuits, and
when they shall recognise what is needed to
foster and develop each to the fullest extent.
Personal inspection in such matters as these
is invaluable. There is a certain legislator
whose patriotic enthusiasm is combined with
a sincere desire to do what is right. This
gentleman once thought that 200 acres was suffi-
cient for any farmer, but when men of experi-
ence whom he questioned explained to him that
they would need three times that many acres —
one-third for cultivation, one-third for grazing,
and one-third for fallow —in order to farm
methodically and to make a living, ho admitted
his error, and brought forth fruits meet for
repentance! Now, having travelled through
the colony, this legislator recognises that in
proportion to the deterioration in the nature
of the country the holding must be more and
more increased/- Particularly he personally
inspected pastoral runs, and carefully studied
the laws affecting them; and the evolution of
thought thus secured was most satisfactory.
Altogether his example is worthy of imitation. ,
•Jf each individual member of Parliament
would made an extended trip through our
pastoral country he could not help, at
the termination of the time, exclaiming
in effect—“l have seen, and I believe.”
One thing ho would learn would be the fact
that the days of squatter kings and the
amassing of large fortunes out of “thepeople’s
grass” are days which are not likely to return ;
and, on the average, he needs such a lesson.
As Mr. W. H. Duncan said in the Assembly
the other day:—
“ A great many people, and he was afraid
some hon. members, seemed to think that
squatting outside, say District Councils, was
the same as it was in years gone by on such
properties as Bundaleer, Bungaree, Hill |
River, and Gum Creek, or other properties in
similar situations; but such was not the case.”
And those who railed most against the
squatter invariably forgot to show the other
side of the picture—the men who sank thou-
sands of pounds in the country, and whose
enterprise was rewarded by hopeless ruin.
Howraany men accumulated wealth by sheep-
farming on the rich lands within an easy
distance of Adelaide only to lose it all when
they moved “ further out!” The opinion that
pastoral pursuitsiwere not carried on in their
proper sphere might have been justified when,
to revive a characteristically vindictive ex-
pression, “them there squatters” reigned
supreme near Adelaide, but very few who
have travelled over and are acquainted with
the interior will advance that opinion to-day.
Rooted prejudices are slowly but surely dying
out, and it is devoutly to bo wished that the
process of evolution will now. hasten towards
the desideratum of the pastoralist—extension
of lease with reasonable limitations, security
of tenure, and fair rental.
The recent terrible drought which now for-
tunately seems to have broken up inflicted
untold suffering upon farmers and also caused
pastoralists to suffer in at least due propor-
tion, though, comparatively speaking, this
latter fact seems to have been little appreci-
ated. The depletion of sheep during the past
two years has been nothing less than a national
calamity. The loss in the Northern flocks is
estimated at 50 percent.; or, taking the colony
throughout, the destruction is, according to the
calculations of competent authorities, put
down at one-third. Then, practically speak-
ing, there has been no lambing in the North
for two years. In subsequent articles, however,
detailed figures on this point will be given.
It is difficult to say what would have hap-
pened had the long-prayed-for rain not come
at last. With many dams empty, others fast
drying up, and the stock perishing in thou-
sands around them, station managers had a
sorry time. One wanted to be on the scene to
realize the awfulness of the picture. Men did
their utmost, but after all were compelled to
watch their flocks gradually weaken and die.
Dwellers in the city have not even the shadow
of an idea of what their fellow-colonists in the
drought-stricken country have endured and
are enduring. With each succeeding dry day
those whose care wore the fairest flocks of the
land grew more and more despondent. They
scanned the sky with the eagerness of ship-
wrecked mariners beseeching a few drops from
heaven to quench their thirst. Even the


children could not take the accustomed
pleasure in their gambols, and the more
thoughtful ones became sadly serious. It was
a quaint incident in the which
gave a Victorian writer material for this little
story;—
“Billy, who is the youthful heir to a
drought-stricken South Australian run —pro-
vided always the Banks don’t intervene—had
heard little talked about but the dry weather,
starving stock, and bare pastures. When his
mother on Sunday last road from the Bible
the story of the Deluge he showed an interest
that the Scriptures had not previously won
from him. 4 Rained for forty days and forty
nights,’ he exclaimed. ‘Gwacious, mother,
what feed they must ha’ had.* ‘l’ll make
something of that boy,’said the father after-
wards, ‘if they don’t spoil him at school!’ ”
But the welcome showers descended at last
on the parched earth, and the satisfaction and
delight induced by the musical patter on roof-
top and window-pane is indescribable. Men
experienced the novelty _ of getting wot, and
ingeringly regarded their tracks in the mud
with something of the delight which plays in
a juvenile’s breast when he is moulding clay
men. June, 1897, will be long remembered
by those “outback.” Its Jubilee anniversary
may even be celebrated.
During this eventful month, in company
with Mr. W. M. Paterson, who was making
an extended trip principally through the
north-eastern pastoral holdings, I visited
Outalpa, Ophara—Mr. Peter Waite’s experi-
mental block in New South Wales—Oulnina,
Netley, Panararaatee, Teetulpa, Melton,
Koonamore, Nillinghoo, Curnamona, Erudina,
Wirrealpa, Moolooloo, Beltana, Leigh’s
Creek, and Mount Searle; and any one who
will take the trouble to trace this route on the
map will see the great extent of territory
which was traversed. In its natural state our
pastoral country is on the whole a desert, not-
withstanding the fact that some people have
conceived the notion thatthere aremanyoascsin
it. It is not the country which carries the stock,
but rather the improvements on it, and only
in proportion to the wise and judicious ex-
penditure incurred in such improvements will
drought and vermin ever be effectively
resisted. A man needs encouragement,
pluck, and enterprise to tackle the combats of
settlement in our treacherous North. Those
who have been many years in these arid
expanses will tell you that it is a splendid
country for a gamble, but the advice of the
wisest is “play for a drought.” A man needs
to serve his apprenticeship in the North before
he can understand the vastly alternating con-
ditions peculiar to this strange territory. A
good season has its attendant temptations and
allurements, and more often than not hurries
the unknowing on to experience the heavy
losses which result when heat and drought
succeed luxuriant herbage and lakes of water
smothered with wild fowl, and, if there is not
a recovery within a reasonable time, to sub-
sequent ruin. Strangely, however, the lessons
one man all too dearly learns are very seldom
utilized by others. During my trip I met a
gentleman who has good cause to remember
the Australian droughts. His story is worth
repeating:—
“ My father came out to the colony in 1839.
I was then a piccaninny. My father went in
for farming and sheep-keeping, and my brother
and I grew up amidst these pleasant opera-
tions. Wo had 10,000 sheep on the Bremer
Ranges, and we knocked together between
£IB,OOO and £19,000. We knew all about
sheep, shepherding, lambing-down ewes, and
poisoning dogs. We grew up to be young men,
and became ambitious. We wanted to be
squatters, and make a fortune. We thought a
flock of 10,000 a tiddly-winking business. In
18G2 we were offered Hergott Springs. I went
and inspected the country. It was a grand
season. The cattle were so fat that you could
lie on their backs. I heard there was a
splendid lake, Lake Arthur, GO or 70 miles
east of Hergott. I went out and had a look
at it. The sheet of water was about a mile
long and three-quarters of a mile across at the
widest part. It was encircled by reeds, and
was black with wild fowl. I wrote down to a
land agent instructing him to take up a block
of 150 miles, and to make the lake the centre.
He did so, and I returned home confident
that our fortunes were made. It took us
some time to get ready to go to this
Arcadia. We spent a lot of money in
purchasing teams and a splendid outfit.
Eventually we took up 18,000 sheep. I had
the pleasure of driving them up. After a lot
of struggling I arrived with the sheep, but it
had commenced to look awfully dry. You
could see round stones everywhere on the
plains, and the bush was shrivelled up. Then
I thought of my splendid lake. We had
given the country a gruelling, and we saw
that we must get the sheep away. I got a
horse and started for the lake. I took some
damper and some mutton, but no water, as I
thought I could get out in a day. I went up
the head of the Clayton, but the waterholes
which eighteen months before were two hun-
dred yards long were dry. It grew dark,
and I thought I ought to be close on Lake
Arthur. But I rode on and on without find-
ing it. At last I camped for the night. I
tied the horse’s rein to my wrist and dosed
fitfully. At daybreak I discovered I was
camped on the edge of what appeared to be a
big claypan. I got on my horse and rode
round and round, and my heart sank within
me, for this was my lake. I had been all the
day and night without water, so I mounted the
horse and rode back. For the last ten miles I had
to walk, first leading and then pulling the horse.
At last the old chap would go no further, so I
took the saddle off and hung it on a bush, and
took the stars for my guide. I got in dead
beat next morning, when the camp were pre-
paring to shift the headquarters to the lake.
My father then went up and started boring,
and I returned to Adelaide to attend to the
harvest. After this was gathered I got
twelve good bullocks, and drove up to Port
Augusta, taking a ton of flour, some tea and
sugar, and all that I thought we wanted on
our very much ‘out back’station. I got the
bullocks through from P'ort Augusta to Her-
gott, but all the beasts died soon afterwards.
Up to this time wo had lost 5,000 sheep. I
came back to town after the shearing, the
idea being that I should return again with
further supplies. The others hung on wait


ing for rain, and meantime the flock was
reduced from 18,000 to 3,000. Then came the
final smash. My brother was in the hut one
night when it commenced to rain. The water
soon rose in the floor of the hut, which was a
mile away from the bed of the creek. Then
they thought of the sheep, and went out
to find them swimming in their yard.
Those in the hut collared a blanket and a
Fiece of damper and made for the high land,
n the morning they could just see the eaves
of the hut, which primitive domicile carried
away before night. The woolshed and wool
had all gone too. Of the 3,000 sheep twenty-
seven alone were saved. The rations had been
swept down the Frome, and everything left
was abandoned. The people were starving,
and flour was worth £2O a ton. My brother
had a chest in which he kept his clothes. The
blacks had rifled this, and taken everything
but a crumpled-up cheque for £25, of the value
of which they had no notion. That was the
only thing saved. Our dreams of fortunes
were ended, the £IB,OOO had been swamped,
and that is how I got my first experience
of the Australian droughts.”
Droughts have come and gone since then,
but to the same want of experience which
led to that smash, in a greater or lesser
degree, have been attributable many subse-
quent failures. The consensus of opinion is
tnat the last drought is the most disastrous
which has ever been experienced. But while
a great many emphatically aver that white
men never saw the country in such a
shocking state, not a few hold the opinion
that the 18G5 drought was more severe.
On Wirrealpa there is halt a mile of running
water in a creek which dried up in 1805, yet in
other Diaces wells have “forked out.” The
great difficulty in the early drought was the
absence of surface waters. The bush was
naturally more plentiful, but those who went
through these trying times say that it was
dry, shrivelled up, and without any substance.
Daring the succeeding thirty years, however,
the bush, especially adjacent to the permanent
waters, has undergone a terrible ordeal, and
in some cases the country is bare for miles
around. Then many of the dams drying up
necessitated the sheep which they were carry-
ing having to be removed and piled on to the
remaining waters. In one run practically all
were on one well. What this means
can properly be understood only by one who
has worked the country; but more of this
anon. Then we have to look at the stock the
country was carrying through this drought |
f compared with 18G5 —not that the increase
! over those three decades is anything to be proud
of. Then there is the larger population of
to-day to feel the blow; so, even if it is granted
that actually the present drought was not so
severe as that of 18G5, various conditions have
combined to make it more disastrous. Finan-
cially, it is certainly one of the heaviest blows
that South Australia has experienced. One
great factor in helping to pull the people
through which must not be lost sight of was
the locomotive. It is shocking to contem-
plate what would have been the result
if during the last two years the stores had
had to be carted out back from Port Augusta.
As it is the cost of carriage to outside stations
has been a heavy item, but if the people
had had to rely on teamsters the expense of
even living would have been enormous. Then
the iron horse has been an inestimable boon in
enabling starving stock to bo trucked to fresh
fields and pastures now in the Far North.
Few things are more interesting than the
study of the characteristics of one’s country,
and of all our scenery none besides makes so
lasting an impression on the mind as the
“ stern solitude of the Austral waste.” There
are some who would think only of “the heat
and drought and the duststorm smiting,” and
who would re-echo the sentiment—
Further out may be the pleasant scenes of which
our poets boast.
But I think the country’s rather more inviting
round the coast.
Yet journey to whatever country you like,
and where will you find that “strange
inviting” which the Australian bush possesses
for him who catches the spirit of the scene?
How enchanting it is to ride
Over the miles of saltbush plain— \
The shining plain that is said to he I
The dried-up bed of an inland sea, I
Where the air so dry and so clear and bright /
Refracts the sun with a wondrous light, I
And out in the dim horizon makes /
The deep-blue gleam of the phantom lakes.
But perhaps it is when the “black vault 1 of
heaven is studded with stars unutterably
bright” that one hears the true music and
learns the untold stories of the bush —when
the moon silvers the mulga, when the roving
breezes come and go among the sandalwood,
and the air is laden with the scent of the
musk-plant.
For the trees and grass and the shrubs contain
A dry, sweet scent on the saltbush plain
For those that love it, and understand
That saltbush plain is a wonderland.
No. II.—THE EATEN-OUT COUNTRY.
Neither in pictorial representation nor in
word-painting can tho characteristics of the
North-East be faithfully delineated. Any
written description of tho waving fields of
pallid sage-green saltbush appears sadly in-
adequate, and who can reproduce that weird
and yet charming stillness which hangs over
the arid plains? Tho writer on bushland
might justifiably recognise how inadequate a
pen-and-ink sketch of his subject seems, and
exclaim with tho poet—
To such as see thee not ray words were weak;
To those who gaze on thee what language could
they speak?
For the first week or so we were every day
introduced to dust and drought. The soil is
generally light, and when the bush and other
vegetation are killed it is at the mercy of the


winds. It blows more often than it rains
in the North; and clouds of dust,
the particles being microscopically fine,
are raised far into the heavens. When
a duststorm is raging it is no unusual thing
to bo unable to seo the horses you are
driving. The powdery substance insinuates
itself through almost impossible cracks and
crannies, and housewives have a sorry task in
their constant warfare with it in the rooms.
During a recent spell of duststorms the custom
observed with visitors savoured somewhat of
that once common in the East. The traveller
was first given a drink, and then allowed the
pleasure of a wash; and, these preliminaries
completed, be was spoken to. But when the
surface soil blows away, and there is constant
traffic of sheep the earth becomes hammered
and hard. The country which undergoes this
treatment does not absorb ihe rain with the
readiness of the virgin soil. This is especially
the case when heavy showers fall, and the
water, instead of soaking into the ground,
begins to run almost immediately. The little
rivulets soon swell into stormy torrents, which
tear out gutters and ravines, numbers of
which have been formed during recent years.
These watercourses reveal the fact that the
clouds sometimes break over this droughty
land; but there is a lot of stern reality in the
lament of a north-eastern manager—
“ \Ve have no rains of our own. We get the
tail end of the tropical and coastal rains and
the * Adelaide empties’ not infrequently pass
overhead.”
From a light loamy clay the soil in places
becomes sandy; and, carried slowly but surely
by the strong winds, it often drifts into the
dams. There, combining with the accumu-
lation and settling of the sediment carried
down by the fioodwaters, it confronts the
managers with the vexatious question of the
silting up of the excavations. Low ranges of
rough scrubby hills seem to encircle the other-
wise unbroken country in a series of amphi-
theatres, and in the far-stretching arenas the
salt and blue bush may be seen to perfection.
From the hills to the westward watercourses,
satirically marked on the map as “rivers,”
race down through the country at all too
varying intervals. These watercourses, wide
and deep with now sandy now gravelly stony
beds, are mostly dry. Although it is
seldom that one has the pleasure of
looking on water in these gum creeks
they impart an acceptable picturesqueness to
the landscape. Their banks lined with almost
perfectly shaped eucalypti, the avenue of
trees stretches like a sinuous verdant creature
far away in the dim perspective, and the
weary eye rests lingeringly on the green
line. These watercourses gradually die out,
and several of them converging into one
invariably end in a rich alluvial flat formed by
successive deposits. Here such vegetation as
marshmallow, clover, geranium, and canary-
grass grows with tropical luxuriance, and in
a good season the pastoralist cannot gaze on
these fields of fodder without thinking of
prime fat sheep and quick returns. One must
not forget the mulga scrub, which is met with
on hill and plain alike, the acacia, the black
oak, the pretty sandalwood dotted about
here and there, and the hundred-and-
one other native shrubs and bushes. Then
there are occasional belts of mallee, while
on the sandy ridges the native pines find a
lodgement. In the Flinders Range there are
forests of pine, and wherever they abound
they kill the country for the sheep. With a
rainfall what a wonderful territory it would
bo! But there’s the rub. The land we passed
over in the early part of our trip was parched
and thirsty-looklng. There was not on it a
particle of herbage in any shape or form.
The bush in some places was killed altogether,
in other places only black sticks remained of
it, and even where the stock did not get at it
it was dusty and dry-looking. In that narrow
strip on which the January rain had fallen
the bush presented a much fresher appearance,
and was in better heart. But what wonderful
changes are wrought by the rain! The whole
complexion of the country is transformed
almost as if by magic. “ Banjo” Paterson gives
a striking example of this in his poem “In
,Defence of the Bush.”
Yet, perchance, if you should journey down the
very track you went
In a month or two at furthest, you would wonder
what it meant;
Where the sun-baked earth was gasping like a
creature in its pain,
You would find the grasses waving like a field of
summer grain;
And the miles of thirsty gutters blocked with sand
and choked with mud.
You would find them mighty rivers with a turbid,
sweeping flood;
For the rain and drought and sunshine make no
changes in the street.
In the sullen line of buildings and the ceaseless
tramp of feet;
But the bush hath moods and changes as the seasons
rise and fall.
And the men who know the bushland—they are
loyal through it all.
The bush is the great stand-by in the time of
drought, and yet it does seem as if in many
cases we have done our best to kill it. Good
seasons inspiring high hopes have led to the
venturesome cocky going further out, and
beautiful fields of saltbush have been ruth-
lessly torn up. It is, however, an ill wind
that blows nobody any good, and perhaps the
drought will stay the eagerness and agitation
for resumption. The notion that rain follows
the plough has proved to be altogether
erroneous. In addition to wholesale destruc-
tion of the salt and blue bush, what has very
appropriately been termed the “natural
haystack” of the country has been gradually
killed round the permanent waters; and this
same process of annihilation is still going on.
\Vhat this state of things means has never been
properly appreciated. To say that it does not
matter, and that grass and herbage will come
up when the bush is eradicated, is to talk non-
sense. The intense heat withers the grass,
which is here to-day and gone to-morrow; but
the bush is perennial and weathers heat and
cold, sun and rain. In our North country, as
I have said before, a man must “play for a
drought.” The farmer who saves his straw
and cocky chaff in the times of plenty and
the pastoralist who shepherds his fields of
bush, are the men who are going to
pull through the years of drought or
famine. Of course water conservation
should go hand-in-hand with the preset


vation and proper treatment of the bush.
When the country was in its natural state the
holding-off of rain did not mean a scarcity of
feed, but it did mean an absence of surface
waters. In the drought of 18G5 it was this
lack of surface waters which proved so fatal.
During the present drought it was in many
cases just the reverse of this—an abundant
supply of water, but no feed, the bush having
been eaten out round the waters for a radius
of from three to five miles. There was and is
good bush outside this ring, but any one with
any knowledge of sheep will readily admit the
disastrous effect produced on lambing ewes, for
instance, by such extended travelling. Strong
wethers will do it, but the long walk tells on
their condition. Sheep require what members
of Parliament in office appreciate—“rest and
quiet,” Mr. Holder, in those able articles he con-
tributed some years ago to The Register— the
country people are sorry that the hon. member
for the Burra did not present the picture to
Parliament as ho did to the public through
the columns of the Press—made a strong point
when he said:—
“ It is not only a permanent and absolutely
reliable supply of water that is required, but a
supply so distributed over the country as that
feed and water should be proportionate to
each other.”
In the past neither the occupiers nor the
Government appear to have realized what
this extensive destruction of the country
meant, and if they did realize it they were
not sufficiently altruistic to shepherd it for
those who were to come after them. All
other things being equal, the carrying capacity
of the land should determine the rental; and
as the bush carries the sheep the Government
have been losing one of their valuable assets.
No matter what country might have been
worth in its original state, the more it is eaten
out the fewer sheep it will carry to the mile,
and to this extent its rental value deteriorates.
If past Governments have not recognised this
it has been owing to their ignorance on such
matters; or, assuming that they were
cognizant of the gradual spoliation of the
country, then they, as landlords of the State,
have been found wanting. And this is easily
accounted for. They are different from the
private landlord m that their own pockets are
not affected. They simply hold the country
in trust, they are here to-day and gone to-
morrow, and with the easy philosophy of the
lotus-eater they say, “Whyshould we trouble?”
But while Governments have been coming and
going the killing of the country has gone on
continuously.
For one man to assert that the bush,
and for another to say that the im-
provements, carry the stock might seem
conflicting and contradictory; yet in a mea-
sure both ideas are equally correct.
The axiom that a man must spend to live is
very applicable in respect to our pastoral land.
The bush would be no good without improve-
ments, and improvements would be of very
little use without the bush. Looked at in
another light, the salt and blue bush are the
capitalof thepastoralists. That capital requires
careful manipulation, and in proportion to a
wise or careless handling it will yield from a
maximum to a minimum return. By the
concentration of stock upon it country
may soon be eaten out, but by judi-
ciously feeding it off and spelling it the
same area may not only be kept in good
heart, but improved. Sheep like their old
haunts, and have a strong habit of mostly
travelling south from a water. Instances may
be given where they have eaten out and
remained almost starving in the southern end
of a paddock, with water, say in the centre
of it, notwithstanding the fact that
there was good feed to. the north.
Some people consider that this is due to sheep
always following the prevailing winds. A
nobleman, having noticed a flock of sheep
lying with their heads to the wind, remarked
to the shepherd that if he were a sheep he
would lie with his back to the wind. There
was a lot of wisdom in the shepherd’s simple
retort—“lf my lord was a sheep perhaps he
would have more sense.” The salt and blue
bush —the latter especially—possess wonderful
vitality. It will stand a lot of eating down,
and if it is given a chance to recover the plant
will grow more bunchy and bushy than it was
before being fed off. The stock trample out
the dead sticks, and the spindly bush with
proper treatment becomes round and bunchy.
But it would be defying all the laws of
nature to expect this wonderful vegeta-
tion to survive continuous punishment;
yet this is what it has received round the
permanent waters. A vine is one of the
hardiest of plants, and will stand a deal of
pruning, but if the young growth was eaten
or rubbed off the branches as soon as it began
to shoot the vine would eventually die; yet
similar things are done to the salt and blue
bush. Even when there is plenty of feed and
water out back, as soon as rain makes the
perhaps already over-pruned bush shoot out
the sheep will confine their attention to nip-
ping off the young and succulent growth. A
few years since a well-known pastoralist was
driving through his run a visitor from India.
It was after a good season, and the lambing
ewes were all gathering round the permanent
water engaged in finding what few young
shoots remained, while there ‘was an
abundance of feed and water further out in
the paddock.
“There go those silly old ewes,” said the
pastoralist, “returning to their old haunts,
and dragging their poor little lambs after
them, where there is no feed. Yet out there,
as you see, there is plenty of good bush and
water. What we will have to do is to devise
some means to keep them on the bush, which
they leave untouched, while the eaten-off bush
is given a chance to recover.”
“ But what you say seems so elementary,”
replied the visitor.
“Elementary as it may appear to you, and
undoubted fact as it is to me, many squat-
ters have not yet realized it,” explained the
owner.
What is wanted is a return to the shepherd-
ing days on advanced and improved lines.
When the country was first taken up in the
fifties it was pretty much all alike; and in the
shepherding times, which continued up to
about 1874, when fencing began, the sheep
were stationed in summer about two and a half
to three and a half miles from the well, and


they went to water every other day. The day
following that on which they were in at water
they fed out in the opposite direction, thus
making use of the country for six or seven
miles around the well. As soon as rain fell
in the beginning of winter the hocks were
shifted from their summer to their winter
camps, and they remained there until the
feed became so dry that they had to get back
to the summer camps. This system gave the
summer camps and the country round the
wells an opportunity of recovering. The land
improved during the shepherding days, and
was on the whole in a better condition when
the sheep wore turned adrift into the large
paddocks than it was when first taken up.
But the owners continued year after year to
live on their capital. The stock were left on
the same country all the year round, and they
slowly but surely ate it out around the wells
without the lesiees realizing what was taking
place. It was thought that the sheep would
run back in the winter time, but they preferred
to remain on the young feed round the water.
The flocks then watered every other day;
to-day they mostly water every day, so there
is more reason now for shifting the animals
from the water than there was when the
shepherds had charge of them. Put in a nut-
shell, the whole matter amounts simply to
this. Through want of legislation, or through
lack of knowledge, these paddocks have too
long been left too large, arid the natural bush
has been eaten out round the permanent waters,
Then comes the question whether the leasees,
circumstanced as they are at present, can do
anything to bring the country back again to
its proper condition.
No. III.—WORRIES OF THE PASTORALIST.
By careful treatment the country, where it is
not too far gone, may be brought back to
something like its former state; but where
there is not a skernck remaining, where the
ground is as bare as a macadamized road, it is
doubtful whether the bush will ever recover.
Saltbush, however, can be propagated from
seed, and in America they are cultivating the
plant. At Oulnina some time ago Mr. A.
Treloar had a little plot of ground trenched
and fenced in with wire-netting for garden
purposes, and within this area several beauti-
ful saltbush plants have come up, some of
them standing from 18 in. to 2 ft. high. It is
very problematical, however, whether saltbush
could be “cultivated” to any appreciable and
profitable extent, and in any case it would
take many years to get the country back to its
former state. The only hope for it is further
water conservation to enable the bush, which
is better in many places, to recover, and to
subdivide the paddocks so as to keep the sheep
off the eaten-out areas. In fact the saltbush
should be treated in a commonsense way, and
on very much the same lines which the in-
telligent lucerne-grower observes with
reference to his alfalfa crop. But this re-
quires expenditure, and the question is will
it pay the lessees, situated as they are at
present, to incur the outlay. They answer in
chorus, No. With a lease of twelve years to
run, even if a man started at once to put
these new methods into practice, he would
only about have got the country into proper
working order when his time would expire.
The fallacy of the idea that the 1888 leases are
fully improved has long since been demon-
strated. ' On one of the runs we visited the
owner has spent £lO,OOO, and is prepared to
spend a further £5,000 if he can get an ex-
tension of lease and a surety of tenure at a
fair rental.
These remarks suggest reference to a knotty
problem—the carrying capacity of the saltbush
country? Who is there who can estimate it?
Two hundred sheep to the mile might be piled
on in a good season, and the county eaten out,
but that could not be regarded as the “carry-
ing capacity.” Indeed, there are at present no
reliable data by which it may be gauged, and
until the country is so watered and subdivided
that the whole of it can be made available for
sheep, and the bush grazed off without in any
way encroaching on the capital, that data will
not be forthcoming. When so many sheep to
the square mile have been grazed over a series
of years, and the country is in as good “nick”
as it was in the first instance, then the num-
ber carried will give the grazing capacity. In
the interest of our inheritance everything
should be done to prevent the destruction of
the natural haystack of the country.
Then the true worth of the scrub has never
been properly appreciated. Bulloak-bush,
sandalwood, mulga, and acacia are splendid
“ stand-bys” in a dry season, and in many
cases in the North during the 1895 and 1896
drought thousands of sheep lived for months
on the scrub. It was impossible for the jum-
bucks to reach the leaves themselves,
as the trees had long since been
trimmed up to “ high-water-mark,” but
men were engaged in scrub - pulling.
A smart fellow with a long pole surmounted
by a strong iron hook can pull down in a day
sufficient for 2,000 sheep, and it is wonderful
how quickly the animals learn to follow the
man. Only the leafy branches are broken off,
and the “pruning” process has a good effect
on the tree. An old straggly sandalwood,
for instance, after being treated in this
manner becomes a fresh bushy symmetrical
tree. In years gone by great quantities of
this timber were used for fencing and firewood,
but the Managers are now alive to the import-
ance of conserving the fodder-trees, especially
near a water. When Waukaringa was a thriv-
ing mining centre the several hundred in-
habitants had the right to cut the scrub within
a distance of fifteen miles of the town. This
naturally led to the destruction of a large
number of valuable trees in this particular
locality. The bulloak-bush, which cannot be
excelled as a fodder-plant, is very fat-
tening, will stand a lot of punish-
ment, and recovers itself very quickly.
Thousands of valuable shrubs and trees owe
their destruction to the rabbits. The little


rodents will bark a sandalwood round in no
time, and of course kill it. Residents in the
Northern Territory used to facetiously remark
of the mosquitoes there that “lots of ’em
weigh a pound, and they climb the trees
and bark,” but the North-Easterners can
beat this. They tell a visitor that they have
seen rabbits 12 ft. high, and their information
has the merit of being open to demonstration.
The stranger at first consoles himself with the
thought that “all men are liars,” more or less,
but when he sees the truth of the statement
exemplified he cannot but believe it. Given a
slanting tree bunny doesn’t mind how high he
has to climb to reach food. Very often as the
result of his enterprise he is hung in a fork
and remains in the inextricable position until
he dies, and serves as a warning to other
venturesome rodents.
It was a cold, cheerless morning when we
left Mannahill for Outalpa. The bare-
lookingf block on the flat first attracted our
attention. This was once the site of an experi-
mental farm, where the Government were
going to show the people how to grow wheat
and other cereals in this country, but Nature
asserted her claims, and the project ended, as
was only to be expected, in failure. The mail
contractor who subsequently took up the land
got one crop off it. Shortly afterwards we
passed a deserted hostelry which had seen
livelier days. To complete the irony of the
situation there was a notice on the door of the
house respecting “working men’s leases.”
The bush was in good heart in the north end of
Oulnina, and it improved when we entered the
Weekeroo paddock belonging to Outalpa.
This was accounted for by the absence of
water, which meant also the absence of stock.
The dam in this paddock, which was con-
structed six years ago, has never had water in
it. It is situated in a rotten flat, and the
wonder is why main drains with leaders
to them have not been made to “feed” it.
Outalpa, which embraces 9GO square miles,
had the benefit of the January rain, and the
sheep—47,32s were shorn last year—were in
fairly good order. In fact this run was only
just beginning to feel the pinch. However,
the country is eaten out round the waters, and
the sheep had a long way to travel for feed.
There were 15,000 lambing ewes, but from
appearances Mr. Kent, the Acting Manager,
did not expect any result, although in a good
season ho would have looked to get 12,000
lambs, Outalpa is divided into eighteen pad-
docks, but a largo extent of open country with
beautiful bush on it was lying idle, owing to
there being no water on it. A fine dam, 100
yards x 80 yards x 18 feet deep, was con-
structed comparatively recently, out it only
got three feet of water in it when it was com-
pleted, and there had been no rain since. To
make proper use of this country feed tanks
and further subdivision are necessary.
Mr. Kent said the rabbits which ate them
out three years ago—they were present in
thousands even at the beginning of the year —
had nearly all perished owing to the drought.
During our journeyings through the run
we saw very few of the little rodents, but the
remnant of the vermin still remained, and it
is wonderful how quickly the rabbits will
breed up in a good season. The pastoralists
know this to their sorrow. To calculate to
what extent one pair of rabbits will multiply
in a few years is an interesting study in geo-
metrical progression, and recalls the schoolboy
Eroblem of the grains of wheat on the chess-
oard and the doubling of the cost of the
horseshoe nail. Most of the rodents which
survive the drought manage to do so by
making back into the rough hills where they
find the necessaries of life. But when spring
decks the plain they venture forth again, and
renew their work of devastation. Now the
rabbits have been reduced strenuous efforts
should be made to keep them down. Isolated
action is of very little avail. Rabbits are
migratory, and it is very disheartening for one
man, after eradicating the vermin as far as
possible, to find millions of rabbits from
“over the hills and far away” sweeping across
his country and eating all before them.
To cope with it the pest must be localized,
and here again Mr. Holder showed his grasp
of the question when he wrote—“ One plan
alone will enable the difficulty to be over-
come, and that is the subdivision of the
country by means of vermin-proof fences, so
that the matter can be dealt with in detail.”
When a run is vermin-fenced a man knows he
is killing his own rabbits, and it is immensely
satisfactory to him to realize that he will not
be swarmed with vermin from outside or
deserted territory, or even from neighbouring
holdings. The proof of the pudding is in the
eating, and the efficacy of the vermin fence
has been demonstrated beyond a doubt. The
amount of money which has been paid away
for the destruction of rabbits is terrible to
contemplate. The Vermin Boards gave as
much as 4d, each for rabbit scalps. Owing,
however, to the increase of bunny the bonus
was reduced to 2d., and finally abolished. It
was not the eradication of the vermin
which the rabbiting parties had in view.
Their idea was the continuance of a lucrative
business. One party found that three camps
could keep them going all tho year round.
When they had committed what they re-
garded as sufficient slaughter in one place
they thoughtfully gave the pest a chance of
recovering by shifting camp. They, at any
rate, recognised the virtue of “spelling.”
The Board at Beltana, known as Board No.
31, of which Mr. N. E. Phillipson was Chair-
man, destroyed G,237 doge and 585,043 rabbits
from June 29, 1882, to October 20, 1885. The
dogs were paid for at the rate of 155., and the
rabbits at the rate of 2d. But it was in the suc-
ceeding years that the rabbits increased with
such alarming rapidity. At the beginning
of last summer 40,000 were killed in
one month at one dam at Mutooroo.
During the early eighties tho Government of
New South Wales helped a then lessee to the
extent of 75 per cent, for the destruction of the
vermin at the rate of 6d. a scalp, and con-
tributed 50 per cent, up to Is. per scalp. This
was afterwards reduced by about one-half, but
even then it was found that the contribution
was running the country into such enormous
expense that the subsidy had to be stopped
altogether. Cunning fellows manufactured
scalps, others thought scalps too valuable to
bo destroyed, and instead of burning them
threw them over the fire and through a


hole in the fireplace, whence they were
gathered up and presented a second time to
the inspector. Such a remunerative trade was
established that one man and his son were
said to have made £1,500 in twelve
months. At any rate they took a trip
to the Continent on the strength of it.
A junior once employed with Mr. J. H.
Symon in the Law Courts was so confident
that the eminent Q.C. would win a verdict
that he made a remark with reference to the
easiness of the case. “ I always look upon the
present case as the worst.” replied Mr. Symon.
And what the pastoralists need to do is to
constantly regard the present state of the
rabbit pest as the most serious. They must
keep pegging away at the little rodent, and no
greater mistake could be made than to relax
the efforts and measures for their destruction
when they are reduced to a minimum.
“The dogs are terribly bad now,” so Mr.
Kent told us, and hero we come to the
“cancer” of the pastoral industry of South
Australia. It is a question beset with many
difficulties, and, as with the rabbits, the only
wav to cope with the trouble is to localize it
and act concertedly. Fencing has been and
will have to be erected wherever feasible, but
in the rough, rugged Flinders Range managers
rightly ask how is this possible. Assume that
the fence had been carried over high hills
and numerous watercourses at enormous
expense. An inch of rain falls, and
several miles of it is swept away.
And this suggests a matter not infrequently
referred to. Numbers of people, and even
members of Parliament, say “Who knows
what the pastoralists want? No two of them
think alike. Here, for instance, is ono man
warmly in favour of vermin fencing, in fact
regards it as his only salvation, and here is
another who says such a remedy will not
answer in his case.” Although apparently the
one man’s views are diametrically opposed to
those of the other they harmonize to tho
extent that each thinks the other is right.
Members of Parliament need to understand
the totally varying conditions before they pass
judgment. To illustrate what I mean, tako
two runs, Curnamona and Moolooloo. The
first named hasn’t a hill on it and therefore is
admirably adapted for fencing, but the second
named mostly comprises rough country, some
of it exceedingly so, and as Mr. Fergusson
points out it would be a hopeless task to
attempt to fence it. Tho only way seemingly
out of the difficulty is to fence the good
country off from the bad. What would you
do with the bad country? somebody asks. Will
not a few facetiously suggest that it
should be given to the blackfellows
or “thrown' open for closer settlement?”
Apropos of this, quite recently a gentleman at
Mount Lyndhurst remarked to one of the
dusky sons of the soil—“ Black man jumpum
up alonga Lyndhurst.” “Yes,” answered tho
aboriginal, “ No longa good for whitefeller.”
The great bone of contention is the payment
of scalp money. Some men think that it is de-
moralizing and degrading to tempt a man
with a bonus to do his work,- while others
advocate raising tho sa. premium. In the
early days the station hands used to bo re-
warded with a half a pound of tobacco fur
killing a dog. The gift was a secondary con-
sideration altogether; the dogs preyed on the
sheep, and the men lost no opportunity to kill
tho wretched canines.
But there rose a shout and a wild hubbub
When the dingo raced for his native scrub,
And he paid right dear for his stolen meals
With the drovers’ dogs at his wretched heels;
For we ran him down at a rattling pace,
While the packhorse joined inthestirringchase.
That was “in tho droving days,” when men
felt as much pleasure at “the kill” of a dingo
as the gladiators did in the winning of the
laurel wreath. Mr. Kent, of Outalpa, ex-
pressed tho opinion that “if you gave £5 a
a scalp you would have the dogs wiped out.”
Outalpa until recently had been paying £1 —
their bonus is now 10s. —and as the scalp
money paid away by this station in 180(3
amounted to £1(58 2s, 9d. it would not have
been a particularly pleasurable item for a
squatter wishing to live to contemplate had
the difference between £1 and £5 been added.
Then I put this question to Mr. Kent —“Even
supposing that the principle is not wrong,
should not a boundary-rider make asstrenuous
efforts to rid his paddocks of dogs at a reward
of ss. over and above his wages as he would at
a higher rate?” He replied—“ Well, I’ll give
you a case in point. 1 give a man as much
strychnine as he can take out and as
many traps as ho can look after, and
although he represents that ho is
doing his utmost to suppress the dogs,
they are still running-in the paddock. He
protests to me that he is doing his utmost to
cope with the vermin, and yet this man
is overheard to say he is not going to kill
the dogs for 55.” “Then would it not be
advisable to employ a better man?” To this
he answered that a first-class dogcatcher was
in the majority of cases only serviceable in his
particular line of business, and that it would
only be by accident that you could prove that
a boundary-rider was not putting forth his best
efforts to catch tho dogs. Here it may be
said that there are professional dogcatchers
who live on the game. They study the dogs’
habits, and use every conceivable and incon-
ceivable device to trap the vermin. They are
very jealous and secretive of their knowledge
on this subject. Not a few will tell you that to
be an expert dogcatcher you want to be “a bit
balmy.” Perhaps those who make this asser-
tion are envious of the cunning wiles of tho
trapper. A local pastoralist onco took an
English visitor, who was, by-the-way, dressed
in tourist costume, up to see his run.
During tho day the party came across an
expert dogcatcher. His trousers would have
stood- up by themselves, his hat was so
oleaginous that it would have made an accept-
able meal for a dingo, his hair was dishevelled,
and ho was bespattered with the blood of the
last victim. The stranger and tho trapper
beheld each other with wonderment. “ What
man is that?” asked the amazed man from
foreign parts. He was enlightened. When
the party had departed the station hand en-
quired—“What sort of a bloke do you call
that?” He was informed, but he could not
understand, and scratching his head an-
swered —“Me and my dog (who had sus-
piciously sniffed the tourist) thought he was
an old-man kangaroo,”


No. IV.—THE WILD DOG.
During the trip I had the opportunity of a
chat with a dogcatcher who with two fat
horses was proceeding to Adelaide to celebrate
the Jubilee. He told me he killed 200 dogs
on Teetulpa in twelve months—Mr. Farrant
the Manager, informed me subsequently that
it was not so many as this —and that he
received £1 a scalp. He made as much as £l5
a week occasionally, and he graciously
remarked that he did not think that bad
wages. I asked him if fraud was ever prac-
tised by a man getting only ss. or 10s. for
scalps passing them on to a friend on a station
where £1 was paid, and dividing the profits.
He wanted it to be understood from the outset
that he never did anything of the sort, as he
was quite satisfied with what he was earning;
but admitted that profitable interchanges of
such a character could be executed, although
there was the risk of being found out. He had
heard of drovers coming from Queensland and
New South Wales poisoning a beast and getting
as many as 200 dogs for their trouble, and
bringing the scalps on to South Australia.
“But surely they would not palm off 200
scalps on one poor lessee.” “Oh no,” he
added, laughing at my ignorance, “they would
distribute them about a bit.” Whore does
the “ heathen Chinee” come in amongst dog-
scalpers? He had, however, known of an
instance of a man going in on horseback to a
station with fifty-three scalps strung round
the horse’s neck. “It was quite a staggerer
for the Manager,” he observed. This trapper
further told us of a station where the
Manager used to lay poison, and never get a
dog. He was at a loss to understand this, as
the baits disappeared. The man who was in
the ranges a couple of miles off got the dogs.
“ The Manager put the strychnine too far in
the meat,” explained the dogcatcher, “ and
it took a good while to take effect.” Mr.
Paterson, who was interested in the conversa-
tion, interpolated that he had known a dog go
thirty miles after taking a bait. “You want
to give the dogs a good dose when you are on
piecework,” remarked the man of experience.
The subject of this interview once accidentally
got a dose of strychnine, and his manner of
relating the sensation he experienced was
worthy of Mark Twain. Whenever he moved
his muscles contracted violently and everything
took kaleidoscopical changes and somersaults,
He had to remain hanging on to a post for half
a day, at the end of which time he recovered.
July is the month to bo lavish with the poison,
as then it is that the puppies begin to come
about; but this communicative fellow thought
Managers were most indifferent at this time.
No fewer than 17,500 foxes were destroyed
in Victoria during the ten months preceding
May 1, and it seems that a great deal of
fraud has been practised in connection with
the bonus system in that colony. According
to the statements which have reached Mr.
Best, the Minister for Lands, some of the
persons who deal in the skins of foxes are
(says the Argus) as cunning as Reynard him-
self. It is asserted that the skins of animals
killed in a shire which dues not pay a bonus
are sent into districts where one is given, so
that the scalps might be cut off by the muni-
cipal officer and paid for. Moreover, it is
stated, there are a class of men who visit skin
stores in the city and purchase the inferior
skins, provided they have the scalps
attached, so that they may be forwarded
to shires where good bonuses are paid.
One Manager told me that he knew of an
instance where the person authorized to burn
scalps had seen a number put into a fire, but
that a gentleman happening along some time
afterwards had found several in a fit state to
do service again. Mr. W. Ferguson, of
Moolooloo, suggests a means to prevent fraud.
His recommendation is that the individual
presenting the scalps to the person authorized
to destroy them should also furnish a statemen t
from the Manager or owner certifying where
the dogs were caught.
The dingo is bad enough in all conscience,
but the half-bred is a thousand times worse.
The native animal is cowardly and frightened
at heart; even when brought to bay he doesn’t
fight. He only snaps, but he is careful to
make his teeth meet every time. The hybrid
combines boldness and fearlessness "with
cunning, and the extent of his depredations
is incredible. Many are in favour of raising
the registration-fee in the outlying country to
£l, so as to make the keeping of a dog a
necessity. This, it is believed, would lead to
the extermination of numbers of the mon-
grels which roam about the country
and intermix with the wild dog. Tho
blacks are perhaps the greatest sinners
in this respect. Their dogs, mostly lean, half-
starved brutes, are not to be numbered in ones
or twos, but in scores. They are partial to a
bit of mutton, and are often seen several miles
from the wurlies. The suggestion has been
heard that the trooper should make a trip
round every three months or so and put into
force a system of culling. Of all tho skins we
saw only a very few were those of the real
dingo. Some were brindle, some black and
tan, some black and white—indeed, they com-
prised all those varying colours peculiar to the
canine tribe. This makes the scalp business
further complicated, and it is rumoured that
tame dogs have been killed for bonus purposes.
A good equestrian well mounted can run a dog
down if he gets him on open country, but
horsemen have of late years been fearful of
this owing to many places being honeycombed
with rabbit burrows. There are isolated in-
stances of the vermin having been run to earth
by cyclists, and here it may-be mentioned
that on the majority of stations visited the
bicycle was to be seen. Some Managers are as
much in love with the wheel for station pur-
poses as others are determined to ridicule it.
The rabbits have not only been a curse in
themselves, but they have unwillingly minis-
tered to the wants of the wild dog. In tho early
days the litters of the dingo used to average
between three and four pups, but now it is no
uncommon thing to find a nest containing
seven or eight. One was recently discovered
at Nilpena wilth eleven pups in it, and ten of


Station.
1892.
1893.
1894.
1895.
1896.
Beltana
17
12
20
39
48
Lyndhurat
55
72
46
100
79
Murapeowie ..
. 325
445
542
1,040
927
1,354
617
Kanowana
. 734
825
493
Cordillo
59
9
44
50
133
Mutooroo
66
63
59
44
48
Mulyungarie .
—
—
—
—
180
Totals ... 1,256
Grand total, 8,645.
1,426
1,204
2,200
2,459
them were pure white. In days pone by the
dingo slut had difficulty in obtaining nourish-
ment for her offspring, but now all she has to
do is to catch a bunny. As an evidence of the
wild dog’s fondness for the little rodent, I
heard of an instance where an employe of one
of the small men at Nackara had stated that
he was threatened with dismissal if he killed a
litter of pups, as his master regarded the dogs
as his friends, in that they destroyed the rabbits.
To this plenitude of food is no doubt attribu-
table the increased fruitfulness of the dogs.
In this direction they seem to be emulating the
animal they prey on when they are at a loss to
procure mutton; but not a few ascribe the big
litters to the infusion of the new blood.
As you always want to be on the alert with
the rabbits, so you require to pursue a
vigorous policy in coping with the dogs.
“Anticipate their coming” is the watchword
of Mr. Andrew Smith, of Mutooroo. When
they come in first from the open country the
canines will take a bait more readily than
will a dog that has tasted mutton. Mr.
Smith never goes out without his bag of
f>oiaoned baits, generally little bits of boiled
iver which have been allowed to get hard,
with a dainty morsel of strychnine secreted
inside. In this state the baits are not liable to
the ravages of the ant, and they will keep for
a long while. In time they become like
leather, and the dog who is partial to a chew
has not far to go, on Mutooroo at any rate, to
gratify his taste. Dingoes or half-breeds that
have frequented a run for any length of time
become marvellously cunning. “Once bitten
twice shy,” and if they manage to extricate
themselves from a trap by leaving a toe or two,
a paw, or even part of a leg behind as a
souvenir for the catcher they take good
care to keep free of the iron clasps in the
future. No matter how delicately it is
concealed, or how deliciously scented, the
’cute customers will scratch and scrape
round the trap but never walk into it.
Dogs often get out of the double-spring gins,
but Mr. Fergusson told mo of a clever dodge
which they had found very effective at Moo-
looloo in making doubly certain of the animal.
They wrap a piece of greasy poisoned rag
round one of the jaws, and as the brutes, when
captured, bite at the imprisoned leg they get
a dose which “doubles them up for ever.”
Even if they extricate themselves their life is
not worth a very long purchase. As an evi-
dence of how wildly savage and infuriated
these wretches become in their attempts to
secure their freedom, Mr. Fergusson has in
his possession the iron plate of a trap bitten
right through by a dog. The following table,
supplied by Mr. Peter Waite, gives the
number of dog scalps from the under-
mentioned stations destroyed during the
years 1892 to 1896, both inclusive: —
The greater part of Mutooroo is enclosed
with vermin-proof fencing, and as soon as the
ring is completed the owners intend to no
longer demoralize their men by bribes to do
what they are specially engaged for, viz., to
destroy dogs and rabbits and look after the
sheep in the paddocks they are put in charge of.
This is the common-sense way of looking at
the question, but it is as difficult to alter old
customs, no matter how wrong they may be.
as it is to inducea Mohammedan to change his
religion. Mr. Kent says he believes if the
bonus was everywhere reduced to os.—that is
to say, the payment of the Government fee
without the lessee supplementing it; of course
the lessee actually pays the ss. as he is rated at
6d. a mile to provide the funds—it would not
be possible to keep sheep at all. And then
a gentleman who has given the question infinite
study observes—“ If you are going to raise the
premium to £1 you will soon have any
amount of dogs, and if you live long enough
you will have all dogs and no sheep.” The
Acting Manager at Outalpa is pessimistic
to the extent that he regards the
dogs and rabbits in the same light, and
thinks they will never be exterminated.
“ To stop dogs you will have to erect a fence
not less than 4 ft. G in. high,” remarked Mr.
Kent. “I have seen dogs which have been
chased jump the boundary fence comfortably.”
The experience of those who have vermin-
fenced, however, js that the canines will not
jump. An occasional one which is educated
might. They will, however, run along the
wire-netting for miles, and perhaps make an
effort to scramble over at the corners. Mr.
Paterson, who is a great believer in vermin-
fencing such as is being carried out at
Mutooroo and elsewhere, says that thirty and
forty dogs a month were in the habit of enter-
ing Mildura from the Wimmera, but that after
the settlement was fenced only an odd dog
was captured every other month or two. At
Oulnina ninety-six dogs were caught in 1896,
and the monetary outlay in wages and bonuses
amounted to £IBB 10s. In addition the ra-
tions, poison, traps, horses, and wear and tear
have to be taken into consideration, and the
sum would run up to quite £2OO. In answer
to questions Mr. Treloar said he was positive
in his own mind that every one of the ninety-
six dogs was caught on Oulnina. Sixty of them
were skinned on the run, while some of thb
puppies were never skinned. Mr. Terry, along-
side, was paying a £1 a scalp, but only two
dogs had been caught there during the present
year. That proves beyond a doubt that no fraud
is practised here. Oulninais practically vermin-
fenced, and Mr. Treloar thinks to discontinue
the bonus would be to cause a check in the
men’s ardour. Mr. R. J. Young, of Netley,
agrees with Mr. Peter Waite’s plan where a
large station is concerned, but in a small
glace where you have your eyes on the men he
elieves in paying a bonus. Yet he deprecates
establishing a class of professional dog-
catchers. Vermin-fencing at Netley was
completed nearly twelve months ago, and since
then fourteen dogs have been caught. Efforts
have not been relaxed in the slightest. Mr.
Young says that four years before they fenced
they caught 200 dogs on the run. At the time
of our visit Mr. Young knew of the presence


of only two dogs on Netley. As an evidence
of the cunning of the wild dogs Mr. Young
told us that they had set twenty traps within
a distance of half a mile on a dog’s pad, but
that the animal quietly zigzagged round them.
This one was finally run down after evading
the traps for twelve months. Mr. W. Wade,
who has been paying a bonus of £3, has had a
great deal of trouble with the dogs at Panara-
mateo In 1800 200 dogs were destroyed. He
thought they were all caught on his pro-
perty. although he admitted that one by
chance might have been got elsewhere.
A couple of years after Mr. Wade went to
Panaramatee he had 4,000 lambing ewes, and
when the flock was mustered three months
afterwards there were 2,900 ewes and only 500
lambs. This was in a good season, and the
heavy loss was duo entirely to dogs, which
came in off the unstocked country. Mr. Wade
says that most of the dogs killed in the dis-
trict during the last ten years have come from
the Government lands. With the exception
of one piece on the south side Panaramatee is
vermin-fenced, and the owner reckons ho has
now just about done with the dogs. After the
barrier was erected between Garronbane at
right angles to the railway fence Mr. Terry’s
overseer caught eighty dogs in four months.
Mr. Wade was compelled to fence, and he is
more than satisfied with the result. He
is a believer in abolishing the scalp-
money after fencing. At Teetulpa 550 scalps
have been paid for in five years, and Mr.
Farrant, the Manager, says the destruction of
those dogs would average £1 a head. They are
not troubled so much now on account of the
vermin fence on the west side. The run is
open on the east and north sides, and Mr. Far-
rantsays—“Wo are just waiting to see what the
Government will do before we finish fencing.”
Mr. Farrant approves of a small bonus being
paid to encourage men to destroy the dogs.
“Where one man will kill them for a wage
ten won’t,” he remarked. “They say we are
getting only 15s. a week, and let them pay us
something to get them. When there is a ring
fence I admit it is a man’s duty to look after
that fence and kill the vermin.” At Melton
the dogs are a terrible nuisance. Mr. Charlie
Downer says—“ They breed on the Minburra
Ranges, and swoop down on us. We have
been killing on an average forty dogs every
three months. We pay a man wages and 15a.
a scalp. About five weeks ago we got seven
dogs in one paddock,” With a satisfactory
lease the owner of Melton would be prepared
to vermin fence. Mr. J. Murray, of Koona-
more, is one of those who does not believe in
giving bribes to men. He says—“lf a man
doesn’t kill the dogs in his paddocks then put
somebody else in his place.” Mr. Bayes, of
Nillinghoo, was pleased to report that the
dogs had not been bad in his country during
the present season, seven only having been
caught since January. Curnamona, Erudina,
and Frome Downs caught 1,893 dogs between
them in the fifteen months before the
erection of the vermin fence, and the three
runs paid equally for the scalps, the bonus
starting at £l, and when it was discontinued
the rate was 7s. fid. Frome Downs has paid
for 2,546 dogs during the three years up to
October, 1890. One quarter of the station
is now vermin fenced,—there are blocks to
the east and west which are not enclosed—
while there is a ring fence round Cur*
namona and Erudina. Mr. Began, the
Manager of Curnamona, remarked that most
of the 1,893 dogs ware caught on the east side.
“They came from the open country. Inside
we now pay £1 for the dogs. It profits us to
give £1 or even £2 where it would not pay
others outside to give 7s. Gd. It pays to get
professional men to do the work. As an evi-
donee of the efficacy of the fence, two profes-
sional men found in tucker and receiving £2 a
scalp were not able to make a living at the
business.”
At Wirrealpa only ten miles on the Erudina
boundary is vermin fenced. In 189 G 162 dogs
were killed here, and in 1897, up to the time
of our visit, 72. Only the ss. bonus is given.
One man and a boy receiving wages and the
bonus are employed in catching dogs, while
all the boundary-riders are supplied with
traps and poison. Mr. Phillips said—“l
have never seen dogs so bad round the
head station here and in the vicinity as
they have been lately. They have been
coming in from all sides during the last three
months. The boundary of the run is on the
range, and it would be impossible to fence it
owing to the creeks and ravines. Supposing
wo did fence a comparatively small fall of
rain would tumble it all about. It is a
difficult thing to enclose our boundary with
an ordinary post an 1 wire fence. The dogs
have been so thick on the sandhill country
to the east that it has been very little trouble
for a man to go out there and make a living.”
We met the Manager of Angorigina in
Blinman. He said the dogs were very bad,
and that it would l>eacase of shepherding sheep
if they put any on. There is no stock on the
place at the present time. They had been
giving 7s. Cd. a scalp, and had killed forty
since Christmas. There was no one on the
station, but men with nothing else to do went
out to destroy the vermin. At Moolooloo
the dogs are very prevalent, especially in the
hilly country. Three vears previous to 1897
they got 500, and this year so far Mr.
Eergusson has received eighty-five scalps.
“ I can safely say that two years ago
theykilled over 7,ooosheep,”said the Manager,
Mr. Ferguson informed us that they had dis-
covered five nests of puppies within a radius
of three to five miles of the homestead. An old
halfbred slut, who had lost two toes in a trap,
had had her litters found for throe successive
years. One season she had eight pups. A
trapper, who had lost as many as ten dogs out
of his traps, had not missed one since using
the poisoned greasy rag rounc the jaws of the
gin. Mr. Ferguson considers it would be
a waste of money to vermin fence Moolooloo,
Mr. C. H. Say, of Beltana, has the same tale
to tell. “Never saw the dogs so bad before;
they are coming in from all sides, but more
particularly from Lake Torrens. This is a
good deal owing to the country being
abandoned. The country on the top end of
Ediacara is thrown up too, and the place is just
a breeding ground for dogs. We are kept
constantly going, and, as far as I can see, the
dogs are increasing instead of decreasing, J
guarantee to keep our own dogs down, but wa


only clear the runs when the vermin come in
of! the unoccupied territory.” Beltana adapts
itself for fencing, and M!r. Say approves of
localizing the vermin in this way to success-
fully cope with it. Thirteen dogs had
been caught on Beltana since January 31.
The country is simply smothered with poison,
every man being supposed to carry a poison
pouch. Mr. Say considers you cannot set too
many traps, and, in his opinion, it should be
every man’s duty to destroy the canines. At
Leigh’s Creek about fifty dogs had been killed
within the last three months. Mr. K. Mathe-
aon said there had always been an odd dog or
two on the run previously, but that the pest
had only lately come upon them to any extent.
They are paying 10a. for the scalp at Leigh’s
Creek. Mr. Matheson stated —“I hardly
believe in paying scalp-money. A man should
do his duty and poison the vermin, and try
to keep them down as much as possible.
The scalp-money is only a temptation to men.”
As to fencing, the rough country on the west
side would make it very costly. It might be
done, however, by making a big district. The
dogs which trouble Mr. Mathesou come from
Lake Torrens and Lake Frome. Mr. Mathe-
son’s brother, who isatNilpena, informed me
that the dogs had been very troublesome
there, but that they had captured most of
them. Twenty-six had been destroyed since
Christmas.


No. V.—OLD AND NEW METHODS.
Having spent a pleasant night at Outalpa
we left next morning for Olary Well, an out-
station of Outalpa, situated to the south-east.
The country en route was bare, and' the dust
was exceedingly unpleasant. At the first dam
we found the sheep watering. Several were
bogged hard and fast. Three or four had
perished, and their eyes and brains were
missing. Perhaps the carrion crow, “ the grim
sexton of the overway,” had cruelly tormented
the dying creatures. We extricated the jum-
buoks that were still living < and set them on
their legs, but they were painfully weak. The
sheep around the water were generally strong,
and Mr. Kent explained that those which
had got bogged were stray ones. With the
gradual lowering of the water, owing to evapo-
ration and the flocks drinking, the sides of the
dams as the bottom of the excavation is ap-
proached grow boggy, and there is the danger
of even the strongest sheep losing its life in
the mud. With an occasional mulga, sandal-
wood, or acacia to relieve the eye we passed on
through the thirsty country, and eventually
arrived at the little town of Olary. The prin-
cipal feature of this north-eastern township
is the prevalence of children. More than
fifty attend the local school. If it does not
carry sheep the country appears at least to
carry children to the acre. Crossing the rail-
way line wo met lambing ewes nearly five
miles from water, and with hardly any
vegetation. The lambs wtre weary and
footsore. Here and there one, its sorrows
ended, lay stretched out stiff and stark. One
little thing, baa-ing pleadingly as if it realized
that the eaglehawk soaring high in the
heavens had its keen eyes upon it, followed us
for a couple of hundred yards. The bush
around Olary Well is eaten out for miles, and
the ewes had nothing to sustain their young.
Under such conditions their milk gives out in
a week, and then the offspring perish.
Maiden ewes have that instinctive care for
the young so deep-rooted in the animal king-
dom killed in them, and they walk
away without licking the lambs. The
older ewes will shepherd their lambs,
and even coax them on to travel until they
have to leave them in despair. One lamb,
struggling in the throes of death, we put out
of its misery. The girl who becomes petulant
and irritable when a wet day prevents her
displaying her new dress, or the housewife
who rails at the heavens when they discharge
their showers, should see such sights as these
to realize what rain means to the country.
There is a good deal of acacia scrub in the
neighbourhood of this out-station, and it was
Mr. Kent’s intention to engage a couple of
men to cut it.
We caught a goods train at Olary, and
jolted along to Cockburn. Wo saw the
waving bush stretching away for miles on the
open territory, which was unstocked owing to
absence of water, and incidentally we thought
of the wrong impression one gets of the
country from the window of a railway
carriage.
Here it may not be inappropriate to say
that the wish that members of Parliament
should visit the country and see it for
themselves everywhere prevailed. “If they'
would only come up we would be only
too ready to show them round,” said
several of the managers. “It is only by
personal inspection that legislators can under*
stand the nature of the country, what a
drought means, and what improvements are
necessary to properly work the runs; and also
the need of concessions and the granting
of liberal terms to enable such improve*
ments to be undertaken and carried out.”
In almost every instance the Managers
wished to emphasize this. In a lecture he
delivered on “ Our Pastoral Interest” in 1894
Mr. A. G. Downer put the position fairly and
succinctly when he said—
“ The desire of everybody who wishes justice
done would be that such of you as have a voice
in our country’s laws or who take upon them-
selves to express opinions should personally
see our country; should see it both in its
best and worst seasons, either of which, let me
say, might be misleading. In its worst seasons
you might suppose that by no possibility
could stock live on such country. In its best
seasons you might have an equally wrong
impression the other way. Not that at its
best it is very attractive-looking, except in a few
low-lying spots. But in some favoured spots,
particularly in those spots where the bush
which is the true standby for our stock has
been destroyed, the herbage in the best
seasons grows luxuriantly; and it is only the
experienced that know that what looks inviting
will wither away under a week or two of our
burning heat, and that when the food is most
wanted not a vestige of it will be left.”
Impressed with the fact that to those most
prejudiced against the pastoralists the sight of
the country even in the best seasons had been
little less than revelation, the managers are
only re-echoing the opinion of the lessees
when they say that those who legislate for
them cannot see too much of the country.
“If I were a member of Parliament,” said
one man, “I should after my years of ex-
perience reckon myself competent to speak
on pastoral matters, but if a question such as
the South-Eastern drainage works arose I
should say that I was not Qualified to give an
opinion alongside men wno had as much
experience on the subject as I, for instance,
had in matters affecting the pastoral interest,
and should therefore be more or less guided by
them.”
“We don’t want the members to see the
country from the window of a railway
carriage,” chimed in the Managers in chorus;
and any one who has travelled along the
railway line and also gone into the heart of the
country can readily understand the necessity
for and the significance of such a qualification.
But the Parliamentarians would not need to
hump their blueys “out back” unless,
of course, they wished to realize the
novelty and fascination pf such an


£,
s.
d
Dams, 106,593 cubic yards, with drains
4,394
9
8
Tanks, troughs, and water - raising
appliances
643
4
11
Wire fencing
1,091
16
5
Netting fencing
1,045
10
11
Drafting yards
63
7
6
Hut
74
4
6
Total
7,217
13
11
experience—as the various stations would
extend to them that hospitality for which
they are proverbial, pass them on from stage
to stage, and let them absorb facts and figures
from their inexhaustible supply of information
qoncerning the all-important industry on
which they are engaged.
The rainfall at Cockburn for 1896 was 4*065
in., and for 1897 up to the time of our visit
3*045 in. had been recorded. Of this 2*555 in.
fell in January. It was dry, bleak, and periah-
ingly cold when under the care of Mr.
Andrew Smith, the Manager of Mutooroo, we
left this town at daybreak for Ophara, Mr.
Peter Waite’s experimental blouk of eighty-
four square miles, which is situated in New
South Wales, close to Cockburn, and adjoin-
ing the province boundary. This school,
from which Mr. Waite sends instructions to
the other stations in which he is interested,
is a wonderful object lesson so far as
extensive water conservation and subdivision
are concerned. A paddock of 100 square miles,
with a ring fence and a well or permanent dam
in the centre of it, was, previous to 1888, con-
sidered by Ministers and members of Par-
liament to be fully improved. Indeed, the
popular notion was that it required no further
outlay. The average cost of improvements on
1888 country was £l7 per square mile, and the
fencing and water improvements above men-
tioned would cost about thac sum. Ophara, a
sketch of which is reproduced, has an area of
only 84 square miles, and it is divided into
sixteen paddocks—there are two fences to be
run up yet—every one of which is watered,
as will be seen on reference to the map.
Several additional dams are to be sunk after
lambing is over. This country is improved up
to the extent of £B3 18s. 6d. per mile, the
various items being as follows:
There is not a gallon of natural water on the
place, and at the time of our visit Ophara was
carrying 7,000 sheep, which, considering the
season, were in splendid condition. Even the
lambs appeared to be coming on nicely. The
bush throughout the various paddocks was
even and uniform and in a perfect state
of preservation. The seven paddocks on the
east side, which had had sheep in till the end of
May, were spelling at the time of our visit, and
the remaining paddocks now carrying the
stock were then resting. They had a spell of
three months for the lambing. Mr. Smith
explained that as soon as the feed grew the
sheep would be shifted back again. The first
principles which a sheepfarmer should
observe if he wants to be successful are
these: —
“Feed your sheep well; water them
well; let them travel as little as possible.”
What better proof of this can be given than
to instance the case of a pet sheep? It always
has plenty to eat and drink, and walks about
as little as possible. There is a pet sheep
Oulnina which shore 8| lb. as a hogget. As
Mr. Smith says, “Your sheep will not grow
wool if they have to travel. They will travel
if they are compelled to, but the evil effects
of this will be detectable in the fleece.”
Four paddocks are watered from the
permanent supply, and the idea is to hold
these in reserve. In the case of a drought,
and when the auxiliary dams give out, the
fences can be opened and the stock allowed to
come in to the permanent water. Mr. Peter
Waite’s lightening fence, the chief features of
which are ite comparative cheapness in erection
and generalutility, has been used for subdivision
purposes. The strainers are 60 yards apart,
while the distance between the posts is 60 ft.
Two droppers alternate with each post. The
posts are 4 ft. 4 in. long, with 1 ft. 6 in. in the
ground. The strainers are 1 ft. longer, the
extra length being in mother earth. The
bottom wire is in. from the ground, and the
spaces between the others are in., 6|in., and
9J in. The wire used is of a hard steel com-
position which does not stretch. The fence is
thus always taut but springy, and when any-
thing tries to get through it it gives in a body,
rebounds, and rattles for a considerable
distance. Many others have erected
fencing on similar lines, and Mr. Waite has
been much complimented on his invention.
The gates, made of the same wire as the
fence and pulled taut by a lever, are
40 ft. wide, and the sheep draw
quietly through this opening without any
crushing or squeezing; and the advantage of
this, especially in the case of lambing ewes, is
obvious, and cannot be overestimated. The
permanent water at Ophara would be the envy
of any pastoraliat. The dam is 120 yards x
80 yards x 21 ft.=35,389 cubic yards, and with
the embankment will hold 23 ft, of water.
At the time of our visit the depth of water
was 19 ft. The water is pumped from the dam
to a storing tank, whose capacity is 15,000
gallons, by means of a small windmill, which
draws 1,000 gallons an hour, or when necessary
by means of a horseworks which draws 3,000
gallons an hour. The water ia conveyed from
the storage tank to the trough through a 4-in.
pipe with a self-acting valve, and so works
automatically. With the filling of the tank
the windmill is thrown out of gear. The
trough ia 400 ft. long by 4 ft. wide, and can
water 800 sheep at one time. Owing to an
ingenious appliance it is impossible for the
animals to get into the trough or even dirty
the water. In undertaking and carrying out
these improvements Mr. Waite is looked up to
bv his fellow-pastoralists as a benefactor.
They all admit that he is on the right track,
but not a few ask the question, “ Will it pay?
Will such lavish expenditure on improvements
return interest on the money?”
I asked Mr. Waite if he thought his im-
proved methods would so increase the carrying
capacity of the run as to make the venture
remunerative. “Time alone will answer
this question,” he replied. But when
considering the matter one must not
forget that Mr. Peter Waite has
long been acquainted with the North, and is
recognised by authorities as the “best sheep
man for dry country in the colonies,” and
therefore proceeds with that caution and judg-


ment born of past experience. Naturally he
does not put his methods into practice from
pure philanthropy, but is actuated by more
than a hope of reward. Ophara is hold on
a twenty-eight years’ lease, with tenantright
in improvements. Mr. Smith is very
hopeful of the success of the now methods.
He says—
“ Under the old system of working the
country deteriorates continuously; ntfw it is
always in good heart, so you must get paid in
the long run.”
As we were discussing this very question
of subdivision at Erudina “The Squatter’s
Bream” lay upon the table; and, curiously
enough, it was open at the chapter in which
Jack Redgrave and his manager, Alex McNab,
are talking about the drought. The two were
longing for rain, and in answer to a question
by the hero regarding the appearance of the
sheep McNab answered —
“ They couldn’t possibly look better. There
is any quantity of feed and water at the back,
and I have not troubled the frontage much.”
Therein lies the secret of success, and this is
a method which our pastoralists will have to
put into practice to enable them to overcome
droughts. Mutooroo, for which the owners
received a forty-two years’ lease in considera-
tion of their improvements, has been ex-
tensively improved as the result of that
extension of lease. Up to the end of
1896 —and they have been added to since
—the improvements on this run were
100 dam5=830,999 cubic yards, 290 miles of
drains, 1,116 miles of fencing, 5,440 ft. of
troughing, 21 tanks, 5 outside huts, 19 sets of
horseworks, and 18 windmills, and 4 steam
pumps. The paddocks number 159.
After visiting the dam on the north-west
side of the Ophara Block—which, by-the-way,
was intended also to work the country on the
South Australian side, but which has been
reserved for commonage and let to small men
—we camped, lit a fire, boiled the billy, and
had breakfast. We drove right round the
entire block, passing through the scrubby
hills on the north-east side—there is not much
bush here, but it is good herbage country after
rain—and at dinner-time made the acquaint-
ance of the cook at the hut. All along the
route Mr. Smith distributed his little liver
strychnine baits in “ anticipation of dogs.”
We met one of the men distributing
phosphorized pollard around the rabbit-
warrens, and also laying the same poison along
a lightly ploughed furrow. The vermin
cannot complain of want of attention on
Ophara. The visit to this experimental
station made one of the most interesting days
of the three weeks’ tour. Looked at in
comparison with some of the other runs this
one was quite a revelation.
No. VI. —FROM STATION TO STATION.
The fact that there has been practically no
lambing in the North for two seasons reminds
me of a good story which smacks of freshness.
A Western Australian who had ventured into
pastoral pursuits without any experience was
soon brouarht face to face with the devasta-
tions of the drought. His Manager wrote
down from the station to say that things were
in a very bad way, that the lambing was
coming on shortly, and that he saw no
prospect of saving any of the offspring of the
weak sheep. But the squatter, seeing that
the drought must eventually breakup', and full
of ■ resource, conceived a marvellous plan to
overcome the difficulty. By return of mail he
wrote simply, yet imperatively, “Postpone
the lambing.” Truly a modern Joshua!
Would that our Managers had been able this
season to defy nature and put into execution
such a wondrous plan.
Arriving at Mannahill after midnight
we found Mr. A. Treloar ready to
hurry us off to Oulnina. Oulnina com-
prises 797 square miles, divided into
seventeen paddocks, exclusive of small
horse paddocks, Mr. Treloar would like to
see the run cut up into fourteen more divisions,
which would reduce the average area from
forty-six miles to twenty-five miles. A list of
the sheep shorn at Oulnina from 1870 to 1896
gives a capital idea of the fluctuating seasons
and the ravages of the over-recurring
droughts:—ln 1870 the number off the shears
was 18,848; 1880, 59,095, and nine years later
the total reached only 16,902. In 1890 as
many as 20,000 sheep were purchased, as much
as Os. being given for ewes for the purpose of
restocking. In 1805 18,000 lambs were
tailed and shorn, and the loss on
them to the next shearing was one-third.
Then in 1806 the lambing from 22,000 ewes
was only 8 per cent., and none of them were
fit to shear. About 2,500 of these lambs were
reared, but they are only “poddies.” Mr.
Treloar said he expected to shear 40,000 sheep
in August, but he safeguarded the estimate by
remarking that “if things remain as they are
now it will make a tremendous difference.”
On all sides the lambs were dying, only one
here and there living longer than a week or so.
In the event of no rain falling until shearing
the Manager said the sheep would die under
the operation, and when the wool was off their
backs there would bo bonfires all over the
place. It was just a question of the survival
of the fittest. If he felt sure it was
not going to rain within the next six
weeks Mr. Treloar said ho would cut the
throats of a lot of the jumbucks and get the
skins. But ho went on hoping, and the vain
came at last. “Sheep will be worth gold
shortly; I don’t know where we are going to
get them for restocking.” The loss up to the
time of my visit was not more than that of last
year, but Mr. Treloar said 8,000 or 0,000 would
not cover it.
One of the many arguments used in favour
of large pastoral holdings is that, whereas one
portion of the country might have a good or
comparatively good season, another at no


great distance might have missed the rain
altogether, and be in a bad state, and vice
vena. At Oulnina head station, which is
situated under a Bluff which seems to catch
the rain-clouds, 9'950 in. were registered in
1895, while the fall over the same period at
Maldorky, an out-station, situated 28
miles east, was only 7‘990 in. In 1896 the
figures were:—Oulnina, 6 - 265 in.; Maldorky.
4'350 in. Mr. Treloar posted me the returns
for 1897 up to July 1 as followsOulnina,
4 - 010 in.; Maldorky, 3'400 in.; while 0 - 250 in.
was recorded at the head station on July 1
there was nothing registered at the out-
station, At Oulnina the country is eaten out
round the permanent waters, and the virgin
bush, which is very good, is too far from the
water to be utilized. The sheep don’t
even go back when it rains, as there is
sweeter picking round their old haunts.
From the Bluff, which is quite a landmark, a
splendid view of the country is obtainable.
Owing to the water when it rains running
sharply off this immense upheaval the face has
all fretted away, and the rocks which cap it
are now overhanging. This makes the Bluff
difficult of access, but Mr. Paterson and
myself scaled it in half an hour, and surveyed
the far-stretching landscape. Near the house
we saw the paddock of 600 acres which is used
only at shearing time. Last August this was
eaten down till it was just like a dustbin.
Since then it had been given a thorough rest,
and at the time of our visit there was not a
better bit of saltbush in the north-east.
What finer proof than this could be offered
of the efficacy of spelling? The country
around one large dam was as bare as a
street pavement, and the light-brown circle
of eaten-out country stood out boldly in the
panoramic view. A sixteen-mile corner, cut
off by the railway, had carried 1,800 sheep
through the dry season. This bit of
country takes in a lot of rough hills, and is
not up to the average of the run, but it kept
the sheep in excellent condition owing to their
having feed and not being able to get far away
from water. Mr. Treloar had more sheep in
this paddock than he would like, but he was
forced to keep them there. We travelled
through the plain, eaten-out within a radius
of three miles of the water, across the old
Barrier track, and then on over the undulating
country into some low hills. Here the bush
was flourishing like a green bay tree, even the
elevations being smothered with it. We drove
through seven miles of this unused country.
Some of it was as much as thirteen miles
from water. With proper development and
usage this saltiferous vegetation could not
only be fed off but improved. On the following
day we visited Jumbuck Well, four miles west
of Oulnina. Here again the country is all
killed round the water and would take years
to recover, and at the time of our visit the
lambs were all dying. A windmill, which was
erected in 1888, and has only had £2 spent on
it in repairs, draws the water from the well,
which yields a good supply. The storage
tank has a capacity of 60,000 gallons, and the
troughs will at a pinch water up to 13,000
sheep. One of Sir W. W. Hughes’s first
shepherds was stationed here, and he be-
moaned the terrible season, apd talked to us
of the shepherding days—summer and winter
camps—a subject already dealt with. Mr.
Troloar has had a battle with the rabbits.
“They ate us out in 1886 and 1887,” he said,
“and then we had the drought on top of
that.” Oulnina is now practically vermin-
fenced, and the Manager has the great satis-
faction of dealing with his own rodents. He
supplies them with refreshment in the shape of
phosphorized pollard, strychnine sticks, and
poisoned water. Quite a delicious little menu!
Next day we made a start for Netley. Again
it was another chapter in the story of “eaten-
out” country. Where the stock did not get at
it, owing to the absence of water, the bush was
looking well. When we entered Netley we
came on a fine piece of saltbush country, to
which the sheep had found their way. This
only lasted a couple of miles, however, and we
soon learned that the sheep had travelled a
long distance to reach it. The paddymelons
cracked under our feet as we walked over the
rich flat to the homestead. Three-quarters of
an inch of rain fellat Netlev at the end of Febru-
ruary, but there wasnone in January, although
the creek came down a banker and covered the
flat. The rainfall here in 1896 was under 4 in.
The run comprises 150 miles, divided into ten
paddocks. One or two of these are very small,
but there are two large paddocks which Mr.
Young intends to subdivide. The great clump
of gums seen from the front of the houseimparts
picturesqueness to the homestead. From
“Gum Well,” hard by, 30,000 gallons of fresh
water can be pumped in a day. The storage
tank has a capacity of 97,000 gallons. A
little plot of lucerne which has been liberally
irrigated from this tank and some vegetables
were looking healthy and well. Mr. Young
has wire-fenced a good-sized block on the flat,
and, having erected fluming, piping, and a
galvanized-iron tank, intends to cultivate
lucerne more extensively. Of course this can
only be accomplished through the agency of a
liberal supply of water, and as an indication of
what would happen without irrigation it is
worthy of mention that when wheat was sown
for hay on two successive occasions none of it
came up.
They have had their fair share of the rabbits
at Netley. The summer before last 1J tons of
skins were sent away, while thousands of the
carcasses were not relieved of their skins.
Three thousand were poisoned in the fruit
garden in three nights. “ I have screwed the
necks of 1,500 before breakfast,” remarked the
Manager. Mr. Young thinks the rabbits will
never be exterminated. “ Some of them make
away into the rough hills, and you never get
at them. You might eradicate the pest
if you spent £1 an acre, but it is better to
stick to the £l.” Netley is now vermin-
fenced, but he is of opinion that it is unfair
that the fence should become the property of
the Government without any recompense.
He thinks there should be an extension of
lease for vermin-fencing. Mr. Young has a
grievance. In the event of an application for
the reduction of rent he is met with the final
dictum that the rent will not be reduced
below 5 per cent, on the value of the improve-
ments. Now at Netley the improvements are
unwieldy, and in some cases useless. Indeed,
worse than useless, because the lessee is re


sponsible for their deterioration. Before the
country was cut up as many as 150,000 sheep
were shorn at Netley, Now 12,000 pass
through the shod, and whereas a building
with twelve stands would be sufficient the old
woolshed has sixty stands. There is provision
for 100 men, and accommodation for only
twenty*tive is required. There are huts valued
at £SO or £6O, which Mr. Young says he
could put up for £lO if they were needed.
Then there is adam whichthe Manager charac-
terizes as a pothole, valued at £l5O. H
states he could excavate a dam three times
the size for the same money, A cumbersome
bachelors’ hall, where the jack ® roos were
lodged in “the good old days,’ is only a
shelter for travellers, who burn the floor and
break the windows, and yet the owner of
Netley has to pay on this “improvement!”
It means quite a heavy item to keep these
buildings in repair. The Government say —
“ The buildings are there, the State paid for
them, and we must have our 5 per cent.”
There was more justice in the demand of the
Merchant of Venice for the fulfilment of his
bond than there is in this action of the Go*
vernment, and the lessee of Netley is only one
of many treated similarly. Mr. Young says
the Government cut the country up, and they
should have reckoned with this. “ All those
improvements are worth to me is the extent
up to which I can use them with these 150
miles, and on that value only should interest
be paid.” Who can gainsay that argument?
A person might just as well let a farm of a
couple of hundred acres with a mansion built
thereon to a man and ask him to pay 5 per cent,
on the palatial hall, whereas with the interest
on the money he would pay for the “improve-
ment” the farmer could erect more than one
homestead that would answer his purpose.
Mr. Young considers the vermin represent
enough rent. He says—“ You cannot cope
with the vermin properly and pay the rent
too.” In 1896 3,000 sheep out of 15,000 were
lost at Netley, but the losses this season were
not known. .Six thousand ewes did not have
the rams on account of the drought. Fifteen
hundred ewes were stinted, but the lambs
were dying as fast as they were dropped.
Netley is no exception to the rule, having a
good big piece of “ eaten-out” country.
On the following day we were driven
to Panaramatee. We passed along the
Grampus watercourse, which forms a
rich alluvial fiat. The teamsters aggra-
vate Mr. Young by telling him that
fifteen years ago they were frightened to let
the bullocks loose here for fear that they
would get “blown” with the marshmallows,
clover, Scotch thistle, and other luxuriant
vegetation. It was from this flat that Mr.
Bartlett cut marshmallows 14 ft. high. He
took the wonderful growth to Adelaide,
jumped at conclusions, and raved at “them
there squatters.” That was seven years ago,
and since then the marshmallow has never
grown high enough to seed. The stalks of the
Scotch thistles, which carried 4,000 sheep
during the summer months, still remained.
It is these fertile fiats, with their wonderful
crops of natural herbage, which inspire men,
Who apparently look upon bad years and
attendant droughts as things of the past when
they are face to face with a bountiful season,
to raise the cry of “ Resume !” One Manager
told me he had had a chat with the late
Commissioner of Crown Lands on this very
point. This, in effect, is what passed between
the two.
Manager—ls it possible that this country
will be resumed for the purpose of closer
settlement?
The late Commissioner —lt is not only
possible but probable.
Manager—Can you point me to a single man
who has succeeded on a small holding in this
country?
The late Commissioner —No; I cannot. But
the Government cannot resist the pressure
which is being brought to bear, and if 1 don’t
comply with the request my successor will.
Itia this cry of “closer settlement” which in*
timidates the pastoralists. During the trip I
was shown a piece of poetry entitled “The
squatter’s elegy,” composed by an owner, who
has purchased his experience of our Northern
country at some cost, when agitation was rife.
So keenly did he feel the insecurity of his
position that he climbed the heights of Par-
nassus, and laid this mournful and despondent
tribute at the feet of the muses:—
With listless weary eye, and heavily laden heart,
The squatter stood at his woolshed door and
watched the cocky’s cart.
Stood in the same old shed where he pressed his
first wool bale.
And he tun’d his cracked and quav’rlng notes to the
following dismal wail: —
Work I work ! work ! ’midst struggling hopes and
fears;
And work! work! work] thro’many toilsome years.
And i>ow, with the run well stock’d, an’ fenced—no
longer dry,
Resume! resume! for selectors room! is the uni-
versal cry.
What waste of money and strength in fencing, in
scooping dams,
In killing rabbits and wild dogs off, in breeding
first-class rams,
In culling the fairest flocks that ever shearer shore,
If I’m stripped of a' ’ 7ben my head is grey and
must shoulder my a wag once more.
Oh for a tenure sure, for longer terms of lease.
Security based on honour and truth, some chance
of living in peace;
To know that the colony’s word is as good as the
colony’s bond,
That your lease contains no legal tlause by which
you may be wronged.
Wheat! wheat! wheat! still the cocky sings.
And wheat! wheat! wheat! no matter what price
it brings.
What odds if it grows at all an’ we turn the
squatters out,
So long as those bloated pastoral lords are sent to
the rightabout?
A few more years shall roll and the cocky’s turn
will come,
And they’ll clear him out as they’re clearing me and
resume for Chinaman John. •>
Then John on bunny will live, and bunny on John
will thrive,
For only these two in the blooming North will tb*
Government leave alive,


No. VII.—FROM NETLEY TO ERUDINA.
On the road to Panaramatee the country
assumes the shape of an amphitheatre. Here
the surroundinghills andthe gums on the banks
of a waterless creek wore the only relieving
features in a monotonous landscape. A horse
lay dead beside the track, while some weak
sheep very much tucked up were looking in
despair for something to eat. A few acacias
and sandalwoods were dotted about, but all that
remained of the bush were black sticks. It
was cold and bleak when we arrived at the
homestead. Mrs. Wade remarked that she
had never hated the back blocks until this
year. The only green thing visible was the
buckboard, which was painted that colour the
day before our arrival. Nearly all the dams
were dry, so Mr. Wade was falling back on
the permanent water. Some of the sheep had
four miles to walk, and not a bit to eat on
the way. It is hardly necessary to say
that the lambing ewes could not stand this.
On the question of rent, Mr. Wade said,
“What we want is a uniform charge in the
same district. The Government has reduced
my neighbour’s rent, and it won’t give me
any concessions.” This calls to my mind a
deputation that waited on the Commissioner
of Crown Lands from this district asking for
a reduction. Those who waited on the Go-
vernment had paid their rent up to the end of
the year, so the Minister was able to inform
them that they were the best tenants the
Government had. The request, it is almost
needless to say, was refused. These gentle-
men are now asking themselves whether
honesty is really the best policy. The Govern-
ment apparently look upon the rent as the
Alpha and the Omega of the pastoral industry.
One man who applied for a reduction was told
that he had not enough sheep on his place.
Look what such-and-such a station is carrying,
said the Surveyor-General. But as the lessee
had nearly eaten out his country he was at a
loss to know what the extra sheep he was
recommended to pile on his run were going to
live on.
We left next day for Teetulpa, halting en
route at Yunta, where the scarcity of water
was felt very keenly. The rainfall at Teetulpa
in IB9G was about 4 in. The run consists of
204 miles of country, divided into nine
paddocks. Last year 14,500 sheep were
shorn, but Mr. Farrant told us that if they
were mustered now there would only be about
10,000. There were some 5,000 lambing ewes.
“If rain holds off I won’t get any lambs,
and at the very best there will only be a
20 per cent, result,” observed the Manager.
Mr. Farrant is a believer in spelling his
land, and he favours tho sinking of dams
in the back of the paddocks so that the
country can be utilized. “But,” says he,
“the rent is so terribly high that you have
to stock the country heavily to enable you to
pay it. If we had a fair rent we might
improve the place.” There is a fifty-mile
block adjoining Teetulpa on the west side.
The sheep hero were in a bad way. They
had been on the dams, but these drying up
the owner was forced to put them back on a
salt well, with the result that they were
dying. We left Teetulpa after dinner, and
travelled over level country, from which all
the saltbush had disappeared. When wo
got some distance from the water the roots
of the speargrass were plainly discernible.
In a good season this is said to be a really
first-class piece of spear-grass country. On
entering Melton the appearance of the
“ natural haystack” was far from reassuring.
When, however, we had advanced a mile or
so the bush which had been spelling was
shooting up, and young plants were to be seen.
The country was looking well on the north-
west end of the paddock. The feed dam
was dry, and consequently no sheep were
in this paddock, but directly rain came it was
Mr. Downer’s intention to shift some here
off the permanent > water. We had been
travelling in a drizzling rain for some time,
and quite relished the idea of getting wet.
From Battery Hill, where the coach used to
halt, a good view is procurable of Waukaringa.
At this stage the passengers were accustomed
to have a refresher, and the pile of dead
marines eloquently testifies to the fact. If
one did not know one would imagine that a
Parliamentary party had journeyed that way
some years ago. The Waukaringa Paddock,
which was completely eaten out except for
sticks, was given a rest for three months,
recovered, and is now looking well.
The rainfall for Waukaringa for 1895 was
G*4G5 in., and for 189 G 3*985 in. Waukaringa,
once a thriving mining centre, is now dead.
Most of the tenements are deserted, and the
Hospital is fast going to rack and ruin. Even
a goat standing under the verandah of an un-
occupied butcher’s shop looked miserable, and
seemed to be comparing the past activity and
brisknessof the town with its present moribund
state. It was not long before we made
Melton, and were ensconced at “Government
House.” This run comprises 440 miles
divided into thirty-eight paddocks, not count-
ing the horse paddocks. Mr. Charlie Downer
says he would like seventeen more paddocks.
That would moan the sinking of fifteen more
dams, besides little feed dams. Then he says
the sheep could be shifted so as to work the
country properly. Improved as it is at
present, the Manager states that it is fully
stocked. In 1895 00,103 sheep were shorn,
and in 1890 49,040 passed through the shed.
Tho losses since last season amounted to 5,000,
and if it continued dry Mr. Downer estimated
they would be 10,000 short in August.
It was two .and a half years since they had
had a general rain. About 100 miles of the
Melton territory is not used, owing to the
drought and want of development. If tho
Government would only give the lessee the
encouragement money would be spent here
and elsewhere on improvements, and surely
this is tho true solution of tho unemployed
difficulty. As an instance of what expendi-
ture by a pastoralist means, it may be
mentioned that some farmers took tho con-
tract for erecting tho vermin fence between
Mutooroo and Oulnina, and with tho money


they were able to put in their crops, keep
themselves and their families, and buy food
for their horses. The sooner the Government
recognise that the pastoralist must spend to
live and spend again to make a profit, and
help and encourage him in every way to make
that expenditure, the better it will be for
every one, and for no one more
than the working classes. The bush has
been severely punished round the per-
manent waters at Melton, and re-
quires a rest. There is a splendid well
near the homestead, and besides watering the
sheep here the supply has been piped three
miles out. The idea is to take the service on
another three miles. This well had carried
12,000 for the last eight months, and at the
time of our visit 4,000 more had been piled on;
3,500 were watering at the end of the nipe-
track. The lightening fence has been adopted
at Melton—four light droppers were being used
—and were found to work admirably. We were
detained a day at Melton on account of the
rain, o'6lo in. falling from Tuesday night till
Friday, but very little water ran.
The ground was quite slushy when we left
for Koonamore. This station runs into 840
miles, divided into twenty-six paddocks, all
having water improvements. Since 1889 £B,OOO
has been spent on the property, and during
that time there has only "been one general rain
to fill all the dams and allow the place to be
worked properly. One has been filled here
and there, off and on. The owners pay 30s. a
mile for Koonamore proper, and 255. for the
remainder of the run, and, as Mr. J. Murray
says, “if there is any difference they are both
alike.”
I had along conversation with the Manager
of Koonamore, and his remarks, which are
here chronicled, will be found interesting. He
said—“lf the Government will give long leases
at a fair rental they may get people to live on
the country. The drought means that owners
will have to restock after this year, and many
won’t do it. Unless wo get rain to put water
in the dams there must be a tremendous loss.
The bush and everything else have gone,
and there is no water, and that means
death at once. This is one of the
greatest countries possible to lead you on. I
got up to a thousand bales of wool at one
time, and I have been gradually dwindling
down ever since. The year before last there
were 17,000 lambs, last year 5,000, and this
year none. It would bo a wise man who
would tell you what you would shear this
year. Last season 50,000 passed through the
shed. \Ve lost 6,000 sheep during the few
months before shearing, and hundreds of
sheep came into the shed that never gotback
into the paddocks. In 1889 we had 15 in. of
rain, and we had the sheep on top of one an-
other, and then we could not find them for feed.
You cannot stock too heavily in a good season
nor too lightly in a bad season; the thing is to
strike the happy medium. Rain falling in
June and July does not do much good owing
to the cold weather. If we had 3 in. in March
and April and 3 in. in August and September
one would be able to live. The annoying part
of it is that you get your sheep classed and in
order, thinking you are going to have a good
rain, and you are met with a bad season. The
result is that one has to ram the sheep here,
there, and everywhere, and at the present
time mine are so jumbled up that any one
coming here and not knowing the circum-
stances of the case would say I knew nothing
about sheep. There is no doubt we are paying
too much rent, and again a man is not going
to spend money if he doesn’t enjoy security of
tenure. A lessee wants a forty-two years’
ease of this country and the certain know-
edge that he won’t be sent adrift before that
s up. Even if the Government got no rent at
all, look at the revenue to the country if the
pastoral industry was properly revived. I
think no white man has seen the country,
taking it as a whole, in the state it is to-day.
As to the rabbits—well, if we could get at
what are left now we could so check
the pest that it would not trouble us for
two or three years, but with chaff at £lO a ton
we would soon ruin the owners. It simply
amounts to this. If the lessees have got to
cope with the dogs and rabbits and pay
the present rent then the country will
have to be thrown up. Yes,
thousands of acres of country have
been cut up which were never intended for
anything else than a sheepwalk. When 1
came into this country they used to shear
200,000 sheep at Paratoo. How many do they
shear to-day?” Mr. Murray has tried to grow
a crop of hay for the last five years, and he
has never got a bucketful yet.
We started next morning for Nillinghoo.
Passing through the hilly country Mount
Victor stood out prominently on our right,
while away in the opposite direction was the
blue line of the Wirrapa and Glen Warwick
Ranges. We passed a good number of dead
sheep, and noticeable features of the country
were the mistletoes and parasites on the san-
dalwood and mulga. This alien life is fast
killing the trees, and the Managers, recog-
nising this, always instruct the men engaged
on scrub-pulling to break off the mistletoes.
Nillinghoo comprises 196 miles divided into
eight paddocks. Some 22,000 sheep were
shorn last year, and Mr. Bayes estimated that
they had lost about 6,000 to date, but as they
had never been mustered he could not say
positively. He put seventy rams in with the
station ewes and only three were known to be
alive. All the dams were dry, and the bulk of
the sheep were watering at the permanent
water. During our two hours’ stay the sheep
came in for the first time since the rain to
water. They ran hopefully to the dam, only to
find it dry, and then betook themselves more
slowly to the troughs at the well. We learned
that 0 770 in. had fallen at Nillinghoo, but
previous to that rain all that had been re-
corded over a period of two years was in.
Good country for wheat-growing! Mr. Bayes
is a great believer in the divining-rod, and he
having armed us each with a green fork of a
tree we walked about trying to find water. If
a stranger not knowing the circumstances had
seen those four figures holding a branch of a
fork iu each hand and watching intently
to see if the apex would develop a
downward tendency he would have
thought ’ them fit subjects for Parkside.
The country round the permanent water at
Nillinghoo has had a bad doing, and it was


some time before we got on to good bush.
There were a few olaypans about the place,
and the sheep having found these were close
to good feed. At Tom’s Dam, where the rain-
gauge indicated that 0'550 in. had fallen, we
saw a grotesque figure. In front of the hut
was the stuffed image of a man surmounted
by a sheep’s head, in the mouth of which had
been placed a clay pipe. On a placard
fastened to the breast of the effigy was written
“Jimmy the rambler, the Nillinghoo scrub-
cutter. ” Dead sheep were lying all along the
track. Entering Curnamona we were in a
waving field of saltbush. This was water-
course country, and so the fine fresh growth was
easily explained. The supports of the fence
here are of mulga, two stakes alternating with
each post, and as an evidence of the dura-
bility of this wood it may be mentioned that
we raised one of the stakes out of the ground
and found it as hard where it had been buried
in the earth as it was when it was erected
twenty-seven years ago. We passed some
Deautitul bush, but it was mostly a consider-
able distance from water.
Curnamona has an area of 530 miles, and
there are twenty sheep paddocks. There were
32,000 sheep shorn last year, and the losses to
date amounted to about 20 per cent. There
were 6,000 lambing ewes, and Mr. Regan did
not expect any result. That, of course, is irre-
spective of the 20 per cent. loss. Mr. Regan
deprecates eating out the country. Ho is an
advocate of spelling. He said—“ I believe in
shepherding the bush like a mother nurtures her
child. I could have given the owners bigger re-
turns if I had eaten out and killed the country.
We could make better use of the country if it
was cut up more and additional waters put on
it. But it is two or three years and some-
times more before you get water in a dam. I
should be quite satisfied if I bad paddocks of
sixteen miles. But the owners will have to
get a better lease, lower rent, and security of
tenure before they will be encouraged to
undertake those improvements.”
The average rainfall at Curnamona since 1881
is 7J in. In 1888 the figures were 2’310 in.; 1889,
12-800 in.; 1896, 4’000; 1897, up to June 20,
2*olo in. The bush has been ton good at
Curnamona to allow of the drought playing
much havoc with the rabbits. Mr. Regan has
been laying phosphorized pollard, however,
and a great number of the rodents have been
destroyed. “ This is a wonderful country to
stand the drought,” remarked the Manager of
Curnamona, “ but once kill the bush and the
country is finished. And if lessees have to
pay a rent which necessitates their killing the
country it will eventually be no good to any
one.” The depths of some of the wells
at Curnamona will be interesting as show-
ing what water improvements mean in
this dry territory—Mulga Well, 371 ft.;
Round Hill Well, 336 ft.; and the Station
Well, 310 ft. A heavy item at Curna-
mona during the drought was horsefeed, £l4
a ton short weight having been paid for chaff.
This of course includes carriage.
Most of the stations have had the experience
of “ seeing” small men looking for commonage
through the run, and some of the Managers
know all too well the truth of the sentiments
expressed in “Saltbush Bill.”
Now this is the law of the overland that all In the
west obey—
A man must cover with travelling sheep a six-
mile stage a day.
But this is the law which the drovers make right
easily understood,
They travel this stage where the grass is bad, but
they camp where the grass is good.
For this is the law of the great stock routes, *tis
written in white-and-black—
The man that goes with a travelling mob must keep
to a half-mile track.
And the drovers keep to a half-mile track on the
runs where the grass is dead,
But they spread their sheep on a well-grassed run
till they go with a two-mile spread.
One man left Quorn for the other side of
Frome Downs with 5,000 sheep, and when he
reached Curnamona he had 1,600 left. It
took several weeks to see him across this
station. The poor fellow was frightened to
let his horses lie down, for fear they would not
get up again. We pushed along to Erudina on
Monday morning. On the one side the country
stretched far away to the horizon without a
break there was here and there just a
faint suggestion of the “phantom lakes”
formed by the mocking mirage; right
ahead in the distance loomed Tooth’s Nob,
and the almost transparently blue hills
relieved the landscape to the westward. In
the lowlying places where water had settled
little clumps of scrub were to be seen. An
occasional sickly pale buck bluebush towered
over the other saltiferous vegetation, and,
en passant, it may be mentioned that the
stock will often starve before they will eat this
coarser growth. We crossed the Siccus
“River” without any difficulty, and before
long had entered Erudina. The country for
the next couple of miles was as bare as a
billiard table. The homestead of Erudina,
reared high up on piles, is situated on the
edge of the Pasmore, which in certain seasons
floods its flats for miles. Wonderful vegeta-
tion springs up as the result of this, and the
country in the vicinity then presents the
appearance of the Roedbeds. Quite a forest of
large gums as well as numerous river black-
woods grow on this rich alluvial flat. Such
wonderful country is it in a good season that
it has been called the “ garden of the
North-East.” Imagine marsh-mellows 10 ft.
high, with stalks as thick as your wrist,
canary grass, milk thistle, geranium, spinach,
or warrigal cabbage, native carrots, and native
clover, all growing so luxuriantly that one
would imagine one could see them springing,
and you will have some idea of this flat in a
bountiful year. After a flood the clover has
been measured running up a bush for a dis-
tance of 6 ft., and, in a good season, it is a
common thing to find it 2 ft. 6 in. high. In
1888, after the break-up of the drought, the
floodwater was thirteen miles wide. As an
idea of the herbage which has covered this
alluvial territory, it may be stated that Mr.
W. H. James sent away 65,000 fat sheep from
1889 to 1896. He has fattened 14,000 sheep on
3,000 acres in seven months. He held the
sheep fat, too, for nine months, and got the
healthy price of 17s. 6d. for them. When we
saw it the place would not carry a sheep, while
a good deal of the bush country had had a
rough time.


One might be inclined to say that Mr. James
has overstocked, but, when considering the
question of overstocking, one must not forget
the rabbits.
Mr. James said to me—“l never had to
artificially feed horses or bullocks till the rab-
bits came, and now I have to feed the bullocks
which draw water at the well. Generally-
speaking, in fair seasons the feed kept green
in the swamps up till the end of December,
but owing to the immense influx of rabbits
which came in in the first week in November,
1892, as the result of the feed growing dry on
the outside country, everything was killed. In
a fortnight they had bitten off the herbage at
the bottom and laid it on the ground dry.
That did me out of 4,000 fats, which otherwise
I could have held fat for months. Then I had
to alter my plans and buy sheep, and turn
them over as quickly as possible. I reckon
my carrying capacity has been reduced by
10,000 owing to the pest. Now I have fenced
the run, and I can do well if I get a good
tenuie. If I hadn’t improved I should have
come to grief, but by improving I shall pull
myself through. What we want are reduc-
tion of rents and security of tenure, with exten-
sion of lease for those who vermin-fence. ”
With reference to the rabbits reducing the
carrying capacity of the country, Mr. Treloar
affirms that they have done so quite 50 per
cent. He adds —“One may easily seem to
exaggerate on this point, but it is only neces-
sary to travel over the country to see that what
I say is true, for the rabbits have killed two-
thirds of the edible bush and scrub, and eaten
out the roots of a large portion of the grass.”
Erudina comprises 345 miles, divided into
twenty-nine paddocks, and since 1888 Mr.
James has spent £lO,OOO in water improve-
ments and fencing. With reference to spell-
ing the country, the owner of this station
says—“ There is no greater opponent of the
policy of killing the country than myself. Eat
it down, but spell it afterwards. I have not
been able to work this so well as I should have
liked owing to the big dam going dry, but I
have obviated this by enlarging the excavation,
the capacity of the three dams unning into
eaoh other now being 45,000 cubic yards. The
difficulty in sinking dams here is that if you
go too deep you either come on concrete or
saltwater. At the big dam 1 could not go
below 12 ft., and now there is saltwater run-
ning into it. Spelling is the secret of success;
if you like to apportion off one-third ot your
country you will pull through any drought.”
At the time of our visit Mr. James was
spelling thirteen paddocks, and there were
31,000 sheep on the run. He had lost 5,000
since last shearing, but he thought he could
pull through for another six weeks without
rain. Two flocks were being shepherded in a
paddock in which £5OO had been vainly spent
in sinking for water. The sheep fed for two
days, and the third day they came into water.
Taking one season with another, Mr. James
reckoned that his country ought to comfort-
ably carry 30,000 sheep. A very sore point
with the owner of Krudina is the stock tax,
which he regards as iniquitous. He says—
“ Take my experience. I actually paid the
stock tax of Is. a head on 25,000 sheep from
New South Wales. In addition the Govern-
ment received from me £BOO or £9OO for truck-
ing fats. The stock tax never raised the price
of my sheep to me a penny, and I had to stand
the brunt of it, and during the particular year
to which I refer fat sheep only brought Bs. 3d.
in the wool. Then the cost of the men I em-
ployed to drive has to be reckoned. The
only way to make the business pay was to for-
ward great numbers down to market and risk
it. It costs Is. 9d. a head to send sheep from
here to the Adelaide market and get them
sold. When buying sheep in New South
Wales the squatter doesn’t say ‘Do you come
from South Australia or Victoria?’ The price
he puts on a sheep is its value in New South
Wales, not its value minus the Is. ' killer-of-
enterpriae’ tax.”
This experience will be very common this
year, and farmers and others will be obliged
to pay the duty on all sheep purchased for re-
stocking.
No. VIII.—FROM ERUDINA TO MOUNT SERLE.
traversed some good bluebush country in
Wilpena, but it was several miles from water.
We crossed and reorossed a ti-tree creek, and
eventually arrived at the Old Nob Station,
where the stockyards and gallows still stand.
As we were passing through the gap we came
upon a farmer from Quorn, who was returning
home with his wagon and six horses after
having vainly tried to get work. When he
reached home he said he would have travelled
500 miles in five weeks. This man, who has
teen in South Australia for fifty-eight years,
stated that he never saw the country looking
so bad. There were about eight or nine
hundred teams up north, and in his own
words, “ God knows how many loose horses."
All the teams were making for Tilcha. This
was June 22 (Jubilee Day), and we apprised
the agriculturist of the fact. He, sadly
reflecting on the wretchedly bad times, simply
Leaving Erudina in a buckboard we
said, “Is it?” It was not so much what ho
said, but his manner of saying it that was very
suggestive. In another half-hour we had
pulled up at the Limestone Hut, an outstation of
Wirrialpa. There was a plenitude of bush in
in the ram paddock, and thejumbucks were
looking well. There is a large area of swamp
country in the vicinity of the Hut, and in
good seasons it grows splendid feed. Two of
the hands were boring for artesian water in
close proximity to a limestone spring. The
old cook satisfied our appetites with “mutton
and browny,” and we rested for the remainder
of the day. A kangarooer who had been
dying for some time was in terrible agony.
We gave him some whisky, the only medicine
we had, but the poor fellow succumbed on the
morrow. How different the scenes in this
little hut “outback” from the joyous festivities
of the oity!


Another stagecompleted, and we had reached
Wirrealpa. This station has an area of 1,G43
miles, divided into thirty paddocks. Although
there is a paddock of thirteen miles, most of
the divisions are large, one of them running
into 11G miles. In a great many of these
quite a third, and in some a half, of the
country is eaten out. The bush is demolished
too from three to four miles from the
waters, and in some instances Mr. Phillips
does not believe it will recover. At any rate
he says it will require years of rest. The
Manager of Wirrealpa is a thorough believer
in spelling. He says —“I have always stood
out for some good winter country so as to be
able to shift the stock from the permanent
waters.” In one paddock on Wirrealpa there
is enough water to carry 10,000 sheep, but the
bush is killed, and only at intervals when it is
grassed can the country be used. This
paddock has only had sheep in it for three
months in two years. In Mr. Phillips’s own
words, “as things are at present, it is a case
of work yourself up only to tumble down
again.” Wirrealpa shore 65,000 sheep last
season. The losses then amounted to
8,000, but Mr. Phillips could not tell with any
certainty what they would bo this year.
In the paddocks in which they had mustered
there was a deficiency of 4,183. In the
remaining- paddocks the losses were not
known, but the Manager estimated they
must be quite 6,000 sheep, and by shear-
ing time he expected a shortage of 10,000.
They were just feeling the pinch, and sheep
were becoming weak. “If we could get at
the bush in the corners of the paddocks we
might run on for a good time,” observed the
Manager. “ But this cannot be done. In one
case there are two paddocks together. One of
these has been worked out, and the fence has
been opened to allow the sheep into the other,
and some of them travel as much as ten miles.
I dread shearing time. If we get cold weather
with the weak sheep we shall lose a lot. ” Last
year 500 Prome Down sheep died in the yard
after shearing, and Mr. Phillips says they
will have to be particularly careful this
season. There were a fair sprinkling of
lambs on the north end of the run, but the
dogs were killing them. The rabbits had not
been very troublesome lately, although they
wore very bad two years ago. Mr. Phillips re-
marked—“We destroyed a great many; wo
had men on constantly killing them. The
pest will not be got out of these ranges in my
into, in the rocks and in the most inaccessible
places you will find the rabbits. The Vermin
Inspector used to say ‘Catch the last rabbit.’
That’s just the thing, and when you are backed
up by runs with hundreds of miles of country
with only one or two men on them what can you
do?”
After breakfast the mules were harnessed
up, and we made an early start for Moolooloo.
Wirrialpa is 800 ft. above sea level, but
Blinman boasts an altitude of 2,000 ft., so we
had to make an ascent of 1,200 ft., and the
mules knew it. The brown mare, to use a
colloquialism, had “been there before,” and
she put her cars back, grew sulky, and un-
mistakably evidenced the fact that she in-
herited her sire’s disposition. Passing through
the paddock used for the ration sheep,
which was sprinkled with a little bush, we
wore at once in amongst the hills. All that
was left of the bush were a few dry sticks, and
the prospect was anything but bright from a
sheepfarmer’s point of view. Good spear
grass used to grow in the ranges with favour-
able rains, but the marsupials have played sad
havoc with the herbage. In 1860 Mr. Phillips
stated that they gathered large quantities of
grass in the rough country, but that it had
nearly all been eaten out by the rock
wallabies, which multiplied considerably,
as did the kangaroos, owing largely
to the increase in the surface waters.
The red-coloured, warm-looking sandstone
range and the rocky rugged hills were
decidedly picturesque after the endless sea of
saltbush plain. The scrub was composed of
black oak with an occasional bulloak bush and
acacia, while the silver mulga waved in the
breeze on the side of the hills. A peculiar
outcrop, which might be described as a high
broad wall of stone, which Dame Nature had
built in one of her ever-changing moods,
arrested the attention, and the mules in
amusing manner pricked their ears forward
and watched the rock wallabies bound from
boulder to boulder with alarming agility.
Prettily shaped sandalwoods ornamented the
brow of a hill, and a mile or so further on a
great number of these trees were met with,
and as in many other places they were as
heavily burdened with raisletoes as a Christ-
mas tree is with presents. The hybrids were
now racing down a sharp descent, and now
slowly climbing the succeeding stiff pinch on
the opposite side. Ti-tree abounded in the
watercourses, while the delicately green
leaved quondong, the fruit of which
makes delicious jam, was seen to have
found a lodgment under the dry mossed stone
cap of a towering hill. Everywhere the hills
were denuded of bush and grass. Mr. Phillips
stated that there were fifty miles of useless
country in Wirrealpa. We enjoyed a winding,
mile run down to the bed of the creek, and
here we had an “ easy all.” A fire was lit and.
the billy boiled, and we were thinking of
pushing on when a traveller came tramping
down through the pines. His story was “no
work, and not even tucker where you are not
known.” This man has come to the conclusion
that it is better to live in a prosperous com-
munity, and that in proportion to the means
and circumstances of the pastoralists so the
state of the men improves. To what ends will
not man follow a favourite habit. This
swagman enjoyed his smoke, but hard timeshad
compelled him to bo once more a boy, and his
pipe was filled with tealeaves. With the air
of acontemplativephilosopher he was gathering
the last few dry leaves of this great bush com-
modity from the corner of his waistcoat pocket
when we took compassion on him, and asked
him to help himself to the contents of a roomy
pouch. A few pines are growing hereabout,
out in other parts of the ranges there are
forests of these trees, and they kill the country
wherever they flourish. In Artimore Valley
and Wilpena Pound there are thousands
of young pines. If they were thinned out
they might eventually make poles, but if
allowed to remain as at present they can


develop into nothingbut scrubby, stunted trees.
The tobacco-plant is becoming another curse
of the country. This hardy, useless, nourish-
ment-absorbing tree is not in the least
exacting as to soil or locality, being met with
in rich alluvial flats and far up on the rocky
heights. We passed through some wretchedly
poor country, then on through the Hundred
of Carr and into the Bhnman. We encoun-
tered the Manager of Angorigena—loo square
miles —en route. He had a talc of woe to
communicate. They had lost 6,000 sheep
during the last two years. Of the 1,700 they
kept after last shearing all were dead. He
said in most places the bush was killed and
would never come back. Fven the grass
would not grow unless they got more rain.
The Blinman has had an average rainfall of
in. since 1875. The lowest record was
that of 1888, 5*823 in., and the highest, 1875,
21*269 in. In 1896 the figures were B*lso in.
The amount registered for 1897 up to the time
of our visit was 2*840 in. No rain fell at all
in March or April of 1897, and although they had
had six dry Marchs previously it was the first
occasion on which nothing wasrecordedin April.
The postmaster, Mr. Sutcliffe, informed us that
the old cronies said that ’65 was bad enough,
but was not to be compared with this year so
far as stock was concerned. All the small men
had gone north. One of these sufferers told
us that he had 12,000 acres. He bought 2,400
sheep and got 1,800 lambs, but out of the
4,200 he had lost all of them but 400. If the
grass did not grow soon he expected these
would also die. After leaving the Blinman
the chief characteristics of the country were
seony cliffs and gums.
In a drizzling rain wo made the homestead
of Moolooloo. This run comprises about 800
square miles, but in it is included a great deal
of rough and bad country; 300 miles never
has a hoof on it. One gentleman re-
marked that the hills ought to be fenced
off and given to the blackfellows.
“At Warrawena,” said Mr. Ferguson,
“where they used in the early days to
shepherd three flocks of 3,000 sheep, and
wliere when I came here loose sheep did well,
nothing grows owing to the forest of pines
and tobacco-plants. What carried 3,000 sheep
wouldn’t now carry thirty. The dogs are the
curse of this country. There was bush in the
back of the paddocks to enable us to withstand
drought, and we were stocked to a nicety,
but the depredations of the vermin were some-
thing terrible. It is not altogether what the
brutes kill, but it is the sheep they
tumble over the rocks, and frighten to death. - ’
What increases Mr. Ferguson’s difficulties a
hundredfold is the unoccupied country abut-
ting on his territory. “We can contend against
droughts,” ho says; “we know they come
periodically, but the dogs are a perpetual
menace, which under present circumstances
we cannot guard against. The only thing is to
have the wholeof the country occupied. Those
parts not worth renting should be given to
people just to keep the vermin under.” The
more one studies this question the more
one is convinced that the country be
settled if the vermin is to be combated. “By
adopting this course,” Mr. Ferguson went on,
“there would be some revenue for the colony,
and the Government would be relieved of tbe
necessity of paying men £1 or 30s. a week to
smoke their pipes.” The tally-board at Moo-
looloo has gradually been decreasing. In 1892
48,065 sheep were shorn ;in 1893, 48,228; 1894,
43,168; 1895. 38,552; 1896, 21,832. In 1893
Mr. Ferguson got over 13,000 lambs from
15,500 ewes; in 1894, 5,262 from 14,000 ewes;
1895, 8,249 from 15,000 ewes—there are only
about 1,000 of those left; and in 1896, 182
from 12,283 ewes. Mr. Ferguson affirmed
that he could safely say there were not twenty
of those alive now. In 1895 490 rams were
put in with the ewes. When they were taken
out in April, 1896, there were 460. These
with some 700 wethers were placed in the ram
paddock, where there was good feed, and the
sheep were in fairly good condition. At
shearing-time all that were mustered were
103 rams and 120 wethers. About 120 wethers
had been killed for ration purposes, and the
rest had gone to the dogs. At the present
time Mr. Ferguson has not a 4-tooth or a
2-tooth on the run, and he calculates that his
flock has gone to the bad to the extent of two-
thirds during the past two years. A bastard
wattle has taken possession of a good deal of
the Moolooloo country. Of 3,300 weaners
which were being travelled from Parachilna to
Wirrealpa only 2,200 got through. There was
little or nothing to eat on the track, and the
sheep gorged themselves with the wattle and
died.
Having partaken of a very early breakfast
we left Moolooloo for Beltana. From tbe top
of Moolooloo Hill, the ascent to which is dan-
gerously steep, we caught a glimpse of Lake
Frorne, while our eyes dwelt lingeringly on the
pretty little homestead nestling at our feet.
We crossed and recrossed Blackfellows’ Creek,
passed the old tumbledown Nuccaleena
hostelry, two rooms of which were built of
dead marines and pug, and shortly afterwards
arrived at the old copper mine similarly
named. The hills about hero were awfully
bare. Mr. Ferguson said “If it rained hero
for three nights and throe days feed suffi-
cient to enable you to hobble your horses
out or to carry a flock of sheep would not
come up.” The tobacco-plant and the vermin
between them have killed all the grass and
herbage. Thousands of wallabies and euros
were killed here in the scalping days. Good
saltbush made its appearance on the fringe
country. We passed through Temple Bar,
had a snack at the hut, and were soon once
more on our way.
Entering the Beltana Pastoral Company’s
property we saw some splendid bush, the
explanation being that owing to the absence
of water it had not been stocked. The rabbits
have been bad at Beltana, but the drought
played great havoc with them. But where
showers had fallen they had started to breed.
Mr. Say stated that if they were fenced he
thought they could hold the pest in check. “ I
reckon the rabbits here were equal to carrying
double the number of sheep,” the Manager
remarked, “because they were killing the bush
on mo. It- will take us years to get back to
what we were two or three years ago, and the
vermin more than the stocking has been
responsible for that.” Since January 31,1896,
Mr. Say estimated they had lost 25,000 sheep.


Thirty thousand had been dispatched to
Mount Lyndhurat and Mumpyowie, and
Mount Lyndhurst had in its turn to send
numbers to the former station. The Manager
of Beltana had just returned after taking 5,000
sheep to Mumpyowie. He said the country
en route was fearfully bad. Only in three or
four places was there a bit of bush of any sort.
He thought it was really wonderful to get
through with a loss of only 150, Mr. Say
stated that three-fourths of Beltana was badly
eaten out. A great portion of it would have
to be spelled for the next twelve months, and
then he did not think a lot of it would come
back. There were between 12,000 and 15,000
sheep at Beltana, and there had never been so
few stock as this on the run for the last
twenty-five years. The rainfall at Beltana in
1896 was 4’910 in.
We caught the train at the station, and
alighting at Leigh’s Creek Mr. K. Matheson
was ready to hurry us off to Myrtle Springs.
The Leigh’s Creek and Myrtle Springs Runs,
which are held conjointly, have an area of 655
miles divided into 17 paddocks. In 1895
45,229 sheep were shorn; in 1896,34,723; and at
the time of our visit there were not more than
10,000, if that, on the place, and none had been
sold. In one paddock only 500 were mustered
out of 4,500. In 1896 but 4*036 in. of rain was
recorded. This fell in six little rains
distributed over the twelve months, and
at no time was more than o*4oo
in. registered. In 1897 2*950 in. fell up
to June 26. Mr. Matheson considered
thel in. which fell on June 17 better than Sin.
in the summer time. The rabbits were a great
source of trouble two years ago, but the
drought had nearly exterminated them. But
for the ravages of the pest Mr. Matheson
said he would have pulled through better.
All but 100 miles of country is eaten out. A.
lot of the good bush was with drought, heavy
winds, and rabbits rooted out of the ground,
and a considerable area of the country will
never come back again. A beautiful rain fell
on the Sunday, and Mr. Matheson grew quite
jubilant. But he could not forget his losses.
“I would be quite happy if I only had my
jumbucks alive again, he observed. Mr.
Matheson has been two years on the place,
and he has not marked a lamb. He put the
rams in with the ewes to no purpose, and they
died. Seven or eight men had been cutting
scrub, but it is not good scrub country. Horse-
feed had cost £SOO during the two years. At
the time of our visit the horses were being fed
on crushed maize and ration sugar—Blb. of
the former mixed with 2 lb. of thelatter being
the daily allowance for each horse —and the
steeds grew fat on it and were full of spirit.
The cost had thereby been reduced from 225.
to 7s. a week per horse. “It will take us
years to recover our position,” observed Mr.
Matheson. “For one thing there are no
sheep in the country to buy. We have only
twelve years to run, and it will take that time
to get back to the position we were in before
this drought, and during that period we
might have a recurrence of these bad times. I
believe in judicious spelling and the shepherd-
ing of the country, but for two years I have
had the sheep on the wells, and I have not
had a chan:e to do what I should have liked.
If wo had longer leases I would advocate
dividing all my paddocks. If the country
was held on more reasonable terms lam
sure improvements which would lead to the
proper working of the country would be under*
taken. To talk of resuming the country
within a radius of ten miles of the railway
would be ridiculous. It would ruin the runs.
Within that line all my wells and permanent
waters are situated. In the back country I
have to depend on thel:cal catch, so you can
see at a glance what it would mean.” A
beautiful rain fell at Myrtle Springs on the
Sunday, and a dense fog enveloped the
homestead on the following morning.
When this lifted shining claypans of water
could be seen on the country to the west. The
whole aspect of the landscape was altered;
even the keen fresh air seemed totally different.
We returned to Leigh’s Greek on the Monday
morning, the road being quite heavy with
mud. In the warm sandy patches feed was
showing up, while the bush in some cases had
actually started to shoot. Some of the smaller
watercourses were full, and everything tended
to drive depression from a station manager’s
troubled mind.
Mount Serle was visited on the following
day. We passed through about six miles of
the Leigh’s Creek Run. All the bush and
other edible vegetation had been demolished.
Even the camel bush had been eaten up as far
as the jumbucks could reach. Numbers of
sheep lay dead along the track, while several
horses that had nerished were lying stretched
out stiff and stark. The mailman lost about
ten horses during the last drought. As he
runs from Leigh’s Creek to Paralana for £96 a
year this was a heavy item. Into the Mooloo-
loo Run, and the country altered completely,
the saltbush being good, while the scrub im-
proved. This portion of Moolooloo has not
been stocked, owing to the fact that in some
places it is as much as twelve miles from water.
This bit of bush is about the only “ turnout”
the teamsters have along this particular track.
As we approached Pat’s Springs the vegeta-
tion deteriorated. Even the boundary-rider
at this out-station was much impressed with
the seriousness of the vermin difficulty. He
said if Mount Serle and McKinlay Pound were
not taken up and vigorous efforts made to
cope with the vermin there this country would
have to be thrown up. We reached the de-
serted homestead of Mount Serle about an
hour after dark. This station, which is
situated in exceedingly rough country, was
thrown up at the beginning of the year. It is
in these parts that the wild dog makes his
home. In five months Mr. Strother, the care-
taker, has got thirty dogs, and he has only been
trapping for about three months. Of the thirty
canines only two were purebred. One of the
sluts which was caught had eleven pups.
We never saw a skerrick on the place. An
old man we met in Leigh’s Creek informed
us that four years ago Mount Serle and
McKinlev Pound country was alive with
vermin, but that the drought had destroyed
it, even the rock wallabies having perished.
Mount Serle is a depot for the blacks, and
they were deploring the absence of animal
life. Four of the dusk> sons of the soil had
died during the last four months, and one old


blind woman had not long to lire. We were
told that another plague ere long would be
the wild donkeys. Our informant remarked—
“ There are thousands of them in the rough
country, and when you give chase they make
where no goat would go.” Good horsemen
hunt those wild asses. When they get them
into tolerably plain country they give chase
and lassoo the animals. A donkey having
been captured it is tied to a tree. In duo
course the wild creature is introduced and
fastened to a tame donkey. The denizen of
the hills is then hobbled out and gradually
quietened. TheßoltanaPastoralCompany give
£1 apiece for donkeys thus caught and subdued.
“ They will be offering so much a scalp for
donkeys before long,” ventured the man of
knowledge. We drove to Frome Station on
the morrow. The flock of goats we passed
were looking well, and that is about all the
country at the present time is fit to carry.
With the exception of a few ration sheep there
is no stock on Frome Station. Mr. HcConville
having shifted them to Berllina, on the
Cooper, and a few to Avondale, close by
Farina. The history of Mount Serle is
interesting in that it shows the other side of
the picture so far as the payment for improve-
ments is concerned, and instances the fact that
the Government sometimes got the best of the
bargain. Mount Serle, 252 miles, and Mount
MoKinlay, 110 miles, were originally leased
together, the total area being 362 miles. The
rent was 2d. per bead on sheep, and Is. per
head on cattle. The improvements returned
to the Government at the expiry of this lease
were:—Buildings, £1,88255.; woolpress, £100;
water, £216 os. 6d. ; fencing, £3,448 Os. 5d.;
total, £5,646 10s. lid. The lease ex*
pired in 1888, and the country was
reoffered by the Government for twenty*
one years from January 1, 1889.
The Government valued the improvements at
£4,423 14s. 9d. The actual amount paid at the
sale on June 27, 1887, was £342, being twelve
months’ rent. On February 6, 1889, the in-
coming tenant paid a 10 per cent, deposit of
£442 ss. on the improvements. The total
amount paid on April 12, 1889, to the outgoing
lessee, who made the improvements, was £422
Os. 9d., compensation for water improvements
under the Act of 1884, so that the deposit
paid by the incoming man was £22 in excess of
the total amount paid to the outgoing lessee.
On December 31, 1883, there were 12,461 sheep
and 57 cattle on the run; on December 31,1888,
8,626 sheep and 123 cattle. In 1895 7,000 sheep
were shorn, and when the country was aban-
doned, at the beginning of the year, 2,2oosheep
only were mustered and sold. The chief cause
of this decline can be expressed in one word-
vermin. The countrywaa recently reoffered, par-
ticulars of which may be found in the Gazette
of May 19. Mount Serle is still open, but
Mount McKinlay has been taken up by Mr, S.
M. Buttfield.
No. IX.—CONCLUSION.
The object of these articles has been to
present a faithfully dispassionate picture of
the country traversed as it is, and to set out
the various causes which have led to the
decline ot the pastoral industry. In the
process of summing up, the drought and its
effect naturally claim early attention.
THE “DROUGHT” MORTALITY.
The losses sustained by stockowners on
account of adverse seasons have been enor-
mous. I think I am well within the
mark in putting the number of sheep in the
colony in 1895 down at 7,750,000 head.
In declaring the exports in wool the Customs
Department give the number of pounds. There
has been no census since 1891, but one of our
leading woolbrokers takes the number of
pounds of wool exported that year and divides
it by the total sheep in the colony. That gives
the rate of wool per sheep. The mean rate for
the year 1890-91 was 7J lb., and for 1891-2
6Jlb., but this authority takes 7 lb. as the
average rate per fleece. Granting that, and
allowing forty-nine fleeces to the bale, the
deduction as to the number of sheep in the
colony in 1895 works out as stated. To what
extent has the drought reduced that number.
In 1896 there was a very small lambing, and
this season practically none at all. In addi-
tion our Northern flocks have diminished by
one-half, while, taking the colony as a whole,
it can be safely said that one-third of the sheep
have perished. The smaller men - “leaseholders
with from 10,000 to 20,000 acres lying just out-
side on the fringe of the agricultural country-
have suffered even more acutely than the
pastoralists. One man at Edeowie shore 6,700
sheep in 1895 and 4,400 in 1896, and now he
has 500 left. Of forty horses one only remains,
while out of fifty head of cattle he now owns ten.
Here are some more instances of terrible
losses, the men having holdings in the vicinity
of Hawker, Cradock, and Boolcunda, the
figures showing respectively the number of
sheep shorn last year, and the number now
alivel,7oo—lso; 1,000—200; 2,000—100;
1,200—150; 1,500—700; 1,100—nil; 450—nil;
2,000 —277. One only needs to be apprised of
such cruel experiences as these to banish any
incredulity as to 33 per cent, being too high a
percentage to “write off” the flocks of the
colony. On the lower portion of Yorke’s
Peninsula the loss has been comparatively
small, while in the south-east and southern
districts there has only been the ordinary
death rate. But northwards even such
runs as Bungaree, Hill River, Gum Creek, and
Canowie have suffered severely. Adelaide
and the suburbs consume approximately
400,000 sheep and lambs every year. It is a
well-known fact that the country people eat
more mutton than those living in the town,
and the consumption, at the lowest estimate,
can be put down at 600,000 for the country.
So it will be seen that quite a million sheep
are required for “home consumption’’
annually in South Australia. The excess of
imports overexports was in 1895191,526 sheep,
and in 1896 21,568, while large numbers have
been brought into the colony since 1896. The
only inference that can bo drawn from these
figures is that there are not more than five


million sheep in the colony at the present
time, and that is looking at the best aide of
things. Assuming it takes one man to every
3,036 sheep, a shortage of even two millions
would mean 700 men out of work, and, say
each man earns £6O per annum, it
represents over £40,000 in wages. This is a
direct loss to the working classes. But in a
hundred other ways the “sons of toil” feel the
effects of this national calamity. There will be
less wool to shear, cart, and ship this season,
while the price of meat has already risen con-
siderably. One cannot too forcibly emphasize
the fact so frequently presented by The
Register and The Observer that the pas-
toralist’s question is the Labour Party’s
quos-tion, the merchants’ question, the
shop-keepers’ question, and the Tre-
asurer’s question.” To the pastoralist it
is not the mere money value of the sheep that
have died; it is also the loss of the sequence of
classes, the effect of which will be felt for
years. To recover in numbers alone will take
some time, and to do this all the “rubbish”
will be utilized ; but before the flocks recover
their status of two years ago a decade will
have elapsed.
DECLINE OF THE PASTORAL INDUSTRY.
# With dogs, droughts, and doubtful condi-
tions things pastoral have gradually been
drifting from bad to worse, and if some means
are not soon adopted by the landlord and the
tenant to stem the tide the industry will float
to the sea of fearful failure. Some people
say “all that is wanted to set the pastoralists
on the flood tide of fortune is a return to high
prices.” Such a consummation as an appreci-
able rise in wool is devoutly to be wished, but
under present conditions could the lessees take
advantage of the tide at the flood? The
following figures demonstrate one thing, and
one thing only—the decline of the wool-
growing and meat-raising business. The area
held under pastoral occupation, which
in 1870 was 67,400 square miles, rose to
226,130 square miles in 1884, and is at
present only 166,824| square miles, includ-
ing 67,000 square miles of vermin lease.
An interesting return laid before the Legis-
lative Council last year gave the number of
square miles abandoned since 1888 at 30,206,
and still unleased 21,306 square miles. The
value of improvements in the country when
abandoned was £66,488, the estimated value at
date £30,000, the number of caretakers eight,
and the cost per month £65. It is surprising
when improvements are lying idle how quickly
they deteriorate. Perhaps one of the strongest
arguments as to the precarious nature of pas-
toral pursuits at the present time was a
remark of one of the Managers, who has had
years of experience. “I would rather be a
Manager than an owner, ” observed this gentle-
man in all sincerity.
FURTHER IMPROVEMENT NECESSARY.
It is gradually being recognised that in order
to live in our outside country the lessee must
spend. He must make further improvement
in the direction of additional subdivision and
water conservation and vermin-fencing, .That
a gravp mistake has been made in “eating
out” the country in the past is now
everywhere recognised. The wonder is
that previous Governments so long
encouraged such a disastrous practice.
For years lessees have been living not only on
what was for the time being their own capital,
but on the capital of the State, and this
indirectly affects every man, woman, and child
in South Australia, because in proportion to
the annihilation of the bush the carrying
capacity of the country diminishes and the
value is reduced. As sure as the night suc-
ceeds the day so sure will there be a periodical
recurrence of droughts in our northern country.
Nature in her great wisdom provided sal-
tiferous vegetation to withstand such trying
exigencies of climate, and man in his little
wisdom has done his best to kill it. If a
pastoralist does not hold himself in readiness
for a drought how can he take advantage of
the good seasons? What is the use of “build-
ing up” only to see the structure tumble down
again? In certain seasons grass flourishes in
this back country, but it withers away again,
and this as quickly as it grows. It would not
be overstepping the mark to say that the
“ bush is the country and the country is the
bush.”
“shepherd the bush.”
This should be the motto of every lessee.
Mr. Peter Waite has set a splendid example m
this direction, and heis providing an admirable
object-lesson at Ophara, in New South Wales.
That he is on the right track a good many
admit, although some are dubious as to
whether he has not carried his new methods
too far. There is no gainsaying the fact that
this common-sense principle of working the
holdings will have to bo adopted, and if the
Government does not make it w.orth the while
of the lessees to undertake the necessary im-
provements the system of “eating out” the
country, which cannot be too strongly con-
demned, will continue, and in a few decades
there will be no pastoral industry at all. The
country must be spelled, and by subdivision
and further water conservation this can bo
done. If over-stocking—or rather a concen-
tration of the stock around the waters—has
been indulged in in the past, one must not
lese sight of the fact that with small pad-
docks opportunities are afforded for killing
the entire country. But with proper legisla-
tion the leasee would recognise that such a
policy would even in his own interests be
suicidal. If legislators will realize the virtue
of these new methods, they must then
ask themselves —“How best can we induce
men to carry them out?” Those versed in
matters pastoral will admit that they cannot
be put into execution in a day, or in a month,
nor in a year. Time is needed. Then when the
money is spent —I cannot too often reiterate
that the pastoralist has to spend to live, and
spend again to make a profit—the owner
cannot rely on making use of his improve-
ments immediately. Unless the conditions
are particularly favourable some years will
have elapsed before ho can take advantage of
his expenditure. So again it is a case
of “time and patience.” Subdivision and
water conservation does not surmount the
vermin difficulty; rather does it increase it.
As has been pointed out, the only panacea for
dogs and rabbits is to vermin-fence and


localize the pest. Time and money again.
And then a man is not likely to wire-net his
leasehold when he gets nothing at the end of
the term for having done so. The 1888 leases
have twelve years to run, and what would it
profit a man to spend money on subdivision,
water conservation, and vermin-fencing on
those holdings, especially when he is only paid
for water improvements?
WHAT IS WANTED.
Longer leases at a fair rental, to
encourage the pastoralist to develop the
country, and a fixity of tenure, which
will assure to him some hope of reaping a
reward for his heavy expenditure and enter-
prise. When Mr. W. H. Duncan was inform-
ing the House of Assembly what the pasto-
ralists asked for, the Commissioner of Crown
Lands interjected—“ All provided for in the
Act of 1890.” He might have added, subject
to the “uncontrolled of the Sur-
veyor-General. One Manager informed me
that he was told it was no use his applying for
a surrender, as it would be refused. Mr. Poyn-
ton justly wished to know how many of the
lessees in Class 1 country had applied to come
under the terms of last year’s Act, and of the
number who applied how many the Surveyor-
General had approved, “because it was all
now a matter of administration.” If the
people are not allowed to surrender, how can
their wants be provided for by the Act of
1800?
A FAIR RENT.
This seems a reasonable demand. The
only way to arrive at the value of pastoral
country is to charge on a basis corresponding
to the number of sheep it will depas-
ture in average seasons when improved.
The Register has often shown the incongruity
of the present arbitrary division of the
country. Proximity to a railway ora port
should not determine the length of term, as
such country, except to the extent it might be
already improved, will probably require the
same development as country not so con-
veniently situated. Adventitious aids such as
proximity to railways and ports should up to
the degree to which they can be utilized bo
altogether questions of rental. On the matter
of assessing the rent I cannot do better than
quote the words of Mr. A. G. Downer —“ This
principle of payment according to the number
of sheep will ensure lo the Crown an increased
rental according as the run is increased in
carrying capacity, and thus the rental to the
Crown will increase proportionately with the
lessee’s power to pay ; and my own feeling is
that the mere rental that would be payable on
well-developed runs, estimating the rental on
the per-head basis suggested by me, would in
the course of a few years more than double the
total rent now payable under pastoral leases—
a total which is unhappily gradually becom-
ing seriously less by the abandonment of
country and by the inability of num-
bers of lessees under the existing
state of things to pay their rents.”
In other words, a man should bo encouraged
by longer lease and reasonable security of
tenure to develop his holding up to its full
carrying capacity. At the present time some
owners, much as they would like to do other-
wise, are compelled to overstock to pay the
rent and make both ends meet. But give a
man a truly beneficial interest in his holding
and he will stock it with care, and on the
judicious, carefully arrived at, and average
carrying capacity the lessee should be rated.
If the term of every lease was for thirty years
the tenant, where the land was unimproved,
could be reasonably asked to develop to the
extent of, say, £5 a mile during the first five
years, £5 a mile during the second five years,
and £ls during the remainder of the term.
Let the lessee be still further encouraged to
improve his holding by granting him a further
term of five years for every additional £5 a
mile expended beyond the £25 minimum up to,
say, £SO maximum. An existing lessee
who surrenders his improvements and comes
under the Act might be credited with the
value of such improvements as part of the
£25 minimum. Where the improvements
belong to the Crown provision could be made
for the lessee purchasing them by cash or in
instalments, their value being determined on
their utility to the country as it is at present
cut up.
VERMIN FENCING.
This must follow as a natural conse-
quence. It has been suggested > that the
Government should erect vermin - proof
fencing and charge 3 per cent, per
annum during the currency of the lease, no
principal to be paid by the lessee, or that the
Government advance to Vermin Boards the
necessary capital to erect vermin-proof fencing,
the amount to be repaid by twenty instalments
of £5 per £IOO each year, and no interest to be
charged. The Queensland Government sup-
plies wire netting to the pastoralists, charging
£5 each year for every £IOO advanced
during the currency of the lease as pay-
ment in full for principal and interest.
In the Flinders Range, say from Blinmah
North, no help can bo got from wire-netting
fences. “We find too,” says Mr. N. E.
Phillipson, all too truly, “that hard hilly
country gets worse year after year. This
seems to arise from prolonged droughts
succeeded by very heavy falls of rain which
wash all the soil and seeds away, and unless
rains fall in the spring of the year nothing
grows.”
A PROMISE OF THE FUTURE. V '
The other night I had a dream, “Think bf
anything intently in the daytime,” says Paula
Tanqueray, “and it will come to ydu at
night.” In the world of sleep I dreamt,the
Commissioner of Crown Lands was miking a
speech in the Assembly on pastoral legislation.
After dealing exhaustively with facts and
figures, he went on to say— 1
“Gentlemen, this is a great question^ - It is
no use trilling with it; we must dear'with
it as statesmen. In our hands wo hold
the destiny of a great and important •
industry. Are we going to
to make that destiny something ofj\yhich
posterity will be proud, or are we going to,
mar it by’parochial foolish us
settle once and for all what land is
for closer settlement, and surely therc/Wjio
better arbitrator to whom I can refev Vopifi:
this matter than Nature. Let us abolish con-'


fused tenancies and classify what is obviously
pastoral land as pastoral land; let us secure a
man’s holding to him, and encourage him to
make that expenditure which is necessary for
its proper working, an expenditure which
will or should mean profit to the man and the
preservation of a big asset of the State. All
I appeal to for a favourable verdict from you
is your common-sense.”
Then on the wings of sleep I was carried
twenty years into the future, and I travelled
over the same country which I visited in 1897.
Queen Mab kindly provided a good season.
The fields were waving with feed, the dams
were full, the runs had been vermin-fenced,
the paddocks subdivided, water conserved,
and the country “brought back.” It
was shearing time, and at Mutooroo
the air resounded with the click of the shears,
and the musterers were bringing the sheep a
hundred thousand strong. At Myrtle Springs
Mr. Matheson was reading to his grand-
children “The Squatters’Elegy,’’’and almost
wondering if such a state of things as prompted
the verses had ever existed. At Koonamore,
Mr, Murray, I dreamt, was explaining
to the third generation that the little
pet creatures called rabbits confined in a
hutch were in days gone by a curse to the
pastoralists. At Wirrealpa, the head of a
dingo told of a bygone race, and at Moolooloo
I got caught in a rusty trap, the only relic of
the period when dogs were the curse of the
country. The snap of the iron teeth
awakened me. "Only a dream!” you will
say, “a mere fantasy; an hallucination of
the brain.” But “the dreams of life are the
promises of the future, ” says Lord Rosebery.
That it may prove to be so in this instance is
the ardent wish of every right-thinking South
Australian. There need be no philanthropy
in dealing with the pastoral lessee. The policy
to be pursued should be dictated by motives
of gain. The occupation of the outside
country means profit to the State; and
through various channels, every member of
the community will prosper along with the
lessee.


AUSTRALASIAN SHEEP RETURNS.
Official Returns of the Number of Sheep in each of the Australasian Colonies at the end of December in each of the ten years ending 1895.
Colony.
1895,
1894. , 1893.
1
1892.
1891,
1890
1889. 1 1883.
1887. 1886. | Increase.
•Victoria
New South Wales
Queensland ..
{South Australia
West Australia
13,180,943
46,508,363
19,856,959
7,325,003
2,295,832
13,180,943
56.977,270
19,587,691
7,335,194
2,132 311
13,098,725
56,980,688
18,697,015
7.267.642
2.220.642
12,965,306
58,080,114
21,708,310
7,251.349
1,685,500
12,928,148
61,831,416
20,289,633
7,646,239
1,962,212
12,736,143
55 986,431
18,007,234
7.004,642
2,524,913
10,882,231
50,106,768
14 470,095
6,386,617
2,366,681
10,818.575
46,503,469
13,444 005
7,150,000
2,112,393
10,623,985 10,700,403 ; 2,480,540
46,965,162 39,169,304 7,339.069
12,926,158 9,690,445 10,166,514
7,264,000 6,696,406 62S.597
1,909,940 1,809,071 | 486,761
* No returns being available /or 1895 t those for 180k are repeated.
t No South Australian figures for 18S5 and 1836 being available, those for 188 U are repeated ,
IMPORTATIONS OF COLONIAL AND FOREIGN WOOL INTO THE UNITED KINGDOM. 1854 To 1898
Victoria
New South Wales
Queensland
South Australia
West Australia
Tasmania
New Zealand
1896.
1895.
1894.
1893.
1892. 1891.
1890.
1889.
1888. j 1887.
1886
1885.
1884.
Increase.
345,445
293,759
210,970
118,616
34,011
22,567
355,257
418,56'
369,037
221,972
115,717
24.332
22,655
377,934
382,937
347,277
190,372
103,462
26.959
22,458
878,991
347.036
310,534
196,481
104.838
18,541
20,794
349,061
335,914 365,490
373,767 353,4)7
247,330 173,558
112,166 120,665
25,002 26,933
23,644 25,855
319,615 316,165
365.172
274,448
144,093
98,249
87,949
23,537
292,724
372,057
806.091
126,637
111,236
22,897
22,u35
277,720
330,330
321,154
122,367
115, «49
19,382
20,167
265,684
345.396
245,290
106.614
106,403
17,656
22,261
272,918
350,731
265,181
84.(65
130,628
16,862
21,463
260.912
317,152
217,119
104,361
115,108
14,427
21,681
237,875
358,228
241,277
99 974
118,357
13,204
24,4 16
228,900
Bales.
12,783*
62,482
10,996
269
20.817
1,848*
126,357
* Decrease.


SURPLUS IMPORTATIONS SHEEP INTO
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Surplus
Surplus
Importations.
Exportations.
*]88G
73,549
’—
*1877
—
51,974
*1888
9,372
—
1889
178,014
...
1890
357,401
—
1891
169,251
—
1892
71,770
—
1893
141,809
...
1894
191,526
—
1895
188,879
...
1896
18,448
—
Total
1,400,079
Less Surplus Ex-
portations
51,974
Net Importations
1,348,105
* The Annual Statistics for these years were not taken, hence the numbers can only be approximate.
LANDS HELD UNDER PASTORAL AND ANNUAL LEASE ON
Acres. Sq. Miles.
Decrease. Increase.
June 30, 1884
144,723,200 = 226,130
— ... —
“ 1893
93,149,819 = 145.546
80,584 ... —
“ 1894
83,661,279 = 130,720
14,820 ... —
“ 1895
77,666,177 = 121,353
9,367 ... —
“ 1896
78,992,431i = 154,675|
— ... 33,322?
The above shows that there were 71,454square miles of country less helil in 1895
than in 1884.
The following facts anil figures will also be found interesting;
Value of Improvements taken possession of by the Govern-
ment on termination of 188 S Leases for which the Lessees
received no payment ... ... ... ... £277,000 0 0
Amount paid by the Government for water improvements on
1888 Leases £350,48.'? ]2 9
Amount paid by Government through Play ford's resumptions £4O 751! 2 0
Amount paid by the Government on the 1888 Leases owing to
passing of Act Xo. 321 of 1884 £2O 288 0 10
RETURN LAID BEFORE THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL, NOVEMIiER IS,
1896.
No. of Square Miles abandoned since 1888 ... ... ... 30 206
Do do. still unleased ... ... ... ... 21,306
No. of Caretakers ... 8
Value of Improvements on Country when abandoned ... ... £66,488 0 0
Estimated Value at date £30,000 0 0
Cost per month £65 0 0


TABLE
SHOWING THE AVERAGE
MARKET
PRICES OE
ADELAIDE
GREASY WOOL, PER LB.,
IN LONDON.
s. d.
s. d.
1866
1 Of
1882
0 10J
1867
0 10J
1883
... 0 9*
1868
0 9|
1884
0 9*V
1869
0 u
1885
... 0 7 t ’ 5
1870
o u
1886
... 0 7f
1871
0 10i
1887
... 0 7$
1872
1 1
1888
... 0 8A-
1873
... 0 Ilf
1889
0 10
1874
1 Oi
1890
... 0 8 r » ff
1875
1 0|
1891
... 0 7,/u
1876
0 10J
1892
0 5 t " u -
1877
0 10|
1893
... 0 5g
1878
0 10
1894
0 51
1879
0 9|
1895
0 61
1880
... 1 Of
1896
• ••
0 6
1881
0 11
STATEMENT SHOWING NUMBER OF WILD DOG SCALPS PAID FOR IN
CROWN LANDS OFFICE SINCE PASSING OF WILD DOG AND FOX
DESTRUCTION ACT, No. 460 of 1889, WHICH CAME INTO OPERATION
IN FEBRUARY, 1890.
The numbers are given as year against year.
February, 1890, to August, 1890
September’ 1890, to August, 1891
September, 1891, to August, 1892
September, 1892, to August, 1893 ... ..
September, 1893, to August, 1894
September, 1894, to August, 1895
September, 1895, to August, 1896
September, 1896, to August, 1897
4,010 scalps.
8,295 “
11,280 “
12,178 “
8,403 “
7,671 “
15,856 “
15,871 “
Total
83,564 “
Incluyed in this statement are 46 foxes, killed during the 7J years. The cost from
February, 1890, to July 31, 1897, including printing, amounted to £23,385 16s. 8d.
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers Adelaide.
