

p 0m
Vang-
pahs
fto X
THE PRIESTLY OFFICE
AND THE
CHRISTIAN TEACHER
THE INDUCTION SERMON
MISS MARTHA TURNER
On assuming the Pastorate of the
UNITARIAN CHRISTIAN CHURCH, MELBOURNE, ON NOV, 23, 1873
Published by request of the Congregation
MELBOURNE : GEORGE ROBERTSON
LITTLE COLLINS STREET WEST


SERMON.
“ Kings and priests unto God.” — Rev, i. 6.
The Christian Church is divided into three sections.
Each of these sections bases its religious thought,
faith, and life upon a different idea of inspiration. The
oldest and the one that still retains by far the largest
number of adherents in the Christian world is that
which starts from the assumption of infallibility in the
Church —a continuous stream of inspiration flowing
through the successors of the Apostles, giving to the
Church as a corporate body the ultimate authority in
matters of religious belief or discipline, and endowing
her priests with a certain supernatural power, by the
possession of which the ritualistic observances of the
Church became in their hands a series of magical rites.
By the aid of these mysteries the greatest sinner might
reach to heaven, while the unsullied babe in whose case
they had been omitted must pass into the regions of
outer darkness.
The second section comprises the Protestant sects
who have taken their stand upon the Bible as the great
reservoir of God’s inspiration, containing the whole of
His message to mankind, outside of which nothing
can be authoritative —nothing can be wholly divine.
With the last word in this somewhat miscellaneous
collection of books God ceased to speak with man;
the fountain of His inspiration was closed and sealed.
The third section is based upon the great facts
of consciousness, which show us that the ultimate
authority must, after all, rest with the individual. It


believes that no church, nor creed, nor book, can possibly
be a court of appeal above the mind and conscience.
It believes that children of the living God are fed by
a living inspiration, the light that lighteth every man
that cometh into the world, not left to grope amid the
records of a dead past for the light, the hope, the in-
spiration, that are needed for the living work of to-day.
This faith—this firm, religious trust —is ours. It is
the legitimate outcome of Protestantism. Protestant-
ism that stops short of this is illogical and inconsistent
with its own principles. To break with one authority
in order to set up another, is to show that we have a
principle that is above either, since it is competent to
decide upon the claims of both ; for if any of us wished
to join the Church of Rome to-morrow, we could not
do so but by an act of rationalism. Not having been
born in that communion, we should have to sit in
judgment upon the value of the claims she puts forth
to be the true church. Until our decision on this
point was formed, we should ourselves be the final
court of appeal, before which Pope and Cardinals,
General Councils and Apostolic Succession, must take
their trial, and prove their right to be by us received,
believed, and obeyed.
In the same way the Bible has to take its trial at
the bar of human reason, and the most profound Biblio-
later must have satisfied his judgment with reasons
that were to him good and sufficient as to the super-
natural origin and divine authority of the Bible before
submitting his intellect to its teachings. Thus we
find that, practically, the religious discriminating faculty
is recognized as the highest authority, let theology
teach what it may about the presumption of poor
human nature, or warn us ever so peremptorily against
the vagaries into which the carnal intellect may lead
us. The great truth that we are kings and priests
unto God, that the end and aim of Christianity is to
educate us to this high calling, with all the responsi-


bility it entails, that every man is, under God, his own
Saviour, is acted upon in a blind, unconscious way,
even by those who are most resolute in prostrating
themselves before an external authority.
Christianity teaches the true democracy in religion,
that fidelity to ourselves by which we receive the
present help of a living God, and need not rest content
with catching the echo of His voice as He spoke to
faithful souls through the ages. It is by following this
law of our spiritual being that we rise into the higher
life revealed by Jesus, and become kings and priests
unto God. It is want of courage and trust in God that
has caused Christendom to seek an external standard
of belief. We cannot trust the nature God has given
us sufficiently to believe that it has within itself the
power of apprehending the truth that can save and
bless us. We do not trust God sufficiently to believe
that He will guide the sincere soul, and quicken it with
His spirit of holiness, if patiently and reverently it seeks
to know Him. Jesus opposed a dominant hierarchy
and an ancient sacerdotalism by faithfulness to His
own intuitions and trust in a living God, an. ever
present Friend and Helper. His followers have been
incessantly turning to human institutions, and human
traditions, to learn how far it would be safe to follow
Him in this respect, to share His belief in a present
inspiration, a perpetual divine guidance. Kings and
priests unto God He would make us by His teachings,
His influence, His example. Christendom has pre-
ferred an external visible authority in the Kingdom of
God, and an intercessory priesthood.
We find, then, the three great principles of the three
schools. The Church infallible, compelling its mem-
bers to take the whole of its teachings, without ques-
tion and without investigation. The Protestant
compelling, through his infallible Bible, belief in a great
many things that are becoming daily more and more
unbelievable. Third, the principle of submitting all


things to the individual conscience, claiming no infalli-
bility, owning to many errors, but believing that God
has given to every man power to apprehend as much
of spiritual truth as is necessary for his guidance
through life.
Each of these schools has necessarily a different
theory of the office and work of the minister. In
the first he is a priest endowed with a special grace
descended in direct and continuous succession from
those humble fishermen of Gallilee, whose attitude
towards the priesthood of their day was one of con-
stant and radical opposition. This Apostolical and
successional priesthood is the sole channel of the Divine
favour, they are the appointed intercessors between
God and the sin-laden soul, the magical manipulators
of certain sacraments through which alone the grace
of God flows to the lay members of that Church. Set
apart from worldly interests and purposely excluded
from those ties of kindred which bind us all in a com-
mon humanity, they must, in all but exceptional cases,
sink into the tool of the Church, and merge the man
in the priest. That all have not done this, that some
still retain the breadth of sympathy and largeness of
heart that keeps them in feeling and interest fellow-
men and fellow-citizens, shows what a grand and
powerful thing human nature is, how superior it
will rise to a thousand adverse influences, how it
will surmount and survive all the warping, withering
effects of caste or class, or even a dehumanizing theo-
logy. This priest is an interpreter of the relations
of the Church to human life. He is a student of
the Church’s decrees, ritual records, and other
mediaeval lumber, and he interprets human needs by
and through them. To the sorrow-stricken, the sin-
burdened, and the dying he has the Church’s panacea
to offer, the Church’s consolations, and the Church’s
help. By an almost perfect organization and a singu-
larly complete ritual every emergency is provided for,


every circumstance of life taken under the Church’s
sanction. The price to be paid for all this is simply a
resignation of all right to think for yourself, to submit
the neck of the individual completely to the yoke of
the Church.
The position of the minister in the second great
section, which includes all orthodox Protestant sects,
differs from this in the fact that he is not and never can
be a priest, although there are not wanting clergymen in
the Anglican Church who have so far lost their way in
this nineteenth century as to be haunted with the idea
that their office is a priestly one. Their Church, how-
ever, claims none of the infallibility that could endow
them with the priestly function. The only infallibility
recognized by this school is that which they accord to
the Bible. The Protestant minister, therefore, is a
student and interpreter of the Bible. His whole edu-
cation tends in this direction. He has to study the
languages in which ancient manuscripts have come
down to us, in order to secure the best verbal render-
ing—such is our slavery to the letter. Then he must
wade through an amount of theology that is enough to
warp the directness of any intellect, and crush the
human feeling out of any heart. When he has been
thus studiously trained to look at all things through
the glamour which the thoughts and traditions of past
generations have thrown around them, he has to take
his place in the world of life and thought and action ;
the first thing he learns probably is the vast unlikeness
between the actual men and women by whom he is
surrounded and the “ souls ” he has been studying how
to cure. Then he is accused of being behind the best
thought of the times, unreal, and filled with the preju-
dices of a class, by the very people who insist upon
their clergy receiving this narrow and traditionary cul-
ture. There is no class of men treated with more
consistent injustice than the Protestant clergy. Their
interference with politics or business is regarded with


jealous mistrust, and then they are condemned for not
understanding either. They are taunted with living
in a world of their own, that is not the ordinary work-
a-day world, yet if they seek to mingle in the amuse-
ments of the people, to know something of the world
of art and literature, they are condemned for frivolity.
This great schism, or want of sympathy, between the
people and their teachers arises mainly from the clergy
being still expected to build their work and frame their
message to mankind upon an authority no longer
recognized by the great body of the laity—the plenary
inspiration and infallible truth of the whole Bible.
The theoretical assertion and practical denial of this
standard of faith and duty leaves some sad hollow-
nesses in our social life and religious observances.
In the third section of the Christian Church which
admits no infallible authority anywhere, holding that
the truth in its integrity is not to be apprehended by
the finite mind, but that God will always vouchsafe
sufficient for our personal guidance if we humbly and
reverently seek it, the position of the minister differs
essentially from the other two. He is certainly not a
priest, nor can he altogether be considered in the light
even of a teacher. He is rather a fellow-student and
helper in those studies which the inexorable indi-
vidualism of our faith demands alike from all. He is a
student, not of divinity, creed, or old-world document,
but of humanity, life, and the thought of to-day. He
is a student, in the first place, of the character of God
as revealed in His works and ways, and then he is a
student of human nature, of the character of man as the
object of all his efforts. He is in the true sense a
prophet, a witness for God amongst men. He is an
interpreter of human life; it is for him to decipher the
divine meaning in all life, and to proclaim it. He
seeks to influence secret springs of motive, through
which alone outward conduct can be effectually regu-
lated. It is for him to show mankind what they lose


by living content with low ideals and conventional
standards —to shame them out of their meanness —to
urge and win them to true nobleness of life and cha-
racter. Such is the ideal of a Christian minister re-
cognized by that school to whom truth is the only
authority, and the revelation in the mind of humanity
the only permanent revelation. Not that we reject or
for one moment wish to estimate at less than their full
value the external revelations of Himself God has
made through the ages which are recorded for us in
the Scriptures. They are a precious reservoir of truth,
a storehouse of religious consolation. Taking our
stand above them, selecting from their varied stores
that which our heart and conscience know to be
divine, and rejecting the dross which may be mingled
with it, we learn their real worth, and render them a
just homage which does not degrade them into a fetish
nor rob us of our intellectual manhood. To bend our
minds to receive any doctrine that can be proved from
Scripture, no matter how repugnant to our natural
feelings, is a slavery we decline to accept, and which,
moreover, we consider high treason to that discrimi-
nating faculty God has planted in the human soul to
guide it through the intricate paths of life and duty.
We do not, therefore, seek to trim and alter the Bible
to make it express what is not to be found there. We
do not eliminate doubtful texts and ignore plain state-
ments, in order to show that it does not teach that
which the whole tenor plainly indicates. We do not
recognize the obligation to believe. Take, for instance,
that point on which modern thought has been much
troubled —the doctrine now so commonly disbelieved
even in the most orthodox circles, that God will punish
the sins and errors of a short human life by an eternity,
of anguish. It is of no use to tell us thattloctrine is
taught in the Bible. We do not believe it any the more
on that account. It is contrary to all we know of the
character of God and to much that we have learned


from that same book about Him, too. Therefore, we
wholly decline to believe this dreadful thing, even
though one rose from the dead to come and tell us it
was true. The Christian teacher has to divide the
wheat from the chaff by the aid of that winnowing
process which modern thought has introduced into
ancient traditions. His work amid the old theologies
will be mainly a destructive one, yet nothing which
has influenced human thought or moulded human life
must be considered undeserving his patient investigation
—no faith by which a human soul has been sustained
can be outside the circle of his sympathies. It is for
him to discriminate between the fleeting and ephemeral
form and the enduring reality.
He must be quick to observe and appreciate the
bearing of all scientific investigation on the religious
questions of the day, for a scientific age needs a scien-
tific theology, of which the foundation is already begin-
ning to be laid deep down on these great facts about
the nature of God’s laws, which modern science
has made known to us. No province of human
thought must be without interest for him. No phase
of human life beyond the reach of his sympathy. To
him the cant of mere professionalism must never cling.
On him the blighting influence of caste must never
light. The narrowing power of class prejudice must
be to him unknown. In short, he must be a man much
more than he is a clergyman, a Christian much more
than an adherent of any sect.
After sketching so high an ideal of what I believe
a Christian minister should be, which would indeed
require a many-sided man to realize, I am conscious
of a very sad declension from the ideal to the actual
when I inform you that I have accepted and under-
taken the duties of an office I estimate so highly, I
can scarcely hope to escape being set down as one of
that large class of people who are ever ready to rush in
where angels fear to tread. However, we are not


likely to improve the character of our work by lowering
our ideal standard. Better to bear the burden of that
divine discontent which must grow out of a high ideal,
than sink into the slumbrous self-complacency that is
satisfied with a low one.
Most of you are acquainted with the circumstances
which have led to my being offered the pastorate of
the church. It seemed to me at first not quite in
accordance with the fitness of things that Unitarianism,
which represents an essentially masculine order of
thought, should be represented by a woman. At the
same time, a woman represents the laity more com-
pletely than a man could do, and Unitarianism has
always upheld the rights of the laity in the Church.
As the logical issue of Protestantism it would
naturally do this, for the soul of Protestantism is
the vindication of the principle, that religion is
not a thing of priests, and ritual churches, and
Sundays, but a power in the world, and, in the lives
of ordinary men and women, a thing of the streets,
the market-place, the exchange, and the shop. Our
principles have educated us into a recognition of the
fact that the individual Christian is a king and a priest
unto God, therefore it was fitting that when circum-
stances deprived us of the services of a valued
minister there should be found those amongst the laity
who could supply a temporary necessity, and keep the
church open. We started at the beginning of last
year with a good number of lay lecturers. It was not
to be supposed, however, that men engaged in the
business of this busy community could secure the
leisure which the labour of preparation demands.
Quite naturally, therefore, the work devolved upon
the one who had the leisure. Hence it has come to
pass, through the mere force of circumstances, that I
find myself to-day in the somewhat unusual position
of the recognized pastor of a church. Into the ques-
tion of the abstract propriety of a woman ministering


in a church I do not propose to enter, it would lead
us too far. Still, it is the duty of every member of a
community to explain an unusual course to any who
honestly and frankly require them to do so. I can but
justify myself from the personal side of the question.
I was conscious of no impropriety in following the
lead of circumstances, and if in the future other women
should be led to undertake similar duties, I can only
hope that they they may find their path as smooth as
mine has been rendered to me by the generous con-
siderateness and freely expressed sympathy of my
congregation. Every honest effort has met with an
exaggerated appreciation, all shortcomings have been
over-looked, and every expressed wish has met with a
prompt response. I feared at first that the natural
conservative instincts of women would lead the ladies
of the congregation to discountenance or forsake me,
but I was mistaken.
While the fire burns brightly within doors, we can
bear the cold blasts that rage around without discom-
fort. Thus your kindness and sympathy has enabled
me to bear with equanimity, and I trust in a spirit of
teachableness, the usual amount of public criticism to
which a new undertaking is naturally subjected. It is
our own fault if we do not learn from criticism ; it is
invaluable as an instrument of instruction, whether
virulent and splenetic as some that I received, or wise,
impartial, and scholarly, as some other. As for the
somewhat inconsistent gentleman who came to hear a
woman preach, and then complained that she was not
a man—who was surprised that in an Unitarian sermon
he heard no allusion to the Trinity or atonement, no
elucidation of a vicarious scheme of redemption—he
brought forcibly before our minds the fact of the very
great ignorance of our principles still existing. We,
therefore, arranged some lectures on our leading tenets,
which were well attended and occupied six Sunday
evenings. You further resolved to publish the sermon


which this gentleman had, to say the least, misrepre-
sented, and it had a satisfactory circulation.
It has been said that we are not a church-going de-
nomination—and said with truth—for we have no
authoritative principle that can make church-going a
duty. To us there is no special sacredness about any
place or form of worship that can insure us any bless-
ing from our simple presence there. For us it is no
fetish removing the sins of the week. We do not
regard it as too many even amongst Protestants do, as
the place where we may take the tablet that bears the
record of the week’s ill-doings, and have it cleaned, in
order that we may start afresh. It seems to me the
chief service associated worship can do us, apart from
the quickening of the religious feelings, is in the ten-
dency which all association has to check that excessive
individualism which, though it is inseparable from our
principles, must be guarded against, as its excess will
render us incapable of fellowship and absolutely unable
to assimilate new ideas. The tendency of free thought
is to make us lonely and self-assertive. Carried to an
extreme, without any of those modifying influences
Christian fellowship can offer, it is apt to degenerate into
that bigotry of unbelief which is so much worse than the
bigotry of orthodoxy, because it is so illogical. There
are people who pride themselves on their rationalism
who are as little able to appreciate anything new or
outside of the hard mechanical groove of thought in
which they are accustomed to move as the most con-
servative theologian who lies buried beneath the
accumulated rubbish of his creeds, catechisms, and
confessions of faith.
Walker, May Sc Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop-street, Melbourne.
