



JL‘ llc
of £lO and upwards.)
0 *
Anthony, Wm:
Bancroft Dr.
Barrett, Mrs. E.
Bartley, N.
Baynes, Ernest
Baynes, George
Baynes, Harry
Billington, Richard
Billington, Mrs. Richard
Bland, Elliot
Brown, W. A.
Bruce, H.
Bunton, Thomas
Burrows, John
Byrne, Dr W. S. 0.
Byron, Captain J. J., Q.A.
Cameron, Alexander
Carter, Chas. C.
Chambers, Arthur W.
Childs, Thos.
Cockle, Sir J.
Ceilings, D.
Corrigan, N.
Corrigan, Rev. Philip
Cowlishaw, George
Cowlishaw, Mrs. James
Cummings, James T.
Cusack, L.
Dickson, The Hon. J. R.
Edwards, Richard
Edwards, Mrs. Richard
Edwards, Thomas E.
Evans, W.
Finney, Thos.
Francis, John V.
Galley, Richard
Gebbie, John
Gray, Thomas R.
Griffin, Captain
Grimes, George
Hale, Bishop, D.D.
Hay, Charles
Hickson, Arthur H.
Hill, C Lumley
Hope, The Hon. Louis
Ithaca Shire Council, President of
Jennings, Sir P. A.
Kent, W. H.
Lamb, John
Langley, Mrs. W.
Lloyd, W. M.
Longland, D. F.
Luya, A F , M.L.A.
Mcllwraith, The Hon. Sir Thomas, M L.A.,
KC.M.G.
Maxwell. Samuel
Mayne, Dr. J. O’Neil
Meston, Archibald
Midson, C. W.
Moore, Rev. W.
Munro, James
Naumberg, E.
Newman, George Henry
I Norman, Sir H. W., G.C.M.G.
Paige, T. H.
Parker, Henry
Petrie. Mrs John
Petty, R. G.
Phillips, I. A.
i Pottholf, Bernard
Potts, John
Pratten, Henry
Prentice, George
Primrose, G. E.
Raff, The Hon. Alex., M.L.C.
Riding, Thorpe
Sinclair, Duncan
Sinclair, Jno.
Southerden, Francis Q.
Stevens, E. J., M.L.A.
Stewart, John
Stone, Jno.
! Swanwick, Fff
Thomas. J. Shaw
Tuson, George
Tyson, James
Wakefield, A.
Walker, W. T.
Ward, Moses
Watson, John, M.L.A.
Williams, Wm.
Wilson, R. W.
Wilson, W. Horatio, M.L.C.


‘^WDSPITAL
tfacts about its development, Dflianagement, J^c.
;■' ; ; : .: W- v ' : ■-■ 1/ ,- . •• ■••’■■ ’ ■■'■■■/'. :
I i


frislumt:
ALBXE. MUIR & MOBCOM. PRINTERS, &C., 221 QUEEN STREET.
1892.
" '


THE BRISBANE HOSPITAL.
I.—ITS DEVELOPMENT.
1. Brisbane was founded in 1824.
'>crju> 2. It is clear that in the very earliest years
<Mr of the history of the settlement, provision w T as
|' made by the authorities for the medical treatment
of the sick people of the place, for it is on
record that in what may
be called the “ penal
f era,” (1824 to 1839)
among the bull dings
■ erected by the super-
, intendent, Captain
3. Further testimony
3. Further testimony
is to be found in Dr.
Lang’s “ Cooksland,”
for at page 214 of that
book there is a table
compiled by Dr.D.Keith
Ballow, “ Colonial Sur-
ADMINISTRATION BLOCK. AND OPERATING THEATRE.
geon in charge of H-M. General Hospital at Brisbane,” covering
the years 1839 to 1845, and showing the “ quality ” and
“ strength ” of the population in those years, the number of
“ cases ” and the “ diseases ” treated in the Hospital, with the
mortality, from Jan. Ist, 1839 to Dec. 31st, 1845-


4. The history of the Brisbane Hospital as a public
institution, as distinguished from a Government establishment,
begins in January, 1849, when the “ Moreton Bay Hospital”
was founded. A copy of its first Rules is now in possession of
the Institution.
5. At its foundation, and for a few years, the “ Moreton
Bay Hospital ” -served the needs of a very large area of
territory, described as “ the five districts according to the limits
of the jurisdiction of the Commissioners of Crown Lands, namely
Moreton Bay, Darling Downs, Wide Bay, the Burnett, and
Maranoa.”
. 6, Before 1856 some other Hospital or Hospitals had been
founded in this area, and the name of the Institution was in
consequence changed to the “ Brisbane Hospital,” by which
name it has since been, and is now, known.
7. Until 1860, that is to say for the first 16 years of its
history, the Hospital stood in George Street, on or about the
site of the present Survey Office, near the Supreme Court
buildings
OUTLOOK


r r * T ”7~"‘
OUTLOOK N E.
8. In 1864 increased provision and change of site having
become necessary, a new Hospital was built at a spot then
known as “ The Quarries,” on the Bowen Bridge Road, its
present site; and in 1860 the new building was occupied.
9. The building so built and occupied was the two-storied
stone building with tower, shown in the view No. 1-
10. The years which have passed since then have, by reason
of increase of population, caused the erection of additional
general wards, and in 1880 of the special Fever Ward, so that
now, in 1892, there are sixteen Wards, an excellent Operating-
Room, convenient Administration Block, and Offices, covering-
in all a large area on a site of exceptional excellence and
fitness, as may be judged from views of outlook Nos. 3 and 4.
The former showing view S.W. over Victoria Park, having
Gregory Terrace (with Grammar and Christian Brothers’
Schools) and Red Hill, for back ground. The latter showing
view to N.E. over Bowen Hills and Albion, with O’Reilly’s
and Bartley’s Hill for faraway back ground. Wtiile immedi-
ately in front are the beautiful grounds of the Acclimatisation


Society, and nearby is Bowen Park, the National Association’s
ground, with the fine Exhibition Building.
11. The Institution now contains provision for 230 patients;
and a Convalescent Home at Sandgate established in 1885,
and having accommodation for, say 30 or 35 inmates, provides,
at a cost of about £9OO a year, a necessary help to convalescents
before discharge from treatment.
12. The area of country which the Institution now serves is
large, comprising that part which lies between near Gympie on
the north, down to the southern border of the Colony and
beyond (for the Brisbane Hospital is the nearest to the Tweed
River), and stretching inland to the district near Ipswich.
-13. From the beginning large numbers of sufferers belong-
ing to other paits of the
Colony have for various
reasons found their way
to the Brisbane Hos-
pital. In 1809, 57 per
cent, of the patients
admitted were from
other parts of the
Colony ; in 1875, 53 per
cent.; and now (October
1892) of 165 patients in
the Hospital, 35, or
over 20 per cent., be-
long to Other districts OUT-PATIENTS DEPARTMENT, DISPENSARY) AND MAIN ENTRANCE.
14. The committee are of opinion that on this account the
Institution has a rightful claim, and that they may rightly urge
that claim, upon the charitably disposed of the Colony generally,
and they desire that this publication shall be regarded by all who
receive it, as an appeal for a cash response to their request for help.


2-ITS MANAGEMENT,
15. For many years, indeed up to 1872. the
management of the Hospital was in the hands of
a committee, somewhat large and probably there-
fore unwieldly, comprising some of the best known
and trusted citizens, some of whom are still living,
but of many the name and memory only remain.
16. In 1872 a change was made by the Government of the
■day. It was then provided, on the suggestion of the subscrib-
ers, that the committee should “in future consist of a chairman
and three members appointed by the Government, and three
members elected annually by the subscribers from among
themselves.”
17. This arrangement still continues, and the present mem-
bers of the committee (with date of appointment or election)
are: James Stodart (chairman) 1885 ; John Hardgrave, 1885 ;
Peter Mallon, 1887; and John D. Campbell, 1892, appointed
by the Government; and S. W. Brooks, 1886; Henry J. Oxley
(treasurer), 1887 ; and
George Baynes, 1888,
elected by the sub-
scribers. Thomas Bun-
ton is the honorary
solicitor.
18. Two members of
the committee in rota-
tion, month by month,
constitute a “ House
Committee,” which has
control of details in the
management of the
Hospital.


WORKING STAFF AND THE
WORK THEY DO.
19. Subject to the committee, the internal
medical management of the Hospital is under the
control of a “ Consulting Staff,” consisting of some
of the oldest practitioners of the city; an active
“Visiting Staff” of six of the leading doctors of
the neighbourhood (now Drs. Marks, Tilston, Thomson, Tay-
lor, Kebbell, and Connolly), who render constant and efficient
service, and of a Medical Superintendent, formerly designated
House Surgeon (now Dr. Jackson, who is moreover responsible
for the discipline of the entire establishment), assisted by two
Resident Medical Officers (now Drs. Kent and Mayne, two
Interior of ward no- a. mens


INTERIOR OF WARD NO. 5 WOMENS*
Brisbane bom gentlemen). In addition to these there is a
Medical Officer, non-resident, fcr out-patients (now Dr. E. H.
O’Doherty), an honorary dentist (Mr. D. R. Eden), and an
honorary bacteriologist (Dr. Hirechfeld),
20. The succession of Blouse Surgeons since the foundation
of the Hospital has been Dr. Ballow, Dr. Barton, Dr. Lansdown,
Dr. Bancroft, Dr. Jaap, Dr. McGrath, Dr. Mohs, Dr. Thomson,
Dr, Kesteyen, and now, from 1883, Dr. Jackson.
21. The office of President, or Chairman, has been held by the
following gentlemen in succession:—Capt. Wickham, R.N.;
Hon. R. G. W. Herbert, Hon. A. Macalister, Mr. Justice
Lutrwyche, Chief Justice Sir James Cockle, Hon. J. Bramston,
Hon. E. O. McDevitt, W. L. G. Drew (six [years), John Petrie
(eleven years), and now James Stodart.


MEDICAL SUPERINTENDENT’S RESIDENCE.
22. The succession
of Secretaries from the
foundation has been
Alex, McClosky, P. L.
Burke, J. L. Bourne,
and now, since 1885,
A. P. Payne.
23. The Medical
Staff is aided by an
excellent body of
Nurses, in number
now, say 40, and a
number of wardsmen.
24, The Nurses are under the control of a Head Nurse (now
Miss E. F. Crosse); they are carefully trained for the fit
performance of their duties, and Certificates of
Efficiency on passing at esting examination. The Convalescent
Home is in charge of Mrs. C. Hutchison.
25. The total number of in-patients in the year 1891 was
2389 (in 1889 there were 3017); the average daily number 166
(in 1889 it was 204); the largest number in one day 204 (in
1889,230; the smallest 131 (in 1889 155); while the number
of out-patient attendances during that year was 15,340 (in
1889,17,386). 1889 was a specially heavy year.
26. For the convenience of sick people living in South
Brisbane, the Committee opened, in October of this year, a
Dispensary for out patients. The South Brisbane Municipal
Council having granted the use of the building in Stanley
Street formerly occupied by the Fire Brigade, and fitted up
the building for that purpose.
10


4-HOW IT IS
SUPPORTED.
27. From the beginning the contributions of the
public have been liberal, but they have ever been
insufficient for the needs of the Institution, and
have been supplemented year by year by help
from the general revenue.
28. Up to 1869 that help was unconditional, but from that
date it has been conditional and so continues. To every £1
■contributed by the public, the Government add £2. For
in-patients sent to the Institution by various Govern-
ment Department 3s. a day is paid. Certain fines, as for
“disorderly conduct, &c.,” imposed by magistrates in the
various Police Courts in the Bris-
bane district are also handed to
the treasurer.
29. Patients who are able to do
so are required to contribute an
amount equal to the cost oi their
keep and treatment- In 1891,
£976 was so contributed.
30. Since the year 1875, £3178
has been received in the shape of
legacies and donations of over £lOO.
31. For some years legacies
were treated as ordinal income of
the year in which they were re-
ceived ; but in 1890 t he committee
resolved that money received from


that source should be invested (the
amount is now £919), and the inter-
est only of the money so invested
used as ordinary income. This
interest the Government has recently
decided shall be reckoned a contribu-
tion for the year, and the usual
subsidy be granted upon it.
32. For the encouragement of this
excellent and effective mode of help,
provision is made by which legators
“ shall be in everlasting remem-
brance.” The names of these are
inscribed deeply on a slate slab,
which, for that purpose, has been
fixed in the entrance porch of the
main buildings. (The companion
slab contains the names ot those
who have contributed £lOO to the funds in one sum)
33. It is confidently hoped that as the years go on no
inconsiderable portion of the income will be derived from
invested legacies, and the committee uige upon the rich of
charitable heart this ready way of making their good-doing a
thing of continuous value and blessing; and- in order to
facilitate so praiseworthy an act, a “Form of Bequest” is
appended to this statement-
34. The total income in 1891 was, £15,305, of which the
public gave £3300. (Of the £3300 given by the public in 1891,
£B7l came through the “Hospital Saturday and Sunday Fund,”
an organisation dating from 1886 and of great and extending
excellence and usefulness ) Be it, however, very carefully noted
that this amount was obtained only by very urgent and unusual
appeals to the public. The ordinary sources ot income are not


yielding the ordinary amounts, and in consequence the income
is falling; and it must be remembered that e very £1 short in
receipts from the public, means a lessening of £3 to the funds
of the Institution, and a consequent continuous and increasing
burden in the shape of Bank overdraft.
35. The total expenditure for that year was, say £15,396.
PRIVILEGES OF SUBSCRIBERS.
36. “ Donors of £l in one sum shall be subscribers
f° r the current year, during which they may recom-
-1 mend two patients” (Rule 4). “ For every additional
63 donation of £1 in one sfim, a subscriber may recommend
two patients ” (Rule 5).
37. “ Donors of £lO in one sum shall be life subscribers, and
may recommend two patients annually ” (Rule 3).
38. “ Every annual subscriber shall be qualified by payment
of a subscription of £l, to one vote; of £2 and under £5, two
votes; of £5 and upwards, three votes. Life members, £lO, one
vote ; £2O, two votes ; £3O and upwards, three votes ” (Rule 7).
The names of those who contribute £lOO and upwards in one
sum are inscribed on one of the slabs in the entrance porch of
the main building.
39. The minister of every church which makes an annual
collection for the funds of the Hospital, is for that year a
subscriber.


«40. The Committee have caused the foregoing facts to be
compiled and published, with such illustrations as they
deemed might be helpful and interesting, in the hope
that by the distribution of them they may interest
their neighbours, near and far, in an Institution
which the Committee consider has a well founded
claim upon their help. The Hospital has for now
many years been the House of Suffering and of
Death to hundreds ; it has,however, been the Home
of Help and Comforting to thousands more, who, hav-
ing no such a resort, would have largely lacked both help and
comforting. It has been, moreover, and is to-day, the theatre
of much self-sacrificing service, worthy the praise of those whose
hearts beat true with sympathy for their fellows. That an
Institution which has done such good work towards the
alleviation of suffering, and which continues to do such work,
will be allowed to suffer diminution of effort through want of
timely money help, the Committee cannot, do not believe.
With such confidence in the well-wish of their fellow
countrymen, this statement is sent forth.


FORM OF BEQUEST,
The 101 l owing form of words is recommended to those
who may desire to become Benefactors to the Hospital by their
Will.
I BEQUEATH to the Treasurer for the
time t)eing of the Brisbane Hospital the sum of
pounds for the uses of
the said Hospital, to he paid, to the said Treasurer
within months after
my death , free from Succession and Legacy Duty,
to he applied hy him for such uses and purposes
as may he from time to time directed hy resolution
of the Committee for the time being of the said
Hospital.


THE following extract from a report presented to the
Committee by Mr. Payne, the Secretary, on Tuesday,
November 15th, 1892, on his return from a
j visit to the Southern Colonies, may well serve
for both information and suggestion :
“ There is another point which eases the work of
the governors of Southern hospitals : the philan-
thropy of the people has established institutions
for such as are not the legitimate inmates of a
general hospital—the incurables and convalescents.
These are provided for elsewhere. We are
probably alone in having to sustain a Con-
valescent Home and retain incurables for an
indefinite period,
* * #
It is gratifying to find that with our many
disadvantages (from an economic point of view)
such as climate, suburban position, high wages,
and the rest, the Brisbane Hospital holds a good
place in comparison with its fellows in the South.
But there remains the fact that we greatly need
adequate and proper accommodation for the nursing
staff; and until we acquire steam labor-saving
been N ur?eT!n«!e public appliances for kitchen, laundry, and other purposes*
by the Committee year by we are doing much of our work under great
year since 1885. disadvantages, and under conditions which entail
heavy expense, and severely tax the energy and
zeal of the staff.
I could not but note the evidences which in the
Southern hospitals are all around one of liberality
of wealthy individuals Large buildings and
elegant appointments commemorate the donations
and bequests of those who out of their riches have
ministered largely to the needy, and while providing
lasting monuments to their own name have
strengthened the hands and encouraged the hearts
of the executives of these institutions.”
16


(I‘ommtilcc and 1h92.
Patron:
Ul£> EXCELLENCY GENENAL SIR HENRY W. NORMAN, G.CM.G.
Committee:
S. W. BROOKS, J.P.
HENRY J. OXLEY J.P. (Hon. Treasurer)
GEORGE BAYNES’
JAMES STODART, J.P. (Chairman).
J. HARDGRAVE, J I>.
P. MALLON, J.P.
J. 1). CAMPBELL, J.P,
THOMAS BUNTON.
Hon. Solicitor
Hon. Consulting Staff:
HUGH BELL, M.D., F.R.C.S.E. KEVIN I. ODoHERTY, F.R.C.5.1., L.K.Q.C.P.I
JOHN J. MULLEN, L.R.C.5.1., L.K.Q.C.P.I.
Hon. Visiting Surgeons:
THE HON. CHARLES P. MARKS, M.D., M.R.C.S.E., M.L.C.
JOHN THOMSON, M. 8., Oh. M. EDWARD TTLSTON, L.R.C.8., Ed., M.R.C.S.E
Hon. Visiting Physicians;
WILLIAM KEBBELL, M.R.C.S.E, L.RC.P., Loud.
PRANK GLYNN CONNOLLY, M.R.C.P., Loud., M.R.C.S.E.
Hon. Ophthalmic Surgeon : THE HON, W. F. TAYLOR, M.D., M.L.C.
Hon. Bacteriologist: EUGEN HIRSCHEELD, M.D.
Honorary Dentist: U. R. EDEN.
Medical Superintendent: E. SANDFORI) JACKSON, M. 8., Ch. B.
Resident Medical Officers:
CHARLES G. KENT, M. 8., Ch. 8., M.R.C.S.E.
J. O’NEIL MAYNE, M.R.C.S.E., L.R.C.P., Lend.
Dispensary Medical Officer; EDWARD H. O’DOHERTY, M.R.C.5.1., L.K.Q.C.P.I.
Dispensers: D. F. BROWN and F. L. HARDGRAVE.
Head Nurse: MISS E. I’. CROSSE.
Secretary : A. P. PAYNE.
Collectors: J. R. P. ADAMS and F. G. R. NEWMAN.
Convalescent Home (Sandgate).— Matron: MRS. C. HUTCHISON,


