

STORY OF A GREAT WRONG,
AN APPEAL
TO THE SYNOD OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN THE
DIOCESE OF SYDNEY, MEETING ON THE
19th of SEPTEMBER, 1899,
FOR JUSTICE AND JUDGMENT.
“ To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice."
—Fbovkhbs xxi., V. 3.
Published for distribution to the Members of the Synod—Clerical and Lay—
and Superintendents of Sunday Schools and Sunday School Workers, in the
Diocese of Sydney, by K. McG. S. Hill, Rockdale, N.S. W.
Sydney:
THE WOO DRILL PRINTING WORKS, 127 YORK-STREET.
1899.




STORY OF A (TREAT WRONG,
AN APPEAL
TO THE SYNOD OE THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN THE
DIOCESE OF SYDNEY, MEETING ON THE
19th of SEPTEMBER, 1899,
FOR JUSTICE AND JUDGMENT.
“To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.”
—PROVKRBS XXI., v. 3.




STORY OF A GREAT WRONG,
AN APPEAL
TO THE SYNOD OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN THE
DIOCESE OF SYDNEY, MEETING ON THE
19th of SEPTEMBER, 1899,
FOR JUSTICE AND JUDGMENT
“To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.”
—PROVERBS XXI., V. 3.
Published for distribution to the Members of the Synod—Clerical and Lay—
and Superintendents of Sunday Schools and Sunday School Workers, in the
Diocese of Sydney , by K. McC• S. Hill , Rockdale, M.S, W,
Sydney:
THE WOODHILL PRINTING WORKS, 127 YORK-STREET.




THE STORY OF A GREAT WRONG.
JN order that it may be seen that I am not hastily bringing this matter before
the Synod of the Diocese of Sydney, or that it is being done without the
knowledge of the Archbishop of Sydney, or the Rev. Arthur Killworth, I
consider it but right to put forward the three following letters :
To His Grace, Rockdale, 7th November, 1898.
The Archbishop of Sydney.
May it please Your Grace,
I desire to bring before Your Grace’s notice again the matter of the policeman
having been brought by the Rev. Arthur Killworth to eject me from St. John’s
Church, Rockdale, on the morning of Sunday, the 13th of March last, and the
subsequent sayings of Mr. Killworth concerning myself and some of the teachers.
I wrote to the Secretary of the late Provincial Synod on the matter, but the
Synod had closed its Session on the morning on which ray letter reached him. In
his reply to me the Secretary writes “If your letter had reached me in time I
think it would have been doubtful whether the Synod would have considered it,
as the subject referred to is a matter of Episcopal administration in the Diocese
of Sydney. , „ ,
This being so, I would probably have brought the matter forward at the late
General Synod had it not been that it was at the time being considered by a
certain institution in Sydney, with the work of which I did not wish to interfere.
As I am now, however, free in the matter, I desire to notify to Your Grace
that unless, as stated in my letter to the Advocate (a copy of which I forward
herewith and would request Your Grace to read)*, a full apology is forthcoming
before the next Synod meets, it is my intention to bring the whole matter fully
before that Synod, and to ask the Synod to adjudicate upon it. This I shall do,
not through its Secretary, but by having a detailed account of the transactions of
that morning, and subsequent proceedings, printed, and placing a copy in the
hand of every Church of England clergyman and every Synodsman in New
South Wales, f ... , , ~ ,
I am determined that the injustice of the indignities heaped upon myself and
others in this matter shall be publicly acknowledged as they were publicly inflicted.
I am, Your Grace’s obedient servant,
E. McC. S. HILL.
Bishopscourt, Sydney,
Dear Sir Tuesday, Nov. 8, 1898.
I am desired by the Archbishop to acknowledge your letter of the 7th date,
with enclosure. . . , , „
I am, yours faithfully,
RICHARD GRIFFITHS, Chaplain.
To E. McC. S. Hill, Esq
Rockdale, August 1, 1899.
Rev. A. Killworth, 8.A., LL.B. . , ,
Sir—l desire to inform you that it is my intention to bring the matter of your
treatment of me, as Superintendent of St. John’s Sunday School, Rockdale, on the
t T S was* hen Wilder the impression that every clergyman and Synodsman in the Colony had a voice
in this Synod. I have now, however, practically limited the distribution to the Diocese of Sydney.


thirteenth day of March, 1898, and subsequently, before the Diocesan Synod which
meets on the nineteenth of next month (September), in order that I may publicly
vindicate my character in the matter, and endeavour to obtain from it the justice
which you violated, and which the Church authorities in Sydney have hitherto
refused to accord me.
That I may properly do this, it will be necessary to place all details before
each member of the Synod—clerical and lay. This I intend doing.
You will, very probably, remember that in the Church on the morning of that
13th of March I informed you that that morning’s occurrences would probably be
known from one end of the Colony to the other, and your answer to me was that
you “did not care.” You will also, probably, remember that I called on one of
the teachers, who was near us at the time, to bear witness to your answer. This
being so, you cannot object to the steps which I am about to take, but I consider
it best to give you due notice of ray intentions.
As I simply seek to remove from my character the stigma which was publicly
placed upon it when, while Superintendent of a Church of England Sunday School,
the clergyman of the parish sent for a policeman to have me removed from his
church, I am still willing, if you will stand before the congregation before which
you stood in St. John’s Church to thank God that you had been enabled to “turn
the weeds out of the church,” and there publicly apologise for your treatment of
myself and the others of those “weeds,” and will allow that apology to appear
in the local press —I am still willing to accept that apology as a full satisfaction
for all the past. But, if not, I shall certainly go to the Synod with the whole
matter, in the sincere hope that I may thus have removed from my own mind
all thoughts of a subject which has been almost intolerable during the past
eighteen months, and that I may be enabled also to terminate the spectacle of
discord and disruption which the Church of England in Rockdale has exhibited
before the members of all other denominations—and those of no denomination-
in the district since that Sunday which all so well remember.
I am, Sir, Yours, etc.,
E. McC. S. HILL.
To this last letter I received no reply.


PREFACE.
The following letters, &c., are printed in connection with my appeal to the Synod
of the Church of England in the Diocese of Sydney (which meets on the 19th of
this month) for justice in the matter of which they treat.
In my search for this justice which has been so long denied to myself and
others, and which I have earnestly, but vainly, endeavoured to obtain from
different sources, I now take this matter to the chief ecclesiastical tribunal
within the Diocese of Sydney (though not within the Church of England organ-
ization), in the hope that, in such a gathering, composed as it is of all that
represents the highest forms of the Christian Doctrines as accepted and taught by
the Church of England, I shall at last succeed in finding that which I have for so
long sought in vain. ,
As this Petition would be practically useless if the full particulars connected
with it were not perfectly known to the members of the Synod, it is intended
that a copy of this pamphlet shall be in the hands of every member before the
I would most particularly commend a careful perusal of all these letters to
all superintendents, teachers, and workers in Church of England Sunday Schools.
They all stand on the brink to-day of exactly the same treatment which I and my
Sunday School Teachers have already received—and v like us, under existing
circumstances they can obtain no possible redress. I would therefore urge them,
for the sake of the Sunday School work which they love, and for which they are
willing to give up their time, and to suffer many inconveniences (1 have been
almost incessantly connected with Sunday Schools as scholar, teacher, and super-
intendent for over thirty-two years), to lay the whole matter before their
Representatives in Synod, with the request that they will aid them to obtain as
Church officials some better recognized standing in connection with Church
Institutions than the experiences placed before them in the following pages will
show that they at present possess.
But even now it may be that my attempt to bring this matter before the
Synod may be frustrated if no Member of that Synod can be found who, in his
love for justice and right, will volunteer to lay my Petition before his fellow -
Members.
The following explains my difficulty at this stage :
Standing Orders Relating to Petitions.
19. Petitions must be in writing, and conclude with the prayer of the
Petitioners, and be signed by them. _ . .
21. A Member presenting a Petition must make himself acquainted with its
contents and affix his name at the beginning thereof, and shall state from
whom it comes, its material allegations and its prayer, and may require
that it be read by one of the Secretaries, and the only question which
shall be entertained by the Synod on its presentation shall be “ That the
Petition be received.”
In connection with these “ Standing Orders,” I wrote the following letter :
Rockdale, August 29th, 1899.
To His Grace,
The Archbishop of Sydney.
Your Grace, _, . T , , ~. • , t
In accordance with my letter to you dated 7th November last, the receipt of


which was acknowledged on the Bth, it is my intention to present a Petition to
the Synod of the Diocese of Sydney which meets on the 19th prox., with reference
to the treatment received by myself and others in connection with St. John’s
Sunday School, Rockdale.
The Registrar informs me that it will be necessary for me to get some Member
of the Synod to present the Petition on my behalf.
Now, Your Grace can well understand from the nature of the Petition why I
should have a great objection to ask any special individual to aid me in this
matter, and I much prefer, if at all possible, to be alone responsible for this
Petition rather than that the name of any member of the Synod should be impli-
cated with mine in connection with it, and I feel certain that all the members of
the Synod will appreciate my motive.
I therefore desire to ask Your Grace—“ Will it be sufficient if I forward this
Petition to the Secretary to be presented to the Synod by him ? ”
This I believe will be in accordance with your rule, and it will also remove
the onus of appearing to assist me from any individual who might otherwise take
the matter in hand.
I am, Your Grace,
Yours obediently,
E. McC. S. HILL.
To this I received the following reply :
Sydney Diocesan Registry,
Bathurst Street, West,
August 31st, 1899.
Dear Sir,
I am desired by the Most Reverend the Archbishop of Sydney, to acknowledge
the receipt of your letter of 29th inst., and, in reply, to say that by the
Standing Orders it appears that a Petition must be presented by some member of
the Synod.
Yours faithfully, .
E. McC. S. Hill, Esq., Rockdale. ROBERT ATKINS, Secretary.
Thus I am compelled to ask—ls there any member of the Synod, clerical or
lay, who will volunteer to present my Petition in conformity with the above
“Standing Orders?” If there is, I, and many others, will thank him sincerely,
and he will have the knowledge within himself that he, at any rate, has taken his
part in endeavouring to secure that “justice and judgment,” to do which “is more
acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.” Nothing further is necessary in the matter
than that any member simply presents the Petition.
I will gladly answer all correspondence, and will give any information which
may be required of me. There is a principle involved in this whole matter which
I shall do my best to vindicate.
E. McCREERY SHEA HILL.
Rockdale, N.S.W., September 9th, 1899.


PETITION.
Having been publicly dismissed from the position of Superintendent of St. John’s
Church of England Sunday School, Rockdale, and a policeman having been
brought to the door of the same Church, for the purpose of ejecting me, by the
Rev. Arthur Killworth, the clergyman of the Parish, while under the jurisdiction
of your Synod ; and having vainly endeavoured by all other means in my power
to publicly establish my own innocency in the matter, and to obtain a public
redress for the indignities to which I was thus publicly subjected, I now
approach your Synod with the following petitions :
I PRAY that the whole circumstances connected with my dismissal from the
Sosition of Superintendent of St. John’s Church of England Sunday School,
Rockdale (particulars of which are contained in the accompanying printed
pamphlet, a copy of which has been forwarded to every member of your
Synod), may be impartially and fully investigated by your Synod, and that the
result of that investigation may be publicly made known in the Sunday School
from which I claim that I was so unjustly dismissed, and in the Church from
which the aid of a police officer was sought to eject me.
I PRAY that if, after an exhaustive investigation, it is determined that I
was unjustly treated, your Synod will cause a public apology to be made—under
definite instructions from your Synod—in the Sunday School, and in the Church,
to me, and to those Sunday School Teachers and others who have suffered with
me, for the treatment which we received while workers under the jurisdiction of
your Synod and its laws—and especially for the reference made to us in the
Church by Mr. Killworth immediately after his last sermon there, when he
“thanked God that he had been the means of turning the weeds out of the
Church,” or used some similar expression.
I PRAY that, in view of the declaration of His Grace, the Archbishop of
Sydney, that he could not interfere with his clergyman’s actions in connection
with Sunday School affairs ; and in view of the efforts which have been vainly
put forth by myself and others during the past eighteen months to place this
matter before any responsible department of Church of England government; and
in view also of the fact that, under present conditions, exactly the same trouble
may occur in any Church of England Sunday School next Sunday, your Synod
may be pleased to appoint a special committee, composed equally of clergymen
and laymen (these latter, if possible, Superintendents or ex-Superintendents of
Sunday Schools), to which all Sunday School matters can, when necessary, be
referred for adjudication, the authority of which committee shall exceed that of
the Parish Clergyman, and the decision of which shall be supreme.
I PRAY that, if it be considered necessary for the full investigation which I
seek, I may be summoned to appear in person before the bar of your Synod to
answer any questions which may be required of me, and that I may there be
afforded an opportunity to deny any accusations which have been, or which may
be, laid against me before any credence is given to those accusations.
And your Petitioner will ever pray.
EDWARD McCREERY SHEA HILL,
Rockdale, N.S.W*
19th September, 1899.


CORRESPONDENCE. &c.
Letter to Archdeacon Cowper, Lean of Sydney. (The Archbishop had not
yet returned from England.)
Rockdale, 26th February, 1898.
Von. Archdeacon Cowper, Lean of Sydney.
Yen. Sir,— ln your position as the present head of the Church of England in
Sydney I desire to ask you for information on the following point in connection
with Sunday School work :
When money has been collected by the Superintendent and Teachers in a
Sunday School, almost solely from the children in the Sunday School—thus
forming a “ Sunday School Fund” for the purpose of purchasing books and other-
wise carrying on the work of the school—is it in the power of the clergyman of
the Parish to appropriate any of this money and hand it over to the use of the
Churchwardens without the consent of, and in direct opposition to the wishes of.
the Superintendent and Teachers of the Sunday School ?
In whose hands is the control of monies thus collected ? and in what manner
should they be disbursed ?
By giving information on these points, you will very much oblige
Yours obediently,
E. McCREERY SHEA HILL.
It should be noticed that there was in this letter no special charge made
against any person. It simply, and broadly, asked for information. The
necessity for desiring such information from a recognized authority will be fully
understood from my second letter to the Lean.
Leanery, March 2nd, 1898.
Sir, — I have to acknowledge your letter of the 26th ult., and in reply beg
to say that I must decline to answer such questions as those which you have put
to me, which insinuate misappropriation of a Sunday School Fund without
specific information on the subject.
Your words imply that clergyman and churchwardens agree in such mis-
appropriation.
Yours faithfully,
WILLIAM M. COWPER.
Mr. E. McCreery Hill.
Rockdale, 3rd March, 1898.
Venerable Archdeacon Cowper, Lean of Sydney.
Yen. Sir, —In answer to your letter of yesterday’s date, I exceedingly regret
that any necessity has arisen for approaching you as I am doing, but under the
circumstances in which our Sunday School is placed I feel perfectly justified in
coming to you as the present head of the Church of England in Sydney, for in-
formation and help and guidance in the matter.
I had hoped that the questions which I had put in my former letter would
have obtained such answers as would have enabled us to settle our difficulties
here without further trouble, and I am really sorry that I am asked for “ specific
information” on the subject to secure your definite answer. But, as I am con-
vinced that the future welfare of our Sunday School, and the interest of the


teachers in their work are inseparably bound up in this question, I will put the
whole matter fully before you, trusting solely to your sense of justice in your
decision, and being, with, I am sure, the teachers, perfectly willing to bow to your
ruling.
The matter refers to St. John’s Sunday School, Rockdale.
Some weeks since, at a Teachers’ Meeting, the Churchwardens*, through one
of the Sidesmen, who is also a teacher, made a request that the Sunday School
would contribute something towards the cleaning of the Church—the Sunday
School being always held in the Church, and, of course, the children making it
more dirty in one Sunday than the congregation in a dozen Sundays.
The justice of this request was at once seen, and it was immediately decided
that four shillings a month be paid to the Churchwardens towards the cleansing of
the Church.
But,—and here is the whole trouble, —the teachers positively objected to take
this four shillings out of the Sunday School money-box, which contains only the
contributions of the children towards the working of the Sunday School. Some
of the teachers were even willing to come once a month and clean out the Church
themselves sooner than allow this money to be taken. It was eventually decided
that the teachers would make up the amount amongst themselves each month,
and hand it over to the Churchwardens, and information to this effect was sent
to the Wardens.
But at our next Teachers’ Meeting word was sent by the Wardens that they
would not have this money from the teachei s, but must get it out of the Sunday
School funds. Their answer was that if they did not choose to receive the money
as the Sunday School Teachers gave it, they might do without it altogether.
Previous to our next meeting, a Wardens’ meeting was held. I have infor-
mation that Rev. Mr. Killworth,f though he had been present at our meeting and
knew perfectly well the wishes of the teachers, there told the Wardens that he
would himself take the money out of the Sunday School box.
At our next Teachers’ Meeting, then, Mr. Killworth said that the money was
to be taken out of our Sunday School Fund for the cleaning of the Church. I
said that we had arranged to collect it amongst the teachers, but he said that he
ordered it to be taken out of the box, and he would not listen to anything further
in the matter from myself or from the teachers—but directed the next business to
be proceeded with at once—and he has since obtained the four shillings from the
Treasurer of the Sunday School.
I will make no comment of any kind on the action of Mr. Killworth and the
Churchwardens.
This, then, is my whole question—has the clergyman such control over the
Sunday School Funds, that—in direct opposition to the wishes of the superin-
tendent and teachers he can dispose of those funds as he pleases ? or, are the
funds—collected by the superintendent and teachers—in their own control, to be
disposed of, at their Teachers’ Meetings, as they consider best for the good of the
Sunday School ?
I have been superintendent of this Sunday School since July, 1892—when
it was St. Stephen’s—and I have now a band of Sunday School workers number-
ing twenty-seven, of which any superintendent might be proud.
They are thoroughly united, earnest workers, willing, as the above-mentioned
incident will show, to do almost anything for the good of the Sunday School,
and there has always been perfect peace and harmony amongst us when we are
let alone, and we have clearly demonstrated, by the wonderful success of our
Sunday School, that we are quite capable of managing its affairs. But this is the
second time this kind of trouble has occurred in connection with money matters,
disturbing our harmony and otherwise causing a feeling of insecurity and uncer-
tainty which is not conducive to a thorough interest in our Sunday School and
its work, and I sincerely trust that the whole case will receive your earnest
* The Churchwardens mentioned herein are Mr. E. J. Statham, of Bexley ; Mr. W. Carson, J.P.
formerly of Rockdale, now of Marrickville ; and Mr. T. Eatherly, of Rockdale.
fßev. Arthur Killworth, 8.A., LL.B., at present of St. Mary’s, West Maitland.


attention, so that we, as superintendent and teachers, may be placed in our correct
position with regard to our control of our Sunday School collections and their
disbursement.
I am, Ven. Sir, yours faithfully,
E. McC. S. HILL.
Deanery, Sydney, March 10th, 1898.
Dear Sir,—l have not found time to answer your letter of the 3rd inst.
until to-day.
Some of the statements contained in it rendered it necessary for me to see the
Rev. Mr. Killworth and question him upon them. He has denied the accuracy
of several things stated by you, and assures me that he has not acted in the
arbitrary manner represented by you, but with the assent and approval of the
teachers.
With regard to the payment of four shillings a month by the teachers for the
cleaning of the Church-school, he informs me that some of the parents objected to
their children who were teachers paying for the cleaning, and not the teachers
generally.
He further asserts that he has neither taken nor received any money what-
ever from the box.
Your first question does not appear to give a fair statement of the case. But
I may say that your description of the fund as one raised for the purchase of
books, &c., and other purposes connected with the working of the school, may be
taken as embracing the occasional cleaning of the building.
The control of the fund is generally in the hands of a Committee, and the
disbursement by a Treasurer.
Yours faithfully,
WILLIAM M. COW PER.
E. McCreery Shea Hill, Esq.
The words in italics in this letter were underlined by the Dean. The meaning
of the words “ not the teachers generally” is not very clear, as I certainly did not
state that the “ teachers generally” objected to pay for the cleaning. On the
contrary, I stated that it was “ decided that the teachers would make up the
amount amongst themselves each month.”
With regard to the other underlined words—the only “ parents” who, as far
as the teachers were able to discover, “ objected to their children paying for the
cleaning” were one of the churchwardens and his wife, the two daughters of whom
were teachers. “ Parents” and “children” could thus, and thus only, be used in
the plural.
But is it not strange that a Churchwarden objected to his children paying
one half-penny each per Sunday for the benefit of the Sunday School ? And is it
not also strange that Mr. Killworth allowed this objection of one Churchwarden
(who, apart from the fact that two of his daughters had recently been made
teachers, had nothing whatever to do with the Sunday School or its work), to
overrule the expressed wishes of about twenty-five Sunday School teachers and
officers, almost all of whom were free to act for themselves in the matter, and
whose parents, in no instance which we could hear of, objected to the money
being paid as the teachers had previously determined ?
Other parts of this letter will be alluded to later on.
The post which brought me the above letter, brought me also the following
from Mr. Killworth :
Kogarah, March 10, 1898.
Mr. E. McC. S. Hill
Dear Sir,—As Rector of the Parish of St. George, I beg leave to inform you
that your services as Superintendent of St. John’s Church of England Sunday
School are no longer required.


By your persistent disloyalty to myself, by your malicious attempt to injure
me by your recent communications with the Dean of Sydney, as well as by your
ostentatious antagonism to the interests of the Church, you have rendered your
dismissal absolutely necessary. Yours faithfully,
ARTHUR KILLWORTH.
Immediately on receipt of this letter—which reached me on the morning of
Friday, the 11th March, —1 wrote to all the teachers and officers in connection
with the Sunday School, informing them of my dismissal by Mr. Killworth, and
asking them to meet me that night in the Rockdale Town Hall.
I also wrote the following letter, which I took to the Deanery myself, inclos-
ing with it Mr. Killworth’s letter to me :
Rockdale, 11th March, 1898.
To the Yen. Archdeacon Cowper, Dean of Sydney.
Yen. Sir, —I received your letter this morning and with it the letter from
the Rev. Mr. Killworth, which I now inclose.
I would very earnestly pray for your very careful attention to this whole
matter.
In July, 1892, I was put in charge of St. Stephen’s Sunday School, with two
teachers and sixteen children. It has now, I think, -twenty-seven teachers and
nearly two hundred and fifty children. *
This.dismissal is certainly unjust, and will have big results if not cancelled.
I have very little indeed to interest me in life, but half of that little is centred
in St. John’s Sunday School—and all Rockdale knows this. The Sunday School,
the Church, and the Church of England at large, will lose much prestige in Rock-
dale if this dismissal is persisted in.
A common murderer has a fair trial before many witnesses. Will the Church
of England grant to one who has been Superintendent in one of its Sunday Schools
for nearly six years, a fair trial before witnesses, ere he is dismissed from that
position ?
Will you hear a suggestion ? I have hurriedly summoned all my teachers to
meet in the Rockdale Town Hall to-night at 8.30. Will you, as you value justice,
send someone to confer with them, and hear the whole state of matters in the
Sunday School —and even beyond it—from their lips, in the absence Of both Mr.
Killworth and myself ?
I will go even further. Will you make the most searching inquiries concerning
the work of each, from one end of Rockdale to the other, and I will abide by
any result you arrive at ?
But for to-night—l would give much not to be absent from my post on Sunday.
If you will send a judge to Rockdale to-night I will gladly pay any expenses
which you may wish, and I will willingly accept his decision as to whether I am
to be dismissed or not. Ido not fear any inquiries—and surely I can be granted
what a murderer can ?
lam really earnest about my Sunday School. It is my Sunday School—not
Mr. Killworth’s.
I bear this letter myself, and await a reply.
You admit in your letter that Mr. Killworth had not that control over the
money which he twice assumed.
I am, Yen. Sir, yours obediently,
E. McC. S. HILL.
I did not see the Dean, but was informed that the reply would be sent after
me. Later in the evening I received the following telegram ;
Mr. E. McC. S. Hill, Rockdale.
Sir, —Letter received with regret, but am unable to comply with request
regarding to-night. Further consideration.
Dean of Sydney, Deanery.
I afterwards found the number to be neirly two hundred and eighty


At the meeting of teachers which took place in the Town Hall that night,
I learned that Mr. Killworth had been informed that the meeting was about to be
held, and had sent word to several of the teachers requesting them not to attend it.
At that meeting the following letter to the Dean was drafted, and signed
by every teacher and officer present.
Town Hall, Rockdale, 11th March, 1898.
To the Ven. Dean of Sydney.
Sir, —At a meeting being held in the above Hall, we, as teachers,
having heard the full correspondence between Mr. Hill and yourself, desire fully
and unanimously to vindicate Mr. Hill in every of his statements, and to deny
that the Rev. A. Killworth has acted in this matter, as he states he has done,
“ with the assent and approval of the teachers.”
Mr. Hill has gained the respect and esteem of us all as teachers, and some of
us have worked under him from the beginning, and should he be so unjustly
dismissed from the position of Superintendent, we feel sure that the school will
suffer greatly, and the matter will cause a great scandal, and will injure the work
of Christ in this parish.
Signed by—
Mrs. Twiss Miss G. Allars
Mrs. Walker Miss King
Mrs. Gissing Miss O’Brien
Miss Price Miss Isabella Young
Miss Lardner Mr. Sharpe
Miss Penhall Mr. King.
Miss A. Allars.
I cannot allow this letter to pass without stating that, though the original
letter forwarded to the Dean was in the handwriting of the above-named Mr.
Sharpe, he immediately afterwards severed himself from the rest of the teachers
and sided with Mr. Killworth and the Churchwardens. It is also worthy of
mention that one of the Churchwardens was conspicuous, during the holding of
the meeting, by his presence in the large hall on to which the room in which the
meeting was held opened. And it was specially observed by the teachers during
the meeting that the door of the room should remain.open. These two circum
stances easily account for the fact that on the following Sunday Mr. Killworth
was evidently aware of all that had transpired at the meeting which he had
attempted to prevent, and he told the teachers, while in the Church, that the
meeting was a “conspiracy,” and he called them “ conspirators.”
I forwarded the above letter from the teachers, together with the following
to the Dean :
Rockdale, 14th March, 1898.
To the Very Reverend Dean Cowper,
Dean of Sydney.
Ven. Sir, — I have been requested to forward you the accompanying letter,
which is signed by everyone who was present at the meeting which 1 informed
you was about to be held. Some of the teachers sent me word that they could
not attend, and others might have been present had the Rev. Mr. Killworth not
sent word to them that he reqwsted them not to attend the meeting. I was directed
to hold over this letter until it was seen what Sunday would bring forth—hence
the delay.
You, Sir, have this matter in hands, and I trust that, in the cause of justice,
you will hear my version of matters as well as Mr. Killworth’s, and, if there is
any difference in our statements, I ask that you will sift them to the bottom.
At the meeting on Friday night the teachers denied that Mr. Killworth had
any power to dismiss me without their approval, and they directed me to take
my place on Sunday morning as usual.
I feel sure that the details of yesterday’s proceedings will thoroughly astonish
you.


1 ar “ ved ft the church at the usual hour, but found the door locked. Mr.
Kill worth and Mr. Bowers* shortly afterwards drove up, and Mr. Killworth
obtained the key and opened the church. The Minister’s Warden and another
Warden then arrived.
I waited until the teachers came, and walked into the church with them and
as the Sunday School was being opened, stood up near a seat at the top of the
, Mr ; Klllwo , rth immediately, from the pulpit, before the teachers
and children, ordered me to leave the church, and I refused to do so. Mr. Bowers
and one of the Wardens then ordered me to leave, and I refused. They then
seemed as if they were going to put me out, but I instantly warned them not to
attempt to do it. Mr. Killworth then, still standing in the pulpit, ordered Mr
Bowers to go for a policeman to put me out of the church. Mr. Bowers went for a
policeman, who came to the door of the church, but refused to enter.
The only thing which I attempted to do in connection with the Sunday School
was to mark the Roll Book without speaking to either teacher or child, but Mr
Kdlworth knocked up the book in my hand before all in a manner which many
would have knocked him down for doing. I did not even re-open the book, but
asked one of the V\ ardens to give the teachers their registers, and walked over
to a seat and remained there for the rest of the service.
, * , m .ay mention that if I had left the building the teachers and children would
destroyed W 6( 016 a m ° St to a unit ’ and the Sunday School would have been
I remained for Church, and, on coming home, learned that it was the whole
conversation of Rockdale that a policeman had been sent for to remove me from
tne church.
I then went to the evening Sunday School, and sat in the same place during
the service, but no one interfered with me. *
After the school Mr. Killworth requested the teachers to wait for a moment.
I remained. He then told them that if they did not withdraw from the position
which they had taken up by Wednesday night (when there will be a teachers’
meeting), they might consider their places in the Sunday School vacant
The sister of one of the trustees of the church then attempted to speak, but
Air. Kdlworth told her he would not listen to her. The wife of another trustee
ot the church tried to speak, and he used the expression—“ Hold your tongue
Mrs. . f Ao one was allowed to utter a word, and all filed out.
I can assure you that the only crime of myself and the teachers is that, in
connection with our Sunday School work, we will not submit to be told by Mr
Killworth as he has told us in the exact words, “ I’ll do as I like,” and I do not
think that any law of the Church of England asks us to do so.
Now, as to the future. This matter has roused all Rockdale, and all denom-
inations in it, for all know what I have done for the Church of England Sunday
m h °2r : „ I > , e l eve *: hat , even the policeman told Mr. Bowers that he “ knew what
Mr. Hill had done for the Sunday School”—and the Archbishop of Sydney will
remember that he was told on two or three occasions what I had been doing for four
years for the Church of England in Rockdale, when it had neither clergyman nor
church I brought my Sunday School to Mr. Killworth’s church, and now he
wants to turn me out and keep the Sunday School. I may tell you that the
teachers, the children, and the parents of the children are with me, and if I am
turned out the Sunday School is ruined, and the church may practically be
Why will you not cause full, but uninfluenced inquiries to be made all over
Rockdale, concerning Mr, Killworth and myself? and if I am found to be worthy
of dismissal by a properly-constituted tribunal and a fair trial, I will promise to
leave at once, and will try to influence both teachers and children to remain
Surely I can offer no more than this ?
You can save my Sunday School.
Yours obediently,
E. McCREERY SHEA HILL.
* Mr. W. B. Bowers, catechist, at present of Ultimo,
t This name was inserted in full in my letter to the Dean.


The following is the Dean’s reply : Deanery,
Sydney, March 14th, 1898,
Dear Sir, . T ~
In the telegram which I sent you on Friday afternoon I said 1 would give
further consideration to your letter ; I have done so, and 1 think it ray duty to
refer especially to the mistake which you give expression to in its concluding
You say: “The Sunday School is my Sunday School, not Mr. Killworth’s.
In this you are entirely in error. The Sunday School in a Parish is a part of the
machinery by which the clergyman endeavours to instruct and train the young of
his flock by the aid of teachers, for whose selection and appointment he is
resnonsible.
The Superintendent of the school, when there is one, is regarded as his officer,
and not an independent authority.
I think it right to point out these things plainly to you, as you have evidently
misconceived your position.
Since writing the above I have received your letter of the 14th, enclosing the
letter signed by thirteen of the teachers. I refrain, at present, from expressing
any opinion in reply to it.
Yours faithfully,
WILLIAM M. COWPER.
E. McCreery Shea Hill.
I may state here that the Dean has never expressed his opinion to me
regarding that letter. To one remark in the above letter I felt it necessary to
make the following reply , ....
Rockdale, March 16th, 1898.
To the Yen. the Dean of Sydney,
Yen. Sir, —In answer to your note just received, one word of explanation is
necessary, and I trust you will receive it. , . ,
By stating that the Sunday School was my Sunday School I meant to imply
that I had made the Sunday School, and had held it free from any authority or
control for four years, so that it absolutely belonged to myself and my teachers.
When Mr. Killworth came, then, we welcomed him, put ourselves under his
leadership, and became the greatest factor—the only nucleus from which anything
could come—in establishing a Church of England in Rockdale. And now we
are receiving our reward. . . . , ,
I am sincerely sorry that you have been brought into this trouble, but we
needed a higher authority than our clergyman to whom we could apply for help
and guidance. ~ , ..
I am, Yen. Sir, yours obediently,
M. McC. S. HILL.
It will have been observed that Mr. Killworth announced a teachers’ meeting,
to be held on the night of the 16th, after the usual week-night service.
When, after the service, the teachers entered the building, Mr. Killworth
announced’: “There will be no teachers’ meeting. Kindly all leave the church.”
He afterwards sent special invitations to selected teachevs to attend a Social
Evening ” at his own private residence, and, even though some of those so invited
did not attend, he there appointed Mr. Statham and Mr. Carson—two of the
Churchwardens—as joint superintendents in my place. The teachers’ “con-
spiracy,” in a public Hall and with open doors, and the invitations having been
sent to all teachers and officers, without exception, will surely bear favourable
comparison with this “teachers’ meeting ” ?
Rockdale, 21st March, 1898.
To the Yen. the Dean of Sydney. , , .
Yen. Sir,—l forward you herewith a marked copy of one of our local
newspapers.


It is a matter of great surprise to everyone that the Church authorities in
Svdnev have taken n o g action of any kind in this affair, but are allowing it to
scandalize the Church of England all over the parish. The people are looking to
them for iustice, and none seems to be coming.
I attended the Sunday School yesterday, morning and evening.
When Mr Killworth had opened the school in the morning he announced t
the tochers and scholars that £ had appointed Mr Statham -
and Mr Carson as his Assistant Superintendent. It is worth noticing that these
are two of the three Churchwardens who refused the money from the teacheis,
hut demanded that it should be taken out of the Sunday School fund .
Surely you can inform me if all these proceedings are legal. Has Mr.
Killworth the power to dismiss me, and to appoint two others in my p
any part, and in the will of the teachers and the
parents of the children, simply through lus own autocratic will.
The non-interference of the Church authorities is making matters much worse,
and i* simply lessening all chances of a final settlement. Children and congregation
are dr if awafy already there are some I never expect to see in the Sunday
School again. It was expected that there would have been someone present from
Svdnev fast Wednesday night; but no one came. The teachers came ready t
Killworth, but, before the, peoph. had left the
building after the usual week-night service, Mr. Killworth announced i
will be no Teachers’ Meeting to-night—the meeting is adjourned. Kindly all leave
the four teachers determined to remain away, and they were absent
yeoterfay Sterday fo«r more, with possibly a fifth determined to be abeent
next S many children were absent, and others came in the hope that I
would to State? But it was announced that Ift. Statham was appointed
and I have alrea.ly this morning heard of four famta-three rf
three children, and one of two—which will be absent next Sunday, six children to
goto the Congregational Sunday School, and three (if not the five) to go to the
WeS Now' S Sir is it in humanity for me to sit quietly idle and see the workofsix
vears destroyed by the “ I’ll do as 1 like” of any man ? I tell you piamiy that
Mr Killworth’s whole congregation has risen against him in this ma ei ( P
few who honour the position which he holds), and they
nm-nothing more than an impartial justice, and they look to the Church
3horities for it And, as a proof that they are in earnest, members have left
collectors have returned their cards, and contributors have
them contributions. inst me which if found true would
unfit mf for the position of Superintendent of St. John’s Sunday School I
** S l k „d m „o«! whtam Itodo 1 You still hold my letter of dismissal horn Mr
Killworth and until you return it 1 cannot consider my dismissal ratified, noi
m v successor legally appointed, and so I can take no free steps. Suggestions are
bemg made, anS offers of different kinds are bemg given to me but lam repelling
~ii x hear definitely from the Church authorities in Sydney. But of this lam
" if it was only through the love which they have shown me lately, the
Zter has workZ So do°aLngst the children, ami I will not give it up until
He present conditional things cannot last much longer, and I must make
STb d inlS t ifnot°to t 1 but, '*hate“or they may


I would respectfully, but earnestly, urge an immediate settlement of this
mat ter by your Church authorities.
I am, sir, yours faithfully,
E. McC. S. HILL.
Deanery,
Sydney, March 26th, 1898.
Dear Sir, —The effect of reading the article in the newspaper which you sent
me—so grossly vituperative and insulting in its language—was to prevent me
sending you any reply. ' .
I now write to acknowledge your letter, and to say that I have no authority
to interfere in a dispute between a clergyman and the teachers and officers in his
Sunday School. lam unable to interfere in this.
I deeply regret the occurrence, and much which seems to have attended it.
Yours faithfully,
WILLIAM M. COWPER
E. McC. S. Hill.
P.S.—I return Mr. Killworth’s letter to you, apologising for not having done
so before—which was an oversight.
W. M. C.
“ The article in the newspaper,” referred to above, was the account of the
proceedings in the church on the morning of the 13th, which appeared in one of
the local newspapers.
Letter to St. George's Advocate, 2nd April, 1898.
Sir, —There is an observation in your edition of last week, which gives mean
opportunity of writing you a few lines concerning the matter of the “ church
embroglio.”
You imply that you have been charged with unfairly taking my part in this
matter. I, Sir, have heard that lam charged with writing the article which
appeared under the above heading in your issue of the 19th instant. Now (forgive
me if I state the matter plainly) the Rockdale public knows very well that there
has been in the past no love lost between the Advocate and myself. Apart from
the wording of that article, the public ought to know that I would not have
sought the assistance of the Advocate in any personal matter, neither would the
Advocate have taken my part if it had had a shadow of doubt as to the integrity
of my position or the injustice with which I had been treated. These thoughts
ought surely exonerate both the Advocate and myself from any complicity in the
whole matter. I certainly supplied you with any information for which you
asked.* I have also supplied at least two other papers with information, but
neither in your case nor in anj r other have I volunteered to do so.
May I make use of this, at any rate temporary, rapprochement to add a few
more words concerning this very unpleasant affair ?
Your article of the 19th has been declared by certain parties to be nothing
but “lies.” I happened to be present as well as other people when it was all
going on, and I think in Rockdale my word is believed at least as much as the
words of other people, and, having gone carefully over the whole article, the only
inaccuracy which I can perceive is that the word “policeman” was used, and not
the word “constable.” The word “constable” is used twice—so that may
account for the plural “ lies ” having been applied to the article.
I have been asked, however, to point out an inaccuracy in your issue of the
26th. You state that on Sunday the 20th, I “ continued to administer the
Superintendent’s functions.” Now, from the time that the roll book was so
forcibly closed in my hand, I took no part in connection with the Sunday School,
but simply sat on one of the seats during each of the two services on the 13th,
20th, and 27th inst.
* Not direct to the editor, but through his reporter.


Next Sunday, assisted by those teachers who have left St. John’s, I will open
the Church of England Mission Sunday School in the Masonic Hall, at 10 o’clock
in the morning and three in the evening.
And here may I record a few words of thanks ? *
It is in times like this through which I have lately passed that expressions of
sympathy, and a belief in the justice of the position taken up, are needed and
valued ; and from all parts, and from all classes have I received these expressions,
and I heartily thank all for them. But there are those whose kindness and
sympathy and sacrifice I can never forget—the teachers who, attached to their
classes and loving their work, were yet willing to give up all, and brave a clerical
ostracism so that they might take my part when they considered that I was un-
justly treated. These are sympathetic actions which speak far louder than any
words, and for which I here tender grateful and sincere thanks.
Now another tone in conclusion. I believe many charges are being made
against myself and the teachers which are absolutely untrue. Amongst other
things, I have heard that there are certain charges of heresy promulgated against
myself.
I desire publicly to challenge the Rev. Mr. Killworth, Mr. Bowers, and the
three Churchwardens of St. John’s Church—Mr. Statham, Mr. Carson, and Mr.
Eatherley—to a public meeting in the Town Hall or the Masonic Hall (for the
use of which I will pay) that they may there bring this whole affair before the
public, and accuse me of any matter relating to my beliefs, or my past six years’
work or teaching in connection with the Church of England in Rockdale. If
they will not accept this challenge, the public will know more fully which side to
take, and I am perfectly within my rights to deny all accusations, and to ask the
public not to believe anything which is not proved.
Yours, &c.,
E. McC. S. HILL.
As he had now returned to Sydney from England, I obtained a personal inter-
view with the Archbishop, who was accompanied by Archdeacon Langley. The
Archbishop informed me that he had learned of all the trouble, but he stated that
he “ could not interfere in the matter,” and that “ Mr. Killworth had a perfect
right to act as he did.” The Archbishop asked me not to open the Sunday School
which I informed him I intended to open ; but, as he did not attempt to make any
alternative offer or suggestion, or hold out the slightest hope of any settlement, I
told him that I would do so.
To the Parents of Children lately attending St. John’s Sunday School,
Rockdale, and the public generally.
My dismissal from the position of Superintendent of St. John’s Sunday School,
and the circumstances accompanying it, are too recent and too well known to need
repetition ; and my record in connection with Sunday School work in Rockdale
during the past six years has been so noticed and appreciated, that there need be
no excuse offered for my refusal to remain idle now, while, if such is required, the
circumstances in which I am placed must be sufficient excuse for the peculiarity
of the phase which my future work has now been forced to assume.
While justice does not always at first prevail, and matters have often to be
left in the hands of Time, the great Vindicator, to be set right, the present, with
all its opportunities for usefulness, dare not be allowed to pass neglected by.
It is for this reason, and seeing that numbers of children are being taken
from St. John’s, that I have willingly and gladly acceded to the expressed wishes
of many of yourselves and your children, and have determined to open a Sunday
School which shall be carried on under exactly the same conditions as those which
I adopted, and which have been so successful, during the past six years.
In this undertaking I shall have the able assistance of most of those Teachers
who, as you are probably aware, have left St. John’s Sunday School on account
of recent events, and I feel certain that, knowing our past work amongst your
children, you will have no hesitation, should you desire to do so, in entrusting
their future religious education on Sundays to our caret


I would take this opportunity to express my heartfelt thanks, first to those
Teachers who, through sympathy with me and my cause, and to show their sense
of a great injustice done, withdrew from the work which they loved, and to which
they had given their Sabbaths in some cases for years; and secondly, to the public
of Rockdale, and, indeed, the whole district, who have, almost with one voice,
expressed their sympathy with me and these Teachers, and their appreciation of
the position which we took up upon all matters connected with these recent
troubles. I trust that our future work will show that all these kindnesses
are remembered and deserved.
March 30th, 1898. E. McC. S. HILL.
The Church of England Mission Sunday School
Will open in the Masonic Hall, Bay-street, on Sunday next, April 3rd.
Sunday School Hours—Morning 10 until 10.45.
Evening 3 ~ 4
E. McC. S. HILL, Superintendent.
I received the following letter from one of the Superintendents who did not
hesitate to take my place, though appointed in the manner above mentioned :
Beaconsfield St., Rockdale, April 1, ’9B.
Mr. E. McC. S. Hill,
Dear Sir, —I have to request that you will be good enough to give up to me
the Registers and any other records in connection with St. John’s Church of
England Sunday School, Rockdale. Also to return the School prizes and certifi-
cates which were presented to the Minister by the Church of England Sunday
School Institute, and were improperly removed from the vestry.
I remain, Dear Sir, yours truly,
E. J. STATHAM, Superintendent.
The following is my reply to him :
Rockdale, 4th April, 1898.
Mr. E. J. Statham,
Sir,— ln answer to your note of Ist inst., I must take very strong exception
to the remark with which that note concludes.
You accuse me of having improperly removed certain articles from the vestry.
While I was Superintendent of the Sunday School, I recognized that I had
no right of any kind in connection with the vestry, and, as far as I can
possibly remember, I never removed anything from it except the chairs occasion-
ally for the teachers, the mission hymn-books when those hymns were being sung,
and the plates for collections during the children’s services, and the key to lock
the church door. I never otherwise interfered with the vestry or anything
connected with it
As Superintendent of the Sunday School, I had full charge of anything and
everything connected with it, and the prizes and certificates did not come into
my possession “ improperly.”
From your conduct towards me lately, I am convinced that you have heard
and believe, without giving me the chance to refute them, many statements which
are equally as false as the above.
If you write another letter which does not contain a falsehood, I will answer
you concerning the other part of your note.
I am, yours, &c.,
E. McC. S. HILL.
I never received an answer to this letter. Most of the prizes and certificates
referred to—and which were gained while I was their Superintendent—l dis-
tributed at a public meeting (ot which I gave Mr. Statham due notice), to the
children who, having left St. John’s, were then attending the Church of Eng-
land Mission Sunday School—and the remainder I returned some time afterwards
to St. John’s. The Registers and other matters which I held as Superintendent
of St. John’s Sunday School I still have in my possession.


Rockdale, 11th April, 1898.
To His Grace the Archbishop of Sydney.
May it please Your Grace,
In reference to the present Sunday School trouble in Rockdale, I have been
directed to ask Your Grace if the Rev. Mr. Kill worth had a legal right to act as
he did, seeing that we believe he holds no license for St. John’s Church, nor for
any Church in Rockdale.
Now, a personal matter. Since the interview which I had with Your Grace,
I have remembered that Your Grace spoke of the article which had appeared in
the local newspaper as if I had written it. I desire to state that, no matter how
I felt towards any man, I would not write an article like that concerning him,
and I certainly did not write that one.
I desire to ask a question. I have evidence that both Mr. Killworth and
Mr. Bowers are spreading absolute untruths concerning me, and are speaking of
the Sunday School Teachers who have left St. John’s in a manner which is a
disgrace to Christianity. People are being told that I have done things which I
have not done, and I am being charged with heresies of which I am not guilty,
and, further (Your Grace can have immediate proof should you desire it), Mr.
Killworth has stated that he will not allow his present teachers to have any
communication whatever with me. v
Now, Your Grace, am Ito have no chance to refute these statements ? 1
have, in the public press, challenged Mr. Killworth, Mr. Bowers, and the Church-
wardens, in a letter, of which I forward Your Grace a copy,* to accuse me in
public, but the challenge has not been accepted.
Now, my question is this : Have I not a legal right to bring up this matter at
the Easter Meeting, and to demand that I there be accused of these crimes, and
not in house-to-house visitation where I have no opportunity of answering the
charges ?
The Church of England preaches to others justice from its pulpits, but I have
been for the past month striving to get justice from the Church of England, and
have failed.
Forgive me if I state that it is possible these matters referred to above will
be denied to Your Grace. If they are, will Your Grace kindly bear in mind that
the signatures of thirteen Sunday School teachers gave an absolute denial to some
of Mr. Killworth’s statements to the Dean —and then ask me to produce my
witnesses at any public meeting Your Grace may choose.
It is a disgrace to any Church, and to Christianity, that persons, after years
of devoted service, should be practically excommunicated from that Church, and
should receive such approbrious names as I and my teachers are now receiving,
because we take the side of Right and Justice, in opposition to autocratic
despotism and self-will.
Would Your Grace kindly let me know at once if I have a legal right to bring
this matter before the Easter Meeting, and to there meet my accusers face to
face. The meeting will be held on Wednesday night.
> I am, Your Grace, yours obediently,
E. McC. S. PULL.
The Archbishop’s reply to the above letter is marked Private,” but the
following answer of mine touches on some of its points.
Rockdale, 22nd April, 1898.
To His Grace the Archbishop of Sydney.
May it please Your Grace,
I thank Your Grace for your letter of the 12th inst. In deference to Your
Grace’s wish, though I attended the Easter Meeting at St. John’s, and desired to
say something on a couple of matters which were mentioned, I did not once speak.
But I considered that my presence there would prevent things being said which
most likely would have been said had I been absent.
* See Page 17.


Your Grace takes exception to me opening the Mission School, and believes
that “it has a separatist tendency.” 1 can assure Your Grace that, on the
contrary, it will be the means of keeping children and teachers together, who
otherwise would have become separated and scattered. The teachers and
children who have joined the Mission Sunday School would, in nearly every case,
have gone either to Sunday Schools of other denominations or to nowhere. In
every single teacher’s case, it would have been the latter.
One of my agreements with the teachers is that, if another clergyman comes
to the Parish, they can, by a vote of the majority—and if St. John’s will admit
them—re-enter the Sunday School, bringing their children back with them —
though I may state that, from the treatment which they have received, I never
expect to see them return. It will thus be seen that there is far more of a uniting
than of a “ separatist tendency” in the Sunday School.
As for myself, Your Grace writes of my “loyalty” to the Church. I doubt
if there is one in Rockdale who has been so “loyal” to the Church, or one in
Australia—perhaps in the world at the present moment—who has been rewarded
for that “ loyalty” as I have been.
Once is ((iiite sufficient in a lifetime to have a policeman brought to a church
door for the purpose of ejecting me ; and if every clergyman of the Church of
England has the power to do this, without any possibility of redress being
obtained, my only way of escape is to never again acknowledge the authority of
the Church of England over me, or over any of my work.
At the same time, I feel thankful that I have never regarded any Church as
the one centre of Christianity, and consequently the Catholic Church, as far as I
am concerned, has lost nothing by the recent trouble. But it might have been
otherwise, for, as Your Grace doubtless remembers, it was a dismissal for three
months by a Church of England clergyman from teaching his Sunday School class,
which made a Charles Bradlaugh ; and I may state that these recent events have
changed the lives and thoughts of many in'Rockdale.
I look forward to years of usefulness to my Master in different parts of the
world—for I have plans which may come to fruition—but I shall never forget the
way in which the Church of England rewards her workers, nor the indignity
which it has so utterly unjustly placed upon me.
With apologies for again writing to Your Grace,
I am, Your Grace, yours obediently,
E. McC. S. HILL.
To the Editor of the St. George’s Advocate.
Sir, —It is quite probable that many of your readers, having read through the
following letter, will consider it should not have been written. But will those
who thus consider bear in mind that the matters mentioned here have been
uttered in semi-secret from door to door by those whose position should make it
sacrilege to doubt them, so that the hearers can hardly but believe. And I may
tell them that if the Church, or any of its representatives, attack, falsely, my
personal character, I feel perfectly at liberty—nay, 1 consider it my bounden
duty—to fling back the charges at it or them, and exonerate myself and those
who depend upon me in the matter, from the contemptible accusations which I
feel fully justified in placing before the public in this letter.
You and your readers will remember that two or three weeks ago I offered
to pay for the use of either the Town Hall or the Masonic Hall if the Rev. A.
Killworth, Mr. Bowers, and the three churchwardens—Mr. Carson, Mr. Statham
and Mr. Eatherly—would there meet me and publicly charge me with any
matters which they might have against me in connection with the church work, or
doctrine, or anything else. It is almost needless to say that they had not the
moral courage to do so—and, if they think they have, I repeat the offer. My
whole desire is to make everything as public as I can make it, and, as I cannot
meet my accusers otherwise, lam compelled to answer them here. If lam asked
to do so, I will prove before the public every statement which I make in this
letter, naming the persons from whom the accusations came, and to whom they
were uttered.


It is quite possible that I would have ignored all these matters were it not
for the following incident. Some days since, two of the teachers of the Mission
Sunday School were visiting some children who have not been attending either
Sunday School. They were told that the father would not let them come to the
Mission Sunday School because he was informed that I had sent copies of your
edition of the 19th ultimo to the members of the Parochial Council in Maitland
on purpose to injure Mr. Killworth’s prospects of getting there.
Now, there are some very nasty accusations amongst these which I shall
mention, but I would sooner plead guilty to all of them, or to the worst form of
heresy with which I am charged, than have to admit that I was guilty of such a
despicable action, lam not attempting to judge the person who did send the
papers, but, if I had sent them, I would have been unworthy of being allowed to
have the charge of children in any Sunday School. And this was not the only
person to whom the tale was told.
I will now answer some of the questions seriatim. Everyone is aware that all
this trouble arose about the payment for the cleaning of the church. I am accused
of having refused to allow anything to be paid for the cleaning, thereby depriving
the “ poor washerwoman” of the money which Mr. Killworth and the wardens
were so solicitous that she should receive. In answer to this, I have been asked
to give the full particulars of the whole affair. Mr. Killworth was in the chair at
a teachers’ meeting, during which a message was received from the wardens asking
the teachers to contribute something from the Sunday School towards the cleaning
of the church. No one could deny the justice of that request —and no one did
deny it. If I was not the first, I was one of the first to speak in favour of giving
the money, and I pronounce it to be an untruth which that person has uttered
who stated that I had refused to allow the money to be paid. Word was sent to
the wardens that four shillings a month would be paid, but the teachers fully
agreed—and Mr. Killworth agreed with them—that the money would not be taken
out of the Sunday School funds, but the teachers would themselves contribute the
amount each month. And, in talking the matter over afterwards amongst them-
selves, it was suggested that a “Teachers’ Fund” be formed, and that the surplus
money which it contained might be spent on clothes for some of the
Sunday School children whose parents were very badly off. It was to
this arrangement that the wardens, displaying a childishness which is
utterly unaccountable in men of their years, sent word that they would
“ not have the money from the teachers, but must have it out of the Sun-
day School funds.” The answer was sent back to them—and the direct
message came from me—that they would “take it as they got it, or do
without it altogether.” Subsequently Mr. Killworth, though he had previously
agreed to the teachers’ arrangement, turned round, and, after an interview with
the wardens, in a manner which I would not brook from Pope or prelate, “ordered”
the money to be taken out of the school funds, and silenced every teacher by
“ next business, please.” It seems to me and to many others that the only way
to account for the above is that the Sunday School was in far too flourishing a
condition to please all those who had no hand in its management, and whose
special part of the work was in anything but a flourishing condition. A com-
parison can certainly be formed between the two departments when it is known
that, months ago, the wardens obtained books which the Sunday School had paid
for. Mr. Killworth promising that they would be paid for “when the wardens
could afford it.” When I was dismissed, the books had not been paid for, and I
doubt if they have been paid for since.
I then wrote to the Dean of Sydney—the Archbishop not having yet arrived
—asking if Mr. Killworth had power to interfere with the Sunday School funds
in direct opposition to the wishes of the superintendent and the teachers. Dean
Cowper referred to Mr. Killworth, who made statements to him which the
teachers afterwards wrote and flatly contradicted, and the same post brought me
the Dean’s answer and my dismissal from Mr. Killworth. After occurrences are
fairly well known. Thus it will be seen that, instead of refusing to allow this
money to be paid, I agreed to help to pay it out of my own pocket.
It is stated that Mr. Killworth sided with the wardens on account of my


“impertinent answer to them.” My answer to this is by asking the question
which is the more impertinent, my answer to them or their answer to the
teachers when offered what—no matter where it came from—was a gift, that the» r
would not have it from the teachers, but must have it out of the Sunday School
funds ?
I am accused of having falsely informed the Dean that Mi-. Killworth took
the money from the Sunday School box. I did not so inform the Dean. I told
him that at a certain wardens’ meeting Mr. Killworth stated that, if necessary,
“ he would himself take the money out of the Sunday School box,” and that Mr.
Killworth had since “obtained” the money from the treasurer of the Sunday
School. Though he did not actually handle the money himself, he ordered the
treasurer to pay it over to the wardens, which she did.
1 am accused of writing the article which appeared in your edition of the 19th
of last month. I have already answered this accusation in your columns by
emphatically denying it.
I am accused of sending copies of that edition to the Parochial Council in
Maitland. As previously stated, I consider this the most miserable and con-
temptible accusation of the lot. Whatever I have done in this whole matter has
been done openly, and my great trouble is that I cannot get my accusers to
face me as openly. I did not send a single copy of that paper to any without
letting them know from whom it came. I did not send the papers to Maitland,
and Ido not know who did. It is very probable, however, that if I can now find
the address of anyone on the Council, I will send a copy of this paper, because, if
the others were sent anonymously, I would be very sorry that the Council should
think I sent them.
I am accused of having improperly removed certain articles from the church
vestry. In a letter which I received from Mr. iStatham, one of the two present
superintendents of the Sunday School, the following words occur—“ I have to
request that' you will . . . return the School prizes and certificates which
. . . were improperly removed from the vestry.” Part of the conclusion of
my answer to that letter was as follows : —“ From your conduct towards me lately
I am convinced that you have heard—and believe without giving me the
chance to refute them—many statements which are equally as false as the above.”
I feel confident that that answer was brought before the conclave, but though
written on the 4th of this month, I have not yet received any acknowledgment.
There can be only two sides to this. If the matter contained in Mr. Statham’s
letter was true, my letter should have been very forcibly contradicted ; if it was
untrue, they should have had the manliness to admit it.
I am accused of having, previous to all this trouble, taken round for signature
a paper which was an endeavour to have Mr. Killworth removed from the parish.
I feel very much inclined to use “strong language” here. Not even such a
thought ever crossed ray mind, and I defy the one who has told this tale to
procure one person to whom I have ever shown or mentioned such a paper.
With such an accusation as this hovering round me, is it a wonder I write this
letter ?
And now there are some matters in connection with church doctrine and my
management of the Sunday School with which lam accused. They will perhaps
be of a personal nature, but they will serve to show that any accusation which
the present officials of St. John’s Church see the slightest chance of making
against my character they will not neglect, and they will also show the insigni-
ficance and the futility and the falseness of the accusations. At the same time, it
is but fair to the parents of those children whose religious education I have had
under control for the past six years, and to those of the children at present attend-
ing the Mission School, that they should know my answers to these accusations,
and my opinions in connection with these doctrines.
I am accused of not believing in the Sacrament, and of never having attended
it. Ido not like approaching this subject in a public paper, but it is one which I
dare not leave unanswered. It is perfectly true that I have never attended com-
munion since Mr. Killworth has come to the parish, but it is sufficient to state
that I have always believed to such an extent in the Sacrament, and have regarded


it as such a solemn ordinance that, for conscientious reasons which lam perfectly
willing to explain, 1 have never felt justified in approaching it during all that
time. lam far from having any High Church ideas in the matter, but the “In
remembrance of Me” is very sacred. Thus Ido “ believe” in communion with a
deep, firm, holy faith, which I am convinced that comparatively few have.
lam accused of not believing in Confirmation. It is strange that this should
be brought as an accusation against me, for I have always regarded Confirmation
as the most sacred moment in a man’s or woman’s religious life, and it is not long
since I urged upon the children in the Sunday School the solemnity of the step
which some of them contemplated taking. I will answer this somewhat as 1 have
answered the previous accusation. Ido believe in Confirmation—far more fully,
I am convinced, than do my accusers.
And now comes the latest and most extraordinary statement of all. It is not
an actual accusation against anyone, but people are left to form their own
opinions in the matter.
It was on the 13th of last month that all this trouble occurred. On the 15th
of this month I heard for the first time that the reason why the police was sent
for was because an anonymous letter was found on the vestry table threatening
Mr. Killworth, and stating that it might be necessary to send for the ambulance.
The insinuating part of this story lies in the fact that if the letter was placed
there it could only have been done between the Friday I received my dismissal
and Sunday morning, and everyone knew that I always had a latchkey for the
side door of the building. Thus my position in the matter is, to say the least of it,
peculiar. Mr. Killworth admits having received a threatening letter, but whether
prior to the 13th ultimo or not, I do not know.
Now, it is my intention to send a copy of this letter to Inspector Fosbery, of
the Sydney police, and to ask him if he will take any steps in this matter, for,
until something is more definitely known about it, those who accused me and
my teachers in other matters will have no difficulty in formulating accusations
in this.
Mr. Killworth called myself and the teachers “ conspirators” for holding
those two meetings which we held in the Town Hall, though I sent an invitation
to ever}' teacher and officer connected with the Sunday School, including the son
and two daughters of the wardens ; and yet we are to suppose that there was no
conspiracy in Mr. Killworth holding his first teachers’ meeting after the 13th ult.,
in his own private residence, and inviting only those whom he knew to be “ the
better class of teachers,”* while excluding those who were likely to oppose his
wishes.
And now it has been urged against us that I should not have opened a Sunday
School in opposition to St. John's. In answer to a letter which I received from
the Archbishop of Sydney on the 13th of this month, I wrote :—“lt was dismissal
by a Church of England clergyman, for three months, from teaching his Sunday
School class, which made a Charles Bradlaugh,” Was it not better for myself and
the teachers and children who left St. John’s that all should keep together and
help each other in a work which does not depend on any earthly church, than that
an opportunity should be given us to get disheartened and to wander, it might be,
even from Christianity. I believe that some day it will be found that our Mission
Sunday School has had its usefulness, though now, under the title of “Wesleyan
ranters,” we have been catalogued with other “Schism Shops.”
The above are some of the accusations which have reached me concerning
myself and those teachers who have left St. John’s on my account. If the public
could only know what I, and far more particularly they, have suffered in
connection with this matter, and the petty annoyances to which we have been
subjected, and the attempts which are being made to injure us, they would
not marvel that this retort has been wrung from me. Mr. Killworth has
stated to one lady that I am “ a bad, wicked man,” and to another that he “ will
not allow any of his teachers to have any communication with me.” But, has he
also included the teachers who have left him in this fearful condemnation ? I
*Mr. Killworth told one of the teachers who did attend my meeting in the Town Hull, that
he was very glad that “none of the better class of teachers” atteudel that meeting.


know he has stated that the teachers who have remained with him are “ the
better class of teachers,” and that Mr. Bowers has stated that the others are the
“ undesirable element ” which have been weeded out of the church (I can prove
these sayings if proof is asked for) ; but is this sufficient to account for some of
the present teachers in St. John’s passing the Mission Sunday School teachers in
the street without recognizing them ? But we cannot afford the time to go from
door to door to deny the charges which are being made against us, and to refute
the arguments which are being used to alienate from us the sympathy which
we have received from all classes in the district, and thus I am forced to answer
all these charges in the public press.
In conclusion, I would add a word to those belonging to St. John’s who have
known the present “undesirable element” in the past, and who have seen our
work for our Master amongst the children of the Sunday School and in connection
with the church. Have we ever done anything by word or deed to deserve the
persecution to which we are now subjected ? Have we not always done our very
utmost, giving time, and thought, and money to help the children and the Sun-
day School ? I defy one of you to contradict it. Then I turn on you all, and ask
4 ‘ Is this the way you reward us for our work of years amongst you ? Have you so
little moral courage amongst yourselves that —because a man, having the
legal right, scorns all moral right and justice, and gets rid of some
of the best workers whom he has ever had in the place, simply because
they dare to show that they have more courage and self-respect than you
have—have you so little moral courage, I say, that, though acknowledging the
integrity and justice of our position, you are afraid to show openly that you do
so ! This may seem hard on you, but I may tell you all that both I and the
teachers who have left you have been more than surprised at the utter want of
gratefulness for the past, or sympathy for the present which, as a body, you have
displayed towards us. There are exceptions amongst you, but they are very, very
few. Take care that the time does not come—as there are rumours it is coming
for some of you—when your work in the place shall be forgotten, and the fascin-
ation of some new-comer shall obliterate all memories of your past services, and
you, too, shall go. If it is so, I trust that, instead of wandering from the Master
on account of the doings of His servants, you may begin to understand more
fully—as we are beginning to understand—the depth of meaning in the prayer
“ Oh ! Thou Who changest not, abide with me.”
E. McC. S. HILL.
Rockdale, 28th April, 1898.
In accordance with statement in the above letter, I forwarded the following
to Inspector Fosbery :
Rockdale, 4th May, 1898.
To E. Fosbery, Esq., Inspector-General of Police.
Dear Sib, —I forward herewith a copy of the St. George’s Advocate of last
week, containing a specially marked portion of a letter over my signature.
On the 13th of March last, a policeman was sent for to eject me from the St.
John’s Church (Church of England) in Rockdale. I had received a letter from the
Rev. A. Killworth on the previous Friday, which was my dismissal from the
position of Superintendent of the Sunday School ; but, immediately on my entrance
to the church that morning Mr. Killworth ordered me out—and, because I would
not go, he sent for a policeman. Of course, as I was perfectly quiet and composed
from the moment I entered the building, the policeman could not interfere.
But now, as you will notice by my letter in the Advocate, it is rumoured that
Mr. Killworth received a threatening letter, stating that the “ ambulance might
be required” on that morning, and I know that he has admitted having received
some sort of a threatening letter, though I do not know when or of what kind.
I write to you, Sir, in the hope that this may be a matter for the Police
Department to take up. If a clergyman of the Church of England has received a
letter threatening bodily injury, if not death, would it not come under your in-
vestigation, though the threatened party did not approach you first in the matter ?
My interest in the matter is clear. The church authorities are doing what


they can against me at present, and, as there were only two or three keys —of
which number I have always held one—to the side-door of the church, it is not at
all difficult to implicate me in this matter.
Of course, I know that the letter which Mr. Killworth received may have
been received long after the 13th, but the public and myself are, I think, entitled
to particulars. With apologies,
I am, Sir, yours faithfully,
E. McC. S. HILL.
Police Department, Inspector-General’s Office,
Sydney, 13th May, 1898.
Sir,—l beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated the 4th inst., and
to inform you that the matter referred to therein is one in which the police could
not interfere.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
EDWIN FOSBERY,
Inspector-General of Police.
Mr. E. McC. S. Hill, Rockdale.
To the Editor of the St. George’s Advocate.
Sjr, —Will you kindly permit me, through the columns of the Advocate, on
behalf of myself and the teachers in the Church of England Mission Sunday School,
to thank Mr. and Mrs. Kinsela and our many friends for the great success which
our picnic of the 12th instant was enabled to secure. No such large or so
successful picnic has ever been organized within this district, and the enthusiastic
help which the Sunday School received serves as a„public condemnation of the
actions which led to the establishment of the School, and the vindication of the
position which myself and my teachers considered it right to take up at the time,
and which we have maintained ever since. I have reason to know that this was
the spirit in which much of the help which we received was accorded, and, that
being so, I am all the more anxious to return our helpers our sincere thanks for
their very welcome sympathy and approval.
The offering of these words of thanks gives me an opportunity to say a few
words to my friends concerning some rumours which are just now being circulated
regarding the present and the future of the Mission Sunday School, and the work
of myself and of my teachers in connection therewith. But I would at once refute
several rumours (those who have heard them know to which I allude) by stating
that the hire of buses cost a few shillings short of Fifteen Pounds, and, with the
exception of less than One Found, the treasurer of the Sunday School handed me
this sum on the evening after the picnic out of the Sunday School funds without
waiting to get in the accounts of the tickets sold. Whatever may occur in con-
nection with the Mission Sunday School, poverty, at any rate, will not be its cause.
I have been told by many that they have heard that myself and my teachers
are about to return to St. John’s, taking the children of the Mission Sunday
School with us, and I am asked if it is so. To this question it is but fair to
the parents of the children and to all others that I should give an answer, and I
do so with no uncertain sound.
It may be thought that the actions of the 13th of March last and the untruths
of subsequent weeks have been buried by me in a forgotten past, and that I have
done nothing to obtain redress for myself, and those who have suffered with me,
in this matter. But this is not so. The memory of those deeds and words is so
engraven on my brain, that while life shall last I shall see and hear them all as
clearly as when they were enacted and spoken ; and, as memory is, in itself, a
necessity of Eternity, the doings of that 13th of March and their results shall
never die, and shall never be forgotten. During the months which have passed
since then I have had much correspondence with many in connection with the
affair, and have not yet ceased this correspondence. I have fully determined
never to rest until some form of public apology is made to myself and my teachers,
together with many others who left the church on our account, for the despicable
treatment meted out to us by a Church of England clergyman, his catechist, and his


three churchwardens, practically because, while voluntary workers in the Sunday
School belonging to his church, we objected to fall down and worship him. I
have been told by some that Christ has taught us to forgive our enemies,
and that I should now let the whole matter terminate in peace. But will
those who so talk, remember that it was He who also told us the story of
the unjust judge and taught us thus to cry aloud to the Father day and
night for justice. And this is all I seek. When the Church of England and
her authorities accord me and my fellow-sufferers a public justice, then I
shall gladly cease from this agitation (for it is filling my mind with the doubts
and turmoils of something approaching to scepticism—but as yet undefined),
but until then I shall move Heaven and earth, public and private individuals,
Sunday Schools, Societies, Synods, Churches, and all sorts and conditions of
men, in an attempt to obtain a reparation adequate to what we have suffered. If
those who have the interests of the Church of England at heart desire
to save it from further disgrace in this matter, let them immediately take such
steps as will publicly apologize for the treatment which we have received ; but,
until this is done, our friends—and enemies—may reject all rumours, and may
believe that neither I nor my teachers—and I think that none of the parents of
our children —will enter into any treaty concerning a reconciliation with St. John’s
Church, and that I will pursue the matter with a relentless determination that
truth, and integrity, and right, and justice shall yet prevail, even though for a
time they should have been trampled in the dust.
I am, Sir,
E. McC. S. HILL,
Superintendent Church of England Mission
October 18th, 1898. Sunday School, Rockdale.
I will conclude with the following letters, which were written by three of the
teachers to the Dean, and his reply thereto. I know that at least one other letter
was written, but the teachers who wrote them gave me copies of these. They
will serve to show how utterly Sunday Schools, with their superintendents,
teachers, and all workers, are at the absolute autocratic will of the clergyman of
the parish, who evidently is not even responsible to liis chief ecclesiastical
authorities for the manner in which he rules them. And they will also serve to
show that there is, at present, no provision in ecclesiastical law which recognizes
that any Sunday School superintendent or worker, even after years of faithful
service, has any right to expect a shadow of that justice from the heads of the
Church of England which the meanest culprit is sure to have accorded him in any
Court under English civil or criminal jurisdiction.
Street, Rockdale,
March 23rd, 1898.
To the Very Reverend Dean Cowper.
Rkv. Sir, —As a teacher of St. John’s Sunday School, Rockdale, also member
of the choir, and collector and general church worker, I do earnestly entreat that
Mr. Hill, our worthy superintendent, may not be allowed to be dismissed in such
a disgraceful and unchristian way.
I have been a worker under him for nearly three years, and a better and ,
more straightforward Christian man I would not wish to find.
I have been in this part of the Parish of St. George eleven years and eight
months, and am well known here, also at Kogarah. Surely, in the name of God,
whom we profess to serve, we may be allowed to have justice, and not allow our
Church to be so disgraced.
I may also say that there is not one teacher in our Sunday School who could
honestly and truthfully say Mr. Hill deserved to be dismissed. The truth I value
above all things.
The parents of the children in our Sunday School are most indignant at the way


Mr. Hill is being treated. I have resigned all my positions as above-mentioned in
consequence, until we have a settlement.
Trusting this will meet with your most earnest and Christian consideration.
I remain, Rev. Sir,
Yours most respectfully,
Street, Rockdale,
March 23rd, 1898.
To the Dean of Sydney,
Rev. Sir, —We are all anxiously awaiting your advice in connection with our
Sunday School.
It is a matter of sincere regret throughout the district that our superintendent
should be dismissed without a just reason after having kept the school together—
and, in many instances, defrayed the many expenses thereof —for so many years.
Can nothing be done to settle this unfortunate trouble ? Mr. Hill is, and
always has been, a good and generous worker, and, if necessary, we could get
witnesses to prove his popularity and kindness.
We await your decision, and earnestly beg you will give us an unprejudiced
reply.
Pardon me for trespassing on your valuable time.
I am, Sir, yours faithfully,
—- Street, Kogarah.
To the Rev. the Dean of Sydney,
Rev. Sir, —We all wish to know what just reason there is against Mr. Hill’s
character for his dismissal q,s superintendent of St. John’s Sunday School.
I have worked with Mr. Hill between five and six years, since the school was
re-opened, and always found him to be straightforward, upright, just, and
truthful, most kind and courteous to the children and teachers. I never found
him guilty of one mean action in all his transactions, either in School or his
business, and he was most sincere in the training of young children for their
spiritual welfare. .
This trouble arose from a very small matter, in which I had a good share.
At a Teachers’ Meeting, a message was sent from the Churchwardens to know
if the children could not pay towards cleaning the church. I offered to clean it
myself. Another teacher suggested to give something towards it. It was then
suggested by some to give one penny a week each. At the next meeting, the
Wardens objected to receive the money from the teachers, but it must come out
of the children’s box. My intention was to assist some of the poorer children to
buy clothes for them to come to School, as some in my class could not come for
the want of boots and other clothes, and also to help the Church funds, as I know
they are in much need of money. But my intentions were misunderstood. I have
both Church and School at heart, and, God is my witness, I have worked for my
Church all my life, whenever I had the chance. I regard truth and justice
as my life.
When Mr. Hill received his dismissal he wrote to each teacher to meet in the
Town Hall to consult us as to what to do. We persuaded him to go to School as
usual, to try and reason things out with Mr. Killworth, as we heard he had called
a meeting of the teachers at ten o’clock on Sunday morning. When I arrived in
the afternoon, the children told me what had happened.
We would like you to judge by this, what there is against Mr. Hill’s
character and that of us all,
I am, Rev. Sir, your obedient servant,


Yours faithfully,
WILLIAM M. COWPER.
W. M. C.
muo
ROA-i" 7
/J CCjft
Deanery, Sydney.
March 26th, ’9B.
Dear Madam,—ln matters of a purely parochial nature, such as that to
which your letter of the 23rd inst. refers, viz. a dispute between the clergyman
of the parish and the superintendent of his Sunday School, I have no right or
authority to interfere. I must therefore content myself with acknowledging
your letter, and expressing a hope that you will not, on account of such a dispute,
discontinue a good work in which you have been engaged for the last three years.
I may add that I greatly regret much which is reported to have occurred.
P.S.—Finding your name amongst thirteen others who signed an address to
me, dated 11th March, I shall be obliged if you will make the contents of this
letter known to them also.




