

THE SHEEP,
LONG-WOOLLED AS WELL AS BHORT-WOOLLED,
VICTOEIA, TASMANIA, & NEW ZEALAND;
WITH A WORD OR TWO ON
SCAB AND FLUKE.
By OMEGA.
IBelbxrurm :
BLUNDELL AND FORD, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST.
1865.




THE BHJ
LONG-WOOLLED AS WELL ASPS.
VICTORIA,
A Desideratum in
CHAP. 11.
,ing under the notice of
AT -qi ly.LiA— IN Spain—lN G °
Australasia, the advan-
CHAP. as short-woolled sheep
Sheep—The Leicester- „ .. , , ~ r
_ lally suited to them, from
FED COTSWOLDS ... . J
g e herbage ; and likewise to
CHAP. iC ious means of curing that
.g-wool—The Bradford Worstei m ci . ~ ~
—The &cab—indicating a
CHAP i' s properly applied, and at
Scab and its Cure mtility, and in some cases the
lications for that disease. Some
on The Fluke, which has com-
>cks of the western districts of
CHAP
Fluke and Rot
Testimonials passed.
d Fluke have in great part
fonthly Manual. They have




CONTENTS.
CHAf. I.
Variety in Wool-production—A Desideratum in
CHAP. 11.
~ ™ ing under the notice of
The Merino—in Australia—in Spain—in G &
Australasia, the advan-
CHAP. HI-311 as short-woolled sheep
Long-woolled Sheep—The Leicester- „ „
IMPROVED COTSWOLDS ... SUlted l ° them - flom
e herbage ; and likewise to
CHAP. lc ious means of curing that
Long-wool—The Bradford Worstei m ~
vs —The Scab —indicating a
CHAP I *' properly applied, and at
Scab and its Cure mtility, and in some cases the
lications for that disease. Some
CHAP
Fluke and Rot
on The Fluke, which has com-
>cks of the western districts of
Testimonials isfr passed.
d Fluke have in great part
(onthly Manual. They have




HAJJ 36 /f
Z - DECW92 'C, i
\°/, Jy
INTRODUCTION.
The following pages aim merely at bringing under the notice of
stockholders, in the cooler portions of Australasia, the advan-
tage of producing long-woolled as well as short-woolled sheep
on those pastures which are especially suited to them, from
the richness and luxuriance of the herbage ; and likewise to
direct attention to the most efficacious means of curing that
fearful pest of Australian flocks— The Scab —indicating a
remedy that never fails when it is properly applied, and at
the same time exhibiting the inutility, and in some cases the
mischievousness, of tobacco applications for that disease. Some
observations are also added upon The Fluke, which has com-
mitted such ravages in the flocks of the western districts of
Victoria during the Autumn just passed.
The chapters on Scab and Fluke have in great part
already appeared in Hood's Monthly Manual They have


been, however, re-written and enlarged for the purpose of being
published in their present collective form, and it is hoped they
will be found to furnish a useful compendium of practical
knowledge on the subject of these diseases, which so ravage
the Sheep Stations of Victoria in an especial manner, and
likewise those of the adjoining colonies to a large extent.
Melbourne, July, 1865.


THE SHEEP,
LONG-WOOLLED AND SHORT-WOOLLED.
VARIETY IN WOOL PRODUCTION —A DESIDERATUM IN
AUSTRALIA.
Sheep Farming and the Production of Wool have
become from the outset as remarkable a characteristic of the
British colonisation of Australia as the produce of gold has in
the later stages of that colonisation. It has exercised an in-
fluence upon the manufacturing industry and the commerce of
Europe quite as marvellous as that which has been produced
upon both by the unparalleled yield of the precious metals,
which the later developments of Australian colonisation have
afforded. It is, therefore, well worthy the attention of the in-
habitants of these countries of the great southern continent, as
well as of those of the adjacent territories of Tasmania and New
Zealand, to consider how the 'prestige of Australasian wool pro-
duction may be best maintained and extended, free from all draw-
backs likely to be caused by diseased flocks, by ill-conditioned
fleeces, or by the neglect of furnishing that variety in the kinds of
wool which the wants of the European market, both British
and Continental, demand, and which the varying soils and
climates at the disposal of Australasian colonists enable them
to supply. Hitherto, the wool exported from this part of the
world has been solely confined to the fine-stapled short wool
of the Merino sheep, and although this is usually of first-class
character of its kind—that is, for carding and felting purposes,
and the manufacture of superior cloth—and as such, although
it commands a high price, yet it is not the less a fact that
Victoria, Tasmania, and New Zealand are equally well fitted
to produce also the long lustrous wool required for combing


and for worsted manufactures, and which, owing to the limited
supply of that article, commands even a higher price at the
present time than the fine short wools of the Merino sheep,
the single exception to this being the rare, choice, small sup-
plies of the fine wool of the carefully-tended and improved
flocks of the Saxon Merinoes.
The wonderful development of the production of wool in
these colonies, within a comparatively brief period of time,
leaves no room to doubt that, if our flock-owners apply them-
selves to the production of long-stapled wool, in addition
to the short fine wool yielded by the Merino, they will succeed
even beyond their most sanguine expectations in that branch
of industry. And the creation of the comparatively small
holdings of land which is taking place at the present time,
under the changed system of land occupation that has been
inaugurated of late, in this and the adjoining colony of New
iSouth Wales, presents a favorable opportunity for commencing.
The union of agriculture and sheep-feeding upon the same
.farm offers the means of advantageously entering upon the new
branch of wool-production to which we refer, namely, that
of long-stapled lustrous wool for combing purposes. This
would be accomplished by the introduction of the improved
Leicester breed of sheep, or, better still, of the most perfect type
of that improved breed which is known as the New Oxford-
shire, and sometimes called the New Cotswold sheep. This
valuable animal gives a heavy abundant fleece, together with
great weight of carcase and mutton of fine flavor; and it is
also characterised by very early maturity. It furnishes,
therefore, a two-fold source of profit of the highest kind;
and from its hardy constitution leaves little to apprehend of
its successful acclimatisation in the pastures of the cooler and
more richly-grassed districts of this country, and of Tasmania
and New Zealand. We will recur to this subject further on ;
but in order to show how small beginnings, judiciously and
zealously carried out, will in a short time lead in this favorable
climate to results of vast magnitude and of the most suc-
cessful character in the production of sheep, we must first
glance at the history of the Merino in Australia. Its wondrous
story may act as an encouragement to those who may feel
disposed to adopt our suggestion, and experiment in the intro-
duction of the best breed of English long-woolled sheep to
the pastures and farms of Victoria.


THE MERINO SHEEP : ITS ORIGIN IN AUSTRALIA.
The merit of the introduction of the Merino sheep into Aus-
tralia is due to Captain M‘Arthur, who first arrived with his
regiment (the 102nd Foot) in New South Wales in the year
1791. This sagacious and enterprising gentleman soon dis-
covered the vast field which the mild climate and virgin soil
of Australia opened up to the man of capital, skill, and
industry ; and he speedily quitted the barren occupation of an
infantry officer for the more profitable engagements of com-
merce and of stock-breeding combined. A few sheep, supposed
to be of Spanish breed, which had been sent out from Holland
to the Cape of Good Hope, and had been brought from the
latter place to Sydney, were, even at this early date, to be
found on the shores of Port Jackson. There was also a small
number of inferior Irish sheep, together with a few Southdowms
and Leicesters, which had been brought in some of the early
convict ships. And M‘Arthur becoming possessed of some eight
or ten of these mixed sheep, increased his little flock in the
year 1793 by the purchase of thirty small, lean, ill-shaped
East Indian ewes, with kempy, hairy, thin-woolled fleeces,
which he got out of a ship that arrived from Calcutta. Four
years subsequently, viz., in 1797, he made use of his interest
in England to get possession of what his sagacious mind told
him was the one thing wanted to lay the foundation
of a valuable breed of sheep, particularly suited to the warm
climate of New South Wales. And he succeeded in his
object. He was so fortunate as to obtain three rams from the
flock of choice Spanish Merinoes which His Majesty George
the Third possessed at that time in Windsor Park, in England.
This flock had but a short time previously been presented to
His Majesty, and had been selected from the best Merino
blood of Spain. The three rams obtained by M ‘Arthur
were therefore a veritable prize, 0 f utmost value. From
these three Merino rams and the East Indian sheep, together
with the eight or ten mixed ewes already mentioned, have
sprung the millions of the Australian Merino which now
crowd the vast and wide-spread pastures of this continent,
and of Tasmania and New Zealand ! In the year 1803
M‘Arthur returned to England, bringing with him sam-


pies of the wool he had grown from the progeny of the
mixed flock and the three Merino rams. He exhibited
this wool to Lord Hobart, who was then Secretary of State
for the Colonies, and at the same time presented an
address to that Minister, setting forth the peculiar aptitude of
Hew South Wales for the growth of the finest wool. His
object appears to have been to secure the favorable notice of
the home authorities, with a view to obtaining grants of land
for the development of his new industry ; and in this object
he succeeded so well, that, in a very few years, partly by grants
from governors of the colony, and partly by grants from
British Ministers at the head of the Colonial Office in
London, he and his sons found themselves the owners
of 18,000 acres of land in New South Wales. With this
ample domain at his disposal, Mr. M‘Arthur speedily developed
the growth of wool to an extent he himself never anticipated
possible when he first began his operations.
The astonishing increase in the production of wool in
Australia, during the half-century which has elapsed since
M‘Arthur’s efforts first began to assume developed form up to
the present time, would appear incredible if it were not a fact
within the memory of living persons. In the year 1810, the
entire export of fine Merino Australian wool to England was
167 lbs. This, however, only refers to the export of
M‘Arthur’s pure Merino wool. There were previously to this
date exports, large for the then state of the colony, of inferior
coarse wool to England, the details of which are given in the
note at foot of the page, and which are taken from the Mark
Lane Express (London newspaper).* But the yield of wool
was uncertain, wavering, and with a tendency to diminish
during the first twenty years of the century ; and the export
can scarcely be said to have made a proper start until the
year 1823, when it first reached and exceeded half a
* THE BRITISH WOOL TRADE.
Perhaps no branch of national commerce has undergone so prodigious
an expansion of late years as this trade. The growth of population, the
progress of comparatively luxurious tastes, the almost universal preva-
lence of broadcloth (at any rate, when the British people are endi-
manche), have contributedto this result, which, however, could not have
been attained had not the marvellous progress of wool production in
Australia kept prices at a moderate point. This will be seen by group-


of sheep, lamb, and
31, 1863: —
Year. lbs.
1851 ... 83,311,975
1852 ... 93,761,458
1853 ... 119,396,449
1854 ... 106,121,995
1855 ... 99,300,446
1856 ... 116,211,392
1857 ... 129,749,898
Year. lbs. Year. lbs. Year. lbs.
1800 ... 184,240 1808 ... 35,840 1816 ... 13,160
1801 ... 364,560 1809 ... 3,920 1817 ... —
1802 ... 98,840 1810 ... 13,240 1818 ... 19,000
1803 ... 6,040 1811 ... 2,520 1819 ... 89,600
1804 .. 45,920 1812 ... 540 1820 ... 110,040
1805 ... 336,840 1813 ... — 1821 ... 196,560
1806 ... 157,920 1814 ... 30,800
1807 ... 20,720 1815 ... 68,040
Year. lbs. Year. lbs. Year. lbs.
1822 ... 155,120 1829 ... 2,059,120 1836 ... 6,3/9,240
1823 .., 534,520 1830 ... 2,240,840 1837 ... 8,489,040
1824 ... 417,480 1831 ... 3,256,880 1838 ... 9,016,000
1825 ... 362,320 1832 ... 2,935,240 1839 ... 10,946,680
1826 ... 1,240,400 1833 ... 4,185,440 1840 ... 11,487,000
1827 ... 353,640 1834 ... 4,558,120 1841 ... 14,844,200
1828 ... 1,762,880 1835 ... 5,533,360 1842 ... 14,811,160
million pounds weight. From that date, though flicker-
ing somewhat, still its progress was rapid and certain. In
1832 it rose (including the quantity supplied by Tasmania)
to 3,516,869 lbs.; in 1843 it was advanced to 16,226,400 lbs.;
whilst in 1864, the export of the whole of the Australian
colonies reached the marvellous amount of upwards of
ing together the imports of
years ending December 31,
Year. lbs. Ye?
alpaca wool, for the 20
Year, lbs.
1844 ... 65,713,761
1845 ... 76,813,855
1846 ... 65,255,462
1847 ... 62,592,598
1848 ... 70,864,847
1849 ... 76,768,647
1850 ... 74,326,778
1858 ... 126,738,723
1859 ... 133,284,634
1860 ... 148,396,577
1861 ... 147,172,841
1862 ... 171,943,472
1863 ... 177,496,644
The great source of these supplies—which, it will be observed, exhibit
an increase of 170‘16 per cent, in the course of 20 years, while last
year’s imports were larger than in any former twelve months, the
immense stride made in 1862 having been more than maintained in
1863—is Australia. The colony of New South Wales was not
attempted until 1788, and for very many years it was only a convict
settlement. In 1800, however, the exportation of wool commenced,
and was carried on in a feeble and flickering fashion for the first
third of the 63 years which have since elapsed—thus:—
These figures show a very sluggish state of affairs, but the case will be
seen to have changed very materially in the second period of the 63
years, when men’s minds began to be directed to the development of the
vast resources of the great island-continent;—
From 1832 to 1841 it will be observed that the deliveries of Australian
wool made an uninterrupted progress; in 1842 there was a slight


Year.
lbs.
1857 ...
49,209,655
1858 ...
51,104,560
1859 ...
53,709,542
1860 ...
59,166,616
1861 ...
68,506,222
1862 ...
71,339,092
1863 ...
77,173,446
77,000,000 lbs. of wool! And this is all of the fine short-
stapled description, which is adapted for felting and for
cloth and woollen manufactures, as distinguished from the long-
stapled lustrous wool, partly coarse and partly fine, which is the
proper material for worsted fabrics and carpeting. The Austra-
lian Merino wool, it should be mentioned, has been sustained
check, but in the succeeding years the
onward course—thus :
figures
soon resumed their
Year. lbs. Year. lbs.
1843 ... 17,433,780 1850 ... 39,018,221
1844 ... 17,602,247 1851 ... 41,810,117
1845 ... 24,177.317 1852 ... 43,197,301
1846 ... 21,789,346 1853 ... 47,076,010
1847 ... 26,056,815 1854 ... 47,489,650
1848 ... 30,034,567 1855 ... 49,142,306
1849 ... 35,879,171 1856 ... 52,052,139
Fears were entertained in 1851 that the great gold discoveries of that
year would paralyse the pastoral interest; but it will be seen that they
have scarcely checked its progress for an instant, and that, comparing
the Australian wool exports for 1851 with those of 1863, there is an
increase of 35,363,329 lbs., or 84*69 per cent. Assuming, what is not at
all improbable, that a similar progress is achieved during the next 12
years, the imports of Australian wool in 1875 would reach the immense
aggregate of 112,536,775 lbs. The fact is, the gold discoveries of Aus-
tralia, so far from checking the development of the fleecy resources of
the continent, have given an immense stimulus to every branch of
Australian production, by attracting additional population to the
various settlements, increasing the demand for meat, &c. It will be
interesting to note the progress of the Australian wool deliveries at
the following quinquennial periods :
Year lbs. Year lbs. Year lbs.
1823 ... 534,520 1843 ... 17,433,780 1863 ... 77,173,446
1833 ... 4,195,440 1853 ... 47,076,010
Thus the increase in the second period over the first was 3,650,920 lbs.;
in the third over the second, 13,248,340 lbs.; in the fourth over the
third, 29,643,230 lbs.; and in the fifth over the fourth, 30,097,436 lbs.
The accelerated rate of progress here observable is due, of course, to
the application of a constantly increasing amount of labor and capital
to the work of wool production in the Australias, and also to the
gradual extension of settlements. Thus, in 1800, only New South
Wales existed as a colony; in 1808, a settlement was effected in Tas-
mania ; in 1829, a rather abortive and unprofitable effort was made to
turn Western Australia to some account; in 1836, Port Phillip drifted
into a colony, and a rather ambitious beginning was made with
South Australia; in 1842, various settlements were formed in the
North Island of New Zealand ; in 1850, the Canterbury settlers broke
ground in the Middle Island ; and, in 1859, the Moreton Bay district


following progress during the last twenty years :—
Year lbs. j Year lbs. Year lbs.
1844 ... 2,197,143 . 1851 ... 5,816,591 1858 ... 16.597,504
1845 ... 3,512,924 1852 ... 6,388,726 1859 ... 14,269/343
1846 ... 2,958,457 1853 ... 7,221,448 1860 ... 16,574,345
1847 ... 3,747,392 1854 ... 8,223,598 1861 ... 18,676,286
1848 ... 3,497,250 1855 ... 11,075,965 1862 ... 18,930,886
1849 ... 5,377,495 1856 ... 14,305,188 1863 ... 20,166,617
1850 ... 5,709,529 1857 ... 14,287,828
On comparing 1844 with 1863, we see progress to the extent of
Year lbs. Year lbs.
1844 ... 1,916,129 1851 ... 4,549,520
1845 ... 2,765,853 1852 ... 7,880,784
1846 ... 8,975,866 1 1853 ... 12,400,869
1847 ... 3,063,142 | 1854 ... 14,965,191
1848 ... 5,997,435 1855 ... 14,283,535
1849 ... 4,182,853 j 1856 ... 15,386,578
1850 ... 3,473,252 [ 1857 ... 19,370,741
Year
lbs.
1858 ...
17,333,50*
1859 ..
14,363,403
1860 ...
20,214,170
1861 ...
19,161,004
1862 ...
17,959,404
1863 ...
20,670,111
in its superior fine quality thoughout all this vast increase in
the flocks by the constant introduction, more especially of
late years, of the best class of rams from the superior flocks
of Saxony, as well as from the large-framed, heavy-fleeced
French Merinoes of the Rambouillet stock. The warm, dry
climate of Australia (which is so suited to the constitution of
was separated from New South Wales, and placed under independent
government, under the new and attractive name of Queensland. So
the work of Australian colonization constantly expands; but if the
reader will glance at a good map of Australasia, he will see that, after
the lapse of nearly eighty years, since a convict settlement was first
formed at Port Jackson, we have still not got half round the enormous
Australian pittoral, while the settlements actually formed are of a
very patchy and imperfect character. It appears probable that in
the course of the next twenty years colonization will advance still
further towards the north of the Australian continent, while the
existing settlements will become more perfect in their details ; so that
it would not be at all surprising if, by 1884, we attained an annual
export of Australian wool of some 150,000,000 lbs. Another great
source of our -wool supplies is South Africa—a less favorite portion
of our colonial empire, but still a territory possessing resources and
attractions to the vigorous enterprise of the Anglo-Saxon race. The
deliveries of wool from this quarter of the world have made the
17,969,474 lbs. in the latter year, the advance being at the rate of no
less than 820'54 per cent. British India again is becoming an increas-
ingly important centre of wool production, having effected the follow-
ing strides in this matter in the last two decades
Hence we have an increase of 18,753,982 lbs.,
or 984 21 per cent.,
comparing 1863 with 1844, On comparing the whole wool imports in
1844 with those of 1863, we arrive at a general increase of 111,622,883


lbs.
Australia 59,571,199
South Africa 17,969,474
British India 18,753,982
Total 96,294,655
the Merino sheep), and its boundless pastures, are the two-fold
cause of this almost miraculous development of wool produc-
tion in the brief space of half a century.
THE MERINO IN SPAIN.
The Merino, in whatever countries it now exists, has been
introduced there from Spain. The origin of this breed in
that country is involved in obscurity. The most generally
accepted view is, that it is a native breed similar to the
ancient, but now non-existent, fine-woolled sheep of Italy,
which, in the most flourishing epoch of the Roman Republic
and Empire, was cultivated to the highest point of per-
fection, as far as the production of the finest fleece possible
was concerned. Previous to the introduction of silk into
Europe, the nobility and higher classes of the Roman people
were clothed solely in superfine cloth fabrics, manufactured
lbs. ; and to this progress Australia, the South African colonies, and
British India contribute as follows :
We thus arrive at the curious fact that of the whole increase the three
great groups of British colonies contributed 96,294,655 lbs., and other
parts of the world—Spain, Germany, South America, &c.— only
15,328,228 lbs. The woollen manufacturing industry of Great Britain
has accordingly been placed on its present highly satisfactory basis
through the exertion of British colonists in a great measure—a fact
Which philosophical dreamers who declaim against colonies would do
well to remember. There is only one weak point in the present aspect
of our wool supplies, viz., that we are becoming increasingly dependent
on Australia. Of a gross total of 177,496,644 lbs. received last year,
77,173,446 lbs., or 43’50 per cent,, came from Australia; while in 1844
the same quarter of the world contributed 17,602,247 lbs. out of
65,713,761 lbs., or only 26T5 per cent. The disastrous experience of
the cotton trade during 1861, 1862, and 1863, has shown what a fatal
policy it is for any one branch of industry to depend upon one quarter of
the world for its supplies of raw material; and although in the matter
of wool, as in everything else, we cordially echo the colonial watch-
words, “ Advance Australia,” we yet hope to see the Cape Colonies,
India, Brazil, &c., more freely pouring in their highly-acceptable
contingents.


from the delicate soft wool of the native Italian sheep; and
Spain, possessing a similarly favorable climate for the fine-
woolled sheep, the native breed there was improved to an
equality with the Italian by the introduction of the best
rams of that country. Africa, too, which also possessed an
equally valuable breed of sheep at this period, contributed
choice rams to improve the Spanish breed; and thus, from a
date anterior to, or at least coeval with, the rise of Christianity,
Spain found itself enriched by the possession of the finest
wool-yielding sheep in the world, the improved type being
fixed and made permanent by the favorable climate and pas-
tures of the Peninsula, and subsequently by the care and
enterprise of the Moors. This fine-woolled improved Spanish
sheep subsequently became known to the civilized world under
the name of the Merino ; and it has for ages been celebrated
throughout Europe on account of the matchless superiority of
its fleece.
The Merino is small in size, with narrow chest, flat sides,
and long legs. The color of the wool is generally white ; it
is, however, of a dusky hue on the legs, face, and ears —a
coarse tuft growing upon the forehead. The skin is of a
healthy reddish tint, hanging somewhat loosely on the throat.
The ram has large spiral horns ; the ewe is without these. The
flesh is not equal in weight, in flavor, or juiciness to the
mutton of the short-woolled sheep of England. It is, there-
fore, not a very profitable animal as far as the carcase is
concerned, its chief value being derived from its fine fleece.
The latter is close, short, and supplied with abundant yolk .
It weighs heavy, and is unequalled for the felting properties
of the wool. In Spain, the Merino is, for the most part, a
migratory animal—vast flocks, numbering some millions of
sheep, being led, twice every year, a journey of many hundreds
of miles from south to north of the Peninsula, and back
again, for winter and summer quarters. These travelling
flocks occupy six weeks in each journey, and are known by
the title Transhumantes. The migratory system is a false
and injurious mode of treating these valuable animals,
as it wastes their vigour, and causes an enormous loss
of lambs annually ; but the Spaniards are a conservative
people, and cling to their old customs long after experience
has shown them to stand greatly in need of reform.
There is, besides these Transhumantes, another breed of Merinoes


in Spain which are kept stationary on their pastures, and these
are styled Estantes. The stationary are found to thrive
better, in every respect, than the travelling Merinoes.
Amongst the Estantes there are also flocks of large long-
woolled sheep, and some mixed breeds, which are a cross
between the stationary Merino and the long-woolled sheep.
THE GEEMAX MEEINO.
Spain succeeded in jealously confining the Merino within its
own territory for centuries, despite all the efforts that were
frequently made by other countries to get possession of a
flock of this much-prized breed. In the middle and towards
the close of the last century, however, Austria, Saxony, and
some other German states, were fortunate enough to obtain
some small flocks; and from these have sprung the much-
valued improved breed of the German Merinoes. Just one
hundred years ago, viz., in the year 1765, the Elector of
Saxony introduced the first flock of Spanish Merinoes into
Germany. About ten years subsequently, another small flock
was brought into Austria. And again, in 1786 and 1802,
further introductions of the Merino into Germany took place,
and were located in the Imperial Domains of Holditch, in
Hungary, and Mannersdorf, in Austria. This is the origin of
the German Merino, which has, in the course of years, become
subdivided into two distinct breeds, presenting a marked
difference in the appearance of the animals and in the qualities
of their wool. The one is known as the Infantado or Negretti
Merino; the other, as the Escurial , or Saxony Merino. The
Negretti is characterised by shorter legs and stouter body than
the Saxony. The head and neck are also comparatively short
and broad, the nose somewhat turned up, and the body round.
The wool is very close and even matted upon the back and
thighs ; and it covers the head to the eyes, and the legs down
even to the feet. The yolk in the wool is excessively abun-
dant, dense and almost pitchy in its consistence, which renders
the washing of the wool a difficult operation. The Negretti
is descended from the flock of Merinoes which was originally
brought direct from Spain into Austria. The Escurial or
Saxony Merinoes are the descendants of the flock imported by
the ruling Sovereign of that German state, in the year 1765.


They have spare necks and heads, the latter covered with but
little wool; they have longer legs than the Negretti , and their
wool is finer, shorter, and softer, but somewhat less in quantity.
It is said that all the attempts to amalgamate these two breeds
of the Merinoes have been unsuccessful, the distinctive good
qualities of each being retained only by keeping the breeds
pure.
The peculiarities of the Merino are concisely sketched by
an eminent breeder of these sheep, in Germany, who observes
that they “ cannot thrive in a damp climate, and it is quite
necessary that they should have a wide range of dry and hilly
pasture of short and not over-nutritious herbage. If allowed
to feed on swampy or marshy ground, even once or twice in
autumn, they are sure to die of liver-complaint (the fluke or
rot) in the following spring.lf they are permitted to eat
wet grass, or are exposed frequently to rain, they disappear by
hundreds with consumption.” It is of the utmost importance
to preserve the breed pure in the Merino, for purity of blood
is the first requisite towards perfection in the fleece, t
A French breed of Merinoes , known as the Rambouillet, is
a large-framed, fine-woolled variety, of great value. In
England the Merino, when introduced there, did not succeed
well. The climate is too damp and cold. When crossed
with the Southdown and Leicester sheep, the mixed breed
resulting from the cross was a worthless mongrel.
With this brief notice of the Merino we must close our
remarks upon short-woolled sheep. It is not part of our
purpose to travel beyond the limits of what has a practical
application to sheep breeding in Australia, and the adjacent
colonies, alone. We omit, therefore, all reference to the
Southdowns and other short-woolled breeds of sheep in
England, as the introduction of them into the Australian
Colonies is, on many grounds, not to be recommended.
The correctness of these observations is fa,tally corroborated by
the large mortality amongst the flocks in the Western Districts of this
colony, at the present time, June, 1865.
*t* Many of the flock-owners in Australia and Tasmania have wisely
acted up to this maxim, by the introduction of superior German
Merino rams into their flocks, and the superior weight and fineness of
the fleece have justified and repaid their enterprise with profit.


LONG-WOOLLED SHEEP.
Theee is but one, or at most two, of the long-woolled breeds
of sheep in England which it is desirable to introduce into
the southern parts of Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand.
These are, first, the improved Leicester sheep, of the well-known
Dishley breed, which owes its origin to the care, skill, and
enterprise of the celebrated Bakewell, who established his
improvements in sheep-breeding some 80 years ago ; and next,
the New Oxfordshire breed , which has been derived from a
judicious commingling of the best qualities of the improved
Leicesters and the Cotswolds; this is now a well established
and permanent type, and takes position as a distinctive breed
of sheep.
The long-woolled breeds of sheep •were originaly natives of
the richest, and in some cases the marshy, pastures of England.
With the march of improvement, of late years, in agriculture,
they have gradually extended to all parts of Great Britain
and Ireland, and have to a great extent excluded the short-
woolled breeds. This arises from two causes. First, from
their being more profitable, both on account of their superior
weight of fleece and the higher price of their long lustrous
wool, which has risen in value of late years, owing to the
increased demand for long staple on the part of the worsted
manufacturers. In the next place, it is caused by reason of
their heavier carcase and their greater aptitude for fattening
and for early maturity. Most of the old breeds of long-woolled
sheep have, however, been supplanted by the improved Leicesters,
and more recently by the New Oxfords, or, as they are some-
times called, the improved Cotswolds. Some writers, Camden
amongst others, have referred to the Cotsivolds as though they
were originally a short-woolled breed of sheep. And they have
allowed themselves to suppose they were the originals of
the Spanish Merinoes. Their grounds for this mistaken
supposition are, that in the 1464, Edward IV., King of
England, permitted a number of Cotswolds to be exported to
Spain, where they throve wonderfully and greatly increased in
numbers. But long antecedent to this date, Spain was cele-
brated for the fine short wool of its Merinoes. And better
informed writers show that the Cotswolds were always long-
woolled sheep.


This latter type of the improved long-wools, namely, the
New Oxfords , is held in greater consideration, especially of late
years, even than the Dishley Leicesters. They are much more
hardy, more amenable to common, or less careful, treatment;
more prolific, and better nurses than the new Leicesters. Their
mutton, especially when young, is superior in flavor and general
quality.
Their fleece is more heavy than the Leicester, the wool
being similarly lustrous, firm, and uniform in texture, and
longer in the staple. And they have accordingly succeeded in
bearing away from all others the prizes at agricultural shows
in England for the best long-woolled sheep.
The qualities of the New Leicester , or Dishley breed of sheep,
are too well known to need any lengthened reference to them
here. Great weight of carcase, in connection with compactness
and symmetry of form ; a wonderful aptitude to arrive at
early maturity and to fatten; a heavy fleece of long, bright
wool, and little offal, all combine to make the Leicester a most
profitable sheep, both for the uses of the butcher and for its
fleece.
The infusion of the Leicester blood has been used to im-
prove every breed of long-woolled sheep in England. And it
still stands facile princeps at the head of the long-woolled sheep
of that country, in the estimation of many of the most ex-
perienced and intelligent breeders of stock.
The Leicester has, however, its disadvantages in a com-
paratively delicate constitution, in an inability to bear exposure
to the weather, in a tendency to inflammatory disease, in not
being very prolific, and in not being a very good nurse so as
to sustain its lambs sufficiently; in all of which respects it is
decidedly inferior to the New Oxfords. But allowing for these
comparative defects, the Leicester is still a most profitable
sheep. Its fleece is fine and soft, its carcase is still more
valuable. It arrives at such early maturity, that wethers are
fully fattened at fifteen months old; and at two years old the
Leicester wethers will often weigh from 28 lbs. to 35 lbs. per
quarter. The meat is accumulated, too, on the parts that are
most valuable, and the fat is distributed amongst the lean or
muscles in the most advantageous manner, and not collected
in masses around the kidneys or in the interior of the body,
as is usual with other breeds of sheep. The hind and fore
quarters, too, more nearly approximate in weight to each other
b 2


than is found to be the case with other sheep. And on the
whole, the advantages far out-weigh the defects in all respects.
Where the pasturage is good and abundant, and food for the
winter, or, as in this country, for the summer, to make up for
scarcety of herbage, can be supplied in sufficiency, so as to
insure abundance of feed throughout the year, the Leicester is
undoubtedly a most profitable sheep. And the same con-
ditions with respect to the necessity of permanence of feed
throughout the year are equally applicable to the New Oxfords.
These conditions can, however, be readily observed where
agriculture is combined with sheep breeding upon a good sized
farm.
LONG WOOL.
Wool of long staple forms a production wholly distinct in its
qualities and uses from short wool. It is yielded, too, by a
very different class of sheep from that of the short-woolled
breeds. The most valuable of the latter is the Merino, which
forms, with scarcely an exception, the flocks of Australia.
Long wool is, therefore, a product all but unknown to the
sheep-farming industry of Victoria. And this is a positive
and great loss. For not only is this class of wool an article
of high price, and of great demand for a certain description
of manufactures, but also the supply is so limited that there
is scarcely a possibility of over-production for years to come.
The main source of supply at present is from the flocks of
Great Britain and Ireland; and as these flocks have been
multiplied to the utmost extent that the soil of the British
Islands will admit of, without the supply of long-stapled wool
being anything like sufficient to meet the requirements of
British manufacturers, it follows that any new source of
supply, wherever it may come from, will share in the high
prices which good, bright, long-stapled wool now commands
in the European market. Many other countries, besides the
British Isles, furnish an inferior description of so-called long
wool. But owing to defective breeding and feeding, and
general bad management in the rearing and treatment of the
sheep in those countries, the wool is but of medium length,
and is often thin, harsh, coarse, and deficient in most of the


qualities which should distinguish good combing long wool.
The sheep that yield in perfection the long, bright, lustrous,
firm wool, which is in great demand in England for its own
special class of manufactures, are the Leicester and the New
Oxfords , which we briefly noticed in the preceding section.
Long wool, as distinguished from short wool, is used for
worsted manufactures. Short wool forms the raw
material of woollen fabrics or cloth, and, also, of fine
felt hats, bonnets, &c. Long wool is a combing wool; short
wool, until recent improvements in machinery, was styled a
carding as well as a felting wool—but it can be combed now.
Long wool is required by the worsted manufacturers of
England to have a length of staple varying from four to seven
inches. It must be of uniform strength throughout its whole
length. It must be soft to the touch, and bright and lustrous
in its appearance. All these qualities are furnished in
perfection by the Leicester and New Oxford breeds of sheep.
But to insure these results, the sheep must be well fed
throughout every period of the year, and never be suffered to
go on “ short commons,” as often happens to be the case with
the short-woolled breeds, without any very material injury
resulting to the fleece of the latter. In the long-woolled
breeds, however, should either an English winter or an
Australian summer considerably reduce the quantity and
quality of the feed for any length of time, the wool that grows
during the period of scanty feed is found to be weak in fibre,
as compared with the rest. And in combing, this wool of
unequal fibre breaks at its weak part, and thus the advantage
and special use of long-stapled wool are lost. The long-woolled
sheep, then, to be profitable for their fleece, must be fed on rich
succulent pasture ; and should the herbage fail at any period of
the year, turnips, or other forms of artificial food, must be
available to keep up the proper nourishment of the sheep.
This attentive management, which is so requisite for the
excellence of the fleece, is likewise equally profitable for the
carcase. And where cultivation of the soil and sheep
husbandly are combined, so that abundance of feed, natural
or artificial, can be insured throughout the whole year, the
long-woolled sheep, especially of the Leicester and New
Oxford breeds, will be found largely and doubly profitable in
meeting the requirements both of the wool-broker and the
butcher. The great weight of superior mutton goes along


with the heavy fleece of valuable wool. In the ewe, the fleece
weighs generally from 6 lbs. to 7 lbs.; in fat wethers, from
7 lbs. to 9 lbs.; and the average price within the last three
or four years, in the case of medium-sized sheep, has been
from 9s. to 10s. per fleece. This year (1864-5), prime, long,
lustrous combing wool has reached in London the extra-
ordinary price of 2s. 6d. per lb. This will be admitted to be,
with the great weight of fleece, something better than the
yield even of the fiue-wooled Merino. But the fact is that
the supply of the finest short wools, owing to the great
development of pastoral pursuits in Australia, is now almost
on a par with the demand; whereas the supply of good
combing long wool is, as we have said, so limited that the
worsted manufacturers of England are completely crippled
from that cause alone. Hence, long wools, whether coarse or
fine, which were once much cheaper, are now more high-
priced than the fine short wools.
This, as well as the other points we have briefly touched on,
will be made plainly obvious from the following instructive
official document, which was issued, four years back, by
The Worsted-Wool Supply Association of Bradford, in
Yorkshire, England, and which had for its object to stimulate
the production of long-stapled wool throughout the various
countries of the world :
il The Chamber of Commerce for the Worsted District,
Bradford, Yorkshire, February 21, 1861.
“ ADDRESS OF THE WOOL-SUPPLY ASSOCIATION OF THE BRAD-
FORD AND HALIFAX CHAMBER OF COMMERCE TO ALL
PARTIES INTERESTED IN THE GROWTH OF COLONIAL AND
OTHER FOREIGN WOOLS.
“ The increase in the worsted trade of Great Britain has
been very considerable during the last few years, and its
further development has been checked only by the difficulty of
meeting with an adequate supply of long wool.
“ To meet this condition of things, and in order, if possible,
to increase the supply, the Wool Association is desirous of
disseminating information in the wool-growing districts.
“ The increase in the imports of foreign wool during the
same period has been very large ; but these supplies were almost
exclusively of a nature to adapt them to the woollen rather than


to the worsted manufacture. Those interested in the latter
branch of industry are anxious to stimulate the growth of
wools suitable to their wants. The qualities they require give
to the wool a higher marketable value for all purposes of
manufacture, and are, therefore, well deserving the attention
of growers, collectors, and shippers of wool.
“ The wool (the increase of which they desire to promote)
should have a staple from four to seven inches long, according
to its fineness, and should, as far as possible, be uniform in
quality throughout its whole length, bright and lustrous in
appearance, or soft and kind to the touch, of good spinning
properties, free from burrs or other vegetable fibre. It should
also be well washed before it is clipped, or, where this is not
practicable, care should be taken that it be not cotted or felted
in drying. It is most desirable to retain the whole natural
length of the staple, by only clipping the lambs or sheep once
during the season’s growth, unless local causes render it ab-
solutely necessary to do so oftener. It is also very desirable
that a proper classification of wool should be made in packing,
and that the packing should be thoroughly trustworthy and
fair.
“ An improvement is already manifested in the wool of
some countries, and the association believe that it might be
made general if proper care were taken in the selection of
breeding sheep, particularly of the rams, and (where neces-
sary) by the introduction of new blood.
“ The flocks should, as much as possible, be pastured upon
succulent grasses, similar to those grown in Great Britain.
“ The destructive effects of drought or cold, or other
climatic causes, which check the growth of the grasses, and,
by depriving the sheep of the necessary supply of food, render
the staple tender, ought to be prevented by a constant supply
of food throughout the whole year.
“ The Wool Supply Association will be happy to answer
any inquiries, and give any information that foreign corres-
pondents may require in their efforts to increase the supply
and improve the quality of their wools, and to render any
assistance in their power to facilitate the export of breeding
sheep suitable for crossing and improving the inferior foreign
breeds. Already ten rams have been sent to India by this
association, from which the best results are expected.
" The Wool Association offer their gratuitous services to


parties abroad desirous of purchasing rams for exportation, or
in any other manner to promote the views expressed in their
observations.
“ A few samples of different varieties of combing wools
required will be transmitted to the consuls in foreign parts,
and to the Governors of Her Britannic Majesty’s colonies,
and wherever wools suitable for the worsted trade are culti-
vated.
“ Address the Bradford Chamber of Commerce, as above.”
This document presents the case fully and fairly. The
difficulties, however, which want of proper knowledge, and
want of the proper breeds of sheep, throw in the way of
furnishing the desired kind and quality of combing wools, in
new or foreign countries generally, have prevented this appeal
of the English worsted manufacturers from being responded to
by advantageous results. The list given at Toot of the page *
will show how universal are the defects which abound in the
long wool, furnished by every country in the world, foreign to
Great Britain and Ireland. This list is furnished by the
Bradford Association.
* REMARKS CONCERNING WOOL ; CHIEFLY POINTING OUT THE FAULTS
ATTACHED TO EACH DESCRIPTION NAMED.
Oporto. —The wool usually imported from thence is long-stapled
and bright, but troubled with a sprinkling of grey and reddish hairs,
which depreciate the value and limit the competition. The sheep,
also, for want of attention, are apt to produce cotted and yellow
tinged fleeces which only realise in the English market about two-
thirds the value of free open-stapled white wools. The receipts from
Oporto have increased considerably, but a good portion of the increase
consists of wool from a lower breed, and is called here “Mountain
Oporto.” This description is part long, very coarse stapled, and the
other part of the fleece is short and dull-looking wool, unsuitable for
same purposes as real Oporto, and realising twenty-five per cent, less
price. By attention, this mountain wool might be raised to same
character as the usually good description received from Oporto.
Iceland.— We don’t know the exact quantity produced annually,
but think it is 8000 to 10,000 packs. The effect of a cold climate
acting upon sheep left to nature has been to produce a wool consisting
of a long, spiry, coarse top, with a fine downy bottom, which for
English consumers is very objectionable, and reduces the value.
Russian.— The Donskoi wool does not seem to meet •with the same
care as the flocks of merino that have attained such perfection in
Southern Russia. The Donskoi sheep is probably in a state of nature,
or at least partially so, and the Crimean entirely so. Both these


SCAB AND ITS CURE.
Scab is the great scourge of the flocks of Australia. Occa-
sionally, other diseases peculiar to the sheep make their
appearance to some slight extent; but, with the exception of
admit of great improvement, and by care for a few years a long-
stapled, good combing wool of finer quality might be produced, up-
wards of thirty per cent, more valuable. The Russian Government
has the power, and probably the inclination, to initiate improvement,
and will probably do so at its own expense, if the future advantage
be made manifest. We see splendid flocks of merino have been
created in Southern Russia during the last thirty years ; we don’t
know wether this was done by the rich noblemen or the Government,
but it proves what improvement may be effected on a large scale.
Turkish —Asiatic and European— including Servia, Bosnia,
Nissa, Scutari, Scoria, Salonica, Angora, Smyrna, Syria,
Persia. —These wools are usually very scurfy and kempy,* both of
which are serious faults, but may be eradicated by attention. It
seems as if most of these wools got no care at all, and in evidence
of this we point to the large proportion of scurfy and mangy fleeces.
There is the basis for capital combing wool, even if the growers cross
with their own selected rams, without the introduction of English
sheep.
East India and Persian Wool—lmported from Bombay.—
Improvement has already commenced here, and a large field awaits
full development. Each year our imports are collected from a wider
range; and, as we penetrate into a more temperate region, we find wool
of a longer and sounder staple, assimilating more closely to our
English descriptions than the short hairy wool that is usually grown
nearer the tropics. East India wool has a tendency to be burry and
scurfy, with a slight mixture of grey hairs. The staple is generally
too short.
China, —This wool is usually soft, short-stapled wool; looks like
neither fleece nor lamb ; it is usually very cotted, kempy,* and
yellow. No attention seems to be bestowed upon it by the growers ;
but when a regular demand arises the Chinese will, no doubt, turn
their attention to the article, and effect desirable changes ; and, from
the extraordinary fecundity of the sheep, large quantities might be
produced.
Egyptian. —Here is a wool with many of the properties so wished
for by our consumers. The staple might be long enough if the native,
collectors and growers did not induce the practice of twice shearing.
The wool is bright, sound, and silky, but is sometimes spoiled by a
sprinkling of grey hairs, also by the admixture of ill-bred, rough,
fuzzy wool, known in the trade as Syrian.
The Cape, —The chief remark to be made upon the wool from this


the Fluke, they do not occasion much trouble to the
proprietor of flocks in this part of the world. The Scab
alone is the one great overpowering pest of the sheep in
Australia. It is everywhere present.
The Scab in sheep is a disease of the same character as the
mange in horses and dogs, and the itch in man. The
district is to protest against the pernicious practice of shearing the
sheep twice in the year, which altogether disqualifies it for combing
purposes, and depreciates its value greatly ; and it is strongly recom-
mended to discontinue the practice of shearing until the entire length
of the staple of which the wool is capable is attained.
Natal. — Considerable attention is being paid to the growth of
wool in this colony, and, like New Zealand, it possesses great natural
advantages.
Mogadore. —The wool of this country is deficient in lustre,
kempy,* and of a brownish color ; but by judicious crossing with
English blood it could be brought to resemble our breeds, and find a
large and remunerative market.
Canada—The bulk of this wool appears to be a neglected
Leicester, but is capable of improvement. There is a tendency in
some parts to cross the native sheep with United States Merinos, but
for the English market we recommend new Leicester rams, so as to
impart length, lustre, and soundness to the staple. One great fault
is the prevalence of burrs, which often depreciate the value five, and
sometimes ten per cent. This year’s imports have been irregularly
packed, consequently a manufacturer has been obliged to purchase
much wool that he did not require along with that which he did want.
If regular classification of the fleeces is unattainable at present, let
the growers, at least, pack up the cotted and cast fleeces separately
from the others.
California. —We have great hopes of this place being able to
supply Europe with very large quantities of both long and short
wool of medium and fine quality. At present, the growth is exported
almost exclusively to New York and Boston, where it enters duty
free. We think, however, that Californian wool will, ere long, find
its way to England. The value in New York of the unwashed
fleeces varies from fid. to 17d. per lb. The sheep-farmers profess
to be able to raise any breed, from Leicester up to pure Merino. At
present there is every variety of cross, with an infusion of United
States Merino. , .
Peru. —This wool is long-stapled tender wool, unfit for combing,
but might be improved, and the kemp and scurf eradicated. The
kemp is very prevalent. The Lima wool is better bred, and nearly
approaches a combing wool of middling quality to fine quality.
* By kempy wool is meant the presence of short white hairs at the roots of the
staple, which never take the dye, and disfigure all goods into which they are
introduced.


characteristic pustule, in all these eruptions of the skin, forms
the location or abode of a minute insect of the A car us class,
and this acarus, in its turn, becomes the instrument by which
the disease is at first spread over the body of the sheep, is
then propagated through the flock from one animal to
another, and is ultimately communicated from one flock to
another. The Scab is thus one of the most contagious of
diseases ; and it is principally communicated and spreads
generally by contagion, or the contact of the sheep with other
sheep already infected, or with places, posts, or trees previously
frequented by infected sheep, and to which the acarus or
scab-insect, or its eggs, adhere. It is at times, too, of spontaneous
origin, and to this we will advert farther on.
The earliest symptoms of the Scab is the sheep itching, or
plucking its wool and rubbing itself against posts or trees.
This symptom is observed about ten or twelve days after the
seeds of infection have been communicated. On examination,
small pustules will be noticed, and the skin will feel rough
and full of very small hard pimples. If, from any cause, the
disease is suspected to exist prior to the violent itching of the
sheep above referred to as a marked symptom, the examina-
tion of the skin, if the acarus has already effected a lodgment,
will reveal a reddish round spot about half an inch in diameter,
with a few dots like the puncture of a pin towards the middle
of the spot, and this latter subsequently becomes of a darker
Large quantities of long, coarse, carpet wool are shipped from Valpa-
raiso to the United States.
The Chilian Wool is capable of considerable improvement.
Argentine Republic (Buenos Ayres, Cordova, Entre Rios,
Santiago).—Buenos Ayres wools are chiefly short-woolled, shipped in
the grease. Entre Rios and Santiago, coarse wools. Cordova is a
carpet wool, and, from its length, capable of great improvement.
Republic of the Uraguay (or Banda Oriental; chief town,
Monte Video). —The wool from this quarter chiefly consists of fine
short-stapled.
New Zealand.—Large supplies of this wool have already come
to England, and we believe the country is peculiarly adapted to
produce the long combing wools required, from its soil and climate ;
and an unlimited market is opeh here for such wools.
Australia.—The wools from this colony form a large article of
export. They are generally of a finer character‘than those of the
other countries referred to, and for certain purposes are exceedingly
valuable.


hue. The dots soon become pustules, in which the acarus has
burrowed, and is at the moment hatching its young. Puru-
lent matter quickly gathers; and when it escapes from the
pustules, the characteristic Scab is formed.
These general observations will suffice to make the earlier
aspects of the disease plainly understood. The following
more detailed notices respecting the disease, its origin and cure,,
are taken from the earlier numbers of Hood’s Monthly Manual*
The appearance of the Scab in its earliest stages presents
itself in the rough and inflamed condition and reddish hue of
the skin. When closely examined, the skin also feels granular
to the touch. These granulations are the germs of the pus-
tules which contain the acari at a later stage of their growth.
A few days further on, an extensive eruption of pustules is
detected about the upper part of the back, and towards the
shoulders; and the sheep furiously scratches itself against every
post, stump, tree, or other object in the way. The pustules
speedily ripen, break, and run together, forming a species of
incrustation or scab, from which the disease gets its name.
The skin under the scab is taw and sore, and continues so until
the scab dries and scales off. The acarus , or parasitical insect,
which had its receptacle in the pustule, as soon as the latter
dries, moves away to a clean part of the skin, and, burrowing
there, sets up a new point of inflammation, and a further ex-
tension of the disease. Thus travelling about, the acarus
spreads the scab all over the sheep’s body ; and getting fixed
upon, or adhering to, the various “ rubbing places,” where the
diseased sheep have been scratching themselves, the insect at-
taches itself to the fleece of any luckless sheep that touches the
spot; and if but one pair, male and female, effect a lodgment
on the fleece of a clean sheep, so quickly and in such myriads
do they propagate their numbers, that in a few weeks from the-
first infection the sheep will be covered with millions of these
parasitical pests, and the scab will be spreading in all direc-
tions, in all the fulness of malignant maturity. The sheep,
thus preyed upon by its countless minute tormentors, quickly
loses condition, becomes fetid, scurvy, and sore looking; its
fleece harsh, ragged, and torn off in patches; its gait feeble
* Published by Hood and Co., Manufacturing Chemists, and Pro-
prietorsbf Hoods Sheep-dipping Composition , Melbourne.


and staggering; its whole appearance repulsive, and at no very-
distant period it succumbs to the disgusting disease. The
presence of the male acarus alone is not sufficient to propagate
the scab. There must be male and female, or the impregnated
female alone, to burrow into the skin, and there deposit its
eggs and bring forth its countless myriads of young insects,
which burrow in their turn, and propagate their own numbers
and the elements of the scab at one and the same time. A
litter of these insects contains from a dozen to fifteen or
sixteen young ones.'* Those which are hatched at the
later period of the summer generally survive over the winter ;
and, whether fed on the succulent juices of the sheep’s skin,
or existing by means of the moisture attainable on the “ rub-
bing-places” to which they adhere, they retain enough of
vitality in the ensuing spring to generate the scab again in
sheep which were apparently or actually made clean in the
autumn or winter previously. Where the latter has been the
case—that is, where there has been a positive cure or eradica-
tion of the disease, and it nevertheless returns again with the
opening warmth of spring, the contagion is reproduced by the
“ rubbing-places” frequented by the sheep. All such “ rub-
bing-places” should therefore be purified by exposure to the
action of flame ; and this can be best and most conveniently
effected by setting fire to the grass upon the run, or pasture-
'* A German veterinarian named Walz was the first who in modern
times brought accurate observation to bear upon the scab-insect, its
habits, physical structure, &c. The Greeks and Romans, in the ancient
world, were, however, acquainted with this parasite and its ravages
on the health of the sheep. Walz published his observations in the
year 1810. He thus refers to the acarus: —“ If one or more female
acari are placed on the wool of a sound sheep, they quickly travel to
the root of it, and bury themselves in the skin, the places at which
they penetrated being only distinguished by minute red spots, about
the size of the point of a pin. On the tenth or twelfth day, a little
swelling may be detected with the finger, and the skin changes its
color to a greenish-blue tint. The pustule is now rapidly formed,
and about the sixteenth day breaks, and the mothers again appear
with the little ones attached to their feet, and covered with a portion
of the shell from which they have emerged. These little ones imme-
diately set to work, and penetrate the neighboring skin, burying
themselves beneath it, where they find their proper nourishment, and
grow and propagate until the poor animal has myriads of them to
prey on and torment it—every litter of the parasites comprising from
eight to fifteen little ones. ”


ground. The young acarus, however, if kept apart from all
moisture, quickly perishes, and dries up into crumbling dust.
But the surviving of the older insects from the autumn to the
following spring, is sufficient to show the sheep-owner the
skill and perseverance he must have in his efforts to eradicate
the scab. The disease will re-appear again and again. And
some so-called cleansing solutions never do affect the germs of
the disease —that is, the young acari burrowing deep in the
sheep’s skin; whilst others, which are destructive to them,
cannot be applied with full strength so as to be really effective,
without, at the same time, doing mischief to the health of the
sheep, and great injury to the staple of the wool. It requires,
therefore, medical science, caution, skill, and perseverance, to
work a thorough cure in a large flock of sheep affected with
the scab.
The Scab, unlike the Rubbers, which is a disease of the
tissues lying immediately under the skin, is an affection of the
skin itself. It may be originated in many ways. Whatever
impoverishes the blood; whatever disorders or checks the per-
spiration ; whatever over-heats or surfeits the sheep; sameness
and poorness of feed ; long exposure to wet and cold ; length-
ened and fatiguing travelling, accompanied with thirst and
insufficient keep; the feverish debility arising from protracted
and intense heat, in conjunction with inadequate supply of
water; a lack of saline elements in the food; all, or any of
these causes, will result in generating Scab, especially in flocks
which are the offspring of sheep that had previously suffered
from Scab, and which have thus, as it were, an hereditary dis-
position towards that form of disease. These are the “ first
causes ” which originate the Scab; but there are multitudes
of flocks which have never been exposed to these causes,
and which are, nevertheless, either inevitably, or from wilful
mismanagement or neglect, afflicted with this scourge. In the
case of these, however, the Scab is communicated by conta-
gion. But whether originating of itself from any of the excit-
ing causes referred to, or whether communicated by conta-
gion, the modus operandi for restoring health is the same.
The curative agency must first arrest the progress of the dis-
ease, and restore the healthy action of the skin. And then at
a subsequent date, when the “posts of contagion” —the old
gum trees, stumps, fences, and other u rubbing places ” —have
again inoculated the sheep with the infection, the remedy


must be of such a nature that it can again and again be readily
and speedily applied, without injury to the fibre of the wool,
without irritation, but rather with a soothing, yet stimulating,
effect to the skin, and with a power to produce an increased
and copious secretion of the yolk. Hood’s Sheep-Dipping
Composition accomplishes all these ends with certainty and
satisfaction; and as the experience of flock-masters in Victoria,
Tasmania, and New Zealand proves, it always produces a per-
fect cure when properly applied. Other specifics have failed
and been forgotten.
Hood’s Sheep-Dipping Composition has alone maintained
its ground. Unless the application fulfil the conditions
enumerated above, there will be no thorough cure; however
appearances may at first warrant a belief in the restoration of
health to the flock ; the disease will return worse than it was
at first. But if the application is of a kind to be thus safely
and curatively brought to bear, at each critical period of the
re-appearance of the disease—and at a very small and alto-
gether insignificant cost per sheep likewise, as Hood’s Com-
position is—then the first and chief means is obtained towards
lidding the flocks operated upon, and the tainted pasture
grounds also, of this nauseous disease, and of all its latent
germs, or of any lurking tendency towards its renewal. But
it may be asked, why thus speak of its re-appearance at
first, with a certainty that almost seems to savour of a
wish that it should rather re-appear than not 'I The reason
is plain: it is because it will re-appear, partly from the nature
of the disease, but chiefly from those local facilities for propa-
gating by contagion, to which we have already adverted; and it
would be absurd to blink the fact. The proper course is to
recognise the fact, and provide the means of meeting it. These
means consist in carefully dipping the sheep at least twice, and
in some instances, three different times, at separate intervals, in
an effective and proved curative preparation, such as Hood’s
Composition.
The efforts of sheep-owners, on the other hand, if their
flocks are clean, should be directed towards preventive
measures. It is far easier to secure the flock from con-
tamination, by proper medical applications brought to bear
upon all the sheep, individually and collectively, before-
hand, than it is to restore them to cleanness and health,
by any curative ageny applied after they have been once


thoroughly defiled by the foul infection. In the case of
flocks, however, already suffering from the pest, or supposed
from certain indications shown by individual sheep to have
got the disease just introduced amongst them, the clean should
be at once separated from the infected ; and whilst all, both
dean and foul, should be immediately dipped in a properly-
prepared cleansing solution of Hood’s Composition, the chief
attention should be bestowed upon the latter. The object in
view in taking this course is to destroy at the earliest moment
possible the main source of the contagion, viz the thickly-
clustering acari of the most severely attacked sheep. By
damming up the fountain-head of the contagion, you stop its
speedy or extensive spread.
SHEEP-DIPPING.
Those who have seen, or have much to do with, sheep-dipping,
must have observed how often the persons engaged on a station
about sheep, and even in some instances the sheep-owners
themselves, think and act as if a cure of scab-infected sheep
can be effected without exercising the utmost care and atten-
tion in their treatment of the flock. A well-known remedy,
which is certain to clean the infected flock if properly used,
may be entrusted to the hands of such persons, but they apply
it in a way that frequently spoils the benefit it would other-
wise accomplish. It either fails in their hands, or they do
not pay sufficient attention to get the entire advantage of the
cure. Some apply it shortly before night, or when the weather
is cold, and the sheep, after being dipped, are left dripping wet,
exposed to the chilling influence of the night air or to the cold
weather, and a violent cold is the consequence, which depresses
the vital energies of the sheep and endangers their lives; and
if, as is almost sure to be the case, any of the sheep die from
such treatment, it is often ignorantly attributed to the curative
application, instead of their own thoughtlessness. Most
sheep-owners and overseers, we know, are quite aware of
the danger of exposing sheep, when all wet after the dip,
to the night air, or to the cold wind in open sheds or
unsheltered paddocks, and with such persons there is no danger


to be feared. They understand the necessity of dipping only in
the full noon-day and in warm weather, when the fleece will
speedily dry. But all have not that forethought; andVt is
these that we wish to guard against that careless treatment of
the sheep to which we refer. There are others who sometimes
dip their sheep in rainy weather, and in all such cases it
would be quite a wonder if the cure should succeed. The
preparation which cures the scab is in this case usually washed
off by the rain, before it can get at and kill all the acari or
scab-insects. These insects, on every scabby sheep, are in all
stages of growth, from the full-grown acarus to the minute eggs,
which are buried deep in the skin. The salts which the
sheep-dipping composition contains, and which kill the scab-
insect when they reach it, leave a deposit which clings in a
dry state to the fleece and skin of the sheep, and when the
newly-hatched insect comes to the surface, the salts, which
form a dry deposit on the sheep’s body, immediately destroy
the insect. But if the salts are washed off by the rain, though
they kill all the insects in the wool and upon the skin, yet it
is plain that the young brood buried deep in the skin, in the
form of ova or eggs, cannot at first be reached, and when they
crawl out, the composition-salts are not on the wool to destroy
them. In all such cases the scab, which at first seemed to
have been cured, makes its appearance again—being pro-
pagated by the newly-hatched broods of the acarus.
The composition is then declared to be useless, because
it did not do impossibilities—because, in fact, it did not
refuse to be washed off by the drenching rain. Again,
some people think that one dipping is in all cases quite enough,
even when the sheep are all crusted over with the scab
whereas a moment’s consideration would show that wher
there is an extensive and thick crust of scab on the sheep,
the composition cannot possibly, at one dipping, get at the
skin; and if it does not, it cannot of course destroy the cause
of the disease, namely, the scab insect. In such cases two or
even three dippings should be given.
All this is well understood, as we have before observed, by
every intelligent man on a sheep-station who knows his business,
and it is not for these persons we make these remarks ; they
do not stand in need of advice or information on this subject.
But, as we have said, there are others who do not appear to see
this matter in its true light; and it is these that we desire t 6


caution against thoughtless or insufficient treatment of their
sheep in dipping for scab.
The extensive application of Hood’s Sheep-dipping Com-
position throughout all parts of Victoria, and in Tasmania
and New Zealand, has made manifest the fact that there are
many persons connected with sheep stations who stand in need
of these remarks, and it is to them only that we address them,
in a fair and well-meaning spirit; and we hope they will be
accepted for what they are intended, namely, as a friendly
suggestion for their own advantage.
is tobacco advisable fob the scab ?
In reply to the question—“ What are the objections against
the use of tobacco as a cure for scab V —we find ourselves
unable to furnish a reply without going somewhat into detail
on the subject. And although the considerations, which we
bring under notice in so doing, partake in some degree of the
character of a contrast favorable to Hood’s Sheep-dipping
Composition, yet we will not, from any false delicacy, hesitate
to present these considerations to view, since they prirnd facie
prove themselves. They are of a kind to be plain and intel-
ligible to every man’s mind.
For greater convenience, we arrange in separate sections the
two classes of objections which exist against the use of tobacco
in the scab. These are, first, the purely economical objection
on the score of the great expense of tobacco; and, secondly,
the combined sanatory and economical objections on the score
of the well-known injury, both temporary and permanent,
which is inflicted by tobacco-washes upon the health of the
sheep, and on the growth and staple of the wool. The loss
caused by the reduced value of the animal and its produce, in
consequence of this injury, is far greater than most flock-owners
imagine.
x.—economical objections to the use of tobacco.
Tobacco will, undoubtedly, cure the scab. But, as will be
seen further on, there are many grave objections to its use.
These objections arise, in the first instance, out of the expen-
siveness of the application; and a very few words upon this


hood’s composition.
(Proportion—1 lb. to 10 gals.) 100 lbs. for 1000 gals., at
Is. per lb. ...5 0 0
Difference on 2000 sheep £13 15 0
division of the subject will be sufficient to give this view of the
matter complete proof. The question as to its expensiveness
will be best illustrated by comparison with what is a more
certain, and wholly safe cure, such as Hood’s Composition.
The two kinds of tobacco which are chiefly used for sheep -
dip in this country are Calcutta and Virginian leaf. Calcutta
leaf is a poorly-grown and badly-cured description of tobacco,
that possesses but a very slight per centage of nicotine , which
is the essential alkaline oil of the plant, and on the presence
of which the curative properties of the tobacco depends. To
make an effective dip of Calcutta tobacco, the quantity used
must proportionably exceed by at least 50 per cent, the
quantity taken of the best Virginian leaf. And in conse-
quence, though it is to be had at Is. per lb., it is not cheaper
than the Virginian, which costs Is. 6d. per lb. The larger
quantity of it proportionately requisite, viz, : 1A lb. for 1 lb.
of Virginian, makes the cost alike, whichever sort is used. In
determining, then, the expense of the tobacco-cure for scab
when compared with that of Hood’s Composition, the cost of
Virginian leaf will best form the standard of comparison.
The usual strength of tobacco-dip (Virginian) is 1 lb. to four
gallons of water; that is, 25 lbs. of tobacco will give one
hundred gallons of dip. The cost of this is, 25 lbs. at Is. 6d. per
lb., 375. 6d. 10 lbs. of Hood’s Composition gives one hundred
gallons of dip, the cost of which is, at Is. per lb,, but 10s.
Thus the tobacco-cure for scab is within a fraction of being four
times the cost of Hood’s Composition. The great difference
between the two will be more conspicuously shown by apply-
ing the comparison to large quantities, such as are required
for dipping (say) 2000 sheep—that is, about 1000 gallons of
liquor. The comparison stands thus :
TOBACCO.
(Proportion—l lb. to 4 gals.) 250 lbs., for 1000 gals., at
Is. 6d. per lb
£lB 15 0
So much for the net cost of tobacco as compared with
another effective, safer, and more easily applied remedy.
c 2


There are other matters also to be taken into account,
which add to, and increase proportionately, the cost of tobacco
as a sheep-dip. It has to be boiled, and the boiling heat kept
up, as long as fresh tobacco is added for any increase in the
numbers of the sheep first dipped in the liquor. The cost of
the boiling apparatus and fuel have thus to be added to the
original outlay for the tobacco, whilst the inconvenience and
trouble of the method of the application, which have no
existence in the case of Hood’s Composition, have also to be
taken into consideration. Thus, on the score of economy
alone, tobacco is far less eligible than, and greatly inferior to,
Hood’s Composition, as an application for the cure of scab. The
purely economical view of the matter, however, presents but a
fractional part of the objectionableness of tobacco as a curative
agency in cases of scab. The second division of the subject
brings under notice a far more serious class of objections, as
will be seen from the following.
II. —SANATORY OBJECTIONS TO THE USE OF TOBACCO.
The injury to the wool, to the skin, and to the bodily
health of the sheep, resulting from the use of tobacco-washes,
should put an end for ever to the employment of that article
in dipping sheep; and it would put an end to it if the question
were fully understood.
The growth of the wool on the sheep’s back, its softness,
fullness and fineness of staple, its weight, its luxuriance and
abundance of rich fibre, all depend on the copious presence of
yolk. If this natural secretion of the skin is not abundant—
or if it is removed by washes, without something in the
nature of a temporary substitute for it being at the same
time left on the skin, so as to nourish the growth of the
wool until the yolk itself has been again secreted in abundance—
two mischievous results take place. The wool already grown
is rendered light, thin, and hairy, and loses all that elasticity,
suppleness, softness, and fullness of touch, which are the
indispensable qualities of a first-class wool. In the next
place, the yolk, which is the very pabulum of the growing
wool, and without which there can be no kindly growth of it,
having been removed by the wash or liquor, the young wool
which is produced in its absence is of a harsh, wiry, hairy tex-
ture j and this after-growth never subsequently recovers its
proper soft, full, fine texture, even when the yolk has again


begun to make its appearance on the skin. Thus, the same
fleece exhibits wool of a staple having different qualities—one
part of the staple having a soft pile, richness, and pliability ;
the other being harsh, thin, brittle, and bristly. The same
effect, in fact, is produced upon the filaments of the wool, as
is seen in the wool of a sheep, which, from having been at one
season of the year in vigorous health, has been reduced to
a condition of feebleness of constitution or a sickly debilitated
state, by any such causes as bad and poor feed, exposure to
wet, cold, or other severe vicissitudes of the weather. In this
latter case of constitutional debility, from whatever cause
produced, the growth of the wool sympathises with the bodily
condition of the sheep ; and its staple shows no longer the
fullness and brilliancy cf fibre that it did at the earlier date,
when the sheep was in strong health. The bulk of the fibre
is reduced, its surface is not transparent, but withered and
opaque, and the undulating outline of the filaments, with its
characteristic serried, cone-like formation, is obliterated to a
great extent. The contrast between the healthy-grown and
the sickly-produced fibre at the break or joint, where the two
growths i unite, is quite obvious to the wool-stapler or pro-
fessional dealer, even without the aid of a microscope. The
very touch will reveal the deterioration which the wool has
undergone in the course of its growth. Now this same
injurious effect is produced by the regular use of tobacco
liquor as a sheep-dipping application for the scab. It dete-
riorates the wool already grown at the time of its application,
and it spoils the future growth to a still greater extent for
some considerable time after its application. Tobaoco-dipped
wool thus always presents a mixed quality of fibre, and is
greatly lessened in value in the eyes of the wool-stapler.
Tobacco is thus injurious, because it acts in the way which
we will now endeavour to explain. It is a powerful narcotico-
acrid poison; that is, its operation is to depress or lower the
tone of the bodily health and prostrate the strength of the
animal it is applied to; whilst it also exercises an irritating
influence on the surface, i.e., the skin to which the application
is made. A strong tobacco-wash thus acts in two ways—the
one mechanically and chemically; the other, constitutionally
and morbidly. If the sheep is kept in it sufficiently long, and at
a temperature high enough for the purpose, to enable the liquor
to saturate the wool and penetrate the skin, and also carry off


to some extent the incrustation of the scab, it will certainly
destroy the acarus or scab-insect. But its acrid, irritant
effect is also so detergent, that is, it so scrubs the sheep’s pelt,
that it washes away the yolk likewise, and leaves the skin
and the wool harsh, rough, and wholly destitute of that nutri-
ment which the yolk can alone give. The effect of this operation
is to check the future nutritive growth of the wool for a con-
siderable length of time, as well as to deteriorate the already
existing staple, in the way we have explained above. If the
tobacco-wash could, like Hood’s Composition, leave after it on
the sheep’s body an oily or soapy substance, which would act as
substitute for the yolk and encourage the by its
kindly action on the skin, this first and most direct injurious
action of the tobacco-liquor would 6 be obviated. But no such
substance can be held in solution with the tobacco-liquor and
be effective. Hence there is no alleviation of its harsh scrub-
bing effects possible. The reason why the tobacco-liquor
exercises all its full detergent, or scrubbing powers upon the
sheep’s skin, so completely as to wash|away every trace of the
yolk , is not merely on account of its own acrid nature, but
also by reason of the nature of the yolk itself, which greatly
aids it in its operation. The yolk is a true animal-soap, of
which potass forms the base and main ingredient. The great
Trench chemist, Vauquelin, and others after him, have
analysed the yolk , and found it, in all instances of number-
less examinations, to be an oily potassa-soap secreted from
glands in the sheep’s skin, and deriving its peculiar odour and
color from the presence of an animal oil, in mechanical contact
with this soapy matter, but not in chemical combination with
it. This animal soap, then, combines with the tobacco-water,
and the wash that is produced carries away everything in con-
nection with the wool, including the animal oil, which gives
its color and smell to the yolk. There is no escape, therefore,
for the wool from the desiccating and withering effects of the
tobacco-juice.
What we have just described forms the first-named—that is,
the mechanical and chemical —mode of action of the tobacco-
liquor, when applied to the skin, or external surface Of the
sheep’s body.
The second mode of the injurious operation produced by
tobacco sheep-dip, namely, its constitutional and morbid effect
on the sheeps’ health, arises out of the peculiar influence of


the narcotic tobacco-poison. The depressing action of the
nicotine on the vital powers gives a shock to the bodily
system, at the same time that it vitiates the blood and all the
juices and secretions of the animal. Absorbed through the
pores of the skin, the nicotine- poison penetrates the whole
system, and produces that general debility and low state of
health, which results, amongst other consequences, in the
animal yielding lank, inferior wool of the kind described in
the foregoing part of this article. As long as the sheep is
suffering from the tobacco-poison, so long will the growth of
the wool be bad ; and the constitutional effects of the poison
last much longer than a casual or an inexperienced observer
would be able to detect.
Hood’s Composition, it may be stated in contrast, whilst
being more certain in its function of eradicating the scab than
tobacco is, avoids at the same time producing any injurious
effect whatever, either on the wool, the skin, or the health of
the sheep.*
* There is no one kind of attempted remedy for scab which has
been so extensively patronised by flockowners for some years back in
Victoria as tobacco-water, and what has been the result ? Has this
once universal, but now much distrusted, application for the cure of
scab stayed the progress of the pest in this colony, or reduced its
prevalence amongst the flocks of Victoria ? So far from that being
the case, that Mr. Curr furnishes us with the statistics, which prove
that the progress of scab of late years in Victoria has exceeded the
rate of increase amongst the numbers of the flocks in the colony. Not-
withstanding the prevalent use of the tobacco cure (?), scab has ad-
vanced with greater rapidity than the increase in the numbers of the
sheep produced in Victoria ! This is a startling fact, and Mr. Curr
presents it plainly to view. For instance, he says there were in Vic-
toria, in 1846, 2,996,992 sheep ; in 1850, 6,032,783 sheep ; in 1863,
7,974,198 sheep. Thus in the four years from 1846 to 1850 the flocks
of Victoria more than doubled themselves, notwithstanding the ex-
tensive “ boiling-down ” carried on at that period; whilst in the
thirteen years from 1850 to 1863, with an increased consumption of
mutton certainly, but with no boiling down, and with a large import
of sheep from the adjoining colonies, the flocks of Victoria only in-
creased by one-third. Within the same period the number of sheep
infected with the scab in Victoria has risen to the enormous amount
of 5,000,000. Five millions of scabby sheep out of eight millions in
Victoria ! Is not this a startling and disgraceful fact ? It is pretty
obvious from these figures that tobacco wash has not been very suc-
cessful in ridding the colony of the scab.”— Review of Curr's Prize
Essay on Scab in Hood's Monthly Manual for July , 1865.


THE FLUKE.
The Fluke or Rot has been known as a most fatal plague
amongst sheep from time immemorial, and in all countries and
climates —hot, temperate, and cold. The early symptoms of
the disease are very obscure; and this is the more unfortunate,
as it is only in its early stages that the Rot offers any prospect
of a cure, either by means of medical treatment or change of
food and improved pasture. When once the disease has taken
full possession of the sheep, there is no remedy. Hence, in
all countries where the ravages of Rot occur, the disease sweeps
away thousands and tens of thousands of the flocks almost
before its presence has been suspected. One of the most
perceptible of the early symptoms of Fluke in the sheep is
that the animal affected is dull and slow of movement, and
falls behind, instead of keeping up with, the rest of the flock.
The intelligent shepherd, who would observe this, should at
once make certain of his fears by examining the skin. On
parting the wool on the brisket with the finger and thumb, if
the skin exhibits a pale yellow hue instead of the usual flesh-
red color, the sheep may be set down as suffering from inci-
pient rot. As the disease advances the eye of the sheep presents
unmistakable symptoms. The small veins at the corner of the
eye-ball are swollen, and injected with a yellow serous fluid, and
the eye-gland, called the caruncle, situated at the corner of the eye,
is yellow instead of being red, or, as it is when the sheep are at
grass, white. The yellowtinge shows that the liver is diseased, and
that the bile is beginning to mingle with the blood. There is
at first no loss of condition in the sheep, but rather a tendency
to increased flesh and fat. But this latter deceptive appear-
ance soon gives way to wasting, pallor, and flabbiness. Fever,
emaciation, loss of appetite, black and yellow patches on the
skin, the falling off of the wool, swelling of the belly, livid
tongue, fetid breath, and general decline marked by a putrid
or rotten condition of the tissues —all mark the progress of
the disease to its final fatal result. Hence the name Rot; and
the post-mortem examination, revealing, as it does, the pale,
flaccid condition of the muscle, and the general prevalence of
purulent matter, confirms the appropriateness of the name thus
given to this fearful disease. The biliary ducts of the liver


are found filled with flukes; and the substance of the liver
itself is observed to be rather hard and schirrous, pale or
spotted, or inflamed and ulcerated. Here is the central seat
of the disease, which has been also termed Fluke , from the
almost invariable presence of these Entozoa in large numbers
in the liver, or the visible traces of them. Acute and distinc-
tive inflammation of the liver, aggravated by, and receiving a
peculiar character from, the presence of those parasites, is seen
to be the source whence the disease has spread over the body
and destroyed the animal. Is then the fluke-worm the cause
or the effect of rot 1 This has long been a moot-point amongst
practical and scientific men familiar with the sheep and its
diseases. The most rational, as well as the most generally
accepted, opinion is that the fluke is to a great extent both
cause and effect of the disease.
The inflammation of the liver having once been produced
from causes to which we refer further on, as the disease
progresses the flukes are developed in the passage of the liver,
and speedily multiply to myriads. They thus corrupt its
juices, impede its action, obstruct the flow of the bile, and
complete the irritable and disorganised state of the liver, which
the inflammation had originally begun. But how account for
the presence of the flukes ? A limited number of these
Entozoa, or internal parasites, is found in the livers of the
most healthy sheep in high condition ; and it is thought that
they form an element in a sound constitution, when present in
those limited numbers only. They excite the liver to a more
uniform and sufficiently-abundant secretion of bile. It is only
disease of the liver that leads to their fatal multiplication in
myriads. Again, it is thought that the eggs of the parasite,
voided by flukey sheep in their excrements, and becoming thus
scattered over the herbage, are taken into the stomach of the
sheep, along with their feed ; and being there hatched find
their way ultimately to their proper seat in the interior of the
sheep’s body, namely, the liver. This is very probable. But
the whole question of the branch of pathology connected with
the origin of these Entozoa is yet in an imperfectly-developed
state ; and it is reserved for the further progress of science to
elucidate it and make it more thoroughly understood. It is
of more practical consequence, however, to deal with the
conditions of the atmosphere or weather, and of the pastures
frequented by the sheep, which have been always without


exception found to be the great exciting causes of this fatal
disease.
Many causes have been assigned for the origin of fluke or rot
in sheep. All of these have reference, more or less, first, to
the condition of the pasturage, and next to the state of the
atmosphere, in which moisture and heat are in operation,
either together at once, or in succession, the one after the other.
The causes which are thus set at work result in the produc-
tion of decomposed or partially-rotted vegetation, and the
formation of a species of marsh miasma , or poisonous exhala-
tions, emanating from the decomposed vegetation. Some have
contended that the miasma alone, being breathed by the
sheep and entering the system by the lungs, is sufficient to
produce the disease ; whilst others have maintained that the
decomposed or rotting herbage is the immediate cause of
the malady. Both are partially right. The pestilential
vapours, or miasmata , produce that debility of the constitu-
tion which prepares the sheep for falling a ready victim to the
half-fermented and rotting herbage, which they take into the
stomach when feeding upon lands of a certain description,
or that are temporarily subjected to excess of moisture.
The two causes, viz., poisonous vapours and poisonous vegeta-
tion, act together —the one through the lungs, the other
through the stomach—and develop the rot in the sheep
with extraordinary rapidity. So much is this the case, that a
flock of sheep have been known to get the rot from feeding
for half an hour along the borders of marshy ditches, in
which stagnant water was lying in pools, or upon marshy
ground covered with sour and half-decaying herbage.
The description of land that is most productive of rot is
iowlying, boggy, spongy, and naturally retentive of moisture.
Peaty soils, or those which have a peaty subsoil, are especially
liable to give the rot. But the most healthy and dry uplands
can be brought into a condition which will be sure to commu-
nicate the disease to the sheep depastured upon them. When
rain has fallen in quantity, and the undulating surface of the
ground allows stagnant pools, or even a damp surface, to
remain for the sun and air to act upon —whether this stagnant
moisture arises from the subsoil being too impervious to allow
of speedy and complete drainage; or from the surface of the
land, even though the situation is high, being too flat or too
uneven to admit of the wet running off at once—all such land


will, whilst in that condition, give the rot to the sheep that
feed on it, even though they remain there but an hour or two.
If the herbage were altogether covered with water, so as to
keep out the action of the sun and the air from the surface of
the ground, there would be no danger of disease ; but when
the moist surface and wet herbage are exposed to the sun and
air, the herbage immediately begins to rot and ferment close to
the roots, and to give forth poisonous exhalations, as well as
becoming itself unfit for food. This would not take place in
the spring so much as in the autumn; and for this reason,
viz., that the powers of growth in the herbage are so strong
in the spring as to counteract the tendency to decomposition.
But in the autumn, when the season’s growth has stopped
altogether, or is very feeble, the rotting influence of the com-
bined moisture and warmth has full effect, without any check
whatever, in decomposing the herbage and rendering it a
poisonous sort of food. A modern writer on the sheep and
its diseases puts the case plainly in the following passage :
“ Whatever difference of opinion there may be as to the mode
by which the deleterious matters are introduced into the
system,” says this author, “ there is, and can be, none as to
the fact of the combined operation of heat and moisture pro-
ducing it. Numberless facts have sufficiently proved that the
rot does not occur on a sandy, chalky, or porous soil, or on
land altogether under water, or completely dry ; but on land
retentive of moisture, or having pools of stagnant water, rot is
very likely to appear.”
A tract of sheep-country, it may be thus seen, however high
and dry in situation, may, in certain seasons, be dangerous. If
it has spots which retain a moist, damp surface after the rain,
these spots will be sufficient in most years to generate the rot,
and thus to render of no avail the otherwise healthy and airy
situation of the pasture-grounds. Perfect drainage of these
plague-spots is the remedy for the land, and the removal of
the flocks to dry, or, if possible, salt-bush, country is the
remedy for the sheep. It will, at all events, stop the further
spread of the disease amongst the flocks, even though many of
the individual sheep attacked before the removal may not
recover.
Medical remedies are not of much avail in the rot . Salt is
the only article that acts like a specific in arresting the progress
of the disease. In what way the salt operates it is not easy to


explain. The writer whom we have already quoted says upon
this point:—“ The blood in this disease is in a state of unna-
tural dilution—it is deficient in its fibrous and coloring
principles. Now, whether salt, which is a combination of
chlorine and soda, acts by restoring some portion of these salts
of which the blood is deficient, or whether it is prejudicial to
the vitality of the flukes and their eggs, or whether it acts by
the antiseptic power which belongs to chlorine, we cannot tell,
although its influence over the disease is generally acknow-
ledged.” He prescribes the following course of treatment :
“ The sheep should be removed from the unsound pasture as
soon as possible, either to a salt marsh or the driest pasture
that can be found ; as much salt may be given as the animals
will take with their food; to this the sulphate of iron may
be joined. Half a drachm daily for each sheep, with the same
quantity of ginger, may be given. An aperient should be
given once or twice during the treatment, and may consist of
one or two ounces of sulphate of magnesia, or a large table-
spoonful of common salt dissolved in water. Food should be
given in as nutritious a form as possible ; and a pint of beans
daily will be an excellent diet, with good hay on sound
pasture.” The treatment here prescribed is judicious, and
likely to be attended with success as far as rot is capable of
cure. The medicine will act both as a tonic and cleanser of
the blood, and will likewise destroy the flukes. It is the same
sort of prescription that has lately been communicated by a
Melbourne medical man to the Acclimatisation Society as a
remedy for rot. This prescription is as follows : —“ Take one
part of powdered sulphate of iron and three parts of common
salt, which mix well together, and callow to stand until it has
become thoroughly decomposed, and is quite yellow; then mix
with ten parts of burnt clay, and place in the camp for the
sheep to lick. If the animals are very bad, the mixture may
be given without the clay, as, in case it is taken in excess, the
only effect will be a slight scour.” This medicine, it is said,
has been recently found very effectual, producing a change for
the better in flocks suffering from the fluke here in Victoria.
But too much must not be expected from it; for no medicine
is of much avail if the disease has got a firm hold on the
sheep. Medical treatment, to be of any use in the rot or fluke,
must be adopted at the very first symptoms of the disease.
Delay is fatal.


NOTICE.
HOOD AND CO.’S SHEEP-DIPPING COMPOSITION
FOR THE SCAB IN SHEEP.
In submitting the following testimonials from flockmasters
and our agents in Victoria, Tasmania, and New Zealand,
we desire to make a few preliminary observations.
When, about eighteen months ago, we introduced to the
notice of the sheep-farmers of Australia our sheep-dipping pre-
paration, we claimed for it the character of being one of the
best remedies ever submitted to the public for the cure of Scab
in sheep. At that time the preparation was new, and in Aus-
tralia, at least, had not been tried. There was also the further
difficulty to contend with—that several other so-called specifics
hadbeen introduced,all more or less failures. We then admitted,
as we do now, that, for the bare cure of the disease, good tobacco
is effectual. But we affirm, and the proofs are exhibited in the
following testimonials, that there are three points in which our
preparation is superior to tobacco : first, it is only about one-
third the price ; next, it positively improves the wool; and, in
the third place, it is always uniform in its effects, if carefully
and properly applied, a quality utterly unattainable with
tobacco, the curative properties of the latter depending
wholly upon the presence of nicotine, which may or may
not be present according as the tobacco has or has not
been properly fermented. When, at the period referred
tp, we stated our belief that our preparation would be found
as effective as the best tobacco, we were assailed in no


measured terms by a portion of the squatters. Some even
had the temerity to rush into print, thereby showing their
entire ignorance of the subject they wrote upon ■ others,
again, less emulous, or less touched with itch (we had
almost written scab) for writing, contented themselves with
detailing their limited experience of the use of the immacu-
late tobacco, whilst in conclave with their brother-squatters in
town or elsewhere. All this, however, has come to an end.
We have, as we then said we would do, proved to the satisfac-
tion of the most incredulous that our preparation is a sure,
effective, and speedy cure for the Scab. If, however, there
are a few who still doubt, we beg to submit for their perusal
the following pages. We may here state a fact in connection
with the sale of the preparation, bearing upon the extent to
which it has been used: — Since Ist January, 1864, we
HAVE SOLD MORE THAN 80 TONS, A QUANTITY SUFFICIENT TO
DIP ONCE THREE AND A HALF MILLIONS OF SHEEP ! ! !
HOOD & CO.,
160 Elizabeth Street,
Melbourne.
July, 1865.


TESTIMONIALS.




TESTIMONIALS
AS TO
THE EFFICACY OF
HOOD’S SHEEP-DIPPING- COMPOSITION
VICTORIA.
EXPERIMENTS AT THE MODEL FARM, MELBOURNE.
At the Model Farm, the following experiments were made with our
Sheep-dipping Composition, under the authority of the Board of
Agriculture :
‘‘ On the 10th September, eight sheep, suffering from the disease
in its most virulent form, were dipped in the solution prepared by
Mr, Hood.
“ The application was cold, and the sheep received the same treat-
ment which is generally followed on a station. It was simply a
common dip in the cold solution, and nothing more ; the sheep
remained about a minute in the dip,
“ After dipping, the sheep were placed in a pen in the farm yard,
where they were kept and artificially fed by Mr. Mitchell during the
experiment.
“On the 22nd September, the sheep were re-dipped in a solution
of five pounds of the composition to forty gallons of water.
“ The dipping was simply such as they would have had on a sta-
tion; the temperature was 110°, and the sheep remained about a
minute in the dip.


‘‘ On the 6th October the sheep were very carefully examined.
Their general appearance indicated that the solution had been most
efficient, and its application had apparently removed all traces of the
disease ; but a further examination was determined upon at a future
day, when the effects of the dipping would be more fully developed.
“On the 16th October the sheep were again inspected. After a
minute examination, by the aid of very powerful glasses, no acari
could be found, and no trace of the disease could be detected. The
general improvement was very manifest, and no irritation appeared to
exist. The healthy color of the wool, and the improved appearance
of the sheep altogether, proved that the solution was a valuable cura-
tive of scab.
(Signed) “ J. M. Matson.”
“Boardof Agriculture, Nov. 10th, 1863.”
On the sth November the following report was submitted by the
judges appointed by the Board of Agriculture :
“We beg to report that, upon examination of the sheep dipped in
Mr. Hood’s solution, we found that the disease had been most effectually
eradicated. The general healthy appearance of the sheep and wool
clearly establishes the fact as to the curative properties, and the
beneficial effects produced by its application ; and considering the
sheep had been penned up during the experiment, and artificially fed,
the result is highly satisfactory, as it proves, beyond a doubt, that a
cure has been effected.
(Signed)
“ W. S. Cox.
“D. Ballantine, Jun.
“F. W. Dallimore.
“ J. F. Shaw, M.R.C.V.S.
“Thomas Brown, Jun.
“ The Secretary, Board of Agriculture.”
The following letter from George Currie, Esq., Kaarimba, con-
clusively proves the preventive properties of the composition :
Melbourne, Dec. 7th, 1863.
Sir— Feeling a considerable interest in the trial of Scab Specifics
lately made at the Model Farm, I was desirous, since coming to town,
of seeing the sheep that had been experimented upon with your pre-
paration, and judging for myself as to its efficacy as a curative. I
accordingly went to the farm on the sth instant, and saw the eight
sheep, that had been dipped on the 10th and 22nd September,
examined on the 6th and on the 16th October, and finally on the sth of
November, by competent judges, and I am glad to say that the
result of my examination, at this distance of _ time (eleven weeks
since they received the last dressing), was highly satisfactory, as
upon the most rigid scrutiny I could not discover the slightest trace


of scab, and have no hesitation in stating that they have been effect-
ually cured.
What struck me forcibly was, that the preparation must have
acted as a preventive as well as a curative, otherwise the sheep
could scarcely have failed by this time to have become re-infected,
and 'this from the circumstance that the yard in which they are
confined at present, and have been all along, Mr. Mitchell informed
me, is the same in which they, as well as about fifty more sheep
in the worst stage of scab, were kept for some time previous to
the late experiment having been tried. Under these circumstances,
therefore, it is my opinion that a flock might be dipped in your solu-
tion and turned on scabby ground, or if joined by scabby sheep
within a reasonable period after dipping, they would be proof against
infection.—l am, Sir, yours obediently,
Mr. J. Hood, Chemist, Melbourne. George Currie.
As evidence that this preparation absolutely improves the cha-
racter of the staple, both in fineness and elasticity, we refer to the
following Testimonial, kindly furnished to us by Mr. Mitchell, lessee
of the Model Farm, under whose supervision all the experiments
above alluded to were conducted :
Experimental Farm, December 23rd, 1863.
I would also further add that, from observation during the experi-
ments carried out here, I am of opinion that Mr. Hood’s Specific
lias the effect of promoting the growth, and cleansing the wool of
sheep dipped in it. (Signed) Josiah Mitchell.
Extract from a letter dated 11th January, from JohnTrainor, Esq.,
Chewton Station, near Kilmore:—
“ My opinion of your preparation is, that it completely cures Scab,
and I may add that I intend to dip with your Specific each year after
shearing, on account of the beneficial effect it has on the growth of
the wool and the general health of the sheep.’’
The following letter Has been received from W. L. Wilson, Esq.,
Derrimut, under date 2nd March, 1861:
Gentlemen —Having tried your Sheep-dipping Composition, I beg
to state the result, I dipped 330 lambs, all more or less scabby, in.
d 2


200-gallon dip, with 20 lbs. of your preparation; 125 gallons only
were used, thus making the cost 12s. 6d. They were shorn fifteen
days afterward, and only two showed the slightest trace of the disease
remaining. They were again dipped, and thoroughly cured. I
further beg to add that, for simplicity of application, and for the im-
provement of the wool both in quality and quantity, your composi-
tion cannot be surpassed, if equalled.—To Messrs. Hood and Co.
Messrs. Hood and Co.—Gentlemen—l have dipped 2500 scabby
sheep in a solution of your preparation. They were twice dipped,
and a thorough cure was the result. The cost of the material, ten
pounds (£10). It is far less trouble to prepare it than any other
dressing I ever used, and the wool after dipping is soft, and unin-
jured in color and texture. I consider your composition superior to
tobacco in every particular. It is cheaper, more certain, easier of
application, and improves the fleece.—l am, gentlemen, yours faith-
fully,
Goron Park, Werribee. John Bertram.
Melton Station, August 6, 1864.
Mr. Hood— l have dipped a flock of 1500 in your preparation; they
were very much diseased, some of them as bad* as any I ever saw,
and I now consider they are clean. There cannot be a doubt but it
improves the wool.
Thomas Waller,
For George Minns.
The following is a copy of a letter received by Messrs. R. Golds-
brough and Co., to which we beg to draw the particular attention
of our readers :
Warranga Park, Rushworth, September 7, 1864.
Messrs. R. Goldsbrough and Co.—Gentlemen —In justice to
Messrs. Hood and Co., as well as for your guidance and information,
I think it only right that I should make you acquainted with the
result of my sheep-dipping in their preparation. You are, of course,
aware that I had about 10,000 sheep, all more or less scabby, and
that I had been endeavoring to cure them with various applications
for some months past, but failed. I was induced to try Messrs.
Hood and Co.’s preparation early in July. I dipped 8500 of the
worst, making the solution about 10 per cent, stronger than recom-
mended by the proprietors, and using it warm. I noticed most


decided benefit from even one application. In ten days I dipped
them a second time, same strength as first, and in ten days after had
them all carefully examined, and drafted out about 380, which were
supposed to be not thoroughly clean. These we again dipped, and
now, after sufficient time to test whether a cure has or has not been
effected, lam perfectly satisfied that my sheep are cured. I may
mention that the remainder of the 10,000 were only dipped once,
but that was done with great care, and they are also cured. I woul
wish it to be understood that all bad cases were hand-dressed before
dipping, but this in no way detracts from the merit of the prepara-
tion, as I consider spotting absolutely necessary, no matter what
preparation may be used. In conclusion, I would say of this pre-
paration that it is one of the most efficient agents I have ever used
for the cure of scab; that whilst I might be inclined to prefer good
tobacco when the fleece is long, I most decidedly prefer Messrs.
Hood and Co.’s preparation after shearing. I may also mention one
or two other points : the cost is only about one-third that of tobacco;
the same hands can dip fully one-half more than with tobacco, and it
in no way injures the fleece.—l am, gentlemen, yours faithfully.
W. Gunn.
We would wish specially to draw the attention of all those having
scab in their flocks to the case of Mr. W. Gunn. This gentleman had
been annoyed with that disease in his flocks for a very long period ;
had tried many remedies, even tobacco, but without success. In.
July last, he determined to give our preparation a trial. In a letter
dated 7th September, he states that a thorough cure was the result.
In confirmation of that statement we have now the pleasure to
insert the subjoined, and which we consider conclusive :
[extract.]
Warranga Station, 20th March, 1865.
The Inspector was here a few days ago, and examined with
scrupulous care every sheep on the station, and, I am happy to say,
pronounced them clean. He is perfectly satisfied now that your pre-
paration did it, and that, too, under most unfavorable circum-
stances. In fact, I heard him state so to two settlers in this neigh-
borhood.—l am, dear sirs, yours truly,
(Signed) W. GuNNr
Messrs. Hood and Co.


Portland, 19th. November, 1864.
Messrs. Hood and Co., Melbourne.— Dear Sirs—As we are-
running out of your Specific, please send us another supply.—We
remain, dear sirs, yours truly,
Lord, Croaker and Co.
Belfast, 24th December, 1864.
John Hood, Esq., Melbourne.— Dear Sir—We are quite out of
your Scab Specific, and shall be glad if you will send us down a
supply by first steamer, if possible. We expect a considerable de-
mand, now the shearing is over. Send invoice.—Yours faithfully,
Lord, Croaker and Co., ser John G. Green.
Morton’s Hotel, March 9, 1865.
Messrs. Hood and Co., Melbourne. —Dear Sirs—l may inform
you that I have used your Sheep-dipping Composition very largely
and with the greatest success. My sheep were very badly infected
with Scab; some of them I dipped but twice, while others needed
three dippings to effect a cure; but as I went on the principle of
making a thorough cure, an extra dipping was of no object to me. I
am certainly of opinion that your Composition is the most reliable as
well as the cheapest remedy for Scab, and I can confidently recom-
mend it to the notice of all those whose flocks are troubled with that
disease as a simple, cheap, safe, and certain cure, if the directions
are followed to the letter. It is not more than one-fourth the cost of
tobacco.—l remain, dear sirs, faithfully yours,
Lake Meran, Lower Loddon. Donald Cameron.


Tasmania;
Launceston, Tasmania, May 16th, 1864.
Messrs. Hood .and Co., Melbourne. —Dear Sirs—Fletcher,
who at first was dissatisfied, now speaks in terms of the highest
possible praise of your composition, and we have had several other
very satisfactory conversations with some who have used it. Mr.
Fletcher goes so far as to say, that he believes in it to so great an
extent that he will guarantee a cure to any disbeliever, if present
himself at time of dipping, &c. We fully expect next season to
have a great call for it.—We are, dear sirs, yours very truly,
M‘Naughtan and Co., per Ronald T. Gunn.
28th September, 1864.
Messrs. Hood and Co.—Dear Sirs—l had a case of your composi-
tion some short time ago from Mr. Gunn, and will require a little
more to carry me on to shearing in case of need. I suppose I can get
it from Mr. Gunn as before.
At shearing time I intend to use it for dipping. Will Mr. Gunn
have a stock on hand about the middle or end of November ?
I still adhere to the 8 gallons of water to the 16, instead of 10.
I like to make sure work of it. Probably 10 gallons in a dip for
clean sheep might do; but where disease exists, or is even doubtful,
I would reduce the quantity to B.—Believe me, dear sir, yours truly,
James Maclanachan.
Isaac Wright, Esq., Hobart Town. —Dear Sir—Please forward
me another lot of Hood and Co.’s Sheep-dipping Composition. My
experience of it is that it will cure the very worst cases of scab.
When I had the former lot, I determined to give it a full and fair
trial, and for this purpose selected some sheep in as bad a condition
with scab as any I ever saw. They were literally alive with it. One,
an old ewe , had been dressed again and again with various dressings
to no' purpose. I took her, and one hogget, and dressed them in
Hood's Specific; I also took other four hoggets, and dressed them in
the usual dressing of tobacco, sulphur, and spirits of tar. Directly
the two, dressed with Hoods, were finished, they commenced to eat,
and from that time till the present—nearly two months—have con-
tinued to improve in condition, and now not a speck of the disease
remains. Of the other four, threp died the day after being dipped.


and the other was as had as ever in a fortnight after. So satisfied
am I of its efficacy, that I intend to use it this season, especially for
my hogget flocks, as I have always had the greatest difficulty with
them, and I feel certain I shall now succeed.
All that is requisite to insure success, is to carry out to the letter
the directions for use. I also notice its peculiar suitability on account
of its not staining the wool.
E. Chancellor.
Eunnymede, Tasmania, October 31, 1864.
1 can verify all Mr. Chancellor has said in reference to the above,
having seen the ewe he alludes to before being dressed. I never saw
a worse case. I have seen her since. The new wool is growing well
—is soft as silk; she is thoroughly clean. I consider Eunnymede
Station a bad place for such experiments, as it is a very wet run,
and rains oftener there than in almost any other part of Tasmania.
It is a very wet part of the country.
E. A. Lovell.
r Messes. Hood and Co. —Gentlemen—I carried out a careful
series of experiments with your composition, in strict accordance with
your instructions, and I am glad to be able to inform you with com-
plete success. One lot of selected very badly-diseased sheep I hand-
dressed first, then dipped at a temperature of 100°, and kept them
separate, in fair pasture, for a fortnight, when they were examined ;
and although I think a cure had been effected, as we had some doubts
as to a perfect cure, dipped again. The result has been most gratify-
ing and satisfactory. They have been in the general flock for some
time, have thriven in condition, wool perfectly sound, without the
slightest signs of a return of the disease. I would order a quantity
now, but have a large supply of tobacco on hand, but you can forward
100 lbs. as a stand-by.—l am, gentlemen, yours faithfully,
Egbert Crawford.
Ellinthorpe Hall, Eoss, Tasmania, Oct. 5, 1864.
Messrs. Hood and Co., Melbourne. —Dear Sirs—The accom-
panying, being the substance of a conversation which took place in
the stores of the undersigned in the presence of the writer, is one
among the many testimonies that are being constantly borne to the
efficacy of your Sheep-dipping Composition.—l am, dear sirs, yours
faithfully,
Isaac Wright.
James Lord, Esq., one of our oldest settlers, coming into the
store at the time one of our constituents was hesitating whether or
not to try Hood’s Composition, he said:—“ You take my advice, and


try it; I have found it to be a perfect cure if you only attend strictly
to the instructions. I run my sheep through every 21 days, and I
have proved that I can do 7000 sheep at a cost of 2s. with Hood’s
Sheep-dipping Composition.” He further said, “ I was at a meeting
a short time since, where there were a large number of sheep-farmers
(naming them), and one especially, the warden of my municipality,
expressed his doubts as to the efficacy of the Composition. I told
him at such and such a place you will find a flock of 2000 sheep
which have been dipped and dressed with it, and if you can find a
scabby sheep among them I will make you a present of the whole
flock.” Several of the gentlemen then present have since purchased
the Composition.
You know how much we have sold on your account, and I can
confidently state that we have not had a single complaint.
The two tons of Dip is not yet broken into, but a good deal of it
is bespoken, and I hope to have to order more shortly.—Very truly
yours,
Launceston, 14th December, 1864. Isaac Wright.
Hobart Town, 26th April, 1865.
Sheep Dip I shall do well with for you. It is giving great satis-
faction, and I shall soon have some of the very largest flock-owners
on my books as entire users of it.—l am, my dear sirs, yours very
truly.
19th December, 1864. /Eonald T. Gunn.
Hobart Town, November 4, 1864.
Messrs. Hood and Co., Melbourne. —Dear Sirs—Yours of the
24th came duly to hand. lam happy to say that the Sifeep-dipping
Composition still continues to command the attention of fiockmasters,
and in all cases that have come under our notice where the instruc-
tions have been fairly attended to, the results have been successful.
The extreme portability of your packages, added to the very flatter-
ing testimonials we have, and are daily receiving, places your Com-
position beyond the fear of any competition. Hoping to hear from
you by return mail, I am, dear sir, yours faithfully,
Isaac Wright.
Hobart Town, November 16, 1864.
Messrs. Hood and Co., Melbourne. —Dear Sirs—Since I had this
pleasure on the 4th, I am happy to say I have received continued ac-


counts of the success of your composition. My friends, as they
bring in their wool, continue to speak well of the Sheep-dipping
Composition, and it is my opinion that next year it will entirely super-
sede the use of tobacco, &c.
Without having any detailed testimonials to send you, I am
happy to be able to say that, almost without exception, those who
have had the composition continue to speak well of it, and to recom-
mend it to their neighbors. I feel very sanguine as to the ultimate
results, viz., that we shall entirely supersede the use of tobacco and
other preparations.
I enclose memorandum of unsold portions of consignment. If' cor-
rect, please be good enough to confirm in your next. —I am, dear sir,
yours faithfully,
Isaac Weight.
Launceston, Nov. 23rd, 1864.
Messrs. Hood and Co., Melbourne.— My dear Sirs—l am a
little bit put out at not receiving the soft-soap and further supply of the
sheep-dressing by this steamer, as I have several parties waiting for
both that lam sorry to have to disappoint. I hope you will not fail
in sending it by first opportunity. I have sold a great many sample
cases to one and another, and am getting short. You had better let
me have a ton first opportunity, and another ton say a week or ten
days after.
January 13th, 1865.
The dipping still moves off well. I shall want a very large
supply next season.—l am, my dear sirs, yours very truly,
Eonald T. Gunn.
Cawood Ouse, June 22, 1865.
Isaac Wright, Esq., Hobart Town. —Dear Sir—l have the pleasure
to inform you that I dipped 17,000 of my sheep, after shearing, with
Hood’s Specific. It gave me the greatest satisfaction. The sheep were
kept in the dip one minute, at 110 Fahr. It completely destroyed all
scab, tick, &c. I have had scarcely any trouble with them since.
It cleansed the skin, and improved the growth of wool; and I shall
certainly dip them next shearing. Hoping you will provide me with
sufficient of the Composition for that purpose, I am r dear sir, yours
truly,
Henric Nicholas.
Memo. —The gentleman who writes the above purchased 3 cwt. of
the first lot that we received, and gives us permission to make any
use we like of his statement.


Hobart Town, July 8, 1865.
Messes. Hood and Co., Melbourne. —Dear Sirs—Your esteemed
favor, dated 29th June, came duly to hand. It is a most satisfactory
explanation of the matter about which we had written you. We
were quite sure you both could and would sweep away every objection
that fancy might raise against the Composition. We have read your
letter to several of our friends, and keep it at hand to be read again
and again, as occasion may require. We continue to receive daily
good accounts of the Composition. I enclose copy of one received
from H. Nicholas, Esq. If you require them, I can send you other
testimonials; but there seems to be but one opinion about the
matter.—l am, my dear sirs, yours faithfully,
Isaac Weight.
N EW ZEALAND.
(From Messrs. Curtis Bros., Hood and Co.’s Agents at Nelson.)
We believe that we shall by-and-by have a considerable sale for
your composition, as it seems to be very generally approved of, but
run-holders have hitherto been in the habit of using tobacco of their
own growth, and until their stocks are exhausted the sale of the com-
position will be restricted. So far as we can leam, the cultivation of
tobacco will be in future, to a great extent, discontinued.




ADVERTISEMENTS.
HOOD’S SHEEP-DIPPING COMPOSITION,
DIRECTIONS FOR USE.
100 lbs. weight of the Composition is the proper quantity for a bath of
1000 gallons of full strength for the Cure of Scab, which will dip at least
3000 Sheep, or it will make a dip of 1500 gallons for the cure of Tick,
Lice, or Fly.
For convenience of purchasers, the composition is in packages of 100
lbs., price One Shilling per lb. Sample Packets of 10 lbs. each (equal to
a dip of 100 galls.), may be obtained from the Manufacturers, at 160
Flisabeth-street; or at the works, 59 Little Bourke-street west.
Directions for Dipping. —Pour upon ten pounds of the Composition
ten gallons of hot water, and thoroughly dissolve it by well stirring;
then add ninety gallons of hot water, so that the dip may be kept, as
nearly as possible, at a temperature of ninety degrees Fahrenheit. In
the dip thus formed the sheep are to he thoroughly immersed for about a
minute, then placed on the drainer, and allowed to drain for a time. If
the water used is hard or brackish, a little soda should be added before
dissolving the Composition. The Composition must not be boiled. The
second dipping should be about ten days after the first.
Orders may also be sent to any of the following Merchants :
MELBOURNE AND GEELONG.
Messrs. Grice, Sumner & Co. Messrs, M‘Clure, Valantine &Co.
„ E. Goldsbrough & Co. ~ Heape Brothers & Co.
~ Filson, Caughey & Dal- Mr. John Stevenson.
zell. ~ C. J. Dennys, Geelong.
Ballarat Mr. E. J, Strickland.
Belfast Messrs. Lord, Croaker & Co.
Beaufort Mr. W. Tonge.
Castlemaine Messrs. Anderson, Greig & Co.
Deniliquin ~ Filson & Dalzell.
Echuca Mr. Frederick Payne.
Gisborne ~ H. E. Dixon.
Hamilton ~ D. Cameron.
Inglewood Messrs. Tivey & Jennings.
Portland ~ Lord, Croaker & Co.
Port Albert ~ Johnson & Hood.
Sandhurst ~ E. Eow & Co.
Sioan Hill ~ M'Lellan & Taylor.
} = — Mr .” Lo £ AEE Be ™'
Warrnambool Messrs. Aitken & Botock.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Guichen Bay Messrs. Ormerod & Co.
TASMANIA.
General A gent Mr. E. T. Gunn, Launceston.
TJ y-\ St MVI T
Hobart Town ~ I. Wright.
.C-in/tn o on A A-n atta ■%
Sxoansea ~ A. Graham.
Hamilton ~ T. P. Cowle.
Richmond ~ J. W. Nicholls,
NEW ZEALAND.
Canterbury Messrs. Miles & Co.
Nelson ~ Curtiss Brothers.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Sydney Messrs. J. Binny & Co.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
TO THE FLOCKOWNERS OF AUSTRALIA.
GENTLEMEN —We beg to draw your attention to the fact that we are
Manufacturers of a White SOFT SOAP made specially for WOOL
WASHING purposes. The advantages of washing sheep before shearing
in soap and warm water have been so fully recognised, particularly in
Tasmania, that it is quite unnecessary for us to say one word on the
subject. It may not, however, be so well known as it ought to be that
hard soap —common household soap—should not be used for that purpose.
The yolk of the fleece has been analysed by some of the most eminent
chemists in Europe, and it is found to be neither more nor less than a
pure potash soap, that is, soft soap. Hence it foflows that wool washed
with our soap, which is prepared in strict conformity with the compo-
sition of the yolk, if any of the yolk is displaced an exact equivalent is
left, the wool thereby retaining aU that softness which clean wool not
freed from the yolk always has ; besides, the loss in weight is much less
than when hard soap is used. We are happy to say that the experience
of all those who have used our soap fully confirms the above.
This Soap received a first prize at the Geelong and Western District
Agricultural Society’s Exhibition, 1864.
Price, 4d. per pound.
Messrs. Hood and Co.
Gentlemen — I have tried your Soft Soap for Wool Washing, and
find it answer very well. The Wool comes up equal in color to that
washed with the ordinary hard soap, and I find it more economical. I
intend to use no other sort. —Yours truly,
James H. Turner.
Church-street, Collingwood, Dec. 6, 1864.
Messrs. Hood and Co.
Dear Sirs — l have the pleasure to hand you the honorary certificate
of the Northern Pastoral Association for your samples of Soft Soap, which
were very much admired. Thfey were considered superior to any sample
of the kind before seen.—l am, dear Sirs, yours truly,
Echuca, sth Dec., 1864. Fred. Payne.
Messrs. Hood and Co. , Melbourne.
Dear Sirs — l have tried the sample of your Soft Soap; my overseer
is highly in favor of it. I have a small stock of bar soap yet on hand,
but as soon as it is used I shall send you an order.
Ballaarat, Nov. 29th, 1864. . E. J. Strickland.
HOO ID cfe 00-,
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS,
160 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Consumption, Disease of the Chest, Chronic Cough, Defective
or Insufficient Nutrition, General Debility, &c.
DR CHURCHILL’S
SPECIFIC TREATMENT OF CONSUMPTION AND TUBERCU-
LAR DISEASES BY THE HYPOPHOSPHITES.
Syrup of Hypophosphite of Soda.
Syrup of Hypophosphite of Lime.
PiHs of Hypophosphite of Quinine.
PiHs of Hypophosphite of Manganese.
Numerous testimonials as to the efficacy of the above-named Medi-
cines can be seen by applying or writing to
HOOD & CO., 160 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne.
Country Chemists are respectfully informed that these Goods can be
obtained through their ordinary wholesale houses.
The only preparations of the Hypophosphites recognised by Dr.
Churchill are those prepared by Mr. H. H. Swann, 12 Rue Castigilone,
Paris. We are his sole Agents, and have received a large supply.
HOOD & CO., Manufacturing Chemists, 160 Elizabeth-street,
Melbourne.
BLUNDELL AND FORD, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.


HOOD & CO.
Mlirilmle Druggists
IAMEACTIJEIM CHEMISTS,
MEEBOBBBE.
MAHIirACXURERS OF
HOOD & CO.’S SOLUBLE SHEEP-DIPPING
COMPOSITION
(For the Cure of SCAB, TICK, LICE, AND ALL OTHER SKIN
DISEASES OP SHEEP),
WHITE SOFT SOAP FOR WOOL WASHING.
NOTE THE ADDRESS-
160 ELIZABETH - ST., MELBOURNE.
