

Federal Financial
Problem
AND ITS SOLUTION
A. INGLIS CLARK
JOHN VAIL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART.
1 9 0 0.
{Tasmania:


)u>» s'2-B^.
<3
J If
I | JcvvwJUl
1 ft '!<)*>
s f\—'o
voe.i
JAMES DALLY
OLD AND RARE BOOKS
99 WalkerviUe Terrace
Walkerville, Sth. Aus.
Telephone 65 7909


Federal Financial
Problem
AND ITS SOLUTION
A. INGLIS CLARK
Gasman is:
JOHN VAIL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, HOBART.
1 9 0 0.




The Federal Financial Problem
AND ITS SOLUTION.
On three previous occasions I have contributed some observa-
tions to the discussion of the Financial Problem attending the
federation of the Australian Colonies, and on each of those
occasions I have advocated the transfer of the largest possible
proportionate part of the public debt of each Colony to the Federal
Government as the speediest and most effectual method of
avoiding the fiscal difficulties which seem to threaten several
of the Colonies as a consequence of their entrance into the
Commonwealth. But I find that the proposal which I have
made for the solution of the Federal Financial Problem has
been confused with the provision contained in Section 105 of
the Constitution of the Commonwealth, and I desire, on this
occasion, to endeavour to make perfectly clear the nature of my
proposal, and to set forth the grounds upon which I believe it
can be properly and justly advocated in the Federal Parliament.
The provision relating to the debts of the States which is
contained in Section 105 of the Constitution is that the Federal
Parliament may take over from the States their public debts as
existing at the establishment of the Commonwealth, or a
proportion thereof, according to population, and may convert,
renew, or consolidate such debts ; but the States shall indemnify
the Commonwealth in respect of the debts taken over, and
thereafter the interest payable in respect of the debts shall be
deducted and retained from the portions of the surplus revenue
of the Commonwealth payable to the States, or if such surplus
is insufficient, or if there is no surplus, then the deficiency or
the whole amount shall be paid by ihe several States out of
their own revenues. This provision does not contemplate any
removal or reduction of the liability of the several States to
provide the moneys to pay the interest upon their debts as a
compensation to them for the perpetual surrender of their power
to raise revenue by duties of Customs and Excise, But the
provisions of Section 87 of the Constitution, which directs that
for a period of ten years after the establishment of the Common-
wealth, and thereafter until the Parliament shall otherwise
s S 7/


provide, only one-fourth of the net revenue collected by the
Commonwealth from duties of Customs and Excise shall be
appropriated by the Commonwealth for its own purposes, and
that the balance shall be paid ro the several States, or applied to-
wards the payment of the interest on debts of the several States
taken over by the Commonwealth, demonstrates very clearly that
the Convention which framed the Constitution came to the conclu-
sion that the several States would require, for an indefinite
period, some financial assistance, in consequence of their loss of
the revenues previously derived by them from Customs and
Excise duties. It was impossible that any other conclusion
could be reached by any assembly of persons acquainted with
the financial history of the Australian Colonies; and the
insufficiency of the provisions of the Constitution which are
intended to provide for the inevitable financial exigencies of a
majority of the States under Federation becomes more apparent
the more closely the financial history of the several Colonies is
examined.
My proposal for the solution of the Financial Problem of
Federation is that the Commonwealth shall take over the largest
possible proportionate amount of the public debt of each State,
measured by population, and shall discharge each State from all
liability to provide in any manner for the payment of the
interest on such transferred portion of its debt, or for the re-
demption of it at any future time. In other words, I propose
that the proportionate part of the debt of each State which shall
be taken over by the Commonwealth shall cease to be a part of
the debt of the State, and shall become a part of the debt of
the Commonwealth as fully and as exclusively as if it had been
incurred by the Common wealth for its own purposes, and that
the interest upon it shall not be charged against the revenue
collected by the Commonwealth in the State by which the debt
was originally incurred, but shall be paid out of the total annual
revenue of the Commonwealth, irrespective of the sources of
any portion of that revenue or the place of its collection.
I shall not enter into any discussion upon the question of the
compulsory character of Section 105 of the Constitution, and
of the consequent question of the inability of the Federal
Parliament to ignore it, and to legislate in regard to the debts
of the States in accordance with my proposal. A discussion of
these questions would require a disquisition totally different in
character and scope from the argument I intend to make on
this occasion, and it would necessarily be appreciable only by
those persons who were acquainted with the legal principles and


rules by which written laws are construed by the courts. 1
may say that I believe that the Federal Parliament has the
power to take over the debts in the manner proposed by me,
and I shall now proceed to set forth the grounds upon which I
believe that the proposal which I have made can be supported
as a proper, safe, and equitable solution of the Federal Financial
Problem.
1. The latest available statistics of the six Colonies which
are to become immediately Stales of the Commonwealth exhibit
the total amount of their several debts at £195,208,347,
and the total amount of interest annually payable thereon at
£7,312,478. The total amount of revenue annually collected
by the same six Colonies at the present time from duties of
Customs and Excise is £7,643,627. It therefore appears that,
after deducting the cost of its collection, the total amount of the
revenue derived by the six Colonies from Customs and Excise
duties is substantially the equivalent of the total amount paid by
the same six Colonies in interest upon their debts. The close
equivalence of these two amounts is not an accidental or a
temporary result of any exceptional facts connected with the
financial policies or operations of the Colonies at the presnt
time, or in their immediately past history. An analysis of
the statistics of the same six Colonies during the last thirty or
forty years will reveal the fact that, with temporary and local
fluctuations, the sums derived by the six Colonies collectively
from duties of Customs and Excise have closely approximated
to the suras they have paid in interest upon their debts
throughout the same period. This fact leads inevitably to the
conclusion that there has been an historical and economical
association of a very intimate character between the debts and
the tariffs of the several Colonies; and it is a fact, beyond all
doubt, that it has been the spontaneous increase in the revenues
derived by the Colonies from duties of Customs and Excise,
consequent upon the natural increase of their populations and
immigrational accessions, which has enabled the separate
Colonies to borrow from time to time the large sums of money
which they have expended in the construction of their roads
and railways and other public works. The expenditure of these
borrowed moneys has, in its turn, produced an increase of
population, by inducing immigration, and hence the tariffs
and the debts of the several Colonies have been, to a very large
extent, the mutual causes and results of one another.
If we examine the latest fiscal and financial statistics of the
six Colonies respectively, we shall find that in four of them,
viz., Victoria, Queensland, Tasmania, and Western Australia, the
revenue derived from Customs and Excise duties is in excess of


the sum paid for interest on the public debt, but that, after
deducting the cost of collecting such revenue, the two sums
approximate very closely in each of those Colonies, excepting
Western Australia, in which the revenue derived from Customs
and Excise duties is more than double the sum paid in interest
upon the public debt of the Colony. The figures for these
four Colonies are as follow:
Interest on the
Public Debt.
Revenue from Duties
of Customs and Excise.
Victoria
Queensland ..
Tasmania* ...
W. Australia
1,852,701
1,339,149
316,417
374,618
£
2,267,140
1,610,113
448,120
933,717
ad Excise during the
payment of interest
source at the present
* The revenue collected in Tasmania from duties of Gusto
last two or three years is largely in excess i>f the am
upon her debt, but there is large surplus revenue from
time.
Customs and
he annual pa
In New South Wales and in South Australia the revenue
derived from duties of Customs and Excise is less than the sum
paid for interest upon the public debt. The figures lor these
two Colonies are as follow :
Interest on the
Public Debt.
Revenue from Duties
of Customs and Excise.
New South Wales
2,463,771
1,735,621
South Australia
965,822
648,916
In the cases of the two last-mentioned Colonies the revenue
derived from Customs and Excise duties is not sufficient to pay
the interest on the public debt. The deficiency is, therefore,
necessarily supplied by revenue obtained from other sources.
But the public debts of these two Colonies are not, conjointly,
less per head of the population of the two Colonies than the
average amount of the debt of all the Colonies per head of their
populations. The average amount of the public debts of the
six Colonies, measured by population, is £s*2 2s. o d. per head.
The public debt of New South Wales is below the average,
being only £4B per head ; but it is in excess of the public debt
of Victoria, which is only £42 4s. 6d. per head ; and the public
debt of South Australia is the largest of all the public debts of
the six Colonies, being £7O 14s. per head of the population.


The amount of the public debt per head of the population in
each of the six Colonies is as follows:
£ s. d.
New South Wales 48 0 0
Victoria 42 4 6
Queensland 70 7 9
South Australia 70 14 0
Western Australia 65 10 5
Tasmania 46 0 0
The Colony of New South Wales derives only 17'40 percent.
of its total revenue from duties of Customs and Excise, and
South Australia derives from the same source 23 33 per cent, of
its total revenue ; but the proportion of revenue derived by the
other four Colonies from duties of Customs and Excise exceeds,
in the case of each of them, 30 per cent, of the total revenue
of the Colony. The figures for all the six Colonies are as
follow:
Per cent.
New South Wales 17 "40
Victoria 30’43
Queensland 35 09
South Australia 23'33
Western Australia 32-47
Tasmania 47'47
These figures disclose the fact that the six Colonies derive
from duties of Customs and Excise 26'64 per cent, of the total
amount of their combined revenues, and that the four Colonies
of Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia, and Tasmania
obtain from the same sources 36'37 per cent, of the total
amount of their combined revenues ; and it has been previously
observed that, in the three Colonies of Victoria, Queensland, and
Tasmania, nearly the whole of the revenue derived from duties
of Customs and Excise, after deducting the cost of collection, is
absorbed in the payment of the interest on the public debt.
But the power to collect that 36 37 per cent, of the total
amount of their combined revenues from Customs and Excise
duties will pass away from these three Colonies upon the
establishment of the Commonwealth, as will also pass away the
present power of the other three Colonies to collect any portion
of their revenue from the same sources ; and the provisions of
the Constitution which require the Federal Parliament to raise
from Customs and Excise duties a quadruple of the amount
of revenue which it will have the power to appropriate to its
own expenditure, and to distribute the surplus among the
States, prove conclusively that the Convention recognised the
serious fact that some compensation or assistance from the
Commonwealth was imperative for those Colonies which have


New South Wales ,,
1
5
7
Victoria
1
19
0
Queensland -
3
6
9
South Australia
1
14
9
Western Australia
5
9
2
Tasmania
2
9
10
hitherto derived so large a portion of their total revenue from a
source which Federation would take away from them. The
total revenue hitherto collected annually by all the Australian
Colonies from duties of Customs and Excise, as measured by
population, has been more than double the sum collected from
Customs duties by any of the great nations of the world, and
this significant fact indicates irresistibly that the revenue from
that source occupies an unique position in the fiscal systems of
all the Colonies, and that the total transfer of it to the Common-
wealth necessitates a compensatory transaction on the part of
the Commonwealth which shall be equally permanent in its
character, and which shall have results commensurate with the
effects of the transfer upon the financial conditions of the
States.
The average sum collected at the present time from duties of
Customs and Excise per head of the populations of the six
Colonies which are entering into the Commonwealth is £2 Is.;
and the following table shows the sum collected in each Colony
per head of its population :
£ s. d.
If, by any mutual arrangement, or by the operation of
coincident causes in each of them, the several Colonies had
regrtlarly borrowed the same sums per head of their populations,
and if each of them had continuously raised the same sum per
head of its population from duties of Customs and Excise under
substantially similar tariffs, and the result in revenue in each
Colony had been a sum equal to the interest upon its public
debt, it seems impossible to believe that the Convention would
not have provided for a transfer of the public debts of the
States to the Commonwealth simultaneously with the transfer
of all the revenue collected from duties of Customs and Excise.
In that case, the simultaneous transfer of the public debts of the
several States and the revenue derived in each State from
Customs and Excise duties could have been effected without the
slightest disturbance to the finances of any one of the States,
and the inseparable association between the transferred revenues
and the debts transferred with them, and the facility with
which the simultaneous transfer of them could be effected, woldu
have been so protrusive to common observation that any argu
ment in favour of the proposal would not have been required.


But if duties of Customs and Excise are hereafter to be collected
under the same tariff in all the States, why should not an equal
amount of the debt of each State, measured by population, be
taken over by the Commonwealth ? All the objections which
have been made, to my knowledge, to the proposal, have been
based upon the supposition that under a uniform tariff a larger
sum per head of the population will be collected from Customs
and Excise duties in some of the Colonies than the sum collected
from the same sources in the other Colonies, and that if the public
debts of the States are transferred to the Commonwealth, and
the interest upon them is paid by the Commonwealth, without
any indemnity from the States, then a portion of the revenue
collected by the Commonwealth from Customs and Excise duties
in one State will be used to assist in the payment of the
interest on the transferred debt of another State. But objec-
tions based upon this supposition are arguable only if the
consumers, in each State, of articles subject to Customs and
Excise duties collected by the Commonwealth, are to be
regarded as paying such duties on behalf of the State, or under
circumstances in which the State can claim a distinct interest
against the Commonwealth in the appropriation of them.
There is not any such distinct interest reserved to any State by
the Constitution, excepting the provision made for the distribu-
tion of surplus Federal revenue during the first five years after
the imposition of uniform duties of Customs. That provision
is expressly temporary in its purpose and duration, and any
conception of the position of the consumers of articles subject
to duty under a uniform tariff in the separate States which
regards them as paying such duties in perpetuity on behalf of
the State is contradictory of the fundamental purpose of the
Constitution of the Commonwealth and of the fundamental
principles of the form of federal government established by it.
The fundamental purpose of the establishment and continued
existence of the Commonwealth is the union of the inhabitants
of the several States into one people in the application of their
energies to all those industrial and commercial enterprises from
which revenue by means of Customs and Excise duties is
derived. Almost every power conferred upon the Federal
Parliament by the Constitution of the Commonwealth has
been conferred to effectuate this purpose, and any discrimina-
tion between the States by the Federal Parliament in their
fiscal relations with the Commonwealth will be a restriction of
the commercial and fiscal unity of the inhabitants of the States,
and will introduce into Federal politics a conflict of sectional
interests in regard to the Federal tariff which will not have any


natural origin in climatic, or geographical, or industrial
differences, but which will arise out of a purely artificial
attempt to perpetuate within the Commonwealth terrritorial
divisions in relation to matters in respect of which the Consti-
tution was designed to abolish all such divisions.
In the imposition of taxation, the Commonwealth will not
discriminate between the residents of different States; and it
will not discriminate between the States upon the basis of the
amount of revenue collected in each of them in the matter of
its annual expenditure upon the Departments transferred to its
exclusive control, or upon any matters over which the Federal
Parliament shall assume control in the future. There was not
any imperative and inevitable obligation upon the Convention
to frame a Constitution which should transfer to the Common-
wealth the control of every Department and every subject which
the Constitution has placed under the legislative power of the
Federal Parliament, and not over any additional or any less
number of subjects ; and the surplus Federal revenue which
will be distributed among the States will be used by them to
assist in the maintenance of some institutions which the Con-
vention might have transferred to the Commonwealth. On the
other hand, the Commonwealth will maintain some institutions
which the Convention might have left under the control of the
States. In the one case, the Commonwealth will wholly main-
tain institutions without any discrimination between the States
and without regard to the amount of revenue collected by the
Commonwealth in each of them. In the other case, the
Commonwealth will assist in the maintenance of institutions
in the several States proportionately to the amount of revenue
collected by the Commonwealth in each State. But in both
cases the revenue disbursed by the Commonwealth will be
derived from the same sources, and will be paid by the same
taxpayers, under the compulsion of the same laws. Can the
contrary systems of appropriating’ different portions of such a
revenue be justified ?
After the establishment of the Commonwealth, the Postal,
Telegraphic and Telephonic Department of all the States will be
transferred to the Commonwealth, and the Constitution provides
that the Commonwealth shall at the date of the transfer assume
the current obligations of the States in respect of all Departments
transferred to it. The collection and control of duties of
Customs and Excise pass to the Executive Government of the
Commonwealth immediately after the establishment of the
Commonwealth, and the military and naval forces of all the
States will pass under the control of the Executive Government


of the Commonwealth as soon as a Federal Defence Depart-
ment can be organised. In the cases of all these departments,
viz., Customs, Postal, Telegraphic, Telephonic, and Defence,
large debts have been incurred by the several States to provide
land, buildings, and appliances, and these debts will be assumed
by the Commonwealth, and the interest upon them will be
thereafter paid by the Commonwealth out of its own revenues
without any indemnity from the States. But the revenues from
such of these Departments as yield revenue will vary greatly in the
different States in comparison with the cost of the maintenance
of the Departments and in comparison with the interest payable
upon the debts incurred in establishing and equipping them.
In the matter of providing postal and telegraphic communica-
tion, the expenditure in a large and thinly populated State will
necessarily be greater per head of the population than the similar
expenditure in a smaller and more thickly populated State ;
and it may be that in a State in which less duties of Customs
shall be collected per head of its population than the revenue
collected from the same source in another State, a much larger
contribution per head of its population shall be made through
the Postal and Telegraphic Departments towards the cost of
their maimenance than that which is made in the other State in
which a larger revenue per head of its population is derived from
duties of Customs. In some instances, the revenue collected
by a transferred Department in a particular State may yield a
surplus above the cost of its maintenance which will be avail-
able as a contribution towards the interest payable upon a debt
taken over by the Commonwealth, but which was originally
incurred by the State to establish or equip the Department. If
these divergences in the proportions of the contributions made
by some of the Departments of the Commonwealth in different
States towards the cost of their maintenance and towards the
interest payable upon debts originally incurred by the States
to establish or equip them, and afterwards assumed by the
Commonwealth upon their transfer to it, are to be rightly
disregarded as not cognisable by the Commonwealth against the
States; upon what grounds can a cognisance of differences in
the proportions of revenue collected by other departments be
justified against the States in relation to the payment of interest
upon debts originally incurred by the States, and afterwards
assumed by the Commonwealth proportionately to population ?
If the discrimination can be justified in the one case, it ought
to be justifiable in the other. But if the Commonwealth, as
distinguished from the States, is to be a political unit within
which territorial divisions shall exist only for electoral and


strictly administrative purposes, such discrimination between
the inhabitants of different States is a perpetual contradiction
of its political unity and of the name it carries.
The Federal Parliament has the power, with the consent of
the States, to purchase the railways of any State, and, with the
like consent, to construct new railways in any State. But it is
well known that the railways of different States, and different
railways in the same State, yield disproportionate contributions
to the cost of working them, and to the interest payable upon
the debts incurred for their construction. If the Common-
wealth purchased the railways of all the States the transaction
would be substantially the same as if the Commonwealth
accepted a transfer of them, together with the debts incurred
for their construction, and it would thereafter pay the interest
upon the purchase cost of them out of its own revenues, without
distinction as to the contributions of the different railways
towards such interest, and without any indemnity from the
States in regard to the matter.
In the matter of Defence, the Commonwealth might find it
necessary to expend in a single State a sum which would entail
an annual payment of interest much larger in proportion to the
revenue collected in the same State from all sources than the
interest payable upon the cost of works of Defence in any other
State. Such an expenditure would be properly made for the
benefit of the whole Commonwealth, and if the assumption of a
proportionate part of the debts of the several States by the
Commonwealth will be conducive to the general welfare and
prosperity of the whole Commonwealth, any objection based
upon the varying proportions in which the revenue of the
Commonwealth is collected in the several States is as untenable
and as contradictory of the political unity of the Common-
wealth as a like objection would be to any local expenditure for
Defence or Postal Communication which did not correspond
with the revenue collected in the State in which the expend-
iture took place. The general welfare and prosperity of the
whole Commonwealth must be affected by the prosperity or the
financial distress of each of the States, and if the transfer of an
equitable proportionate part of the debt of each State to the
Commonwealth will relieve any two or three States from any
pending financial embarrassment the immediate benefit to them
will produce an ultimate benefit to the Commonwealth. If
financial embarrassment comes to any State after it has
entered into the Commonwealth, in consequence of the
surrender of its power to raise revenue by duties of Customs
and Excise, the establishment of the Commonwealth will be


the cause of the embarrassment, and the power and the resources
of the Commonwealth ought to provide the remedy; and the
compensation to the State ought to be commensurate in
character with the sacrifice of revenue which it has been
compelled to make. The sacrifice of its revenue from duties
of Customs and Excise will be perpetual, and the compensation
ought to be made in a form that will produce an equally
permanent result. A distribution of surplus Federal Revenue
among the States will be only a fluctuating palliatrve of the
annually recurring eflects of a continuous cause; but the
assumption of a commensurate portion of the debt of each State
by the Commonwealth will be the permanent removal of the
cause, and a permanent contribution to the peace, prosperity,
and good government of the Commonwealth,
2. The assumption of the public debts of the States by the
Commonwealth is also justifiable on the ground that, under
Federation, the larger share of the fiscal benefits and possi-
bilities proceeding from the expenditure of the moneys which
the States have borrowed and invested in public works will be
at the disposal of the Commonwealth. The moneys which
have been expended by the States in the construction of roads,
railways, and other similar works have enabled the territories of
the States to support much larger populations than such as they
could have supported without such expenditure, and every
adult inhabitant of a State will be a taxpayer of the Common-
wealth. When the States incurred their debts they depended
upon the future growth of their populations to proviie the
interest upon the debts, and I have already drawn attention to
the significant fact of the concurrent growth of the debts of
the States and the increase in the revenues collected by the
States from Customs and Excise duties in consequence of
the increase in their populations. But that source of revenue
has been surrendered by the States to the Commonwealth
in perpetuity; and in addition to that source of revenue
the Commonwealth possesses an unlimited power of imposing
taxation in any other form that it may choose to adopt. The
States are peremptorily prohibited from raising revenue by
duties of Customs and Excise, and therefore, as between the
States and the Commonwealth, Federation has conferred upon
the Commonwealth a control of the revenue-producing capacities
of the States largely in excess of that retained by the States.
But the revenue-producing capacities of the States have been
enlarged to their present extent by the expenditure of moneys
borrowed by the States, and the responsibilities attached to that
expenditure ought to follow the preponderance of the fiscal


benefits to be derived from it. Under complete unification
the Commonwealth would necessarily have assumed all the
debts of the States, and under Federation the Common-
wealth will have all the taxing power over all the inhabi-
tants of the States and all the control of the revenue-
producing capacities and fiscal possibilities of the States
which complete unification would have conferred upon it.
Under complete unification the argument against the assump-
tion of the debts of the States by the Commonwealth which is
based upon possible variations in the amounts of revenue
collected in each State per head of its population would involve
a demand for discrimination in the taxation of the inhabitants
of the different States. But the Commonwealth is positively
prohibited by the Constitution from discriminating between
States or parts of States in the imposition of taxation (Sec. 51,
Sub-sec. n.), and if the mode of distributing surplus federal
revenue among the States which the Constitution authorises to
be adopted during the first five years after the imposition of
uniform duties is continued after the expiration of that period,
the High Court may be required to decide whether its con-
tinuation will not be contrary to the prohibition against dis-
crimination between the States in matters of taxation.
3. The final ground upon which I urge the assumption of the
public debts of the States by the Commonwealth is that the
financial dependence of the States upon a contribution from the
Federal Treasury is contrary to the fundamental character of the
type of federal government which the Constitution purports to
establish, and, if it becomes permanent, it will subjugate the
whole financial policy of the Commonwealth to a consideration
of its results upon the separate treasuries of the several States.
But the assumption of the public debts of the States by the
Commonwealth in the manner which I have proposed will
put an end to all compensatory distributions of surplus federal
revenue among the States, and therefore will put an end also
to any consequent keeping of accounts between the Common-
wealth and the States. The fundamental feature of the type
of federal government exhibited by the Constitution of the
Commonwealth is the perfect independence of the States
and the Commonwealth inter se in the exercise of the govern-
mental powers respectively assigned or reserved to them.
To secure this result in its entirety, the financial independence
of the States and of the Commonwealth inter se is indis-
pensable, If a relationship of financial dependence on the
part of the States is maintained between them and the Com-
monwealth, the financial policy of every State will be inevitably


controlled by the financial policy of the Commonwealth, and
questions of federal politics will become intermingled with the
local politics of every State to an extent which will make every
political conflict in each State a reflection and repetition of a
contemporaneous conflict in the sphere of federal politics. But
this departure from the true ideal of federal government will
not be confined to the subordination of the political life of the
separate States to the politics of the Commonwealth. It will
extend to the political life of the Commonwealth ; and the
intermingling of local and national questions will frequently
cause the local questions to have a determining influence in the
elections of members of the Federal Parliament ; and thus
produce a counter dependence of the politics of the Common-
wealth upon the politics of the States. The inevitable result
will be a lower level of statesmanship in the Parliament of the
Commonwealth than that which the national life of Federated
Australia ought to evolve, and the predominance of provincialism
in an arena into which it ought never to enter. If these ob-
servations are well founded, it is evident that the emancipation
of the States from financial dependence on the Commonwealth
means also the emancipation of the Commonwealth from the
entanglements and drag-weights of the local politics of the States,
and a free course for the Federal Parliament in the pursuit of
the national welfare, and in the expression and manifestation of
the national life and aspirations of the Australian people. This
emancipation of the Commonwealth from influences that
threaten to degrade its statesmanship and its legislation would
be cheaply purchased by its assumption of the public debts of
the States, and every debt taken over by the Commonwealth for
that object would be a debt incurred to enable it to fulfil more
perfectly the highest purposes of its existence, and, therefore, in
the truest sense of the words, would be a debt incurred for the
benefit of all the States.
A. INGLIS CLARK.
Judges’ Chambers, Hobart,
11 th December , 1900.
Note.— Under the proposal set forth in the foregoing pages, the whole of
the public debt of the Colony of Victoria would be taken over by the Com-
monwealth, it being the lowest of all the public debts of the" Australian
Colonies, as measured by population, viz,, £42 4s. Qd. per head. That
Colony would, therefore, be relieved of the whole ot the interest payable on
its debt, viz,, £1,852,701, and would at the same time surrender to the
Commonwealth £2,267,140 collected from Customs and Excise duties, and
would be relieved of the cost of collecting that revenue, with the result
that her finances would not suffer any appreciable disturbance by the advent
of Federation, A similar sum, viz., £42 4s, Qd. per head of the population,


would be taken over by the Commonwealth from the public debt of each
of the other Colonies, which, in the case of Tasmania, would amount to
,£7,706,000, and the Colony would be relieved of an annual payment of
£290,447 for interest. The revenue from duties of Customs and Excise
which will be surrendered by Tasmania amounts at the present time to
£448,120 ; but it is well known that the Colony is collecting 1 a large surplus
from those duties at the present time, and, in the absence of Federation,
the tariff would undoubtedly be reduced to yield, probably, £IOO,OOO less
than the sum now obtained from it. Therefore, the amount of revenue sur-
rendered by Tasmania in the immediate future may be fairly assessed at not
more than £350,000, and, against this, she would be relieved of the cost of
collecting it, and be relieved of an annual payment of £290,447 of interest
upon debt. The cost of collecting her revenue from duties of Customs and
Excise is, in round figures, £IO,OOO per annum, and the result of the transfer
of a proportionate part of her debt, as proposed, would be that the deficiency
in her revenue under Federation would not exceed £50,000.
The following Table shows the amount of debt and interest of which each
of the Six States would be relieved under the same proposal :
PUBLIC DEBT
Australia and Tasmania,
Debt to be
Transferred
on Basis of
Victorian
Debt and Interest remain-
ing against each State.
Existing
Debt.
Interest
Transferred
Debt.
Interest,
New South Wales,
65.333.000
49.325.000
57,473,000
2,167,371
1,852,701
7,860,000
296,400
Victoria..
49,325,000
Queensland
34,348,000
20,602,000
803,249
13,746,000
535,900
South Australia...
26,132,000
15,600,000
576,522
10,532,000
4,151,000
389,300
133,200
25,970
West Australia...
11,675,000
8,395,000
7,524,000
241,418
Tasmania
7,706,000
290,447
689,000
195,208,000
158,230,000
5,731,908
36,978,000
1,380,770
In the Amendments suggested by the Tasmanian Parliament to be made
in the Constitution of the Commonwealth in 1887, it was proposed that the
balance of the debt of each State should be gradually transferred to the
Commonwealth with the growth of the population of the State, and I have
fully dealt with that proposal in my appendix to the pamphlet on Federal
that proposal in my appendix to the pamphlet on Federal
Finance, written by my friend Mr. R. M. Johnston in 1887, and I desire to
acknowledge my obligations to him for the figures contained in this pamphlet.
A. I. C.
JOHN VAIL,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER. TASMANIA.




