

TH Vprn
Af.A
r l 8
Reprinted from "THE BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN
fhe Present
of
and future
Western Australia.
/lAf ADDRESS
DELIVERED BY THE
Rt. Hon. Sir John
P.C., K.C.M.Q., LL.D.,
Premier and Colonial Treasurer,
AT A PUBLIC MEETING
CONVENED BY THE
WEST AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER
On MONDAY, JULY
19th,
ALSO,
Proceedings ol a Deputation from tie daintier oi mines
Received by Sir John Forrest
on Friday , July 9th
Revised by the Premier and issued by the
West Australian
Chamber of Mines.


The Right Hon. SIR JOHN FORREST. P.C., K.C.M.G., LL.D.,
Premier and Colonial Treasurer


SPEECH
BY THE
JOHN FORREST.
Right Hon. SIR
LL.D., &c., &c..
P.C., K.C.M.G
Prime Minister and Colonial Treasurer of Western Australia ,
IN LONDON,
On MONDAY, JULY 19th, 1897.
The Eight Hon. Sir John Forrest, Prime Minister of
Western Australia, addressed a large and influential
audience of City men interested in the fortunes of the colony,
in the Great Hall of the Cannon-street Hotel on Monday,
July 19th, at 2.30 p.m. The meeting was convened
under the auspices of the West Australian Chamber of
Mines, and was very largely and influentially attended.
Lord Castletown, of Upper Ossory, the new President
of the Chamber, took the chair, and on the platform
were the following members of the general committee
Lord Arthur Butler (vice-president), Mr. F. Faithfull
Begg, M.P., Mr. J. W. Broomhead, Sir C. W. F.
Graufurd, Mr. Dyson Weston, Mr. John Girdwood, Mr.
L. E. Higgins, Mr. James Judd, Mr. E. H. Lapage, Mr.
Philip Mennell, Mr. Herbert Moir, Mr. C. A. Moreing,
Colonel Parry Nisbet, C. 1.8., Mr. E. C. Ogilvie, Mr. S. W.
Paddon, Major F. I. Eicarde Seaver, Mr. A. E. Eobertson,
Mr. A. H. P. Stoneham, Mr. William Thompson, and Mr.
Oliver Wethered. Mr. Burn (of Messrs. Burn and Ber-
ridge, hon. solicitors), and Mr. A. N. Jackman (secretary)
were also on the platform.
The Chairman : Ladies and Gentlemen, — Before going into the
matter which has brought us here to-day and referring to this, at the
present time, unique event, I would like to ask you all, and I am sure


you will agree with me, to join with me in expressing our regret that
one who only a short time ago occupied this chair has now passed
away from among us. I refer to one of the great pro-Consuls of the
Empire, Sir William Robinson. He was one who had the interests of
the Colony represented here to-day deeply at heart. He was a personal
friend of many, I have no doubt, in this room, and I can only say that
I feel very unequal to filling the position which he so adequately filled
last time we were in this hall. Long speeches at a time like this are
absolutely undesirable. I shall, therefore, only say a few words in
introducing Sir John Forrest, Premier of Western Australia. (Applause.)
Among all those whom we saw in the great Imperial pageant a
few weeks ago, no one, to my mind, and I hope he will permit me
to say so, was a more noteworthy or remarkable figure than Sir
John Forrest as he passed along the streets among those who had
made the history of the colonies. (Applause.) He was born in
Western Australia, he has lived in Western Australia, he is one of the
greatest explorers in Western Australia, and after he passed through
those severe trials of exploration he settled down to represent
his native town in the Parliament of that colony; he became the
first Premier of the colony in 1890, and has represented it
as its Premier ever since. (Applause.) Ladies and gentlemen,
this is a great record, and I think I may safely say that we
have in Sir John Forrest, who is here to-day, one who is a true
and loyal son to Western Australia —(hear, hear) —and a great
Imperial figure as well. (Applause.) He is one of those by whose
wisdom and foresight great tracts of land are being opened up to
British subjects at the present time and to unborn generations of the
sons of Great Britain. He is one of those who by energy and patriotism
is ever forging day after day the links of affection and devotion which
bind the colonies to the motherland. You will hear him to-day, and
what he says will be spoken—l have had the honour of hearing him
speak before —eloquently, graphically, and practically. He will tell us
what he thinks of Western Australia at the present time, what
are his anticipations and hopes for her future, and we can assure
him of this, hat it is a high honour for us to meet him here to-day,
and to hear the eloquent words which I know will shortly fall from
his lips. Ladies and gentlemen, I have great honour and pleasure in
introducing to you Sir John Forrest. (Loud applause.)
Sir John Forrest, who was very enthusiastically received, said: My
Lords, Ladies, and Gentlemen, —I fear the noble chairman has been too
kind to me in the few words that he has addressed to you. I, however,
thank him most heartily for his kind introduction, and I may say at
once that I have very great pleasure indeed in being here to-day at the
invitation of the Western Australian Chamber of Mines, in order that
I may have an opportunity of addressing you in this great city,
the heart of the Empire, and of placing before you—as I know you


are all interested in the colony I have the honour to represent—a few
facts which, though not new probably to many whom I am addressing,
at the same time may be information to some, and, coming direct from
me, probably will be taken as coming from one who has a great responsi-
bility, and who is not accustomed, and, I hope, never will be accustomed,
to use words which are not based upon sound judgment and upon facts.
(Applause.) lam here to-day, my lords, ladies, and gentlemen, in only
one capacity, as a representative of Western Australia, in
order to place before you the interests of the colony. (Hear,
hear.) I hope that any words I may address to you will not be
taken as of sufficient importance for you to run away and make invest-
ments, unless they are based upon statistical information or upon—
and that you will have to judge for yourselves—reliable reports. lam
not here to talk of one property or of one class of people, nor to advocate
one industry or another. I am only here as the representative-—the First
Minister—of Western Australia, invited by your Chamber, to place before
you, and I am glad indeed to do so, some facts and figures in regard to the
colony. I feel it my duty on all occasions whenever there is an oppor-
tunity of doing a good turn to my colony to take advantage of that
opportunity, and I think it is a great advantage to you all, and it is a
great advantage to the people of Western Australia, that when
a suitable occasion offers, their First Minister should, with the
authority which he ought to possess, place before you what he con-
siders reliable information. Now, the principal subject I propose
to deal with to-day—although not the only one—is the question of
Western Australia as a gold-producing country, because there can be
no doubt whatever in my mind, or in anyone else’s mind, that
the chief factor in the great developments that have taken place
during the last five or six years in Western Australia has been the dis-
covery and the large export of gold. I have also another object;
perhaps it is comprised in the few words I have already uttered. My
desire in this great city is to inspire in you all the confidence that I
myself possess in regard to Western Australia—not, however, because, as
the noble chairman has told you, I was born there and have spent
most of my life there, for it would be of very little use to me
if I had confidence which was not warranted, and which would recoil
upon myself within a year or two or within a very short time ; it would
be of no use to me to have confidence in a place where people
only went to invest their capital and to come away having
lost it. Therefore I say to you, as I have said in many
other places, that the statements I have to make to you I make
deliberately, after a long experience, and with the best judgment I
am able to command. I think there are few people, even among those
who are intimately connected with the colony—and certainly outside of
that limited number there are very Sew indeed—who have any real idea of
the extent of the auriferous land of Western Australia. From the Dundas


goldfield in the south to the Kimberley goldfield in the north-east part
of the colony is a very long cry. It is something like 1,000 miles from
the southern goldfield to the northern one. If anyone will just realise
to himself what 1,000 miles is he will know that it is double the
length of this island of Great Britain —at any rate, three times as
far as from here to Edinburgh—which I think is 300 miles or more.
You will at once see that it is a long distance. Ido not mean to say,
of course, that it is auriferous throughout the whole of that 1,000 miles ;
but at the present time, after the few years that the mining industry
has been in course of development, there are 17 goldfields on which
people are working, and upon which the Government have esta-
blished Wardens, Wardens’ Courts, and the administration of
the law, and have taken there all the advantages of such
administration and of a civilised government. When you
leave Dundas on the south you go to Coolgardie. We have
all heard of Coolgardie. I believe it is a name even better known
than the name of Western Australia. From Coolgardie, a little
to the west, is the old-established goldfield of Yilgarn. Yilgarn
once embraced the whole of the Coolgardies, but now it has been
separated. The Yilgarn goldfield, however, is still an important centre,
with Southern Cross as its principal town, and the mines there are
still working, one of them especially turning out a large amount of
gold; I allude to the Fraser’s Mine. From Coolgardie, after leaving
Yilgarn, you go to East Coolgardie. The famous Kalgoorlie
is really the centre of that district. You all know that the
greatest gold mines in Western Australia at the present time
are situated there. Then we have the North-East Coolgardie, which
has for its centre the town of Kanowna, or White Feather. There
you know of some mines to which I will refer later on. Then we have
the North Coolgardie, of which Menzies is the centre. We have East
Murchison, of which the town called Lawlers is the centre—a very
important, rising goldfield. Then we have Yalgoo, which has a
town called Yalgoo as the principal centre. Then we have the Mount
Magnet goldfield; the town is named Mount Magnet after a prominent
hill named in 1854 by an early explorer, because the stone was so
mineralised that it attracted the compass to such an extent that the
compass was found to be useless. Then we goon to Cue, in which gold-
field is embraced Cuddingwarra or the Dead Finish, Day Dawn, The
Mainland, and the Island, all important centres. Then we come to
Nannine. Then we get to Peak Hill goldfield, which, although it has
been established some time, has just now been made the seat of a
resident warden, and from which some of you have seen some magnifi-
cent specimens and smelted gold that I saw the other day. Then we
come to the Gascoyne—the Lyons River and Gascoyne—which
has a resident warden ; the warden holds o ffice for the two goldfields.
Next again is the Ashburton, and from Ashburton we go to Roe-


bourne, and then to Pllbarra, the principal town being Marble Bar,
From Pilbarra we go to Kimberley. You thus have the 17 gold-
fields I have enumerated, and when I tell you the information I have
just given you is not on this paper, but is in my mind, and that I have
visited nearly every one of these places, and have an intimate know-
ledge of nearly all of them, you will be able to say, at any rate, “ He
is speaking about that of which he has had ocular demonstration.”
What I desire to impress upon everyone is, that in a colony like
Western Australia, with an auriferous belt of a thousand miles long,
and with seventeen wardens and separate goldfields already established,
there must be great possibilities. Now, although this colony of
Western Australia, possessing all this auriferous country, was first
founded in 1829, it was only in 1886 that it first became an exporter of
the precious metal. That was due to various reasons which I need not
go into now. It is a curious thing that an all-wise Providence seems
to have decided that this precious metal which we call gold should not
be found too easily. It is generally placed in localities that
are difficult of access, and which have a good many natural
disadvantages, so that the obtaining of it is surrounded with
considerable difficulty and expense. That, of course, is the reason
why this precious metal has become so valuable. This is the case in
Western Australia to an equal extent with most other parts of the
world. A large extent of poor land—waterless country—existed
between the settled districts on the coast and this interior provincia
aurifera, that prevented the early colonists from crossing it.
It is a curious fact that the auriferous country is generally the
most waterless, and that again accounts for the early explorers
not finding this gold as they probably would have done if it
had been situated in a well-watered country. I myself went
across the country in 1869, when I named some of those places which are
now famous —Mount Malcolm, Mount Flora, Mount Margaret, and Lake
Carey. All these were named by me in 1869, but I had to rush for my life
across the country, and had to pierce it as well as I could without the
aid of camels and with horses only, and then had to rush back in order
to reach a safe retreat where there was water But the wisdom and
ability of the prospector have to a very large extent overcome these
natural disabilities, and we find now on the goldfields a system of
condensing water from the salt water which is generally plentiful for
this purpose, which I do not believe prevails in a simpler or better way in
any other place in the world. It is no trouble now for the prospector to
go about the country and obtain the water he requires, and the popula-
tion have become so accustomed to providing water by condensing that
the idea of being short of water does not occur to the extent that
■one would suppose. In 1886 we began to export gold. In that year we
exported it to the value of £1,147 only. Four years later, in 1890, at
the end of which year I took up the Government of the colony and became


’the first Premier—the export of gold for the year was £86,664. Three
years afterwards, the export for the year 1893 was £421,385, and last year
—lß96—it amounted to £1,068,808. (Applause.) This year for the
‘ first six months only—and I may tell you that the first six months of
a year is generally the worst half, because in the summer months
prospecting is not so easily carried on, and altogether mining
operations are more difficult in the summer than in the winter—for
the six months the export has been £1,008,253, as compared with only
' £426,852 in the first six months of last year. It will thus be seen that
we have considerably more than doubled our output of gold during the
first six months of 1897 as compared with the first six months of 1896,
and I make bold to state—and I am positive that it will he more than
realised —that for this year 1897, when December 31 arrives, the output
of gold will be considerably over £2,000,000. (Loud applause.)
Therefore if we double our export for 1897 over what we exported in
1896, and if that rate, or anything like it, can be kept up—it is not
easy to go on doubling, as you all know, but if anything like this
rate of increase can be kept up it seems to me quite clear—and
I do not make this statement for the first time here, for I
have made it elsewhere —that by 1898, or, at the furthest, at the
end of 1899, Western Australia will be the greatest gold producer
in Australasia. It has already passed four colonies. Of course,
some of them are not very large producers of gold. Unfor-
tunately for us all, neither South Australia nor Tasmania are large
producers of gold, though they have other advantages which no
doubt to a great extent compensate them. But if we take
Tasmania, South Australia, New South Wales, and New Zealand
Western Australia has already overtopped them, and there are only wo
places, Queensland and Victoria, which we have to overtake, and
as far as I can judge, looking at these statistics, and not wishing to he
too sanguine either, I desire to state as my deliberate opinion, that
at the latest, when the year 1899 is finished, we will be ahead of them
all. (Loud applause.) If we take again the annual output of gold for
the last four years, you will see that it has not been going
up and down spasmodically, but that it has been gradually
increasing. In 1894, we exported £787,099 ; in 1895, £879,748 ;in
1896, £1,068,808; and in 1897, already over £1,000,000 has been
reached, and at the end of the year, there is no doubt in my
‘mind, it will be over two millions. This is a gradual increase
showing, I think, unmistakably that with better appliances,
’ more machinery, more advantages in the way of railway communica-
tion, &c., which are supplied by the Government now, hut which were
not supplied a short time ago, the result is coming which we antici-
pated and which must come, namely, that as the machinery is being
erected and coming into work, so the output of gold must largely
increase. Ido not want to say, and I hope no one will accuse me to-


day of saying, a word against any other place. I want to see all other
countries this great mother country and all her dependencies
throughout the Empire—flourish. (Applause.) I want the Empire to
he stronger and stronger, and I hope to see every one of the colonies
increase and prosper. But I desire to say that if anyone takes
the trouble to investigate the gold produce statistics of all the world,
I do not believe, and I will give some information on the point
directly, that you will find any place where the produce has been
better than it has been in Western Australia. (Applause.) I
do not believe you will find anywhere else so good a return
from the mines that are working, taking them altogether—such a
large return per ton as is evidenced by the statistics placed before Us,
and which are published under the responsibility <md direction of this
Chamber, and the June report of which they were kind enough to
send me a day or two ago. I think you will find evidence in that
return which must he satisfactory to everyone who takes the trouble
to investigate it. We have had a lot of difficulties to contend with in
Western Australia. We are only now beginning to produce gold
in earnest; in fact, I do not think we have begun yet to get into real
working order. The difficulties of transport alone which until recently
existed no one who has not been there can have any idea oh
There, have been the difficulties of transport over three hundred
miles into the hush, with very little water, and with necessarily
heavy roads, and cartage. There has been this heavy machinery
to transport, and if you were to see the place you would wonder really
how they have been able to transport all the houses there,
all the galvanised iron and nearly all the timber, all the mining
machinery—thousands of tons, which you see everywhere—l say you
would really wonder how it came about that this great work could have
been carried out under such terrible natural difficulties, (Hear, hear.)
But it has been carried out. Large towns have arisen, every piece of
iron and almost every piece of wood having had to be transported by
teams over hundreds of miles, and recently, of course, by railway; but.
Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie have arisen, and a hundred miles further on,
Menzies, large towns with all the conveniences, and, I was going to
say, luxuries, of life, have arisen, notwithstanding that everything has.
had to be carted by teams through a generally badly-watered country.
When one realises that, I think one will see that a large
amount of the capital which was subscribed by the people of
this country in order to prospect and open up the mines had
of necessity, owing to the great natural disadvantages which had
to be encountered and overcome, to be spent really in getting te
the site of the work, and I am sorry to say that in many cases;,
by the time the machinery and other necessaries were transported the
capital was all gone, (Laughter.) On that I will say a word later on.
We will now make a little further comparison, because there is nothing


like statistical information, which, you cannot get away from. Although
some people tell you statistics will prove anything, I maintain that
statistics in regard to the gold return which are verified by the Customs
department of Western Australia you cannot get away from. Now if
we compare the first six months of the past four years—and the reason
I do this is because we have had six months of the year 1897, and not
the whole of the year—we have as the output or export of gold the
following satisfactory figures:—ln 1894, £288,108 for the first six
months; in 1895, £411,465 ;in 1896, £426,852; and in 1897, £1,008,253
—nearly three times as much for the past half-year as for the first half
of last year. I reiterate that the reason for this large increase is that the
machinery in the mines is getting to work. The machinery has been
transported, is now being worked, railway communication has been
established, and consequently the facilities for transport are much
improved, and as a natural consequence solidjdevelopment work is now
beginning and will go on, so that I am certain that during the next
year or two you will see a great and marvellous increase in the export
of gold from Western Australia. (Applause.) The total export of gold
from the beginning of 1886, when we first began to export gold—in the
first few years there was very little indeed exported, but I will take
the whole time, and up till June 30, 1897—notwithstanding
ail the disadvantages we have had to contend with, we have
exported from the colony £4,685,233 Worth of gold. Nearly
five millions of gold, therefore, have already been exported from Western
Australia under all these disadvantages, and, as I said, we are just
at the beginning of gold producing in earnest. I just now referred
to a return which was sent to me, published under the authority of
this Chamber. I may say at once that I have no statistical information
before me in any way to verify these figures, but I take them, coming
from a responsible Chamber like this, as being accurate, and figures which
can be relied upon. You can see them for yourselves, but I have culled
out a few of the principal ones—the best—to place before you, and I
find the following wonderful results. I find the Associated Gold Mines
have crushed 888 tons, at an average of 4 ozs. 15 dwts. per ton. The
Burbank’s Birthday Gift have crushed 4,020 tons, at an average of
3 ozs. 6 dwts. Burbank’s Grand Junction have crushed a small
quantity—442 tons—giving an average of 3 ozs. 10 dwts. The East
Murchison United crushed 4,452 tons, averaging 1 oz. 20 dwts. The
Emperor Mine crushed 1,085 tons, averaging 2 ozs. 5 dwts. The Great
Boulder Perseverance —a very well-known mine at Kalgoorlie—crushed
6,280 tons, averaging 2 ozs. 10 dwts. Then I have the figures for the
Great Boulder Proprietary, of which you have all heard, and which I
think, is the greatest mine we have at the present time; and I
should like to say a good word for it for this reason, that it has done
good service to the colony in keeping the goldfields alive in the
minds of people in this great centre. This great gold mine has done


a good work not for its shareholders only, but also for the district of
East Coolgardie, or really the Kalgoorlie goldfield, and above all it has
done and is doing great good for Western Australia. I find that at that
mine 33,504 tons have been crushed at an average of 3 ozs. 12 dwts. per
ton. Then we come to Hannan’s Brownhill. That mine has been
worked under great disadvantages because the ore was refractory. Great
hopes were entertained of it in people’s minds, and many thought they
were doomed to disappointment, hut a way was found of getting the
gold out of the ore, and they have sent away 3,722 tons to he smelted,
and it has realised 6 ozs. 3 dwts. per ton. Then we have the Ivanhoe,
where 11,764 tons have been crushed at an average of 2 ozs. 7 dwts. Then
we have the Lady Shenton, where 3,978 tons have been crushed and the
magnificent result of 4 ozs. 1 dwt. per ton has been realised. At Lake View
Consols, a mine well known all over the world, 17,964 tons have
been crushed, with 2 ozs. 17 dwts. per ton as the result.
Then we have the Mainland Consols, with 1,781 tons crushed,
giving an average of 3 ozs. 18 dwts. per ton. At Menzies—the
Crusoe Mine at Menzies—6,ooo tons have been crushed under great
difficulties at the beginning, with a result of 1 oz. 19 dwts. per ton.
Then we have Menzies Gold Reefs Proprietary, which has crushed
3,920 tons, averaging 1 oz. 11 dwts. per ton, and Mount Magnet 1,240
tons, averaging 1 oz. 6 dwts. The North Boulder, another well-known
mine near Kalgoorlie, has crushed 2,342 tons, at an average of 2 ozs.
10 dwts.; the North Star, 1,397 tons, with an average of 1 oz. 3 dwts.
per ton; the Premier, 4,622 tons, averaging 1 oz. 13 dwts. per ton;
Queensland Menzies, a well-known mine near Menzies, 2,062 tons,
with the magnificent return of 4 ozs. 18 dwts.; the Sons of Gwalia,
751 tons, averaging 2 ozs. 16 dwts. per ton; the Western Australia
Proprietary Cement Leases, 1,729 tons, averaging 3 ozs. 6 dwts. per
ton; and White Feather Main Reef, near Kanowna, 745 tons,
giving an average of 1 oz. 1 dwt. I have picked out these
from this return, which you can all see for yourselves, and
which many of you doubtless have seen, leaving out those that
are not so good. This list that I have given you seems to
show to me a marvellous record of rich stone on the goldfields where
these mines exist. Of course, there are many other mines, hundreds
of them, some of which I do not oven know the names of, but many of
which I could mention. I have not, however, the information with
me in regard to them, and I should not have been able to give the
information I have just placed before you with regard to all these
mines if it had not been for the kindness of this Chamber in supplying
me with it. There is one mine that I should like to mention. The
return was given me the other day at Mount Magnet, and the result
seemed so extraordinary to me that I asked for an official return, which
was handed to me, duly signed, and which I have. It was with regard
to the mine called the Morning Star, situated at Mount Magnet*


and where they had to cart all the machinery and stores about
200 miles and I was so struck with the result that had been
obtained that, thinking over what I should say to you to-day, I
came to the conclusion that I could not give you a better illustration
of what can bo done with a low grade mine than quote to you the
return furnished to me by Capt. Bryant, the manager of the Morning
Star mine. His return, duly signed and authenticated, shows that
from the beginning, a year or two ago, 19,015 tons have been crushed
by him, with an average result of only 13 dwts. 14 grs. per ton. That
was the average result, and the value of the gold extracted was
-644,794; and the clear profit to the company on that low grade
mine, yielding only 13 dwts. 14 grs. per ton, had been £20,410.
(Applause.) The reason I mention this matter to you is to show
you what a gold mine is capable of doing under great disadvan-
tages, but with good management. I have no doubt it was very
good management, but it shows that low grade mines with the advan-
tage of railway communication and with fairly good management are
not at all to be despised, and it is not at all necessary to get two or
three ounces per ton in order to return a very good profit to those who
embark their capital in gold mining. Of course, there are a great
many other mines in Western Australia—a great many indeed, from one
end of the colony to the other ; many of you know more about them,
as far as names are eoncerned, than I do. There are rich mines at
Pilbarra and on our Northern goldfields, but it is impossible for me
with the time at my disposal to even refer to them. There are the
East Murchison, Lake Harlot, and Mount Sir Samuel, and other
localities, which are supposed to have very good mines; in fact, some
people think that as you go further north into that district
the mines will be even richer than those down in the south. There
is one mine there, the Bellevue, which is very much spoken
about. We are all looking forward for the first crushing, which I believe
is soon to take place ; a great many in Western Australia, at
any rate, look forward with great expectancy to the results of
that mine; and there are a great many other mines all over the
country which are turning out gold, but to which I have not
referred. There is one I would like to refer to at Southern Cross called
Eraser’s Mine. (Applause.) That is a low grade mine. I do not
think the return is much over J an ounce to the ton—certainly not more
than f —and for a long time, as I can vouch for myself, because I have
a few shares —(laughter)—we have been receiving 6d. per month,
or 6s. per year. Regularly during the last two years we have been
getting, that, and the shares in the market were not more than £1 when
I left the colony. It seems to me that that is a very good return—6s.
for 20s. —in one year. My object is to show you that low grade mines,
if properly worked with care and economy, are not to be despised, but
are really great wealth producers. Now, of course, no one knows better


than I myself, who have lived there during the time, and have taken
a prominent part in public matters, that the great gold mining
boom which came upon the colony so suddenly, made it difficult for
the Government to keep pace with the times, and consequently a
good deal of inconvenience was experienced. But the Government
have now, I think, overcome the difficulties, and all cause of
dissatisfaction has been removed. The result is that solid develop-
ment has taken the place of booming.
We have passed the boom now, and are coming into tho solid
development stage—(applause)—and everyone in Western Australia,
including myself, hails this change with delight. We are quite
willing to stand or fall upon our merits. We do not want to be boomed
and then subside. That will do us no good; in fact, it will do us harm.
What we want is to go on gradually up the ladder, not too slowly, but
gaining rung by rung until we get to the top. lam glad to say—and
this is a thing which I am sure must be as pleasurable to all of you
as it is to me—that notwithstanding the terrible depression that
came upon us through the subsidence of the boom, the stoppage, in
other words, to a very large extent, of the money that was flowing in
so quickly during the last year or two, the colony is still going
ahead and progressing. It would be idle to say we have not felt
the effect of that depression, but still our revenue has been
increasing, as also have our railway revenue, land settlement, and
gold output; so that, notwithstanding all the difficulties we have had
to encounter, owing to the subsidence of this boom, the colony still
continues to go ahead. If anyone wishes for evidence that the Govern-
ment have real faith and really believe in the permanence of the gold-
fields of Western Australia, he has only to look at their actions during
the last few years. They have never hesitated to do anything to push
forward the industry. We have built railways far away into tho
interior at a very rapid rate, and we have constructed public works all
over the colony; in fact, we have used all our ow r n revenue, which has
been enormous—every bit of it—and we have used as much money as we
have been able to obtain from London, in order to push forward and
provide for the great development that has taken place upon our
goldfields. We have also, as you all know, embarked upon the con-
struction of a Mint, in order to mint the gold we produce and
assist the producer; it is nearly finished, and in a very short
time will be at work. We have also entered into arrangements
with a company, which is about to carry out its engage-
ment, to erect smelting works near Fremantle, to which
the refractory ores will be sent. Instead of being sent to
Adelaide and other parts of Australia these ores will be smelted at
Fremantle, and all the trouble and expense of shipping will be
avoided. (Applause.) We have done more than that. We have
abolished all duties which affect the mining industry, if I omit some


which were referred to a little while ago, namely, on agricultural pro-
duce. We have abolished all duties on tea and sugar, on all kinds of
machinery, all kinds of appliances for extracting gold, cyanide, &c.;
we have abolished all duties on tools, galvanised iron, and, in fact, on
everything that is necessary for gold producing. I think that when
those who are interested in the colony see that the Government are in
earnest, and are most anxious to join hands with them in trying to
develop the industry and make the country prosperous, they will at
any rate have faith in the Government of the colony as being anxious
not only to provide for the moment, but also to look well into
the future, so as to help those who are helping forward the
country. When I told you just now we had a thousand
miles of auriferous country it may have occurred to you, and certainly
it occurred to me, that a great deal of that immense territory—that
auriferous area—has hardly been travelled over yet. A great deal of it
has not even been prospected. It would not surprise me if to-morrow
we had a cablegram to say that a new field as rich as any discovered up
to the present time had just been found. There is great scope for pro-
specting in that country. Much of the auriferous area has not been
travelled over at all yet, and there may be richer fields undiscovered
than those already discovered. I should like to say something to
encourage in this great gathering and in this great City a desire on the
part of the adventurous and bold, and those who have strength and a
desire to prosper in the world, I should like to inspire in them some
desire to go and prospect—of course, with capable persons. It is no
use for a person who does not know anything about gold to go prospecting
for it, although it is said that those least experienced generally find the gold.
But Ido not believe in that; I believe in experienced men. They may not
find a big nugget like some inexperienced man might, but you must be
a person of some knowledge in order to explore and prospect a country.
I should like to see more prospecting done, because we have scarcely
got beyond that stage in Western Australia, except in a few
important places.
I know four or five persons who sent out a prospector in
Western Australia; I do not believe they spent £IOO apiece
—at any rate, not much more, and certainly not £I,OOO
altogether and that prospector found mines which returned
to each of those persons certainly £20,000 or £30,000. I have
that on very good authority, and I myself—and this is absolute
knowledge—joined a party of six others in sending out a prospec
tor, who found several mines for us in a very short time, and I
obtained £B,OOO for an expenditure of less than £IOO. (Laughter and
applause.) And I may tell you that we got £IO,OOO for the gold which
that prospector brought in on his camels, gold which he had obtained from
the surface, where he found it, and which we sent away to the Mint. These
instances, I think, show there is room not only for a competency, but also


for great affluence in that country if people will only turn their atten-
tion to it. Of course, there are other things besides gold in Western
Australia ; but those Ido not intend to refer to at length to-day. We
have a large agricultural country. All the extra-tropical fruits will
grow there; in fact, you can do there that which you cannot do in
many other places, for you can go there and say good-bye to your own
-country, and you can make a home where you can live and flourish, and
your families after you. (Applause.) The vine, the peach, the
apricot, the nectarine, the loquat, the orange, and all kinds of extra-
tropical fruits not only grow but flourish there. You must know it is
not in the torrid zone, but in a temperate part of the world, where
there is a good rainfall and a fairly good climate, and where men
can live, and their families with them, for ever, without going
to any other place. And I may tell you also that we have the
most liberal land laws in the world there, that you can get 160
acres for nothing, if you will only live on it for a short time
—(laughter)—and what is more than giving you the land for
nothing, the Government will lend you some money to improve
it. Then we have timber which our expert values, I think,
at 124 millions sterling. The area of this timber is so largo
that it would be impossible for any man, unless he were there for
many years, to estimate with great accuracy the value of timber 150
miles long by 20 or 30 miles wide, consisting of magnificent hard
woods. I should say certainly that the estimate was under the marie,
rather than over. There are no better woods in the world: for hard
woods we have the jarrah and the karri. As far as the jarrah is
concerned, there has been no wood found yet which is equal to it for
marine purposes. It resists the teredo navalis and also the white ant,
and it is used with confidence for railway sleepers. You all know
the value of the karri and the jarrah in London ; we all hope and
believe these woods will be a great boon to you and a great advantage to
ourselves. lam glad to say we have a coalfield, and when I tell you the
Government have built a railway to that coalfield already, which
should be altogether finished by the time I return I need not
say any more as to the Government’s opinion of that coalfield. I
may add that the value of the coal is reckoned by experts
to be many millions sterling. I have nearly come to the end
of what I have to say. I have one or two other facts, how-
ever, that I would like to tell you with regard to the colony of
Western Australia now I have the opportunity. The population of
the colony when I took office was under 50,000, and at the present time
it is 160,000. Our revenue at that time was only £400,000; for the
last financial year, which closed on June 30 last, the revenue of the
colony was £2,842,750 —nearly three millions of money. When we
commenced 61 years ago, we were down at the bottom of the Australian
colonies, having the smallest population and the smallest revenue. At


that time Tasmania had about double our revenue, while at the present
time ours is four times that of Tasmania. I believe in the past
year we even exceeded by a quarter of a million the revenue of South
Australia, with a very much larger population. But be that as it may,
we had a revenue of £2,842,750 last year, which was £417,450 above my
estimate. My estimate of the revenue of the colony was £2,425,000,
and we received £417,000 more than that. I do not know whether
to say I am sorry or pleased, but the fact remains that we
have spent it all. (Laughter.) We only increased our credit
balance on the year’s transactions, with this nearly three mil-
lions of revenue, by £3,298. But lam glad also to say that
we have no deficit, and that we had a credit balance at the
end of the year of £315,362. Most of it, as you will gather,
was carried forward from the previous year, because we only
saved £3,298 on the whole year. I will tell you the reason
why we have spent so much money in Western Australia. People
often wonder why with that immense revenue we should want to
borrow money here. The reason is, that there is so much to do in a
new country. Everything has to be done, and it has to be done by
the Government. I replied to a British statesman the other day by
telling him, when he was speaking about our debt, to consider what
your debt would be in this country if you had to construct all the
public works in this country that the Governments of Australia have
constructed out of Government moneys. I have heard it said that the
railways alone in this country are valued at 1,000 millions sterling.
I should say that is a moderate estimate. You often hear of the
reduction of the national debt. It is being reduced every year,
but would it be reduced if they had to build all their railways
and other great public works out of it ? (Laughter.) No, they would
have doubled it long ago if they had done that, and if they had con-
structed railways, harbours and other public works such as the Austra-
lasian colonies have done. But mind you, all these works that we are
constructing, as a rule, are self-supporting. Our railways, which have
cost us so much—not so much for the mileage, because we have built
them cheaply, but an immense amount of money, which for the most
part we have had to borrow, last year not only paid all the working
expenses, interest, and a good sinking fund—and I believe we are the
only colony that has a sinking fund—but also contributed £130,000 to
the general revenue of the colony. (Applause.) So that, although we
have had to borrow money to build these works, the works are there
as a grand asset. When I took office we had only 400 miles of railway;
now we have 1,500 miles working, and we have had to do many other
things not only for the goldfields, but for other parts of the colony to
try to make the country habitable not only for ourselves, but for you
as well. It was said some time ago at a meeting I was at that the
Australasian colonies ought to do more than they do for the mother


country in regard to the national defence. Well, personally, I
should be very glad indeed to do everything in my power to assist this
great mother country, to which we all owe so much, in national
defence or in anything else, but I should like the people of this
great country to remember, that if we are not contributing to the
national defence, at any rate we are doing a great work for all of you
as well as for ourselves. The object of all our work and all our anxiety
has not been to get a little gain for ourselves only. What are we doing
there ? We are building up another Great Britain on the other side of
the globe. Not for ourselves only, hut for all of you, and for all of our
countrymen we hope. We hope to have our own race there, our own
people, with the same sympathies, the same past, the same ambitions,
the same future. (Applause.) We have a great work to do on
that great continent of Australia, all of it encircled by the sea,
flying the flag of Old England, no other nation having
any right or part in it. (Applause.) There is one great
work which we are trying to do, and which we hope shortly
to do, that I will mention. There may be some little
delay perhaps, hut it will not be long, and I may say that Parliament
has already approved of what is proposed to be done. The great dis-
ability which the people on the Coolgardie, the Kalgoorlie, Menzies, and
all those goldfields labour under at present is the want of a pure and
sufficient supply of water. Now we intend to take a river there. There
is nothing, in my opinion, difficult about it: it only wants the money.
I believe it will be self-supporting, and I shall try and devote what
energies I can to the carrying out of that great scheme. What grander
thing can there be for anyone than to try and transform a country, to
subdue it, to overcome the forces of nature and make a country habit-
able, where people can live and enjoy themselves? Now I should like
to tell you before sitting down that while we have had a great deal to
do, we are prepared to do a great deal more. (Applause.) We are not
going to live on the past, we intend to do everything we can to assist in
the great work which you also have been carrying out in that country;
that is, supplying the money for the development of those goldfields.
Nothing shall be wanting so far as lam concerned. No reasonable
request will I turn a deaf ear to. Ido not say I shall agree to
everything you propose, but I will say that any request coming from
responsible persons shall have my careful attention, and, if possible, I
will try and assist you. One other word before I sit down. There
may he some in this room, and no doubt there are some in other
places, who have invested their funds in Western Australia and have
not had a return. (Hear, hear.)
I would say to them that if they are convinced they are in a bad
mine—there are sure to be some useless mines—it is no use bothering
about it any more. The best thing is to strike it off and say it is a loss.
But I would like to urge you and others not to get disheartened because


you get a little short of money or because your company is short of money.
The very best mine in the world will be of no use to anyone unless it is
worked, and working is not an easy matter —digging for gold is not
easy work. It may sound easy to talk about it, but when you
co ire to work underground with your shafts and drives it takes a
good deal of labour, and a good deal of money to obtain that labour, and
the best mine in the world will be no good to anyone if it is not worked.
Now there is no doubt a mistake was made in the early days by people
here and people there. They thought that a certain sum would be
sufficient for working capital for these mines, but they omitted to
reckon that a great deal of the money had to be spent in getting the
machinery on to the mine, in obtaining water, in carting, and all sorts
of things, and there is no doubt I shall have a great many people with
me when I say that the companies generally when formed did not
provide sufficient working capital. Well, so soon as you run out of
money people begin to get dissatisfied. It is much better to
provide sufficient capital at the beginning than to come again to
the shareholders and ask them for more money. (Hear, hear..)
Now I think this can be overcome in the future, certainly by
many. The first thing you have to do is to find out if your
mine is any good. Wherever it is possible, do not desert a
mine unless it is no good, because I have shown that a low grade
mine is capable of paying not only all its cost, but of giving a
good return in the future. One or two more words, and I have done-..
I should like to tell you how big this colony of W estern Australia is.
It is one-third of the Australian continent. It is as big as France,
Spain, Italy, Austria, and Germany all put together. (Applause.) If
you wanted to walk right round the territory I represent to-day, you
would have a 4,000-mile walk. I should like to point out to you that
although it is so large, and to a large extent absolutely unoccupied,
except by the aborigines, it is a self-governing country, a country in
which if you come to you have all the rights and privileges you
enjoy here, and in a very short time you can be an elector and take part
in the administration of its affairs. Our laws are nearly all the same
as yours. Our fathers who went there some fifty or sixty years ago took
with them the common law of England, and the laws that have been
enacted since are to a large extent the laws of this cpuntry ; so that you
will find no disability when you get there, but you will find that you
are under the same old British flag—(applause) —and that the law
there protects your life and your property as well as it does here. You
will find the institutions flourishing there which you left behind you
0:1 this side of the globe, and, above all, when you get there, you wit!
be in your own country just as much as you are in this your own
birth-place. And there is another advantage which you will have.
Whether you go there yourselves, or whether you send your capital
there, neither the revenue derived by the colony, or the investments


you make, or the property you acquire, will ever be used or taxed
to buy rifles and powder and shot to be used against you in time of
war —(laughter and loud applause)—but it will be used in making the
country more habitable, another England, another Great Britain for
you and for your children on the other side of the world. All I desire
is that, as time goes on, we who live in the colonies and those who live
in the mother country should, as far as we can—l am sure it is tend-
ing that way —forget the distinctions which call us colonials and you
Englishmen—that we shall more and more be one in all things. We
certainly have the same history, the same past; we have the same
common object and the same future, and I hope that as time goes on
we will pull more and more together, and be able to say with Shake-
speare—let us “ to our own selves be true, and it must follow as the
night the day we cannot then be false to any man.” (Loud applause.)
The Chairman: I will call upon Lord Arthur Butler to address the
meeting.
Lord Arthur Butler : Ladies and gentlemen, do not be alarmed, for
lam not going to make a speech. I quite agree with our noble Chair-
man that except for the principal speech of the day, the shorter you
make your remarks the better. I have, however, been called upon to
propose a vote of thanks to Sir John Forrest for the very admirable
address which he has just delivered, and I can assure him I have the
very greatest pleasure in so doing. Nothing, I think, could have been
more eloquent or more interesting than all the information which Sir
John has given us, and knowing as we do that he speaks from facts
and from ocular evidence, and not from the effects of imagination more
or less vivid, it makes the information which he has given us doubly
interesting and doubly satisfactory. Sir John Forrest’s forecast of the
prosperity of Western Australia as a colony, and of the mining
industry especially is most encouraging, and I am sure we all hope
that his forecast will be amply verified, and that the results
will even surpass his own expectations. (Hear, hear.) I am
sure wo all regret that Sir John is so shortly leaving us on his
return to Western Australia, but he may rest assured that he carries
with him the best wishes of us all, not only for a prosperous voyage,
but also for the prosperity and welfare of the country which he so ably
represents, and which he has so long and faithfully served. (Applause.)
I now beg, ladies and gentlemen, to move a most hearty vote of thanks
to Sir John Forrest for his kindness in coming here to-day and
delivering us his eloquent address. (Applause.)
Mr. Allen Stoneham; My lord, I cordially second the vote of thanks to.
Sir John Forrest, more especially as I know he came here at very great,
inconvenience to-day, only having a very few days to spend in the
country. lam sure we all very heartily thank him for coming, and I
cordially second the resolution.
The motion was carried with acclamation.


Sir John Forrest, in reply, said :—My Lords, Ladies, and Gentlemen
—I am very much obliged to you for having passed so enthusiastically
the vote of thanks to myself. It has been a great pleasure for me
to be here and to meet you all. I have been in England for a few weeks
now, and I must say that from everyone I have received the utmost
consideration and kindness. I shall carry away with me a heart full
of thankfulness and of gratitude, and I value as another mark of your
kindness and generosity the attentive way in which you listened to what
I had to say on behalf of my colony. lam much obliged to you, and I
hope that as time goes on we may become better acquainted, and if any
of you ever wend your way to that far off colony which I represent on
the other side of the globe, you may be sure I shall be glad to see you
and give you any information—(applause)—as well as assist you in
any way that lies in my power. I again thank you. (Applause.)
The proceedings then terminated.
18


THE MINING REGULATIONS (HID CUSTORIS TARIFF
OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
DEPUTATION TO SIR JOHN FORREST
FEOM THE
WEST AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF MINES.
On July 9th a deputation of the West Australian Chamber of
Mines waited on Sir John Forrest, Premier of Western Australia, at
the Hotel Cecil, for the purpose of bringing under his notice several
important questions affecting the mining industry of the colony.
Amongst those present were:—The Right Hon. Lord Castletown
(President), the Right Hon. the Earl of Donoughmore (Vice-*
president), Sir C. W. F. Craufurd, Major F. I. Ricarde-Seaver,
Col. Parry Nisbet, Mr. F. Faithfull Begg, M.P., and Messrs. J. W.
Broomhead, H. Pelham Clinton, Malcolm S. Cooke, A. Johnstone,
Douglas, Dyson Weston, L. R. Higgins, J. Judd, R. H. Lapage, C. C.
Macklin, Philip Mennell, C. Algernon Moreing, Allen H. P. Stoneharn,
and W Thompson (members of the general committee), Mr. Burn (of
Messrs. Burn and Berridge, hon, solicitors), Mr. A. N. Jackman
(secretary).
The deputation was introduced by Lord Castletown, who said:
Sir John Forrest, I have the privilege of bringing before you to-day a
deputation from the West Australian Chamber of Mines, and I feel
that great honour has been done me in allowing me to introduce
the deputation to you. The West Australian Chamber of Mines was
formed some time ago, not for the purposes of profit, but simply
as a channel by which we might convey to those living in this country
news of what was going on in the colony of Western Australia,
which you so ably represent over here. I may mention that the late
Sir William Robinson, whose death we very much deplore, was our
first chairman. He was one who was always most anxious for the interests
of the colony: he did a great deal for it over here and, I believe, also
on the other side. I understand, and I may say we all realise, from
the public speeches and utterances you have made, that you will be
glad to assist us in any way you can by allowing us to disseminate
information from Western Australia through what we believe is the
best channel, and that is the Chamber of Mines, which these gentle-
men now represent here. lam also very glad to learn that you kindly
consented that the Government shall give to us—that is, to the Chamber
of Mines—information direct as to what is going on in Western
Australia. I think I need hardly add anything else. These gentle’
men here would like to address you, and, with your permission, I will
first of all ask Mr. Moreing. We are all deeply grateful and sensible
of the honour you have done us in permitting us to wait upon you.


Mr. Moreing: Sir John Forrest, I have been requested by my col-
leagues of the Chamber to bring before you the question of the
amelioration of the mining laws in the colony. We quite recognise
that the laws which are now in vogue were very suitable and probably
sufficient in the earlier days of the colony, but they are quite inadequate
in view of the large amount of capital which has now been poured into
the colony from this country for the development of those mines. You
will remember that in March last this Chamber held a public meeting
in the City of London, in the Pillar Hall of the Cannon-street
Hotel, which was presided over by Sir William Robinson,
with the view of requesting some change in the laws, and that
meeting was very largely attended, the hall, in fact, over-
flowing with representatives of capital in this country.
Those gentlemen passed a resolution stating that in the interests of the
mining industry of the colony of Western Australia it was desirable
that the mining laws should be altered, and in the following par-
ticulars. I think I cannot do better than read those particulars at
this stage(l). “That the regulations as to the employment of
labour should be modified so as to allow of claims being efficiently
worked by one man for twelve acres during the first twelve months,
and one man for six acres subsequently. (2). That any claim-holder
should be at liberty to amalgamate to the extent of 100 acres claims
in the same district which can he worked as one property, the said
claims, when so amalgamated, to be deemed, for the fulfilment of
the labour conditions, one holding. (3). That a permanent title (sub-
ject to the payment of rent only) should be obtainable to mining pro-
pertios by the accomplishment of a substantial amount of work in
accordance with the labour conditions, or the expenditure of a sub-
stantial amount of money. (4). That applicants for the forfeiture of
mining holdings should be required to give security for costs; and that,
in the event of forfeiture, such applicants should be compelled to pay
to the former owners such sum as may be certified by the warden to
be fair value for any improvements made in the property by the former
owners.” These particulars and this resolution were, I believe, cabled
at the time to Western Australia, and on behalf of this Chamber I wish
to express our thanks to you, sir, for having dealt at the earliest
possible moment with the first of these demands, and that you did, as
soon as possible, modify what we considered were the altogether too
onerous conditions of the regulations as to the employment of labour.
We now wish to press upon you the importance of the other points
raised. First of all, we desire a law enabling us to amalgamate claims
in the same district, or, at any rate, adjoining one another, so that when
amalgamated they may be deemed, for the fulfilment of the labour con-
ditions, as one holding.
Sir John Forrest: Adjoining, I understand ? You do not mean dis-
jointed ones miles away ? ”


Mr. Moreing: No, adjoining. We have no desire to ask you to
support any law which would enable large tracts of land to be locked
up and held for mere speculative purposes. We quite recognise that
any one who takes up mining claims should be bound to work them,
and if they do not do so they should make room for others who will.
The amalgamation of claims, however, would not enable that course to
be pursued; that is to say, holding them for speculative purposes. The
object of the amalgamation is to enable the labour which is necessi-
tated by law to he usefully employed, and not frittered away as has to
be done under the present laws. As reefs usually dip at an angle, and
sometimes at a very fiat angle, it is necessary for claim holders to take
up a very considerable amount of acreage to the dip of their property,
and no work can be usefully performed in the early stages of that mine
on those dip claims, and to force companies in order to hold them to
spend money on them is an absolute waste, and cannot be in
any way advantageous either to the colony or to the mining industry,
or to the labouring classes, because the company’s money is being
frittered away, whereas the same money could be usefully employed in
sinking shafts or in putting up machinery. So that all we really ask is
that the same amount of labour shall be employed, but that that labour
may be concentrated at one particular spot on an amalgamated block,
so as to enable a company to usefully spend its capital in sinking deep
shafts, driving levels, and opening up the property in a proper manner.
Sir John Forrest: I believe that is often done now, with the warden’s
consent.
Mr. Moreing ; But we do not want to be dependent upon the warden.
We want a law which, without the caprice of any human being, will
give us the right to do what is the right thing. The next point we
desire to have conceded is that when we have spent a large amount of
money in sinking shafts and erecting machinery and mills, we shall
be able to obtain a permanent title to the property. We quite admit
that the Government cannot be asked to give a permanent title to
claims which are only in a prospecting stage ; but certainly when a
company has taken hold of a property and spent £20,000 to £50,000 of
capital on. it, as they have in many cases done at present, it is quite a
different matter, and I think they have a right to ask for a permanent
title. The position now is that under our limited liability laws a com-
pany can subscribe, say, £50,000 of capital to develop a mine in
Western Australia. When they have gone through all sorts of
difficulties, and have found it will take a great deal more
money than they expected to develop their property, having come
to the end of their capital, while they are negotiating with
their shareholders or others to raise more capital, their
property becomes jumpable by any person who is prepared to take advan-
tage of their misfortune, and naturally that is preventing a great deal of
capital being put into Western Australia. People will not buy shares


in undertakings where the title is so insecure that at any moment they
may find their property is gone and they have nothing but bits of paper,
representing no value whatever.
Sir John Forrest: But that has not occurred.
Mr. Moreing : At the present time I know of one case which was
mentioned to me only to-day, where a company had spent £40,000 of
capital on a property in Western Australia. They have come to the end
of their resources, and the Warden of the district has refused to
give them exemption of any kind while they are raising further capital.
Sir John Forrest: They could appeal to the Minister, you know,
from the Warden.
Mr. Moreing: Still what we want is that there should he no
necessity in such a case, where we ought to have rights, to appeal
either to the Warden or to the Minister. We think that, £50,000 or
£40,000 spent upon a property ought to give a right to it, and it
ought not to be jumpable in any way. As long as it is jumpable it is
quite certain that it causes a great deal of uncertainty in this country,
and prevents us from getting the necessary financial assistance from
many quarters where such assistance would be available if the security
of title was greater in such cases. We certainly think it would be to
the benefit of the colony and to the benefit of the labouring classes
that companies should have this security. Mining in Western
Australia is absolutely and entirely dependent on the expenditure of
large amounts of capital. That capital is not in the colony, and cannot
be got in the colony to the extent required; it can only be got from
the old country, and in this country people do not like to feel, situated
so far away as they are, that their titles are so insecure as they are
under the present arrangements. Now, sir, those are our main
points, and one further point we desire is that the laws, which
at present favour vexatious applications for forfeiture of leases, should
be modified in such a way as to favour, in place of the jumper, the
holder as far as possible. A single alteration would be sufficient
we think, by compelling applicants for forfeiture to give security for
costs. The present jumper of W estern Australia is a mean sort
of rascally hound. That is the general opinion we have of him
here, and he is not the sort of population which it is advisable
for a colony to encourage. The men they want to encourage are men
who go there to work and spend money with the view of
developing the country—not the man who lies down, smokes his pipe,
and waits for the misfortune of others so as to jump in and steal their
property. We think that in addition to giving security for costs, that
jumpers should be compelled also to pay to the former owners at any
rate the value of any permanent improvements they may have made
upon the claim that has been jumped. I think these few alterations,
which appear to be necessitated by the great expenditure of capital
which has taken place within the last three years, would satisfy the


large client die which the colony has in England in the way of share-
holders and capitalists who are anxious to continue providing money
for the development of what is likely to prove the most magnificent
mining field which the world has ever seen. (Applause.)
Mr. Faithful! Begg: Sir John Forrest, the Committee of the
Chamber has asked me to speak more particularly on the question of
the import duties upon food; because they consider that that is a
subject which very nearly affects them in connection with mining
operations, for reasons which are obvious. Now, I wish to say, Sir
John, that we do not in any sense endorse, and we should not like for
a moment to be supposed even to echo, the tone of observations which
have appeared in the local press of Western Australia attacking
the Government upon this subject. We wish to approach it in a calm
and business-like spirit, and to speak of it without any heat, and with-
out the use of language which is always objectionable—language such
as I have already referred to. But we have gone into the figures, and
I may say that any figures or facts I shall mention to-day are drawn
from official sources —practically from the “ Western Australian Year
Book,” published under the authority of the Government. Therefore, we
think that any of these figures are figures upon which we can abso-
lutely rely. Now, Sir John, the duties in Western Australia, as you are
perfectly aware, are, of course, under different headings. There are
what are called the specific duties, and then there are ad valorem
duties under schedules. Now, I have looked through these ad valorem
duties and the schedules, and I have extracted one or two figures from
those as illustrative of the point which the Chamber desires to bring
under your notice to-day. The ad valorem duties range from sto 20 per
cent, by stages in four schedules, and the specific duties are very various.
Sir John Forrest: The 5 per cent, has been removed, I may say,
absolutely.
Mr. Faithfull Begg; There might be one of my items in that.
Sir John Forrest: There is no 5 per cent, schedule now. They are all
on the free list—all the former 5 per cents.
Mr. Begg: That is so much to the good, our grievance lies in connec-
tion with the duties on food.
Sir John Forrest: You only mention those where you think you
have a grievance. Those that are satisfactory you say nothing about.
Mr. Begg: Ido not commit the Chamber in any statement I may
make that we have included everything on which we have a grievance.
That would make the statement too long. But I have collected a few
pertinent examples for the purpose of argument, and I would draw
attention to these. I have calculated the specific duties in the form of
percentages in order to compare the rates with the ad valorem duties,
and I take the following cases as illustrative of my point. I take cheese,
which is charged with the equivalent of 30 per cent. Beef is charged
with the equivalent of 25 per cent.


Sir John Forrest : I do not think so.
Mr. Begg: Well, Sir John, my figures are subject-
Sir John Forrest; What beef is it—live or dead ?
Mr. Begg: Dead meat. Bacon, in the same way, works out at 25
per cent., and pork at 22 per cent. Tobacco works out at 60 per cent.,
which is a very heavy impost; and sheep, on which I wish to say a special
word, work out, as regards the dead animal, at the rate of 25 per cent.
Sir John Forrest: They bring them alive generally.
Mr. Begg: I will come to that in a moment. I have something to
say on that also. These duties are, in every case I have mentioned, in
excess of the maximum duty under the ad valorem scale, under
schedule 4, which runs to 20 per cent. You have nothing
Sir John Forrest: They are not greater than in any other places in
Australia, except New South Wales.
Mr. Begg: I have a point to make in regard to that later. What I
wish to say about sheep particularly is this : When I had the pleasure
of visiting Western Australia last autumn, it struck me that the prices of
meat were exceptionally high, and as I had an opportunity of visiting
New Zealand shortly afterwards, I induced a friend of mine there to
take the subject up, with the result that, at the present moment, he is
importing mutton into Western Australia. The vessel which he took
to Western Australia some few months ago carried the following :
19,000 sheep, 4,000 lambs, and 150 head, of cattle, all dead meat. There
were other small matters which do not need to be mentioned. Those
were the main items of that consignment. I find the total duty on
that shipment of 600 tons of food products of the kind I have men-
tioned for use in Western Australia came to £8,400. I submit
Sir John Forrest: That does not show that meat is increased in value
by that amount. There is the local supply from all over the country.
Our object is to try and encourage the production in our own country, and
not be dependent always for everything on the products of other places.
Mr. Begg; That, of course, is an arguable point. lam stating the
broad fact that this effort to provide food in Western Australia by my
friend has resulted in his having to pay this sum.
Sir John Forrest; He knew that before he started.
Mr. Begg; Yes, but I think he won’t go again, under the circum-
stances. But we need not argue that point any further. I wish to
come to the application.
Sir John Forrest: Yes, how it affects the goldfields.
Mr. Begg: First of all, with regard to the local products. I have
looked into the figures as to the production of food products, and I find
a curious fact with regard to wheat. The area under wheat has fallen
in a most remarkable manner, according to these figures.
Sir John Forrest; I believe our statistics are badly compiled.
Mr. Begg ; That is very unfortunate. We have only these before us
to guide us. In the same way the area under oats has not increased,


and barley has fallen off to almost a fraction o what it was as far back
as 1885; and that is in spite—in the case of barley—of the very heavy
duties, 16s. a gallon on whisky, and 6d. per bushel upon malting
barley. I must admit, on the other side, that a large portion of this
land, which appears to have been under cultivation for these crops
previously, has apparently gone into hay. The land has not gone out
of cultivation ; but these specific articles, instead of increasing in local
production, owing to the protective duties, have fallen off. I do not
wish tp say anything against the colony—far from it. Its future is more
promising than that of any other colony in the British Empire at the
present moment, and the gentlemen here are endeavouring to make it
prosperous to the best of their ability. But Ido say that the figures
and facts go to show that the colony itself does not seem to be—if I may
say so with all deference—specially capable of producing cheap food.
Now, Sir John, our point is cheap food. We are accustomed in this
country to look upon cheap food as the one thing which enables us to
hold our position in the markets of the world. If w r e could not provide
it our manufactures would come to an end. We know the conditions
in Western Australia and in this country are dissimilar. Ido not
think any member of the Chamber would desire free imports of food to
prevail in Western Australia; but the analogy is a good one, and I put
it in this way. The product of Western Australia and the thing upon
which Western Australia must depend in the future is the gold product.
That is the sheet-anchor of Western Australia, and the thing which is
going to be developed most in the future. Now, if the industry
Sir John Forrest: You cannot eat gold, you know
Mr. Begg; I will take it in preference to anything else you can give me.
Sir John Forrest: Ido not think you would if you were hungry.
Mr. Begg; My point is that that is going to be the industry in
Western Australia which is going to be the making of the colony.
Therefore, anything that can be done to improve the conditions under
which that industry is carried on must be in the interests of the colony.
I should like to see, for example, a change in the conditions of life in
Western Australia. I do not want to go into the question of morality,
but it is unfortunate that so many diggers in Western Australia should
be still keeping their families in the eastern colonies. Now this affects
the whole question.
Sir John Forrest: They have not been there long enough yet.
Mr. Begg : We should like them to bring their families.
Sir John Forrest: They are bringing them in large numbers.
Mr. Begg: Then we are at one on the point, and need not discuss it.
What we need is, in the first place, security of tenure, but we also want
a good, constant, steady supply of labour ; and if the labouring man
finds that although he gets a very high wage, after all, when the
expenses of living are considered, he is practically not any better off
than he would be living in another colony—


Sir John Forrest: Ido not think that is so.
Mr. Begg: And has all the enormous discomforts of living on the
goldfields, which I have experienced myself, to contend with in addition,
it is not reasonable to suppose the influx of population will be so great
and rapid as it would otherwise be. We desire to put everything before
you without heat, and without any of the language which I am sorry
to say I read in the opposition papers in Western Australia, and which
we deplore. We wish to put it before you as business men, and to
express our views moderately and temperately, and the object of our
coming to you is to lay them before you in order that if we are wrong
in any particular in our facts, figures, or inferences, you may have an
opportunity of correcting them, and at all events we may have from you
your views on these questions which we consider vitally affect the indus-
try in which these gentlemen are all so deeply interested. (Hear, hear.)
Mr, Stoneham : The point to which I wish to call your attention has
already been referred to by Lord Castletown. What I particularly wish
to point out very clearly is that although the Chamber was started by a
few individuals, who have now grown into a considerable body ; it was
started entirely in the interests of the colony, and the endeavour has
always been to make it an entirely and altogether representative concern,
not governed or controlled by any clique or division, but entirely
for the purpose of collecting and disseminating information and not
for the purpose of benefiting any one or two or number of cliques.
The general committee was formed on the widest possible basis, and will
he added to from time to time as various other interests are created. I
submit that this Chamber is of vital interest to the colony, and this is
evidenced, I think, by the fact that the other Australian colonies
have followed the example we have set, and have formed a Chamber
of Mines for themselves. It is, in fact, a bureau of information, and
desires the recognition and cordial co-operation of the Government, so
that its information may he obtained first hand and at the earliest
possible moment. The suggestions I would make are that in place of
the quarterly return at present necessary under Section 98 of the Gold-
fields Act, miners should he required to give returns within ten days of
the expiration of each calendar month.
Sir John Forrest; They won’t do it. You cannot get them to.
Mr. Stoneham : Then I will say companies.
Sir John Forrest: Say leaseholders.
Mr. Stoneham : I will say leaseholders then.
Sir John Forrest: The miners are scattered all over the country,
and they could not, and would never do it.
Mr. Stoneham; And that each month the total gold production for
the various fields, and the aggregate, he cabled to the West Australian
Chamber of Mines, to be given by that institution the fullest possible
publicity. Thirdly, I would suggest that in the event of the Govern-
ment deciding to establish in London an official bureau of information,


which would cover a much larger field than that already occupied by
the Agent-General, the stall and offices of the Chamber should be
taken advantage of, for we think that information could be more
readily disseminated through the Chamber of Mines than through a
Government department. It is hoped that the Chamber may be
the means of collecting information as to complaints such as have
been put forward by Messrs. Moreing and Begg, so that they may be
thoroughly sifted by the Chamber and forwarded to the Govern-
ment from time to time, if they be found to be real, and not
trivial complaints. By that means we shall save you trouble, and you
may know when a complaint is sent forward that it is regarded as a
legitimate complaint, which has been threshed out by the committee
of the Chamber in London, and is not a mere trivial complaint
put forward by any one individual for the benefit of any particular
section. Those are all the points I have to bring before you, and it
now only remains for me to thank you for receiving the deputation,
and to ask you to give your serious consideration to these points, and
to give the Chamber every support you can.
Sir John Forrest, in reply, said: My Lord Castletown, My Lords,
and Gentlemen, —I may say at once that I am very pleased to
have the opportunity of meeting you all here, and of hearing
direct from you the views you entertain in regard to the best
way of promoting the gold mining industry in Western Australia.
Of course, I need hardly say that your interests—the interests
of all who are interested in Western Australia—and the interests
of the Government should be, and I have no doubt are,
identical. (Hear, hear.) You wish to promote the goldfields in the
interests of those you are connected with, and desire that they shall
flourish and be made profitable, and that is the very thing the Govern-
ment desire also. (Hear, hear.) That being so, I feel certain that
there will be very little difficulty in our coming together and working
together for the common object we have in view. Now, I may say that
the Government have always desired to work harmoniously with, and
to assist as far as it was possible for them to do so, those persons who
have embarked their capital in Western Australia, whether in gold
mining or any other industry. We have an immense territory, very
sparsely peopled, and our object, of course, is to try and induce
persons to come to the colony and bring capital there; and when they
are there to treat them well, so that they may flourish and obtain the
reward to which they are entitled. It is no advantage to the colony—
it is altogether a great disadvantage—that people should lose money in
it, and I have often said that what we require is that many people
should make their fortunes in Western Australia, and then they will
be a walking advertisement throughout the world wherever they go.
(Laughter.) lam thankful to you, my lord, for your kindly reference
to my old friend, the late Sir William Robinson. I am very sorry


indeed that he is not amongst us. I am sure he would have taken a very
lively interest in our proceedings to-day, and we would have had the value
of his long experience and knowledge of the colony. In regard to
the requests you have made, I think, taking them altogether, I will not
include at the present moment the remarks made by my friend, Mr.
Begg, which I will deal with later on, but merely the requests you
have made with regard to gold mining—these requests are, I think,
fairly reasonable. (Hear, hear.) You request that you should have direct
communications from the Government as to the official returns. That
is a request I shall be very glad to comply with, and I think we shall
be under an obligation to you for distributing the knowledge which we
shall be able to send to you periodically, though of course I cannot
promise you any exclusive information. In regard to the security of
tenure of leases, I am personally altogether in accord with the observa-
tions that have been made. (Hear, hear.) I always have been. I
think if it were generally thought that the tenure was insecure it would
have a very disastrous effect upon persons embarking capital. I
think it can be said with truth that the tenure is not so insecure as
it might be made to appear. I do not know of any instance where
great hardship has resulted, but at the same time I am in accord with
Mr. Moreing when he says that when a large amount of capital has
been invested in any property it should not be subject to the whim or
the fancy, or even the decision of any one as to whether it
should be forfeited or not. (Hear, hear.) In regard to the “jumper,”'
as he is called, I have no sympathy whatever with him, and have
never had any; but I may say this, that he is not looked upon as
the disreputable person you might imagine. On the goldfields a
man puts in an application for the property of another, perhaps on
which several thousand pounds have been spent, and he moves about
among his fellows, and he is not looked upon with any disfavour, as far
as I know. He seems to be a person who, if he is not respected, cer-
tainly does not suffer very much socially because he has tried to take
the property of another under the law. But as far as I am concerned
I have no sympathy with anyone who desires to acquire what another
man has worked for, and obtain it for nothing. I think if he wants
another man’s property—and I have said this many times in Western
Australia—whether it is the Government or any one else who wants it,
there is only one way in which he should expect to obtain it, and that
is by paying for it. (Hear, hear.) In regard to the labour conditions, as
you all know, if we have not altogether complied with your wishes we
have almost complied with them. The last day I was in Perth, before
leaving for this country—May 7 —we approved of a regulation by which
two men can hold a lease—whether it is twenty-four acres or any other
lesser area—and I may say that not less than two men can work upon
any lease; there must he one man below and one above ; these two men
can hold the lease for the first twelve months and after that one man for


every six acres is the specified labour condition. With regard to the
amalgamation of leases, that is an important matter, and I think that
your views, being as I consider fairly reasonable, will have a very good
chance of being approved by Parliament. (Applause.) I may say that
it is not, as is the case with the labour conditions, a matter of regula-
tion, but it is a matter of alteration of the law, and, therefore, the
Government are powerless to deal with that matter until they have an
opportunity of placing it before Parliament and obtaining its sanction.
The objection raised by many to amalgamation is that a large area of
reef along the line of reef may be held and remain unworked. Well, to
get over that difficulty there might be some condition inserted that the
length of the lease along the reef should not be more than a
certain distance. As you all know, if you take up small leases
you get a longer line of reef than if you take up big ones. In leases
of twenty-four acres you do not get as much frontage on the lease
as in four six-acre blocks. However, Ido not think that will be an
insurmountable difficulty, and, dealing with a Chamber like this, I am
quite sure that when you urge that the limit should he 100 acres you
mean it should be 100 acres under ordinary circumstances. In regard
to the permanent title, I think that is a matter which you very pro-
perly bring under our notice, and, although I am unable to promise
exactly the direction that the law will take, because I have not fully
considered it with my colleagues, I think I may certainly promise that
the Government will propose a very much better tenure than at
present. (Applause.) I would have no hesitation in saying that, after
a person had spent £20,000 or £30,000 on a property he should have a
title which would be indefeasible. But, of course, there are smaller
people who spend a smaller amount on leases, and they, too, have to
he considered. The whole matter, perhaps, is surrounded with some
little difficulty, because, as you know, there is a party in every country
which is always desirous of placing on the capitalist as many restric-
tions and burdens as possible, and that party is not without influence,
and has to be considered. At any rate, I can promise you this,
that my influence will be directed towards giving a better title
to the holders of gold raining leases, after a certain expenditure
has been made on the lease. Now, with regard to the
question of security for costs, and also the payment for improve-
ments, for that will be a matter which will have to be considered
at the same time, it is against our ideas of natural justice
that the man in the street should come along and acquire the property
of others without paying for it, and as I have just now said, my inclina-
tions and my influence will be directed towards protecting the property
of persons whether it he in gold mines or in any other property in
Western Australia. (Applause.) With reference to the request of Mr.
Stoneham that leaseholders should report monthly, I am not sure what
the law is at the present time.


Mr. Stoneham: Quarterly.
Sir John Forrest; Probably it bas been done already; at any rate, I
know tbe Minister of Mines was moving in that direction when I left.
I think it a very reasonable request, and shall do my hest to meet your
wishes in that respect. (Applause.) With regard to this Chamber
being made a bureau of information, that, too, will have my considera-
tion, and I think it might be worked with advantage, because it is to
your interest to do all you can for Western Australia, as it is ours, and,
therefore, it is to the mutual advantage of all parties that you should
be put into as good and as beneficial a position as possible. I think I
have touched upon' all the matters that have been referred to with
regard to gold mining, and I will now just for a moment refer to the
remarks of my friend, Mr. Begg, on the question of the tariff.
I do this with’ some reluctance, because I had to go through
this matter a few weeks ago at a general election, and I do not feel
very much inclined to go over the same ground again, but I think
that if this Chamber will take the trouble to look at the tariff of
Western Australia as it existed two years ago, or about that time,
and look at it now, I do not think they will be able to say that
the Government have been unmindful of the interests of the gold-
mining industry. Our object has been—l may freely say so—and is at
the present time, to try and make our colony self-supporting. We want
to build up a farming community there which will improve our lands,
and will produce all that is necessary in the way of food for the
people who are in the colony or are coming to it, and with that object
in view we think it is wiser for us to continue for a time—though not
for ever —as at plresent. lam quite in accord with those who say that
an industry that will not livfe by itself should not be supported for ever,
but for a limited time we should do our best in the days of our prosperity
to try and cultivate and improve the lands of the colony, and to try
and settle people on the land. That is the great object that we have
in view. lam just as eager and anxious that food should be as cheap
as possible as my friend Mr. Begg is, or anybody else. I should like very
much to be able to get food for very little. The question is
which is wisest in the interests of the colony. Free Traders will tell
you that the gold product is the only thing. We have only
to look after the gold, everything else will take care of itself.
But those are not the principles on which the Government of
Western Australia are acting at the present time. We believe
the gold mining industry is a great factor in the prosperity of the
colony, and' We wish to use that industry to. promote every other
industry in the colony, as I think it will, and we think the time has
not arrived when we should remove duties from those articles of food
which we are able and which the colony is fitted to produce. Now, if
any one will look at the free list of the colony of Western Australia I
think they will be astonished. Since I have been in office that list has


been enlarged to an immense extent. All kinds of mining machinery
are imported free. (Applause.) All kinds of tools, not only mining,
but also agricultural, and all machinery of every kind is admitted
free. Tools of every kind are admitted free. Galvanised iron,
which is so largely used, is admitted free. Tea and sugar are
admitted free, which can scarcely be said of any other part of the
world, not even excluding our great mother country. You pay 4d.
a lb. on tea, whereas in Western Australia the miner and every-
one else gets it duty free. Mining appliances of every description
for extracting gold are admitted into the colony free of duty,
and when you remember that the colony has during the last
few years not only removed all these duties, but has exerted
itself to the utmost to build railways to the goldfields, to put
up telegraphs here, there, and everywhere to every important
centre of the goldfields, that it has made thousands of miles of
roads, and provided water supplies along those roads and at the
various centres of the goldfields, that it has carried out public
works and public buildings throughout that immense auriferous and
waterless area, I think it is asking too much to ask that the
small duties you are paying upon food, which are really infinitesimal
and are not felt by the miner, should be removed. What revenue
are you going to pay at all? What revenue is the miner to pay ?
How can we carry on all these public works and spend millions
of money? We are now projecting a scheme for taking water
to Coolgardie, which will cost two and a-half millions. Surely no one
can say that the people of Western Australia have no faith in the
future of the goldfields. If we had no faith we should not only be
bringing ruin upon those who have embarked their capital on the gold-
fields, but we should be bringing ruin upon every person who has pro-
perty or resides in Western Australia. I should advise this Chamber
of Mines, if I may be permitted to do so, to urge by every proper and
reasonable means the amelioration of conditions which they think Will
help forward the gold mining industry or any other industry they are
connected with, but not to try and interfere in regard to the fiscal policy
of the Government, which is not only devised to encourage the gold
mining industry, but is also devised to build up Western Australia as a
great self-supporting part of the Empire. (Applause.) I thank you,
my lords and gentlemen, for your courtesy in asking me to meet you all
here to-day. You may depend upon this, that not only while I am
here, but on my return to Western Australia also, every reasonable
request coming from you, responsible people as you are, shall not only
have my careful consideration, but you may depend upon it, as far as
it is possible for me to do it, feeling as I do that you are taking a great
part in furthering the best interests of Western Australia, you may
depend upon it that I shall give you all the support I can reasonably
and properly give you. (Applause.)


Mr. Moreing: May I just raise one point ? In speaking about the
amalgamation of claims you mentioned that we should not ask for the
amalgamation of claims not contiguous to one another. I have thought
that point out, and one or two other members have spoken to me about it.
It, seems to me that there are many cases where it would be most
advantageous for the mining industry that claims that are not adjoin-
ing might be amalgamated for the purposes of working.
Sir John Forrest; My own opinion is that it would be impossible to
do it —that it is another property.
Mr. Moreing: I think we can show you that there are many cases
where it would be most advantageous for the industry, and I should
like you to keep that point in mind.
Mr. Begg; With regard to the suggestion that the figures I referred
to are out of date. These are for 1894-5. It would be well to know
where we can get the latest figures. It is misleading to be acting on
figures that are out of date.
Sir John Forrest: The later figures are not out yet. Of course, we
are bound by the figures, but I fear they are not right.
Lord Castletown : I am sure I shall be voicing the unanimous view
of the deputation so kindly received by Sir John Forrest if I tender him
our most sincere and hearty thanks for the kind, courteous, and most
sympathetic speech he has made to us to-day. (Applause.) It has
been a great honour and pleasure to us to-day to see Sir John Forrest
on these very important subjects, and I think we may rejoice in
knowing it is not the last time we shall see him, as he has kindly con-
sented, as I understand, to address a meeting on the 19th • of: this
month, when we shall have the honour and privilege of again hearing
him expound the views so ably put before us to-day as to the future of
the colony of Western Australia, which he so ably represents.
The Earl of Donoughmore: Perhaps I may be allowed, as having
some slight connection with Western Australia myself, to cordially
second the vote of thanks which has just been proposed. I believe that
more can be done in ten minutes’ conversation than in as many months
of correspondence, and having been met in the cordial, kind, and
sympathetic way in which Sir John Forrest has met us, I am certain
every one of us will go away from here believing that the result of this
interview will not only be of great advantage to those who have
embarked their money in Western Australia, but also to the general
understanding prevailing between us and those in the colony which
Sir John Forrest so ably represents.
The vote of thanks was unanimously passed.
Sir John Forrest: My Lord Castletown, lords and gentlemen, I
thank you very much for the kind words which you have addressed
to me, and I can only say I am extremely obliged to you.




West Australian Chamber
of Mines, Limited.
X, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, E.C.
THE attention of all interested is directed to the facilities
offered by the Chamber to those desirous of obtaining in-
formation relative to West Australian Companies and the
West Australian Goldfields.
The Chamber has on file the official documents (Prospectuses,
Articles of Association, Reports, &c.) of some 400 Westralian
Companies, and additions are constantly being made. These
documents are supplemented by reports of meetings,
particulars of developments upon the properties, and other
information. Records of general matters affecting the Gold-
fields are also kept.
Government lease maps, reports, &c., are available for the use
of Subscribers, the Chamber being in receipt of all publications
issued by the West Australian Department of Mines.
The Reading Room is supplied with newspapers published at
Coolgardie, Kalgoorlie, Perth, Cue, Menzies, &c., in addition to
the principal London journals dealing with Mining and Finance.
Private individuals can join the Chamber by payment of 20s.
or 10s. per annum. Subscribers of the former amount are en-
titled to refer to the Files, to use the Reading Room, and to
receive the Crushing Returns and other publications; Subscribers
of the latter amount are entitled to receipt of publications only.
Apart from these privileges, it is obviously to the advantage
of all who have investments in Western Australia to support an
institution one of whose aims it is to act as the representative of
Capital.
Subscriptions date from Ist May.
Cheques to be made payable to the West Australian
Chamber of Mines, Limited.
