

THE BOOK
OF
GEELONG.
A Handsome Mementto of Geelong
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Its
People, Places, Industries,
and Amusements.
Illustrated by over 150 Views, Portraits, Groups, &c.
Printed and Published by
HENRY FRANKS & CO., MOORABOOL & MALOP STREETS,
GEELONG, VICTORIA.


fio (Xlondet* . .
die do the Tt*ac
ALWAYS WIN THE DAY FOF
Creek
. . . AND . . .
Roberts
9
MOORAROOL
STREET.
POPULAR
GEELONG...
DRAPERs . . .
You Need Never Go Past Our Place !
r
KEEP . .
EVERYTHING . . .
AND THE BEST .
AND LATEST OF GOODS




TALMA, Photo
THE HON. SIDNEY AUSTIN, M.L.C.


THE
BOOK OF GEELONG:
ITS
PEOPLE, PLACES, INDUSTRIES
AND
AMUSEMENTS.
COMPILED BY EDWARD A. VIDLER.
PRINTEP AND PUBLISHED BY
HENRY FRANKS & CO.,
Moorabool Street and Malop Street, Geelong.
1897.


the HON. J. H. CONNOR, M.L.C.,
G. L. MASSINGHAM, PHOTO.
0 N 18!)t iteglrr *"* Weatem Dietrtet, w« born i„ the North o( Ire , and .
£S ESJZX 3 110 ■* pS^4,'^. to m 2S ta of , " Ul , 4 f“
was elected a vice-president nf fh n ? culture, with branch colleges in the varirma r 1 ur ged the
tow,, S I„ 1860, Mr? M «»• toel “5'
e,ected ,0 “ the Booth - w “ tera <” -tsttsat


THE HON. J. H. GREY,
WHOSE portrait appears on page 77, has been one of the most active and popular of Geelong’s public men.
*' He has been a member of the Newtown and Chilwell (Geelong) Borough Council for nine years, and
has been re-elected Mayor for seven successive years—a position he still holds. He has also been a member
of the Geelong Town Council, and was Mayor in 1893, during which year he entertained the Governor, the
Earl of Hopetoun, in regal style on the memorable occasion of the opening of the Hopetoun Channel into
Corio Bay. He has been President of the Geelong Hospital for three years, and for some years has been
President of the Geelong Football and Cricket Club. As a member for several years of the committee of the
Protestant Orphanage, he has served as vice-president and president, the latter of which positions he still holds.
He has also served on the committee of the Gordon College, and was elected president. In 1895, be was
elected, unopposed, to represent the local province in the Legislative Council, resigning in 1896. Mr. Grey
is a partner in the well-known legal firm of Taylor, Buckland k Gates, with which he has been connected
since his boyhood.
MR. H. B. HIGGINS, M.L.A.,
TIT HO was returned at the head of the poll at the
' ' General Election of 1893, is a leading Mel-
bourne lawyer. At the equity bar he has attained
the highest position by sheer force of intellect and
determination, unassisted by personal influence. He
came from Ireland (County Dowu) as a youth, and was
educated at the Scotch College and Melbourne Uni-
versity, securing numerous scholarships and graduating
M.A., LL B. He was called to the bar in 1875, and —
unless he prefers a parliamentary career, in which he
has already made his reputation—is doubtless destined
for a judgeship. He is President of the Victorian
Phonographic Association, being an expert shorthand
writer. Mr. Higgins has been for some years a member
of the Council of the Melbourne University.
MR. WILLIAM GURR, M.L.A.,
TIHE junior member for Geelong in the Legislative Assembly, is
a local man who has taken an active part for many years in
several public bodies, notably the local branch of the Australian
Natives’ Association and the Geelong Town Council. He has
always been well to the front as a working-man’s representative,
and although in a previous parliamentary election he was unsuc-
cessful, he was elected in 1893 by a solid labor vote, and has since
proved himself eminently a worker, in securing for Geelong not
only due representation in Parliament, but also recognition of its
desires and aspirations in the Government departments. He was
appointed by the Government a member of the Tariff Board, and
also president of the Fire Brigades Board.


i
'
1
r
■ ..
%&£
&
±\tz.
: ’ ■'■■»'~«*s«wr» ii^
>r?».
.
D :■ v
—m
,
-;y.vr^:.:-:./r^
• • • • DAILY EXCURSIONS BETWEEN
Melbourne, portarlington, point Denrfc Geelong
7Y
, Howard Smith & Sons, Ltd,
wo
Popular Passenger Steamer “ EDINA ” leaves
Melbourne for Geelong and intermediate Ports, Daily.
TIME TABLE:
Up :
Geelong—Moorabool Wharf - 4n m
Point Henry . . . 4.20 p.m.
Portarlmgton . . . 6 . 15 p . m .
Melbourne (arrive about) - 7.45 p.m.
SUNDAY TRIPS :
Leaves Melbonrne-Qaeen’s Wharf 11 a.m„ and other Ports One Honr later than above.
Down :
Melbourne—Queen’s Wharf
Portarlington
Point Henry
Geelong (arrive about)
10 a.m.
12.30 p.m.
1.30 p.m.
2 p.m.
POIN L -
• . . let during the Summer Season


CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
Page.
Hon. Sidney Austin, M.L.C.,
Mayor of Geelong ... Frontispiece.
Hon. J. H. Connor, M.L.C. ... 4
H. B. Higgins, M.L.A. ... 5
Wm, Gurr, M.L.A. .. ... 5
W. Howard Smith & Sons ... 6
Huddart, Parker & Co. ... 8
Round About Geelong—
*
The Port of Geelong... ... 9
Yarra-street Pier ... ... 10
Railway Pier ... ... H
The s.s. “Courier”... ... 12
J. Blakiston & Co. ... ... 13
J. Bannister & Son ... ... 14
Dennys, Lascelles, Austin & Co. 15
Grand Coffee Palace ... 16
Corio Bay ... ... 17
Chas. Cole & Co. ... ... 10
Jas. Munday ... ... 20
H. McGregor ... ... 21
A. Deane ... ... 21
E. J. George ... ... 22
Jas. M. Anderson ... ... 22
Savings Bank and Free Library... 23
A. H. Roadknigbt ... ... 24
A. J. Young & Co. ... ... 24
Cr. Thos. Holden ... . ... 25
J. Webber & Son .. ... 25
Joseph Everett ... ... 26
“ Franks’ Corner ” ... ... 27
J. Harwood ... ... 27
Exhibition Hall ••• ... 28
Cr. H. F. Richardson ... 28
Seeley & King ... ... 29
Victoria Hotel ... ... 30
Bull & Owen ... ... 31
Morris Jacobs ... ... 32
Cr. Sol. Jacobs ... ... 32
Albert Coffee Palace ... 33
Prince of Wales Hotel ... 34
Alex. Lowe ... ... 34
Moorabool-street ... ... 35
Bright & Hitchcocks ... 36
T. A. Dickson’s Pharmacy ... 37
W. H. Potter ... ... 38
Page.
Cr. Chas. Sommers ... ... 38
Ryrie-street ... ... 39
Cr. H. W. Day ... ... 40-41
Wm. Box & Son ... ... 45
R. W. Dalton’s Seed Warehouse 43
W. H. Watts’ Photographic Studio 44
Hearne’s Medicines ... ... 45
R. Clarke & Co. ... ... 46
Scott Bros.’ Timber Yard ... 47
R. Lawry & Sons ... ... 48
Industrial and Commercial—
The “Vulcan” Foundry ... 49
M. Donaghy & Sons... ... . 52
Hawkes Bros. ... ... 59
Jas. Strong & Bros. ... ... 63
Western Freezing Company ... 66
Geo. Hague & Co. ... ... 68
Strachan, Bostock & Co. ... 70
J. J. Trait’s Hop Beer Factory ... -72
Union Woollen Mills ... 74
Great Western Agricultural Im-
plement Manufactory 76
Public Institutions and Associations—
Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum 77
Gordon Technical College ... 82
Chamber of Commerce and Manu-
factures ... ... 84
Agricultural and Horticultural
Society ... ... 86
Kennel Club ... ... 88
Corio Branch, Australian Natives’
Association ... ... 89
Yacht Club ... ... 94
Corio Bay Rowing Club ... 96
Golf Club ... ... 97
“ Nondescripts ” Cricket Club ... 97
Football Club ... ... 98
Liedertafel in “ The Mikado ” ... 62
Amateur Dramatic Club ... 100
Tennis Club ... ... 101
Coursing Club ... ... 102
Creer & Roberts Cover page 11.
Barwon Foundry (H. Hobbs) „ 111.
Austral Cycle Agency „ IV


ffuddart, barker (f *£td.,
STEAM SERVICE BETWEEN
*\
Geelong, Po*tat*lington, JVlelbouFne
Leaving Geelong :
“ EXCELSIOR ” 9 a.m., daily (Sundays
excepted)
i
Leaving Melbourne :
COURIER 10 a.m., daily. (Sundays
11 a.m.)
r 7 . -it a.m.)
“ COURIER ” 4 P- m -> Saturday 3.30 p.m. /] V “ EXCELSIOR ” 4 p.m., daily (Saturday
/ \ 2.30 p.m.)
7
R EB S (Holidays Excepted)
SINGLE
RETURN
Saloon : | | Steerage :
2/- I I SINGLE
3/- I I RETURN
.... SUBJECT TO ALTERATION
Saloon Return Tickets available for One Month from date of issue
1 /-
1/6
Attention is specially invited to the opportunities thus provided for Morning or
Afternoon Trips to Portarlington. On Saturday afternoon, passengers by
the COURIER leaving at 3.30 p.m., may return by “ Excelsior,” arriving
—:o: in Geelong shortly after Six o’Clock
-:0:
Steam Services to all the Australian Colonies and New Zealand, Fiji, Honolulu
Canada and Europe, by the Company’s own boats, or by those of the
Australian United Steam Navigation Co , or the Canadian-Australian Steam-
ship Co., for whom we are agents in Geelong.
For Information .
apply at the Office
8 MOORABOOL STREET, GEELONG.
HEAD OFFICE-525 Collins Street, Melbourne.
CORli
(Newcastle and Victorian) Coke, Etc., at
Lowest Current Prices.


Round About Geelong.
WASHBOURNE, PHOTO.
THE PORT OF GEELONG. FROM THE EASTERN TERRACES.
(With the Geelong Sen Bathing Cmpainy's Ladies' and Gentlemen's Baths).
_ its exceptionally favorable position, both as to its proximity to the largei
centres of population and the many attractive and healthy sea-side places
within a few miles and an hour’s journey by coach, Geelong has become
one of the most popular, as it is certainly one of the most beautiful, of the
* * holiday resorts of the Colony of Victoria, in this sunny land of Australia.
With the unusual advantages of a land-locked harbour, which judicious dredging
and the construction of fine wharves and jetties have given a high reputation in many
commercial centres of the world, it is not surprising that Geelong has become, during the
half-century of its existence, one of the busiest and most prosperous ports of these colonies.


"*°f° ‘ ,m ™ of agricultural prosperity, when large fortunes were made in the
Geelong district by the production of wool and wheat, as many as twenty vessels from all
parts of the world have been seen in one day in Corio Bay, either busy loading at the
Railway p .er, and Moorabool-street and Yarra-street Wharves, or moored in safety in the
d T ! y T Uing their tUrn - That SUch times are P ast is n °‘ to the
discredit of Geelong for the port is now-thanks to the recent opening of the sand-bar
which, until the year 1893, rendered entrance to the inner bay difficult and even dangerous—
‘° r eIS „ draWing 24 feet ° f ” d —hie to cpJZTith
Enmnt I “7, aS present promises t 0 provide ' and a more favorable market in
dUk'itsTnUesfeZt “* imPr ° Ved "h* l * 86 “* hMb ° r — da «<>» »e
That a progressive public spirit has been awakened in the town of late years is
tZVn T I “P° rtant ™provements made by the Government at the instance of
the Town Council the Chamber of Commerce, and other public bodies, and the public and
at North Sho PnSe <iH S d y !n *7 WeStCra Com P a "T- ia acting extensive works
freev.n! “ l im P«>™ d machinery and appliances for killing and
extensiv T r batter f ° r “P”* Ihy Mr. Richard Cheetham, in utilising the
extensive bay frontage at Point Henry and Moolap for the manufacture of salt; of such
G. H. B RINSMEAD, Photo.
YARRA-STREET PIER.


world-famed firms as Dennys, Lascelles, Austin & Co. ; Dalgety & Co.; Shannon, Murray
& Co.; Strachan, Bostock & Co. ; and George Hague & Co., and numerous other firms, in
placing the wool and wheat of the surrounding districts before wholesale buyers from all
parts of the world. Indeed, the commercial and industrial activity of Geelong, which is set
forth in more or less complete fashion in the following pages, has long earned for the town
a high reputation for sound enterprise, and has carried the name of Geelong to the further-
most parts of the world, as well as over the length and breadth of the Australasian continent.
Much as has been done in the past by the construction of delightful terraces on the
banks overlooking the bay and the laying out of innumerable public parks and reserves in
various parts of the town, most of which receive appropriate illustration in this book, it
G. H. BRINSMEAD, PHOTO.
GEELONG RAILWAY PIER.
is nevertheless a fact that the past two or three years have seen a marked increase in the
measures adopted for the further beautification of the bay frontages, the better lighting and
drainage of the streets, and so forth, reviving the long-deferred hope that ere many
years are past Geelong will be a model town for beauty and cleanliness.
During the past year, various important proposals for the popularising of the town
as a holiday-resort and as a pleasant place of permanent residence, have been brought
forward at public meetings convened by the Mayor (Cr. H. F. Richardson), supported by
the local members of both Houses of Parliament, the mayors of the adjacent boroughs, and
the leading citizens of the town, at the instance of the newly-formed Progress League.
These 'proposals '.include the establishment of an Art Gallery, which Mr. J. W. Sayer is
energetically bringing to a successful issue]; the formation of a Town Band, which the


Mayor and Lieut.-Col. Eashleigh have succeeded in securing for the entertainment of to
mmmmm i
the public parks, which have been effected this year are works calc ™ nVemeilCeS ln
popularity of the town as a holiday resort. * ’ calculated to increase the
Howard^T^, UlT’ T "*
i;=
families by steamer for a week-end vi<df tn tr lQ 1 • , . , # fco brin g their
MESSRS HUDBART, PARSER & CO.'S FAVORITE STEAMER “COURIER.”


MASSINGHAM, Photo.
MR. J. BLAKISTON.
of the first offices we find in proceeding up
Mocrabool-street, the principal thoroughfare
of the town, from the wharf at which the large
number of passengers travelling daily from Mel-
bourne by the steamers are landed, is that of
Messrs. Blakiston & Co., Carriers and Shipping
Agents. They have also an office at the Railway
station and various stores in the town.
They are employed by the Railway Depart-
ment and the Postal Department in the delivery of
parcels, and represent Messrs. Mayne, Nickles & Co.,
Victorian Parcels Express; the McCulloch Carrying
Company, and Messrs. Permewan, Wright & Co. ;
also Messrs. Wright, Heaton & Co., of Sydney;
and Messrs. Walter S. Bell & Co., of Launceston,
for the carriage of furniture, parcels, &c. In their
shipping business their agencies include Messrs.
W. Cooper & Son and H. Moss, (who have a large
fleet of lighters trading between Geelong and Mel-
bourne), as well as the popular Norddeutcher Lloyd
German Mail Steamers.
The principal of the firm, Mi?. J. Blakiston, who was born in Geelong in 1851,
has identified himself with many public institutions, being vice-president of the Free Library,
member of the Council of the Chamber of Commerce, besides having filled the various offices
of the Manchester Unity I. 0. Oddfellows, and other kindred societies, as well as treasurer
and member of the Board of Directors of the Australian Natives Association, having served
as president of the Corio Branch. On the appointment of the new Commissioner of Rail-
ways, Mr. Blakiston was asked to confer with him in 1 e-adjusting the goods rates.


W. H. WATTS, Photo.
MR. JOHN BANNISTER.
Ip was in 1854 that Mb. John Bannister
came to the town from London, and
commenced business as a carrier in Moora-
bool-street. He was at first associated with
bis brother Robert, now of Melbourne, but
subsequently bought him out and continued
the business himself until 1892, when he
uas joined by his son Harry, who now con-
ducts the business alone. About three years
ago, the firm bought the carrying business
of Messrs. Kerley Bros., and it is now the
largest carrying firm outside Melbourne.
Ihe firm act as local agents for the well-
known inter-colonial firm of Broadbent
Bros., and are the authorised carriers for all
the wool warehouses in the town. They
are also agents for the new Geelong
Lighterage Company and McLeod’s steam
lighters. The firm also carry on an
extensive business as wood and coal
merchants.
WILMOT, Photo.


;jN passing np Moorabool
& Street, one of the
most noticeable buildings
is the fine wool and wheat
warehouse of Messrs.
Dennys, Lascelles, Austin
& Co. The firm was
founded in 1857 by Mr. C.
J. Dennys, who was the
first to open business as
a wool-broker, holding
weekly sales of wool, hides,
skins, and produce gen-
erally. He commenced this
business in a large iron
building on the Western
Beach, and it was there
that sales of wool, which
were previously held in
Melbourne, were under-
taken for the first time in
Geelong in 1859. Since
that time the firm has
greatly increased its busi-
ness, and Mr. Dennys has
now associated with him
as partners, the Hon.
Sidney Austin. M.L.C.,
the Mayor-elect of
Geelong ; Mr. B. H.
Lascelles, well-known as
the pioneer of the famous
Mallee; Mr. M. Conran, the
president of the Geelong
Chamber of Commerce and
Manufactures, recently
elected a member of the
Town Council; and Mr.
David Strachan, carrying
on their large business in
the extensive premises
shown in our illustration.


Gfelong Grand Coffee Palace (Mack’s Hotel).
WlLMOT, Photo.
gNE of the most conspicuous building overlooking the Bay is the G EE Io„ 0 Guam C off«
Hot 1 h u T aS MACE ’ S H ° TEt ' Corio Terraoe - The original Mack’s
Hotel, which stood on the same site, was a slab hut built by Mr. McNaughton in 1838 Our
, view will give an idea of the
handsome appearance of the
present building. It contains
a large and well-furnished
dining-room, drawing-room,
leading-room, billiard-room,
smoking-room and wine bar,
8 private suites of rooms, 40
bed-rooms, 7 bath-rooms; the
terms being as follows: single
bed rooms, 255.; double bed-
rooms, 455.; meals from Is.
6d.; boarders by the week
from 255. Telephone number
240, and an electric bell
communicates with the cab
rank in Malop-street. Mrs.
R. Strachan is the propriet-
ress.


CORIO BAY, GEELONG.
(From a Photograph by Mr. G. H. Brinsmead.)
c




WILMOT, Photo.
to some fifteen years ng> the vineyards in the Geelong district produced first-class
wines ; but at that time the dreaded phylloxera broke ont, and local vineyards had to
be uprooted. There has, however, during the past four or five years been a renewal of vine
planting, and the vineyards of Messrs. Deppeler, Giigger, Merandez, and others, produce
wines which are generally considered of most excellent quality, and, when well matured,
will undoubtedly command a good market Many thousands of acres in this district are
pre-eminently adapted for the production of fine wines, and there is every reason to believe
that in the near future the produce of the district vineyards will be one of the largest
factors in building up the material prosperity of the town and district, as every year
Australian wines are coming more into favor in Great Britain and the East; and the
consumption in the colony is rapidly increasing in preference to European wines and spirits,
being far more suited to our climate. Geelong wines have gained first class honors in
competition with European wines, at the Bordeaux Exhibition and at the Paris Exhibition
some years ago.
Messrs. CirAS. Coi.e & Co., among others, have made a very careful study of the
varied qualities of Australian wines, and have succeeded in securing for them a large and
constantly increasing output not only in the colonies but in the more populous centres of
Great Britain, India, and the East; their success being shown by repeat orders from
connoisseurs, who have expressed the greatest satisfaction with the qualities of the wines
supplied to them.


J. MUNDAY'S
GEELONG TANNERY.
ALD. JAMES MUNDAY.
I! , the far larger and more important part
of Mr Jambs Monday’s splendid enterprise is to be
ound on the banks of the Hirer Barwon, where his Gee.
TA f EItY 'S m active operation, the fact that his
ofhce and store is m Moorabool-street, a few doors higher
np than Messrs. Okas. Cole & Co.'s premises, is sufficient
Mr M°d pnbhcdtioiuof his portrait on this page.
Mi. Monday was born in the State,of Jersey, in the
United States, but left his natire country as a youth
some thirty years ago. Therefore in him we hive a
“rough cosmopolitan, for whilst, to all who know him
ie is undoubtedly an Irishman, by birth he is an American’
citizen and yet we have long since accepted him as an
Australian. He served his apprenticeship to his trade
to Go 7 ’ ? 8 ° nt a field for nnfoi'prise, came
to Geelong, where he has now developed-du ring a
manufactories in these colonies Altlxouo-lThpV 50 ”^* 16 " 8^6 ’ father
Mr. Monday has secured his grttesA succls in I", ° f leathOT '
as equal in quality to the best procurable anywhere HhUeS aCCt * ted
driving machinery in all parts of Australasia, deluding Fij and has a ‘° b ° f ° Und
London and other parts of the old wnH,l t* • • ?. ■ ’ d iias a laT ¥ e export trade to
to give anything „ 7l e ,Z £Lof’T'T ° ‘V h ° at °" r d “P^'
the proprietor! suffice j t *' ,2 n ™ factory of which Mr. Monday is
3-e.rly put through this tannery, which Zy'tZaT"
and has been, fo/some "’em enterprising spirit to boar on public affairs,
taking an active part in other matters of public utility! ‘ ® GeC '° ng Town Council . besides


WILMOT, Photo.
MEr. H. McGregor, the
* s * sl * well-known sail,
tent, tilt, tarpaulin and
oilskin maker, and ship
chandler, whose premises
adjoin Messrs. Strachan,
Bostock & Co.’s new wool
warehouse in Moorabool-
street, has had an exten-
sive experience of over
twenty years in his busi-
ness. He served with
Messrs. Huddart, Parker
& Co. for nine years, and
twelve years ago set up for
himself in the premises
he still occupies. His
stock of ropes of all sizes
is very extensive, and
marquees, tables, tressl-
ings, bunting and flags, and all similar necessaiies for open-air entertainments, meetings,
and so forth, are always obtainable from him on hire or sale at lowest prices.
fHE captains of vessels calling at this port will also find themselves well served by Mr.
.A. Deane, Shipping Butcher, of Corio-street., who has a list of most flattering
WILMOT, Photo.
testimonials from no
less than 120 cap-
tains of steamships,
headed bj some of
Her Majesty’s navy,
several yachts, in-
cluding His Ex-
cellency the GoA rer-
nor’s “ Sunbeam,”
and about another
hundred sailing ves-
sels, all of whom bear
testimony to the
excellent qualities
and reasonable rates
at which Mr. Deane
has supplied them
with provisions.


WILMOT, Photo.
jUJR. George,* the local agent of that
leviathan English insurance company,
the Liverpool, London, and Globe, is a native
of the town. In 1871 he left school to enter
the office of the company, the local agent then
being Mr. E. F. McAllister. When, in the
following year, that gentleman went to Mel-
bourne to join Messrs. Jas. Henty & Co., Mr.
George, though only sixteen years of age, was
retained as their agent and has remained in
that position ever since. The building, of
which we give a view, is the property of the
company, having been purchased from the late
Hon. Jas. Cowie, well-known in local annals.
This company is one of the largest and sound-
est in the woild. It was established in 1866
and commenced business in these colonies in
1856.- At - the present time the company has
assets of £9,000,000, with over £400,000 in-
vested in the colonies. The total income is
over £259,000, and it has paid in claims in
Australia alone ovor £200,000.
B b ' James Anderson came to Geelong in 1852
from Scotland. He immediately smarted
-in business as a draper and clothier in Malop-
street, building the premises now occupied by the
Sports Depot near “ Franks’ Corner.” In 1857
lie removed to larger premises opposite where he
continued hi? business until 1879. In that year
he became the local agent for the National Insur-
ance Company, a highly successful association,
which in 1894 became amalgamated with the
London and Lancashire, when Mr. Anderson took
over the local agency and removed to his present
offices in the Free Library Building. He has
been for many years secretary to the trustees of
the New Cemetery at Herne Hill, and has also
been secretary for the Geelong Sea Bathing Com-
pany since September, 1861. In 1864 Mr.
Anderson was elected a member of the Geelong
lown Council and served as chairman of the
Water Supply Comfnittee, resigning in 1866.
MR. JAMES M. ANDERSON.


WILMOT, Photo.
SAVINGS BANK.
FREE LIBRARY.
§|HE Geelong Free Library was established in the year 1876, when its Committee
-1 purchased the present building—which was formerly the Chamber of Commerce—for
£3200. In that year the President was the Hon. G. F. Belcher, the late Mr. Chas. Andrews,
M.L.A., being Treasurer, and Mr. G. F. Link lion. Secretary. The institution has been
supported during the twenty years of its existence by the generosity of the townsfolk, and
that it has supplied a definite want may be gathered from the fact that the average daily
attendance is 257 at present. There are over five thousand books, comprising fiction, poetry
and drama, educational, scientific, geological, religious, biographical, historical, classical,
travels and descriptive works, with innumerable daily, weekly, and monthly publications.
The Museum contains a small but interesting collection of geological and mineralogical
specimens, native weapons, and objects of natural history. The secretary and librarian is
Mr. Thomas Bennett. _ _ j
! \ - 1 \ . '
||HE Geelong Savings Bank was established in 1848 as a bivinch of the “ Port Phillip
1 Savings Bank,” Mr. Charles Friend being the first actuary, that position having been
successively filled by Messrs. John Buckland, M. H. Barrass, John S. Hill, and Alfred R.
Reed, which latter gentleman was succeeded last 3 ear by Mr. B. C. Thacker. The bank
his for many years been a branch of the Commissioners’ Savings Bank, and under Govern-
ment guarantee. A bill is now before Parliament with the object of merging the Post Office
Savings Bank into the Commissioners’ Savings Banks.


MASSINGHAM, Photo.
MR. A. H. ROADKNIGHT.
Alfred Roadknight, is a son of the late Mr.
Thomas Roadknight, a pioneer, who landed in
Victoria in May, 1836. He was born at the River
Station, near Winchelsea, and was educated at the
Geelong Grammar School, being, with Mr. George
Armytage of Ingleby, the first of the late Mr. J.
Bracebridge Wilson’s boarders. In 1868, he was one
of 63 who passed the civil service examination in
Melbourne, 400 candidates being “plucked,” but did
not enter the service. Mr. Roadknight was elected
in 1881, as a representative for Villamanta Ward in
the Geelong Town Council, occupied the position of
Alderman for three years, and served as chairman of
several important committees, retiring in 1893. He
has been in business as a stock, land, and estate agent
since 1873, and was specially chosen by the Govern-
ment to represent them in giving expert evidence as
to values at the Local Option Court in 1889.
=|LN 1886 Mr. Frederick Smith opened
the business of auctioneer, land
and estate agent, in Malop-street, now
carried on by Messrs. A. J. Young
& Co. The premises have since been
rebuilt, the late Mr. Henry Roebuck,
Town Treasurer, erecting the present
handsome building, known as Queen’s
Chambers, in 1891, in which year Mr,
Smith died and Mr A. J. Young took
over the business. Mr. Young suc-
ceed the late Mr. Smith as Secretary
of the Geelong Protestant Orphanage,
and was secretary of the Geelong Dog
and Poultry Society, which was dis-
banded last year, and now replaced by
the Geelong Kennel Club. He has
been one of the auditors for the Gee-
long Corporation, and also an auditor
and liquidator for firms and com.
panies. He holds weekly sales, every
Tuesday, of furniture and household
effects in his spacious auction-rooms.


MASSINGHAM. Photo.
CR. THOS. HOLDEN.
Thomas Holden is a native of New South "Wales,
and came to Geelong in 1847. He had some prac-
tical farming experience, and in 1857 went into
business with the late Mr. John Short, then the largest
grain and produce merchant in the town, with whom he
remained for seven years, afterwards going to Messrs.
H. & F. Harvey—now Messrs. Harvey, Dann & Co. —
whom he also served for seven years. In 1891 he started
business for himself in his present premises at the corner
of Mercer-street and Brougham-place. He has since
occupied also extensive stores in Brougham-place and
Cavendish-street, and in 1883 opened a branch business
at Wallace, between Ballarat and Melbourne, where he
has a large chaff-cutting and grain-crushing mill, which
he has since found necessary to considerably extend and
rebuild, securing the additional advantage of a railway
siding into the premises.
Mr. Thomas Holden has taken an active part in several public bodies, including
the Chamber of Commerce, of which he has been vice-president, and last year was elected
a member of the Geelong Town Council.
J. WEBBER & SON'S GEELONG COOPERAGE.
L largest Cooperage in the colony is that of Messrs. J. Webber & Son, Mercer-street.
It was forty years ago that Mr. Webber, sen., who is still an active worker in spite of
ns 76 years, started in Geelong as a cooper with two men. Now a very different tale is to
told. The firm has an extensive connection among the vignerons of the colony, casks
.and hogsheads being forwarded by the hundreds to the Rutherglen district, Tahbilk, Great
esteru, and Yering ; among others, brewers’ vats and all the wooden paraphernalia of
rewing and wine-making are turned out in first-rate style.
D


WILMOT, Photo.
Joseph Everett, the well-known carriage builder of Mercer-street, came to Geelong
from Cambridgeshire, England, with his parents in 1853, when an infant, and, on
leaving school, was apprenticed to the blacksmithing trade. After a travelling experience of
some seven years in Melbourne and elsewhere as a coachbuilder and general wheelwright, he
MASSINGHAM, Photo.
MR. J. EVERETT.
returned to Geelong and started in business for him-
self, in his present premises, in 1875. His business
rapidly developed, and some five years ago lie added
new offices and showroom, the old building being re-
tained as a forge and workshop. His output has been
a large one in all classes of vehicles —carriages and
buggies, waggons, lorries, drays, &c., for which he has
secured a high reputation, having competed very suc-
cessfully for many years at the Geelong shows, and
securing a considerable number of prizes. He always
retains an extensive stock of well-seasoned and up-to-
date materials, and employs, besides fifteen permanent
hands, all kinds of machinery driven by steam-power;
and has also a first-class tyring apparatus —the best
in the district—which enables him to tyre wheels
with exceptional despatch and thoroughness.
Mr Everett always keeps up his stock of every
variety of vehicles, so that his showroom gives pur-
chasers an opportunity of an immediate selection.


“FRANKS’ CORNER.”
fg|S will be seen in the illustration of “Franks’ Corner,” no inconsiderable public attention
is attracted to the American Dental Company, having their offices over Messrs. Henry
Franks & Co.’s shop. Mr. J. Harwood, the principal, has given very close study to
MR. J. HARWOOD,
President, Dental Students.
his profession, and, aided by considerable prac-
tical experience, lias secured a large practice
among town and country residents. His special care is
in dealing with the teeth, both of children and adults,
from the point of view of the permanent health and
well-being of the patient, holding that badly-grown,
ill-formed, or decayed teeth are most potent factors in
many cases of bad health. So many of the diseases of
childhood and maturity are directly due to neglect of
the teeth, that this view cannot be too constantly
placed before the public, and Mr. Harwood’s success,
both in Geelong and in Colac—which town he visits
professionally every Saturday —has been largely se-
cured by painless extraction, skilful attention to the
dental diseases, and mechanical expertness in the
•fitting of artificial teeth.


WZ ition The " r tre i aad Ha,l -o f which building we give a view-stands in the centre
of the town in Market-square. It was built in 1887, and has been the scene of the
.a appearance of some of the most celebrated dramatic, musical, and elocutionary stars
present hme - these may be mentioned Miss Louise Pomeroy, Mr. George
Coppm, Mrs Bernard Beere, Miss Olga Nethersole, Miss Janet Achurch, Signor Foil Mr
ar es Santley Madame Urso, Madame Sapio, Madame Belle Cole, Sir Charles and Lady
o>r ’. ”T: R v ctT n R r D ; Witt Talmage ’ H - “ M-k Twain,” ‘ Max
, the Rev Charles Clark, and several other of the world’s famous people.
CR. H. F. RICHARDSON.
(Mayor of Geelong, 1894-5 and 1895-6.)
!|jpß. Horace F. Richardson, who was Mayor of Gee-
long- in 1894-5, and was unanimously re-elected
in 1895-96, is the first native of the town to attain that
position. His father, the late Mr. John Richardson,
was parliamentary representative of Geelong for 14
years, and was for some years in the Town Council.
Mr. H. F. Richardson was appointed, when only 20
years old, as secretary and treasurer of the Barwon
Shite Council, a position he held for many years. In
1892, he was appointed secretary, treasurer and valuer to
the Barrabool Shire Council. As proprietor of the
Exhibition Markets for the sale of farm, dairy, and
orchard produce, and as an estate and insurance agent,
etc., Mr, Richardson is known throughout the district.


MASSINGHAM, Photo.
Mr. T. F. Seeley.
M R. GEO. R. KING.
rr EULONG is perhaps as well supplied as any other town in the colony with good buildings
®•' from the imposing wool-stores, of which views appear in these pages, the handsome
public buildings and offices also illustrated, to the charming bijou residences, set so
snugly in their bright gardens, in Newtown and the other suburbs of the town. The
recent erection of substantial buildings, in which a more decorative style of architecture is
employed than was deemed necessary in earlier and, perhaps, more practical days, is a fact
encouraging to the hope of the growth of a handsome town on the banks of Corio Bay. A
firm, therefore, combining practical experience in the building trade with artistic taste and
knowledge cannot fail to secure an extensive practice, and these conditions apply in no small
degree to the firm of Messrs. Seeley & King, whose offices are at the Exhibition Exchange.
Mr. T. F. Seeley has had practical experience in the erection of a varied class of buildings
extending over 30 years ; whilst Mr. G. R. King has, though still young in years, already
achieved considerable success as a designer, and in many other directions in connection with
the practice of his profession. Mr. King secured, some three years ago, the first prize for
his' elaborate design and scheme for the improvement of the foreshore of Corio Bay, offered
by the Chamber of Commerce, which he treated principally from an architectural standpoint,
offering many suggestions which, under more favorable financial circumstances, will doubtless
be acted upon by our municipal bodies. Among the many buildings in the town which hax e
been erected on the designs and under the supervision of Messrs. Seeley and King are the
decorative and tasteful Prince of Wales Hotel in Market-square, opposite the Exhibition
Theatre ; Messrs. Parker & Murphy’s (late M. O’Grady) drapery establishment; Hr, Max
Wall’s new residence, in Latrcbe-terrace ; and the new tannery and fellmongeryl buildings
now being erected for Mr. Frank Howarth at the Breakwater, near Geelong.


VICTORIA HOTEL,
which is E the^rSnaUtr'lctare Ith 1 th P l '°P , ' ietor - is I'bte » historical building, part of
been made some fire 1 A Sh ° Wn by ‘ be balconies in Oration having
of railroads, this town was the “inm'r,' Tbe Vagabond . " rote : “ In ‘he golden days, before the construction
of passengers at the wharf who mostf ' ’’ T*i Ballarat d, KK ,n K - Steamers landed their thousands
on to tl/conquest rf \ike"Ter wo^ld 7 °" ‘ he t *“ t " Hopefully they marched
struck wealth returned triumphantly in Pol 1 of “ ni l uerors ’ man 3’ died in ‘he attempt. But those who
corner, fluno abroad the r m * l 7 7 ° r e « ht - horSe coacl ' es *° Geelong, and, stopping at the Victoria
d l gg e ra ■-houtrug champagne for the univeme. . . . Time passed on. No more
road. The glory of Geelonlfd • 1 , ”* aram « c oach. Travel by rail succeeded to travel hy
at the corner of the , T P C6S departed ' B “‘ tbe Victoria remained a " d Papered.” Its situation
and steamer— makes the vT* H ,T ** ° f tbe - *> B P“b. by train
owned the Victoria and fo “ B °7 ° 1 f , hub of Ge elong. Two generations of the Sommers family have
Handsomely andtell 77 * 7 its «•*-*»• P»pW
a most excellent mIL the chmces't I 'j". apartmmts ( abpoad balcony looking on to Corio Bay and the You Yangs),
Hotel rank amongst the’best-conducted ’


*HE premises of Messrs. Bull
& Owen have been devoted to
the pharmacy business since their
erection in 1850 by Messrs. Cowie
& Noble. Mr. J. T. Thomas was
the founder, and in 1864 the busi-
ness passed into the hands of the
late Mr. Plummer, uncle of Mr.
Justice Hood. In two years it was
sold to the late Mr. W. J. Bull,
who died in 1874. Mr. A. J. Owen
was assistant to Mr. Thomas in
1864, since which time he has con-
tinued his association with the
business, becoming partner on Mr,
Bull’s death, with his widow, and
sole proprietor in 1880. Mr. Owen
conducts a general pharmaceutical
business, devoting himself specially
to perfecting the details of dispens-
ing, so as to secure perfect accuracy
and purity. Connected with the
Pharmacy is a well-furnished la-
boratory, where pharmaceutical
preparations are carefully prepared and tested as to strength and quality. The store-rooms,
which are extensive, were built by Mr. Owen, and are fitted with every convenience for the
proper keeping of the bulk goods and conducting the wholesale branch of the business. He
is manufacturer of a number of household remedies and requirements, amongst which the
‘‘ Concentrated Sweet Essence of Rennet ” may be specially mentioned. Unsolicited testimony
to the merit of this preparation is constantly being received. Mr. Owen was the first in
the colony to supply measures gratis to his clients, in order that the accuracy of the
dispensary should be continued in the sick-room. He was elected a member of the
Pharmacy Board in 1880, and at the council table and as an examiner has been an active
worker ever since. He has for several years been a member of the Geelong Chamber of
Commerce, and on the retirement of Mr. G. M. Campbell was elected to fill that gentleman s
seat on the council. He has served on the committee of the Mechanics’ Institute for ten
years, and was one of the most active original members of the Y.M.C.A., serving also for
a number of years on the committee of the Free Library, and acting as local correspondent
for many years to the Board of Advice for the State Schools. Mr. Owen has taken an
active interest in public affairs, contributing pretty frequently to lay and professional
journals, whilst not personally ambitious ;of civic honors, not having gone beyond an asses-
sorship. About four years ago he’ took up an agency for Messrs. Carter & Werner,
manufacturing and oculist opticians, and 'fitted up a room with the necessary appliances for
properly testing all refractive errors of the eyes.


WILMOT, Photo.
Upbß. Morris Jacobs hails from London, whence he came to Victoria in 1852. He
entered the business of Mr. Ackman, clothier, in Corio-street, but after a few years
MASSINGHAM. Photo
CR. SOL. JACOBS.
with him returned ,to .England, and there secured
the necessary merchandise with which to open up
for himself in Geelong. This he did in Yarra-street,
subsequently removing to his present premises, at
that time consisting of one shop only. Success has
necessitated an increase of space, and he has within
the past few weeks still further enlarged his shop
by including the premises next door, so that he now
occupies three adjoining shops, devoted respectively
to drapery, clothing and oilskins, etc., and boots and
shoes. Mr. Jacobs buys and sells entirely for cash.
jUjftß. Sol. Jacobs, who acts as manager for his
father, was born in Geelong 39 years ago, and
leceived his education at the Geelong Grammar
School. He was for many years hon. secretary of
the local Fire Brigade, when under the old volun-
teer system, and is the representative on the com-
mittees of the Free Library and Progress League of
the Town Council, to which he was elected unop-
posed last year.


THE ALBERT COFFEE PALACE.
HI HE Albert Coffee Palace, which occupies a large and conveniently-situated block on
the corner of Malop-street and Yarra-street, in the most central portion of the town —
only five minutes’ walk from wharves or railway station —and facing that rendezvous of the
country visitor, the Market-square —is a coffee palace not only in name but in fact. It is
conducted, and always has been during the 20 years of its existence, on strictly temperance
principles, and also on the sound principle of comfort and cleanliness, combined with
moderate charges. The title of “Albert Home,” by which it was popularly known for
many years, presents perhaps its most fitting cognomen, for the manager’s aim has always
been to make his visitors feel, in the best sense, “at home.” It is, therefore, not surprising
that the list of permanent boarders is by no means a scanty one —the charges of from 21s.
per week, or 4s. per day, being well suited to the times. The building, as shown in our
view, is a commodious one, with a substantial air of comfort about it, and affords considerable
accommodation, there being over fifty well-appointed bedrooms, several sitting-rooms, smok-
ing and reading room, and hot and cold water baths throughout the house, together with all
such conveniences as make life easy, either for residents or visitors to Geelong. In a town
presenting such a variety of elements —with its beautiful bay, which brings shipping of all
kinds, whether for pleasure or profit; the healthful attractions of sea-bathing, boating, and
fishing; with its extensive agricultural district, and consequent continuous influx of country
visitors, and the fact that so large an industrial community finds Geelong its natural centre
and outlet, it is not surorising to find such large and well-conducted establishments as the
Albert Coffee Palace.
E


HIS magnificent
61 hotel, known as
the Prince of Wales,
was built a few' years
ago on the site of the
old-established hostelry
of the same name, by a
local firm, and presents
features of external ap-
pearance and interior
luxuriousness unrival-
led in these colonies.
The accommodation for
visitors, permanent re-
sidents, and commercial
travellers is on a splen-
did scale—the furnish-
ing of the 50 bedrooms,
numerous sit ting-
, rooms, billiard-room,
and reading 1 and smoking rooms being of an unusually handsome description. The two large
lmng-rooms contain numerous separate tables for privale parties, and are often used for
banquets and other public functions. There it a spacious and comfortably equipped balcony,
and a look-out on the top of the building commands an extensive panorama of the bay and
town. The telephone number is 173. Mr. W. H. Spier is the proprietor.
Alex. Lowe learnt his trade as a
saddler from the well-known firm of D.
Alston, Melbourne, where he became ac-
quainted with every branch, having also a
wide experience in South Australia and Hew
South Wales, from which colony he came to
Greelong under engagement to a leading local
saddler, and remained with him for several
years. Some eight years ago Mr. Lowe started
in business for himself in his present premises,
Market-square, next the Prince of Wales
Hotel, where he pursued his trade in all its
branches with increasing success, securing a
large connection not only in this district but
in the other colonies, and recently made a
lady s saddle on special order from England.
His work is recognised as equal to that of any
firm in the colony.


MOORABOOL STREET —LOOKING TOWARDS THE BAY.
(From a Photograph, specially taken for this book, by G. L. MASSINGHAM, Geelong.)


name of Bright & Hitchcocks, the well-known drapers and general outfitters, whose place of business occupies
a large area on the Moorabool-street and Little Malop-street corner, is perhaps the best known in Geelong and the
suirounding district. It was one of the first retail businesses established in the colony, the date of its establishment
being 1850. The present firm consists of Messrs. Geo. M. Hitchcock, Thos. G. W. Coburn, and the son of the first
named, Mr. Howard Hitchcock, Mr. Walter Hitchcock representing the firm in London.


SpHE illustration we engrave on this page gives a good idea of the interior of Mr. T. A.
* Dickson’s Pharmacy at 155 Moorabool-street. The business was established in 1858
by the late Mr. B. G. Wilkins, a well-known resident, and in January, 1893, was purchased
by Mr. Dickson, who carries it on in a thoroughly up-to-date manner. He has added several
proprietary articles to the extensive list of Mr. Wilkins, which have proved a great success,
notably “ Dickson’s Quinine Wine,” a palatable and efficacious tonic, of which no less than
500 bottles were sold last year alone. Mr. Dickson is special agent in Geelong for “ Ann
Macaulay’s Syrup,” which is rapidly becoming popular as an indispensable household
medicine, orders being received from many remote parts of the various colonies, where its
sound properties have introduced it. “ Gough’s Cough Syrup is another of the proprietary
J. E. BENNETT, Photo.
INTERIOR OF MR. T. A. DICKSON’S PHARMACY.
medicines which Mr. Dickson has taken under his especial care; and “Wilkins’ Asthmatic
Smoke,” for the relief of asthma —which was one of his predecessor’s most pronounced
successes—has more than maintained its reputation. As we are enumerating Mr. Dickson’s
various specialities, mention must be made of “ Day’s Ginger Beer Powder s,’ which are
turned out by the thousands during the warm weather, and supply a splendid summer
beverage at an infinitesimal cost. Mr. Dickson is chemist for the Australian Natives
Association (Corio Branch), St. Andrew’s Lodge, Independent Order of Rechabites, Corio
division of the Sons of Temperance, Ashby Yearly Provident Society, Geelong Medical Benefit
Club, and Loyal Phoenix Lodge.


gORN in Sydney, N.S.W., Mr. W. H. Potter
came —or rather was brought—to Victoria
when an infant. After spending some years at
Colac, he entered into business with Mr. J. Davey,
grocer, at his present premises in Moorabool-street.
Leaving Mr. Davey in 1883, he joined Mr. Ebery in
partnership and opened in Malop-street, Messrs.
Potter & Ebery afterwards purchasing the late Mr.
Davey in 1890. Mr. Potter, whose business is now
conducted under the style of Messrs. W. H. Potter
& Co., was one of the pioneer members of the Corio
branch of the Australian Natives’ Association, of
which he has been, elected president three times.
He has also served for a number or years on the
Free Library and Gordon College committees, and
it was at his suggestion that a second—and this time
successful—attempt was made to secure the Wed-
nesday half-holiday for shop employes. Mr. Potter
has been an aspirant for municipal honors on two
or three occasions, running popular men very close,
MR. W. H. POTTER.
and it is likely that his aspirations in this direction will be successful when he again offers
his services to the ratepayers. He has always been a progressive citizen, keenly alive to the
advantages which must accrue to the town from the improvement of its foreshore, and the
increase of its attractions for visitors.
MR. CHAS. SOMMERS.
Charles Sommers is a well-known resident of
the town ; a member of a family whose name
orii-s constantly in the pub ie annals. His father—
M Wm. Sommers—was for many years an active
member of the Town Council, and occupied the mayoral
chair. Mr. C. Sommers was born in Geelong in 18G2;
he engaged in business with his brother-in-law, Mr.
H. F. Richardson, as an auctioneer in connection with
that gentleman’s produce, land, and estate business,
starting for himself as an auctioneer in the Free
Library building. In 1891 he removed to the large
premises built by the Mercantile Bank, shown in our
full-page view of Ryrie-street, wh rr he continued until
last year, when he went to West Australia. He was
elected a member of the Town Council in 1894, serv-
ing on the finance and public works committee. He was also auditor for the Geelong
Chamber of Commerce, and a trustee of the Corio branch Australian Natives’ Association.
Mr. Sommers came out on the eve of last general election as an aspirant for local parlia-
mentary honors, and polled a good vote as aidindependent candidate.


WILMOT, Photo.
RYRIE STREET —L OOKING WEST.


CR. HERBERT W. DAY.
(From a Photograph by MASSINGHAM, Geelong.)


»R. Herbert W. Day was born in Geelong 26 years
ago, the eldest son of the late Mr. W. B. Day, well
known here as a wool-buyer and wool-classer. Leaving
the Geelong Grammar School to commence his business
career, Mr Day rapidly achieved success, and when he
had only reached his majority he was appointed manager
of the local branch of the Standard Bank, and he still
manages their business with his own as auctioneer, incoi-
porated accountant, auditor and trustee, estate and
insurance agent, mining manager, and share broker,
his Geelong office being 173 Moorabool-street, near Ryrie-
street.
Mr. Day has taken considerable interest in the various
public movements of the town, and is an active member
of the council of the Gordon College, the Gorio branch
of the Australian Natives’ Association, of which body
he is auditor, the general and finance committees of
the Geelong Football Club, Geelong Bowling Club, and
Progress League. When the movement for the formation
of a Progress League, to assist in the development of the town as a holiday resort, was
initiated last year, Mr. Day was one of its most active promoters and was elected on the
permanent committee ; and is also a member of the special committees interested in the
formation of an Art Gallery and a Town Band, in both of which he feels a keen interest. He
took'an active part in securing a trade half-holiday —a concession to the workers which,
after three unsuccessful attempts, has now become permanent. Mr. Day was elected,
unopposed, during the past 3? ear as a representative of Bellarine Ward in the Town
Council.
Mr. Day’s insurance agencies include the Norwich Union, Thames and Mersey, North
China, and Ocean Accident Insurance companies, and the National Mutual Life Association ,
he is legal manager for the Rokewood Consols Gold Mining Company, the Day Dawn,
Woodburn Creek, and Ashton’s Reef, Ballan, Rokewood G. M. Go., and receives official
quotations from Melbourne, Ballarat, Bendigo, and Adelaide daily. He has a branch office in
Melbourne, at 77 Swanston-street, and his office at Ballarat, at the Mining Exchange, is
under the management of Mr. J. H. Peters. He has also special agents in every mining
centre, so his clients are kept constantly posted-up in the latest quotations on the market.
Mr. H. W. Day has trust moneys to lend, from £2O to any amount, on deposit of deeds, etc.,
no valuation fees being charged. He has properties for sale and to let, and makes valuations
and collects rents.
His offices —of which we give a small view—are situated at 173 Moorabool-stteet, close
to Ryrie-street, and opposite the Mercantile Chambers shown in oui full-page engraving on
page 39. Telephone, Nos. 9 and 205.
F


William Box came to Geelong as a child, from
Lngland in 1845. After a varied colonial experience,
Mr. Box succeeded, in 1858, in securing a permanent
situation in the ironmongery business, remaining in the
same place' with three successive employers—Messrs.
I Samuel Barter, G. H. Tempest, and William Hill. In
1874 he started in business for himself on the site of his
present premises, lately rebuilt and considerably enlarged,
and he has now with him as partners his two sons, Messrs.
W. N. &F. W. Box. Messrs. Box & Sons are agents for
the Granville Bicycles. The firm have several speci-
alities, the more important being the Corio One-Fire
Stove, containing all the features of an up-to-date cook-
ing apparatus, and the Kerosene Stove, in which any
meal can be cooked in first-class style.
Mr. Box is one of the most active members of the
Progress League committee, of which he is hon. treasurer.


WILMOT, Photo.
MR. R. W. DALTON’S SEEP WAREHOUSE.
IpIEFORE coming to this
colony 36 years ago, from
that “ Garden of England), ” the
county of Kent, Mr. Robt. W.
Dalton’s earliest experiences
were of horticultural pursuits
—to wit, the growing of seeds
for the London trade. But it
was not to that business that
he first directed his attention
when he found himself face to
face with the realities of colo-
nial life. He followed the sea
for some ten years, joining the
pilot service outside the Heads.
After that experience, he was
for over 18 years road manager
for Cobb & Co., the well-known
local coaching firm, until the ex-
tension of the railways through-
out the district practically broke
up the coaching business, and
caused him to drift back to the
one with which he had his
youthful associations. It was
some eight years ago that Mr.
Dalton opened as a seedsman
and florist in his premises, at
163 Ryrie-street, not far from
Moorabool-street, which may
claim to have been the earliest
established business of its kind
in the town—Mr. Levien, sen., the father of the Hon. J. F. Levien, M.L.A., being the first
proprietor. Mr. Dalton has an extensive wholesale and retail business, not only in new and
choice varieties of absolutely “reliable” agricultural, vegetable, flower, tree, land hedge
seeds, but nursery stocks, fruit trees, shrubs, vines, flowering and pot plants, bulbs and
tubers of every description. Artistic floral designs are also to be had at Mr. Dalton’s
establishment, the Misses Dalton having earned a high reputation as designers of wedding
bouquets, baskets of flowers, wreaths, and other artistic floral designs, many of which have
been presented to the wives of Governors and other distinguished people visiting the town.
He also conducts a large business in all kinds of fruits and vegetables in season, regularly
supplying a considerable number of private families.


W. H. WATTS, Photo.
MR. W. H. WATTS’ PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIO.
W. H. WATTS, Photo.
R- W. H. Watts came to Geelong
0 from Kent, Eng-land, having had
considerable experience as a photo-
grapher, some ten years ago. During
that time he has been assistant to Mr.
G. L. Massingham, the well-known
photographer of this town. When
Mr. F. Monteath left Geelong, a few
months since, Mr. Watts purchased
his business at the Elite Studio,
Ryrie-street, and has since carried it
on with marked success, making a
feature of high-class work at mode-
rate rates. Mr. Watts pays particular
attention to the photographing of
children and family groups, and
has made a special success with
dainty pictures of the little ones, a
charming example of which we en-
grave on this page.


p|HE reputation earned by Hearne’s Medicines in producing a cure in the most aggravated
1 cases, and in those rendered desperate by long neglect, has carried the name of Mr.
W. G-. Hearne of Geelong to the furthest parts of these colonies, as is testified to by
numerous unsolicited letters of gratitude he is receiving almost daily. Since his arrival
here some twenty years ago, Mr. Hearne has completed the task of supplying the public with
an absolutely reliable series of cures which, from their rapid effect, have given sufferers
ready means of immediate relief and permanent cure. When we state that Hearne’s Medicines
now comprise no less than fifty-six special remedies—carefully classified and accompanied by
the most precise descriptions and instructions —it will be understood how heavy a task Mr.
Hearne set himself, and the wonderful success to which he can now point in every instance
must be accepred as conclusive testimony to the thoroughness with which he has studied the
various diseases of humanity Hearne’s Bronchitis Cure is one of these medicines, and it is
no exaggeration to say that it is selling by thousands, and its popularity is phenomenal, its
sales having more than doubled regularly every year —reaching further and further afield.
Mr. Hearne also supplies a valuable selection of his medicines in a polished walnut-wood
cabinet, which is handsome, remarkably convenient, and calculated to meet the requirements
of squatters, sea-captains, and the travelling community generally.


G. H. BRINSMEAD, Photo.
gjß. Richard Clarke arrived in Victoria from England in 185], and in the following year
t 0 Gee '°“/’ 77 °P ened ™ b ™»ess as a grocer in MoorabooUtreet He
was at first associated with his brother Thomas, for some twelve years, when he continued
the business for himself for a few years. In .1880 he built the present large premises-
shown in our illustration-in Ryr,e-street, opposite the Post Office, where lie has since
conducted an extensive wholesale and retail business in groceries and wines and spirits,
no on yin Geelong but in the surrounding country districts. He had Mr. Ros S P Bell
associated with him for a few years as partner, and, later, took into partnership Mr. T. R.
and ley, the firm being known under the present style of R. Clarke A Co. Mr Handley
retired from he partnership in J„„ e last, and is now managing the firm’s branch at Colac,
which was established some three years since. About two years ago Mr. Richard Clarke
took his son Henry into partnership. Teas have always claimed a large share of the firm’s
en ion an , amongst other brands, they are now the sole agents for the famous Billy Tea.
Mr. Richard Clarke has done his share of work in various public capacities, serving
on the committee of the Geelong Hospital during the years 1865 and 1866, and for upwards
of 25 years on the committee of the Protestant Orphan Asylum, serving as President,
besides various other committees. About 20 years ago he was appointed a Justice of the
Peace, and in 1881 was elected to the Town Council, being chairman of the Finance
committee, in 1885.


SCOTT BROS. TIMBER YARD, RYRIE-STREET.
WILMOT, Photo.
|j|HE well-known business of timber merchants, Messrs. Scott Bros. —whose extensive
® l ® , yards and stores are situated in Ryrie-street, nearly opposite the Mechanics’ Institute —
was founded in 1853 by Messrs. James, John, and Donald Scott. It was then conducted in
Corio-street, on part of the present site of Messrs. Dennys, Lascelles, Austin & Co.’s wool
warehouse. Ten years later the firm bought out the late Mr. Sperry, who then occupied the
present premises of the firm in Ryrie-street, and the two businesses were conducted for a
time, Messrs. Scott Bros, eventually giving up the Corio-street branch and concentrating
their business in Ryrie-street. Some ten years ago Mr. John Scott retired, and shortly
afterwards died; Mr. Donald Scott also retiring later —the latter gentleman died in March,
1896, at the ripe age of 84 years. The business was continued by Mr. James Scott until his
death in 1894, when his eldest son, Mr. Clover Scott, bought the business from the executors,
and has continued it under the same name in the same premises, which comprise several
stores on a frontage of 100 feet by a depth of 150 feet.
Mr. James Scott was a well-known citizen, and was for many years Chairman of the
Geelong Sea Bathing Company and the Geelong Permanent Building Society.
The firm has a widespread connection, not only in Geelong but throughout the
large surrounding district, supplying all kinds of timber and building materials —including
bricks, lime, Portland cement, plaster, corrugated iron, drain pipes, spouting, and the usual
ironmongery indispensable in building operations. The firm is prepared to furnish estimates
for the erection of all kinds and sizes of buildings.


INTERIOR OF MESSRS. R. LAWRY & SONS’ CHAFF-CUTTING MILLS.
G. H. BRINSMEAD, PHOTO.
business of Messrs. R. La wry & Sons, the well-known produce merchants, of Ryrie-street, was founded by
the late Mr. Richard Lawry in the early fifties, and since that gentleman’s death, in 1895, has been carried
on by his sons, William and Albert brands Lawry, under the same style. Being fully seized with the necessity of
keeping pace with the advance of the times, and to cope with the large increase of their output, Messrs. Lawrv
A Sons have laid out several hundred pounds in the extension of their chafE-cutting, grain-crushing, and dumping
machinery, as shown in the accompanying view, their plant including one of the new “ Hornsby-Ackroyd ” safety
oil engines. The firm’s chaff-cutting plant was erected, under their own supervision, by Mr. W. R. Hill, of South
Geelong, and is pronounced by experts to be the most complete in the colony.


Leading Industrial and Commercial Firms.
THE “VULCAN” FOUNDRY.
(Illustrated from Photographs by G. C. WlLMOT, Geelong.)
|||IM0NG the many industries which have carried the name of Geelong as a manufacturing
town to various parts of the Australasian colonies, it may well be said that the
“Vulcan” Foundry, with the name of the firm of HUMBLE & NICHOLSON, holds a
prominent place in most of the agricultural districts of Victoria ; indeed, in many places
throughout Australia where farming pursuits are carried on —even so far afield as the
Argentine Republic —the horse-works, 'winnowers, refrigerators, thrashing-engines, and so
forth, manufactured at the Vulcan Foundry, have assisted the agriculturists to harvest their
produce and carry it to market profitably. Messrs. Humble & Nicholson are among the
pioneers of local enterprise, their association in the foundry business dating back to 1861 —
thirty-five years ago.
Mr. William Humble was born at Richmond, in Yorkshire, in 1835, and after serving
his apprenticeship to his trade as an iron-founder, in his native town, went to the well-known
firm of Hornsby & Sons, of Grantham, and later gained further experience with Messrs.
Lalco & Vaughan, of Middlesbro’. He came to Victoria in 1858, and immediately secured a
position at Fulton’s Foundry, in Flinders-street, Melbourne, where he remained
engaged only a few months, having accepted a position in the Corio Foundry at Geelong.
He soon, however, determined upon being his own master, and in 1861 commenced business
on his own account, associated with the late Mr. John Simmons and his present partner.
G


WILMOT, Photo.
MR. WARD NICHOLSON.
MASSINGHAM, Photo.
MR. WILLIAM HUMBLF, J.P.


MKr. Ward Nicholson was born in 1836 at Low Walker, near Newcastle-on-Tyne, where he
served his apprenticeship and worked as a journeyman blacksmith. When he was
twenty-one years of age, he sailed for this colony, arriving in Melbourne in 1857. He came
to Geelong and started work at Ford’s Foundry. Mr. Nicholson remained with Messrs.
Ford until 1861, when he joined Messrs. Humble & Simmons, as already stated.
The firm as then constituted commenced business at the Western Foundry, situated
on the corner of Latrobe-terrace andjWellington-street, where tliey [engaged in general
engineering and foundry work.
In 1862, Mr. Simmons died, and Mr. John Lessels took up his interest, only remain-
ing in the firm, however, for a few months, being succeeded by Mr. John Valentine. When,
shortly afterwards, Mr. Valentine returned to Melbourne, Messrs. Humble & Nicholson were


left as the sole remaining partners and have continued associated together ever since.
Meanwhile the business had developed in so encouraging a degree, that in 1863, the
rm found it necessary to move to more central premises, purchasing half an acre in
Malop-street and renting another half-acre with a Ryrie-street frontage. For some years
the firm continued to steadily develope their business, and were so successful that in 1873,
it was found necessary to extend the premises by the purchase of a further half-acre,
and later the premises were extended by another similar portion. In 1883, the old
theatre in Malop-street, made famous by G. V. Brooke and George Coppin, and the
land beside it, was purchased, and the firm became possessed of three acres of ground,
with frontages to Ryrie-street, Little Malop-street, and Malop-street.


In the early eighties the firm opened up into general contiacting, securing several
works of considerable magnitude, executing large contracts for the local and Warrnambool
woollen mills. They constructed, at a cost of £5,000, the Cressy railway bridge, also a large
number of works for the railway, and the hydraulic crane for the Echuca wharf; a 40,000
gallon tank for the Benalla Water Supply, with necessary pumping gear, engines, etc. ; also
several other large contracts from Warracknabeal, Muitoa, and other places. A few years
ago they obtained from the Government the important contract for the construction of two
pairs of compound non-condensing engines, with pressure and vacuum pumps, for the
Pneumatic Tube service at the General Post Office, Melbourne.
Messrs. Humble & Nicholson are large manufacturers of engines and boileis, agricul-
tural machines and implements—such as thrashing machines, winnowers, horse-works, etc.


MESSRS. M. DONAGHY & SONS
ROPE, HARVEST TWINE, AND MAT WORKS.
THE LATE MR. M. DONAGHY.
gEELONG has often been called the “Town of
Churches and Hotels,” but so it might also,
even more reasonably, be known as the “ Town of
Factories,” and certainly none of its industries
have done more to earn for it that reputation
than the “Fairview ” Rope, Harvest Twine, and
Mat Works at Geelong West. These works were
founded in the year 1852 by the late Mr. Michael
Donaghy, and continued after his decease by his
son the late Mr. John Donaghy, and now a
highly flourishing and important concern con-
ducted by the surviving partners, Mr. Henry
Sargeant, J.P., of Geelong, Mr. Fredk. Scarlett
of Melbourne, and Mr. F. J. Donaghy who has
charge of the Adelaide Works, with the assist-
ance as accountant of Mr. D. Powers at the
Geelong head office and Mr. J. J. Niven, who
acts in a similar capacity in the Adelaide office.


THE LATE MR. J. DONAGHY.
MR. FRANK DONAGHY.
To tell the story of the firm from the beginning, we must commence in the early
fifties, when the late Mr. Michael Donaghy came out from England with his family and
soon after started the first rope works in the Colony, at Marnock Vale, on the River
Barwon, near Geelong. Here the task of rope-making was necessarily of a primitive
nature, everything in those days being done by hand. That drawback did not, however,
prevent the out-put of .the works from attaining large and profitable dimensions, steam-
power having eventually to be resorted to, to keep pace with the growing demand. About
the year 1873, the premises and power at Marnock Vale were found to be too limited for
the necessary trade, and the firm then purchased the land in Pakington-street, Geelong
West, and built their present extensive works, increasing the steam-power in proportion.
The ground held by the firm was originally five acres in extent, but even this large space
Was found to be insufficient, and two more acres eventually added, so that the extent of this
colossal industry may be appreciated by the fact that the works occupy no less than seven
M R. HY. SARGEANT, J.P.
(Mayor of Geelong West, 1895-6 and 1896-7.)
MR. FREDK. SCARLETT.


acres of ground, a very large area of which is covered by buildings, as may be seen by the
bird’s-eye view of the works, printed at the head of this article.
In the manager’s office are to be seen many trophies, medals, and certificates from
Exhibitions held not only in these colonies but in all parts of the world. The manufacture
of harvest twine since the introduction of the Reaper and Binder into the harvest field has
become a large industry, and the name of M. Donaghy & Sons’ Kangaroo Brand Harvest
Spinning
Twines is now well-known throughout Victoria, South and West Australia, and Tasmania
as the best brand on the market. One of the most interesting sights in the manufactory is
the making of this twine; also the balling process, and the packing into bags and storing
away for the season’s supplies. This portion of the firm’s business has to be carried on all
the year round, so as to provide for the great supplies required each season, which only lasts
for about two months. The Rope-walk in the “ Fairview ” Works is 2,500 feet long—by far
the longest in the colonies. It is here that the long cable (2,000 feet) for the Adelaide
Government was made, no other walk having the space requisite to make that length. Ropes
are made here up to 18 inches in circumference—in fact, the firm can make from a ball of


twine to a ship’s cable. One of the most interesting departments, from an outsider’s point
of view, is the Mat Factory —one of the most recent additions to these famous works.
Here are made all sorts and designs of mats from cocoa and coir yarn, which is imported
by the firm direct from India.
The picture we give of the spinning frames can necessarily give scarcely any idea of
the rattle and hum of the machinery, the whirl of belting, and the activity of the men and
boys, and women, all feeding their different machines, which were in their silent mood when
photographed. We are informed that the yarn-spinning machines are going at the rate of
1,400 revolutions to the minute ; that each spindle can tnrn out 80 lbs. of yarn per day, and
that most of the machines were manufactured by the great makers, Lawson & Sons, of Leeds,
England, to the order of the firm.
The magnitude of Messrs. Donaghy & Sons’ business may be estimated from the fact
that not only do all the cities and towns of Victoria know the firm’s products, but large
business is done in South Australia, Western Australia, Tasmania, Fiji, and other Pacific
ports. The name of Donaghy has ever been in the foremost rank in the trade, and the value
of a good name may be gathered from the fact that when the firm’s New Zealand branches
were sold to local companies, the value of the name was prized so highly that a heavy
premium was paid for the right to work the factories at Dunedin, Invercargill, and Auck-
land under the name of Donaghy’s, and although several other companies’ works were also
purchased, that name ,is still retained as a badge of the integrity and enterprise for which
the firm has been noted for close upon half a century throughout the Australian colonies.
MR. DANL. POWERS,
Accountant, Geelong.
MR. J. J. NIVEN,
Accountant , Adelaide.
H


MESSRS. HAWKES BROS., IRON MERCHANTS.
(Illustrated from Photographs specially taken by G. C. Wjlmot.)
H&O give anything’ like an adequate idea of the multitudinous details presented to one who
makes a tour of inspection—whether on business bent or only prompted by curiosity-
through the numerous largely-stocked departments of Messrs. Hawkes Brothers’ wholesale
hardware warehouse in Clare-street, off Malop-street, would be a difficult task. In the
present instance, however, one is assisted by the various views here engraved, from which
some idea of its extent may be gathered ; but it is not possible to illustrate the real extent
of the various floors filled to every available yard with stores of hardware goods, sheet and
rod iron, paints, wire and wire-netting, wooden ware, and so forth, sufficient, one would
think, to stock all the retailers of the colony.


The large cluster of buildings—of which we give a necessarily restricted view op-
posite —occupy 222 feet of frontage by a depth of 50 feet, covering as much ground as any
similar business in the colony. These premises were occupied by the firm in 1889, previous
to which date the business was conducted in Malop-street, the film having been started so
far back as 1853, in Mercer-street The founder of the film was the late Mr. Thos Hawkes,
who died in 1894, and that gentleman conducted the business with great success, taking his
eldest son, the late Mr. Frederick Hawkes, into partnership in 1889, his second son, Mr.
Tom Hawkes becoming a partner in 1893, in which year Mr. F. Hawkes died. Since the
M R. T. S. HAWKES.
death of his father, Mr. Tom Hawkes has been the sole proprietor of this large business. In
addition to the Clare-street premises, the firm also occupy stores in Brougham-place and
Kardinia-street, which are devoted to the bulk stocks from which they draw supplies for
Clare-street. Messrs. Hawkes Bros, are direct importers in a large way from Great Britain,
America, and Germany for all classes of hardware, and confine their business to the
Geelong and Wimmera districts. Their manager is Mr. W. J. Smitham ; accountant, Mr.
G. E. Crowle; and storeman, Mr. W. Bamett; Mr. A. Baton has charge of the shelf-gcods


department; the firm being represented by Mr. A. Watt, Mr. A. Stutteid, and Mr. A. Gess.
There are also sixteen hands employed in the various offices and stores, which contain an
extensive and up-to-date stock in every branch of the hardware trade.
The Glare-street warehouse comprises three large buildings, the main building
consisting of three extensive and well-lighted flats, and also a cellar, with an asphalt floor,
covering the whole of the space below the warehouse, lighted throughout with gas. The
offices are situated on the second floor, which is also occupied by the shelf-goods department
—of which we give a view—the stock here comprising all kinds of fancy hall, table, and
carriage lamps; brass-foundry, cutlery, bolts, taps, hammers, files, locks, rivets, nails,
scfews, American carriage castings, ammunition, scales, milk dishes of all kinds, brushware,
mats, and twine, etc. ; and also large cases of electro-plate ware and guns.
TOP FLOOR AT MESSRS. HAWKES BROS.’ WAREHOUSE.
The top floor —which is splendidly lighted by a glass roof —holds an immense store
of hollow-ware, English and American spades and shovels of all kinds, American and bass
brooms ; forks, rakes, hoes, and all descriptions of agricultural implements ; harvest tools,
saws, lanterns, air-bricks, hames, gridirons, fenders, glass-ware, hessian, coppers, mangles,
wash-boards, gold-dishes, chaff-cutters, and a miscellaneous stock of other goods too numerous
to specify. We also give a picture of portion of this department.
The next department is on the ground-floor of the old building adjoining the central
warehouse; and it is here that the packing is done, communication with the upper floors
being secured by means of a lift. On this floor is an extensive and varied stock of all kinds
of paints and white lead, also ridging and spouting, hammers, sash-weights, camp and
colonial OYtns and stoves, giindstones, shot, and many other similar goods.


Passing into the next store—which is the ground-floor of the new building, and is of
considerable dimensions—we find the space fully utilised for such heavy and bulky goods as
barbed wire, black and galvanised wire, wire-netting, nails of all kinds, axes and axe-handles,
axles and springs, tin-plates, woolpacks, sheet-lead, &c. On this floor is a laige lift used for
receiving all incoming foreign and colonial goods and transfeirii g them to the various
departments above.
SHELF-GOODS DEPARTMENT AT MESSRS. HAWKES BROS.’
Under this floor, and extending over the entire basement, is the cellar to which we
have previously referred ; and here we find large stacks containing dry colors, putty and
grease, iron tanks, plough-shares, cement, chains, vyces, etc., etc.
The iron-yard shown in our picture is next visited, which contains, a,s will be seen,
well-stocked racks of every variety of rod iron and steel. The space over each iron rack is
utilised as a store for axles, springs and cart boxes, and galvanized hoop-iron, no available
space befng wasted.
Our last picture shows another portion of the same division, which is devoted to
heavy stocks of sheets and plates, tinned sheet-iron, etc. ; and here we find ourselves at the
end of our tour of inspection, surprised by the extent and variety of the stock, and gratified
to see so enterprising and important a firm making Geelong the centre for an extensive
business in hardware of every description ; and with this firm’s advantages and splendid
stock it is not surprising that nearly all the retail firms in the district find it not only to


ROD-IRON AND STEEL STORE, AT MESSRS., HAWKES BROS.’
their own interests, but also to that of the district and port of Geelong to obtain their stocks
from Messrs. Hawkes Bros.
SHEET-IRON STORE AT MESSRS. HAWKES BROS.’


James Strong & Brothers,
BOOT AND SHOE MANUFACTURERS AND IMPORTERS.
SECTION OF MACHINISTS’ ROOM.
(Illustrated from Photographs specially taken by G C. Wilmot.)
JAS. STRONG- & BROS., Boot and Shoe Manufactures and Importers, of
Moorabool-street, are a firm of over 30 years’ standing, employing 130 hands of both
sexes. In addition to having a large wholesale and retail output at their central premises,
the firm have a very extensive connection in the Western and surrounding districts, as
all requirements in the trade are provided for and met by them. They are manufacturers
of all classes of goods from the heaviest and most durable of miners’ boots to the lightest
and most fashionable ladies’ evening shoes. They have also adapted themselves to the
times by making low-priced lines of good quality in great variety, in addition to which they
are direct importers from the best English and American houses, receiving monthly
consignments, and enjoy special facilities with the above for securing the best and latest
materials, as well as choicest and most fashionable styles in all foot-wear.


Messrs. Jas. Strong & Bros ’ factory is perfectly up-to-date, being equipped with
the most modern and improved machinery used in the manufacture of boots and shoes.
The accompanying illustrations represent various sections of their spacious, well-ventilated,
and well-appointed workrooms The machinists all enjoy the advantage of motive power
furnished to them by an 18-horse-power gas-driven engine. The high reputation of the
firm, so generally known and admitted, is worthy of the very large output from their
SECTION OF THE BOTTOMING DEPARTMENT.
factory and warehouse, and the branch businesses which they have in Stut t-street, Ballarat;
Murray-street, Colac ; High-street, Terang ; Chapel-street, Prahran ; High-street, Outtrim ;
and Main-street, Walhalla, are stocked from the central and uniform prices rule all, so
that clients in those localities find it an advantage to continue to trade with the old 'firm
in the newer districts.


Special reference may be made to certain classes of work in which the firm approach
very closely the imported article, such as the “ Good-Year- Welt ” (hand-sewn); the
light-turned pump work; and the Cavendish Patent Asbestos insertion-lined boot,
water-proof and heat-proof, and therefore suited to all temperatures, for which the firm
have received splendid testimonials; with innumerable other lines which might be
specified if space allowed. Messes. Jas. Strong & Bkos. also lay themselves out for
executing special personal orders for weak, disabled, deformed, and otherwise invalided feet
retaining a specialist for that purpose. They execute also, of course, all general orders,
retaining wooden lasts for specific work. With so extensive a clientele, the firm have
adopted the system of giving immediate and careful attention to telegrams and corres-
pondence from customers living in or visiting the more remote country districts, and even
in the other colonies.
The originator of the firm, the late Ald. Jas. Strong, J. 1)., took ,an active part in
local municipal matters for some sixteen years, filling the civic chair in 1890-91.
SECTION OF FINISHING DEPARTMENT.
I


WESTERN AND WIMMERA DISTRICTS FREEZING COMPANY.
i ojvlt / ?' eSter “. and Wl ” mera Districts of Victoria Freezing Company occupy a position that for
convenience of sh.pment is unequalled. Built upon an elevated point of the northern shore line of Corio
fne hand andlT wT"" nt" With “u rai ' Way ’ Which ’ N ° rtb Geel °”£’ branohes o£E to Ballarat »■ the
greatest drlngh Z°“ u ° ther ' The ** a * tMs P° in ‘ is Ver -'' dee P- 80 that vessels of the
greatest draught may come with, n a stone’s throw of the works to receive the shipments of frozen mutton and
being C !'' I’™'’ B ™;'"* °n th<! W ° rkS " fac!litated b y tbe “atural excellence of the situation, the buildings
g aid out in such a way that the sheep, from the time they are killed and frozen until they are finally stoned
away below hatches on board the vessels, pass through the smallest amount of handling, and the frozen carcases
are simply discharged from the cold storage chambers at the works into a net alongside the ship or steamer by


means of an aerial tram. The works were designed by Mr. Chas. D’Ebro, C.E., an expert in
this class of construction, and erected at a total cost of about £lB,OOO. The slaughtering
place, with a killing capacity of 700 sheep daily, is built upon brick arcbes in a most
substantial manner, and every possible provision made to ensure absolute cleanliness. The
dimensions of the cooling room —ventilated all round with louvres —are sufficient to accom-
modate 1100 carcases, the ceiling being traversed from end to end by parallel steel bars
with a simple contrivance at the end of each to permit of the carcases being switched from
one rail to the other without lifting. The arrangement is so perfect that even the weighing
of the sheep is done while they are travelling along the rail leading from the cooling room
into the freezing chambers.
Great care has been shown in regard to the construction and equipment of the freezing
chambers and cold storage rooms, which immediately overlook the bay. They consist of a
double-storied building, the freezing chamber, of course, being on a, level with the depart-
ments previously noted, whilst the cold storage rooms are built upon the lower floor, the
frozen carcases being passed down into them through air-tight hatchways. One of the
chambers has been set apart for the reception of dairy produce intended for shipment, and as
the Geelong Butter Factory goes in a good deal for export, the existence of the works is of
great advantage to the dairy farmers of the district. Three other chambers are used for the
carcases of the sheep required to be frozen. A new and substantial jetty, erected by the
company at the foot of the slope upon which the works are erected, permits vessels to come
practically within the shadow of the stores. An idea of the manager, Mr. T. James, has been
adopted to facilitate the loading of steamers. Instead of being sent down to the wharf in a
carrier, the carcases are slung on to a fine-pointed hook, run down a light wire rope and
dropped into a net at the vessel’s side. Machinery of the most approved type has been erected
in the engine-room, the ammonia compressors working in conjunction witli a compound
tandem engine, 60 h.p. indicated. The fans in the brine tanks are driven by separate
engines, and the electric dynamo for the illumination of the building by night is worked
independently of the other machinery.
A. PURNELL, Photo.
THE S.S. “GULF OF BOTHNIA” LOADING AT THE JETTY.


MESSRS GEO. HAGUE & CO.’S WESTERN WOOL WAREHOUSE.
UfHE father of Mr. George Hague was one of the pioneers of the colony. Mr. Seth Hague landed in Sydney from
Manchester, nith his ■wife and family, in 1841, and in 1843 came to Melbourne, where he founded the firm
of Seth Hague & Co., merchants and wool shippers, doing an extensive trade. In the early sixties Mr. George
Hague joined a leading local firm, and was appointed wool valuer and manager of the wool and station produce
department. In 1887 he determined upon starting in business for himself, and purchased the large iron store on
the W estern Beach, which still forms the front portion of his present premises. After a visit to Europe for the
benefit of his health, he commenced business as a wool broker in 1879, and soon secured a large and valuable


connection. By the year 1884, the large and continued increase in his business necessitated
the addition of a new warehouse and show-room at the rear of and adjoining the old stores,
and in 1888 a further extension was made by building another iron store off Smyth-street.
The present premises now occupy a depth of 300 feet, extending from Victoria-terrace to
Smyth-street, with a frontage to both streets. Besides these stores, the firm occupies large
stone and iron stores in Cavendish-street, which are used for station produce, etc , in which
MR. GEORGE HAGUE, J.P.
an extensive business is conducted. Mr. George Hague has served as a member of the
Geelong Council, and has given considerable attention to military matters, joining the
Volunteer force in 1859, and attaining the rank of captain commanding the Ist Geelong
Artillery, eventually retiring with the rank of major. He was a member of the first Board
of Advice to the Education Department for Geelong West, and is trustee for several Wesleyan
chuiches in the district, in connection with which he holds various offices.


MESSRS. STRACHAN, BOSTOCK & Co.’s NEW WOOL WAREHOUSE.
(Specially Photographed for this Bunk by G, C, WILMOT, Geelong.)


W. H. WATTS, Photo.
ALD. T. E. Bosrock.
one of the latest founded firms
of wool brokers, that of Messrs. Strachan,
Bostock & Co. is certainly one of the most active
now trading in Geelong. Started in 1889, in the
premises originally occupied by Messrs Strachan
& Co., at the corner of Moorabool-street and
Corio-terrace, the firm had the initial advantage
of the introduction which the old firm offered
them, and upon that substantial basis the new
firm have built up an excellent reputation for
energy and enterprise. So considerably has their
business developed within the past few years
that they have been obliged to greatly extend
their premises, during the last year, by the
erection of the large and handsome red-brick
warehouse in Moorabool-street, adjoining their
old premises. The firm’s offices are still located
in the old building, but it is, we believe, their
ultimate intention to replace it by a continuation
of the new structure to the corner, which will
form a splendid addition to the already consider-
able number of fine buildings in the town. The
firm has offices at the Rialto, Melbourne.
WILMOT, PhotO.
SAMPLING WOOL AT MESSRS. STRACHAN, BOSTOCK & CO’S.


J. J. TRAITS HOP BEER FACTORY.
(Illustrated from Photographs specially taken by G. C. VViLMOT.)
IfIROBABLY the best known beverage in the Geelong district —and one which is almost
M equally popular in Ballarat, Bendigo, Kyneton, Taradale, Ararat, Stawell, Castlemaine,
MR. J. J. TRAIT.
Warrnambool, Wycheproof, and even in Melbourne —is
the non-alcoholic summer drink, “ Trait’s xxx Hor Beer,”
or its winter substitute known as “Vigo.” That this
popularity is a tangible thing is proved by the fact that
in the warm weather the weekly out-put at “Trait’s”
exceeds 3000 dozen bottles. It was a happy thought that
set Mr.! J. J. Trait to Avork making a really wholesome
and palatable hop beer —a beverage which until very
recently was essentially a “ home-made ” drink, and, con-
sequently, not invariably successful.
In addition to the Hop Beer, there is turned out from
Mr. Trait’s establishment a number of aerated and fer-
mented beverages, which are admittedly of the highest
quality, including Bitter Beer, Fruit Champagne, Lemon
Squash, Hop Stout, Old Stone Ginger Beer, Cordials, etc.


BOTTLING TRAIT'S HOP BEER.


THE UNION WOOLEN MILLS.
PORTION OF THE INTERIOR OF THE UNION WOOLLEN MILLS.
(From a Photograph by Mr. A. E. BRATLEY, Geelong.)
THE most important branch of manufacture engaged in locally is, undoubtedly, the
making of tweeds, there being no less than three extensive woollen mills, representing
an outlay of some hundreds of thousands of pounds, disbursing several thousands weekly in
wages to many hundreds of skilled operatives of both sexes. All that enterprise, backed up
by substantial capital and practical experience—all that extensive and well-equipped
buildings, stocked with all the most modern machinery and choicest materials, can do to
produce a really first-class article has been done in the local mills, and the Geelong tweeds
have consequently proved worthy rivals of the fabrics imported from the old country.
The splendid mills on the banks of the Barwon are among the most interesting of
industries, and from the extent of their works and the large number of operatives constantly
employed at good wages, together with the high value of their products, may be said to be
of exceptional importance to the community, as contributing largely to its commercial
prosperity.


The difficulties successfully combatted by the local mills—the neglect of the wholesale
houses, the prejudice of the public, the competition of cheap imported fabrics—all these are
already ancient history, and with successive increases of the much-valued protection at the
Customs House, and tangible proof of public favor, they have at length secured, at least a
share of recognition and success, and entered upon what promises fairly to be an era of
permanent prosperity.
The Union Mills, owned by Messrs. Collins Bros. —which are situated on the banks
of the Barwon, at the southern end of Latrobe-terrace —have been in active operation for
upwards of ten years, and have turned out an immense quantity of manufactured material
of a kind which has earned for them a solid and valuable reputation. The mills occupy an
extensive area, and comprise large two-story stone and brick premises, to which various
structural additions and internal improvements have been made from time to time—thereby
keeping them well up to date, and capable of competing successfully with the best of
colonial-made goods. The machinery—of which a small section is shown in our view (which
was photographed when in a silent mood) —is of the latest pattern, comprising a complete
equipment of carders, and their succeeding machines; automatic mules, looms, milling
machines ; wool-washing and scouring machinery of latest design, which has well been
described as a model of mechanical ingenuity ; an improved drying apparatus, for extracting
the moisture from the washed fleece; nap-raising and cutting machines, presses, and all
the other details of such a neccessarily extensive plant. The staff of operatives numbers
above fifty hands of both sexes, and the wages paid yearly must be reckoned by thousands
of pounds.
To the uninitiated visitor to these mills, there is a world of interest and information
to be gained from the various machines, their complicated action in preparing the raw
material—which has to be thoroughly scoured in large troughs, filled with a chemical
solution, by means of sets of teeth working continuously to and fro; the washing of the
scoured wool in clean water; the dyeing of the wool thus prepared, according to the
requirements of the various patterns of goods; the drying of the colored wools in a heated
temperature and by means of revolving fans ; and the treatment of the wool by its passage
through a ‘‘burring” machine, which removes all the burrs which may have entangled
themselves in the fleece —are all of a simply preliminary nature. The real process of
manufacturing the tweeds may be considered from the time the wool is placed in the
receiver of the carding machine, where it is drawn through an apparently interminable
series of cylinders, covered with closely-arranged steel wires which draw out the staple of
the wool and condense it into a loose skein, whence it is finally reduced to a thread and
wound on to cylinders in readiness for the mules or spinning machines. Some idea of the
imposing effect of the carding machines may be gathered from our illustration. To further
describe the preparation of the warp for the weaver —its passage on to the looms, with
their numerous shuttles, each weaving in the different colors comprising the pattern of the
material—and consequent milling of the cloth, would take far more space than is available
iu this brief article.


GREAT WESTERN AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENT
MANUFACTORY.
A. E . BRATLEY. Photo.
3jjprß. W. H. Bayley, the proprietor of the Great Western Agricultural Implement
Manufactory, situated close by the Barwon River, in Moorabool-street, South Geelong,
was born in Geelong in 1858. He was apprenticed to the wheelwrighting trade, and served
under Messrs. James Wood, Veitch, and other firms in different parts of the colony, thus
gaining extensive experience before starting for himself in 1888. He opened first on the
west side of Moorabool-street, and having purchased the Young Queen Hotel and land
adjoining, moved his business to the present premises, the front and office portion of which
only is shown in the illustration on this page. As his business has increased he has
added considerably to Tiis premises from time to time. Some idea of its development may
be gathered from the fact that whilst at the outset he had oidy one furnace working, he
now keeps six in active work. He also lias a large store for timber and for the painting
operations in connection with his business. Mr. Bayley’s business consists in the manufacture
of agricultural implements of all kinds, waggons, drays, buggies, carts, and all classes of
carriage work —turning out the largest number of waggons in the district, employing 22
hands in constantly full work, doing all the work in every department on the premises. He
always keeps an extensive stock of waggons and other vehicles for the convenience of clients,
and has a large store of seasoned timber always on hand. He has, for somn years, been the
largest exhibitor of buggies, drays, and farm waggons at the local show, having won a large
number of prizes.


Public Institutions and Associations.
GEELONG INFIRMARY AND BENEVOLENT ASYLUM.
W. H. WATTS, Photo.
HON. J. H. GREY, PRESIDENT.
|||INCE the above institution was founded in 1852, it has supplied the needs of this large
town and district in a most thorough and invariably successful manner. The general
equipment of the Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum is now very complete, and it can fairly
lay claim to the distinction —often given to it by those qualified to judge—of supplying all
its requirements in a manner reflecting the greatest credit upon its officers and managing
committee.
The original founders of the institution were Messrs. Charles Sladen, J. G. McMillan,
Thomas Forster, William Roope, A. R. Reed, and G. T. Lloyd, of whom only Mr. Reed now
survives. The first secretary was the Rev. Francis Sherlock, and the number of patients
treated the first year was 150, and seven inmates were admitted into the Benevolent Asylum.
Last year 2,740 cases received relief at the hospital, and the number of inmates of the
asylum was 178, which affords eloquent testimony to the utility of the institutions.
It had been, from the first, the custom to appoint the Governor of the colony as
President, and this continued until 1872, when the office was vested in the Mayor of
K


GEELONG INFIRMARY—MAIN BUILDING.


WASHBOURNE, Photo.
“AUBKEY BOWEN” OPERATING ROOM AND WARDS.
Geelong, this being continued until the year 1893, with the exception of 1876 to 1881,
during which period the late Mr. S. V. Buckland continued in the office. In 1893, Mr. J. H.
Grey, then Mayor, succeeded to the position, to which he has since been yearly re-elected.
The successive secretaries have been Mr. Middle-
miss, appointed in 1852; Mr. Robert J. Bradley, in
1872 ; Mr. Edward Sharp, later in the same year ;
and the present secretary and superintendent, Mr.
Alliott Hopkins —who may well be said to have
completely revolutionised the institution, both ex-
ternally and internally—was appointed in 1891.
The present house surgeon, Dr. T. J. M. Kennfdy,
succeeded Dr. Marwood in 1890; Mr. A. E. S.
V ernon, house steward and dispenser, succeeded
Mr. W. C. Kernot in 1891, in which year the pre-
sent matron, Mrs. 0. Denham, succeeded Miss Stitt.
The collector, Mr. W. H. Hudson succeeded Mr.
Dwyer, now town rate collector, last year.
Whilst it is impossible in our limited space to
describe in detail all the many important improve-
ments— both in the internal working of all
departments, and in increased and improved ac-
commodation for patients and staff - mention must
be made of the new bath-rooms and sanitary con-
veniences ; the re-laying of the floors in the most
modern and approved style, so as to minimise the
danger of infection and secure thorough cleanliness;
W. H WATTS, Photo.
MR. ALLOTT HOPKINS,
Secretary and Superintendent.


WASHBOUHNE, Photo.
OUT-PATIENTS’ DEPARTMENT AND DISPENSARY.
the new large dining-rooms for the inmates of the Benevolent Asylum, who had previously
had meals in their sleeping wards; lofty tents for the isolation of typhoid patients ; electric
bells and automatic gas-burners; a complete system of ventilation, etc.; and the erection,
duting the past year or so, of the admirably-designed and up-to-date new buildings. These
which are illustrated in our views—comprise a new] Operating Room and two wards,
W. H. WATTS, Photo.
DR. T. J. M. KENNEDY,
Resident Surgeon.
WILMOT, Photo.
MR. A. E. S. VERNON,
House Steward and Dispenser.


constructed and fitted up on the most approved system in every detail, which were erected
in March, 1895, at a cost of £ooo, donated by the widow of the late Dr. A.ubrey Bowen out
of a sum of £20,000, left by her late husband for distribution among the charities of the
colony; a special sum of £IOO being given by Mrs. Silas Harding for a new brass and glass
operating table, instrument cases, etc. Also a new Out-Patients’ Ward and Dispensary,
With doctors’ consulting room and three wards, constructed at a cost of £SOO on the most
modern and scientific principles. The liberality of Mrs. Silas Harding, who donated £4OO
G. H. BRINSMEAD, Photo.
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES.
for the purpose, rendered possible the erection in March, 1896, of a Training School for
Nurses, with a comfortable Home to accommodate eight trainees. All the new buildings,
and the numerous structural improvements in the old. building, were carried out under the
secretary s personal supervision in the most complete manner, incorporating the latest
scientific principles, so that the Geelong Hospital now takes rank second to no other
institution of the kind in the colony. The office-bearers are as follow :—Vice-presidents,
Hon. J. H. Connor, M L.C., and Mr. Geo. Martin ; hon. treasurer, Mr. J. W. Sayer. General
committee—the Revs Canon Goodman, ,J. P. McCann, A. Davidson, and A. Webb; Dr. Small,
Messrs. W. W. Bradley, H. Blomfield Brown, E. Coulston, E. L. Jullien, W. Gardiner, W.
Higgins, W. Humble, Jas. Munday, J.Nicol, G. S. Faulkner, C. Shannon, J. J. Trait, and J.
Vines; hon. medical consulting officer, Dr. Croker; hon. medical officers—Drs. Hope,
Marwood, and Small; auditors, Messrs. Whitfield and Hitchins.


GORDON TECHNICAL COLLEGE.
Mr. GEO. M. HITCHCOCK,
President.
(Illustrated from Photos, by Mr. A. PURNELL, Secretar}'.)
«||HE desire to provide an adequate system of tech-
M nical instruction for the young people of Geelong,
and perpetuate the memory of General Gordon, re-
ceived tangible expression at a public meeting in the
Town Hall on July Ist, 1885, at the hands of some
500 residents, the outcome of the various resolutions
moved by Lieut.-Colonel Charles Raslileigh, Canon
Chalmers, Messrs. Connor, Humble, Link, Hitchcock,
and Jas. Strong, being the reservation of a large allot-
ment of ground at the corner of 1 enwick-street and
Little Malop-street —then a portion of Johnstone
Park—and,the subsequent commencement, in 1887, of
the handsome building which now adorns the site, and
supplies splendid accommodation for the numerous
classes now in active work. Mr. Alex. 1 umell was,
from the first, the secretary of the institution. Among
the first liberal donors towards the funds may be men-
tioned the late Hon. Francis Ormond (a most generous
supporter], Messrs. Bright Hitchcock'; Messrs. Kenny, I.ascelles & Co.; the late Mr. Geo.
Cunningham, Messrs. Humble & Nicholson, and the Hon. Jas. Munro. Ihe foundation stone
was laid by the Hon. Francis Ormond on June 20th, 1887 (Jubilee Day), arid the building
was opened on November 14th of the same year by the Hon. C. H. Pearson, then Minister
of Education. At that time classes were held in free-hand, architectural, and mechanical
THE WOOL SORTING CLASS.


JUNIOR CARPENTRY CLASS. — Mr. A. Purnell Instructor.
drawing, painting, book-
keeping, v mathematics,
'shorthand, telegraphy,
French, German, and
chemistry. Since then
classes in arithmetic,
carpentry (senior and
junior), cookery, dress-
making, geometry, plumb-
ing, veterinary science,
wool-sorting, and writing
and correspondence have
PLUMBING CLASS. — Mr. M. A. Kerr , Instructor.
been added. An ambulance
class has been started, and
in connection with the
College are an Art So-
ciety, a Science Club, a
Horticultural Society, and
the well-known Amateur
Philosophic Association,
which is taking an active
part in the development
of the photographic art
in these colonies.
SENIOR CARPENTRY CLASS . — Mr. J. W. Tingate , Instructor.


A MEETING OF THE COUNCIL OF THE GEELONG CHAMBER OF COMMERCE.
(From a Photograph specially taken by G. C. WILMOT.)


GEELONG CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES.
WILMOT, Photo.
LTIIOUG H a Chamber of Commerce
had some years previously to 1891
existed in Gfeelong, it was in December of
that j’ear that the present chamber was
constituted. The leading spirits of that
movement were Messrs. W. T. Appleton—
who initiated it—G. M. Hitchcock, Chas.
Shannon, M. Conran, A. D. Price, W. Reid,
T. Holden, T. M. Dobie, W. F. Dann,H. M.
Sutherland, W. McMullen. R. Taylor, J.
Blakiston, and others. Mr. E. Becher-
vaise was secretary, a position he has held
to the present time. Starting with some
twenty members, that number has been in-
creased to 126. The first president was
Mr. G. M. Hitchcock, who was succeeded
by Mr. W. T. Appleton, during 1898-4,
Mr. M. Conran being president in 1895-6.
The vice-presidents have been Messrs. C.
Shannon, Henry Sargeant, Thos. Holden,
and Wm. Dann. The present Council com-
prises Messrs. Appleton, J. Blakiston, E. Philpot, H.
Fielder, A. J. Owen, T. Holden, J. W. Sayer, B. Free-
man, T. Hawkes, Jas. Hill, Hitchcock, Jas. Munday,
C. Shannon, R. Taylor, and Joshua Vines. The most
important work to attract the immediate attention of
the chamber was the necessity of improving the
harbor by the cutting of the new channel into Corio
Bay, which was completed two year s later ; and among
other valuable advantages secured to the town by the
action of the chamber, assisted by the Town Council,
have been increased wharfage accommodation, tele-
phone facilities, exchange of direct mail with Adelaide,
the establishment of a frozen-meat export trade, vine
planting, dredging at the wharves, reduction of wharf-
age rates on wool, telephone communication at the
police stations, and many other matters. The cause
of Federation has also received active assistance from
the chamber ; and delegates from Manchester, on the
question of direct trade between Australia and that
city, were cordially welcomed last year.
WILMOT, Photo
MR. EDWARD BECHERVAISE,
Secretary.
L


COMMITTEE OF THE GEELONG AND WESTERN DISTRICT AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY.
(From a Photograph specially taken for this Book by G. C. WILMOT.)


THE GEELONG AND WESTERN DISTRICT AGRICULTURAL
AND HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY.
MR. NEIL CAMPBELL,
President.
SgT was on 24fch February, 1855, that a public meeting was held in the Masonic Hall,
Geelong, for the purpose of “ Considering the propriety of forming an Agricultural
and Horticultural Society.” The Hon. H. S. Y ills, M.L.C., occupied the chair, and at a
subsequent meeting was elected president; Messrs. John Armstrong and David Fisher being
vice-presidents ; the secretary, Mr. John Middlemiss ; treasurer, Mr. A. C. Macdonald ; and
the committee consisting of Messrs. A. J. Learmonth, Henry Philips, C. J. Dennys, G. L.
Curjewis, J. Piper, J. S. Beamish, J. D. Moller, Thomas Gauge, W. Roope, John Davison,
John Young, and Major Webh. The first show was held in the Immigration Depot yard on
October 4th, 1855, but was a very modest effort. During the first year, a grant was made
of five acres of land, at the corner of Ryrie-street and Garden-street, by the Government
as a show-ground. On October 4th, 1856, Acting-Governor Major-General McArthur opened
the Society’s show-ground. The following gentlemen have successively filled the position of
President Hon. H. S. Wills, 1855 to I 860; Hon. Dr. Hope, 1861-2; Hon. W. C. Haines,
1868 to 1867; Sir Chas. Sladen, 1867-8; Mr. John Middlemiss, 1869 to 1872; Hon. J. H.
Connor, 1873 to 1895; Hon. J. H. Grey, 1895-6; the present president being Mr. Neil
Campbell. The various secretaries of the society have been Mr. John Middlemiss, 1855 to
1858 ; Mr. James Campbell, 1859 to 1879, in which year the present secretary, Mr. Chas.
Craike, succeeded to the office.


GEELONG AND WESTERN DISTRICT KENNEL CLUB.
H. J. H. Storrer.
A. J. Young.
H. S. S. Kyle.
H. D’Helin,
(Secretary,)
Wm. Lawry.
S. Wrathall.
( Treasurer .)
H. G. Roebuck.
( Vice-President.)
N. Campbell.
( Vice-President,)
Wm. McMullen.
J. B. Leitch.
(Veterinary Surgeon.)
(From a Photograph specially taken for this Book by W. H. WATTS.)
|I|HE fact that it was found necessary to wind up the Geelong Poultry, Dog, Pigeon, and
7 Canary Society, which had existed for live }’ears with more or less success, awoke
several local dog fanciers to the desirability of keeping the canine section of the old society
in active existence. This was done immediately the former society ceased to exist, by the
formation of the “Geelong and Western District Kennel Club,” a group of some of the
committee appearing on this page. The office-bearers are as follow : —President, Mr. Philip
Russell; vice-presidents, Messrs. Neil Campbell, H. G. Roebuck, and Dr. Small; secretary,
Mr. H. D’Helin ; treasurer, Mr. S. Wrathall ; and committee—Messrs. H. J. H. Storrer, .J.
F. Guthrie, W. McMullen, Wm. Lawry, H. S. S. Kyle, H. Howarth, A. E. B. Cotton, and
A. J. Young; veterinary surgeon, Mr. J. B. Leitch, M.M.C.V.S. ; auditors, Messrs. C. P.
Storrer and D. Walker. The club held their first show on Wednesday and Thursday,
September 30th and October Ist, 1896. in the Exhibition Buildings, which was extremely
successful, practically all the champion dogs of Australia being present, and the public
interest manifested in the show being so considerable as to afford the greatest encourage-
ment to the club in this their initial appearance.


CORIO BRANCH, AUSTRALIAN NATIVES’ ASSOCIATION.
MR. E. D. WILCOX,
President.
Q N May 14th, 1886, the Corio Branch of the Australian Natives’ Association was formed,
and this was successfully accomplished with a roll of forty members. With half-yearly
elections of members, the composition of its officers’ roll has been constantly changed. In
October, 1889, Mr. J. C. Bottomley was replaced by Mr. E. G. Gurr in the secretaryship, a
position which that gentleman has held with exceptional success, the rapid rise of the branch
being in no small degree due to Mr. Gurr’s energy and skilful management. The presidents
of the branch have been as follows : —Messrs. Wallace, G. Sawyer, W. H. Potter, C. Brown,
J. Blakiston, C. Dickins, R. J. Bourke, R. C. Wilson, W. H. Potter (second term), J. 0.
Williams, J. S. Aitchison, and E. D. Wilcox.
From the date of its formation, the local branch has made steady, and sometimes
rapid progress, not only as regards its members’ roll but also in its less business-like aspect
—for the admirable work done by its members in literary work, in debates, and in the social
arts of music and elocution has done much to fit them for the public positions which manj
have since taken in parliamentary and municipal matters. The importance of the local
branch may be appreciated from the fact that the accumulated funds amount to £1,850, and
the membership considerably over 300. The branch stands fourth in the Association as
regards funds, and sixth in regard to its number of members.


MR. R. C. WILSON.
MR. J. S. AITCHISON.
MR. J. C. WILLIAMS.
MR. CHAS. DICKINS.
Ex-Presidents, Corio Branch, A.N.A


M R. E L. JULLIEN.
CR. WM. BROWNBILL.
MR. ALEX. HILL.
MR. MARK GOUGH.
Gommittee, 1895-6.


MR. E. G. GURR,
Secretary.
CR. E. E. HENDY,
Committee.
CR. H. W. DAY,
Auditor.
M R. J. THEWLIS,
Treasurer.
Note. —Since the above was in type. Mr. E. G. Gurr has resigned his post as secretary, owing to
removal to Western Australia, and Mr. E. D. Wilcox elected in his place. Mr. Alex. Hill, who has left
Geelong, has been replaced on the Committee by Mr. W. J. Pike.


Geelong Sea-Bathing Company.
g|EA-BATHING is undoubtedly one of the principal attractions of Geelong, and visitors
and residents alike take the fullest advantage of the exceptionally favorable facilities
offered by Corio Bay, in the first place, and the enterprise of the Geelong Sea-Bathing
Company, Limited, in making the bay a safe and pleasant bathing ground. On page 9, in the
early part of this book, appears a view showing the situation of the well-equipped ladies and
gentlemen’s baths on the Eastern Beach belonging to this company, which may claim to be
the pioneer of sea-bathing in Geelong. So far back as 1852, indeed, accommodation of a
kind was provided for bathers, but on November 18th, 1853, the company secured the right
to erect baths, and in the following year made good provision in,that matter, though in
those days the charges were Is. and fid. for a single bath—first and second class. Even at
these rates the baths were so well patronised that the company was able to pay dividends of
lfi| per cent, to the lucky shareholders. In 1854, Mr. and Mrs. Nathaniel Pywell were
appointed caretakers of the baths. There being only one structure, different bathing hours
were set apart for ladies and gentlemen respectively ; but ladies baths were built in the
following year. The first secretary of the company was Mr. James H. Horner, who was
succeeded, in 1857, by Mr. L. W. Carter, who retired in 1861, when he was replaced by the
present secretary, Mr. James M. Anderson, a portrait of whom appears on page 22.
The Eastern baths, erected by the company, were not only the first in existence in the
town, but also the first to inaugurate the annual swimming contests which have done so
much for the encouragement of the healthy art of swimming by offering valuable prizes. The
first of these was held in 1862, and was highly successful, having been continued locally
yearly to the present time. Among those who have specially distinguished themselves in
these contests may be mentioned Messrs. W. McKinlay, G. Steedman, C. and F. Kitz, C. A.
and Walter Mclndoe, A. Booth, F. Ibbotson, F, M. Douglass, F. W. De Little, Jas. Julien,
Harold Wilson, F. Blunt, and H. D. Anderson. One of the most pleasing features of these
swimming carnivals was that held in 1879, when over 1000 ladies and gentlemen visitors
assembled to witness the wonderful performances of Miss H. E. E. Dick, the well-known
lady swimmer.
In 1885, the company introduced what was then a novelty in the Hot Bea Baths, which
have since become so popular with invalids, especially those suffering from rheumatism,
sciatica, and diseases of the liver and kidneys. A hot bath can now be procured at the
gentlemen’s baths, ladies being admitted from 9.30 a.m. till 1 p.m., and gentlemen from 7
till 9 a.m, and from 1.30 p.m. to 7 p.m. The efficacy of these baths in effecting cuies in
many aggravated cases has been abundantly proved during the past ten years.
The baths are now under the management of Mr. and Mrs George Blunt, the latter
being an expert swimmer, and who is always ready to teach the best methods to adults or
children who patronise the baths. The present directors are Messrs. James Noble (chairman),
John Montgomery, Andrew White, J. W. Taylor, and Walter S. Pride.
M


GEELONG YACHT CLUB.
M R. C. M. POYNTER,
Vice- Commodore.
MR. H. P. DOUGLASS,
Commodore.
From Phtographs by W. H. WATTS.)
MR. ALFRED SHEA,
Rear-Commodore.
MR. H. G ROEBUCK’S “SIREN.”
MR. CHAS. SHANNON’S “THISTLE.”


DR. T. J. M. KENNEDY,
Ex-Commodore.
MR. C. M. POYNTER’S “MINERVA.”
DR. KENNEDY'S "BETA."
MR. HY. SPEED, HON. SEC.


MR. GEO. UPWARD.
MR. DANIEL POWERS.
The late
MR. J. W. SOMMERS.
PIONEERS OF ROWING IN
CORIO BAY.
COMMITTEE, CORIO BAY ROWING CLUB, 1896.


W. H. WATTS, Photo.
GEELONG GOLF CLUB.
“NONDESCRIPTS” CRICKET CLUB.


MR. J. J. TRAIT, Umpire.
MR. R. ROBINSON, Son. Treasurer.
M R. C BROWNLOW, Secretary.


(From Photographs specially taken for this book by W. H. Watts.)


(From Photographs by W. H. WATTS, Ryrie-street, Geelong.)


GEELONG TENNIS CLUB.
S. Calvert,
Hon Secretary.
J. G. Glassford.
T. C. Irving.
A, D. Kearney.
W. Bell,
Hon, Treasurer.
EASTER TENNIS TOURNAMENT, 1896.
N


THE GEELONG AND WESTERN DISTRICT
GOURSING CLUB.
MR. FRANK AUSTIN,
President.
MESSRS. GUTHRIE & BELL'S “GEM.”
DR. MARWOOD’S “MIGNONETTE & MISTLETOE.”
MR. H. B. HODGES, Hon. Sec.


GEELONG AND WESTERN DISTRICT COURSING CLUB.
CR. JOSHUA BANNISTER,
Vice-President.
MR. H. J. H. STORRER’S “LYNDHURST.”
MESSRS. HODGES BROS’. “HOPPICKER.”
IjOR several years past, the plains of Avalon,
the estate of Mr. Frank Austin at North
Geelong, has been the scene of some of the most
successful open coursing in the colony, and under
that gentleman’s genial presidency, backed up by
*the skilful management of the lion, secretary, Mr.
Harry B. Hodges and his earnest and energetic
committee, comprising—Dr. Marwood and Mr.
Joshua Bannister, vice-presidents ; Mr. S. Young,
treasurer; and Messrs. Van Nordern, A. Tulloch,
J. F. Guthrie, W. Pacey, John Hardiman, W
Bell and C. P. Storrer, with Mr. Albert A. Austin
as judge—the club has attained great popularitv.
The most successful dogs associated with the
club, besides those which appear on these pages,
are Mr. J. T. Lloyd’s “Souvenir,” Mr. Pacey’s
“Pariah,” Mr. Carney’s “Morning Light,” Mr.
Jas. Stout’s “Tarcoola,” Mr. Hodges’ “ Werri-
bee Chime,” and Mr. Young’s “ Werribee Belle.’’


GEELONG LIEDERTAFEL.
MR. GEO. F. WHEATLAND,
Hon. Secretary & Stage Manager.
|I|HE illustrations we print on page 99, show the various
M principal characters in the highly successful production
in November, 1896, of “The Mikado” by the Geelong Lieder-
tafel, under the skilful stage direction of Mr. Geo. F. Wheatland,
the orchestra being conducted by Mr. Geo. Steedman. The
various characters are as follows : —l, The Mikado, Mr. J. D.
Keown ; 2, Nanki-Pooh and Yum-Yum, Mr. F. W. Moore and
Miss Lottie Anderson*; 3, Nanki-Pooh, Yum-Yum, Pitti-Sing,
and Peep-80, Mr. Moore, Misses Anderson, De Gruchy, and
Digby ; 4, Pooh-Bah, Mr. Geo. Wheatland ; 5, Ko-Ko, Mr. R. J.
Holden ; 6, Ko-Ko and Katisha, Mr. Holden and Mrs. Bailey;
and Pish Tush, Mr. J. Ritch. the Liedertafel had previously
performed “ H.M.S. Pinafore” and “ The Pirates of Penzance ”
during the past two years, the former having been played four
times, “ The Pirates ” three times, and “ The Mikado ” three
times, with unqualified success.
THE GEELONG AMATEUR DRAMATIC CLUB.
SOUNDED in 1893, the Dramatic Club have produced “Uncle’s Will” and “Milky White,”
“ TheiSnowball,” “ Our Regiment,” “ < >ur Boys,” “A Pair of Lunatics,” “ Caste,” and “ The
Pickpocket,” “ Sweet Lavender ’ being now in rehearsal. The secretaries of the Club have been
Mr. E. A Yidler, the promoter of the club, Mr. F. J. Barlow, Mr. R. C. Hocking, and Mr. T. C.
Cole, the present secretary, whose portrait appears on page 100. The pictures we engrave
represent various scenes in “ Caste,” the characters being played by Miss Hocking, Mr. A. H.
Bowman, Miss Gillingham, Mr. E. H. Cotton, Mr. E. D. Wilcox, Miss Ada Wilkins, Mr. H.
Speed, and Mr. H. B. Hodges, the latter’s portrait being in a character in “ The Pickpocket.”
mportant Announcement Y T
he
llustrated
Jfo/idqy Wuiefe
3d
3d.
AND THE
iouthern Sea Side Resorts
% \'Seeiong -
A beautifully illustrated and printed book of some thirty pages, containing full-page views of
Corio Bay, Ryrie Street, Moorabool Street, The Beach at Barwon Heads,
The Sands at Ocean Grove, and smiller views of the Eastern and Western Baths,
Yarra Street Wharf, Exhibition Theatre, the Fernery in Eastern Park, Harding Park,
Queen’s Bridge, the Road to Highton, Dog-R rcks on River Moorabool, Among the Rocks
at Torquay, Sylvan scene at Torquay, and the various Hotels and Coffee Palaces in Geelong
and surrounding Districts.
Printed in an Artistic Pictorial Colored Cover, on the Best Paper,
and in First-class style.
Ready early in the New Year. Price, 3d.


ERRATA.
Page 25.—F or “in 1891 he started business,’
Bead “in 1871 he started business.”
Page 68 .-For “in 1887 he determined." _
Bead “ in 1877 he determined.
PIGE 81 —Dr. Newman’s name is omitted from
the list of Hon. Medical Officers.
SOUTH .
) GEELONG.
Specialty:
Ghill ....
Plough Shapes.
Other 3mportant Manufactures:
[Works and Chaff-cutters,
ines, Bone Mills, Washing
Hilling Machines, Tanners’
ieze Works, Grave Fences,
kgs of All Descriptions,
fttings ; . . .
Agriculturalists & JVlanufaeturers
Should Call at The
BARWON FOUNDRY, MOORABOOL ST., SOUTH GEELONG.
H . HOBBS,
Engineer. -


li. Franks & Co.. Printers & Engravers, Malop Street, Geelong.
THE FAMOUS
yCumder
'€yc(e4.
r r
THE KING OF ALL WHEELS
Jfcave the reputation of being the beet that
human okill and ingenuity can produce .
/
TJhe o/dest and largest
Tf/anufactureo of Cycles
in the 'll?or Id
/
Also the famous . .
Helical Tube
“ PREMIERS ”
And the Celebrated
“NEW RAPID”
Cycles ....
as?
w
£
'ft
&
Ham
SPVENTRIi
BUY
The Best Machine.
The Best is the . .
Cheapest « . .
The Cheapest is
the Dearest
THE TRADE MARK OF THE WORLD
Write or send
for Illustrated
Catalogue to .
rfmtrai '€yeie Agency,
ALEX. McRAE, Manager,
RYRIE ST., GEELONG.
