

SOCIAL JUSTICE STATEMENT 195!
The FUTURE OF AUSTRALIA
PRICE
6“




The Future of
Australia
In the annual Social Justice Statements which
have already been published. We have addressed
ourselves to the social problems of this country
and endeavoured to apply the precepts of the
Moral Law to the current circumstances of our
own community.
We have based all of the proposals which We
have made upon the eternal principles of the
Moral Law. In addition, We have assumed that
the application of these principles in this country
would depend on the free choice of the Australian
people.
This second assumption, however, can no longer
be taken for granted.
The great issue which faces the Australian
people today is whether Australia will survive as
a nation of European origin and of Christian
culture beyond what, in the view of history, would
be but a few years.
The moral problem associated with this issue
is whether Australia deserves to survive.
The practical question which arises from this
issue is to determine the policies, the means, by
which survival can be ensured.
No living Australian can afford to divorce himself
from a consideration of these problems. In this
case at least, the judgment which a people will
bring on itself by apathy, narrowness and selfish-
ness will certainly be death, accompanied perhaps
by the violent physical convulsions of military
conquest and alien occupation.


THE FUTURE OF AUSTRALIA
A.
The survival of Australia as an independent nation for
the fifty years since Federation must appear as an historical
anomaly. To the North of Australia lie a thousand million
people suffering from a dreadful poverty which must be
seen to be realized. In this Australian sub-continent of Asia
there live a few paltry millions of Europeans who, in the very
worst times and at the very lowest standards, have lived a
life which to the downtrodden inhabitants of Asia would
seem to be one of unbelievable ease and comfort.
How was it that a few million Australians maintained
their independence and their comfort in the face of such a
set of circumstances?
The reasons were never far to seek. They had little to
do with the efforts or the policies or even the valour of the
Australians themselves. The independence of Australia was
made possible by a conjunction of three factors over which
Australia had little or no control.
The first factor was military. It was the fact that the
nations of South-East Asia —India, Burma, Indo-China, the
Dutch East Indies, the Philippines—were physically' con-
trolled by one or other of the Western Powers. A glance at
the map will at once indicate how the European armies acted
as a military bulwark shielding Australia from the grim facts
of Asia—colonialism, poverty, oppression.
The second factor was political. Europe’s domination
was the result not only of Europe’s military strength, but of
Asia’s political weakness. Throughout Asia there were
indeed nationalist movements struggling for freedom. But
until a few years ago they were weak and divided; and it
was because of this weakness and division that the European
nations were able to maintain their power.
The final factor was economic. Even had they been
free and capable of pursuing their own political aims, the
Asian people would not have been able successfully to invade


Australia. Modern war is based on industrial power. Yet,,
with the exception of Japan, in the whole of Asia there was
no industrial economy which could have provided the arms
and the ships which a Pacific war would have required.
Today, all these three factors have disappeared. It would
be suicidal for Australians to behave as if they were still in
existence.
In the six brief years since the end of the Second World
War, European military power has disappeared from Asia.
The British have left India and Burma and barely maintain
their enfeebled grip on Malaya. The French have acknow-
ledged the self-government of Indo-China now known as
Viet-nam; the Dutch have withdrawn from Indonesia.
As the military picture is thus transformed, so the
political scene has been revolutionised. New Asian nation-
states, potentially great and powerful, with large populations
and great undeveloped economic resources, have been estab-
lished. Pakistan, India, Burma, Siam, Viet-nam, Indonesia,
the Philippines act now as independent States and no longer
as colonies in subjection to European rule.
Finally, industrialisation has begun on the mainland of
Asia. In one great area alone —Manchuria —whose popu-
lation grew in a few years from thirty to forty-two million
people, there exists already a heavy industry which is capable
of sustaining a war effort on a modern scale.
The return of Japan to the field of international action
restores still another industrial economy to the resources of
Asia.
It is, therefore, abundantly clear that all of the factors
which combined to preserve the independence of Australia, as
we have known it, have completely disappeared. Their place
has been taken by new factors which, taken together, make
the simple physical survival of Australia extremely uncertain
even in the lifetime of the present generation.


B.
In what sense does the emergence of Asia threaten
Australia?
The growing ambition of the Asian peoples for inde-
pendence and national self-expression must command the
sympathy of all Christian people. The genuine religious
instinct and the deep reverence for family ties which are
typical of so many of Asia’s peoples contain notable lessons
for the Western races which, in too many cases, have aban-
doned religion as well as the sacredness of family relations.
Equally just and deserving of support is the determina-
tion of Asia’s national movements to put an end to the
exploitation of the peasantry and to ensure that the land
belongs to r the people. It is noteworthy that wherever these
movements are genuinely national, and where they do not use
nationalism to disguise sinister policies, the agrarian revo-
lution which they have started is based upon the demand
for ownership of the soil by individuals and by families..
This middle way between the excesses of private monopoly
on the one hand and State collectivism on the other is com'
pletely in harmony with , Christian tradition and should
command the support of Christian people. With this policy
Australia has no quarrel. , ,
There are features, however, of the Asian situation
which are less desirable and which do carry within themselves
the seeds of war and aggression.
The first of these is the tremendous pressure of Asia’s
millions upon Asia’s undeveloped resources. This results in
poverty on an immense scale, and predisposes the rulers of
the new nations to look with .covetous eyes on the empty
spaces of countries like Australia.
The second factor is that too many of the leaders of
Asia’s new nations have imbibed the very doctrines of
expansionist nationalism against which they themselves have
rebelled. To exaggerated nationalism of this type a weak
nation is a standing temptation. Because of its own under-
population and under-development, Australia must inevitably


attract those nationalist Asian regimes which are on the
look-out for prestige and are able to harness the martial ener-
gies of the hungry millions behind them.
The third—and greatest immediate—danger to Australia
arises from the swift southward march of Communism to the
very northern borders of this country. Communism has
taken China by military conquest, and, using China’s military
power, it presses today upon India, Burma, Viet-nam, Indo-
nesia, the Philippines and other Asian lands. The logical
completion of Communism’s conquest of Asia—the greatest
military conquest in history—is the rounding-off of Com-
munism’s Asian empire by the inclusion of Australia.
The nature of Asian Communism is often misunderstood.
Almost as often it is deliberately misrepresented.
The Australian people have been made aware, by the
bitter experience of the past few years; of the way in which
the Communist Party uses the industrial unions to develop
political strikes by fastening upon industrial grievances which
in many cases are genuine. So, in the different circumstances
of Asia, Communism has fastened itself upon the legitimate
aspirations of the Asian peoples for national independence,
land ‘reform and higher living standards.
The fact that these aspirations are in themselves legiti-
mate does not lessen the evil of Communism, or the danger
which it represents not only to the Western world but to
the Asian people themselves.
Nor is it true, as it is sometimes said, that Communism in
Asia is a different thing from Communism in Russia. There
is not a shred of evidence to show that Chinese Communism
is not totally subservient to the Kremlin. Nor would the
danger which Communism presents to the whole world be
greatly lessened if the two regimes were really independent of
each other. They are both founded upon the same evil
principles, and these principles must issue in the same evil
policies.
The aim of Communism is the military and political con-
quest of the entire world. Asian Communism’s part in the
master plan is to unfurl the Red Flag over the Pacific and
Indian Oceans. This includes the conquest of Australia.


To sum up: The seemingly impregnable bulwarks behind
which Australia sheltered in the past have been tom down
The vacuum thus created is being filled by powerful forces
which will be driven either by land hunger or by nationalism
or by Communism to expand until they have overrun and
subdued this country.
The indefinite survival of the Australia that we know
can no longer be taken for granted.


c.
Is there any valid moral reason why we should strive for
the survival of Australia as a nation predominantly European?
The answer to this question is all-important.
The moral justification of Australia’s survival will not
simply be found in Australia’s own achievement. This
achievement, great in many respects, has been marred in
others by manifestations of human frailty of which we can
hardly be proud. We have refused to populate this country.
Contraception has ravaged our population. We have
denuded the land and crowded our people into great cities.
The instinct for honest work is under constant attack from
habits of thought and practices which treat work as an evil
thing. The glaring threat of Communist subversion has been
unable to rescue the masses from their apathy.
Nor will the necessary justification be found in any false
assumption of racial superiority which too often underlies
the so-called White Australia Policy.
In fairness, it should be admitted that there is
merit in the economic argument which has been used to
justify this policy—that the mass migration of Asian peoples
to Australia might be used by sinister forces to establish a
cheap labour market to the detriment both of native Aus-
tralians and of the newcomers. The absolute exclusion of
Asian migrants has little relation, however, to this economic
argument and can hardly be justified.
In the last analysis, there is only one valid argument
which will evoke the great sacrifice which will be needed
to preserve Australia as a nation of primarily European
texture. With all its defects, Australia is still to a consider-
able degree a Christian country. The programme of Euro-
pean migration which is already under way will add greatly
to the strength of the Christian elements in this country.
If these European migrants are properly absorbed into the
Australian community, within a century Australia can be-
come a great Christian commonwealth. A Christian nation
located so close to Asia as Australia is, could be a


major force in the conversion of Asia .to Christianity. The
fact that Australia is at present a small nation does not
disqualify it from such a providential destiny. The tiny Irish
nation, because it possessed a strong and living Faith, has
been able throughout the centuries to exercise an apostolic
influence throughout the world out of all proportion to its
size.
But if Australia were absorbed by Asia within the next
twenty years, it would be the absorption of a nation the
basis of whose institutions is still largely Christian by peoples
who, through no fault of their own, are still pagan. It would
be the elimination of a Christian culture by a pagan culture.
This concept of Australia’s historic destiny—that an
Australian Christian commonwealth should play a major part
in the conversion of Asia—demands that Australians should
make every effort to ensure the survival of the country.
To those who reject the supernatural as a guiding light in
human events, such a plea will be meaningless. To those
who believe in the primacy of the things of the spirit, and
who believe that the greatest blessing which could come to
Asia would be its conversion to a living Christianity, this
concept justifies the greatest sacrifices to ensure Australia’s
survival.


D.
It is clear, however, that the Christian culture of Aus-
tralia will not be saved if it is only nominally Christian.
A nominal Christianity will brand us as Pharisees and hypo-
crites in the eyes of Asia. It will evoke only cynicism in
the eyes of Australians themselves.
Is there a touchstone by which the true depths of
Australia’s Christian spirit can be gauged by Asian and
Australian alike?
There is. As ever, the Christian spirit of a people will
be judged by the charity which it manifests. No statement
from Holy Scripture is so direct and unequivocal as this.
“If any man say: I love God, and hateth his brother; he is a
liar. For he that loveth not his brother whom he seeth, how
can he love God Whom he seeth not?”
As a Christian people, and as part of the Western
world, our duty towards Asia is clear. Asia suffers from an
unbelievable poverty among its hundreds of millions of
people. In South and South-East Asia —those regions with
which through the simple facts of geography we are most
intimately connected —the great scourges of poverty, of
starvation and of disease have reached depths which Euro-
peans cannot begin to visualise.
Yet, it is not that South and South-East Asia do not
possess the resources from which their teeming millions can
be maintained. “The human and material resources of the
area are large enough to solve its problems,” declared the
Commonwealth Consultative Committee (representing,
among others, a number of Asian Governments) which
evolved the Colombo Plan.*
What is needed to enable Asia to maintain its millions
is the development of itsi own great untapped resources.
Asia’s need is to bring under cultivation great tracts of land
at present untouched by the plough, to irrigate lands with
insufficient rainfall, to increase industrial power capacity, to
* The Colombo Plan, Page 11. (S.P. No. 8080 Printed by H. M. Stationery
Office. November, 1960).


expand and develop the present rudimentary transport ser-
vices, to provide the beginnings of the industrial plant which
Asia lacks, and to train technical experts in the skills which
will be needed to achieve all these things.
How is Asia to achieve this immense transformation 7
The pre-requisite is the inflow of capital on a very great
scale—a scale which has been set down by experts at
hundreds of millions of pounds. Because it is so under-
developed, Asia cannot provide its own capital. The Western
World, on the other hand, possesses the resources with which
the development of Asia could be begun.** The investment
of portion of the surpluses of the Western World in Asia- —
not to secure the exorbitant profits of the past but to ensure
that Asia can maintain her people—is one of the methods by
which the crying problem of Asia’s poverty can be solved.
We wish therefore to stress the need for a great act of
international charity which challenges the imagination, the
moral worth and the essential Christianity of Western
statesmen and of the Western peoples to whom they are
responsible.
It is heartening to realize that the Western World has
already begun to realize its historic responsibilities in this
regard.
President Truman in the now famous Point IV of his
Inaugural Address pledged himself to the principles of which
We speak. Various expert bodies in the United States have
recommended the precise programme We have put forward,
not so much for the moral reasons which should be utterly
compelling for Christians, but because of the sheer necessities
of foreign policy.
The British Commonwealth, in the Colombo Plan, has
pledged itself to invest two billion pounds sterling to develop
the backward economies of South and South-East Asia, As
part and parcel of this joint contribution, Australia’s commit-
ment is ten million pounds a year for a number of years.
All of this is but a beginning in the mammoth task in-
volved in the development of Asia’s resources, so that Asia’s
people may be fed.
• ♦ Colin Clark: “World Saving’s in the 1950’5.” (“Fortune”, July, 1950).


This programme will be carried through for high moral
reasons of Christian charity—or it will not he carried through
at all.
If it is left to business interest operating for private
profit, it will not be undertaken at all, for the returns will
not be as great as those which can be obtained elsewhere.
Nor would Asia accept this type of business investment of
which it has had so many bitter experiences.
Jf it is left to politicians, as distinct from world states-
men, it may well be that, if the military power of inter-
national Communism were eliminated, the nations most
involved in the programme would forget their obligations.
It is not to their credit that these obligations were assumed
so late in the day, largely through fear of Communism.
It would be unjust, immoral and disastrous if, with the
elimination of Communism, the obligations and the promises
were once again forgotten or ignored.
The salvation of Asia—and the consequent preservation
of this country —will be achieved only if the Western World
continues to realize its duty in Christian charity to the poor
and oppressed people of that great continent; only if it acts in
the knowledge that this is a moral issue and not primarily
an economic or a political matter.
Australia’s task is clear.
The Australian people must realize that the life or
death of their own country is involved in the life or death
of millions of Asian people.
They must rapidly develop their own country so that it
will have the resources to play the part which its nearness
warrants in the great constructive revolution which Asia
needs. Here again, for the development of Australia,
Christian charity on an international plane is demanded
towards Europe’s migrant peoples who long to make a new
beginning under the Southern Cross. If we refuse to accept
the needy millions of Europe because it may possibly involve
some temporary lowering of our own living standards, we
shall discover that in our selfish attempt to hoard everything
for ourselves we have doomed Australia to destruction and
lost everything we value.


Australians must raise the level of public opinion within
their community and thus automatically demand a higher-
level in public life. Thus, when great financial sacrifices
must be made in the interests of our Asian neighbours,
no vested interest or sectional group will be allowed to stand
in the way.
They must arouse the public conscience of the Western
World, convincing it that the most remote Asian peasant is a
brother to the citizens of the West and entitled to their
fraternal aid.
Unless all of these things are done, Australia will not
survive.
E.
In conclusion, it should be clearly understood by all, by
the political leaders of the community and by the peoples
whom they represent, that the very life of the nation is at
stake, and that it will be an immediate issue every day for at
least the next decade.
In this crisis, the nation cannot afford the luxury of
internecine party strife, or the conflict of sectional interests
which continually subordinate the public interests to their
own immediate financial gain.
In this crisis, divisions which might be tolerated in
normal times will certainly destroy us. Mediocrity, that fatal
inability of a people to rise to the heights of sacrifice which
a crisis demands, will certainly destroy us.
Under God, it is only greatness —of mind, of heart, of
spirit—which will save a nation endangered as Australia
Is today.
Renown Press, Woorayl Street, Carnegie, Vic.
