



A. H. SPENCER
News Secondhand Bookseller
a Publisher
Melbourne
(Ihe Hill of Content ) Aust
Tel. Cent. 8856


S-\




A tiu- /&U&/L %Uuuu4M. Crfiy
1 U±- falu- C%)U-UOi*LS)
&(£\jt. t$ toxciCi**, axA^Ct^c-
ftyCta/ tfiZ7knunau*&o*.
Ut,
AeMrtJUuis :
y Saoc*y, <Cs7u£a c£auJrrff
, UXLO 4z£ftAt7%**~ /%2iT
*o*l4
fzut*' wittu* tuslcui
, tlajtffai Jojm, / /*u£ (hr AM*t,U~
i&&* Jfrurpuu* ic^c&iee
** **
ffXs Cot4i/H±*ZAs dc4*CZ£l£~tfcAXrtC(U4JL', J
£o*l4 u>t%*>C'fijU4-*V4*'
auJrvJ
fa&tu. liuJtZUy \
crpftoi SaihZMf
tihrCa, (enyUU^C^cutd^Shct*-*
Av /ALk*
oU£
a/u~ u<, ia^cct ■■'„ <foc
&vfcuuiu£ &4 ttcksLf' oa&eiy
o-^huzX^' ctu*i
/cufazt, $e ,


**e*A, &u 4 umc4 utrfdzrS^
au&ibAjfaufa
/1 7 <ar .
&i*U4 UeuoJiajht^
M*s «'ttoa 1
f (Zudfita) /ituf', Anu, SriUtu fa
*“<& UtaMu/uu^u
/#%*, '*
4 y /keJhixliz.
JUhMue/et,/Si '


HERMIT
jMsssaaisj®© a&snDa
FROM THE
COLONIAL TXNEXSS.
Iftofiatt Colon:
PRINTED r
-» ELIZABETH-STREET,
• y
1829.




**"£ ;
I I? r
f I*# *'l
■
Perhaps it may be in the recollection of some,
portion of our readers, that a few years ago, a.
series of numbers appeared in one of the London
publications, under the title of “ The Hermit
in London ” We have great pleasure in ac-
quainting them, that a younger brother of this
family has lately arrived in the Colony; and,
having acquired, almost intuitively, considerable
information upon the general state of Manners,
Society, and Public Characters of our little com-
raunity, has partially promised to adapt his ob-
servations to such a shape, as shall lit them to
meet the eye of the Public.
With this short preface, we introduce our Con-
tributor to the acquaintance of our numerous
readers, and leave him to speak for himself.


• c
■
, . - ,
' . ' *
...
.
,
' " J (
'■’■• - r • 5
1
,
* ■
.
.
1
i ■■ tm \ t\4' \ l f \ \
■
■
’
I■ ‘ •
i • > *■ ' .
f■ 5 ,4V . ; , ,
■ - ,
! " V ‘
•* j v ’ O ’
/ • • f . /» . . ! *
c . ’
■ ' v.. • » .i .
I
.
... f • •
■ .
,* • ■


AUTHOR’S PREFACE.
The object of the Essays which are compiled
in this small Volume, is to import information
upon the state of manners and society in the Co -
lony of Van Diemen’s Land ; to hold up to de-
served ridicule, some of the vices and follies by
which they are distinguished; to present a mir-
ror wherein good qualities are exhibited, the
possession of which is not always acknowledged
—in a word, to present a picture of this in-
fant state, which, it is hoped, may prove in-
teresting as well as instructive, not only to its
own component Members, but to the general
Reader.
The Author has endeavoured to avoid any
expressions which might be calculated to cause
pain to a single individual —his aim has been
to lash the vice, but spare the name and
he will be sufficiently rewarded, if, in addi-
tion to the notice which his few first essays have
already attracted, and which has induced him to
re-publish them in this form, he should witness
that they produce the good effects, the hope #f
which originated their publication.


■
t
■
* . *
.
V.


The Hermit
iff tun IBimen’a Hans.
**■ **
No. 1. Hobart Town, June 5, 1829.
“ There is not in the world a greater error than that which
fools are so apt to fall into, and knaves with good reason to
encourage, the mistaking a satirist for a libeller; whereas to
a true satirist nothing is so odious as a libeller; for the same
reason as to a man truly virtuous, nothing is so hateful as a
hypocrite.”— Pope.
Notwithstanding all modest men naturally feel a certain de-
gree of diffidence when speaking of themselves, a courtesy
which is due to the world, requires that a person who makes
his first appearance in a given character, should say something
of the pretences whereon be claims attention. Know then,
most courteous reader, that he who this day addresses you.
is derived from the ancient stock of the Stukeleys, of the
West Riding of Yorkshire, a race “ whose men were always
brave, and women ever fair.” Early disappointments of a
tender nature led to a seclusion from the noise and discord
of a busy world, at the very morning of my existence, and
induced a retirement, from whence I could learn much, but
said nothing. The fame of this distant Island having,
however, reached my abode of privacy, and rumour having
represented it as a place which was well adapted to my
acquired habits and inclinations, I determined to judge ot
a for myself , and, changing the disguise which I had


long worn, for a fashionable suit bj Stultze, boots by
Hoby, and bat by Bicknell, I took my passage by one of the
vessels which were advertised to sail positively on the tenth
of the coming month, being the seventh positively already an-
nounced, and destined-to be succeeded by three others ere we
departed. At length setting sail, and patiently enduring the
usual ills of a long voyage, I put my foot upon Terra Firma
a few tyteeks ago, and immediately re-exchanging my west-end
fashionables, for the Hermit’s gown, slippers, and cap, I set
about making my observations—but how have I been alto-
gether deceived !
It was not necessary for me to wait the approach to this
hemisphere, before I found that a ship load of passengers was
another term for quarrelling, contention, and strife that
those who would be peaceable, had scarcely an opportunity
afforded them of following the bent of their inclinations—
those who were viciously disposed, had abundant aiders, en-
couragers, and supporters—those who were virtuous, could
scarcely escape calumny and detraction. Ah ! thought I, as
f witnessed scenes, to which I had long been unaccustomed,
as I heard language, calculated to stir up anger, or to inflame
"the passions and corrupt the mind, when I shall reach my des-
tined shore all this will be over ; I shall see only, primitive
habits and manners—l shall mix with a population, who ei-
ther not having found Old England good enough for them,
must themselves be the purest of the pure, or who having
been purified of their sins by punishment, must now have re-'
pented, and upon the principle, that a reformed rake makes
the best husband,- have become the most virtuous of the vir-
tuous ! But let no man who may chance to peruse the record
of my disappointment, ever more presume to indulge in fairy
hopes and dreams. It is for the good of all, who, like my-
self, are of a sanguine and yet a charitable temperament,
that I have determined to commit my thoughts and observa-
tions to paper ; but as the routine of certain official forms has
placed me already, though so recently arrived, in all stages
of public business, from the audience room of His Excellency,
to the Prisoners’ Barracks, as either under my real character
or in my disguise, I have mixed in all societies, from the
drawing-room at Government-house to the tap-room of the
Macquarie Hotel; and, as I have been present in the Coarts
•f Law, and incog, hare witnessed the alternate petulaaee.


firmness, sparring, and catting between the lawyers, who,
scissars-like ne’er hurt themselves, but only what’s be-
tween —hpve therein also greatly admired the sadden tran-
sition between grotesque gravity and “ inimitable humour ” —
have noticed the mode of conducting commercial affairs, so
unlike what is practised at home, and have in a word, been
grievously disappointed in the Utopian picture I had formed,
I think myself qualified to impart my thoughts to the world ;
and having said thus much for the present, may perhaps make
my second appearance this day week. In the interim, I say
to all those who have honored me, by having perused what I
have now written, that I am their most obedient servant,
Simon Stukeley.
No. 2. Hobart Town 12, 1829.
It was a remarkably fine clear day when I landed from the
ship on the Wharf. What was my surprise, to observe the
large handsome stone buildings, into which, porters were
busily engaged rolling casks and other packages, and at seve-
ral civil looking well dressed young men, who were standing
with pens behind their ears, and memorandum books in their
hands, paying the most diligent attention to what was going
on. A number of other persons formed little knots or circles ;
and the hallooing of ferrymen, the cracking of whips, and the
vociferation of carters, struck me as creating altogether, a
scene of bustle and activity, which indeed I had little ex-
pected. For the moment it occurred to me, that our Cap-
tain, in the hurry and confusion which the quarrels on board
had occasioned, had missed his reckoning, and had made a
wrong port; and accordingly seeing a fat, portly, sleek-looking,
apparently good-humoured Gentleman approaching, I en-
quired of him, with an apology, in what place I was ?
Judging from my manner and appearance that I must be a
stranger, he very civilly replied, that I was in Hobart Town,
the capital of Van Diemen’s Land, adding, “ Perhaps, Sir,
you would like to walk into our Commercial Room, to which
I can introduce you.” I then accompanied my new acquain-
tance up a flight of stone steps into a rather elegantly fitted-up


room, in which were three or four plainly dressed Gentlemen
reading Newspapers. One of them, who appeared bor-
dering upon sixty, wore spectacles, and had a considerable de-
gree of eagerness in his manner, rose upon my entrance, and
addressed me, “ Just from England, eh, Sir?” What news,
Sir, when you left ? The Colony is much talked of at home,
Sir. Suppose you heard of our Association, but things are
not now as they used to be. ” Before I could make a reply,
he offered me a Newspaper, farther acquainting me, that the
town maintained three such publications ; one of which, said
he, is so dull and prosy, that nobody reads it ; another has
lately been at death’s door, owing to some Government regu-
lations, but has now, Phoenix-like, risen with redoubled
splendour ; and the other is made up of short paragraphs and
country letters written in town, but commands an extensive
circulation. I expressed my thanks for the information, and
for my courteous reception, and mentally wondering at a com-
modious Wharf, fine Stone-buildings, a Chamber of Com-
merce, and three Newspapers, felt that so many other things,
to be in character, must still await my attention, that I made
my bow to the company, and proceeded on my tour through
the town. The fat portly Gentleman was my companion to
the end of the Wharf, and then, with a true John Bull air and
manner, left me, and turned into one of the stone ware-
houses.
How great was my astonishment, at the magnificent straight
line of street, extending apparently for more than a mile, by
which my sight was greeted upon leaving the Quay. I could
scarcely credit my senses, that I was in a town, which is only as
it were of yesterday. As I proceeded along, my surprise
was increased by seeing other fine streets, meeting at right
angles, the one by which I was walking towards a handsome
brick church, with a steeple like the extinguisher upon
a flat candlestick, my left being flanked by well laid
out gardens and shrubberies, in the centre of which stood the
Governor’s residence ; and every here and there, the right
being ornamented by large two-story brick or stone houses.
The church door happening to be open, I took the opportu-
nity of judging of its interior, and I could almost have fancied
myself in one of the modern churches of the metropolis of the
world. Such regular well-arranged pews, so beautifully a
finished pulpit and reading desk, made of wood, which lat


first thought was Spanish mahogany, quite astonished roe ;
U p on a nearer examination, however, and upon enquiry of a
m'uu who was dusting the aisles, I learnt that it was the pro-
duce of a tree, indigenous to the Colony, known by the name
„f Myrtle. While I was thus employing myself, a Gentleman
wearing a Clerical hat, approached, and with much affability of
manner, addressed me as a stranger, and gave me some gene-
ral information respecting the religious institutions of the
place. He had a lisp in his speech, which was by no means
disagreeable, and his well cased ribs bore evident marks that,
whatever other doctrines he might preach, that of fasting was
not one upon which he laid much stress, at least in its prac-
tice. He acquainted me, that independent of the congrega-
tions belonging to this large Church, a Presbyterian Chapel,
a Roman Catholic Chapel, and a Wesleyan Meeting House,
were each well attended every Sunday, and it gave me great
pleasure afterwards to be told ol this Gentleman, as he him-
self had beautifully expressed of his brother labourers in the
vineyard, that in their lives and conduct the religion they all
professed received its brightest ornament—that they each
made a well formed corner stone of the superstructure they
supported. Oh ! thought I, this must be the effect of a vir-
tuous and industrious population. Arts, architecture, litera-
ture, religion, and commerce must here thrive so well, be-
cause so many excellent people, for whom Old England was
not good enough, have congregated, and because so many
others have been cleansed of their sins, and are now restored
to innocence. Happy people, and thrice happy Simon Stuke-
ley, to have left your retirement, to come among them!
Every thing seemed indeed greatly superior to my expecta-
tions. Well dressed and elegant Ladies were promenading
one street, well mounted Equestrians were galloping along
another, respectably attired Pedestrians helped to add to the
scene, which was still more enlivened by the relief-guard of
the Military as it approached the Main-guard House from the
Barracks, and by the rapid passing and re-passing ot gigs,
carts, and other wheel vehicles. I was completely in a reve-
rie, scarcely knowing through which street I would perambu-
late, or which object best claimed my attention. The entire
absence of all beggars, or indigent persons, added to my won-
der, but after a little reflection, I accounted tor it in my own
ruiad, by considering that as all the inhabitants were either


pure or purified, it was quite of a piece with their religion
and virtue to be charitable, this being the brightest ofthe car
dinal gems. I continued my walk for a long-time, each mo-
ment more astonished than before at the progress which had
been made in lay.ng out and building the town—at the excel-
lent shops in the different streets —at the wide well mac-
adamised thoroughfares, and their convenient causeways, and
at a hundred other matters which excited my admiration,
until I found myself in a quarter of the town situated on an
eminence at some distance from the Church, and where the
bouses and inhabitants seemed rather of an inferior descrip-
tion to those I had before seen. In their manners and style
of conversation, upon the different subjects, respecting which
I interrogated them, they exhibited however all the easy con-
fidence of virtue. The calls of my appetite now warned me
that the day was fast waning, and I applied my hand to my
fob to ascertain the hour, when to my utter dismay 1 found that
one of Hawley’s best gold watches, with which I had pro-
vided myself previous to my departure from England, was
missing. To have lost it in any other manner than by acci-
dent, did not cross ray mind for an instant, and I pictured to
myself what delight would be the portion ofhimwhohad
found it, when he should know to whom it was to be restored,
and therefore pursued my journey to the Macquarie Hotel,
with the view of taking up my quarters there, and obtaining
some refreshment.
Having knocked at the door, it was opened by a smart dap-
per waiter, who ushered me into a large and well-furnished
room, which I had scarcely entered before the Landlord, an
obliging well-behaved man, paid his respects and enquired
what I pleased to order. Upon my telling him that I was ex-
ceedingly hungry, he said that if I should not object to dine
m a public room, dinner was now serving up, and that the
company who were there, were all very respectable. I used
to like table d’hote dinners before my seclusion from the
world, and the idea now pleased me. Accordingly, I fol-
lowed my host into the opposite room, in which were the
Landlady, whose appearance and manners were greatly in her
favour, and four visitors. They were all men well informed.
Pud of lively conversation, and as I am ever a good listener,
I brought this quality into full play on the occasion, care-
fully noting all that passed. It would be tedious to repeat


nhut £ then learned ; one thing-, however, I discovered to my
sorrow, that my ideas of purity and virtue were like snow be-
fore the sun —beautiful, but easily dispelled, and that most
probably my chronometer and I had parted company for ever.
I determined however to make my loss the subject of a visit
next morning to the Police-office- Ruminating upon the
events of the day, and full of reflections at what I had heard
and seen, I retired to my pillow, and being weary both in
body and mind, was soon in the arms of Morpheus.
Amongst my plans for the succeeding day, I had purposed
paying my respects at Government-house. Perhaps the re-
sult of my visit, as well there as at the Police-ollice, and the
manner in which I spent the remainder of the day, may be
communicated to my readers, when they next hear from me,
till when, I am their obedient servant,
Simon Stukeley.
No. 3. Hobart Town , June 19, 1829.
The intelligence I had collected from the turn, the conver-
sation at the dinner table had taken, having determined me, as
I before said, to make the loss of my watch the occasion of a
"isit to the Police-office, I proceeded thither early the fol-
lowing morning, and was shewn into the Jufetice Room, which
is large and well adapted for its intended purposes.
The exterior of the building appeared neat and well finish-
ed, the tout ensemble being quite in character with the apart-
ment which I first entered. Upon my beginning to mention
ny business to a smart priggish clerk, who was writing at a
table, he interrupted me by saying, “ Mr. Siftall will be here
directly, Sir, and will attend to you.” Within a few mi-
nutes, a short plainly dressed man entered, apparently be-
tween thirty and forty years of age, of pale features, high
forehead, and light thin air, hut possessing no particular ex-
pression of countenance, which would induce a bye-stander to
look at him a second time. He was closely followed by a per-
son of about the same age, fair complexioned, dressed in a
blue coat and fawn-coloured trovvsers, with much spic and
span neatness, and holding in his hand a small gold-headed


cane or walking stick. There was a certain consequential air.
and manner about this personage, which rendered it para-
doxical to me what could be his calling. A third individual
accompanied them and completed the group—a man shabbily
dressed, bearing all the marks of dissipation in his squalid
features, and exhibiting the oddest shaped head I had ever
beheld. It was an oblong, nearly Hat on the top, of great
length from the crown to the forehead, and projecting over
towards the eyes, forming a broad front and narrowing off
like the bow of a vessel towards the occiput. The smart
priggish clerk whom I had first seen, then said to me, IVIr.
Siftall, Sir, will now take your deposition.” I immediately
began to detail my loss, but which of the three was Mr. Siftall,
nothing that then occurred could lead me to comprehend.—
They all seemed of equal power and authority, but the short
(Gentleman, who had preceded the others upon entering, asked
rep the most pertinent questions, and appeared, if any thing, to
take the lead. During this time, the who.e party stood close
together. After the affair had been fully explained, be of the
gold-headed cane remarked, with a most complacent simper,
J gee how it is, Sir, the Gentleman is a new chum, and has
been up in St. Giles’s, and I suppose being sharp set after a
long voyage, he has eaten a slice of a cut-ioal, without using
his eye-teeth ! Ha !ha ! ha 1” “ I cannot allow such observa-
tions, Mr. Fowler,” gravely replied the short Gentleman,
whom I now found was Mr. Siftall, and who immediately
turned towards the Bench, and taking his seat, said, “Mr.
Scribewell, take Mr. Stukeley’s deposition. With wonder-
ful rapidity did he perform his task- I never saw a pen so
handled, and the constant interruption I received from Fow-
ler, who still to my great annoyance persevered in acting the
Magistrate, by perpetually questioning me, really made it
difficult to keep up with him. My business at length being
completed, I made my bow and retired. Although the anti-
cipation I had formed of the dignified appearance of a Police
Magistrate, judging by my recollection ot the Bairisteis who
preside as such, in the Eng ish Metropolis, was not realised
by Mr. Siftall’s manner and deportment, he seemed to conduct
himself with tolerable tact and acuteness,. and if he were to
keep his myrmidons at a greater distance, were to make them
confine themselves to the duties of their own situations, instead
of travelling out of them, to lower the dignity of the Magis-


tracy, he might pass muster very respectably. I could not,
however, help admiring the perfection of a machinery,
which could be so admirably kept in motion by such instru-
ments as form the Poli e Establishment of the town, for iu no
place that I ever visited, or have become acquainted with by
report, is it superior, if equal, to what I have seen in Hobart
Town. I should observe before I take my leave of describing
the interview with Mr. Siftall, that he gave his head man,
Fowler, directions so to lay his nets andsnaies, as would b«*
likely to lead to the recovery of my watch, adding a very sig-
nificant caution to myselt, not in future to visit St. Giles’s,
when 1 might be in search of virtue and innocence.
Some considerable time had been occupied with this affair
before it was completed, and it was not too early therefore
to proceed straight to Government-house. Approaching it,
through a newly-made road, which leads from the main street,
to the court or yard in which it is situated, a sort of half
dragoon, that is, a man dressed in a non-descript light hors
uniform, received my card, and forwarded it by a servant. 1
was immediately requested to walk into an ante-room, com-
municating with the vestibule or entrance. I had scarce!'
- **
taken a seat, when a door opened, and a pleasant looking
young Gentleman accosted me, forthwith acting as Usher, by
leading the way into a commodious well-furnished room, ir
which stood a table, covered with papers, neatly tied in bun -
dles, and beyond it, towards the fire-place, was a handsome
escrutoire, at which had been sitting, till I entered, a Gen-
tleman wearing an undress military uniform, whom lat once
perceived was the’Lieutenant Governor. If I had any doubts,
however, they were removed, by a few introductory words
modestly spoken by rny young Gentleman Usher.
I had brought with me from England some letters, written
by parties of high distinction, and addressed to His Excel-
lency, which I had previously caused to be delivered, and my
name and pretensions were not therefore unknown to him
His style of addressing me was well-bred and gentlemanly,
his features and general countenance were rather hard favour-
ed than otherwise, but expressive ; and his eyes denoted
quick perception or sagacity, which was a quality soon deve-
loped by the general tenor of his conversation.. “In what
manner, Sir, can I promote your views or wishes in the Co-
loiiy he caid to me, after a few passing remarks had been


made on various subjects. “ I fear that your coniine here in
search of virtue and innocence, as you tell me, will prove a
visionary idea at the best —there is on’y one way b\' which
your object might by possibility be even hoped to be attained
—and that is by the rule of extremes or contraries, if
an extreme of vice, as some suppose, may beget virtue
I am sorry to say that vice has so much sway here that
its opposite extreme cannot be very remote, and according
to this reasoning, the first step to virtue may be nearer
than I fear it is.” I immediately felt that His Excellency
was ridiculing my Quixotic search for that which I now
fear this world does not contain—a pure and innocent race
of beings—and I was ashamed that I had so exposed myself
before him. Perceiving my confusion, he very good natuml-
Jy changed the subject, conversed freely upon the state of the
Colony, respecting which he seemed astonishingly well in-
formed, even to minutim—entertained me with some well told
anecdotes, explanatory of the characters over whom he has to
rule-exhibiting throughout an interview, which lasted up-
wards of an hour, a shrewdness and clearness of intellect,
with which I was much delighted. I could willingly have
staid longer, but thought it quite time to take my departure,
and tlierefore rose for that purpose, feeling really grateful for
my very courteous reception. As I was turning round the
corner which leads mto the street, I saw a Gentleman cornin '-
quickly across, as if to speak to me, and I presently recog-
nized my acquaintance of the Commercial Rooms, who had
spoken to rneofthe newspapers. “ What, Sir, been to Govern-
ment-house, eh Sir ?” “ I have. Sir, and am much pleased
with the manner in which His Excellency has received me.”
res. Sir, yes, Sir, all very good to new comers; when vou
have been here as long as I have, you’ll find ’twont do, Sir.
e are too heavily taxed, Sir, and until we have a House of
Assembly and Trial by Jury, we shall do no good, Sir.”
‘Really, Sir, these are subjects which I do not understand,
and at present if you will excuse me I cannot enter upon them ,
as I have a pressing engagement, but probably at some other
time I may thank you for information which doubtless your ex-
perience must render valuable.” With this I took my leave,
although he would fain have prolonged the conversation, and
marched on to the Macquarie Hotel, where the same company 1
had before met, and an excellent dinner rendered the remainder


of the day equally agreeable as its forenoon. Lute in the
evening, a card from Government-house invited me to dine
there the next day, with an apology for the shortness of the
notice. I determined to accept it, but as I have no desire to
tire my readers, I must defer an account of my visit,
the large party to whom I was then introduced, to another op-
portunity, remaining in the mean time their most obedient,
Simon Stukeley.
No. 4. Hobart Town,June 26, 1829.
Six having been named as the dinner hour in the invitation,
card I had received from Government House, a few minutes
before the clock struck I proceeded thither, dressed in my
Very best attire. Upon entering the hail by the front door
leading to the shrubbery, through which I had approached
the house, a servant in a plain blue livery received me, and
led ray way to the drawing-room. Already several Gentle-
men were assembled, all of whom were strangers to me, and
amongst them were some Military Officers. His Excellency
himself appeared in the full dress uniform of a Colonel on
the Staff, which was not, however, in my idea so becoming
to his shape and figure as the blue frock and trowsers in
which I had before seen him. His reception of all his guests
was easy and polite, and to myself he paid particular atten-
tion.
The room in which we were assembled was well propor-
tioned and neatly furnished. Nothing at all resembling the
splendid drawing-rooms which are met with, even in private
bte, in England ; the furniture being rather good and sub-
stantial, than fashionable or elegant, and certain almost in-
dispensables, such as brilliant chandeliers and magnificent
mirrors, being absent.
The young Gentleman, with whom I had become acquainted
the preceding day, n et me with much obliging frankness, and
introduced me to several of the company—amongst others, to
a sallow-complexioned Gentleman, of a very sad and woful
countenance, upon which a smile seldom even for a moment


banished a certain measured demure look, which might have
served for an original whereby to have drawn the portrait of
some of the Members of long Parliament. He
spoke but little—indeed he seemed as if he had been trans-
planted into society to which he had formerly been unaccus-
tomed — but I understood that he was much esteemed by the* •
Lieutenant Governor, and that he held an important and con-
fidential place in His Excellency’s household. While I was
conversing with my young friend upon general chit chat sub-
jects, dinner was announced, and we proceeded to a large
room, apparently of recent construction, in which was a well
covered table laid for fourteen persons. It was my chance
to be placed between two Gentlemen, about half-way down
the right-hand side of the table, one of whom was an elderly
person, habited in a straight cut single breasted coat, with
upright collar, and whom I soon discovered to be a Clergy-
man ol the old school ; and the other appeared to be turned ft
Ot forty, wore spectacles close to his eyes, had a single
breasted dress coat, and an appearance altogether somewhat
resembling the celebrated Bob Logic, in Tom and Jerry, and
reminding me of what was said of Sir Joshua Reynold’s pic-
ture ot Garrick, when personating one of Shakespeare’s
finest drawn characters. My Clerical neighbour possessed a
remarkably mild placid countenance, and his manners were
easy nd gentlemanly in the extreme ; his conversation was
lively and agreeable, ami we soon appeared perfectly to un-
derstand each other. Exactly opposite us sat a tall thin Gen-
tleman, of solemn melancholy visage, apparently a valetudi-
narian, who took snuff largely, and seemed as little pleased
with hiniielt as with all around him. He was engaged in
conversation with another tall thin Gentleman, apparently his
junior, who sat upon his right, and with a young man of en-
gaging countenance, d rk expressive eyes, and wearing his
hair, which was also dark, very thick and bushy ; but it be-
came him, and helped to set off tolerable features, into which,
when he pleased, he knew' how to impart much grace and
sweetness, by a most agreeable smile. He was dressed in
the Court-suit of a King’s Serjeant, exhibiting an unusual
display ol shirt frill. I gathered from the conversation of
tnose three Gentlemen, that they were discussing some point
connected with public affairs, for I caught from the one
whom mentioned, “ I am clearly of opinion that


nothing but the most rigorous discipline can do any good ; I
say that in all cases the very letter of the law should be ful-
filled. The youngest of the party replied, I cannot agree
with you at all, Sir ; on the contrary, 1 am much more the
advocate of sun than wind, and I would always much rather
reward than punish.” The other tall Gentleman, who was,
/$ like his left hand companion, a most immoderate snuff taker,
then said, “ I doubt very much as to the abstract question, I
wish I could find precedents whereon it might be well argued,
but I confess my doubts have increased the more I have con-
sidered it, and the cases which I am constantly called upon
to decide, rather still further add to my doubts than other-
wise.
The conversation now became too general for me to under-
stand any more that was said. Had not the last speaker
/: been gaily dressed in a blue coat, with corresponding et ce-
teras, I should have taken him for some high authority,
learned in the law ; but as it is as much out of the question
to see a Barrister in a party coloured suit, as a Clergyman,
or, as a soldier in a sailor’s blue jacket and trowsers, my
doubts as to who he could be, w. re fully equai to his own
upon the question which had been before them, and as my
good manners forbad my making any enquiry, I cannot even
at present solve the point. I now settled into a quiet cozy
chat with my friend the Clergyman, whom 1 soon found to be
what is known by the term a choice spirit. With the true
scent and knowledge of a kindred soul, he speedily discover-
ed that I had been accustomed to follow Lord Fitzwilliam’s
fox hounds, and like an old broken down hunter, who will
snuif the gale and snort and toss his head at the exhilerating
tones of a pack in full cry, when lame and spavined he can-
not move three paces, so did my worthy neighbour’s face
wear a more than usually expressive smile, bis voice became
more than usually animated, as he recounted some of the ex-
pipits of his early days, and told “ each thrice told field of
battle once again.” The good old Gentleman at length so
warmed with the subject, that he shook me by the arm, and
said in an under tone, “ you must come and see Bob at the
cottage—yeoix, yeoix ! tantivy, tantivy !”—to which friend-
ly invitation I immediately assented. My spectacle com-
panion now addressed me. “ I fancy, Sir, you are of Ox-
ford— may I have the honor of enquiring of what College ?”


“Of Brazen-nose, Sir,” was my reply. “ I also am an Ox-
onian, and have to th< nk my luck more than my merit, per-
haps, that I hold an honorary degree, by which I am able to
write A. B.”
** Indeed, Sir,” said I, “ you are fortunate.” “ Rather
so,” he replied, “ for I was never very fond of learned pala-
ver, but I have my degree as well as others.” There was a
young delicate looking Gentleman sitting next below the last
speaker—he had a very consumptive appearance, but an agree-
able countenance, and very sprightly manners. Taking up
the conversation, he added, “ not only as well as others, but
better than most, for if you can say B. A. in virtue of your
Oxford degree, so can you write me down A.S. S. in virtue of
your antiquarian honors.” A very hearty laugh followed this
sally, but nothing more was said.
It would be tedious to dilate further upon the conversation
of the evening. His Excellency was very attentive to his
guests, and exerted himself to do the honors of the table.
1 he dinner was good of the kind, but “ though Heaven sends
meat, the Devil sends cooks.” The wine and dessert were
excellent, the attendance of the servants might perhaps have
been better, but in other respects the entertainment passed off
extremely well.
Just before we left the dinner table, my fox-hunting friend
said to me, “ mind Bob at the cottage,” which I assured him
I would, pledging him my honor. “ A fox-hunter’s honor is
good security,” replied he, “ but there is nothing like a
collateral,” tilling at the same moment two bumpers of Bur-
gundy, ‘‘ come, Sir, your word’s the bond, and this is the
collateral,” drinking at the same moment the wine, and hand-
ing me the other glass, “ and now,” said he, “ tis signed,
sealed, and delivered.”
M e retired to the drawing-room soon after nine, when the
pleasure of the day was increased by meeting several ele-
gantly dressed ladies, and who with my late companions form-
ed a lively converzaione, till the . Church clock sounding
eleven warned us to make our bows and depart.
It I had not already spun out my account of the dinner *>
unconscionably, I might enter into a description of the
charming addition thus made to oi>r party. However desirous
1 might be of employing my pen upon so interesting subject,
discretion whispers mo to beware of fatiguing my readers.


My motto is “ A gam quarn brevipotero,” I wish to be
as brief as possible. I therefore, for the present, subscribe
myself their most obedient,
Simon Stukeley.
No, 5. Hobart Town , July 3, 1829.
Previcusly to leaving England, I deposited in the hands of
the Colonial Agent, a certain sum of money, taking from him
a letter addressed to the Local Authorities, and which he said
would enable me to receive the same amount upon my arrival
here. I had been several times advised to claim the grant of
land, to which my property would entitle me, and having no
particular occupation one day last week, I determined to de-
vote the morning to these objects. Having so arranged my
plans, I felt inclined to deliver in person the letter which I
had received in England, as I always like to acquire informa-
tion, and to see how business is conducted. For this purpose,
T went to a brick two-story building, nearly opposite the
Government-house, and, having been received at the door
by a man in tolerable attire, was conducted by him to a large
room up stairs, which was approached through a small ante-
chamber. At the further end, at a table covered with papers,
apparently in sad confusion, sat a man perhaps fifty years of
age, but of an appearance not gentlemanly or prepossessing.
He wore spectacles, appearing to be near-sighted, as he had
a particular manner, when he looked at a distant object, of
screwing his eyes, which were of a hazel grey. His clothes
had a good deal of the Monmouth-street cut about them, but
did not seem unsuitable to his tout ensemble. In his tone
and gestures, he exhibited a wonderful degree of authority,
for just as I entered the door-way, he was severely censuring
one of the Clerks for some neglect of duty, and it might have
been supposed that he was the Minister ofWar himself, pour-
ing forth his phials of wrath, from the style of his language,
and the expression of his countenance.
The poor fellow who was being drilled, was the exact pro-
totype of the Knight of Mancha, a tall lank figure, without
shape or substance, dressed in a long sombre coat, hanging


like a garment on a clothes horse, which, contrasted with his
pallid features and staring eyes, gave him altogether a most
woful appearance. He held the door in one hand, as I
passed him, and I heard him say, “ Pardon me, Sir, I was up
till 3 o’clock this morning, and I have prepared several plans
to be submitted to Mr. Consumet, one of which particularly
relates to a suppression of these German dollars, which are
“ Hold your tongue, Sir, this instant, and don’t
now
talk to me of your plans, and your interferences—go to your
room, Sir, and attend to your business, and leave Mr. Con-
sumet alone till he wants you, I have had quite enough of your
intolerable assurance.” ** Pardon me, Sir,” again was
heard, but he could proceed no further, for the peremptory
orders he received, compelled him to retire, taking with him
under his arm a large bundle of papers. As soon as I could
command sufficient attention to have the nature of my errand
understood, 1 was requested to take a chair for a few minutes,
when a Messenger presently entered, and announced that the
head of the department wished to see me. I followed him into
a handsomely furnished room on the ground floor, where a
Gentleman was sitting, whom I instantly recognized, and who
received me with much stiff formality. After a short space
occupied in desultory conversation, in the course of which I
gave him to understand that I should be obliged by his allow -
ing me to be the bearer at once of whatever credentials I was
to be furnished with, he rung his bell, and ordered the at-
tendant to send one of the Clerks to him. Immediately the
same gaunt figure I had before seen entered the room, bearing
in his countenance the utmost obsequiousness, almost to fawn-
ing, and having received his orders withdrew, but shortly re-
turned with a paper in his hand, which he presented to the
Gentleman for signature, and which was then given to me, ac-
companied by the information that by presenting it as di-
rected, my wishes would be attended to. I then took my
leave and departed. The letter being an open one, I had the
curiosity to see what was the form adopted on these occasions,
and I found that it was merely to transmit a copy of the docu-
ment I had brought from England, and to say that a warrant
from the Governor for paying me the money would be pre-
pared. I proceeded at once to my further destination,
according to the address of the letter. Upon entering a low
narrow building, which I understood was the Treasury, I was


shewn into a small apparently inconvenient room on the left-
hand side of a dark passage, and which was divided oft” by a
sort of a stop gate and counter, such as I have seen in
England at the entrance of a country Theatre, which had been
tilted up for the evening by an itinerant corps dramatique,
having given full employment all the forenoon to the indus-
trious exertions of some sturdy thrasher.
Behind this make-shift money changing board, stood a
young Gentleman of pleasant open countenance, and a person
apparently his senior by a few years, bearing all the appear-
ance of “ un homme d'affaires,” and whose deportment seemed
marked by obligingness and civility. The young Gentleman
having been made acquainted with my business, left the room
for an instant, when he returned and motioned me to follow
him. Upon his leading the way into another apartment at the
end of the passage, a Gentleman who was there seated rose to
return my bow, and immediately entered into conversation—
There was a hurried quickness in his manner —a sort of ab-
seutism, if the expression may be allowed—a change from
one subject to another, which makes it difficult to relate what
passed, but upon one or two points, the information he
bestowed, made some impression on me. He had a little of
the brogue in his style of language, but only such as is met
with in the best bred Hibernians—just enough to swear by ;
but it was not difficult to see that his birth and breeding had
been good. “In what part of the Colony do you propose to
settle, Sir,” he asked ; “ the property you possess, will, I be-
lieve, entitle you to a maximum grant, but upon this point the
Land Board will instruct you.” “ I really do not know.
Sir,” I replied, “ I have been here so short a time, that I an
very little acquainted with the country —indeed, I have
scarcely made up my mind about taking land, for I have been
informed by several, that, paradoxical as it may seem, I can
buy cheaper than I can have it given to me ; but there’s a cer-
tain pleasure in owning dirty acres, and I’ve not yet deter-
mined.” “ You say quite true, Sir,” said he, “as to the
pleasure of owning dirty acres, perhaps no man places a higher
value upon them than I do. It is to the failure of a large em-
bankment scheme at home, whereby I sought to reclaim a few
hundred thousands of acres from the sea, that I may owe the
honor of now addressing you, but the unruly element paid no
more regard to me than to Canute of old, and in one hour the


work, of years was destroyed. The same love of these same
dirty acres has accompanied me hither, and I am almost con-
stantly either buying, selling, or bartering them. If you
should determine to buy land, I may perhaps have the honor
of being allowed to name a farm or two of mine which are in
particularly eligible situations.” Our conversation was here
interrupted by the abrupt entrance of a tall stout person, who,
judging by the easy familiar style in which he addressed the
last speaker, I suppose is a Gentleman. He appeared to
have a defect in his eye sight, much resembling in its appear-
ance, an infirmity under which some of the Royal Dukes
labour. His mien was stately and commanding, but its im-
pression was but momentary, for no sooner was his mouth
opened, than my uncertainty as to what rank of life he was
filling was two-fold increased. Seeing that the Gentleman
with whom I had been conversing was engaged, he said in a
tone which would have suited Lady Morgan, “ I’ll just be
with ye again by and bye, I did but just bring ye some
money, and not allowing time for a reply, retired.
I now made some enquiry as to what was my best course to
pursue towards obtaining the land to which my property en-,
titled me, as I seemed in such good quarters for information,
and which the Gentleman gave me with much readiness.—
I then prepared to depart, when the door-keeper an-
nounced that somebody, whose name I could not collect, was
waiting to be admitted, upon which my companion quickly
said, “ Oh, he’s the very man himself,” and leaving the
room, re-entered in a minute or two, accompanied by a Gen- *
tleman of perhaps between forty and fifty, rather above the
middle height, and proportionably stout, and who was intro-
duced to me as a person extremely well qualified to impart
information respecting the interior of the Colony. I soon dis-
covered that he was a man of sense and talents, and a long
and interesting conversation ensued. In the course of it, se-
h eral points were made known to me connected with the ca-
pabilities of this Island, of which I was before ignorant ;
these however, although they may open the door to future ob-
servations, will not be further pursued at present. Before
we parted, I made an engagement to accompany him upon a
tour of inspection as soon as the state of the roads and bridges
rendered travelling practicable, for he told me that at this sea-
son of the year, many of them are nearly impassable j a wide


field will therefore be opened to my readers.—l now sub-
scribe myself, their most obedient servant,
Simon Stukeley.
No. 6. Hobart Tow July 10, 1829.
Passing down Macquarie-street a few mornings ago, m y
attention was attracted by seeing a number of persons enterin g
a large unfinished stone building, opposite the Church, and
which upon enquiry, I found was the Court House, where
the Criminal Sessions are held, and Civil Causes tried.—
Among those who were pressing towards the door-way, ap-
parently in great haste, was a tall thin Gentleman dressed in
black, tripping along on his toes in a pace somewhat between
a walk and a run. He leant his body forward, the projection
of his back, which was unusually long, forming a very consi-
derable angle. In his hand, which I noticed as he passed,
was larger than ordinary, he held a bundle of papers. Just
as he entered the broken enclosure in front of the Court
House, he stopped for a minute or two to converse with
another Gentleman, who was travelling the same road, but
who, so far from having any hurry in his look, seemed won-
derfully quiet and composed. Ever and anon during their
short conference, the tall Gentleman had recourse to a snuff
box of extraordinary dimensions ; the box indeed appeared to
have been made for the hand, and the capacious power of the
nose for both. The Gentleman, who helped to form the t£te a
tete, was also dressed in black. He was much the shortest
of the two —wore his hat a little on one side, inclining the head
a little further still ; —had rather a pleasant smile on his coun-
tenance, which was likewise full of meaning or expression,
and I observed that his mode of talking was remarkably quiet.
Upon my enquiring of a Gentleman, whom I bad met at the
Macquarie Hotel, what all this was about, he told me there
were some civil causes for trial, and I determined therefore
to make one of the lookers-on, and to see in what form jus-
tice was administered. Before I had time to cross the street
for this purpose, my attention was attracted by the approach
of a curricle, at a very rapid rate, drawn by two ponies, who


were scampering at full speed, the one In a canter with the
left leg foremost, and the other in a run, such as is known in v
England by the name of the butcher’s shuffle. The vehicle
turned the corner with such velocity, that I was nearly run
over, and only saved myself by a hasty retreat. It stopped at
the entrance of the building, and the person who had been
driving, alighted and bustled towards the door, as if all the
affairs of the universe were upon his back. He was short
and fat, of a very merry countenance, somewhat resembling
such as a painter would select for the original of the laughter
loving God, and there was a certain something in his air and
manner, as much as to say “ JEcce magnus sed parvus homo.”
I followed these personages and several others into the
building, and passing through a small sort of entrance hall,
presently found myself in a capacious room or chamber, with
a number of windows opposite each other, which producing
cross lights, and admitting the full force of the sun’s rays
from the north side, must not unfrequently annoy the persons
most requiring a steady and not glaring light. Across the
middle of the room, about half way from the door, was a bar
or railing, within which stood a large table, in size and ar-
rangement not very convenient for the profession, two pews
or seats, resembling those of a Church, being on the left,
close to the wall, and one of the same sort on the right, and
immediately in front was an elevated seat across the room, in
the centre of which was a sort of desk, as if intended for a
Chairman or other person holding pre-eminence, and over
which was an unsightly sounding-board, so unsoundly fixed
as to threaten a sudden descent, and the natural consequence
of putting out the lights occasionally below it. Upon a chair
at the left-hand corner of this desk, sat one of the Gentlemen,
whom I had seen enter from the street ; exactly opposite to
him, in another chair, was a young man, in the costume of a
Barrister, and whose countenance seemed familiar to me.—
Round the table, upon forms, were several other Gentlemen,
amongst whom I recognized the tall snuff-laker, and the short
curricle-driver, whom I had before seen, together with many
others. Presently a door in one corner of the room opened,
and a tall Gentleman, wearing the gown and wig of an English
Barrister, entered and immediately proceeded to the desk in
the centre of the Ions: seat under the front wall. His counte-
* y
nance did not seem unknown to me, although I could cot irh-


“ A blue coat and trimmings complete . . . £5 15 0
“ Velvet collar to ditto ....... 0 14 6
snedlately recollect where I had been introduced to him, hut
afterwards a friend brought to my recollection that it was at
the Governor’s dinner party. Some little preliminary busi-
ness having been disposed of, and two more Gentlemen in
plain clothes having Joined him who last entered, one of those
who were sitting on the form rose and said, “ if His Honor
pleased, the cause, Fitwell v. Testy, was resjwiy for trial.” The
Court having nodded assent, the pleadings began. From the
opening speech of the Lawyer, I found that Fitwell was a
tailor, and had been employed by Testy to make sundry ar-
ticles of clothes, which he had done, and had sent them, ac-
companied by a bill or account, amounting to £ll Bs. 10d.—
Among other articles was a blue coat, charged at £5 15s.
with the additional demand of fourteen shillings and six-pence
for a velvet collar, which was the sole ground of action, Mr.
Fitwell having stated in his bill
W hereas Testy contended, that it could not be complete
without a collar, that it only had one, whether velvet or cloth
was no matter, and that he was not therefore liable to pay as
if the coat had been furnished with two collars. His Honor
enquired if it could not be settled out of Court, but neither
party chusing to accede to this proposal, the case proceeded.
After witnesses for the plaintiff had been examined, the Gen-
tleman who occupied the chair on, the floor, on the Judge’s
left, rose, and putting his left hand into his breeches pocket,
and giving his head the exact proper inclination to the right,
cross-examined one of them as follows :
What are you?—-What am I, Sir? a man.
1 did not ask you whether you were a man or woman, I wish
to know what is your trade.
Witness. —A tailor.
Lawyer. —Well now Mr. Mantailor, do you know a coat
when you see it ?
Witness —l should think so.
Lawyer . —I did not ask you what you thought—answer my
q-estion, Sir.
Witness. —What sort of a coat do you mean, Sir?
Lawyer. —I ask you once more if you know a coat when
you see it ?
Witness. —Yes, Sir.


Lawyer. —Pray how many collars are there to a coat?
Witness. —How many collars are there to a coat. Sir, why
every body knows that.
Lawyer. — Well then, if every body knows, you can have
no difficulty in telling me—how many collars are there to a
coat, I again ask ?
Witness. —Why, sure Sir, you know as well as I how many
collars there are to a coat.
Lawyer. —Perhaps I do, but still I wish you to tell me ;
come, Sir, I’ll ask you another question, and perhaps we shall
come round at last. How many tailors do you reckon there
are to a man ?
Witness.—One tailor to a coat. Sir.
Lawyer. —One what ?
Witness. —Collar to a coat.
Lawyer. —(repeating) one collar to a coat.
Witness. —Yes, Sir.
Lawyer. —l thought we should come to the point in time ;
now, if there is only one collar to a coat, do you consider fhat
a coat is complete without a collar ?
Witness. —No, Sir.
The cross-examination was pursued much in this way for
some time, when the case for the plaintiff being ended, the
Lawyer, who had cross-examined the witness, rose and ad-
dressed the Jury on behalf of the defendant, commenting very
batppily on the admission of the plaintiff’s witness, that a coat
had but one collar, and that it was not complete without it.—
The Gentleman neither wore a gown or wig. After he had
ended, the young Barrister immediately opposite to him, ad-
dressed the Court in support of the plaintiff’s claim. He had a
good clear voice and a wonderful degree of self-possession, and
his consumptive and delicate appearance would scarcely have
warranted the expectation that his physical powers were equal
to the deep sonorous tones which proceeded from him, or to
the exertion which he displayed. The points upon which he
chiefly laid stress were, that, although a coat might not he
complete without a collar, it did not require a velvet collar,
that the velvet collar was an extra, for which, it having been
for the defendant’s own pleasure and fancy, he was as much
bound to pay as in a case where a contract might be made to
complete a house or other work, and if the party afterwards
chose to make alterations or additions not included in the con-


tract, they were at his own cost and expence—that £5 15s.
had been the price named by Fitwell for the coat, to which
Testy had agreed, and that he afterwards said “ let me have a
velvet collar.” He went on farther to argue, that it was by
no means incontrovertible that coats might not have more than
one collar —that he had seen coats with seven or eight col-
lars, and had found the comfort of them when travelling in
cold weather. Here he was interrupted by the opposite
Lawyer, who said “ capes—not collars,” —that even one
collar was not necessary to complete a coat, for it was within
the daily observation of every one that there were some coats
of that peculiar make as to shew no collar, unless the straight
neck-piece might be called a collar, and which might with
equal propriety be termed a cape, as the other pieces of
cloth, the mention of which had drawn upon him the inter-
ruption of the learned Counsel. Under these circumstances
he confidently trusted to receive a verdict for the plaintiff.
The Judge then recapitulated the evidence in a husky tone
of voice, frequently altogether inaudible, making constant
breaks, or hesitations, and taking large quantities of snuff as
he proceeded. He doubted very much upon which side the
evidence preponderated—it was entirely a question of fact
rather than law. He explained, however, what the law was
with respect to contracts, and left the case wholly in the
hands of the Assessors, who presently returned a verdict for
the defendant. During my attention to the arguments and
decision of this cause, I discovered how extremely difficult
the construction of this building had rendered it to hear
what passed—that in fact, at a very short distance from the
elevated seat before mentioned, nothing could be distinctly
made out, when the voice of the speaker was not raised, and
when perfect silence was not maintained. As I left the
Court, 1 fell into conversation with a Gentleman with whom I
was slightly acquainted, and who, like myself, had been a bye-
stander, observing to him, that from what I had that morning
witnessed, I presumed law was very cheap in this Colony.—
“ Cheap, Sir,” he replied, with the utmost astonishment,
“ you were never more mistaken in your life—Law, Sir, is not
only very scarce here, but it is very dear—there is a certain
bastard commodity called law, which is very current, but
even this is so much clogged by expenses, that it is perfectly
ruinous, and yet the most surprising thing is, almost every


person encourages it.” “ That’s very strange, Sir,” said I,
“ the Gentleman who cross-examined the witness seemed
clever and ingenious, and I thought the Judge explained the
law clearly.” “ Pretty well as to that,” my friend replied,
“ the defendant’s Counsel is about one of the best of them,
but many of his geese are swans, and the Judge would do well
enough, if he had not so much of the Ex-Chancellor’s doubts,
about him, but you must come and dine with me, and I will
then explain the subject more fully to you. You have only
to-day heard or seen two or three of our Law-expounders. I
will introduce you to the acquaintance of some more of them,
and I will also let you into a knowledge of some of the sweets
of the profession, and of the terrible consequences which at-
tend such infatuation, as we have this morning witnessed, but
which I am sorry to say is very common. The Law Es-
tablishment of this Colony is a grievous tax upon the Public,
and a dreadful scourge to individuals, but we will talk more
about it over a bottle of wine. Mind my dinner hour is live,
and I shall expect you.”
The information I acquired by my visit will be communi-
cated some other time. In the interim, I subscribe myself,
gentle readers, your faithful and obedient,
Simon Stukejley.
I scarcely know whether or not I ought to enter into a
-.description, either of my informant as to the several Law Ex-
pounders, and other matters connected therewith, which I now
propose to submit to my readers, or of his residence ; and
ot the excellent entertainment with which he regaled me, but
upon mature consideration, I think he has done the State good
service, and that he will, through me, be rather honored than
otherwise by my endeavouring to pourtray him. He is of
about the middle height, rather close set, about thirty years
ot age, perhaps a little more, dark eyes and hair, of a
swarthy complexion, wears large whiskers in the cut of
1825 or 6, and is unmarried ; generally dresses without much
regard to appearance, oft wearing a coat of a muddy-coloured


green, the flaps of which are unusually full, and the waist
longer than Mr. Fitwell would have tolerated. He resides in
a house built on the ground floor only, and somewhat in the
shape of the letter L.
As I was walking leisurely to his residence, a little
before the appointed dinner hour, who should I see, coming
slowly along just at the crossing by the Church, but my
clerical friend of the old school, mounted on a small
cream-coloured pony ! Looking at me very pointedly, as if
full of meaning, I thought some words escaped him, which I
did not distinctly hear, and will not therefore venture to re-
peat, but whatever they were, those which followed were less
equivocal. “ So you must'be bobbing and bobbing with
Bob at the Cottage, must ye?” Is that your modern fox-
hunting, to turn out a “ kindred soul,” a “ choice spirit,” to
be game for a pack of puppies ? With your yeoix, and your
yeoix, and your “ collateral security ?” I thought the good
old Gentleman rather scolded me in laughter than in anger,
and therefore merely replied to him, by enquiring if the pony
he was riding, was part of his hunting stud, adding, “ he is
of a very convenient size, for if you happen to come to a
gate or fence beyond his leaping powers, you would have
little trouble in dismounting and in carrying him across on
jour shoulders.” At these words, my friend raised himself
in his stirrups, and making a caracole towards me, I felt my
safety would best be consulted by flight, and bidding him
adieu with my hand, it was not long ere I reached the Gen-
tleman’s house at which I was to dine.
Our meeting was strictly tete a t6te, and during the repast,
which was excellent of the sort, and the zest of which was
heightened by a variety of superior wines, a general conversa-
tion only took place. When the cloth was removed, and the
dessert put upon the table, drawing our chairs to the fire, he
filled his glass, and passing the bottle to me, said “ Come, Sir,
one toast —a Voccasion —the glorious uncertainty of the Law.”
He then proceeded, “ I have promised, you know, to explain
some particulars respecting law proceedings in this Colony,
and to as wise as myself upon the characters and
pretensions of its limbs or pillars. Now you will scarcely
believe it, but so the case is, that a Law process is saddled
with heavier charges here, than in England, and what is
worse, a system is tolerated by which, supposing a Bill of


Exchange should be unpaid, bearing one doubttul and two or
three good names, the latter are instantly pounced upon by
the Lawyers equally with the other, and it is not unusual to
see two or three Law suits upon one and the same transaction,
by which means the original debt is sometimes tripled before
it is discharged.” What can be the use or object of this,”
I enquired. “ Just as it was with Pharoah’s lean kine,” was
the reply, “ many of the Lawyers have arrived here, lean as
the leanest oftbese, but have now swallowed up the fat kine*
The present state of the Civil Law is a great and crying evil,
it operates upon the Colony as a pair of tight shoes would
upon a man, who is undertaking a long pedestrian journey.”
<< Upon whom does the fault rest, Sir?” “ That is really a
difficult question ;” I rather think, however that in the first in-
stance, the cause arose in a clumsiness of legislation, and in
the next, in a lamentable ignorance on certain established
principles of political economy, or the wealth of nations.”—
“ In general, these evils work their own cure, and it is to be
hoped it will be the case in this instance, but I am anxious to
hear your description of the limbs or pillars of the law, as
you call them ” Here a smile played across the lips of my
companion, as he replied. “ Limbs, sure enough Sir, very
little of the tree itself —nevertheless, for the sake of order
and regularity in what I have to say, we will suppose this
room the Court, and pray attend to my divisions and sub-
divisions of the subject. Now, Sir, I will presume an imagi-
nary bar just along from the door to the window, and, like
separating the trumps from the other cards in a hand at
whist, I will place some of my characters within, and some
without this bar. As to the withins, they are less numerous
than the others, and we will take them first. I shall again
class the whole, under those who possess both law and
jaw—those who possess law but no jaw—those who are en-
dowed with jaw without law, and lastly, those who
neither possess one or the other.” “ You are taking
a luminous view, I almost fear I shall scarcely be
able to follow you.” “No fear, Sir, no fear ; I shall have
to lump three or four together, by and bye ; but to sim-
plify the affair, suppose we agree upon some standard,,
bv a comparison with whom, the relative merits of our limbs
may be ascertained.” “ The idea is excellent what think
ve of Brougham or Scarlett ?” “ Brougham or Scarlett!!' 1


do you say ? No, no, we must not look higher than Alley
nr Adolphus, and Harmer or Humphries, at the very utmost.”
“ Well, suppose we take Alley and Humphries, for I pre-
sume there will be two grades necessary.” “ Let it be so—now
for the withins. One of them is a Gentleman by birth and
education, but sadly wants experience and discretion. He is
too much the advocate against unfortunates who come under
his hands —he prejudges them as it were, and shews the
anxiety more of a cat to destroy a mouse, than of a Barrister
of the most refined and humane country upon the face of the
earth, to do justice to the Crown, by whom he is paid, but
nothing further. He has been taught in a good school, but
has yet to study the most difficult of all lessons, the know-
ledge of himself; his ignorance upon which point, oft leads
him into instances of self-sufficiency, dimming the lustre of
the talents, with which he is unquestionably endowed. In
point of law and jaw they are much on a par with him, a
tolerable share of each. Putting him in the scale with Alley,
he will require a little finger perhaps of Humphries, to pro-
duce a balance. He is of tolerable promise altogether, and
would be more so, if he knew better how to control his tem-
per upon certain occasions.” “ Why, Sir, I have under-
stood, that the Gentleman to whom you allude is a very reli-
gious character, a very humane man, and can say the Bible
by heart.” “ Here, Sir ; here, Sir ; take a glass of wine—
there’s oft great cry and little wool-—I seek to interfere with
no man’s privacy;—bring out the next, as they say at Tatter-
sail’s, and let’s have a look at his paces-
He, too, is a Gentleman born and bred,
And law, some little, floats within his head.
Excuse the rhyme, Sir. This person is designed by nature
to act a distinguished part; but he has long been at warfare
with himself. It is a pity, for the goodness of his heart, the
excellence of his disposition, and the pains which have been
bestowed upon him in his youth, would have warranted the
expectation of a happier fate than has hitherto attended him.
He is of a sociable friendly disposition, and the anecdote
which lam going to relate will serve as an illustration. Call-
ing upon him one day at his Chambers, I found him sitting
in an elbow-chair by the fire, close to a table, on which stood
some wine and two glasses ; an empty chair being on the other
side of the table. I observed, that although he was alone.


each glass was filled ; presuming, therefore, that some friend
was absent for the moment, I hesitated to take the vacant seat
which he requested me. “ I never like taking wine alone,
Sir,” he said,’ , and I always therefore picture in my mind’s
eye my friend Sir John Tope well is with me, when I have no
other company, and when it comes to his turn to fill his glass,
I am his proxy—come, Sir John,” playfully addressing the
empty chair, “ here’s your good health. Now you know, as
Sir John cannot return thanks himself, I do so for him, and
thus we cozilj r discuss our bottle.” “An admirable plan
indeed—necessity is the mother of invention.” “ Yes, Sir,
necessitas non habet legem, dum vivimus , vivamus say I :
come, Sir, now you shall be Sir John’s proxy, and “ Richard’s
himself again.” In conversation he is lively and agreeable ;
as for his legal pretensions, law but no jaw must be allotted
to him, and in relative merit w ith the grand standard, the
beam stands nearly equal. “ You have drawn a portrait, Sir,
to trace a likeness to the original of which, may I fear, puz-
zle me. Are there any more “ withins ?” “Oh yes, Sir,
more fish in the net. We have another of the same order in
point of birth and breeding, but his age and experience, ad-
ded to the two others, would barely make one of our vener-
able English law dignitaries. Like a young colt, he is full
of play and anticks, but equal in cunning to another animal.
He wants a little more ballast ere he w r ill be able to trim the
vessel which he navigates, with advantage either to himself
or others. Common sense, although it ought to be the fun-
damental principle of all law, is not always attainable by
practitioners ; and notwithstanding some proclaim themselves
as acting under its banners, they are frequently further from
the mark than their neighbours.” “ Your observation, as a
general principle, is fraught with propriety ; but Ido not
quite understand how you mean to apply it—are you speaking
at, or of, any particular person?” “ Both, Sir, both. I mean
to say that the singing a good song, the sharp repartee, the
brilliant retort, the dancing a pas seul, or the elegant deport-
ment, will not of themselves, obtain for their possessor, the
reputation of being a good lawyer, if there be not common
sense at the bottom.” “I do not know that I am inclined
to dispute that position ; but what do the scales say to the
case in point V* “ More jaw and less law than some of his,
competitors—more law than, but as much jaw as, others,


and as much assurance as any of them must be awarded as his
attributes.” “Ah ! but how does he tally against Alley or
Humphries ?” “ Not so heavy as the first, but outweighing
the other.” “ Upon the whole, then, what rank does he hold
in proportion to the two others whom you have delineated ?”
inferior to both in some points—equal in one or two—su-
perior in none, excepting jaw and assurance,”
If I were to attempt to enter into a description of any more
of the characters which were brought under review on this oc-
casion, I fear I might incur the charge of being tiresome and
prolix. I have no desire to adopt a precedent set by a cer-
tain law authority, and to murder my own reputation. I will
therefore defer, to another opportunity, a recountment of the
particulars of the information which I farther derived on this
altogether most agreeable visit, of which I took ample notes.
—Courteous reader, I am ever your most obedient servant,
Simon Stukeley.
Noc 8. Hobart Town , July 24, 1829.
‘Tis said, whene’er a Lady’s in the case.
Other engagements must of course give place.
Had this not been so with me, I had purposed to have con-
tinued the account of the limbs or pillars of the law, for
which I am indebted to my late informant ; but who is there
that would not prefer mixing in the charming society of the
world’s chief ornament, the accomplished female ? Or, who
having so mingled, would not prefer exercising his pen in
describing the beauty of one, the grace of another, the good
sense of a third, or the elegance of a fourth, to dwelling
upon so dry and musty a subject as lawyers, who are so in
name, but nothing else ? Who, I say, would be so barba-
rous—so heathenish? And who will not, therefore, thank
me for endeavouring to impart some of that pleasure which I
have myself received ? If there be any such, let him betake
himself inquest of the Aborigines, for he is not fit to dwell
among a civilized people.
Enjoying one of the fine mornings, with which we have later
ly been blessed, in sauntering round the barren hillocks dost


to the town, but which although barren, are rendered agree-
able by the prospects they command, J was admiring a new-
built edifice, in the construction of which, much taste ap-
peared to have been combined with a singular attention to
comfort .; was debating in my own mind, what order of ar-
chitecture had been consulted, doubting whether or not the
low projecting roof did not subtract from its claim to entire
chasteness, but notwithstanding was, upon the whole, lost in
admiration and wonder, that so great an advancement in the
arts as it displayed, was to be found in so young a Colony, v
when a Gentleman of my acquaintance advanced towards me, £
accompanied by a Lady, with whom he was walking arm in
arm. He is of tall commanding stature, and proportion ably
broad withal—wore a blue frock coat, buttoned a la
close to the throat; a round plain hat, a black stock, the but-
tons on his clothes denoting in some way or another he was in
His Majesty’s service. The Lady was younger than himself, * /
had dark eyes, and was of a brunette complexion, rather thin ’
and tall, and dressed in a promenade dishabille, in which
ease and comfort, rather than appearance, had been consult-
ed. Meeting each other, and after an exchange of bows,
“ What a splendid dwelling that will be,” said I, pointing
to the house I had been admiring, “ when completed, and
the shrubs and trees around it have attained their full growth.
Oo you know to whom it belongs ?” The Gentleman s coun-
tenance, although plain, is generally rather agreeable than
otherwise. If there be an occasional sternness about it, the
amiableness ot his heart overcomes this to a nice
and to me, who knew him slightly in Europe, his many esti-
mable qualities were sufficiently familiar. Upon this instance
however, it was lighted up in an unusually animated maaner,
as he replied—“ I’ll beg to introduce ye to the owner of the
house and to my ain gude wife baith in the same person,”
turning immediately to his Lady companion, and addings
“ my love, this is an acquaintance of Auld Lang Syne.’’
Paying and receiving the usual civilities which attend first in-
troductions, a general conversation ensued, in which I (found
sufficient cause to congratulate my friend upon his happy
choice. “ Are you going to Mrs. Doubtmuch’s to morrow
evening?” the Lady enquired. “No, madam, I have not.
the honor of her acquaintance, I am but newly arrived in the
Colony, and 1 did not even know that my friend Mr. Sterling


resided here.” “I am quite sure she will be glad to see you,
if you will allow us to procure you a card-—you know single
Gentlemen are never in the way, and that one or two, more
or less, are of no consequence.” I certainly cannot decline
so Haltering a proffer, and shall be proud to be ranked in Mrs.
Doubtmuch’s list, for I have heard her most highly spoken
of, as a Lady of great merit and attainments.” “ She is all
that, and more; and I will undertake to introduce you to
her.”
A few hours after this unexpected interview with an old
acquaintance, and the formation of a new one of much agreea-
ble promise, I received in an envelope, a card which bestow-
ed on me the privilege of having my name sounded, with all
its native beauty, by the rude mouth of the footman in wait-
ing at Mrs. Doubtmuch’s drawing-room door the following
evening. Those who have been accustomed to figure in the
gay world at home, know all. the delights of a party which is
crowded to suffocation., I remember walking in Hyde Park
two or three years ago,, and meeting some of my Lady
friends, who looked as if they had been in a vapour bath,,
was accosted by “ Were you at Lady Squeezem’s cram last
night—twas so delightfully full—never could enter the
drawing-room door—delightfully pleasant evening—did’nt
know a soul in the place—only think how charming,”—
Never having mixed in the beau monde of this town, I fancied:
to myself that Mrs. Doubtmuch’s party might be something
like Lady Squeezem’s, and I determined to go early, in order
that I might at least have a chance of seeing all the fashion-
ables as their names were announced.
Arriving at the large commodious looking stuccoed build-
ing, wherein Mrs. Doubtmuch resided, I was ushered into a
square room of tolerable dimensions, in the ornaments and
furniture of which, were sufficient instances of good taste and*
elegance, to denote that a Lady presided in the house, rather
than as forming the exterior which be thought suitable
to a drawing-room, I shall say nothing, or at least very
little of any of the Gentlemen, who were present, reserving
them for other and more fitting occasions. Upon the an-
nouncement of my name, I looked about me to catch the eye
of the Lady to whom I was to make my bow, and presently
observed one whom, it was not possible to mistake for any
other than the mistress of the ceremonies. She appeared;


(but perhaps it is wrong to touch so hallowed a subject as a
.Lady’s age) to be rather on the shady side of forty, was tail
and sufficiently en bon point, of rather a flushed complexion,,
darkish expressive eyes, her countenance altogether beaming
with much benificence—perfectly at ease in her
returning, or rather anticipating my bow, with a peculiarly
graceful and elegant curtesy. She wore a Tyrian blue gauze
dress, made very fashionably, and her head was ornamented
by a pretty and very becoming capote, made of silk with cor*
responding et ceteras. Among other persons in the room,,
were a tall Gentleman, and a Lady whom I took to be his
wife, and who appeared quite at home. What there was
about this Gentleman, that excited the laughing propensity
of the rest of the company, I could not discover but some-
thing there was, for he scarcely uttered a word without its
being followed by a general titter. The Lady was tall, and
would be usually considered handsome ; but I should rather
call her showy—her manners were those of good society, and
she appeared sprightly and affable. Standing near the Gen-
tleman I heard him say “ Few people can boast of equal suc-
cess with myself in acquiring a knowledge of the valuable
properties ot the Rainbow.” “La ! Major, you do make one
laugh so ; but they say you are a privileged man,” came
rom a short lair Lady, rather lovely than elegant in her per-
son, who was hanging upon the arm of a singularly dandified
young man, apparently younger than herself, although she did
not seem more than two or three and twenty. Still there was
a certain something which to a man of my experience, ex-
p ail^ e t sle had already blessed some happy man, and
was herself most happy. Great attention had been bestowed
on her toilette, which she had left habited in a satin dress, the
u d L ni . ade ° W> and the sleeves sbort and very full. Before
the Major (for so he was called) could take any notice of
her address to him, she continued “ Pray have you had any
success yet in acquiring a knowledge of who this Hermit is
who takes such liberties with all the people ?” “No indeed
hav’nt I, and to tell you the truth, I have no desire to
have Ins acquaintance. I rather think I should be the suf-
ferer by coming in contact with him—he tells very home
truths. Yes indeed, I m sure he’s taken much greater
latitude in speaking of my husband, than I would have dared
use myself, said the Lady of the bouse* "I’d give any


thing to know who he is,” “ and so would I, p too, my dear,”
replied a tall thin Gentleman, holding a handsome snuff box
in his hand, “for I might then have my doubts removed as
to the best way of managing you Ladies, which with all my
experience I confess I have not yet acquired.” “ There’s
one good thing at all events,” said a Lady, rather above the
middle height—fair and with much naivete in her manners,
her accent just enough of the Emerald Isle to be interesting,
and who upon entering the room had been attended by a re-
markably thread paper looking sort of a Gentleman, “ that
we Ladies are exempted from the abominable remarks of this
Hermit, I was frightened out of my very existence when he
talked of the Ladies at the Governor’s party, and I was quite
rejoiced to find he had left us slone.” “ I cannot think that
nature’s best handy work, fair lovely woman, could suffer by
his notice,” said a Military Officer, “ I must do him the justice
to say that he is very good humoured in his criticisms.”—
“ Ay, but not the less severe,” replied a Gentleman whom I
had before met, and with whose unusual display of shirt frill
I bad been struck, “ there’s a good deal more wind than sun
about him”—“ and more biting frost than either,” said the
delicate looking Gentleman, who had formerly raised a laugh
at the expense of the A. B. Oxonian.
Just at this moment, the paity which was already numer-
ous, was increased by some new arrivals. Turning my head
towards the door-way, my eyes caught those of a Lady,
riveted as it were upon my countenance, with a very scrutini-
zing glance. She was not very young, and had the look of
single blessedness—dark eyes and hair, a brunette of not the
brightest sort imaginable—her features plain but rather mark-
ed, and in stature somewhat above rather than under the true
temale staudax-d. As her eyes met mine, she withdrew
them ; but presently I observed that I was again exposed to
her steady gaze. Rather surprised at being so honored, I
began to tax my memory whether or not I might have seeii
her in England, or elsewhere; but failing to recollect her fea-
tures, I enquired of a Gentleman of my acquaintance who
she was. “ Oh,” said he, “ you are undergoing the stare, are
you ? That Lady is a Miss Lookclose, and always looks before
she leaps ; in other words, she has so much the quality of ac-
quiring a knowledge of people’s characters, by studying phy-
siognomy, that she has never yet found a person good enough


for her, and thus is still single.” She was dressed primly
rather than fashionably, wearing white figured lace over a
satin slip, something the same as I recollect in England three
or four years ago *, her hair being in loose curls, in front,
with the forehead but little exposed. But the two greatest
beauties of the room were among the last arrivals. One of /y
them was young, accompanying a Lady of mature age, wear-
ing spectacles with-tortoise-shell mountings. Her clear com-
plexion, set off by dark eyes, a roman nose, but the rest of
the face rather of the Grecian style of beauty, corresponded
equally with the colour and mode of wearing her hair, as;
with the grace and elegant simplicity of her dress. The
other Lady was also very young, had dark eyes and hair, re- H
markabty regular handsome features, and bearing all the ease
and dignity of good birth and education. She was leaning
on the arm of a Military Field Officer, apparently many years
her senior ; but his countenance was expiessive of content-
ment and good humour, and his attentions to the Lady were
marked by true gentlemanly propriety., ]
1 am now warned by my own sense of propriety to take
my leave of this subject, else my readers will think I want
schooling myself, instead of schooling others, and yet it is al-
most as difficult to put down one's pen, as it is to controul
one’s tongue, when woman, charming woman, is the theme—
“ Fair lovely woman-—good and affable,
More clear of hue and far more beautiful
Than precious sardonyx, or purple rocks (
Of amethysts, or glittering hyacinth.”
If it were not for this, I might find much more to say, as al-
though the party did not resemble Lady Squeezera’s cram, in
point of numbers, it was large and well selected, containing
a fair proportion of the useful and ornamental members of com-
munity—-of talkers and listeners, of those who amused and
those who were amused—of all that is charming, young, and
gay ; and of that which is sensible, mature, and grave. But
all this and much more I must defer to perhaps some other
occasion, remaining, unchangeably, my readers’ most obedient
servant,
Simon. Stukeely.


A -jf^-jP"\jf'Jf tk J& k &‘
No. 9. Hobart Town , July 31, 1829.
Having occasion one day last week to make a trifling pur-
chase, I entered a shop in Elizabeth-street, and, having ob-
tained what I required, was about to leave it, when my no-
tice was attracted by the manner in which another customer
was being served at the same moment. He had asked for a
pound of sugar, which w~as weighed, and then deliberately
turned out upon the counter, the purchaser instantly pro-
ceeding to fill his pockets with it, just as it had left the-
scales. “Do not you provide a wrapper for what you sell ?”
I enquired. The shopkeeper, a spare thin man, of a very
vinegar aspect, looking like a “ Praise-God barebones,” who
had been taking physic, stroked his chin, and with a demure
expression, under which much was conveyed, replied, “ Our
profits won’t allow it.” “ Why, the article I have bought is
at least three times what its price would be in the dearest
shop in London, What can constitute this immense dif-
ference?” “Our profits won’t allow paper,” was the only
reply I could again receive. Presently a fat middle-aged
female in great dishabille, approached the shop from a neigh-
bouring public-house, and entering with a semivole, and,
throwing some money on the counter, said, in a tone and style
which could only have been acquired by a long acquaintance
with Billingsgate, “ Give me some tea and sugar.” . “ What
have you to put them in, my good woman ?” “ None of your
good woman for me, d— your eyes,” at the same moment
stooping to draw off a dirty stocking from a dirtier foot,
“ here’s a leg’ll bear looking at —and here’s something’ll
hold the tea and sugar,” handing over the stocking, into
which the sugar was first placed, and then tying it in the
middle with the woman’s garter, so as to form a division for
the sugar, she received her change and left the shop. My
attention to this scene had caused me to remain on the steps
el the doorway ; and just as I was thinking of returning to
my lodgings, the sleek portly Gentleman, whom I met the first
day of my landing, and who introduced me to the Commer-
cial Rooms, came towards me, upon leaving an adjacent stuc-
coed building, apparently in a high state of perspiration, and
shewing doubt and anxiety in his looks. “ Can you tell me


the difference, Sir, between an offence and a misdemeanour ? I
have been puzzling myself how to decide a case which has
been brought before me, and Burns does not clearly explain
w hether it is an offence or a misdemeanour.” “ All misde-
meanours are offences, but all offences are not misdemea-
nours, Sir ; but perhaps if you will acquaint me with the
particulars, I may be able to expound the difference more
clearly.” The Gentleman' hereupon assumed a wonderful
self-complacency, and, putting himself into an attitude of im-
portance, replied, “ Why you must know, Sir, that since I
have had the honor to belong to the Bench, I have been un-
remitting in studying Burns, and I begin to understand a
little of what they call criminal proceedings, which are as I
lake it, derived from a latin word crimens , a crime, which 1
remember to have seen in the vocabulary.” Here he was, or
appeared to be, at least three inches taller than before, con-
tinuing his speech however—•“ But two days ago, Sir, a man
came and said he had a case of crim. con. to bring before me,
and I told him to stay for a day or two, as I thought in the,
meantime, I might find out what it meant, but Burns does not
give the necessary information, and two or three of my
brother Magistrates, whom I have consulted, are as much in
the dark as myself. What I want to know, Sir, is whether T.
am to commit the parties to Gaol for an offence, or for a mis-
demeanour, if I think the case sufficiently made out,” “ I
am very little of a Lawyer, Sir, but I may save you some
trouble by telling you that crim. con. or criminal conversa-
tion, although a crime of the highest magnitude, according to
the Divine Law, is not considered so by our human code, and
cognizance of it does not come within the province of u Ma-
gistrate. The only remedy the parties have is by a civil pro-
cess. It is an anomaly inYhe law, but so it is—that a man
who steals another’s sheep, loses his life as the forfeit; but be
who steals another’s wife, commits a moral offence only, not
a misdemeanour which is punishable by law. You could not
have chosen a more apt illustration of your enquiry. Crim.
eon. is a great offence, but no misdemeanour—sheep-stealing
is both an offence and a misdemeanour.”
During the progress of this conversation, our party be-
came a trio, having been joined by another Gentleman, whom
I had before seen. “ Eh, Sir, eh, Sir, good morning, Sir ?
Well, Sir, what news from Government-house, Sir ?—been


there lately, Sir ? “No, Sir, my respects having been paid
to His Excellency, I have no further occasion at present to
trouble him. Next directing his speech to ray portly com-
panion, “ you should do as I used, Sir, in all difficult Ma-
gistracy cases—decide first, and try afterwards.” “Why
that is scarcely consistent with your patriotic principles ; is it
Sir ? A true Patriot will ever seek to preserve the laws of
his country inviolate, and will neither k.hd himself to the op-
pression of the people by their Rulers, nor to the factions de-
magogue, who would seek to lessen the authority of the
Rulers by the Undue influence of the People. Are you on
the Bench now, Sir?” No, Sir—no. It broke down
uader me some years ago, and has never since been repaired ;
but that will be one of the first acts which I mean to intro-
duce into the House of Assembly.” “ W hat House of As-
sembly is that, Sir?” What, Sir ? what, Sir? Hav’nt you
heard of our Great Association ? I have written to tell
them that the first order they must execute, is to procure for
us a House of Assembly.” “ I thought, Sir, that the ob-
jects of the Association were purely mercantile, I did not
know that it was intended they were to be State Cobblers.”
“ State Cobblers ! what do you mean, Sir ? What do you
mean? Do you know, Sir, who are the Members? That a
friend of mine is one of them, and do you think, Sir, that
between us two and JOSEPH Hume, we can’t do any thing we
please? I tell you, Sir, we shall have a House of Assembly,
and I am already preparing for it by practising talking.”
“ W r hose style of eloquence do you most admire, Sir?”
Whose style, Sir? Few equal to my own—certainly none
can improve it, unless it be that young man, who spoke so
strongly in Court about the Attorney-General. He bids fair
to be first rate, Sir, and I mean to have him in the House of
Assembly, to lead against the Crown Lawyers.” “ Indeed,
Sir !I do not know him. What Acts do you think the si-
tuation of the Colony most immediately requires, when the
House of Assembly shall be convened ?” “ Whpt Acts, Sir?
I’ll shew you a list of them.
—An Act to. annul all former Laws and Acts, and to in-
troduce a new order of things, so that we may start clear,
and mould the leaven as we like. “ That’ll be a most im-
portant measure, Sir—nothing like a clear stage, and plenty
of elbow-room.”


2. —An Act to consolidate all offices—to make the Gover-
nor his own Secretary —the Sherifi his own Hangman—the
Judge his own Crier —the Treasurer his own Collector—and
the Magistrates their own Flagellators. “It will be quite
impossible to carry this point, Sir. The essence of all Go-
vernment and discipline, is gradation.” “No such thing,
Sir—no such thing. I dare say the drones we have now won’t
like it, but I have every thing provided. I have had a
young man in training, Sir, the last twelve-months, who will
make an excellent Governor —I’ve already taught him to in-
sult somebody, and he’s uncommonly docile. I’ve brought
him to be as tractable as a young puppy ; and as for his fitness
for being Secretary, he’s the very thing itself—he’d put an
end to all correspondence—for nobody can read what he
writes, nor would they understand it, if it were deciphered.—
I think I shall be Treasurer myself—perhaps I may promote
the young Orator to be Judge, as he uses his voice so well,
and my friend here at my elbow, will obtain a fine appetite by
exercising his right arm an hour or two every morning at the
triangles.” “ I’ve no desire to take office,” he replied ; “ nor
can I say that I wish to see any material change in our pre-
sent system ; but I think an Act might be introduced which
would benefit the agricultural interest-” . “ Legislation upon
commercial and agricultural questions, I observed, requires a
profundity of research, an acquaintance with the state of other
countries, which few possess. What particular point would
your proposal embrace ? “It would be an Act to compel all
householders and heads of families to have a hot luncheon every
day, between breakfast and dinner, at the rate of two pounds
of meat per head, so as .to encourage the consumption, and
raise the price of live stock.” “I am afraid, Sir, you have
overlooked difficulties and objections to which your plan is
open., It is rather invading nature’s prerogative to attempt
to coutroul the belly.” “ Why not legislate as well in eating
as drinking, Sir? lam sure there are Acts and Laws enough
upon the latter subject, and I cannot se.e wherein lies the dif-
ference.” “ The discussion would perhaps be tiresome, Sir,”
I replied, “ but I do not go along with you in the analogy, al-
though at the first blush your position is striking.”
Here the other Speaker, who had evidently been ex-
ceedingly impatient during this digression, interrupted with
“ the commercial interest, Sir, is, and always shall be under


my particular charge, and I have an Act all cut and dried
upon the subject,” taking at the same moment a long written
paper from his pocket. “An Act to render it felony without
benefit of Clergy, to buy, sell, or contract for any imported
commodities, or to import any commodity into the Island of
Van Diemen’s Land and its Dependencies, without having
previously obtained a License under the hand and seal of the
framer of this Act, countersigned by the Governor for the
time-being.”
“ How do you mean benefit of Clergy, Sir ? That absur-
dity has been removed from our Statute book by the en-
lightened mind of Mr. PEEL.” “We don’t understand Mr.
Peel’s Acts here, for the Judge’s doubts have raised fifty
per cent, since their existence has been made known to him ;
and the Attorney-General will find that the sun will not dry
up the ink, nor the wind blow away the writings by which the
occurrences of his administration will be recorded.” At this
moment the arrival of two or three more Gentlemen put an
end to our conversation. Making my bow, therefore, as I
now do to you, my readers, (who by the bye I understand
are very numerous) I took my leave until some other occa-
sion, remaining your devoted servant,
Simon Stukeley.
No. 10. Hobart Town August 7, 1829.
• ;» 4 \ * | • ; >
“ Are we never to have a continuation of the account of
our Law Expounders given by the Gentleman who entertains
well, and lives in the house shaped like the letter LV’ me-
thinks I hear from some of my readers. Have patience, my
friends, and you shall know everything in time ; but so long
as I have the happiness to move occasionally in the fashion-
able world, composed as it is, of beauty and the graces, with
all their charming laughter-loving faces, I shall perhaps, let
the memoranda which I took of the conversation between that
Gentleman and myself, remain where they now are, upon my
closet shelf, not feeling the least apprehension that the subject
will spoil by keeping ; but rather on the contrary, hoping, as
some men hope against reason, when they bottle bad wine,
that time, the grand regulator of all things, may work a mi-


racle, and render of some value that, which is new next to use-
less—may enable me to soften the asperity of some of my
informant’s expressions. In other words, I am fain to hope
(I do not say expect) that a short delay may assist me to ac-
quire such other information, as may somewhat reduce the
number of that portion of thewithouts, who are, to use the
words of my friend, “ little better than live lumber—pos-
sessing neither law, jaw, or any thing else excepting assu-
rance,” and to place them one degree higher in the scale.
But were it otherwise, I have other matter at present, for I
have been a guest at two weddings ; and I do not know that
I can render my unmarried readers a more acceptable service,
than by describing the sweetly mingled hopes and fears which
sat upon the brows of the lovely brides, or the fresh alacrity
of the new-trimmed bridegrooms as they attended them at
the Altar, in order that they may know, when their turns
come, how they should comport themselves upon so interest-
ing an occasion.
Returning one evening to my lodgings from a ramble,
in the course of which I had met the A 3 Oxonian, walking
in company with a grave looking personage, dressed in a suit
of rusty black, with long gaiters and breeches, rather a broad -
brimmed bat, and his whole appearance being a sort of shabby
genteel, not unlike that of the French Emigrants in the small
country towns of England, during the iats war, I bad two
notes put into my hand by the servant, one of which tf re-
quested the honor of my company” to attend a wedding, and
afterwards partake of a dejeuner a lafourckette,” and the
other was from a Gentleman, “ Re Self and another,” and went
on to explain, that on such a day at such a time and place, a
long and attentive courtship was to be terminated by “ vows
made in the sight of Heaven to be on Earth performed j” in-
viting me to be one of the witnesses of their approaching hap-
piness, and to take a seat at the marriage feast, or dinner.-*—
Could any man withstand such temptations ? But unfortu-
nately it so happened, that both ceremonies were fixed for
one and the self-same day. This however did not deter me
from accepting each invitation, purposing to fill up the space
between two entertainments, by a walk through some of
the beautiful scenery by which the town is surrounded, enjoy-
ing the fine clear air of this agreeable season of an agreeable
climate, in order to procure a second appetite.


Ido not know whether I was most struck with the re-
markable precision with which one of the brides wag
dressed —every plait and fold in its exact place—every pin
just where it should be, so as to keep all the corners and rum-
ples in proper order, or the trepidation and alarm which were
depicted on her countenance.^She had passed the May-day
of youth, attaining that period of life when discretion is at its
maturity—when the idle nonsense which is sometimes breathed
into the female ear, can be weighed in the balance, ere it be
allowed a place in the heart; but on reaching this enviable
point, she had acquired that peculiar style of speaking,
acting, looking, and dressing, to which younger votaries in
the world of fashion cannot aspire. In her dress there was
somewhat of a deviation from the established rales of bridal
garments, the emblematical white having been exchanged for
the party-coloured vest. When the eventful moment arrived
in which she was called upon to declare herself for better or
worse, the property of another, the interesting anxiety which
crept over her mind was pourtrayed by her countenance,
somewhat reminding me of the exhibitions of alarm, which 1
have in former days witnessed in certain of the domestic fea-
thered creation, when a hawk has been hovering in the air,
ready as it were to pounce upon it j and when she came to the
important words, “ I will,” her apprehensions seemed ten-
fold increased. The other bride had also arrived at that
* l
stage of our earthly sojourn, when all the vows and protesta-
tions of deceitful man are not received as Gospel* She was
dressed in what is called a Corsage a I Bspagnol, rather high
and straight across the bust, made apparently in the newest
Kode, and looking as if of recent importation. She suffi-
ciently exhibited “ the sweet roses of crimson modesty,!*
without shewing so much apprehension as her sister bride ,
and went through the important ceremony with great self-
possession and As for the bridegrooms, the one
who was united to the first Lady seemed well matched ie
point of age and rank of life, as indeed, did the other Gentle-
man to the chosen one of bis affections—altogether forming
two very suitable marriages.
After leaving the Church, we repaired to the house of the
(gentleman who had invited us to the dejeuner a Id fourth site,
where a sumptuous repast indeed awaited ns. Such a pro-
fusion of the good things of this life, has oeMcm come under


my observation ; not merely tea, toast, and muffins, but a cold
collation, including the choicest productions of the farm-yard,
as well as spoils of the Collared things of all
descriptions, rusks buttered and covered with anchovies,
shell tish, pies of various sorts, and a long list of jellies,
trifles, blanc-manges, custards; dried fruit, &c. &c., the
whole crowned by a magnificent cake, upon which the loves
of Pyramus and Thisbe were emblematically recorded.
Among the assembled visitors, many of whom I had never
before seen, one was a Gentleman of fair complexion, good
stature, middle age, very slightly marked by the small pox,
wearing his hair, which was of a light colour, flat and straight
at the sides, but pushed op in front in the shape of a cone
His manners and style of address were remarkably mild and
complacent—very attentive to the wants of those around him,
particularly to the Ladies of the party. There was a certain
something in the expression of his face, whenever he hap-
pened to eye the bride, which reminded me of a shopkeeper
whom I once saw in England, when unpacking a bale of very
splendid French goods. He belonged to the Society of
friends, and as one thing after another was turned out upon
his counter, rubbing his hands, he said in a tone of self-con-
gratulation “ Thou It be the means perhaps of bringing me
many a good pound.” Just as be looked upon that occasion,
did this-Gentleman shape the expression of his features as he
regarded the newly-made bride ; but what could be passing in
bis mind, I do not pretend to know.
Next to him sat a short stout personage, reminding me in
point of figure, of Sir Walter Scott’s description of Rashleigh
Osbaldestone, but unlike in features, inasmuch as this Gen-
tleman had thick lips, and his eyes wanted that acuteness,
for which the character delineated by Sir Walter is distin-
guished. ... , ; ;
I vvas rather amused to find by a conversation which t was
passing between these two, and another person talle Van
either of them, that I, although incog, was the subject of
their remarks. The last named was of rough unaccommodating
manners, a round face, rather small eyes, and bore evident
marks that he was a dear lover of the bottle.* Sell-dear, dar-
ling self seemed the main-spring of his thoughts, words, and
actions. He filled his plate plentifully with all the good
things by which he was surrounded, eating voraciously, and


■suiting this action to abundant libations of the Champagne and*
other choice wines and liquors by which the table was covered.
He was in the act of cutting up a cold chicken, as some per-
son observed, “ lam completely at a.loss to know who he can
be,” •when the other replied with a tremendous oath, “ If I
had the handling of the brute, I’d just serve him as lam now
doing this fowl.” The mild fair complexioned Gentleman
here smiled, and said, “ I rather think in the cutting up line
you are scarcely his match. He uses a two-edged knife, and
sometimes cuts close. Yo.u would do better trying your
prowess with him by swimming in brandy, and letting us see
who’d drown first.” “ Ye ken vara little about it, I tak
upon mysel’ to say that he’s na mair nor less than a Mr.
Stoobs.” “ D—n him, whoever he is,” said the tall Bon
Vivant, and by whose accent I now learnt that he was from
North of the Tweed, “ I fear him not —there is not sic a
word spoke of in Scotland, as this term of fear,” as Shaks-
peare says. Shortly after this, my attention was drawn ft)
the bridegroom, who was engaged to all appearance, in di-
lating upon his happiness, to a tall, ruddy complexioned man,
of considerable bulk, and who seemed quite at ease both with
himself and the world. “ I cannot think,” said the newly-
made Benedick, “ how any man can remain a Bachelor.—
Only imagine the difference between a dear creature like my
wife, and one of those left-handed liaisons, in which twenty
others may have an equal interest with one’s-self. I cannot
believe it possible that any man should remain unmarried, if
he only considers a little.” “ Yes, by St. Dafit, a man is a
fool who does not marry ; and when he is married, he is a
greater rogue if he does’nt use his wife well.”
In the midst of our good cheer and hilarity, I saw a gig
drive up tc the door, and presently it struck me, that a cer-
tain impatience was manifested in our host’s features, as if he
would be more honored and better pleased by our absence
than presence. This seemed understood by most of the com-
pany, and one by one they took their leave \ although two or
three, particularly the tall Scot, a middle sized man of very
dark, almost a creole complexion, and another or so, seemed
to think that
Parting would be “ such sweet sorrow,”
That they could stay and drink, ♦* till it beroorrow.”
Not so with me however, I made my bow and proceeded on


my walk, and an hour or two afterwards had the pleasure of
meeting the happy couple on the north road in a gig, a mile or
two from town.
Towards dinner time, I repaired to the other house of
mirth and feasting, but cannot do justice either to describing
toe few select friends who were there assembled, or to the ex-
cellent entertainment which was presented to them, unless I
defer the particulars to some other occasion, i therefore re-
main for the present, my readers, most obedient,
Simon Stukelev
A few days ago my notice was attracted by seeing a Gen-
tleman of middle stature, and rather stout, perhaps forty or
five and forty years of age, stop almost every well-dressed
person whom he met, and accost him in a very earnest and
emphatic manner. Just as I approached him, he said ti>
another Gentleman who was preceding me by a few steps
.** don’t believe a word of it, Sir—not a word of truth in it—
it’s an infamous falsehood.” Stopping to exchange a fen
civilities with the person whom he was addressing, 1 wars
imperceptibly drawn into a share of the conversation, and
heard him continue “ I have been to his Excellency about it,
And have a great mind to go and horsewhip that little rascal
of a printer’’—then turning towards me “ don’t believe »
word of it, Sir,” again met my ears. I observed to him that
I did not know to what he alluded, but received no answer ;
and it was not till he pot into ray hand a small ivory tablet
and pencil, that I comprehended the cause of his not replying
to me, although if I had attended to his manner of speaking,-
I need not have been at a loss to have discovered it. 1 there-
fore wrote the question which I had before put verbally—b a
immediately took oat of his pocket, a newspaper, and gravely
pointing to one of my own Essays, again said “ Don’t believe,
a word of it Sir—l am not the author—’tis all an infamous
falsehood, and I have been and explained it all to the
Governor,’’ I could scarcely forbear smiling to hear him
thus utter truisms wbigb I could so well verify ; but willing


to enjoy the joke, I wrote the enquiry “ And what does His
Excellency say ?” I formerly studied Lavater a little, and
have some skill in deciphering by the countenance, what is
passing in the mind. 1 could see by this question that it had
operated as a spark in a well-appointed tinder box, towards
striking a light, and had created an amazing degree of self-
consequence and imaginary importance. “ Oh, Sir !” he
replied, “ the Governor received me with great politeness,
and paid me the utmost attention; telling me, that he never
suspected, for a moment that I could do such a thing ; but he
said to me, it’s not of the least consequence, Sir, I assure you
not the least in the world, smiling very good huraouredly as
he spoke; so that I hope I have removed all unfavourable
impression in that quarter.” “ You were quite right, Sir,” I
pext wrote upon his tablet, “ always court the powers that
be, there’s never any knowing to what fertile plains they may
prove an averwe.” Hereupon, he smiled unutterably, and
replied “Oh, Sir I I see you are a Wag, but don’t touch me
upon pastoral pursuits too closely—l can assure you, Gentle-
men, the same as I said to the Governor, that ’tis all an infa-
mous fabrication.” “ Don’t be alarmed” interposed the
other Gentleman, “ no man who was ever in your company
would charge you with being a Wit—much less a satirist—
any thing but that, my friend.” “ Well! do you know, Sir,”
he replied, “ that I really believe the Governor thought
the same, by his manner to me.” “I do not doubt it, Sir,” I
made him understand, “ His Excellency possesses too much
penetration to need being set right upon that subject.”
W hile we were thus conversing, another Gentleman joined us.
I had previously seen him on more than one occasion; and
now, as at other times, he addressed his hearers in rather an
abrupt manner :—“ lam piqued, Sir, and will be piqued, Sir,
and mean to be piqued Sir—’tis a most unwarrantable liberty,
Sir, with a man of my bearing, Sir, and I was never so piqued
in all my life, Sir.” Here the Gentleman who had hitherto
spoken but little, interposed. “ I really think you are wrong
my good friend, thus unnecessarily to take up a glove which
you happen to see lying in the street, and because it chances
to fit your hand, forthwith to presume that it was thrown there
as a challenge for you ; why, possibly it might fit a dozen
others equally well as yourself, and we shall by and bye have
von all by the ears together, fighting in order to settle to whom


the gage belongs—-tut, tut, Sir, believe me, such conduct is ill-
becoming the occasion—reserve your anger till it can be pro-
perly bestowed ; remember how does a mastiff* treat a snarling
cur, when the latter barks at him, and do the same yourself
in this case.” The idea seemed to tickle the other’s fancy ;
for he began to laugh, and continued increasing, until the tears
absolutely ran down his cheeks—when he said “ I wish I
could, Sir—l wish I could ; but I’ll take your advice, Sir, and
will laugh louder than the best of them, at the fellow’s au-
dacity.” “ You cannot more entirely defeat your enemies’
malice or add to your friends’ satisfaction, than by such a
course, Sir.” With these words we bade one another good
morning, and each pursued his several way.
When I left home, my object was to take a walk to the
Government Farm atNew-town, respecting which I had heard
a good deal since my residence in this country. I was
anxious to see what system of operations it had been possible
to introduce, so as to overcome the decided objections which
must strike every impartial person, as belonging to the whole
principle of such establishments. The profit is wholly on one
side—in other words, it sticks so closely to the pockets of
those who receive Government salaries, that no other person
can receive any advantage whatever from it. As to the Public,
by whom all the charge is paid, and for whose benefit, such
concerns are nominally carried on, it resembles a wealthy
farmer, who has a large heap of corn in his granary, from
whence daily supplies are drawn for use or consumption ; the
heap being constantly replenished by fresh quantities—un-
known to the owner, however, the weevil is making its silent
ravages at the bottom of the heap; and thus for every bushel
which he adds to his store, and thinks he will have so much
for his uses, he in fact receives but three pecks. Just so, are
such undertakings as Government farming. A good season or
a bad season, good land or bad land, good servants or bad
servants, industry or idleness, makes no dill’erence to the hand
that pays lor all.—Whether the heaps be added to, or di-
minished, matters not to any of the workmen or labourers, or to
the owner—all supplies are still furnished, all wages still paid,
the whole resembling the Wiltshire sign of the “ Five Alls.”
The Governor says, I order all; the Government cattle con-
sumo all—the overseer looks after all, the servants pocket all,
and the poor Public, with a doleful face, cries out—and 1 pay
for all.


It is an incontrovertible fact, that unless the expenses of
any Establishment, are bond fide borne by itself, it is carried
on for the owner, who in this case is the
Public. To return however from this digression, after lea-
ving the par tie quarree of which I had formed one, I pro-
ceeded on my walk towards the farm, and upon reaching it,
was civilly received by a person, apparently the Superinten-
dent ; but he had not much the appearance of a farmer, being
more like an English Exciseman, who had lost an eye in a
scuffle with smugglers, and by whom I was shewn over the
several enclosures and buildings. If I had previously enter-
tained an unfavourable idea of the general principle of pub-
lic farming, I did not see one single reason for altering my
opinion on this occasion. Poor, miserable, shallow, cold land,
has been manured and cultivated, apparently with much per-
severence ; but, can an Ethiop be washed white? Had one-
half the expense and labour which have been bestowed upon
this spot, been applied upon a soil capable of making a re-
turn, or had one-fourth of it been at the command of the
careful industrious Settler, every ton of hay or green forage
which this farm can produce, would cost about one-third of
its present invisible expense—but although invisible—not (he
less certain. I really must say, that I am rather surprised
such a moth upon the Public Treasury as public farming
should be permitted to exist —it should be crushed as a vile
and noxious reptile.
The extreme fineness of the day, induced me to extend my
stroll towards the river, on my way homewards, pursuing the
path, along the banks of which, I came to the large Govern-
ment Garden, and the foundation of the new residence for the
Governor, by which this place is distinguished ; and men-
tally lamented, that either so much had been done, or that so
much had been left undone, scarcely knowing which ; but
whilst amusing myself with such meditations, two or three
persons of my acquaintance came towards me, and nolens
volens insisted upon my agreeing to join them and a few others
that evening, at a celebrated Tavern in the town, to eat “ an-
chovy toast and drink Burgundy.” The rattle of their
tongues completely drove from my head all the reflections
which the scene 1 had been contemplating engendered ; but I
was so much pleased with the beauty of the spot, that I fra-
med in my own mind another walk there, upon some future


occasion ; when, should any thing particular occur to me, I
may perhaps make a note of it, for the edification of my readers.
Punctual to the hour which had been named for the anchovy
toast and Burgundy party, I repaired to a large roomy build*
ing, at the corner of two streets, where the simpering of the /
landlady, serving as a counterpoise to the scowl of the 0
lord, welcomed me, as well as many others, with appa-
rent attention. We passed the evening much as is usual upon
such occasions—some talkers, some listeners ; some boister-
ous, others placid ; some uttering rude jests and then laugh-
ing at them ; others looking wise, and laughing too, without
knowing at what ; and others again, enquiring of their next
neighbour what all the laughing was about; when, at rather
a late hour, or more properly at an early one, being
past the time “ when witches dance, and fairies tread the
earth,” an incident occurred giving a new turn to our merri-
ment. Among the company were two, one of whom, a “ bravv S
bonnie Scot,” in the very prime of life, sprightly, gay, affa-
ble, and endowed with a full portion of bonhomtnie ; the other
was his junior, but altogether a non-descript—a thing sui~
generis; a compound of pride, affectation, and conceit, clo-
thed in an exterior—“ neat trimly drest, and his chin nevV-
reaped, show’d like a stubble land at harvest home.” He
took great pains to shew oft* his figure, by wearing clothes
made to fit tight—beautifully close, as Mr. Fitwell would
say—not that he need have taken such trouble, had he form-
ed the same opinion of himself which others very freely ex-
pressed of him ; he was too slim to be the true Apollo Bel-
videre which he evidently fancies himself ; not tall enough for
a life guardsman, and his face wants that something, which
nothing can supply. Between these two, some misunder-
standing arose, about a trifle ; but in proportion as the
wine had oozed in, the wit had oozed out with many of us,
and what could be expected where, as in one of the pair,
there was no wit at the outset 1 What first met my ears were
the words “ an ye repeat that experiment I shall just make
free to bring my fingers in contact with your nose”—a threat
scarcely uttered, ere the neatly trimmed gentleman found to
his cost, that the “ braw bonnie Scot” was in earnest. If
any of ray readers have ever chanced in their peregrinations*
to see a cur tail-piped, they may picture to themselves, by
bringing the poor animal’s appearance to their mind’s eye.,


what was the cut and figure of the wight who was thus handled.
He looked upon the company with a beseeching sigh, as much
as to say, pity my indignity and assist me to avenge it; but
compassion, he found none ; he then endeavoured to turn th?
whole into jest; saying to the Scotsman, with a forced smile,
It is now my turn to pull your nose, and then you know, we
shall be quits.” “ Just as ye like” was the reply, “ but an
ye do, you’ll just tak the consequences.” Nothing daunted,
he proceeded to try this mode of retaliation ; but was met by
such a broad-side of Mendozas, followed by the application of
the foot like a battering ram, bombarding the seat of honor,
that a breach was speedily made, which in Europe, would
have been thought capable of being repaired only by “ pistol
charged with mortal lead.”—Here, however, the march of
“ Virtue and innocence,” has so far overcome the human pas-
sions, as to have produced a different result; for collecting
together in the best manner be was able, some of the tattered
trophies which might else have graced the brow of his oppo-
nent, he bade the company adieu, saying “ I’ll make you
repent this. Sir—l have the law in my own bands, and you
shall feel its effects too, Sir.” A violent langb followed this
J hreat, and was succeeded by “ I do not know what law you
may have in your hands, but we all know you have precious
little in your head.” Soon after, we were warned by the cock-
crowing, which we heard all around us, that it was time for
sober citizens to retire to their pillows. I therefore said
larewell to my companions, as I now do to you, most courteous
readers, and am your obedient
Simon Stukelev.
No. 12. Hobart Town, August 21, 1829.
1 have received the following Letter. To Mr. Simon
Stukeley :—Sir, Yours without date, came duly to hand o*
the Ist instant, and note the Contents. Beg leave to acquaint
you in reply that you have taken a very great liberty with me,
and which I can by no means think of allowing. Have also*
observed some very improper freedoms with gome cf ay
frieads, to which I have called their attention.


Beg leave farther to acquaint you that if this practice is
continued, I shall write about it to the Home Government; it
being of no use to complain to this. I am, Sir, your most
obedient servant, Mercator.
Good gentle Mercator, why art thou so wrathful ? How
have I unintentionally offended thee? Let me only explain
myself to thee in half a dozen words, and I will hold any w ager,
that be thou even more choleric than thy letter represents,
thy vinegar will be turned into milk, and thy angry words into
those clothed in the most honied form of language.—l am, as
I have before said, a lone and simple man, known to few, and
still fewer knowing me. I walk here, and Igo there, 1 en-
quire no names—l note no deformity or imperfection of nature,
but only such peculiarities as have been acquired, and such
as are very capable of being remedied. If, therefore, some of
the pictures I have drawn from the observations thus made,
chance upon being hung up for the public gaze to be thought
£Ood likenesses, and, if the likenesses be not so handsome or
cb flattering as the originals considered was their due, am i,
the poor painter, to blame? Or does not the fault rather lie
w ith those who in this manner are informed wherein they may
profitably apply ray wholesome instructions ? If the originals
cannot endure the sight of their own portraits, how, I will ask
them, are the Public to endure the originals. A very simple
way of meeting the question is obvious, and I will recommend
it to MERCATOR, and any others who may think themselves.
aggrieved by me. If Ido not draw their characters faithfully,
my representations are no likenesses, and, therefore, unworthy
notice.—lf I do delineate them in their true colors, and the
picture be not pleasing, let them correct what is amiss in the
originals, and I will hereafter do them justice ; but, for once
and all, I say to MERCATOR, and in so doing, 1 mean to ex-
press the same thing to others, that with a true feeling for their
good, and to give them a just claim to the amiable characters
whereto they, perhaps, already think themselves entitled, I
shall act the part of the skilful physician ; and when I find
that one dose has failed, of its intended effect, 1 shall repeat
it, accompanied by the lancet and blister, until the disease be
cared.
Why does not Mercator, follow the example which has
been represented to me, as having been set by one of the
Quorum ; at whom I accidentally glanced lately, having in my


mind’s-eye, when I first saw him, one of the characters of a
great modern writer, as his prototype, in point of shape and
figure. Laughing heartily, he congratulated himself that my
shafts were so pointless, in regard to anything which required
correction, “ I care vara little what he says of me, so that he
kens nothing to my disadvantage either in my public or private
pursuits—let him sift me upon these as he likes ; the more
both I and others are so watched over, the better for all.”
This was at once magnanimous and manly—well deserving
Mercator’s attention, as a rule for his own conduct.
Ohejam satis ! methinks I hear, and will, therefore, dismiss
the subject, trusting I shall have no occasion to recur to it ;
for I am strictly in earnest, when I say, that the more kicking
I perceive, the more lashing I shall infiict.
Being busily employed one morning last week, in arranging
and preparing for publication, the notes I had taken illustrative
of the pretensions of the “Withouts,” a knock at the door
was presently followed by the entrance into my room of a man
dressed in a sort of half-jockey style, who made many bows
and apologies, for what he called his intrusion. He was of
middle stature, of a round and not unpleasing turn of features,
rather swarthy, and of tolerable address, but was a perfect
stranger to me. “ I beg your pardon, Sir, for taking the
liberty of waiting upon you,” he said to me, “ but I under-
stand you are in want of a horse, and I have two or three on
sale, which I can most highly recommend.” I told him in
reply, that he had been misinformed, as I had no intention to
be encumbered with a care of this sort, until the season should
be sufficiently advanced, to allow me to proceed into the inte-
rior, according to the promise which I had made, with the
Gentleman who had spoke of the roads and bridges, as I have
before mentioned. “I am very sorry for that, Sir,” he an-
swered, lam in the hands of the Lawyers ;by whom I have
already been nearly ruined, and, if I cannot sell one of my
horses, so as to raise a certain sum by Saturday, I shall have
to go to gaol, leaving my wife and young family unprotected.”
I take no delight in hearing tales of distress, in whatever shape
they come. The expression of this man’s countenance, rather
awakened a curiosity to learn a little of his history—and, upon
putting a few questions to him, I found that he had arrived in
the Colony five or six years ago, as an Emigrant, and had
commenced the business of a Storekeeper--that in an evil


hour, requiring pecuniary assistance upon some occasion, he
bad recourse to one of the “ Withouts” who dealt in that line,
to the tune of f* never exceed twenty per cent.,” and by whom
the needed help was bestowed, upon the joint security of a
Mortgage and Warrant of Attorney.—l was sceptical upon
this latter point, thinking he was mistaken in telling me they
were both for the same transaction ; but he was positive, and
in the end convinced me he spoke the truth. He farther told
me, that the Lawyer’s fangs having been once fixed on his
property, never left hold of it, until by foreclosure, writs of
fieri facias, compound interest of twenty per cent, upon
twenty per cent., and all the other damnables which followed
in the Lawyer s train, he was shorn as closely of his pos-
sessions, as ever was a six month’s lamb, whose wool was
Leonesas Quality’ ——that he had since struggled with all
sorts of difficulties, and had nearly surmounted them, when
accident having again placed him in the hands of this same
Without, he was pursuing him with unrelenting severity.
The account thus given of this limb of the Law, having tallied
in its main features, with what had been previously mid me
by my general informant, I felt disposed to judge of him my-
self ; and, accordingly taking a memorandum of the unfortu-
nate man’s name and debt, I promised to call upon the Lawver
and try if I could make any terms for him. How shall I
describe my interview with this Dispenser of Law’s rigours,
under their most rigorous shape ? After waiting a few minutes
i».- the Clerk s office, during which, I could not help observing,
that the tables were covered with writs of capias, summonses,
Fi:fa’s, and Ca:sas, in awful number, I was told that
my turn of admission was come, and was forthwith ushered
into an adjoipjpg room. Here was a scene which struck me
forcibly a hapdsome Side-board stood on one side, covered
partly with glasses, decanters, &c., partly with bundles of
papers, docketed apd tied together with rod inkle, and partly
with various articles of merchandize.—ln the centre of the
room, was placed a large table, on which were piled all sorts
,of papers j some relating to law, others to merchant’s invoices.
bills of lading, &c., others to calculations of interest at twenty
per cent., for any given sum in the readiest way ; there being
also, seveial books resembling those kept by a shop keeper,
I u the corners, by the fire-place, were large deal cases, such
as are used for packing light valuable importations from En-
gland.


When I entered, the man of law, or rather, as it stinolc
me the man of compounds, was standing by the table, as it
waitino- to receive me; and immediately returned the bow
with which I saluted him- He was dressed a dishabille;
inasmuch as he wore a grey beaver dressing-gown slippers
down at heel —a yellowish, half-dirty, night shirt; his neck-
cloth tied loosely, and he did not appear to have shaved that
morning. In person and stature, there , was nothing prepos-
sessing rather under the middle-height than otherwise, his
bulk corresponding therewithal ; he had a shrewd cunning
look about the eye, which had rather a tendency to create re-
pulsion on the part of strangers, than to invite familiarity.
Still there was a constrained politeness in his manner, a ser-
vility in his mode of replying to me, which argued that he
could be all things to all men ; and warned me, that I was not
to be misled by superficial speciousness. One thing struck
me as very remarkable, in his countenance; all the lines of
which were uncommonly sharp and picked that, whenever
he attempted to smile, or to utter words which might lead to
the suspicion that his heart sympathized for a moment, with
other’s sorrows, two sorts of furrows were exhibited, one on
each side of the mouth ; reminding me to the very life, of the
two supporters of the Arbuthnot Arms. Such nearly was the
person to whom I now introduced myself. After I had ex-
pressed all I had to say, my object having been to try to gain
time for the man, but, if I tailed, to settle the debt In the best
way I was able, by the purchase of one of his horses, the
Lawyer replied to me, “I can do nothing for him, Sir; he
must go to gaol, or pay the money ; I only know my duty to
my client,” “ Surely, Sir, your client cannot suffer by allowing
he poor fellow a little more time for payment ol the debt—
you would never think of separating a man Irom his wite and
children, by so cruel a process as imprisonment, when no pos-
sible good can arise from it.” “ I know nothing of wives and
children, Sir—my duty to my client is all I have to think about.
People have no business to have wives and children, if they
cannot pay their debts. I have but one rule. Sir —I alwav*
say in reply to the question, what is to be done with so and so.
Let him go to gaol, and I say so now.”
Finding that the iron features I had been contemplating,
were but the index of the heart, that like bits of ore upon iha
surface, they did but disclose the nature of the mine under-


Death, I determined to waste no more time in talking, but re-
quested to have the particulars of the man’s debt, intending to
agree with him the price of one of his horses, and thus enable
him to discharge it. It was with astonishment I discovered,
that, although the sum originally due, was under fifteen
pounds, it had now been swollen, by law expences, to
£29 17s. Bd.! ! !
After leaving the house, and meditating upon what I had
that morning witnessed, reflecting that in every instance which
had come under my own observation, my informant as to the
“ Withouts,” with all his severity, appeared scarcely to have
been severe enough, I determined that to introduce more than
one at a time to my readers, would argue upon my part, want
of proper consideration for the varied classes into whose hands
lam informed my Essays weekly pass. They would be sur-
feited, with the highly seasoned dish I should be obliged to
cook for them. I think, therefore, upon mature consideration,
that I shall continue the plan adopted last week, and at pre-
sent ; and shew one of them up at a time, now and then, when
the plain roast-beef and plum-pudding nature of some of the
remarks, which passing occurrences require at my hands,
will be a little relieved by game, as the second course. I am,
friend Mercator, and all other of my Patrons, with much
sincerity, your obedient servant.
Simon Stukeley.
No. 13. Hobart Town , August 28, 1829.
If my Correspondents continue to ply me with so many
letters as 1 have received in the course of the last fortnight,
1 shall have to advertise for a Secretary to enable me to re-
ply to them. I must, therefore, for once and always acquaint
the persons who so honor me, that it is only special occasions
whereon I can notice their communications.
, Among the heaps of epistles which now lie upon my table,
ate the two following, both of which claim a few words from
me ; one, because as the writer says, I have done him great
injustice, and the other, because it comes from a Lady.
Sir,—Observing that in your late notice of the “ Withouts,”
you have thought proper to pass over in silence the result of


. *V ■'* J*
the information I gave you, when you partook of my hospita-
lity, respecting their relative attributes in the Law and Jaw
way, and also according to the general standard, I write to
s&y you do me great injustice, in trying to palm upon the
public, opinions as your own, for which you know you are in-
debted to me, and in withholding the valuable information I
also gave you. —I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
Corner-house, Informant,
In reply to this, I candidly acknowledge my fault, and
i stand corrected ; but, in extenuation, my Correspondent will,
I am sure, recollect and admit with regard to him, sui generis,
i that he told me, it would require six such to move the scale eien
when weighed against the little finger either ot Alley or Hum-
i phries —that Law there was none—Jaw, much such as that
used of old by Sampson, and therefore it was in tender com-
. .passion only that I passed him sub silentio —not wishing to
I rub the youth too closely ; but far from desiring to rob my in-
formant of any of the merit which belonged to his discern-
ment. As for him, whom he designated “ iron-hearted,” his
Law was decided to be superficial ; his relative importance
compared with the standard, as a donkey is to a race horse,
but as for his jaw, it was prodigious !
My other Letter is as follows :
Dear Mr. Hermit,
I expect a few friends to take tea with me next Monday,
and to talk of my neighbours ; for entre , this is the most
delightful thing in life. Do come in your charming incog,
so as to draw the portraits of the company—for you cannot
think how much I want two or three of my acquaintances
quizzed in your delightful way ; for they dress so smart, and
are besides so provoking, there is no other way I know to
punish them. By the bye, when you speak of myself, pray
dip your pen in what you call hooey, and keep your vinegar
for somebody else. You cannot think how I long to see what
you will say of my friends. Pray therefore come on Monday,
and believe, I am, your obedient servant,
Amelia Truefriend.
My fair Correspondent must pardon me if I make my reply
to her letter, the channel of communicating to herself, and
many others, who have similarly invited me, and would lain
bribe my good word, that I neither lend myself or my incog
to any such purposes as her note expresses. It is always


with reluctance when I make my pen the possible organ <>i
pain to any of my readers ; but sometimes, a regard to truth
leaves me no alternative. The case would be very different,
were I to travel out of my way, seeking occasions to excite
unpleasant feelings—and however much some of my remarks
may lead people to suspect me to be a crabbed, ill-tempered
old Gentleman, suffering under gout, bile, and Other equally
powerful incentives of spleen, 1 can assure them,that lam one
of the most amiable, good-humoured men living and that I
would rather write fifty lines of praise, particularly when na-
ture’s best handy-work, is the theme, than one ol censure.
Feeling disposed the other day, to make a trial of the me-
rits of my newly-purchased bit of blood, I mounted him, and
directed his steps towards the village ofNew-town, thean-
glified appearance of which, I had much admired, when
viewed from a distance in my walk from the Government
farm towards the river. Just as I had passed a short distance
beyond a house of entertainment, ornamented by a splendid
representation of the Dallas Arms, and presenting an outward
appearance, well calculated to invite the way-worn traveller,
and to beguile him of his weariness, I heard the sound of a
horse’s hoofs behind me, coming at a pace which appeared as
if three legs were all that were left to do the work ol tour.-
Being presently overtaken, the rider drew up as he came along-
side of me, and I immediate y recognized an acquaintance, by
whom I was saluted with “ Bonjour Monsieur , which way
are you bound ?” Returning his civility,, and replying to his
enquiry, we jogged on together in friendly chit chat. I had
never before seen him on horseback, but had frequently no-
ticed his extraordinary height and carriage as a pedestrian,
and now, mounted on a hack whose ribs and prominent pin
bones denoted but too plainly, that corn and he were acquain-
tances of ancient date, almost forgotten by each other, by vir-
tue of long absence, he appeared like amoving tower j his
two legs swinging backwards and forwards, resembling the
pendulum of a clock at rapid motion. Our conversation
speedily turned upon the medical profession, my companion
observing, “ Have you seen our new Dandy Doctor go this
way?” “I do not know to whorrt you particularly refer, I
replied, “ but I can answer your question generally, as no per-
son has passed me.” “ ’Tis lucky for the people that this is a
fine climate, he observed —for whether we speak of the ars


medico, out chirurgica , ’tis in a lamentable state for the Public.
You would be surprised, did you know as much as I do, of the
ignorance and unskilfulness of most of our practitioners—in-
deed, I may say all, as not one of them is fit to bold my stir-
rup leather.” “ You quite astonish me ; I always considered
from what I had heard, that the profession was most respec-
tably supported here. I only know one of them—a Gentle-
man I lately met at a wedding, but I was not then aware he was
a Doctor—but having since been rather unwell, he was re-
commended to me by a friend, and I must say 1 like him very
much —he was exceedingly attentive, and f thought him
very clever.” “Ha ! ha! ha ! so you have been in Doctor
Gallipot s hands, have you? Ha! ha ! ha !—ha! ha ! ha!—
Oh tempora, oh mores— why, Sir, you may think yourself lucky
you are now here—he knows just as much of physic, as my
horse does of oats ; and that I am sure, poor fellow, is little
enough, but my time is so occupied, I can scarcely allow
either him or myself to eat or drink.” “ Well, Sir,” I re-
plied, “ yon will sooner be able to retire with a fortune—nothing
like working hard in the morning of one's life —making hay
when the sun shines.” “lam of the same opinion, and look
forward to enjoying an otium cum at no distant day.”
We now reached a pretty looking house, standing a hundred
yards or so to the left of the road, within an enclosure, into
which my companion turned, requesting me to follow him, un-
der the promise that he would not be detained more than a
minute or two. Giving our horses to the charge of a servant,
we entered the house, and were shewn into a room, wherein
were sitting rather a delicate looking young woman and a child,
with two or three other persons. My companion having
made enquiry about the state of some inmate, who was an
invalid, left the apartment attended by the female, and in ».
minute or two the door was opened by a thin middle aged
man, who entered, bringing two glasses of spirits and
water—one of which he placed before me. The man began
talking, by saying “the Doctor’s a wonderful man, Sir—he
knows a matter of thirteen languages, and ’twould most make
your hair stand on end, if you were to hear him as I have,
when he’s a little gone in the wind, as the saying is. Lord,
Sir, he raps out foreign lingo so, just for all the world like a
frenchman.” *• How do you know what the Doctor’s is like,
when gone in the wind, as you call it ?” I enquired. “ Oh, Sir,


he and a friend of his, are pretty nearly the best customers
some in our line have, and they both talk in the same way like,
and I’ve heard said, they are the two best scholars in these
parts —half the custom of both, comes because people think
one good turn deserves another.” Just as mine host finished
thus speaking, my companion re-entered the room, and sys-
tematically as it were, emptying one of the glasses, invited me
to do the same, but which I declined, it being too early in
the day for my general custom to partake of such refresh-
ment. I found an able and willing proxy, however, in the
person of the landlord.
At this moment, a messenger from town came express, re-
quiring the instant attendance of the Doctor, upon some case
of emergency ; and bidding one another farewell, I rode on
towards the village. At the corner of the road turning to the
right, I met a Gentleman in a dark green gig, drawn by a
grey horse. Being slightly acquainted, we each pulled up
to exchange a few words of conversation. He had a fidgetty
sort of manner when addressing me, accompanying his words
by contortions of some of the muscles of the face, to which,
additional force was given, by motions of such other parts of
the body, as could be spared from the management of his car-
riage. “ Eh, em-t-speaking very slowly, “ I began to think;
you were going to neglect calling upon me—l’ve been ex-
pecting you some time—but—eh,” nodding his head at the
same moment, and giving a twist with his eyes, “ my house
is always in order — no fear of m getting a touch of the —-— ”
here he frisked his whip, looked at me, very significantly,
and added—“ you understand me, eh !” “ I could never be
so neglectful as to fail in proper respect to such a Gentleman
as yourself,” I replied, “I understood you were a-t present par-
ticularly engaged on public business, and have not therefore
wished to obtrude—l have also been told that a visit from
me, would be more likely to be agneeable at a certain tribunal
of no small import to the Colony, than upon any other occa-
sion.” “Eh !—em— always glad to see Mr. Stukeley—but
between ourselves, I rather think that when I sit for my por-
trait, that is the place to produce a picture which will bear
the public gaze—you understand me—don’t you ?” “Per-
fectly, and I can only say in the words of a late Civic Autho-
rity, a speedy sitting and soon.” With mutual adieus we
now parted. Within half a furlong of the spot I fell in with


another acquaintance—-a Gentleman whose energy and activity
of mind, had created cause for admiration in several instances
wherein I liad noticed his proceedings. He was on horse-
back, riding in an easy negligent manner, wearing as usual,
his hat a little inclined on one side—the head being inclined
a little farther still. At present, as at all other times, when 1
have seen him, his features bore unequivocal marks of good
humour and contentment, and he addressed me, “ Well,
Simon, which way are you travelling ?” In reply to the ex-
planation I gave him, and which included terms expressing
how much I admired the beauty of the neighbouring scc-
nery, he said with a pleasant smile, “ If you want to see a
pretty place, take a ride to-morrow and pay me a visit—l
shall be at home the whole day, and shall be very glad to see
you.” I promised to accept the invitation, and did not fail in
punctuality; but I cannot give the particulars in the short
space which is now left, according to the rule I have pre-
scribed to myself, from a due regard to my friends, the Pub-
lic, and must therefore defer them till this day week j beings
always, my readers, your obedient servant,
Simon Stukeley.
No- 14. Hobart Town , September 4,1829,
The morning of my visit to the gentleman who had invited
me to spend the day with him, was particularly mild and
pleasant ; the soft balmy air corresponding with what I re-
member to have experienced in the South of France, towards
t e end of the month of March ; being rendered still more
ragrant by some of the early blowing shrubs and flowers,
which distinguish this beautiful climate. On my way, I
stopped for a short time to admire a very beautiful garden and
s rubbery, attached to a remarkably genteel sort of cottage
om .e, situated at a corner of the road, commanding an almost
immediate access to the river ; the grounds and general exte-
rmr, being kept with much studied neatness. A clear and
Beautiful stream ran through the shrubbery, which was chiefly
orme o native productions ; and, being benefitted by good
soi an had attained a height and luxuriance
grea y adding to their natural beauty. The house itself was


elegantly constructed, reminding me of some of the villas for
which the neighbourhood of Herne Hill and Dulwich, or
Clapham, is so much admired by strangers ; and altogether I
must say, I by no means expected to see so finished a resi-
dence, in so young a Colony. Passing this spot, my road
turned to the right, and after pursuing it, perhaps a mile or
more, I came rather suddenly to the sight of a building, upon
a gentle elevation, bearing the marks, of being inhabited by a
Gentleman. Before I had time to reach the door-wav, I was
met by my friend wearing his hat upon the incline ,
habited in a dress suited to the country ; and who imme-
diately saluted me, “ I see you are a punctual man, Simon.”
“ I cannot plead any reasonable excuse for being otherwise,”
I replied ; “for I have nothing else to do but to keep my
engagements.” “ Well, walk in, lam very glad to see you,”
leading me forwards as he spoke, towards the entrance of the
house; when he introduced me to a tall elderly Gentleman,
very thin and erect, and clad, as if either the Avarmth, or the
hardihood of his constitution, bade defiance to all exterior cold.
He had a beneficent expressive countenance, keen sagacious
eyes, under long shaggy eye-brows, and was extremely lively
in his manners, exhibiting in them, as well as in his gait and
action, all the fire and energy of a much younger man.
“This is Mr. Stukeley, Sir,” said my conductor to the
elderly Gentleman. “ Not the Mr. Simon Stukeley I hope,
who draws people’s portraits,” said the other, making a bow,
and offering me his hand very affably at the same moment.
“ He is rather a dangerous acquaintance I think, for the Gen-
tlemen of your profession, if he treats you all with as little
ceremony as one or two whom he has lately visited.”
“No fear Sir,” said I, “ I hope I have discrimination
enough, neither to praise or censure, undeservedly ; and while
that is the case, there is nothing to apprehend.” “ That’s all
very well, Simon,” said the youngest of the two, but by
George, you hit some of us very hard; what has a brother
chip of mine done, to draw from you such a philippic as you
gave him t’other day—egad! I almost think you were too
hard upon him.” “ I don’t know much about that,” I re-
plied ; “ others tell me differently; and I happened to be in
company a day or two ago, where no person knew me, and
the picture I had drawn, being the subject of conversation, I
heard one of the party say*—“ I only wish I knew thisJHemit;


i eould tell him a pretty tale or two, what would beat that
Horse-dealer’s story hollow.”—You see it is impossible to
please every body.” “ That’s true enough,” was the reply,
but you must now excuse me for a few minutes ; and after-
wards, perhaps, you’ll like to walk round the grounds :” so
saying, he retired, leaving the elderly Gentleman and myself
constitute a tete-a-tete. I soon found I had not only no
occasion to talk, but had I been ever so much inclined to be
loquacious, no opportunity was likely to be afforded me. So
rapid indeed, was the transition from one subject to another, so
constant the utterance of words, that even my unavoidable
share, such as a reply in monosyllables to certain questions,
could with difficulty be introduced, scarcely allowing me time
to give to Yes or No, its full effect of sound. The subject of
our conversation was varied ; but every topic that was intro-
duced, served to exhibit that my companion was both well
read, and naturally acute and sensible. “ Have you seen the
Lieutenant Governor lately?” he enquired. “ Only once
since I had the honor of dining with him:—His is a difficult
task, to reconcilej so many jarring interests as are con-
stantly before him; but I think upon the whole, he acquits
himself admirably.—He has always appeared to me, to be an
upright conscientious man; and of a very amiable disposition ;
and no person I think, can doubt his talents.” “No ! the
Governor himself is very well; not much fault to find with
him; but he is under the influence of others who have neither
his heart nor his head. For my own part, I have very little
reason to like him, but I have always felt a degree of personal
regard for him, and though I could wish many things different,
I am not blind to many estimable qualities which he possesses.
—I have often given him very good advice.” “ And has
lie taken it ? ’ “It came from the wrong quarter to be
agreeable, pei’haps ; but I have always wished him well ;
and if I, with one or two others whom I could name, have
been rather hardly dealt with, I for my part, heartily forgive
<t. I do not think certain things would have been as they
were > he had been under his own guidance, but it’s all past
»»ow, and perhaps, ’tis all as well.”
Here a close to the conversation was put by the re-entrance
0 t e other Gentleman, who, seeing how earnestly ray com-
panion was talking, said in his good-humoured style, “ by
eor g e > Sir, you’ll not allow Mr. Stukeley to say*a word.


Gome, Simon, are you ready for a walk?” Gladly accept-
ing the proposal, I took up ray hat, and we all three sallied
forth together. I had not proceeded many steps from the
house, ere I had abundant cause to admire the exquisite
scenery of the spot, and the judicious choice which had fixed
upon it, as a Gentleman’s residence. The beautiful turns and
windings of the river, flanked by small mounds rising from its
banks, formed an appearance resembling the alternate moun-
tain and lake views which are so attractive to the Cambrian
or Scottish traveller ; 1 could have almost fancied myself in
the vicinity of Loch Tay, the general beauty of the land-
scape being greatly improved by the towering height of Mount
Wellington in the rear, raising its snowy head among the
clouds ; and on the right by other mountains of various ele-
vations, forming stepping stones as it were, to their more ex-
alted neighbour, and every here and there, creating by their
jagged surfaces, fanciful resemblances to ruinous castles, or
other edifices. The home landscape was one of fields and
buildings in the true English style ; and the spot whereon we
stood had been converted into a meadow of English grasses,
which ray host informed me well repaid cultivation in
this country, when judiciously attended to. Both my com-
panions suffered me to enjoy the prospect, for some little
time without interruption ; when the youngest addressed me,
“ Well, how do you like the place ?”’ “ I have seen nothing
like it since I landed here,” I replied. “ The situation is
romantic and delightful in the extreme.” “ You should come
and pay me a visit,” said the other Gentleman, “ I think you
would adjudge the palm of beautiful scenery to my place.”
“ How you talk, Sir,” replied the other, “ the two place*
will not bear a comparison.” We now advanced towards the
river, following its margin a considerable distance, until we
came to a fence, which I was informed terminated the pro-
perty ; and from thence crossing some enclosures in a direct
line, we again shortly reached the bouse, where, after a
short interval, an excellent family dinner was welcomed by
all, with a hearty appetite.
The character of the owner of this charming spot, had
already been brought under my notice in various lights ; but
now, a new one was made known to me, in no way less attrac-
tive than any thing I had before witnessed. I had seen
him advocating the cause of unfortunate criminals in the Courts


house, using his impassioned eloquence with a fervour, to be
produced only by an amiable heart ; endeavouring to remove
the prejudicial effect which had been produced upon.those,
in whose hands, were the life and liberty of a fellow creature,
by the novel acrimony with which his offence had been sub-
mitted to their notice. It is true, he could not plead for them,
but his ingenuity so framed his questions in cross-examina-
tions, as to allow him opportunities of introducing many
short and pithy expressions ; and his mode of reply to the
hasty, and sometimes rude interruption he met with, shewed
the immense advantage a man has in arguments, when under
a perfect self-command. At other times, I had seen him
upon the Wharf, assuming all the cares and bustle of a mer-
chant, urging this man to load that boat, another to unload
tbifc cart, putting his shoulder to the wheel, in his own words,
with “ by George, my boys, she must and shall be off this
day week. 55 Once I remember to have met him some miles
from town, when he told me he was just returning from brush-
ing up his agents, farther informing me, that be had estab-
lishments for the reception of Colonial produce, in exchange
for necessary supplies, in three different parts of the Island ;
and that he made nothing of riding sixty or seventy miles a
day, to see what they were about. To day he appeared in
the character of the affectionate father of a young family—the
almost enthusiastic country Gentleman ; and the attentive
host. In style of conversation, whenever the garrulity of our
elder, and take him altogether, very entertaining companion,
allowed him a chance of saying any thing, he was quiet,
placid and easy—embellishing his observations by a certain
playfulness, and avoiding subjects wherein himself or his pur-
suits were concerned. I could gather, however, that between
himself and the Government, there was no good understand-
ing ; and although little was said, that little seemed to convey
that he had been very hardly dealt with. He enquired if I
had ever seen his hook ; of which, upon my replying in the
negative, he promised to send me a copy ; adding, “ unless
you absolutely saw it, I am sure you would never believe
things could be—yet I own I do not know why the per-
secution I then experienced, should have since been continued
in many little trifles, but never mind Simon ! They cannot
eprive me of some things, and I don’t envy any of them.”
ter a few hours agreeably passed in this manner, receiving


an additional zest by a hearty welcome and some choice Lon-
don particular, I took my leave, and mounting my recently
purchased nag, was soon at the door of my lodgings. I cannot
do better than sum up in the words of my Informant, the pro-
fessional character of the Gentleman I had thus visited.—.
“ With regard to Law, I believe he is as good as, if not the
best, this Colony possesses—he has an ample share of jaw
•—both law and jaw being nearly equal. He shines particu-
larly in cross-examining witnesses, in which he is much aided
by a retentive memory ; but take him as a whole, he is fully
on a par with either of the two selected as a standard—re-
quiring, perhaps, a little of one of them to give a turn to the
scale.
The drawbacks to his character—(and who has them not ?)
are a too eager desire for gains; an inordinate attachment to
lucre, having sometimes led him into a course of practice,
which the more rigid of his profession have not approved.
Regarding him at all points, however, he may well be called
the Prince of the “ Withouts,” and if there were none worse
than him, certain galled jades would not have winced as they
have done.—Courteous readers adieu, for the present. Yours,
Simon Stukeley.
There is not perhaps a greater pleasure than an epistola-
tory communication between distant friends, and next per-
haps to that, in intellectual enjoyment, is the dissemination
of useful and entertaining information by means of the noble
art of printing. Both these gratifications have lately fallen
to my lot, and out of them, as we frequently find through
life, have sprung incidents which may perhaps in some mea-
sure tend to amuse my readers.
Passing by the Post Office a day or two after one of the
recent arrivals from England, my eyes caught the words
of my own name, “ two letters,” written among many others,
terming a long list stuck upon the post of the little gate, com-
municating between the street and the outward court of that
building, and forthwith knocking at the door, I enquired for


the treasure, so valuable to all of us, when coming from dear
and estimable friends. The door was opened by a young man
of sullen and reserved appearance, who knitted his brows as
if displeased at the interruption I had occasioned him ; and
scarcely condescending to look at me, opened a small draw-
er, turned over several letters, and selecting my two, handed
them to me, saying “ four shillings.” Upon payment of
this sum, I withdrew to read the contents of my prize, for
so I deemed it, well-knowing by the hand-writing from whom
they came. Among other information, one of the letters ac-
quainted me, that a box was on board the vessel, bearing my
address, and filled with the newest and best publications of
the great metropolis of the world.
As I was unacquainted with what routine would be neces-
sary as the means of becoming possessed of this package, I
directed my steps towards the Custom-house, and was so
fortunate as to meet a Iriend at the door, through whose as-
sistance all my difficulties were at once removed. He was in
the meridian of his days, of average stature and bulk—fair
complexion, but pale—very little hair, being almost bald to
the crown—wore spectacles, as if near sighted, and had a
habit of accompanying his words by something between a
smile and a grin, having a troop of he ! he! he’s ! not the
full hearty ha! ha ! ha’s !, ready to turn out at a moment’s warn-
ing, at whatever was said by others. Between this Gentle-
man and myself, there had been a how d’ye do acquaintance,
C mce I met him one morning at Government-house, where we
were both kicking our heels, waiting for admittance in our
several turns ; and as he was a sociable conversible sort of a
companion, and I have since been told, saying nothing about
■he properties of the serpent, that he was harmless as the
dove, and that withal, he was a scholar and a Gentleman, I.
>elt inclined to be upon good terms with him, and was there-
■ore glad of the present opportunity of improving our ac-
quaintance. No sooner had I explained my present embar-
rassment, than he said, with much good nature, “ I’ll put you
m the way of doing all that is necessary—l have the same
thing to go through nearly every month—step with me into
tus room. Following him to the end of a short narrow
passage, we entered a small apartment to the left, across
w uch, leaving an inconsiderable space for the Public, ran a
nariow coun ter, and behind it were two or three individuals


seemingly intent upon business, one of whom appeared to be
a man of superior authority, judging by his appearance, and
the respect paid him by the rest. Immediately upon our en-
trance, he approached the partition, and addressed my com-
panion with great civility and attention ; treating me also with
the politeness due to a stranger. He was young, and pos-
sessed pleasant features, as well as expression of countenance - y
and his dress, without reaching the point known by men mil-
liners as minimy pinimy, was exceedingly neat and precise.
While we were all conversing together, a heavy sound of
footsteps along the passage, was almost the immediate pre-
cursor of the entrance of a tall stout personage, whom I once
before met at a public office, and the nature of whose birth
and breeding had created in my mind some perplexing doubts.
Shaking byithe hand in a very hearty manner the Gentleman
who was with me, he said to him, “ Faith ! by my soul, ’tis
a long while since I’ve seen you.” “ I do not think 1 have
had that pleasure,” he replied, “ since the intelligence has
been received which dubs you Honorable. We have always
known you were honorable by every other claim—allow me to
congratulate you upon your accumulated honors.” Here the
honourable Gentleman (for finding his pretensions were so
high, no doubts upon other points could of course longer ex-
ist) twinkled his eyes in a very peculiar manner, and replied,
“ Faith and byjasus, my good friend 1 I think you know me
well enough to know that I would just rather have an odd
twenty pound note than have any thing to do with your * honor-
ables” as you call it. There’s somebody—some player-man
I think—says, ‘ Rude am I in my speech, and little blest
with the set phrase of words,’ but twenty or thirty per cent,
upon a twenty pound note is like the little child of its parents
? —it will soon grow and get bigger—and in no time almost is
equal to its father. Give me what I understand, aud faith !
they may act the * honorables’ as will, for me. ’Tis n’t a
money getting phrase.”
Here the conversation terminated, other persons entering
the office just as he had finished speaking, and making our
conges in a becoming manner, my friend and I left the office,
and walked towards the Wharf; purposing to send on board
the ship, for the package. As we proceeded along, my compa-
nion said to me, “ Do you know. Sir, what books you have ?”
“ No, I do not, indeed” I replied j** but as you have been so


kind as to render me your assistance, if you have the least
curiosity, or, if it will afford you the slightest amusement,
you have my authority to have the first rummage over the
box—and are welcome to the use of an}', to which you may
take a fancy." “ You are very good" he answered, “ I could
not think of that; but if you will come and take tea with me
this evening, I will manage to have the box at my house, and
we can look over the contents together!" This arrangement
being acceded to, we bade one another a temporary adieu, and
each went his several way.
When I again joined my friend at his own house in the
evening, I had the pleasure of being introduced to his lady,
and a whole tribe of little ones, forming, when drawn up in a
row, which was done at the word of command with all a pa-
rent’s fondness, a number of steps at equal distances, resem-
bling a flight of stairs.
It has been well said, that no place so clearly develops a
man’s character, as his own fire-side j for there are too many
who hang up their good humour with their hats upon the pegs
in the hall, reserving all their ill temper for their wives and
children. Not so, however, with my worthy host, who shines
I think, more to advantage in a domestic capacity, than in
any other I have noticed. In addition to his own family,
there was a young Gentleman present, rather under the mili-
tary standard in point of height, square frame, dark hair, and
of a sombre expression of countenance.—His eyes, which
were dark and small, were deep sunk in his forehead; pos-
sessing keenness and penetration. He appeared to have come
of a tolerable pedigree, judging by his general manner and be-
haviour ; but had some odd tricks or habits with various
parts of his body, particularly an automaton sort of movement
of the arm, and a constant turn of the head, like a Mandarine.
It was not difficult to perceive that he had adopted the wise
rule of forming a good opinion of himself, so that he might be
sure somebody thought well of him, fearing, perhaps justly,
that few others might arrive at the same conclusion. After
. e * ea serv * ce was removed, the anxiously looked-for box was
intro need, and taking off the lid, book after book was passed
rougithe hands of each'—“Oh dear me!" exclaimed tb6
s rangei Gentleman, “ what a beautiful edition of Zimmer-
re^ r * n £ a chair a.p he spoke, and contemplating the
00 e still held, as if enraptured with the very idea of soli-


tude. After a short lapse thus passed on his part, daring
which we continued ransacking the contents of the package,
he suddenly observed, “ Have you chanced to meet with any
work upon phrenology ? If you should do so, pray favour me
with a sight of it.” dI do not think it very likely we shall
be able to gratify you,” I replied, “ for my bookseller knows
pretty well my taste, and that I attach no importance to the
subject. I never yet could arrive at the conclusion, that a
knowledge of its mysteries would -recompense the time and
application necessary for its study, to say nothing of the ex-
pense ofbuying such books.” “ fou quite astonish me,” he
replied, “ I consider it a Sublime branch of the metaphysics,
I should never be tired of it.” “ And I, on my part,” I an-
swered, “ attach very little importance to ontological
sions of any sort. I prefer solid useful information to argu-
ments which, after all, end in nothing.—My orders to Cadeli
were, to supply me with all the best periodicals, new editions
of established authors, and other works of sterling merit, but
none upon abstruse subjects.” “By the bye” he replied,
“ speaking of periodicals, what think you of the public press
of this Colony ?—I presjame you have read the Essays called
tbe Hermit?” “I believe I have seen most of them,” I
answered. Here our host took up the subject by saying
they are written in a very peculiar vein—the author draws
portraits with some effect, but like most caricaturists is apt to
dwell on and sometimes enlarge any little peculiarity in his
sitting subject; there is one thing, however, they cannot last
long.” “I do not see any symptoms of flagging,” observed
the other Gentleman, “there are many characters I hope yet
to see touched off, and amongst others you (addressing par-
ticularly my friend as he spoke) would, I think, form an en-
tertaining subject for a paper.” “ And why not all three of
us, if it come to that ?” replied the other ; —but I still say, the
Hermit cannot last long, for I speak from experience when I
assert it to be a style of writing, which cannot be supported ;
I have tried it myself, and have found it break down under
me; already I, apprehend the Hermit is very little read.”
“You are quite mistaken there,” said our companion, “I
can answer differently to that.” “ Well, but at all events, ’
replied our host, “you must admit that my Hermitage was
much more attractive and more admired than the' Hermit -
did you see my Hermitage, Sir?” addressing himself purlieu-


iarlv to me ; upon my replying in the negative, he said “ I
will shew it to you,” and whilst he was absent from the room
for a minute or two for the purpose of fetching it, the other
Gentleman took out his pencil, and handed me the two fol-
lowing lines —
“ Its learning and its classic lore
Make it a most confounded bore.”
Perhaps the impression thus created in its disfavour, ope-
rated against my comprehending all its latent beauties, as it
was presently read aloud to us, with all the tone of fondness,
a father would adopt, when speaking of a favourite child. As
in duty and politeness bound, however, I expressed myself in
terms of admiration of the performance ; but our companion,
perhaps more at home than myself, and consequently privi-
leged to say what he liked, remarked “ I tell you what, Sir ;
I only hope the Hermit will keep clear of the Hermitage ; for
if it were to have the same effect upon him, as it always has
upon me, it would infallibly drive him to sleep, which I by no
means wish to be the case.” I thought there was a degree of
chagrin across the mild and placid features of our excellent
friend, as these words were uttered, and I presently endea-
voured to turn the conversation, which was effected with
little difficulty, and the evening glided pleasantly away, enli-
vened by rational converse, and a due share of the good things
of this life, until it was time to wish one another good night,
when the other visitor and myself proceeded homewards toge-
ther. I cannot say, I altogether felt much inclination to cul-
tivate the addition thus made to my circle of acquaintance.
There was something of pedantry about him which I dislike;
a sort of authoritative tone often acquired by persons who hold
some petty trust or place, giving them much more importance
m their own eyes, than in the estimation of their neighbours 5 he
was besides, evidently upon uncommonly good terms with
himself and with bis figure and appearance. The opinion so
tormed was rather confirmed than otherwise, at a second in-
terview I had with him an evening or two afterwards It was
at a card party, where he was undergoing a good deal of play-
« ba„ter about something which I did not well understand
but the words “ Youthful indiscretion” which fell from him
Te W* served to increase the laughter previously excited at
t* expense, and to add to the confusion which was already


manifest in his countenance. I could enlarge on the subject ,
but must now say farewell.
Simon Stukeit.v.
No. 16. Hobart Town , September 18, 1829.
I little expected, when my Utopian schemes, of virtue and
innocence, peace and tranquillity, led me to visit these distant
shores, that among the new characters wherein I should have
to figure as part pf my sublunary career, it would be reserved
tor me to become one of the dramatis persona of a new and
entertaining farce ; but so the fates have willed it, and of what
use, contending with the weird sisters?
As I was quietly seated by my fire-side one evening, about
a week or ten days ago, my servant announced that a person
wished to see me ; and ere 1 could signify whether or not Iwas
engaged, the stranger followed him into the room, and I dis-
covered that he was one of the three whom 1 had seen at the
Police-office, upon the occasion of losing my watch ; but I
noticed that the gold-headed cane was laid aside—-in other
respects, his neat and prim appearance was the same. Ad-
dressing me with the familiarity and nonchalance of an old ac-
quaintance, but not without civility, he said that his business
was to summon me to attend on board a newly arrived ship,
the following morning as a Juror, upon a Coroner s Inquest j and
having further intimated that my obedience was indispensable.
he made his bow and withdrew.
A little before the appointed hour, the next day, I repaired
to the Wharf, and upon the landing place at its extremity ,
nearest the water, 1 saw three or four Gentlemen standing, as
if waiting for a boat, amongst whom I recognized several ac*
quaintance. Presently, our group received an addition, by
being joined by my hospitable friend, who gave me the va -
luable information respecting the limbs of the law, some oi
which is already before my readers. As soon as he came
near us, he accosted me with much familiarity, " What! do
vou make one in this humbug affair? but I. say, let’s have no
more telling tales out of school— twas hardly fair of you to
mix my muddy colored green so—Egad! I did not


voa were such a dangerous person; but I expect there will
be a fine field for you to-day, as I understand old Thing-um-
light will be here directly. What fun we shall have, if he
should happen to be in one of his grotesque humours !” Be-
fore I could reply to him, “Boat a hoy!” having for some
time been sounded and resounded, at length one approached
from the vessel, and vve all proceeded towards her. There
were already assembled on the deck several other J urors, and
I recognized the recently made Benedick, who honored me by
an invitation to breakfast, and whose joy now seemed to have
lost some of its wire edge, and to have sobered down into staid
tranquillity. My kind and good friend, who is Commander-
iu-Chief of the he! he ! he’s, and ha ! ha! ha’s, was also
there—the braw bonnie Scot who gives practical illustrations
of the newest and most improved methods of pulling noses —
the tall robust Gentleman, who swore by St. Tafit, that it was
a t d wicked thing to use a wife badly ? and who now
was congratulated by some of his companions, that bis sleek
skin, and well filled vest, bore ample testimony that “ Seventy
pounds of flesh” may soon be recovered, if the thing be well
managed. He was talking of the bad treatment often expe-
perienced by passengers on board ship, and said to me, “Only
lo think, Sir, apsolulely to lose seventy pounts of flesh between
here and Englant—by Cot it is infamous! and then to have
my pocket pick’t by the Lawyers because I cried out.” “If
your flesh had been valued, and you had been paid for it, ac-
cording to the rate of poor Antonin’s in the Merchant of
Venice,” I replied, “you would have made a good thing of it,
but I suppose, although it was long going! going! going!
you did not discover your loss till it was really gone.” Here
the Gentleman who had given me the characters of the Law-
yers, and whom I shall hereafter whenever speaking of him,
designate as. my “ Informant,” observed, “ I dare say he un-
derstands more about going! going! gone! if the truth be
known, than who Antonio was.—Shylock and he are better
acquainted by far I take it.” What followed did’not take my
attention, as 1 was occupied in scanning the countenances of
the remaining Jurors; having had little or no previous ac-
tauce most of them ; —and whilst so occupied, a cry
® here he comes !”, “ there he is, getting into the boat,” at-
tracted my attention towards the shore, and I observed a gig
pus 01, in the stern of which sat a Gentleman, accompanied


by two attendants.—As he neared the side of the vessel, I
recognized an old acquaintance, and upon his mounting the
deck, he was saluted by all of us, with every possible respect.
He was of diminutive stature and shape ; somewhat advanced
in years ; plain features, bearing no particular expression of
sagacity, but what nature had denied him in this respect was
in a measure atoned for by art s—as he contrived every now
then, so to alter his physiognomy, by contracting or lengthen-
ing the muscles of the face, that he put me in mind more
than once of Grimaldi, creating a half belief in my mind, that at
some time or other he must have studied the elegant art of pul-
ling faces under that celebrated master. Taking out his snuff-
box, as he returned our courtesies, and holding it at the extre-
mity of his left arm, at its full distance from his body, as he rap-
ped the lid with his right fingers, he said, looking first at one and
then at another, holding all‘the time the pinch of snuff between
his fore finger and thumb —“ Eh—em—are me—ready to pro-
ceed to business ?” Without waiting for areply, he drew in his
chin upon his breast, first gave a frown, then a stare around
him, and bringing the snuff near his nostrils, and keeping it
there for a second or two, like regaling an Epicure at the top
of a London kitchen staircase, previous to the more substan-
tial enjoyments of the dinner, he lodged the whole of the
pinch in its intended repository, with as much apparent zest,
as I have before now seen an oyster woman exhibit, as she
tossed off a noggin of Hodges’ true blue. So intent was he
upon the passing scene, that he appeared not to hear, or at all
events to regard, the sort of stifled murmur which followed in
the train of the half uttered “ been ready and waiting long
enough • Shame to keep Gentlemen dancing attendance upon
an old ” what was the next word I did not catch, for
all moving towards the cuddy at the same moment, a bustle
was created, which drowned the speakers’ voices.
Our business was commenced by the Coroner’s, as he said.
** briefly” explaining the occasion of our meeting ; but if
brevity and he had ever known one another, they seemed to
have parted company on this occasion ; his style and manner
being prolix in the extreme ; and more than once I thought of
home and my night-cap. One Juror twiddled with his two
thumbs ; another yawned; a third took snuff, and tickled his
nostrils with the feather of a quill to produce sneezing ; and
one, more audacious than the rest, took a book from his pock-


et and began reading. This was too much to be endured.
Starting bolt upright in his chair, and throwing a look at tbc
delinquent, charged with terror and authority, he rapped his
knuckles upon the table, and exclaimed, “ put away that
book this minute, Sir.” “It is only a treatise upon physic,”
was the reply, “ I was referring to it, thinking it might as-
sist our deliberations.” The Coroner looked aghast at this
justification of the offence, and rising from his seat, throwing
out bis right arm, and moving his hand op and down, point-
ing at the same time with his fore finger, “ I insist upon be-
ing attended to, Sir, shut up that book this minute, and at-
tend to the business before the Court. It is a Court, although
a low Court, and I will have proper respect paid it.” It so
happened that my “ informant” and I sat next each other ; he
seemed prone to mischief, ever upon the look out for keeping
the ball alive, when once in the air, and ready to join in any
thing likely to create fun. He now put in his word ; “ I
think ’tis quite immaterial, whether the book be about law
or physic—they are both much alike.” “ What do you mean
by that, Sir?” said the Coroner. With all the ease and im-
pudence imaginable, he replied, “ they both purge and blis-
ster—one acts upon the body, and the other upon the pocket,
but their effect is the same, as they each reduce a man to
nothing, cleaning him of all his substance.” As he finished
speaking, he had recourse to a snuff-box, and having previ-
ously noticed the extraordinary attitudes which accompanied
the passage of a pinch, between the box and our President’s
nose, rather humourously imitated his movements, giving
them additional effect by the turn of the eye, as he glanced
round the table. The good man’s patience, if he had any at
first, was now exhausted. “ ’Tis that brew all the mis-
chief, Sir,” he exclaimed —“ lam aware of you, Sir, before
to day, and your propensity to quizzing might be much bet-
ter applied than as you sometimes indulge it.” My “ infor-
mant now whispered tome, “ that’s a slap at both of us—.
“ e V “S in ? of t . he house ,ike the letter L > but if that’s his
ac ’ * * Blve8 lve enough before we’ve done.”
e now proceeded, at a funeral pace it’s true, in the in-
vestigation as to the cause of the man’s death, which had been
object of our meeting ; and, upon its being stated by one
tiatt i 6 'J UUeS j eS ’ tbat he bad taken an emetic, a short, fat,
y ressed Juror, a stranger to me, and bearing evident


signs that he was one of those who prefer swallowing to dis-
gorging, wisely enquired, •“ whether he had used calomel
or laudanum for the emetic j” but he was unable, I believe,
to obtain a satisfactory answer.
The day had now so far advanced, that it was proposed to
adjourn, which was agreed to after a short discussion, enliven-
ed, as usual, by many eh !—em’s, twists of the face, and
wriggles of the body, and it was fixed that, our next meeting
should be at a tavern on the wharf. Here, a spare, thin, /
meagre looking sort of a body, who was one of our number, '
said, loud enough to be heard by the Coroner, “ 1 shan’t
come any more.” “ How dare you use such language, Sir ?”
was immediately answered. “ Sir, I’ll have you, and all pre-
sent to know, that I’ll not be trifled with.” The young man
seemed to take this reply in dudgeon, but made no answer,
and slinked off, as if glad to be released from apprehension of
any more scolding.
It is out of my power to relate at full length all the inci-
dents attending this five days’comedy ; but one or two more
I cannot refrain from describing. The principal actors were
unquestionably my “ informant” and the Coroner ; but some
of the subordinates amused me, particularly a rather tall,
thin, fresh-coloured person, evidently from the Land of Cakes, /
who listened to all that was said by the Coroner, as if he had
been catching manna ; treating him with obsequiousness,
which might have induced the belief of his having me now
taken lessons of some of the “ Wha wants me ? of the
good City of Edinbugh. One day’s occurrences afforded a
treat, by the mode of interrogation and reply adopted by the
Coroner and one of the witnesses; but as it served only to
exhibit the inimitable attitudes of the one, and the eftrontery,
the true sailor’s rude indifference of the other, it is scarcely
deserving to be repeated. 1 can say for myself, and 1 believe
for all the others, that the proceedings were exceedingly tire-
some ; rendered still more so, by the hemming and hawing
which accompanied every question; but, Englishmen like,
we saw very little reason for fasting upon our work, and on
the last day, foreseeing that we were likely to be late ere we
should be released, we one and all “ struck work,” until we
bad some refreshments. “ Very well, Gentlemen, as you
like,” said the Coroner, “ I’ll stick by ye,” rapping the lid
of his suuff-box ; and preparing a pineh for its journey to the


xiose, as he spoke. Whilst the beefsteaks, ...which were pon-
«equently ordered, were in preparation, two or three Malay*
were introduced with their interpreter, in order to be examin-
ed, but very little was elicited from them, and my green-
«oated “ informant,” who had evidently a touch of the uneasy,
and who already smacked his lips at the idea of a well
covered table, exclaimed “ its nothing but d d nonsense,
examining these blackees.” An altercation immediately en-
sued between him and the Coroner y but he met him by pun*
and ridicule, rather than by replying in the angry tone bv
which he was addressed, saying “ if the fellows had been
oyster-men, there would be some sense in having them here,
as I am devilish hungry, but these Musseltnen are quite use-
less.” “ Pray, Sir,” said the Coroner, “ keep your to
vourself—l am much annoyed by such conduct. People have
quite enough of you and your wit in another character.” Here
1 received a gentle tread on the toes from my neighbour, as
much as to say “do you hear that?” But at this momenl
the waiter announced that dinner was ready, and was laid in
another room. The Coroner, who wanted us to wait till the
examination of the witness who was before him should be
completed, found his authority set at nought after this grate-
ful intelligence reached ns, and all rising together, we pre-
pared to adjourn. In reply to Some remark by the Coroner,
my “ informant” answered, “ a beefsteak is best hot.” jHere
a smile, as if to announce something very witty, played
round the Coroner’s mouth, but it subsided into a grin, as be
rep ie , Ive often suffered from a mistake, and won't
1 ere ore now run that chance, so 111 take your recommenda-
tion as to the beefsteak.*’
Our conversation was light, varied, and cheerful, during
our repast} but! must have done, otherwise it may perhaps
sujd > [hat evil communications have corrupted good man-
■er«. he result of our labours is elsewhere made known : 1
2 " ,eref6re 10 m X », ever, my reader’s
wosl obedient. . ’ • •• • • Y
•* I - I t* ’ «. . . ■■ . :
. SIMO,N StUK£LEY.


No* 17. Hobart Town , September 25,1829.
Among the several institutions established in this beautiful
and rapidly advancing Colony, which at once bespeak a sound
knowledge of the best principles of Government, and a paternal
interest for the prosperity of the inhabitants, none has pleased
me so much, nor has so exalted its rulers in my estimation, as
the schools for the care and education of orphan children.—
Were I inclined to moralize, how many deductions would
present themselves, from even a partial consideration of this
important subject; but the benefits arising to the community,
from the instruction of youth, from checking the evil propen-
sities of our nature, and substituting in their places, the seeds
of virtue and of true Christianity, have been well known from
•/ *
the earliest ages. They have been thought worthy the special
injunction of Holy Writ; they have found a place in the
breasts of the wise and good of all countries, but in no spot,
perhaps, throughout the world, are they more deservedly
called into action, than in a Colony, which serves as a cloacina
to the Mother Country, and many of whose inhabitants are,
consequently, the very last persons to whom the charge of
youth ought to be entrusted. But all such institutions, good
in themselves, become more or less useful, according to the
management which obtains with respect to them, and accord-
ing to the character of the individuals who are selected for this
interesting trust; —and here again, in Van Diemen’s Land,
there is, I apprehend, or rather alas ! there has been, abun-
dant cause to admire and approve the choice which has been
made, I use the past tense, not with any view of disparaging
those who still perform the duties relating to such establish-
ments, but 'as referring to a sad event of recent occurrence,
which gave rise to a scene of deep interest, and of which I
have been an intimate spectator.
Accident, some little time ago, brought me acquainted
with a very worthy couple, with whose story were con-
nected many affecting incidents. The Gentleman, bred and
educated in the bosom of Mother Church, anxious to dis-
seminate the doctrines upon its truths and precepts, had
accepted a situation at a pestilential settlement on the
coast of Africa, regardless of all personal consideration*,


and mindful only of the warfare, wherein he was enlisted.—
His wife, a delicate and accomplished lady, accompanied
him, sharing all his fatigues and difficulties, and exposed to
the influence of perhaps the most unhealthy climate in the
world. The rest is soon told —shattered in constitution, and
.suffering in health, the Gentleman’s appointment, and his
career of usefulness, were changed for this distant Island, the
salubrity of the air here, being probably considered the best
mode of repairing the effects of their former residence. But
scarcely were they inducted in the joint charge of the School
for Female Orphans, ere a slow, but insidious disease began
10 shew itself, creating bodily pain of the most excruciating
nature; baffling the utmost efforts of human skill, and at
length terminating in a release from all mortal cares and.
anxieties. It was the funeral of this patient, this excellent
person, which occasioned the reflections giving rise to my
present remarks ; and although the subject is somewhat dif-
ferent to that which I now and then bring before my readers,
methinks that the object 1 have in view by my essays, is quite
as likely to be attained by holding up departed virtue and in-
nocence to imitation, as by exposing living follies as a warning
or beacon to others how they may avoid them.
After the solemn minute bell had been some time tolling,
ihe mournful procession left the late abode of peace and sin-
cre conjugal affection, where the deceased had breathed
her last, and entering the body of the Church, the last sad
iites were administered in a slow impressive manner, well
befitting the occasion. The greatest sufferer by far, exhi-
bited on his countenance, that calm resignation which can
only ai ise from a mind well at peace with itself, and when
those beautiful words “ I am the resurrection,” &c. were ut-
tered by the officiating Clergyman, an expression of hope and
consolation usurped for a moment the place of the solemn
melancholy which sat upon his brow, and he seemed to feel
we shall yet be united.” When the sorrowing group turn-
ed then steps towards that “ bourne whence no traveller re-
•arns and where the remains of all that was lately good*
anna e, and accomplished, were about to be removed for
vver rom mortal sight, the scene became interesting and af-
ctmg in the extreme. A number of little Orphan Boys,
t L^ U slxt .V °r more, varying in ages from perhaps two or
9 o twelve or fourteen yeafs old, formed the van of the


procession, all dressed alike in a dark cloth suit, straw hats
with crape bands ; next to them came about fifty Orphan Girls,
walking like the others, two and two, and habited in neat
stuff frocks, white aprons, and straw bonnets with crape.
The pall was borne by Clergymen, and at the head of the
body of real, sincere mourners who followed, was the
Lieutenant Governor himself, clad in his military undress,
with tine usual crape symbols, thus shewing the high sense he
entertained of the merits of the deceased, by assisting the un-
fortunate husband through this, his hour of severe affliction ; the
rest of the party was composed of a long train, comprehend-
ing the foremost in rank, talent, and influence of the Colony.
It was, indeed, a funeral of the heart, not the idle pageantry
which too often attends such scenes, but the mourning of the
spirit w hich we are led to believe is ever acceptable ; and, if
human sympathy and condolence be capable of mitigating sor-
row, surely that of him who had thus been separated from all
that was dear to him, must ere now have been somewhat
diminished. Among the parts of the service not the least
interesting, the full solemn notes of the organ yielding their
touching.melody as the instrument was played with exquisite
taste and feeling, in accompanying an anthem adapted for the
occasion, which was sung by the children, particularly im-
pressed me ; and I could not help feeling how much had
been done in the short space of five and twenty years, towards
adapting a wild and savage waste into a fit abode for an En T
glishman. The Arts and Sciences have indeed gone hand-in-
hand here with religion, and have created a striking example
of what may be accomplished, where zeal, energy, and talent
direct the helm.
Gentle reader ! whilst upon a subject so connected with
the rising generation, my memory carries me back to an
occurrence of the early part of this month, which, as it
afforded me a real treat, I had treasured up amongst my
memoranda, until an occasion of a sombre nature might re-
quire the relief of something of a lighter character ; just as
the performance of a tragedy at the public theatres, is some-
times followed by a cheering after-piece.
I have already expressed myself an admirer of the female
character, when it shines in its native lustre, free from ac-
quired and blemishes ; and report had been so loud
in trumpeting the fame of a lady, who was said to be devoting


elegant accomplishments, solid, valuable acquirements, and
the example of an amiable character, to the delightful task of
“ teaching young ideas how to shoot,” that I had long sought
an opportunity of judging for myself; for I am an old
fashioned sort of a fellow, who, like most other bachelors,
prefer having an opinion of my own where ladies are con-
cerned, to implicitly adopting that of others. Long there-
fore had 1 sought, but sought in vain, the much desired op-
portunity of seeing how far my own taste coincided with ge-
neral report, and “ Heaven now granted what” was long “de-
nied.” As I was walking along the principal street of this
well laid out town, one afternoon about a fortnight or three
weeks ago, a la<jiy of my acquaintance whom I met, happened to
observe, that she was on the road to the very house, where
the object of my curiosity resided. “ I wish you could take
me in your pocket,” I replied, “ I have a great fancy to
see that lady, and really think I shall now quarter myself upon
you, for the sake of obtaining an introduction.” “ I shall
be very happy to introduce you,” she answered, “ but we
must make terms first ; you know you are an abominable
quiz, and I do not want to see all the idle nonsense that may
pass, form a butt for your satire.” “ Unless the lady whose
acquaintance I seek be much belied,” I rejoined, “ there is
little fear of her suffering by any of my observations ; but
here we are at her door.” As these words were spoken, we
approached a lofty stone building, situated on what is now
Tendered a gentle declivity (thanks to a judicious employ-
ment ol much compulsory labour) ; and entering the house
through a w r ell proportioned hall, ascended the stair-case, and
were ushered into a very handsomely furnished drawing-room.
Ihe party appeared to be en famille, consisting of the lady of the
house, another lady fully arrived at years of discretion, ofsober,
Maid appearance and manners ; a very elegant interesting young
ad >'> j u st entering the critical age, most anxious to a mother,
most important to herself, when an extra sentinel requires to be
placed at every avenue leading to the heart, and a Gentleman,
scarcely, perhaps, numbering thirty summers. The first glance
le principal member of this partie quuvrte served to assure
r t at although, sometimes, busy rumour travels with her
uu ie tongues, she had not in this case, departed from
n nC ’ im P ar bal justice. Indeed, I doubt not many other
persons, as well as myself, have observed, it is seldom that


good qualities are exaggerated in the telling; it is chiefly to
scandal, that the attribute of magnifying belongs. If I had
had no other criterion than this Lady’s appearance, whereon
to form a judgment, upon the most hallowed of all subjects
where a female is concerned, I should have arrived at a con-
clusion, very irreconcileable with some words she used,
when introducing me to the youngest of the group ;as she
mentioned that she was her daughter ; otherwise I had fan-
cied, what indeed I am now, almost fain to half-believe is the
case, that they were sisters ! Bachelors are of all others the
worst possible hands at describing a Lady’s dress, and general
exterior ; and I am, perhaps, worse even than many of my
brethren in this particular ; but I aw ays know when lam
pleased, and endeavour to express mlyself accordingly. The
Lady whom I now visited, was rather above the middle height;
of a graceful figure, and regular features, to which a charm was
bestowed by great sweetness of expression. Her manners
were lively and attractive; an agreeable vivacity of dispo-
sition, being tempered and regulated by a regard to the rules
of finished good breeding. She was in mourning—her clothes
made fashionably and well; setting off to advantage, a shape
to which nature had been sufficiently bountiful. Such nearly
was the Mistress of the ceremonies presiding over the little
drawing room party, which afforded one of the most agreeable
evenings I have spent since I became an inhabitant of this
Colony. It was easy to perceive from her style of conversa-
tion, that she was well informed upon the various subjects
forming our topics ; in all of which, she maintained her part
with equal good sense as playfulness. As the hours glided
rapidly along, music was introduced, and several duets were
tastefully sung by the youngest Lady and Gentleman ;
afterwards, although not much in my way, an exhibition of
some of the school performances was brought forward, and
drew from my companion, “ Dear me, how pretty j” “ well !
this is really quite wonderful”—but the extraordinary epithets
of praise I heard bestowed upon one particular article, and the
expression “ only eight years old, you say—l never knew any
thing half so astonishing,” uttered in a tone of wonderment,
led me to look at it with some attention, and although Ido
not pretend to be a competent judge of such subjects, I must
needs say, that a piece of needle work by a child, the daugh-
ter, as I was told, of a jolly retired sea Captain on the other


side ofthe Island, who has latterly as much signalized him-
self by his exertions in ploughing the land, as formerly
marked his career in ploughing the ocean, was of a nature td
be highly interesting to her relatives, as shewing talents
likely to be the promise of much good fruit hereafter. But
our pleasures, as well as our pains, are seldom long-lived, and
soon terminate. Although I staid as late as good manners
would allow, the hour of departure at length arrived, and I
took my leave, fully impressed with a high opinion of the trea-
sure possessed by the inhabitants of this Island, with regard
♦o so important, so deeply interesting a subject as female edu-
cation. I cannot indeed sufficiently express the satisfaction
I have derived from witnessing the progress made in this,
and in religion, the two points of paramount consideration to
all heads of families ; and as 1 am aware that the readers of
my essays are not confined to this Island, 1 have pleasure in
considering that in my own “ peculiar vein” I may impart
information which cannot but serve the Colony at large. Let
not my readers, therefore, shake their heads and look angry,
throwing the paper aside, and saying, “ What a dull Hermit
this week.” Things, as well as persons, equally come within
aiy province, and will now and then form materials for my pe-
riodical appearance.
Simon Stukeley.
No- 18. Hobart Town , October 2,1829.
I have already said, that the more I find certain persons,
kick and flounder under the gentle admonitions, which my re-
gard tor a good state of society leads me to offer them, the
more should I repeat the castigation; and I now intend to
caake good my word, for I have been sorry to observe, that,
instead ot producing the benefit I intended, some have been,
jadulging in instances of ill-temper upon the occasion of my
mendly strictures, shewing far otherwise than either au
amiable, or a becoming disposition. /
Some three weeks or a month ago, having called on Sir
* o n lopewells friend, the “ Within,” upon professional
business, I lound him as usual, surrounded by papers, deed*


and musty parchments, ah awful accumulation of arrears,
arising, as he told me, from a long visit Sir John had lately
been paying h|m ; but 1 had scarcely made known my errand,
scarcely had drawn forth the well understood “ Don’t say a
word—l know all about it,” conveyed with that peculiar
twinkle of the eye which at once belied the assertion, when a
rap at the door announced a visitor, and we were forthwith
joined by the tall son of Esculapius, whom* I one morning met
on the road to New-town.
He is always a pleasant, cheerful companion, an excellent
mimic, and, bating one or two little drawbacks, a man formed
to be a general favourite ; but like most of us, his good qua-
lities are sometimes so veiled by certain propensities, that so
far as I can understand, his real professional skill, and his
natural friendly disposition, are not, in the eyes of some, con-
sidered sufficient counterpoises to the inclination for good fel-
lowship and the exhilerating glass, which must of necessity be
gratified, even at the expense now and then of a descent in the
scale of moral society. In very truth, I believe. X was now
in company with much that was well-born, well-bred, well-
educated, well-disposed, clever and accomplished on both
sides 5 but if one was the particular friend, so I apprehend,
the other was the first cousin of that renowned three-bottle
Knight Sir John, and each is, I am told, a worthy disciple of
so celebrated a master.
It is not, however, either of these two Gentlemen, to whom.
the philippick contained in my first few lines is directed, for
I have reason to believe that they are both upon very good
terms with me. Indeed, it has been whispered in my ear,
that there is a certain likeness to myself in each of them,
which has caused many people who know no better to consider
them my near relations ; no less than twin brothers, in the
opinion of some, who do not scruple to assert that Dromio of
Syracuse, and Dromio of Ephesus, are one and the same
person.
After the common how d’ye do’s— pray be seated, ”
“ take one glass of wine,” &c. had mutually passed, the me-
dical Gentleman observed to the other, “ I want you to ac-
company me to pay some money to a Lawyer—are you at lei-
sure ? “ Quite at your service,” was the reply, then turning
to me, “T ou were just talking of the Gentleman we are
going to call upon—suppose you come with us.” “If it will


be no intrusion,” I replied. “ I should like nothing better ;
1 saw that person once, and although I cannot say I was much
captivated, I would fain renew our acquaintance, to try if he
recollects me.” There’s no doubt of that, so long as you
have any money in your pocket,” said the Doctor ; “ he has
a wonderful scent where cash is concerned, and will lick your
hand like a spaniel, whilst it remains filled with the needful;
but woe betide you, if chance place you in his way afterwards.”
M e now took our hats and proceeded to the residence of this
man of law, and knocking at the door, it was presently opened
by a stout thick-set young man, with a pen behind his ear,
wearing around jacket, partaking somewhat of the appearance
of a sort of halt junior clerk, and half foc.t boy, whose time
is divided between copying deeds, cleaning the master’s
shoes, carrying the mistress’s prayer book and umbrella to
church, at a humble distance in the rear of the family group,
and doing certain little nameless offices for the children. “Is
Mr. Cockatrice at home?” was the enquiry made by Sir
John Topewell’s friend. “ Yes, Sir, please to walk in.” Ac-
cordingly we all entered together, and found the Lawyer sit-
ting at his table, every thing in the room wearing much the
same melt character as when I last saw it. No sooner had
we passed the threshold, than Mr. Cockatrice started from his
chair, as if he had been electrified—a spit-fire Grimalkin,
when, with upraised back, and distended brush, she shews her
high displeasure, if her territories are invaded by a luckless
wanderer of the canine race, is nothing in point of rage and
fury, compared with what was exhibited upon the brow of
this “ stern dispenser of Laws rigours under their most rigo-
rous shape.” I began to doubt whether there were not a
mine of gunpowder as well as iron in his composition ; and
immediately conceiving that he recognized me as his whole-
some Schoolmaster, and that I might dread his vengeance for
having given him my friendly admonitions, I prudently en-
trenched myself behind my two friends, resolving, that if an
inkstand was meant to be hurled at my head, as did not seem
improbable, f would have it at second best at all events. But
I miscalculated my man, little anticipating the scene which
was to follow.
“ I have called,” said the Doctor, “to settle the amount
for which you have applied to me; but under the circum-
stances already explained to you, I hope you will not press for


costs.” During the lime occupied by this Speaker, the Law-
yer had evidently a severe touch of the uneasy—he sidled and
fidgetted, casting every now and then a most shivering look at
our little group, but particularly riretted upon the Doctor
he drew back, grasping the back of a chair, upon which he
was leaning ; and at length, as if he had mastered some violent
internal emotion, he cried out, in a voice half choked with
rage and anger, “ how dare you put your foot within my
doors, Bir ? You are the Hermit-you are, Sir”-and then al-
tering his tone, and so shaping the expression of his features as
to clothe them with a sardonic grin, he added, “ I suppose
you are come to see what newly imported packages I have in
my room, and to criticize my bundles of papers j” when imme-
diately again changing the turn of his countenance, and vainly
endeavouring to look amiable, he continued, “ do you see any
iron in my face, Sir?—pray look at it and tell me.” Nothing
could exceed the evident appearance of surprize manifested by
both my companions at this extraordinary attack. For my
own part, although I could with difficulty repress a strong in-
clination to laughter, I contrived, by placing myself in the
rear, by biting my lips, and contracting my breath, to pass
without observation ; and I awaited with much curiosity what
was to follow.
So soon as the Doctor had recovered the momentary contu-
sion into which he had been thrown, he calmly and gravely
replied “ you are quite mistaken, Sir—l am not the Hermit.
This only added fuel to the already furiously raging flame—“ I
know better, Sir—l have it upon incontrovertible evidence—
you are the Hermit and are here to insult me, and I order you
to leave the house directly.” My medical companion is not, I
am told, always blessed with an unruffled temperament, but he
received these broadsides with much composure. Still, I per-
ceived by a transient glance at his face, that the quivering ip,
and the overcast brow indicated orders to have passed from the
heart to prepare for action, although the Ensign of Amity was
yet flying. “Upon the honor of a Gentleman, Sir, I repeat
that I am not the Hermit, nor do I know anything of it, or of
its Author.” “ You a Gentleman! I” replied the other with
a forced laugh—l tell you, what you say is false—you are no
Gentleman, Sir, but I tell you to your teeth, that you are the
author of the calumnies against my character contained m the
Hermit, and once more I order you to leave my house. I


could see by the expression of the Doctor’s countenance, that
there was a contention within his breast, whether he should
give vent to a natural tendency to ire, or treat the Lawver
with the contempt he merited. Presently he replied, “whe-
ther 1 am the Hermit or not, he has produced one good effect
at all events, by teaching your wife to allow you a clean shirt
more frequently. I see she has taken a hint if cannot, and
that your half dirty yellow night shirt has given place to one
a little more consistent with good manners.—You may exhibit
the Arbuthnot Arms as you like (observing that at this mo-
ment the two deep furrows appeared in all their native hideous-
sjess)—l care not for you, nor for any thing that your iron
heart can produce —People shouldn’t have wives and child-
ren if they can’t pay their debts, you know—you understand
me, don’t you?—There ! take your money, and I’ll wash my
bands in future of such company as yours, or any that could
Toe found in your house. I tell you that it is well for you, I
am not the Hermit; for if I had been, I would have produced
a list of your acts of iron-heartedness as long as my arm ; the
mildest of which would have been ten times as biting as the
poor horse dealer’s story. —Egad ! man, that’s nothing to what
I could havejtold him. Good bye, Arbuthnot Arms! Good
morning to yon ! Mind the wives and children ! Good bye—
good bye.”
We did not stay to hear any more, but left the house, con-
versing as we went through the street, upon what had oc-
curred ; all agreeing that the moderate blister which had been
applied, could not have produced such an effect as we had wit-
nessed, if it had not been put upon a raw place, and it was the
Doctor’s opinion, that the application should be repeated the
&st convenient opportunity.
As we proceeded along, we met another limb of the law ; a
redoubtable “Without” of the “ sv,i generis ” race, whom
we found by his conversation, to be smarting under the dose I
lately administered, although I had his good very much at
heart at the time. He indulged in invective—talked very big
—swore what he would and would not do—exhibiting a good
deal of that silly vapouring, for which pert braggarts, idle
coxcombs, and empty-headed drivellers are ever distinguished.
Youth, inexperience, and natural incapacity may excuse much,
but not every thing,—not impertinence, for instance; and I,
therefore, give this individual timely warning, and bid him be-


ware how he continue to give his tongue, the only weapon
which he dares use, the same licence as formerly ! otherwise,
1 will tie him up to the halberd, and so scourge and lacerate,
as to drive him from the untenable ground he has taken, and
make him glad to fly for refuge behind a man-milliner’s coun-
ter ; that being the sphere, for which dame Nature evidently
designed him. Let him, therefore, take heed in time, for
neither he, nor any other person shall with impunity, take
liberties with
Simon Stukeley.
No. 19. Hobart Town, October 9,1829.
When my evil genius some three weeks ago, appeared in
fhe shape of a spic and span personage, who sometimes walks
with a gold-headed cane, and enforced by compulsion, my at-
tendance to form one at a certain caricature exhibition, pretend-
ing to be a Court, I was in hopes that the patience and good
temper I showed upon that occasion, would have stood in my
favour, and saved me from sharing any more such
scenes, calculated as this was, to excite little else than con-
tempt and derision. In sober truth, the Minister of the day
has often much to answer for to the inhabitants of distant
Colonies, for saddling upon them a whole tribe of sons, bro-
thers, and cousins of the Ne’er-do-well family, merely be-
cause some distant relative has a strong borough influence, or
some other equally insufficient cause; thus making a place
for the person, instead of suiting the person to the place. I
remember when I was first entering life, hearing an anecdote
of a Gentleman, who made interest with the then Secretary
for the Colonies, to bestow upon his cousin some post or office,
alleging as a particular reason for pressing the subject, that
he was really a character better out of England than in it.
The Secretary, wishing to oblige his friend, he being a maw
of great influence and connexions, replied that there was a
certain place in one of the West India Islands then vacant,
quite at his disposal, but added, “ as you seem to intimate,
however, that hi* removal from home would be a convenience,
wait a little, there will be two or three good offices presently


io give away at Botany Bay, and he shall have his choice—
any thing is good enough for there, you know.” I do not
mean to insinuate that a similar order of things now exists
for I believe the Colonies to have deservedly risen in the esti-
mation of our home Rulers, and that they have now a sufficient
regard for their prosperity, to be careful in the men selected
to fill vacant places ; but who can be surprised that trees of
deep root, and long ago planted, should cast a wide shadow
from their branches ? Or who can expect, that all at once,
evils of other days can be remedied ?
Some month or six weeks ago, I promised a certain tall
slender personage, who, having hitherto found Dame For-
tune unpropitious, was now inclined to try another tack, and
endeavour to gain her favour by dealing in single noggins, in-
stead of wholesale draughts as heretofore, that I would be-
come surety for his good and orderly behaviour, his keeping
his lamps well trimmed, and his oil burning, his walking
with the fear of the laws before his eyes during the next
twelve months of his earthly pilgrimate, provided Justice
Shallow’s colleagues should be pleased to allow him
permission, in due form prescribed, to exercise the high and
enviable distinction he coveted. Punctual to my word, as
all men of honor should be, I attended at a certain stone
building on the day and hour appointed, and presently found
myself in a crowd of publicans and sinners, many a goodly
score, all appearing to be drawn to the same spot upon a
similar errand. The poisoned, heated state of the atmos-
phere of the place where we were assembled, reminding me
of the air breathed in a low confined part of a manufacturing
town, where column after column of thick black smoke rises
from many a furnace, ascending to the very skies, and infect-
ing all around it, made me hope that I should not long be
detained; but my hopes were fallacious, and my patience
was once more doomed to be severely tried. I attempted
more than once, by shifting my quarters, to get rid of the
terrible blasts every where exhaled, but all was useless. I
had reason to believe that not only Sir John Topewell him-
self must be present, but all his cousins to the thirty-fifth
degree ; and I found that no alternative but patience, or the
abandonment of my engagement, remained tor me. In this
dilemma, of course I chose the former.
After waiting five hours beyond the time fixed by the Jus-


tices, oue or two scouts, who had been upon the look out,
came running to us, exclaiming, “ here comes the Ma-
gistrate at last, and all the rest of *6lO, ” and in the course
of a few minutes four or five Gentlemen approached us. It is
not my business to describe the party who took their seats
upon the Bench. I may, perhaps, pay my respects to them
hereafter; at present I merely refer to whichever of them hap-
pened to take part in the business of the day, or rather after-
noon.
Those of my readers who have ever seen a duck waddling
and sidling through a farm-yard, first looking on one side
and then another, casting up its eyes, all the time making a
discordant noise, as if to testify its importance, can picture
to themselves the gait, attitudes, and expression of one of these
Gentlemen, a» he made his way through the assembled multi-
tude, to take his seat, on the bench, at the upper end of
the room, wherein the business of the day was to be trans-
acted.
After waiting a few minutes, part of the assemblage below
were summoned into the presence of the Justices, and I
perceived preparations were making for addressing them ;
for it was evident that a certain routine of forms and cer-
emonies was to be gone through, ere the speech could be
commenced. An inimitable glance of the eye around the audi-
tors, the elevation of the right hand, with its extended fore
finger, the three taps upon the lid of the snuff-box, and then
reclining the chin upon the bosom, as if the head, in moving
from side to side, required some change of muscles for its
ease or comfort, were the immediate precursors of “ eh—-em
—I have to apologise a little for keeping so many respectable
persons waiting,” (here there was a grin, as much as to say
' fudge’), “ but the Magistrates have been occupied with
many and weighty matters, and the delay has been unavoid-
able. lam truly sorry. Gentlemen ; but "the public interests,
you know, must be attended to. I have sent for you first,
who are now present, because lam happy to say that during
the past year no complaints against any of you have reached
me, and I hope we shall meet one another on equal good
terms this day twelvemonth. I hope what I now say will be
a stimulus to you, and induce you all to keep your lamps
•lean and well trimmed.” All this was spoken in a very
tolerable manner, free from much grimace ; but, as if to in-


dulge a natural disposition, he now changed the position of
his features, and resting his eye upon a certain very short fit
personage, of smooth face anti skin, whose corpnienc, gave
to his shape the appearance of a tun standing bottom upwards
upon two sticks, with a small round ball at the other extre-
mity, fixed upon another stick, he said, with a tone and ges-
ture all his own, “ is that my friend, . I see before
me?” “Yes, Sir,” replied the other, “ I hope I see your
Honor well. “ Eh_em ! well, really I scarcely knew you,
if I hadn t heard you speak I should have thought you bad
been some lady in the family way.” The look by which this
witticism was accompanied was perfectly understood as meant
to call for a laugh, and it was too much the interest of ah
present to flatter the good > man’s vanity by humouring his
taste, to render it doubtful that he had anticipated wrongly
on calculating upon a forced troop of ha !ha ! ha’s 1• '
These worthies being now dismissed, the remainder of the
party were ushered into the room, and the business
of the day continued. After the Clerk had gone through
some usual preliminaries, the customary tokens of a coming
speech excited the curiosity of the auditors, and presently
the same Gentleman, who had addressed the others, resumed
what to him seemed a very pleasing duty. But instead of a
general discourse, he spoke to many individuals in succession
giving each some wholesome admonitions, and, in almost
every case, indulging an apparent taste for low wit, some-
times falsely called humour; equally out of place, as
unworthy the dignity of the occasion. Among those
whom he so singled out, were two, who appeared part-
ners. One had a singular scowl upon his brow, indicative of
a sullen, ill-tempered, unaccommodating disposition, and
giving any other than a wise appearance to his countenance ;
the other bad a sharp pertuess about him, a darkness, of as-
pect, more resembling the shades of night than the light of
day, and not shewing to a physiognomist, any sign whereby
d could be supposed that he possessed many counteracting
properties. The Justice gave them some pretty strong inti-
mations about using caution as to receiving stolen goods.
Next came a half-dandy sort of a personage, very neat and
precise, rather thin, middle aged, and bearing about him a
good deal of consequence, bat still with civility and an ap-
parent inclination to please. I can bear testimony to the wel l


regulatedUand comfortable state of this person's establishment*
having been his inmate for some time after my arrival in the
country. The caution he received, had reference to some fray
which had taken place in his house. After he was dismissed,
a little cowed as it were, by his scolding, two or three more
received lectures according to their delinquencies, and pre-
sently a consequential man, dressed in a long frock coat, of a
sanctified amen-squeak cut and expression of face, came for-
ward to answer to his name, and had rather a severe trimming
“ Eh ! I have something to say to you, Sir ; you are a gam-
bler, and ga nbling won’t do, it leads to ruin, and will ensure
yours. I know you before to-day, you know—l dare say
you understand me, don’t you ?” Seeing the man appear to
be thrown aback by this salutation, be continued with a grin
and a pinch of snuff* in due form, “ crying amen is not enough
of itself, you know—the Vicar wants a little more of Mo-
ses than that—eh—do you understand me—do you know any
body who wrote a letter on your behalf to a certain great man,
saying “ indulgence is wanted by the bearer ; I can only say
it was never granted to a bigger
and
and upon
those qualifications he is well deserving of it?” “ Take care
you deserve the indulgence you have since had—there, go
away, and mind I hear of no more gambling ; keep your
lamps clean and good liquors in your house—remember, good
wine needs no bush.”
But before him, there had been a remarkably demure puri-
tan looking old man, who had been tolerably drilled. If I
had been called upon to say who and what he was, I should
have judged him to be a Missionary out of employment, or
one of the half-guinea Parsons of the English metropolis,
who derive their precarious subsistence by casually assisting
better paid and less zealous divines. He looked the picture
of half-starved morality, and I was therefore much surprised
to hear him addressed nearly as follows :—“ What can I say
to you. Sir -eh—you understand me—l am ashamed of you,
that’s what I am—you are no better than you should be—you
encourage females to visit your house, and young ones too,
and for no good purposes. You’re not old enough to be my
father ’tis true, but you are old enough to know that you arc
a very wicked old man—your house is infamous, I know all
about you. Sir, and if you continue such practices, you shall
never have another license—there, bye, bye, for the present,,


and mind I hear no more of you.” The next in order was a
short fat man, of middle age, who was told that unless he
reformed his conduct, and that of his inmates, he would
come to ruin. The Magistrate added, “ I would always
rather make peace than breed disturbance, but mind what I
toll you, Sir, you only hold your license by the skin of your
teeth.”
There was rather a good looking dark young man, who re-
ceived a little wholesome advice. “Ah ! I see you, Sir,
you are upon the brink of a ditch, Sir, and into in it you will
go, if you don’t leave alone the naughty Jewesses. Think of
Solomon of old, and tremble—you understand me, I dare
say. Those honest good inhabitants of a certain temple in
this town, gave me a very good character ofyou-r-you should
tread in their steps—they are very worthy religious people-
yon know what I mean—you will come to destruction if you
don’t abandon your naughty courses—yes, you will.”
It is altogether out of ray power to dilate upon all the other
occurrences of the day ; a large portly man, partaking of the
appearance of-a rough rider in a dragoon regiment, growled
and looked as angry as a bear when deprived of his prey, upon
being desired by the Magistrates to change the sign of his
bouse, but he was well spoken of as a publican. Another, a
tall stout John Bull looking chap, upon being reprimanded
for the late hours kept at his premises, looked at the Magis-
trates with a sort of easy indifference, peculiar to persons of
low origin who have acquired much wealth, jingling at the
moment a quantity of silver, with which his pocket was half-
filled, as much as to say, “ you may talk—bat I can buy up
the whole of you.”
Before conclusion, a Magistrate put on one of bis gravest
faces, and adapting himself for a speech, repeated his warn-
ings and caution as to the future behaviour of all present. I
am sadly over burthened with work,” he observed, “ and eh
em, nothing—nothing but my zeal for the public should
make me continue so many laborious employments—l feel it
my duty to forego all personal considerations where the pub-
lic are concerned—l love the public as my children, and”
—here some wag exclaimed, “ he means he likes
day and an order on the Treasury”:—“ silence there,” in the
Stentorian lungs of the Crier—“ and I labour for it inces-
santly, but be assured I will not sit here to grant licenses to


people who don’t know how to conduct themselves, by all
that’s sacred I won’t. I have had a deal of trouble, and
though I am aware that my doing so would put every thing
wrong, as (here there was a stroke of the chin, a pinch of
snuff, and a half-grin, half-smile), I fancy I could not
very easily be replaced. I’ll throw up my Commission, ra-
ther than continue as I have done—there—ljhope you’ll mind
what I say, I’ll throw up my Commission, I say, and where
will the Colony be then?”
The meeting now broke up, and I returned home, as much
tired I dare say as my readers are by this time of my nar-
rative.
Simon Stukeley.
It is not long since, that I took occasion to express myself
favourably of the Rulers of this Island, in respect to the estab-
lishment of Orphan Schools, making, at the same time, a few
general observations upon the great benefits arising to the
community from disseminating knowledge by means of the
education of youth. When Iso conveyed my sentiments, a
little publication, in the shape of an Almanack, edited as I am
told by a Gentleman of great literary pretensions, had not
come into my hands : and I was, therefore, somewhat sur-
prised, upon since taking it up, to learn from it, that the Or-
phan Schools, important as they are, sink into insignificance in
comparison with another Institution, under the imposing title
of the King’s Grammar School, at New Norfolk; conducted
according to the same authority, upon a scale and principle,
well calculated to attain the most important results, and to
affix a lasting honour upon the brow of its founders and pro-
moters.
I had heard New Norfolk much praised as a beautiful
spot; and two such objects, as to indulge a taste for rural sce-
nery, and to enjoy the high intellectual treat of becoming ac-
quainted with the internal economy of so noble an Establish-
ment being, in my estimation, a sufficient inducement for a
day’s excursion, one morning last week, I mounted roy bit


of blood, and rode to that romantic settlement. Excepting
an occasional canter round the suburbs, I had scarcely ever
passed the precincts of Hobart Town, and was not prepared
to see so fine, and well made a road, as I was now travelling.
On the right, I had every here and there, a peep at the Der-
went, as it was gently pursuing its silent way, through fine
wood scenery and lofty clifis—again emerging into wide open
sheets without a ripple, resembling a fresh-water lake, until
its serpentine mazes were lost in the distance, excepting now
and then, the ascent of a hill, and turn of the road, again
opened it to my view among the woodlands, sparkling from the
sun’s rays, with indescribable lustre, much as a brilliant dia-
mond may be seen to most advantage, when placed upon a rich
brocade, or dark Genoa velvet. To the left, were hills rising
upon hills, thickly clothed with timber ; but they wanted that
diversified—that charmingly variegated appearance, so at-
tractive a part of an European landscape j all the foliage being
nearly of one sombre gteen, unrelieved by the light shades of
the beech, chesnut, or maple ; rather on the contrarv, par-
taking of the colour of the elm or oak, although the thick
branches and short trunks of those valuable trees, bear no re-
semblance to the long straight barrels, and thin slender arms
of the indigenous forest productions of this Colony. What
afforded me much pleasure was, the astonishing perfection to
which cultivation has been brought, all along the wide, hand-
some, gravelly bottomed road I was pursuing, there being a
succession of farms and houses, bearing evident marks of
creditable industry, and hard earned opulence ; but nothing of
this sort astonished me so much, as a plot of ground, probably
four hundred acres, a little to the right, nearly opposite the
fifteenth mile stone. -
By skilful and judicious draining and embankment, and so
calculating the levels, as to have completely mastered their
courses, this large space, evidently once, nothing more than a
morass, abounding with bulrushes, has now been subdued, and
converted into a rich meadow, capable of bidding defiance to
drought, and certain of ensuring a most profitable return to its
spirited owner, in almost any season.
The course of my journey, continued through much the
same sort of scenery, passing some extensive lime-kilns, well
situated for the command of water carriage-r—a purling stream
clear water which disembogues itself into the Derwent, and


numerous farms and cottages, the whole way being upon a
gentle ascent, until twenty miles were accomplished; when,
all at once, a noble and extensive prospect awaited me. The
Derwent, making a sudden turn, was seen in two directions,
watering a rich and fertile tract, its banks exhibiting neat cot-
tages and enclosures, and in the distance, an establishment of
Flour Mills, which I afterwards learnt had been erected by a
worthy and thriving countryman, and are in constant work ;
and, at a mile further, I entered New Norfolk, or, as I was
informed to speak more correctly, Elizabeth Town. I have
not space at present, to describe the neat brick Church, and
adjoining School House, or the Governor’s elegant Cottage
residence, with its tastefully laid out shrubberies, imme-
diately fronting the traveller’s entrance to the town, or the
many other buildings which I noticed with admiration, as I
jogged on towards a large two-story brick house of entertain-
ment, where, alighting at the door, the attendance I instantly
received, might readily have led me to fancy myself at a first-
rate English Country Inn. The Landlady, a civil, obliging
dame, a dear lover of cleanliness, and evidently bustling and
notable, paid me the usual compliments with respect, and I
presently felt completely at home. Making some enquiry as
to certain edifices, one of which she told me was the residence
of the Magistrate of the district, another of the Doctor, and
another of the Clergyman. I enquired “ but where is the
School?” “ Just by the Church, Sir,” she replied. “We
are well off here for Schools, and one thing or another of that
sort; —there’s a capital School for young Ladies, and there’s
a great many respectable people all round the neignbourhood.
•—I suppose you know our Parson?” “No, indeed Ido not,”
I answered; “I am almost a stranger in the Colony, and
was never at New Norfolk before.” “Is it possible ?” she
said, with an air of astonishment, as if surprized that a person
could remain four and twenty hoars upon Terra Firma, without
proceeding to the charming spot she had selected for her
abode. “Is it possible, Sir?”—-Why then, perhaps, you
don’t know the Doctor neither; —there an’t their fellows in
the Colony—every body likes ’em; but there’s the Doctor
-coming, Sir.—He’s a very conversible Gentleman, and I dar^
say, will be able to get you a sight of the Government Garden.”
As she finished speaking, a Gentleman of middle stature and
rather slight make, mild, pleasant deportment, and apparently


scarcely thirty, approached, and seeing that I was a stranger,;
dropped all the formality of large Towns, and made me a pas- 7
sing bow. —Seizing the opportunity afforded, when I returned
his civility, I addressed him. “ This is a charming spot,
Sir ; I had heard much of it, but am nevertheless agreeably
surprised.” “It is pleasantly situated,” he replied, “andcom-
mands many advantages. It is the key of a rich country, opening
a water communication between several tine farms, which sup-
ply Hobart Town with grain and ether farm produce.—lt,
besides, enjoys a never-failing supply of good water, and we
have a very tolerable little circle of society ; altogether, it cer-
tainly is, as you observe, a charming spot.” “ But you have
not yet named what I consider gives the place a stronger
claim to notice than any thing else ;” I replied, “ I have
rode from Hobart Town almost expressly to see the King’s
Grammar School whereabouts is it? The Landlady said
somewhere near the Church.” As the words “ Kind’s Gram-
mar School” met his ears, I fancied I saw a smile, with a
shrug of the left shoulder ; but ere he spoke, these signs had
disappeared, and he gravely answered, “ Alas, Sir! we have
nothing of the sort here.—Something like it, was once talked
about, but it was still-born, as we should say, it died, ere it
drew breath.” “ Why, Sir,” I answered, “\vhat can this
mean?” pointing to the manner the School was mentioned
in the Almanack. “It does not say that such a thing is to
he ; but speaks in the plain intelligible present tense, —-
Were there no Scholars, when it opened “ There
would be no lack of them,” he replied, “ but I see a friend
coming, who will perhaps be able to reply to your enquiry,
better than myself—all 1 know is, no King’s Grammar School
exists in Van Diemen’s Land ; but if it did, there would be no
■want of Scholars. I believe I speak within eompass when I
say, that every respectable inhabitant of the Colony, would
support it.”
We were now joined by a stout, middle aged Gentleman,
dressed without much regard to appearance, in a suit of russet
black ; he was of florid complexion, evidently endowed with
a full portion of bon hommie, and his sleek skin, and twinkling
eye, at once bespoke a cheerful disposition, and a friendly
heart. “ Explain to this Gentleman, something about the
Grammar School,” said my companion, as he shook him by
the hand, with great familiarity. “ I suppose you can tell


better than any body else, why it is not in being, according to
tbe advertisements which appeared about it?”
“I’faith,” he replied, “that’s rather a poser, and if you
please, I’ll be for moving the previous question, as is done else-
where, when certain great people are unable to reply, as they
would wish.”
The subject not being pursued, we entered into an agree-
able and general conversation, and as I thought it not only
due to myself, but to two Gentlemen, who, although I
was unknown to them, had been so very polite and attentive,
that they should not be ignorant of my name or calling, I
contrived to introduce the necessary information, and had no
sooner done so, than the Clergyman exclaimed, “ why, I
know the name well; you were surely at
University,
and must be acquainted with one of my dearest friends ; his
family lives close to yours, in Yorkshire, and I’ve often
heard him speak of you. Doctor, I’ll have no denial, you
shall both come and dine with me, and I’ll pick up another,
and form a cozy toe-to-toe afternoon. No use saying a word,”
seeing the other Gentleman attempting to speak, “ an’t I your
lamp and your guide ? I’ll go and call upon
, and
don’t be later than four.” We then separated, and I filled
up the space between the present hour and that named by our
hospitable friend, by strolling around the infant town ; and at
the dinner table found the addition made to our party, con-
sisted of a tall, thin, high-cheeked Scotsman, who talked
in the true Aberdeen accent, and entertained us with some
anecdotes illustrative of the pertinacity wherewith his coun-
trymen adhered to the unfortunate Charlie, even when de-
prived of his last hope.
Much of our conversation, to say nothing of the Scots-
man and myself, was such as might have been expected from
the education and attainments of ray two acquaintances of the
forenoon. They were both graduates at different. Colleges,
and do not appear to have spent their time in vain. It was
manifestly part of the Clergyman’s creed, that the innocent
pleasures of life, are perfectly reconcileable with the profes-
sion of religion. It precisely agrees with my own sentiments,
and I was delighted to hear them so well expressed, and to
witness their practical illustration, so completely as at present;
and lam willing to hope, that when our little par tie quarree
broke up, full of the “ feast of reason and the flow of soul,”
the pleasure I had derived had been a little reciprocated.


Still, the satisfaction arising from my journey was incom-
plete, in consequence of n»y disappointment in one of its
leading objects. I attach infinite importance to education,
and willingly hope that the mind which conceived the grand
project of the King’s Grammar School, will not be deterred
by any difficulties, but that “ perseverance’' will be its motto,
and governing principle, until all obstacles shall have sunk
under its influence.
Simon Stukeley.
No. 21. Hobart Town, October 23, 1829.
Notwithstanding my disappointment at New Norfolk, with
respect to the King’s Grammar School, I saw and learnt
enough, daring the few days I remained in that delightful
neighbourhood, to put me in a very good humour with the
system of Government, which had produced so happy a state
of affairs, as I every where witnessed ; and instead of return-
ing to Hobart Town* I determined to pursue my excursion,
and see a little more of the interior of the Colony.
Will it be believed by my readers in England, (for I pre-
sume I shall have such), that it has been possible to intro-
duce a system of Police, so complete, as to curb the unruly
spirits sent here from time to time for their offences ; so per-
fect in all its links and bearings, that a traveller is muck
more safe, equally in crossing the loneliest wilds, as the most
frequented spots, than in any country in Europe ; or, that the
industrious cottager, equally as the opulent settler, may re-
tire to his pillow for the night without regarding door or win-
dow fastenings, with ten times more security than perhaps in
any other portion of the globe ?—And how has this been pro-
duced ?—How have the many bold and hardened perpetrators
of crime, forming, as they do, so material a part of the popu-
lation, been so tamed and humbled—so led and governed, ap-
parently by a mere thread ? The answer is plain ; first, by s
judicious division of the Island, into certain districts, placing
each, under one responsible Magistrate, who, being liberally
paid, becomes a servant of the Public, and is accountable to
the peace and tranquillity of the country under his jurisdic-


tion ; and, secondly, by applying one of the strongest princi-
ples of human nature, as a powerful engine in the bands of
these Magistrates, much as so mighty a body as a large ves-
sel, is turned and directed at pleasure, by the mere operation
of the rudder. “ Patria cara, carior libertas,” is well
known to the Authorities, to be so strongly implanted by na-
ture in the human mind, that to obtain this liberty, men will
almost war with their second nature, and leave off crime ;
thus, by making it one person’s business to do that well,
which, when every one’s affair was oft done carelessly, the
Magistracy is in a most effective, as well as highly honorable
state ; and by holding out, and strictly acting up to, the sys-
tem of indulgence, proportionate to services, the prisoner po-
pulation, at the very idea of whom, people in England might
be, and doubtless are deterred from emigration, fearing vio-
lence, both to their persons and property, carries within itself,
not only the rudder, capable of directing it at will, but form-
ing the very means of checking and controlling the evil pro-
pensities of other classes. For this, and much more informa-
tion of a similar nature, all tending to induce a strong feeling
of self-gratulation, that I had made choice of so well-governed
a land for my residence, I was partly indebted to events,
arising out of the little dinner party I described, when I last
appeared before the Public.
The following morning, as I was strolling up and down
in front of the inn, where I had taken up my night's quarters,
I met my new medical acquaintance, and was invited to accom-
pany him to a small Court-house, where some Magisterial busi-
ness was in progress, and afterwards, to take a ride a few
miles in the neighbourhood, returning to his house to dinner.
Upon entering the Court-room, I recognized a Gentleman whom
I had met at Mrs. Doubtmuch’s, with two tall, rather thin
ladies ; but, compared with either of whom, the Gentleman him-
self was thinness personified. When I then saw that group,
there was so much wit, beauty, and elegance otherwise around
me, that with the exception of an observation or two, made
by one of his companions, with peculiar naivete , 1 did not re-
gard the party with any great attention. To day, he was in
quite another character, as he presided over a Bench ot Ma-
gistrates, among whom my companion took his place, and
also the tall Scotsman I had dined with at the Clergyman’s,
and who were assembled to hear and determine a few uninter-


esting cases. There was great mildness and urbanity shewn
by the Gentleman in the chair, and he evinced a quickness of
perception which rather surprised, and at the same time, plea-
sed me; for, to own the truth, his half-military costume, long
brass spurs, and altogether what I thought rather an affec-
tation of singularity, under an exterior, far from imposing,
had impressed me with an idea I was afterwards happy to
relinquish, and am glad to be able to do him the justice to
say, that he exhibited a well-informed and acute mind, as
various questions came before him. After the business of
the Court was over, our horses w'ere ordered, and the Doc-
tor and I proceeded on our ride.
Our road lay through a rich and fertile district, watered
by the Derwent on the right, and flanked on the left by moun-
tain and forest scenery. Tillage seeemed to be the pursuit of
all the occupiers of the small farms near which I passed, and,
contrasted with the wide open plains, affording pasture to
numerous flocks and herds, farther up on the other side of the
river, gave a beautiful variety to the landscape, and strongly
impressed me with the opulence of the neighbourhood. Still,
I regretted, every here and there, to observe a system of
farming, slovenly and disgraceful in the extreme. In more
than one instance, I noticed last year’s stubble now only in
course of being ploughed; and upon enquiry was told, that
wheat, as had been already the case for five successive years
upon the same ground, was again to be sown ; it thus ap-
pearing the hard destiny of this land of fertility, that the
laziness and obstinacy of man, are raised up to counteract the
beneficence of nature. Upon my remarking something of this-
sort to my companion, he replied, it was an evil, incident to
all young Colonies, but was annually becoming lessened, ad-
ding, “ in proportion as the inveterate rum-drinkers of long
standing die off, and are succeeded by a race trained to in-
dustrious habits—first by necessity, in order to procure a
maintenance, and afterwards, by the force of example, will
this Colony experience many great improvements, and among
others, in its system of agriculture.” While thus pursuing
our way in conversation, we came near a handsome two-story
brick dwelling, surrounded by offices, and enclosures in cul-
tivation, although I cannot say under such tillage as would
be tolerated in England, by the name of farming. Standing
near a gate, about half-way along a very curious, oddly shaped


fence, we observed a tall, thin, raw-boned Gentleman, of
hard features, but not unpleasant expression—on the con-
trary, when he spoke, he had an indescribable way of moving
his eyes and shaping his mouth, which reminded me of Lis-
ton in some of his characters, and produced, too, almost the
same effect as this inimitable actor, for although I do not recol-
lect that he said one thing, particularly calculated to act upon our
risible faculties, we were kept in a kind of titter, the whole
time we were in conversation. He was dressed in a short
frock coat, with a large fur collar, pantaloons, and hessian
boots, and was accompanied by a boy, apparently his son,
perhaps ten or twelve years old, wearing a cap with a plaid
border, and carrying in his hand, a long riding whip. It oc-
curred to me, that I had seen him before somewhere, but I
doubt much where it was ; nor, although I have since tried to
recollect, have I had more success than on that day. Taking
-leave of this Gentleman, we crossed a small stream of clear
water, watering the adjacent farms, and flowing towards the
Derwent. Immediately across this rivulet, my companion
turned op towards a house, standing in the midst of various
yards and buildings, the land all around, being in a rich flou-
rishing condition ; the whole reminding me of the appearance
of some of the small lairdships of the “ Land of Cakes.”
The owner of the manse, a bien Scot of middle age and sta-
ture, and possessing a peculiarly keen, dark eye, received us
with civility, pressing us to dine with him ; but, “ ye’ll stay
and partake of what’s ganging forward at dinner time, al-
though urged in the most hospitable manner, could not in-
fluence us to break other engagements, and accordingly we
shortly re-mounted and proceeded onwards.
The principal object of my companion was to make a pro-
fessional visit to a disconsolate widow, living a few miles
distant, whose spirits, sinking under her heavy calamity, had
produced symptoms requiring advice. We had not proceeded
far before we were overtaken by our tall Scots friend at a
hand gallop, just as a neat dwelling upon our right appeared
an view. “Ah ! ma gude frien’s, but ye are in the vara luck
of it, for a jug of whiskey toddy—eh. Doctor, come alang
with an auld neebour, and by Charlie, I ken me
weel enough to believe ye’ll be vara welcome.” We had
great difficulty in excusing ourselves, but in truth, what with
■one delay and another, admiring the scenery, and talking u P on


different subjects, the day was fast wearing away, and much
yet remained to be done.
We jonrneyed on, through a continuous tract of country ,
similar in its face and appearance, to that which had already
marked the course of the Derwent, till, a little further, the
river, which had made several meanders in various parts of
its progress from New Norfolk, all at once, formed a most
beautiful bend or curve, giving to the land upon its banks,
the appearance of a picturesque Island, and we presently
came in sight of a property, which, for style and elegance,
much surpassed any thing of the sort I had before seen.
Entering what might be called a small park, from the
nature and extent of the enclosure, studded here and there
with ornamental trees, having on one side, the magnificent
Derwent, on another, a much smaller, but yet beautiful
stream, falling into the other, towards the conflux of these
two rivers, was a really handsome, well finished gentleman's
residence, standing surrounded by orchards, shrubberies,
fields, and gardens, fenced in by hawthorn and other English
shrubs and trees. Approaching the house, our horses were
held by a servant in waiting, and we were shewn into a badly
furnished, uncomfortable looking apartment, where we were
received by a female in deep mourning, and a short, brawny,
thick-set, broad-shouldered man, perhaps thirty, or five and
thirty years old, also dressed in mourning, but wearing leather
gaiters, and drab inexpressibles —reminding me, by his cut
and figure, of a sort of Under-bailiff or Land Steward, to a
Gentleman of Fortune. The female was short, and rather
stout, not less than forty, nothing about her manners, which,
would lead one to suspect that her early life had been spent
where such things as looking, speaking, or acting the woman
of quality, were taught ; but rather, if I must speak the truth,
there was a something in her air, gait, gestures, aye, and in
the very expression of her countenance, calculated to impress
the idea, that she had rather grown to, than sprang from, so
fine a place as 1 was now visiting. While the Doctor was
-engaged in conversation with her, upon subjects more in-
teresting to themselves than us, every now and then, such sen-
tences reaching iny ear, as, “ dreadfully low spirits, “ place
so lonely,” “ can’t sleep at nights,” <f I am sure, poor dear
man, 1 shall never be happy again—first love, you know Doc-
tor, is never forgotten,” I was endeavouring to draw my


bumpkin companion to saj something, but it was all to no
purpose. I did not seem one of his sort, and he stood, gaping
at me, like a great Suffolk calf. I was quite glad, therefore,
when we left the house, and returned to New Norfolk, to a
late dinner, rendered the more agreeable by the presence of
my friend’s wife, who struck me, as being an unaffected,
amiable young lady, well suited to her husband—-she indeed,
seemed to be, what Shakspeare describes, his “ goods, his
chattels, his house, his household stuff, his field, his barn, his
every thing,” nor did there appear any want of reciprocity in
kind feeling, on her part.
It was in the course of this day, that my information was
derived, whence sprung the few observations with which I
introduced my subject.
I know not whether it may be interesting to my read-
ers, but it pleaseth myself, to render the justice which is
no more than due to the Supreme Authorities presiding over
this Colony, wdiere their claims are so strong as in the in-
stance I have referred to ; and, as it is chiefly to please myself,
that I write, so, courteous reader, you must even be satisfied
to take me as you find me, and not attempt to scold, if I am
not always scolding others. However, I have one or two
rods yet in pickle, of which more hereafter, perhaps you
may have one of them next week.—lnterim, and alwaj's, I
still subscribe myself, their faithful servant,
•r ' #
Simon Stukeley.
No, 21 Hobart Town , October 30, 1829.
From New Norfolk, I bent my course through a peculiarly
rich and park-like tract of country, on the other side of the
Derwent, to the Lower and Upper Clyde; proceeding from
Bothwell, to the high North road, and following it, as far as
Jericho ; leaving which, I directed my steps through Bagdad
and Brighton, to Richmond; thence, to Sorell town, returning
across two wide ferries to the seat of Government.
i During my ride, I paid many visits, took sundry notes, and
made several observations upon the characters with whom I
became acquainted. All these will be digested and arranged


in proper form, for the perusal of my readers, in the course of
future weeks. At present, the events of one of the days,
since I resumed possession of my snug and retired lodgings in
this embryo grand metropolis of the Southern Hemisphere, as
some say it is hereafter destined to become, may perhaps
afford as much entertainment to others, as they did to my-
self.
It was a beautiful, clear morning—the mist that at early
dawn, had been overhanging the summit of Mount Wellington,
had gradually disappeared, exhibiting its rough and towering
majesty in all its splendour ; and I was doubting in my mind,
whether I should ride, walk, go upon the water, or lounge
upon my sofa, read a novel, and sip lemonade, when a friend
called, saying he must have my company to pay a visit or
two, where he bad particular reasons for not wishing to go
alone.
I am always at command, when works of good fellowship,
or charity, are in hand. Asking therefore no questions, I
prepared to do as I was requested.
We walked on together, along one of the principal streets
of, the town, until a certain stone building, already the scene
of two or three occurrences, familiar to ray readers, met my
eye—and turning towards it, we passed by the usual en-
trance, and ascending a lofty, ill-arranged, badly constructed
flight of steps, found ourselves in a tolerable sized apartment,
directly communicating by a door way with another; but of
rather smaller dimensions. Upon entering this inner-room, a
thin, darkish complexioned Gentleman in the prime of life,
wearing his hair in a stiff, bristly fashion, leaving his fore-
head bare, and rising trom it, somewhat like a square tuft,
and not impressing a stranger by the expression of the face,
or shape of the head, that nature, in filling its storehouses,
had bestowed more than an average share of her good gifts,
returned our salutations, in rather a formal, awkward manner,
somewhat different to that ease and refinement, peculiar to the
manners of good birth and breeding. “ I have brought a
friend,” said my companion, “to take a ticket in your raffle—
shew him the prospectus, that’s a good fellow.” Addressing
a short thin young man who was in the outer room, the
Gentleman desired him to let me see the scheme, adding
“But are there any shares left?” “Ob yes, Sir” replied
the other, “ plenty.” He then gave me the paper, setting


forth the particulars, whereon, at the head of the list war
written as follows
“ It’s a very fine thing, to call father-in-law.
One who holds dollar bags, under his paw ;
But a much finer thing, to have one, for a wife.
Who hates and abominates discord and strife—
Yet, in some way or other, I scarcely know how,
A few Chinese bawbles have kicked up a row.
With six hundred a year, ’tis a shame to record it,
But ’tis settled on all hands, we cannot afford it.
Thus, in order to guide ray dear wife with a snaffle,
I’ve resolved to dispose of the whole by a raffle.”
“ With so good an object in view. Sir” I observed, “ every
person must be glad of an opportunity of enrolling his name—
is it very costly?” “Oh no, Sir,” he replied, “it’s only
ten pounds in all, there are twenty tickets of ten shillings
each.” I then turned towards the young man at the table,
to give him my name, and chuse the lucky number. With a
familiarity and freedom, more such as might have been ex-
pected from a pell mell acquaintance at an Epsom race, than
in a grave office, stuffed with parchments and papers, he im-
mediately said to me “What are the odds, Sir, I don’t name
the winner ?”“I do not understand the chances,” I answered,
scarcely bending my eyes towards him. “I have already
two or three bets” he replied, “ but shouldn’t mind making a
hedge—give me fair odds, I’ll name who throws highest.”
I was a little annoyed, and looking at the speaker with in-
creased attention, recognized in his features, a young mao,
who rode a losing race one day, a few weeks ago, upon the
sands near the town ; but the difference of dress, between a
smart jockey suit, and the plain costume of an office drudge,
would effectually have concealed him from my recollection,
had not the inward leaven, the working of the spirit, operated
to disclose the latent principles of the mind. Nothing farther
now remaining to be done, we took up our hats and proceeded
onwards.
We next made a morning call upon a Lady, who resides in
a pretty looking bouse, standing within a small enclosure,
neatly turfed and planted, close along the side, next adjoining
the street, there being a row of native shrubs and plants;
and the access, through a gravelly road or walk, commu-
nicating with the main street by a neat wicket. We


}oiu»d her at home, busily employed upon domestic duties •
inasmuch, as a fine chubby boy, apparently between two and
three jears old, occupied her unceasing notice, to prevent him
from any mischievous tricks. Another equally fine boy, but a
year or eighteen months younger, was crawling about the
carpet; the Lady herself, being engaged at needle work. A
pianoforte stood open, and there were several books in the
room, attording a tolerable earnest, of the sort of conversa-
tion likely to await us. Her appearance was greatly prepos-
sessing j—a brunette, with regularly formed features, dark
expressive eyes, and of an agreeable figure. Here, we
chatted away halt or three quarters of an hour, having the
pleasure more than once, to hear myself mentioned, and to
receive a greater share of commendation than censure, al-
though she said, “he is sometimes very severe” adding,
“ I was quite delighted, that all he could find fault with, in
my husband, was, that he carried such an immense snuff-box,
—-I have often scolded him for it myself; but he does not
mind what I say; I rather think, however, he stands in some
little awe of Mr. Stukeley.”
Proceeding from this mansion, seemingly of peace and har-
mony, we bent our course towards the wharf, and about half
way, stopped for a minute or two, looking at the commence-
ment of a new brick building, at one end of the Governor’s
house, destined, as we were told, to be a Council Chamber.
The Government in this instance, cannot surely be charged
with an improvident expenditure ; for they have adopted Mrs.
Glass’s celebrated recipe, about boiling a turbot— * first
catch the fish, and then dress it’—so in the present case, not
only have they waited till the Council was named, but even
afterwards, like the man who built a house, and then dis r
covered, it had neither door nor chimney, the Council has
been long appointed, the acts to be first submitted to it, are
all said to be ready and waiting, when, lo and behold, it is all
at once found out, there is no Council Chamber! I delight
in recording ray approbation of public measures, whenever it
is possible; and, having a little tory blood in my veins,
would willingly stretch a point, to pass, sub silentio, what, if
noticed at all, must be censured ; but conscience, though thus
obsequious in matters of politics, protests against such a line
of conduct in this instance ; and, as the experience I have
derived from my daily intercourse with society, has convinced


me of the necessity of certain legislative enactments being
passed without delay, I own that I cannot reconcile to myself,
the beginning to build, at so late a period, as at all consistent
with the generally sound measures of the enlightened indi-
vidual, who now governs this Colony.
While thus employed, an acquaintance, whom I have oft
met, turned the corner by the Guard-house, mounted on a di-
minutive pony. I thought there was less animation in his
eye than I had once observed ; and that an hasty impetuosity,
which at first, almost made me startle, had sobered down into
a look of moody, disappointed ambition.—“Eh, Sir! what
d’ye think of this new waste of the public money?—Shall
write home about it by the next ship.—l can’t see, Sir, why
the Council should’nt sit in the Governor’s dining parlour,
it’s quite large enough, Sir.” “ Perhaps they may. Sir,” I
replied, “ upon proper occasions; but I do not agree with
you, that a dining room, is a suitable place, wherein the re-
presentatives of the people should hold their deliberative as-
semblies.” I spoke these words with an emphasis, which
did not escape him ; but ere I would give him time to reply,
I continued, “You speak of the size of the room, Sir; were
you ever in it?” “No Sir, no Sir, nor don’t intend it.”
“ By-the-bye,” said my companion, addressing the eques-
trian ; I wonder you don’t enlist Simon Stukeley to reform
some of the abuses, of which you* complain so constantly ; his
“peculiar vein” might save you a great deal of trouble.—Of
course, you patronize the re-publication of his Essays ?”
“ What Sir, what Sir! do you think lam mad? No, Sir, I
have had quite enough of Mr. Simon Stnkeley and his Essays
already, without paying any more for their re-publication,—l
wish he had staid where he was, —he’s too knowing for me,
by half, Sir, what! pay twenty shillings for my own picture !
No, Sir, one shilling was quite enough, indeed too much, if I
pay any more, ’twill be to raise a subscription to send him out
of the country.” As he said these words, he turned from us,
and we renewed our walk.
We now turned into another street, and went into a shop,
to make a trifling purchase ; and were presently attended to
by the tradesman himself, who did his best to welcome us,
by a sort of cringing civility, peculiar to a certain class of per-
sons, who take the upper place in the Synagogue, and are for
ever exclaiming in public “ Lord be merciful to me a Sinner.”


van diemen’s land.
lie was short and stout, of fair complexion, and wore a flaxen
wig. whose straight yellow locks, combed along his forehead,
looked as if the Barber, when giving it the last finish on the
block, ere it was transplanted to the head, had placed a basin
over it, and used his scissars to clip the extremities, exactly
as the brim covered them. His clothes consisted of a snuft-
coloured coat and vest, with breeches to match, partaking a
little of the Quaker cut —a little of the old school puritan’s,
and a little of that sly humility, that affects singularity, under
the garb of simplicity. In his mode of serving us, there was
nothing to complain of; indeed, the assistance he received
from a sharp active lad, dressed in a suit of grey, left him
little to do, but to talk ; and in this, he was quite at home.
I.was particularly struck with his prying inquisitiveness ;
it would have almost seemed that he was a caterer for a club
of gossips, from the nature of his incessant conversation, and,
as a matter of course with such characters, he knew every
person’s business better than his own.
Particularly addressing me, he enquired, “ Been long in
the Colony, Sir ?” and almost in the same breath, “ ever been
to New Norfolk ?” Having replied to both these questions,
he continued with great volubility, “ very strange, Sir, but
do you know, that long as I have been here, I was never at
New Norfolk before t'other day ; and who do you suppose
was my companion up there ? Why, Sir, I was there along
with the Hermit.” “ That is strange, indeed,” I replied,
then of course, you can solve the mystery, and let us know
who, and what he is like.” Oh, yes, Sir, but I don’t know
that I am quite at liberty,” he answered with a significant
grin, “ but he was capital company, and gave a pretty ac-
count of our journey, though after all, he praises the place
more than I should, as ’tisn’t so much to my mind as a muddy
sort of soil, for regular crops. I shall take him some day to
what I call a fine spot, and see what he says to that.” Our
purchases had been completed, a minute or two, but to in-
dulge the good main’s taste for gossip, we lingered at the
shop door, listening to his rapid change of subjects, upon
many of which, he exposed equal ignorance, as when telling
us, who was New Norfolk companion, until tired of his
garrulity, we proceeded onwards, paying several visits; more
than one, yielding materials for my note book. There, how-
ever, for the present, they must remain.
Simon Stukeley.


No. 23. Hobart Town, November 6, 1829.
When I left New Norfolk on my intended excursion in the
interior, I crossed the river by means of a ferry, about a
hundred yards wide ; and, landing upon the opposite shore,
mounted my horse to proceed onwards. In the boat was a
pleasant looking countryman, of the better sort of farmer,
dressed in a light colored single-breasted coatee, white duck
trowsers, and striped waistcoat—appearing in age, to be be-
tween thirty and forty, and of unreserved, sociable manners.
Finding by his conversation, that he was a traveller on the
same road as myself, I proposed to become his companion;
hoping that, independently of the pleasure of thus whiling
away the time, the information he would impart, respecting
the country through which we were to pass, would add to the
interest of the ride. During the first few miles, several small
farms attracted my notice ; some of which were well culti-
vated, and appeared fertile. A fine plat of deep rich soil
near the river, extending two miles or more, was lying in
fallow, ready, as my companion told me, for the culture of po-
tatoes ; this species of tillage being remarkably well adapted
to the nature of the land in that neighbourhood, where large
quantities are usually grown, and easily brought to the water’s-
edge, for conveyance by boat to Hobart Town. I also learnt
that the land, in this immediate district, had been parcelled
but and distributed many years ago, in small farms, among a
number of persons, who, upon the abandonment by Govern-
ment of Norfolk Island, had removed hither, receiving grants,
free from all restrictions, in compensation for the places they
had left; constituting a nest of old settlers, from whom have
sprung many of the fine and hardy race, commonly known by
the term, Native Youths. We pulled up near an Inn, for a
few minutes, to chat a little, with a remarkably fine venerable-
looking old man,'whose expressive features, beautifully formed
head and profile, set off by hoary locks, and extreme cleanli-
ness, constituted a model, worthy the hand of the Sculptor.
His faculties seemed unimpaired, as he replied to our general
questions, with a readiness and vivacity, indicative of the full
bodily and mental health he enjoyed; but I was sorry to


learn, that by imposing upon his easy nature, and friendly
heart, he was become a tool in the hands of some designing
people, who were gradually stripping him of his pro-
perty.
Proceeding onwards, we came to a spot, where the Der-
went suddenly burst upon our view with great splendour ; and
presently our road lay close along-sido its banks, having a
few neat houses and farms on our right.—Some little way fur-
ther, we approached a spot, where the hand of man has been
brought into active operation, warring against Nature, who
had almost destined it to be impassable. A tremendous sort
of bank rises almost perpendicularly, two or three hundred
feet from the river, occasioning the traveller a kind of sicken-
ing apprehension that he may, without much care, be precipi-
tated to the bottom. To remedy this, a road is being cut
through the bank, much below the old line, and when com-
pleted, will be a grand and striking improvement. Some
little distance from hence, we took leave of the river, making
a turn to the right, and had a view of some of the country on
the other side, familiar to me by my ride the day before—
still pursuing our way through a rich and greatly diversified
tract, which was gradually assuming a more expanded and
park-like appearance, every mile we travelled. Immediately
in front and far-outstretched on either side, were rich and fer-
tile plains ; two remarkably, and prettily rounded hills, being
upon our remote right; the extreme left, bounded by a range
of distant mountains.
For sheep pasturage, these plains, and some we afterwards
travelled over, cannot be excelled; but it really grieved me
to witness- the shameful supineness and ignorance of the
owners of the flocks, every where grazing around us ; little or
no attention appearing to be paid to classification, to separa-
tion of the lambs from their dams, or to indiscriminate inter-
course* While we were in this vicinitv, we were overtaken
by a bustling, and somewhat plebian-looking man on horse-
back, resembling in his appearance, a north country gauger.
He was of middle age and stature ; no person could ever offer
him so high an insult, as to mistake him for a Gentleman, al-
though the easy look of self-complacency he carried about
him, plainly enough bespoke that he was what is understood
by the term, “ well to do in the world.” Accosting us as he
came up, with “ Good morning to you, Sir are you lately


from Hobart Town?” be no sooner received a reply, than be
continued, “ what news is there stirring? Any ships from
England ?” These questions being also answered, he went
on, “ Did yon hear how trade was going on ? Any fresh im-
portations of tea from China ; wine from the Cape ; rum from
England ;or sugar from the Mauritius ?—I rather fancy some
of the speculations won’t turn out quite so well as was ex-
pected ; but he was always an obstinate old fellow ; thought
no person knew any thing but himself—he has had a few sour
grapes for his palate lately, I’m thinking, and ’twas time bis
blood was cooled a little ; for, even now, the marks of his in-
temperate passion a’n’t obliterated-—Well, well! [he may
chafe, and call names ; I always say, let him laugh who
wins.” I was induced to observe our new companion a little
more closely, as he spoke these last words, and noticed, that
just below r one of his eyes, the remains of a bruise were appa-
rent ; that sort of yellow and green streaks, which now and
then are a consequence of pugnacious combats between two
school-boys ; and there was a covert slyness about the eye
itself, as it returned my momentary gaze by a significant
twinkle, as much as to say, “ a bird in the band, is worth
two in the bosh”—a sentiment, the more likely to have been
passing in his mind, inasmuch as we were now within view of
a good, substantial-looking house, built of free stone ; to-
wards which he turned, as he wished us good morning, ad-
ding, with a laugh, “ I think of the two, I have the best end
of the staff'!” Just as he left us, the prospect assumed a new
and highly interesting appearance ; the left commanding the
sight of the Derwent, as it bounded by its windings, a sort of
Peninsula; the land on its bank, being picturesque, and well-
cultivated, interspersed, here and there, by farm and other
buildings, and immediately upon the neck, formed by the
river, stood a respectable family residence.
The country every where around, continued of a fine descrip-
tion for another mile or two; when my companion, who, in
the course of our ride, had displayed a fair share of good
sound sense, and information, intimated that he must shortly
bid me adieu, unless I could be persuaded to accompany him
to a neighbouring house of entertainment, where he told me,
that he expected a friend would be waiting for him ; with
whom he bad to transact some business ; and that he should
there be at home. I found in him, one topic of conversation,


I was not prepared to expect. Speaking of the few birds
there are in this Colony, which possess any melody in their
notes, I discovered that by the word music, I had touched a
chord, from which indeed, sweet sounds vibrated ; and, as the
theme was continued, he seined equally at home, in descanting
upon the magnificence of Handel, the grandeur of Haydn, the
lively vivacity of Rossini, the overwhelming force of Beet-
hoven, the sweetness of Mozart, or the plaintive melody of
Bishop, as he was upon the style and execution of the cele-
brated Masters, who now delight the British Public by their
several performances ; or, to bring him more within his sphere
in this Island, as, upon the best mode of clearing land, avoid-
ing . smut in wheat, or breeding sheep, so as to combine a
fine fleece, with a weighty carcase. His manner of urging
his invitation, had so much of the true English hospitality
about it, that I felt it an act of duty, particularly as it coin-
cided with my inclination not to wither in the bud, so beau-
tiful a plant, now that it was transplanted here, from the
Mother Country—fearing that the chilling hand of refusal
might destroy it, ere it had well taken root. I therefore re-
signed myself to my fate, and followed him to the door of'a
building, or rather the shell of a building, several worknytn
being yet employed towards adapting it toils character, evi-
dently of modern date. The Landlord, a middle-sized mao,
perhaps between thirty and forty, met us at the door, as we
alighted, and I instantly perceived by his very bow, that he
was young in his calling. Having intimated to my com-
panion, that a person was waiting for him, and that the dinner
he had ordered, would be ready in half an hour, I left the two
friends together for that time, and entered into conversation
with mine host and his wife, upon various subjects connected
with the neighbourhood ; and I learnt, that they had formerly
suffered much, and been driven from their farm, by Bush-
rangers ; but had now returned to it, without the fear of a
recurrence of such a misfortune. Whilst so engaged, a young
chubby-looking man, well mounted, rode up to the door, and
alighting, I recognised in him, a billiard-table acquaintance,
whom I met at Hobart Town, during the winter, and also at
one or two other places, best known to ourselves. He is
rather under the middle stature, quite raw and inexperienced
in the ways of life, although I rather think he fancies himself
fully a match for the knowing ones.—He wore a kind ot


riding jacket, and trowsers with boots ; and, if he were to
laugh less loudly at his own wit, and to remember how beau-
tifully modesty of speech and manner becomes a youth of his
age, he might pass muster for a Gentleman, in the absence of
a better. It is a bad plan, however, at times to be too fas-
tidious ; and, learning from him, that he resided in the neigh-
bourhood, that his abode lay on my direct road, and that a
bed and hearty welcome should be my reception, if I would
accompany him thereto, I agreed to the proposal, and we pre-
sently parted, he, to pursue his journey, engaging to call
for me in three hours, and I to join the dinner table.
Our third companion proved a tall, tolerably proportioned
middle aged man, of rather rough manners and appearance.
He amused me a good deal, by the naivete of some of his ex-
pressions, although couched in a broad provincial dialect,
which, if not really Zummersetshire, is, I am sure, not far re-
moved from it. Among other miseries of life, that he de-
scribed as having escaped by coming to this Colony, he con-
gratulated himself that he had “ done” the Parson of his
tithe pig, entertaining us with the many pranks he and his
mother’s cherry-cheeked dairy-maid used to pay the collector,
when, in making his rounds, even the sacred privacy of the
hens’ nests was invaded. “A pretty job I should make of it
now,” he added, “if I had these gentry to settle with every
year.” “Why yes,” replied the other, “you must have a
tolerable number of breeding animals; but, somehow or
other, your establishment is not quite right in that way yet
’tis’nt quite complete—l don’t know how it is, but sometimes
people get beat at trifles, though they manage great things
very well.—l take it you find it a deal more easy to coin silver
and gold, than to polish steel to some people’s minds, eh
neighbour! The joke, whatever it was, conveyed by these
words, did not seem very agreeable ; for the other replied,
apparently half-displeased, “the kettle has no business to
upbraid the pot, with its black sides—the steel may be
polished enough yet, for aught you know; or, perhaps, we
may gold may give a polish, although steel cannot
take one. I now comprehended enough of the subject of
this conversation, to throw in a word or two, and perhaps
somewhat roguishly, took up my pencil and wrote the fol-
lowing:—


“ Vet, spite of what dame Nature has denied,
Fortune adopts him, with her fondest pride ;
And while he has two thousand pounds a-year,
From many a Miss’s mother you will hear
‘His face is not the finest. I’ll agree.
And seldom, a more bashful man you’ll see :
His shoulders, certainly, are rather high,
But, then, he has a most expressive eye !
Nor be your heart, by outward charms inclined.
But seek the higher beauties of the mind.’ ”
We spent an hour or two in general chit-chat, and I almost
regretted my engagement to proceed onwards in the evening,
as both my companions made me a tender of their good offices,
towards introducing me to a family in the neighbourhood ;
from their report of whom, I was led to expect that I might
have passed an agreeable and sociable evening. I was there-
fore reluctantly compelled to decline their kindness, although,
wisely providing for the possibility of again travelling the
same road on some future occasion, I thankfully accepted so
miueb of the proposal, as related to the introductory part of
the business ; and then proceeded on my ride, accompanied
by my friend of the billiard table. I must defer, however,
any further account of my journey till another week.
Simon Stukelev.
No, 24. Hobart Town, November 13,1829.
The country in the immediate vicinity of the spot, where I
met my young Billiard-table acquaintance, is Park-like and
picturesque, apparently well calculated, either for pasture or
tillage.
Previously to commencing the ride, with him, to his resi-
dence, I had accompanied my other two friends to a large,
handsome looking house, standing upon an eminence, about
two miles distant from the Inn, and near which, I observed
some arable land, wearing an appearance of more care and
diligence, than have struck me as generally obtaining in the
agricultural labours of the inhabitants of this Colony > the re-
sult of which, as usual in such cases, is that it bears its own
reward in the clean and healthy state of the growing crop,-


I was informed, that upon this eminence, and other places,
within a short distance, several very curious and beautiful
petrifactions of the different woods of the Colony have long
been found, preserving all the veins and tints of their original
substance, giving it a resemblance to the most showy and
finely variegated marble.
I am not a naturalist, else, the extraordinary fact of meeting
in such complete petrifaction substances, at an elevation from
the sea, of a thousand or fifteen hundred feet, in a dry soil, far
distant from the apparent influence of any water, would create
cause of wonder that might perhaps, lead me to dilate upon
the subject, with the hope of exciting some person, better
skilled in such matters than myself, to offer an explanation of
the causes which have Jed to so remarkable an effect, and
perhaps even now, the hint so thrown out, may conduce to
this object. Upon reaching the house, I was introduced by
my companions to a Lady of handsome, well formed features,
dark, expressive eyes, conveying the impression of great sa-
gacity, who received me with ease and politeness, added to
that sort of hearty welcome, which bespoke the sociable foot-
ing whereon ray two friends stood with her. I much re-
gretted it was not in my power to accept an invitation she
gave me for the rest of the day ; but promised to renew my
visit at some other time, when she permitted me to under-
stand, I might hope to see other parts of her family, who
were now either from home, or rambling about the grounds.
Bidding her adieu, I rode to keep ray appointment, ready to
proceed to my destination for the evening. After proceeding
about six miles, through a fine sheep country, we arrived at a
small town, or township, lam told, more properly speaking,
situated on a stream, which afterwards falls into the Derwent',
affording in its way, a plentiful supply of water for the farms
and houses along its banks, and also for turning a flour mill,
erected near the town.
Just as we approached this place, we observed a crowd of
country people standing together, close to an enclosure, which
1 piesently discovered to be the Pound, and imprisoned
within it, were several head of cattle. The Pound-keeper, a
darkish, down-cast looking man, rather thin and of middle
dressed with a sort of nattiness, somewhat unusual in the
country, and wearing white cord breeches and gaiters, was
pioceeding to hold an auction, to defray the expenses that


had been incurred. Among the bve-standers, were one or
two, seemingly the owners of the cattle, who were not sparine
in abusive language, for what they termed “ rank robbery ”
downright imposition,” &c. and I cannot help saying that
il what they represented, in answer to a few enquiries I made*
be correct, there is no part of our Colonial regulations, so
much requiring the interference of the Legislature, as those
relating to impounding.
I have collected many anecdotes, connected with this sub-
,» • . , excursion, disclosing acts of
apparent injustice and oppression, which I am sure, the pre-
sent Head of the Government is the very last man breathing
to tolerate, if they were to come before him ; and at a proper
season, I shall recur to the subject, if I see occasion.
From the commencement to the termination of our ride, I
was unable to take any particular notice of the country, as I
had enough to do to keep pace with my comrade, who con-
stantly urged his horse forwards at great speed, seemingly
altogether indifferent to i every thing around him • and pro-
ceeding in this manner, shortly after we passed the township,
©lose to the stream I had before noticed, we arrived at a verv
pretty Cottage ornte, standing within a flower garden, at this
season wearing its brightest livery, and approached by means
of a neat wicket. Alighting at the gate, I followed my com-
panion to the door, and entering the bouse, was shewn into a
parlour, where two ladies were sitting, and two fine children.
One of the ladies appeared rather older than the other, but
neither of them had passed the very morning of life. She had
a mild, pleasant countenance, agreeable figure and genteel de-
portment, but I observed with sorrow, that nature had not
bestowed her good gifts unmingled by drawbacks ; for, in
proportion as the beauties of the mind wore disclosed by the
expression of her features, was my regret in discovering, that
she possessed an infirmity, depriving her of the pleasure of
hearing what was passing, so as to be able to join in conver-
sation, in the manner for which she otherwise appeared well
calculated. The other lady was dark,- and of a foreign style
of features, by some much admired, and thought interesting ;
although I do not quite know that X am of this number,
being rather prejudiced in favor of what may be called, the in-
digenous beauty of my native country.
My companion had not mentioned whether he was about to


introduce me to his father, mother, brother, sister, friend, or
wife : he had merely said, “ I live in such and such a place,
and shall be glad to see you.” I therefore felt the awkward-
ness of my situation, when, upon his entering the room in a
rude boisterous manner, he bade me be seated, without saying
one word by way of introducing me to the ladies, and his
mode of treating them afterwards equally perplexed me, par-
ticularly the darkest of the two, it being too unceremonious
for a dependent, too free for a brother, too indifferent for a
lover, and he was too young to allow me to think him a hus-
band, —too old for a son—altogether puzzling me exceedingly.
Adapting myself however, as well as I was able, to my com-
pany, I joined in conversation, as subjects arose, trusting to the
chapter of accidents for the issue. After a short while, the Lady
said, “ We have nothing but disappointments, for to-morrow, —I
cannot think what’s come to all the Ladies in the neighbour-
hood, for every one of them has sent excuses—we shan’t have
for me,”
a Lady here.” “ The women may all be
the young man replied—“ who the h—ll cares whether they
come or stay away? I have brought one friend here, at all
events, who will stay —and he is worth a dozen petticoats at a
party —d
’em they’re only in the way.” The Lady
here addressed me, “We have a little fete, preparing for to-
morrow—l hope you will be of the party ?” Bowing assent,
I replied, “ I will with pleasure, but my friend here, has not
allowed me the opportunity of knowing to whom I may ex-
press my acknowledgments. Come, Sir/’ addressing him,
“ Pray act the master of ceremonies, between myself and these
Ladies.” So appealed to, he did the needful, by which I
just learnt enough, to be still more puzzled ; for my own
notions of the situation he told me he filled in the household,
were so at variance with his manners and general deportment,
I could not understand it; and I thought, although perhaps it
was my mistake, that the significant glances which passed be-
tween the Lady and the young man, seemed to imply that,
they saw and comprehended what was passing in my mind.
We passed an evening, not altogether so agreeably as I had
hoped, when I first entered the room—the loud ha ! ha ! ha’s
of the Gentleman, interspersed with numerous oaths, and an
evident taste for the bottle, sadly interfering with my precise
notions of what is due to Lady’s society, and, (must I tell the
'truth ?), there being nothing whatever, the principal


speaker of the two females, to atone for the want of decorum
he exhibited. The other Lady appeared of a very different
sort, and perhaps, her blushes were spared upon one or two
occasions, by her want of hearing.
Early next morning, a ride was proposed ; and, mounting
our horses, we proceeded a considerable distance, making two
or three calls—among others, upon a Gentleman of bulky
make and shape, a dear lover of his grog, if there be any
truth in signs, and whom we met just in front of his residence,
walking with a fair complexioned Lady, with flaxen ringlets,
and possessing a full share of the en hon point, whom I at
firs presumed was his daughter, but upon entering into con-
versation, my ears detected that the Lady was a gem from the
Emerald Isle, while the Gentleman struck me as an East
Mercian; and presently there were so many “my loves” and
“my dears” added to other unequivocal tokens, that the
truth flashed on my mind, and I Judged rightly enough, they
were a new married couple. Upon following them into the par-
lour, I saw a pretty, recently finished picture, hanging over the
chimney-place, the subject taken from the Merry Wives of
Windsor, pourtraying the humourous Knight making love,
and under it was written—
“ It is better to be an old man’s darling.
Than with a young man, to be ever snarling.”
After taking leave of this couple, we returned homewards,
just in time for dinner, and to prepare for the evening’s enter-
tainment. I was informed, the original plan comprehended a
dance among other amusements ; but owing to the untortunate
and unaccountable whim of the Ladies who had been invited,
not one appeared to grace by her charms, the sombre medley
of a parcel of beings, in broad cloth, and when the latest possi-
ble hour arrived, ere all hopes of this sort were relinquished,
the miserable substitute of a bowl of punch, and cheroots,
with its concomitants of toasts, sentiments and songs, was re-
sorted to, in order to supply the place of the absent votaries
of Terpsichore, whom I had hoped to see —
“ In the smooth dance to move with graceful mien,
Easy with care, and sprightly, though serene.
All the party were strangers to me, nor did I notice any o
them particularly, excepting a military officer, a genilemauiy
young man, who said he was quartered in the neighbourhood,
and who described to me what an excellent fry, a small fish,


caught in the Derwent makes, and a tall, well-favored jouth,
whose chin is just shewing the dawn of manhood, and who
conducted himself with modest, uuobtruding propriety, mark-
ing him as a young Gentleman of promise :
“ Ingenui vultus puer ingenui-que pudoris.”
The young man who acted as Major domo, did not rise in my
estimation, by his behaviour during the course of the evening.
His manner of addressing the Lady of the house was rudely
familiar, to use the mildest term, and such as a regard for
herself, should cause her to disallow.
It may be said, it is a sorry return for people’s hospitality,
to hold them up to censure; but my object is, as I have
before said, to encourage virtue, to restrain and correct, what
is otherwise, and as I never go any where uninvited, let those
who have a hole in their coals, which they wish to conceal, have
a care how they ask me to become their guests.
The morning succeeding the fete, as it was called, I pro-
ceeded on my journey, and passing through a rich tract of
country well watered, and parcelled into various farms, en-
tered the town called Bothwell, of which more hereafter.
Simon S^ukeley.
No. 25. Hobart Town,November 20, 1829,
During the course of my recent country excursion, I was
tempted to become the purchaser of an Estate, on the other
side of the Derwent; and certain legal forms, having conse-
quently become necessary, it was matter of consideration with
me, which, of the various limbs of the law, who have taken
up their abode ip the Colony, I should consult. I was ac-
cordingly led to refer to the notes, taken from my Informant’s
communications, in order to form such an opinion of their re-
active merits, as might decide me.
One or two of the list, have already passed in review before
my readers, but several yet remain unnoticed ; and perhaps,
I cannot do better at present, than place on record, the infor-
mation that had been imparted to me on the subject.
Indeed, when it is borne in mind, what a bane to the well-
doing of Society/ is an unskilful practitioner in either of the


✓ .. .
learned professions, what, incalculable mischief to families yet
unborn, is oftentimes produced, by the ignorance and pre-
sumption of persons, calling themselves Lawyers, it dan ex-
cite no wonder that, upon so important an occasion as an
exchange of money for dirty acres, I should be anxious to
have full conviction, not only that there was a right to sell the
property, but that, it should be ?o conveyed, as to baffle the
legal quirks and ingenuity of some future Gilbert Glossin ; a
family, proved by direful experience, to be extremely nume-
rous, and endowed with a most accommodating conscience.—
I therefore opened my memorandum book, with a full deter-
mination to weigh each impartially ; and I do not know that,
in stating the result, I can improve upon giving, almost ver-
batim, the words of my informant.
No. I.—Upright and honest, and above doing a dirty
action ; not deeply skilled in law, and consequently, leaves
much to subordinates ; certain of whom, although sharp and
•lever, are not sometimes, if there be truth in common re-
port, more nice than wise, when their own interest or plea-
sure can be forwarded ; the latter, too often consisting in any
thing that will procure a liberal allowance of aqua vita. At
a former period, this Gentleman had the best practice in the
Colony ; but one cause or other, has assisted others to sup-
plant him ; and although, still universally respected and es-
teemed, as a man of honor and integrity, yet, these proper-
ties, not being all required by him, who resorts to a Lawyer,
he has been thrown into the shade by some, of a higher pro-
fessional, although less exalted, moral rank, and who are
reaping the harvest, of which he sowed the grain.
2. —Ignorance and presumption, mingled with rude, vulgar
manners, not softened by education, or even tolerable acquire-
ments. For some years, a borrowed lustre was bestowed, by
being attached to the train of a brightly shining comet ; and
a certain imaginary importance was also derived, by having
been taught to say “ Bow, wow,” at the word of command of
one, who can write A. B. even if this be nearly the length of
bis tether. Nevertheless, like a true bairn of the “ Land o
Cakes,” he so made hay, whilst the sun shone, was so old, in
saving knowledge, however young be might be, in all other
information, that he has contrived to accumulate a tolerable
hwap of this world’s goods, having at the same time, pre-
served an unblemished reputation for integrity. He has


Abernethy’s manners, without his brains, and should recollect,
it is only the possession of rare qualities that can ever
atone for the absence of that suaviter in which is the
true characteristic of a Gentleman.
3. —ls altogether a different character. His attainments,
although perhaps, not of themselves, sufficient to place him in
a conspicuous rank in the orb of law practitioners, receive a
reflected importance, by being seen in the mirror, held up by
another individual. He possesses considerable industry, ap-
plication, and the methodical exactness of a man of business.
To bis friends and retainers, he can assume a courteous, or
even, polite manner ; but, in arguing or discussing with
strangers, he has a disagreeable snarl, that derogates from
the favourable impression, be might 'otherwise create. This
is the more striking, inasmuch as the borrowed light in whieb
he shines, is remarkably clear and lucid, seldom disturbed by
clouds, or lowering darkness, and it might have been sup-
posed that, so ill-favored a weed as discourtesy, would ere
now, have been withered by its influence. Still “ his bark is
waur than his bite.” Besides, he is not rapacious, nor, is
there any iron in his composition ; and, take him altogether,
I determined that I might probably go further and fare worse,
than by enrolling my name, as one of his clients.
I shall only at present bring forward one other, leaving
those that remain, for a future occasion.
4. —Again differs from all the preceding ones. He has qua-
lities that are exclusively his own, in respect to being a so-
ciable, entertaining companion, full of anecdote, glee, and
humour.
Place him on an elbow chair, by a chimney corner, with its
arms well filled by the rotundity of his person, his clothes,
put on with a sort of degage air, his tasty watch ap-
pendages, hanging around his neck, and just enough visible,
to be contrasted with the diamond brooch, stuck in the shirt
bosom, with great exactness, and he is as much calculated to
excite mirth, as, when he is seen Jehu-like, driving all before
him, bis head projecting forwards beyond his body, and his
two arms elevated, and stretched out, saving, as plainly as
they can speak, “ ’ware elbows.” To notice him in either of
these situations, the spectator would scarcely be prepared to
expect to find him a limb of the law, indifferently learned,
upon all common questions; and withal, sufficiently honest
and courteous.


He is however, too fond of scum and refuse ; —in ascending
the ladder, he forgets that, although the steps of thorough
down-right respectability, may be more tardy, they are iu
the end, more sure ; and that, all the art and ability of the
most accomplished Chymist, cannot divest pi.ch, of its natural
adhesive qualities j nor, can an honest Lawyer bestow upon an
unworthy cause, a good reputation. He may be pure him-
self, but when he comes in contact with impurity, the misfor-
tune is that, the latter bestows, not receives, its amalgamating
qualities. There is more brass than Iron, in this Gentleman’s
composition, and he partly atones by diligence, for the ab-
sence of other essentials, towards forming a complete man of
business.
Having upon the whole determined that No. 3 should be
my Homme d'Affaires, in completing the necessary arrange-
ments for my purchase, I went to his office, one morning last
week, and having sent in my name, and requested an inter-
view, was presently ushered into his room. There was
nothing remarkable in his appearance, of a nature, either to
excite a favourable, or an unfavourable impression. His sharp
teatures, sallow complexion, and bony form, well enough cor-
responded with his dress, and general expression, and except-
ing the habit he has acquired, of constantly pulling his finger-
jOints, so as to occasion a cracking noise, I have no particu-
’.icular fault to notice in his deportment. While we were
conversation, upon the subject of my visit, the door
was opened, and a Gentleman entered, with whom I was pre-
viously acquainted, having met him at Mrs. Doubtmuch’s,
and at one or two other parlies. His manner was now, as it
always is, mild and gentlemanly—the soft tones of bis voice,
well according with his delicate appearance and figure ; and
■here was a playfulness, in his cast of features, rarely met
with, in “ the gravity of one, skilled in his country’s laws.”
He seemed to be quite at home with the other Gentleman ; so
much so indeed, that his entrance did not even interrupt our
discussions ; and so soon as they were ended, he addressed
him, with a very pleasant smile, “ Do you know who has
done you the honor of becoming your client? I only hope for
your sake, that you and he are upon good terms with each
other—my friend here, if I mistake not, says with Burns,
sometimes—
“ A duel’s amang ye, takfn ’notes,
And faith he’ll prent it.”


“ Isn’t it so?” turning towards me as he spoke. “ This
Gentleman has entrusted me with the completion of a pur-
chase, he is desirous of making,” gravely replied the Law-
yer, and then, relaxing his features into half a smile, con-
tinued—“ I believe I have no cause at present to fear any re-
sults from the honor of his acquaintance.” As he uttered
these words, he gave his finger joints another pull, which oc-
casioned a significant glance between the other Gentleman
and myself, serving in my idea, at least, to record a note,
hereafter to be printed. After some little further discussion
upon various subjects, the Gentleman who last entered,
turned to me, and said “ Which way are you going next ? ’
“ No where, in particular,” I replied ; ,f but am quite at your
service, if you have any thing to propose.” “ Why,” he an-
swered, “ I have to call upon a Gentleman, upon some bu-
siness, that will not detain me more than five minutes—after-
wards, suppose we stroll and hear the band for an hour.”—
Readiiy acceding, we went together, to an unfinished free-
stone building, I have already often visited, and upon my
companion’s enquiring for some particular person, was told by
the man i,i waiting, that he was just gone to a neighbouring
brick edifice, of fearful front and entrance, whither, we fol-
lowed him. I saw one or two curious characters, during th,e
few minutes I was detained, whilst my friend was engaged
on his business ; —particularly, a real original, who appeared
to be the Cerberus of the frightful dens, I saw around me ;
but I cannot do justice to him, in the short space now re-
maining, and shall defer any further notice of the acquain-
tance so formed, until another occasion.
The party who had preceded us to this abode of wretched-
ness, and whom we followed there, proved an old friend of
mine, being the Gentleman who bad presided on one or two
occasions, where I was present, particularly at alate Coroner’#
Inquest; but now, for some reason or other, he seemed desi-
rous of shunning me, and was evidently acting under a re-
straint, in the two points of second nature, distorting the face,
aud taking snail with an air altogether his own, during the
whole time I was near him.
Passing afterwards through a yard, we left the place by a
different door to that by which we had entered, and were pre-
sently within the reach of sweet sounds of martial music, and
in the midst of all the grace, beauty, and elegance of this ra-
pidly rising town.


Upon several occasions, I had previously noticed with
some surprise, a certain style of dress, adopted bj some of
the striplings, whp, more fortunately for themselves than the
Public, have been invested with a petty, subordinate post
under Government, and consequently think fit to display their
imaginary consequence, by assuming a garb, similar to that
worn by some of the Royal household in England. Fine fea-
thers make fine birds, it is true ; but beautiful plumage can-
not compensate for more solid and valuable qualities, that are
denied j and, it one or two of the vain-glorious, consequential
youths, who strut about in a coat, cut a Id Militaire, with the
G. R. buttons, and all the other essentials, towards converting
them into silly exquisites, could only know one half the sneers
and ridicule that are cast upon them by all sober minded,
steady citizens, unless they be absolutely eaten up by vanity,
they would forthwith doff their nonsensical vestments, and ap-
pear in the more seeming attire of office-drudges. I do
not object to such a distinguishing outward appearance, as is
becoming rank, and real importance;—it is the absurdity of
aping such characters, that I reprobate—the folly of seeing
persons, who may happen to enjoy the privilege of superin-
tending a parcel of unfortunates, doomed to labour in irons,
whilst they break stones for the high roads, or some, who are
sufficiently exalted to be allowed to use the pen, instead of the
measuring chain, in another branch of the public service,
with one or two other classes I could mention, that have in-
duced these observations ; and, as I chanced to see several
such empty-headed gentry, among the group, collected b»
.the attraction of the Band, my inclination to notice whatever is
ridiculous, with a view to werk its cure, would not allow this
opportunity to escape me, of recording my own, and manj
other persons’ opinions. I continued promenading for some
time, near this spot, chatting with various friends and ac-
quaintances, and was introduced to several new faces—among
whom, were a few, who had intended, upon leaving their
native land, to have pitched their tents at the new, and as it
was once, by some, absurdly considered, rival settlement of
Swan River.
The observations made by these persons, upon every thing
they had seen and learnt of this Colony, since their arrival,
was of a nature, to be gratifying to those, whose wise and sound
measures have so greatly tended to bring it to its present stati*.


It is from such, that opinions of our progress as an English
Settlement, are entitled to consideration—and, as my own
daily experience serves to impress me more highly, with the
value of its resources, and capabilities, and its peculiar adap-
tation to the British Emigrant, no matter what may be his
calling, I shall persevere steadily, in the good work I have
undertaken ; shall hold up folly to ridicule, and virtue, as an
ensample without fear, favour or affection, happy indeed, if
able to co-operate in a slight degree, with some, more learned,
wise, and able than myself, towards reforming the inhabitants,
and otherwise promoting the well-doing of a place, to which
nature has indeed, been eminently bountiful.
Simon Stukeley.
No. 26. Hobart Town , 27, 1829.
Those of my readers who are unacquainted with the in-
terior of this Colony, may perhaps expect when they hear of
the towns of Bothwell, Richmond, Jericho, and others, that
these names represent places of much greater importance
than is really the case. They may bring to their recollection,
possibly, some of the county towns in good Old England,
where the neat church spire, the convenient market-house,
the well kept inn, and the handsomely furnished shop, at
once bespeak the wealth and respectability of the inhabitants,
and the busy throng of passing travellers and strangers. If
they do so, however, they will be disappointed with my ac-
count of Bothwell ; which, according to the three stages of
all worldly concerns —past, present, and future—has to look
forward for whatever rank or importance may have been al-
lowed to it in the book of fate. The town, as it now stands,
has a pretty and convenient site, upon the.banks ot the Clyde,
in a rich and fertile district, well adapted to pasturage—its
extensive plains being intersected by various streamlets that
find a vent in the more important river,' and are bounded at a
remote distance, by a range of thickly-wooded hills. Ar-
riving in the neighbourhood of this spot, a few straggling
•ottages, and here and there a better sort of house, intimated
mv journey was nearly finished ; and, riding on, until I ap-
proached a substantial edifice of recent construction, where


lentertainment for man and horse was said to be provided, I
drew up at the door, and presently a rough-looking
Culotte, with a shock head of sandy coloured hair, staring
eyes, his complexion bearing full evidence of the power of
the Sun in creating freckles, came out and laid hold of the
bridle, whilst I alighted. Upon entering the inn, a thin,
middle-aged man made his obeisance to me, and commencing
conversation, I presently discovered him to be the landlord :
but, although I have had some little experience in pourtray-
ing characters, I own myself beat upon this occasion ; for,
though he was civil and obliging, and readily replied to my
questions, he was just one of that class, a man may meet
twenty times in a week, and fail to recollect him the next
day.
Whilst I was standing at the door-way, chatting with him
and his spouse, a bustling stirring dame, npon the localities
best worthy attention, a Military Officer in an undress uni-
form passed the house, walking arm-inrarm with a young and
interesting looking lady, rather tall and thin. The Officer
was perhaps about thirty, of very gentlemanly appearance,
and not unpleasing countenance. ■** There goes a prime fel-
low,” said a jolly looking countryman, who was seated upon
an old cask, just by the door, smoking his pipe and sipping
his grog,- “ there goes a prime fellow, who knows how to deal
with them there obstropolous chaps as we sometimes get for
assigned servants—we shall find the miss of him when we
lose him—Lord ! how he do stick to business, and how he do
clear the police-office of a morning.” “He certainly is an
officer, and an active Magistrate,” replied a bye-
stander, “ and we shall be fortunate in the district if the next
be as good ; but he has his faults as well as others, and
sometimes treats folks very cavalierly. That oftentimes is
the worst failing of Military Magistrates ; they are apt to for-
get the difference between those who ar’n’t soldiers, and those
who are, and expect as muchfrom one as the other.” “ What
T likes ’em for is,” said the countryman, “ they be so used
to hear talk about and see the poor fellows as gets the four ur
five hundred lashes, they don’t think nothing of giving a man
five and twenty—so I always knows how to manage my ser-
vants, for if they don’t please me, or if they be saucy to my
wife when she’s got a drop or so, I have only to take em to
the office , and it don’t seem nothing to give them a couple of


dozen or so, ’tis only a taste like, compared with
soldiers gets, when they misbehaves.” The dialogue was
continued some little time longer, but my attention was drawn
from it, by noticing a thin middle aged man ot respectable
appearance and pleasing address, rather sharp features, and
wearing a dark frock coat of unusual length, who advanced
towards our little group, and returned the salutations made
him, in an affable good humoured manner. It was not long ere
I found that he was a person to whom a friend had given me
a letter of introduction, and making myself known to him,
We left the party, and withdrew, proceeding towards his own
residence. Neatness and hospitality preside within the walls
of his dwelling, under their fairest shape. His wife received
me with the hearty welcome of the country, joined to the
good breeding of the town—-no ostentatious show—no affec-
tation of splendid wealth —but cleanliness almost to a fault,
and real substantial homely comforts, evinced plainly enough
the good management that reigned within the household. In
personal appearance, the lady had much to recommend her,
but her features, which are regular and well formed, sink
into inferiority if compared with the expression of the coun-
tenance, when arrayed in what Burns calls its “witching
grace,” and which it seldom failed to wear.
After sitting down to a plain but excellent meal, a couple
of neighbours called in upon my friend, and as the evening
advanced, a rubber of whist having been proposed, we cut in,
and I found myself the partner of one of the late arrivals.
In former days I have prided myself upon my knowledge iu
the nice points of this fine game; almost fancying that
I was qualified to edit a new edition of Hoyle, even impro-
ving upon Bob Short, Matthews, and the other masters who
have written upon the subject; but my conceit was complete-
ly taken out of me upon this occasion, for, when once or twice
relying upon my skill, and my partner’s acquiescence in suf-
fering me to play my own game, I ventured upon rather a
delicate finesse, with the view of winning the odd trick, I
found myself out-generalled, and was caught, in my own
snares.
f <
Among the rarities in the eating way, peculiar to this
neighbourhood, and of which I now partook, are remark-
ably fine eels, equal in size or richness to those of the far-
famed Isle of Ely, or Salisbury, and which, drest with a


degree of science, worthy of Dr. Kitchener, afforded a de-
licious treat; so much so indeed, that had 1 not kept King
Henry’s fate before my eyes, like him,, I might have been
tempted beyond prudence. The next morning my friend and
I walked together round the little township, looking at the
barracks, school-house, and one or two other buildings ; and
afterwards I intended to proceed and pay a morning visit to a.
Gentleman with whom I had a slight acquaintance, and whom
I bad met lately in Hobart Town, in company with my friend
Mr. Sterling, when he made me promise to include his house
in my proposed country excursion. In the course of our ram*
ble, we met the Military Officer I had seen the preceding
day, walking with a smart looking, stout, fresh-coloured
Gentleman, with sandy hair, reminding me, by his appear-
ance, of one of those active bustling characters that are to be
seen in crowds upon the London Exchange, every afternoon
at five o’clock, wedged together in deep converse upon the
price of stocks, the state of the weather, and the last news
from the Continent. Almost immediately afterwards, we saw
at a little distance on horseback, the Gentleman upon whom I
intended to call, and who deserves to be introduced to my
readers’ acquaintance ere I proceed further.
In years perhaps he may be as near fifty as forty, has
evidently seen much of the world —being equally at home in
conversing upon our immense Indian possessions, as of bis
native heaths and mountains, or of the more fertile plains of
England is a Gentleman by birth and education, and the
patron of talent and respectabiltty of conduct,, whether Tros
Tyrinsve be the exhibitor. .
Since his sojourn in this country, he has exchanged his
sword for the ploughshare, and resembling some ot the pa-
triarchs of old, counts his flocks and his herds by the thou-
sands, appearing altogether devoted to pastoral pursuits.---
Yet there was a something incomplete in his happiness until
within a year or two, when approaching the most dangerous
of all ages for a bachelor, too old to flirt with the young
ladies, and too young to be altogether placed on the shelf,, he
wisely adopted the most discreet alternative that remained,
and having heard much of the joys of wedded life, enrolled
his name as a votary of Hymen, just as the autumn of his
days began to shew its tints upon his forehead*
Such was the Gentleman upon whom I had proposed to call*


but was prevented doing so by having seen him in the town-
ship ; but presently again meeting him alone, he urged me*
with so much earnest hospitality, to dine with him, that I
readily consented, farther agreeing that he should be my guide
to his residence. ' This was the first time 1 had witnessed a
specimen of a country establishment of magnitude, since my
abode in this Colony, and was not prepared by any thing I had
heard, for the display of rural wealth which my visit pre-
sented.
Around the principal dwelling or manse, was a range' of
buildings adapted for almost every agricultural purpose that
can be named ; the house itself appeared convenient and well
furnished, and, as I am a great admirer of the female charac-
ter, when it shines with its native lustre, untarnished by evil
associations, I was much pleased upon entering the drawing-
room to be introduced to a young, unaffected aind agreeable
lady, who did the honors of the house with grace and easi-
ness, rather than the polish, alone to he acquired by an ex-
tensive commixture with the world of fashion.
There were also assembled the Military Officer I had before
seen, the florid, stoat Gentleman with whom he had been
walking, and one or two others, evidently by their dialect
“ fra north o’the Tweed,” particularly one, who seemed a
liberal minded, well informed man, dressed in black, and
whose expressions upon various subjects that arose as topics
of conversation, did honor to his apparent calling* Every
thing at this hospitable board was excellent of its kind—the
mutton, the poultry, the bread, the batter, and the cheese,
all the produce of the farm, were the sweeter and better on
account of their origin, and as the expression of a hearty
welcome illumined the brow both of my friend and his wife,
whilst they attended to their various guests, apparently fan-
cying that the human stomach was never to be satisfied, I
could not help drawing a comparison, in my own mind, be-
tween the heartlessness of the civic banquets, prepared at an
enormous expense to gorge the pampered appetites of overfed
Aldermen, of which we sometimes read accounts in the news-
papers, and such a table as was now before me.
Good eating requires good drinking, says an old proverb,
and so it seemed to be considered by one or two present, par-
ticularly the florid Gentleman ; but all, knew too well what
is due to the lady of the house, to trangress the bounds set


down by strict propriety, and after a few hours spent in agree-
able rational converse, giving a zest to the su cession of ra-
rities both in the eating and drinking way, that was laid be-
fore us, we took advantage of the moon’s light, as it spread
its influence upon the surrounding landscape, its pale rays
being gently reflected by the stream that watered the mea-
dows, close to the township, when ordering our horses, the
guests left the house, each pursuing the way to his own
abode.
A day or two afterwards, I proceeded on ray journey, no-
thing particular having occurred in the meanwhile, and riding
some miles through a very diversified country, which will
afford materials for a future description, found myself close to
a brick two-story house of large dimensions, standing a little
off the road, and turning towards it, and aighting, soon
ascertained to my great satisfaction that I was in capital
quarters. My good and zealous landlady, however, deserves
more notice than such as I can give her at present. More
therefore of her and other matters anon.
Simon Stukeley.
There is not a more interesting, a more edifying sight than
such as is afforded by a clear and serene Sunday, in a Chris-
tian country. The cessation oflabour the day affords, the
recreation to the health and spirits of those, doomed to work
oat their existence by the sweat of their brow, the relaxation
of the mind to others, who pass their lives in more still and
sedentary occupations, are effects sufficiently discernible in
the smiling faces of the neatly dressed groups, which are
every where seen in the streets, either going to, or returning
from places of public worship ; or, as the afternoon advances ,
enjoying by quiet and rational exercise that pure air, which is
denied them the other six days of the week. Were a proof
wanting, that this beautiful world is not the production of
mere chance, that it has been shaped and fashioned by infinite
wisdom, and is governed by infinite goodness, the institution
of the Sabbath, would be alone sufficient, in the estimation


of any thinking, sober-minded person. Happily, however,,
we live in a country, where such proofs are not required,
where arguments are unnecessary, to induce belief at least, in
an over-ruling Providence, however remote, this sometimes*
may be, from the practice that is adopted, and where all, in
one way or another, mark the Sunday by a something, that
is different from all the other days of the week.
It was on one of these occasions, shortly after a day’s
adventures, recently described, that strolling along the water’s
edge between the Town and the Battery, at an hour when the
labours of the different Gospel Ministers were for a while
suspended, I saw a figure walking a little in advance of me,
whose thick and shapeless bulk, as it moved slowly forwards.
appeared in a measure to be familiar.
The person was dressed in a handsome suit of black, neatly
brushed, and looking as if, like its master, it only saw the
light upon special occasions ; his hat was in keeping with his
coat —all the fur laid one way, as smooth and glossy as a
piece of silk. Rather under the middle height than other-
wise, his back and shoulders were nearly square, and his gait,
which was slow and measured, well corresponded with the
rest of his exterior. Presently overtaking him, and turning
my head to catch a glance at his countenance, the quick eye
seated under its long shaggy brow that met my momentary
gaze, served as the recognition of the trusty Cerberus, with
whom I had exchanged a few words, when waiting for the
friend whom I accompanied within walls, which few would
make their habitation unless by compulsion. Accosting him
with “ a fine afternoon, Sir,” “ Yes—it is,” he replied,
“ but ’tisn’t often the weather makes much difference to me—l
have a queer set of customers to deal with, and am forced to be
like a cat on the watch at all hours of the night.” “ Your’s
must be a very hard life of it,” I observed ; “ do you manage
to keep your health pretty good, under so much confinement ?”
“ Middling—pretty middling, I might say, but I assure you,
if I was not up at all hours of the night, prowling about, when
some of ’em think I am asleep, all the birds would be flown
when morning comes, and some day or other we should hear
that half the town was robbed or murdered, if’twasn’t for
me.” “ Have you no assistants?” I enquired. “ Not one as
I can trust,” be answered, “ Why, Sir—sometimes I go in
amongst ’em, and one may hear ’em say such things, as
i


would make many men tremble for their lives—but there, I
■don’t mind ’em, and that they know pretty well.” “ I should
like very much to see the interior of your castle, if I midit be
permitted you will say perhaps ’tis a curious taste, but I
believe man may receive instruction from whatever scene can
be presented to him, and I have no doubt, I may learn some-
thing from your internal regulations.” “ I think Cicero has
the same opimmon,” was the reply. “ I have not the
precise words, but I know he says something about that.”
I was rather surprised to find in the guardian of rogues and
vagabonds, a reference to this elegant classic author, in sup-
port of the opinion I had advanced, and said “ Are you an
admirer of Cicero?” “ Him and Demosthenes, is my
great favourites,” he answered, “ though I han’t no great
time for them, but all the eloquence of both, wouldn’t do no
good towards reforming the rumbusticle gentlemen I have to
dqal with ; but as you was talking about coming to see them,
I am never away, excepting for a minute or two like this, and
I II shew you enough. I’ll be bound to last you some time,
aud so you can come when you will.”
We continued to chat upon various subjects, my companion
displaying great originality of idea in some of his expressions,
and when we parted, I promised to make an early call at his
strong hold.
The next day, it so happened that, like many other people
of consequence, my coffers being at a low ebb, I required such
assistance as Bankers afford, and called therefore at one of
the establishments of that nature, when, exhibiting a Bill of
Exchange, in the same manner as is usual in England, I re-
/ quested the person at the desk to discount it. He was a
short bustling man of business, dressed in black, wearing a
white neck-cloth, much larger than the usual mode ; had a
very peculiar way of placing his head when intent on business,
accompanied by a screwing or twinkling of the eye—and
seemed shrewd and clever. Taking my bill in his hand, ho
looked at it attentively, turned to. the endorsements over and
over again, and said “ This is a very good bill, Sir, I have
no doubt, and if you will leave it, and call again in two or
three days, I shall be able to let you know, whether it can be
done for you.” “ Two or three days, Sir!” said I, “ pray
may I ask why that delay is necessary, in answering so sim-
ple a question, as whether or not a good bill is to be dis-


counted ?” The Banker smiled in a manner that amused me,
and said “We have fixed days, Sir—they are a week ,
and we never discount but upon those occasions. Wny,
thought this was a private establishment.” I replied, “ I was
not aware that forms and ceremonies, allowable enough where
the management is under several Gentlemen who have other
business to attend to, were introduced into a private Bank.—
Surely, that is rather a refinement of minuteness.” I might
have said more, and expressed ray opinion of its being an un-
necessary assumption of importance, but it would have been
rude, and besides I do not know that 1 have a right to find
fault with the plan any individual may chuse to lay down for
the government of his own alfairs, although the habit I have*,
of saying what I think, had nearly got the better of the re -
straint that good manners would impose. However, I did not
pursue the conversation, but suffered it to take another turn.
The Banker was extremely talkative, and in the course oi
various subjects that he discussed, I discovered a keen, pe -
netrating insight into many of the principles that actuate ths
human race, and an apparent strong attachment to the paths ol
morality and religion. I do not quite know that I go the
length he does, in his opinions upon that branch of politico
economy, which refers to the consideration ol money as a cOin-
modity and subject, like all other marketable articles, to the
fluctuations consequent upon the relative proportions ot demand
and supply. Much may be said for, as well as against, the
arguments he advanced, and without conceding the full ques-
tion, I think there can be little hesitation in assenting to the
position that, had the Usury Laws obtained in this Colony,
its progress would not have been nearly so forward, as it now is,
I had not proceeded many steps, after leaving the Bank,
before I met a Gentleman, whom I have only once or twice
seep, since an interesting occasion, of perhaps four months
syne] which made him for the time-being, the happiest of mec.
' Isay ‘ the time-being for which of my readers cannot
bring to his recollection, some one particular moment, when
fie himself would not have exchanged his feelings, or condi-
tion, for that of any other human being on the face of the ha-
bitable globe ? And yet, has he not found that his joys were
transient, and that it was only for the * time-being 1 he could
be called happy ? Judging, however, by this Gebtleman’s
countenance at present, it would appear that his blissful hours


were not yet over ; for lie appeared remarkably cheerful, and,
shaking me warmly by the hand, insisted upon my promising
to take tea with him the same evening.
The party whom I met at his house, consisted of a stout
elderly Lady, who seemed well skilled in the noble science of
gastrono my—dilated with evident knowledge, worthy Professor
Ude, or the renowned Mrs. Glasse, upon the relative merits of
sweet cakes and comfits, in comparison with the more solid,
substantial garniture of the butchers’ shambles—and who, in
addition to this high acquirement, seemed thoroughly versed
in much other matter, well befitting the clever and accom-
plished housewife. And here, before 1 procee . further, let
me do justice to the value of this knowledge, in preference to
the useless, unmeaning accomplishments which are too often
the sole end and object of much of a modern fine Lady’s edu-
cation. Our good grand-mothers were not above superin-
tending every part of their domestic affairs, from the garret to
the kitchen—nay, even the cellar was under their guardian-
ship when they made their daily or almost hourly rounds
with the large bunch of keys as an appendage to the waist
girdle, unlocking one cupboard, locking another, chiding one
damsel for romping with the men servants, showing her fel-
low, how to darn stockings neatly, scolding a third for
wasting the cheese-parings, and performing all the other rou-
tine of a good domestic ruler. And it may be well asked,
whether or not, so far as the husbands, sons, or brothers
vyere concerned, the real, substantial comforts, always at
command, the delicious pasty, the strong October, and now
and then, the fine, tdear home-made wipe, or thimble full of
double distilled cordial, were not much more than an equiva-
lent, for the do. ri. mi. of the Italian school —the Spanish
fandango, or the foreign waltz, or years spent in endeavouring
to force nature, in the acquisition of accomplishments,
where the highest point at last attainable, is much below me-
diocrity. I therefore readily say with the good Lady, the re-
colletion of whose conversation, as we sat quietly chatting
together on a corner of the sofa, is the immediate cause of this
digression, and who had been ably and scientifically lauding
the genius of cookery, “ Esto perpetu Besides this Lady,
there were one or two younger ones—and being young, of
sourse pretty and interesting. There was also a young man
of light coloured hair and complexion, rather formed to be


stout hereafter, than to be so classed at present, very talkative,
and speaking with rapidity, and evincing a smattering upon
various branches of mechanism, and the arts and sciences. He
was particularly at home upon the perfection, to which litho-
graphy has been recently brought, and was hazarding
opinions upon the effects it was likely to produce upon the
system of copper-plate engraving, and wood impressions. His
manners were far from those of high life, but were unobtru-
sive, and not unbecoming his station, appearing also well
enough suited to one or two others of the party, with whom he
seemed intimate, particularly a red haired youth, of about two
or three and twenty, who said little and did less, and one, whose
sex extenuates much, when an amiable temper and obliging
disposition supply the place of other absent qualities.
We passed a lively and agreeable evening, varied by cards
and other amusements, such as characterise the social
meetings of the middle classes. The master of the house,
proved himself a punster, on one or two occasions ; but, if
panning ever belong to the family of wits, of which I am
very doubtful, it must be admitted that it is very distantly re-
lated—and I will not therefore so badly requite his hospi-
tality, as to perpetuate by relating them—attempts that are
more honored by oblivion, than in any other way. His Lady
has completely adapted herself to her new sphere of life, and
well seconded his endeavours, to add to the hilarity of the
guests, by many little nameless attentions.
I do not know that a better opportunity than the present may
offer, for recording the character of this Gentleman, as given me
by my “ Informant,” upon a certain memorable occasion.
He is endowed with acuteness, and a tolerable knowledge
of the principles of common law'—is obliging, and good tem-
pered, but suffers these advantages, which of themselves
would be amply sufficient to obtain for him a good and respec-
table practice, to be obscured by a neglect of the interests that
are entrusted to him—arising from a dilatory, procastinating
habit—there are besides, some who say that but hold
“ de absentibus , nil nisi bonum.”
I returned to my lodgings, well pleased with my evening’s
entertainment, and-the next day paid my visit to trusty
Cerberus, of which, more hereafter.
Simon Stukelf.y.


No. 28. Hobart Town , December 11, 1829.
When a fortnight ago I mentioned, that upon finishing my
ride from Bothwell to the next stage of my country excur-
sion, I found a comfortable resting place, at a large and com-
modious brick residence, standing a little off the road, I added
that justice to the excellent entertainment the good Land-
lady’s management afforded, demanded a rather more diffuse
notice at my hands, than the opportunity I then had at my
disposal ; and I now propose to redeem my pledge, and to give
a few particulars of the hostess herself, and of the manner in
which I spent two or three days at her truly comfortable
home.
I have often wished I had a painter’s, instead of an
author s hand, when attempting to describe the fair sex ; be-
cause, the former has much greater power than the latter, in
softening down and mellowing certain little points, upon
which there is la natural susceptibility in the female breast ;
and yet, at the same time, not departing from the strict re-
semblance, which ought to be the aim both of him who writes,
and of him who paints. If, for instance, a painter find it
necessary for the completion of a portrait, that so essential a
point as age, be not disregarded, as must I presume, be ge-
nerally conceded, he can convert a wrinkle into an expressive
smile, can efface the crow’s-foot, by a mere touch of his
brush, can substitute for the grizzly lock, the elegant curl,
copied from Truefits best style, thus fining down and po-
lishing the shady-side of forty, into the full bloom of woman-
hood, at its very zenith of attractions ; or even, if he be com-
pelled in accordance with strict truth, to make it appear a
little in the wane, he has only to sober down his coloring, but
may still preserve fidelity to the original. Accordingly, he is
rewarded by having it every where rung in his ears, - that he
has been completely successful—not at all flattering, it is
true, but a most excellent likeness. And what, under simi-
lar circumstances, is the very utmost in the power of the un-
fortunate author? To be able to select the prettiest set
phrase he can remember, about “ matured experience,’'
“ noontide discretion,” “ meridian of her days,” varying


from such as these to the shady or sunny side of forty, as the
pivot may happen to torn, but still leaving much to the
reader’s imagination, which the good dame herself, has been
contemplating for many years with pride and satisfaction, and
would willingly have seen exhibited to the world, in all the
glowing colors of eighteen, forgetting too often that, during
the intervening period, the devouring, unsparing hand of time,
has been making ravages that are concealed only amongst all
the world, from her own observation. The good, notable,
clever and obliging mistress of the house, the subject of this
day’s notice, is precisely a case in point to support my posi-
tion. If I were to use the pencil in drawing her picture, I
might possibly do much towards gaining her favourable suf-
frages, which is not in my power, wielding as I do the pen ,
but, as I really feel much to be her due, I will say that, al-
though she is not all she has been, she has still not yet so far
o’erstepped the meridian of her days, as to have lost the pos-
session of much, for which doubtless, sh§ has heretofore been
greatly admired. Nothing can exceed the cleanliness and re-
gularity of her household, every part being strictly in charac-
ter with a good English Country Inn.
I had not been her inmate many hours, ere I discovered
that the good dame, who appeared to be a widow, held in a
measure her own destinies in her hand, and that, the important
monosyllable, yes or no, would alone suffice to be the arbiter
of some other’s happiness, who might supply the good man’s
place, whose loss her weeds showed that she was lamenting.
But although clad in the solemn semblance of woe, time, the
grand modifier of all human afflictions, 1 seems already, if a
judgment may be formed by the sly curl, which every here
and there is now allowed to peep through the restraints that
have long been imposed upon its freedom, would seem to be-
tray that it has not failed in this instance, in imparting its
usual balm, and that hope need not be banished from the
breast of her humble servants.
If I am not mistaken, a darkish complexioned, middle aged
man, of spare habit and long visage, for one appeared to re-
gard her, as the goddess of his idolatry. He seemed, so far
as I could gather, from a casual conversation or two I held
with him, to be a prudent careful personage, and well at home
upon all subjects connected with agricultural occupations ;
but, if 1 have any skill in love matters, he is not destined t«


b* the happy man. There were, now and then I admit, in-
terchange shots of Cupid’s artillery, which seemed to indicate
a mutual good understanding; but, as truth is my guide, I
aiust needs say that a certain very gentlemanly man, evidently
a native of the Emerald Isle, appeared to me a much greater
favourite than the farmer. A bye-stander, it is said, can
generally see most of tne game \ at least so it is considered,
and according to this i ule, I should say that the latter will do
well to relinquish a pursuit, which may perhaps only draw
ais attention from other and more successful exertions.
W hilst sojourning at this place, I made a morning ride or
two in the neighbourhood, particularly one, to see a number
of fine horses standing at a Gentleman’-s Stables, awaiting
approaching sale by auction, which has attracted great and
general notice. On my way thither, just before I crossed a
stream, which waters a particularly rich flat, surrounded on
all sides in the distance by romantic and thinly wooded hill
scenery, I saw a person approaching on horseback, in rapid
chase of some wild cattle—riding as if the Devil was behind
him, and hallooing lustily, after two or three rough, half
greyhound looking dogs, that kept close to the animals be
was pursuing, holding them at bay, by everlastingly heading
and barking at them. The horseman was dressed in a tru*
rustic garb, and covered with dust and dirt, the effects of bis
hard-riding ; and nothing could exceed my astonishment
when brushing close past me, I recognized no less a perso-
nage, than the industrious, praiseworthy individual, to whom
..he Public are under an everlasting debt of gratitude, for
laying the foundation of the press of this Colony, and for his
subsequent efforts towards raising it to its present highly
respectable footing, to say nothing of the benefit he has confer-
red upon mankind by the publication of my “ peculiar” essays.
Little indeed did I expect to find a mighty Nimrod, in my in-
defatigable friend, the “ second Franklin but I must con-
fess, I have seldom seen a more evident show of enjoyment,
even at a fox chase, than now illumined his brow.
Proceeding onward I approached a good family house
standing a short distance from the road, at the door of which
stood conversing with a stranger, as unassuming, mild, ant
gentlemanlike a young man, as I have seen since I becanu
an inhabitant of the Colony. He may perhaps be four and
five and twenty, rather dark complexion, expressive eyas,


and regular well formed features. Added to this, his manners
were easy, and strictly becoming his station. His companion
was a thick-set, red-haired person, wearing spectacles ; evi-
dently, by the accent which caught my ears as I came near
Of him, of Scotch origin ; and I almost startled, upon dis-
covering that my own incognito self was the subject of dis-
cussion, in a manner that might have created a suspi-
cion that my secret was betrayed. The young Gentleman ob-
served, loud enough for me to hear him, “ In some respects
the Hermit is well enough, but do you not agree with me
that he is too personal ?” “ Not a whit—'not a whit,” was
the reply, “ how the de’il can you ca’ him personal, when he
only speaks in sic away that you can just comprehend as it
were, by surmeeses or suspicion, wha he means, but vara
likely he did na mean the same person himsel. Na, r\a, I
think he’s done much gude—he’s a mighty schulemaster wha
uses the birch a leetle freely, lam free to admit; but shew
mean instance, an ye can, whare it has na been deserved.”
Perhaps 1 speak rather feelingly,” replied the other, “ but I
must say 1 wish he had spared one or two whom I could name.
You know one cannot help having one’s feelings excited some-
times for others, although for my own part I have no per-
sonal ill will towards the Hermit, and perhaps he may, as
you say, do some good occasionally.” “ Weel, weel,” said
the Scotchman, “ we are na likely to agree, sa we’ll na pur-
sue the subject, but come, and let’s have a look at (he fine
horses you have for sale.”
I had stood a little aloof during this dialogue, and, now
making my compliments to the pair, we all went towards the
stables together to inspect the stud, and afterwards returning
to the house, were regaled with an excellent luncheon, ren-
dered particularly agreeable by the frank, hearty welcome
and hospitable treatment of the young Gentleman, who did
the honors of the table in a very creditable, obliging manner.
Taking leave and returning to my Inn, just as its brick side-
wall met my eye, at a turn of the road, through the trees, I
earne near an enclosure, within which stood a small neat
building, set apart, apparently, for the service of the Almigh-
ty, and every here and there a small mound of earth, some-
what raised above the usual level, bore testimony to the rfa-
cred nature of the ground, denoting, plainly enough, that
here, man and his kindred earth were re-united. At this mo-


ment a slow procession of some half-dozen persons was en-
tering the burial-ground, following a coffin borne upon men’s
shoulders, probably containing some husband, wife, or friend,
whose loss was never to be replaced, and advancing towards'
a grave which was open, fearfully yawning to receive its due.
During this while I was surprised to see no Clergyman, nor
Officiating Minister at his usual place, leading the troop of
Burners \ but was infinitely more so, when, a few minutes
afterwards, upon reaching the spot, I observed the coffin
lowered into our mother earth, with as little ceremony as
though it had contained the dead body of one of the brute
creation. Strange as this seemed, in a Colony where I have
had so much occasion to admire the great attention on the
part of its Rulers, to all matters connected with religious
instruction, and a regard to sacred ordinances, I do not know
that I should have thus noticed it, had I not been informed
the same evening, when speaking of it to one or two Gentle-
men whom I saw, that the fault does not rest with the Go-
vernment ; for that, a liberal provision is made for the dis-
charge of all duties of this description; and which ought to
give the inhabitants of the neighbourhood the command of all
that the Church has provided, both for its fix--d as well as
incidental occasions. If this be so, probably the notice thus
taken of it may prevent a recurrence of a similar negle; in
future, and it is with this view that I Lave now mentioned it,
as it is strictly within the province I have assumed, that the
neglect of duties on the part of Public Officers, should not
pass unheeded.
Simon Stukeley.
No. 29. Hobart Town , December 18, 1829.
Those, who are only acquainted with Van Diemen’s Land,
by having resided at either of its two principal towns, have
little idea of its real pretensions to be considered, a rich or
valuable country. They should witness, as I have lately
done, its fertile and extensive plains, its clear streams WB:er-
ing rich rallies, which yield the most luxuriant pasturage, its
hills affording shelter to its numerous flocks and herds, equal!'


-144 THE HERMIT IN
from the summer sun, as the winter’s rain, and still more, its
careful and industrious settlers. Under the busy hand of the
builder, the fencer, and the farmer, the face of nature has
wholly become changed. Neat dwellings, well laid-out enclo-
sures, and excellent tillage occupy what, a dozen years ago,
was a continuous range of wild country, over which a human
foot had scarcely ever trod. Thousands and tens of thousands
of sheep, browse over land, which, only yesterday as it were,
was the exclusive common right of kangaroo and other na.Ove
animals. In a word, a traveller must visit the interior, in order
to acquire such a knowledge, as may make him acquainted with
the sinews of the Colony, as a place of rising importance, or
with its claims to the praise for beautiful scenery that has
been freely bestowed upon it. In no part that I have visited,
with the exception perhaps, of the immediate neighbourhood
of the banks of the Perwent, commencing at New Norfolk,
have I seen a tract with which I have been better satisfied,
than the district next adjoining the comfortable house of enter-
tainment, described when I last appeared before the public.
If fertility of soiI ; a plentiful supply of water, and a happy
mixture of bill and dale, are sufficient to constitute an eligible
spot, the country through which I journeyed, when I took leave
of my notable hostess, to proceed towards Jericho,'must stand
high in estimation. I had not rode more than a mile or two,
when I was overtaken by a horseman, mounted on a hack of no
very promising appearance, and which, judging by its weary
step, and the frequent use of the spur, seemed to have tra-
velled quite as far as was agreeable. The rider wore a loose
shooting jacket, but in every other respect, be struck me as a
sort of what are called in England, Gentlemen farmers, was
stout, of a fair complexion, and pleasant, but very solid ex-
pression of countenance, and his manner of returning the pas-
sing civility I offered, as he came alongside me, was good
uatured and courteous. “ This is a fine country, Sir” I said
to him, as we continued to jog on together, “ I have been
making a short tour, chiefly for the purpose of learning by
ocular demonstration, many tbin*gs, upon which it is otherwise
difficult to procure accurate information. It strikes me, as
particularly well adapted for sheep, but the management
usually adopted with respect to that useful animal, is perfectly
abominable—it is really disgraceful.” There are very few
who attend to them as they ought,” he replied, with a pecu-
liarity of accent, which, if my ears do not deceive me, de-


Betas .the land of bis nativity to have been a western county,
not remarkable for the purity of its pronunciation. “It is *
very great pity,” I continued, “ for if people knew their own
interest they would rather do a little well, than much bad-
ly. What, for instance, can be more absurd, than the plan
some people adopt, of rather estimating their ricbes_by the
quantity than the quality of their Hocks One hundred well
bred sheep are more profitable than a thousand of the gene-
rality we meet with.” X found by the nature of my com-
panion’s replies, that upon the topic, of farming he was cora :
pletely at home, and we became upon such good terms with
each other, that after riding a mile or two, beguiling the way
by conversation, he observed, “ As you say you are not hur-
ried in your journey, if you will accompany me to a farm I
have, close by, I will shew you that all sheep farmers are
not as slovenly as you were talking about, but there are too
many who are, that’s certain.” I accepted the invitation,
and presently turning off, to the left, we rode on a short dis-
tance, until we approached a homestead, where accommoda-
tions for farm purposes of every description were erected.
The hearty welcome, visible in the manner of the servants,
who, one by one, greeted the arrival of their master, was as
strong a proof as fcould be given, corroborative of the favour-
able impression his previous deppitment had made, and con-
vinced me that he must be a good master. Having alighied,
he led the way towards the house, where 1 was introduced to
another Gentleman in a friendly manner, who immediately
ordered refreshments, and after partaking of which, we sal-
lied forth to ramble over the farm.
It happened to be sheep-shearing, and I was much pleased
to witness the capital order in which every thing was con-
ducted. The animals had been all cleanly washed; the
fleeces, as they were taken from them, were rolled up close-
ly, and placed in heaps with evident marks of classification ;
the wool, which was superior to any thing I had seen, hear-
ing ample testimony to gi’eat attention to, blood, on the part of
the owner. One of the shearers, a clumsy awkward fellow,
exercised his calling in a manner that drew from the master
one or two severe reprehensions, although conveyed in a mild
tone, and at length tired of finding fault, he took the shears
from his bands, and tasting one of the sheep, sheared it in
£*n expeditious and workmanlike manner, that would have


even done honor to Holkbaia. I cannot describe all the ex-
cellent management visible throughout every part of the ex-
tensive property I was now shown. Suffice it to say, it was
of the highest order ; and that, when I took my leave, mean-
ing to ride oh to Jericho, for my night’s quarters, I left the
place and the people, favourably impressed by both, and
feeling that I had now seen an instance in which the true in-
terests of the Colonists, as wool-growers, or sheep-farmed,
were thoroughly understood and acted upon.
Nothing particular occurred worth describing between this'
spot and a small bridge a few miles distant, having crossed
which, I approached a comfortable looking house, where I
bad been assured of finding good accommodation. It is, I
believe, the part of all travellers of experience, wisely to in-
gratiate themselves with the mistress, rather than the master
ef the house, if they have a mind to enjoy the nicest tit-bits
at the dinner table, to occupy the best aired bed, or to obtain
the other comforts of a well kept inn in the highest degree.
It required very little discernment to perceive that in this in-
stance, l,he shrewd, active, and obliging landlady, who ruled
ascendant over the household, was precisely the very charac-
ter formed for the sphere she was filling ; and that, under the
quick dark eye that illumined features, not of themselves per-
haps, possessing any remarkable attractions, there lay con-
cealed a something capable of being favourably excited by
corresponding civility, but holding rude intruders in awe. I
continued at this place the whole day, spending part of it
in rambling around the neighbourhood ; and in the course of
one of my walks I fell in with a gentlemanly man, of pleasing
address and exterior, dark complexion, middle age, and ra-
ther thin, who addressed me in a frank and open manner, in
replying to some enquiries I made respecting the place, treat-
ing me with well bred affability. I thought there was a cer-
tain vein of caustic humour in some of his remarks, which re-
minded me of something I have seen in print, hut where or
when, Ido not immediately recollect. He seemed well in-
formed, and spoke favourably of the Colony, but towards
the present local Government appeared to be far from well
affected, judging by an observation he made, when a servant
advanced towards os, bringing the newspapers which had just
keen left by the postman. Apologising for a momentary in-
terruption in oir conversation, as he glanced his eye over one


31 P a £ es » sa “ I must just see what Simon has to
say this week. How much better 1 should like him, if he
did not praise the Governor, as he sometimes does. I bear-
tily wish he would use his peculiar style to lash the Govern-
ment, instead of private individuals ; they richly deserve it."
“ It appears to me, from what I have seen of his writings
that he is very impartial," I replied. “ Impartial ! do you
sa ) J No, no, he cries up the Governor too much for that. ?,>
\ou would not have him scold when it is not deserved," I
answered, “ merely because the Government are concerned,
would you?" “According to my opinion," he replied,
“ every thing they do, deserves lasting, and though I am cer-
tainly an admirer of Simon Stukeley, I should admire him
much more, were he to change his tone, and flog the Go-
vernment severely. It was not likely, from his tone and
manner, that either of us would make a convert of the other j
accordingly the subject dropped, and 1 presently gave him an
opportunity of ascertaining whether or not the budget of the
week might be more to his taste, by making my bow and re-
turning to the inn.
The next morning I rode to the adjoining township, a dis-
tance of ten or a dozen miles, just iu time to be present at a
meeting of two or three Magistrates, who were assembled iu
a small building, tor the purpose of determining some cases
that were brought before them. The principal personage on
the occasion was a stout middle-aged Gentleman, of plain
features and manners, but evidently, from the tone lie gave
to several discussions that arose, a man of sense and expe-
rience.
In the nature of the business that occupied his attention
in c*ie or two instances, I found cause to admire the sound-
ness of the policy which gave rise to the institution of these
District Courts, for preserving the laws and regulations of the
Colony in their full vigour, and I considered his decisions as
a happy mixture of justice with mercy. I gathered from the
tenor of certain of his remarks, that unlike the Gentleman
with whom I had recently been conversing, he is a strenuous
supporter of the present Government. In this respect I
avow myself his zealous coadjutor ; for, wifh every wish to
maintain a proper curb upon the encroachments of power, I
never yet could see the wisdom or propriety of seeking to
lessen the dignity or of those, by whom we are


governed ; nor could I ever entertain any other feeling xhku
contempt for the factious spirits who prostitute talents ami
acquirements in abusing the powers that b§, merely fqr th#
sake of gratifying the corrupt taste of certain readers, or gain-
ing an unstable popularity.
The township was the extreme point of my excursion. I
spent a few hours in surveying all that struck me as worth
noticing, and returned in the evening to my quarters of th*
preceding night, where I again found every thing as clean and
comfortable as in any inn -I ever remember to have visited in
any part of Englnpd,;" nor could I help drawing reflections
upon the many indications I hp.d seen, (not excepting the ca-
pital houses of entertainment all along the road), tending to
prov* the rapid progress this Colony is making towards a
inn and solid prosperity^—a progress it never could hate at-
tained, if its helm had not b*en guided by a wise and skilful
pilot.
Simon Stukeley.
No. 30. Hobart Town , December 25, 1829..
Soon after my arrival in the Colony, I became acquainted,
as I have already mentioned, with some of the Members of
what was then pretended to be called, a Chamber of Com-
merce, and among others, with a certain very talkative, self-
suflicient, ever grumbling old Gentleman, who has laboured
hard to persuade me, in several conversations I have had with
him, that until he have more influence than at present, in
affairs of state, things would never go on well. It so happen-
ed a short time after we became acquainted, that meeting him
one day in the street, he accosted me “ Fine doings, Sir,
line doings, but the Bank will l?e heard, Sir—it’s not to be
run down, Sir, by a parcel of Government Officers* who have
clubbed together their salaries, taken from the pockets of the
people, and think to have all the cream—leaving us nothing
but skim milk. No, no, Sir. Lf the Government doesn’t
take our part, Sir, I shall write home about it by next ship.”
“ I do not quite understand you, Sir,” I replied, “ what
may it be, to which you allude ?” “ Not understand me, do
you say! Eh—Sir !-—why, I think I speak plain English,


Sir they want to give the other Bank all the pickings of
1 reasury Bills and specie, through the Public Offices ax!d I
for one, won t allow it; but, by the bye. Sir, why don’t you'
take a share in the Bank ? it pays good interest; will giv«
you a preference when you want any thing done—and I’ll al-
ways take care that you shan't be disappointed.” More with
the view of getting rid of his importunate volubility, than any
other object, I assented to his proposal, and authorizing him
to put my name down as a shareholder, promising also, to call
and do what more was necessary at some other time, wished
him good morning, and walked on. The occurrence had been
almost forgotten by me, until about three weeks ago, when
one morning, as I was sitting, amusing myself with one of
Colburns last new novels, who should I see advancing to-
wards my lodgings, but my acquaintance, the old Gentleman,
and three or four-others—some of whom were well known to
jnc, particularly a little undersized man, of very repelling
features, wno thinks 1 speak more true than agreeable—a
short stout Gentleman, who improves upon acquaintance, being
a person of sense and discernment, and a merry waggish
young man, who passes for a wit, has things said for him, to
which lie knows he has no claim, even sometimes is thought to be
myself, and would lain make people believe he is a radical re-
former, although he well knows himself, and has oft admitted
it to me, in our private cozy chit chat meetings, when over a
bottle of excellent wine, we have been discussing whether
such and such things were “ within” or “ without” bonos
mores, that he sees the error of his ways and repents—he has
’moreover said more than once, •* there’s some fqp ia
finding fault with the Government, and running the rig
upon the great folks, but develish little, in being the
«at’s-pavv of a set of selfish malcontents, or the j'ackall of a
toothless old lion—and if I only knew how to back out, and
make my recantation, without crying peccavi, with too doleful
a tone, egad, I’d hoist my real colours in a jiffy.” It is in
some measure, in performance of a promise I gave hinv, to en-
deavour to assist his laudable efforts, and to act as his
pioneer, in clearing the way for him, that I have said thus
much at present, and he has only to adopt for his motto preesfo
■it persto, and his road to reform is open and easy.
• • A v
I was rather at a loss to conceive what could hare occa-
sioned me the honor of so many visitors, when the knock at th®


door was promptly followed by the entrance of the whole
party. The elderly Gentleman is said never to be happy,
unless he is talking, and did not upon this occasion long te-
main silent. “We want your vote and interest at the Bank,
Sir—likely to have a parcel ot meddling people pushing
tkemselves forward for Directors, who will upset every
thing—sure to be ruined, Sir, if they are admitted we shall
be nothing but a prop for tea speculations, it we don t rally
and keep them out, Sir —next Monday is the day, be sure to
be there, Sir, and I’ll let you know who to vote tor. 1 did
not altogether relish this assumed controul over ray move-
ments, and could not help feeling, that it aflorded a line illus-
tration of the narrow-minded and selfish principles ol those
pretended patriots, who run about finding fault with every
thing, and uplift their voices at the corners of the streets,
crying, the day of ruin is at hand, ever seeking to lower others,
only that they themselves may be exalted ; but I said nothing
la reply, farther than that I would attend on the day named, if
other engagements did not prevent me. The little ill-tavored
Gentleman then said, in a snuMing voice, “ I presume of
eourse, the Gentleman wishes to exclude all who may not be
agreeable to the President.” “ I really know nothing of any
of the parties at present,” I replied, “ and can only repeat
that I will attend at the Bauk on Monday, if nothing pre-
vent me.”
When the important day arrived, I kept my conditional en-
gagement, and proceeding to the Bank, presently found myselt
in a good sized room, where was already collected a conside,-
rable assembly. As might have been expected, the party
who had called upon me, formed a prominent part of the
meeting, and near them, at the upper end of the room, were a
lew others, who appeared to take an active interest in what
was going forward. Among these latter, was a grave, middle
aged Gentleman, who appeared an invalid —the Magistrate
who could not find in Burns, a satisfactory explanation of the
difference between an offence and misdemeanour, and a tall
ruddy-complexioned person, heavy in purse as in person, if
report speaks true ; and a little on the left, stood another
group, with few of whom 1 had any previous acquaintance.—
One, was a pleasing looking, modest young man, of retired-
manners, who seemed to be acting under the influence of
«;bers upon the occasion, and whose diffidence and blushes


bespoke that In doing so, he rather conformed to their wishes,
than acted upon the impulse of his own feelings. I was told
that he is a promising man of business, active, clear-headed,
obliging, and strictly honorable ; and moreover, that he was
of a disposition containing qualities, which in the words ef
Addison—
“ Shun the day, and lie concealed
In the smooth seasons and the calms of life."
In other words that he requires to he drawn out. Close te
him, stood a short, very smartly dressed person, of middle
age, rather inclined to bulk than the contrary, and upon
whose countenance were imprinted certain signs, said to be
unequivocable proofs, not only of the knowledge, but also of
the practice of what is good. In speaking, he had a very pe-
culiar hem and ha, as a sort of intermediate pause between bis
words —which were besides uttered in a very measured, pre-
cise tone —quite of a character with his appearance.
Between the two parties, were several others, who seemed
anxious as to the result of the approaching bustle ; but more
90, as regarded their friends than themselves, judging by the
nature of the observations some of them made.
The issue is already before the Public. Suffice it for me
to say, that never were longer faces exhibited by the Under-
writers at Llpyds, upon the opening of Oat-port Letters, after
a tremendous storm, than were shown by some of the party
who had called upon me, the moment that the result of the
ballot was made know r n. The elderly Gentleman, mild, pla-
cid, and amiable, as he is well known to be, teeming too, as
his breast ever is, with the milk of human kindness, looked
sour, moody, and discontented—and I overheard him say,
** tis scandalous, Sir ! talk of Directors, Sir—talk of Direc-
tors —it’s nothing but a Tea Committee, Sir, and as for ray
part, I’ll resign.’’ Even the short, stout Gentleman, whose
equanimity is seldom disturbed, or temper ruffled, seemed a
little discomposed by the announcement of the Members,
observed “ its vara unexpected;’’ but another of the group
appeared less pleased, if possible, than either of the others, a*
chagrin and disappointment sat in full sovereignty upon his
brow, bestowing upon his features, even a larger share of re-
pulsiveaess than tad been fixed on them by nature. Mac i
discontent was openly expressed by others ih the room, w e
did not hesitate t* say that the election was good for nothing ,


that it was invalid—and that there must he another ; but, in
the midst of the squabbling and discussions that arose, T
withdrew, leaving the disputants to settle it among them-
selves, in the best manner they were able.
As I walked through the street, I met two or three young
men dressed in the very extreme of puppyism, who stalked
along, looking at their own dear persons with an air of won-
derful self-consequence as they proceeded, and laying under
contribution, so far as their own opinions went, the admira-
tion of all bye-standers. Poor infatuated creatures ! they
had better have remained at home, tied to their nurses’ apron-
strings, or led about by some master like ahy other of the
monkey tribe, than have transplanted themselves hither, un-
der the idea of astonishing the weak nerves of our sober-mind-
ed Settlers. We want no such unprofitable idlers in this Co-
lony, as these silly, consequential beings, who measure their
importance by the quantity of broad cloth in their trowserS —
by the width of their coat collars—by the position of the curl
on the side of the head —by the strut and air of their walk—or
by their fal lal la way of replying to the most common question.
Let them at once pack up their dressing cases, and their band
boxes, putting themselves inside one of the latter, if they
please, as the fittest place for them, and let them betake them-
selves somewhere else, where their pretensions, if they have
any well grounded ones, can be better appreciated than in
Van Diemen’s Land. So far from obtaining their evident ob-
ject, they only draw upon themselves contempt and derision ;
-and, could they but know the jokes and jeers that are made
at their expense, in nearly all societies, they would hide their
diminished heads in some of the ample folds of their gar-
ments. Hotspur had not a more sovereign contempt for the
exquisites of his day, such as Shakespeare describes a fop—■
“ Perfumed like a milliner ;
And ’twixt his finger and his thumb he held
A pouncet box, which, ever and anon,
He gave his nose, and took’t away again”—
than the inhabitants of this truly English Colony have for
foreign airs and fashions, engrafted upon the barren stocks
that have been recently transplanted from the Mother Goun-
frJ—and, if they will take counsel of one of some experience
mi the world, they will not remain in a place where nothing
feat disappointment and vexation await them'.


At)d BOW, my friends and readers, I am going to say a few
words to you, upon quite another subject. It was entirely
my own pleasure that led me, a few months ago, to appear
before the world as an author. Your kindness, your partiali-
ty to my “peculiar vein/’ and your warm encouragement
shewn in numlierless instances, induced me to continue my
weekly essays much longer than I originally contemplated,
and much longer than I should have done under any other
circumstances than those which have really occurred. In the
course of my travels, I have, as you all know, paid many
visits—mixed in many societies—made numerous observa-
tions—and related a great variety of occurrences. Walking
as 1 have done, unknown, both in the parlour and the hall—
the public street and the private path—l have acquired, I be-
lieve, a tolerably correct knowledge, not only of men and
things, but of what is said and thought of myself ; and if I
candidly acknowledge that there are some who say 1 have
been too severe, and have trodden ground where I had no
business—where I have been an impudent trespasser —I can
assert fearlessly, and without the danger of encountering a con-
tradiction, that by far a majority of the Public consider I
have done the Slate some service ; and that the tendency of
my writings has been both good and useful. If I have, in a
single instance, inflicted pain where it was undeserved, 1 can
truly and honestly say, that no person can more regret it
than myself, and I assure all who may consider me to
have done s», that in no one case have I been governed by a
personal motive—l have neither commended private friends
nor censured enemies, (for, unhappily we all have such),
merely because tbey stood towards me in thuse relations —I
will say more ; I have acted the true part of a friend ; and
have told many of those with whom I mix on intimate terms,
home truths, when I have pourtrayed theiy characters, which
otherwise perhaps they never might have heard. One
inducement to continue my weekly appearance before you so
long, has been the desire expressed to me, both through and
by my publisher, on behalf of many persons, that my Essays
might be extended, sufficiently to allow their re-publication
in another shape ; and at the time this was communicated to
me, as might have been inferred from his advertisement, oi
more than two months standing, he added, that by the end ol
•he year there would be enough to form a ‘volu’ ’, but not
X


sooner. This period is now arrived ; and with It I take in r
leave for the present of that Public by whom I have, indeed ,
been llattered and encouraged. It is well said,
“Yet there’s a period to all our actions,
Nothing is everlasting m this world.”
And such for a lime must the case be, so far as regards my
connexion with the Van Diemen’s Land Press. I say for a
time, for it is more than probable, that in a few months I
may resume my pen, since, independently of many notes and
observations which I have collected, ready to be put into
shape for my kind and partial readers, had time and occasion
permitted, I have been strongly solicited to visit the other
side of the Island, and whi«h I hope jet to do in the course
of my travels. lam therefore likely to hav*e abundant mate-
rial for hereafter. At present, however,. I am about to take
my departure for the sister Colony, where not only some press-
ing engagements require my pi'esence, but where, I aimlpld,
an ample field awaits me, and whither I should have proceed-
ed many weeks ago, had I not been not prevented the
reasons already adduced.
Reader ! what more can I say ? Leave taking is at the
best but a species of self torture, and why should I distress
either you or myself unnecessarily ? Believe me, I retain a
grateful sense'of your very flattering patronage, and I will
only add, that it 1 have been the means of pleasure to any of
you, it is a feeling that has been fully reciprocated by your
part of our mutual connexion.
Simon Stukele? 1 .
■;i 'FINITE, Tov;; VAV TUr.yKN 'S LAND.


Death of Mr. Thomas W
We have this week the painful task ofrecord-
ing the melancholy sudden death, at Launceston,
on Monday the 10th inst., of Mr. Thomas Wells,
late proprietor of Allanvale, in the Macquarie
district, in the 52d year of his age. Mr. Wells
arrived in this Colony with Lieutenant Governor
Sorell, and, during the whole of that officer’s
administration, held a confidential situation in the
Secretary’s Office. On the arrival of Lieutenant
Governor Arthur, he ceased his connection with
the Government; and, having acquired a large
property, Allanvale among other estates, com-
menced farming and speculating in wool. In the
exportation of the latter article, his speculations
turning out unfortunate, reduced him to a gaol,
and for many years he remained a prisoner for
debt in Hobart Town. His misfortunes at last
preyed so much upon his mind, that he became
delirious—in which state, he remained for many
weeks; but the claims of his large family to his
care at length seemed to arouse him, and with
that spirit of persevering industry, for which he
was so eminently distinguished, he commenced
practising as a Public Accountant, while confined
in prison, which he followed so closely, that he
not only supported himself and family in a genteel
manner, but paid off some thousands of pounds
of his debts ; in fact, settled with nearly all his
creditors. After his release from a five years’con-
finement, he gave up his beautiful property at
Allanvale, and opened an office in Hobart Town,
as an Accountant; in which he was doing a good


aaL.
business, when he wss induced to accept an offer
made to him, to go over to Launceston, for the
purpose of settling the accounts of the Cornwall
Bank, in which work he was suddenly cut oft by
a locked jaw. He leaves a widow and eleven
children, totally unprovided for, to lament Ins
loss ; whose distress, on the melancholy occasion,
must be much encreased by the circumstance of
his dying away from his home, among strangers ;
and who certainly have a claim upon the public,
on account of the long and valuable services of
the deceased. In his habits, the late Mr. Wells
was very industrious; but luxurious and extrava-
gant —very reserved, and in some measure haughty.
His talents, as an Accountant, were of the first
order; and, as an English scholar, he was surpass-
ed by few. He wrote many very able and bene-
ficial articles for the Colonial Press, and among
his avowed works is the “ Hermit in Van Die-
men’s Land,” although it is supposed and gene-
rally stated, that those papers were the production
of another person,j(who has just quittedhis connex-
ion with the Publm Press,) and that Mr. Wells only
acted as an amanuensis in the matter. In concluding
this notice of the deceased, we cannot fail to sug-
gest that the Government ought to provide for
young Mr. Wells, by giving him a situation under
Government; and we think there are few who
would regret seeing Mrs. Wells placed upon the
Colonial pension list.






3 1508 00246140 3
num w
'8


• " - 'i -
