

Five
Shillings
:■ ' -
THE..
ELECTRIFICATION
of the
METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY
SYSTEM
of
MELBOURNE.
Published by Authority
Edited by
C. T. STEPHENSON
Victoria,
Australia,
1919.


£
f
m
HR
AO
r
SK!
SSK
mi 1 .
S£
View of Portion of Melbourne Railway System
THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY COMPANY LTD.,
Manufacturers of
Pig Iron, Billets, Blooms, Steel Rails and
Structural Steel Plates, Sulphate of Ammonia.
STEEL WORKS :: NEWCASTLE, N.S.W.
■
m
msmmm
ttinutii
Warn
an
■■■
a
RAIL YARD AT NEWCASTLE STEEL WORKS.
Contractors to the Commonwealth of Australia and all
the State Railway Departments.
Broken Mill (M.S.W.), Hummock Milt (SAi, Newcastle (N.S.W. >, iewnpurt (las.) f
3
M
□


THE ELECTRIFICATION OF THE
METROPOLITAN RAILWAY SYSTEM OF
MELBOURNE, VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.
Published by Authority.
1
1919.
The Industrial Australian
AND MINING STANDARD.
Melbourne and Sydney.


VICTORIAN
RAILWAYS
Tourist Resorts in Victoria
Every Kind of Scenery and Climate to suit the
Tourist, the Sportsman and the Health Seeker.
THE SOUTHERN COAST-LINE.
Rocky cliffs and sandy beaches, with safe bathing
and splendid fishing.
The favourite places are Mallacoota Inlet, Mario,
Inverloch, San Remo, Cowes, Flinders, all the
shores of Port Phillip, Queenscliff (The Heads),
Lome (Queen of Watering Places), Apollo Bay,
Port Campbell, Peterborough, Warrnambool,
Port Fairy and Portland.
THE BUCHAN CAVES,
With Newly-Opened Caverns, filled with sparkling
stalactites.
THE NEARER RANGES.
Replete with the charm of woodland and waterfall.
Gembrook, Warburton and Mt. Dandenong,
Plenty and Dividing Ranges.
I THE GRAMPIANS.
The Mountain Wonderland of North-Western
Victoria, possessing an endless variety of wild-
flowers.
THE AUSTRALIAN ALPS.
Jebb’s Pool, Cumberland River, Lome, Snow-covered during the greater part of the year.
Skating, tobogganing ski-ing, &c.
Mt. Buffalo (5640 ft.), Mt. Feathertop (6300 ft. \
and Mt. Bogong (6508 ft.)
CHARMING RIVER REACHES.
Sparkling stretches, well stocked with trout, and
deep pools beloved of blackfish and other native
fishes. I ..
Flowing north from the Dividing Ranges to the
River Murray—the Mitta, Ovens. Coulburn, Cam-
paspe, and Loddon ; and flowing south from the
Dividing Ranges to the sea the Snowy, Mitchell,
Latrobe, Thompson, Yarra, Hopkins and Glenelg.
MURRAY RIVER.
Steamer excursions in ideal weather through
interesting irrigation settlements. Navigable dis-
tance, 1100 miles.
THE BUFFALO PLATEAU.
“Garden of the Gods.” Striking physical fea-
tures, awe-inspiring gorges, waterfalls, snowy
peaks, granite tors, and trout-stocked lake.
Government chalet for visitors.
THE GIPPSLAND LAKES.
Fishing, shooting, motor boating, sailing and
bathing. Circular journey 100 miles by water.
Winter Sports. Mould Buffalo,
COMBINATION TICKETS, covering transport by Motor. Coach, .Steamer, or Launch, in conjunction
with Rail, are, during the Summer Season, issued at Excursion Fares to all Tourist Resorts in Victoria;
Week-Inclusive Tickets, to the Buffalo Plateau, Beechworth (Summer Season only). Healesvillc and War-
burton, covering all expenses. Week-End Tickets at Holiday Excursion Fares all the year round. Splendid
services of express trains to provincial centres and adjoining Slates. 1 lining. Sleeping and Parlour Cars available.
For Full Particulars apply to the
Government Tourist Bureau,
COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE,
Where Time Tables, Maps, Plans, Excursion Literature, and Accommodation Guides arc available.
GEO. H. SUTTON. sV, retor®.
2


ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE .
YARD MASTERS
BRIDGE
JOLIMONT
SUB STATION
JOLIMONT
CAR SHED
& WORKSHOP
LECTURE THEATRE
SCHOOL FOR TRAIN CREWS


Panoramic View of Flinders Street Yard —showing Flinders Street Station and Princes Bridge Station on the Right.


PRINCES BRIDGE
STATION
FLINDER ST
STATION
[Oyer.


Fig. I.—Special Overhead Construction, showing Cross Spans and Bridges at Flinders Street Yard.
EXPLANATIONS.
Sections (extending between sub-stations)—plain whole number- - . . „ "{ I )
Circuit Breakers feeding a section are numbered the same as the sections that they are feeding.
All sections going we t of the Yardmaster’s Bridge have even numbers, and all sections east of Princes
Bridge Sub-station have odd numbers.
Sub-sections (divisionsof main sections)—Section on top plain whole numbers, sub-section number below it ( -- )
These divisions extend between sub-stations and sectioning structures and between two sets of tensioning '-J-''
structures. Switches connected to one or both ends of a sub-station are numbered the same as the
sub-sections. When a switch directly connects two sub-sections together, it is given both sub-section
numbers, such as
Branch sections (siding and platform tracks fed from sub-sections) —Section on top plain whole number.
Sub-section number in the middle. Branch section on thebottem - - - . _ |~p j
Branch sections consist of sidings generally, and occasionally platform tracks at terminals with no through
feeders .such as the Wilhamslown tracks at Flinders St. Station and all terminal platforms at Spencer St,
Switches connected at one or both ends of branch sections are numbered the same as the branch section
Sub-branch sections (sidingsand platform tracks fed from branch sections)—Section number on top.
Sub-section number underneath it. Branch section number under sub-section number, and l the Sub- /"jIN
branch section number under the Branch section number I 21 J
Sub-branch sections consist of tiding and platform tracks fed from branch sections where no direct con-
nection to section or sub-section is possible. These sections occur in very few cases, the principal
occurring in Spencer St. terminus. Switches connected to one or both ends of sub-branch sections
are numbered the same as the sub-branch section to which they refer.
Section Switches for paralleling two sections normally closed are numbered with both section numbers, i ■
and prefix “A’* on top and sub-section numbers below -
Section Switches for paralleling two sections normally open are numbered with both section numbers
and prefix “B” on lop and sub-section numbers below -
SYMBOLS.
Airbreak between tension structures at a Sectioning or Feeding Point • —»■
Airbreak between tension structures <other than «t a Sectioning or Feeding Point -
Airbreak other than at tension struct lures /
Section Insulator at a Switching Poinit 4 - • w
Section Insulator other than at a Switching Point - —mmo-
Section Switch (Hornbreak) • - il • • - - - - y ...
Knife Switch - - - - 4 - • - - - —» m
Automatic Circuit Breaker - - 1~ " - - - -—.
Automatic Line Breaker - -i-----
Main Line shown by thick full line - < - - - - - A
Siding Lines shown by thin full line tihe same Cilor as the section from which it is fed -
Sub-station Feeders (underground) tt# lines same as lines fed ... -
Overhead Track Feeders - - \ - - - - -
Cross Country Feeders - - .
Fig. 2.—Sectioning Diagram of the Lines between Jolimont and Newmarket Substations.
ELECTRIFICATION OF TEE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


CONTENTS.
Page.
Preface 5
Frontispiece “The Men Responsible” 6
Historic 7
Events leading up to the adoption of the present scheme 7
General conclusions and the influence of the Electrification of the
Railways upon the supply of Electric Power in Victoria .... 9
The Power House at Newport 13
Boiler Houses 13
Coal and Ash Handling Plant 15
General Arrangement of Generating Plant 15
Condensing Plant 20
Switch Gear at the Power House 21
Distribution 23
The 20,000 Volt Transmission 23
Direct Current Feeders 25
Substations 27
Rolling Stock 30
The Number and Type of Coach 30
Motor Coach Underframes 30
Air Brakes 31
Train Equipment . . 32
Motor Control Apparatus 33
Master Control Apparatus 35
Air Compressor 38
Dynamotor ■ , . . 38
Safety Devices 39
Permanent Way ’ 40
Track Construction and Length of Line Equipped 40
Overhead Equipment 41
Structures for Supporting Overhead Wires 41
Connecting Structures to Earth 44
The Catenary Wire 44
The Contact Wire 46
Sectioning 47
Construction at Tramway Crossings -48
Automatic and Power Signalling 51
Three-position Automatic Signals 51
Three-position Interlocked Signals • 52
Dwarf Signals 52
Track Circuit Control 53
Signal Operation 53
Light Signals 53
Automatic Train Stops 54
Operation of Points 54
Signal Levers 55
Wiring 55
Power Supply 55
Accessories 55
Electric Car Workshops at Jolimont 57
Training of Train Crews* 38
List of Principal Contractors 60


Industry relies on
RUBBER GOODS
In every direction its use is now essential in some form for the furthering
of the commercial and manufacturing enterprises of Australia In hundreds
of ways it makes for Efficiency, which from now on must be the slogan of
the industrial community of this country. In this connection, all users


PREFACE.
The work of equipping the Melbourne suburban railways
for electric service is now complete on some of the lines,
and the publication of this pamphlet, descriptive of the work,
is a fitting acknowledgment of this epoch in the history of
a system of railways that has ever been in the forefront of
railway practice.
It is peculiarly appropriate that the first State in Aus-
tralia to establish a railway traffic system should have taken
the lead in railway electrification. On the success of the
Victorian experiment will undoubtedly depend the future direc-
tion of railway development throughout the Commonwealth.
The Railway Commissioners of Victoria, in thus pioneering
the way for other States, have always been keenly conscious
of the immense and peculiar responsibilities, both direct and
indirect, of their office. They have, therefore, taken abun-
dant care to avoid mistakes which might prove ultimately
detrimental to their great enterprise, and to see that their
selected scheme of electrification should be well and truly
carried out down to its last detail. It may be safely pre-
dicted that the new service, in operation, will triumphantly
vindicate the foresighted wisdom of the Commissioners, and
will endure as a monument to the sagacity, skill and excellent
workmanship of all who have co-operated in its establish-
ment.
AMBROSE PRATT.
Melbourne,
1919.


THE MEN RESPONSIBLE
FOR CARRYING INTO EFFECT THE
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN RAILWAY SYSTEM
OF MELBOURNE, VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.
FRONT ROW. Left to Might.
Mr. W. R. RENNICK - • .Assistant Chief Engineer of Way and
Works, and xMember of Electrification
Committee.
Mr. W. STONE ■■■ - - Chief Electrical Engineer, and Member
of Electrification Committee.
Mr. E. P. GROVE ■■■ - Chief Superintending Engineer, Messi s.
Merz and McLellan.
The Late Mr, E. B. JONES - Railways Commissioner, and Chair-
man of Electrification Committee,
Mr. C. E. NORMAN - - Chairman of Railways Commissioners.
Mr. W. xM. SHANNON - Railways Commissioner and Member
of Electr ideation Committee.
Mr A. K. SMITH - ■■■ Chief Mechanical Engineer and Mem-
ber of Electrification Committee
Mr. E. H, BALLARD - Chief Engineer of Way and Works.
Mr. T, B. MOI.OMUY - General Superintendent of Trans-
portation, and Member of Electrifica-
tion Committee.
SECOND ROW.
Mr. G. WEYMOUTH - - Messis. G. Weymouth Fty. Limited.
Mr. T. C. CHRISTIANSON Railways Distribution Engineer, Super-
vised, under Mr. Grove, Electrical
Installation.
.Mr. W. J. NEWBIGIN - .Messrs. C. A. Parsons & Company
Limited
Mr. W. D. BKACHER - Secretary to Electrification Committee
-Mr. W. P WARD - - The British Insulated and Helsby
Cables Limited.
Mr. \V. A. REYNOLDS - Messrs. Babcock & Wilcox Limited.
Mr. A S HERBERT ■■ - .Messrs. Siemens Brothers Dynamo
Works Limited.
Mr, F. W MURRAY ■ - The British Westinghouse Electric
and Manufacturing Company Limited.
THIRD ROW.
Mr. H, FORSTER - - Electrical Superintendent.
Mr, IL P. COLWELL- ■ .Assistant Electrical Engineer.
Mr. W. HWI ELLA MS - Messrs. Siemens Brothers Dynamo
Works Limited, Engineer in charge
of erection of electrical plant,
Mr. M. CALCUTT - - Engineer of Signals.
.Mr. A. HORTON - - - Engineer in charge, Newport Power
House. Supervised, under Mr. Grove,
erection of Power House.
Mr. H. N. MAY - - - Workshops Manager, jolimont. Super-
vised, under Mr. Grove, installation
of Train Equipments.
Mr, P, A. McGEE - - Overhead Equipment Engineer,
Messrs Metz am! McLellan.
BACK ROW.
Mr. J. LANG - - - Assistant Engineer in charge, Newport
Power House.
.Mr. G. T. LUTTRELL Railways Construction Engineer,
Overhead Equipment Structures.
Mr. j. FAWCETT - - Chief Architect. Railways Department
Mr. M. C. TIMMS - - Cable Engineer, Messrs. Siemens
Brothers Dynamo Works Limited.
Mr. j. R. KAVENSCROET- Assistant Electrical Superintendent.
Supervised, under Mr. Grove, Cable-
Laying.
Mr. G. S, SCOT!' - - Overhead Equipment Superintendent.
Supervised, under Mr. Grove, erection
of Overhead Gear.


The Electrification of the Metropolitan Railway System
of Melbourne.
Comprising an account of the events leading up to the adoption of the scheme; the Newport
Power House; Permanent Way Equipment; the Substations; Distribution System; Rolling
Stock and Signalling System, &c.
HISTORIC,
By
C. T. Stephenson.
Sixty-five years ago there were no railways in Aus-
tralia, for it was not until the 20th January, 1854, that the
first Victorian line —the first railway line in' Australia —was
available for carrying traffic between Port Melbourne and
Flinders-street Station, Melbourne. This pioneer line was
two miles in length, and was owned by a private company.
In the year 1880 the original line to Port Melbourne, together
with lines that were subsequently constructed, and at that
date were owned, some by a private company and some by
the State Government, merged into the Victorian Railway
system, and to-day the whole of the railways in Victoria, with
the exception of fourteen miles of track, are owned by the
State. Thirty-nine years ago, when this amalgamation of in-
terests took place, there were 1199 miles of railway open for
service, and the annual revenue earned by the system was
£1,492,917. At June last year, the corresponding figures were
4152 miles of railway open for traffic, and the gross revenue
earned for the twelve month preceding was £6,562,259. Dur-
ing this period of thirty-eight years the operating expenses
have exceeded the revenue by £6,950,000. There have been
periods of respite; years in which the income exceeded the ex-
penditure, but the average result is shown by the above figures.
But these figures alone are not sufficient as a basis on which
to appraise the management of the State railway sys-
tem, for broader issues than those of an immediate
cash return have guided the policy of railway develop-
ment. As one of the principal influences in opening
up a new country, the railways have been extended
into sparsely populated districts that the land served may be-
come productive. The railways have very much increased the
earning power of the country, and it can be said that the
capital that has been expended on the rail service is capable
of earning a large additional revenue if the primary pastoral
and agricultural industries are developed, and the lands along
existing railways are used to produce the additional produce
of which they are capable. The financial success of the rail-
ways depends, to some extent, upon the energetic adminis
tration of Government departments outside the jurisdiction
of the railway managers, such as the Departments of Mines,
Lands, and Agriculture, and the interest of the Department
of Railways in the energetic and successful administration ot
these other departments is strikingly illustrated in the very
obvious need of the railways for the business the country is
capable of supplying.
The management of the Victorian State railways is vested
in a board of three Commissioners, who are free from poli-
tical interference, and who have supreme control of the de-
partment. The department is represented in the Cabinet by
the Minister of Railways, and he is empowered by law to call
upon the Commissioners to formulate a scheme for the pur-
pose of carrying out any work of policy propounded by him
or the Government; but in such event an amount must be
voted by Parliament to meet any loss of revenue or increase
of expenditure that may be thus caused.
The scheme of electrification that is here' described was
carried out upon the advice of Mr. Chas. H. Merz,
consulting engineer of London and Newcastle, who
had considerable experience of electrically operated
trains in Great Britain. Mr. Merz has been re-
presented locally by Mr. E. P. Grove, and the work has
been supervised, on behalf of the department, by a special
Electrification Committee, consisting of Mr. E. B. Jones, Rail-
way Commissioner, Chairman; Mr. W. M. Shannon, Com-
missioner; Mr. W. Stone, Chief Electrical Engineer; Mr.
W. R. Rennick, Assistant Chief Engineer, Way and Works;
Mr. T. B. Molomby, Gen. Supt. of Transportation, with
Mr. W. D. Bracher as Secretary. At the initiation of the
electrification question, this committee collected data for the
consideration of the consulting engineer, and it has since con-
ferred with his staff regarding the execution of the work.
The electrical equipment of the Victorian railway system
has been under discussion for about twenty-three years, and
the Railways Commissioners were active in opposing a pre-
mature change from the steam locomotive to electric traction.
The first report on the subject was presented, in 1896, by an
engineer, on the staff of the General Electric Company of
America, named Mr. A. W. Jones. He proposed to equip
a portion of the lines for electric operation of trains, and
set out a scheme that provided generating plant, consisting
of three 225 kilowatt, 600 volt “tramway dynamos.” Two
years later, in 1898, a select committee, appointed by the
Legislative Council, recommended, as a result of their en-
quiries, that no new Melbourne suburban railways be con-
structed on the steam locomotive system, until the advantages
of electric traction had been more fully enquired into, and it
suggested that some sections of the line be electrically
operated. No action, however, was taken along the lines
recommended by this committee, and three years later another
select committee studied the problem, and recommended that
the services of a man with experience of electric railways
be obtained to report on the subject in its relation to the
Melbourne service. This suggested course of conduct re-
ceived the hearty support of the Railways Commissioners,
and, in the year 1907, Mr. Thos. Tait, Chairman of Commis-
sioners, submitted a report on the conclusions he had formed
during a tour of enquiry in Europe .and America, on the elec-
trification of the Melbourne suburban lines and the engage-
ment of a consulting electrical engineer to investigate and
report in regard thereto.
Mr. C. H. Merz was the authority selected by Mr. Tait
to investigate the matter, and the report by Mr. Merz was
made available in the year 1908. The scheme submitted, and
recommended for adoption by Mr, Merz provided for a power
house, at Yarraville, containing seven turbo-generators, each
with a capacity of 5000 e.h.p., to supply current of 25 cycles,
3 phase, 12,000 volts- between phases. The three phase, high
tension, current was to be distributed to substations, and there
converted to direct current 800 volts, at which pressure it
was to be distributed to the trains by means of a conductor
rail. Under this scheme it was estimated that a loss would
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


The Site of Flinders St. Station.
1854..
Flinders St. Station —Main Entrance.
1918.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


be incurred of over £76,000 in the first year of complete
operation. Because of this financial outlook, and also because
the Railways Commissioners desired to await the develop-
ments in electric railway working, the Commissioners recom-
mended that the conversion, then proposed by, Mr. Merz,
should not take place. Consequently the work was not under-
taken.
In 1910 the Government appointed the Metropolitan Traffic
Commission to consider and report upon the transport arrange-
ments of the metropolis. This Commission, and the Parliamen-
tary Standing Committee, recommended the electrification of
the Melbourne suburban lines, although the Railways Commis-
sioners gave evidence adverse to the conversion. As a result
of these recommendations, the consulting engineer was asked
to review his original scheme. This was done, and Mr. Merz
presented a final report in 1912, in which it was recommended
that alternative tenders be secured for providing equipment
for operating the trains by direct current or single phase
alternating current. The direct current scheme provided for
generating 3-phase, alternating current 25 cycles at 3300 volts
between phases, transmitting at 20,000 volts to various sub-
stations, in which the alternating current was to be converted
into direct current and distributed to the trains at a pressure
of 1500 volts. In the single phase alternating current scheme
the tenders called for plant to generate three phase current
at 25 cycles. The power was to be transmitted to substations,
and at these centres subdivided —the wires above the track
being correspondingly subdivided and insulated —into three
distinct single phase currents and supplied to the trains at
a pressure of 11,000 volts.
When the tenders received for the two schemes were
compared it was found that the initial cost of the single phase
scheme was about 23 per cent, more than the direct current
proposal, and that a saving of £707,000 would be effected
by adopting direct current, in preference to alternating cur-
rent for operating the trains. The annual cost of the direct
current scheme was estimated to be about £70,000, or 21.7
per cent, less than the annual cost of the alternating current
system. It was a study of these figures that finally decided
the issue in favour of the application of a direct current system
to the Melbourne suburban railways.
The present scheme of electrification embraces only the
Melbourne suburban section of the Victorian railway system,
a system of lines that radiate from Melbourne; the longest
individual line extends to a distance of 26 miles from tot
city. Trains' in the country districts, and trains from the
country arriving within the electrically equipped area, are still
to be drawn by steam locomotives.
Within these pages is given an account of the circumstances
leading up to the adoption of electricity as the motive powc;
selected for operating the trains. The description of the scheme
is effected under several distinct headings, and contains a
comprehensive description of the equipment of the power
house, sub-stations, the trains, and the overhead work, A
special article is contributed by Mr. F. M. Calcutt, Engineer
of Signals, in which he describes a signalling system that has
been devised especially for the Victorian railways. The
system, for which Mr. Calcutt is largely responsible, embodies
the best features of American and English systems, and should
prove of particular interest, as being the result of extensive
enquiries made by the author during his visit to Europe and
America.
The articles are fully illustrated with photographs sup
plied by the Railway Commissioners and the Consulting En
gineer, and we are indebted to Mr. E. P. Grove, who repre-
sents Mr. Merz, as superintending engineer of the whole elec-
trification scheme, for the assistance he has generously ren-
dered by supplying most of the technical details from which
the articles are compiled. The Railway Commissioners have
afforded us every assistance, and without their hearty co-
operation the production of a publication on this scale would
have been impossible.
The publication contains a complete list of the contractors
who were responsible for supplying and erecting the various
plant, and it is with peculiar pleasure that, amongst the names
of world-wide repute that appear on the list, we are able to pub-
lish the name of Geo. Weymouth Pty. Ltd., a Melbourne firm
that has taken an important part in equipping the power house
at Newport.
Of other work done in Australia, that carried out in the
department’s own shops at Newport, in connection with the
provision of suitable rolling stock, and in the manufacture of
signal apparatus and a large quantity of track equipment
structures, deserves special mention. I would also like
to make some passing mention of the local firms who have
contributed in a smaller way to the scheme, for, I believe, we
should give full prominence to the achievements of our local
manufacturers, that confidence in ourselves may be strength-
ened; that the general public may be led to support local in-
dustry; that they may learn to share with me a belief in the
future industrial greatness of Australia. The firms who are
entitled to special mention under this heading are:—
McKenzie and Holland Ltd., for the construction of
signal apparatus.
Australian Porcelain Co. Pty. Ltd., for the supply of insu-
lators.
Electric Equipment Manufacturers Pty. Ltd., who have
supplied some switches.
The Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd., who have sup-
plied most of the steel for the overhead structures,
which was manufactured at their Newcastle Works.
The war has greatly hindered the work of construction, and
the same influence has been responsible for largely increas-
ing the cost of the work. Already 2% million pounds have
been spent on the scheme, and three years ago it was seen
that the original estimate would be exceeded by £400,000.
It is now clear that this sum will be inadequate to cover the
amount by which the estimates will be exceeded.
The delay in getting the scheme into operation results in
a large amount of capital lying idle, and the extra capital ex-
penditure with which the system will be loaded, as a result ot
increased cost of construction, are two factors that will tend
to prejudicially affect the financial benefit that it was esti-
mated the department would derive from the adoption of
electric operation.
The Railway Commissioners hesitated for many years be-
fore finally recommending the adoption of a scheme that
involved the expenditure of large sums of money upon a rail-
way service that was already equal to any similar service in
other parts of the world, and it is necessary to look further
than the railways to see the full advantage of electric opera-
tion of the trains. The benefit of the system consists largely
in its bearing on the question of the supply of power for gen-
eral purposes throughout the State. The power house at
Newport may be regarded as the nucleus of a scheme that
will finally make available the cheap supply of power that is
absolutely necessary to the future industrial development of
the country.
The plant that will finally be installed to deal with the
maximum demand of the railways will not be employed to its
full capacity during the whole day. In suburban railway work
the demand on the system is greatest for short periods dur-
ELECTRIFICATION OF TEE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Princes Bridge Station.
1918.
Flinders St. Station Immediately before Electrification.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Flinders St. Station—Looking East.
18S’S.
ing the morning and evening, and power plant must be pro-
vided to deal with this demand; during the intervening time
the plant is standing idle, and earns no revenue if
serving the railways only. If occupation can be found
for the plant during these idle periods, its revenue-
earning power is largely increased, and the cost of
power is decreased. Another factor influencing the
cheap supply of power is the use of large generating
units, and the employment of such units only becomes pos-
sible as large demands are made on the power stations. This
condition is assisted by dealing with all demands under one
system, and by the general adoption of electric power in place
of isolated steam and internal combustion engines for operat-
ing plant on the railways and in factories. A scheme for uni-
The increasing cost of coal is another factor that
seems to justify electric operation of trains. The
estimates on which the cost of generating electricity for
the trains were based allowed for coal at 10s. per ton. Coal
has increased in price till now it costs 18s. sd. per ton, de-
livered at the power station, and although the increased cost
of coal will result in an increased cost of electric power for
the trains, the increase will be less in proportion for the elec-
tric system than for a system that provides for the coal being
burnt in locomotives.
Electric traction is becoming increasingly popular in
other countries, and its adoption in Melbourne will, undoubt-
edly, increase the efficiency, comfort, and earning capacity
Flinders St. Station —Looking West.
1854.
fying the generation and distribution of electric power m
Victoria is under consideration, and if the Railway Depart-
ment joins the organisation the electrified trains will pro-
vide one of the largest customers of such general scheme;
it may confidently be expected that the railways will be an
important influence in reducing the cost of power for the
development of industries.
of our railways; it will enable the burden of increasing cost
of coal and labour to be borne by the department, and it
will tend to cheapen the cost of electricity for industrial and
general purposes. An influence so far reaching must attract
general attention, and the following description of the plant,
by means of which these results are to be attained, will bt
of most profound interest to the whole community.'
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


SITE PLAN
NEWPORT POWER STATION ■
VICTORIAN RAILWAYS
MELBOURNE SUBURBAN ELECTRIFICATION -
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Newport Power-House from the River Yarra.
Newport Power Station.
The power station has been placed at the mouth of the
river Yarra at Newport, the position, relative to the suburban
system, being shown on map (p. 26). A site plan is given
in Fig. 1, which also shows the canals which have been ar-
ranged so as to bring the circulating water to the condensers
from the bay, and admit of its being ejected after performing
its functions, to the river beyond the retaining wall, slightly
diverted so as to separate —except at extreme high tide —the
inlet of cold water from the outlet of heated water. When it
is realised that at the maximum duty of the generating plant
some five to six million gallons per hour will be passed from
the bay to the river, the importance of obtaining the best pos-
sible site in proximity to ample supplies of cold water will be
appreciated. The site was also well adapted for heavy
machinery, being wholly on basalt rock. The level of the
turbine room basement is ift. Sin. above maximum high
water mark —Harbour Trust datum.
The arrangement of buildings and plant is shown in
Figs. 4, 5.
The two boiler houses are at right angles to the turbine
room, the coal storage yards being on the same centre line
as that of the boiler houses; the step-up transformer house
and switch house being parallel to the turbine room.
A fitting shop is provided on the river side of No. 1
boiler house, whilst stores and workmen’s accommodation,
meeting and other rooms are placed between the two boiler
houses.
The site is laid out for two similar power houses, and
some work in preparation for a second power house has been
carried out in the way of circulating conduits and excavation
in rock.
The buildings are steel-framed structures encased in
armoured cement plaster. The reinforcement is in the form of
panels of expanded metal hung from the steel frame.
The roofs of the turbine room and boiler houses are of
galvanised corrugated iron, that of the former being double,
with a space between to eliminate the effect of condensation.
The turbine room is a fine lofty building of imposing ap-
pearance.
The screen house, entirely of brick stuccoed, with con-
crete roof, is situated on the eastern side of the main build-
ings, near the entrance lodge, also brick stuccoed to match
the main building. In the extreme south-east corner of the
site is an oil store of similar character.
Boiler Houses. —The equipment for each of the boiler
houses is as follows:
12 Babcock and Wilcox marine type water tube boilers,
30,000 lbs. normal evaporation, 210 lbs. per square inch work-
ing pressure, 610 deg. Fahr. total temperature of steam, 6725
square feet heating surface, 168 square feet grate area; 2
chain grate stokers per boiler; 288 pipe Green economiser per
boiler; 6 “Sirocco” fans, one fan to two boilers; 2 “Weir’s”
impulse turbine driven centrifugal feed pumps; 2 “Nichols”
vertical single cylinder feed pumps; 30,000 lbs. capacity water
per hour, each type feed pump; 2 ash handling plants; 3
coal conveyors, 40 tons per hour each; 1 coal storage yard
and crane.
No. 1 Boiler House—Firing Floor.
The boilers are arranged six aside in pairs, each boiler
having its own integral superheater and economiser.
One steel chimney, 7ft. in diameter and 58ft. above
economiser door level, with an induced draught fan, serves
each pair of boilers.
The furnaces are arranged at present for the burning of
coal from the State Mine at Wonthaggi or Newcastle (N.S.W.)
coal, but the arches could doubtless readily be adapted for the
burning of brown coal if necessary, whenever its use can be
proved to be more economical, having regard to the large per-
centage of moisture in this class of coal and the consequent
loss through transporting non-productive weight.
The boilers and economisers have so far not been sub-
ject to any efficiency test, but are guaranteed by the contrac-
tor, when working in pairs, with Wonthaggi coal, having a
calorific value ranging from 11,000 to 12,000 B.T.U. per lb., to
be capable, of evaporating 30,000 lbs. of steam per hour each
boiler at a pressure of 210 lbs. per square inch above atmos-
phere and superheated to 600 deg. Fahr. measured at the
turbine stop valves from water supplied to the economiser
at a temperature of 90 deg. Fahr.
Each boiler has also to be capable of maintaining con-
tinuously a 25 per cent, greater evaporation under similar con-
ditions.
ELECTRIFICATION OF TEE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Fig. 2.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


At normal full load the efficiency of each economiser and
boiler combined is not to be less than 85 per cent, with
draught of 0.65 inches at boiler dampers. It is anticipated that
the contractors will have little difficulty in obtaining this
efficiency.
The feed pumps, which are installed in the basement of
the pump house, which forms an avenue to the turbine room,
normally draw their water from the hot wells, which are kept
supplied from the condensed water extraction pump, and
heated by the exhaust from the feed pumps and auxiliary tur-
bines when running.
In parallel with the hot wells are the hotwater storage
—to the coal bunkers above the boilers, or by the central con-
veyor to the coal storage yard.
Motor driven crushers are provided below the hoppers, in
case it may be more convenient to deliver large coal.
The bunkers are built of mild steel plate lined with cement
concrete reinforced with expanded metal.
The coal, on reaching the gantry over the coal storage
yard, can be automatically dumped where required, just as in
the coal bunkers. In addition, a grab—handled by an electric jib
crane of the luffing type—can be used to spread the coal over
the storage area. To recover this coal for the boiler houses,
the grab can be brought into use again, feeding the chutes to
Newport Power-House—Turbine Room.
tanks of 12,000 cubic feet capacity, installed in the area be-
tween the two boilerhouse buildings.
The make up water is obtained from tanks of 1500 cubic
feet capacity, situated above the workmen’s accommodation,
and fed by the Yan Yean or town water mains, of which two
of 6in. diameter are brought on to the site.
The steam piping consists of solid drawn pipes, the flanges
of forged steel being riveted in the case of pipes of yin. diame-
ter and over, and screwed in the case of smaller pipes. The
exhaust and escape steam piping is lapwelded. The layout of
the piping can be seen from the plans and elevations, Figs. 4, 5.
A large expansion loop is provided at approximately the
centre of each length of main steam header running at the
back of the boilers, the pipe being anchored towards each end
of this header. There are four loin, main headers from the
boilers to the four steam receivers in the turbine room, which
are connected together again by loin, mains. The supplies
to the six turbine stop valves are taken off these four re-
ceivers. '
Coal and Ash Handling Plant.—The storage and handling
of coal is provided by means of sidings from Spotswood sta-
tion, on the VVilliamstown line, the full and empty waggons
being worked in a continuously forward direction. The 15-ton
hopper waggons, which have been built at the Newport Work-
shops, dump their coal into large hoppers below the track, be-
tween the boiler houses and the storage yard. From these
hoppers the coal passes to the bucket conveyors below, which
carry it over weighbridges—weighing four buckets at one time
travelling coal filler in the underground passage below the
storage ground, which returns it to the other conveyors; or
the grab can deliver it direct into an auxiliary hopper on the
end of the coal gantry, which, in turn, feeds the main hopper.
The ash handling equipment consists of two sets of suc-
tion plant, each with an exhauster driven by a 60 b.h.p.
motor, and a receiver, into which the ashes are drawn while
being subjected to a fine spray of cooling water.
The four ash bunkers, which are lined with concrete, are
erected over the track on which ash waggons are worked in
between the coal waggons.
A few half-ton trucks, running on narrow gauge rails
under the furnaces, are provided for ash handling, in case of
emergency.
General Arrangement of Generating Plant.—The generat-
ing plant is so arranged that, provided any one boiler is in
steam, any one turbo-alternator can be started up; but, as no
atmospheric exhaust valve is fitted between the condenser and
the turbines, these are not intended to run on atmosphere, and
two small auxiliary turbines, each of 350 k.v.a. capacity, have
been installed for starting up the power house auxiliaries at
any time when all the main turbines have been shut down.
In addition, the breakdown of anything comprised in one
generating unit will not prevent the operation of the remain-
ing sets.
Six main turbo-alternators comprise the ultimate equip-
ment of the turbine room. Each turbine has its own steam
driven oil pump for use when starting up, its own oil cooler
. ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Working Pressure »2iO Lbs o*
Test • . 330 Las o*
Scale i Foot.
Victorian Government Railways.
Newport Power Station.
■ ARRANaCMENT OF ONE BABCOCK t, WIUCOX MARINE TYPE BOILER. ■
FITTED WITH
SuPtRHCATEi iyCwAihf Crate Stokers.
Heating Surface or Boiler -6725 Sq Ft.
■ ■ or Superheater <043 Sq Ft
GrAte Area of sq>lcr 168' So Ft.
Fig. 3.
16
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN ,
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF . MELBOURNE.


and oil pump direct driven from the H.P. spindle, condenser,
circulating pump, air and water extraction pump. On the
electrical side each turbo-alternator has a self-excited exciter,
direct driven off the alternator shaft.
The alternators generate three-phase current at a
periodicity of 25 cycles per second, and at the normal voltage
of 3300. This is raised to 20,000 volts in three single-phase
step-up transformers of the oil cooled type. The heated oil
is circulated through a cooler in the turbine room basement,
there being one set of transformers and cooler with its cir-
culating pump per turbo set. The transformers for each unit
are installed in separate chambers of the transformer house.
In addition, a three-phase unit transformer, self oil cooled
through radiating tubes built into the tank, is installed for
each unit, by which the supply to the turbine auxiliaries is
transformed from 3300 to 440 volts.
Thermometers, of the Fournier indicating type, with pro-
Motor Generator Chamber at the Power House.
vision for automatic alarm, are provided for each step-up
transformer tank.
Each turbo-alternator will be cooled by a “Sirocco”
blower direct dmen, drawing its air through a wet air filter,
the water for which is circulated by a pump, driven by the
same motor as that driving the transformer oil pump.
The unit transformer feeds a 4-panel switchboard,
equipped with 3-phase oil switches of 800 to 600 amp. capacity,
controlling the before-mentioned auxiliaries, with an addi-
tional panel equipped with 800 amp. switch arranged so that
the supply to the auxiliaries can be taken either from the unit
transformer, or from the main station 440 volt switchboards
which are fed from the station transformers.
These station transformers consist of two sets, each of
two —1000 k.v.a. 20,000/440 volt, three-phase, self oil cooled,
tubular radiator type transformers, installed in pairs in sep-
arate chambers, one at each end of the switch house, and fed
through oil switches, one set off each set of the 20,000 volt
main busbars. The low tension terminals of each set are con-
nected through a 2500 amp. switch to a main station 440 volt
switchboard, installed along with the no volt lighting and
battery charging motor generators, in a room leading out at
right angles from each end of the turbine room. These switch-
boards—each of which can supply the auxiliaries for three
main units—also take the supply from the two auxiliary turbo
sets, provision being made by cables for interconnecting the
two boards.
One board supplies the auxiliaries for the No. 1 Boiler
House, the other board for No. 2 Boiler House, the odd cir-
cuits, such as screening plant motors, fitting shop motors, en-
gine room crane, transformer house cranes, turbine oil filter
pumps, compressor and vacuum cleaner, etc., being supplied
from the nearest main board. • All these supplies are passed
through separate fuses in ironclad boards in the distributing
chambers below the main station boards.
The two station batteries, which supply lighting, control
and switch operating circuits, are installed in chambers ad-
joining the fuse distribution chambers below the motor
generators.
The air filters are installed in spacious chambers adjoining
the step-up transformers, and adjoining these again are cham-
bers containing the resistances to be inserted in one or two
of the running generator neutral connections to the earth-
plates.
All control of the 20,000 volt switching is done from the
control room at the west end of the switchhouse building.
Turbine Room Plant.—The turbine room will ultimately
contain :—6 Parsons horizontal reaction type turbines, with one
high and two (or one double flow) low pressure cylinders.
Normal Working Conditions.—Steam pressure, 200 lb. per
square inch; steam temperature, 600 deg. F.; vacuum, equal to
an absolute pressure of i%in. mercury; speed, 1500 revolu-
tions per minute.
Current Generated.—Three-phase 25 periods 3300 volts.
Economical Output of Set. —4 10,000 k.w. at .95 lagging
P.F.; 2 12,500 k.w. at .95 lagging P.F.
Maximum Continuous Capacity of Set— -4 12,500 kw. at
.95 lagging power factor; 2 14,000 kw. at .95 lagging power
factor.
Maximum Output for Short Intervals.— 4 14,000 kw.; 2
15,000 kw.
Six Weymouth twin surface condensers of the “contraflo”
type, each twin condenser having a cooling surface of 22,000
square feet, and being capable of dealing with 120,000 lb. of
steam at a vacuum of 28.8 m. when supplied with 14,000 gallons
of circulating water per min. at a temperature of 60 deg. Fahr.
Six Michell type Weymouth air and water extraction
pumps, working on the Kinetic system, each combined' set of
air and water extraction pumps being driven at a speed of 750
r.p.m. by an induction motor of 80 e.h.p.
Six circulating water pumps, built by Messrs. G. Wey-
mouth Pty. Ltd. —the pumps being of Mr. Michell’s design—
each pump of the vertical turbine type and capable of deliver-
ing 40,000 gallons of water per minute when driven at a speed
of 500 r.p.m. by a vertical induction motor of 225 e.h.p.
Six Bilge pumps of the vertical and centrifugal type, cap-
able of lifting 100 gallons of water per minute against a head
of 35ft., when driven by induction motors of the liberal rating
of six e.h.p. at 750 r.p.m.
Port of Pump House-. Circulat'my Pump Motors in Foreground.
Six ventilating fans of the “Sirocco” type, each driven by
a 30 b.h.p. Westinghouse induction motor.
Six transformer oil circulating and wet air filter pumps,
the pumps of each type being connected to and driven by a
Westinghouse induction motor of 15 b.h.p.
Six 350 k.v.a. auxiliary turbo-generators, non-condensing,
generating three-phase current at 440 volts 25 cycles for start-
ing up.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


jLECINFCAIBs' cr K£I_BXW€ SO3LRBAN RAI WAY'S,
NEWPORT POWER STATION
C£T£gWL i»*WC&ENT CPCSS Cf RTIO^
SCm.l i -rfoor
Vehicle
—Section oi Link a Enct-c Mouses
■ Cooss Section cn Line BB’ &a_£P Mooses & Tank Housr
Fig. Jf.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Fig. 6.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Sundry motor driven oil pumps, air compressor and
vacuum cleaner.
The turbine room crane —supplied by Messrs. Babcock
and Wilcox—has a capacity of 60 tons, with an auxiliary hoist
capable of lifting 50 tons, the span being 75ft. Fifteen-ton
Screening Plant at the Power-House.
hand operated cranes, by the same firm, are provided for repair
shop and pump house.
Turbo Generators.— The high and low pressure portions
of the turbines are in separate cylinders, the high pressure
cylinder being of cast steel. The rotor shafts and discs are
forged of solid steel. Each turbine is directly connected to the
condenser below it, the condenser being supported on large
steel spiral springs. There is no exhaust valve between the
turbine and the condenser, it being intended that these turbines
shall not run on the atmosphere longer than is necessary to get
a spare turbine into commission.
In the case of the two turbo-alternators yet to be installed,
the economical output of the turbine has been raised to 12,500
k.w., and the maximum continuous output to 14,000 k.w., the
steam consumption being correspondingly reduced. The
machines will be similar to the four already installed, the im-
proved rating being obtained by “end-tightening” of the blad-
ingi and other modern improvernents.
The speed of the turbine can be controlled by a small elec-
tric motor from the control room switchboard. Oil is supplied
continuously under pressure to the bearings by means of two
gear pumps, a steam-driven pump being provided for starting
up and shutting down.
The alternators are totally enclosed and ventilated by fans
on the rotor, in addition to the forced ventilation by means
of the separately driven “Sirocco” fan. Air is drawn through
a wet air filter from the passage-way between the transformer
house and the switch house buildings, and is ejected above
the roof of the transformer house. The alternator is ex-
cited by an exciter mounted on an extension of the alternator
shaft, the exciter being of the compound type, but without
commutating poles.
The step-up and station transformers for each generator
set are housed in separate chambers in the transformer house.
The unit transformers are also housed in these chambers.
Condensing Plant. —Condensing water is taken from an
arm of the Bay on the west side of the River Yarra retaining
wall. The circulating water, after passing through the con-
denser, being returned to the river on the opposite side of
this retaining wall. The water is collected in two channels
mainly excavated in the bluestone rock, with which material
the sides of the channels have been pitched. These channels
7he Pump lions/’, S >’u port P/iii cr-llon#/'.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


..e in the screen pits, the water passing first through
stationary screens—the bars of which are approximately
inches apart, and remove only the heavy debris—then
through the revolving screens, which consist of link chains
carrying screens of galvanised iron wire of heavy gauge, the
mesh of which is approximately 5-8 inch square. Four
screens are provided, each of which is driven by a Westing-
house sb.h.p. motor. The screens are washed by jets of
water, supplied as required, at 50/60 lbs. pressure per sq.
inch, by two pumps driven by Westinghouse motors of 53
b.h.p. each. These screens and the pumps were supplied by
Messrs. Babcock and Wilcox the pump-makers being
Messrs. Gwynne, of London. It is found not necessary to run
the screens continuously—one or two hours a day serving the
necessary purpose of keeping the circulating water clear of
seaweed, fish, etc.
The circulating water pumps draw their water from a pit
between the two boiler houses, which is supplied through a
tunnel in two sections —each of which can be separated—and
Power Station Switchgear.—All main switching is car-
ried out at 20,000 volts, the oil switches being installed in the
switch house running parallel with, and at an average dis-
tance of some 120 feet from the turbine room, while the
operating is effected from the control room at the extreme
north-west corner of the switch house building.
The switch-house building is divided into two similar
sections by a passage-way, the ground floor of which is used
as a cable run for control cables carried in racks from the
floor above, on which are installed the operating magnets for
the Siemens oil switches.
The two sections of the building on either side of this
passage are divided up into three floors. • On the lower floor,
guarded by steel-framed doors filled with expanded metal,
forming screens, are installed the cable terminal bifurcating
boxes, the potential transformers and isolating and earthing
switches.
On the floor above, in cells enclosed with heavy sheet
steel doors, are the Reyrolle current transformers and the oil
Fig. G.—The Control Boom, Newport Porver-llouse.
the suctions of the pumps are so arranged that four pumps
can always draw from one section of the tunnel, should the
other section be shut down for cleaning and repairs. The
circulating water pump bodies are of cast iron, lined with
bronze, the impellers also being of bronze, while the pump
haft is sheathed with the same metal. The pumps are in-
tailed in a pit below the pump house basement, so that they
re flooded at all stages of tide.
The induction motors driving these pumps, which are
counted on the turbine floor level, are of the vertical type,
quipped with Michell thrust bearings—separate thrusts be-
ing provided for the motor, as distinct from those for the
pump shaft—the drive being through flexible coupling.
Continuous oil lubrication is supplied by means of gear-
driven pumps mounted on the water pump casing.
The air and water and hotwell pumps are mounted on a
common cast-iron bedplate, with the motor which drives the
combination, the set standing in front of the Kinetic tank, and
immediately in front of the condenser.
switches, supported on steel channels, while on the back wall
of the cell, and on a concrete shelf behind the switches, are
carried the protective type Reyrolle current transformers.
The top floor contains the busbars, carried on pedestal
type porcelain insulators mounted on brick cross walls and
steel frames. Below the busbars are the bus isolating switches,
all of which will ultimately be operated through bevel gear-
ing and cranks from, the operating magnet gallery, without
the necessity for the operator entering the busbar chamber.
The same applies to the cable isolating and earthing switches.
The entrance to all cells or behind busbar screens will be in-
terlocked with the oil switch and bus isolator opeating gear.
Each 3-phase oil switch consists of three separate single
pole switches, having four breaks per pole.
The feeder switches are of the split conductor type, i.e.,
the split conductors, as they leave the cable terminal box,
are brought through two sets of split phase current trans-
formers to the oil switch, and the splits are not connected
together except at the switch contacts when the switch is
ELECTRIFICATION OF lUE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


closed. The switch tanks are circular, with dished bottoms,
and tops of heavy construction. The operation is by means
of flexible steel wire ropes brought out of the top of the tank
and over pulleys to cast steel wiper arms, mounted on a
shaft, which is turned through approximately thirty-eight
degrees by a rotary magnet. The rotary magnet operates
through a connecting rod and clutch box, in such a way, that
immediately the switch is closed, a dog catch takes hold, and
the clutch disengages, leaving the shaft carrying the 3-wiper
arms free to return by the effort of the springs contained in
the switch tanks on the dog catch being released by the trip
solenoid.
The speed of closing averages sft. per second, and ab-
sorbs approximately 50/60 k.w., while the opening speed
averages B.4ft. per second, the rate at parting of the contacts
being 10 to 12ft. per second.
Fig 6 is a photograph of the control panels mounted
on the south side of the control room. The order from left to
right is as follows:
Battery change over switch for throwing the control and
lighting circuits on to No. 1 or No. 2 battery.
Station Transformer Panel No. 1
Generator No. 1 |
Generator No. 2 v
Generator No. 3 j
On No. 1 Bus Section.
Bus Section Switch
Generator No. 4
Generator No. 5
Generator No. 6
Station Transformer No. 2 ,
On No. 2 Bus Section
Substation feeders with spaces for additional feeders.
Mounted on the back of the control panels are the gene-
rator field switches relays and terminal boxes for all small
wiring. In front of the panels are the electric telegraphs for
signalling to the boiler house and turbine room attendants,
and in front of these six voltage regulators—one for each
generator —with a loud speaking telephone in the centre.
On the wall to the left, above the doorway into the switch
house, is to be painted a diagram of the 20,000 volt trans-
mission system.
Cables in the power station are mainly paper-insulated,
lead covered and armoured —the largest 3-core cables being
those between the step-up transformer secondaries and the
generator oil switches, which, while in duplicate, are of .25
sq. inch cross sectional area per conductor, the diameter over
the armouring being 4.2 m.
The heaviest single core cables are those between the
station transformer secondaries, and the 2500 amps., 440 volt
switches being of 1.5 sq. inch cross sectional area per phase.
The majority of the cables are drawn into ducts laid
in the foundations, but, in some cases, porcelain cleats and
racks have been used, particularly for the smaller multi-core
control cables between the control room and the switch cells.
Temporarily three British Westinghouse solenoid ope-
rated switches have been installed for the station trans-
formers and Newport workshops supply.
Above the operating magnet gallery a set of 3-phase bus-
bars has been installed, connected by underground cable to
the test tanks in the open space betwen the two boiler
houses. These busbars can be readily connected by means of
flexible insulated cables attached to copper connecting rods
which can be Inserted into the lower hinged ends of any one
generator bus isolators, provided that the isolator switches
are standing in the open position. In the closed position of
the isolators, the rods cannot be inserted, as the hole in the
porcelain insulator through which it, the rod, is passed, is
capped by part of the bus and cable isolator operating
mechanism.
ELECTRIFICATION OF TEE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


The 20,000 Volt Three-phase Transmission.—The present
electrification and power supply schemes include 13 feeders
from the power house to the traction substations. Of these
9 are of 0.15 square inch and 4 of 0.1 square inch cross sec-
tional area. A cross section of the 0.15 square inch cable is
shown in Fig. 1. All of these thirteen feeders are of the split
conductor type.
These cables are laid mainly in trenches in the streets
owing to the very limited space available alongside the rail-
way lines.
The average depth of trench is 4ft., and the cables are
laid at a distance between centres of ift. gin. and covered by
boards gin. wide, thick of red gum, laid about 4m.
above the cable.
Cast iron boxes are provided (See Fig. 4) fitted with
domes to provide for filling with compound so that air
pockets in same are eliminated, special care being taken to
ensure this. The cable joints are made in these boxes, and the
cast iron box is bonded across to the cable sheath with a copper
bond of section equal to the cable, in addition to the plumbing
of the lead sheath to the gunmetal glands at each end of the
box.
All 20,000 voit cables are paper insulated, lead covered
and wire armoured, with a protective serving of heavily com-
pounded hessian tapes between the lead and the armouring,
and again over the armouring.
From Newport and Jolimont traction substations, two
20,000 volt cables of similar construction are laid to each
of the workshops substations. These cables are, however,
plain 3-core, and provided with pilot cables for tripping the
440 volt switch of the trans-
former supplied by each cable,
so that a fault on one cable or
transformer will not neces-
sarily interrupt the supply by
the other cable and trans-
former. These cables are of
0.05 square inch cross sectional
area, the pilot cables being
0.015 square inch.
The supply to the Albion
substation will be for first mile
only by underground cable.
When the two cables reach the
Braybrook line, they will be
connected each to a separate
overhead transmission line,
carried on high steel masts of
similar construction to those
carrying the contact wires on
electrified tracks. These masts
will be so arranged that by
the introduction of steel
bridges the track can be elec-
trified and duplicated if neces-
sary. These transmission lines
will extend to the electrified
tracks of the Footscray-St.
Albans lines at Sunshine, from
where to Albion substation the
masts will be of somewhat dif-
ferent construction. In all cases
the transmission lines will be
carried on brackets extending
from the sides of masts fur-
thest from the tracks (see Fig.
No. 2), the three phases, each
of two separate wires each of
0.035 square inch across sec-
tional area, being placed di-
Distribution System.
Fig. I. — 3-Core Transmission Cable.
rectly above one another, and supported on chain type insu-
lators.
Similar construction to this latter will be adopted from
North Essendon to GlenroV, North - Fitzroy to Reservoir,
Westgarth to McLeod, East Camberwell to Mitcham, Caul-
field to Springvale, Mentone and Seaford substations. In all
cases a few hundred feet of insulated cable will be used to
connect the overhead transmission lines with the oil switches
in the substation.
Fig. 2. — T'wo-Track Knee-Braced Transmission Structure.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


CO
z: z
o 9
H- fe
h-
(/) O cO
>E 5
a:
Lj r
— 1 Ll
a fe
z >
«r «
Z eo z
a; o
=3 Z
O (/) «
LU <
O 3E oe
_ OC H
> § §
CO
o
MJ §
5T o
* e\j
O
z
u.
X
tn
S
a:
£3
<
c
@)©@oo° a h ? ? H h
i i 1 1 i i i i iii i * £?•.
1| 1 1 IM I i | |
• 1 I l | | | | l i ; I M Ifi
| ... Ijl g | |I j 1 1 |fr
► III!\\ I S 5 | I I ii.
J f ■ ■ ■ 1 ?l~“ I- 15°;
o ; 11 ! I : I f i ?;
2 * °2 o S « £ os°'X.
w « j l22?sSwj[|«s^r^
M ••■if lit 115 i 11 1151
“Is i £ 1 .5 1 ■ 1 :iI I ( ;;
S . • ■ | f E ii 1 ;
§ : ‘ <lr \ M
> , . , i< ; s si? , , ■ ; : I l .
* * * * o *i s ? I
gooo o o » 1 1- . . ■ ■ ii i :
|s.es » § s st f< 1 ■ 1
s'
®C>
GC
, b
r°
£
• P*S
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


As already mentioned, the over-
head lines consist of two wires per
phase, so retaining the Merz Hunter
split conductor protection through-
out the extra high tension trans-
mission system. Telephone cables
are laid along the routes of
the 20,000 volt cables. These tele-
phone cables consist of 20, 8 or 4
pair dry core air spaced paper in-
sulated lead covered single wires,
armoured and served with com-
pounded tapes. While the cores
arc arranged for superimposed cir-
cuits, this feature cannot be made
use of at present, as the telephone
exchange is of the complete auto-
matic type. The exchange is in-
stalled at Jolimont substation, and
is fitted for 50 lines. This exchange
provides communication between
the control room, all substations,
and certain signal boxes, from
which important switching on of
the overhead contact wires may
be regulated; also between the con-
trol room and the principal offi-
cers concerned with the mainten-
ance of the electrified system.
Direct Current Feeders. All
1500 volt direct current feeders,
both positive and negative, are
paper insulated lead covered,
served with tape, and, with the
exception of some of the negative
feeders supplied when war condi-
tions prohibited it, are wire ar-
moured with a further serving of
tape over. These are of .75 square
inch sectional area, with the excep ■
tion of the cross country feeders be-
tween Caulfield and Darling, which
are .5 square inch sectional area.
On leaving the 1500 volt switch
cells the positive cables enter ducts
laid in the foundations of the sub-
station buildings, and on reaching
the nearest structure they are car-
ried up same in hardwood cleats
strapped to the mast.
Where automatic or track signal-
ling is in use, the negative track
feeders are each connected to the
rails through an impedance bond,
so that the signal track circuits
will not be unbalanced.
The cable ends in a terminal box,
over which is mounted a cast iron
pillar, through which is carried a
copper rod to the gunmetal cap,
supported on a porcelain insulator.
This cap is connected to the impe-
dance bond or track rail by flexible
stranded bonds of .25 square inch
sectional area, laid in troughing.
Over the cap is placed an earthen-
ware cover, the pillar being filled m
with pitch.
All cable armouring and terminal
boxes are heavily bonded with
copper to the earth bars in sub-
stations, the earth plates connected
with which have an unusually lib-
eral exposed surface.
fC
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


MAP or SUBURBAN RAILWAY. SYSTEM
SHCVjiVjtTiNfS TO 0f JjYr THIF.ItO Of THt_
POWtH ST A T IOSt , SU STATIONS A TH E PROPOSED ROUTES
or ■'xt toooo vol't t overhead
PEEPERS
g£fi»L!ltes. _
Powtß ir»T!ON t subst»tio|is Shewn thus ■
20000 Volt UNDERCiROyNO rttOtPTS. • ■ ----
20000 VOLT Ovt"H6AO FEEDERS »
1500 vour Cross Country f ecpe«3
Fig. I. — Substations.
ELECTRIFICATION OF TEE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Substations.
A complete description of the Substations for the present
Electrification System of the Melbourne Suburban Railways
would be out of place at the present time, because numerous
departures from the original plans have had to be made, and
temporary work has been rendered necessary, to enable a
start to be made with electric train operation with the mini-
mum of delay. These temporary expedients became neces-
sary, as the great European war made it impossible for
contractors to effect delivery of the apparatus that was
originally ordered, and of all the substations that situated
at Jolimont was most seriously affected by temporary ex-
pedients.
Fig. 2. —Substation Building at Jolimont.
Under the present scheme substations are to be provided
at Jolimon’, Middle Brighton, Newmarket, Glenroy, Newport
Albion, North Fitzroy, Reservoir, Macleod, East Camberwell,
Mitcham, Caulfield, Springvale, Mentone, and Seaford— 15
substations in all, of which the first 7 have been erected, but
the electric equipment is only partially completed.
There is, in addition, a substation at Elwood for supply-
ing power to the St. Kilda-Brighton Electric Tramways in-
terlinked with the high tension transmission system; also, at
Sandringham (the terminus of the Sandringham-Black Rock
tramways) there is a substation fed by an extension of the
20,000 volt transmission system from Middle Brighton sub-
station ; also, a substation is to be built at Spencer-street,
adjoining the present steam power station, to take over the
supply of lighting current to Flinders-street, Spencer-street,
and other of the inner stations, as well as to the State Gov-
ernment offices, and power to the railway workshops, etc.
In addition, there are two static substations already partly in
commission—one at Newport workshops and one at Joli-
mont workshops.
The location of these substations is shown on the map.
(Fig. 1). The method of feeding- and interconnecting the
various substations with the 20,000 volt system, as well
as the plant to be installed, is shown in Fig. 3 (distribution
system).
An exterior view of the substation buildings is shown in
Fig. 2. They are of brick and stucco, having flat con-
crete roofs covered with malthoid. The buildings are pro-
vided with numerous screened openings of large area to the
basement; vertical louvres are fitted above the roof level,
and special attention has been given to secure efficient ven-
tilation.
Fig. S.—lnterior Substation Buildings, showing Rotary Con-
verter Bays.
Each traction substation building consists of two or
more rotary bays (Fig. 3), with an unloading bay, and, in the
case of the central substations, a y set apart for signalling
equipment; with an annexe forming the switch house and
operating gallery.
Each rotary is installed in a separate compartment, and
provision is made to prevent anyone from entering the cham-
ber during the starting up and operation of any particular
1500 Static Transformer for Rotary Converter.
ELECTRIFICATION OF TEE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


rotary. The chamber will be screened off, and the locking
gear on the entrance gate will be interconnected with the
20,000 volt oil switch that controls the supply to the rotary
static transformers, and also with the operating levers con-
trolling the 1500 volt direct current switchgear.
Three floors are provided in the switch house. Cable
terminal boxes, earthing switches, and potential transformers
(Fig. 4), occupy the ground floor; oil switch cells and current
transformers are situated on the first floor; and the busbar
chambers are located on the second floor. In the typical cable
cell, illustrated by Fig. 4, the cable bifurcating box and
earthing switches are shown. The photograph was taken
with the potential fuses removed. On the first floor is
also the operating gallery (Fig. 5) from which the 20,000 volt
oil switches, 1500 volt D.C. switchgear, and the 2200 volt sig-
nalling supply switching is controlled, as well as the isolating
of the oil switches from the busbars and the earthing of
the 20,000 volt feeders for inspection and testing purposes.
The 1500 volt direct current positive busbar and switch-
gear is installed below the operating gallery, while the nega-
loOOkw. Rotary Converter.
tive and equaliser busbars are run in the basement below the
rotary converters.
It is intended to equip the signalling bays with 65KW.
motor generators for providing a supply of 2200 volt single
phase current to the signalling circuits from the 440 volt
side of the 3-phase auxiliary transformers —of which 2 are
provided in each substation. These motor generators consist
of a 3-phase induction motor, connected by slip coupling
with free wheel clutch to a 2200 volt single phase 25 cycle
generator with exciter on same shaft, and a direct current
no volt motor coupled solid to the single-phase generator,
so. that, should the A.C. supply fail, the signalling supply
will be maintained by the batteries, which arc of 500 amp. hr.
capacity.
The auxiliary transformers are installed below a gallery
carrying the 440 volt switchgear. The switchgear is of the
ironclad type.
A travelling crane is provided for each substation. The
crane is hand-operated, but a three-phase induction motor
is provided for- hoisting.
The present equipment of the Newmarket Substation
consists of two 3ocokw. rotary converters, manufactured by
Messrs. Siemens Bros.’ Dynamo Works Limited, of Stafford,
England, but while each rotary is ultimately to be equipped
with two static transformers for its full rated output, at
present the output is limited, as it has only, so far, been
possible to equip each rotary with one transformer.
Fig. 4. —Typical Spit Conductor Cable Cell.
With the exception of earthing switches, which are of
the Siemens type, the 20,000 volt switchgear at this sub-
station is mainly of British Westinghouse manufacture.
Current transformers and potential transformers made
by Messrs. Reyrolle and Co. Ltd., of Hebburn-on-Tyne, sup-
plied through Messrs. Siemens Bros.’ Dynamo Works Ltd.,
are installed at all substations so far equipped.
Middle Brighton Substation is at present equipped with
two Isookw. rotary converters, manufactured by Messrs.
Siemens Bros.’ Dynamo Works Ltd.—one,of which, however,
Fig. 6. —Substation Interior—Operating Gallery.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


is temporarily equipped with a British Westinghouse 3-phase
static transformer. The oil switches at this substation were
manufactured by The British Wcstinghouse Electric and
Manufacturing Co. Ltd., Manchester, but the busbar isolators
and earthing switches are all of Messrs. Siemens’ design
or type.
Jolimont Substation is temporarily equipped with 4
General Electric, New York, U.S.A., rotary converters,
2250 kw. 2-hour rating —the switchgear (both 20,000 volt and
1500 volt) controlling these being also of the General Elec-
tric- Company’s manufacture. The 20,000 volt feeder oil
switches are mainly of the American Wcstinghouse manufac-
ture, and entirely of a temporary character —the 20,000 volt
busbar isolators and earthing switches being of Siemens’
design.
The Elwood Substation is equipped with two 35okw. 600
volt rotary converters, which, with the switchgear at this
substation, are of British Wcstinghouse manufacture.
In the Newport Substation 3 British Wcstinghouse 2250
kw., 2-hour rating, rotary converters are now being installed,
and the North Fitzroy Substation will be similarly equipped
about the end of the present year. It is expected that a third
Siemens rotary converter will be added to Newmarket and
Middle Brighton Substations at about that time.
The Siemens and Wcstinghouse rotary converters are
started by induction motors, the stator of which is con-
nected between the static transformer secondaries and three
of the rotary slip rings—the motor being short circuited by
a switch installed immediately below in the basement and
operated mechanically from the operating gallery, when the
machine has pulled into synchronism. The equaliser switch
is similarly installed and operated; the field switch and field
rheostat, which are also similarly operated, being installed
against the wall of the rotary chamber. The levers controlling
these switches, together with the 1500 volt circuit breaker
and isolating switch on busbar side of same, are interlocked,
so that a definite order of operation is necessary.
The rotary circuit breakers are interlocked electrically
with the 20,000 volt oil switch controlling the supply to the
step-down transformer, so that, should the oil switch open,
the direct current circuit breaker will be opened also, and
the operator will be forced to go through the correct sequence
of movement. Feeder circuit breakers are equipped with an
isolating knife switch on each side, so that a circuit breaker
can be examined and adjusted without waiting for the busbar
or the overhead line to be made “ dead. - ’
The General Electric Company’s make of rotaries are
started at half-voltage on the alternating current side by
means of taps on the transformer with a throw-over switch
-—according to the firm’s usual method, the field circuit being
split up during this operation.
The lighting is supplied from a xokw. single phase trans-
former, reducing the voltage from 440 to no, with an auto-
matic change over switch, which throws the lighting on to
the battery in case of failure of the A.C. supply.
An air compressor is installed in each substation, and
from it pipes are laid to convenient locations throughout the
buildings to provide the necessary means of cleaning out the
plant.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY ,SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Swing Door Sliding Door
Type.
Type.
Total.
Motor Coaches 164
359
Driving Trailer Coaches .. .. .. 27
29
56
Non-driving Trailer Coaches.. .. 126
161
287
3i7
385
702
Fig. I. —Six Car Train of Sliding Door Type.
Rolling Stock.
The rolling stock for operating on the electrically-
equipped lines consists of 702 coaches, made up of motor
coaches, driving trailer coaches, and non-driving trailer
coaches in the following numbers:—
New motor coaches of the sliding door design are being
constructed, and the existing cars of this type are having
the necessary minor alterations made, and electric equip-
ment installed, to enable them to be utilised as driving trailers
and non-driving trailers as required. An electrically equipped
six-car train of the sliding door type is shown in the accom-
panying photograph. Fig. 1.
Prior to the introduction of the sliding door cars on
the suburban lines, the standard cars were of the swing
door type, and, when the electrification scheme was decided
upon, the majority of these cars had been lengthened, the
bodies strengthened, and the cars otherwise improved; and,
as will be seen by the above table, 317 of them will be used
for the electric trains.
The requisite alterations to the bodies have been car-
ried out, and the cars returned to steam traffic for the time
being. A number of those to be utilised as trailers have also
been equipped with conduit, wiring, etc., for electric opera-
tion; but in the case of the swing door cars to be utilised
as motor coaches, new underframes and bogies of uniform
type to those for the sliding door coaches are being made.
Sufficient underframes and bogies for the first group of lines
are ready, and are being electrically equipped at the work-
shops in Melbourne, and the altered bodies now in steam
service will be transferred to them there, and the electrical
installation completed. The underframes and bogies released
will be utilised for excursion cars, a number of the bodies
for which are now under construction at the Newport Work-
shops.
The sliding door motor and driving trailer coaches each
have a guard’s compartment and eight passenger compart-
ments, three being reserved for smokers; and the remaining
five compartments are for non-smokers. The sliding door
non-driving trailer cars have nine compartments, grouped into
three main saloons, one group of which is reserved for
smokers. V.
All cars of the sliding door type have a central passage
way to permit of passengers distributing themselves through-
out the cars; and each compartment is fitted with side doors
to permit of rapid ingress and egress of those travelling by
the train (Fig. 2).
The body framing of the new motor coaches is of teak;
the interior is finished in Queensland maple; and Australian
timbers have been used wherever practicable.
In the construction of the roof, mild steel carlines 3m. x
Vs'm. are used, placed at short intervals throughout, and
well secured to the cant rails and longitudinals.
The interior and exterior panels in the side and end walls
are of lead-coated steel of No. 18 and No. 16 8.W.G., while
the ceilings are of embossed steel.
Battened seats, with brown duck cushions, are provided
in the second class; but the seats in the first class cars are
upholstered in Australian green leather.
The cars will be electrically lighted, and the fittings
for the electric light are on the lines of the existing Pintsch
gas fittings, with the necessary modifications. A two-light
fitting has been provided in each compartment, with a total
of 80 candle power. The lamps are arranged on three separate
circuits, and the two lights in each compartment are sup-
plied from different circuits, so that in the event of the failure
of one circuit, the carriage will not be left without light.
Motor Coach Underframes are constructed of steel
British standard sections throughout, the side soles and
headstocks are of loin, x x 25.39 lbs. channel, while
the longitudinals, cross bearers, and diagonals are of 6in. x
3m. x 14.49 lbs- channel. The transoms and side soles arc
connected by angle knees and by s4'm. gusset plates 4ft. 61n.
x 1 ft. sm. top and bottom. The transoms are also reinforced
ELECTRIFICA TION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


by yin. plates top and bottom, tying the two channels to-
gether. A flanged plate is used to join the headstocks, sole
bars and diagonals. Angle knees support the longitudinals
and cross bearers. The whole upper surface of the under-
frame is covered with yin. steel sheathing to provide a
fireproof protection between the underframe and the body.
The buffers are of the self-contained type. The draw-gear is
non-continuous, and the pull is taken by a loin, x
channel secured between the longitudinals. The underframe
is strengthened by queen trusses of suitable section. All
the electrical apparatus is hung in frames supported by the
underframe members.
The underframes for the new sliding door motor coaches
are 58ft. long x 9ft. oin. wide, with 42ft. oin. bogie
centres; and the underframes for the swing door motor
coaches are Bft. oin. wide, 77 of them being 58ft. long
axles being 6yin. diameter, parallel between wheels, with
qin. x journals and gunmetal bearings lined with special
white metal. The axlebox guides are of cast steel, with re-
newable gunmetal wearing faces. The brakes are of the
“ Clasp ” type, i.e., acting on both sides of the wheels, and
actuated by levers hung from brackets on the bogie framing
and connected with pull rods to a cross beam which moves
in guides supported by the end framing. This beam is con-
nected to the brake pull rod from the cylinder levers by
means of a roller arrangement which allows for the radiating
movement of the bogies on curves without affecting the
brake gear adjustment.
The thrust of the motor nose is taken on a beam which
extends across the bogie and is connected to coil springs;
these are supported by steel castings, wfiich are also used
as ties between the side and transom plates.
Fig. 2. —Sliding Door Coach.
with 42ft. oin. bogie centres; while 87 of them are 56ft. Byin.
in length with 40ft. oin. bogie centres.
The motor bogies, Fig. 3, are constructed of y 2 in. pressed
steel side frames, the end ties and transoms also being of y 2 in.
pressed steel. The transoms are tied to the sides by means
of a yin. gusset plate, which extends from side to side, and
the corners are braced with steel castings, which also carry
the brake hangers.
The bearing springs are of the laminated type, 4ft. span,
11 plates 4in. x yin., and are fitted with double auxiliary
spiral springs at each end. The bolster is made up of two
pressed steel plates Ysin. thick, and is of the swing type, hung
with links, diameter from the transoms. The bolster
is supported on spiral springs, four per nest at each end. The
wheels are 3ft. 6in. diameter, and are of the disc type, the
The trunnion or bogie centre casting is of the flat type,
with renewable gunmetal wearing ring.
Air Brakes.—The Westinghouse air brake is fitted to
the trains, Fig. 4. Air is supplied by means of a two-cylinder
single-acting, electrically-driven air compressor, one being at-
tached to each motor coach. This compressor is controlled by
a “compressor governor,” which automatically cuts off the
current when a pressure of too lbs. per square inch is
reached, and cuts it in again when the pressure in the main
reservoir falls to 90 lbs. per square inch. A safety valve
is fitted to each main reservoir, and is set to release at 100 lbs.
per square inch. The air is fed to the train pipe through
a reducing feed valve adjusted to automatically allow the
air to. pass through at a pressure of 80 lbs. per square inch.
The brake cylinder is i6in. diameter, and it is fitted with
Fig. 3. —Motor Bogie.
ELECTRIFICATION OF TEE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Seats
Tons
Tons
Lbs.
nett.
equipped equipped
Sliding door motor car ..
84
32.92
47-83 '
io7,M3
Swing door motor car. ..
80/70
31.88
46.79
104,819
Sliding door driving trailer
84
27.2
27.58
61,768
Swing door driving trailer
80/70
25-9
26.28
58,856
Sliding door non-driving .
trailer
94
27-05
27-4
61,376
Swing door, do., do
90 •
25.06
25-43
5 6 ,952
Fig. If. Diagram.—Westinghovxe Air Bran
an automatic slack adjuster for taking up the slack in the
brake blocks.
. A brake force equal to no per cent, of the tare weight
of the vehicle is provided. on the motor coaches, with a
pressure of 60 lbs. per square inch in the brake cylinders;
while the brake-force in the case of the trailer coaches is
100 per cent, of the tare weight. Each cylinder is fitted
with a blow down valve which permits the air pressure, after
a fairly heavy application of the brake has been made, to
gradually reduce to 50 lbs. per square inch. A duplex check
valve is fitted between the main reservoir and the whistle
reservoir, and is set to open at 50 lbs. per square inch, to
prevent air passing too quickly from the whistle reservoir
in the event of the whistle valve failing or of the continuous
use of the whistle, so that the air pressure in the main reser-
voir cannot be affected to the extent of interfering with the
working of the brake. The air for the pantograph cylinders
is supplied from the whistle reservoir through the magnet
valve.
Every driving coach is fitted with a “ Pilot,” or " Dead-
man’s,” valve and a “Trip ” valve, both being connected to
the top side of the emergency relay valve attached to the
train pipe. Should a driver take his hand from the con-
troller, or should a train pass a signal at danger and the trip
is operated, the valves automatically open and allow air to
escape, thus overbalancing the emergency relay valve which
opens the train pipe directly to the atmosphere, and applies
the brakes.
If the pressure in the train pipe is thus reduced below
50 lbs. per square inch, the switch of the control governor
opens, preventing the moving of the train.
The general layout of the Westinghouse brake on the
motor and driving trailer coaches is shown on the accompany-
ing diagram. (Fig. 4.)
The electric trains will usually consist of. two or three
units, each unit being composed of a motor and trailer
coach, but provision has been made for a limited number
of motor coaches, driven from either end, for the outer-
suburban lines where the traffic is light, and where one car
is sufficient for its accommodation.
The seating capacity and weights of the various types
of cars under the electrification scheme are as follows:
TRAIN EQUIPMENT.
The ultimate scheme as laid out in the Victorian Rail-
ways Electrification calls for 400 motor coaches and 400
trailer coaches. These motor and trailer coaches will be
made up into a maximum of eight-car trains on a half-and-
Fig. J.— l'linlogruph.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


he as fitted to the Trains.
half basis. The trains will be controlled on the multiple unit
system, a system that is now adopted, with but few excep-
tions, throughout the world for suburban electrically operated
services. This system was first employed in America, where
it was used on the Manhattan electrical railway of New
York as the Sprague Electric Co.’s system. The particular
type in use on the Victorian lines is “all electric,” it
is known as the Sprague General Electric System of Auto-
matic Control, and it might be well to state here, briefly, why
the multiple unit system has been chosen: —
1. On account of flexibility. Coaches can be quickly
added to or taken away from trains to suit the volume of
traffic, thereby cutting down the haulage of empty coaches
in non-rush hours. Flexibility in operation* reduces non-
revenue mileage. It allows concentration of car movement,
which is very desirable.
2. Acceleration rates are more rapid and uniform, which
means greater schedule speed and greater power economy.
This is brought about due to the fact that the weight of
the train is on the drivers to a greater extent. A tractive
effort is provided, which is ample and proportional to the
weight and length of the train.
3. The distribution of the weight of the train on the
rails is better. This reduces the intensity of pressure and
all strains by distributing them along the road-bed, bridges,
or viaducts. Distributed weights and strains decrease the,
cost of maintenance and increase the safety of operation.
4. Distribution of motor power throughout the train is
ideal in practical operation. Power is not concentrated in
one or two locomotives at the head of the train. The strains
transmitted to the supporting structures along the car bodies
and through the couplings are reduced.
5. The reliability of service is increased. The distribu-
tion of motors provides for a reserve in case of accident to
individual motors.
From an operating point of view, one motor coach and
one trailer coach will be considered as a unit. Each motor
coach is equipped with four motors rated at iqoh.p. each.
Provisions are made for controlling the motor coaches from
one end, and sixty-seven of the trailer coaches will also be
controlled from one end. A detailed description of the
apparatus and its working is as follows:
The system comprises two, distinct sets of control ap-
paratus, namely, “Master Control” and “Motor Control.”
The master control is operated by the motorman; the motor
control depends for its operation on the master control.
Every motor car is equipped with a set of motor control
apparatus, which serves to carry current fom the pantograph
collector through the motors to track rails, forming a dif-
ferent combination of motors and cutting down resistance
in starting that particular motor coach. Every motor circuit
is local, being confined to its respective car.
Every motor car is equipped with master control ap-
paratus, the function of which is to operate the motor
control. An important feature of the master control is the
train cable, comprising nine wires, running the entire leng.th
of the train, with suitable couplers between cars. On every
motor car a connection is made from this cable to the
master control apparatus of that car. At the motorman’s cab
a connection is made from the train cable to the master
controller. Consequently the entire train can be energised
and all the motor control apparatus connected thereto can
be operated through any master controller on any coach in
the train. This is known as “ The Multiple Unit Control
System.”
Motor Control Apparatus.—The pantograph collector
( Fig. 5) is located on the car roof. It has a working range
1 etween the height of 21ft. bin. and 14ft. bin. The range
of working is secured by means of springs, but the panto-
graph is raised, maintained in position, and lowered by com-
pressed air, admitted, retained in, or exhausted from cylinders
mounted on the frame of the pantograph. Two electro-
magnetic valves control the position of the pantograph frame.
These valves may be electrically controlled from any driver’s
compartment on the train, or the valves on individual cars
may be operated by hand control from the car immediately
concerned. The pantograph is capable of collecting from
the contact wire more than the current —500 amperes—nor-
mally required for operating each motor coach. Two shoes
of the sliding pan type make connection with the contact
wire. A spring connection is provided between the shoes
and the pantograph frame, leaving the shoes free to adjust
themselves independently to the contact wire. Two strips
of copper 2in. wide and %c>> n - thick are fitted to each shoe,
and these provide the wearing surface of the pantograph.
Graphite grease is placed in a receptacle formed between the
two strips. The running contact surface is 45m. overall,
and is designed to give the largest surface in the centre
where the contact wire usually works.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Main Fuse.—The current from the pantograph passes
through a fuse with a continuous carrying capacity of 400
amperes. The fuse is held under copper clamps by means
of thumb screws. It is provided with magnetic blow out for
extinguishing the arc when the fuse blows, and is located
on the roof, and mounted on the base of the pantograph in
an insulated iron box.
Lightning Arrester.—From the main fuse the circuit
passes to the choke coil of a lightning arrester of the
magnetic blow out type, and from there to the main switch.
Fig. sa.—Diagram showing Pantograph — Operation.
Main Switch is a single pole, single throw knife-blade
switch. Normally it is closed and is intended as a safety
device that may be opened to isolate the motor control ap-
paratus, when anyone is working around the car.
Circuit Breaker and line switch, Fig. 6, is designed to make
and break the full current taken by the motors on each car.
It is the last switch to close on the first step when current
is supplied by the master controller, and is the first switch
Fig. o.—Circuit Breaker.
to open when current is taken off the master control circuit.
It has, in addition, the automatic feature of a circuit breaker
and opens in case of overload. When this happens, it is
necessary to re-set it by means of an electro-magnet, which
is energised by momentarily closing a switch located in the
motorman’s cab.
Fig. 7. — Contactors.
Any one circuit breaker in the train may be opened,
automatically, independent of others. The re-set coils of
all circuit breakers in the train are connected to the train
cable, and they are closed simultaneously by operating the
circuit breaker switch.
Contactors, Fig. 7. Current to the motors is automati-
cally regulated by means of seventeen contactor switches.
Their operations are controlled through the master control
circuits, and the different combinations are made automatic-
ally. The circuits for operating the contactors are so inter-
locked that it is impossible to close them in other than their
proper sequence.
Reverser, Fig. 8. —The direction of current to the motor
fields is established by a reverser, causing the motor to rotate
in the forward or reverse direction, depending upon the move-
ment of the master controller. The movable part of the
reverser is a drum controlled by two electro-magnets, one
for each direction. These magnets are energised by current
through the master controller and the train cable, the con-
nections being made so that only one magnet can be ener-
gised at a time. The control connections for the reverser
are so arranged that, unless the reverser is in the proper
position, current is cut off from the contactors. When the
reverser is in the correct position, it is electrically locked
and cannot be operated while the motors are taking current.
The reverser is always closed either in the forward or reverse
positions, depending upon the position of the master con-
troller handle.
Fig. S. — Reverser.
Rheostats are made up of cast iron grids mounted in
iron frames. Cables connect various sections of the rheo-
stats to different contactors.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE jmetropolitan
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Main Motors, Fig. 9. —Every motor car is equipped with
four iqoh.p. ventilated type motors, which are operated in
pairs, that is, two motors are connected permanently in series,
and are treated as a single unit as far as their control is con-
Fig. o.—Type Of Main Motor.
cerncd. A definite.longitudinal circulation of air is provided •
through the whole interior of the motor, which cools all
the interior parts more effectively than is the case with
designs employing radial armature ducts. The motor arma-
tures are connected to the car axles through single gear
reductions. The gears are solid, and are mounted on the
axles, and the pinions are on the armature shafts.
The four motors are designed to handle one motor car
and one trailer with the existing station stops and grades
of the Melbourne suburban railways. The gear ratio is so
proportioned that the maximum train speed will be approxi
mately fifty-two miles per hour on level tangent track. Taps
are taken off the field of these motors, so that 20 per cent,
of the field is automatically cut out when the motors are
operating in parallel, and a certain predetermined current has
been reached. The armature is so constructed that the shaft
may be removed without disturbing the windings or con-
nections to the commutator.
All bearings are designed for oil and waste lubrication.
The armature bearings are solid, and are made of bronze
with a layer of babbitt sweated to the shell. The thickness
of babbitt is such that should the babbitt be melted by over-
heating, the shaft will be supported by the bronze sleeves,
preventing the armature striking the pole pieces. The axle
bearings are made of bronze and are in two pieces. An out-
line of motor G.E.237 and axle is shown in Fig. 10, and a
characteristic curve is given in Fig. No. n.
The Motor Cutout Switches, two in number, are
mounted in the reverser box. They are provided for
emergency use to permit disconnecting either pair of
motors from the motor control circuit without interfering
with the operation of the other pair of motors on that car.
The switch which cuts out Nos. 1 and 2 motors is a double-
pole double-throw switch, and that which cuts out Nos. 3
and 4 motors is a single-pole double-throw switch. When
either of these switches is cut out, an interlock switch con-
nected in the master control circuit is opened, which prevents
the parallel combination contactor switches on that car from
closing, and at the same time the motor cutout switch which
is operated completes the motor control circuit for the other
pair of motors.
With the exception of the pantograph and the main
fuse, the whole of the above apparatus, adequately protected
by insulated iron boxes, is supported from the underframc
of the car.
Master Control Apparatus.—The master control circuit
forms the path for current from the dynamotor through the
master controller and train cable to the operating coil of the
motor control apparatus. The essential parts of the master
control for every motor coach comprise the following ap-
paratus :
The master controller is located in the motorman’s com-
partment. The function of the master controller is to regu-
late, at the will of the motorman, a supply of current to the
train cable for operating the reverser, line circuit breakeV and
contactors; it contains a single movable contact cylinder and
stationary fingers, which are mounted on an insulated sup-
port. The controller has a single handle for both forward
and reverse direction of train movement. Four points are
indicated in the cap plate for forward direction, and two for
reverse. Ihe first point in either direction is called the
“Switching” or “Lap” position, the second “Series.” In
the forward direction the third point is called “Parallel Lap,”
and the fourth “Parallel.” There are but two running points
for the controller handle, the “Series” and the “Parallel.”
The other points, known as “Switching” or “Lap” positions,
are resistance, and not running points.
The master control switch is located in the driving com-
partment above the master controller. Its function is to
cut off current from the master controller when not in use;
also to energise the re-set coils of the line breakers in case
of overload. It also serves as an emergency switch in the
event of failure of the master controller.
The main control switch is located on the switchboard.
It is enclosed, and contains a fuse. The cover for the fuse
compartment is interlocked with the switch handle in such
a manner that it is impossible to remove the fuse when
the switch is in the closed position. The function of this
switch is to cut off current from the master control, line
circuit breaker, and collector operating switches. This switch
is normally open. It is closed on the car from which the
train is being operated.
The train cable is composed of nine insulated conductors
all covered for identification purposes with different coloured
braids. Its function is to connect any master controller
to the motor control apparatus, and also provides for the
control of all the collectors from any collector operating
switch. It passes through two connection boxes, and ter-
minates at the coupler sockets at each end of the car. On
the motor car, branch cables run from the connection boxes
to the master controller, control cutout switch, line circuit
breaker, and collector operating switches.
The train cable coupler sockets, four per car, are attached
to the underside of the car underframes. A socket consists of
a malleable iron box containing a body moulded insulation,
into which are set nine split bronze plugs, each one being
attached to a conductor of the train cable. Every socket is
provided with a hinged cover designed to hold the jumper
plug in place, and to prevent the entrance of dirt and mois-
ture when no jumper is inserted.
The train cable jumper, used to connect the train cable
on adjacent cars by placing them in the coupler sockets,
consists of a short length of nine-conductor flexible cable
with a coupler plug attached to each end. A plug contains
nine insulated contacts, each one connected to a conductor.
The current limit relay is mounted on the switch-
board. This is provided in order to produce automa-
tic regulation of the master control circuit. This relay
has two lifting coils and one series or holding coil. The
two lifting coils are alternately energised, each circuit being
completed through the disc on the plunger of the other
coil and the operating coils of the contactors. As soon as
a contactor is closed, the circuit is broken by the interlock
on the contactor. This ensures the completion of each step
before the next step is taken. A dashpot for producing
a time element is provided on the plunger of each lifting
coil, which may be adjusted independently of the holding
coil. The holding coil is in series with a pair of motors, and
is on the earth side. The general scheme of operation is
that, as each resistance contactor closes, it transfers its
operating coils from a lifting to a holding circuit, and also
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Fig. 10. —Outline of Main Train Motors.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


connects the operating coil of the contactor for the succeeding
step.
These control circuit connections are obtained by means
of interlock switches, which are. attached to the contactor
frames, and are operated by the movement of (he contact
arm. At the same time that the resistance contactor is
closed the current limit relay, which is provided with a lift-
ing coil in the contactor circuit, rises and interrupts the lift-
ing circuit to prevent further progression of the contactors
until it again drops. If the motor current flowing through
the series coil of the relay is sufficiently high, the relay will
breaker. Control fuses are inserted in the control circuits
between the cutout switch and operating coils <A the con-
tactors, reverser, and line switch. These fuses are located
on the switchboard, and are enclosed in the same box con-
taining the cutout switch. Their function is to protect the
individual circuits in which they are inserted.
The pantograph cutout switch is enclosed in the same
box as the control cutout switch. The function of this switch
is to control the supply of current to the operating solenoids
of the magnet valve, and a defective pantograph, after being
lowered, may be cut out by opening this switch.
Fif h 11.—Characteristic Curve, Main Train Motors.
not immediately drop, and in this manner the automatic cur-
rent limiting feature is secured.
With the automatic control the “bridge” connection is
used for making the transition from series to parallel of
the motors. The “ bridge” connection permits a continuous
torque being exerted by the motors throughout the range of
steps, there being no cessation of tractive effort in passing
from series to parallel.
Control Cutout Switch. —The control cutout switch is a
six-point switch mounted on the switchboard. It consists
of a set of copper contacts mounted on an insulated drum,
and two sets of fingers fastened to the switchboard. It is
provided for disconnecting from the train cable, the master
control circuit to the contactors, reverser, and line circuit
■ Pantograph Collector Operating Switch.—One of these is
provided per motor coach, and is mounted in the motorman’s
compartment above the controller. This is provided for the
electro-pneumatic operation of all pantograph collectors in
the train.
The switch receives its energy from the master control
switch. The handle, when moved to the right, energises
the magnet coils of the valves which control the upward
movement of the collectors. When moved to the left, it
energises the magnet coils of the valves which control the
downward movement of the collectors.
Pantograph Operating Valve, Fig. 12. —One of these is
provided for each motor coach, and is located in the motor-
man’s compartment at the right-hand side of the controller.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


This valve is of the electro-pneumatic type, and is provided for
the control of collectors. The valve consists of a solenoid coil
and plunger with an air valve attachment. The so'enoid coils
are connected to wires in the train cable to provide for the
control of the collectors through the train and receive their
energy from the collector operating switch. In addition,
this valve can also be operated manually.
Fig. 12. —Pantograph Operating Valve.
The potential relay is provided with one coil, which is
connected across the 1500 volt circuit through suitable re-
sistance. If for any reason the main current supplied to
any car is interrupted due to the pantograph on that par-
ticular car passing over a section insulator, etc., this relay
will then open the master control circuit on that car. When
the current is restored the relay will close and again
complete the master control circuit. The contactors on
the car affected will pick up in their proper sequence just
as if the motorman had thrown the controller handle to the
“off” position, and immediately returned it to its original
position.
The Switchboard, Fig. 13, is located in the motor-
man’s compartment, and has mounted thereon the fol-
lowing apparatus: —1500 volt switch for controlling the
air compressor, switch for controlling the dynamotor, main
control switch with fuse, main lighting switch with fuse,
dynamotor bus line switch with fuse, compressor cutout
switch, current limit relay, field shunting relay, control cut-
out switch' with fuses, pantograph cutout switch with fuses,
dynamotor bus line couplers, dynamotor jumper, ammeter
shunt.
In addition to material furnished with the master control
and motor control apparatus, the following material goes
towards the make up of a complete motor coach equipment:—
Air Compressor. The air compressor consists of
a duplex pump driven through a gear and pinion by
a motor which is supplied with current at 1500 volt.
The compressor furnishes air for the operation of the
air brakes and the pantograph collector. The air compressor
governor is a pneumatically operated switch which controls
the operation of the air compressor so as to keep the pressure
of air in the main reservoir between certain fixed limits.
It consists essentially of a single pole switch of the con-
tactor type, operated by means of a rubber diaphragm, piston,
and a set of levers. The construction of the governor is such
that air does not pass through or come into contact with the
operating mechanism, but is restricted to a chamber below
the diaphragm ; hence troubles resulting from moisture due to
condensation are eliminated.
The movable parts of all the air compressor governors
in a train are connected to ground. The stationary parts
are connected to what is known as the “ balance wire ” in
the control cable. The balance wire is connected to the
energising coils of the compressor relay contactors in
the train, the positive side of which is connected
to the main 1500 volt circuit. Therefore, when any
governor in a train closes, it completes the circuit of all the
energising coils of the compressor relay contactors, closing
same, which, in turn, complete the circuit for all the air
compressors in the train. This insures all, the air compres-
sors working together, the work of same therefore being
uniformly divided. Once they start they will continue to
operate until the last air governor in the train opens up.
This will break the ground for the compressor relay con-
tactors, which, in turn, will also open up.
The dynamotor furnishes current ; t 750 volts for
the master control and train lighting circuits. A single
field and armature is provided on the dynamotor with
two identical armature windings and commutators. A
shunt field is provided for excitation, and the two armature
windings are in series across the 1500 volt circuit. The
low voltage load current is tapped from the centre of the
series field winding connected between the armatures. The
series field winding between the two armatures is provided
to limit the current at starting. Part of the load current
is drawn from the line through the first armature, and one-
half of the series field turns as it flows to the load circuit,
and part is drawn through the second armature, which is
acting as a generator, and consequently flowing in the oppo-
site direction to that of the current of the first half, through
the second half of the series field turns. This arrangement
of circuits enables the dynamotor to be switched directly
Fig. 13.—Train Switch Board.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


across the 1500 volt supply without the intervention of
starting resistance.
Current from the dynamotor is sufficient for the control
circuit of one motor coach and one trailer coach of an eight-
coach train, and, in addition, supplies the lighting circuits,
and is distributed throughout this unit by means of the dyna-
motor bus line.
Hand Pump. —All motor coaches are equipped with a
hand operated pump to supply air for raising the pantograph
in case the air supply should be exhausted, as would be the
case after a train had been out of service. The pump is
located in the guard’s van under the seat. Provision is made
by means of a three-way cock for connecting a special emer-
gency reservoir directly to the operating cylinder of the col-
lector. The hand pump is provided in order to obviate the
necessity of a motorman in any way coming into close con-
tact with a pantograph collector.
Safety Devices. —The handle of the master controller is
so arranged that, in the event of the motorman becoming in-
capacitated and releasing the handle, it automatically moves
to the "off” position, cutting off power, and opening an air
brake pilot valve, which, in turn, applies the air brakes.
A trip valve is fitted on the left hand leading axle box
of every motor and driving trailer car in such a position as
to be operated by a train stop arm interlocked with the
signal (page 54, Fig. 9). In the event of the signal being at
“danger,” this train stop arm is raised into a position where
it engages with the trip -valve, and in the event of the train
passing the signal at “danger,” the brakes are applied and
the power is cut off from the train.
The control governor is situated in the motorman’s com-
partment near the roof. It consists of a pneumatically
operated switch in the circuit of the master control. Its action
is such that if the air pressure in the brake train pipe is
below fifty pounds, this switch opens the master control
circuit, and it is not then possible to move the train in
either direction. When the air pressure is raised to the cor-
rect value this switch closes. The control governor works
in conjunction with the trip'valve described above.
All the switches for auxiliary circuits are totally en-
closed. The fuses for protecting these circuits are mounted
on the same base as the switch in a separate compartment.
The switch handles are interlocked in such a manner with the
covers of the fuse compartment that it is impossible to attempt
to remove a fuse while the switches are in the “closed”
position, thereby protecting employees from coming into
contact with any live parts.
All wiring for both the main and auxiliary circuits is
run in steel conduit, each wire being in an individual con-
duit, thus ensuring protection and reliability in the operation
of the apparatus.
The general arrangement of the wiring connections for
both main and auxiliary apparatus is shown in the accom-
panying diagram. (See Fig. 14.)
wm/un diagram for Moron Cars
Fig. 14. —Wiring Diagram for Motor Gars.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Fig. I. —Tensioning Structure Spanning Six Tracks.
Permanent Way.
There are approximately 340 single track miles, including
sidings, in the Melbourne suburban railway system.
A few branch lines, such as those to Kew, Ashburton, Deep-
dene and Fawkner, are single track lines. Each route is gen-
erally double track, the principal exceptions being from North
Melbourne to South Kensington on the Williamstown line,
and from South Yarra to Caulfield, which arc four-track routes;
and the Heidelberg to Eltham line, which is single track.
Over the Flinders-street Viaduct, which connects the Northern
and Western systems with Flinders-street terminus, there are
four tracks. These four tracks feed two suburban tracks
through Spencer-street station, • eventually joining up with
one four-track and two two-track routes from North Mel-
bourne.
Tracks which run parallel for any distance may be taken
for construction purposes to represent a route, and on this
basis the approximate disposition of tracks is as follows.: —
• 3.15 miles 6 track route.
5-36 „ 4 „
2.23 „ 3 » »
110 a 2 ~ ~
33 n 1 a a
36 „ Single track miles of siding approximately.
Rails used for the track construction are “T” section,
100 lbs. per yard on inner area, and 80 lbs. per yard on outer
area. Fishplates are angle type 30m. long, with six lin. bolts
at each joint. Rails are secured by }i'm. square dogspikes to
hardwood sleepers of redgum, ironbark or box, dimensioned
9ft. oin. x loin, x 5m., and spaced 2ft. loin, at intermediate
sleepers, and ift. Sin. joints. Ballast is broken metal
gauge, the approximate depth under sleepers being loin.
Much work was required in improving joints and reshaping,
cleaning and draining ballast to fit the lines for electric
operation.
The line between Sandringham and Broadmeadows, which
may be taken as typical of the system, contains a maximum
grade of 2 per cent. Between North Melbourne and Broad-
meadows, a distance of approximately 9 miles, the average
grade is .85 per cent. The maximum permissible speed on
this section is 52 m.p.h., with restrictions at junctions to suit
train operations and restrictions on curves as follows: — •
Maxim. Rate of Speed.
Radius of Curves in Chains. Miles per Hour.
Less than 8 10
8 to 9 .. 15
More than g „ 11 . . 20
„ n „ 14 25
„ 14 ~18 .. 30
18 „ 22 . . 35
„ 22 „26 . . 40
.. ~ 26 ~ 30 . . 45
~ 30 „ 35 • • 50
Practically all curves have 150 ft. casement approach and
a maximum track superelevation of 3b-.
'Brack gauge is sft. 3m., and double tracks are centred lift.
Bin., with provision for increase of this dimension. Minimum
structure clearance above platform level on straight track is
7ft. oin. from centre of track. This dimension is increased
to Bft. oin. on 12 chain curves. The minimum curve on
Flinders Street Viaduct is 9 chains radius, but very few curves
are sharper than 12 chains radius. On the inner area there
is a large percentage of curve track, on the outer area the
lines are fairly level and straight.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


OVERHEAD CONSTRUCTION.
The original scheme drawn up by the consulting engineer
in the year 1908 provided for the distribution of power at
800 volts from the sub-stations to the train motors by means
of a conductor rail, but in the scheme finally recommended
the overhead system of contact wire was adopted as the most
suitable means of providing connection between the train
motors and the power supply. The general scheme of over-
head construction provides for the flexible support of the
contact wire above the track by means of a catenary wire,
and energy is transmitted to the motors at 1500 volts direct
current. The catenary wire in turn is carried on steel struc-
tures designed to meet the varying conditions that are met
with at different points along the track. The catenary wire,
and the contact wire that is suspended from it, are divided
into sections along the track. The catenary wire and the
contact wire in the respective sections are connected together
and form one circuit. The various sections into which the
overhead line is divided are insulated one from the other and
fed through cables laid from the nearest sub-station.
Structures Supporting Overhead Wiring. The sup-
ports for the simple catenary system consist of pairs
of tensioning anchor structures situated approximately
3000 ft. apart, with light intermediate structures spaced at
300 ft. intervals on tangent track, and at lesser intervals on
curved track, to suit the radius of curve. On curve work with
single and two-track construction light pull-off masts arc
located between the intermediate supporting structures. An
idea of the magnitude of the forces to be provided for in de-
signing the structure may be obtained from the following
facts:—Each contact wire normally has a tension of about 2500
lb., and each catenary wire about 3000 lb. The pressure of the
wind on the wires (at the wind velocity provided for) amounts
to 1400 lb. per two-track structure at normal spacing. To
this must be added wind pressure (either across or along
track) on the structure itself, and any signals, switches, etc.,
carried by it.
Figure 1 shows a tensioning structure spanning six
tracks and having 12 wires “dead-ended” on to it. The
bridge booms consist of Sin. steel channels braced together
with angles. The posts of the masts are angles 6in. x 6in. x
Fig. S.—Standard Two-Track Tangent Intermediate Structure.
yin., and lighter angles form the bracing. The masts are
bolted down to concrete foundations sufficiently massive to
give stability.
Pulleys for tensioning the contact wires are attached to
the bottom boom. Chains, connected to the contact wires,
pass round these pulleys and carry weights which may be
seen within the mast at the right-hand end. The catenaries
arc rigidly anchored to the top bridge boom. Tension struc-
tures for fewer tracks are of similar type, but lighter. For
instance, the two track tension structure has 6in. channels in
the bridge and x 3}4in. angles in the mast.
Fig. 3. — Tico-Tmck Supporting Structures for Curved Track.
Figure 2 shows the standard two-track tangent in-
termediate structure. The masts each consist of two chan-
nels 6in. x 2yim. (with flanges turned toward each other),
laced together with a steel ribbon or flat 2in. x x / 2 in., which is
bent to corrugated form and riveted to the webs of the
channels, which are about 2ft. apart at the base, but taper to
gin. at the top. The masts are embedded for about 7ft. in
concrete bases, designed to give stability by the lateral pres-
sure of the earth against the sides of the base.
The bridge also consists of 6in. channels with ribbon
lacing, but in this case the flanges are turned outward to faci-
litate attachment to the masts by means of the clamping
angles seen in the photo., which allow of variation in the
position of the bridge on the masts.
The two-track supporting structure for curved track is
shown in Fig. 3. The masts are similar to those used on
straight track, but have /in. channels. The bridge is similar
to that just described, with the addition of a central vertical
composed of two 4m. channels braced to the ends of the bridge
by round tie-rods. This vertical member carries the pull-off
rod holding the contact wire to the curve of the inner track.
The attachment to the insulator between the pull-off rod and
Ihe vertical member is hinged, giving vertical flexibility to the
contact wire- Between the two supporting structures in
Fig. 3 is seen a pull-off mast, with its cantilever, pull-off arm.
This gives no vertical support to the catenary and contact
wires, but merely holds them to the curve of the track.
Where a number of tracks are spanned the bridges arc
generally made of the trussed type shown in Fig. 4. The
top boom of the bridge is composed of two 6in. channels with
ribbon lacing, the verticals each of two 4m. channels, and the
other members of round tie-rods, with turn-buckles for adjust-
ment where required. On curves a larger number of verticals
may be used for attachment of pull-offs. Thus in 'Fig. 6
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Fig. 4- —Intermediate Struct are Spanning Six Tracks.
Fig. s. — Two-Track Structure Converted to Carry Signals.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE


may be seen several four-track bridges, each with three ver-
ticals. The masts in Fig. 4 are similar to the standard, but
have Sin. channels.
Special Structures.—As the best place for signals is on
a bridge over the tracks governed, the structures carrying
overhead equipment have, in many cases, been designed or
adapted to discharge the additional duty of signal bridges.
The tension bridge shown in Fig. 1 is designed to carry
signals by adding certain standard attachments.
Fig. 5 shows a standard two-track tangent structure
converted to carry signals, by the addition of an extra channel
boom about Bft. below the ordinary one. To the two booms
is clamped a length of sin. pipe which now forms the standard
semaphore post. A platform supported on the lower boom
is reached by means of a ladder attached to the mast.
Fig. 6 shows a combined signal and overhead equipment
structure spanning four tracks. Each mast is composed of
four angles with angle bracing, and the bridge is of similar
construction. A railed platform on the bridge is reached by
a ladder attached to one mast. Two semaphore arms and a
special lamp signal may be attached to one post, and access is
provided to each by subsidiary ladders from the main platform
to smaller railed platforms, as shown suspended below the
bridge. Protective screens are provided in all cases to pre-
vent workmen from accidentally coming in contact with con-
ductor wires.
In some locations such as that shown in Fig. 7 (on Flin-
ders Street Viaduct), road traffic requirements and the
presence of buildings under the viaduct prevented the masts
being carried down to the ground, and they were therefore
attached to brackets fixed to the girders. In other positions
on the viaduct the space available at the side of the track is
restricted, especially as the sharp curve on the track necessi-
tates greater clearance between structures and the track. The
masts have therefore been designed of minimum width
at right angles to the track. The knee-braced construc-
tion adopted gives increased rigidity in this plane, and by
reducing the bending stress at the foot of the mast simplifies
the connection and also reduces the excess loading on the
viaduct girders.
Fig. 6.—Combined Signal and Overhead Equipment
Structure.
The supporting structure in the foreground of Fig. 7
has masts composed of two Sin. channels, while the bridge has
two 6in. channels with light angle bracing.
The combined overhead equipment and signal structure, a
little farther down the track, is supported by similar but
heavier brackets, each consisting of two steel joists riveted
to the under side of the outermost girder and the next inner
girder, and projecting to a sufficient distance to carry the mast
clear of the footway flanking the viaduct.
On each side of North Melbourne station, where the
spans need to be great and the wiring is complicated on
account of the number of junctions and crossings, the type of
construction shown in Fig. 8 was adopted.
Fig. 7.—Structures on Flinders St. Viaduct.
These structures, though not of the conventional arch
form, are from the point of view of structural design, two-
hinged arches, in that the reactions at the supports are not
vertical, but inclined. Change of temperature induces stresses
which must be allowed for. The bridge tends to expand on a
hot day, but the points of support are at a fixed distance apart,
and thus an inward reaction is imposed on the lower ends of
the legs, causing the centre of the bridge to rise a little. The
calculation of the stresses under the various vertical and hori-
zontal forces (both across and along track) was an intricate
matter, and was further complicated by provision being made
for carrying signals bracketed out from the bridge. The sig-
nals, with their equipment, involve a load of about 6 tons.
The span varies, the maximum being 120 ft., and a single struc-
ture may carry the overhead equipment load of 13 tracks on an
[8 chain curve. The under side of the bridge is 30ft. above
rail level, and the bridge is 7ft. deep, by 4ft. oin. wide.
Each of the four main chords of the bridge is composed of a
pair of angles 4m. x 4m. x reducing to x x
3-Bin. in the legs. The legs are splayed from 4ft. width at
bridge level to 6ft. at the base. The bracing is of angles vary-
ing from 3j4in x 3/4in. x ]/i in. to x 2in. x 5-i6in.
The plated panel in the legs provides room for variation
in the level of the span wire, which acts as a pull-off in holding
the contact wires to the curves of the tracks.
The 120 ft. span structure weighs about 14 tons.
Supports on sidings, where the number of siding tracks
are few, are provided by structures similar to the light inter-
mediate structures employed over the siding and main sub-
urban lines.
The yard at Flinders Street station, where the suburban
rolling stock is stored, cleaned and inspected, has six two-
track main lines passing through it. Between the main lines
are groups of sidings varying from five to twelve tracks deep.
The sidings on each side of the main lines represent about 30
miles of track that is used for storing trains till required for
service on the adjacent main lines. In this yard the track
catenaries, which are much lighter than those serving main
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


tracks, are carried by transverse catenary wires anchored to
rigid structures which span the main passenger tracks. Fig.
9. This type of construction is shown more fully in Fig. 1
on folder facing page 3.
Connecting Structures to Earth.—All overline bridges,
signal bridges to which line work is attached, and overhead
equipment structures are bonded to the track rails through a
wire is fixed, while the contact wire itself is suspended from
the catenary wire. (See Fig. 11.)
On the main tracks the catenary wire consists of a
stranded hard drawn copper cable .375 square inch, or .25
square inch cross section, joined up to each supporting struc-
tuie by means of a bracket insulator, giving double insulation
to earth. The centre supporting insulator is of diabola shape,
Fig. B.—Pin Arch Structures at North, Melbourne.
paper spark gap by means of a copper cable. The paper is
placed between two aluminium discs. One disc is placed
against the steel structure, while the other is connected to
the end of the bonding cable. A bronze cap, bolted to the
steel work through an insulated bolt, holds the aluminium
discs in position. A rubber washer is placed between the cap
and the face of the steel work. Under normal conditions the
paper is sufficient to insulate the structures from the rails, and
leakage of current through imperfectly insulated structures is
reduced to a minimum. If the insulation between the support-
ing structures and the overhead wires breaks down, the paper
spark gap is punctured and connected to the nearest rail, thus
and a gunmetal collar is provided to fit around the porcelain
midway between the two ends. The collar itself is grooved,
the catenary wire resting in the groove, and is thus supported
on the collar. The catenary wire is secured in this position
by passing a piece of wire under the insulator, each end of
the wire forming this underloop being clamped by means of
U bolts to the catenary. The undcrloop is composed of
wire of the same cross section as the catenary wire. The
catenary wire is normally supported every 300 ft. At the
centre of this span it assumes a 10ft. pin. sag at a tempera-
ture of bo deg. F., with a maximum tension of about 3200 lb.
At intervals of about 3000 ft. the wire is anchored to the
Fig. 9.—Cross Span Construction—Flinders St. Yard, showing Knee Braced Supporting
Structures over Main Suburban Tracks.
giving a return, of comparatively low resistance, to the sub-
station. This precaution is necessary as a means of limiting
the unbalancing of current through the impedance bonds which
connect the signalling track circuits referred to in the article
on automatic signalling.
Catenary Wire.—To these various structures a catenary
structures illustrated in Fig, i. The simple catenary
wire is arranged in a staggered formation between support-
ing structures, so as to give uniform wear on the pantograph
collecting strips.
Low overline bridges are numerous on the system, but
the catenary construction has been retained throughout, in
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Fi<j. 10.—Method of Supporting Catenary Wire under
Bridges.
preference to the use of rigidly supported collecting
wires or a rigid collecting skate. The liability to
arcing has thus been reduced to a minimum,
and the pantograph is not subjected to excessive wear
at high speeds. On lines that will continue to use steam
locomotives after the service of electric trains has commenced
a special support is provided to carry the catenary under low
bridges, with the object of placing the supporting insulators
away from the direct blast of the engine. In these cases sup-
porting insulators are erected on the bridge structure above
each side of the track. A T-section bridges the track, and is
supported at each end on an insulator. The catenary wire is
clamped to the T-section at a point above the centre of the
track. Fig. No. 10 shows this method of supporting the
catenary wire under bridges.
The catenary construction on sidings is similar to the
main line work, but a 7/9 gauge galvanised stranded Siemens-
Martin steel catenary is employed in place of the copper cable
used for the catenary on main line work. The contact wire
is supported from, and directly below, the catenary wire by
means of bronze wire droppers 3-i6in. diameter. The upper
ends of the droppers are bolted to the catenary wire by means
of a clamp, the lower end carries six inches of chain, termi-
nating in a ring. This method of support is designed with the
object of securing flexibility to the contact wire and its free
vertical movement. The dropper connections are measured
and cut in lengths to give a level line at 70 deg. F. To facili-
tate this work of preparing the line for erection a special
dropper table is provided, furnished with the necessary adjust-
ments to allow for grading in the line where such takes place.
The droppers and the necessary slider bars that are made
up in the contractors’ store are erected on the lines without
further adjustment. The catenary supporting wire is stressed
well within its elastic limit. In hot weather it sags to the
extent expected, and at lower temperatures returns to its
original sag. Measurements taken on the wire, which has
gone through a few seasonal changes, show that there has
Fiy. 12.—Special Line Work near Essendon.
been no tendency for the wire to progressively increase in sag
when subjected to recurring high temperatures. The contact
wire is well aligned and responds uniformly in vertical move-
ment to changes of temperature. In Melbourne the tem-
perature varies between 27 deg. F. and 175 deg. F., sun
temperature.
Fig. -11.—Some Features of Overhead Construction Graphically Represented.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Contact Wire.—Over the main line tracks the contact wire
for normal service consists of hard drawn grooved copper of
.25 sq. in. cross sectional area. It is connected to the catenary
wire at intervals of about 600 ft. by means of a flexible copper
cable of .075 sq. in. cross section. The catenary and the con-
tact wires together give an equivalent of .5 sq. in. of copper,
and they form the only feeders along the tracks.
Fig. 13.—Special Line Work near Sandnngham.
The contact wire is erected at a minimum height of 18ft.
above rail level over grade crossings, but the height over the
main suburban tracks is 16ft. 6in. at 70 deg. F. Under low
bridges the wire is arranged at a minimum height of 14ft. 6in.
The overline bridges have a minimum clearance of 15ft. 6in.
from rail level to the lowest bridge member, at points imme-
diately above the collecting surface of the pantograph. There
remain but twelve inches vertical clearance between the col-
lecting surface of the contact wire and the underside of the
bridge. Country rolling stock reaches to a maximum height of
14ft. 2in., leaving 4m. clearance between the contact wire and
the ventilators on coaches of country trains.
The contact wire is erected in 3000 ft. lengths, and auto-
matic tensioning is ensured by attaching cast iron weights to
each end of the wire. The wire is carried over pulleys at the
tension structures. The weights referred to hang within the
masts, and are adjusted to tension the wire to about 2500 lb.,
as described under track structures, and as illustrated
in Fig. 11. The contact wire is anchored to the
catenary wire at a distance of 1/3 and 2/3 respectively from
the tension structures, taken in the direction of normal train
movement. Movement of the wire, due to changes of tem-
perature, is free to take place on either side of the connection
that anchors the contact wire to the catenary wire. That this
movement may not be restricted by the dropper connections,
by means of which the contact wire is suspended from the
catenary, connection to the droppers is made through brass
bars fixed to the contact wire by means of clamps, one at each
end of the bar. The bars stand above and parallel with the
contact wire, and receive the rings that are carried at the end
of the flexible chains on the lower end of the droppers. The
brass bars vary in length from a maximum of 26m. at tension-
ing structure to Sin. at places nearer the anchoring point. The
flexible chain is connected direct to the contact wire through-
out the anchoring span, no slider bar intervening. The chain
connection permits free vertical movement and secures flexi-
bility to the contact wire. At tensioning points two termi-
nating structures are employed, placed iSoft. apart. The
contact wires from either direction overlap this 180 ft. span.
The overlapping wires are arranged 15m. apart horizontally,
and the pantograph makes connection with both contact wires
for a distance of about 15ft. on either side of the centre of the
overlapping span. From the centre of this span each contact
wire rises gradually to its automatic tensioning attachment
and the supporting catenaries are terminated on the tensioning
structures at points vertically above the contact wires which
they support. Feeding cables can be connected to the wires
at either of the terminating structures, and at tensioning points
where sectioning is required the arrangement gives a 15m. air
clearance between wires and switches. Where sectioning is
not required the overlapping wires are connected by means of
jumper cables.
At junction work the contact wires are not crossed at the
pantograph level. Fig. No. 12 and Fig. No. 13 illustrate
the method adopted to meet this condition. The individual
pull-off arms employed at the junctions shown permit of the
use of air sections between the various wires. In the Fig. No.
13 an insulating distance clamp is used to hold the two con-
tact wires together at the centre of the scissors crossing.
With the exception of this distance clamp each wire in
the junction work shown is independently held, and is cap-
able of adjustment without affecting the other wires.
At the approaches to Flinders Street Viaduct and through
extended junction work, where the contact wire makes many
sharp turns to avoid crossing at the pantograph running level,
the flexibility of the numerous pull-offs act as automatic ten-
sioning devices, the contact wire is rigidly anchored, and no
provision is made for its accumulative movement.
This construction is shown in Fig. No. 14. It will be
noticed that slider bars, and, to a large extent, individual pull-
offs, are dispensed with, while cross steady wires are connected
to the contact wires through triangular clips.
In siding construction also the contact wire is rigidly
anchored, and the flexible droppers are connected to it direct,
the length of chain being dispensed with on the lower end of
the dropper, and placed between the catenary wire and the
dropper wire on the upper end of the dropper. This arrange-
ment is rendered necessary because the contact wire on sidings
is lighter than the corresponding \vire above main line tracks,
and tends to rise under the influence of the pressure exerted
by a pantograph adjusted to suit the conditions of the main
line working. The lifting of the contact wire would re-
sult in the chains falling below the wire, where they would
foul the pantograph.
Fig. H. — Cross-span Construction between Balanced Supporting
Structures.
ELECTRIFICATION OF TEE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


The contact wire on sidings is of .125 sq. in., hard-drawn,
grooved copper, and is tensioned to a maximum of about
2400 lb.
Where the contact wire passes under low cross-line
bridges; where the main line construction and the construction
on sidings meet, or where, for other reasons, it is necessary
Fig. lo. —.1 Part of Yardmmter’s Bridge—Yard Cross-span
Construction in Foreground..
to vary the height of the contact wire above rail level, the wire
is carefully graded, that the pantograph may pass under any
part of the line without shock. Under low bridges, where the
construction is as illustrated in Fig. No. 10, it is necessary
that the vertical movement of the contact wire be limited to
2in., with the normal upward pressure of the pantograph be-
tween 25 and 30 lb., and a speed of 50 miles per hour. Under
these conditions a maximum grade of ift. in 150 ft. is adopted,
but, where possible, a grade of ift. in 250 ft. is used. And a
grade of ift. in 100 ft. may be used, under special circum-
stances, where the speed of trains is limited. Where section
insulators are introduced into the line this condition of smooth
running of the pantograph is met by using insulators de-
signed to gradually transfer the pantograph contact from the
flexible contact wire to the rigid surface of the insulator at a
grade of lin 150. Section insulators are only used where the
speed of trains is less than 25 miles per hour. On the main
lines air spaces are employed between sections, and the over-
lapping arrangement of the contact wires, previously de-
scribed, admits of the gradual transfer of the pantograph from
one section to the next.
Construction in Car Shed.—The contact wire is erected
above nine of the tracks, through the repair shops at
Jolimont, and the catenary construction is continued into
the building. The catenary insulators are spaced at intervals
of about 20ft., and attached direct to the roof members. The
contact wire itself is erected at a height of 17ft. 6in. from the
rail level.
SECTIONING.
For sectioning purposes the overhead wires are divided
up into sections, which extend between sub-stations,
as shown in Fig. 2 on folder facing page 3. These
sections are subdivided into sub-sections, which extend be-
tween sectioning points. Terminal tracks and sidings leading
from sub-sections are divided into branch sections. Through
extended junction work, where trains cross many different
tracks, in following their route, the overhead wires over a
number of tracks are connected together and are treated as
one section, othewise all routes are, so far as possible, sepa-
rately fed. The up and down tracks of all routes are sepa-
rately fed. Cables from the sub-stations are brought direct
to the tensioning structures, in the vicinity of the sub-stations,
where they are connected to the catenary wire. Two cables
per track are employed in this way, giving a separate supply to
the catenary system in both directions from the sub-station.
At special junction work, where several routes lead off
from a limited number of tracks, the junction work is sec-
tioned at both ends, so as to limit the effect of trouble which
may occur on any one route. On two-track routes the up
and down tracks are normally parellel at approximately
rnid point between substations. On two-track routes, fed
from one end, sections of the line on the up and down tracks
are normally paralleled at the non-fed end.
On outlying lines sectioning points are employed from two
to three miles apart.
At the extensive Flinders Street yard special attention
has been paid to the question of sectioning. The sectioning
point is at the yard-master’s bridge, Fig. No. 15, where the
siding groups are divided up into insulated track lengths, and
fed through separate switches. A small part of the bridge is
screened off, and here all operating and switch locking boxes
are located. A ’bus bar supplies the energy for siding opera-
tions ; the ’bus bar itself is fed from the Jolimont substation
through the catenary and contact wire over a special track.
Types of Section Insulators Employed. Fig. No. 16
shows the porcelain continuous feed section insulator, for .125
sq. in. contact wire, as used in siding and, occasionally, in
cross-over track. Continuous feed to the pantograph is se-
cured throughout the length of the insulator by means of the
runners located on the sides of the insulator.
The continuous feed, wood, section insulator for .25 sq. in.
contact wire, sometimes employed in cross-over track work, is
shown in Fig. No. 17. The end runners at the approach to the
insulator are of light U-shaped metal pieces about 3ft. in
length. The runners surround and are attached to the contact
wire, which terminates in a cone; the cone is pinned to the
end casting on the insulator. The side runners are hinged to
this end casting, and are free to rise with the contact wire;
gradually transferring the collecting pantograph from the flex-
ible contact wire to the rigid surface of the insulator. Hard
Australian Tuart wood, well seasoned, has been used in the
construction of these insulators.
Five switches are employed for the standard arrangement
for sectioning two-track line work; one switch each feeds the
two directions of each track to a ’bus. The fifth switch is
employed as a paralleling switch for separating the two tracks.
Switches of an outdoor, horn break, type are employed to
secure sectioning between sub-stations, and between sub-sta-
tions and terminals. These switches are mounted on tension-
ing structures and are actuated by a handle conveniently
placed.
Fig. 10. —Contact Wire, Porcelain, Continuous, Section
Insulator.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Fig. IS.—Single Horn Break Siding Switch.
I he handle projects from a locking box, and is connected
to the switch through an actuating rod. Provision is made, in
the box, for locking the switch at the in or out position.
The horn break switch consists of two blades, with a
quick acting plunger, connected between spring horns. When
the switch is opened the double blade leaves the main switch
jaws before the plunger connection between the horns is re-
leased with a quick spring action. By this means the arc result -
ing from opening the circuit on load is finally broken at the
use of cleaners and other workmen, is used also as an anchor-
ing point for many siding overhead equipment wires, and is
conveniently situated as a sectioning point for the tracks
passing beneath it. 'All the switches controlling the sidings
in Flinders Street yard are mounted on this bridge, as shown
in Fig. 15.
The switches in the sub-stations and the sections con-
trolled by these switches are numbered with corresponding
figures; the sub-sections and branch section switches are num-
bered to correspond with the numbers of the sections on which
they are placed, and the sub-section and branch section to
which they arc directly connected. The numbers on the
section paralleling switches correspond with the numbers
on the sections which they parallel, and the sub-sections
through which they are paralleled. This system of numbering
gives particulars of the lines affected by the switch, and, with
a general knowledge of the location of sections, gives infor'
mation regarding the position of the switch on the lines.
Sectioning diagram of a portion of the lines is shown in Fig.
No. 2 on folder facing page 3.
Tramway Crossings.—At points where the electric tram-
way crosses the railway lines'special sectioning arrangements
are made. The tramway trolley wire and the railway contact
wire are connected together, and the system thus formed
above the rail crossing is insulated from both the tramway
and railway systems. The insulated portion of wire work over
the crossing can be made alive to either the 1500 volt rail-
way supply or the 500 volt tramway supply. For this purpose
two switches of the circuit breaker type are used; one control-
ling the 500-volt supply for tramway operations, the other
controlling the 1500-volt supply for railway work. The switches
are operated from the signal cabin, and all precautions arc
taken to prevent a circuit being established between the tram-
way and railway wires. To this end the circuit breakers are
arranged to operate in response to the influence of solenoid
coils. If one circuit breaker is closed it opens the circuit
controlling the operating solenoid coil of the other circuit
breaker, making it impossible to operate both breakers at the
same time.
The circuit controlling the solenoid is taken through
contacts to the gate stop lever in the signal cabin; this lever
is interlocked, in the usual way, with the railway signal
levers and the tramway signals, and derails. And the
switches cannot be operated if the signal is against the train
Fig. 17.—Contact Wire, continuous Feed Wood Section Insulator.
spring horns. The live parts of the switch are double insulated
to earth. Fig. 20 represents a group of horn break
switches mounted on a level with the top boom of a tensioning
structure, the operating handles are arranged for working the
switches from a platform on the lower boom of the same struc-
ture. Fig. 18 shows a single switch mounted on the
mast of an intermediate structure and operated from the
■ground level.
At the Flinders Street yard the bridge that has been
erected over the numerous main line and siding tracks, for the
or if the gates arc set to tramway traffic. If a train does
approach the closed gates the 500-volt circuit breaker will
automatically open.
There are installed automatic train stops at a sufficient
distance from the points at which the pantograph would paral-
lel the contact wires over the crossing and the main contact
wire, to pull up a train, travelling at the permissible speed, if it
passes a signal set against it.
The arrangement of circuits is shown in Figure 19,
from which it is seen that the 500-volt circuit breaker is fed
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Fig. 19.
u ELECTRIFICATION OF TUE METROPOLITAN
R RAILWAY SYSTEM OF. MELBOURNE.


Fig. 20. —Groups of Horn Break ; Sectioning Switches mounted
on Tensioning Structures at Tramway Crossing.
through switches from either, or both, tramway overhead
lines. The control circuit is taken through contacts which
are controlled by a relay (500 R.). The relay is controlled,
in turn, by the circuit breaker contact on the gate stop lever,
No. 2, in the signal cabin. The gate stop lever is interlocked
with the tramway signals and derails and the railway signal
levers. The circuit is also passed through contacts on the
track relays, Nos. 12 and 34, track circuits. Before the
circuit breaker can be closed all these contacts must be made.
When a train runs on to the lines it bridges the railway
tracks in the immediate vicinity of the tramway crossing, the
track relays are de-energised, and their contacts placed in the
off position. When all the tracks are cleared the relays auto-
matically close their contacts, and, if the gate stop lever is in
the position that sets the gates for tramway traffic, the ope-
rating circuit of the 500-volt circuit breaker will be complete.
It is the operation of these track relays that opens the 500-volt
circuit breaker if a train runs on to these particular track
cicuits when the gates are set for tramway traffic, thus avoid-
ing the danger of connection between the tramway and rail-
way systems through the pantograph bridging the air space
between the contact wires of the two systems.
The circuit breaker controlling the 1500-volt supply is
fed, through a manually operated horn type switch, from one
of the main contact wires. A resistance is employed to re-
duce the voltage, across the controlling solenoid coil, from
1500 to 750 volts; the circuit passing through contacts con-
trolled by relay, 1500 R., which, in turn, is controlled by the
circuit breaker on the gate stop lever, “made” when the lever
is normal to railway traffic. Interlock of the 1500-volt circuit
breaker is further obtained by leading the control circuit
to two contacts on the 500-volt circuit breaker. These con-
tacts are bridged when the 500-volt circuit breaker is open
and the 1500-volt breaker may be closed, so far as that switch
is concerned. The 500-volt circuit breaker is provided with
an interlock on the 1500-volt breaker in a similar way.
The circuit breakers are of a similar type to those used
in the train equipment. Each is fitted with an overload de-
vice to open the circuit if connection is made between the
tramway and railway wires.
The overload coil of the circuit breaker operates a me-
chanical trip. The main solenoid circuit to be broken at the
re-setting solenoid contacts is carried by the mechanical trip.
The circuit breaker does not require re-setting in case of no
voltage, as it is only tripped in the event of overload or inten-
tional tripping. It opens circuit due to loss of current in the
solenoid coil, but picks up when the supply is resumed.
The overload device is re-set by the operation of a
locked-up switch.
Both circuit breakers are provided with knife switches
between the breakers themselves* and the crossing wires, in
order that the service can be maintained on one system if
the circuit breaker on the other system is under repair.
Where control circuits enter the signal cabin high tension
fuses are installed in the relay box outside.
If the circuit breaker does not respond to the movement
of levers in the cabin the signalman is informed of the fact
by a lamp placed in his cabin.
The crossing of the tramway and railway contact wires
is arranged through a channel frame work. The tramway
trolley is attached to the inside of a channel section, 3m. x
extending for 3ft. The channel trough guides the
Fig. 21. — Two-Track Tensioning Structure.
trobey wheel, and ensures that the train pantograph slides
clear from the tramway wire. The railway contact wire
terminates on the framework on a level with the bottom of
channel flanges. Due to the crossing wires not being at
right angles, the railway pantograph gradually passes diago-
nally over the channel trough.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Automatic and Power Signalling on the Melbourne
Suburban Railways.
By
As an important adjunct to the Electrification of the Mel-
bourne Suburban Railways, it was from the outset realised
that successful traffic operation would largely depend upon
safe and expeditious signalling. Under Electrification con-
ditions with improved acceleration, increased speed of
trains, and anticipated denser traffic, the signalling problem
demanded careful review.
Early in 1913 the Engineer of Signals of the Victorian
Railways visited the United Kingdom, the Continent, and
America, and made exhaustive enquiry into the various sig-
nalling systems extant, particularly those systems operating
under electric traction, as affording naturally the closest
approximation to Melbourne conditions. After considerable
deliberation, it was decided by the Railways Commissioners
to adopt the Three-positibn Automatic Signalling System,
as used very extensively in America. That the decision was
a correct one has since been borne out by the favourable
comments of the operating staff and the results achieved.
Three-Position Automatic Signal.
The essential difference between this signal (illustrated
by Fig. 1) and the well-known mechanical type of signal
is that it operates in three distinct positions, instead of two,
as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 2, further that the arm
moves upward instead of downward. The horizontal position
is common to both types, and means “STOP,” or “DANGER.”
The three-position arm lifted to 45 deg., “Caution Position,”
means “Proceed prepared to stop at next signal,” and the
arm lifted into the vertical position (termed the Clear posi-
tion) signifies “ Proceed,” without any qualification. In other
Fig. I. — One-arm A utomatic Mast Signal.
words, the “ Clear ” signal means that a driver will not have
to stop at the next signal, though he may, at that point, re-
ceive a cautionary signal.
The electrical arrangements are such that the clear signal
always requires to be preceded by at least the caution aspect
Fig. 2. — Three-Position Signal Aspects.
at the next signal in advance. The series of aspects met
by a driver are shown in Fig. 3. Signal 1 shows “ Clear ”
because there is no necessity to stop at Signal 2, which,
in turn, shows “ Caution,” on account of Signal 3 being in
the “ Stop ” position. Signal 3 is here represented at “ Stop ”
because of a train occupying the section in advance of it.
Fig. 3.—Series of One-arm Aspects.
At night the signal indications are given by coloured
lights, the corresponding aspects being:—
Red, .for “Stop.”
Yellow, for “ Caution.”
Green, for “ Clear ” or “ Proceed.”
In the three aspects of the Automatic Signal (Fig. 2) a
second light, always fed, is shown. This is known as a
“ Marker Light.” It serves as a precaution in the event
of the signal light being extinguished, the “Marker Light”
exhibiting the “Stop” indication. It brings the night aspect
of automatic signals into uniformity with interlocked signals,
which, in the general scheme, are all two-light signals. The
F. M. CALCUTT.
ELECTRIFICATION OF TUE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF. MELBOURNE.


end of the Automatic Signal arm is pointed, which means
that after having stopped at such a signal for a specified
time, the driver is authorised to proceed cautiously into
the next section. The night equivalent for the pointed arm
is two staggered lights; that is, the lights are not arranged
vertically, as in the case of interlocked signals.
From a train-running point of view, three-position sig-
nalling' has a great advantage over the mechanical system,
comprising home and distant signals, in that it enables trains
to follow each other more closely, and, further, defers giving
the “Caution” signal to the latest moment compatible with
Fig. Jf.. —Home and Distant and Three-Position Signals
Compared.
practicable braking. Fig. 4 attempts to illustrate this latter
advantage. In the mechanical system, Distant Signal (1) is
not permitted to be lowered to the “Clear” position unless
home signal (2), starter (3), and advanced starter (4), have
been lowered. If, therefore, the advance starter (4) cannot
be lowered, say, on account of a previous train in the section,
a train passing distant signal (1), travels at reduced speed to
signal (4).
Comparing this with the three-position system shown
immediately below, “Clear” signals are displayed at (1) and
(2) and the train does not reduce speed until signal (3)
is reached; that is, the speed check betwen signals (1) .and
(3) is saved. It may quite well happen that after the train
has passed automatic signals (1) and (2), signal (3) may
operate to the “Clear” position, and so eliminate the check
altogether. This is different from the action of the mechanical
Fig. s. — Two-arm and Low-Speed Mast Signal.
distant signal, which, when passed at danger, always con-
tinues to exercise its speed check throughout the limits of
its control, whether the home signals are clear or not.
Three-position Interlocked Signal.
This is illustrated in Fig. 5, and its aspects are represented
diagrammatically in Fig. 2. It is essentially a two-arm sig-
nal, and is used lor governing movements over points ana
crossings, .briefly, tfle top-aim is a "i\ormal speed" arm,
ana no speea restriction is mvoivea in its use otfler tnan tne
maximum speea lor wflicn tne line is suitaoie.
ihe indication given by tne oottom arm is decidedly re-
strictive, is Known as tfle "medium speea' indication, ana is
employeu particularly lor directing diverging movements over
points or otfler sections ot tfle line wnere only a moderate
speed is peimissime. Un the Victorian Kailways tms arm
limits the speea to 25 miles per hour, bacn arm woncs in
tne "Caution ' (.45 aeg.) ana ‘Clear" (Veitical) positions,
as in the case 01 tfle one-arm automatic signal, tfle complete
series ot aspects and their meanings being given in the dia-
gram. 'i he only aspect tor which both arms are brought into
commission is in the “reduce to medium speed” indication,
which is used lor cautioning the driver that he is approaching
a medium speed signal.
it will be noted that these arms have square ends (in
contradistinction to the pointed arms of the automatic sig-
nal), and at night the two lights—one for each arm—appear
exactly vertical. Ihis denotes an absolute stop signal, which,
unlike the automatic, cannot be passed after waiting a given
time.
A further indication is frequently arranged to be given
by the interlocked signal, 'ihis is known as a Low Speed
Signal, and consists of an electric lamp placed below the lower
of the two arms, and hooded so that it may be seen both by
day and night. The indication is visible at short range only,
and it enjoins the driver to “proceed at low speed” (not ex-
ceeding 10 miles per hour), “and to be prepared to stop short
of any obstruction,” thus it gives no guarantee that the
section is clear. In the American systems, this third indi-
cation is given by a short arm. The Low Speed Light Signal,
in conjunction with semaphores, is a Victorian innovation,
the electric lamp being very simple and cheap in comparison
with the more complex motor mechanism for working the
arms, and which, in addition, must be provided with a lamp
for the night indication.
It will now be gathered that the two-arm signal is really
a speed indicating signal—the top arm for high speed, the
second arm for medium speed, and the yellow light, lowest of
all, for low speed, thus the higher the position of the indi-
cation, the higher the speed permitted. Usually, there can
only be one high speed route, though the second arm and low
speed signal frequently govern two or more routes.
In the mechanical system of route signalling, a separate
arm is provided for each route, consequently, where there is
a multiplicity of routes, the meaning of the groups of arms
becomes increasingly difficult to interpret. The permissible
speed of the train for each route has to be remembered, and
the speed regulated accordingly. A noteworthy instance of
the complication involved in route signalling exists at the
west end of Flinders Street Station, where one group of sig-
nals from one of the. Viaduct lines comprises twelve arms
leading to as many different routes, and another group on
the same bridge leads from a second Viaduct line to seven
routes. In the new system this will be greatly simplified
by the substitution of the two-arm signal for each group. The
speed-signalling system, then, tells the driver not where he is
going, but at what speed he may safely proceed.
The application of the three-position signalling system in-
volved many engineering problems, the drafting of new rules
and regulations, and the thorough education of all concerned
in its operation. The smooth working of the system up to
date is, however, testimony to the manner in which the men
have intelligently studied and quickly adapted themselves to
the new method.
Dwarf Signals.
These are provided for shunting movements, and consist
ELECTRIFICATION OF TEE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


of a small white disc (Fig. 6) placed between tracks slightly
above the ground level, and on which is painted the represen-
tation of a signal arm. By rotation of the disc the painted arm
simulates the movements of the actual arms on mast signals,
Fig. 6.—Dwarf Signal.
the necessary rotation being imparted by the electric motor
mechanism at the back of the disc. In order to minimise the
number of red lights which a driver would see at night in
congested areas, the “Stop” indication of the Dwarf Signal is
purple instead of red. The “Caution” and “Clear” indications,
however, are yellow and green.
Track Circuit Control.
The foundation of the automatic signal system is the
“Track Circuit.” This is an electrical circuit, comprising the
rails throughout the section over which the signal gives per-
mission to proceed. The idea is shown diagrammatically in
Fig. 7. The rails are electrically divided at each signal loca-
Fig. 7.—Diagram of Track Circuit.
tion by substitution of wood blocks for the usual metal fish-
plates. Current from a transformer at one end circulates via
one rail, passes through the signal controlling mechanism,
and thence returns via the other rail to the transformer; this
operates the signal, and continues to operate it so long as
current is maintained; but immediately a train passes the
signal the current from the transformer passes through the
axles of the train and returns through the short circuit rather
than through the higher resistance path of the signal-control-
ling mechanism. Thus the signal is robbed of its operating
energy, and the arm falls to the horizontal “Stop” position.
As soon as the train vacates the section, normal energisation
of the track circuit is restored, and the signal clears again,
for which reason the system is known as a “normal clear”
system. To ensure good and constant conductance across
the joints in the rails, these are bridged by copper bonds.
A strong feature of the track circuit is that its operation
is purely automatic. The human element does not enter in-
to it at all. Track circuits operated by battery current have
been in use on the Victorian Railways for many years. This
type is, however, inadmissible under electrification condi-
tions, as heavy currents used by the trains will be returned
to the generating station over the same rails.
A happy discrimination, however, is possible, and *the
track circuits are arranged to operate with alternating cur-
rent only, and are thus immune to any interference likely to
arise from the traction current. .The insulated joints shown
at the extremities of the track section would, of course, pre-
vent the passage of traction current, and these gaps are
bridged by the addition of Impedance Bonds, which carry the
traction current, but resist the alternating signal current.
The pressure of the alternating track circuit current on
the rails is approximately one half-volt.
It is not practicable to transmit the amount of current
required by the signal motor directly through the track rails,
therefore, a much more sensitive instrument, known as a
Track Relay, is arranged to receive the track circuit current.
The track relay, as a matter of fact, is a small electric motor
operating contacts, which, when closed, permit the passage
of the larger current required for operating the signal motor.
A second relay, known as a signal control relay, is electrically
interlaced with the signal in advance to select the position of
the arm, whether for 45 deg. or vertical.
A small transformer, with its regulating resistance, is
used for feeding alternating current through the rails to the
track relays. This reduces the supply voltage from no volts
to 6 or 3 volts, as required, and thence through regulating re-
sistances to that required to operate the relays.
Signal Operation.
The signal arms are operated electrically by induction
motors at no volts. The motors operate the arms through
a train of gears, the latter running on ball bearings. A com-
paratively heavy current is needed in raising the arm, but once
the required position is attained the arm is retained in that
position by a small current acting upon a solenoid which
latclfes the arm and operating mechanism in position. As
the arm is raised against the force of gravity, the tendency is
for it always to return to the horizontal “Stop” position, by
virtue of its own weight, in the event of any failure of cur-
rent, etc. It is known as “Upper Quadrant” signal, as dis-
tinct from the “Lower Quadrant” signal, which is turned
down for the “Clear” position. The latch device, as well as
the motor, are controlled by the track circuit, consequently,
as soon as a train passes the signal and the rails are short
circuited, the latch is released, and the signal arm steadily
descends by running the gears of the motor backwards.
The track circuit alone, when unoccupied, will operate
the automatic signal to 45 deg. (Caution), but the vertical
(Clear) position is controlled also by current from the next
signal in advance. The signals are electrically lighted by 6
volt half-candle power lamps, the filaments of which are
accurately set at the focal point of the lamp leris, and which
gives excellent illumination for the small amount of energy
expended. Generally speaking, the lamps burn continuously
day and night. Two electric bulbs are provided in each sig-
nal lamp in order to reduce the chance of extinguished lights
through lamps burning out. The lighting current is sup-
plied from a small transformer mounted on the signal mast
close to the lamps.
Light Signals.
A few signals have been installed whereby the indica-
tions are given by coloured lights, both by day and night.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


These consist of electric lamps, with differently coloured
lenses, viz., red, yellow and green, the whole arrangement
being heavily hooded as a shield against daylight, and fitted
with a black background. Higher candle power lamps have
obviously to be used than in lamps for the night indication
only. The efficiency, however, depends greatly upon the
accurate focussing of the lamp rays iri the driver’s direction.
Such signals can be discerned surprisingly well even in bril-
liant sunlight at a range of several hundred yards. The ad-
vantages of light signals are simplicity, cheapness, absence of
moving parts and rapidity of action. A three-indication light
signal (Fig. 8), is giving satisfactory service at South Yarra,
as are also a number of two-indication light signals at Flin-
ders Street. It is intended shortly to control the traffic on
the Flemington racecourse line by light signals.
Automatic Train Stops.
However perfect the signal, absolute safety in train run-
ning ultimately depends upon the driver’s implicit obedience
to the signal indications, and the checking of the human ele-
ment in this respect has been the subject of much thought and
invention. The most practical arrangement yet devised is that
of a trip cock on the engine or leading car of electric train,
connected with the air brake pipe, the valve being normally
closed. On the ground and near the rail is fixed an auto-
matic train stop mechanism consisting of a movable arm
operated by an electric motor, as illustrated by Fig. 9.
Should a train over-run an automatic train stop in the
danger position, the trip on the train strikes the arm of the
train stop, and the air brake pipe is thereby opened, applying
the brake, and bringing the train, to rest. If, however, the
section is clear, the train stop arm is lowered clear of the trip,
which passes freely over it. As a certain distance is neces-
sary to bring a train to rest after having been “tripped,”
automatic signals and train stops are governed by the track
Fig. B. — Three-Position Light Signal.
Fig. '■). —.1 utomatic Train Stop and Trip Gear on Electric
Train.
(through the track circuit) for a sufficient distance beyond
the next signal so that, should that signal be over-run, the
extra section affords' space for bringing the train to rest be-
fore reaching a second train or other obstruction. The idea
is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 10, where signal 1 will
operate only when section A.C. is clear. Signal 2 and its
train stop remains at danger because of a train in the station.
Fir/. JO. —Automatic Train Stop Control.
Should the second train attempt to pass signal 2 it will be
stopped in the overlap B.C.
'The blow which the train stop would receive by engage-
ment with the trip at high speed would be very severe and
considerable effort has been expended in designing an arm
capable of withstanding the impact. There is, however, al-
ways the possibility of train stop arm being carried away by
train obstructions, etc., and as a check upon such contingency
the Victorian Railways have introduced a new feature, in
which a detector rod, coupled to the end of the train stop arm
actuates electrical contacts in the circuit of the signal, and
which cannot be operated unless the train stop arm is intact.
Operation of Points.
It is possible to operate points by electrical power. So
far, this has not been done on the Victorian Railways, al-
though an installation of power worked points would have
been installed at Brighton Beach but for the delays due to
the war. Points continue to be worked manually from in-
terlocking machines. An improved mechanical arrangement
for point operation has been introduced, and by means of an
escapement movement the points are unboltd, switched over,
and reboltcd in the reverse position by a single stroke of one
lever, instead of using separate levers for the bolting and
switching operations. A sensitive electrical detector, in-
vented by two officers of the Railway Department, is fitted
to the arrangement so that a very small movement of either
switch or bolt will suffice to break down the circuit and cause
the signal leading over the points to show the danger indi-
cation.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Signal Levers.
Signal levers of the mechanical interlocking machines
have been adapted for power signalling by fitting them with
electrical contacts through which current is transmitted to
the signals. The levers divested of mechanical wires and *
weights are very easy to work, and are perhaps dispropor-
tionately large for the work they are called upon to do. The
arrangement, however, is economical, and obviates the provi-
sion of new machines. A special electro-mechanical mach-
ine (Fig 11) is installed at South Yarra, where the points are
worked by the usual type of lever and the signals by a minia-
ture lever or slide. This is a very neat arrangement, and is
probably the best possible, short of operating both points and
signals by electric power, in which case an interlocking frame
of miniature levers throughout would be used. The electro-
mechanical system has given very great satisfaction, and it
is intended to extend its use.
Wiring.
A considerable amount of outdoor wiring is necessary for
connecting the signals with one another, and through their
track circuit and other controls. This wiring is carried
wherever possible in twin paper insulated lead sheathed
cables laid in wooden troughing supported on pegs about ift.
above ground level. There are many cases, however, where
the use of lead cable is not practicable, such, for instance, as
connections to the rails themselves, wiring from the control
relays to the signal motors and wires crossing the track un-
less laid at sufficient depth as to secure immunity from vibra-
tion, etc., which method would be very costly. As absolute
safety so much depends upon the integrity of the insulation
of the signal controls, it is desirable to use the highest class
of insulated wire practicable, and a very high class of wire
known as Kerite was selected. This wire has proved to have
had very long life under the diverse conditions met with in
railway work, such as exposure, damp, presence of oil or
other deleterious matter, mechanical vibration, etc., and is
used in all cases for signal control purposes where lead-
sheathed cable cannot be used.
Fig. 11. —Electro Mechanical Frame and lllvminated
Diagram (South Yana).
Fig. 12.—Belay Rack.
Power Supply.
The signal power supply is generated at Newport power
station, transmitted to the electrification sub-station, at
20,000 volts, and from the latter points delivered to the signal
power transmission mains at 2200 volts.
The signal main at the various signalling points along
the track is connected through by means of well-protected
oil switches. With the switchgear is housed a transformer
which reduces the pressure from 2200 volts to no volts for
signal operation, and 6 volts for track circuits. The 2200-
volts cable is carried in the same troughing as the signal con-
trol cables.
Accessories.
Only the fringe of the subject can be touched in an ar-
ticle such as this, but which would be incomplete without
passing mention of some of the interesting accessories to the
automatic signal system. Signal cabins are furnished with
illuminated diagrams, showing the whole of the track ar-
rangements, points and crossings, etc. The diagram is
divided into sections, each being illuminated separately by an
electric lamp placed behind the diagram. A train entering
any section extinguishes the lamp for that section, the lamp
re-lighting immediately the section is clear. The diagram
shows the approach of a train from a considerable distance,
and is very useful in showing the exact position of the train
in passing over points which the signalman might be wait-
ing to move for another train. The approach of a train is
automatically intimated to the signalman by a ring on a bell.
Indicators worked by small electric lamps show the signal-
man whether his points are correctly set; indeed, the scheme
goes further, as current for operating the signal is also
taken through detectors on the points, which ensures the
latter being tightly closed and bolted before the signal is
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


given. Electric locks are provided on the levers of the in-
terlocking frame. These prevent levers from being moved
unless the track conditions are safe for such movements. This
electric locking is provided in addition to the usual mechani-
cal interlocking system between the various levers. Over
each signal lever is fixed an indicator, which shows a red
light when the signal is at “stop,” and a green light
when the signal is “clear.” A special push button is
provided for giving the low-speed light signal. The time re-
lease is quite an interesting piece of mechanism, and affords
the signalman a means of releasing signal levers in the event
of cancellation or change of road being necessary while a
train is approaching him. The operation of the time release
sets the affected signals to danger, and no alteration can be
made in the route until a certain predetermined time has ex-
pired. This ensures changes only being made by the signal-
man with great deliberation. The under-portion of the sig-
nal-cabin, in addition to the usual interlocking apparatus, con-
tains switchgear for the electric power, electrical contacts
fitted to the levers, a rack (Fig. 12) carrying relays operated
from the track, and a multiplicity of wires, all of which are
carefully labelled.
The three-position signal and automatic train stop
mechanism, impedance bonds, alternating current relays, time
release mechanisms, and Kerite insulated wire, all of which
are highly specialised products, were imported from America.
The high tension switchgear, main transformers and lead
cables were obtained from Great Britain. A considerable
quantity of apparatus has been designed by the Department’s
officers, and manufactured at the Newport signal shops,
among which may be enumerated:—Signal masts and fittings,
signal lamps, light signals, illuminated diagrams, relay and
transformer boxes, relay racks, low-tension switchboards, an-
nunciating bells, electric lever locks, a variety of circuit con-
trollers, and many other miscellaneous fittings.
Conclusion.
Owing mainly to the Department’s inability to obtain
essential material at the present time, it is not possible to
provide three-position automatic signals throughout the
whole of the Essendon to Sandringham section prior to elec-
trification. In a number of the sections remaining to be
dealt with the mechanical signals have been for some years
controlled by direct current track circuits, and, in order that
the existing degree of safety may not be diminished, it has
been necessary to convert these to alternating current track
circuits, so as to avoid any possibility of interference by the
traction current. This applies not only to the Essendon-
Sandringham tracks themselves, but in addition to all other
tracks running in close proximity to them.
Car Workshops—Lifting Bay — lnterior.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Cat Workshops nl Jollmont.
Electric Car Workshops, Jolimont.
All work in connection with the inspection, overhauling,
and maintenance, of the electric rolling stock will be carried
out at the Electric Car Workshops erected at Melbourne
for the Electrification Scheme. In these workshops the
equipment of the coaches with the electrical apparatus was
carried out by the contractors. The building is constructed
of brick on concrete foundations, with a roof of the saw
tooth type, steel framed, and covered with double corrugated
iron. It is designed so as to minimise fire risk, brick, con-
crete, steel, and wired glass having been used throughout in
its construction. The workshops are divided into three sec-
tions by brick walls, with fireproof doors, and the entire build-
ing is completely equipped with a sprinkler and thermostat
fire alarm system.
The three sections into which the building is divided,
comprise the Lifting Bay and Workshop; the Running Inspec-
tion Bay, and the Painting Bay.
The Lifting Bay is 63ft. wide and 600 ft. long, and con-
tains four tracks, three of which are provided with pits
running the full length of the shed. In this bay the work of
lifting cars for heavy repairs and overhaul will be carried
out, and for this work two electric travelling cranes of 25
tons capacity, which taverse the full length of the bay, are
provided. This portion of the workshops is 40ft. high, and
the runway of the crane is carried on large reinforced con-
crete columns.
The Workshop adjoins the lifting bay, and between the
two are 24 cross tracks, each 32ft. long, provided with pits.
These pits are designed to accommodate the car bogies after
they are removed from the cars in the lifting bay, and so
enable the electrical and other gear to be readily dismantled.
The workshop is 55ft. wide and 523 ft. long, and is pro-
vided with a gallery 25ft. wide and 27ft. above the ground
floor. The gallery runs the full length of the workshops on
the south side, and on it the bulk of the electrical repairs,
testing, and light mechanical fitting will be dealt with. The
ground floor of the workshop is served by two 15-ton electric
travelling cranes, while access to the gallery is provided by
an electric lift and an electrically operated hoist, which
enable materials to be transferred from the ground floor to
the different parts of the gallery.
The workshop will be equipped with all the latest appli-
ances for repairing the electrical and mechanical equipment
of the electric trains. Boiling down tanks are provided for
cleaning the bogies and other parts of the equipment before
repairs are commenced. Compressed air for blowing out the
electrical equipments, for brake testing, and for the operation
of pneumatic tools, is provided by an electrically operated
compressor plant located in the workshop, and a very com-
plete air service is provided throughout the workshop, lifting
bay and running repair bay. Owing to delays due to the
war, the equipment of the workshops has not been com-
pleted.
The Running Inspection Bay is 132 ft. wide and 400 ft.
long, and contains nine tracks each capable of accommodating-
one six-car train. Each track has a pit 3ft. bin. deep over
its full length, and, in addition, shallow pits 2ft. qin. deep
between the tracks facilitate the inspection of the equipment
under the cars. The electric trains, after running a specified
mileage, will pass into this shed for the complete examina-
tion of the electrical and other parts of the equipment.
The Painting Bay is 104 ft. wide by 400 ft. long, and con-
tains six tracks. -These tracks have no pits, but raised plat-
forms are provided between the tracks in order that the work
of painting the cars and repairing the upholstering may easily
be carried out. Provision has also been made in this section
for a Paint Store, Carpenters’ Shop, Upholsterers’ Shop, and
Boiler Room.
A block of buildings, three stories high, at the south-west
corner of the workshops, contains the offices of the Works
Manager and his staff, and various store rooms. The store
rooms occupy the ground and second floors, and the offices
‘ are situated on the first floor.
The workshops are well lighted throughout by elec-
tricity, and power for this purpose, and for the motors with
which the tools are driven, is supplied from a small sub-
station adjacent to the workshops, where current, from the
Newport power house, is transformed to a voltage suitable
for lighting the building and operating tool equipments.
Although the present electric workshop varies from 400
to 600 ft. in length, in the construction arrangements the possi-
bility has been kept in view that, with the extension of the
Melbourne-suburban traffic, it may ultimately have to be ex-
tended to a uniform length of about 1000 ft.
When completed and in regular working order, the
workshops will be one of the finest of the kind, and will
undoubtedly prove a valuable adjunct to electrical working.
ELECTRIFICATION OE THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


Fig. jL —Interior of Lecture Room where Train Crews are Instructed.
Fig. #. —Interior of Lecture Room where Train Crews are Instructed.
Training Crews for the Trains.
It was necessary to make special provision for training
crews to control the electrically operated trains, and to facili-
tate this work of training the men a well-equipped lecture
theatre has been erected. The building is illustrated in Figures
Nos. i and 2. It contains a complete car equipment arranged
so as to leave each part of the equipment easily accessible to
the scholars and teacher. Adequate wiring diagrams are hung
on the walls, and when the men have received some know-
ledge of the principles underlying train operation they are
taken out on the trains and receive practical training under
working conditions.
Normally a train crew consists of a motorman and a
guard. The guard is trained in a portion of the motorman’s
duties that he may be able to drive the train in cases of emer-
gency. Shunters also are trained as drivers, but their opera-
tions are limited to moving the trains in the metropolitan
yards. In addition to his ordinary duty as driver of the
train, the motorman is expected to effect minor repairs that
may be necessary when a train is out of reach of the repair
shops.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


DICK’S
s.
u
Q
□r
<
<
a
r~
BALATA
S
| THE TWO BEST BELTS. |
u
MAXI
»
\
encircles
AUSTRALIA
«Va
tr
LEATHER
James Hardie & Co. Pty. Ltd,,
30 Currie St, 581-583 Little Collins St., Cr. York and Wynyard Sts., Queensland Machinery Co.,
ADELAIDE, S.A. MELBOURNE, Vic. SYDNEY, N.S.W. BRISBANE, Qld.
Types of Insulators used on O.H. Construction
Electrification Victorian Railways.
The many excellent results obtained from Porcelain
Insulators manufactured by the Australian Porcelain Com-
pany Pty. Ltd., 19-25 Russell Street, Melbourne, Victoria,
has been again demonstrated by the many uses this porcelain
ware has been put to, both on high and low pressure systems.
The following illustrations show a few of the various types of
insulators used on the O.H. Construction of the Electrifica-
tion of the Victorian Railways.
The accompanying illustration (Fig. 1) depicts a
“Catenary” bracket, being insulated by a centre porcelain
Fig. i.
being placed on either side distance pieces. The rod re-
ferred to is screwed into the end in-sulators.
Fig. 2 shows a terminal strain insulator. This class
of insulator having to fulfil
an important position—that of
taking the enormous strain
at the terminal point of the
trolley wire. The porcelain
reel insulators in this class
Fig. 2.
of overhead material must be of the best, and must be
reel and two-end insulators, the
centre reel fulfilling two objects,
retaining the suspension span
wire and Insulating it from the
bracket, the insulation being
doubly protected - by the end in-
sulators. The two-end insulators
being secured to the brackets by
straps, hold the centre reel in
position by means of a rod pass-
ing through the reel, copper tubes
capable of standing a very high crushing strain and at
the same time retaining their insulation properties.
In Fig. 3 we have a good sample of a large aerial knife
switch, which are erected at various points in the over-
head construction. These knife switches are of double action
—when on the “off” position can be placed so that the
O.H. trolley line is earthed for safety purposes. These
switches are operated by a lever from off the ground.
Fig- 3-
sulating properties. They must be capable of standing vibra-
tion, jolts, suspension, dead-weight and crushing strain,
which proves Australian-made porcelain ware has stood the
test, and can compete with the world’s productions.
The illustrations referred to above of O.H. construc-
tion were designed by the British Insulated and Helsby
Cables Ltd., the metal work being manufactured by Williams
and Benwell, of Little Lonsdale-street, Melbourne; the in-
sulators being supplied by the Australian Porcelain Com-
pany Pty. Ltd., 19-25 Russell Street, Melbourne, Victoria
In the construction of these
switches it will be noted six in-
sulators are used, which, whilst
retaining their high insulating
properties, must be capable of
standing a certain amount of
vibration and sudden jars, when
the switch is operated, as well as
hold in position the base frame-
work of the switch itself.
The insulators used in the con-
struction' of the O.H. material in
Figs. 1,2, and 3 have been called
on to fulfil many parts besides in-


List of Principal Contractors.
The principal contracts let in connection with the electri-
ftc-ition were as follow:
Power station buildings, complete boiler house equipment
and other plant, steam and water piping, circulating
water screens —Babcock and Wilcox Ltd., London and
Glasgow; Melbourne office, 84 William-street.
Turbo-alternators and transformers —C. A. Parsons and Co.
Ltd., Newcastle-on-Tyne, England; Melbourne office, W.
A. Adams and Co,, 521-523 Collins-street, Melbourne.
Condensing plant, hotwells, piping, circulating pumps, sump
pumps, air and water extraction pumps —G. Weymouth
Pty. Ltd., Neptune-strect, Richmond.
Switchgear and accessories, substantion equipment —Siemens
Bros’. Dynamo Works Ltd., London and Stafford.
Rotary converters, frequency changers, switchgear and trans-
formers—British Westinghouse Electric and Manufactur-
ing Co. Ltd.; Melbourne office, 84 William-street.
20,000 volt and 1500 volt cables, overhead equipment of per-
manent way and 20,000 volt overhead transmission mains
—British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd., Prescot;
Melbourne office, Wool Exchange.
Train equipments—General Electric Co. of New York
(U.S.A.), with British Thomson Houston Co. of Rugby
as sub-contractors for specified portions of the contract;
Melbourne office, corner Queen and Little Collins
streets.
Electrically operated carshed cranes —Chambers, Scott and
Co. Ltd.; Melbourne office, Knox, Schlapp and Co. Ltd.,
Collins House.
Substation and power house transformer cranes —Herbert
Morris Ltd.; Electric Supplies and Engineering Co. Ltd.,
163 Clarence-street, Sydney, N.S.W.
Motors for driving workshop and other machinery—J. H.
Holmes and Co.; Melbourne office, Strachan, Murray and
Shannon Pty. Ltd., 99 King-street.
Substation switchgear, track feed boxes, track transformers,
etc., for automatic signalling—A. Reyrolle and Co., Heb-
burn-on-Tyne, England; Melbourne office, W. A. Adams
and C o.
Transformers for automatic signalling—Ferranti Ltd.; Mel-
bourne office, Noyes Bros. (Melb.) Pty. Ltd., 499 Bourke-
street.
Track resistances for automatic signalling—McKenzie, Hol-
land and Westinghouse Power Signal Co. Ltd.
Impedance bonds, relays and signal machines for automatic
signalling—British Pneumatic Railway Signal Co. Ltd.
Transformers and relays for automatic signalling —Australian
General Electric Co., corner Queen and Little Collins
streets.
Twin wire cable —Western Electric Co. (Aust.) Ltd., Syd-
ney, N.S.W.
Electric tram stops, signals and spare parts, relays, trans-
formers and kerite wire—General Railway Signal Co.,
U.S.A.
The foundation work and cement plaster walls in con-
nection with the power house buildings have been carried out
by the Victorian Railways Department Way and Works
Branch, and this branch has also erected the buildings for the
first five substations, viz., Jolimont, Newmarket, Middle
Brighton, Newport and Glenroy, also new repair and mainten-
ance shops at Jolimont. Messrs. J. S. G. Wright and
Swanson Bros, were contractors for the Albion and North
Fitzroy substations respectively.
in connection with the overhead equipment, the follow-
ing contracts were placed for steel structures, erection of
which has been carried out by the Way and Works Branch
also' —
The material for carrying out these contracts was manu-
factured by the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd.
Victorian Railways Signal Shops. Newport.
Victorian Railways Metropolitan Shops, Spencer-street.
Messrs. Gray Bros., Williamstown.
Messrs. Johns and Waygood, South Melbourne.
Messrs. A. Challingsworth Pty. Ltd., Richmond.
Messrs. Cowley’s Works, Ballarat.
State Shipbuilding Yard, Williamstown.
Messrs. Forman and Co., South Melbourne.
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF MELBOURNE.


■
The Great
Railway
Viaduct
MEPHAN FERGUSON
PTY. LTD.
O’
View of portion of Flinder* Street (Melbourne) Viaduct.
iNE of the vital links in the
Railway System of Mel-
bourne, and. incidentally,
that of the State is the mam-
moth viaduct stretching from
Flinders Street to Spencer Street.
The work was a huge one, involv-
ing five distinct contracts. Of
these Messrs. MEPHAN FER-
GUSON PTY. LTD.. Footscray,
secured three, and the others went to o*her Metropolitan firms. The original contract was signed in May, 1913. the work through
various causes being spread over a number of years. The Firm’s actual working lime, exclusive of many delays and hold ups over
which they had no control, represented only eighteen months. Girders weighing an aggregate of about 2000 tons were installed in the
viaduct, individual girders weighing up to 27 tons. The contracts were handled under exceptionally trying and exacting conditions,
but the firm had the satisfaction of completing the entire work three weeks ahead of the stipulated time, this being a record and
achievement of which they are justifiably proud The Railway Department through its officers, placed on record its entire
satisfaction with the work performed, and with the high standard of efficiency maintained throughout.
In addition to the many huge railway and other works carried out in Victoria and throughout Australia, Messrs. MEPHAN FERGUSON
PTY. LTD. are equipped with such engineering facilities as will enable them to carry out any and every class of engineering work.
At their Footscray works, all classes of bolts, nuts and spikes for railways, as well as for general purposes, are manufactured
in a special Department equipped with an extensive plant. Another Department is fully equipped to turn out forgings of all
descriptions whether large or small In the General Foundry, castings up to ten tons in weight have been made. There is
also a complete plant for moulding cast-iron pipes of all sizes. Another Department is given up to the manufacture of pipes straight
riveted and spirally riveted, and their accessories, such as bends, tees &c. The Engineering Department is a large one, and,
coupled with the other Departments, enables the firm to turn out a wonderful variety of work, entirely manufactured in its own shops.
The works at Footscray are amongst the largest in Australia, whilst at Outer Harbour, South Australia, the Company has
established other large Works given up to the manufacture of their famous Lockingbar Pipes.
gave money by sending us your enquiries for
Wm. Crosby & Co.
Engineering Department,
591 Bourke St, Melbourne.
TEL. 11290
Power Plants, Pumping and Electrical Equip-
ment, Water Tube Boilers, Super-Heaters,
High-class Boiler Pumps, Wood-Working
and General Machinery.
Belting, Machine Tools, Lathes, Drilling
Machines, Emery Wheels and Garnet Paper,
Wire Rope, “Apexior” Boiler Paint, and
Bractal Eucalyptus Disincrustant.
SOLE AUSTRALASIAN REPRESENTATIVES:
POOLE ENGINEERING & MACHINE
CO., New York.—Turbo Gears.
THRIFT'S PAINT CO. LTD., London.
Paints, &c.
J. T. HARDAKER, Bradford.
Pattern Cutting Machines.
DIAMOND LUBRICATING CO.. Man-
Chester. Calypso! Grease and Yarn
Grease. Cup Greases. & Lubricating Oils
SOLE VICTORIAN AGENTS for
EMPIRE ENGINEERING SUPPLY CO.
LTD. And also Agents for S Aust,
W. Aust, and Tasmania.
BRITISH ELECTRIC PLANT CO., Alloa,
Scotland.- Electric Equipment.
HOLDEN & BROOKE Ltd., Manchester.
Injectors.
J. P. HALLS & SONS. Peterborough.
High-class Boiler Feed Pumps, Pumping
Machinery.
DAVID AULD & SONS, Glasgow.
Auld's Reducing and Surplus Valves.
WONHAM. BATES & GOODE, New York.
Engines, &c.
G. MUNRO PTY. LTD,, Ballarat.
Elevators and Conveyors,
T. P. HALL & SONS LTD , Peterborough.
England.—Vertical Steam Pumps.
GOLDIE & McCULLOCH CO. LTD.
Canada. Water Tubs Boilers, Steam
Superheaters.
A. RANSOME & CO. LTD., Newark-on-
Trent. - Wood - Working and General
Machinery.
SHELDON LTD., Canada.
Exhaust Disc and Propeller Fans.
THORNLEY, Sydney. Lathes, Drilling
Machines, Hack Saws, &c.
□
Circuit Breakers
Type “H” 35,000 VoltlCircuit Breaker.
E.H.T. Circuit Breaker,
With
Elliptical reinforced oil tanks.
Strong ventilated cast-iron expansion chamber above the oil level.
Cam and roller action, giving speed or power at those parts of
thestroke where
they are respec-
tively required.
Automatic re-
setting of the
trip gear.
a
Manchester
TO:
61


THOMPSON & CO.
(CASTLEMAINE) PTY. LTD.
Engineering Works,
Codes Used:
A.8.C.. 4th & sth Edns.
Bedford McNeill.
Morelng & Neal’s.
McNeill’s 190& Edition.
Bentley’s Phrase.
Engineering 2nd Editn.
Private and Special.
Telephones 5 and 113,
Castlemalne Exchange.
Cable Address:
“Thompsons,
Castlemalne.”
Telegraphic Address:
“Thompsons Ltd.
Castlemalne."
Telephones 5 and 113,
Castlemalne Exchange.
Designers & Manufacturers of Most Modern Machinery
STEAM ENGINES—
Vertical High-Speed Forced Lubricating,
Horizontal - Corliss and Drop-Valve Types.
OIL ENGINES—
Crude Oil—Marine and Stationary.
AIR COMPRESSORS
Vertical High Speed and Horizontal Types.
PUMPING ENGINES-
For Sewerage, Water Works and Irrigation.
PUMPS-
Single and Multi Stage Centrifugal Types.
Centrifugal Gravel Pumps (Kershaw Pat.)
MARINE ENGINES—
For Standard Vessels, up to 10,000 tons,
with complete equipment.
BOILERS—
All Types and Powers and Highest Pressures.
Mining and General Machinery, Power Plants, &c.
bh
mm
m
BBRI
—■■Hl
||‘|||||
■1
JBHB
H
■
bSSBJib
BBB—
I—
: >liS
9
■il
Railway and Tramway Forged Steel Weldless Tyres and Axles.
Made in Australia from Australian Materials
FORGE DEPARTMENT.—Loco, and Car Wheel Tyres, Axles, Plain Shafts, Large Built-up Crank
Shafts, Sugar Rolls, Pressed Small Crank Shafts, Stamper Battery Shoes and Dies, &c.
RAILWAY WORK.- Point and Crossings, Tramway Crossovers, Traverser Crossings.
AUTOMATIC MACHINE SHOP WORK.—Sets Screws, Studs, Bright Bolts, Brass Goods, and
Repetition Work.
Representatives in Australia and Abroad:
MELBOURNE:
Gibson, Battle (Melb.) Prop. Ltd.
SYDNEY:
Gibson, Battle & Co. Ltd.
BRISBANE:
Engineering Supply Co. of Aust. Ltd.
ADELAIDE:
Newton, McLaren Ltd.
PERTH:
Brown & Bureau Ltd.
LONDON: Francis Chapman, Son,
& Deekes, Fenchurch St.
THE EAST : McAlister & Co. Ltd., Singapore. Ipoh, Kaula Lumper, Penang.
62


ff
U
C 7
jt
-
iff!
uT,’ MS V*
£*£
,025
r yr /:
ii'iim
MM(|
w
ffitWW
mini
?»■»>■///;
//,
/✓>//
un^i^Biy
. ■
PAHA RUBBER WORKS \
FOOTS CRAY .'
iEs
..A
Oi
uw
\ -==-:
■M
A/
The NAME that
implies Quality -*
to everything in
RUBBER
GOODS
Hlyij
f/V
»rj
ir
UK
'flii
&
(2.
m*„
ii/*
s
K
s*' • >
ll
I
w;
m
3 •
> r
/•/
ar-*. r
/
fSP
K
w
K
fiS
%
91
£
i
4
£3
i
§llllll
y/
r**
fTTHC
f ®sflL , R , ..i' ni ,,H ' "T 1 ■
m
t*-y
«raassßJir. , "”V?'
I KVnfK
*«»
THE
Barnet Glass Rubber C°. t?
FOUNDERS
OF
THE
RUBBER
IHDUSTRV
IN
AUSTRALASIA


fxlfiiuut* ‘ilWHu J
VLm
I / .
JT 'il l, r i
1/' j './////' *
/ / I// 1
tii
The siiti
W
i
'ifhKu
! ,
PI
♦
.i|Hu *
\\\l
ffr'
..V
>£EM
|WL
.to
the World
Knows
VfL
&55,;
II is the Gargoyle—the world symbol
* of scientific lubrication.
Ihe red Gargoyle appears on cans and
barrels which leave Vacuum Oil Com-
pany refineries scattered over the globe.
The red Gargoyle points the way to
correct lubrication on six continents.
It will be found in garages in every
country where motor cars are a factor.
In the ports of the world it is looked for
by owners of steamships.
It is a servant to electricity, steam and
gas. It gives these power-sources their
right to work at full efficiency.
Kvery natron on the two hemispheres
recognises the red Gargoyle. It is their
guide-post to mechanical efficiency.
I—l
Lubricants
A grade for each type of serv
ICb
lifm
'Wh
'Vv
■Vs
\N
Vacuum Oil Company Pty. Ltd., Throughout Australasia
Specialists in the manufacture of high-grade lubricants for every class of machinery
M I 5
Primed and Published by Harold Smith, for the Proprietors at the registered office of the Company, 376 Flinders Lane, Melbourne, V.
