



[?]




TESTIMONIALS
IS FAVOUR OF MR. HILL’S SYSTEM OF SPEECH-CULTURE.
THE SCOTCH COLLEGE, MELBOURNE.
Enclosed I send you a short testimonial, and you will permit me
at the same time to express my unqualified approbation and satisfac-
tion with the results of your labours during the term you have been
engaged in the Scotch College. With best wishes,
I am, dear Sir,
Very truly yours,
ALEX. MORRISON, A.M.,
T. P. Hill, Esq., Professor of Elocution,
I have much pleasure in bearing testimony in favour of Sir. T. P.
Hill, Professor of Elocution at the Scotch College. lie has conducted
large public classes in this institution for five years. For some time I
had doubts as to whether •practically it was possible to teach the higher
departments of elocution and declamation to largo classes simultaneously •
but the result of Mr. Hill’s labours has convinced me that it is prac-
ticable, and that this useful branch of study ought to be introduced into
‘all our schools. I speak only of what has passed under my observation,
when I certify that in a short time Mr. Hill produced results which
have sathfled and surprised me. The manner in which, at our public
examinations, the pupils performed the parts assigned them in the
programme, elicited the approbation of the public and the press. The
students were all young, but it was apparent that they thoroughly
understood what they were doing. I have almost daily opportunities of
witnessing themanner inwhichMr.HiLL conductshis classes,and the way
in which he discharges the practical part of his duties, and with both I
am highly satisfied. A visit to the College will satisfy any one on this
point. Mr. Hill is an enthusiast in his profession, and without
enthusiasm I believe no great remits have ever been achieved in the
(i ■» .• rn i ~i **
cause of education.
ALEX. MORRISON, A.M.,
Principal , Scotch College.
CHURCH OF ENGLAND GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
I hate much pleasure in bearing testimony to the merits of Mr.
T. P. Hill as a Professor of Elocution. His method of teaching in
large classes has peculiar advantages of its own ; the more apt seldom
derive all the benefit they would do from separate instruction, and
the timid are encouraged to make efforts which they would not venture
npon if appealed to individually, I will only add that Mr. Hill’s
manners are affable and pleasing, and that he always secures the good-
■will of his pupils.
J. E. BROMBY, D.D.,
Head Master of the Church of England
Grammar School, Melbourne .


ST. PATRICK’S COLLEGE.
Erom the very beginning of your engagement here, I felt the
necessity of procuring for our boys a competent Professor of Elocution,
and that conviction was confirmed by every day’s experience of your
success. Still, I never believed it possible for our pupils to effect
under any system of tuition what they achieved at the last “Aca-
demical Exhibition.” Accept my warmest thanks for the energy ,
assiduity , and great success* that characterised your efforts.
JOHN BARRY, D.D.,
President of St. Patricks College.
T. P. Hill, Esq., Professor of Elocution.— 2nd Jan., 1861.
GEELONG COLLEGE.
Erom Mr. Hill’s well-known eminence as a Professor of Elocution in
the principal Metropolitan Grammar Schools, I was induced to avail
myself of his services for the Geelong College; and lam happy to state
that the marked improvement the pupils of this institution have made
amply demonstrates his great success as a teacher of those important
branches of education to which he directs his particular attention. Mr.
Hill is earnest, enthusiastic, and painstaking, and infuses his own spirit
into that of his pupils. lam sure that his labours will be of great benefit
to the school.
GEORGE MORRISON, M.A.,
Principal, Geelong College.
SYDNEY GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
Sydney Grammar School, Sept. 25, 16G5.
My deae Sir, —I have much pleasure in expressing the very high
estimate which I have formed of your skill, zeal, and success as a teacher
of elocution. In the short space of sis weeks (during which every form
in this school passed under your instructions, so that each received only
twelve lessons) the general improvement in voice and articulation has
been very marked, while the speeches with which we are accustomed to
close each quarter exhibited an extraordinary progress in declamation.
Allow me to add, that I have been exceedingly gratified by the observa-
tion of your vigour and assiduity in teaching, and much struck by the
success of the simultaneous and catechetical method in your hands. I
regret that your departure for Melbourne will interrupt, though it will
not, I hope, terminate, your connection with this institution. Pray
make any use of this note you please, and believe me, very truly yours,
W. J. STEPHENS, M.A., OXON.,
Head Master of the Sydney Grammar School.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
The display of elocution was remarkably superior, generally, to that
of any previous year. Mr. Hill deserves much credit for the success
ho has achieved.—*
Argils.
As Mr. T. P. Hill is the Professor of Elocution at the Scotch
College, it is only just to him to say that his pupils, in delivering the
pieces entrusted to them, acquitted themselves to admiration, and did
him great credit. —j
Herald.
* The italics arc the Doctor’s.— T. I*, n.


The display was followed by further readings from the Bible, and
also by the perusal of newspaper extracts, which the class had not
seen before, and which very conclusively demonstrated the soundness
in principle of Mr. Hill’s system of instruction. —.
Age.
LECTURING TOUR IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
During Ids stay in South Australia, Mr. Hill has succeeded in
drawing numerous and highly-respectable audiences, by which his efforts
as a Professor of Elocution have been thoroughly appreciated. He
leaves these shores bearing many testimonials from men of education
and attainments, and we sincerely trust his future career may be as
satisfactory as the past has proved. —-
South Australian Advertiser .
LECTURING TOUR IN TASMANIA.
Mr. Hill’s success has been universal. Wherever he has appeared
he has been acknowledged a master of the Art of Elocution.-
Laun -
cesion Chronicle.
Mr. T. P. Hill. —This gentleman made his last public appearance
in Hobart Town on Monday evening. The room was densely crowded,
a large number of persons being unable to find admission. Mr. Hill
gave several recitations with great effect. As Mr. Hill is on the
point of leaving the colony, we must put on record our high sense of
the service he has rendered to the cause of education here, by directing
attention to a branch of it that is by far too much neglected. His
Excellency the Governor and Lady Young patronised the performance.
Hobart Town Mercury.
LECTURING TOUR IN VICTORIA.
Mr. T. P. Hill’s Lecture ox Elocution.—Last evening a very
interesting and entertaining lecture on elocution was delivered by
Mr. T. P. Hill, at the Mechanics* Institute. Altogether, this was
one of the most instructive, pleasing, popular entertainments that has
been introduced into the colony.—.
Argus.
At the Mechanics’ Institute last evening, Mr. T. P. Hill gave a
drawing-room entertainment, entitled “Reading and Speaking.” The
lecture was highly interesting and effective, and was well received by
the numerous and respectable audience. Ilis Excellency Sir Henry
Darkly was present, and remained during the whole entertainment. —
Age.
Ms. T. P. Hill’s Pickwickian entertainment at the Mechanics’
Institute last evening was a decided success. Mr. lliil’s mimic faculty
enables him to realise before his audience, by the mere illusion of tone,
the various characters so felicitously introduced by the inimitable Boz,
in the “ Pickwick Papers,” and without the aid of scenery or appoint-
ments to bring them before the imagination of his hearers. Mr. Hill
was peculiarly happy in the selection of his scenes, and the best we can
say of Ids rendering of Pickwick is, that Dickens himself would have
no be ashamed of his illustrator.—.
Age.
Mr.. T. P. Hill gave an elocutionary entertainment in connection
with the St. lulda Mechanics’ and Literary Institute, at the Town
Hall, Grey-street, last evening. The chair was occupied by the Hon.


T. T, A’Peckett, M.L.C., one of the Vice-Presidents of the Institute,
and so crowded and fashionable an audience had not assembled since
Mr. Michic’s famous lecture. Mr. Hill sat down amidst loud applause.
Herald.
Me. T. P. Hill, the elocutionist, lias just returned from a tour
through the principal goldfields, where he has been delivering his
entertainment on “ Beading and Speaking.” The country papers have
been unanimous in eulogising, in the warmest terms, this gentleman’s
ability, and pronouncing him “ a master of his profession.”—-
Age.
LECTURING TOUR IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
“To Peofessoe Hill belongs the merit of possessing a thorough
knowledge of his subject, with great practical ability, llis teaching
is characterised by logical arrangement of details, lucid exposition of
rules and principles, and judgment in the selection of apt and forcible
illustrations. He is also gifted in a high degree with the power of
arresting and maintaining the attention of his hearers; and while ho
knows how to enliven the dry details and mechanical processes of his
art by the relation of a sparkling anecdote or mirth-provoking blunder,
he is able in a moment to recall the thoughts of his pupils to their
proper business. It is to be hoped that Mr. Hill’s abilities may be
rendered more extensively useful to all w’ho axe engaged in the w r ork of
education, and who are in a measure entrusted with the destiny of our
noble English tongue on this continent.”— Sydney "Morning Herald ,
June 8, 1863.
“Last evening, Peofessoe Hill’b farewell drawing-room entertain-
ment took place in the hall of the Australian Library. The hall was
crowded by the elite of our city, amongst whom were his Grace
Archbishop Folding and several clergymen of different denominations.
Peofessoe Hill’s reception by his audience, throughout his enter-
tainment, was most enthusiastic.”— Sydney Empire, June 26, 1863.
“The lecturer was eminently successful, as though he had reserved
the choicest spirit of his art for this, its last display in our city. He
had also an incentive to increased exertions in the repeated plaudits
of a numerous and well-pleased audience. At the close of the enter-
tainment it was unanimously resolved —‘ That a vote of thanks be given
to Peofessor Hill for the high intellectual treat he has afforded his
audience on this and on former occasions, as w'ell as for his laudable
exertions to create and diffuse a refined literary taste amongst the
various classes of this community; and that on leaving Sydney he
carries with him our sincere esteem and best wishes.’ ” — Sydney Morning
Herald , June 27, 1863.
“ The cultivation of the voice is a subject which just now is engaging a
good deal of attention, and it is only due to Mr. Hill to say that lus
performances and lectures here first induced the press to dilate upon the
advantages of a good delivery, and insist upon its cultivation as one of
the essentials of a good education. Mr. Hill has given lectures on
reading aloud and kindred subjects at nearly all our large schools, and
his efforts in that direction have received the approbation of some of o
first men.”— Sydney Correspondent of the IFcstcrn Tost, May 8, 1863.




Fig. 4.
Fig. 3
Fig. 2.
Fig. 1.


THE
ORATORICAL TRAINER:
A
SYSTEM OF VOCAL CULTURE.
BY
THOMAS PADMORE HILL,
PROFESSOR OF ELOCUTION - .
jZiJZ’L-
-#+-PTH EDITION.
(FuJrt'c ■dtjr'' y
XJ y_*2


F. HUNTLEY AND CO., PUNTERS, SHOE LANE,* FLEET STREET.


PREFACE
TO THE
FOURTH EDITION.
The favourable acceptance which tlic Oratorical Trainer
has received at the hands of the Australian public, and
the growing interest -with which the subject matter is
being regarded, induce the Author to submit the present
edition of tho book, which has been much enlarged, to the
criticism of public opinion.
The kindness of those authors and publishers who have
consented to the use of extracts from their works for this
volume, is hereby thankfully acknowledged.
T. p. HILL.
Melbourne,
June 28 tl, ISO 7,


The sale of three thousand copies of the Oeatouical Tbaisee affords
an encouraging proof of the importance which is beginning to ho
attached to the study and practice of the Elocutionary Art.
A Fourth Edition of the work having been demanded, advantage
has been taken of the opportunity for making many valuable additions
calculated to bo of service to all who through the medium of the voice
seek to amuse or instruct mankind.
The system of vocal culture advocated in this book commends itself
to public favour on the following grounds :
1. —Because, os is clearly demonstrated in the body of the
work, it is highly conducive to health.
2. —Because a cultivated and w T eIl modulated voice always
commands attention, and enlists the sympathies of an
audience.
3. —Because it enables us to do at all times what Kafuro
dictates only on rare occasions.
4. —Because it places in the hands of one man the power of
spreading the refining influences of literature amongst
thousands who might otherwise bo unconscious of them.
5. Because it begets a love for reading, which, if formed in
youth, will, by mere force of habit, last through life.
G. —Because, wherever the system has had a fair trial, the
verdict of Educationists, the Public, and the Press, has
been in its favour.
For these reasons it is hoped and believed that the support
given to former will not bo withdrawn from the Fourth Edition of
the Oeaioeical lEii.Nrr..
PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION.


CONTENTS.
PACE
ELOCUTION 17
FOURTEEN IMPORTANT PRELIMINARY DIEECTIONS 38
-Method op Teaching Simultaneous Elocution 19
The Organs op Speech and the Management op the Breath 21
ENUNCIATION 23
Elements op Vocal Language 24
Labial Sounds 20
Dental Sounds 20
Palatal Sounds 27
Lingual Sounds 27
Nasal Sounds 28
Tna Aspirate II 23
Combination op Consonants mud Vowels 23
Causes op Indistinct Enunciation 30
Exercises on Monosyllables 33
Exercises on Teeminational and other Sounds 33
Alliterative Exercises 31
Method op Exercising the Pupils in Enunciation* 35
PRONUNCIATION 37
Exercises 40
INFLECTION 41
The Upward Slide op irk Voice 43
The Downward Slide op the Voice 45
CONTEASTED INFLICTION 40
Exercises 49
THE CIRCUMFLEX 50
Illustrations 50
HODULATIOIT 51
Illustrations 52
The Six Notes op the Speaking Voice 53
The Deep Whisper 59
The Natural Conversational Non? 59
The Dice Declamatory Note 59
The Highest Note 60
The Low Note 60
The Lowest Note 61
Unimportant Clauses to bk Subordinated to Principal Ideas Cl
Subordination op Words to Ideas 63


TAGS
EMPHASIS C 3
Illustrations (:q
PAUSATION 63
Illustrations 69
FORMATION OF THE OROTUND 71
Exercises 73
GESTURE 74
EARNESTNESS 74
ILLUSTRATIONS.
READING ALOUD.
PROSE.
The Now Qualification for Holy Orders Dnlllcola 78
The Death of Colonel Newcomo Thackeray 80
The Death of Little Nell Dickens 81
Hood’s Character Thackeray S 3
Sydney Carton and the Poor Seamstress at the Foot of tho Guillotine ...Dickens 84
The Trial of Warren Hustings Hlacaulay 86
A Picture of Venice , Iluskin 87
Characteristics of British Eloquence Dr. Croly 83
On Charity St. Dual 89
Golden Advice to Talkers, Writers, and Speakers Dean Alford 89
DECLAMATION.
THE ORATORY OP THE PLATFORM,
Invective against Sir Robert Peel W.J.Fox 91
Invective against Disraeli Daniel O'Connell 93
On the Colonics Burke 94
Oh! let us be Independent of Foreigners T}',J,Fox 95


PARLIAMENTARY ORATORY.
PAGE
On Slavery Lord Brougham 93
Invective against Cobbett Sir Bolt. Feel 97
On the Death of the Prince Consort The Karl of Derby 93
On the Declaration of Irish Bights Grattan 99
The Fickleness of the Multitude Lord Mansfield 100
A Scene in the House of Commons T. F. Hill 101
Tho Celebrated Reply to Lord Lyndhurst Shell 103
On the Reform Bill Macaulay 101
FORENSIC ORATORY.
England tho Home of National Freedom Whiteside 105
Universal Emancipation Curran 106
In Defence of Stockdale Ersktne 107
The Peroration of the Speech in Defence of Queen Caroline Brougham 103
PULPIT ORATORY.
On the Plurality of Worlds Chalmers 109
A Fine Example of Analogical Reasoning Edicard Irving 110
The Day of Judgment 2lassillon 111
The Imprisoned Eagle and the Enchained Christian Soul liev. Mr. Held 111
The Peace of God I2ev. H. Mclvill 112
The Tine Has Como JRev, J. M. Belleto 112
RECITATION.
POETICAL ILLUSTRATIONS.
Tho Charge of “ Six Hundred "at Balaclava Tennyson 113
The Bridge of Sighs Hood 115
Horatius Macaulay 113
The Present Aspect of Greece Byron 119
Highland Mary Burns 120
Caoch the Piper Keegan 121
Tho Queen’s Letter W. 11. Bellamy 123
Our Gallant Volunteers Mackay 125
The Witnesses Longfellow 123
Wallace at Falkirk 77, 77cir 123


PACT!
Death of the May Queen Tennyson 127
Invocation to Greece Vyron 120
Pibroch of Donuil Dhu Scott 120 '
The "Holly and Ivy” Girl Keegan 131
Perseverance Conquers All Things Anon. 133
DSAHATIC ECEITE3.
Scene from “ Hamlet" Shahspere 133
Senate Scene from “ Cato " Addison 135
Scene from the “ Rivals ” Sheridan 139
Scene from " Glsippus” Origin 113
Scene from “John Bull” Colman 115
Scene from “ William Tell” James Sheridan Knowles 143
Scene from the " Knights of the Round Table ” Planchc 150
Scene from “ Werner ” Byron 153
Scene from the " Merchant of Venice” Shahspere ISO
BEAHATIC lIUrSTSATIOITS.
Good Advice to a Son Shahspere 103
Good Advice to Wives Shahspere 163
The Sea Captain’s Story Kulteer Lytton 161
Eienzi’s Address to the Romans Hiss Zlit/ord IC3
HBIIOUEOBS ILLUSTP.ATIOIJ3.
Mr. Bob Sawyer’s Party Ziehens IC7
Mereutio’s Description of Queen Mab Shahspere 171
Faithless Helly Gray llood 173
The Farmer and the Counsellor Horace Smith 171
The Young Orator j- 5
Account Current Anon, 17G
The O llegian and the Porter Horace Smith 177
Richardson’s Show Ziehens 179


APPENDIX
OF
ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONS.
PROSE READINGS.
PAGB
The Death of Paul Dombey Dickens 181
The Reign and Death of George 111 Aviles of Thackeray ISo
On Study Bacm 188
Clinging to the Tree of life Cartwriyht 187
Ragged Schools.—First Plea Oulhrie 183
Ragged Schools.—Second Plea Guthrie 189
The Pirst and Last Dinner Anon. 190
Je ff rs H 191
Macbeth and Richard 111 Hazlitt 193
Capital not opposed to the Eights of Labour Dr. Cooke Taylor 193
Death and Immortality , BulwcrLyiton 193
The Natural Bridge Dlihu Burriit 194
The Old Oak Tree Cordelier 197
Byroll’s Poetry Jeffrey 19S
The Death of Poor Jo Dickens 193
A £hip striking a Schooner Anon. 20.)
The Moral of the Battle of AYaterloo W• J • Fox 200
Byron measured against Shakspere Jeff re H 203
POETICAL READINGS.
The Prisoner of Chillon Byron 204
Zara’s Ear-rings .. Lockhart 207
The Corsair Byron 203
The Execution of Montrose Aytoun 211
The Haven D. A. Foe 218
Lcuore D. A. Foe 219
The Captive Xcwt* 220
The Lament of the Irish Emigrant Lady Duffcrin 221
The Death of Minnehaha Lonyfelloio 223
Virginia Ilacaulay 22G
Gilderoy Campbell 227
The Last Man Campbell 223


PAGE
The Republican Painter Beranger 230
The Death of the Collier’s Child Farmer 231
Gougaune Barra Callanan 232
The Ocean Byron 234
ORATORICAL READINGS.
The Famous Reply to the Counsel of Warren Hastings Burke 235
The Common Informer Curran 237
The Prosecution of Warren Hastings Burke 237
The Famous Reply to the Duke of Grafton Lord Thurlow 233
Against employing Indians in the War with America Lord Chatham 239
Peroration to Speech in Defence of Mr. Magee Daniel O'Connell 241
On Catholic Emancipation Shell 241
Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord FJicard Irving 243
DRAMATIC READINGS.
The Scene between the Two Smalls and Peter James Sheridan Xnoiclcs 244
The Defiance Scene from the King-Maker Franklin 240
Scene from the Provost of Bruges Lovell 253
The Conspiracy Scene from Julius Ca?sar Shakspcre 255
The Quarrel Scene from Douglas Home 258
The Dungeon Scene from Pizarro Sheridan 261
The Mountain Scene from William Tell James Sheridan Xnoicles 202
The Attractive Young Lady Tyrrell 203
Cassio when dismissed by Othello Shakspere 200
The Canvassing Scene from Money Bnhcer Lytton 263
Scene between Graves and Evelyn Bulwcr Lytton 270
HUMOUROUS READINGS.
The Outwitted Landlord Anon. 273
Mrs. Caudle’s Umbrella Lecture Douglas Jcrrold 275
King John and the Abbot of Canterbury Fercg 277
The Hon. Mr. Sucklethumbkin’s Story Ingoldsly 280
Sam Weller’s Valentino Dickens 253
Paddy the Piper Lover 288
Mr. Caudle is made a Mason Douglas Jerrold 295
The Untimely Eud of “ the Inwouter of the Patent Never-Lcaving-OIT Sassage
Steam-Ingine” Dickens 207
The Captain’s Whiskers Anon, 298
MIMIC PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE.
Illustration of the Art of Oratory T.F.JHU 300


INTRODUCTION.
[The great majority of teachers seem to have no conception of the importance of
good reading to the children of the labouring classes, or of its value as a mental
discipline. They clearly have not been taught in their training colleges, wbafc
is nevertheless indisputable, that through no one subject can so much mental
discipline, using this expression in a large sense, be conveyed as through reading.
We do not hesitate to say that no children can be taught to read accurately,
intelligently, emphatically, and expressively, without acquiring in the course of
that training, an amount of general mental cultivation which exceeds in impor-
tance the cultivation derivable from all other subjects united.— From an Article
contributed to the “ Museum ” ly Me. Sijion Latjeib.]
The Report of the Commissioners appointed lay tlio
Homo Government to inquire into the state of popular
Education in England and Wales, and to consider what
measures, if any, are required for the extension of sound
and cheap elementary instruction to all classes of the
people, has brought to light a very startling fact. Out of
five hundred schools inspected by the Commissioners, only
thirty were found where the children read their own-
language even passably.
Referring to this subject, the Edinburgh Review, in an
article on the report —which all friends of sound elementary
education in this and the neighbouring colonics would do
well to “read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest ” —makes
the following statements :
“ The first object of secular instruction is, of course, to teach
children to read aloud with correctness and articulation, bo as to mate
1


others understand what is read; tho other, to apprehend correctly
the meaning conveyed by print. Tho inspectors generally report that
reading aloud is not taught as it ought to be ; that good reading is
exceedingly rare, and that it is seldom good enough to be au avail-
able resource for a Sunday evening by the cottage fireside. The
children fall into slovenly habits—indistinctness of tight as well as of
speech—in tho lower classes, which become incurable.”
As a vivid illustration of the sort of evils engendered by
what one of the inspectors very aptly terms “ the tendency
to slur over words so that it could not be told whether they
were rightly or wrongly pronounced,” two answers, written
on slates, by children of average intelligence, of eleven
years of age, arc given verbatim. Tho questions asked
were from the Church Catechism, viz.:—“ What is thy duty
towards God ? ” and “ What is thy duty towards thy neigh-
bour ? ” Tho answers were as follows :
“My duty torch God is to bleed in him, to fering and to loaf him
withold your arts, withold my mine, withold my sold, and with my
sernth, to vvhirchp and to give thinks, to put my old trast in him, to
call upon him, to onner his old name and his world, and to save him
truly all tho days of my life’s end.”
“ My dooty fords my nabers, to loaf him as thyself, and to do all
men as I wed thou shall do and to me, to love, onner, and sake my
farther and mother, to onner and bay the Queen, and all that are pet
in a forty under her, to smit myself to all my gooness, teaches, sportial
pastures and marsfers, to oughten myself lordly and every to all my
betters, to hut nobody by would hor deed, to bo trew in jest in all my
deelins, to beer no malis nor ated in your arts, to keep my ands
from peckcn and steel, my turn from evil speaking, lawing and slanders,
not to civet nor desar othermans good, but to lern labor trewly to git
my own leaving, and to do my dooty in that state of life and to each
it is please God to call men.”—[Keport, p. 257.]
“I never in one instance,” says one of the Assistant
Commissioners, “found the slightest apparent interest
excited in a class by the reading lesson; and this, no
doubt, is one of tho onuses of the fault into which children
almost universally fall, of reading mechanically, without
any apparent notion that tho words have a meaning.”


This discreditable state of things is attributed to the
unskilfulncss of Teachers, caused by deficient training in
the art of communicating knowledge. Nor is the evil con-
fined to the National and Elementary Schools. It pervades
the highest seats of learning in the land. The greatest
care and attention are lavished in storing the mind with the
spoils of ancient and modern learning, but no provision what-
ever is made for cultivating the medium by which that learn-
ing may be communicated and made available to others.
“ What may be adduced in the way of exception,” says
the Times, in one of a series of well-directed and telling
articles on the subject, “is utterly inconsiderable. From
the time a gentleman’s son goes to school, to the happy
moment when ho sees his name, perhaps, on the list of
wranglers or the ‘ class list,’ he has, most probably, never
recited English poetry or prose, never even read aloud,
much less has he ever made an oral statement of fact to a
greater length than a short sentence to a short question.
Up to the ago of three-and-twenty it is a matter yet to be
ascertained whether the intended clergyman can read a
verse in the Bible as it ought to be read; whether the
intended barrister can make a legal statement without
giving disgust, or persuade without making himself ridi-
culous. He may at that age bo able to do many things
seldom required. lie may be deep in Greek and Homan
antiquities, and able to construe, and even to construe any
chorus ; he may write Latin and Greek verses in a dozen
metres. He may bo a good mathematician, and even com-
pose a tolerable essay. He may have these, and many
other accomplishments, which may never bo called into
practice in a whole life, except in the production of written
sermons, or in some correspondence of unusual gravity.


Tfikat however every man must do, in one way or another,
what is the common gift of all classes and all professions, all
ages from infancy ; what is the first and foremost difference
between man and brute, between one man and another, is left
to chance, icithout any assistance ivhatever from schools or
universities. The first education that the country can. give
offers no security whatever that a man shall not offend and
disgust, when ho should please and inform. Enter church
after church, in the metropolis or elsewhere, and you will
hear the prayers read by a machine, and the sermon
preached by a drone. This ought not to be, but it is so,
and will remain so as long as the art of speaking is
neglected in all its stages and applications, and nothing is
cared for but head-work and pen-work, as applied to
ancient languages and pure mathematics.”
One of the causes, perhaps the cause, of the neglect into
which speech-culture has fallen, arises from an impression,
unhappily too prevalent, that a good delivery is the gift of
nature, and not the product of art. Many persons take for
granted the late Archbishop Whately’s dictum, and “ pooh-
pooh ” all attention to the subject, on the ground that a
speaker who has been instructed in elocution will always have
the rules of his art present to his memory, and that these, by
reminding him of himself, will defeat the natural manner. A
more mistaken or unsound proposition was never made. As
well might it be contended that thewriterof an ordinary busi-
ness letter must necessarily always bo thinking of the rules
of syntax by which he constructs his sentences, or that the
accomplished singer must always bo thinking of the gamut.
The study of a good delivery should commend itself to every
cducatorof youth, because, to use the common-sense observa-
tion of Lord Brougham, “ it enables a man to do at all times


what nature only teaches upon rare occasions.” True ease
in reading and speaking, as in writing—
“ comes from art, not chance,
As those more easiest who have learned to dance.
’Tis not enough no harshness gives offence,
The sound must seem an echo to the sense.”
Dr. Whatcly, in his chapter on the intellectual and moral
influence of the profession, admits that “ anything a person
is prevented from doing habitually, ho is likely habitually
to omit.” Just so. That is precisely the reason why bad
delivery in the reading-desk and pulpit is the rule, and good
delivery the exception. The Rev. Daniel Moore, who, it will
he recollected, succeeded the “ golden-mouthed” Melville as
incumbent of Camden Church, Camberwell, in a recent work
entitled “ Thoughts on Preaching in relation to the require-
ments of the Age,” truly observes : —“ With regard to the
substantial matters of a good training, perhaps no class of
men have greater advantages than clergymen of the Esta-
blishment ; hut in reference to their special duties, they have
to enter upon their spheres of labour sadly unprepared. When
a thoughtful person is present at an ordination of deacons,
and secs thirty or forty young men transformed at once from
laymen to clergymen, he might well feel compassion for them
as to what they will immediately have to do. The next
Sunday 'the whole of them will have to ascend the desk, and
the pulpit probably, without knowing the simplest elemen-
tary rules for the management of the voice, and perhaps
without having stood in the presence of an audience.”
But the editorofthishookis prepared to go a good deal fur-
ther. Ho asserts that, in the vast majority of instances,young
persons arc not only not taught to read well, hut that, on the
contrary, they absolutely acquire the habit of reading badly


from their teachers. This may smack of exaggeration,
hut its truthfulness is home out by the Rev. Mr. Glennie
(one of the Inspectors of Schools in England), who, in a
report published a short time ago, unhesitatingly affirmed
that the fault of had reading, which has been proved to
prevail so extensively in the English National and Elemen-
tary Schools, rested universally (that is the word), not
with the children, hut with the teachers.
“As the child,” he observes, “has no remedy within its
limited reach to supply the deficiency of its teacher, a compro-
mise has to be made between Nature, who asks for sense,
and the teacher who rests content with nonsense ; and an un-
meaning mannerism, which eonventionallyis allowed to servo
the purpose of all words and clauses, is adopted, and cause
and effect (the teacher’s defective pattern, and the child’s
too perfect imitation), by a compact of monotones, form a
second agency to lull the intellect to sleep. Now, the whole
of this ungenial process may have been gone through, and
the above conventional usage established in a child within
three months of its attendance at school, however young its
age. As regards the schools I inspect, lam sorry to say
that, in nine-tenths of them, I have found it thoroughly
effected almost as soon as the alphabet is learned : and I fear
that these schools are but a type of the greater number
throughout the land.” Such is the evidence of the Rev.
Mr. Glennie.
The revelation of these facts has had the effect of setting on
foot a movement admirably calculated to bring about a re-
form, the beneficial tendencies of which, in a religious, social,
and literary point of view, can hardly be over-estimated.
The press, of every shade of opinion, has addressed
itself energetically and eloquently to the subject, and is


loudly demanding that “ tho birds who cun sing, and wont
sing, must bo made to sing.” The clergy themselves, too, to
their credit be it spoken, are also beginning to bestir them-
selves. “ The views,” says the Morning Post, “of the
highest dignitaries of the Church, of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Archbishop of York, and tho Bishop of
London, unite in dwelling on the very great importance of
this subject. Tho Bishop of Oxford, who in this matter
speaks with the authority due to so eminent a master in the
art of public speaking, apart from tho conviction enter-
tained by him of the necessity of correct elocution in
a clergyman, declares, that in his opinion, it is alto-
gether impossible to rate too highly tho importance of
distinct, articulate reading in tho performance of Divine
service; and tho Bishop of Exeter, with characteristic
energy, says of the art of reading and of delivering sermons,
that it is one that has for a long time been disgracefully
neglected, and he expresses a hope that many future
candidates for holy orders may profit by the revival of tho
instruction.”
“ From the common spirit breathing through all
these episcopal letters,” adds tho journal quoted from,
“ we may safely infer that the matter of improved
elocution in ah branches of our public services -will
bo generally and effectively taken up, while we an-
ticipate very important results should the expectation bo
realised.”
Such being tho favour in which a long-neglected branch
of useful instruction is now regarded, the present has been
deemed a favourable opportunity of committing this work
to the press. During its preparation the editor has endea


vourcd to avoid all unnecessary technicalities ; to lay down
rules for guidance, the practical utility of which have stood
the test of experience, and produced the results indicated in
the testimonials published elsewhere; to introduce a series
of unhackneyed selections from the writings and speeches
of the best modern authors and orators ; and, in short, to
make the study of the art of delivering written and spoken
language easy, delightful, and instructive. How far these
objects have been realised, it remains for the public to
pronounce.


THE
ORATORICAL TRAINER.
Elocution is tlic art of delivering written and spoken
language in a manner that shall vividly represent the
conceptions of an author, or impress upon an audience the
full force of a speaker’s original effusions. The prime
requisites of a good delivery arc—
1. A PROPER, MANAGEMENT OP TUB BREATH.
11. Clear and distinct enunciation,
111. CORRECT PEONUNCIATION.
IV. The ability to employ the upward or downward
SLIDES OP THE VOICE SO AS TO FASTEN THE MIND ON
THE SENSE OP WHAT IS BEAD OR SPOKEN.
V. Modulation op the voice, and the power op subor-
dinating WORDS TO IDEAS.
VI. Discriminating emphasis.
VII. Judicious pausation.
VIII. A GOOD OROTUND TONE.
IX. Gracepul gesture.
2. Earnestness.


FOURTEEN IMPORTANT PRELIMINARY DIRECTIONS.
A strict adherence to the regulations given below will
enable a student to acquire a speedy command over the
organs of utterance, and furnish him with the best means of
obtaining a clear and forcible style of delivery.
1. Read and declaim standing.
2. Inflate the lungs with air inhaled through the
NOSTRILS.*
fTho process of inspiration and respiration must be perfectly
effortless.]
3. Give full value to vowel sounds, and effuse them
from the larynx with an imperceptible swell of
tone.
4. Be distinct in the enunciation of consonants, par-
ticularly those at the beginning and ending of
words.f
5. When a word ends with a consonant, followed by a
word beginning with the same consonant, imme-
diately after uttering the first word drop the lower
jaw quickly and gently. Practice will enable you
to do so imperceptibly.
[This is the great secret of distinct enunciation.]
6. Unless the sense obviously requires a higher note,
begin reading and speaking in the note you employ
in ordinary conversation.
[The cultivation of the NATURAL note is of the highest
importance.]
* There are two good reasons for this rccommendalion. First,
because it greatly facililates vocal exertion ; and, secondly, because
ihc nostrils, by means of their delicate and fibrous linings, purijg and,
icarm the air in its passage to the lungs. In a sanitary point of view,
therefore, the practice is very important.
t A speaker who is very distinct will be heard and understood,
when a man with a very powerful voice who wastes it in bawling out
his vowels will only make a noise which no one can understand.


7. Understand and feel what you read. If your voice
sympathises with an author’s conception, you will
command attention.
8. Take advantage of every legitimate pause to give the
lungs a fresh supply of air.
0. Accustom the eyes to bo in advance of the voice, so
as to take up a lino or two before enunciation.
The ability to do this well greatly facilitates
effective reading.
10. What you have to read publicly study well privately.
11. Mark emphatic words, generally by an alteration of
pitch, rather than by an increase of loudness.
12. Pitch the voice towards the centre, rather than at the
extreme end of the place in which you read or
speak.*
13. At the commencement of the study and practice of
the art, read and speak slowly.
14. Practise constantly and pcrscvcringly. Remember,
that by continually falling on the same spot a drop
of water in time perforates the hardest stone.
METHOD OF TEACHING SIMULTANEOUS ELOCUTION.
In giving instruction to large classes,’the simultaneous
methodf (the best for imparting self-possession and en-
suring solid progress) necessarily comes into play. The
teacher requests his pupils to take their places in the form
of a semicircle. This is with, the view of accustoming their
eyes to curves. All angles arc inimical to graceful gesture.
* See note at the bottom of page 77.
+ The advantages of the simultaneous system of teaching are these:—
I. It saves time, inasmuch as all may read aloud what one reads.
11. It facilitates the acquirement of a clear and vigorous enun-
' elation.
111. It induces concord as to tones and inflections of voice, as in
the ease of singing.
IV. It produces sympathy by force of numbers.
V. It begets a taste for what is elegant and graceful in gesture
as well as in speech.
VI. It imparts confidence and self-possession.


Having completed this preliminary arrangement, the fol-
lowing directions should bo given in a clear tone of voice,
and immediately responded to.*
1. “Arms extended—hands on shoulders.”
[The object of this direction is to keep the pupils at equal
distances from each other, in order that they may have
plenty of room to use their arms freely. This position
is described by Diagram I.] f
2, “First position.”
[The pupils make a graceful curve with their arms, and take
the position indicated by Diagram ll.]
8. “ Second position.”
[The pupils elevate their arms, and assume the position indi-
cated by Diagram III.]
4. “ Third position.”
[The pupils drop their arms, aud assume the position indi-
cated by Diagram IV.]
5. “ Fourth position.”
[Same as Diagram ll.]
C. “Attention.”
7. “ Head erect.”
8. “ Chest expanded.”
9. “ Shoulders downward and backward.’'
10. “Body well poised on the lower limbs, resting chiefly
on the right foot.”
The organs of utterance being now in a favourable
position for vocal exertion, the following system of practice
should be adopted with reference to all the illustrations
given elsewhere; —
1. The instructor gives out a lesson.
2. The pupils repeat the lesson simultaneously after him,
clement by element, syllable by syllabic, word by
word, sentence by sentence, and so on throughout.
3. The pupils repeat the whole lesson simultaneously
without guidance.
* Good discipline is of tho utmost importance. With it much can
be accomplished. Without it, all will be confusion,
t See TTontispieee.


THE ORGANS OF SPEECH AND THE MANAGEMENT OF THE
BREATH.
The larynx, or, as it is familiarly called, “Adam’s apple,”
is the immediate seat and instrument of vocal sound. This
“hard-pointed projection,’’perceptible to feeling and to sight,
is situated in the anterior part of the neck at the top of the
windpipe. The larynx bears some resemblance to an inverted
cone, the cavity of which is considerably lessoned in the
centre. Here it presents t-wo horizontal clastic vibrating
membranes, one of which is placed on the right hand and
the other on the left. These are called the vocal chords.*
The opening between these chords is termed the glottis, and
the chords themselves the lips of the glottis. In proportion
to the dilatation or contraction of this part of the vocal
apparatus, caused by a current of air being forced through
it from the lungs, will he the gravity or acuteness of tho
vocal note produced.
Tho management of the breath, therefore, becomes a point
of great importance. “It is,” says Dr. Hunt, in his work on
tho Philosophy of Voico and Speech, “indirectly, perhaps,
the most important branch of physical education; for the
amount of vital power depends chiefly on the health and
vigour of the respiratory process, the regulation of which
must be the first step in the cultivation of the voice. Where
the chest is narrow, with a predisposition to pulmonary
disease, there is much to ho done in the way of prevention.
In all such cases, regularly-repeated deep inspirations are of
paramount value. On account of the elasticity of all tho
parts concerned, tho expansion of the chest is, in early child-
hood, easily effected; tho capacity of tho lungs is increased,
and tho tendency to disease is counteracted. It should bo
borne in mind that the roof of tho mouth is nature’s sounding
* Tho length of these chorda is about 7-10t!i9 of an inch in man,
and only 5-Oths of an inch in woman ; hence, men’s voices are deeper
and graver than those of women.—The lari/nx of bo;, 9 resembles that
of females; tlie vocal chords in boyhood being only two-thirds of tho
length they subsequently acquire.


board ; that tbo nostrils arc to tbc lungs what the holes of
a flute are to that instrument; and that what the blast of
the bellows is to the organ, such is the proper inflation of
the lungs to the production of vocal sound.
Leaning or bonding attitudes are inimical to, and interfere
with the vocal apparatus. They must, therefore, be strictly
guarded against.* The fatigue complained of by many
clergymen, after performing Divine service, arises from the
circumstance of their being accustomed to droop their heads
when reading in the desk and preaching in the pulpit. This
stooping position depresses the vocal chords, and clogs the
whole vocal action. Hero we have the fruitful cause of
dysphonia and disease. One hour’s extempore speaking is
not so trying to the barrister, who looks up to “ my lord and
gentlemen of the jury,” as twenty minutes’ reading is to a
minister, who has to look down on his congregation. And
why ? Because in the former case the stream of utterance
flows on without let or hindrance, and in the latter it is
almost dammed up. To facilitate the action of the lungs,
and at the same time to render vocal exertion an agreeable
as well as a healthful exercise, it is essential that the
directions given under the head of “ Simultaneous Elocu-
tion ” should be rigidly adhered to.
The pupil, having conformed to these regulations, should
now slowly inhale through the nostrils a copious supply of
breath, and expire the same effortlessly from the larynx.
Between the process of drawing in and giving out the
breathf there should be a short pause. This exercise ought to
* Important Note. —A radical charge in school furniture is needed.
The seats and desks non' used compel an attitude which results in a
stooping form. Bending over our desks in our schools would make us
crooked if we were made of steel. The desk top should be so arranged
that it can be raised nearly to the perpendicular before the face of the
pupil, and the book held in such a position as will compel him to sit
with his head and shoulders well drawn back. — De. Davjs ora “ Physical
Culture and Gymnastic Exercises,"
f To breathe at tho proper time, and in the proper place, is an art
which is indispensable to every speaker. But although tho general
rule —to breathe whenever the sense requires a pause —is simple enough,
it requires considerable practice under a skiltul tutor to acquire this
art, for such it really is. —De. llunt.


precede every elocutionary effort for a considerable time.'’'
A very good means of strengthening the vocal organs is, after
inhalation, to expire the breath abruptly, as in the act of
coughing. The great value and importance of this preliminary
course of vocal culture has been tested by considerable ex-
perience. The practice cannot be too strongly recommended.
ENUNCIATION.
Tnn next step in the elocutionary ladder is the acquire-
ment of a clear, distinct, and sonorous enunciation.! Many
speakers, when rising to address a large assembly, seem to
bo under the impression that, in order to be well hoard, it is
necessary to speak at the top of their vomes. This is a
great mistake. Clearness, not loudness, ensures audibility.
With a distinct enunciation a person of only moderate vocal
power is heard by the largest audience much more easily,
and with less effort to himself than one who “ splits the cars
of the groundlings for it is a well ascertained fact that
lend, confused noise does not travel so far as pure musical
sound. Hence the necessity of distinct enunciation. With
the view of facilitating tho progress of the pupil, ho is
directed to effuse from the larynx, with an imperceptible
swell of tone, tho exercises on following pages:—
* “ The habit of hooping tho chest open and erect is indispensable
to tho production of a full, round tone of voice; but it is of still higher
value, as one of the main sources of health, animation, and activity.
To persons whose habits are studious and sedentary, and especially
to females, tho vigorous exercise of tho organs of respiration and of
voice, is, in every point of view, an invaluable discipline.”—EtjS3Ei.li
on Qrt/tophony.
+ In reference to the important part played by vowels in effective
reading and spealdng, I)r. Stone, in his recent work, On Certain Physio-
logical Points Connected with Speech , observes: —“I am of opinion
that, however expedient it may bo that tho consonants, in all their
variety, should be pronounced with every attention to exactness, yet
the grand source from whence the speaker should derive his power of
transmitting speech is the proper fitting of the vowels, each in a perfect
mould formed for it within the mouth.”


ELEMENTS OF VOCAL LANGUAGE.
fi long,* as heard in the words mate, pail,t lay, deign,
great, prey, o’er.
:i opeh, as heard in the words calm, aunt, heart, laugh,
qualm.
a eeoad, as heard in the words all, broad, saw, bought.
a short, as heard in the words cat, plaid, raillery, bade.
C long, as heard in tho words meet, people, pique, key,
appear, siege, Ccesar.
e short, ns hoard in the words met, again, bread, friend,
leopard.
i I.OXC, as beard in tho words isle, height, die, guide,
i short, as heal’d in tho words fit, forfeit, motive.
# Kbt one ordinary reader out of a hundred gives the full value to
the four sounds of the first letter of the alphabet. The reason is this,
the teeth are not kept sufficiently wide apart. To remedy so general
a defect, the pupil is advised to insert a small piece of wood about an
inch long, of the size of an ordinary pipe stem, with a notch in each-
end, between the teeth perpendicularly, and then to articulate the
sounds effortlessly from the larynx . Practice of this kind promotes
and ensures purity and volume of tone. The o}:»en sound of A as
heard in the word calm ; and the broad sound of that letter as heard
in the word aw ful, when properly enunciated serve to bring out very
beautifully the music of poetry. A verse from Tennyson’s “ May
Queen” will illustrate what is meant: —
All in the wtld March morning, I lizard the angels call;
It was when the moon was setting, and the dark was over alls
The trees began to whimper; and the winds began to roll,
And in the wild March morning I heard them call my said.
The sounds indicated in this passage are great favourites with great
singers, and are harmoniously given forth with the greatest advantage
to themselves and to the great delight of the musical public.
f The letters italicised are improper diphthongs, that is to say, “ a
union of two vowels, of which only one is pronounced.” “In uttering
a proper diphthong (pronounced dif* thong) both vowels arc pro-
nounced; the sound is not simple, but the two sounds arc so blended
as to be considered as forming one syllable, as in joy, noise , hound ,
out.” —Webster.


o long, as heard in the words note, yeoman, sett), boat, door,
houvno, gloa - , hazdhoy.
5 extended, as heard in the words cool, saiocr, shoo, coup,
two.
0 stowed, as heard in the words bull, book.
it short, as hoard in the words cot, laurel, Georgia,
cough,
u long, as heard in the words time, vi mu, few, cho, bade,
u shout, as heard in the words bat, docs, blood, rough,
surgeon, dove.
01 compound, as heard in the word voice,
on compound, as heard in the word ounce.
This exercise should bo carried on—
1. In a whisper.
2. In the natural conversational note.
3. In a high note.
4. In the highest note.
5. In a low note.
6. In the lowest note.
7. In the highest note, diminishing gradually down to
the lowest.
8. In the lowest note, swelling up gradually to the
highest.
Continued practice of this description has the effect of
materially strengthening and improving the whole vocal
apparatus. When the exercises on the vowel sounds have
boon gone through satisfactorily, let the instructor give the
following directions to the pupils (see next page) relative
to the organic* formation of the consonants :
Defective articulation is exceedingly common. Perhaps there is
not one individual in ten thousand whose articulation is perfect. This
arises from the neglect of a proper gymnastic training of the organs
of speech in childhood. As soon as children are capable of imitating
o


LABIAL SOUNDS.
[So called because they are produced by tbe action of the lips.]
closely hut gently together, open them,
_ ~ and give utterance to the sound of P
Press the lips b togo ther, open them, and give
y utterance to the sound of B
' gently against the upper teeth, and give
Press the under utterance to the sound of P
lip firmly against the upper teeth, and give
utterance to the sound of Y
Close the lips, and while in the act of doing so, give utterance
to the sound of M
DENTAL SOUNDS.
[So called because they are modified by tbc action of tbe teeth.]
S gently against tlio gums of the upper
teeth, and give utterance to the sound
j. °^ 7 •'' V ‘ V-i' cTI
firmly against the gums oi the upper
teeth, and give utterance to the sound
V of D
! Rest the tip of the tongue against the inner surface of the
« upper teeth, and give utterance to the thin sound of TH
< as hoard in the word THm
I Repeat the same action, and give utterance to the thick
V sound of TH as heard in the word TH ine.
sounds, they should be taught the elements of vocal language; and,
to facilitate their acquisition of this knowledge, they should bo made
to exercise before a mirror, so as to compare tho movements of their
own lips with those of the lips of their instructor. By pursuing this
course, a good foundation will bo laid for a perfect and graceful arti-
culation. —Dr, Cojisiock on Stammering and Defective Articulation,


! Gently raise the whole forepart of the tongue towards the
roof of the mouth, allow the breath to escape it and the
teeth, and give utterance to the sound of SH as heard
in the word SHame
Repeat the same action more firmly, allow the breath to
. escape it and the teeth, and give utterance to the sound
' of ZH as heard in the word Azure
iLet the tip of the tongue vibrato against the gnm of the
upper teeth, and give utterance to the sound of S as
heard in the word Cease
Repeat the action with greater force, and give utterance
to the sound of Z as hoard in the word Zouo
PALATAL SOUNDS.
[So called from their dependence on the action of the tongue against
the palate.]
S Gently drop the lower jaw, press the root of the tongue
against the upper part of the mouth, and give utterance
to the sound of K
Repeat the same action with a greater pressure of the
tongue against the roof of the month, and give utterance
to the sound of G as heard in the word Gay
(Press the flat surface of the tongno firmly against the
palate, and give utterance to the sound of J
Repeat the same action a littlemoro gently, and give utter-
ance to the sound of CH as heard in tiro word... CELcer
LINGUAL SOUNDS.
[So called from their dependence on the action of the tongue.]
Press tlic tip of the tongue against the gums of the upper
tooth, and give utterance to the sound of L
Let the tongue vibrato gently against the gums of the upper
teeth, propel the breath through the laryiu ’, and give
utterance to the sound of the trilled It as heard in the
■"■’ord T\.anyo
[Care should be taken not to prolong the “ trill.”]
Inote.— When R follows a vowel, as in the words orb,
arm, air, &c., it snould not he trilled.


NASAL SOUNDS.
[So called because their articulation is accompanied with a sound
through the nose.]
Press tho tip of the tongue against tho gum of the upper
teeth, and give utterance to tho sound of N
Press the root of the tongue against the back of the palate,
and give utterance to the sound of iNG
THE ASPIRATE H.
This letter is pronounced with an expiration of breath,
which, preceding a vowel, is perceptible by the ear at a
considerable distance. It requires more breath to xnako
this sound than any other in the language, as in producing
it, even mildly, the lungs arc nearly exhausted of air.
Illustrate this by giving utterance to the words, harm,
high, home, hack, half, &c.
Note. —A list of words commencing with H, in which
that letter is silent, will be found under tho head of pro-
nunciation.
COMBINATION OF CONSONANTS WITH TOWELS.
Tlio pupil should now proceed to combine the consonant
sounds with those of the rowels, and vice versa, in the
manner indicated in the following table: —


A
AH
AF
A
E
' _
iT
I
I
O
do
oo
O
U
V
ort
out
p
nacre
palm
paw
pad
uccn
pet
piko
pick
polo
pool
pull
pm!
pure
purr
point
pound
B
babo
halm
bought
bad
beef
bed
bido
bid
bone
boon
book
box
bureau
burn.
boil
bounce
F
fame
farm
fault
fat
feed
fell
fight
fix
foam
fool
full
fox
fame
furl
foist
found
V
vain
vast
vault
van
veer
vend
vilo
vigor
veto
(gr) oovc
—
volley
view *
vulgar
void
vouch
31
make
mark
malt
man
meat
mend
milo
miss
moan
moon
—
mob
muto
mull
moist
mouse
T
tamo
task
talk
tack
tcaso
tend
tight
tick
tone
tooth
took
top
tnno
turf
toy
town
D
date
dark
daub
dad
deep
desk
divo
dip
doe
doom
—
dot
duko
dull
doit
doubt
N
nave
nard
naught
gnat
kneel
nest
nine
nib
no
noon
nook
nob
new
nun
noise
noun
TU
thane
thaler
thought
thank
thief
theft
thigh
thick
throat
through
—
thong
th cw
thrush
—
thousand
Til
they
—
—
that
theo
then
thino
this
though
—
—
—
—
thus
—
thou
G
cause
gasp
gauzo
gag
gear
guest
glide
gift
glow
gloom
—
god
gewgaw
gun
—
gout
J
jado
jah
jaw
jam
Jeer
jest
gibo
glpscy
joko
—
~
John
juno
just
rejoice
jounco
K
cako
calm
cauuht
cat
keel
kept
kito
kin
COpQ
coop
cushion
cot
cuc(q)
clung
—
—
S
safo
salvo
sauce
sad
seal
send
siem
six
soul
soon
—
sob
suit
sulk
soil
sound
sa
shame
—-
shaums
shaft
sheep
shell
shine
ship
shoal
shoot
shook
shot
“
shun
—
shout
z
zany
zarnich
—
zax
zeal
zealot
zion
zinc
zone
—
—
—
~
—
—
zounds
ca
change
chaff
chaw
chat
check
chess
chido
chip
choke
chooso
—
chop
chew
churn
choice
chouso
L
lato
lark
law
lack
leap
let
liko
limb
loan
loso
look
lot
Into
lull
loin
loud
ii
rain
rasp
raw
rat
reef
rest
right
rib
rose
roost
rook
rock
—
ruck
—
rouso
H
halo
heart
hawk
have
heat
head
hide
hit
hope
hoop
hook
hop
humor
hurt
hoist
houso
vf ar d Y Combine the Sounds of these Letters with the Vowels running across tho top lino of the above Table, thus :
wa, wah,
wau, Ac., ya.
yah, yau, &c.
*
IEV7 - and EAU are Triphthongs. They only occur in a few words adopted from tho French, f Proper Diphthongs.


CAUSES OF INDISTINCT ENUNCIATION.
Indistinct enunciation is chiefly caused, first, by dropping
the final consonants of words; and, secondly, by driving
words into each other which require to be uttered sepa-
rately. Thus :
“deep | amZ | dark” degenerate info “deepandark.”
“a great | abbey” „ „ “ a gray tabby.”
“ port jor | bay” „ „ “ Porter Bay.’”
“ the Ethiopian’s skin” „ „ “ the Ethiopian’s kin.”
“the | leopard’s | spots” ~ „ “ the leopard’s pots.”
“ pause |in | amity” „ „ “ paws-inamity.”
“and | ours” „ „ “Ann Dowers’.”
“ you | can | stay” „ „ “ youk’n stay.”
“I jam | coming” „ „ “I am cornin’.”
“mine | ears” „ „ “mi-nears.”
“mine j eyes” „ „ “mi-nize.”
“ green ( earth” „ „ “grce-ncarfli.”
and so on ad infinitum.
Note. —It may be laid down as a general rule for regu-
lating distinct enunciation, that whenever a word ends with
a consonant, the lower jaw must fall before beginning
the utterance op the following word, more especially
when it begins with the same consonant. Attention to this
simple direction enables a reader or speaker to have his
voice always under command, while at the same time it
furnishes him with a constant supply of breath, and thus
renders the vocal apparatus impervious to fatigue. The
little word “ and,” which is so frequently used in written
and spoken language, is almost universally robbed of its final
consonant. One of the best methods of overcoming this
vicious habit is the careful reading of selections where the
monosyllable “ and ” is constantly occurring. The first
chapter of the book of Genesis affords a case in point, but a
better exercise still is that which we now append, viz., a
portion of Southey’s well-known poem of “ The Cataract of
Lodorc,” in which the word “ and” occurs more frequently
than in any other composition in the language. Teachers
and pupils are recommended to read this selection repeat-
edly. It affords a valuable lesson in enunciation.


THE CATARACT OF LODOEE.
“How does the water
Come down at Lodore ?”
# -;■;***
Do not clip the Queen’s English by saying retreatin’,
&c., hut lot the terminational syllable ing have full justice
done to it: —
jletrcating and | beating and ] meeting and | sheeting,
Delaying and | straying and | playing and | spraying,
Advancing and ( prancing and | glancing and | dancing,
Decoding, turmoiling, and ( toiling and | boiling,
And | gleaming and | streaming and 1 steaming and ] beaming,
And | rushing and ) flushing and 1 brushing and | gushing,
And 1 flapping and [ rapping and | clapping and [ slapping,
And curling and ] whirling and j purling and ] twirling.
And thumping and | plumping and ( bumping and (jumping,
And dashing and j flashing and | splashing and | clashing,
And so never ending, but always descending,
Sounds and | motions for ever and ( ever are blending,
All at once and ( all o’er with a might uproar;—
And J this way the water comes down at Lodore.
Owing to slovenly habits acquired in early yontb,
good j and | bad—are converted into —good-an-bad.
cause 1 and | effect „ ~ canse-en-effect.
loaves 1 and ( fishes „ „ loaves-un-fishes.
worse | and | worse „ „ worsen-worse.
np 1 and j down „ „ np’n down j
all of which mistakes arc to tho ear, what had spelling in a
letter is to the eye. By tho thoughtless these common
errors may bo regarded as trifles; but wo would remind
snch people that trifles go to make up perfection, and that
perfection is no trifle.


EXERCISES ON MONOSYLLABLES.
Tlicrc is an old saw which lolls us, that if we look after
the pence, the pounds will take care of themselves. In like
manner, it may he said, that if wo look after our little
words, the big words will take care of themselves. Mono-
syllables when judiciously employed in composition and
properly uttered in speech, are very effective. They abound
in the Sacred Books, and arc much used by our old writers.
Some of the suhlimest ideas embalmed in typo wear the
form of the monosyllable.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
And God said, —let there he light! and there was light.—
Generis, i. 3.
And ho said unto me, —Son of man, can these bones LIVE? —And I
answered, —0 Lord God, thou knowest.— Ezekiel, xxxvii. 3.
[ln this verso it will ho perceived that there are
seventeen monosyllables.]
Jesus said unto him, —“ Thou sholflove the Lord tby God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.”— Matthew,
xxir. 37.
[This first and great commandment in the law con-
tains twenty-one monosyllables.]
Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are,
and the things which shall be heeeaete n.—Bevelaiion, i. 19.
[Note the majesty which is given to this passage by
the eighteen monosyllables which precede the
word “ hereafter.”]
The hell strikes oke. We take no note of time
Save by its loss ; to give it then a tongue
Were wise in man.
[This quotation, from Young’s “Night Thoughts,”
forcibly illustrates the value of attending to the
subject under consideration.]
lend fool, six feet shall serve for all thy store,
And he that cares for most shall find no more.
Hall. On the vanity of “ adding house to
house and field to field."
SiIAKSrERE frequently employs this pure form of English
speech. The following passage from the historical tragedy


of King John that relates to the famous interview with
Hubert, during which tho guilty monarch suggests tho
murder of Prince Arthur, is a capital case in point;— •
Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet,
But thou shalt have, and creep time ne’er so slow,
Yet it shall come for me to do thee good.
I had a thing to say. —but let it go,
The sun is in tho heaven, and the proud day,
Attended with the pleasures of the world,
Is all too wanton, and too full of gawds.
To give rac audience.
In this short quotation there arc sixty-five monosyllables.
Attention has been drawn to this subject because of itw.
importance, and also because of the glaring neglect with
which it is generally treated.
EXERCISES ON TERMINATIONAL AND OTHER SOUNDS.
Another cause of defective enunciation arises from tho
slovenly way in which syllables terminating words aro
uttered; thus instead of
A prudent man we have ... A prudimt man.
The cause of temperance ~ ... The cause of tcmpcncacc.
Self-reliance „ „ ... Self-reliance.
A Trench windoto „ „ ... A French windar
A yellow flower. „ „ ... A yeller flow.
The Queen’s prerogative ~ „ ... The Queen’s prerogative.
An eminent statesman „ „ ... An cmimmt statesman.
The Lord our God „ „ ... The Lord our Gaud.
A quiet home „ „ ... A quuit homo.
Variety is charming „ ~ ... Yariurty is charmin’.
Beautiful violets „ ~ ... Beautiful vi«rlets.
A terrible sight „ „ ... A ten-able eight.
The producing classes „ „ ... The prodooeing classes.
I beg to second the resolution „ „ ... I beg to second tho reso-
lootion.
When you presume „ „ ... When you presoome.
An excellent constitwtion „ „ ... An excellent constitootion.
The illus'tratcd news „ „ ... The ilTustrated noos.
Amelia Ann ~ ~ ... Amelia Ban.*
To avoid these and similar vulgarities, the student is recom-
mended to prepare and give utterance to a list of words
having tho following terminations; — ow,ume, une,ution,unar,
* Sounding words ending with a, as if they ended with ar, is a very offensive
vulgarism.


tike, tice, ure; cut, ess, ety, et, cty, ible, iiive, ity, ible, itivc ;
acy, aiive, ant, ance, al, iny.
The subjoined list of words contains some difficult com-
binations of the vocal elements ; they require great pre-
cision of utterance :
months
rhythm
twists
breadths
tasks
acts
shrinks
hands
mists
truths
baths
paths
sixths
worlds
tracts
friendship
attempts
exhausts
precepts
themselves
suspects
resolves
exists
thousands
thousandth
objects.
ALLITERATIVE EXERCISES.
These, in practice, tend much towards securing a firm
and strong enunciation. They will also bo found to bo a
great source of amusement to young people. Let the in-
structor give tho following passages out to his pupils in a
clear distinct tone of voice :
Butcher-horn, but Bishop bred;
Christ Church College crested head!
Peists’ Paring Pream Pcfying;
Flail of Fickle Faith denying;
Greatness Gradual Grandeur mark ;
Haughty Highness, Hierarch;
Jurisconsult, Just, Judicial;
Keen-eyed Katherine’s Kind official;
Lawn-sleeved, Lawyer, Layman, Lcvito;
Mighty Meteor, Mcgathcrite;
Noble Name, no Numbers Needing;
Persecution’s Power impeding;
Questioning Questman of a Queen;
Robed in Royal Raiment sheen;
Sermonizing, Sequestrator;
Toady Tool To Tough Testator;
Veteran, Viceroy, Virtue’s Van;
Vt'olsey, Wisest, Weakest man.
Rough rolled the river’s roaring stream,
And rapid ran the rain,
When Robert Rutter dreamt a dream.
Which racked his heart with pain.
Ho dreamt there was a raging bear
Rushed from the rugged rocks ;
And strutting by with horrid stare,
Breathed terror to the brocks.


But .Robert Rutter drew his sword,
And rushing forward right,
The horrid creature’s trapple gored,
And bared his rueful spite.
Then stretching forth his brawny arm,
To drag him to the stream,
He grappled Grizzle, rough and warm,
Which roused him from his dream.
TJntwirling the twine that untwisteth between, —
He twirls, with the twister, the two in a twine;
Then twice having twisted the twines of the twine,
He twisted the twine he had twined in a twine.
The twine that in twining before in the twine
As twines were untwisted ; ho now doth untwine ;
’Twixt the twine untwisting a twine more between,
He, twirling his twister, makes a twist of the twine.
A thateber of thatchwood went to thatch a thatching;
Did a thatcher of thatchwood go to thatch a thatching ?
If a thatcher of thatchwood went to thatch a thatching,
Where’s the thatching the thatcher of thatchwood thatched?
As a further means of improvement in enunciation, the
pupil should he required to practice all the vocal elements of
words contained in the exercises given in the Appendix, before
pronouncing the words themselves.
METHOD OF EXERCISING THE PUPILS IN ENUNCIATION.
Suppose the first word in a sentence to be “ reading,'”
the following questions should be put
What is II ?
Is it trilled or soft ?
Why?
How is the sound produced ?
What is E ?
How many sounds does this symbol represent ?
Name them.
What is A ?


How many sounds docs this symbol represent ?
Name them.
What docs a union of two vowels, such as ca in the
word reading, represent ?
Why is it so called ?
What is the difference between a digraph and a diph-
thong ?
What sort of sound is D ?
Why is it called dental ?
What is the difference between the sound D and T ?
What is I ?
How many sounds docs it represent ?
Hame them.
What sound does it represent in the word reading ?
What is N ?
How is the sound produced ?
What is G ?
When is it soft ?
When is it hard ?
How are these hard and soft sounds produced ?
How do you pronounce the termination “ ing ? ”
What error is frequently made in the pronunciation of
this syllable P
How pronounce the whole word “ reading.”
Hero it will bo observed that one simple word has given
rise to twenty-eight questions—questions that are rarely,
if ever, put, and yet questions that must bo asked and
satisfactorily answered, before any solid progress can be
achieved in the art of reading. What the instructor does
for one word in the lesson, ho must, during the preliminary
lessons, do for all the words in a lesson. His trouble will
be amply remunerated.


PRONUNCIATION.
Tire nest requisite of a good delivery is correct pronun-
ciation,* without which no public reader ought to bo
tolerated by an intelligent audience. Articulation is often
confounded with Pronunciation, whereas they differ widely.
The former deals with elementary sounds; the hitter with
reords. A correct pronunciation includes a distinct articula-
tion, the importance of which cannot be over-rated. Wo
articulate sounds ; pronounce words ; and read sentences.
Among some of the most noticeable mispronunciations of
the day, may be mentioned the following;—
Accimfplish instead of acconfplish.
again „ a-gen.
advcrtlso'mcnt „ advertisement,
s,'gite „ aj'il.
apost'lo a-pos'l.
bade „ bad.
condiiit ~ kon'dlt.
courteous ~ kurtc-us.
daunt „ dalmt.
dock „ dwke.
haunt „ ha/mt.
’ouse „ 7;ouso.
mercantile ~ mer'cantil.
hostile „ hos'til.
projectile „ projec'til.
sofforons sono'rous.
convcr'sant „ con'vcrsnut.
disputable „ disputable,
pro' gross „ progress,
pro'cess „ pros'cess.
lunat'ic „ lu'natic.
* The English language, when properly pronounced to
the genuine composition of its words, is a nerrons, masculine language,
well adapted to popular eloquence; and it is not improbable that
there may ho eornc connection between the manly character of the
language and the freedom of British and American institutions.—
"WeDSX-ER.


fanatic instead of fanat'ic.
clandestine „ clandos'tin.
plethora „ plcth'-o-ra.
plethoric „ plcth-'o-ric.
chlorine „ chlo'rin.
extraordinary „ oxtror'dinarj.
egotism „ e'gotism.
finance „ fo'nanco.
hein'ous „ ha'nus.
miscol'any „ mis'ccllany,
peremptory „ peremptory.
Perhaps the best general advice ever given with reference
to pronunciation and manner is contained in Hamlet’s well-
known instructions to the player;—
“ Speak the speech [he says] as I pronounced it to you, trippingly
on the tongue ; but if you mouth it, as many of our players do, I had
as lief the town-crier spoke my lines Ob, it offends me to
the soul t'> hear a robustious periwig-paled fellow tear a passion to
tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings ; who, for the
most part, are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb show, and
noise.”
By “trippingly on the tongue,” Hamlet evidently means
that natural bounding of the voice from accent to accent,
instead of resting and drawling upon syllables, after a
fashion much moro “ honoured in the breach than in the
observance.” The word “mouthing” clearly refers to that
offensive pomposity and melancholy whine for which certain
itinerant vapourers have been long unfavourably known.
Some people, who ought to know better, adopt a pronun-
ciation still moro reprehensible. Thcso splendid specimens
of tho genus homo, whoso sayings and doings have been
immortalised by Mr. Punch, prefer such wretched namby-
pambyisms as “ hey hid friends , ” “beautiful gei/urls,”
“southern slxys,” and “noble womans to kind friends,
beautiful girls, southern shies, and noble Homans.
There are others who, whenever they rise to address a
public audience, scorn to bo po'sessod with a determination
to take every o'casion that may o'cur, to o'prcss ns with
the o'pression of tho o'prcssor, which certainly produces an
effect, but unquestionably, a very unpleasant one.
Then,again, what is more commonthan to hear some of our


orators, 'when relieving themselves of the virtuous patriotism
which burns so brightly beneath their immaculate waist-
coats, declaring that it is a dooty which they 7/-owe to
themselves —a dooty "which they ftowe to their constitooents
—a dooty which they ftowo to the country —to support the
resolootion before the ’ouse.
In noticing this worst, and, unfortunately, most prevalent
fault in pronunciation—namely, the omission of the aspi-
rate where it ought to be, and placing it where it ought not
to be, the Dean of Canterbury (Dr. Alford), in his very
suggestive and critical work, entitled “ A Plea for the
Queen’s English,” writes as follows :
“This is a vulgarism not confined to this or that province of
England, nor especially prevalent in one county or another, but
common throughout England to persons of low breeding and inferior
education, principally to the inhabitants of towns. Nothing so surely
stamps a man as below the mark in intelligence, self-respect, and
energy as this unfortunate habit: in intelligence , because if ho were
but moderately keen in perception, he would see how it marks him;
in self-respect and energy , because if he had these, he would long ago
have set to work and cured it. Hundreds of stories are current about
the absurd consequences of this vulgarism. You perhaps have heard
of the barber who, while operating on a gentleman, expressed his
opinion that, after all, the cholera was in the hair. ‘ Then,’ observed
the customer, ‘you ought to be very careful what brushes you use.*
* Oh, sir,* replied the barber, laughing, ‘ I didn’t mean the air of the ed t
but the hair of the hatmosphere ,’ **
The Dean adds:—
“ I have known cases where it has been thoroughly eradicated, at
the cost, it is true, of considerable pains and diligence. Put there are
certain words with regard to which the bad habit Ungers in persons
not otherwise liable to it. Wo still, sometimes, even in good society,
hear ‘ospital,* ‘ erb* and ‘ umble ,’ —all of them very offensive, but tho
last of them by far tho worst, especially when heard from an offici-
ating clergyman. The English Prayer-book has at once settled tho
pronunciation of this word for us, by causing us to give to God our
‘humble and hearty thanks’ in the general thanksgiving. Umble and
hearty no man can pronounce without a pain in his throat; and
* umhlanariy* he certainly was never meant to say; humble and
hearty is the only pronunciation which will suit the alliterative stylo
of the prayer, which has in it not only with our lips, but in our
lives. If jt be urged that we have i an humble and contrite heart,’
I answer, so have we ‘ the strength of an horse but no one sup-
poses that we were meant to say i anorse. t The following are even
more decisive: ‘Holy and humble men of heart;’ ‘ thy humble
servants,’ not thine. And the question is again settled in our times,


by the satire of Dickens in * David Copperfield ' lam well aware
that I am the umblest person going,’ said Uriah Heap, modestly,
‘ let the other bo who he may. My mother is likewise a very nmblo
person. We live in a numblc abode, Master CopperGcld, but have
much to be thankful for. My father’s former calling was umblc; ho
was a sexton.’ ”
For the benefit of those who arc accustomed to take
liberties with the letter H,* the following list of words in
which it is silent is subjoined:
Heir, heiress, heirdom, hcirlcss, heirship, heirloom.
Honest, honestly, honesty, hostler.
Honour, honourable, honourably, honourablcness.
Honorary, hour.
Humour, humourist, humourous, humourously, humour-
ousness, humoursomc, humoursomcly.
EXERCISES.
He that Aath ears to Aear, let him Aear.
How Aigh Ais ZZighness /iolds Ais /mighty Acad.
My Aorse Huntsman refuses to eat 7as oats.
Octavious Hope is a brewer of ale, and a Aale and hearty man.
Up a Aigh, Aill he Aeaved a Augo round stone.
High-soulcd, honourable, and humoursome, Henry Hare, the heir
of Highercombc, is highly esteemed.
All 7ml, Macbeth! /'ail to thee, tbanc of G-lamis!
All 7ml, Macbeth! 7ml to thee, thane of Cawdor!
All Aail, Macbeth! that shall be king hereafter,
WAich of you have done this? Which witch?
WAy, wAat, w7m, wAcn, wAere, have a right to the aspirate. See
you rob them not of it.
Note. — When II begins a syllable not initial , it must bo sounded.
Examples:—Perhaps, bcAest, abAnr, bcAemoth. It is only
when it does not begin a sellable that it is uniformly mute. Ex-
amples : —bulil (pronounced bule) 5 dahlia (pronounced dal’ya); “h!
(pronounced a); ah! (pronounced a as in far) ; brahma, pronounced
bra’ma) ; hallelujah (pronounced hal-le-lu-ya).
* 'What r. av happen to a man who disuses the aspirate is armm'ncrly illustrated
in the fallowing anecdote\ Rtuiient at a military ac idmnv had copied a drawing
of a scene in Venice, and in copying 'he title, hud spelt the name of the city
Vennice. The drawing master put, his pen through the superfluous letter, observing,
<( Don’t you know, Sir, there is hut, one hen in Venice ?” On which the youth burst
out huti-hui'T. On bein ' a-ked what he was laughing about, lie replied he was
thinking how unciramo'dj/ *c<n ce pi/fi* rnrn-t h>■ there. The master, in wrath, reported
him to the colonel in command, a Scotchman. lie, on hearing the disrespectful
reply, without in the least perceiving the point of the joke, observed, “ An’ a varra
naaturul observation to 5.”


INFLECTION.
The ability to read aright even the most ordinary com-
position, depends mainly on the proper use of the waves or
slides, or, as they are technically called, the “ rising ” and
“ falling inflections” of the voice. Destitute of those, reading
degenerates into those dreary mechanical monotones with
which everybody, more or less, is painfully acquainted. The
object of inflection is to fasten the mind upon the sense of
language, and thus, through the medium of the voice, to
render words emphatically the representatives of ideas. The
great advantage of this process consists in the fact, that,
while it intellectualizcs what is being delivered, it abso-
lutely prevents that physical fatigue, of which more me-
chanical readers are in the habit of complaining. In support
of this statement, attention is invited to the following ex-
tract from a very ablo “ leader ” in the Saturday Beview :—
Good reading is, in truth, no slight mental exertion. Bad reading
is as nearly mechanical as any process con be to which the mind can
bring a certain amount of knowledge. The latter, some may think,
must be far less trouble, and the former not worth the pains that must
he bestowed. But it fortunately happens, to counterbalance this, that
had reading, if easier to the mind, is far more trying to the body,
because it does not exercise equally what, for want of a more appro-
priate word, we must call the muscles of the voice. Some are used too
much, some not at all, and the result is speedily fatigue. The voice of
a good reader, on the contrary, has worked in obedience to an intelli-
gent and ever-active will, and, therefore, in the manner calculated to
produce and preserve the greatest efficiency. Practical proof of the
advantage of good reading may he seen by any one who has clerical
acquaintances. Cateris paribus, a bad reader will always be more
fatigued by a Sunday morning service than a good one.
The rising inflection is formed by the voice sliding up-
wards, and is marked in the exercises by the acute accent ['] ;
the falling inflection is formed by the voice sliding down-
wards, and is marked in tbo exercises with the grave
accent [']. Let tbo pupil utter the word indeed'! in a tone
of surprise, and be will have no difficulty in understanding
wliat is meant by tbo rising inflection; and, if ho will then
bo good enough to utter it in a tone of derision, bo will
readily apprehend what is meant by the falling inflection.


THE UPWARD SLIDE OR RISING INFLECTION MUST BE
EMPLOYED:
1. Wlien questions admit of an affirmative or negative
reply.*
2. When tlie sense of a sentence is suspended.
3. When a negative emphasis is expressed.
4. When words representing leading ideas are repeated
in the form of exclamation.
[Most writers on elocution lay down many more rules than
the above for regulating the use of the rising inflection,
but for all practical purpioses those now given will
prove sufficient.]
Exercises ox Eule 1.
Am I not an apostle"! Am I not free'! Have I not seen Jesus
Christ our Lord'! Are not ye my vork in the Lord’? Have we not
power to eat and to drink’ ! Have we not power to lead about a sister,
a wife, as well as otukk apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and
Cephas' ?
Is any among you afflicted’! Let him pray'. Is any merry’ ? Let
him shy psalms'. Is any sick’ among you? Lot him send for the
elders of the church'.
Is not this he that sat’ and legged! ? Do the rulers hnow indeed
that this is the very Christ’ ?
Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we
knoto’!
Hast thou not known’,— hast thou not heard’, that the everlasting
God, the Creator of the ends of the earth fainteth' not, neither is
weary’!
He that planted the car', shall He not hear’ ?
He that formed the eye', shrill He not see’ !
He that chastiscth the heather!:, shall He not correct! ?
He that teacheth man knoivledge', shall He not know ’!
Are they Hebrews! ! So am I. Are they Israelites’! So am I.
Arc they the seed of Abraham’ ! So am I. Are they ministers of
Christ’ ! lam MOKE.
* The exercises on this rule afford the best moans of acquiring a
good rising inflection.


Can honor set a leg '1 No'. Or an arm' ? No'. Or take away
the grief of a wound' i No'. Honor liath no skill in surgery' then?
No'. What is honor 1 ? Award'. What is that word! honor P Air'.
Who hath' it ?He that died o’ Wednesday'. Doth he feel' it ? No',
Doth he hear' it? No'. Is it insensible' then? Yea, to the dead'.
Dm will it not live with the living’ ? No', Why' ? Detraction will
not suffer it.
Is the chair empty' ? —is the sword unswayed' ?
Is the king dead ? —the empire wqiosscssea' ?
What heir of York is there alive but we' ?
And who is England’s king hut great York’s heir' ?
Then tell me—what makes he upon the seas' ?— Siiaesperb.
Shall we adopt' the measures proposed by this speaker? Are the
arguments which he has advanced sulllcicnt to produce conviction' ?
Can we proceed with perfect confidence that we shall not have to
retrace' our steps ?
Does the work relate to the interests of manhind' ? Is its object
useful, and its end moral' ? Will it inform the understanding, and
amend the heart' ? Is it written wit \\ freedom and impartiality' ? Does
it bear the marks of honesty and sincerity' ? Docs it attempt to ridicule
anything that is good or great' ? Does a manly style of ihinJciug
predominate in it? Do reason’ , wit’, humour', and pleasantry') prevail
in it ? Does it contain new and useful truths' ?
Hamlet. Hold you the watch to-night' ?
All. We dd % my lord.
Hamlet. Armed' * say you?
All. Armed", my lord.
Hamlet. From top' to toe' ?
All. My lord, from head to foot.
Hamlet. Then saw you not his face'?
Horatio. O yeS) my lord ; ho wore his beaver tip'.'
Hamlet. What, —look’d \vefrowninghJ ?
Horatio. A countenance more in sorrow' than in anger
Hamlet. Dale' or red'
Horatio. Nay, very pale'.
Hamlet. And fixed his eyes' upon you?
Horatio. Most constantly'. — Hamlet , Act 1., Scene 4.
Exercises on Rule 2.
There can be no doubt that if the solemn and beautiful
service of the Litany of the Church were read with subdued
• The upward wave or slide of the vo ce should always rest upon the most
import iU t word.
"iu-n tonoertf'd by the disjunctive or, the first part of the question takes the
5 - n £, and the latter part the Ihiliu*; inflection.


earnestness and proper intonation by ministers, the re-
sponses would bo much more general and prayerful than
they now are. As is the reader so arc the listeners. The
following is an excellent illustration of the rule now under
consideration: —
From all evil' and mischief'; from sin', from the crafts' and
assaults' of the devil'; from Tlnf ivralh', and from everlasting
damnation’^
Good Lord | deliver ' us.*
From ell blindness of heart • from pride, vain-glory and hypo-
crisy' ; from envy', haired and malice'', and all uncharitableness',
Good Lord \ deliver' us.
'From fornication', and all other 1 deadly sin ; and from all the deceits
of the world!, the JlesJt, and t lie devil',
Good Lord \ deliver ' tis.
From lightning' and tempest; from plague', pestilence', and famine' ;
from battle ’ and murder\ and from sudden' death ,
Good Lord \ deliver ' us.
From all sedition', privy conspiracy', and rebellion!; from all false
doctrine', heresy' and schism'' ; from hardness' of heart , and contempt of
Thy Worti and Commandment',
Good Lord | deliver' us.
By the mystery of Thy holy Incarnaiiori ; by Thy holy Nativity'
and Circzimcision''; by Thy BaptismFasting'', and Temptation!,
Good Lord J deliver'' us.
By Thine agony' and bloody Sweat; by Thy Cross' and Fassion';
by Thy precious Death' and Buriat ; by Thy glorious Resurrection'
and Ascension' ; and by the coming of the Italy Ghost',
Good Lord [ deliver'' us.
The various inflections ns marked above servo to bring
out in striking relief the full sense of the supplications.
Exercises on Rule 3.
The quality of mercy is not strained'. —Siiakspeee,
Enter not mto Judgment' ■with thy servant. — Fsal. cxliii. 2.
* Epuiember what was said in the chapter on Enunciation about dropping
the lower jaw after weirds terminating with consonants, and you will then
perhaps sny, “(rood Lord \ cU liver us/’ instead of, as is usually the practice,
“ Goodlordeliverus,”


The right honourable gentleman has called mo “ an unimpeached
traitor.” I ask, why not “ traitor unqualified by any epithet ? I
will tell him; it was because he dared not. It was the act of a
coward , who raises his arm to strike', but has not courage' to give the
lloio'. I will not call him villain’, because it would bo unparliamen-
tary', and he is a privy councillor. I will not call him fool 1 —because
he happens to be Chancellor of the Exchequer . — Guar TAX.
The region beyond the grave is not a solitary land.
True charity is not a meteor that occasionally’ glares.
Exercises on Rule 4.
Eevcnge! Eevexoe' ! Timothcus cries.
Can Parliament be so dead to its dignity and duty as to give its
consent to measures thus obtruded and forced upon them ? Measures’,
my lords, which have reduced this late flourishing empire to scorn’ and
contempt'. — Chatham.
Oh happy, happy’ Christmas!
On! On’ you noblest English!
Whose blood"is fetched from fathers of war proof!
Fathers'! that like so many Alexanders,
I’.ave, in these parts, from morn till even fought,
And sheathed their swords for lack of argument,
SHAKSPERE.
THE DOWNWARD SLIDE OF THE VOICE OR FALLING
INFLECTION MUST BE EMPLOYED:
1. When questions are asked not admitting a reply of
“ Yes,” or “ No.”
[These generally commence with pronouns or adverbs.]
2. When the sense is complete.
3. When a negatively constructed sentence is expressive
of command.
4. In all imperative sentences.
Exercises on Rule 1.
Where is the wise' ? —Where is the scrile' 1 —Where is the dispute?
this world ?


Why are all the works of nature so perfect ? Why on the contrary
are the works of man so intperfect ?
Which is the great commandment in the law? Who can forgive'
sins but God only' ?
Why reason ye these things in your hearts' 1 ?
From tchence' hath this man these things ? Why troullest thou the
master any further' ? Wno hath warned you to fee from the wrath to
come' 1 ?
To ivhat shall I liken'' the men of this generation ?
i( Who’s here so base that would be a bondman' ? —lf any, speak ';
for him have I offended. —Who’s here so rvde, that would not he a
Roman'? —If any, speak' ; for him have I offended. —Who’s hero so
TILE, that will not Love his country '?—If any y speak'j for him IIATE
I offended. — I pause for a reply.”— Shakspere.
What war has thus laid waste the fertile fields of this once beau-
tiful and opulent country'?—what civil dissensions have happened
thus to tear asunder and separate the happy societies that once pos-
sessed these villages?—what disputed succession, what religious
rage, has, with unholy violence, demolished those temples, and dis-
turbed fervent, but unobtruding piety, iu the exercise of its duties'—
what merciless enemy has thus spread the horrors of fire and sword'?
—what severe visitation of Providence has dried up the fountain, and
taken from the face of the earth every vestige of verdure' ?—Or, rather,
what monsters have stalked over the country, tainting and poisoning,
with pestiferous breath, what the voracious appetite could not devour'?
—From Sheridan’s Speech against Hastings.
And after all, when men so vehemently blame the Canadians, who
is it, let me ask, that taught' them to revolt? When;'—in what
country'—from what people' did they learn the lesson' ? You exclaim
against their revolt —though you have taken their money against
their wishes, and set at nought the rights you boasted of having
bestowed upon them. You enumerate their other comforts'—that
they pay few taxes'—receive large aids from this country'—enjoy
precious commercial advantages lor which we pay dear' —and then
you say, the whole dispute tor which they rebelled is about the taking
of twenty thousand pounds without the consent of their representa-
tives! Twenty thousand pounds taken without their consent'! Why,
it was for twenty shillings’ thus taken that Hampden resisted—and
by his resistance, won for himself an imperi.-hable name, which the
Plantagencts and the Guelphs would give ail the blood that swells
their veins to boast/ of! If to resist oppression'—if to rise against
usurped'power', and defend our liberties when assaulted', be a crime'
—who are the of all criminal?*' ? Who, but ourselves tho
English people' ? We it is I hut have set tho example to our American
brethren. Let us beware how we biamo them 100 harshly for following
it|— From Brougham's Speech on Canada.


Exeecises on Rule 2.
Bejolcc evermore' .
Pray -without ceasing'.
In everythin" give thanks ' .• for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you.
Quench not the Spirit'
Despise not prophesying?,
Prove alt things: hold fast that which is
Abstain from all appearance of evil.—l Thessalonlans,
Heading 7 maketh a fait man; conference ' a ready' man; and writing
an exact man ; and, therefore, it a man write ' little', he had need
have a great memory '; if he confer 1 little, ho need have a present wit /
and if he read' little, he had need have much cunning\ and seem to
know that he doth not, —Bacon.
At length [in the course and progress of His government] there
arrived a period, when this earth was to be called into existence.
*When the signal moment [predestined from all eternity] was come,
the Deity arose in Ilis might, and with a word' created the world'.
What an illustrious' moment was that, when from non'-existencc there
sprang at once' into being' this mighty globe', on which so many millions
of creatures now dwell' ! No preparatory' measures were required'.
No long circuit of means' was employed', “lie spake', and it was
done'; He commanded*, and it stood The earth was at first
“without form* and void': and darkness' was upon the face of the
deep'.” The Almighty'surveyed'the dark abyss ; and fixed bounds'
to the several divisions of nature'. He said 7 , “ Let there be light', and
there-was light'.” Then' appeared the sea* and the dryland'. The
mountains' rose'and the rivers 7 fiowed'. The sun 7 and moon' began
their course 7 in the skies'. Herbs' and plants 7 clothed the ground'.
The air', the earth 7 , and the water' were stored with their respective
inhabitants'. At last' han v was made after the image' of God'. He
appeared' walking with countenance erect 7 , and received Ids Creator’s
benediction as Lord 7 of this new world'. The Almighty' beheld His
Work' when it was finished 7 , and pronounced 7 it good'. Superior' beings
saw with winder 7 this new accession to existence'. “The morning
stars' sang together': and all' the sous of God shouted for joy'.”-
Blaie.
Exeecises on Rule 3.
An excellent illustration of the advantage of this rule is
the Decalogue. It is, therefore, subjoined. The tone should
he dignified, solemn, and authoritative.


I. God spake these words, and said; I am the Lord? thy God',
Thou shalt have none other' Gods but me''.
11. Thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image nor the
likeness of any that is in heaven above’ or in the earth beneath',
or in the water wider* the earth. Thou shalt not how dowr? to them,
nor tvorship' them : for I the Lord thy God am a jealous' God, and
visit the sins of the father.? upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mercy unto thou-
sands of them that love' me, and keep mg commandments'’.
111. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God' in vain ‘ :
for the Lord will not hold him guiltless' that taJceth His name in vain.
TV. Remember that thou keep holy the Salbath'- day. Six days
shalt thou labour', and do all that thou hast' to do; but the seventh'
day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God'. In it thou shalt do no
manner * of work, thou, and thy son', and thy daughter', thy man'-
servant, and thy ?»aid'-servant, thy cattle', and the stranger' that is
within thy gates'. For —in six dags the Lord made heaven' and
earth', the sea', and all? that in them is, and nested the seventh day :
wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed? it.
Y. Honour thy father and thy mother*; that thy days may be long
in the land which the Lord thy GodgiveiU thee.
VI. Thou shalt do no murder',
VII. Thou shalt not commit adultery',
YIII. Thou shalt not steal,
IX. Thou shalt not hear false witness' against thy neighbour',
X. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s house', thou shalt not covet
thy neighbour's wife, nor his servant, nor his maid?, nor his ox', nor
his ass', nor any'thing that is Ids'.
Exercises on Rule 4.
Hold' ! for your lives'.— Othello.
Hold, hold' ; the general speaks to you j hold'; for shame'! — lbid.
Silence' that dreadful bell, it frights the isle
JOTom herpropriety'.— lbid.
Hence', horrible shadow!
Unreal mockery hence' I—Macbeth.
Arm', arm', and out' •
If this, which he avouches, does appear',
There is nor flying hence, nor tarrying here. — Ibid,
Rcgone' ; run to your houses . — Julius Cccsar.


CONTRASTED INFLECTION.
OPPOSITION of meaning requires opposition of inflection.
Exercises.
AH' flesh is not the same ' flesh; but there is one hind of flesh of
men', another flesh of beasts' , another of fishes', and another of birds',
There are also celestial ' bodies, and bodies terrestrial ; but the glory
of the celestial' is one', and the glory of the terrestrial is another
There is one glory of the sun\ and another glory of the mood, and
another glory of the stars' ; for one' star diflereth from another 1 star in
glory. !rfo also is the resurrection of the dead, It is sown in cor-
ruption' ; it is raised in It is sown in dishonour' j it is
raised in glory '; it is sown in weakness* ! it is raised in power ': it is
sown a natural' body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural'
body, and there is a spiritual body.— St. Paul.
The high* and the low\ the rich' and the poor', approach, in point of
real enjoyment, much nearer to each other than is commonly imagined.
Providence never intended that any state here should be either com-
pletely happy', or entirely miserable lf the feelings of pleasurd are
more numerous and more lively in the higher' departments of life,
such also are those of paid. If greatness flatters our vanity' it multi-
plies our dangerd, If opulence increases our gratifications' , it in-
creases in the same proportion our desires and demand i. If the poor
are confined to a more narrow' circle, yet within that circle lie most of
those natural satisfactions', which, after all the refinements of art,
are found to be the most genuine and trui,~* Anon.
The “ Portrait of Napoleon Bonaparte ” by the late
Charles Phillips affords another illustration: —
Such a medley of contradictions', and at the same time such an indi-
vidual consistency ' were never united in the same character. A repub-
lican' and an emperor I —a mahometan' and a catholic ' —a traitor' and a
tyrant —a Christian' and an infidel —he was, through all his vicissi-
tudes, the same sierd , im patient,' inflexible original —the same
mysterious incomprehensible self —the man without a model' and
without a shadozd.
Equally in point is the subjoined extract from Lord
Brougham’s ■well-known speech on “ Law Reform: ”
It was the boast of Augustus , that he found Pome of brick' , and
left it of marble'. But how much nobler will be OUR Sovereign's boast
when he shall have it to say, that he found law dear', and left it
cheap'' ; found it a sealed BOOK, left it \an open letter ; found'
i-l | the patrimony of the rich', left' it | the inheritance of the pood j
found it 1 the tzvo-edged szvord ' of craft and oppression' , left it | the
staff of honesty', and the shield of innocence'.


THE CIRCUMFLEX.
Tins is a -wave of the voice embracing both a rising and
falling inflection on the same syllable. Of these waves
there arc two. One is called the rising circumflex (/—-) and
the other the falling circumflex They are generally
employed for the purpose of giving expression to sneering,
raillery, scorn, reproach, contempt, and irony. Doubt,
pity, grief, supposition, and comparison arc also expressed
by them. Great care should be taken to avoid a false school
of elocution in this branch of vocal training—a school in
which a grotesque art substitutes an elongated and dis-
agreeable drawl for the simplicity and beauty of nature.
“Pray yon avoid it.”
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Queen Gertrude, when rebuking her son Hamlet for his
behaviour towards his step-father (the then King of Den-
mark), says :
“ Hamlet you have your father much offended .”
To which the Prince sarcastically replies —
“ Madam, YOU have my father much offended.”
Hamlet alluded to his own father ; the Queen to his step-
father. The strong circumflex on “you ” was meant to
sting his guilty mother’s soul to the very quick. “ The
■wife of my dead father’s murderer!” This was the idea
which was passing through Hamlet’s brain.
In “The Merchant of Venice,” Shylock makes great
play with the circumflex, wdtness the following examples : —-
“ How like a fawning publican he looks.”
Again: —
“ —Should I not say.
Hath a dog money ? Is it possible,
yt eur can lend three thousand ducats ?
Or, dia l I bend loro , and in a bondmans key,
"With bated breath, and whispering humbleness,
Say this
Fair Sir, you spit on me on Wednesday last;
You spurn dme such a day; another time
You call'd me —HOG ; and for these courtesies
I’ll lend ye thus much monies.”


It will be perceived that the circnmflccted words add
much force to the cogent reasoning of the despised Jew.
A variety of other examples might he given to show the
effect of the circumflex when properly and naturally
employed, bnt sufficient lias been said to put the student
on the right track. One more remark, however, must ho
made. There is a great tendency with some readers to
introduce the circumflex too frequently, and to acquire the
babit of altogether over-doing it. Thus, instead of a simple
combination of the waves of the two slides of the voice, the
vowel sounds are sometimes stretched out india-rubher-liko
as follows; “ You arc f —o —o —o —I—ish,”1—ish,” instead of “ yon
are foolish;” “fo —c —a —rs and t —c —c —a —rs,” instead
of “ fears and tears,” &c., &c. It is needless to add that
this stylo of utterance is much “ more honoured in the
breach than in the observance.”
MODULATION.
What light and shade arc to a picture, that is modulation
to speech. When judiciously employed it enhances and
heightens the effect of and imparts brilliancy and finish to
the most glowing conceptions. The works of great authors
belong as much to the domain of art as those of illustrious
composers, and require to bo sounded forth, even as music
is given out, by the tongue of man. It is through the me-
dium of a cultivated and well-modulated voice that poetry
of the highest order must ever have its noblest and most
perfect exponent. Good modulation consists in the ability
to pass easily from one transition of the voice to another,
from high to low, and so on. The car loves a variety of
cadence.
’Tis not enough— the voice bo sound and clear,
’Tia modulation, that must, charm the ear.
"When desperate heroes grieve, with tedious moan,
And whine their sorrows, in a see-saw tone,


The same soft sounds—of unimpassioned woes.
Can only make the yawning hearers—doze.
The voice—all modes of passion can express,
That marks the proper word, with proper stress:
But none emphatic—can that speaker call,
Who lays an equal emphasis—on all.
Let the reader endeavour to realize a vivid conception of
the meaning of his author, and there will then be little
difficulty in discovering the appropriate tone in which that
conception should be conveyed to the car.
The following eight simple rules for regulating the
modulation of the voice will be found very useful: —
Rule I.
When a question is followed by its answer, the latter
should bo uttered in a lower tone than the former.
ILLUSTRATION.
Oh how hast thou with jealousy infected
The sweetness of affiance !
Show men dutiful' ? Why, so didst thou'.
Or seem they grave' or learned' I AVhy, so didst thou'.
Come they of nolle family' ? Why, bo didst thou'.
Seem they religious ' ? Why, so didst thou'.
—Buakspeke.
Rule 11.
When the answer to a question contains an important
assertion it should be uttered in a higher tone than the
latter.
ILLUSTRATION.
Why do you love , —why do other nations honor JEngland' ? Are
you —are they, dazzled by her naval or military glories', —the splendour
of her literature', —her suhlime discoveries in science', her houndless
wealth', —her almost incredible labours in every work of Art and Skill' ?
No! You love, —you clinu to England because she has been for ages
past, the seat of free discussion, and, therefore, the home of rational
freedom, and the hope of oppressed men TIIEOUGUOUT the would. —
Whiteside.


Rule 111.
When similes are employed the voice should be lowered.
ILLUSTRATION.
—He above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent,
Stood— like a tower', — Milton.
Rule IY.
Sudden transitions* of thought, feeling, and description,
should he marked by a corresponding change of modulation.
The observance of this rule is very important.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
There was a sound of revelry by night:
And Belgium's capital had gather’d then
Her Beauty and her Chivalry; and bright
The lamps shone o’er fair women and brave men;
A thousand hearts beat happily : and when
Music arose with its voluptuous sivell ,
Soft eyes look’d love to eyes which spaJce again ,
And all went merry as a marriage bell—
But hush !— harlc /—A deep sound strikes —like a rising knell I
—Byron.
An hour passed on; the Turk Awoke,
That bright dream —was his last.
lie woke —to hear his sentry's shriek,
“To arms! they come! the Greek I the Greek P*
He woke —to DIE —midst flame, and smoke i
And shout , and groan , and sabre stroke,
And death-shots falling thick and fast
As lightnings —from the mountain-otoVidi ;
And heard with voice as trumpet loud,
Bozzarris —cheer his band.
Strike ! till the last armed foe expires ;
Strike ! for your altars and your fires,
Strike ! for the green graves of your sires,
God— and your native land. — Halleck.
* In speech this means the change of pitch from one note to another
agreeably to the nature and requirements of what is read or spoken.
The lights and shades of emotion can bo painted by the voice and
countenance far more effectively than the artist can place them on the
canvas.


All the world?s a— stage;
And all the men and women —merely players:
Th ev have their exits and their entrances ;
And one man, in his time , plays many parts ,
His acts — being seven ayes. — At first, the INFANT
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
And, then, the whining sciiool-roy with his satchel ,
And shining morning face, creeping, like snail,
Unwillingly to school. —And, then, the loteßj
Sighing lik c furnace ; with a woeful ballad,
Aladc to his mistress’ eyebrow. —Then, the SOLDIER ;
Full of strange oaths , and bearded like the pard ;
Jealous in honour; sudden and quick in quarrel
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth.— And then the JUSTICE
In fair round belly, with good capon lined*
“With eyes severe , and beard of formal cut;
Eull of wise sates, and modern instances —
And so be plays his part. —The sixth age—shifts
Into the lean and slipper’d PANTALOON ;
With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side;
His youthful hose, well sav’d, a world too wide
Eor Ins shrunk shanks ; and his big manly voice
Turning again towards childish treble — pipes
And whistles in his sound. — Last scene of all ,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness, and mere oblivion ,
Sans teeth , eans eyes, sans taste , sans everything.
SHAKSPERE.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, — Hypocrites! —for ye make
clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are
full of extortion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, —cleanse first that
which is within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may bo
clean also.
Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, — Hypocrites! —for ye are
like unto whited sepulchres , which indeed appear beautiful outward 9
but arc within full of dead men's bones , and of all uncleanness.
Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but WITHIN
— ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
* * & *
Fill yc up then the measure of vour fathers; ye serpents , ye genera-
tion of vipers, how can yc escape the damnation of HELL?
Wherefore— behold —I send unto you prophets —and wise men —and
scribes : and some of them ye shall hill and crucify ; —and some of them
shall ye scourge in your synayoyu.es— and persecute them from city to
city


That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the
earth —from the Hood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias
son of Barachias , whom ye stem between the temple and the altar.
Verily I say unto you All these things shall come upon this
generation.
[Note. —Tkc transition which now follows, from tlio lan-
guage of denunciation to that of the deepest compassion,
should he strongly marked in the modulation of the voice.
In the whole range of the sacred writings there is nothing
more beautiful or touching than this passage : —]
0 Jerusalem , Jerusalem:, — thou that killest the prophets and
stonest them which arc sent unto thee —how often would I have
gathered thy children together—even as a hen gathereth her chickens
under her ivings— and ye would is'ox!
— your house is left unto you desolate. —XXIII, St.
Matthew ,
Eule Y.
Opposition and contrast require a marked change in the
modulation.
ILLUSTRATION.
As Coesar loved' me, I weep'' for him ; as he was fortunate', I rejoice'
at it: as he was valiant', I honor' him; hut as he was ambitious', I
slew' him'. There are tears' for his love, joy' for hi* fortune', HONOR'
for his valor*, and DEATH' for his ambition . —Suakspeiie.
Eule YI.
Parenthetic and explanatory clauses should be uttered in
a quicker and lower tone than the rest of the sentence.
ILLUSTEATIONS.
An honest man (says Air. I’ope) is the noblest work of God.
Knozo yc not, brethren (for I speak to them that know the law) how
that the law —hath dominion over a man—as long as he lictih'l
Por as many as have sinned', -without law, shall also perish' without
law; and as many as liavc sinned in the law, shall be judged by the
law, [for not the hearers' of the law arc just before God, but the doers'
of the law shall be justified ;] for when the Gentiles [which have not
the law] do by nature the things contained in' the law, these [having
»ot the law] arc a Jaw unto themselves, which show the worJc of the
law written m their hearts [their conscience also bearing witness] and


their thoughts [the meanwhile] ac'casing or eke ex'casing' 1 one another ;
in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my gospel.
Rule YIL
When the narrative style is followed by the impersonal
style, the difference between them mnst bo clearly conveyed
to the ear by a marked modulation of the voice. This rule
is of the utmost importance when applied to the reading of
the Bible.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
[Then said Martha unto Jesus,] Lord, if thou haclst been here, my
brother had not died. But I know, that even now whatsoever thou
wilt ash of God, God will give it thee. [Jesus said unto her,] Thy
brother shall rise again. [Martha said unto him,] I know that he
shall rise again in the resurrection of the last dag, [Jesus said unto
her,] I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he lire; and whosoever liveth and
believeth in me, shall never die. Believest thou this ? [She saith
unto him,] Yea, Lord : I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son cf
God, who should come into the world. [And when she had so
said, she went her way, and called Mary her sister secretly :
saying,] The Master has come, and callcth for thee. [As soon as
she heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto him. Now Jesus
was not get come into the town, but was in that place where Martha
met him.
The Jews, then, who were with her in the house, and comforted her,
when they saw Mary that she rose up hastily and went out, followed
her saying, She goeth unto the grave to weep there.]
[Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, sh efell
down at his feet : saying unto him,] Lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother had not died. [When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the
Jews also weeping who came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and
was troubled, and said,] Where have ye laid hint [They say unto
him,] Lord, come and see. [Jescs wept —Then said the Jews,] Behold
how ho loved him!
Rule YIII.
Passages descriptive of vastness, sublimity, and awful-
nosa, should be road in a full, low, deep tone.
* Words placed in antithesis to each oilier have the ciTcct of transposing the
ordinary seat of the accent to the syl'alde containing the point of contrast:
Ha;-, wo sht, Mr. to-and-So was a cu/pablo man, but Mr. So-and-So was au
incapable man.


ILLUSTRATIONS.
And I heard—as it were—the voice of a great multitude —and as the
voice of many waters — and as the voice of mighty thuuderings — saying
— Alleluia — for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth.
And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal —and —lo!—there
was a great earthqualce ; —and the sun —became hldclc as sdclccloth of
hair, and the moon —became as blood.
And the stars of heaven —fell unto the earth —oven as a fig tree
casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind.
And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together /—and
every mountain and Island —were moved out of their places'' ,
And the kings of the earth —and the great men —and the rich men
—and the chief captains —and the mighty men—and every bund man—
and every free man —hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of
the mountains.
And said to the mountains and rocks —FALL on us —and hide us
from the face of Him that sitteth on the throne — and from the wrath
of the Lamb\ For the great day of his wrath is come and who shall
be able to stand 1 ?— Revelation.
Rule IX.
Make sound the echo of sense.* When well done this
is very effective.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
SOFT and SMOOTH.
How sweet the moon-light sleeps upon this hank;
Here will we sit, and let the sound of music
Creep in our ears ; soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony. — Merchant OF VENICE*
EAESn and BOUGH.
Blow wind, and cesck your cheeks! eaoe! blow!
You cataracts, and liurricanoes, spout
dill you have drench’d our steeples, drown’d the cocks!
You sulphurous and thought-executing tires
Vaunt couriers to oah-cleaving thunderbolts
Singe my white head ! And thou all-shaking- tixundeb,
STRIKE ELAT THE THICK ROTUNDITY o’ the world!
Ceaok Nature's moulds all germens split at once,
llliat make ingrateiul man!—King Lear.
QUICK and JOYOUS.
One touch to her hand, and ono word in her car,
Vv'iicn (hey reach’d the hall door, and the charger stood near,
So liaht to the croupe, the fair lady he swung,
So light to the saddle, before her he sprung.
* ’Tis not enough no harshness gives offence,
The sound must seem the echo of the sense. —Pcrr.
4


“She is won! she is won! we are gone, over bank, bush, and scaur,
The\ ’ll have swift steeds that follow,” quoth young Lochinvar.
There was mounting ’mong Gimmes of the Netherby clan.
Fosters, Fenwicks, and Musgraves, they rode and they ran,
There was racing, and chasing on Cannobie lie a,
But the lost bride of Netherby ne’er did they see.
So daring in love, and so gallant in war,
Haro you e’er heard of gallant like young Lochinvar.
SCOTT.
SLOW and SOLT2MX
The hills,
Bock-ribbcd, and ancient as the snn ; the vales.
Stretching in pensive quietness between ;
The venerable woods ; rivers, that move
In majesty, and the complaining brooks
That make the meadows green, and, poured round all,
Old ocean’s grey and melancholy waste,
Are but the solemn decorations all—
Of the great tomb of man. The golden sun,
The pl-mcts, all the infinite host of heaven,
Are shining on the sad abodes of death,
Through the still lapse of ages.
All that tread
The globe, are but a handful, to the tribes,
That slumber in its bosom. Take the wings
Of morning, and the Barcan desert pierce,
Or, lose thiself in the continuous woods,
Where rolls the Oregon, and hears no sound,
Save its own dashings—yet the dead ore there;
And millions in those solitudes, since first
The flight of years began, have laid them down
In their last sleep: the dead—reign there alone.
BRYANT.
THE SIX NOTES OF THE SPEAKING VOICE.*
Another excellent mode of acquiring l a flexible and musical
modulation consists in practising all the notes of the speaking
voice on the plan indicated in the following examples :
* A man’s character is reflected in Use tone of his voice. "While, therefore,
striving t> culliva’e to the utuuft (he dinne faeuliy of speech, and taking
pains in the eradication of all d' feo’s capable of removal, we should never
attempt to assio ilate the tones of our voice to those of any other man. A
made-vp voice is unnatural, and that which is ui natural will never inform tho
judgment or influen.ee ilic passions. X-ture abhors dissimulation. These obser-
vations ar-‘ made Incanse there is ju*t now quite with many of our
young men for mere imifitficft delivery. Such aspirants for *-l"cunonary fame
are reminded th>t th» peculiarities which ch.-tracmrise the utterances of a few
distinguished histrionic art.sts nil) not be toler.-iP-d in those nho-e only talent
cousins ia umaicking, very imperfectly, the mannerisms and eccentricities of
others.


THE DEE? WHISPER.
Macbetti. I have clone the deed; didst thou not hear a noise ?
Lady Macbeth. I heard the owl scream, and the crickets cry.
Did nor you speak?
Macbeth. When ?
Lady Macbetti. Now.
Macbeth. As I descended?
Lady Macbeth. Ay.
Macbeth. Hark!—
Who lies i 5 the second chamber?
Lady Macbeth. Donalbain.
Macbeth. This is a sorry sight.; — hlacheth. Act IT I, Sc. 2.
THE NATURAL CONVERSATIONAL NOTE.
Deadino aloud is not more neglected, as a rule, in the Cannibal
Islands, where there is no written language, than in Great Britain,
where to number the books printed annually would carry mo out of
my depths in enumeration, as I am not a Cambridge man, much less
a senior wrangler.
If the human voice surpasses all instruments, surely it is in reading
that its compass is best ascertained, and its various intonations of
pathos or fun, mirth or sadness, most pleasingly, because most natu-
rally, drawn forth.
And surely the voice of man cannot, in my humble opinion, be
better employed secularly in the worship of God. than in reading aloud
to others the works of those great and good writers to whom He has
confided genius and inspiration. Thus may we assist, but
slightly, the spread of civilization, education, and the humanising
. — j > “i' I'-*'* 1 '-*'* w *- - * »
influences of literature among our fcllovv-creatures.-
THOMAS HOOD.
He who rises early, is met by the domestic animals, with peculiar
pleasure : one winds and purs about him, another frisks and capers,
and does everything but speak. The stern mastiff, the plodding ox,
the noble horse, the harmless sheep, the prating poultry, each in its
own way expresses joy when lie first appears. Then how incomparably
fine is the dawning of tlie day, when the soft light comes stealing on.
It first glimmers with the stars, but gradually outshines them all! How
beautiful are the folding and parting of the grey clouds, drawn back like
a curtain, to give us a sight of the most magnificent of all appearances,
the rising of the sun! flow rich is the dew, decking every spire of
Rrass with coloured spangles of endless variety, and of inexpressible
beauty ! Larks mount, and fill the air with a cheap and perfect
music; and every tree, every steeple, and every hovel, emits a cooing
or a twittering, a warbling or a chirping —a hailing of the returning
day.— Robinson.
THE HIGH DECLAMATORY NOTE.
Ding joyous chords ! —rinpj out again!
A swifter still and a wilder strain!
And bring fresh wreaths ! —wo will banish all
Save the free in heart from our festive hull.
On through the maze of the fleet dance, on !
MRS. HEMANS.


Sink or swim, survive or perish, I give my hand and my heart to
this vote! Sir, before God, I believe the hour is come. My judgment
approves this measure ; and my whole heart is in it. All that I have,
all that I am, and all that I hope, in this life, I am now ready here to
stake upon it; and I leave off, as I began, that live or die, survive or
perish, lam for the declaration. It is my living sentiment; and, by
the blessing of God, it shall be ray dying sentiment: —independence
now and independence por ever !-
JOHN ADAMS.
THE HIGHEST NOTE.
Aw&ke! awake!
Bing the alarm-bell!—Murder and treason!
Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm! awake!— Xlacheth.
Hold, hold! for your lives! — Othello .
And dar’st thou, then,
To beard the lion in his den,
The Douglas in his hall ?
And hop’st thou hence unscathed to go ?
Ho! by Saint Bride of Bothwell, no ! — Scott.
Talk not to mo
Of odds or match ! —When Comyn died,
Three daggers clashed within his side!
Talk not to me of sheltering hall!—
The Church of God saw Comyn fall!
On God’s own altar streamed his blood ;
While o’er my prostrate kinsman stood
The ruthless murderer, even as now,
With armed hand and scornful brow,—
Tip ! all who love me! — blow on blow!
And lay the outlawed felons low !-
SCOTT.
THE LOW NOTE.
All heaven and earth are still—though not in sleep,
But breathless, as we grow when feeling most;
And silent, as we stand in thoughts too deep ;
All heaven and earth are still .• From the high host
Of stars to the lulled lake, and mountain coast,
All is concentrated in a life intense,
Where not a beam, nor air, nor leaf is lost,
But hath a part of being, and a sense
Of that which is of all Creator and Defence.-
BYRON.
This is the place—the centre of the grove ;
Here stands the oak, the monarch of the wood;
How sweet and solemn is this midnight scene!
The silver moon unclouded holds her way
Through skies where I could count each little star;
The fanning west wind scarcely stirs the leaves j
The river, rushing o’er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a stilly sound.


In such a place as tins, at such an hour, —
If ancestry may be in aught believed, —
Descending spirits have conversed with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.— Home.
THE LOWEST NOTE.
I had a dream which was not all a dream.
The bright sun was extinguished ; and the stars
Did wander darkling in the eternal space,
Hapless, and pathless ; and the icy earth
Swung blind and blackening in the moonless air*
Atom came and went—and came, and brought no day
* * * The world was void :
The populous and the powerful was a lump,—
Seasonless, herbless, treeless, manless, lifeless,—
A lump of death —a chaos of hard clay.
The rivers, lakes, and ocean, all stood still;
And nothing stirred within their silent depths.
Ships, sailorless, lay rotting on the sea;
And their masts fell down piecemeal: as they dropped,
They slept on the abyss without a surge ;
The waves were dead; the tides were in their grave 5
The moon, their mistress, had expired before ;
The winds were withered in the stagnant air ;
And the clouds perished : Darkness had no need
Of aid from them.—She was the universe.-
BYRON.
UNIMPORTANT CLAUSES TO BE SUBORDINATED TO
PRINCIPAL IDEAS.
Another excellent means of acquiring a natural and agree-
able modulation of the voice will be found in the practice
°f analysing sentences, and separating therefrom the clauses
containing principal and subordinate ideas. It will be
readily perceived by the youngest boy in a class vthat if the
subordinate clauses can be eliminated without destruction
to the main sense of the sentence, such clauses must ne-
cessarily bo of less consequence than those which are
retained; and hence the necessity of indicating, by an
alteration in the tone of the voice, the nature of such
clauses, will become apparent to the mind. Exercises on
this rule should be marked on the black-board. The
compiler of this work has found the practice very
valuable.
The subordinate clauses are marked thus [ ], and should
be read in a lower key than the other clauses.
The following touching picture of “ The Death of the


Chancery Prisoner,” from the “Pickwick Papers,” affords
a good illustration of the value of this rule; —
The turnkey led the way in silence ; and [gently raising the latch
of the room-door], motioned Mr. Pickwick to cmer. It was a large,
bare, desolate room, with a number of stump bedsteads made of iron :
on one of which lay stretched, the shadow of a man : wan', pale', and
ghastly'. Ills breathing was hard and thick, and he moaned painfully
as it came and went. At the bedside sat a short old man, in a cob-
bler’s apron, who [by the aid of a pair of horn spectacles] was reading
from the Hible aloud. It was the fortunate legatee'.
The sick man laid his hand upon his attendant’s arm, and motioned
him to stop. He closed the book, and laid it on the bed.
“ Open the window ” [said the sick man].
He did so. The noise of carriages and carts ; the rattle of wheels;
the cries of men and boys ; all the busy sounds of a mighty multi-
tude, instinct with life and occupation, blended into one deep mur-
mur ; floated into the room. Above the hoarse loud hum, arose [from
time to time] a boisterous laugh; or a scrap of some jingling song
[shouted forth by one of the giddy crowd], would strike upon the ear,
ibr an instant, and then be lost amidst the roar of voices and the
tramp of*footsteps—[the breaking of the billows of the restless sea ol
life, that rolled heavily on, without]. Melancholy sounds to a quiet
listener at any' time; hoto melancholy to the watcher by the bed of
death'!
i( There is no air here,” [said the sick man faintly]. “The place
pollutes it; it was fresh round about, when I walked there, years
ago; but it grows hot and heavy in passing these walls. I cannot
breathe it.’*
“ We have breathed it together for a long time,” [said the old man],
“Come, come.”
There was a short silence, during which the two spectators
approached the bed. The sick man drew a hand of his old fellow
prisoner towards him, and pressing it affectionately between both his
own, retained it in his grasp.
“I hope, [he gasped after a while—so faintly that they bent their
ears close over the bed, to catch the half-formed sounds his pale lips
gave vent to] —“I hope my merciful Judge will bear in mind my
heavy punishment on earth. Twenty years, my friend, twenty years
in this hideous grave! My heart broke when my child died, and I
could not even kiss him, in his little cofGn. My loneliness since then,
in all this noise and riot, has been very dreadful. May God forgive
mo ! He has seen my solitary, lingering death.”
He folded his hands [and murmuring something more they could
not hear] fell into a sleep—[only a sleep at first] —for they saw him
smile.
They whispered together for a little time, and the turnkey,
[stooping over the pillow], drew hastily back. “He has got his
discharge,” [said the man].
He had. Hut he had grown so like death in life, that they knew
not when he died.


SUBORDINATION OF WORDS TO IDEAS.
As an illustration of tlic great importance of subordi-
nating words to ideas, attention is drawn to the following
verses from the 12th Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
as quoted hy the Rev. J. J. Halcombe, M.A., in his recent
work entitled “ The Speaker at Homo
“And, [behold,] the Angel op the Loan came upon him, and a
light shined in the prison ; and ho smote Peter on the side, and
raised him up, [saying,] Arise up quickly.” But subordinating all
words in the first clause to the prominent idea, “the Angel of the
Lord’' the narrative is brought out graphically, and the tact of the
angi-l's appearance is realised to the hearer’s miud; but if read in the
ordinary matter-of-course stylo, much of this is lost, and it is rather
implied that it was an event expected than otherwise. Again, the
fact of A light shining in the prison, is brought out as something to
bo remarked upon, and as showing the nature of the visitation. So
again in the words of the 11th verse—the damsel “ ran in, and told
how Peteu stood without.” The force of the narrative turning, not
upon the tact of any one standing without, that being already known
by the knocking, but upon the fact of its being X’liek, whom they
thought to be in prison.
Professor Blunt, in his “ Duties of the Parish Priest,” writes thus
on this subject“ Ko rule for reading God’s Word can help a man
so effectually as the rule of thoroughly hndeestandino what he reads,
while the mere regulation of his voice will be an actual commentary,
conveying to his hearers the true meaning, when it might otherwise
escape them, and often giving a novelty to lessons which they had
listened to a hundred times before.”
lii all tbo exercises given in tbo Appendix tlio practice
of analysing sentences, and eliminating therefrom clauses
containing subordinate ideas, should bo constantly
enforced.
EMPHASIS.
Emphasis is aparticnlar and distinct stress of the voice laid
on certain words to which a speaker attaches special weight
and importance. “ There is as great a difference between
a chapter of the Bible, or any other piece of plain prose, read
by one who places the several emphases everywhere with
taste and judgment, and by one who neglects them, as there is
between the same tunc played by a masterly hand, and by


the most bungling performer.”* The only general rule
that can be laid down for the regulation of emphasis, is
this —understand and feel the force of the thoughts to
which you desire to give utterance.
As an illustration of the manner in which ideas embodied
in written words may bo entirely changed by the tone in
which they are spoken, Dr. Hunt, in his “ Philosophy of
Speech,” gives the following extract from “ Kenil-
worth:” —
Elizabeth, being anxious for the reconciliation of Sussex and
Leicester, thus addressed them—
“ Let me see you join hands, my lords,” said Elizabeth, “ and forget
your idle animosities.”
The rivals looked at each other with reluctant eyes, each unwilling
to make the first advances to execute the queen's will.
“ Sussex,” said Elizabeth, “ I entreat —Leicester, I command you.”
Yet so were her words pronounced, that the entreaty sounded like
command, and the command like entreaty.
The full importance of the right use of emphasis in
bringing out the full force of a powerful conception is well
illustrated in these lines from “ Macbeth —
Will all great Kept line’s ocean wash this blood
Clean from my hand ? Ko ; —Tins my hand will rather
The multitudinous sea incarnadine,
Making the green ONE BED.
Some persons have been guilty of placing the inflection
on the word “ one,” and thus converting tho sea into a
“green one.” The proper reading is, “ making tho green'
one red'.” This brings out tho full beauty of the con-
ception.
Another good illustration of the effect produced by em-
phasis occurs in Edmund’s reply to Albany in “ King
Lear.” See Act V., Sc. 3.
There’s my exchange: [ Throwing down a
glove] what in the world he is,
That names me traitor , —villain-like he lies :
Call by thy trumpet: ho that dares approach,
On him, on you—WHO NOT?—I will maintain
My truth and honour firmly.
* Blair.


Marc Antony, in closing his celebrated oration over the
body of Julius Ctesar, makes great “ play” with emphasis :
But, were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle up your spirits, and put a TONGUE
In every wound of Ceesar, that should move
The STONES of Romo to rise and mutiny.
[t. e. hfot only movo men to avenge Cassar’s death, hut
rouse even inanimate nature —movo the very stones to rise
and mutiny.]
A story is told of Cooke, the musician, which affords a
very humorous instance of tho clfcct of emphasis. Cooke
was suhpocned as a witness at a trial in tho Court of Queen’s
Bench as to the alleged piracy of an arrangement of “ Tho
Old English Gentleman.” On his cross-examination by
Sir James Scarlet, afterwards Lord Ahinger, who was acting
as counsel for the opposite side, that learned gentleman
rather flippantly questioned Cooke as follows; —
Sir James. Now, sir, you say that the two melodies are the same
but different —now, what do you mean by that, sir?”
Cooke {very promptly). I said that the notes in the two copies were
alike, but with a different accent, the one being in common time, the
other in G-8 time, and that, consequently, the position in the accented
notes was different.
Silt James {impatiently). What is musical accent, sir?
Cooke (provokingly). My terms are one guinea per lesson, Sir
James. {Much laughter.)
Sir James {ruffled). Never mind your terms, sir. I ask you what
is musical accent ? Can you see it ?
Cooke. No.
Sin James. Can -yon feel it ?
Cooke. A musician can. {Great laughter.)
Sir James {rery angry). Now, pray, sir, don’t heat about tho bush,
but explain to his lordship and the gentlemen of the jury, who are
supposed to know nothing about music, the meaning of what you call
accent ?
Cooke {measuredly). Accent in music is a certain stress laid upon
a certain note in the same manner as you lay an emphasis upon any
given word for the purpose of being better understood. Thus, if I
were to say, “ You are an ass, it rests upon ass ; but if I were to say
h rests upon you, it would rest upon YOU, Sir James.” {Roars of
laughter.)
The Judge {with much seeming gravity). Are you satisfied, Sir
James? {Continued laughter.)
Sir James {with a countenance the color of his name). The witness
111 ay go down. {Great laughter, amidst which Coolee left the box.)


As a further and last illustration of the effect which can
1)0 imparted to written language hy emphasis, we subjoin
the following passage from XL Samuel xii. 1 to 7: —
And the Lord sent Nathan unto David—and he came unto him,
and said unto him ;
“ There were two men in one city; the one p.tcti/—and the oilier'
took'. The rick' man had exceeding many /locks and herds —but
the poor' man had nothing—save one little cw e-lamb', which he had
louy\f, and nourished up'; and it grew up together with him and with
ms children': it did eat of his own meat', and drank of his own
cup', and lay in his bosom*, and was unto him as a daughter'.
“And there came a travelled unto the rich man; and lie spared to
take of his own' and of his own' herd, to dress for the way-
faring man that was come unto him : —but took the poor' man's
LAHI3', and dressed it for the man that was conic' to him.”
*And David’s anger'was greatly kindled against the man: and he
said to Nathan: —
“As the Loud lircih', the man that hath done THIS thing shall surely
DIE': And ho shall restore the lamb pouxiTold because he did this
thing, and because be hud no pity'.”
Nathan said unto David,—“ TIIOIT—art the man.”
There arc four modes of producing effective emphasis.
I.—BY STEESS.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Avoid a slanderer, ns you would a scorpion.
What is worth doing at all, is worth doing well.
Shall wo crown the author of the public calamities, or shall we
destroy him ?
He who cannot hear a joke, should never give one.
Hen of principle ought to be principal men.
A wager is a foots argument.
The head without the heart —is like a steam-engine without the
hoilcr .
II. —BY CHANGING THE SEAT OF THE ACCENT.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Does ho emphasize correcilg, or ?
Docs he speak distinctly, or indistinctly ?
• These passages, being purely descriptive, should be read in u different tone to
the others. The Trice should sympathise with the touching narrative r< lated by
Nathan, and give full expression to tho angry feelings it excited in the mind of
David. I his will greatly enhance the impressiveness of Nathan's emphatic reply,
Uhoa art the man.”


There is a great difference between owing and "SO'Rgiving.
There are probably as many invisible things as there are visible.
Mind and voice — act and he act upon one another.
For this mortal must put on immortality ; and this corruptible must
put on YScorruption.
"What's done cannot be vs done.
What fellowship has righteousness with UK righteousness I —or what
communion hath light with darkness ?
Pure religion raises men above themselves — inreligion —sinks them
fo the brute.
Wo arc not now, gentlemen, to inquire into the or the IK-
justice, the honour, or the Dishonour of the deed; not whether it was
lav'Jvl or vxlau'/id, wise or vstcise, but whether it was actually
COMMUTED.
lII.—BY AN ALTERATION OF PITCH.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
A day—an no UR —of virtuous liberie is worth a whole ETERNITY
in BONDAGE.
I tell you—that though you —though all the world —though an
angel from HEATEN—were to declare the truth of the statement —I
could not believe it.
Have patience—gentle friends—l MUST not read it—lt is not meet
—you know how Cicsar loved you—you are not wood —you are not
Stokes—but men —And being mkk—hearing the ivill of Cxsar —It
will ivftame you —it will make you MAD.
IV.—BY PROLONGING THE SOUND OF A WORD.
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Let our object be the truth —the whole truth—and nothing BUT
the truth.
I warn yon—do not dare lay your hands on the Constitution.
You cakkot —my lord —you canNOT conquer America.
Ido not ask —I demand — your attention.
The honorable member tells the House that power may pass from
his hands—what we complain of, sir, is that power HAS passed from
his hands.
What man could do is done already. —Heaven— and Earth —will
witness—it H-o-m-e—m-u*s*t f-a-11 — that we arc innocent.


PAUSATION.
In her valuable and interesting “ Notes on Nursing,” that
generous-hearted and noble-minded woman, Florence Night-
ingale, advises all persons who read to the sick to do so
slowly. People, she observes, often think that the way to
get over reading aloud with the least fatigue, is to get over
it in the least time. They gabble, they plunge, and gallop
through their reading. There never was a greater mistake.
A celebrated conjuror once observed that the way to make
a long story short was to tell it well and slowly; so it is
with reading to the sick. Very few people read aloud as
pleasantly as they speak. In reading they sing, they hesi-
tate, they stammer, they hurry, they mumble, when in
speaking they do none of these things.
Short-hand writers have ascertained that ordinaryspeakers
utter about 120 words a minute, or upwards of 7000 words
within the hour. But this rapid tongue-travelling is ex-
ceeded hy the general run of readers. These rattle away at
the rate of something like 135 words a minute, or 7800
words per hour. A vocal speed like this produces two
evils; it fatigues the reader and obscures the sense. To
remedy the ono and to shed light on the other are the
objects of pausation. There are two kinds of pauses, viz.:—
the grammatical pause and the rhetorical pause. The former
has reference to the syntactical structure of a sentence, and
appeals to the ege; the latter regards the sense of a passage,
and is addressed to the ear. Not a tithe of the jiauses made
by a skilled reader are noticed by the printer. The careful
observance, then, of the rhetorical pause is of great moment.
The definiteness and force with which it aids the expression
of thought arc made apparent in the following extract: —
“ Some men ear,” that “ wealth ia power”—and some that “ talent
—ia power”—and others that “ authority —ia power”—but there is
an apothegm, that I would place higi above them all, when I assert,
that, “Tkuiii —ia power.” Wealth cannot purchase ; talent —cannot


refute; knowledge —cannot over-reach; authority —cannot silence her:
they all, like Felix, tremble at her presence: cast her into the seven-
fold heated furnace of the tyrant's wrath—fling her into the most
tremendous billows of popular commotion —she mounts aloft in the ark
—upon the summit of the deluge. She is the ministering spirit, who
sheds on man that bright and indestructible principle of life, which is
given, by its mighty author, to illuminate and to inspire the immortal
soul —and which is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.
To remedy the defect of rapid delivery, the student is
advised to accustom himself to observe the following regu-
lations for making appropriate pauses; —
1. Pause slightly before and after parenthetical clauses of
sentences.
2. Pause slightly after the nominative.
3. Pause a little longer before and after the word repre-
senting the leading idea of a sentence.
4. Pause longer still when the subject matter changes.
Those four simple rules should he applied to all the exer-
cises contained in the appendix.
As an illustration of the effect produced by pausation,
attention is called to the following anecdote ; —During the
struggle against the obnoxious Stamp Act, so unwisely
imposed upon America by the British Government, Patrick
Henry, in one of those remarkable displays of eloquence
which gained for him the title of
The forest-born Hemosthene?,
Whoso thunder shook the Philip of the seas, —*
■wound up a brilliant speech in these stirring terms :
Cccsar had his Brutus, Charles his Cromwell, and George the Third
~[the orator paused. “Treason!” cried the Speaker. “Treason!
treason !” echoed from all sides of the House. It appeared to be a
frying moment; but Patrick Henry, nothing daunted, drew himself up
to his full height, and fixing an eye, flashing with fire, upon the
Speaker, continued] —and George the Third' —may profit by their
example. If that be treason, make the most of it.
-Hie impression produced was electrical.
ANOTHER ILLUSTRATION.
At a public meeting bold by the Free-traders in London.
* ByiT'n.


in 1844, one of the speakers made a retort npon a dis-
tinguished Protectionist, in the following happy language ;
The honourable member tells us that Protection is the sun of our
social system —that it gilds the spire of the church, the dome of the
palace, and the thatch of the cottage. lie might have added, and, —
THE CHIMNEY' OF THE LANDLORD'.
[By suspending the voice on the conjunction, and making
a slight pause after it, the effect of the retort is greatly
increased.]
Equally good as an illustration of the point now under
consideration is an anecdote told of Curran by the late
Charles Phillips.
Lord Avenmore, a judge before whom Curran was frequently
pleading, had one great fault. He was apt to take up a first impression
of a cause, and it was very difficult afterwards to obliterate it. The
advocate, therefore, had not only to struggle against the real obstacles
presented to him by the itself, but also with the imaginary ones
created by the anticipation of the judge. Curran was one day most
seriously annoyed by this habit of Lord Avenmorc, and he took the
following whimsical method of correcting it. It must be remembered
that the object of the narrator was, by a tedious and malicious pro-
crastination, to irritate his hearer into the vice which he was so
anxious to eradicate. They were to dine together at the house of a
common friend, and a large party was assembled, many of whom had
witnessed the occurrence of the morning. Curran, contrary to all his
usual habits, was late for dinner, and at length arrived in the most
admirably affected state of agitation. The following scene then took
place
The Judge [walking up and down impatiently, and spealciny in a
grumbling tone of voice]. Why, Mr. Curran, you have kept us a full
hour waiting dinner for you.
Curran [apparently labouring under the effects of considerable
excitement ]. Oh, my dear lord, I regret it much: you must know it
is not my custom ; but \a slight pause] I have just been witness to
a most melancholy occurrence.
The Judge. Good heavens! You seem terribly moved by it; —
take a glass of wine [ pouring one out for him]. What was it, —Curran
«—What was it ?
Curhan [still apparently discomposed]. I will tell yon, my lord,
the moment ! can collect myself. 1 had been detained in court —iu
the Court of Chancery —your lordship knows the Chancellor si's late.
The Judge. I do, —I do ; but go on—go on, Mr. Curran.
Curhan. Will, ruy lord, X was hurrying here as last as I could —
I did not oven change my dress—l hope I shall be excused for Cuming
in my Imou ?
The Judge. Pooh, pooh—never mind your boots. The point—tho
point; —come at once to the point of the story.


Curt?an. Oh, yes ; — I will, my good lord, in a moment. I walked,
here—l did not even wait to get the carriage ready jit would have
taken time, you know.
The Judge. Of course it would, —of course it w r ould. Go on—
go on.
Curran. Xow, there is a market exactly in the road by which I
had to pass —your lordship may recollect the market. Do you ?
The Judge. To bo sure I do. Go on, Curran, —go on with the
Story.
Curran. I am very glad your lordship remembers the market,
for I totally forget the name of it. The name—the name—the
name
The Judge. "What the deuce signifies the name of it, Sir? It is
the CasTe Market.
Curran [lowing politely'}. Your lordship is perfectly right ; it is
called the Castle Market. Wei!, I was passing through that very
identical Castle Market, when I observed a butcher preparing to kill
a calf. He bad a huge knife in his hand—it was as sharp as a razor.
The calf was standing beside him —he drew the knife back to plunge
it into the animal. Just as he was in the net of doing so, a little boy,
about four years old —his only son—the loveliest little baby I ever saw,
ran suddenly across his path, and he hilled— [a pause]— oh heaven !he
hilled'
The Judge [in a "highly excited tone of voice]* The child! the
child ! the child !
Curran [with great coolness]. Ko, my lord,—the CADY—ho
killed—the calf s ; but your lordship is in the habit of anticipating.
They say that Lord Avcnmorc never anticipated afterwards.
FORMATION OF THE OROTUND.
Tins is the highest achievement of speech-culture. The
term orotund has reference to the oro rotundc, or swelling
utterance, for which the great orators of an elder day wore
so famous. It signifies fulness of intonation. When pure and
deckled, it enables a speaker to bring out those deep, round,
dear, and sonorous tones which are so necessary for giving
effect to images of sublimity and grandeur. The formation ol
the orotund is, therefore, indispensable to him whoso high
privilege and solemn duty it in to read the Bible in the con-
gregation of the people. To acquire—and it is to be acquired
■ —this rare and telling quality of voice, it is essential thattho
speaker should have perfect command over the elements 01


spcooli, and be able to utter them with great distinctness in
his very lowest notes. The student will find his progress
materially facilitated, by emitting all the vowel sounds from
the larynx in that peculiar percussional manner which
Induces what is called a ringing intonation. The note given
forth should bear some resemblance to the sound produced
by an abrupt attempt at coughing.
As one of the very best illustrations of the, so to speak,
photographing power of the orotund, the following selection,
from the impressive service for the Burial of the Dead, as
used by the Church of England, is recommended for con-
stant study and practice: —
I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord; he that be-
lieveth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live : and whosoever
liveth, and believeth in me, shall never die.
I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth, and though, after my skin, worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.
Man that is born of a woman hath but a short time to live, and is
full of misery. He cometh up, and is cut down, like a flower ;he
flecth as it were a shadow, and never continued! in one stay.
In the midst of life we are in death : of whom may wo seek for
succour, but of Thee, 0 Lord, who for our sins art justly displeased?
Yet, O Loed God most holy, O Loud most mighty, O iioly and
most merciful Satioue, deliver us not into the bitter pains of
ETEEYAL death.
Tiioxj khowest, Loed, the secrets of our hearts ; shut not thy
merciful cars to our prayer; but spare us, Loed most holt, 0 God
most mighty, O uoly and merciful Sayioue, thou most woeiuy
judge eternal, suffer us not, at our last hour, for any pains of death, to
fall from thee.
[Note. —The less the effort in giving the proper vocal
sound to the vowels printed in capitals, the greater ivill he
the effect. Pure tone is all that is required.
Other Exercises.
Of old hast Thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens
arc the work of '1 by hands. They shall perish, but Thou shalt endure;
yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shalt Thou
change Them, and they shall bo changed: but Thou art the same;
and Thy years shall have no end.
Refore the mountains were brought forth, or ever Thou hadst
formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting,
Thou art God.
Thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, “Return, ye children


of men.” Eor a thousand years, in Thy sight, are but as yesterday,
when it is passed, and as a watch in the night.
Thou earnest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep : in
the morning they arc like grass which groweth up. In the morning
it fiourishcih, and groweth up ; in the evening it is cut down, and
whhereth. —Look of Psalms.
Thou glorious mirror ; where the Almighty’s form
Glasses itself in tempests; in all lime
Calm or convulsed, —in breeze', or or storin', —
Icing the pole', or in the torrid clime'
Dark heaving ; —boundless, endless', and sublime',—
The imago of Eternity, — the throne
Of the Invisible ; even from out thy slime*
The monsters of the deep are made; each zone
Obeys'thee,—thou gocst forth, dread', fathomless', alone'!
BYRON.
It must he sc—Plato, thou reason’st well!
Else, whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire,
r lhis longing aher immortality ?
Or whence this secret dread, and inward horror.
Of falling into nought? Why shrinks the soul
Each on herself, and startles at destruction ?
’Tis the Divinity that stirs within us:
’Tis llcav’n itself that points out an hereafter,
And intimates —Eternity to man.
Eternity ! thou pleasing —dreadful thought!
Through what variety of untried being,
Through what new scenes and changes must we pass!
The wide, th* unbounded prospect lies before me;
Put shadows, clouds ; and darkness rest upon it.
Here will I hold. If there’s a power above us
(And that there is, all Nature cries aloud
Through all her works), He must delight in virtue;
And that which lie delights in must be happy —
Put when? or where? This world —was made for Ccesar?
I’m weary of conjectures—this must end them —
\Laying his hand on his sword,']
Thus am I doubly arm’d. My death and life,
My banc and antidote are both before me.
This—in a moment, brings me to an end;
Put this—informs me I shall never die.
The soul, secur’d in her existence, smiles
At the drawn dagger, and defies its point,—
The stars shall fade away, the sun himself
Grow dim with ago, and nature sink in years;
Put thou slialt flourish in immortal youth,
Unhurt amidst the war of clcmcnis,
Tito wreck of matter and the crush of worlds!
ADDISON.
5


GESTURE.
Proficiency in tin's department of oratorical study cannot
bo obtained by written directions. It must bo sought for
at the bands of a competent master. One practical hint,
however, may bo offered. It is this : never assume an
angular attitude.* The curve is the line of beauty. Fre-
quent visits to a Sculpture Gallery arc strongly recom-
mended to all who admire the eloquence of action.
EARNESTNESS.
A lakge portion of tin's work lias been devoted to tlic
subject of sounds. But, be it remembered, sounds are
nothing without souls in them. The power of fixing our
ideas and feelings upon the minds and hearts of others —this
is the great end contemplated by the art of elocution ; and to
acquire it, the voice, whether in reading or speaking, must bo
* “To stand erect, in a dignified and graceful posture, so as to
have a complete command over the whole body, is one of the first
requisites for oratory of any kind. Most speakers know how their
utterance is cramped if they are obliged to stand in an awkward and
constrained position, and many of our modern pulpits seem constructed
on purpose to impede the flow of words, and to hinder any graceful
and appropriate action. They arc literally tubs, into which the
preacher is thrust, often up to his elbows; and if any attempt bo
made to raise the preacher, so as to give him a little more power over
himself, and over his audience, it is done by means of a rickety
platform, or a still more unsteady hassock. He has generally no
other alternative than either to be packed in a barrel or mounted on a
balance; and how such a position can bo favourable to eloquence, let
those who make pulpits decide.”—“ Pkkacukiis axd ITidaciiiko,” by
the Hev. 11, Christmas .


strongly impregnated with the warmth, of genuine emo-
tion. A. speaker will affcot his audience according to
the degree in which ho is affected himself. There is a con-
genial sympathy which darts like electrical spirit from heart
to heart. It will strike others more or less forcibly accord-
ing to the impulse it receives from the speaker. Ho is the
master-spring which puts them all in motion. But how
can that man transfuse the very life of the passions into the
souls of others, while ho himself remains unmoved, or but
moderately agitated? Ho; he must feel in the most ex-
quisite degree, every tender, every bold, every animated
emotion! Then, and then only, shall he bo able to excite
kindred feelings in the hearts of his audience. Many of our
public addresses have a kind of freezing and benumbing
influence, which is an antidote to animation. Their speeches
may be compared to a waxen image which has form, pro-
portion, and ornament, but is destitute of life and motion.
But there is an inborn fire of the soul, which is the very
life of eloquence. There is a wide-flaming enthusiasm in
the strains of a masterly speaker, which will force its way
into the hearts of all.”*
When the Bishop of London asked Betterton —“ What
could be the reason that whole audiences should be moved
to tears, and have all sorts of passions excited, at the repre-
sentation of some story on the stage which they knew to
ho feigned, and in the event of which they were not at all
concerned, yet that the same persons should sit so utterly
unmoved at discourses from the pulpit upon subjects of the
utmost importance to them, relative not only to their tem-
poral but also to their eternal welfare ho received from
the tragedian this memorable reply : —“ My Lord, it is
because we aee in earnest.”
A man may bo a Coenewall Lewis in scholarship —a
Bckke in political philosophy —a Locke in intellectual fore-
sight— a Wiiately in argumentative skill—but if ho bo
destitute of expression and sensibility, his words will fall
upon the car “ like sounding brass and a tinkling - cymbak
An orator, it has been well said, should be a kind of Electric
* Ilcrricg on t{ Speech.”


Telegraph, and all tlio people spoken to slionld be so many
wires in his hands.
“To this one standard mate your just appeal,
Here lies the golden secret —learn to feel:
Or fool, or monarch, happy, or distress’d,
!Mo speaker pleases that is not possess’d.
A single look* more marks the internal woe,
Than all the windings of the lengthened oh!
Up to the face the quick sensation flics,
And darts its meaning from the speaking eyes ;
Love, transport, madness, anger, scorn, despair,—
And all the passions—all the soul is there.”
It is earnestness which draws the cutting edge of words
across the car, and startles oven stupor into attention. It is
earnestness which lessens the fatigue of listening, and out-
voices the stir and rustle of an assembly. You may lay a
hammer on a plate of glass without impressing it, but
strike it forcibly witb that implement and you shatter it
into fragments. So truth simply laid on the minds and
consciences of men scarcely impresses ; it is when uttered
with all the zeal of a heart burning to bring it home to
tho hearts of others, that it becomes like a hammer that
breaketh the rock in pieces. It was this that clothed in
thunder the magic words of Chatham, when with flashing
eye and uplifted arm ho
shook the nations through his lips—and blazed
Till vanquished senates trembled as (hey praised
—it was this that charmed the voice and sunn’d tho soul
of levikg, as ho rolled forth in grand and liquid melody tho
tones which excited tho envy of Buougiiam, and made
Caknino’r tine face flash with pleasure —it was this that
induced the disbelieving Hump to bang with rapture on tho
accents of Whitfield, and to travel twenty miles to hear
him — it was this that enabled Kiuwas to draw such miglity
gatherings together in the churches of Dublin, and by bis
eloquent and irresistible appeals to obtain rings from tho fin-
gers of ladies, watches from tho pockets of gentlemen, and
even epaulettes from the shoulders of officers—it was this
which lent such fascination to the melodious and highly cul-
tivated tones of M‘All, of Manchester, and which melted,
* The eyes are the wiiulcws of the soul.—Cicero.


enchained, and tlirillcd, and thunder-struck his souT-
a wakened hearers —and it was this that enabled the great
Apostle to reach the altitude of that majestic argument
which constrained the royal sceptic to exclaim, “ Almost
thou persuades! me to bo a Christian.”
Let, then, the aspirant for oratorical distinction above
all things embrace earnestness of thought, naturalness of
manner, and truthfulness of feeling—not the mere attempt;
to put them on the outside. They will manifest themselves
if they can bo excited. All beyond this is the fable of the
frog and the ox, and betrays a most pitiful ambition in the
man that uses it.
Note.—“ Writers on acouslics generally agree that that form of
apartment is best suited for the proper distribution ot sounds in 'whies
the length is from a third to a half more than the breadth, the heigh 1 ,
somewhat greater than the breadth, and haying a ceiling bevelled oil
all round the sides, called technically a coved or coach, roof.\ from its
being lower at the sides than the centre.


APPENDIX.
READING ALOUD.
PROSE ILLUSTRATIONS.
[To make resclircr aloud a pleai-ui able as well as profitable exorcise, the minds of
tbo young mint I e stjn.ulut* d. A word or two well put by the teiu-her about
the iutbor his origin—his enflienUies—bis times— his works, See., will s< cure
attention, awaken interest, and prove instructive. Ine regulations laid down
in the* theoretical part of this work should be applied to all the given
out lor simultaneous reaoirg or recitation. AVlen mlficientlv advanced, boys
should be called upon to give frequent viva voce descriptions and explanations
connected with the subject matter cf their reading.]
THE NEW QUALIFICATION FOR HOLY ORDERS
[PUBLICOLA.]*
The Bishop of BocbcFter lias issued a much-needed and admirable
order. He requires a certificate from each candidate for holy orders
to the effect that he has power of voice eufficient for Ids public minis-
trations ; that he lias no impediment or hesitation; and that his
manner of reading is not heavy or monotonous, but such as is well
fitted for the sacred functions which he will have to discharge. He
also requires every candidate to read before him previous to the ordi-
nation. I can bear personal testimony, as can thousands, perhaps
millions, of others, to the urgent need of such an order. Some years
ago, I lived in a small cathedral town, which swarmed with clergy;
out of the whole mass I can scarcely remember more than two or
three that were in the habit of reading the Lord’s Prayer with due
emphasis and expression. * * * * !Now, as touching the feelings
and reaching the heart, as well as enlightening the mind, is the great
object for which cl erg much exist, the Bishop of Rochester is entitled
to all praise for insisting on u much-neglected qualification. Isor docs
it diminish that piaisc that the same object lias been from time to
time conttmplatcd by other prelates, and efforts made for securing
it, though falling far short of the energy and tffeieney which may be
• 'Wi.liam Johnson Pox,


recognized in his attempt. They arc rather upon record as witnesses
testifying to the evil, than as his forerunners in the work of reformation.
« # # # *
The mischief of miserable reading is by no means confined to the
clergy, although it may in them bo of more consequence than in most
other cases. The moral influences which they should study aro of
paramount importance ; and if they fail for want of so simple an
attainment, why, they arc sinners above all men that dwell in Jeru-
salem. But the defect is a very common one. Nor is it best remedied
by a technical study of elocution. Merely to keep all the stops will
not do ; our punctuation is grammatical, and not oratorical. Nor is it
cured by the most intimate study of rising and falling inflections.
The real secret of good reading is, a distinct understanding of the meaning
of the author , sympathy in what he says, if it imply anything of feeling
or passion, and a command over the organs of speech. In these respects
it is that failures are so common, not only amongst the clergy, but
even generally in tolerably well-educated persons.
The Bishop of Rochester has made a good beginning at one end, and
the Educational Commissioners arc worthy co-operators by their at-
tempts to promote a corresponding beginning at the other end. And
they have amply illustrated the equal need thereof. One of the
Assistant Commissioners speaks of good reading, meaning thereby
distinct articulation, proper expression, and intelligent apprehension
of the drift cf the passage read, as “ a great treat which he was very
rarely permitted to enjoy.” He gives instances of the absurd misap-
prehension and ignorance of the meaning of very plain passages, and
traces many of the causes why teaching is in this respect a failure.
The fact Is, that the teachers are often not much better readers than
the pupils. Now this importance attaches to decent reading; a book
is only tolerably well understood in proportion as it is tolerably well
read; the intellectual advantage is essentially connected in the mind
with the correctness of the mechanical operation. Only as this is
attained can reading be expected to become a resource and enjoyment
in after life, and to have a beneficial inllucncc upon others as well as
upon the individual. It both implies, and in turn tends to create and
stimulate, mental appreciation of the true and beautiful. There are
hundreds to whom Mr. Dickens has done as much good by reading his
tales as ho has to others by writing them. When an actor recites the
verses which belong to the character for which ho is cast, how broad
is the difference which is made by his perception of their poetical
beauty or passionate truth) No man ever made an audience more
distinctly appreciate his perception of poetical imagery limn did Mr.
when on the st »ge, and especially in his line recita'ion of
many fine passages in the rather unuramatic dramas of Lord Byron.
The evening school which he established and superintended during his
residence at {Sherborne awoke a just feeling on this matter in the
minds of friends of education in ilic neighbourhood, and one Dorset
clergyman at least showed his sense of what might be done, and was
needful to be done, by offering an annual prize lor good reading.


the hint might ho taken by the Committee of Council; it would be
no bad way of applying a portion of the public grant, if a system of
prizes were established, which might be divided between the master
and the pupil, for good reading,- skilful arithmetic, and various other
of the attainments with which it is desirable that children should be
furnished before they are sent out to try their fortune in the world.
A congregation of people who were themselves good readers would
scon make a clergyman feel that it was his business and duty to
accomplish it himself, He would not merely feci the schoolmaster
treading on his beds, but pupils also, to whom he had to speak
every Sunday’, would beguiling lii3 kibes. Perhaps the most impor-
tant view of good reading is its connection with the power of subse-
quent self-instruction in the pupil. Idore than anything else does it
put the key of knowledge into his bands. It makes a book become a
companion to him. He docs not fall back, as is so commonly the case
now, into forgetfulness and ignorance. 11(3 docs not unlearn to write,
for lie is often impelled to make extracts from volumes which his yet
scanty library does not allow Lira to possess. There is something
like a pledge that the great ends of education will be answered; and,
if accomplished intellectually, they are secured against a complete
failure morally. The public money is not wasted, and the r ational
character is not unimproved,
=* o & i’ f
On one point I have off on insisted, viz.:—“ That we should look to
the results in the pupil as paramount to all other considerations,”
By the same rule as the Bishop of Rochester would apply to a clergy-
man, not ‘How many years have you been at a University ? ” but
“ Are you fitted really to teach and improve people ? ” would I have
a schoolmaster judged. “ Have you really a due amount of good to
show in the mental condition of your pupils P ” And of that good,
while there arc other acquirements that should not be neglected, no
single test can be more valuable than satisfactory answers to the ques-
tion, “ Can they read easily, fluently, intelligently, and expressively ? **
THE DEATH OF COLONEL NEWCOME.
[THACKERAY.]
satiric of Lugl ::ru b " i,s burn at I'alcuila, in 1011. “ Vanity F.ar,” “ I'eu-
donr-’S,” “ Ks'i oa<i,” “ The A’ewcorrup,” ;u d his Lectures on The Humour*
ii-ts" and “ Tho Pour Gcoi-p's/’ baae £jveu their author a plate in the
Temple of Lame. Thucktray was found dead in Lia Led on the *olh of
December, IhUl.]
Apthi the child had pone, Thomas Kcwcome began to wander more
and more. Jie talked louder ; and pave the word of command, spoko
Hindostance, as if to liia men. Thou he spoke words in Trench


rrpidly, seizing a hand that was near him, and crying, “ Toujonrs,
tjjjcurs!” But it was Ethel’s hand which he toot. Ethel and Clive
tad the nurse were in the room with him ; the latter came to us who
were sitting in the adjoining apartment; Madame do Elorac was there,
with my wife and Bayham.
At the look in the woman’s countenance, Madame de Elorac started
up. “He is very bad, he wanders a great deal,” the nurse whispered.
The Erench lady fell instantly on her knees, and remained rigid in
prayer.
Some time afterwards Ethel came in with a scared face to our pale
croup. “Ho is calling for you again, dear lady,” she said, going up
to Madame de Florae, who was still kneeling ; “and just now he said
he wanted Pendennis, to take care of his boy. lie will not know you.”
She hid her tears as she spoke.
She went into the room, whore Clive was at the hod’s foot; the old
man within it talked on rapidly for awhile : then again ho would sigh
end bo still: once more I heard him say hurriedly, “ Take care of him
when I’m in Indiaand then with a heart-rending voice ho called
out “Beonorc, Lconore!” She was kneeling by his side now. The
patient’s voice sank into 'faint murmurs; only a moan now and then
announced that he w*as not asleep.
At the usual evening hour the chapel bell began to toll, and Thomas
hands outside the bed feebly beat a time. And just as the
last hell struck, a peculiar sweet smile shone over his face, and he lifted
up his head a little, and quickly said “Adsuml” and fell back. It
vras the word we used at school, when names were called ; and 10, he,
whoso heart was as that of a little child, had answered to his name,
and stood in the presence of The Master.
THE DEATH OF LITTLE NELL.
[CHARLES DICKENS.]
[lns works of this gifted and popular author Lato Ion? become a familiar
literature in every part of the world where the English tongue is spoken, and
many of them have been translated into the various European languages.
One of Dickens’ leading claims to the gratitude of Lis countrymen is the
ardour, intensity, and thoroughness with which, from the first moment he
bounded into the arms of public applause down to the present hour, he has
mane his delightful fictions the means of exposing and thereby redressing
some of the most pernicious social wrongs and flagrant abuses of our times.
Sympathising deeply with the wrongs and sufferings of those whose lot it
is to labour, and to cam their daily bread by the sweat of the brow, ho
lias shown us, that wherever there is an honest heart beating beneath a dilapi-
dated w-dstcoat, there may be something worthy our attention —our assistance
—ay)—and it may be—our admiration. It is in these and other directions
closely allied to, and intimately associated with, the sanitary, 1 * social, moral.
* Sanj/ary and fauafory are but just beginning to be rightl} l, understood. Sanitary
from nanitu*, Latin for soundness or health, morns appertaining to healths
Bancffory, from suuo, to cure, means appertaining to healing or curing. “'lhe town
is m such a baa f-anit.-ry condition, that some sanatory measures must be under-
taken,”—Da. AnrOKD'ii “ Queen’s English”


educational, nnd Christian welfare of bis fellow-men, that the name of Charles
Dickens is most known and best appreciated. Dickens was born at Lanfiport,
Hampshire, in ISI2, and is consequently now fifty-live years cld. Our author’s
command over deep pathos is seen to advantage in the subjoined description
of the Death of “ Little Nell,” from “the Old Curiosity Shop,”]
She was dead. There, upon her little bed, she lay at rest. The
solemn stillness was no marvel now.
She was dead. No sleep so beautiful and calm, so free from trace of
pain, so fair to look upon. She seemed a creature fresh from the hand
of God, and waiting for the breath of life ; not one who had lived and
suffered death.
Her couch was dressed with here and there some winter berries and
green leave- 1 , gathered in a spot she had been used to favour. “ When
X die, put near me something that has loved the light, and had the sky
above it always.” Those were her words.
She was dead. Dear, gentle, patient, noble Nell, was dead. Her
little bird—a poor slight thing the pressure of a finger would have
crushed —was stirring nimbly in its cage ; and tho strong heart of its
child-mistress was mute and motionless for ever.
"Where were the traces of her early cares, her sufferings, and fatigues ?
All gone. Sorrow was dead indeed in her, but peace and perfect
happiness were born; imaged in her tranquil beauty and profound
repose.
And still her former self lay there, unaltered in this change. Yes.
The old fireside had smiled upon that same sweet face ; it had passed,
like a dream, through haunts of misery and care; at the door of tho
poor schoolmaster on tho summer evening, before the furnace fire upon
the cold wet night, at the still bedside of the dying boy, there had
been the same mild lovely look. So shall we know the angels in their
majesty, after death.
THACKERAY ON HOOD.
[The subjoined extract from one of tho celebrated “Round-about Papers,” so
pleasurably nmemberod by the readers of Ihe “ Comhiil Magazine,” brings
out si;mo of the best characteristics ot Thacucray’s wiuic. A mure genial,
generous, or manly passage was never written. It could only have emanated
from a large-hearted and lofty-minded gentleman. 'lhe closing remarks on
what should constitute the literary man's point of honour will, now that the
hand that penned them is motionless fur ever, be perused wuh affectionate
interest.]
"When Hood laid down his puns and pranks, put tho motley off, and
spoke out of his heart, all Kngland unci America listened with tears
and wonder! Other men have delusions of conceit, and fancy them-
selves greater than they are, and that the world slights them. Have
we not heard how Liston always thought he ought to play Hamlet?
Hero is a man with a power to touch tho heart almost unequalled;
and he passes days and years in writing, “Young Leu, ho was
a nice young man,” and so forth. To eay truth, I have been


reading “Hood’s Own’* until lam perfectly angry. “You great man,
you good man, you true genius and poet,” i cry out as I turn page after
page, “Do, do, make no more of these jokes, but be yourself, and take
your station.” When Hood was on his deathbed, Sir Hubert Peel, who
only knew of bis illness, not of his immediate danger, wrote to him a
noble and touching letter, announcing that a pension was conferred
on him. *• * * * * O sad, marvellous picture of
courage, of honesty, of patient endurance, of duty struggling
against pain ! How noble Peel’s figure is standing by that sick bed!
how generous his words,how dignified and sincere his compassion!
And the poor dying man, with a heart full of natural gratitude
towards his noble benefactor, must turn to him and still say —“ If it
he well to be remembered by a minister, it is better still not to bo
forgotten by him in a ‘burly Burleigh]’”* Can you laugh? Is not
the joke horribly pathetic from tho poor dying lips? As dying
Kobin Hood must firo a last shot with his bow—as one reads of
Catholics on their deathbeds putting on a capuchin dress to go out of
the world —here is poor Hood at the last hour putting on his ghastly
motley, and uttering one joke more. He dies, however, in dearest love
and peace with his children, wife, friends; to the former especially
his whole life bad been devoted, and every day showed his fidelity,
simplicity, and affection. In going through tho record of his most
pure, modest, honourable life, and living along with him, you come
to trust him thoroughly, and feel that here is a most loyal, affec-
tionate, and upright sou], with whom you have been brought into
communion. Can wo say as much of all lives of all men of letters?
Here is one at least without guile, without pretension, without
scheming, of a pure life, to his family and little modest circle of friends
tenderly devoted. I like, X say, Hood’s life even better than his
books, and I wish, with all my heart, Monsieur et cher confrere ,
the same could bo said for both of us, when the ink-stream of our
life has ceased to run. Yes: if I drop first, dear Baggs, I trust you
may find reason to modify some of the unfavourable views of my
character, which you arc freely imparting to our mutual fiieuds.
What ought to be the literary man’s point of honour now-a-days?
Suppose, friendly reader, you arc one of tho craft, what legacy would
you like to leave to your children? First of all (and by Heaven’s
gracious help) you would pray and strive to give them such an
endowment of love, as should last certainly for all their lives, and
perhaps be transmitted to their children. You would (by the same
aid and blessing) beep your honour pure, and transmit a name
unstained to those who have a right to bear it. You would —though
this faculty of giving is one of the easiest of tho literary man’s
qualities—you would, out of savings, small or great, bo al io to help a
poor brother in need, to dress his wounds, and, if it were but two-
pence, to give him succour. Is the money which the noble Macaulay
gave to the poor lost to his family? God forbid! To the loving
hearts of his kindred is it not ratlur tho most precious part of then?
* Sir Kobcrt had come from Burleiyh to sco Hood.


inheritance? It was invested in love and righteous doing, and It
hears interest in heaven. You ■will, if letters be jour vocation, find
saving Larder than giving and spending. To save be your endeavour
too, against the night’s coming when no man may work ; when the
arm is weary with the long day’s labour; when the brain perhaps
grows dark ; when the old, who can labour no more, want warmth,
and rest, and the young ones call for supper.
SYDNEY CARTON AND THE POOR SEAMSTRESS AT THE
FOOT OF THE GUILLOTINE.
[DICKENS.]
[The readers of the “ Talc of Two Cities” will remember that Sydney Carton, who
was deeply attached to the daughter of I)r. alannetto, determined to prove his
devotion to her by sacrificing his own life iu order that her husband’s might be
saved. How that was accomplished is told in Lichens’ best style.]
As lio stood by the wall in a dim corner, while some of the fifty-
two were brought in after him, one man stopped in passing, to em-
brace him, as having a knowledge of him. It thrilled him with a
great dread of discovery, but the man went on. A very few moments
after that, a young woman, with a slight girlish form, a sweet spare
face in which there was no vestige of colour, and large widely opened
patient eyes, rose from the seat where he had observed her sitting,
and came to speak to him.
“ Citizen .Evremonde,” she said, touching him with her cold hand.
“ I am a poor little seamstress, who was with you in La Eorce.”
He murmured for answer: “ True. I forget what you were
accused of?”
“Plots. Though tho just Heaven knows X am innocent of any.
Is it likely ? "Who would think of plotting with a poor little weak
creature like me?”
The forlorn smile with which she said it, so touched him that tears
started from his eyes.
“ I am not afraid to die,” Citizen Evremonde, but I have done
nothing. lam not unwilling to die, if the Republic, which is to do
so much good to us poor, will profit by my death; but I do not know
how that can be, Citizen Evremonde. Such a poor weak little
creature.”
As the last thing on earth that his heart was to warm and soften to,
it warmed and softened to this pitiable girl.
“I heard you were released, Citizen Evremonde. I hoped it was
truer”
“It was. Put, I was again taken and condemned.”
“HI may ride with you, Citizen Evremonde, will you let me hold
your hand? lam not afraid, but X am little and weak, and it will
give me more courage.”
As the patient eyes were lifted to his face, he saw a sudden doubt
in them, and then astonishment. Ho pressed tho work-worn, hunger-
worn young fingers, and touched bis lips.


“ Are you dying for him ?” she ■whispered.
“ And his wife and child. Hush! Yes.”
“ Oh you will let- me hold your brave hand, stranger ?”
“ Hush I Yes, my poor sister ;to the last.”
Six tumbrils roll along the streets.
On the steps of a church, awaiting the coming-up of the tumbrils,
stands the Spy and prison-sheep. He looks into the first of them ; not
there. He looks into the second: not there. He already asks him-
self, “Has he sacrificed me?” when his face clears, as he looks into
the third.
“Which is Evremonde?” says a man behind him,
“ That. At the back there.”
“With his hand in the girl’s?”
"Yes.”
The man cries “Down, Evremonde! To the guillotine all aristo-
crats! Down, Evremonde!”
“Hush, hush I” the Spy entreats him, timidly.
“ And why not, citizen ?”
“He is going to pay the forfeit; it will be paid in live minutes
more. Let him be at peace,”
But, the man continuing to exclaim, “Down, Evremonde!” the
face of Evremonde is for a moment turned towards him. Evremonde
then secs the Spy, and looks attentively at him, and goes his way.
# * # *
The ministers of Saintc Guillotine are robed and ready. Crash!—
e bead, is held up, and the knitting-w’omen who scarcely lifted their
eyes to look at it a moment ago when it could think and speak, count
One.
The second tumbril empties and moves on ; the third comes up.
Crash ! —And the knitting-women, never faltering or pausing in their
work, count Two.
The supposed Evremonde descends, and the seamstress is lifted out
next after him. He has not relinquished her patient hand in getting
out, but still holds it us he promised. He gently places her with her
back to tno crashing engine that constantly whim up and falls, and
she looks into bis face and thanks him.
“But for vou, dear stranger, I should not be so composed, for I
am naturally a poor little thing faint of heart; nor should I have been
able to raise my thoughts to Him who was put to death, that we
might have hope and comfort here to-day. X think you were sent to
me by Heaven ”
“Or you to me,” says Sydney Carton. “ Keep your eyes upon me,
dear child, and mind no other object.”
“ I mind nothing while I hold your hand. I shall mind nothing
when I let it go, if they are rapid.”
“ They will be rapid. iVar not
The two stand in the fust-thinning throng of victims, but they
speak as if tliev were alone. Eye to eye, voice to voice, hand to
hand, heart to hear', these two children of the Universal Hothcr, else
so wide apart and diliering, have come togalicr on the dark highway,
to repair home together and to rest in her busom.


“Brave and generous friend, will you let me ask you one last ques*
tion ? lam very ignorant, and it troubles me—just a little.”
“ Tell me what it is.”
“ I have a cousin, an only relative and an orphan, like myself,
whom I love very dearly. She is five years younger than I, and she
lives in a farmers house in the south country. Poverty parted us,
and she knows nothing of my fate —for I cannot write —and if I
could, how should I tell her! It is better as it is,”
“ Yes, yes : better as it is.”
“What I have been thinking as we came along, and what am I
still thinking now, as I look into your kind strong face which gives me
so much support is this: —lf the Republic really does good to the
poor, and they come to be less hungry, and in all ways to suffer less,
she may live a long time ; she may even live to be old.”
“ What then, my gentle sister ?”
“Bo you think —the uncomplaining eyes in which there is so
much endurance, fills with tears, and the lips part a little more and
tremble ;—“that it will seem long to me, while I wait for her in the
hotter land where I trust both you and X will be mercifully
sheltered ?”
“It cannot be, my child; there is no Time there, and no trouble
there.”
“You comfort mo so much! lam so ignorant. .Am Ito kiss you
now ? Is the moment come ?”
“Yes.”
She kisses his lips ; he kisses hers; they solemnly bless each other.
The spare hand docs not tremble as he releases it; nothing worse
than a sweet, bright constancy is in the patient face. She goes next
before him—is gone; the knitting-women count Twenty-Two.
“ I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord : he that he-
Heveth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever
liveth and believeth in me, shall never die.”
The murmuring of many voices, the upturning of many faces, the
pressing on of many footsteps in the outskirts of the crowd, so that
it swells forward in a mass, like one great heave of water, all flashes
away. Twenty-Three.
THE TRIAL OF WARREN HASTINGS.*
[MACAULAY.]
[Tins rh’slinguisbccl ecsnyist, Instori in, orator, poet, and statesman was Ibo son
of Zrtfliarv Macau’a'. whose ♦ flbrts to stride off tbc fort era of the slave have
covered his mane with iinpenshuhlo renown. In Ibofi Mr. Mncnnhiy resigned
his seat for Kninlnirgh. lie was created peer of the rca'm on September 10,
1857. He died on the 2Sth December, ISSO. Referring to Macaulay’s merits
* In 1757, at the instance of Burke, Fox, Sheridan, and others, a bill was passed
in Parliament for the impeachment of 'Warren Hustings, late Governor-General
of India, for high ci imes and misdemeanours committed against the native princes
and population of Hindu-tan. The tiial lingered over a period of seven years,
and tern inatt dinti e acquittal ot the accused. The opening of tbo trial is
painted in striking colours by Macaulay.


as a prose writer, a recent critic observes :— rt His touch is singularly free, his
colour is rich and deep, and hi* mind is never feigned. There is in all that
comes from bis pen a rem.trkabh* facility of i,lustration, if be rarely produces
original thoughts or profound views of life. A more brilliant and interesting
writer of English prose could not ho named. M'canlay’s gi eatesfc distinction,
considered cridcaUv, is found in his invention of a new prose style, which is
decidedly his own, whatever be its merits or its faults.”}
The place was worthy of such a trial. It was the great hall of
William Rufus—the hall which had resounded with acclamations at
the inauguration of thirty kings—the hall which had witnessed the
just sentence of Paeon and the just absolution of Somers —the hall
where the eloquence of Stafford had for a moment awed and melted
a victorious party inflamed with just resentment—the hall where
Charles had confronted the High Court of Justice with the placid
courage which has half redeemed ids fame.
Neither military nor civil pomp was wanting. The avenues were
lined with grenadiers. The streets were kept clear by cavalry. The
peer?, robed in gold and ermine, were marshalled by the heralds
under Garter King-at-Arms. The judges, in their vestments of state,
attended to give advice on points of law. Near a hundred and
seventy lords—three-fourths of the Upper as the Upper
House then was—walked in solemn order from their usual place of
assembling to the tribunal. The junior baron present led the way—
George Elliott, Lord Heatlifield, recently ennobled for his memorable
defence of Gibraltar against the fleets and armies of Franco and
Spain.
The long procession was closed by the Duke of Norfolk, Earl
Marshall of the realm —by the great dignitaries, and by the brothers
and sons of the King. Last of all came the Prince of Wales.
The long gall Tics were crowded by an audience such as has rarely
excited the liars or emulation of an orator. There were gathered
together, from all parts of a great, free, enlightened, and prosperous
empire, grace and female loveliness, wit and learning, the represen-
tatives of every science and every art.
A PICTURE OF VENICE.
[RUSKIN.]
[Tcrs celebrated art critic was born in London, in February, 2519. Ills ft Modem
Painters,” “ The Seven Lamps of Architecture,” and “The Stones of Venice,**
have formed the themes of much cri'iciam. Euskm is an entJuif? astic ad-
mirer of Turner, compared with whom the old nm&tcra in End.-cape, such
as Claude, Poussin, Salvator, Euysdael, and oiher*, are, in his opinion, very
inferior. He is said to have abandoned all other studies, in order to devote
his future labours exclusively to the works of Turner and the Venetians.’!
A city of marble did I say ?—nay, rather, a golden city paved
with emerald. For truly, every pinnacle and turret glam-cd and
glowed, overlaid with gold, or bossed with jasper. Ihwnth, the
unsullied sea drew in deep breathing to and fro its eddies of green
wave. Deep-hearted, majestic, terrible as the sea, the men of "Venice
moved iu sway of power and war; pure as her pillars of alabaster


stood her mothers and maidens ; from foot to brow, all noble, walked
her knights; the low-bronzed gleaming of sea-rusted armour shot
angrily under their blood-red mantle folds. Fearless, faithful, patient,
impenetrable, implacable—every word a fate —sate her Senate. In
hope and honour, lulled by flowing of wave around their isles of
sacred sand, each with his name written and the cross graved at his
side, lay her dead. A wonderful piece of world. Bather it-elf a
world. It lay along tho face of the waters no larger, as its captains
saw it from their masts at evening, than a bar of sunset that could
not pass away; but for its power it must have seemed to them as if
they were sailing in the expanse of heaven, and this a great planet,
whoso orient edge widened through ether. A world from which all
ignoble care and petty thoughts were banished, with all the common
and poor elements of iifs. No foulness, no tumult, in those tremulous
streets that filled or fell beneath the moon • but rippled music of
majestic change or thrilling silence. No weak walls could rise above
them ; no low-roofed cottage, nor straw-built shed. Only the strength
as of rock, and the finished setting of stones most precious. And
around them, far as the eye could reach, still the soft moving of
stainless waters, proudly pure, as not the flower, so neither the thorn
nor the thistle could grow in tho glancing fields. Ethereal strength
of Alps, dreamlike, vanishing in high procession beyond the Torcellan
shore, blue islands of Paduan hills, poised in tho golden west. Above
free winds and fiery clouds ranging at their will; brightness out of
tho north, and balm from the south, and tho stars of the evening
and the morning clear in the limitless light of arched heaven
circling sea.
CHARACTERISTICS OF BRITISH ELOQUENCE.
[DR. CROLY.]
[The late Ecv. Goorpe Crolv, EL.D., was for many years pnst known na the
eloquent historical preacher of St. Stephen’s, Walbrook, London. In the
■\vovid of literature, lie is recognised as a vigoioua writer, both in prose and
verse. He was born in Dublin, in 1750.]
If wc were asked to Cx our choice on tho finest combination of the
finest faculties, or tho noblest application of historic knowledge, and
of the most comprehensive, captivating, raid powerful instrument of
the influence of man over man—the golden sceptre, at once lovely in
its ornament and rich in its material—the choice would fall upon
eloquence. And this I Bay with special foiling, for the honour of tho
British name; for eloquence belongs to liberty alone, and where is
liberty to be found in Europe but in that name, or where is it to be
found in tho globe but in the descendants of Britons? The power of
its wing, and the brightness of its 03-0, droop in the foreign menagerie.
It must have the broad atmosphere of the British Constitution.
Eloquence must bear this character, or it loses its dignity. I see
none of that dignity in tho rhetorical displays of Iho Continent. I
should as soon take a slave that watches, sabre in hand, at the doors
of the seraglio for tho soldier, as 1 should take the foreign artifice of


words, with its tinsel, ornament, and transparent tissue, for the man-
liness, simplicity, and stateliness of eloquence. With lion’s hide,
'proudly won, and proudly worn, lit only for the shoulders of freedom,
British eloquence is at once the ornament and the emblem of the
country whose labours are for the world.
ON CHARITY.
[ST. PAUL.]*
Tuonan I speak with the tongues oimen and of angels, and have not
charity, Xam become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cgmhal. And
though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and
all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove
mountains , and have not charity, I am nothing.
And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I
give my body to be burned, and have not charity , it profdeth me
nothing. Charity —suffercth long and is kind; charity—envieth
not; chanty —vaunteth not itself; is not puffed up ; doth not behave
itself unseemly ; seeketh not her own; is not easily provoked;
thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth;
heareth all things, bclieveth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all
things.
Charily —never faileth ; but whether there be prophecies, they shall
fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be
knowledge, it shall vanish away. For we know, in part, and we
prophecy, in part. But, when that which is perfect , is come, then
that, which is in part, shall be done away.
When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I
thought as a child; but when X became a man, I put away childish
things. For now*, we see through a glass darkly; but THEN face to
face: NOW, I know in part; but then, shall X know, even as also lam
knoicn. And now abideth, faiths hope, charity , these THREE; but the
greatest of these is charity.
GOLDEN ADVICE
TO
TALKERS, WRITERS, AND SPEAKERS.
[DEAN ALFORD.]
Be simple, be unaffected, bo honest in your speaking and writing.
Never use a long word where a short one will do. Call a spade a
spade, not a well-known oblong instrument of manual industry; let home
• There are some truths, deeper and more vital than those of science, and with
respect to which ihe heart U wiser than the head. It is Poetry or Literature
which—reflecting the concentrated result of the universal experience of life—
communicates those unchanging and everlasting truths through the imagination,
alT.'ctions, and conscience. The Bible itself is only the highest iorm of Literature.
—National Review,
G


bo /iome, not a residence $ a place a 'place , not a locality ; and so of the
rest. Where a short word will do. you always lose by using along
one. You lose in clearness ; you lose in honest expression of your
meaning ; and, in the estimation of all men who are qualified to judge,
you lose in reputation for ability. The only truo way to shine, even
in this false world, is to be modest and unassuming. Falsehood may
boa very thick crust, but in the course of time, truth will find
a place to break through. Elegance of language may not be in the
power of all of us ; but simplicity and straightforwardness are.
Write much as you would speak ; speak as you think. If with your
inferiors, speak no coarser than usual j if with your superiors, no
finer. 33e what you say ; and, within the rules of prudence, say what
you are.
Avoid all oddity of expression, Ko one was ever a gainer by
singularity in words, or in pronunciation. The truly wise man will so
speak, that no one may observe how he speaks. A man may show great
knowledge of chemistry by carrying about bladders of strange gases
to breathe; but he will enjoy better health, and find more time for
business, who lives on the common air. When I hear a person use
a queer expression, or pronounce a name in reading differently from
his neighbours, the habit always goes down, in my estimation of him,
with a minus sign before it j stands on the side of deficit, not of credit.
Avoid likewise all slang words. There is no greater nuisance in
society than a talker of slang. It is only fit (when innocent, which it
seldom is) for raw schoolboys, and one-term freshmen, to astonish their
sisters with. Talk as sensible men talk : use the easiest words in their
commonest meaning. Let the sense conveyed, not the vehicle iji which
it is conveyed, be your object of attention.
Once more, avoid in conversation all singularity of accuracy. One
of the bores of society is the talker who is always setting you right;
who, when you report from the paper that 10,000 men fell in some
battle, toils you that it was 0970; who, when you describe your walk
as two miles out and back, assures you it wanted half a furlong of it.
Truth docs not consist in minute accuracy of detail, but in conveying
a right impression : and there are vague ways of speaking, that are
truer than strict fact would bo. When the Psalmist said, “ Rivers
of water run down my eyes, because men keep not Thy law,” he
did not state the fact, but he stated a truth deeper than fact, and truer.
Talk to please, not yourself, but your neighbour to his edification.
What a real pleasure it is to sit by a cheerful, unassuming, sensible
talker; one who gives you an even share in the conversation and in
his attention ; one who leaves on your memory his facts and his
opinions, not himself who uttered them, not the words in which they
were uttered.
All arc not gentlemen by birth : hut all may be gentlemen in open-
ness, in modesty of language, in attracting no man’s attention by
singularities, and giving no man offence by forwardness; for it is this,
in matter of speech and style, which is the sure mark of good taste and
good breeding.


DECLAMATION.*
THE ORATORY OF THE PLATFORM.
[“ORATonT,” says Pycroft, ‘‘is the art, above all others, which most defies our
power to convey any adequate impression of its great masters. The mind of
the poet is enshrined in his verse; the mind of the painter or sculptor, on
the canvas <r in the marble. Who can convey a Fox, or a Sheridan, when not
only the excitement and the occasion which added force to his words have
parsed away, but when the eye can no longer be riveted by the energy of his
action, nor the ear by the force of h : s intonations ; and when the drama is com-
paratively dumb show, and even the words, which alone survive, are far from
being, like a modern report, a faithful transcript of the speech?” The same
dea, in reference to the art of the actor, is poetically expressed by Garrick, in
bis prologue to “ The Clandestine Marriage
‘‘The painter’s dead, yet still he chr.rms the eye:
While England lives his fame can never die:
But he who struts his hour upon the stage
Can scarce protract his fame through half an age:
Nor pen nor pencil can the actor save :
The art and artist have one common grave.”}
INVECTIVE AGAINST SIR ROBERT PEEL.
[W. J. FOX.]
[During the agitation for the repeal of the Corn Laws, carried on by the Anti-
Corn-Law League, there appeared week after week a series of letters in the
League newspaper, bearing the signature of “ A Norwich Weaver Boy/’
These were from the pen of William Johnson Fox, the well-known public
lecturer, platform orator, political writer, and member of Parliament. In
his youth ho teas a Norwich weavi r boy, a fact which, in the highest noon of
his after success, he was never ashamed of. Throughout his long and useful
life he identified himself with every good work calculated to elevate the
tastes and improve the social and political condition of the people. Fox
was, at the time the writer of thi-* brief notice was accustomed to hear him,
to the pUufurm what Edmund Kean was to the stage. _ The effects produced
by Lira on his audiences were electrical. To this fact Guizot, in his
* Note.— AVhilc using every efibrt to quicken the sensibility of his pupils,
the teacher should never allow himself to “o’erstep the modesty of nature.”
Peposo is the scul of art. Hence Hamlet’s celebrated injunction to the player :
“ Use all getiHy ; for in tho very torrent} tempest, and [as I may say] whirlwind
cf your passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it
Kmoothuc^c-.”


« Memoirs cf Sir Robert Prel,” has borne testimony. From simple enuncia-
tion tip to the highest expression of feeling and passion attainable by the
human voice, he was a perlVct master. Mr. Fox -was born in 17S'J. As an
illustration of his platform style, we subjoin the peroration of a speech
delve! ed at one of the great gatherings of the Anti-Corn-Law League in
Govern G nden Theatre, just after the Timex had admitted the agitation to b©
“ a great f ct.” The diversified modulation, expression, and emphasis thrown
into the delivery of this powerful piece of declamation produced an extraor-
dinary eficct. No actor, though his profession be to bannonize the voice and
to fascinate the feelings, could have given the passage with more powerful or
thrilling effect. Everybody present was completely carried away; and the
rupporteva of monopoly, against whom it was directed, seemed really alarmed
at the torrent of feeling raised against them.*]
It is something, it is much to many here, that, through every station,
in every rank of life, the pressure is felt. The demon seems to be
Omnipresent, and they cannot escape his pestiferous influence. But
even this is not the deadliest bane of the Com Laws. Did one want
to exhibit it in this great theatre, it might be done, !Not by calling
together such an audience as I now see hero, but by going out into
the bye-places, the alleys, the dark courts, the garrets and cellars of
the metropolis, and by bringing thence their wretched and famished
inmates. Oh! wo might crowd them here—boxes, pit, and galleries
—with their shrunk and shrivelled forms, with their wan and pallid
cheeks, with their distressful looks—perhaps with dark and bitter
passions pictured in their countenances—and thus exhibit a scene
that would appal the stoutest heart, and melt the hardest —a scene
which I should like to bring the prime minister of the country upon
this stage to see—and 1 would say to him —“There, delegate of
majesty ! loader of legislators! conservator of institutions!—look
there ; look upon that mass of human misery ! That is what your laws
and powers, if they do not create, have failed to prevent, have failed
to euro or mitigate!” And supposing this to be done, —could this
scene be realized, —wc know what would bo said —exactly what would
he said. We should be told, —“ There has always been poverty in the
world ; there are numerous ills that legislation can neither make
nor cure; whatever is done, much distress must exist.” They will
say, —“ It is the mysterious dispensation of Providence, and there we
must leave it.” I would say to the prime minister, if he used such
arguments,—“Hypocrite! hypocrite! urge not that plea yet; you
have no right to it. Strike oif every fetter upon industry ; take the
last grain of the poison of monopoly out of the cup of poverty; give
labour its full rights; throw open the markets of the world to an
industrious people; and then, if after that there bo poverty, you
have earned for yourself the right to qualify for the unenviable dignity
of a blasphemer of Providence ; hut until you have done this—yon
cannot — you dai;e not come down here and look that gaunt spectre
of human misery in the face, and exclaim.— * Thou cans't not say I
did u r ”
* The vvrit.r heard the speech, and will never forget it


INVECTIVE AGAINST DISRALLI.
[DANIEL O'CONNELL.]
(TriUTArs in the wlulo historv of Oratorical Abuse their* is nothin;; for downright
soxirrility that can vie with O’ConneH’a famous castigation of Disraeli. The
latter commenced liis political career as a Radical; at d in 1831, or the
beginning of 1832, be put up fr the vacant RorLUgh of Wycombe. Disraeli
got an introduction to O'Connell, and wrote him a letter stating that he was
going to stand on the liadical interest for the Borough of \\ ycombe, where
there were many persons who would be influenced by O’Connell's opinion.
He, therefore, solicited a recoramcnnHtory letter from him. 0 Connell imme-
diately complied with the request, and Disraeli thought the communication so
valuable that he had it primed and placarded. It was, in fact, the ground
upon which he canvassed the Borough. But notwithstanding all Lis exertions,
be lost the election. He subsequently started up m the Radical interest for
Marylebone, and was again defeated. Having been twice beaten on the
liadical interest, he joined the Conservative Club, ami put him-elf up as a
candidate for two or three places in the Conservative interest. In referring to
the sudden change in his politics, O'Connell uttered the following celebrated
invective:—]
How i 3 Disraeli now engaged? Why, in abusing the Radicals, and
eulogising the King and the Church like a true Conservative. At
Taunton, this miscreant had the audacity to stylo me an incendiary.
Why, I was a greater incendiary in 183\ than I am at present, but if I
were, or am one, he is doubly go for having employed me. Then he
calls me a traitor. My answer to that is—ho is a liar. Ho is a liar in
notion and in word. Ills life is a living lie. He is a disgrace to his
species. What state of society must that bo that could tolerate such
a creature, having the audacity to come forward with one set of prin-
ciples at one time, and obtain political assistance by reason of those
principles, and at another to profess diametrically the reverse? His
life, I say again, is a living lie. He is the most degraded of his species
and hind. The whole country is degraded in tolerating, or having
upon the surface of its society, a miscreant of his abominably foul anti
atrocious nature.
My language is harsh, and I owe an apology for it. Rut I will tell
you why i owe that apology. It is for this reason—that if there were
harsher terms in the English language I should use them,—because it
is the harshest of all terms that would ho descriptive of a wretch of
this species. He is just the fellow for the Conservative Club. I sup-
pose if Sir Robert Peel had been out of the way when he was called
upon to take office, this follow would have undertaken to supply his
place. He has falsehood enough, depravity enough, and selfishness
enough to become a fitting leader of the Conservatives. He is Con-
ecrvatilm personified. His name shows he is by descent a Jew. His
father became a convert. He is the better for that in this world, and
I hope, of course, that he will be the better for it in the next. There
is a habit of underrating that great and oppressed nation, the Jews.
They are cruelly persecuted bv persons calling themselves Christians,
but no person ever yet was a Christian who persecuted. The cruellest
persecution they suffer has come upon their character by the foul
names which calumniators bestowed upon them before they carried


their atrocities into effect. They feel the persecution of calumny more
than the persecution of actual force and the tyranny of actual torture.
I have the happiness to be acquainted with several Jewish families in
London, and amongst them more accomplished ladies or more humane,
cordial, high-minded, or better-conducted gentlemen, I have never
met. It will not be supposed, therefore, that when I speak of Disraeli
as a Jew, that I mean to pay him a double compliment. The Jews
were once the chosen people of God. There were, however, miscreants
amongst them also, and it certainly must have been from one of them
that Disraeli descended. He possesses just the qualities of the impeni-
tent thief who died upon the cross, who-o name I verily believe must
have been Disraeli. Lor aught I know, the present Disraeli is descended
from him, and with the impression that he is, I now forgive the heir-
at-law of the blasphemous thief who died upon the cross.
ON THE COLONIES.
[BURKE.]
[Editpnd BrniKE, the son of an Irish attorney, at the commencement of his
career, carved out a position lor himself in the world of letters, His “ Essay
on the Sublime and Beautiful” is considered to be bis best critical production.
As an orator ami statesman, he occupies the highest rank. For political know-
]ed{p* and wisdom, his speeches will bear comparison with any that have been
uttered in ancient or modern times. His vi ry ineffective delivery, however,
marred tin ir spnk* n success to such an extent, that he was familiarly known
aa “ The Dinner-bell of the House of Commons,”]
Sly hold of the colonics is in the close affection which grows from
common names, from kindred blood, from similar privileges, and equal
protection. Thet-e arc lies which, though light as air, jet are as strong
as the linhs of iron. Let the colonies always keep the idea of their
civil rights associated with jour government, —they will (ding and
grapple to you ; and no force under heaven will be of power to tear
them from their allegiance. But let it once be understood that your
government may be one thing, and their privileges another; that these
two things may exist without any mutual relation; —the cement is
gone, the cohesion is loosened; and everything hastens to decay and
dissolution. As lung as you have the wisdom to keep the sovereign
authority of this country as the sanctuary of liberty, as the sacred temple
consecrated to our common faith, wherever that chosen race—the sons of
England—worship freedom, they will turn their faces towards you. The
more they multiply, the more friends will uni have ; the more ardently
they love liberty, the mo:c perfect will he their obedience. Slavery they
can have any win re. It is a weed that grows in every soil. But, until you
become lost to all feeling of your true interest and your natural dignity,
freedom they can have from none but ymi. Tins is the commodity
of price, of which you have the monopoly. This is the true act of


navigation, which binds to you the commerce of the colonies; and
through them, secures to you the wealth of the world. Deny them this
participation of freedom, and you break that sole bond which made origi-
nally, and must still preserve, the unity of the empire. Do not entertain
so weak an imagination, as that your registers, and your bonds, jour
affidavits, and your sufferances, your cocketa, and your clearances form
the great securities of your commerce. Do not dream that your letters
of office, and your instructions, and your suspending clauses are the
things that hold together the great contexture of this mysterious whole.
These things do not make your government. Dead instruments, passive
tools as they are, it is the spirit of the English communion that gives
to them their life and efficacy. It is the spirit of the English constitution,
which, infused through the mighty mass, pervades, leeds, unites, in-
vigorates, vivifies every part of the empire, even down to the minutest
member.
OH! LET US BE INDEPENDENT OF FOREIGNERS.
[W. J. FOX.]
The Duke of Richmond tells us we ought not to bo dependent on
foreigners. To show the fallacy of this statement, allow me to take a
gentleman from the noble Duke’s class of society, and analyse his
appearance, tastes, and modes of life. Wo shall then see how much
of all this is of the true home growth.
A Trench cook dresses his dinner for 7dm , and a Swiss valet dresses
Mm for Ids dinner. He hands down his lady, decked with pearls that
never grew in the shell of a British oyster, and her waving plume of
ostrich feathers certainly never formed the tail of a barn-door fowl.
The viands of bis table are from all countries of the world; Ids wines
are from the banks of the lildnc and the Rhone. In his conservatory
he regales his sight with the blossoms of South American Jloivers .
In his smoking-room, he gratifies his scent with the weed ot North
America . Ilis favourite horse is of Arabian blood ; his pet dog of tho
St Bernard breed. His gallery is rich with pictures from the Flemish
school, and statues from Greece. For his amusement.be goes to hear
Italian singers warble German music, followed by a French ballet. If
he rises to judicial honours, tho ermine that decorates his shoulders
is a production that was never before on the back of a British beast.
His very mind is not English in its attainments; it is a mere pic-nic
of foreign contributions. His poetry and philosophy arc from Greece
and Rome; his geometry is from Alexandria; his arithmetic is irom
Arabia; and his religion from Palestine. In his cradle, in his infancy,
he rubbed his gums with coral from oriental oceans; and when bo
dies, his monument will bo sculptured in marble from the qtiavries of
Carrara. And yet this is tho man who says —“Oh! let us be inde-
pendent of foreigners /**


PARLIAMENTARY ORATORY.
ON SLAVERY.
[LORD BROUGHAM.]
[Lord Brougham, whose father was an Englishman, was born in St. Andrew’s-
square, Edinburgh, on the 19th September, 1779.* Eor versaliiify of talent no
living man is, perhaps, to be mentioned in the same sentence with him. As
an advocate, parliamentary and platform orator, philanthropist, statesman,
philosopher, and savant , ho rai k* amongst the most illustrious men of modern
times. He established the Society for ihe Diffusion of Useful Knowledge,
laboured with Bukbeck in the formation of Mechanics’ Institutes, and was one
of the founders of, and constant contributors to, the “ Edinburgh Review.”
Amidst the diversified labours of bis wonderfully active life, he has found time
to write voluminously and well on natural theology, biography, rhetoric,
political economy, constitutional history, commercial law, finance, physical
science, and many miscellaneous subjects. The last werk which, issued from Lis
prolific pen was a treatise on tho British Constitution.]
I tetjst that, at length, the time has come when Parliament will no
longer bear to be told that slave-owners are the best lazv-givers on
slaveryi no longer suffer our voices to roll across the Atlantic in
empty warnings and fruitless orders. Tell me not of rights —talk not
of the property of the planter in his slave. I deny his rights,—l
acknowledge not the property. The 'principles , the feelings of our
common nature rise in rebellion against it. Be the appeal made to tho
understanding or to the heart , the sentence is the same —that rejects it!
In vain you tell me of lazes that sanction such a claim ! There is a
law above all the enactments of human codes —tho same throughout
the world —the same in all times ; such as it was before the daring
genius of Columbus pierced the night of ages, and opened to one world
the source of power, wealth , and Icnoivledge —to the other , nil unutterable
woes, such is it at {lds day ; it is the law written by the finger of God
on the heart of man; and by that law, unchangeable and eternal.
"While men despise fraud, and loathe rapine , and hate blood , they shall
reject with indignation the wild and guilty fantasy, that man can hold
property in man!
* Public speakers ought to live longer, end enjoy better health than other
versons. Ruhiionnvy disease may be thrown oil' by systematic meal training.
The celebrated Cuvier, and Dr. Bhown, the meiaphysicmri, and others tire
■witnesses of this truth. One reason is that public speaking induces one to use a
very large quantity of air, whereby the capacity of the lungs is strengthened, tho
quantity of air increased, and the blood mote perfectly pm Hied. The use of tho
whole body insures a free circulation, and, of course, contributes to general health,
—B&ovszotf'


PEEL’S INVECTIVE AGAINST COBBETT.
[PEEL.]
[Sir R-vavni Peex, the eon of the great Lancashire cslton spinner, was horn
in July, 1763, and died in July, 1650. Front his earliest years be was carefully
trainee! for tho occupation of the h : gh political position be so long main-
tained. In 1817, Sir James Mackintosh, alter an important debate on Catholic
limancipation, thus bore testimony to the advantages of this early training,
and to the effect produced upon the House of Commons by Sir Robert Peel’s
powers of (locution:—“Peel made a speech last night of little merit, but
elegantly and clearly expressed, and so well delivered as to be applauded to
excess. He is a great proof of the value of the mechanical art of speaking
when combined with Industry and education. On great occasions, Sir
Robert could be very imposing and effective. The mode in which ho replied
to Cobbett’s charge that he bad ruined the country is a case in point. Cob-
bett pushed matters so far as to call on the House of Commons to pray His
Majesty to dismiss 6lr Robert Peel from tho Privy Council. Tho affair was
so absurd, so utterly unparliamentary, that the right honourable baronet
would, at any other time, have pooh-poohed it away. But just thou be was
trying to get up a senauion throughout tho country in his favour; and ns
Mr. Cobbett was an undisguised democrat, be chose to construe the motion
into an attempt to dictate, by mob-will, to the aristocracy of Kngland—to
make it, in fact, a sort of Marat, or Han ton affair. He gilded himself up to
a great effort. Hot John Phillip R'emblo could have been more imposing—more
awful in dignity.]
In one of Mr. Cobbctt’s boobs I find a letter addressed to Sir Robert
Peel, Baronet and Cotton Weaver. When the honourable member'
wanted to get into Parliament he did not disdain the assistance of a
cotton weaver. There are no men more distinguished for a vulgar
deference to mere rank than those who assail it with scurrility, and
who affect to be superior to all prejudices—to bo the chosen cham-
pions of liberty and equality. It is to them the most grievous offence
that any man should emerge from that class amongst which they are
destined to remain. These men taunt me with tho obscurity of my
birth, as if they were themselves the descendants of the Courtenays
and the Montmorencies. But they arc not. If they were, they would
be too generous to despise those who have opened for themselves the
avenues to fame and eminence. The illustrious blood which flows in
the veins of the really noble makes them too generous to begrudge
others the reward of their own exertions, and the public honours which
industry and integrity command. To make it a matter of reproach
to any man that he is of humble origin, denotes nothing but inherent
vulgarity of mind. And in this age, and with the principles of
government now prevalent, to taunt a man that he has raised himself
to a station of eminence by his own exertions and hie own talents,
reflects discredit on tho author and not on the object of the calumny.
So far from that taunt causing me any shame, it makes mo only feci
proud. I profess the greatest respect for those who can boast of
hereditary but I profess equal respect for those new families
which have been raised to distinction by the virtues and talents of
their founders. To live under such an ignoble tyranny as Mr. Cobbett


WCuld impose would not only be a bitter calamity, but a calamity
embittered by the greatest disgrace:—
Como the eleventh plague rather than this should be;
Come sink us rather in the sea ;
Come rather pestilence and reap us down;
Come God’s sword rather than our own.
Let rather Homan come again,
Or Saxon, Herman, or the Dane,
In all the bonds we ever bore,
*Wo grieved, we sighed, we wept—zee never Hushed before.*
ON THE DEATH OF THE PRINCE CONSORT.
[THE EARL OF DERBY.]
[The greatest and most effective extempore Parliamentary orator of tbo present
day is Lord Derby. His command over langunge is as happy as his debating
powers are wonderful. He never seems to have prepared his speeches, and it
is bt'lievcd that he does not. There is something in Lord Derby’s stylo of
speaking that literally illuminates his addresses. It is astonishing hew he
manages with that headlong whatever-comes-lirst-into-his-bead way of his to
construct sentences which Macaulay might have < nvied, and which few prepared
rhetorical efforts can boast of. As had been felicitously observed, his nominative
cases never get astray, but. drive right through a long stream of verbs and
accusatives to their legitimate landing-place. On one occas : on ho absolutely
sketched every event of the Crimean war, from the battle of the Alma to that
of Inkcnnan inclusive, in one single, ornate, and descriptive sentence, which
occupied 40 lines of a column of the I'ime*, and there was not a word out of
place. As a specimen of Lord Derby’s style of speaking we subjoin a very
eloquent and dignified passage from the speech which be delivered in the House
of Lords when moving a vote of condolence to our Gracious Sovereign on the
occasion of iho death of the Prince Consort :—]
My Lours,—ln the Prince Consort, the Queen has lost, not only
the husband of her youth, the father of her children —him to whom
her youthful affections were freely given, and for whom maturcr
years only augmented and intensified her conjugal lore—but she has
lost her familiar friend —her trusted counsellor —and her best adviser
■—an adviser to whom she could look up, and to whom she did look up
with that proud humility which none but a woman’s heart can know.
Prom the sorrowing members of her family Her Majesty has derived
* This speech did its work. Cobboit attempted to reply; but the whole ITmi«o
rose ar him, and he was obliged to sit down. Sir Robert Peel, to curry the affair
to its climax, walked away cli>da : ning to vote, and be was cheered from all parts of
the House, while Cobhett could only find four members to vole lor him. The scene
is described as one of the greatest oratorical “hits” on record since the brightest
day of Parliamentary debating.


all the consolation that affection can bestow; but in the discharge of
her public duties the Queen must henceforth tread her lofty path alone,
without the sustaining hand of him whose counsel never failed her.
How deeply, and with what profound emotion she felt conscious of
this aggravated responsibility she proved in tho very presence of
death, when in the first moment of that agony she rose beneath the
overwhelming weight of a crushing sorrow, and resolved, under God’s
blessing, to do her duty to her country. Of this lam certain, that all
who bear me will pray that she may be strengthened to carry out that
high resolve. May He who has seen fit to inflict this heavy blow —
may Ho who deprived her of her one earthly comfort and support—be
Himself her comforter and supporter. My Lords, tho words of our
address inadequately express what we feel, but they will convey —
though still inadequately—the expression of our devoted loyalty.
And in the presence of this sacred sorrow I am satisfied it will be the
desire of your lordships —the desire of all —on all sides of the House—
not only of this, but of the other House of Parliament, to contribute
all in their power to spare Her Majesty one additional pang under the
affliction that presses so heavily upon her.
OH THE DECLARATION OF IRISH RIGHTS.
[GRATTAN.]
[Henry Grattan, an illustrious orator, patriot, and statesman, was born in
Dublin in 1750, For services rendered to bis country, the Dish Parliament
voted him. a grant of £50,000. Grattan’* oratory is distinguished _ for its
epigrammatic force and vigour. He died in 1820. His remains were interred
in Westminster Abbey. The following grand and striking passage Irom.
Grattan's speech on the “ Declaration of Irish Fights” marches along like tho
sound of majestic music:—3
Heceaptee, when these things shall he history — your ago of
thraldom and poverty; your sudden resurrection and commercial
redress, and miraculous armament; shall the historian stop at liberty,
and observe that here the principal men amongst us fell into mimic
trances of gratitude,—that they were awed by a weak ministry and
bribed by an empty treasury, when liberty was within their grasp, and
the temple opened her folding doors, and the arms of the people
clanged, and the zeal of the nation urged and encouraged them on,
that they fell down and were prostrated at the threshold ?
I might, as a constituent, come to your bar and demand my liberty.
I do call upon you by the laws of the land and their violation ; by the
instruction of eighteen centuries; by the arms, inspiration, and provi-
dence of the present moment, —tell us the rule by which we shall go—
assert the law of Ireland—declare the liberty of tho hind 1
I will not bo answered by a public lie in the shape of an amend-
ment ; neither speaking for the subject’s freedom am I to hear of


faction . I wish for nothing but to breathe in this our island, in common
with my fellow-subjects, the air of liberty. I have no ambition, unless it
be the ambition to break your chain and contemplate your glory, I
never will be satisfied so long as the meanest cottager in Ireland has a
link of the British chain clanking to his rags, lie may be naked, he
shall not be in iron; and I do see the time is at hand, the spirit is
gone forth, the declaration is planted; and though great men should
apostatise, yet the cause will live; and though the public speaker
should die, yet the immortal fire shall outlast the organ which conveyed
it, and the breath of liberty, like the word of the holy man, will not
die with the prophet, but survive him.
THE FICKLENESS OF THE MULTITUDE.
[LORD MANSFIELD.]
[VViLi.iAii Mukeat, Earl of Mansfield, eon of Lord Stormont, an eminent English
judge, wu3 born in 1703, and died in 1793. During the riots of 1780 the mob
burned down In a town house for haring voted in favour of the Cuti dies, but
he nobly refused all compensation by the state for his serious loss. As a per-
suasive orator his powers were so great that ho was universally known as the
“silver-tongued Murray.” It was impossible to listen to him and be unim-
pressed. In the early part of his career he devoted himself untiringly to the
study and practice of elocution and oratory in all their branches. He was a
systematic student, and never believed in any royal road to oratorical success.
The following extract is a fair illustration of his power as a speaker, and of his
independence as u judge.]
I come now, my Lord?, to speak upon what indeed I would have
gladly avoided, had I not been particularly pointed at for the part I hare
taken in this bill. It has been said by a noble lord on my left hand,
that lam running the race of popularity. If the noble lord means, by
popularity, that applause bestowed by after-ages on good and virtuous
actions, I have long been struggling in that race; to what purpose all-
trying time can alone determine; but, if the noble lord means that
mushroom popularity which is raised without merit, and lost without
crime, he is much mistaken in his opinion. I defy the noble lord to
point out a single action of my life in which the popularity of the
times ever had the smallest influence on my determinations. I liavc
a more permanent and steady rule for my conduct —the dictates of my
own breast. Those that have foregone that pleasing adviser, and given
up their minds to be the slave of every popular impulse, I sincerely
pity : I pity them still more, if their vanity leads them to mistake the
shouts of a mob for the trumpet of fame. Experience might inform
them, that many who have been saluted with the huzzas of a crowd
one day, have received its execration the next; and many who, by
the popularity of their times, have been held up as spotless patriots,
have, nevertheless, appeared upon the historian’s page —when truth


has triumphed over delusion—the assassins of liberty. If the security
of our persons and property, of all wo hold dear or valuable, is to
depend upon the caprice of a giddy multitude, or to be at the disposal
of a mob; if, in compliance with the humours, and to appease the
clamours of these, all civil and political institutions are to be disre-
garded or overthrown; a life somewhat more than sixty is not worth
preserving at such a price, and he can never die too soon, who lays
down his life in support and vindication of the policy, the government,
and the constitution of his country.
A SCENE IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONE.*
[During the early part of January, 1313, a painful event occurred to add a feeling
of personal sadness to the anxious disposition of Peel’s mind. As he was
one day walking with his private secretary, Mr. Drummond, an unknown
Scotchman, named Danul MacNnauhton, who bad recently arrived in London,
from Glasgow, met him, and asked some bystanders if that was not Sir Robert
Peel. A tew days afterwards on the 21st, Mr. Drummond, while walking near
Charing Cross, was shot by MacXaughton, whohad mistaken him for Sir Robert
Peel. On the 2nd of February following, Sir Robert informed the House,
during the course of a long achate, which did not close until four o’clock in
the morning, that Her Majesty’s Government did not contemplate proposing
any extensive changes in the Corn Laws. This announcement, made as it was
when the hopes of the Anii-Corn-Law League r.m high, caused great excite-
ment on the Opposition B niches. The idea of getting nothing from Parliament,
• after so much had been accomplished with the public, roused the indignation
of the Free Trade leader. Cobden, therefore, rose, and, after a masterly
speech, which frequently elicited the warmest cheers of his supporters, closed
in the following augry and dating tone: —]
W hat, — [exclaimed Mr. Colden, addressing himself immediately to
Sir Robert Pee?], —what is the remedy you propose? What are tho
proceedings by which you propose to give relief to the country?
[Loud cries of “ Hear, hearf from the Opposition."] You have acted
on your own judgment, and you —you are responsible for the conse•
quences of your act. You passed your law, you refused to listen to
the manufacturers; and I throw on you all the responsibility of your
own measure. [“ Hear, hearf from Sir Pohert Peel.~\ The right
hon. baronet says it is his duty to judge independently, and act
without reference to any pressure. [“ Hear, hear f from Sir Pohert.']
But, Sir, I must tell the right honourable baronet that it is the duty
of every honest and independent member of this House to hold him
individually responsible—ay, Sir— [continued Cohden, raising his voice
till he made it ting again , and pointing threateningly to the Prime
Minister']— individually and pki-isoxally responsible for the present
position of tho country. [Mr. Cohden laid the most marhed emphasis
* Described from personal recollection.


on the tvords “individually and ‘personally Sir Robert Reel drew
forth his ivory tablets , and while talcing the words down, exclaimed ,
“ Hear , hear , hear” in a tone of considerable emotion ,J I tell the
Prime Minister that the whole responsibility of the lamentable and
dangerous state of the country rests with him.
When the Opposition cheers which greeted the termination of Mr.
Cobden’s speech had died away, Sir Robert Peel, whose countenance
wore a painful expression, rose amidst a silence so profound that one
could almost fancy he heard the pens of the clerks of the House
travelling over their paper, and in a voice tremulous with emotion,
thus addressed the House: —
Mr. Speaker, Sir, —The hou. gentleman who has just resumed his
seat, has stated here very emphatically, what he has more than once
stated at the Conferences of the Anti-Corn-Law League, that he holds me
individually— [great sensation ] — individually responsible for the distress
and suffering of the country, —that he holds me personally respon-
sible : but be the consequences of those insinuations what they may,
never will I be influenced by menaces either in this House or out of
this House to adopt a course which I consider — [the rest of tie sentence
was lost in the shouts which came from various parts of the House. It
began to he felt that the assassination of Drummond teas passing over
the mind of Sir Robert. The 11 scene” teas notv intensely exciting.]
Mr. Cobden immediately rose, and in a decided tone of voice said
—“ I did not say that I held the right honourable gentleman personally
responsible.”— [Shouts of “Yes. yes ” cries of “ You did , you did
“ Order, order ” “ Chair, chair, *
Sir Robert Peel, pointing with the forefinger of his right hand
significantly to his ivory tablets, and turning round to his supporters,
as if for confirmation of his statement, cried out in a loud tone of
voice, “You did.” The whole of the Conservative party then rose en
masse and repeated Sir Robert’s words.
Mr. Cobden. I have said I held the right honourable gentleman
responsible by virtue of his office—[“ A r o, no” from the Ministerial
benches, and much confusion ,] —as the whole context of my speech was
sufficient to explain. [Reneivcd cries of" Ko, no,” from the Ministerial
benches. J
Sir Robert Peel again rose. “Sir,” he said, amidst breathless
stillness, “ The expression of the hon. gentleman was not that he held
Her Majesty’s Government responsible, but, addressing him e elf to me,
ho said, in the most emphatic manner, that he held me individually
responsible,— individually and personally responsible. [“ Hear , hear
from the Ministerial side.] The hou. gentleman may do so, and may
induce others to do the same, but I only notice his assertion for the
purpose of saying that it shall not influence me iu the discharge of a
public duty.” [“ Hear , hear , hear.”'] The Right Hon. Baronet then
abandoned all further personal allusions, and in one of tbo most lucid
addresses ho ever uttered, enchained the attention of the House till the
cock began to crow.
Lord John Russell and others warmly defended Cobdon from the
imputation attached to him. At the rising of the House, Cobden


again assured Sir Robert of Iris deep regret that his words had been
misinterpreted. The disclaimer was coldly accepted.
THE CEREBRATED REPLY TO LORD LYNDHURST.
[SHEIL.]
[Tee Right Honourable Richard Lalor Shell was born the IGth of August, 1791.
He died a few years ago in Tuscany. With him, to quote the Times, “ perished
the last of the rhetoricians.” Shed was the first Catholic Commoner who was
raised to the dignity of a Privy Councillor in England, since the repeal of the
Penal Code. A very lair idea of this orator’s appearance, style, and manner
is thus given in the Nodes Ainbrosicnee :—“ Ticki-bk. To make some amends
for her carelessness in all other external affairs, nature has given bi n as fine a
pair of eyes as evei graced human head—large, cleop’y-set. da *k, liquid, flashing
like gems ; and these fix you presently, like a basilisk, so that you forget every-
thing else about him; and though it would be impossible to conceive anything
more absurdly ungraceful than his action, sharp, sudden jolts, and shuffles,
and right-about twists and leaps, all set to a running discord of grunts and
moan*; yet, before he has spoken ten minutes, you forget all this too, and give
yourself up to what I have always considered a pleasant sensation —the feeling,
I mean, that you are in the presence of a man of genius!” As a specimen of
Sheil’s rhetorical po* ers, wo have selected bis famous reply to Lord Lyndhurst,
who had been charged with having designated the Irish people as “ aliens in
language, aliens in blood, and aliens in religion.” The brilliant repudiation of
the reproach was rend°red a thousand times more effective from the circum-
stance of Lord Lyndhurst himself being among the spectators iu the House
when it was uttered. Nothing that ever Shell did approached to this in its
electric effect. It was a perfect triumph of oratory. Even Conservatives were
surprised into applause, and the House was long disturbed by unusual excite-
ment.]
In the course of a debate in the House of Lords, a noble lord is
reported to have designated the Irish people as “ aliens in language—
aliens in blood, and—aliens in religion.” Aliens! Good God! "Where
was Arthur, Lube of Wellington, when those words were uttered?
Alethinks he should have started up to disclaim them. Yes, Sir,
“ The battles, sieges, fortunes,”
that he has passed ought to have come back upon him —ho ought to
have remembered that, from the earliest achievement in which he
displayed that military genius which has placed him foremost in the
annals of modern warfare, down to that last and surpassing combat
which has made his name imperishable—from Assayc to Waterloo—
the Irish soldiers, with whom your armies are filled, were the insepa-
rable auxiliaries to the glory with which his unparalleled successes
have been crowned. Whoso were the athletic arms that drove your
bayonets at Yimicra through the phalanxes that never reeled in the
shock of war before ? What desperate valour climbed the steeps and
filled the moats of Tkidqos? All —all bis victories should have
rushed and crowded back upon his memory: —Yimicra, Ladajos,


Salamanca, Albuera, Toulouse, and last of all, the greatest! Tell
me, for you were there —I appeal to the gallant soldier before me
[pointing to Sir Henry Hardinge ], from whose opinions I differ, but
who bears, I know, a generous heart in an intrepid breast; tell me,
for you must needs remember, how on that day, when the destinies of
mankind were trembling in the balance —while death fell in showers
upon them—when the artillery of Trance, levelled with a precision
of the most deadly science, played upon them—when her legions,
incited by the voice and inspired by the example of their mighty
leader, rushed again and again to the onset—tell me if, for an instant,
when to hesitate for that instant was to be lost—these ‘aliens’
blenched? And when at length the moment for the last and decisive
movement had arrived —when the valour which had so long been
wisely checked was at length let loose—when, with words familiar
but immortal, the great captain exclaimed, “Up, lads, and at them I”
—tell me, if Catholic Ireland, with less heroic valour than the natives
of your own glorious isle, precipitated herself upon the foe? Oh,
no! no! —the blood of England, of Scotland, and of Ireland flowed
in the same stream —on the same field. When the still morning
dawned, their dead lay cold and stark together —in the same deep pit
their bodies were deposited—the green corn of spring is now breaking
from theircomminglcd dust—the dew falls from heaven upon their
union in the grave. Partakers in every peril —in the glory shall we
not bo permitted to participate? and shall wo be told as a requital
thatwo are estranged from the noble country for whose salvation our
life-blood was poured out ?
ON THE REFORM BILL.
[MACAULAY.]
[The Reform Bill was proposed by Lord John Russell on tbo Ist March, 1831, and
wag finally adopted iu August. 1313. When the limitation, was at fever heat,
Macaulny, in his place in the lions ; of Commons, closed a brilliant speech on
the subject in the following stirring language s— ]
2fow, therefore, while everything at home and abroad forebodes
ruin to tlioso who persist in a hopeless struggle against the spirit of
the age—now, while the crush of the proudest throne of the conti-
nent is still resounding in our cars—now, while the roof of a British
palace affords an ignominious shelter to the exiled heir of forty
kings —now, while wo see on every side ancient institutions sub-
verted, and great societies dissolved —now, while the heart of England
is still sound— notv, while old feelings and old associations retain a
power and a charm which may too soon pass away—now, in this
your accepted time—now, in this your day of salvation—lake counsel,
not of prejudice, not of party spirit, not of the ignominious pride of
a fatal consistency —but of history, of reason, of the ages which are


passed, of the signs of this most portentous time. Pronounce in a
manner worthy of the expectation with which this great debate has
jeen anticipated, and of the long remembrance which it will leave
ochind. Eenew the youth of the State! Save property, divided
against itself! Save the multitude, endangered by its own ungovern-
able passions! Save the aristocracy, endangered by its own un-
popular power! Save the greatest, and fairest, and most highly
civilized community that ever existed, from calamities which may, in
a few days, sweep away all the rich heritage of so many ages of
wisdom and glory. The danger is terrible. The time is short. If
this bill be rejected, I pray to God that none of those who concur in
rejecting it may ever remember their votes with unavailing remorse,
amidst the wreck of laws, the confusion of ranks, the spoliation of
property, and the dissolution of social order.
FORENSIC ORATORY.
ENGLAND THE HOME OF NATIONAL FREEDOM.
[WHITESIDE.]
[Tun Right Hon. James Whiteside, LL.H., was born at Delgany, county of
Wicklow, in 180(3. His oratorical powers are of a very high order. He defended
O’Connell when he was tried for political conspiracy some fourteen years ago.
His speech on that occasion was pronounced to be the moat brilliant display of
its kind since the days of Curran. He is the author of “Italy in the 10th
Century,” and a book on “ Ancient Rome.” He is one of Her Majesty’s Privy
Councillors, and Lord Chief Justice of Ireland.]
Why do you love, why do other nations honor, England? Are you,
are they, dazzled by her naval or military glories, the splendour of her
literature, her sublime discoveries in science, her boundless wealth,
her almost incredible labours in every work of art and skill? No!
You love, you cling to England because she has been for ages past the
scat of free discussion, and, therefore, the home of rational freedom,
and the hope of oppressed men throughout the world. Emulate this
day the great virtues of Englishmen —their love of fairness, their im-
movable independence, and the sense of justice rooted in their nature:
these are the virtues which qualify jurors to decide the rights of their
fellow-men : deserted by these, of what avail is the tribunal of a jury ?
*Xis worthless as the living body when the human soul has fled.


Believe me, you will not secure the true interests of England by
leaning too severely on your countrymen ; they say to their English
brethren, —"We have been on your side whenever danger was to be
faced or honor won ; the scorching sun of the East, and the pestilence
of the West, we have endured, to spread your commerce, to extend
your empire, to uphold your glory; the bones of our countrymen
have whitened the fields of Portugal, of Spain, of France; fighting
your battles they fell, —in a nobler cause they could not; we have
helped to gather you imperishable laurels; we have helped to win you
immortal triumphs. Kow, in the time of peace, we ask you to restore
that Parliament planted here with your laws and language, uprooted
in a dismal period of our history—in the moment of our terror, our
divisions, our' weakness, it may be, our crime. Be-establish the
Commons on the broad foundation of the people’s choice; replace the
Peerage, the Corinthian pillars of the capital, secured and adorned by
the strength and splendour of the Crown, and let the monarch of
England, as in ages past, rale a brilliant and united Empire in solidity,
magnificence, and power.
UNIVERSAL IMANCIPATION.
[CURRAN.]
[■Such was the defective utterance of this oppirinj? eon of genius, that be long
went by the name of “ Little stuttering Jack Curran." Curran made up for
his first failures by continuing for months to recite the finest passages ot our
literature, and, in every respect, to study the art of oratory, not as if it were
the spontaneous gift of genius, but as a talent to be cultivated by judicious
and persevering exercise.]
I speax in the spirit of the British law, which makes liberty com-
mensurate with and inseparable from British soil; which proclaims,
even to the stranger and the sojourner, the moment he sets his foot
upon the British earth, that the ground on which he treads is holy,
and consecrated by the genius of Universal Emancipation. 3So matter
in what language his doom may have been pronounced; —no matter
what complexion, incompatible with freedom, an Indian or an African
sun may hare burnt upon him; —no matter in what disastrous
battle the helm of his liberty may have been cloven down,* —no matter
with what solemnities he may hare been devoted upon the altar of
slavery—the first moment he touches Ibo sacred soil of Britain, the
altar and the god sink together in the dust; his soul walks abroad
in her own majesty; his body swells beyond the measure of his
chains that hurst from around him; and he stands redeemed, and
regenerated, and disenthralled, by the irresistible genius of Universal
Emancipation.


IN DEFENCE OF STOCKDALE.
[ERSKINE.]
{ThomasLobdEessine, in his early days, ‘‘went to sea,” but petting tired of
this “branch of the service,” he tried the army, but ultimately exchanged
the sword of the soldier for the (jown of the barrister. Some idea of his
wonderful success as an advocate may be formed, when it is stated that, alter
his speech in defence of Captain Baillie, who bad been removed by Lord
Sandwich, from Greenwich Hospital, be, on. leaving the court, received thirty
retainers from attorneys. For a quarter of a century he continued to be
engaged in almost every cause of importance, but especially on the defensive
side in political prosecutions. The exalted position occupied by this distin-
guished advocate was purchased at the price of unwearied industry. He was
intimately acquainted with the best literature of his country, and knew
Shahspere almost by heart. The sensation produced by the magic of his
voice, the flash of his eye, the animation of bis face, and all that is included
in the word “ manner,” were, wo are told, at times so electrical, as to baflle all
description. Lord Erskine died in 1823, aged 73.]
Geetiemes, —I think I can observe that you are touched with this
way of considering this subject, and I can account for it. I have not
been considering it through the cold medium of books, but have been
speaking of man and his nature, and of human dominion, from what
I have Been of them myself, and amongst reluctant nations submitting
to our authority. I know what they feel, and how such feelings can
alone be repressed. I have heard them in my youth from a naked
savage, in the indignant character of a prince surrounded by his
subjects, addressing the governor of a British colony, holding a bundle
of sticks in his hand as the notes of his unlettered eloquence. “ Who
is it,” said the jealous ruler over the desert, encroached upon by the
restless foot of English adventure—“ Who is it that causes this river
to rise in the mountains, and to empty itself in the oeean ? Who is
it that causes to blow tire loud winds of winter, and that calms them
again in the summer ? Who is it that rears up the shade of those
lofty forests, and blasts them with the quick lightning at his
pleasure ? The same Being who gave to you a country on the other
side of the waters, and gave ours to us; and by this title we will
defend it! ” said the warrior, throwing down his tomahawk upon
the ground, and raising the war-sound of iris nation. Those are
the feelings of subjugated humanity all round the globe; and de-
pend upon it, nothing but fear will control where it is vain to look for
affection.


THE PERORATION OF THE SPEECH IN DEFENCE OF QUEEN
CAROLINE.
[BROUGHAM.]
Scon, my Lords, is the case before you! Such is the evidence in
support of this measure—evidence inadequate to prove a debt, im-
potent to deprive of a civil right, ridiculous to convict of the lowest
offcncc, scandalous if brought forward to support the highest charge
which the law knows, monstrous to stain the honour and blast the
name of an English Queen. What shall I say, then, if this is the
proof by which an act of judicial legislation, a parliamentary sentence,
an ex post facto law is sought to be passed against this defenceless
woman ? My Lords, I pray you to pause; Xdo earnestly beseech you
to fake heed. You are standing on the brink of a precipice—then
beware! It will go forth as your judgment if sentence shall go
forth against the Queen. But it will be the only judgment which,
instead of reaching its object, will return and bound back upon those
who gave it. Save the country, my Lords, from the horrors of this
catastrophe —save yourself from this peril. Ilescue that country
of which you are the ornaments, but in which you can flourish no
longer, when severed from the people, than the blossom when cut oil'
from the roots and the stem of the tree. Save that country that you
may continue to adorn it—save the Crown, which is in jeopardy—the
aristocracy, which is shaken—the altar, which must totter with
the blow which rends its kindred throne! You have said, my Lords
—you have willed—the Church and the ICing have willed—that the
Queen should be deprived of its solemn service. She has, instead of
that solemnity, the heartfelt prayers of the people. She wants no
prayers of mine; but Ido here pour forth my humble supplications at
the throne of mercy, that that mercy may be poured down upon the
people in a larger measure than the merits of its rulers may deserve,
and that your hearts may be turned to justice.
PULPIT ORATORY.
[ fl I can only ask ■whether the magnitude of the advantages of a good delivery,
ought not to make us all feel that we have scarcely done our duty until
we have tried every available means of acquiring this power, and can
certify to our consciences that the want of it 38 tube attributed to positive
incapacity on our own part, and not to any want of diligence or per-
severance in the study of it. Let it only be remembered that the gilt of
speech is a talent committed to the Christian Minister’s charge to occupy
for his Master’s service, and then, if we refuse to use every available
means of improving that talent, we cannot escape the conclusion that in
that particular we must be counted as unprofitable servants,”—The Rev. J. J.
Halcombs, M.A.]


[“lr would be difficult to estimate the advantages that under the Divine
blessing, be derived from elocution classes in our universities, where, under the
management of competent professors, our young men might be trained in reci*
tation, both of selections from standard authors, and of their own compositions
on set subjects. Instead of superseding any part of the present process, this
might be added to it all; and if candidates for holy obdebs were thereby
delayed a year, there would be more than compensation tor the delay iatho
increased competency for the work.”—The Key. Hugh Mobile, D.D.]
ON THE PLURALITY OF WORLDS.
[CHALMERS.]
[Tflosus Ciut.mftis, D.D., was born at Anstrutlier, Fifeshire, in 1780. His
eloquence in the pulpit won for him the distinguished title of “The Prince of
Preachers.” He died in 1817. Jeffrey, in describing the concentrated intensity
which strikingly distinguished the manner of Chalmers, finely says, that he
buried his adversaries under the fragments ot burning mountains.]
Shall we say, then, of these vast luminaries, that they were created
in vain? "Were they called into existence for no other purpose than to
throw a tide of useless splendour over tho solitudes of immensity?
Our sun is only one of those luminaries, and we know that he has
■worlds in his train. Why should wo strip the rest of this princely
attendance? Why may not each of them bo tho centre of his own
system, and give light to his own worlds? It is true that we see
thorn not; but could the eye of man take its flight into those distant
regions, it would lose sight of our little world before it reached the
outer limits of our system —the greater planets would disappear in
their turn before it had described a small portion of that abyss which
separates us from the fixed stars; the sun would decline into a little
spot, and all its splendid retinue of worlds be lost in the obscurity of
distance: he would at last shrink into a small, indivisible atom, and
all that could be soon of this magnificent system would be reduced to
the glimmering of a little star. Why resist any longer the grand and
interesting conclusion? Each of these stars may be the token of a system
as vast, as splendid as the one which we inhabit. Worlds roll in these
distant regions; and these worlds must be the mansions of life and of
intelligence. In yon gilded canopy of heaven, we see the broad aspect
of the universe, whore each shining point presents ns with a sun, and
each sun with a system of worlds, where the Divinity reigns in all tho
grandeur of his attributes —where Ho peoples immensity with his
wonders, and travels in the greatness of Ids strength through the
dominions of one vast and unlimited monarchy.


A FINE EXAMPLE OF ANALOCICAL REASONING.
[EDWARD IRVING.]
[This highly gifted man, after turning hia attention to tho ministry, became one of
the greatest preachers of modern times. Hazlilt protested, on returning
nearly halt-squeezed to death from one of his displays, “ that a monologue from
Coleridae, ar< citation of one of his own poems from Wordsworth, a burst of puns
from Charles Lamb, or a burst of passion from Edmund Kean, was as nothing
to a seimon from Edward Irving.” He was just about to strike out a new form
of faith, and to become the leader of a sect, when death stopped his course. He
died in 1834, in his forty-second year,]
If, then, the truth of God’s presence and presidency in our worldly
affairs finds for itself universal belief among Christians, though resting
on revelation alone, and having no foundation either in sight or per-
ception, upon what plea will they reject the doctrine of the Spirit’s
presence and presidency in the great world of grace, if it bo found
revealed with the same distinctness ? There ought, therefore, to be no
preliminary objection taken to it upon the ground of its not being per-
ceptible, but the Scriptures should be searched whether it be so or not.
Kather, upon the other hand, because it is not perceptible, we should
entertain it as more akin to the other operations of the invisible God;
for, exalting your thoughts a little, conceive the ways of God; look
abroad over the world, and what do you behold? Noiseless nature
putting forth her buds, and chinking the milk of her existence from the
distant sun. Where is God? He is not seen, lie is not heard. Where
is the sound of his footsteps ? Where the rushing of his chariot-wheels?
where is his storehouse lor this inhabited earth? where arc the germs
of future plants, the juices of future fruits? and where is the hand
dividing its portion to every living thing, and filling their hearts with
life and joy? Lift your thoughts a little higher; behold the sun.
Doth he, when preparing to run his race, shake himself like a strong
man after sleep, and make a rustling noise, and life up his voice to God
for a renewal of his exhausted strength? Doth the pale-faced and
modest moon, which cometh forth in the season of the night, make
music in the still silence to her Maker’s praise ? Ho the stars in their
several spheres tell to mortal sense tho wondrous stories of their births?
Again, turn your thoughts inwards upon yourselves, and say if your
manly strength did grow out of infant helplessness, with busy prepara-
tions and noisy workmanship, as the chiselled form of man groweth
out of the quarried stone? In the still evening, when you lay you
down wearied and worn out, doth your strength return during the
watches of the sleepy and unconscious night by noise and trouble, as a
worn out machine is refitted by the cunning workman? Tell mo how
intelligence grows upon the unconscious babe ; where are the avenues
of knowledge, and by what method doth it fix itself?


THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.
[MASSILLON.]
[To this famous French bishop, and great pulpit orator, Louis XIY. once paid the
following royal compliment;—“When I hear other preachers, I go away pleased
with them; but when I hear yon, Igo away displeased with myself 1“ Through-
out every department of France, the name of Massillon is synonymous with that
of eloquence of the highest order. The eiiect produced on the congregation
who listened to the subjoined striking passage from his sermon on the last
judgment was electrical, and, according to contemporary authorities, baffled all
description.]
I figuee to myself that our last hour is come—the heavens are
opened over our heads—time is no more, and eternity has begun.
Jesus Christ is about to appear to judge us, according to our deserts,
and we are here, waiting at his hands the sentence of everlasting life or
death. I ask you now—stricken with terror like yourselves, in nowise
separating my lot from yours, but placing myself in the situation in
which we must all one day stand before God our Judge—if Christ, I
ask you, were this moment come to make the awful partition of the
just and tho unjust, think you that the greater number would be saved?
Do you believe that the numbers would even be equal ? If the lives of
the multitude here present were sifted, should wo find among them tea
righteous F Should we find a single one ?
THE IMPRISONED EAGLE AND THE ENCHAINED CHRISTIAN
SOUL.
[THE CLOSE OF A SERMON PREACHED IN SYDNEY IN 1863.]
Eise to the dignify of your nature, and the grandeur of your destiny.
In the spiritual and divine life, mount upwards as on eagle’s wings,
and, rising far above the paltry and insignificant things of sense and
time, ascend nearer and nearer to the source of infinite perfection, and
the splendours of immortality. I know lam prescribing no easy task.
Grace, like the wheels of Ezekiel’s virion, would bo soaring upwards;
but this world’s cares and business, with an “evil heart of unbelief,”
conspire to drag us downwards, so that we have a sad battle to fight,
an arduous and constant struggle to maintain. I have seen an impri-
soned eagle—an eagle fettered with a chain; and who that has seen
that object—who that has seen the chained eagle, and watched that
kingly bird, whose home is beyond the thunder-cloud, can forget the
fire of his dilated eye, as again and again he looked towards the sun, in
whose splendours ho had so often bathed his sweeping and soaring
wings—who, I say, can forget the haughty ruble of his plumes, and the
crushing of his noble spirit, as he felt the touch of that galling chain that
bound him to the soil ? It ia an emblem of the Christian, whose renewed
nature would be perpetually ascending, but which is checked and chained
down by an evil heart of unbelief, and the urgencies and temptations of


the world—so that under this sore and fretting encumbrance, his
only comfort is in looking forward to the time when the fetters
of mortality shall be broken, and the bars of his prison-house
dashed to pieces for ever, and when his emancipated spirit, like the
ea"le of the mountains, shall soar upward and upward through the
cloudless regions of eternal day, until at last it gazes, with a steady
and enraptured eye, on the mild and beauteous, yet burning and over-
powering splendours of the Sun of Righteousness.
THE PEACE OF GOD.
[REV. H. MELVILL.]
Ye have seen the young, and they have fallen in their vigour; ye
have seen the beautiful, and they have withered in their bloom; ye have
seen the gifted, and their genius hath been quenched at its meridian;
ye have seen the dearest ties rudely broken; the hopes that looked
brightest, crushed in a moment; the plans that were wisest, suddenly
frustrated; the joys that were purest, destroyed without warning. But
have ye not marked a peace which subsisted amidst termination of
perfections—undisturbed by the blow when heaviest, undismayed by
the storm when fiercest, unappalled by death when nearest ? There is
such a peace —a peace which the storm breaks not, because there is a
Bather’s voice in its rushings; and which the blow shatters not, be-
cause He who smiteth is still known as pitying his children; and which
death scares not, because an Omnipotent Oue hath promised that He
will swallow up death in victory. And what peace is this ? The peace
of those who love the law, and keep it; the peace which follows obe-
dience to that commandment which is love; “ the peace of God, which
passeth all understanding.”
THE TIME HAS COME.
[REV. J. M. BELLEW.]
[DrstingnisLea te'|,Tcal eluiullulliu,y ptmu. lie Lji a imji Uit,e iuu{;i'ci;ulii)U.J'
“ See, here is the bed of death: the clouds are closing about the
sight of this dying man, like as they thicken round expiring day._ The
beam of life is sinking in his eye to rest, and farrowed lines dim the
face like the dark shadows that foretell the deadly storm. There is an
oppressive weight in the very air. There is a killing silence, a leaden
stillness in the breath-suspended trepidation of those who watch and
wait around; and, in the midst, the hollow gurgling groan of inward
startles every ear and appals every heart. Then the attenuated
hands clutch convulsively at the objects on which they rest; the tongue,
tremblin'* to its last silence, wrestles in thick palsied whispers to pray;
and like a flash of light as the sun sets, a beam of awful lustre kindles
in the eye, telling the tale the tongue refused its office to bear—and all
is over. The night has come; and life’s work is left undone.”


RECITATION.
[Them is a practice which wonderfully assists the speaker in his choice of words
and forms of sentences; wo mean learning; by heart the finest passages of great
writers, and especially all the moat musical parts, so as to be able to recite them
as language that occurs quite naturally, without the effort of a thought, in a
solitary walk. At an early age, this practice of recitation* is bo easy and
agreeable, that he who aspires to the art of speaking ought never to neglect
For, besides furnishing the mind with lino thoughts, well expressed and linked
together, it also fills the understanding with graceful images; it forma the car
to rhythm, and imparts a sense of the harmony of speech; for, speech is not
without a kind of harmony and music of its own,— Hints for the Pulpit, ike
Senate , and the Par, M. Bauxaiit.]
POETICAL ILLUSTRATIONS.
THE CHARGE OF “600” AT BALACLAVA.
[TENNYSON.]
£Aif2Ed TEirorsoy, D.C.L., tho Poet-Laurcate, was bora in 3809, at Somersly,
in Lincolnshire, where his father was rector. In 1813 he published a collected
edition of his works, and at once tool: the highest rank as a poet. la the
heroic charge of the Light brigade at the battle of balaclava (commemorated
in the following lines), on the never-to-be-forgotten morning of the 25th October,
1851, four hundred horses were killed or rendered unserviceable j threo
* The ancient Greeks always cultivated tho memory and recited in public.
The discipline for the formation and improvement of the voice among this classical
people was so comprehensive, that not less than three different classes of teachers
were employed lor this purpose, viz.-the vociferarii , phonasci, and vocales.
The object of the first was to strengthen tho voice, and to extend its compass;
the office of tho second to improve its quality, so as to render it full, sonorous,
and agreeable; while tho efforts of the third were directed to modulation and
infiection.


hundred and seventy were killed in action, and the remainder were in such a sad
state from numerous wounds, that they were obliged to be destroyed the following
morning. No fewer than twenty-six officers, and two hundred and seventy-six
non-commissioned officers and private soldiers, making a total of three hundred,
were killed and wounded.]
Halp a league, half a league,
Half a league onward,
All in the valley of Death
Rode the six hundred.
Forward, the Light Brigade!
“ Charge for the guns ! ” he said f
Into the valley of Death
Rode the six hundred.
“ Forward, the Light Brigade I’*
Was there a man dismayed?
Rot tho’ the soldier knew
Some one had blundered j
Their’s not to make reply,
Their’s not to reason why,
Their’s but to do and die,
Into the valley of Death
Rode the six hundred.
Cannon to right of them,
Cannon to left of them,
Cannon in front of them
Volley’d and thunder’d;
Stormed at with shot and shell,
Boldly they rode and well,
Into the jaws of Death,
Into the mouth of Hell
Rode tho six hundred.
Flash’d all their sabres hare,
Flash’d as they turn’d in air,
Sabring the gunners there,
Charging an army, while
All the world wonder’d :
Plunged in the battery smoke
Right thro’ the line they broke;
Cossack and Russian
Reel’d from the sabre-stroke
Shatter’d and sunder’d
Then they rode back, but not—
Rot tho six hundred.


Cannon to right of them,
Cannon to left of them,
Cannon behind them
"Volley’d and thunder’d;
Storm’d at with shot and shell*
While horse and hero fell,
They that had fought so well
Came thr’ the jaws of Death
Back from the mouth of Hell,
All that was left of them,
Deft of sis hundred.
When can their glory fade
O the wild charge they made!
All the world wonder’d.
Honour the charge they made!
Honour tho Light Brigade,
Noble six hundred.
THE BRIDGE OF SIGHS.
[HOOD.]
[This well-known humourist was born in 1799, and at an early as© was apprenticed
to an engraver, at which trade he learned the cunning of those_ droll sketches
with which he subsequently delighted to illustrate his whimsicalities. In 1823
he became connected with the London Magazine, and for upwards of twenty
years, by the exercise of his ever-active and genial pen, continued to relieve
himself of an apparently inexhaustible supply of puns, and whims, and oddities.
But Hood was something more than a humourist. He was a great-hearted,
noble-minded man. To amelioi ate the condition of the working-classes was the
great object of his life. His famous lyric of the “Song of the Shirt” will bo
remembered when his quips and cranks are buried in oblivion. Rogers con-
sidered this poem as being “ a sublime conception worthy the pen of Shakspere j
while Macaulay thought it “the grandest effort of modern poetry.” Haifa
million copies of the Punch containing this thrilling wail of human misery were
sold. Among Hood’s other imperishable productions may be mentioned “ The
Bridge of Sighs,” and “The Dream of Eugene Aram.” Shortly before hi
death, which took place in. 1315, he received a pension of £lOO a-year from tho
late Sir Robert Peel.]
“Deown’d, Deow^’d.”— Hamlet.
Oke more Unfortunate
Weary of breath,
Kashly importunate,
Gone to her death!


Take her up tenderly,
Lift her with care ;
Fashion’d so slenderly,
Young, and so fair!
Look at her garments
Clinging like cerements,
Whilst the wave constantly
Drips from her clothing;
Take her up instantly,
Loving, not loathing—
Touch her not scornfully;
Think of her mournfully.
Gently and humanly;
Not of the stains of her,
All—that remains of her
Now—is pure womanly.
Make no deep scrutiny
Into her mutiny
Hash and undutiful:
Past all dishonour,
Death has left on her
Only the beautiful.
Still, for all slips of hers,
One of Eve’s family—
Wipe those poor lips of hers
Oozing so clammily.
Loop up her tresses
Escaped from tho comb,
Her fair auburn tresses;
Whilst wonderment guesses
Where was her homo ?
Who was her father ?
Who was her mother?
Had she a sister ?
Had she a brother ?
Or was there a dearer ono
Still, and a nearer one
Yet, than all other ?
Alas! for the rarity
Of Christian charity
Under the sun!
Oh! it was pitiful I
Near a whole city full,
Homo she had none.


Sisterly, brotherly,
Fatherly, motherly
Feelings had changed:
Love, by harsh evidence,
Thrown from its eminence;
Fvcn God’s providence,
Seeming estranged.
Where the lamps quiver
So far in the river,
With many a light
From window and casement,
From garret to basement,
She stood with amazement,
Houseless by night.
The bleat wind of March
Made her tremble and shiver;
But not the dark arch,
Or the black flowing river:
Mad from life’s history,
Glad to death’s mjstery,
Swift to be hurl’d—
Any where, any where
Out of the world!
In she plunged boldly,
No matter how coldly
The rough river ran,—
Over the brink of it,
Picture it—think of it,
Dissolute Man!
Lave in it, drink of it,
Then, if you can!
Take her up tenderly,
Lift her with care ;
Fashion’d so slenderly,
Young and so fair I
Fre her limbs frigidly
Stiffen too rigidly
Decently, —kindly,—
Smooth, and compose them;
And her eyes —close them ;
Staring eo blindly!
Dreadfully staring
Thro’ muddy impurity,
As when with the daring
Last look of despairing,
Fixed on futurity.


Perishing gloomily,
Spurred by contumely,
Cold inhumanity,
Burning insanity,
Into her rest.—
Cross her hands humbly
As if praying dumbly,
Over her breast!
Ow r ning her weakness,
Her evil behaviour,
And leaving, with meekness,
Her sins to her Saviour!
HORATIUS.
[PEOH ilACATJLAY’S LAYS OP ANCIENT EOITE.]
(By permission of 21essrs. Longman Sf Co.)
But hark I the cry is Astur: and, lo! the ranks divide ;
And the great Lord of Luna comes with his stately stride ,
Upon bis ample shoulders clangs loud th q fourfold shield ,
And in his hand he shakes the brand which none but he can wield.
Then, whirling up his broadsword with both hands to the height ,
lie rushed against Horatius , and smote with all his might ,
With shield and blade Horatius right deftly turned the blow,
The bknv, though turned , came yet too nigh;
It missed his helm, but gashed his thigh;
The Tuscans raised a joufal cry
To see the red blood flow.
He reeled , and on ITerminius ho leaned one breathing-space ;
Then , like a wild cat mad with wounds, sprang right at Astur’syhce.
Through teeth, and skull and helmet , so fierce a thrust he sped,
The good sword stood a hand-breath out behind the Tuscan’s head.
And the great Lord of Luna fell at that deadly stroke ,
As falls on Mount Alvernus a thunder-smitten oak.
Tar o’er the crashing forest the giant arms lie spread;
And the pale augurs, midtering low , gaze on the blasted head.
But meanwhile axe and lever have manfully been plied;
And noto tho bridge hangs tottering above the boiling tide,
“ Come back , come back , Horatius I” loud cried the fathers all.
“Tack, Lartius! back , Herminius! back , ere the vuinfallT
Tack darted Spurius Lartius; Herminius darted back:
And, as they passed, beneath their feet they felt the timbers crack ,
Tut, when they turned their faces, and onth o further shore,
Saw brave Horatius stand alone , they would have crossed once more.


But with a crash, like thunder fell every loosened beam,
And, like a dam, the mighty wreck lay right athwart the stream:
And a long shout of triumph rose from the walls of Rome,
As to the highest turret-tops was splashed the yellow foam.
And, like a horse unhroJcen when first he feels the rein.
The furious river struggled hard , and tossed his tawny mane ;
And hurst the curb, and hounded , rejoicing to be free ;
And whirling down, in fierce career,
Battlement , and plank, and pier,
Rushed headlong to the sea.
“ Oh , Tiber ! Father Tiber ! to whom the Romans pray,
A Roman's life, a Roman's arms, take thou in charge this day I”
So he spake , and speaking sheathed the good sword by his side,
And, with his harness on his hack, plunged headlong in the tide.
But fiercely ran the current, swollen high by months of rain;
Axi&fast his blood was jloicing; and he was sore in pain,
And heavy with his armour , and spent with changing blows :
And oft they thought him sinking , but still again he rose.
“ Curse on him I” quoth false Sextus ; “ will not the villain drown t
But for this stay , ere close of day we should have sacked the town !'*
“ Heaven help Idm P* quoth Lars Porsena, “and bring him safe to
shore ;
For such a gallant feat of arms was never seen before.’’
And now h c feels the bottom; now on dry earth he stands;
Now round him throng the fathers to press his gory hands;
And now with shouts and clapping, and noise of weeping loud,
He enters through the River-gate, borne by the joyous crowd t
THE PRESENT ASPECT OE GREECE.
[BYRON.]
[Lord Jettiivy, in his critical review of “The Giaour,” has the following
remarks on the present sehciiou:—“There is infinite beauty and effect,
though of a painful and aim st oppressive character, in this extraordinary
passage, in which the author lias illuslla.it d the In amitul, but still and melan-
choly aspect of the once busy and cloiious shores of Greece, by an imago
more true, more mournful, and more exquisitely finished than any that we
can recollect in the whole compass ot poetry ,”J
He who hath bent him o’er the dead,
Ere the first day of death is lied—
The first dark day of nothingness,
The lust of danger and distress—


(Before Decay’s effacing fingers
Have swept the lines where Beauty lingers,)—
And marked the mild angelic air,—
The rapture of repose that’s there.—
The fixed yet tender traits that streak
The languor of the placid cheek,
And, —but for that sad, shrouded eye,
That fires not, —wins not, —weeps not, —now,—
And but for that chill, changeless brow,
Whose cold obstruction’s apathy
Appals the gazing mourner’s heart,
As if to him it could impart
The doom he dreads, yet dwells upon,—
Yes, —but for these, and these alone.
Some moments, —ay, —one treacherous hour,
He still might doubt the tyrant’s power :
So fair, —so calm, —so softly sealed,
The first—last look—by death revealed!”
HIGHLAND MARY.
[BURNS.]
(Elt.ee? reader of the lifo of Robert Burns has perused with interest and
emotion the narrative of his romantic attachment tor Mary Campbell.
Before tho necessary arrangements could be made lor tho marriage of these
rustic lovers, Mary had to make a journey from Ayr into Argyleshire.
Previous to her departure, Mary and Robert met one Sabbath morning
in May, at a beautiful spot ou the banks of the Ayr, to take a mutual
farewell. They were destined never to meet again. At their parting
the lovers stood on the separate sides of a little streamlet, and holding a
Bible between them, while they laved their hands in the purling brook, vowed
to be faithful to each other. Poor Mary died suddenly shortly afterwards.
Over her remains in the churchyard of Greenock, a handsome monument
has been erected. But the noblest tribute—one far more enduring than
marble—to Mary Campbell’s memory, is to be found in the following lines,
written by the man who fondly and deeply loved her; —]
Ye "banks, and braes, and streams around
The castle o’ Montgomerie;
Green be your woods, and fair your flowers,
Your waters never drumlie!
There simmer first unfauld her robes,
And there the longest tarry;
Yor there I took my last farewell
O* my sweet Highland Mary.


How sweetly bloom’d the gay green birk,
How rich the hawthorn’s blossom,
As underneath their fragrant shade,
I clasp’d her to my bosom I
The golden hours on angel wings,
Flew o’er me and my dearie ;
For dear to me as light and life
Was my sweet Highland Mary.
Wi’ mony a tow and lock’d embrace,
Our parting was fu’ tender;
And, pledging aft to meet again,
We tore oursel’s asunder ;
But oh! fell Death’s untimely frost.
That nip’t my flower sae early !
Kow green’s the sod, and cauld’s the clay,
That wraps my Highland Mary.
Oh pale, pal© now, those rosy lips,
I aft hae kiss’d sae fondly!
And closed for aye the sparkling glance
That dwelt on me sae kindly !
And mouldering now in silent dust
The heart that lo’ed me dearly,
But still within my bosom’s core
Shall live my Highland Mary.
CAOCH THE PIPER.
[kEEGAN.]
[John Keegan' was born of humble parents in a village in Queen’s County, Ire-
land. He died in 1849, in the fortieth year of his age. He did not live to write,
but wrote to live. He furnished the leading periodicals of his country with
tales and sketches illustrative of the every-day life of the class to which ho
belonged, and with whose joys and sorrows he throughout life identified him-
self. At one period of his literary career he contributed many articles to the
Nation. His poetical productions are distinguished for their simplicity,purity,
and tenderness. The ballads of “ Caoch the Piper” and the “ Holly and Ivy 5 '
aiford good illustrations of Keegan’s style. The former is given below. Tho
latter appears elsewhere.]
One winter s day, long, long ago,
When I was a little fellow,
A piper wander’d to our door
Grey-headed, blind, and yellow,
And, oh! how glad was my young heart,
Tho* earth and sky looked dreary,
To sec the stranger and liis dog,—
Poor Pinch, and Caoch O’Bcary.
8


And when he stowed away his bag
Cross-barred with green and yellow,
I thought, and said, in Ireland’s ground
There's not so fine a fellow.
And Fineen Burke, and Shauno Magee,
And Eilr, Kate, and Mary,
Hudi’d in with panting haste to sco
And welcome Caoch O’Leary.
O God! be with those happy times,
O God ! bo wi(h my childhood,
"When I, bareheaded, roamed all day,
Bird’s-nesting in the wild wood.
I’ll not forget those sunny hours
However years may vary —
I’ll not forget my early friends,
Hor honest Caoch O’Leary.
Poor Caoch and Pinch slept well that night,
And in the morning early
He called mo up to hear him play,
“ The wind that shakes the barley.”
And then he stroked my flaxen hair,
And cried, “ God, mark ray deary
And how I wept when lie said, “Farewell,”
And “think of Caoch O’Leary.”
And seasons came and went, and still
Old Caoch was not forgotten,
Although I thought him dead and gone,
And in the cold clay rotten.
And often when I talked and danced
With Eily, Kate, and Mary,
We spoke of childhood’s rosy hours,
And prayed for Caoch O’Leary.
Well, twenty summers had gone past,
And June's red sun was sinking,
"When I, a man, sat by my door,
Of twenty sad things thinking:
A little dog came up the way,
Ills gait was sad and weary,
And at his tail a lame man limped,
’Twas Pinch and Caoch O’Leary,
Old Caoch!—but, ah! how woo-bcgonc,
His form is bowed and bending,
His flesblcss hands are stiff and wan—
Ay—time is even blending
The colours on his threadbare bag ;
And Pinch is twice as hairy
And thin-spare as when first I saw
Himself and Caoch O’Leary.


<c Goff’s blessing hero I” tho wanderer cried,
“Far, far, be hell’s black viper,—
Docs anybody here about
Remember Caoch the Piper ?”
Wii h swelling heart I grasped his hand,
The old man murmured, —“ Deary,
Are you the silken-headed child
That loved poor Caoch O’Leary ?”
“Yes, yes, I cried —tho wanderer wept
•As if his heart was breaking—
<s And where, avich rnachree,” he sobbed,
“ Is all the merry-making
I found hero twenty years ago ?”
“My tale,” I sighed, “ might weary,
Enough to say there’s none but mo
To welcome Caoch O’Leary.”
“Yo! Yo ! Yo!” the old man cried,
And wrung his hands in sorrow, —
*‘Pray lead me in, asthore machree,
And I’ll go home to-morrow.
My peace is made; —I’ll calmly leave
This world so cold and dreary.
And you shall keep my pipes and dog,
And pray for Caoch O’Leary.’’
With Pinch I watched his bed that night,
Kcxt day his wish was granted.—
lie died, and Father James was brought,
The requiem mass was chanted.
The neighbours came, —we dug his grave,
Near Eily, Kate, and Mary ;
And there he sleeps his last sweet sleep, —■
God rest you, Caoch O’Leary!
THE QUEEN'S LETTER.
[W. H. BELLAMY.]
[This wch-known production describes very touchingly tho affectionate solicitude
with which Her Mnjpsty looked for the accounts of her suffering soldiers
during the war in the Crimea. As the incident to which the words relate is of
peculiar interest, we quote the extract from the autograph letter addressed by
Her Majesty to Mr. Sydney Herbert, and through him to Mrs. Herbert, by
whom it was transmitted to Miss Florence Nightingale;—
“"Windsor Castle, Dec. 6,155-4.
Would you tell Mrs. Herbert that I beg she would let me see frequently
the accounts she receives from Miss Nightingale and Mrs. Bracebridge, as I


boar no details of tbe wounded, though I receive many from officers, &c.,
about the battle held, and, naturally, the former must interest me more than
any one. Let Mrs. Herbert also know that I wish Miss Nightingale and the
ladies would tell these poor, noble, wounded, and sick men, that no one takes
a warmer interest, or feels more for their sufferings, or admires their courage
and heroism, more than their Queen; day and night she thinks of her
beloved troops. So does the Prince. Beg Mrs. Herbert to communicate
these my words to those ladies, as I know our sympathy 1s valued by these
noble fellows,— Victoria It."]
Tkeee came a tale to England;
’Twas of a battle won,
And nobly bad her warriors
That day their duty done.
They fell like sheaves in autumn,
Tet, ’mid that fearful scene,
Their last shout was for England,
Their last breath for their Queen,
There came a tale to England
Of Buffering, want, and woe ;
Of the night watch in the trenches,
Of the sortie by the foe—
’Hid rain, and storm, and sickness,
With no rest, no pause between.
And there was grief through England
Erom the humblest to the Queen.
Then wrote the Queen of England—
(And God’s blessing on her pen)
“ Oh, tell those noble wounded,
Those sick and suffering men,
There’s not a heart in England
Can feel a pang more keen;
That day and night her own lov’d troops
Are thought of by their Queen.”
There rose a shout through England,
Through them ’twas wafted o’er
Erom those sick, wounded soldiers,
And it rung from shore to shore.
Erom Alma, Balaclava,
And from Inkcrman it came—
“ God bless the Queen of England!
Again we’d do the same.”


OUR GALLANT VOLUNTEERS.
[MACKAY.]
fCiiAULES Maccat, LL.D.jhas long been favourably known to the public as a
journalist, as well as for his poetical contributions to the current literature of
the day. He was born in Perth, and is in bis iifty-Hftii year,]
Ukdaukted men of England,
They said our blood was cold,
That nothing more could rouse us,
Except the love of gold ;
That cent, per cent., not freedom,
Was all our thought and aim,
And all the glory of our sires
The shadow of a name.
Shout forth a bold denial
With hearty British cheers,
And rifle’s crack that shall not slack,
Our gallant Volunteers.
Undaunted men of England,
If any foe alive
Be fool enough to think so,
Why, let him think and thrive;
But if his folly lead him
To try us where we stand,
Each man shall be as good as three
To guard his native land.
Come one, come ten, come thousands,
Come millions, swords and spears j
Where ten shall come, not two shall go,
So say the Volunteers.
THE WITNESSES.
[LONGFELLOW.]
Ik ocean’s wide domains,
Half buried in the sands,
Lie skeletons in chains,
With shackled feet and hands.
Beyond the fall of dews,
Beeper than plummet lies,
Float ships with all their crews
No more to sink or rise.


There the black slave-ship swims,
Freighted with human forms,
"Whose fettered, fleshlcss limbs
Are not the sport of storms.
These are the bones of slaves;
They gleam from the abyss;
They cry from yawning waves,
<c We are the witnesses!”
Within earth’s wide domains
Are markets for men’s lives ;
Their necks are galled with chains,
Their wrists are cramped with gyves.
Bead bodies, that the kite
In deserts makes its prey;
Murders, that with affright
Scare schoolboys from their play 1
All evil thoughts and deeds;
Anger, and lust and pride;
The foulest, rankest weeds,
That choke life’s groaning tide!
These arc the woes of slaves;
They glare from the abyss ;
They cry from unknown graves,
<c Wc arc the witnesses 1”
WALLACE AT FALKIRK.
[W. WEIR.]
[The hero cf the fc-llo'vin" lines was a eentleman nf small fortune in Scotland.
During the reign of Kimr Edward Iho First, Wallace incited his cornnymcii
to strike oif the Enriish voice. This led to the battle of Falkirk, which ter-
minated in favor of -England.]
Cowpanioxs of my toils arise!
Beheld the dragoned banner flics, —
Stand ere your bleeding country dies,
And show your latest bravery.
Arise—ere tottering freedom falls, —
*Tis Wallace, —his your country calls;
See how you Saxon spear appals
A sad, unaided peasantry!
"Who o’er is daunted at the sight
Of England’s numbers, —Edward’s might,
Who-.-e soid shall echo with affright
The Saxon’s war-cry Tauntingly—


Let him retire, to fear betrayed,
Whose breast with cowardice is swayed;
His country skull not ask his aid,
"Who fears to join undauntingly.
In me yon proud insulting foe
Shall see a weltering corse laid low,
And Scotland hear my life’s last throe,
Proclaiming freedom!—victory!
Yes, Wallace shall be lowly laid,
A bleeding corse on honour’s bed,
Else by your might, and this bright blade,
We win our country’s liberty I
Beneath these cairns your fathers sleep;
But can the grave their glory keep P
Their struggles o’er our souls shall sweep,
To urge the battle rapidly!
The foe advances!—stand ye brave !
Couch—couch your spears—your symbols wave,
Wo must be free —or in the grave, —
Wc stand or fall with liberty 1
Bush on ye Scots! renew' your deeds!
Again the vaunting Saxon bleeds!
On, Scotland, on ! thy Wallace leads.
Again, to death or victory!
THE BEATH OF THE HAY QUEEN.
[TENNYSON.]
I TnorronT to pass away before , and yet alive I am,
And in the fields all round I hear the hlealiny of the lamb,
How sadly, I remember, rose the morning of the year I
To die before the snoio-drop came, and now the violet's here.
O sweet 13 the new violet, that comes beneath the sides,
And sweeter is the youny lamb's voice to me that cannot rise ,
And street is all the land about, and all the Jtowers that blow,
And sweeter jar is death than life to me that long to go.
It seem’d so hard at first, mother, to leave the blessed sun,
And note it seems as hard to stay, and yet. His trill he done!
But still I think it can't be long before I find release;
And that good man , the clergyman , has told me words of peace.


O "blessings on his kindly voice, and on his silver hair !
And blessings on his whole life long , until lie meet me there !
0 blessings on his kindly heart and on his silver head !
A thousand times I blest him, as he knelt beside my bed.
Ho showed me all th q mercy, for he taught me all the sin ;
How, though my lamp was lighted late, there’s One will let me in ;
Hor would I now be well, mother, again, if that could be,
[For my desire is but to pass to Him that died for me.
1 did not hear the dog howl, mother, or the death-watch beat,
There came a sweeter token when, the night and morning meet :
But sit beside my bed , mother, and put your band in mine ,
And FJJie on the other side, and I will tell the sign.
All in the wild March morning I heard the angels call;
It was when the moon was setting, and the dark was over all;
The trees began to whisper , and the ivind began to roll ,
And in the wild March morning X heard them call my soul.
Por lying broad awake I thought of you and Hfjie dear ;
X saw you sitting in the house , and Ino longer here ;
With all my strength I pray'd for both , and so I felt resign'd ,
And tip the valley came a swell of music on the wind,
I thought that it was fancy, and I listen'd in my led,
And then did something speak to me — l know not what was said,
For great delight and shuddering took hold of all my mind.
And up the valley came again the music on the wind.
But you were sleeping: and I said, “ It’s not for them ; it’s mine /”
And if it comes three times , I thought, I take it for a sign.
And once again it came, and close beside window-bars,
Then seem’d to go right up to Heaven, and die among the stars.
So now I think my time is near. I trust it is. I know
The blessed music went that way my soul will have to go.
And for myself, indeed, I care not if I go to-day;
But, Effie, you must comfort her when lam passed away.
O look ! the sun begins to rise, the heavens are in aglow;
lie shines upon a hundred fields, and all of them 1 known
And there I move no longer now, and there his light may shine —
Wild flowers in the valley for other hands than mine.
O sweet and strange it seems to me, that ere this day is done.
The voice that now is speaking, may bo beyond the sun —
Her ever and for ever with those just souls and true —
And what is life, that we should moan ? ivhy make we such ado 1
For ever and for ever, ell in a blessed home —
And there to wait a little while till you and Hffe come—
To lie within the light of God, as IHe upon your breast —
And the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.


INVOCATION TO GREECE.
[BYRON.]
Oxime ot the unforgotten brave !
"Whose land, from plain to mountain-cave,
Was freedom's home or glory's grave i
Shrine of the mighty! can it be,
That this is all remains of thee?
Approach, thou craven, crouching slave :
Say, is not this Thermopylae ?
These waters blue that round you lave.
Oh, servile oilspring of tho free—
Pronounce what sea, what shore is this ?
The gulph, the rock of Salamis I
These scenes, their story not unknown,
Arise, and make again your own;
Snatch from the ashes of your sires
Tho embers of their former fires:
And he who in the strife expires
Will add to theirs a name of fear
That tyranny shall quake to hear.
And leave his sons a hope, a fame,
They too will rather die than shame.
For Freedom's battle once begun,
Bequeathed by bleeding sire to sou.
Though baffled oft, is ever won.
Bear witness, Greece, thy living page,
Attest it many a deathless age!
"While kings in dusky darkness hid,
Have left a nameless pyramid,
Thy heroes, though the general doom
Hath swept the column from the tomb,
A mightier monument command,
The mountains of their native land.
There points thy Aluso to stranger’s eye,
The graves of those who cannot die.
PIBROCH OF DONUIL DHU.
[SCOTT.]
[Srs Waltee Scott, tho son of a writer to the Signet, was born in Edin-
burgh, in 1771, As a pret and historical novelist, Scotland boasts no
prouder name than that of the author of “ Waverley.’* Tho failure of his
publishing house, in 1826, invoked Scott in a debt of £117,000. At years
cf ego he set to work to redeem this tremendous obligation, and ia the


short space of four years actually raised by his pen the large sum of £/0,000.
But tins incessant tax on bis mental and nervous organization brought ms
grey hairs with sorrow to the grave. He died at the age of Cl. In admiration
of Ids talents, George IV. created him a Baronet.}
Pißiiocn of Bonuil Dim, •
Pibroch of Donuil,
Wake thy wild voice anew.
Summon clan Conuil.
Come away, come away,
Hark to the summons!
Come in your war array,
Gentles and commons.
Come, from deep glen, and
prom mountains so rocky;
The -war-pipe and pennon
Arc at Inverlochy.
Come, every hill-plaid, and
True heart that wears one;
Come, every steel blade, and
Strong hand that bears one t
Leave untended the herd,
The ilock without shelter ;
Leave the corpse uninterred,
The bride at tho aliar.
Leave the deer, leave the steer,
Leave nets and barges ;
Come with your lighting gear,
Broadswords and targes.
Come, as the winds come, when
Forests are rended,
Come, as the waives come, when
Kavies are stranded.
Paster come, faster come;
Paster and faster ;
Chief, vassal, page, and groom.
Tenant and master.
Past they come, fast they come ;
See how they gather!
Wide waves the eagle plume,
Blended with heather.
Cast your plaids, draw your blade?,
Forward each man set;
Pibroch of Bonuil Bhu,
Knell for the onset!


THE “HOLLY AND IVY” GIRL.
[kEEGAN.]
Cortir, buy my nice, fresh Ivy, and my Holly sprigs so green 5
I hare the finest branches that ever yet were seen.
Come, buy from me, good Christians, and let me home, I pray,
And I’ll wish you, ‘ Merry Christinas times, and a hanpy New Year’s
Day.’
“ Ah! won’t you take my Ivy ?—the loveliest ever seen!
Ah! won’t you have my Holly boughs—all you who love the Green ?
Ho! take a little bunch of each, and on my knees I’ll pray,
That God may bless your Christmas, and be with you New Year’s Hay.
£< This wind is bleak and bitter, and the hailstones do not spare
My shivering form, my bleeding feet, and stiff, entangled hair;
Then, when the skies are pitiless, be merciful, I say—
So Heaven will light your Christmas, and the coming New Year’s
Hay.”
’Twas thus a dying maiden sung, while the coldhail rattled down,
And fierce winds whistled mournfully o’er Dublin’s dreary town.
One stiff hand clutched her Ivy sprigs and Holly boughs so fair,
With the other she kept brushing the hail-drops from her hair.
So grim and statue-like she seemed, ’twas evident that Heath
Was lurking in her footsteps—whilst her hot impeded breath
Too plainly told her early doom—though the burden of her lay
Was still of life and Christmas joys, and a happy New Year’s Hay,
’Twas in that broad bleak Thomas-street, I heard the wanderer sing j
I stood a moment in the mire, beyond the ragged ring—
My heart felt cold and lonely, and my thoughts were far away,
Where X was many a Christmas-tide, and happy New Year’s Hay.
I dreamed of wanderings in the woods amongst the Holly green ;
I dreamed of my own native cot, and porch with Ivy screen;
I dreamed of lightsfor ever dimm’d—of hopes that can’t return—
And dropped a tear on Christmas fires that never more can burn.
The ghost-liko singer still sung on, but no one came to buy 5
The hurrying crowd passed to and fro, but did not heed her cry;
She uttered one low, piercing moan—then cast her boughs away —
And, smiling, cried, “ I’ll rest with God before the New Year’s HavP


On New Year’s Day I said my prayers above a new made grave.
Dug recently in sacred soil, by Liffey’s murmuring wave;
The minstrel maid from earth to heaven has winged her happy way,
And now enjoys, with saints above, an endless New Year’s Day.
FERSEVERANCE CONQUERS ALL THINGS.
[ANON.]
’XI3 a lesson —you should heed,
Try, try again ;
If at first —you don’t succeed,':
Try, try again;
Then your courage should appear,
Por, if you will but persevere,
you will conquer, never fear,-
Try, try again.
Once, or twice, though you should fail,
Try, try again ;
If you would, at last, prevail,
Try , try again ;
If wc strive, ’tis no disgrace,
Though we may not win the race $
What should you do in any case ?
Try i try again.
If you find your task is hard.
Try, try again;
Time will bring you your reward ,
Try, try again;
All that other folks can do,
Why with patience should not you t
Only keep this rule in vieio,
THY, THY AGAIN.
Rote. —The test time fox - practising Recitation is between 10 and
12 in the morning, and from 5 to 8 in the evening. Manly sports,
gymnastic exercises, daily ablution in cold water, and whatever tends
to tho general health of the body, invigorates and strengthens the
oi’gans of speech. Particular attention should bo paid to the preser-
vation of the teeth, as by their loss the resonance and articulation of
the voice suffer materially.


DRAMATIC SCENES.*
[ A great dramatic critic once likened the acting of Edmund Kean to reading
Shakspere by dashes of lightning. There can be no doubt that the enthusiasm
of the performer did illuminate the genius of the playwright, and kindle the
highest sympathy in the bosoms of those who were privileged to witness his
grand impersonations. But it must not be forgotten that Kean owed much of
bis success to the industry which, in his earlier days, he brought to bear on his
profession. This fact is attested by the anther of a very recent book,
entitled, “ The Life and Times of Charles Kean.” He says :—“ Edmund Kean
used to rehearse scene by scene to his wife, and to repeat a speech twenty
times, until both were satisfied he had hit the right vein.” When a celebrated
painter was asked how long it had taken him to paint a certain picture, ho
replied, ** All my life,”]
SCENE FROM HAMLET.
[SHAKSPERE.]
HiMIET, EOSEKCEANIZ, AND GUILDENSTEMf,
Gtiie. My honour’d lord!
Eos. My most dear lord!
Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern?
Ah, Eosencrantz ! Good lads, how do ye both ? What news ?
Eos. None, my lord; but that the world’s grown honest.
Ham. Then is dooms-day near. But your news is not true. Let
me question more in particular. What have you, my good friends,
deserved at the hands of fortune, that she sends you to prison hither ?
Guil. Prison, my lord!
Ham. Denmark’s a prison.
Eos. Then is the world one.
Ham. A goodly one ; in which there are many confines, wards, and
dungeons; Denmark being one of the worst.
Eos. We think not so, my lord.
Ham. Why, then ’tis none to you; for there is nothing either
good or bad, but thinking makes it so: To me it is a prison.
Eos. Why, then your ambition makes it one: ’tis too narrow for
your mind.
Dramatic scenes, sketches of life and manner, vivid delineations of character,
all demand the utterance of exhilarated emotion. Unaided by the effect of such
expression, the finest compositions fall flat and dead upon the ear, and leave our
feelings unmoved or disappointed. The lifeless routine of school habit is too
generally the early cause of the formation of such tones ; and the chief expedient
lor removing them is to enter, with full life and spirit, into the sentiments and
emotions which we utter in reading.


Ham. 0 God! I could bo bounded in a nutshell, and count myself
a king of infinite space ; w re it not that I have bad dreams.
Guiu. Which dreams, indeed, arc ambition ; for the very substance
of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
Ham. A dream itself ih but a shadow.
Eos. Truly, and 1 hold ambition of so airy and light a quality,
that it is but a shadow’s shadow.
Ham. Then are our beggars, bodies; and our monarchs, and out,
stretch’d heroes, the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to the court? for
by my fay, I cannot reason.
Eos. A Guiii. "We’ll wait upon you.
Ham. No such matter ; I will not sort you with the rest of my
ccrvants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most dreadfully
attended. But, in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore ?
Eos. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.
Ham. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks* but I thank
you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks arc too daar, a halfpenny.
Were you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visita-
tion? Come, come ; deal justly with me ; come, come; nay, speak.
Gun. "What should we say, my lord ?
Ham. Any thing—hut to the purpose. You were sent for; and
there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties have
not craft enough to colour; I know, the good king and queen have
sent for you.
Eos. To what end, my lord?
Ham. That you must teach me. But let mo conjure you, by the
rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the
obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by wdiat more clear a better
proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether
you were sent for, or no.
Eos. "What say you? [To GuiLurKSTEEN.]
Ham. Nay, then I have an eye of you; [Aside] if you love me,
hold not off.
Gun. Wylord, wc w’crc sent for.
Ham. I will tell you why ; so shall my anticipation prevent your
discovery, and your sccresy to the king and queen moult no feather. I
have of late (but, wherefore, I know not), lost all my mirth, foregone
fill custom of exercises : and, inded, it goes so heavily with my disposi-
tion, that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile pro-
montory; this most excellent canopy, the air, look yon, this brave
o’crlnnging firmament, Ibis mqjcsticul roof fretted with golden fire,
why, it appears no other tiling to me than a foul and pestilent congrc*
gallon of vapours. "What a piece of work is maul How noble in
reason! bow infinite in faculties! in form, and moving, how express
and admirable! in action, how like an angel! in apprehension, how
like a god ! the beauty of the world! the paragon of animals! And
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust ? man delights not me,
nor woman neither; though, by your smiling, you seem to say so.


SEHATE SCENE FROM “CATO.”
[ADDISON.]
SEMPEoyxus, Lucius.
Home still survives in this assembled senate!
Let us remember we are Cato’s friends,
And act like men who claim that glorious title.
Luc. Cato will soon be here, and open to us
The occasion of our meeting. Hark! he comes!
[A sound of trumpets .
May all the guardian gods of Home direct him!
Id,iter Cato.
Cato, Fathers, we once again arc met in council,
Osesar’s approach has summoned us together,
And Rome attends her fate from our resolves;
How shall we treat this bold, aspiring man ?
Success still follows him and hacks his crimes;
Pharsalia gave him Home ; Egypt has since
Received his yoke, and the whole Kile is Caesar*?#
Why should I mention Juba’s overthrow.
And Scipio’s death ? Kumidia’s burning sands
Still smoke with blood. ’Tis time we should decree
What course to take. Our foe advances on us,
And envies us cv’n Libya’s sultry deserts.
Fathers, pronounce your thoughts, arc they still hxt
To hold it out, and fight it to the last ?
Or are your hearts subdued at length, and wrought
Ry time and ill success to a submission ?
Sempronius, speak.
Se3l. My voice is still for war,
Gods! can a Roman senate long debate
Which of the two to choose, slavery or death!
No, let us rise at once, gird on our swords,
And at the head of our remaining troops,
Attack the foe, break through the thick array
Of his thronged legions, and charge homo upon him,
Perhaps some arm, more lucky than the rest.
May reach his heart, and free the world from bondage.
Rise, fathers, rise! *tis Romo demands your help ;
Rise, and revenge her slaughtered citizens,
Or share their fate ! the corpse of half her senate
Manure the fields of Thessaly, while we
Sit here, deliberating in cold debates,
If we should sacrifice our lives to honour,
Or wear them out in servitude and chains.
Rouse up, for shame! our brothers of Pharsalia
Point at their wounds, and cry aloud—To battle
Great Pompey’s shade complains that we arc slow,
And Scipio’s ghost walks unrevenged amongst uo


Cato. Let not a torrent of impetuous zeal
Transport thee thus beyond the bounds of reason:
True fortitude is seen in great exploits,
That justice warrants, and that wisdom guides ;
AH else is towering phrensy and distraction.
Are not the lives of those who draw the sword
In Rome’s defence entrusted to our care ?
Should we thus lead them to a field of slaughter,
Might not the impartial world with reason say
We lavished at our deaths the blood of thousands*
To grace our fall, and mate our ruin glorious?
Lucius, we next would know what’s your opinion.
LUC. My thoughts, I must confess, are turned on peace.
Already have our quarrels filled the world
With widows and with orphans : Scythia mourns
Our guilty wars, and earth’s remotest regions
■ Lie half unpeopled by the feuds of Rome:
’Tis time to sheath the sword, and spare mankind.
It is not Cmsar, but the gods, my fathers,
The gods declare against us, and repel
Our vain attempts. To urge the foe to battle,
(Prompted by blind revenge and wild despair,)
Were to refuse the awards of Providence,
And not to rest in Heaven’s determination.
Already have we shown our love to Rome,
How let us show submission to the gods.
We took up arms, not to revenge ourselves,
But free the commonwealth; when this end fails,
Arms have no further use; our country’s cause,
That drew our swords, now wrests them from our hands,
And bids us not delight in Roman blood,
IJnprofitably shed ; what men could do
Is done already : heaven and earth will witness,
If Rome must fall, that we are innocent.
Seu. This smooth discourse and wild behaviour oft
Conceal a traitor —something whispers me
All is not right—Cato, beware of Lucius. [Aside io Cato.
Cato. Let us appear nor rash nor diffident:
Immoderate valour swells into a fault.
And fear, admitted into public councils,
Betrays like treason. Let us slum ’em both.
Fathers, I cannot see that our affairs
Are grown thus desperate. We have bulwarks round us;
Within our walls are troops inured to toil
In Afric’s heats, and seasoned to the sun ;
Humidia’s spacious kingdom lies behind us,
Ready to rise at its young prince’s call.
While there is hope, do not distrust the gods;
But wait at least till Ccesar’s near approach
Force us to yield/ ’Twill never be too lato
To sue for chains, and own a conqueror.


Why should Homo fall a moment ere her time ?
Kb, let us draw her term of freedom out
In its full length, and spin it to the last,
So shall we gain still one day’s liberty ;
And let me perish, but in Cato’s judgment,
A day, an hour, of virtuous liberty
Is worth a whole eternity in bondage.
Enter Marcus.
Mar. Fathers, this moment, as I watched tho gates,
Lodged on my post, a herald is arrived
From Caesar’s camp, and with him comes old Dccius,
The Roman knight; he carries in his looks
Impatience, aud demands to speak with Cato.
Cato. Ry your permission, fathers —bid him enter. \_Exlt Ilarcv.s,
Dccius was once ray friend, but other prospects
Have loosed those lies, and bound him fast to Cxsar.
Ills message may determine our resolves.
Enter FECIU3.
Dec. Cxsar sends health to Cato.—
Cato. Could ho send it
To Cato’s slaughtered friends, it would be welcome.
Are not your orders to address tho senate?
I)EC. My business is with Cato: Cxsar sees
Tho straits to which you’re driven ,* and as he knows
Cato’s high worth, is anxious for your life.
Cato. My life is grafted on the fate of Romo :
Would ho save Cato, bid him spars his country.
Tell your dictator this : and tell him Cato
Disdains a life which he has power to offer.
Dec. Romo and her senators submit to Cxsar;
Her generals and her consuls are no more.
Who checked his conquests, and denied his triumph?.
Why will not Cato bo this Cxsar’s friend?
CATO. Those very reasons thou hast urged forbid it.
Dec. Cato, I’ve got orders to expostulate
And reason with yon, as from friend to friend:
Think on the storm that gathers o’er your head,
And threatens every hour to burst upon it;
Still may you stand high in your country’s-lienors,
Do but comply, and make your peace with Cxsar.
Homo will rejoice, and cast its eyes on Cato,
As on the second of mankind.
Cato. Komore!
I must not think of life on such conditions.
DEC. Cxsar is well acquainted with your virtues,
And therefore sets this value on your life:
Let him but know the price of Cato’s friendship,
And name your terms.
Cato. Rid him disband his legion,
Restore the commonwealth to liberty,
Submit his actions to the public censure,
9


And stand the judgment- of a Homan donate:
Hid Mm do this, and Cato is his friend.
Dec. Cato, the world talks loudly of jour wisdom—
Cato. Nay more, t 1 ongh Cato’s voice was ne’er employed
To clear the guilty and to varnish crimes,
Myself will mount the rostrum in ins favour,
And strive to gain his pardon from the people.
Dec. A stylo like this becomes a conqueror.
Cato. Decius, a style like this becomes a Roman.
Dec. "What is a Homan, that is Cccsar’s foe P
Cato. Greater than Cccsar, he’s a friend to virtue,
Dec. Consider, Cato, you’re in Utica,
And at the head of yonr own little senate;
You don’t now thunder in the Capitol,
"With all the mouths of Home to second you.
CATO. Let him consider that, who drives us hither :
’Tis Cccsar’s sword that made Home’s senate little.
And thinned its ranks. Alas! thy dazzled eye
Heholds this man in a false glaring light,
"Which conquest and success have thrown upon him ;
Didst thou but view him rinht, fhou’dst see him black
With murder, treason, sacrilege, and crimes
That strike my soul with horror hut to name ’em,
I know thou look’st on mo, as on a wretch
Hcsct with ills, and covered with misfortunes;
Hut, by the gods I swear, millions of worlds
Should never buy mo to be like that Caesar.
Dec. Docs Cato send this answer back to Cccsar,
Tor all his generous cares, and proffered friendship?
Cato. Ilis cares for me are insolent and vain:
Presumptuous man! the gods take care of Cato.
Would Cccsar show the greatness of his soul,
Hid him employ his care for these my friends,
And make good use of his ill-gotten power,
Hy sheltering men much better than himself.
Dec. Your high uneonqnered heart makes you forget
You are a man. You rush on your destruction —
Hut I have done. When I relate hereafter
The talc of this unhappy embassy.
All Home will be in tears. \Dxlt Decius,
Sem. Cato, we thank tlice.
The mighty genius of immortal Home
Speaks in thy voice, thy soul breathes liberty ;
Crcsar will shrink to hear the words thou utterest,
And shudder in the midst of all his conquests.
Luc. The senate owns its gratitude to Cato,
Who with so great a soul consults its safety,
And guards our lives, while ho neglects his own.
Sem. Stmpronius gives no thanks on this account.
Lucius seems fond of life; but what is life?
’Tis not to stalk about, and draw fresh air


Prom time to time, or gaze upon the sun ;
’T'is to be free. When liberty is gone,
Life grows insipid, ami bus lost its relish.
Oh, could my dying band but lodge a sword
In Cecsar’s bosom, and revenge my count ry,
By heavens I could enjoy the pangs of death,
And smile in agony.
LUC. Others perhaps
May serve their country with as warm a zeal,
Though ’tis not kindled into so much rage.
Seat. This sober conduct is a mighty virtue
In lukewarm patriots.
Cato. Come! no more, Semprenias,
All here are friends to Pome, and to each other.
Let us not weaken ttill the weaker side
By our divisions.
Seui, Cato, my resentments
Arc sacrificed to Borne —I stand reproved.
Cato. Bathers, his lime you come to a resolve.
Luc. Cato, wo all go into your opinion.
Cresar’s behaviour has convinced the senate
We ought to hold it out till terms arrive.
Sem. We ought to hold it out till death ; but, Cato,
My private voice is drowned amid the senate’s.
Cato. Then let us rise, my friends, and strive to fill
This little interval, this pause of life,
(While yet our liberty and fates are doubtful,)
With resolution, friendship, Boman bravery,
And all the virtues we can crowd into it;
That Heaven may say, it ought to bo prolonged.
Fathers, farewell.
SCENE FROM THE “RIVALS.”
[SHERIDAN.]
JEuicr Sis Anthony Absolute to Captain Absolute.
Aes. Sir, I am delighted to sec you here; looking so well! your
sudden arrival at Hath made me apprehensive for your health.
Sir Akth. Very apprehensive, X dare say, Jack. "What, you arc
recruiting here, hey ?
Aes. Yes, sir, I am on duty.
Sir Aktii. Well, Jack, I am glad to see you, though I did not
expect it, for I was going to write to you on a little matter of business.
—Jack, I have been considering that I grow old and infirm, and shall
probably not trouble you long.
Aes. Pardon me, sir, I never saw you look more strong and hearty j
and I pray frequently that you may continue so.


Sib Ante. I hope your prayers may be heard, vritli all my heart.
"Well then. Jack, I have been considering that I am so strong and
hearty, I may continue to plague you a long lime. Kow, Jack, I ran
sensible that the income of your commission, and what I have hitherto
allowed you, is but a small pittance for a lad of your spirit.
Aes. Sir, you are very good.
Slit Ante. And it is my wish, while yet I live, to have my boy
make some figure in the world. I have resolved, therefore, to fix you
at once in a noble independence.
Aes. Sir, your kindness overpowers me—such generosity makes
the gratitude of reason more lively than the sensations even of filial
affection.
Sm Ante. lam glad you are so sensible of my attention—and you
shall be master of a largo estate in a few weeks.
Aes. Let my future life, sir, speak my gratitude; I cannot express
the sense I bare of your munificence.—Yet, sir, 1 presume you would
not wish me to quit the army ?
Sir Ante. Ob, that shall bo as your wife chooses.
AeS. Aly wife, sir 1
Sir Ante. Ay, ay, settle that between you—settle that between you.
Aes. A wife, sir, did you say ?
Sir Antii. Ay, a wife—why, did I not mention her before ?
Aes. Kot a word of her, sir.
Sir Antii. Odd so!—I mustn’t forget her, though —Yes, Jack, the
independence I was talking of is by marriage—the fortune is saddled
with a wife—but I suppose that makes no difference.
Ae3. Sir! sir! —you amaze mol
Sir Ante. Why, what’s the mutter with tho fool? Just now you
were all gratitude and duty.
Aes. 1 was, sir, —You talked to me of independence and a fortune,
but not a word of a wife.
Sir Antii. Why—what difference does that make? Odds life,
sir! if you have the estate, you must take it with tho livo stock on it,
as it stands.
Aes. If my happiness is to bo tho price, I must beg leave to decline
the purchase.—Pray, sir, who is the lady ?
Sir Ante. What’s that to yon, sir? —Come, give mo your promise
to love, and to marry her directly.
Aes. Sure, sir, this is not very reasonable, to summon my affections
for a lady I know' nothing of!
Sir Antii. I am sure, sir, ’tis more unreasonable in you to object
to a lady you know nothing of.
Aes. Then, sir, I must tell you plainly that my inclinations arc
fixed on another—my heart is engaged to an angel.
Sir Ante. Then pray let it send an excuse. It is very sorry—
hut business prevents its waiting on her.
Aes. But my vows are pledged to her.
Sir Ante. Let her foreclose, Jack ; Ist her foreclose ; they are
not worth redeeming; besides, you have the angel's vows in exchange,
1 suppose ; so there can be no loss there.


Abs. You must excuse rue, tie, if I tell you, once for all, that in
this point; I cannot obey you.
Slit Anti:, 11 ark'ec, Jack ; —I have hear;! you for some time with
patience—l have been cool —quite coo! ; but take care —you know I
am compliance itself—when X am not thwarted; no one more easily
led—when I have my own way;— but don’t put me in a frenzy.
Ab 3. Sir, I must repeat it—in this I cannot obey you.
Sir Antii. Now hang me! if ever I call you Jack again while Hive !
Aus. Nay, sir, but hear me.
Sir Antii. Sir, I won’t hear a word—not a word! not one word!
bo give me your promise by a nod—and I’ll tell you what, Jack—X
mean, you dog—if you don’t, by
Abs. What, sir, promise to link myself to some mass of ugliness!
to
Sir Antii. Zounds! sirrah! tho lady shall boas ugly as I choose:
she shall have a hump on each shoulder ; she shall be as crooked as
the crescent; her one eye shall roll like the bull’s in Cox’s Museum ;
she shall have a skin like a mummy, and the beard of a Jew—she shall
be all this, sirrah I —yet I will make you ogle her all day, and sit up all
night to write sonnets on her beauty.
Acs. This is reason and moderation indeed !
Sir Antii. None of your sneering, puppy! no grinning, jacka-
napes !
Ab 3. Indeed, sir, X never was in a worse humour for mirth in my life.
Sir Antii. ’Xis false, sir, I know you are laughing in your sleeve;
I know you’ll grin when I am gone, sirrah !
Acs. Sir, I hope I know my duty belter.
Sir Anth. None of your passion, sir! none of your violence, if you
please ! —lt won’t do with me, I promise you.
Abs. Indeed, sir, I never was cooler in my life.
Sir Antii. ’Xis a confounded lie!—l know you are in a passion
in your heart; I know you are, you hypocritical young dog! but it
won’t do.
Abs. Nay, sir, upon my word
Sir Antii. So you will fly out! can’t you be cool like me? What
the deuce good can passion do ?—Passion is of no service, you impudent,
insolent, overbearing reprobate!—There, you sneer again! don’t pro-
voke me ! —but you rely upon the mildness of my temper—you do, you
dog! you play upon the meekness of my disposition! Yet take care
the patience of a saint may bo overcome at last! —but mark! I give
you six hours and a half to consider of this: if you then agree, without
any condition, to do everything on earth that I choose, why, confound
you! I may in time forgive you.—lf not, zounds! don’t enter the
same hemisphere with me! don’t dare to breathe the same air, or use
the same light with me; but get an atmosphere and a sun of your
own! I’ll strip you of your commission; I’ll lodge a live-and-thrco-
penco in tho hand* of trustees, and you shall live on the interest. —
I’ll disown you, I’ll disinherit you, and hang me! if ever I call you
Jack again! [Exit,
Acs. Mild, gentle, considerate father 1


SCENE FROM GISIPPUS-ACT IV., SCENE H.
[GRIFFIN.]
LCIiRALD Grams’, the author of “The Collegians,” from winch well-known novel
the plot of the row celebrated drama entitled “The Colleen Hawn” is ta’-iea,
was born at Limerick in 180.3. At a very early period of his literary career
he evinc’d a strong tendency for dramatic composition; and before the com-
pletion of his twentieth year wrote the noble play from which the subjoined
scene is taken. It was submitted to the judgment of Mr. Macready, and
produced at Drury-lanc Theatre. Grill'll d.cd in a monastery at Cork, in
1833.3
Fuxvius (reading a letter ). Yarro refuse ray first request.
First Lictob. Stand back !
"Way for the Frcctor !
Gisiprus. I would speak with the Prcctor.
First Lictor. Thou speak with him? Ha! ha!
Second Lictor. A Greek dog bar the Prrotor’s way in Home.
Fulvius. What words arc these ? Who’s he disputes our way ?
Ho! smite him to the earth —if he v.ill not.
Give room—back, slave! and know your place.
On, Llctors!
(A Lictor strikes GisIPPCS aside—they all pass off.)
Gisiprus. Fright Jove,
Art thou the stranger’s keeper? Let me press
My head—and crush the thought to rest for ever.
{lie presses Ids forehead vdih Ids hands , and remains motionless.)
Ciirfmes enters.
CurejlE3. One thing I had forgot. What! gone already.
Ho! Fuivius!
Gisippus {starting). Curse him, heavens! whos’ev thou art.
Let dumbness seize thee ever for that word!
I had just then begun to tell my soul
That it was false, that I had never heard
The name, and I was dropping quietly
Into a dull, a thick, oblivious madness.
That busy, meddling tongue lias waked my heart
To memory, sense, and agony again.
Curemes, What means this?
Gisippus. Oh ! I see and know thee now.
You are Chremes, the Athenian ? Worthy mates!
Ho is gone that wny—Titus Fulvius,
Hid you not call him ? You are fitted friends—
Two heartless, thankless, mean self-seekers—villains!
CHRE3IE3. Madman!
Gisippus ('clasping Ids hands). Oh, would to heaven it were bo
with me I


CnREMES. Who nrfc thou ? What
Gisirrus. I am Gisippua,
CmtEMFS. Heavens!
Gisirrus. You know me well.
Chremes {after a pause). Though you had been my brother,
Gisippus,
The wondrous, fearful change that has conic o’er thco
ITad been enough to baflle memory,
Even when instinctive nature helped its efforts.
My friend! my countryman! Could you suppose me
That traitor to old Greece, and pleasant Athens,
To meet her exiled son, and the companion
Of my schooldays, and pass him knowingly
In a strange land ? I pray you, be convinced,
That you have wronged me, I have sought you long,
And now rejoice to find ye. By this hand,
This hand that lam glad to grasp—l do.
Gisirrus. I must believe you, sir—
And yet though I should grieve to think you scorned me,
I should not wonder. In this dark, fake world,
[Nothing shall ever now suvpiise me more.
Pray, come not near me, sir; you arc a soldier,
And wear the arms of honour. I have, too,
A sword, but long forgot the use of it;
lam an abject thing—a beaten wretch.
Furies and hell! O peace! peace! Sleep and death!
CiißEAirs. What is it moves you thus ?
Gisirrus. 0 cursed memory !
You see mo where I stand before you, Chremes,
It was not so when you have known me belter;
You can remember what I was. You know
How sweet, how fair a light of promise, fortune
Shed on my days of youth. You know how warmly
My confident soul opened itself to Fulvius.
You know, too, somewhat more than at this time
My tongue can freely utter. Would you think
How all that has been answered ?
Cixp.umes. With a truer
And deeper gratitude than you believe.
Gisirrus. This is th.t gratitude—indeed, a deep one,
Too deep for me to find its virtue. Hear!
When I left Athens,
Despised and hated by my fellow-citizen?,
Yet nought repenting that which X had done,
I toiled for freedom, gained it, and set forth
To Rome. You start? Was 11 1 ■ <t a meanness? 2so!
True, he had wronged mo ; and my pride was stung by it.
Alas! you know net, friend, how very quietly
And silently that same tall fabric, pride.
Is sapped and scattered by adversity,


Even while we deem it still unmoved, unshaken ;
lie was my friend once—and my life now', having
No aim nor object, I said with myself
That I would look once more upon the happiness
I Lad raised from the wreck of mine own hopes,
And so to death or solitude. Look hither, sir ;
Here —here, I met him, hero he bade his slave
Strike mo from out his path! —his own high hand
Scorned the low office—here his ruffian smote me,
And hero I stand to tell it I
Cjieemes. Yet!
Gisippus. No hasty judgment!
Believe me I am not sunk so low to bear that—
But a strange numbness crept upon my senses,
And left mo cold and powerless.
Cueemes. You
Are over apt—(and ’tis most natural in you)—
To fancy what you feared was real—Trust mo
You are deceived to think that Fulvius knew you;
His fortunes have indeed altered him strangely ;
But yet ho is not what you deem him.
Gisippus. This
Is kindly meant in you. I thank you for it;
But I have eyes and cars, and a heart, Chromes,
To sec and hear and feel what passes round me,
Liven ns it doth pass. Fulvius knew me well!
I thank you, though, that you should seek to give mo
The bliss of thinking otherwise,
Cueemes. Gisippus,
You do not go yet ?
Gisippus. Wherefore should X stay?
CnnE:.iES. Come with mo to his palace.
Gisippus. To his palace?
What? Be indeed a hopgir?
CniiEMES. Hear me, Gisippus.
Gisippus. You are the only man that knows of this ;
How if you should betray me now, and publish
My shame unto the world? You arc like to do it.
I have known liars with as clear a brow'
As that. And if you should, by the just gods,
I would not rest, sleep, wink, till I had lorn
Your heart out and destroyed But you’ll not do it;
You know me better. If you’d have me honour you,
You will not speak of this to your general.
Farewell! I’ll meet ye soon again!
CnBEjiES. My friend!
Gisippus. No friend! I charge ye, call mo brother Greek.
But friend! No, no ! friendship and I have found
Each other out, shook hands, and parted quietly.


SCENE FROM “JOHN BULL.”
[COLMAN.]
Enter io Jos Tiioenbeert, Peregrine.
Jos. Well, who are you?
Pee. A friend.
Jos. Then I’m sorry to see you. I have just been ruined by a
friend, and never wish to have another friend again as long as I live ;
no, nor any ungrateful, undutifnl Poll! —I don’t recollect your face.
Pee. Climate and years have been at work on it. While Euro-
peans are scorching under an Indian sun, time is doubly busy in fanning
their features with his wings. Put do you remember no trace of me ?
Jos. Ko, I tell you. If you have anything to say, say it. I have
something to settle below with my daughter —I mean with the people
in the shop 5 they are impatient, and the morning has half run away,
before she know I should be up —I mean, before I have had time to
get on my coat and waistcoat, she gave me—l mean—l mean, if you
have any business, tell it at once.
Pee. I will tell it at once. You seem agitated. The harpies whom
I passed in your shop, informed me of your sudden misfortune; but
do not despair yet.
Job. Aye, I’m going to be a bankrupt; but that don’t signify. Go
on; it isn’t that; they’ll find all fair —but go on.
Pee. I will. ’Tis just thirty years since I left England.
Job. That’s a little after the time I set up m the hardware
business.
Pee. About that time a lad of fifteen years entered your shop: he
had the appearance of a gentleman’s son, and told you ho had heard,
by accident, as he was wandering through the streets of Penzance,
some of your neighbours speak of Job Thornberry’s goodness to persons
in distress.
Job, I believe bo told a lie there.
Pee. Not in that instance, though lie did in another.
Job, I remember him ; he was a fine, bluff boy.
Pee. He had lost his parents, he said ; and, destitute of friends,
money, and food, was making his way to the next port, to offer himself
to any vessel that would lake him ou board, that he might work his
way abroad, and seek a livelihood.
Job. Yes, ye?, ho did ; I remember it.
Pee. Y”ou may remember, too, when the boy had finished his tale
of distress, you put ten guineas in bis hand. They were the first
earnings of your trade, you told him, and could not bo laid out to
better advantage than in relieving a helpless orphan; and giving him
a letter of recommendation to a sea-captain at Falmouth, you wished
him good spirits and prosperity. Ho left you with a promise that if
fortune ever smiled upon him, you should, one day, hear news of
Peregrine.
Job. Ah, poor fellow! poor Peregrine; he was a pretty boy! I
should like to hear news of him, I own.


Per. I am that Peregrine.
Job. Eh? what! you arc—no! let me look at you again. Arc you
the pretty boy that —Bless us, how you arc aliered.
Per. I have endured many hardships since I saw you—many turns
of fortune; but I deceived you (it was the cunning of a truant lad)
when I told you I had lost my parents. From a romantic folly, the
growth of boyish brains, I had fixed my fancy on being a sailor, and
had run away from my father.
Job {with great emotion). Ilun away from your father? If I had
inown that, I’d have horsewhipped you within an inch of your life I
Pee. Had you known it, you had done right, perhaps.
Job. Eight! ah; you don't know what it is fora child to run away
from a father! Kot mo! if I wouldn’t have sent you back to him,
tied neck and heels, in the basket of a stage-coach !
Pee. I have had my compunctions—have expressed them by letter
to my father; but I fear my penitence had no effect.
Job. Served you right.
Pee. Having no answers from him, he died, I fear, without for-
giving me. • [sighs*
Job {starting). What! died without forgiving his child! —Come,
that’s too much! I couldn’t have done that, neither. But goon;
I hope you’ve been prosperous. But you shouldn’t have quitted your
father.
Pee. I acknowledge it; yet I have seen prosperity, though I
traversed many countries on my outset in pain and poverty. Chance
at length raised me a friend in Inula, by whose interest and my own
industry I amassed considerable wealth in the factory at Calcutta.
Job. And have just landed it, I suppose, in England.
Pee. I landed one hundred pounds last night in my purse, as I
swam from the Indiaman, which was splitting on a rock, half a league
from the neighbouring shore. As for the rest of my property, bills,
bonds, cash, jewels, the whole amount of my toil and application, are
bv this time, I doubt not, gone to the bottom: and Peregrine is
returned, after thirty years, to pay his debt to you, almost as poor as
ho left you.
Job. I won’t touch a penny of your hundred pounds —not a penny !
Pee. Ido not desire jou; I only desire you to take your own.
Job, Sly own?
Pee. Yes; I plunged with this box, last night, into the waves.
You see, it has your name on it.
Job. “ Job Thornherry,” sure enough! And what’s in it ?
Pee. The harvest of a kind man’s charity; the produce of your
bounty to one whom you thought an orphan. I have traded these
twenty years on ten guineas (which from the first I hud set apart as
yours), till they have become ten thousand ; t ike it—it could not, I
find, come more opportunely. (Giving him the lux.) Your honest heart
gratified itself in administering to my need • and I experience that
hurst of pleasure a grateful man enjoys in relieving my reliever.
Joe {squeezing Peregrine's hand , returning the box, and seeming
almost unable to titter). —Take it again.
Pee. Why do you reject it 9


Job. I’ll tell you as soon as I’m able. T’other day I had a friend
psha! rot it! I’m an old fool! ( Wiping Ids eyes) I lent a friend
the other day tho whole profits of my trade, to save him from sinking,
lie walked oil with them, and made me a bankrupt. Don’t you think
he is a rascal?
Pee. Decidedly so.
Job. And what should I be if I took all you have saved in tho
world, and left you to shift for yourself?
Pee. Dut the case is different. This money is, in fact, your own.
I am inured to hardships ; better able to bear them, and am younger
than you Perhaps, too, I still have prospects to
Job. I won’t take it. I’m as thankful to you as if I let you starve ;
but I won’t take it.
Pee. Remember, too, you have claims upon you which I have not.
My guide, as Lcamo hither, said you had married in tny absence: ’tis
true, he told me you were a widower; but, it seems, you have a
daughter to provide for.
Job. I have no daughter to provide for now.
Pee. Then ho misinformed me.
Job. Mo, he didn’t. I had one last night, but she’s gone.
Pee. Gone!
Job. Yes ; gone to sea, for what I know, as you did. Run from a
good father as you did. This is a morning to remember; my daughter
has run out, and the bailiffs have run in; I shaVt soon forget the day
of the month.
Pee. This morning, did you say?
Job. Aye, before daybreak : a hard-hearted, base—
Pee. And could she leave you, during tho derangement of your
affairs ?
Job. She didn’t know what was going to happen, poor soul! I
wish she had, now. I don’t think Mary would have left her old father
in the midst of his misfortunes.
Pee {aside), Mary! it must be she! What is the amount of the
demands upon you ?
Job. Sis thousand: hut I don’t mind that ; the goods can nearly
cover it —let’em take ’em —rot the gridirons and warming pans! but
I shall hit upon something.
Pee. Let mo make a proposal to you, ray old friend. Permit me
to settle with tho officers, and to clear all demands upon you. Make
it a debt, if you please, I will have a bold, if it must be so, on your
future profits in trade: but do this, and I promise to restore your
daughter to you.
Job. What! bring back my child? Do you know where slio is?
—ls she safe—ls she far off —Is
Pee. Will you receive the money ?
Job. Yes, yes, on these terms — on these conditions —but wliero is
Mary?
Pee. Patience —I must not tell you yet! but, in four-and-twenty
hours, I pledge myself to bring her back to you.
Job. What, hero? to her father’s house, and safe?—Oh, ’shad!
when I see her safe, what a thundering passion I’ll be in with


her! But you are deceiving mo? You know the first lime you
came into my shop, what a bouncer you told mo, when you were
a boy.
Per. Believe me, I would not trifie with you now. Come, come
down to your shop, that wo may rid it of its present visitants.
Job. I believe you dropped from the clouds, all on a sudden, to
comfort an old broken-hearted brazier.
Per. I rejoice, my friend, that I arrived at so critical a juncture;
nnd, if the hand of Providence bo in it; ’tis because Heaven ordains
I hat benevolent action?, like yours, sooner or later, must ever meet
iheir recompense. [Akr cunt.
SCENE FROM "WILLIAM TELL.”
[JAMES SHERIDAN KNOWLES.]
Gesler. Alone, alone I and ever/ stop the mist
Thickens around me ! On these mountain tracks
To lose one’s wav, they say, is sometimes death.
# ft
Cursed slaves!
To let mo wander from them ! [Tlunclerd\ lioa!—Holloa!
My voice sounds weaker to mine car! I’ve not
The strength to call I Lad ; and through my limbs
Cold tremor runs, and sickening faintness seizes
On my heart! O heaven, have mercy! Bo not see
The color of the hands I lift to thee!
Look only on the strait wherein I stand,
And pity it! Let me not sink ! Uphold—
Support me! Mercy! mercy! I shall die!
\_Uo leans against a rode , stupifled ivlth terror and exhaustion —
it groves darker and darker—the rain pours doivn in tor-
rents, and a furious wind arises—the mountain streams
begin to swell and roar. Albert is seen descending hg
the side of one of the streams , which in his course he
crosses with the help of his pole.
Albert. I’ll breathe upon this level, if the wind
Will let me. Ila! a rock to shelter mo!
Thanks io’t. A man, and fainting ! Courage, friend,
Courage! A stranger that has lost his way—
Take heart! —Take heart; you’re safe, llow feel yon now P
[Gives him drink from a fade.
Ges. Better.
Alb. You havo lost your way upon the hill ?
Ges. I have.
Alb. And whither would you go ?
Grs. ToAUorf.
Alb. I’ll guide you thither.
Ges. You’re a child.


Alb. I know
The way. The track I’ve come is harder far
To find.
Ges. The track you’ve come! What mean you ? Sure
You have not been still farther in the mountains?
Alb. I’ve travelled from Mount Faigel.
Ges. Yo one with thee?
Alb. Yo one but God.
Ges. Do you not fear these storms?
Alb. God’s in the storm 1
Ges. And there are torrents, too.
That must be cross’d.
Alb. God’s by the torrent, too!
Ges. You’re but a child.
Alb. God will be with a child 1
Ges. You’re sure you know the way ?
Alb. ’Tis but to keep
The side of yonder stream.
Ges. But guide me safe,
I’ll give thee gold !
Alb. I’ll guide thee safe without.
Ges. Ilcrc’s earnest for thee. [Offers gold.'] Here—l’ll double
that,
Yea, treble it, let mo but see the gate
Of Altorf. Why do you refuse the gold?
Take’t.
Alb. Yo.
Ges. You shall.
Alb. I will not.
Ges. Why?
Alb. Because
Ido not covet it; and, though I did,
It would be wrong to take it as the price
Of doing one a kindness.
Ges. Ila!—who taught
Thee that ?
Alb. My father.
Ges. Docs he live in Altorf?
Alb. Yo, in the mountains.
Ges. How! —a mountaineer?
Bo should become a tenant of the city;
He’d gain by’t.
Alb. Yot so much as he might lose by’fc.
Ges. \Vhat might he lose by’t?
Alb. Liberty.
Ges. Indeed!
lie also taught thee that?
Alb. He did.
Ges. His name?
Alb. This is the way to Altorf, Sir,


Gf.S. I’d Imow
Thy father’s name.
Alb The day is wasting —Wo
Have far to go.
Ges. Thy lather’s name, I say?
Ale I will not tell it thee.
Ges. Not tell it me!
Why?
Alb. Ton may bo an enemy of his.
GIS. May he, a friend.
Alb. May bo ; but should you be
An enemy Although I would not tell you
My father’s name, I’d guide you safe to Altorf.
"Will you follow me P
Ges. Ne’er mind thy father’s name ;
What would it profit me to know’t? Xhy hand 5
We are not enemies. *
Alb. T never had
An enemy!
Ges. Lead on.
Alb. Advance your staff
As you descend ; and fix it well. Come on!
Ges. What! must we take that steep ?
Alb. ’Tis nothing! Come!
I’ll go before —Ne’er fear. Come on—Como on!
[They $0 cv.f.
SCENE FROM THE “KNIGHTS OF THE BOUND TABLE.”
[PLANCHE.]
Scene. Coffee-room at Zocl-ct's. Gentlemen dining cl various tallies —
Wallers in attendance. Captain Cozens sealed at a table in front.
A table on right vnoccvpled.
Captain {looking at Ids itatcli). Quarter-past five—they arc lain.
Waiter!
Waiter Coining, Sir.
Capt. A pint of claret.
Waiter. Yes, Sir —pint of claret {repeating the order),
Jinter Smith.
Smith {adrancing to empty table). W aiter!
Waiter. Sir.
Smith. Tliis table engaged ?
Waiter. So, Sir.
Smith. Ti en I may be permitted to sit here ?
Waiter. Certainly, Sir. Dimar, Sir?
Smijh. If yon please, 1 should feel obliged—as soon as possible.
Waiter. Bill of fare, Sir. (Citing it to him.)
Smith. Thauk you. I may have any thing X sec here ?


Waiter. Certainly, Sir. (Aside.) Some country gentleman.
Smith (surprised). You’re very good. Then I’ll say some turtle to
begin with.
Waiter. Turtle—yes, Sir. (Aside.) An alderman or a banker.
Smith. To be followed by Filet de Turbot , a la llollandaise — Hashed
Venison, and Apricot Fritters.
Warier (hoiving). Yes, Sir. (Aside.) Oh, a very rich banker!
Capt. (who has been attracted by Smith’s manner, aside.) Humph!
Nut a bad judge of a dinner, whoever he is !
Smith. Some/w;?c£, of course, wi'li the turtle.
Waiter. Yes, Sir —what wine, Sir?
Smith. Is your TFadcira fine?
Waiter. Wo have some very fine, Sir.
Smith. I’ll taste your Madeira (lakes v.p newspaper , and reads).
Capt. '(aside). A bon vivant —dressed plainly, but like a gentleman—
a stranger here ; at least, I never saw him before.
Enter D’ArCY.
B’Arcy (seeiii 7 Captain). Ah! there you arc I
Capt. You’re late. Where’s Sir Ralph?
D’Arcy. Up stairs with the Baron and the Chevalier —we’ve a private
room. 1 made an excuse to slip down whilst dinner is serving, to
see if you were here. What news ?
Capt. The bird is found.
B’Arcy. Ilah! —you are certain?
Capt. Certain.
B’Arcy. And —can be —secured ?
Capt. Win never I please — but the place —
B’Aecy. The lodgings of one of our friends?
Capt. No — I had rather not trust them in this matter.
Smith (whose dinner had been served during the above conversation).
Waiter!
Waiter. Sir,
Smith. Champagne.
Waiter. Yes, Sir (serves champagne),
Capt. (to D'Arcy). Bo you know that man?
B’Alter (leaking at Smith). No.
Capt. He knows how to live.
Waiter (to B’Arcy). Your dinner is served. Sir— the gentlemen
only wait for you.
B’Arcy. lam coming. (Aside.) I trust all to you.
Capt. You may safely. What of your scheme ?
D’Arcv. Come to-night to Madame Boulanger’s, in Golden-square.
Ask for me—X shall bo there till twelve, and may want you.
/APT. Good. [Fecit B’Arct.
Smith. Waiter!
"Waiter. Sir.
Smith. A pint of Burgundy—and some peaches.
Capt. (aside). P. aches in May ! half-a-crown a-piecc, nt least!
Smith (to Waiter, who brings Burgundy and peaches). A toothpick,
(Waiter hands him one in a glass) j and in about ten minutes you
may send for—


Waiter. A coach, sir?
Smith. No! an officer.
Capt. (aside). An officer!
"Waiter. An officer—of the Guards, Sir?
Smith. No ; a peace officer —a constable.
Capt, {aside) 1
and > A constable!
Waiter (aloud) )
Smith. A constable.
Waiter. Lord, Sir! what for, Sir?
Capt. {aside t and rising uneasily), Aye, what for, indeed?
Smith. To tube mo up !
Capt. Take Mm up!
Waiter. Take#o« up, Sir?
Capt. lie’s a madman!
Smith. Well, I don’t insist upon if, only take notice, I shall go as soon
as I have finished this Burgundy.
Waiter. Well, Sir, your bill will be made out in a minute.
Smith. Perhaps so j but it won’t be paid in a minute—l’ve no
money!
Waiter. - No money. Here, Master!
Smith. I told you to send for a constable.
Capt. {aside). If the fellow is not mad, he’s an artist.
Jdnter Landlord.
Landlord. What’s the matter here ?
Waiter. This gentleman, Sir.
Smith. The landlord, I presume. Sir, the matter is exceedingly
simple—l have eaten an excellent dinner, and have no money to
pay for it.
Land. Lost your purse, Sir?—not in my house, I hope.
Smith. Oh dear no, sir ; I had no money when I entered it.
Land. And you ordered a dinner that comes to {holding out lift) —to
one pound eighteen and sixpence.
Smith. No more? Your charges arc very moderate; I should have
guessed two guineas at least.
Land. And you can’t pay it?
Smith. It’s a melancholy fact.
Land. Then what the deuce, sir—
Smith. My friend, my dear friend, pray don’t make a disturbance; I
have desired your waiter to send for a constable ; what would von
have me do more ?
Capt. {aside), lie’s a great artist—a very great artist!
Land. Sir, you—you’re a rogue—you’re a swindler!
Smith. Sir, you are abusive—you arc offensive. If you do not choose
to send for a constable, I am your most obedient—
Land. But 1 will. lit re, Dick, run for a constable.
Capt. Nay, nay! stop! don’t be hasty! the gentleman is, perhaps,
only a little eccentric. Allow me to say one word to him. Sir—
Smith).
Smith. Sir {bowing).


Capt. {aside to him). A little difficulty of this description may happen
to any gentleman. If you will pardon the liberty X take, as an
utter stranger, in offering you the trifling loan of two guineas
{slipping them into his hand).
Smith. My dear Sir, no apology, I beg. lam your debtor!
Capt. Hush!
Smith. Certainly.— {Aloud to Landlord) —Hark’cc, my friend. It
is just possible I may be a rogue, but it is also possible I may be
an Ambassador—a Minister of State—or an East India Director. I,
therefore, only request you to decide whether you will send for a
constable or not.
Land, {hesitatingly). Well, I should bo sorry to do an uncivil thing
by a gentleman for a guinea or two ; and if you are a gentleman, I
suppose some other day you might pay me.
Smith. I mighty undoubtedly, but mind —I don't say, I will.
Land. Well, you are an odd gentleman, certainly, but I’ll trust you
sooner than have a disturbance, and a mob round my door—sol
leave it to your honour { throws hill on table, and exit).
Smith {aside). In that case—here goes the two guineas! {putting the
two guineas which he has held in his hand in his pocket, and talcing
up his hat and cane). Your humble servant, Sir {makes a gracious
how to Captain Cozens, and putting on his hat, walks out , picking his
teeth and humming an Italian air) 1
SCENE FROM “WERNER.”
[BYRON.]
Count Siegendodf and Uiutc.
[Enter an Attendant.
Attkn. A stranger to wait on
Your Excellency.
Si eg. Who?
Atten. He gave no name.
Sieo. Admit him, ne’erthelcss.
[The Attendant introduces Gadob, and aftenoards exit.
Ah!
Gad. *Tis then, Werner!
Sieo. {haughtily). The same you knew, sir, by that name; and you !
Gad. {looking round). I recognise you both : father and son,
It seems. Count, I have heard that you, or yours,
Uavo lately been in search of mo : 1 am here.
SiEGr. I have sought you, and have found you; you are charged
(Your own heart may inform you why) with such
A crime as [Hepauses.
Gad. Give it utterance, and then
I’ll meet the conscience?,
Sieo. You shall do
Unless
.10


Gal. First, who accuses me?
Silg. All thing?,
i f not all men : the universal rumour—
My own presence on the spot —the place—the time—
And every speck of circumstance unite
To fix the blot on you.
Gal. And on me only ?
Pause ore you answer : is no other name,
Save mine, stain’d in this business?
Silg. Trifling villain!
Who play’st with thine own guilt! Of all that breathe
Thou best, dust know the innocence of him
’Gainst whom thy breath would blow thy bloody slander.
Put I will talk no further with a wretch,
Further th an justice asks. Answer at once,
Ami without quibbling to my charge.
Gab. ’Xis false
Silg. Who says so ?
Gab. X.
Silg. And how disprove it?
Gab. . By
The presence of the murderer,
Silg. iName him I
Gab. He
May have more names than one. Your lordship had so
Once on a time.
Sieg. If you mean me, I dare
Your utmost.
Gab. You may do so, and in safety ;
I know the assassin.
Sieg. Where is he ?
Gab. {'pointing io Ulric). Beside you!
[ulric rushes forward io attack Gabor; SiegeKDOLF interposes,
Sieg. Liar and fiend! but you shall not be slain !
These walls are mine, and you arc safe within them.
\fEe turns to Uieic.
Ulric, repel this calumny, as I
"Will do. I avow it as a growth so monstrous,
I could not deem it earthborn :—but be calm ;
It will refute itself. But touch him not.
[lTlpjc endeavours to compose himself.
Cab. Look at him, count, and then hear me.
Silg. (first to Gabor, and then looking at Ulric).
I hear thee.
My God! you look
Ulr. How?
Silg. As on that dread night
When we met in the Barden.
Ulr. (composes himself). It is nothing.
Gab. Count, you are bound to hear mo. I came hither
Kot seeking you, but sought. Wiien I knelt down


Amidst the people in the church, I dream’d not
To find the beggar’d "Werner in the seat
Of senators and princes ; but you have call’d me,
And we have met.
Sieo-. Go on, sir.
Gab. Ere I do so,
Allow mo to inquire who profited
By Stralenheini’s death ? Was’t I—as poor as ever;
And poorer by suspicion on my name!
The baron lost in that last outrage neither
Jewels nor gold ; his life alone was sought,—
A life which stood between the claims of others
To honours and estates scarce less than princely.
Sieg. These hints, as vague as vain, attach no less
To me than to my son.
Gab. I can’t help that.
But let the consequence alight on him
Who feels himself the guilty one among us.
I speak of you, Count Siegcndorf, because
I know you innocent, and deem you just.
But ere I can proceed —dare you protect mo?
Dare you command me ?
[Siegexuorp first looks at the Hungarian , and then at tIIBIC,
vjJio has unhnchlcd his sahro t and is drawing lines ivith it on the
floor —still in its sheath.
Ulr. {looks at his father and sags)
Let the man go on!
Gab. I am unarm’d, count, —bid your son lay down
His sabre.
XJlb. (offers it to him contemptuously).
Take it.
Gab. Ko, sir, ’tis enough
That wo are both unarm’d —I would not choose
To wear a steel which may be stained with more
Blood than came there in battle.
XJlic. (casts the sahiefrom him in contempt).
It—or some
Such other weapon in my hands—spared yours
Once, when disarm’d and at my mercy.
Gab. True,
I have not forgotten it: you spared mo for
Your own especial purpose —to sustain
An ignominy not my own.
Bee. Proceed.
The tale is doubtless worthy the relator.
But is it for my father to hear further? SIEOENDORF.
SIECt. (talcing his son hg the hand). My son, I know my own inno-
cence, and doubt not
Of touts —but I have promised this man patience;
Let him continue.


G-ab. I will not detain you
By speaking of myself much : I began
Life early—and am what the world has made me.
At Frankfort on the Oder, where I passed
A winter in obscurity, it was
My chance at several places of resort
(Which X frequented sometimes, but not often)
To hear related a strange circumstance
Xn February last. A martial force,
Sent by the stale, bad, after strong resistance,
Secured a baud of desperate men, supposed
Marauders from the hostile camp.—They proved,
However, not to be so—but banditti,
Whom cither accident or enterprise
Had carried from their usual haunt—the forests
Which skirt Bohemia—even into Lusatia.
Many amongst them were reported of
High rank—and martial law slept for a time.
At last they were escorted o’er the frontiers,
And placed beneath the civil jurisdiction
Of the free town of Frankfort. Of their fate,
I know no more.
Sira. And what is this to TJlric ?
Gab. Amongst them was said to he one man
Of wonderful endowments :—birth and fortune,
Youth, strength, and beauty, almost superhuman,
And courage as unrivall’d, were proclaim’d
His by the public rumour; and his sway
Not only over his associates, but
His judges, were attributed to witchcraft,
Such was his influence :—I have no great faith
In any magic save that of the mine—
I therefore deemed him wealthy.—But my soul
"Was roused with various feelings to seek out
This prodigy, if only to behold him.
Sieg. And did you so ?
Gab. You’ll hear. Chance favour’d me :
A popular affray in the public square
Brew crowds together—it was one of those
Occasions where men’s souls look out of them,
And show them as they are—even in their faces:
The moment ray eye met his, I exclaim’d
“This is the man!” though he was then, as since,
With the nobles of the city. I felt sure
I had not err’d, and watched him long and nearly ;
I noted down his form —his gesture, features,
Stature, and bearing—and amidst them all,
Midst every natural and acquired distinction,
I could discern, methought, the assassin’s eye
And gladiator’s heart.
Ule. (smiling). The tale sounds well


Gae. And may sound better.—Ho appear’d to me
One of those beings to whom Fortune bends
As she doth to the daring—and on whom
The fates of others oft depend ; besides,
An indescribable sensation drew me
Hear to this man, as if my point of fortune
Was to be fix’d by him.—There I was wrong.
Si£G-. And may not be right now.
Gae. I follow’d him,
Solicited his notice—and obtain’d it—
Though not his friendship : it was his intention
To leave the city privately-w r e left it
Together—and together wo arrived
In the poor town where Werner was conceal’d,
And Stralenheim was succour’d Now we arc on
The verge—dare you hear further ?
Sieg. I must do so—
Or I have heard too much.
Gad. I saw in you
A man above his station—and if not
So high as now I find you, in my then
Conceptions, ’twas that I had rarely seen
Hen such as you appear'd in height of mind
In the most high of worldly rank ; you were
Poor, even to all save rags: I would have shared
My purse, though slender, with you—you refused it.
Sieg. Doth my refusal make a debt to you,
That thus you urge it?
Gae. Still you owe me something,
Though not for that; and I owed you my safety,
At least my seeming safety, when the slaves
Of Stralenheim pursued me on the grounds
That 1 had robb’d him.
Sieg. I conceal’d you—l,
Whom and whoso house you arraign, reviving viper!
Gae. I accuse no man—save in my defence.
A on, count, have made yourself accuser—judge :
Your hall’s my court, your heart is my tribunal.
De just, and I’ll bo merciful!
You merciful!—
Ton! baso calumniator!
I, ’Twill rest
"Witli mo at least to bo so. You concealed mo—
In secret passages known to yourself,
Aou said, and to none else. At dead of night,
\V eary with watching in the dark, and dubious
Of tracing back my way, I saw a glimmer,
Through distant crannies, of a twinkling light :
I followed it and reach’d a door—a secret
Portal —which open’d to the chamber, where,
With cautious hand and slow, having Erst undone


As much as made a crevice of the fastening,
I look’d through and behtdd a purple bed,
And on it Strulenheim !
Sieg. Asleep! And yet
You slew him! Wretch !
Gab. Ue was already slain,
And bleeding like a sacrifice. My own
Blood became ice.
Sieg. But ho was all alone!
You saw none else? You did not sec the
[He pauses from agitation.
Gab. No,
Me , whom you dare not name, nor even I
Scarce dare to recollect, was not then in
The chamber.
Sieg. {to Uleic). Then, my boy! thou art guiltless still —
Thou bad’st me say I was so once—Oh! now
Bo thou as much!
Gab. Be patient! I can not
Recede now, though it shake the very walls
Which frown above us. You remember—or
If not, your son does —that tile locks were changed
Beneath las chief inspection on the morn
Which led to this same night : how he had enter’d
He best knows —but within an antechamber,
The door cf which was half ajar, I saw
A man who wash’d his bloody hands, and oft
With stern and anxious glance gazed back upon
The bleeding body—but it moved no more.
Sieg. Oh! God of fathers!
Gab. I beheld his features
As I see yours—but yours they were not, though
Resembling them —behold them in Count Vine's !
Bistinct, as I beheld them, though the expression
Is not now what it then was; but it was so
When I first charged him with the crime so lately.
Sieg. This is so
Gab. {interrupting him). Nay—but hear me to the end.
Afoio you must do so. —I conceived myself
Betrayed by you and him (for now I saw
There was some lie between you) into this
Pretended den of refuge, to become
The victim of your guilt; and my first thought
Was vengeance : but though arm’d with a short poniard
(Having left my sword without), I was no match
Tor him at any time, as had been proved
That morning—either in address or force.
I turned and tied —i’ the dark ; chance rather than
Skill made me gain the secret d«-or of the hall.
And thence the chamber where you slept: if I
Had found you leaking y Heaven alone can tell


What vengeance and suspicion might have prompted ;
But ne’er slept guilt as Werner slept that night.
Sieo. And yet I hud horrid dreams! and such brief sleep,
The stars had not gone down when I awoke.
Why didst thou spare rae? I dreamt of my father—
And now my dream is out!
Gab. ’Tis not my fault,
If I have read it.—Well! I fled and hid me—
Chance led me hero after so many moons—•
And showed mo Werner in Count Siegendorf!
Werner, whom I had sought in huts in vain,
Inhabited the palace of a sovereign!
You sought me and have found me—now you know
My secret, and may weigh its worth.
Sieo. {after a pause). Indeed!
Gab. Is it revenge or justice which inspires
Your meditation ?
Sieo. Neither— l was weighing
The value of your secret.
Gab. You shall know it
At once When you were poor, and I, though poor,
Rich enough to relieve such poverty
As might have envied mine, I offered you
My purse —you would not share it: —l’ll be franker
With you : you arc wealthy, noble, trusted by
The imperial powers—you understand me?
Sieo. Yes.
Gab. Not quite. You think me venal, and scarce true :
’Tis no less true, however, that my fortunes
Have made mo both at present. You shall aid mo ;
I would have aided you—and also have
Been somewhat damaged in my name to save
Your’s and your son’s. Weigh well what I have said. [Exit.
SCENE FROM “THE MERCHANT OE VENICE.”
[SHAKSPERE.]
SCENE 111. VENICE. A PUBLIC PLACE.
Enter Bassanio and Suylock.
Siiy. Three thousand ducats, —well,
Bass. Ay, sir, for three months.
Shy. For three months, —well.
Bass. For the which, as I told yon, Antonio shall be bound.
Siiy. Antonio shall become bound, —well.
Bass. May you stead mo ? Will you pleasure me ? Shall I know
your answer ?


Shy. Three thousand ducats fop three month?, and Antonio
hound.
Bass. Your answer to that.
Shy. Antonio is a good man.
Bass. Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?
Shy. 110, no, no, no, no ; — my meaning in saying lie is a good
man, i- to have you understand me, that he is sufficient; yet his
means are in supposition : he hath an argosy bound to Tripoli?,
another to the Indies ; I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto, lie
hath a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, and other ventures
he hath, squander’d abroad; but ships arc but boards, sailors but
men: there be land-rats, and water-rats, water-thieves, and land-
thieves ; I mean, pirates; and then, there is the peril of waters, winds,
and rocks: the man is, notwithstanding, sufficient; —three thousand
ducats ; —I think I may take his bond.
Bass. Be assured you may.
Shy. I will be assured I may; and, that I may bo assured, I will
bethink me. May I speak with Antonio?
Bass. If it please you to dine with us.
Shy. Yes, to smell pork ; to eat of the habitation which your prophet
the Nazarite conjured the devil into ; I will buy with you, sell with you,
talk with you, walk with you, and so following ; but 1 will not cat with
you, drink with you, nor pray with you. —What news on tho Rialto ?
Who is ho comes here ?
Enter Antonio.
Bass. This is Signior Antonio.
Shy. (aside). How like a fawning publican ho looks!
I hate him, for he is a Christian:
But more, for that, in low simplicity,
He lends out money gratis, and brings down
The rate of usance here with us in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon tho hip,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred nation j and ho rails,
Even there where merchants most do congregate,
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
Which ho calls interest. Cursed bo my tribe,
If I forgive him !
Bass. Shylock, do you hear ?
Shy. I am debating of my present store ;
And, by the near guess of my memory,
I cannot instantly' raise up the gross
Of full three thousand ducats : what of that?
Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe,
Will furnish me : but soft 5 how many months
Boyou desire ! Restyoufair, good signior; \_lo Antonio,
Your worship was the last man in our mouths.
Ant. Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow,
By taking, nor by giving of excess,
Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend.


I'll break a custom :—ls he yet possessed,
How much you would ?
Shy. Ay, ny, three thousand ducats.
Ant. And for three months.
Shy. I had forgot,—three months, you told mo so.
'Well then, your bond : and, let me see,—but hear you—
Mothought, you said, you neither lend nor borrow,
Upon advantage.
Ant. I do never use it.
Shy. Three thousand ducats,—His a good round sum.
Three months from twelve, then let me see the rate.
Ant. Well, Shylock, shall we be holden to you?
Shy. Signior Antonio, many a time and oft,
In the Rialto you have rated me
About my monies, and my usances :
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug ;
Por sufferance is the badge of all our tribe :
You call me—misbeliever, cut-throat dog,
And spit upon my Jewish gaberdine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears, you need my help:
Go to, then ; you come to me, and you say,
“ Shyloclc , we would have monies” you say so ;
You, that did void your rheum upon my beard,
And foot mo, as you spurn a stranger cur
Over your threshold j monies is your suit.
What should Isay to you ? Should I not say,
il Hath a dog money 7 is it possible ,
A cur can lend three thousand ducats ?” or
Shall I bend low, and in a bondman’s key,
With ’bated breath, and whispering humbleness,
Say this,
“ Fair sir , you spit on me on Wednesday last ;
You spurned me such a day ; another time
You call'd me dog; and for these courtesies
YU lend you thus much monies.”
Notf.-— An elocutionist may calculate beforehand (so far as human agency is
concerned, aud other things being equal) the clTect of u certain ellbrt, by adapting
the milliner to the matter. As a stringed in.-trnment when touched at given
points infallibly produces certain tones, so modulations of the voice attuned to the
language of emotion impress feeling tipon the ear. There is more t-hquonce in the
tone of the voice, in the looks and gesture of a man, than in the choice of Lis
words. Hut he who would be great in the eyes of others, must learn to be little in
his own. Truth and nature are ever loveable. The wordy pretentious speaker
shall not succeed.


DRAMATIC ILLUSTRATIONS.
[Dramatic performances and recitations are a means of bringing the mass of the
people into a quicker sympathy with a writer of get.ins, to a profounder com-
prehension of his grand, beautiful, touching conceptions, than can be effected
by the reading of the closet. No commentary throws such a light on a great
poem, or any impassioned work of literature, as the voice of a reader or
speaker who b'icgs to iho task a deep feeling of his author, and rich and varied
powers of expression. A crowd olectriUeO by a sublime thought, or softened
into a humanising sorrow, under such a voice, partake a pleasure at once ex-
qui-ite and refined ; and I cannot but believe that this and other amusements,
at which the delicacy of woman, and the parry of the Christian, can take no
offence, are to grow np under a higher social culture. The power of utterance
should be included by all in their plans of self-culture.—Ciiaxjsktg.]
GOOD ADVICE TO A SON.
[FROM “HAMLET.”]
[Ko one knows to a certainty what Shaknpere whs; hut it is unquestionable that ho
Sprang from a very bumble rank. IT is father was a butcher and grazier ; ami
Shakspcre himself is supposed in early life to have been a wooleomber ; whilst
others aver ihat he was an usher in a school, and afterwards a scrivener's
clerk. He truly seems to have been “not one, but all mankind’s epitome.”
For such is the accuracy of bis sea phrases, that a naval writer alleges that ho
must have been a sailor; whilst a clergyman infers from internd evidence in
his writings, that he was probably a parson’s clerk ; and a distinguished judge
of horse-flesh insists that be must have been a horse-dealer. Shakspcre was
certainly an actor, and in the course ■ f his life “ played many parts,” gather-
ing his wonderful scores of knowledge from a wide field of experience arid
observation. In any event, he must have been a close student and a hard
worker; and to this day his writings continue to exercise a powerful influence
upon the foimation of English character. Shakspcre was born on the 23rd
April, 1561. — Self-Help. ISmilks.J
These few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Kor any nnproportioned thought his act,
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
The friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them to thy soul with hooks of steel;
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatched unfledged comrade. Beware


Of entrance to a quarrel; but, being in,
Bear’t that th* opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice ;
Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not expressed in fancy ; rich, not gaudy ;
For the apparel oft proclaims the man.
iN’eilhcr a borrower nor a lender be ;
For loan oft loses both itself and friend ;
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all —To thine own self be true;
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
GOOD ADVICE TO WIVES.
[SHAKSPERE.]
A ‘WOMAN mov’d, is like a fountain troubled,
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty ;
And, while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will deign to sip, or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign ; one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance : commits his body
To painful labour, both by sea and laud;
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
While thou best warm at home, secure and safe :
And craves no other tribute at thy hands,
But love, fair looks, and true obedience :
Too little payment for so great a debt,
Such duty as the subject owes the prince,
Even such, a woman oweth to her husband :
And, when she’s froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will,
What is she but a foul contending rebel,
And graceless traitor to her loving lord -
I am ashamed that women are so simple
To offer war, where they should kneel for peace;
Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway,
Where they are bound to serve, love, and obey.


THE SEA CAPTAIN'S STORY.
[BULWER LYTTON.]
[The Eight ITonovirablc Lord Edward George Earle Balwer Lyltou is the son of the
late General RuKer. of lleydoti Hall, Norfolk. and of Elizabeth Ljtton, of tho
ancient house of L'tton, of Kneb\vor ; h, llerta. As novelist, poet, and
dramatist, lie ba* gained a reputation of tho highest class. Lord Lytton is in
his 0 srd jeur. Th • following beautiful passage is from ti;e drama ol The “ A’ec*
Contain ; or, the Birthright. I’j 1 ’ j
Gentle lady!
The key of some charmed music in your voice
Unlocks a long-closed chamber in my soul;
And would you listen to an outcast’s tale,
? Tis briefly told. Until ray fourteenth year,
Beneath the roof of an old village priest,
Hot far from hence, my child hood wore away.
Then waked within me anxious thoughts and deep.
Throughout the liberal and melodious nature
Something seemed absent —what, I scarcely kite?-'—
Till one calm night, when over earth and wave,
Heaven looked its love from all its numberless stars—■
Watchful yet breathless—suddenly the sense
Of my sweet want swelled in me, and I ask’d
Tho priest—why I was motherless?
Ho wept, and answer’d “ I was nobly born!”
As he spake,
There gleamed across my soul a dim remembrance
Of a pale face in infancy beheld—
A shadowy face, but from whose lips there breathed
The words that none hut mothers murmur!
’Twas at that time there came
Into our hamlet a rude jovial seaman,
With the frank mien boys welcome, and wild talcs
Of the far Indian lands, from which mine ear
Drank envious wonder. Brief—his legends tired me
And from the deep, whoso billows washed tho shore
On which our casements look’d, I heard a voice
That woo’d me to its bosom : lialeigh’s fame,
Tho New "World’s marvels, then made old men heroes,
And young men dreamers ! So I left my home
With that, wild seaman.
The villain whom I trusted, when we reached
The bark he'ruled, cast mo to chains and darkness,
And so to sea. At length, no laud in sight,
His crow, dark swarthy men—the refuse crimes
Of many lands—(for lie, it seems, a pirate)
Call’d me on deck—struck off my fetters : “Boy !”
lie said, and grimly smiled, “not mine the wrong;
Thy chains are forged from gold ; the gold of those
Who gave thee birth! ”


I wrenched
From his own hand the blade it bore, and struck
The slanderer to my feet. With that, a shout,
A hundred knives gleam’d round me; but the pirate,
Wiping the gore from his gash’d brow, cried, “ Hold !
Such death were mercy.” Then they grip’d and bound mo
To a slight plank—spread to the wind their sails,
And left me on the waves alone with Q-od !
That day, and all that night, upon the seas
Tossed the frail barrier between life and death.
Heaven lulled the gales j and, when the slars came forth,
All look’d so bland and gentle, that I wept,
Recall’d that wretch’s words, and murmured, “ Wave
And wind are kinder than a parent.”
Hay dawned, and, glittering in tho sun, behold
A sail—a Hag !
It passed away,
And saw me not. Koon, and then thirst and famine ;
And, with parch’d lips, I call’d on death, and sought
To wrench my limbs from the stiff cords that gnaw’d
Into the flesh, and drop into the deep;
And then methonght 1 saw, beneath tho clear
And crystal lymph, a dark, swift-moving thing
With watchful glassy ejes—the occan-inonstcr
That follows ships for prey. Then life once more
Grew sweet, and with a strained and horrent gaze,
And lifted hair, I floated on, till sense
Grow dim and dimlier, and a terrible sleep,
In which still, still those livid ejes met mine,
Fell on me.
I woke, and heard
My native tongue. Kind looks were bent upon mo:
I lay on deck, escaped tho ghastly death —
For God had watch’d the sleeper!
RIENZI'S ADDRESS TO THE ROMANS.
[MISS MITFORD.]
[Miss Mart Rupsrt.l Jlitporp was born in Hampshire in 17SD. In the world
of liter itur e her fame chiefly re*ts on her delightful Sketches of English
Kurid Character and Scenery. She lias also written three tragedies —The
Vespers of Julian, awl Jiienzi. Tho latter lias been frequently repre-
sor ted on the stage with great success. Her stylo is well illustrated in the
following selection :—}
Emends,
I come not hero to talk. Yo know too well
The story of our thraldom. AVo are slaves!
The bright sun rises to his course, and lights


A vane of slaves! He sets, and his last beam
Fails 07i a slave; —not such as, swept along
By the full tide of power, the conqueror leads
To crimson glory and undying fame—
But base, ignoble slaves ! slaves to a horde
Of pclty tyrants, feudal despots, lords,
Hich in some dozen paltry villages j
Strong in some hundred spearmen—only great
In that strange spell,—a name. Each hoar dark fraud,
Or open rapine, or protected murder,
Cries out against them. 13ut this very day.
An honest man, my neighbour,—there lie stands, —
Was struck ; struck like a dog by one who wore
The badge of Ursini; because, forsooth,
lie tossed not high his ready cap in air,
Hor lifted up his voice in servile shouts.
At sight of that great ruffian. Be we men
And suffer such dishonour? men, and wash not
The stain away in blood? Such shames arc common,
I have known deeper wrongs. I, that speak to you,
X had a brother once, a gracious boy,
Full of all gentleness, of calmest hope,
Of sweet and quiet joy ; there was the look
Of heaven upon his face, which limners give
To the beloved disciple. How I loved
That gracious boy ! younger by fifteen years,
Brother at once and son ! He left my side,
A summer-bloom on his fair cheeks, a smile
Parting his innocent lips. In one short hour,
The pretty, harmless boy was slain! I saw
The corse, the mangled corse, and then I cried
For vengeance, House ye Homans! House ye slaves!
Have ye brave sons ? Look in the next fierce brawl
To see them die. Have ye fair daughters ? Look
To see them lire, torn from your arms, distained,
Dishonoured; and, if ye dare call for justice,
Be answered by the lash. Yet this is Home,
That sat on her seven hills, and, from her throne
Of Beauty, ruled the world ! Yet we are Homans.
Why, in that cider day, to be a Homan
Was greater than a king! And, once again,
Hear me, ye walls, that echoed to the tread
Of cither Brutus! Once again, I swear
The eternal city shall be free; her sons
Shall walk with princes.


HUMOUROUS ILLUSTRATIONS.
MR. BOB SAWYER'S PARTY.
BEAiIATISED BY THE ATJTIIOK OF THE “ OnATOP.ICAE TP.AIXEE,”
IKO.M THE “PICKWICK PAPEES.”
Sceke. — Mr. Hob Sauyer’s lodgings.
Me Bor, Sawyee, Me. Bf.sjawik Aliex discovered sitting —a loud
knock at ike door is heard.
Bob. They aro coming, Ben.
Pickwick ( 'without ). Does Mr. Sawyer live here?
Sehvakt Gael (without). Yes, first floor. It’s the door straight
afore you.
Enter Me. Pickwick.'
Bob (to Mr. Hickidck). Glad to see you. I am rather confined
for room here, but you must put up with all that, when you come to
see a young bachelor. Walk iu. You have seen this gentleman before.
I think?
Pickwick ( shaking hands with Mr. Benjamin Allen). Oh, yes—
how do you do, sir ?
Aeeex. Jolly, think you. Hope you’re the same.
Bob. Be seated, gentlemen. (They sit. Aloud double knock at the
door is heard.)
Bon. I hope that’s Jack Hopkins. Hush! yes, it is. Como up,
Jack ; como up.
Enter Jack Hopkiks.
Aleen. You’re laic, Jock!
llopkixs. I’ve been detained at Bartholomew’s.
Bob. Anything new ?
Hopkins. No, nothing particular. Bather a good accident brought
into the casualty ward.
Pickwick. What was that, Sir ?
Hopkins. Only a man falling out of a four-pair of stairs window ;
but it’s a very fair case—very fair case indeed.
Pickwick. Do you mean that the patient is in a fair way to
recover ?
II one IX3 ( carelessly ). No, I should rather say he wouldn’t. There
must bo a splendid operation, though, to-morrow —magnificent sight, if
Slasher does it.


Pickwick. You consider Mr. Slasher a pood operator?
Hopkins. Best alive. Took a boy’s leg out of the socket last
week—boy ato five apples and a gingerbread cake—exactly two
minutes after it was all over, boy said he would not lie there to be
made game of; and he’d tell his mother if they didu’t begin.
Pickwick (with astonishment). Bear me!
Hopkins. Pooh! that’s nothing. That ain’t. Is it, Bob ?
Bob. Nothing at all.
Hopkins (glancing shjly at Mr. PiclcicicJc). By the bye, Bob, we
had a curious accident last night. A child was brought iu who had
swallowed a necklace.
Pickwick. Swallowed what, Sir ?
Hopkins. A necklace. Not all at once, you know, that would be
too much — you couldn’t swallow that, if the child did—eh, Mr. Pick-
wick, ha ! ha! (They all laugh.) No, the way was this; —the child’s
parents were poor people who lived in a court. Child’s eldest sister
bought a necklace —common necklace, made of large black wooden
beads. Child, being fond of toys, cribbed the necklace, hid it, played
with it, cut the string, and swallowed a bead. Child thought it
capital fun, went back next day, and swallowed another bead.
Pickwick. Bless my heart, what a dreadful thing! I beg your
pardon, Sir. Go on.
Hopkins. Next day, child swallowed two beads; the day after
that, he treated himself to three % and so on, till in a week’s time ho
had got through the necklace— -five-and-twenty beads in all. The
sister, who was an industrious girl, and seldom treated herself to a
bit of finery, cried her eyes out at the loss of the necklace; looked
high and low for it; but, I needn’t say, didn’t find it. A few days
afterwards, tho family were at dinner—baked shoulder of mutton,
and potatoes under it—tho child, who wasn’t hungry, was playing
about tho room, when suddenly there was heard a great noise, like a
small hail storm. “Don’t do that, my boy,” said the father. “I ain’t
a doin’ nothing,” said -the child. “Well, don’t do it again,” said the
father. There was a short silence, and then tho noise began again,
worse than ever. “If you don’t mind what I say, my boy,” said
tho father “ you’ll find yourself in bed, in something less than a pig’s
whisper.” He gave tho child a shako to make him obedient, and such
a rattling ensued as nobody ever heard before. “ Why, bless me, it’s
in tho child!” said tho father; “he’s got the croup in the wrong
place!” “No I haven’t, father,” said the child, beginning to cry,
“it’s the necklace; I swallowed it, father.”—The father caught the
child up, and ran with him to the hospital, tho beads in the boy’s
stomach rattling ail the way with the jolting, and the people looking up
in the air, and down in the cellars, to see where the unusual sound
came from. He’s in the hospital now, and he makes such a noise when
ho walks about, that they’re obliged to muffle him in a watchman’s
coat, for fear ho should wake the patients!
Pickwick ( striking the table emphatically ). That’s the most extra-
ordinary case I ever heard of.
Hopkins. Oh, that’s nothing, is it, Bob ?
Bob. Certainly not.


Hopkins. Very singular things occur in our profession, I can assure
you, Sir.
Pickwick. So I should he disposed to imagine.
lion. Now, my boys, what say you to the hot water?
All. Quite agreeable.
(Bob rings the hell , and, the servant Betsy enters.)
Bob (with great suavity). Now, Betsy, the warm water: be brisk,
there’s a good girl.
Betsy. You can’t hare no warm water.
Bob. No warm water!
Betsy (shaking her head). “ No,” Missis Baddlo said you warn’t to
have none.
(The guests exchange looks of surprise.)
Bob (sternly). Bring up the warm water instantly—instantly.
Betsy. No, I can’t; Missis Eaddlo raked out the kitchen fire afore
she went to bed, and locked up the kittle. (Exit Betsy.
(Bob’s face is agitated)
Pickwick. Oh, never mind; never mind. Pray don’t disturb
yourself about such a trifle. Cold water will do very well.
Alien. Oh, admirably.
Bob (with a ghastly smile). My landlady is subject to some slight
attacks of mental derangement. I tear X must give her warning.
Allen. No, don’t.
Bob (with heroic firmness). I fear I must. I’ll pay her what I owe
her, and give her warning to-morrow morning. (Aside) How devoutly
I wish I could.
[At this stage of the proceedings Messrs, Noddy and Gunter, who have
heen carrying on an animated conversation in ivhispers on a subject con-
cerning whitdi loth lave diametrically opposite opinions, vent their feelings
of mutual contempt in a variety of frownings and snortings, until at last
the following clear understanding takes place] :
Noddy (in a loud voice). Sawyer.
Bob. Well, Noddy.
Noddy. I should be very sorry, Sawyer, to create any unpleasant-
ness at any friend’s table, and much less at yours, Sawyer—very ; but
I must take this opportunity of informing Mr. Gunter that be is no
gentleman.
Gunteb. And I should be very sorry, Sawyer, to create any dis-
turbance in the street in which you reside, but I’m afraid I shall bo
under the necessity of alarming the neighbours, by throwing the per-
son who has just spoken out of the window.
Noddy. What do you mean by that, Sir ?
Gunteb. What I say, Sir.
Noddy. I should like to sec you do it, Sir.
Gunteb. You shall feel me do it in half a minute, Sir.
Noddy. I request that you’ll favour me with your card, Sir.
Gunteb, I’ll do nothing of the kind, Sir.
Noddy. Why not, Sir ?
Gunteb. Because you’ll stick it oyer your chimney-piece, and
delude your visitors into tho false belief that a gentleman has been to
sea you, Sir.
11


Noddy. Sir, a friend of mine shall wait on you in the morning.
Gunter. Sir, I’m very much obliged to you for the caution, and
I’ll leave particular directions with the servant to lock up the spoons.
[Here the remainder of the guests interpose and remonstrate with both
parties on the impropriety of their conduct.]
Noddy. What business had he to speak of my father in the manner
that he has done? I beg to state that my father is quite as respect-
able as Air. Gunter’s father.
Gunter. And allow me to state that my father is to the full as
respectable as Air. Noddy’s father, and that my father’s son is as good
a man as Hr. Noddy any day in the week.
[Here there is another interference on the part of the company, and a
general cry of “ Oh, make it up, shake hands and befriends. o ']
Noddy. I am sure I don’t wish to destroy the harmony of the
evening. Everybody knows that I have ever entertained a devoted
personal attachment towards Mr. Gunter. {Loud cries of “ Hear, hear .”)
Gunter. And, gentlemen, permit mo to say that it is equally well
known that I have, upon the whole, rather preferred Mr. Noddy to
my own brother. {Tlenewed cries of “ Hear , hear”)
Noddy {rising.from his seat and proffering Gunter his hand). Do
you say so ? Give me your hand ? (“ Hear , hear .”)
Gunter {grasping the outstretched hand). With all my heart.
{The remainder of the party clap their hands, and shout “ Bravo, bravo !
highly honourable I highly honourable /’]
Hopkins. Now that this little matter is amicably settled, I’ll set
you all going again by giving you a recitation, {Great applause .)
Well, what shall it be, gentlemen ?
{The Company. “ Whatever you like , my boy—whatever you like,”
At the close of Hopkins's recitation a noise is heard from outside.)
Pickwick. Hush! I beg your pardon. I thought I heard somebody
calling from upstairs.
{A pause—Bob turns pale)
Pickwick. I think I iicar it now. Have the goodness to open the
door,
{Bob opens the door)
Mrs. Eaddle {without). Air. Sawyer! Air. Sawyer!
Hob {looking round with dismay). It’s my landlady. (Speaking to
his landlady) Yes, Airs. Huddle.
Airs. Eaddle {without, and replying with great shrillness and
rapidity of utterance). What do you mean by this, Air. Sawyer?
Ain’t it enough to bo swindled out of one’s rent, and money lent out of
pocket besides, and abused and insulted by your friends that dares to
call themselves men, without having the house turned out of window,
and noise enough made to bring the fire-engines here, at two o’clock in
the morning ? —Turn them wretches away.
Air. Eaddle {in a voice which appears to proceed from beneath some
distant bedclothes). You ought to bo ashamed of yourselves.
Airs. Eaddle (rvithout). Ashamed of themselves! Why don’t you
go down and knock’em everyone down stairs? You would if you
was a man.


Mr. If addle ( pacifically ). I should if I was a dozen men, ray dear j
but they’ve the advantage of mo in numbers, my dear.
Mrs. Babble ( without , and with supreme contempt ). TJgh! you
coward! Do you mean to turn them wretches out, or not, Mr.
Sawyer?
Bob {ingreat misery). They’re going, Mrs. Baddle, they’re going.
{Addressing Ids friends.) lam afraid you’d better go. I thought you
were making too much noise.
Nobby. Just as we were getting so comfortable !
Guntee. It’s hardly to be borne — {looking round ) —hardly to bo
borne, is it?
Hopkins. Hot to bo endured; let’s have a song, Bob; come, here
goes!
Bob. No, no, Jack, don’t, lam afraid we had belter not. They are
very violent people, the people of the house.
Hopkins. Shall X step upstairs, and pitch into the landlord? or
keep on ringing the bell, or go and groan on the staircase ? You may
command me, Bob.
Bob. I am very much indebted to you for your friendship and good
nature, Hopkins, but I think the best plan to avoid any further dispute
is for us to break up at once.
Mrs. Babble {without). Now, Mr. Sawyer! are them brutes
going ?
Bob. They’re only looking for their hats, Mrs. Baddle; they are
going directly.
Mrs. Babble {without). Going! going! What did they ever come
or?
Pickwick {at the door, remonsiratingly). My dear ma’am.
Mrs. Babble {without). Get along with you, you old wretch!
Old enough to ho his grandfather, you villin! You’re worse than any
of ’em.
{Sere, amidst general laughter, Holds guests put on their hats.)
Mrs. Babble {without, and speaking at the top of her voice). Mr.
Sawyer, are they going ?
Bob {trying to pacify her). My dear Mrs. Baddle, they are—
Guntee {taking his departure). Going.
Nobby {taking his departure). Going.
Pickwick (takinghis departure). Going.
Allen {taking his departure). Going.
Hopkins {taking his departure). Gone!
(Bob shakes his head, throies up his arms, sighs, and. retires.)
MERCUTIO'S DESCRIPTION OF QUEEN MAB.
[FROM "ROMEO AND JULIET."— Shakspere.]
“ On! then, I see queen Mae hath been with you—
She is the fairies' midwife—and she comes
la shape— no bigger than an agate stone


On the/oreflnger of an alderman —
Brawn by a team of little atomies
Athwart men’s noses—as they lie asleep ;
Her wagon-spokes —made of— long spinners' legs—
The coven—of the wings of grasshoppers —
The teaces —of the smallest spider’s web —
The collaks —of the moonshine’s watery beams—
Her wrap—of cricket’s bone—the lash— olfilm;
Her wagonee—a— small — grey-coated —gnat—
Her ciiaeiot is—an empty hazel-nut
Made by the joiner squirrel —or old grub —
Time out of mind tlx e fairies' coachmakers —
And in this state she gallops —night by night.
Through lovers' bbains —and then —they dream of LOTE —
O’er lawyers’ eingees—who straight dream on fees—
O’er ladies’ LIPS —who straight on kisses dream—
Sometimes she gallops o’er a courtier's nose— •
And then dreams he of—smelling out —a suit —
And sometimes comes she with a tithe-pig's tail,
Tickling a paeson’s nose as he lies asleep—
Then dreams he —of another benefice —
Sometimes she driveth o’er a soldiee’s neck —
And then dreams HE of cutting foreign throats—
Of breaches — amluscadoes — Spanish blades —
Of healths—five —fathom—deep—and then anon
Drums in his ear —at which he starts —and wakes —
And—being thus feigiited— swears a prayer or two,
And sleeps again.
FAITHLESS NELLY GRAY.
[HOOD.]
Ben Batter was a soldier bold,
And used to war’s alarms ;
But a cannon-ball took off his legs.
So ho laid down his arms !
How as they bore him off the field.
Said he, “ Let others shoot,
Lor here I leave ray second leg,
And the Forty-Second Foot 1”


The army surgeon made him limbs :
Said he, “ They’re only pegs;
But there’s as tcooden members quite
As represent my legs!”
Now Ben he loved a pretty maid.
Her name was Nelly Gray ;
So ho went to pay her his devours
When ho devoured his pay !
But when he called on Kelly Gray,
She made him quite a scoff;
And when she saw his wooden legs.
Began to take them off.
“ Oh, Kelly Gray! Oh, Kelly Gray!
Is this your love so warm '{
The love, that loves a scarlet coat,
Should be more uniform!"
Said she, “ I loved a soldier once,
3?or he was blythe and bravo;
But I will never have a man
With loth legs ia the grave !
“ Before you had those tiniker toes,
Your love I did allow ;
But then you know you stand upon
Another footing now!’
“ Oh, Kelly Gray! Oh, Kelly Gray!
Bor all your jeering speeches,
At duty’s call, I left my legs
In Badajos’s hreachcs !”
“Why, then,” said she, “you've lost thc/ce£
Of legs in war’s alarms;
And now you cannot wear your shoes
Upon your feats of arms!”
“ Oh, false and fickle Kelly Gray!
I know why you refuse:—
Though I’ve no feet —some other man
Is standing in my shoes !


“ I wish I ne’er had seen your face ;
But now a long farewell:
Por you will be my death; —alas!
You will not be my Nell !”
How, when he went from Nelly Gray,
Ilis heart so heavy got —
And life was such a burthen grown,
It made him take a knot.
So round his melancholy neck,
A rope he did entwine,
And, for his second time in life,
Enlisted in the line!
One end he tied around a beam.
And then removed his pegs;
And, as his legs were off, —of course
lie soon was off his legs !
And there he hung till ho was dead
As any nail in town, —
Eor, though distress had cut him, up.
It could not cut him down !
A dozen men sat on his corpse,
To find out why he died—
And they buried Bon in four cross-roads,
With a stake in his inside !
THE FARMER AND THE COUNSELLOR.
[HORACE SMITH.]
A COUNSEL in tho “ Common Picas,”
Who was esteemed a mighty wit,
Upon the strength of a chance hit.
Amid a thousand flippancies,
And his occasional bad jokes,
In bullying, bantering, browbeating,
Ridiculing, and maltreating
Women, or other timid folks ;
In a late cause, resolved to hoax
A clownish Yorkshire farmer—one
Who, by his uncouth look and gait.
Appeared expressly meant by fate
For being quizzed and played upon.


So, having tipped the wink to those
In the back rows,
Who kept their laughter bottled down,
Until our wag should draw the cork.
He smiled jocosely on the clown,
And went to work.
“Well, Farmer Numskull, how goes calves at York?
“ Why —not, sir, as they do wi’ you ;
“But on four legs, instead of two: ”
“ Officer!” cried the legal elf.
Piqued at the laugh against himself,
“ Do pray keep silence down below there !
“ Now look at me, clown, and attend,
“Have I not seen you somewhere, friend?”
“ Yees, very like 5 I often do go there.’’
“ Our rustic waggish is, and quite laconic,”
(The counsel cried with grin sardonic,)
“ I wish I had known this prodigy.
This genius of the clods, when I
“On Circuit was at York residing.
Now, farmer, do for once speak true;
“Mind you’re on oath, so tell me, you
“Who doubtless think yourself so clever,
“ Aro there as many fools as ever
“ In the West Hiding ? ”
“Why, no, sir, no! wc'vc got our share,
“But not so many as when you wero there.’*
THE YOUNG ORATOR.
You’d scarce expect one of my ago
To speak in public on any stage,
And if I chance to fall below
Demosthenes or Cicero,
Don’t view me with a critic’s eye,
But pass my imperfections by.
Large streams from little fountains flow,
Tall oaks from little acorns grow, —
And though I now am small and young—
Ol slender frame and feeble tongue —
Yet, all great learned men—like mo—•
Once had to learn their A D C.—•
And why may not our sunny land,
Endowed by Nature’s bounteous band,
With radiant skies and wealth untold,
Broad plains, green fields, and mines of gold,


Rear men as good, as wise, as hold,
As even Greece and Home hare done,
Or any land beneath the sun?
Why not Victoria boast os great
As any old or modern state ?
And—for her age—go far and near—
What town is not out-rivalled here ?
And where’s the boy scarce three feet high
Has made improvement more than I ?
Those thoughts inspire my youthful mind
With hopes to benefit mankind ;
When on the world’s wide-crowded stage
To act my part I shall engage,—
Honour and Truth combined with Virtue’s rule,
Be these the fruits of this and every kindred school.
ACCOUNT CURRENT.
[ANONYMOUS.]
Orr, tho woo that woman brings !
Source of sorrow, grief, and pain!
All our evils have their springs
In the first of female train.
Ere, by eating, led poor Adam
Out of Eden and astray ;
look for sorrow still where Madam,
Pert and proud, directs the way.
Courtship is a slavish pleasure,
Soothing a coquettish train;
Wedded—what the mighty treasure?
Doom’d to drag a golden chain.
Hoisy clack and constant bawling,
Discord and domestic strife!
Empty cupboard, children -bawling,
Scolding woman made a wife.
Gaudy dress and haughty carriage,
Lore’s fond balance lied and gone;
These, the hitter fruits of marriage!
He that’s wise will lire alone 1
Oh! what joys from woman spring,
Source of bliss and purest peace,
Eden could not comfort bring,
Till fair woman show’d her face.
Woman , 2Jf»
Contra, Or.


When she came, good honest Adam
Clasp’d the gift with open arms,
He left Eden for his madam,
So our parent prized her charms.
Courtship thrills the soul with pleasure ;
"Virtue's blush on beauty’s cheek :
Happy prelude to a treasure
Kings have left their crowns to seek!
lovely looks and constant courting,
Sweet’ning all the toils of life ;
Cheerful children, l armlcsi sporting,
Lovely woman made a wife!
Modest dress and gentle carriage,
Love triumphant on his throne ;
These the blissful fruits of marriage—
None but fools would live alone.
THE CULLEGIAN AND THE PORTER.
[HORACE SMITH.]
At Trin. Coll. Cara.—which means, in proper spelling,
Trinity College, Cambridge, —there resided
One Harry Dashington—a youth excelling
In all the learning commonly provided
Eor those who choose that classic station
Tor finishing their education :
That is—ho understood computing
The odds at any race or match;
Was a dead hand at pigeon shooting ;
Could kick up rows—knock down the watch—
Play truant and the rake at random—
Drink —tie cravats—and drive a tandem.
Remonstrance, fine, and rustication,
So far from working reformation,
Seem’d but to make his lapses greater;
Till bo was warn’d that next offence
Would have this certain consequence—
Expulsion from his Alma Mater.
One need not be a necromancer
To guess that with so wild a wight,
The next offence occurr’d next night;
When our incurable came rolling
Ilome as the midnight chimes were tolling,
And rang the College bell. —No answer.—
The second peal was vain—the third
Made the street echo its alarum ;
When to his great delight he heard


The sordid Janitor, old Ben,
Bousing and growling in his den.
“ Who’s there ?—I s’pose young Harum-scarum.”
“’Tis I, my worthy Ben—’tia Harry.”
“ Ay, so I thought—and there you’ll tarry;
“ ’l'is past the hour—the gates are closed—
“ You know my orders —I shall loso
“ My place if I undo the door”—
“And I” (young Hopeful interposed)
“ Shall be expcli’d if you refuse,
“ So pr’ythee”—Ben began to snore.—
“ I’m wet,” cried Harry, “ to the skin,
“Hip! hallo! Ben—don’t be a ninny;
“ Beneath the gate I’ve thrust a guiuca,
“So tumble out and let me in.”
“ Humph!” growl’d the greedy old curmudgeon,
Half overjoy’d and half in dudgeon,
“ Now you may pass, but make no fuss,
“ On tiptoe walk, and hold your prate.”—
“Lookon the stones, old Cerberus,”
Cried Harry, as he pass’d the gate,
“I’ve dropped a shilling —take the light,
“ You’ll Cud it just outside—good night.”
Behold the porter in his shirt,
Chiding the rain which never stopp’d,
Groping and raking in the dirt,
And all without success ; but that
Is hardly to be wonder’d at,
Because no shilling had been dropp’d;
So ho'gave o’er the search at last,
Eegain’d the door, —and found it fast; —
With sundry oaths and growls and groans,
Ho rang once —twice—and thrice ; and then.
Mingled with giggling heard the tones
Of Harry mimicking old Ben.—
“ Who’s there ?—’Tis really a disgrace
“ To ring so loud—l’ve lock’d the gate—
“ I know my duty—’Tis too late—
“ You wouldn’t have me lose my place.”
“ Psha! Mr. Dashington : remember,
“ ’Tis the middle of .November.
“ I’m stripp’d ; —’tis raining cats and dogs.”
“Hush, husb!” quoth Hal, “I’m fast asleep;”
And then lie snored as loud and deep
As a whole company of hogs.
“ But hark ye, Ben, I’ll grant admittance
“ At the same rate I paid myself.”—
“ Nay, master, leave me half the pittance,”
Eeplied the avaricious elf.


“ No: all or none—a full acquittance ;
“ The terms I know are somewhat high;
“But you have fix’d the price, not I—
“ I won’t take less ; —I can’t afford it.”
So finding all his haggling vain,
Ben, with a sigh and groan of pain,
Drew out the guinea and restored it.
“ Surely you’ll give me,” growl’d th’ outwitted
Porter, when again admitted,
“ Something, now you’ve done your joking,
“ For all this trouble, time, and soaking.”
“ Oh, surely—surely,” Harry said;
“ Since as yon urge, I broke your rest,
“ And you’re half drown’d and quite undress’d,
“ Pli give you —leave to; go to bed.”
RICHARDSON'S SHOW
[DICKENS.]
This immense booth, with a large stage in front, so brightly illumi-
nated with variegated lamps, and pots of burning fat, is “ Bichard-
son’s,” where you have a melodrama (with three murders and a ghost),
a pantomime, a comic song, an overture, and some incidental music, all
done in Cve-and-twenty minutes.
The Company are now promenading outside in all the dignity of
wigs, spangles, red ochre, and whiting. See with what a ferocious
air the gentleman who personates the Mexican chief paces up and
down, and with what an eye of calm dignity the principal tragedian
gazes on the crowd below, or converses confidentially with the har-
lequin ! The four clowns, who are engaged in a mock broadsword
combat, may be all very well for the low-minded holiday makers; but
these are the people for the reflective portion of the community.
They look so noble in those Koman dresses, with their yellow legs and
arms, long black curly heads, bushy eye-brows, and scowl expressive
of assassination, and vengeance, and everything else that is grand and
solemn. Then, the ladies —were there ever such innocent and awful-
looking beings ; as they walk up and down the platforms in twos and
threes, with their arms round each other’s waists, or leaning for sup-
port on one of these majestic men! Their spangled muslin dresses
and blue satin shoes and sandals (a leetle the worse for wear) are the
admiration of all beholders; and the playful manner in which they
check the advances of the clown is perfectly enchanting.
“Just a-going to begin! Pray come for’erd, come for’erd,” ex-
claims the man in the countryman’s dress, for the seventieth time :
and people force their way up the steps in crowds. The band sud-
denly strikes up, the harlequin and columbine [set the example, reels
are formed in less than no time, the Eoman heroes place their arms
a-kimbo, and dance with considerable agility; and the leading tragic


actress and the gentleman who enacts the “ swell” in the pantomime,
foot it to perfection. “ All in to begin,” shouts the manager, when
no more people can be induced to “ come for erd,” and away rush the
leading members of the company to do the dreadful in the first piece.
A change of performance takes place every day during the fair, but
the story of the tragedy is always pretty much the same. There is a
rightful heir, who loves a young lady, and is beloved by her; and a
wrongful heir, who loves her too, and isn’t beloved by her; and the
wrongful heir gets hold of the rightful heir, and throws him into a
dungeon, just to kill him off when convenient, for which purpose he
hires a couple of assassins—a good one and a bad one—who, the
moment they are left alone, get up a little murder on their own
account, the good one killing the bad one, and the bad one wounding
the good one. Then the rightful heir is discovered in prison, carefully
holding a long chain in his hands, and seated despondingly in a large
arm chair j and the young lady comes in to two bars of soft music,
and embraces the rightful heir ; and then the wrongful heir comes in
to two bars of quick music (technically called a “ hurry”), and goes
on in (lie most shocking manner, throwing the young lady about as if
she was nobody, and calling the rightful heir “Ar-recrcant—ar-wretch!”
in a very loud voice, which answers the double purpose of displaying
his passion, aud preventing the sound being deadened by the sawdust.
The interest becomes intense ; the wrongful heir draws bis sword, and
rushes on the rightful heir; blue smoko is seen, a gong is heard, and
a tall white figure (who has been all this time behind the arm
chair, covered over with a table-cloth), slowly rises to the tune of
“ Oft in the stilly night.” This is no other than the ghost of the
rightful heir’s father, who was killed by the wrongful heir’s father,
at sight of which the wrongful heir becomes apoplectic, and is
literally “ struck all of a heap,” the stage not being large enough
to admit of his falling down at full length. Then the good assassin
staggers in, and says he was hired, in conjunction with the bad
assassin, by the wrongful heir, to kill the rightful heir; and he’s
killed a good many people in his time, but is very sorry for it,
and won’t do so any more—a promise which he immediately redeems
by dying off hand, without any nonsense about it. Then the rightful
heir throws down his chain ; and then two men, a sailor and a young
woman (the tenantry of the rightful heir) come in, and the ghost
makes dumb motions to them, which they, by supernatural inference,
understand —for no one else can ; and the ghost (who can’t do any-
thing without blue fire) blesses the rightful heir and the young lady,
by half suffocating them with smoke 5 aud then a muffin bell rings,
and the curtain drops.


APPENDIX
OF
ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONS.
PROSE READINGS.
THE DEATH OF PAUL DOMBEY.
[CHARLES DICKENS.]
Paul had never risen from his little bed. lie lay there, listening to
the noises in the street, quite tranquilly ; not caring much how the
time went, but watching it and watching everything about him with
observing eyes.
"When tbo sunbeams struck into his room through the rustling
blinds, and quivered on the opposite wall like golden water, he knew
that evening was coining on, and that the sky was rod and beautiful.
As the reflection died away, and a gloom went creeping up the wall, ho
watched it deepen, deepen, deepen, into night. Then he thought how
the long streets were dotted with lamps, and how the peaceful stars
were shining overhead. His fancy had a strange tendency to wander
to the river, which lie knew was llowing through the great city ; and
now ho thought how black it was, and how deep it would look, reUecting
the hosts of stars —and more than all, how steadily it rolled away to
meet the sea.
As it grew later in the night, and footsteps in the street became so
rare that ho could hear them coming, count them as they paused, and
lose them in the hollow distance, he would lie and watch the many-
coloured ring about the candle, and wait patiently for day. His only
trouble was, the swift and rapid river. He felt forced, sometimes, to
try to stop it—to stem it with his childish hands—or choke its way
with sand—and when he saw it coming on, resistless, be cried out!
Hut a word from Plorence, who was always at his side, restored him
to himself; and leaning his poor head upon her breast, he told Ploy of
his dream, and smiled.
When day began to dawn again, he watched for the sun; and when
its cheerful light began to sparkle in tbe room, he pictured to himself


—pictured I he saw —the high church towers rising up into the morning
shy, the town reviving, waking, starting into life once more, the river
glistening as ifc rolled (but rolling fast as ever), and the country bright
with dew. Familiar sounds and cries came by degrees into the street
below; the servants in the house were roused and busy; faces looked
in at the door, and voices asked his attendants softly how ho was. Paul
always answered for himself, “I am better. I am a great deal better,
thank you ! Tell Papa so !”
By little and little, he got tired of the bustle of the day, the noise of
carriages and carts, and people passing and repassing ; and would fall
asleep, or be troubled with a restless and uneasy sense again—the child
could hardly tell whether this were in his sleeping or his waking mo-
ments —of that rushing river. “ Why, will it never stop, Floy F” he
would sometimes ask her. “It is bearing mo away, I think!”
But Floy could always soothe and reassure him ; and it was his
daily delight to make her lay her head down on his pillow, and take
some rest.
“You are always watching me, Floy. Let me watch you, now!*
They would prop him up with cushions in a corner of his bed, and
there he would recline the while she lay beside him ; bending forward
oftentimes to kiss her, and whispering to those who -were near that she
was tired, and how she had sat up so many nights beside him.
Thus, the flush of the day, in its heat and light, would gradually
decline : and again the golden water would be dancing on the wall.
lie was visited by as many as three grave doctors—they used to
assemble down-stairs, and come up together—and the room was go
quiet, and Paul was so observant of them (though ho never asked of
anybody what they said), that he even knew the difference in the sound
of their watches. But his interest centered in Sir Parker Peps, who
always took his seat on the side of the bed. For Paul had heard them
say long ago, that that gentleman iiad been with his mamma when she
clasped Florence in her arms, and died. And ho could not forget it,
now. He liked him for it. He was not afraid.
The people round him changed as unaccountably as on that first
night at Dr. Blimber’s—except Florence ; Florence never changed—
and what had been Sir Parker Peps, was now Ins father, sitting with
his head upon his hand. Old Mrs. Pipchin dozing in an easy chair,
often changed to Miss Tox, or his aunt; and Paul was quite content to
shut his eyes again, and see what happened next without emotion. Buf
this figure with its head upon its hand returned so often, and remained
so long, and sat so still and solemn, never speaking, never being spoken
to, and rarely lifting up its face, that Paul began to wonder languidly, if
it were real; and in the night-time saw it sitting there, with fear.
“ Floy I” he said. “ What is that ?”
“ Where, dearest?”
“ There! at the bottom of the bed.”
“ There’s nothing there, except Papa.”
Tiio figure lifted up its head, and rose; and coming to the bedside,
said : “ My own boy I Don’t you know me ?”


Paul looted it in the face, and thought, was this his father? But
the face, so altered to his Hunting, thrilled while he gazed, as if it were
in pain; and before he could reach out both his hands to tate it
between them, and draw it towards him, the figure turned away quietly
from the little bed, and went out at the door.
Paul looted at Florence with a fluttering heart, but he tnew what
she was going to say, and stopped her with his face against her lips.
The nest time he observed the figure sitting at the bottom of the bed,
he called to it.
“Don’t bo so sorry for mo, dear Papa! Indeed, lam quite
happy!”
His father coming, and bending down to him—which ho quietly,
and without first pausing by the bedside—Paul held him round the
nect, and repeated those words to him several times, and very earnestly;
and Paul never saw him in his room again at any time, whether it were
day or night, but ho called out, “ Don’t be so sorry for mo! Indeed,
lam quite happy !” This was the beginning of his always saving in
the morning that ho was a great deal better, and that they were to tell
his father so.
llow many times the golden water danced upon the wall; :how
many nights the dark dark river rolled towards the sea in spite of him;
Paul never counted, never sought to know. If their kindness or his
sense of it, could have increased, they were more kind, and ho more
grateful every day ; but whether they were many days or few, appeared
of little moment now, to the gentle boy.
One night ho had boon thinking of his mother, and her picture in
the drawing-room down-stairs, and had thought she must have loved
sweet Florence better than his father did, to have held her in her arms
when she felt that she was dying—for even he, her brother, who had
such dear love for her, could have no greater wish than that. The
train of thought suggested to him to inquire if he had ever seen his
mother ? for ho could not remember whether they had told him yes, or
no, the river running very fast, and confusing his mind.
“ Floy, did I ever see mamma?”
“ No, darling, why ?”
“Did I never see any kind face, like mamma’s, looking at me when
I was a baby, Floy ?”
lie asked, incredulously, as if ho had some vision of a faco be-
fore him.
“ Oh, yes, dear!”
“ Whose, Floy ?”
“Tour old nurse’s. Often,”
“And where is my old nurse?” said Paul. “Is sho dead, too ?
Floy, aro we all dead, except you ?”
There was a hurry in the room, for an instant —longer, perhaps;
hut it seemed no more—then all was still again; and Florence, with
her face quite colourless, hut smiling, held his head upon her arm. Her
arm trembled very much.
“ Show mo that old nurse, Floy, if you please.”


“She is not here, darling. She shall come to-morrow.”
“Thank you, Floy!”
Paul closed his eyes with those words, and fell asleep. When he
awoke, the sun was high, and the broad day was clear and warm. He
lay a little, looking at the windows, which were open, and the curtains
rustling in the air, and waving to and fro: then he said, “Floy, is it
to-morrow ? Is she come ?”
Some one seemed to go in quest of her. Perhaps it was Susan.
Paul thought he heard her telling him when he had closed bis eyes
again, that she would soon be back ; but he did not open them to see.
She kept her word —perhaps she hod never been away—but the nest
thing that happened was a noise of footsteps on the stairs, and then
Paul wok®—woke mind and body—and eat upright in his bed. He
saw them now about him. ■ There was no gray mist before them, as
there had been sometimes in the night. He knew them every one, and
called them by their names.”
“And who is this ? Is this my old nurse?” said the child, re-
garding with a radiant smile a figure coming in.
Yes, yes. Ho other stranger would have shed those tears at sight
of him, and called him her dear boy, her pretty boy, her own poor
blighted child. Ho other woman would have stooped down by his
bed, and taken up his wasted hand, and put it to her lips and breast,
as one who had some right to fondle it. Ho other woman wmuld have
so forgotten everybody there but him and Floy, and been so full of
tenderness and pity.
“ Floy! this is a kind good face !” said Paul. “I am glad to see it
again. Don’t go away, old nurse ! Stay here!”
His senses were all quickened, and he heard a name ho knew.
“Who was that, who said ‘Walter?’” he asked, looking round.
“ Some one said Walter. Is he here ? I should like to see him very
much.”
Hobody replied directly j but his father soon said to Susan, “Call
him back, then: let him come up!” After a short pause of expecta-
tion, during which he looked with smiling interest and wonder, on his
nurse, and saw that she had not forgotten Floy, Walter was brought into
the room. His open face and maimer, and his cheerful eyes, had
always made him a favourite with Paul; and when Paul saw him, ho
stretched out his hand, and said, “ Good-bye!”
“ Good-bye, my child!” cried Mrs. Pipchin, hurrying to his bed’s
head. “ Hot good-bye ?”
For an instant, Paul looked at her with the wistful face with which
he had so often gazed upon her in his corner by the fire. “Ah, yes,”
ho said, placidly, “ good-bye ! Walter, dear, good-bye!”—turning his
head to where ho stood, and putting out his hand again. “ Where is
Papa ?”
lie felt his father’s breath upon his cheek, before the words had
parted from his lips.
“Remember Walter, dear Papa,” he whispered, looking in his
face. “Remember Walter. I was fond of Walter!” Tho feeble


hand waved in the air, as if it cried “good-bye!” to Walter once
again.
“Now lay me down,” he said, “and Eloy, come close to me, and
let me see you!”
Sister and brother wound their arms around each other, and the
golden light came streaming in, and fell upon them, locked together.
“ How fast the river runs, between its green banks and the rushes,
Eloy! But it’s very near the sea. I bear the waves! They always
said so!”
Presently he told her that the motion of the boat upon the stream
was lulling him to rest. How green the banks were now, how bright
the flowers growing on them, and how tall the rushes ! Now the boat
was out at sea, hut gliding smoothly on. And now there was a shore
before him. Who stood on the bank !
He put his hands together, as ho had been used to do at Iris
prayers. He did not remove his arms to do it; but they saw him
fold them so, behind her neck.
“ Mamma is like you, Eloy. I know her by the face! But tell them
that the print npon the stairs at school is not divine enough. The light
about the head is shining on me as I go !”
The golden ripple on the wall came hack again, and nothing else
stirred in the room. The old, old fashion! The fashion that came in
with our first garments, and will last unchanged until our race has run
its course, and the wide firmament is rolled up like a scroll. The old,
old fashion —Death !
Oh, thank God, all who see it, for that older fashion yet, of Immor-
tality ! And look upon us, angels of young children, with regards not
quite estranged, when the swift river bears us to the ocean!
THE REIGN AND DEATH OF GEORGE III.
[FROM A NEWSPAPER NOTICE OF THACKERAY'S LECTURES ON THE
GEORGES.]
“ Dueino the reign of George 111. England had to undergo the
revolt of the American colonies ; to submit to defeat; to shako under
the volcano of the French Revolution; to grapple and fight for the life
with her gigantic enemy, Napoleon; to gasp and rally after that tre-
mendous struggle ; the old society, with its courtly splendour, had to
pass away ; generations of statesmen to rise and disappear; Pitt to
follow Chatham to the tomb ; the memory of Rodney and Wolfe to be
succeeded by Nelson’s and Wellington’s glory; the old poets who unite
us to Queen Anne’s time bad to sink into their graves; Johnson to die,
and Scott and Byron to arise ; Garrick to delight the world with his
dazzling dramatic genius; and Kean to leap on the stage and take
possession of the astonished theatre. Steam had to bo invented; kings
to be beheaded, deposed, restored; Napoleon to bo but an episode f
12


and George 111. is to be alive through all these varied changes, to
accompany his people through those revolutions of thought, govern-
ment, society, and survive out of the old world into ours.” After
describing some of the court scenes of that time, and the eminent
characters that flourished during the reign, and the spirit of the
monarch that “ beat North and box, and even bound the stately neck
of the younger Pitt,” by his indomitable determination, Air. Thackeray
sketched the king’s special affection for the Princess Amelia, whoso
death finally overset his reason, so that from the 10th of November,
1810, he ceased to reign. “ History,” thus concluded the lecturer,
** presents no sadder picture than that old man, blind and deprived of
reason, wandering through his palace, haranguing imaginary parliaments
and reviewing ghostly troops. lie became utterly deaf too. All sight,
all reason, all sound of human voices, all the pleasures of this world of
God, were taken from him. Some slight lucid moments he had, in one
of which the queen —desiring to see him—entered the room and found
him singing a hymn and accompanying himself on the harpsichord;
when finished, he kneeled down and prayed aloud for her and for his
family, and then for the nation—concluding with a prayer for himself
that God would avert his heavy calamity from him; but if not, that
He would give him resignation to submit to it. He then burst into
tears, and his reason again fled. "What preacher need moralise on this
story? What words, save the simplest, are requisite to tell it? It is
too terrible for tears. The thought of such misery smites us down in
submission before the Ruler of Kings and men—the Monarch Supremo
over empires and republics, the inscrutable Dispenser of Life, death,
happiness, victory. Oh ! brothers, [I said to those who heard me in
America] —Oh! brothers, speaking the same dear mother-tongue—Oh!
comrades, enemies no more, let us take a mournful hand together as
wo stand by this royal corpse, and call a truce to battle. Low he lies
to whom the proudest used to kneel once, and who was cast lower than
the poorest; ho whom millions prayed over in vain. Driven off his
throne, buffeted by rude hands, with his children in revolt, the darling
of his old age killed before him, old Lear hangs over her breathless
lips, and calls —* Cordelia, Cordelia, stay a little.’
♦ Vex not bis ghost. Oh! let him pass. He hates him
That would, upon the rack of this rough world.
Stretch him out longer.*
Hush, strife and quarrel, over the solemn grave! Sound, trumpets, a
mournful march! Fall, dark curtain, upon ills pageant, his pride, his
griefs, his awful tragedy 1 ”
ON STUDY.
[BACON.]
Studies serve for delight, for drnament, and for ability. Their chief
use for delight, is in privateness and retiring • for ornament, is in dis-
course j and for ability, is in the judgment and disposition of business.


For expert men can execute, and perhaps judge of particulars, 6ne by
<sne ; but the general cohnsels, and the plots, and marshaling of affairs,
come best from those that are learned. To spend too much time in
studies, is s!6th ; to use them too much for drnament, is affectation ;
to make judgment wholly by their rules, is the humour of a scholar.
They perfect nature, and are perfected by experience; for natural
abilities are like natural plants, that need pruning by study ; and
studies themselves clo give forth directions too much at large, except
they be bounded in by experience. Crafty men contemn studies,
simple men admire them, and wise men use them; for they teach
not their own use, but that is a wisdom without them, and above them,
won by observation, Hoad—not to contradict and refute, not to
belifcvc and take for granted, nor to find talk and discourse —but to
weigh and consider. Some books are to be tasted; others, to bo
swallowed; and some few, to bo chewed and digested: that is, sdme
books are to be read only in parts; others, to be read—but not
curiously ; and s6me few, to be read wlidlly, and with diligence and
attention. Some books also may be read by deputy, and extracts of
them made by others; but that should be only in the less important
arguments, and the meaner sorts of books ; else distilled books arc like
csmmon distilled waters—flashy things. Heading maketh a full man;
conference, a ready man ; and writing, an exilct man. And, therefore,
if a man write little, ho had need have a present wit; if he confer
little, he had need have a good memory ; and if he read little, he had
need have much cunning, to seem to know that he doth not.
CLINGING TO THE TREE OF LIFE.
[FROM "PREACHING IN THE BACKWOODS OF AMERICA.”]
I HATE been riding through the woods. While doing so I noticed
a poor little grape-vine that had crawled along the earth to the roots
of a big tree, and with its feeble tendrils was holding on and trying to
climb up the sides of the mighty monarch of the forest. I also noticed
another vine, as big round as a man’s arm, and lifting its head far
into the light, it stood as noble and as stately as if it had been a tree
itself. But when I looked close I could see that it still leaned for
support to the branches of the tree, and that its arms still clung to the
mighty giant.
It had climbed up as the little one was now trying to do; and
strong as it now seemed, if it were to let go only for a moment, it would
fall and be snapped in pieces ; its strength and protection, like the hope
and promise of the little one, is the tree. So frail and weak as I am, X
still strive to cling to that tree, on which all the great ones of the earth
must rest, and without which they are nothing —a tree whose roots
underlie all things—whose trunk is the strength of the universe—
whose branches are the heavens—whose blossoms are the stars—whoso
whispering breath is the joy of souls redeemed —but whose shadow is
the night of the damned.


BAGGED SCHOOLS.—FIRST PLEA.
[REV. DR. GUTHRIE.]
(J7y Permission of the Fullishei-si)
On approaching Edinburgh from the west, after the general features
which distance presents —dome, and spire, and antique piles of build-
ing, the Castle standing in the foreground, while Arthur Seat raises its
lion-like back between the city and the sea—the first object which at-
tracts the eyes of a stranger is a structure of exquisite and surpassing
beauty. It might be a palace for our Queen —it is an hospital. Near
by, embowered in wood, stands an edifice of less pretensions, but also
great extent —it is another hospital. Within a bow-shot of that, again,
some fine open towers rise from the wood over a fair structure, with its
Grecian pillars and graceful portico—it is another hospital. Now in
the city, and wheeling round the base of the Castle rock, he drives on
by Lauriston. Not far away, on the outskirts of the town, pleasantly
planted in a beautiful part, bordered with trees, stands an old-fashioned
building —it is another hospital. In his way along Lauriston, within a
stone-cast of him, his eye catches the back of a largo and spacious
edifice, which looks beautifully out on the Meadows, the low Braid
Hills, and the distant Bentlands—it is another hospital. A few turns
of the wheel, and before him, within a fine park, or rather ornamental
garden, stands the finest structure of our town—a masterpiece of Inigo
Jones, with a princely revenue of £15,000 a-year —it is another hos-
pital. The carriage now jostles over a stone ; the stranger turns his
head, and sees, but some hundred yards away, a large Dutch-like
structure, stretching out its long lines of windows, with the gilded ship,
the sign of commerce, for ■weather-vane, on its summit—that is another
hospital. Our friend concludes, and not without some reason, that,
instead of the “Modern Athens,” Edinburgh might be called the
City of Hospitals.
1 have no quarrel at present with these institutions : their manage-
ment is in the hands of wise, excellent, and honourable men; and, in
so far as they fail to accomplish the good intended, it is not that they
are mismanaged. The management is not bad; but, in some of its
elements, the system itself is vicious. God never made men to bo
reared in flocks, but in families. Man is not a gregarious animal,
other than that he herds together with his race in towns, a congeries of
families. Born, as he is, with domestic affections, whatever interferes
with their free play is an evil to bo shunned, and, in its moral and phy-
sical results, to bo dreaded. God framed and fitted man to grow up,
not under the hospital, but the domestic roof,—whether that roof be
the canvas of an Arab tent, the grassy turf of a Highland shieling, or
the gilded dome of a palace. And as man was no more made to be
reared in an hospital than the human foot to grow in a Chinese shoe,
or the human body to be bound in ribs of iron or whalebone, —acting
in both oases in contravention of God’s law, —you are as sure in the
first case to inflict injury on his moral, as in the second on his physical


constitution. They commit a grave mistake who forget that injury as
inevitably results from Hying in the face of a moral, or mental, as of a
phvsical law. So long as rice is rice, you cannot rear it on the bald
brow of a hill-top. It loves the hollows and the valleys, with their
water-floods; and, so long as man is man, more or less of injury will
follow the attempt to rear him in circumstances for which his Maker
never adapted him.
RAGGED SCHOOLS.-SECOND PLEA.
[REV. DR. GUTHRIE.]
Dtnuso- tho noontide heat of an African sun, the missionary sat
■with his family in the shadow of their waggon. A widely-spread soli-
tude extended far away and all around them. Tho sun glowed from a
cloudless shy on the scorching sand; the lion lay panting in his shady
den; tho wild beasts had sought, some tho cooling river, some the
depths of tho dark forest; and all around tho travellers there was
neither sound, nor sight of life. Katurc lay exhausted, and had
dropped asleep, like an infant in the heat of day. An object moving
in the distance, and approaching his encampment, at length attracted
tho eye of the missionary. By and by a boy stood before him, in tho
grace of savage freedom, scantily attired in tho skin of a wild beast,
which hung from his bronzed and naked shoulders. He was accom-
panied by a beautiful springbok, which licked his hand, and trotted
lovingly at his heels. The child of parents who had died or deserted
him, without brother or sister, kindred, clan, or companion, save tho
gentle deer, —he told his story in a single sentence. Fixing his large
black eyes on tho man of God, he stretched out his naked arm, and
said, “Stranger, lam alone in the world.” The appeal was touching,
tender, irresistible. Let us hope it will prove as successful with kind
hearts at home.
The solitude of a crowd is tho most painful of all. We have sat on
tho shore of a lonely bay, shut out from the green earth by its gigantic
walls, with nought but the blue sea before us, and the blue sky above
us • on tho sands no print of human foot, nor white sail on the waters.
At the close of day we have stood in a lone Highland glen, where the
mountains, crowned by frowning crags, rose to heaven, and tho lake,
undisturbed by a ripple, lay asleep at their feet, —shining in tho last
gleam of twilight like molten silver at the bottom of a coal-black cru-
cible. In such scenes we have felt much alone ; but never so much so
as, in early youth, on descending from a coach on a winter evening, in
tho heart of London, where, amid the glare of lights, and the roar of
business, and hurrying crowds, we knew no one. Tho Solitary of a
City is a lonesome being ; and such, in the most bitter circumstances,
are many on behalf of whom I venture once more to address a humane
and Christian public.


THE FIRST AND LAST DINNER.
[ANON.]
Twelve friends, much about the same age, and fixed by their pur-
suits, their family connections, and other local interests, as permanent
inhabitants of the metropolis, agreed, one day when they were drinking
wine at the Star and Garter at Kichmond, to institute an annual dinner
among themselves, under the following regulations : —That they should
dine alternately at each other’s houses on the first and last day of the
year; and the first bottle of wine uncorked at the first dinner should
be recorked and put away, to be drunk by him who should be the last
of their number’; that they should never admit a new member; that,
when one died, eleven should meet, and when another died, ten should
meet, and so on; and when only one remained, he should, on these
two days, dine by himself, and sit the usual hours at his solitary table;
but the first time he had so dined, lest it should be the only one, he
should then uncork the first bottle, and, in the first glass, drink to the
memory of all who were gone.
Some thirty years had now glided away, and only ten remained; but
the stealing hand of time had written sundry changes in most legible
characters. Kaven locks had become grizzled ; two or tliree heads
bad not as many locks as may be reckoned in a walk of half a mile
along the Regent’s Canal—one was actually covered with a brown wig
—the crow’s feet were visible in the corner of the eye—good old port
and warm Madeira carried it against hock, claret, red burgundy, and
champagne—stews, hashes, and ragouts grew into favour —crusts were
rarely called for to relish the cheese after dinner—conversation was less
boisterous, and it turned chiefly upon politics and the state of the
funds, or the value of landed property —apologies were made for coming
in thick shoes and warm stockings—the doors and windows were more
carefully provided with list and sandbags—the fire is in more request—
and a quiet game of whist filled up the hours that were wont to be de-
voted to drinking, singing, and riotous merriment. Two rubbers, a
cup of coffee, and at home by eleven o’clock, was the usual cry, when
the fifth or sixth glass had gone round after the removal of the cloth.
At parting, too, there was now a long ceremony in the hall, buttoning
up great coats, tying on woollen comforters, fixing silk handkerchiefs
over the mouth and up to the ears, and grasping sturdy walking-cancs
to support unsteady feet.
Their fiftieth anniversary came, and death had indeed been busy.
Tour little old men, of withered appearance and decrepit walk, with
cracked voices and dim rayless eyes, sat down by the mercy of heaven
(as they tremulously declared), to celebrate, for the fiftieth time, the
first day of the year, to observe the frolic compact, which, half a century
before, they bad entered into at the Star and Garter at Kichmond.
Eight were in their graves! The four that remained stood upon its
confines. Yet they chirped cheerily over their glass,though they could
scarcely carry it to their lips if more than half full; and cracked their
jokes, though they articulated their words with difficulty, and heard


cadi other •with still greater difficulty. They mumbled, they chattered,
they laughed (if a sort of strangled wheezing might be called a laugh),
and, as the wine sent their iey blood in warmer pulses through their
reins, they talked of their past as if it were but a yesterday that had
slipped by them, and of their future as if it were a busy century that
lay before them.
At length came the east dinner; and the survivor of the twelve,
upon whose head fourscore and ten winters had showered their snow,
ate his solitary meal. It so chanced that it was in his house, and at
his table, they celebrated the first. In his cellar, too, had remained,
for more than fifty years, the bottle they had then uncorked, re-corked,
and which he was that day to uncork again. It stood beside him.
With a feeble and reluctant grasp he took the “ frail memorial ’’ of a
youthful vow, and, for a moment, memory was faithful to her office.
She threw open the long vista of buried years, and his heart travelled
through them all—their lusty and blithesome spring; their bright
and fervid summer ; their ripe and temperate autumn; their chill,
but not too frozen winter. He saw, as in a mirror, one by one, the
laughing companions of that merry hour at Richmond, had dropped
into eternity. He felt the loneliness of his condition (for he bad es-
chewed marriage, and in the veins of no living creature ran a drop of
blood whose source was in his own) ; and, as he drained the glass
which he had filled “to the memory of those who were gone,” the tears
slowly trickled down the deep furrows of his aged face.
He had thus fulfilled one part of his vow; and he prepared himself
to discharge the other, by sitting the usual number of hours at his
desolate table. With a heavy heart he resigned himself to the gloom
of his own thoughts—a lethargic sleep stole over him —his head fell
upon his bosom—confused images crowded into his mind—ho babbled
to himself—was silent —and when his servant entered the room, alarmed
by a noise which he heard, he found his master stretched upon the
carpet at the foot of the easy chair, out of which he had slipped in an
apoplectic lit. He never spoke again, nor once opened his eyes, though
the vital spark was not extinct till the following day. And this was
THE EAST DIMES.
SHAKSPERE.
[JEFFREY.]
EvEETTiinra in him is in unmeasured abundance, and unequalled
perfection—but everything so balanced and kept in subordination, as
not to jostle, or disturb, or take the place of another. ITlie most ex-
quisite poetical conceptions, images, and descriptions, are given with
such brevity, and introduced with such still, as merely to adorn, with-
out loading, the sense they accompany. Although his sails are purple
and perfumed, and his prow of beaten gold, they waft him on his
voyage, not less, but more rapidly and directly than if they had been


composed of baser materials. All his excellences, like those of Nature
herself, are thrown out together; and, instead of interfering with,
support and recommend each other. His flowers are not tied up in
garlands, nor his fruits crushed into baskets—but spring living from
the soil, in all the dew and freshness of youth; while the graceful
foliage in which they lurk, and the ample branches, the rough and
vigorous stem, and the wide-spreading roots on which they depend, are
present along with them, and share, in their places, the equal care of
their Creator.
MACBETH AND RICHARD III.
[HAZLITT.]
Tni leading features in the character of Macbeth are striking enough,
and they form what may be thought at first only a bold, rude, Gothic
outline. By comparing it with other characters of the same author,
we shall perceive the absolute truth and identity which is observed in
the midst of the giddy whirl and rapid career of events. Thus ho is as
distinct a being from Eichard 111. as it is possible to imagine, though
these two characters in common hands, and indeed in the hands of
any other poet, would have been a repetition of the same general idea,
more or less exaggerated; for both are tyrants, usurpers, murderers—
both aspiring and ambitious—both courageous, cruel, treacherous. But
Eichard is cruel from nature aud constitution. Macbeth becomes so
thorn accidental circumstances. Eichard is from Ins birth deformed in
body and mind, and naturally incapable of good. Macbeth is full of
“ the milk of human kindness,” is frank, sociable, generous. Ho is
tempted to the commission of guilt by golden opportunities, by the
instigations of his wife, and by prophetic warnings. “Fate and meta-
physical aid” conspire against his virtue and his loyalty. Eichard, on
the contrary, needs no prompter, but wades through a series of crimes
to the height of his ambition, from the ungovernable violence of his
temper and a reckless love of mischief. He is never gay but in the
prospect or in the success of his villanics; Macbeth is full of horror
at the thoughts of the murder of Duncan, which ho is with difficulty
prevailed on to commit, and of remorse after its perpetration. Eichard
lias no mixture of common humanity in his composition, no regard to
kindred or posterity—he owns no fellowship with others, he is “ him-
self alone.” Macbeth is not destitute of feelings of sympathy, is
accessible to pity, is even made in some measure the dupe of his
uxoriousness; ranks the loss of friends, of the cordial love of his
followers, and of his good name, among the causes which have made
him weary of life; and regrets that ho has ever seized the Crown by
unjust means, since lie cannot transmit it to his posterity.


CAPITAL HOT OPPOSED TO THE EIGHTS OF LABOUR.
[DR. COOKE TAYLOR.]
Smaxli capitals do not increase in this country cither as extensively
or as rapidly as would bo desirable to produce a healthy state of
society; but it is utterly absurd to lay the blame on largo capitals,
when it is plainly and obviously attributable to fiscal regulations. The
greater part of the English system of taxation falls on articles of con-
sumption which the poor man must use as well as the rich, and the
result is that the labourer pays in taxes a far greater portion of his
wages than the nobleman or the capitalist does of his Income. Hence
there are far greater facilities in this country for the rich man to
become richer, than for the poor man to acquire the means of inde-
pendence. But this fiscal system was not tho work of capitalists; on
tho contrary, nearly all whose capital is invested in a working form
have strenuously exerted themselves to get it changed. In fact, had not
capitalists, by opening foreign commerce, dissevered to a considerable
extent the monopoly of food from tbo monopoly of land, the working
classes in this country would have been in the same condition as the
peasants of Poland or the serfs of Russia. It is at once the most
palpable absurdity and tho most monstrous wickedness, to represent
capital as in any way opposed to the rights and profits of labour:
without capital there would be no demand for three-fourths of the
labour now employed in this country; without capital, wages for labour
would be reduced to the lowest point at which it w r ould be possible to
support human existence; and without capital the operative could have
no chance of permanent and steady employment.
DEATH AND IMMORTALITY.
[LORD BULWER LYTTON.]
0 eauth! Reservoir of life, over whoso deep bosom brood the wings
of the Universal Spirit, shaking upon thee a blessing and a power—a
blessing and a power to produce and reproduce the living from the
dead, so that our flesh is woven from the same atoms which were once
the atoms of our sires, and the inexhaustible nutriment of Existence is
Decay! O eldest and most solemn Earth, blending even thy loveliness
and joy with a terror and an awe! thy sunshine is girt with clouds,
and circled with storm and tempest: thy day cometh from the womb
of darkness, and returnctb unto darkness, as man returns unto thy
bosom. The green herb that laughs in the valley, the water that sings
merrily along the wood ; the many-winged and all-searching air, which
garners life as a harvest, and scatters it' as a seed; all are pregnant
with corruption, and carry the cradled death within them, as an oak
banqueteth the destroying worm. But who that looks upon thee, and
loves thee, and inhales thy blessings, will ever mingle too deep a moral
with Ids joy? Let us not ask whence come the garlands that wo
wreathe around our altars, or shower upon our feasts: will they not


bloom as brightly, and breathe with as rich a fragrance, whether they
bo plucked from the garden or the grave? 6 Earth, my Mother
Earth I dark Sepulchre that closes upon all which the Flesh bears,
but Vestibule of the vast regions which the Soul shall pass, how leapt
my heart within mo when I first fathomed thy real spell!
Yes I never shall I forget the rapture with which I hailed the light
that dawned upon mo at last! Never shall I forget the suffocating—
the full—the ecstatic joy, with which I saw the mightiest of all human
hopes accomplished; and felt, as if an angel spoke, that there is a life
beyond the grave! Tell me not of the pride of ambition—tell mo not
of the triumphs of science : never had ambition so lofty an end as the
search after immortality! never had science so sublime a triumph as
the # conviction that immortality will bo gained! I had been at my
task the whole night—pale alchymist, seeking from meaner truths to
extract the greatest of all! At the first hour of day, lo ! the gold was
there: the labour, for which I would have relinquished life, was accom-
plished ; the dove descended upon the waters of my soul. I lied from
the house. I was possessed as with a spirit. I ascended a hill, which
looked for leagues over the sleeping valley. A grey mist hung around
me like a veil; X paused, and the great Sun broke slowly forth; I
gazed upon its majesty, and my heart swelled. “So rises the soul,” I
said, “from the vapours of this dull being; but the soul wancth not,
neither setteth it, nor knoweth it any night, save that from which it
dawneth!” The mists rolled gradually away, the sunshine deepened,
and the face of nature lay in smiles, yet silently, before me. It lay
before mo, a scene that I had often witnessed, and hailed, and wor-
shipped; hut it teas not the same: a glory had passed over it; it was
steeped in a beauty and a holiness, in which neither youth, nor poetry,
nor even love, had ever robed it before! The change which the earth
had undergone was like that of some being we have loved —when death
is past, and from a mortal it becomes an angel!
THE NATURAL BRIDGE;
OR, ONE NICHE THE HIGHEST.
[ELIHU BURRITT.]
The scene opens with a view of the great natural Bridge in Virginia.
There are three or four lads standing in the channel below, looking up
with awe to that vast arch of unhewn rocks which the Almighty
bridged over those everlasting hutments, “ when the morning stars
sang together.” The little piece of sky spanning those measureless piers
is full of stars, although it is mid-day. It is almost five hundred feet
from where they stand, up those perpendicular bulwarks of limestone
to the key of that vast arch, which appears to them only of the size of
a man’s hand. The silence of death is rendered more impressive hy
the little stream that falls from rook to rock down the channel. The
sun is darkened, and the boys have uncovered their heads, as if standing


in the prescnce-chambc? of the Majesty of the whole earth. At last
this feeling begins to wear away ; they look around them, and find
that others have been there before them. They see the names of
hundreds cut in the limestone hutments. A new feeling conics over
their young hearts, and their knives are in their hands in an instant.
“What man lias done, man can do,” is their watchword, while they
draw themselves up, and carve their names a foot above those of a
hundred full-grown men who have bom there before them.
They are all satisfied with this feat of physical exertion, except
one, whose example illustrates perfectly the forgotten truth, that there
is “no royal road to learning.” This ambitious youth sees a name
just above bis reach—a name which will be green in the memory of the
world when those of Alexander, Cccsar, and Bonaparte diall rot in
oblivion. It was the name of Washington. Before he marched with
Braddock to that fatal field, he had been there and left his name, a
foot above any of his predecessors. It was a glorious thought to write
his name side by side with that great father of his country. He grasps
his knife with a firmer hand, and clinging to a little jutting crag, ho
cuts again into the limestone, about a foot above where he stands; he
then reaches up, and cuts another for his hand. ’Xis a dangerous
adventure; hut as lie puts his feet and hands into those grins, and
draws himself up carefully to his full length, he finds himself a foot
above every name chronicled in that mighty wall. While his com-
panions are regarding him with concern and admiration, he cuts his
name in wide capitals, large and deep into that flinty album. His
knife is still in his hand, and strength in his sinews, and a new created
aspiration in his heart. Again he cuts another niche, and again he
carves his name in larger capitals. This is not enough; heedless of
the entreaties of his companions, he cuts and climbs again. The gra-
dations of his ascending scale grow wider apart. He measures his
length at every gain ho cuts. The voices of his friends w r ax weaker
and weaker, till their words are finally lost on his car. He now for
the first time easts a look beneath him. Had that glance lasted a
moment, that moment would have been his last. He clings with a
convulsive shudder to his little niche in the rock. An awful abyss
awaits his almost certain fall. He is faint with severe exertion, and
trembling from the sudden view of the dreadful destruction to which
ho is exposed. His knife is worn half-way to the haft. He can hear
the voices, but not the words, of his terror-stricken companions below.
What a moment! what a meagre chance to escape destruction! there
is no retracing his steps. It is impossible to put his hands into the
same niche with his feet, and retain his slender hold a moment. Ho
is too high to ask for his father and mother, his brothers and sisters,
to come and witness or avert his destruction. But one of his com-
panions anticipates his desire. Swift as the wiud, lie bounds down the
channel, and the situation of the fated boy is told upon his father’s
hearthstone.
Minutes of almost eternal length roll on, and there are hundreds
standing in that rocky channel, and hundreds on the bridge above, all
holding their breath, and awaiting the fearful catastrophe. The poo?


boy hears the hum of new and numerous voices both above and below.
Ho can just distinguish the tones of his father, who is shouting with all
the energy of despair—“ William! William! don’t look down ! Your
mother, and Henry, and Harriet, are all here praying for you ! Don’t
look down! Keep your eye towards the top !” The boy didn’t loot
down. His eye is fixed like a flint towards heaven, and his young
heart on Him who reigns there. lie grasps again his knife. He cuts
another niche, and another foot is added to the hundreds that remove
him from the reach of human help from below. How carefully he
uses his wasting blade! How anxiously ho selects the softest places
in that vast pier! How ho avoids every flinty grain! How he
economizes his physical powers, resting a moment at each gain he
outs! How every motion is watched from below! There stands his
father, mother, brother, and sister, on the very spot where, if he falls,
he will not fall alone.
The sun is half-way down in the west. The lad has made fifty
additional niches in that mighty wall, and now finds himself directly
under the middle of that vast arch of rock, earth, and trees. Ho must
cut his way in a new direction, to get from this overhanging mountain.
The inspiration of hope is in his bosom; its vital beat is fed by the
increasing shouts of hundreds perched upon cliffs, trees, and others
who stand with ropes in their hands upon the bridge above, or with
ladders below. Fifty more gains must be cut before the longest rope
can reach him. His wasting blade strikes again into the limestone. The
boy is emerging painfully, foot by foot, from under that lofty arch.
Spliced ropes are in the hands of those who are leaning over the outer
edge of the bridge. Two minutes more, and all will be over. That
blade is worn to the last half inch. The boy’s head reels; his eyes
arc starting from their sockets; his last hope is dying in his heart;
his life must hang upon the next gain he cuts. That niche is his last.
At the last flint gash he makes, his knife —his faithful knife—falls
from his little, nerveless hand, and, ringing along tho precipice, falls at
his mother’s feet. An involuntary groan of despair runs like a dcath-
kncll through the channel below, and all is still as tho grave. At tho
height of nearly three hundred feet, tho devoted boy lifts his hopeless
heart and closing eyes to commend his soul to God. ’Tis but a moment
—there! one foot swings off! —he is reeling—trembling—toppling
oyer into eternity! Hark!—a shout falls on his ears from above !
The man, who is lying with half his length over the bridge, has caught
a glimpse of tho boy’s head and shoulders. Quick as thought, tho
noosed ropo is within reach of the sinking youth. Ko one breathes.
With a faint, convulsive effort, the swooning boy drops his arm into
the noose. Darkness comes over him, and with tho words “ God!”
and “ mother whispered on his lips, just loud enough to be heard in
heaven—the tightening rope lifts him out of his last shallow niche.
Hot a lip moves while he is dangling over that fearful abyss; but
when a sturdy Virginian reaches down and draws up the lad, and holds
him up in his arms before the tearful, breathless multitude—such
shouting! and such leaping and weeping for joy never greeted a human
being so recovered from tho yawning gulf of eternity.


SHE OLD OAK-TREE
[GORDELIER.]
Woodman, spare that tree! And why so? Because the fondest
recollections aro associated with that tree. Under its branches I have
sported with my companions, who now are gone. They lie in the old
churchyard. No stone, with urn on top, or angels’ heads around,
marts the spot where they sleep in peace; hut this tree bids me re-
member them. When Taunting foes threatened this isle, the sturdy
sons of the village assembled in arms beneath this tree, and vowed to
protect their land, the land that gave them birth. They, too, are gone.
Time, with his unrelenting hand, swept them away and gathered them
to their fathers ; but the tree remains like a monument that records
tho deeds of the mighty after they have passed away.
Woodman, spare this tree 1 lor under its time-honoured branches
the maidens have danced the “ Harvest home,” and the swains, as they
lifted high their sparkling glasses, drank love to them beneath the old
oak-tree. It is here the children of the village play, and boys, when
they leave school, cry aloud, “ To tho tree 1 to the old oak-tree 1”
Woodman, oast thine eye on yonder fabric 1 A legend has been
handed down by our forefathers. A stone was laid deep in the earth
by a follower of tho proud and conquering Norman. At the same
time, a soldier of the fallen Harold planted an acorn. On the stone
was built that church, and from the acorn sprang this stately tree. A
venerable hermit saw them, and said that the tree should outlive tho
power of the Norman, and when the axe of the woodman should lay
it low, the hand of Time would have destroyed the church. Such is
the legend: the proud Norman is dead; and his deeds, his victories,
where are they ? Gone! And the soldier of the fallen Harold shares
the same fate as tho lowly hermit; but tho tree and the church remain,
leading us back to other days, and bidding us remember the deeds of
those that are gone.
Hnder this tree sat our forefathers, while before them was the May.
pole, and around it danced the maidens. It is here they blessed the
“ May Queen,” and gave her to him she loved best; then the ale flagon
passed merrily round, and the blithe song sounded sweetly in their
ears.
Woodman, my locks are thin and grey; hut I remember in tho days
of youth, when the fields were green, and the flowers sprang up beneath
tho feet, when the birds carolled sweetly in the air, and all nature was
gay ; there stood beneath this tree a maiden, fair as the blush of opening
day. I saw her, I loved her, and, in that church, I married her.
Woodman, she is gone! but the tree still remains, calling to tho imagi-
nation the fondest recollections of other days. Look around you:
there are other trees on which to try thy keen axe, but, in memory of
the church, of the village, and of her I loved, woodman, spake that
teee!


BYRON'S POETRY.
[JEFFREY.]
If the finest poetry he that which leaves the deepest impression on
the minds of its readers (and this is not the worst test of its excel-
lence), Dord Byron, wo think, must bo allowed to take precedence of
nil his distinguished contemporaries. lie has not the variety of Scctt,
nor the delicacy of Campbell, nor the absolute truth of Crabbe, nor the
polished sparkling of Moore; but, in force of diction, and inextin-
guishable energy of sentiment, he clearly surpasses them all. “Words
that breathe, and thoughts that burn,” are not merely the ornaments,
but the common staple of his poetry; and lie is not inspired or im-
pressive only in some happy passages, but through the whole body and
tissue of his composition. It was an unavoidable condition, perhaps,
of this higher excellence, that his scene should bo narrow, and his
persons few. To compass such ends as he had in view, it was neces-
sary to reject all ordinary agents, and all trivial combinations. lie
could not possibly be amusing, or ingenious, or playful; or hope to
maintain the requisite pitch of interest by the recitation of sprightly
adventures, or the opposition of common characters. To produce
great effects, in short, ho felt that it was necessary to deal only with
the greater passions—with the exaltations of a daring fancy, and the
errors of a lofty intellect—with the pride, the terrors, and the agonies
of strong emotion —the fire and air alone of our human elements.
THE DEATH OF POOR JO.
[CHARLES DICKERS.]
Jo is in a sleep or in a stupor to-day, and Allan Woodoourt, newly
arrived, stands by him, looting down upon his wasted form. After a
while, he softly seats himself upon the bedside with his face towards
him —just as he sat in the law-writer’s room—and touches his chest and
heart. The cart had very nearly given up, but labours on a little more.
The trooper stands in the doorway, still and silent. Phil has stopped
in a low clinking noise, with his little hammer in his hand. Mr. Wood-
court looks round with that grave professional interest and attention on
his face, and, glancing significantly at the trooper, signs to Phil to
carry his table out. When the little hammer is next used, there will
bo a speck of rust upon it.
“ Well, Jo ! What is the matter ? Don’t be frightened.”
“ I thought,” says Jo, who has started, and is looking round, “ I
thought I was in Tom-all-Alone’s agin. Ain’t there nobody here but
you, Mr. Woodcot f”
“ Nobody.”
“ And X ain’t took back to Tom-all-Alone’s. Am I, sir ?”
“No.” Jo closes his eyes, muttering, “I’m wery thankful.”
After watching him closely a little while, Allan puts his month very
near his ear, and says to him in a low, distinct voice:
“Jo ! Did you ever know a prayer ?”
“ Never knowd nothink, sir.”


“Not so much as one short prayer ?”
“No, sir. No think at all. Air. Chadbands he wos a prayin wunst
at Mr. Sangsby’s and I heerd him, but ho sounded as if he wos a
speakin’ to hisself, and not to me. He prayed a lot, but I couldn’t
make out nothink on it. Different times, there was other gcnlmcn
come down Tom-all-Alone’s a prayin, but they all mostly sed as the
t’other wuns prayed wrong, and all mostly sounded to be a talking to
theirselvcs, or a passing blame on the t’others, and not a talkin to us.
We never knowd nothink. I never knowd what it wos all about.”
It takes him a long time to say this ; and few but an experienced and
attentive listener could hear, or, hearing, understand him. After a
short relapse into sleep or stupor, he makes, of a sudden, a strong
effort to get out of bed.
“ Stay, Jo ! What now ?’*
“ It’s time for me to go to that there berryin ground, sir,” he returns,
with a wild look.
“ Lie down, and tell me. What burying ground, Jo ?”
“ Where they laid him as wos wery good to me, wery good to me
indeed, he wos. It’s time for me to go down to that there berryin
ground, sir, and ask to be put along with him. I wants to go there and
bo berried. He used fur to say to me, c lam as poor as you to-day,
Jo,’ he ses. I wants to tell him that I am as poor as him now, and
have come there to be laid along with him.”
“ Dye and bye, Jo. Bye and bye.”
“Ah 1 P’raps they wouldn’t do it if I wos to go myself. But will
you promise to have me took there, sir, and laid along with him?”
“ I will, indeed,”
“Thank’ee, sir. Thank’cc, sir. They’ll have to get the key of the
gate afore they can take me in, for it’s alius locked. And there’s a
step there, as I used fur to clean with my broom. —It’s turned wery
dark, sir. Is there any light a comin?”
“ It is coming fast, Jo.”
Past. The cart is shaken all to pieces, and the rugged road is very
near its end.
“Jo, toy poor fellow!”
“Ihear you, sir, in the dark, but I’m a gropin— a gropin—let me
catch hold of your hand.”
“ Jo, can you say what I say ?”
“ I’ll say anythink as you say, sir, for I knows it’s good.’*
“Oue Fatiiee.”
“ Our Father ! —yes, that’s wery good, sir.”
“Wmcii aet in Heaven.”
, <c Art in Heaven—is the light a comin, sir ?”
“It is close at hand. Hallowed be thy na:ae !”
£< Hallowed be—thy— ’*
The light is come upon the dark benighted way. Dead!
Dead, your Majesty. Dead, my lords and gentlemen. Dead, Eight
Kcverends and Wrong Eeverends of every order. Dead, men and
women, born with Heavenly compassion in your hearts. And dying
thus around us every day.


A SHIP STRIKING A SCHOONER.
"A M forowj —
As I was once sailing in a fine stout ship across the banks of New-
foundland, one of tba-heavy fogs that prevail in those parts, rendered
it impossible for me- to see far ahead, even in the daytime; but at
night the weather was so thick, that we could not distinguish any
object at twice the length of -©tHf-ship. I kept lights at the mast-head,
and a constant watch forward to look out for fishing smacks, which are
accustomed to lie at anchor on the banks. The wind was blowing a
smacking breeze, and we were going at a great rate through the water.
Suddenly the watch gave the alarm of “ a sail ahead!” it was
scarcely uttered,we were upon her. She was a small schooner at
anchor, with her broadside towards us. The crew were all asleep, and
had neglected to hoist a light. We struck her just amid-ships. Tho
force, the size, and the weight of our vessel, boro her down below tho
waves ; we passed over her, and were hurried on our course. As tho
crashing wreck was sinking beneath us, I had a glimpse of two or three
half-naked wretches, rushing from her cabin; they had just started
from their beds to be swallowed shrieking by the waves. I heard their
drowning cry mingling with the wind. The blast that bore it to our
ears swept us out of all f/rther hearing. I shall never forget that cry.
It was some time before we could put the ship about, she was under
such headway. We returned, as nearly as we could guess, to tho place
where the smack wets anchored. We cruised about for several hours in
the dense fog, we fired several guns, and listened if we might hear the
holloa of any survivor'; but all was silent. We never
anything of them morel
THE MORAL OF THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO.
[W. J. FOX.]
Tisie has rendered the battle of Waterloo sufficiently remote forits
character and consequences to be justly appreciated. Those of us who
remember that event seem thereby to belong to another generation.
The veterans who celebrate its anniversary are now thinned in their
ranks from year to year. The passions and triumphs, hopes and fears
of that period have passed away; the writer of fiction weaves the
event into his composition for effect; the historian compares documents,
calls up his best power of narrative, and tries his shill in philosophising;
the various interests and combinations ofpartisanery which then divided
the world have become faint and dim; the schoolmaster points to the
battle in his chronological table, and instructs his pupil ; the mother
finds it in her tale booh, and recounts it to her child. And how-
should the battle of Waterloo be recounted ? With what lessons and
applications should it be told P How should parents of the working
class present it to their children’s minds, so as to “ point a moral” as
well as “adorna talc,” transmit historic truth faithfully, reap wisdom


from the event, and preserve the sense of that responsibility under
which we teach whatever tends to the formation of character and to
the guidance of future conduct; building up the young in the truth-
fulness, honesty, and patriotism, by which they shall render service in
their generation, and do their part faithfully, for the world’s improve-
ment.
This is what I will endeavour to show in the present lecture. With
what feelings and tendencies should parents instruct their children in
the events of those eventful times j how mate them best subservient
to that which is the great object of all education —the guidance of the
mind in the way in which it should go —to the formation of character
according to the truest and noblest principles.
Now, in the first instance, it is desirable that the child should be
well made to understand what the battle of Waterloo was; and what
all battles are. It should not be allowed to rest in a mere collocation
of words: the thing itself should be realized to the mind, that
tremendous thing of twenty-nine years ago. The imagination of
the child should be stimulated: he should have pictures placed before
his fancy ; he should see there the sights and sounds of that awful day.
The picture should be presented in its completeness. The ground
should be traced to him. The valley, with the opposing hills, upon the
one side crowned with wood ; the mansion, the industrial farm-house,
the land covered with the ripening corn —he should see them all as the
sun was shining upon them a day or two before the battle. He should
be taught to behold the gathering of those mighty armies, from 150,000
to 200,000 upon the opposite sides, in the pride, pomp, and circum-
stance of neighing steeds and ponderous artillery, their
waving plumes and banners—the glittering array on either side, their
pride in their leader, their eagerness for the conflict, and the care and
caution with which, by both parties, every arrangement was made for
the opening of that fearful scene. The rainy night, the dull and heavy
morning—the ceaseless roar of the cannon —the impetuous charge—
the rapid retreat —the artillery ranged at different points, and dealing
havoc and destruction —the clang of martial music—the shouts of the
victors —the screams of the wounded —all, all, should be realized, down
to the last great struggle—the defeat —the hot pursuit, and death dealt
on every side upon those who were flying from the field of battle ; and
then the outburst of victory —the messengers speeded to all parts of
Europe —the ringing of bells—the glare of illuminations —the shouting
of the congregated multitude for the fortune of the world decided upon
that tremendous day.
Yes, the child should realize all this, and should not stop here.
The battle should be looked at with the private soldier’s eye, as well as
with that of the officer. Ho should be informed of the feelings of
those who, through that long drenching night, were shivering, foodless
and wearied—so exhausted, that even at the noontide of the following
day, when they were ordered to lie down, that the cannon-shot might
pass over them, some of them fell into deep slumber upon the moist
corn-field, amid all the roar of the battle, from which they awoke in
13


the very agonies of death. He should see the field strewed with some
40,000 corpses, heaped together indiscriminately—men of all nations
—English, French, Germans, Prussians, Poles —all blended there;
and then behold the wounded, with shattered limbs, crawling along
upon the ranks and piles of dead. He should then be taken to the
temporary hospitals, and there behold the lancet of the surgeon as busily
at work as had been the sword of the soldier, the task of amputating
limbs, extracting bullets, and binding wounds, proceeding for eight
days upon that blood-stained field. He should see the roads from the
scene of conflict, in the direction of France at least, marked by the
corpses of those who were cut down as they fled, scattered here and
there, their blood and brains seeming, as it were, inscriptions telling
that “ This is the march to Paris of- the vast armies that professed to
be banded for the independence of nations.” From this his mind
should pass to the bereaved families by thousands and tens of thousands
—the starving orphans and children, the broken-hearted widows—the
consequences entailed upon so many by all the ruinous adjuncts of war.
He should imagine, in contrast with the glittering procession—the
troops crowned with laurel—the bands playing, “ See the conquering
hero comes”—the gratulating cheers of the multitudes awaiting their
return —another long procession of sable-garbed mourners, with the
bitter tears streaming down their cheeks : he should witness the ruined
families, the crowded w’orkhouses, jails, andj graves —all these, too,
being monuments of the great battle, the glorious victory, of Waterloo.
The parent should blink to his child no portion of truth connected
with such events j he should give him no partial or one-sided view of
the matter. Look at the field of battle all around. Trace all its con-
sequences from that gloomy centre, which, as an orb of darkness and
misery, radiates over so many nations. He should impress all this
upon the mind of the youth; he should bring together the sufferings of
those who perished by hundreds and thousands of fatigue and famine,
more numerous than those who fell upon the battle-field. Thus, having
assembled all these attendant circumstances of the battle together, ho
should bid the child think upon them. He should say to him, “ This
is battle I Such is war! and such was Waterloo I” Understand the
event, and then you may proceed to moralize upon its causes and con-
sequences.


BYRON MEASURED AGAINST SHAKSPERE.
[JEFFREY.]
A HAN gifted as he is, when he aspires at dramatic fame, should
emulate the greatest of dramatists. Let Lord Byron, then, think of
Shakspere, and consider what a noble range of character, what a
freedom from mannerism and egotism, there is in him! How much he
seems to have studied Nature; how little to hare thought about him-
self; how seldom to hare repeated or glanced back at his own most
successful inventions! Why, indeed, should he? Nature was still
open before him, and inexhaustible ; and the freshness and variety that
still delight his readers must have had constant attractions for himself.
Take his Hamlet, for instance. What a character is there! —how full
of thought and refinement, and fancy and individuality! “ How in-
finite in faculties! In form and motion how express and admirable!
The beauty of the universe, the paragon of animals !” Vet close the
play, and we meet with him no more—neither in the author’s other
works, nor anywhere else! A common author, who had hit upon such
a character, would have dragged it in at every turn, and worn it to
very tatters. Sir John Falstaff, again, is a world of wit and humour
in himself, but, except in the two parts of Henry IV., there would
have been no trace of such a being, had not the author been “ ordered
to continue him ” in the Merry Wives of Windsor. He is not the
least like Benedict, or Mercutio, or Sir Toby Belch, or any of the
other witty and jovial personages of the same author—nor are they
like each other.


POETICAL HEADINGS.
THE PRISONER OF CHILION.
[BYRON.]
But he, the favourite and the flower,
Most cherish’d since his natal hour,
His mother’s image in fair face,
The infant love of all his race,
His martyr’d father’s dearest thought,
My latest care, for whom I sought
To hoard my life, that his might bo
Less wretched now, and one day free;
He, too, who yet had held untired
A spirit natural or inspired—
He, too, was struct, and day by day
Was wither’d on the stalk away.
Oh, God! it is a fearful thing
To see the human soul take wing
In any shape, in any mood:
I’ve seen it rushing forth in blood,
I’ve seen it on the breaking ocean
Strive with a swoln convulsive motion,
I’ve seen the sick and ghastly bed
Of Sin delirious with its dread ;
But these were horrors —this was woe
TJnmix’d with such—but sure and slow:
He faded, and so calm and meek,
So softly worn, so sweetly weak,
So tearless, yet so tender, kind,
And grieved for those he left behind;
With all the while a cheek whoso bloom
Was as a mockery of the tomb,
Whose tints as gently sunk away
As a departing rainbow’s ray ■
An eye of most transparent light,
That almost made the dungeon bright,
And not a word of murmur, not
A groan o’er his untimely lot, —
A little talk of better days,
A little hope my own to raise,


For I was sunk in silence—lost
In this last loss, of all the most;
And then the sighs he would suppress
Of fainting nature’s feebleness,
More slowly drawn, grew less and less:
I listen’d, but I could not hear :
I call’d, for I was wild with fear;
I knew ’twas hopeless, but my dread
Would not be thus admonished ;
I call’d, and thought I heard a sound
I burst my chain with one strong bound,
And rush’d to him: —l found him not,
X only stirr’d in this black epot,
1 only lived, I only drew
The accursed breath of dungeou-dow;
The last, the sole, the dearest link
Between me and the eternal brink,
Which bound me to my falling race,
W'as broken in this fatal place.
One on the earth, and one beneath —
My brothers—both had ceased to breathe :
I took that hand which lay so still,
Alas! my own was full as chill;
I had not strength to stir, or strive,
But felt that I was still alive —
A frantic feeling, when we know
That what we love shall ne'er be so.
I know not why
I could not die,
I had no earthly hope hut faith,
And that forbade a selfish death.
What next befell me then and there
I know not well —I never knew—
First came the loss of light, and air.
And then of darkness too :
X had no thought, no feeling—none —
Among the stones I stood a stone,
And was, scarce conscious what I wist,
As shrubless crags within the mist;
For all was blank, and bleak, and grey;
It was not night, it was not day ;
It was not even the dungeon-light,
So hateful to my heavy sight,
But vacancy absorbing space,
And fixedness without a place ;
There were no stars, no earth, no time,
Ho check, no change, no good, no crime.


But silence, and a stirless breath
Which neither was of life nor death ;
A sea of stagnant idleness,
Blind, boundless, mute, and motionless I
A light broke in upon my brain, —
It was the carol of a bird;
It ceased, and then it came again,
The sweetest song ear ever heard,
And mine was thankful till my eyes
Ban over with the glad surprise,
And they that moment could not see
I was the mate of misery ;
But then by dull degrees came back
My senses to their wonted track;
I saw the dungeon walls and floor
Close slowly round me as before,
I saw the glimmer of the sun
Creeping as it before had done,
But through the crevice where it came
That bird was perch’d, as fond and tamo,
And tamer than upon the tree;
A lovely bird, with azure wings,
And song that said a thousand things,
And seem’d to say them all for mo 1
I never saw its like before,
I ne’er shall see its likeness more :
It seem’d like mo to want a mate,
But was not half so desolate,
And it was come to lovo me when
None lived to lovo me so again,
And cheering from my dungeon’s brink
Had brought mo back to feel and think.
I know not if it late were free.
Or broke its cage to perch on mine,
But knowing well captivity,
Sweet bird! I could not wish for thine!
Or if it were, in winged guise,
A visitant from Paradise;
For—Heaven forgive that thought! the while
■Which made me both to weep and smile—
I sometimes deem’d that it might bo
My brother’s soul come down to mo ;
But then at last away it flew,
And then ’twas mortal well I knew,
For he would never thus have flown,
And left me twice so doubly lone,
lone as the corse within its shroud,
lone as a solitary cloud, —


A single cloud on a sunny day.
While all the rest of heaven is clear,
A frown upon the atmosphere,
That hath no business to appear
When skies are blue, and earth is gay.
ZARA’S EAR-RINGS.
[LOCKHART.]
Mt ear-rings! my car-rings! they’ve dropped into the well,
And -what to say to Muija, I cannot, cannot tell —
’X'tvas thus, Granada's fountain by, spoke Albuharcz’ daughter
The well is deep—far down they lie, beneath the cold blue water;
To me did Mu9a give them, when lie spake his sad farewell.
And what to say when he comes back, alas ! I cannot tell.
My ear-rings! my ear-rings!—they were pearls, in silver set,
That, when my Moor was far away, X ne’er should him forget ;
That I ne’er to other tongues should list, nor smile on other’s tale,
But remember he my lips had kissed, pure as those ear-rings pale.
When he comes back, and hears that I have dropped them in the well,
Oh! what will Muya think of ms! I cannot, cannot toll!
My car-rings! my ear-rings!—he’ll say they should have been,
Not of pearl and of silver, but of gold and glittering sheen,
Of jasper and of onyx, and of diamond shining clear,
Changing to the changing light, with radiance insincere;
That changeful mind unchanging gems are not befitting well;
Thus will he think —and what to say, alas! I cannot tell.
He’ll think, when I to market went I loitered by the way;
He’ll think a willing car I lent to all the lads might say ;
He’ll think some other lover’s hand, among my tresses noosed,
From the ears where he had placed them my rings of pearl unloosed;
He’ll think when I was sporting so beside this marble well
My pearls fell in—and what to say, alas ! I cannot tell.
He’ll say, I am a woman, and we are all the same;
He’ll say, I loved, when he was here to whisper of his flame—
But, when he went to Tunis, my virgin troth had broken,
And thought no more of Mu (a, and cared not for his token.
My ear-rings! my ear-rings : oh! luckless, luckless well.—
For what to say to Muija —alas! I cannot tell.
I’ll tell the truth to Muga—and I hope he will believe—
That X thought of him at morning, and thought of him at evo :
That, musing on my lover, when down the sun was gone.
His ear-rings in my hand I held, by the fountain all alone ;
And that my mind was o’er the sea, when from my hand they fell,
And that deep his love lies in my heart, as they lie in the well.


THE CORSAIR.
[BYRON.]
He pass’d the portal, cross’d the corridor.
And reach’d the chamber as the strain gave o’er :
“My own Medora! sure thy song is sad—”
“In Conrad’s absence wouldst thou have it glad ?
Without thine ear to listen to my lay,
Still must my song my thoughts, my soul betray :
Still must each action to my bosom suit,
My heart unhush’d, although my lips were mute!
Oh ! many a night on this lone couch reclined,
My dreaming fear with storms hath wing’d the wind,
And deem’d the breath that faintly fanu’d thy sail
The murmuring prelude of the ruder gale ;
Though soft, it seem’d the low prophetic dirge,
That mourn’d thee floating on the savage surge;
Still would I rise to rouse the beacon fire,
lest spies less true should let the blaze expire ;
And many a restless hour outwatch’d each star.
And morning came—and still thou wert afar.
Oh! how the chill blast on my bosom blew,
And day broke dreary on my troubled view,
And still I gazed and gazed—and not a prow
Was granted to my tears, my truth, my vow!
At length ’twas noon—l hail’d and blest the mast
That met my sight—it near’d—Alas! it pass’d!
Another came—Oh God ! ’twas thine at last!
Would that those days were over! wilt thou ne’er,
My Conrad! learn the joys of peace to share ?
Sure thou hast more than -wealth, and many a home
As bright as this invites us not to roam:
Thou know’st it is not peril that I fear,
I only tremble when thou art not here ;
Then not for mine, but that far dearer life,
Which flies from love and languishes for strife
How strange that heart, to me so tender still,
Should war with nature and its better will!”
“Tea, strange indeed—that heart hath long been changed;
Worm-like ’twas trampled, adder-like avenged,
Without one hope on earth beyond thy love.
And scarce a glimpse of mercy from above.


Yet the same feeling which thou dost condemn.
My very love to thee is hate to them,
So closely mingling here, that disentwined,
I cease to love thee when I love mankind:
Yet dread not this—the proof of all the past
Assures the future that my love will last;
But —oh, Medora! nerve thy gentler heart:
This hour again—but not for long—we part.”
“ This hour we part—my heart foreboded this s
Thus ever fade my fairy dreams of bliss.
This hour —it cannot be—this hour away
Yon bark hath hardly anchor’d in the bay :
Her consort still is absent, and her crew
Have need of rest before they toil anew :
My love! thou mock’st my weakness ; and wouldst steel
My breast before the time when it must feel;
But trifle now no more with my distress.
Such mirth hath less of play than bitterness.
Be silent, Conrad! —dearest! come and share
The feast these hands delighted to prepare ;
Light toil! to cull and dress thy frugal fare!
See, I have pluck’d the fruit that promised best.
And where not sure, perplex’d, but pleased, I guess’d
At such as seem’d the fairest; thrice the hill
My steps have wound to try the coolest rill 5
Yes! thy sherbet to-night will sweetly flow,
See how it sparkles in its vase of snow!
The grape’s gay juice thy bosom never cheers:
Thou more than Moslem when the cup appears t
Think not I mean to chide —for I rejoice
What others deem a penance is thy choice.
But come, the board is spread ; our silver lamp
Is trimm’d, and heeds not the sirocco’s damp:
Then shall my handmaids while the time along,
And join with me the dance, or wake the song ;
Or my guitar, which still thou lov'st to hear.
Shall soothe or lull—or, should it vex thine ear,
We’ll turn the tale, by Ariosto told,
Of fair Olympia loved and left of old.
Why, thou wert worse than he who broke his vow
To that lost damsel, shouldst thou leave me now;
Or even that traitor chief—l’ve seen thee smile.
When the clear sky show’d Ariadne’s Isle,
Which I have pointed from these cliffs the while:
And thus half sportive, half in fear, I said,
Lest time should raise that doubt to more than dread,
Thus Conrad, too, will quit me for the main;
And he deceived me—for he came again 1”


“ Again, again—and offc again—my Ioyo!
If there be life below, and hope above,
lie will return —but now, the moments bring
The time of parting with redoubled wing:
The why, the where —what boots it now to tell ?
Since all must end in that wild word—farewell!
Yet would I fain—did time allow —disclose—
Fear not—these are no formidable foes ;
And here shall watch a more than wonted guard,
For sudden siege and long defence prepared :
Nor be thou lonely, though thy lord’s away,
Our matrons and thy handmaids with theo stay;
And this thy comfort —that, when next we meet,
Security shall mate repose more sweet.
List! —’tis the bugle!”—Juan shrilly blew —
a One kiss—one more—another—Oil! Adieu !**
She rose—she sprung—she clung to his embrace,
Till his heart heaved beneath her hidden face:
He dared not raise to his that deep-blue eye,
"Which downcast droop’d in tearless agony.
Her long fair hair lay floating o’er his arms,
In all the wildness of clishcvell’d charms;
Scarce beat that bosom where his image dwelt
So full —that feeling scorn’d almost unfelt!
Hark—peals the thunder of the signal-gun!
It told ’twas sunset, and he cursed that sun.
Again—again—that form he madly press’d,
Which mutely clasp’d imploringly caress’d !
And tottering to the couch his bride lie bore,
One moment gazed, as if to gaze no more ;
Felt that for him earth held but her alone,
Kiss’d her cold forehead —turn’d—is Conrad gone ?
“ And is he gone ?” on sudden solitude
How oft that fearful question will intrude!
“ ’Twas but an instant past, and hero ho stood!
And now” —without the portal’s porch she rush’d.
And then at length her tears in freedom gush’d;
Big, bright, and fast, unknown to her they fell:
But still her lips refused to send—“ Farewell!”
For in that word —that fatal word —howe’er
We promise, hope, believe, there breathes despair.
O’er every feature of that still, pale face,
Had sorrow fix’d what time can ne’er erase ;
The tender blue of that largo loving eye
Grew frozen with its gaze on vacancy,
Till—Oil, how far!—it caught a glimpse of him,
And then it flow’d, and phrensied seem’d to swim,


Through those long, dark, and glistening lashes dew’d
With drops of sadness oft to be renew’d.
“He’s gone!”—against her heart that hand is driven,
Convulsed and quick—then gently raised to heaven:
She look’d and saw the heaving of the main;
The white sail set —she dared not look again •
But turn’d with sickening soul within the gate—
“ It is no dream —and I am desolate!”
THE EXECUTION OF MONTROSE.
[AYTOUN.]
r.
Ccora hither, Evan Cameron!
Come, stand beside ray knee—
I hear the river roaring down
Towards the wintry sea.
There’s shouting on the mountain-side,
There’s war within the blast—
Old faces look upon mo,
Old forms go trooping past;
X hear the pibroch wailing
Amidst the din of fight,
And my dim spirit wakes again
Upon the verge of night,
n.
’Twas I that led the Highland host
Through wild Lochaber’s snows,
"What time the plaided clans came down
To battle with Montrose.
I’ve told thee how the Southrons fell
Beneath the broad claymore,
And how we smote the Campbell clan
By Inverlochy’s shore.
I’ve told thee how wo swept Dundee,
And tamed the Lindsays’ pride;
But never have I told thee yet
ITow the great Marquis died.
m.
A traitor sold him to his foes;
O deed of deathless shame!
I charge thee, boy, if o’er thou meet
With one of Assynt’s name—
Be it upon the mountain’s side,
Or yet within the glen.


Stand he in martial gear alone,
Or backed by armed men—
Face him, as thou wouldst face the maa
Who wronged thy sire’s renown;
Remember of what blood thou art,
And strike the caitiff down I
it.
They brought him to the Watergate,
Hard bound with hempen span,
As though they held a lion there,
And not a fenceless man.
They set him high upon a cart—
The hangman rode below—
They drew his hands behind his back,
And bared his noble brow.
Then, as a hound is slipped from leash,
They cheered the common throng,
And blew the note with yell and shout,
And bade him pass along.
V.
It would have made a bravo man’s heart,
Grow sad and sick that day,
To watch the keen malignant eyes
Bent down on that array.
There stood the Whig west-country lords,
In balcony and bow;
There sat their gaunt and withered dames,
And their daughters all a-row.
And every open window
Was full as full might bo
With black-robed Covenanting carles,
That goodly sport to see I
VI.
But when he came, though pale and wan,
He looked so great and high,
So noble was his manly front,
So calm his steadfast eye;—
The rabble rout forbore to shout,
And each man held his breath,
Bor well they knew the hero’s soul
Was face to face with death.*
And then a mournful shudder
Through all the people crept,
And some that came to scoff at him
Now turned aside and wept.


VII.
But onwards—always onwards,
In silence and in gloom,
The dreary pageant laboured,
Till it reached the house of doom.
Then first a woman’s voice was heard
In jeer and laughter loud,
And an angry cry and a hiss arose
From the heart of the tossing crowd:
Then as the Grmme looked upwards,
He saw the ugly smile
Of him who sold his king for gold—
The master-fiend Argyle!
vin.
The Marquis gazed a moment,
And nothing did he say.
But the cheek of Argyle grew ghastly pale,
And he turned his eyes away.
The painted harlot by his side,
She shook through every limb,
For a roar like thunder swept the street,
And hands were clenched at him;
And a Saxon soldier cried aloud,
“ Back, coward, from thy place!
For seven long years thou hast not dared
To look him in the face.”
IX.
Had I been there with sword in hand,
And fifty Camerons by,
That day through high Dunedin’s streets
Had pealed the slogan-cry.
Not all their troops of trampling horse,
Nor might of mailed men—
Not all the rebels in the south
Had borne us backwards then!
Once more his foot on Highland heath
Had trod as free as air,
Or I, and all who bore my name,
Been laid around him there!
X.
It might not be. They placed him nest
Within the solemn hall, J
Where once the Scottish kings were throned
Amidst their nobles all.
But there was dust of vulgar feet
On that polluted floor,


And perjured traitors filled the place
Where good men sate before.
With savage glee came Warristoua
To read the murderous doom j
And then uprose the great Montrose
In the middle of the room.
si.
w Now, by my faith as belted knight,
And by the name I bear,
And by the bright Saint Andrew’s cross
That waves above us there—
Yea, by a greater, mightier oath—
And oh, that such should be!—
By that dark stream of royal blood
That lies ’twixt you and me—
I have not sought in battle-field
A wreath of such renown,
Nor dared I hope on my dying day,
To win the martyr’s crown!
XII.
** There is a chamber far away
Where sleep the good and brave,
But a better place ye have named for me
Than by my father’s grave.
For truth and right, ’gainst treason’s might*
This hand hath always striven,
And ye raise it up for a witness still
In the eye of earth and heaven.
Then nail my head on yonder tower —
Give every town a limb —
And God who made shall gather them ;
I go from you to Him I”
XIII.
The morning dawned full darkly,
The rain came flashing down,
And the jagged streak of the levin-bolt
Lit up the gloomy town :
The thunder crashed across the heaven,
The fatal hour was come;
Yet aye broke in with muffled beat,
The ’larm of the drum.
There was madness on the earth below
And anger in the sky,
And young and old, and rich and poor,
Came forth to see him die.


XIV.
Ah, God! that ghastly gibbet!
How dismal ’tis to see
The great tall spectral skeleton,
The ladder and the tree!
Hark! hark! it is the clash of arms—
The bells begin to toll—
“ lie is coming! ho is coming!
God’s mercy on his soul!”
One last long peal of thunder—
The clouds are cleared array.
And the glorious sun once more looks down
Amidst the dazzling day.
XV.
“He is coming! he is coming!”
Like a bridegroom from his room,
Came the hero from his prison
To the scaffold and the doom.
There was glory on his forehead.
There was lustre in his eye,
And lie never walked to battle
More proudly than to die;
There was colour in his visage,
Though the cheeks of all were wan,
And they marvelled as they saw him pass,
That great and goodly man!
XVI.
Ho mounted np the scaffold,
And he turned him to the crowd;
But they dared not trust the people.
So he might not speak aloud.
But he looked upon the heavens,
And they were clear and blue,
And in the liquid ether
The eye of God shone through!
Yet a black and murky battlement
Lay resting on the hill,
As though the thunder slept within—
All else was calm and still.
XVII.
The grim Geneva ministers
With anxious scowl drew near,
As you have seen the ravens flock
Around the dying deer.
He would not deign them word nor sign.
But alone ho bent the knee;


And veiled his face for Christ’s dear grace
Beneath the gallows-tree.
Then radiant and serene he rose,
And east his cloak away:
For he had ta’en his latest look
Of earth and sun and day.
xvm.
A beam of light fell o’er him,
Like a glory round the shriven,
And he climbed the lofty ladder
As it were the path to heaven.
Then came a flash from out the cloud,
And a stunning thunder-roll;
And no man dared to look aloft,
For fear was on every soul.
There was another heavy sound,
A hush and then a groan ;
And darkness swept across the sky—
The work of death was done!
THE RAVEN.
[E. A. POE.]
Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore —
While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door;
“ ’Tis some visitor,” I muttered, “ tapping at my chamber door —
Only this and nothing more.”
Ah! distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December,
And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
Eagerly I wished the morrow ; vainly I had sought to borrow
Erom my books surcease of sorrow—sorrow for the lost Lenore—
For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore—
Kameless here for evermore.
And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
Thrilled me—filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating,
“ ’Tis some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door —
Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door:
This it is and nothing more.”


Presently my soul grew stronger ; hesitating then no longer,
“ Sir,” said I, “or madam, truly your forgiveness I implore j
But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
And so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door,
That I scarce was sure I heard you”—here I opened wide the door; —
Darkness there, and nothing more.
Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing,
Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortals ever dared to dream before ;
But the silence was unbroken, and the stillness gave no token,
And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, “ Lenore!”
This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, “ Lenore!”—
Merely this and nothing more.
Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within mo burning,
Soon again I heard a tapping something louder than before.
“ Surely,” said I, “ surely that is something at my window lattice;
Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore—
Let my heart be still a moment, and this mystery explore;—
'Tis the wind and nothing mon?
Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,
In there stepped a stately Haven of the saintly days of yore.
Not the least obeisance made he; not a minute stopped or stayed he ;
But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door—
Perched upon a bust of Pallas, just above my chamber door—
Perched and sat and nothing more.
Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,
“ Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou,” I said, “ art sure no
craven,
Ghastly, grim, and ancient Haven wandering from the nightly shore—
Tell me what thy lordly name is on the night’s Plutonian shore!”
Quoth the Haven, “ Nevermore.”
Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
Though its answer little meaning—little relevancy bore ;
Por we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door—
Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
With such name as “ Nevermore.”
But the Haven, sitting lonely on that placid bust spoke only
That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.
Nothing farther then he uttered ; not a feather then he fluttered—
Till X scarcely more than muttered, “ Other friends have flown before—
On the morrow he will leave me, as ray hopes have flown before.” -
Then the bird said, “ Never more.”
14


Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
“ Doubtless,” said I, “ what it utters is its only stock and store,
Caught from some unhappy master, whom unmerciful disaster
Followed fast and followed faster, till his songs one burden bore—
Till the dirges of his hope that melancholy burden bore,
Of ‘Never—nevermore.’”
But the Raven still beguiling all my sad soul into smiling,
Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird and bust and door;
Then upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore—
What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore
Meant in croaking “ Never more.”
This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom’s core ;
This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
On the cushion’s velvet lining that the lamp-light gloated o’er,
But whose velvet violet lining with the lamp-light gloating o’er
She shall press, ah, never more.
Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
Swung by seraphim, whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor.
“Wretch!” I cried, “ thy god hath lent thee —by these angels he hath
sent thee
Respite—respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore!
Quaff, oh, quaff, this kind nepenthe, and forget this lost Lenore! ”
Quoth the Raven, “ Never more!”
“ Prophet!” said I, “ thing of evil!—prophet still, if bird or devil!
Whether tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
Desolate, yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted—
On this home by horror haunted —tell me truly, I implore —
Is there —is there balm in Gilead ?—tell me—tell me, I implore! ”
Quoth the Raven, “ Never more.”
“Prophet!” said I, “ thing of evil! —prophet still, if bird or devil!
By that heaven that bends above us—by that God we both adore—
Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
It shall clasp a sainted maiden, whom the angels name Lenore—
Clasp a rare and radiant maiden, whom the angels name Lenore ?”
Quoth the Raven, “ Never more.’
“Bo that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!” I shrieked, up-
starting—
“ Get thee back into the tempest and the night’s Plutonian shore!
Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
Leave my loneliness unbroken ! —quit the bust above my door !
Take thy beak from out my heart, and fake thy form from off my door!”
Quoth the Raven, “ Never more.”


And the Eaven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting,
On the pallid bust of Pallas Just above my chamber door;
And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon’s that is dreaming,
And the lamp-light o’er him streaming, throws his shadow on the floor;
And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor.
Shall be lifted—never mors.
LENORE.
[E. A. POE.]
Art, broken is the golden bowl! the spirit flown for ever!
Let the bell toll!—a saintly soul floats on the Stygian river;
And, Guy do Yere, hast thou no tear ? —weep now or never more!
See! on yon drear and rigid bier, low lies thy love, Lenore.
Come! let the burial rite be road—the funeral song be sung !
An anthem for the queenliest dead that ever died so young—
A dirge for her the doubly dead in that she died so young.
“Wretches! ye loved her for her wealth, and hated her for her pride.
And when she fell in feeble health, ye blessed her —that she died!
How shall tho ritual, then, bo read ?—the requiem how be sung
By you —by yours, the evil eye—by yours, (ho slanderous touguo
That did to death the innocence that died, and died so young ?”
Peecavimus ! but rave not thus! and let a Sabbath song
Go up to God so solemnly tho dead may feel no wrong!
The sweet Lenore hath “gone before,” with Hope, that flow beside,
Leaving thee wild for tho dear child that should have been thy bride—
Bor her, the fair and delonnair, that now so lowly lies,
Tho life upon her yellow hair, but not within her eyes—
The life still there upon her hair—the death upon her eyes.
“ Avannt! to-night my heart is light. No dirge will I upraise,
But waft the angel on her flight with a prean of old days!
Let no bell toll!—lest her sweet soul, amid its hallowed mirth,
Should catch the note, as it doth float up from the damned earth.
To friends above, from fiends below, the indignant ghost is riven—
From hell unto a high estate far up within tho heaven —
From grief and groan, to a golden throne, beside tho King of Heaven.”


THE CAPTIVE.
[LEWIS.]
Stay, jailor, stay, and hear my Tree,
She is not mad who kneels to thee;
But what I am too well I know,
And what I was, and what should bo.
I’ll rave no more in proud despair,
My language shall be mild tho’ sad ;
But yet I’ll firmly, truly swear,
I am not mad—l am not mad.
My tyrant husband forged the tale
That chains me to this dismal cell;
My fate unknown my friends bewail,
Oh! jailor, haste that fate to tell;
Oh! haste my father’s heart to cheer;
His heart at once to grieve and glad,
To know though kept a captive here,
I am not mad !—I am not mad !
He smiles in scorn, and turns the key ;
Ho quits the grate; I knelt in vain ;
His glimmering lamp, still still I see j
He’s gone ; and all is gloom again.
Cold, bitter cold—no warmth, no light ;
Life, all thy comforts once I had ;
Yet here I’m chain’d this freezing night,
Although not mad —no! no ! not mad!
’lis sure some dream, some vision vain :
What I, the child of rank and wealth ;
Am I tho wretch who clanks this chain '!
Bereft of freedom, friends, and health P
Ah ! while I mourn all blessings fled,
Which never more my heart will glad,
How aches my heart, how burns my head;
But ’tis not mad—no! no ! not mad!
Hast thou, my child, forgot me thus ?
A mother’s voice, a mother’s tongue ?
Shall ne’er forget your parting kiss,
Nor round her neck how fast you clung,
Nor how with her you wished to stay,
Nor how that suit your sire forbade,
Nor how!—I’ll drive such thoughts away—
They’ll make me mad ! —they’ll make me mad!


His rosy lips how sweet they smiled ;
His mild blue eyes how bright they shone ;
If one ever bore a lovelier child ;
And art thou now for ever gone ?
And must I never see thee more ?
My pretty, pretty, pretty lad!—
I will be free! —unbar the door !
I am not mad! —I am not mad!
But, hark! what means those yells and cries ?
His chain some furious madman breaks;
He comes! —I see his glaring eyes!—
Now—now my dungeon grate lie shakes!
Help! help!—he’s gone. Oh! fearful woe,
Such screams to hear, such sights to see;—
My brain ! —my brain! —I know—l know
X am not mad, but soon shall be!
Yes, soon; for lo! you, while I speak,
Mark how yon demon’s eyeballs glare!
He sees me! —Now with horrid shriek,
He whirls a serpent high in air.
Horror!—the reptile strikes his tooth
Deep in this heart, so crushed and sad!
Ah! laugh ye fiends! —I feel the truth —
Your task is done j —l’m mad! I’m mad!
THE LAMEST OF THE IRISH EMIGRANT
[LADY DUFFERIN.]
I’m sittin’ on the stile, Mary,
Where we sat side by side
On a bright May mornin’ long ago,
When first you were my bride ;
The corn was springin’ fresh and green,
And the lark sang loud and high—
And the red was on your lip, Mary,
And the love-light in your eye.
The place is little changed, Mary,
The day is bright as then ;
The lark’s loud song is in my ear,
And the corn is green again ;
But I miss the soft clasp of your hand,
And your breath warm on my cheek.
And I still keep liat’nin’ for the words
You never more may speak.


'Tig but a step down yonder lane,
And the little church stands near,
The church where we were wed, Mary,
I see the spire from here.
Hut the grave-yard lies between, Mary,
And my step might break your rest —
For I’ve laid you, darling! down to sleep
With your baby on your breast.
I’m very lonely now, Mary,
For the poor make no new friends ;
But, oh! they love the better still,
The few our Father sends!
And you were all I had, Mary,
My blessin’ and my pride:
There’s nothin’ left to care for now,
Since my poor Mary died.
Yours was the good, brave heart, Mary,
That still kept hoping on,
When the trust in God had left my soul,
And my arm’s young strength was gone;
There was comfort ever on your lip,
And the kind look on your brow—
I bless you, Mary, for that same,
Though you cannot hear mo now.
I thank you for the patient smile
When your heart was fit to break;
When the hunger pain was gnawin’ there,
And you hid it, for my sake!
I bless you for the pleasant word,
When your heart was sad and sore—
Oh! I’m thankful you are gone, Mary,
Where grief can’t reach you more!
I’m biddin’ you a long farewell,
My Mary, kind and true!
But I’ll not forget you, darling!
In the land I’m goin’ to;
They say there’s bread and work for all,
And the sun shines always there,
But I’ll not forget old Ireland,
Were it fifty times as fair!
And often in those grand old woods
I’ll sit and shut my eyes.
And my heart will travel back again
To the place where Mary lies ;
And I’ll think I see the little stile
Where we sat side by side:
And the springin’ corn, and the bright May mom
When first you were my bride.


THE DEATH OF MINNEHAHA.
[LONGFELLOW.]
Into Hiawatha’s wigwam
Came two other guests, as silent
As the ghosts were, and as gloomy,
■Waited not to be invited,
Did not parley at the doorway.
Sat there without word of welcome
In the seat of Laughing Water;
Looted with haggard eyes and hollow
At the face of Laughing Water.
And the foremost said, “ Behold me!
1 am Famine, Buckadawin!”
And the other said, “ Behold me 1
I am Fever, Ahkosewin 1”
And the lovely Minnehaha
Shuddered as they looked upon her,
Shuddered at the words they uttered,
Lay down on her bed in silence,
Hid her face, but made no answer;
Lay there trembling, freezing, burning
At the looks they cast upon her,
At the fearful words they uttered.
Forth into the empty forest
Eushed the maddened Hiawatha ;
In his heart was deadly sorrow,
In his face a stony firmness;
On his brow the sweat of anguish
Started, but it froze, and fell not.
Wrapped in furs, and armed for hunting,
With his mighty bow of ash-tree,
With his quiver full of arrows,
With his mittens, Minjekahwun,
Into the vast and vacant forest
On his snow-shoes strode he forward.
“ Gitohe Manito,the Mighty!”
Cried ho with his face uplifted
In that bitter hour of anguish,
“ Give your children food, O father I
Give us food, or we must perish 1
Give me food for Minnehaha,
For my dying Minnehaha! ”
Through the far-resounding forest,
Through the forest vast and vacant,
Bang that cry of desolation,
But there came no other answer
Than the echo of his crying.
Than the echo of the woodlands,


“ Minnelialia! Minnehaha! ”
All day long roved Hiawatha
In that melancholy forest,
Through the shadow of whose thickets,
In the pleasant days of Summer,
Of that ne’er-forgotten Summer,
He had brought his young wife homeward,
From the land of the Dacotahs;
When the birds sang in the thickets,
And the streamlets laughed and glistened,
And the air was full of fragrance,
And the lovely Laughing Water
Said, with voice that did not tremble,
“I will follow you, my husband!”
In the wigwam with Hokomis,
With those gloomy guests that watched her.
With the Famine and the Fever,
She was lying, the Beloved,
She the dying Minnehaha.
“ Hark! ” she said, “ I hear a rushing,
Hear a roaring and a rushing,
Hear the Falls of Minnehaha
Calling to me from a distance !"
“Ho, my child! ” said old Hokomis,
“’Tis the night-wind in the pine-trees 3 ”
“ Look ! ” she said, “ I see my father
Standing lonely at his doorway,
Beckoning to mo from his wigwam,
In the land of the Dacotahs! ”
“ Ho, my child ! ” said old Hokomis,
“ ’Tis the smoko that waves and beckons I”
“Ah! ’’she said, “the eyes of Pauguk
Glare upon me in the darkness j
I can feel his icy fingers
Clasping mine amid the darkness!
Hiawatha! Hiawatha!”
And the desolate Hiawatha,
Far away amid the forest,
Miles away among the mountains,
Heard that sudden cry of anguish,
Heard the voice of Minnehaha
Calling to him in the darkness,
“ Hiawatha ! Hiawatha !”
Over snow-fields waste and pathless,
Under snow-encumbered branches,
Homeward hurried Hiawatha,
Empty-handed, heavy-hearted,
Heard Hokomis moaning, wailing,
“Wahonomin! Wahonomin!”


Would lliat I had perished for you,
Would that I were dead as you are 1
Wahonomin! Wahonomin !
And he rushed into the wigwam,
Saw the old Nokomis slowly
Booking to and fro and moaning,
Saw his lovely Minnehaha
lying dead and cold before him ;
And his bursting heart within him
Uttered such a cry of anguish,
That the forest moaned and shuddered,
That the very stars in heaven
Shook and trembled with his anguish.
Then he sat down, still and speechless,
On the bed of Minnehaha,
At the feet of laughing Water,
At those willing feet, that never
More would lightly run to meet him,
Never more would lightly follow.
With both hands his face he covered,
Seven long days and nights he sat there,
As if in a swoon he sat there,
Speechless, motionless, unconscious
Of the daylight or the darkness.
Then they buried Minnehaha;
In the snow a grave they made her,
In the forest deep and darksome,
Underneath the moaning hemlocks ;
Clothed her in her richest garments,
Wrapped her in her robes of ermine,
Covered her with snow, like ermine;
Thus they buried Minnehaha.
And at night a fire was lighted,
On her grave four times was kindled,
Bor her soul upon its journey
To the Islands of the Blessed.
From his doorway Hiawatha
Saw it burning in the forest,
lighting up the gloomy hemlocks ;
From his sleepless bed uprising,
From the bed of Minnehaha,
Stood and watched it at the doorway,
That it might not be extinguished,
Might not leave her in the darkness.
“Farewell! ” said he, “ Minnehaha !
Farewell, O my laughing Water !
All my heart is buried with you,
All my thoughts go onward with you !
Come not back again to labour,


Como not back again to suffer.
Where the Famine and the Fever
Wear the heart and waste the body.
Soon my task will be completed,
Soon your footsteps I shall follow
To the Islands of the Blessed,
To the kingdom of Ponemah !
To the Land of the Hereafter ! ”
YIEGIHIA.
[PEOM MACATIIAY’S <: LAY3 or ANCIENT HOME.”]
{By permission of Messrs. Longman and Co.)
Straightway Virginius led the maid a little space aside,
To where the reeking shambles stood, piled up with horn and hide,
Close to yon low dark archway, where, in a crimson flood,
Leaps down to the great sewer the gurgling stream of blood.
Hard by, a flesher on a block had laid his whittle down:
Virginius caught the whittle up, and hid it in his gown.
And then his eyes grew very dim, and his throat began to swell,
And in a hoarse, changed voice he spake, “ Farewell, sweet child!
Farewell!
Oh 1 how I loved my darling! Though stern I sometimes be,
To thee, thou know’st, I was not so. Who could be so to thee ?
And how my darling loved me! How glad she was to hear ,
My footstep on the threshold when I came back last year 1
And how she danced with pleasure to see my civic crown,
And took my sword, and hung it up, and brought me forth my gown !
How, all those things are over—yes, all thy pretty ways,
Thy needlework, thy prattle, thy snatches of old lays;
And none will grieve when I go forth, or smile when I return,
Or watch beside the old man’s bed, or weep upon his urn.
The house that was the happiest within the Roman walls,
The house that envied not the wealth of Capua’s marble halls,
How, for the brightness of thy smile, must have eternal gloom.
And for the music of thy voice, the silence of the tomb.
The time is come. See how ho points his eager hand this way!
See how his eyes gloat on thy grief, like a kite's upon the prey 1
With all his wit, he little deems, that, spumed, betrayed, bereft,
Thy father hath in his despair one fearful refuge left.
Ho little deems that in this hand I clutch what still can save
Thy gentle youth from taunts and blows, the portion of the slave;
Yea, and from nameless evil, that passeth taunt and blow—
Foul outrage which thou knowest not, which thou shalt never know.
Then clasp mo round the neck once more, and give me one more kiss ;
And now, mine own dear little girl, there is no way but this.”
With that he lifted high the steel, and smote her in the side,
And in her blood she sank to earth, and with one sob she died.


GILDEPOY.
[CAMPBELL.]
The last, the fatal hour is come.
That hears my love from me :
I hear the dead note of the drum,
I mark the gallows’ tree!
The bell has toll’d; it shakes my heart;
The trumpet speaks thy name ;
And must my Gilderoy depart
To bear a death of shame ?
No bosom trembles for thy doom;
No mourner wipes a tear;
The gallows’ foot is all thy tomb.
The sledge is all thy bier.
Oh, Gilderoy! bethought we then
So soon, so sad to part,
When first in lloslin’a lovely glen
You triumph’d o’er my heart ?
Your locks they glitter’d to the sheen.
Your hunter garb was trim;
And graceful was the ribbon green
That bound your manly limb!
Ah! little thought Ito deploro
Those limbs in fetters bound;
Or hear, upon the scaffold floor.
The midnight hammer sound.
Ye cruel, cruel, that combined
The guiltless to pursue;
My Gilderoy was ever kind.
Ho could not injure you!
A long adieu! but where shall fly
Thy widow all forlorn,
When every mean and cruel eye
my woe with scorn ?
Yes! they will mock thy widow’s tears,
And hate thine orphan boy;
Alas! his infant beauty wears
The form of Gilderoy.


Then will I seek the dreary mound
That wraps thy mouldering clay,
And weep and linger on the ground,
And sigh my heart away.
THE LAST MAN.
[CAMPBELL.]
All worldly shapes shall melt in gloom,
The Sun himself must die,
Before this mortal shall assume
Its Immortality!
I saw a vision in my sleep,
That gave my spirit strength to sweep
Adown the gulf of Time!
I saw the last of human mould
That shall Creation’s death behold,
As Adam saw her prime !
The Sun’s eye had a sickly glare,
The Earth with age was wan;
The skeletons of nations were
Around that lonely man!
Some had expired in fight,—the brands
Still rusted in their bony hands;
In plague and famine some !
Earth’s cities had no sound nor tread ;
And ships were drifting with the dead
To shores where all was dumb ! .
Yet, prophet-like, that lone one stood,
With dauntless words and high,
That shook the sear leaves from the wood
As if a storm pass’d by,
Saying, “ We are twins in death, proud Sun!
Thy face is cold, thy race is run,
'Tis mercy bids thee go.
Eor thou ten thousand thousand years
Hast seen the tide of human tears
That shall no longer flow.
What though beneath thee man put forth
His pomp, his pride, his skill;
And arts that made fire, flood, and earth
The vassals of his will?


Yet mourn I not thy parted sway,
Thou dim discrowned ting of day!
For all those trophied arts
And triumphs that beneath thee sprang,
Heal’d not a passion or a pang
Entail’d on human hearts.
Go! let Oblivion’s curtain fall
Upon the stage of men,
Nor with thy rising beams recal
life’s tragedy again:
Its piteous pageants bring not back,
Nor waken flesh, upon the rack
Of pain anew to writhe ;
Stretch’d in disease’s shapes abhorr’d,
Or mown in battle by the sword,
Like grass beneath the scythe!
Ev’n I am weary in yon skies
To watch thy fading fire;
Test of all sumless agonies
Behold not me expire.
My lips that speak thy dirge of death—
Their rounded gasp and gurgling breath—
To see thou shall not boast.
The eclipse of Nature spreads my pall,—
The majesty of Darkness shall
Receive my parting ghost!
This spirit shall return to Him
Who gave its heavenly spark ;
Yet think not, Sun, it shall be dim
When thou thyself art dark!
No! it shall live again, and shine
In bliss unknown to beams of thine,
By Him recall’d to breath,
Who captive led captivity,
Who robb’d the grave of victory—
And took the sting from Death!
Go, Sun, while Mercy holds me up
On Nature’s awful waste,
To drink this last and bitter cup
Of grief that man shall taste ;
Go, tell the Night that hides thy face,
Thou saw’st the last of Adam’s race,
On Earth’s sepulchral clod.
The darkening universe defy
To quench his Immortality,
Or shake his trust in God!


THE REPUBLICAN PAINTER.
[BERANGER.]
“ You cannot pass,” was the stern reply of the frontier sentinello
To those who bore the painter’s dust to the earth he loved so well.
“ Oh! soldier!” cried the mourners then, in sad imploring tones,
“ Must stern proscription lay its ban even on his senseless bones—
And can his native soil refuse a narrow resting-place
To him whoso genius is the while her glory and her grace ?”
“ You pass not by! ” was still the cry of the frontier sentinelle.
“ Oh! soldier! ere the mist of death athwart his vision fell,
Up to his latest sigh he turn’d his yearning gaze on Trance,
And all the exile’s long fond love was centr’d in that glance.
Oh 1 give a little grave to him, through whose immortal hand
All future times may see and know the grandeur of our land.”
“ You cannot pass!” in soften’d tones now cried the sentinelle.
“ Oh! soldier! freedom’s purest glow alone in him could dwell,
Whoso pencil woke to life the brave, sclf-martyr’d in the pass
Of old Thermopylffi, with great and good Leonidas ;
And unto him his country owed the splendours of the time
That saw her arts and arms revive to glorious, golden prime.”
‘ ‘ You cannot pass! ’tis my duty, alas!” cried the sadden’d sentinelle.
“ Ah! soldier; he whose hand no more shall charm us with its spell—
He knew the gallant warrior’s meed, for he gloried to portray
The peerless hero, whose renown can never pass away :
Like Jove th’ imperial conqueror seem’d to I)avid’s eye the while—
Alas! that laurell’d head Kes low on a far-off rocky isle!”
“You cannot pass!” was still the cry of the frontier sentinello,
Though his faltering tones betray’d the birth of thoughts too strong to
quell.
“ The victor of a hundred lights was bow’d before his foes,
And far from home his painter’s life attained its cheerless close;
Oh! let not France extend to death the ban that blasted life,
But give her son the last, sad home, where ends all earthly strife.”
“ You cannot pass! alas, alas!” cried the weeping sentinelle.
“ ’Tis well the mourners sadly say, as they left the bier—“ ’tis well!
Retrace we now our steps to some more kindly stranger land,
And leave this cruel mother earth, made beauteous by his hand.
For Him who raised the hearts of Franco till Roman stars grow dim—
Come —let us seek some far-off shore, and beg a grave for him.”


THE DEATH OF THE COLLIER’S CHILD.
[FARMER.]
The cottage ■was a thatch’d one,
The outside old and mean,
Yet cv’rything within that cot
Was wondrous neat and clean.
The night was dark and stormy,
The wind was howling wild 5
A patient mother knelt beside
The death-bed of her child.
A little worn-out creature—
His once bright eyes grown dim;
It was a collier’s only child —
They called him little Jim.
And oh! to see the briny tears
Fast hurrying down her cheek,
As she offer’d up a prayer in thought—
She was afraid to speak,
Lest she might waken one she lov’d
Far better than her life,
For there was all a mother’s love,
In that poor collier’s wife.
With hands uplifted, sec she kneels
Beside the sufferer’s bed ;
And prays that Ho will spare her boy,
And take herself instead!
She gets her answer from the child j
Soft fell these words from him —
“ Mother, the angels do so smile,
And beckon little Jim.
I have no pain, dear mother, now.
But oh ! I am so dry;
Just moisten poor Jim’s lips again,
And, mother, don’t you cry.”
With gentle trembling haste she held
The tca-cup to his lips;
Ho smiled, to thank her, as he took
Three little tiny sips.


“ Tell father when he comes from work
I said good-night to him ;
And mother, now I’ll go to sleep
Alas! poor little Jim.
She saw that ho was dying—
The child she loved so dear,
Had utter’d the last words that sha
Might ever hope to hear.
The cottage door was open’d,
The collier’s step was heard ;
The mother and the father met,
Yet neither spake a word !
He knew that all was over—
He knew his child was dead j
He took the candle in his band,
And walked towards the bed.
His quiv’ring lips gave token
Of grief he’d fain conceal;
And see! his wife has join’d him,
The stricken couple kneel!
With hearts bowed down with sadness,
They humbly ask of Him,
In heaven, once more, to meet again,
Their own poor Lithe Jim.
GOUGAUNE BARRA.
[CALLANAN.]
Tiieeb is a green island in lone G-ougauno Barra,
Where Alina of songs rushes forth as an arrow;
In deep-valleyed Desmond : a thousand wild fountains
Come down to that lake, from their home in the mountains ;
There grows the wild ash, and a time-stricken willow
Looks chidingly down on the mirth of the billow;
As, like some gay child, that sad monitor scorning,
It lightly laughs back to the laugh of the morning.


And its zono of dark hills—oh ! to see them all bright’nlng
AVI icn the tempest flings out its red banner of lightning ;
And the waters rush down, ’mid the thunder’s deep rattle,
Like clans from their hills at the voice of the battle;
And brightly the fire-crested billows are gleaming,
And wildly from Mullagh the eagles are screaming :
Oh ! where is the dwelling in valley, or high land,
So meet for a bard as this lone little island ?
llow oft, when the summer sun rested on Clara, ’
And lit the dark heath on the hills of Ivera,
Have I sought thee, sweet spot, from my home by the ocean,
And trod oil thy wilds with a minstrel’s devotion ;
And thought of thy bards, when assembling together
In the cleft of thy rocks, or the depth of thy heather,
They fled from the foemen’s dark bondage and slaughter,
And waked their last song by the rush of thy water.
High sons of the lyre, oh 1 how proud was the feeling,
To think while alone through that solitude stealing,
Though loflier minstrels green Erin can number,
I only awoke your wild harp from its slumber,
And mingled once more with the voice of those fountains
The songs even Echo forgot on her mountains;
And gleaned each grey legend, that darkly was sleeping
"Where the mist and the rain o’er their beauty were creeping.
Least bard of the hills! were it mine to inherit
The Are of thy harp, and the wing of thy spirit,
With tho wrongs which like thee to our country has bound me,
Lid your mantle of song fling its radiance round me,
Still, still in those wilds might young Liberty rally,
And send her strong shout over mountain and valley ;
The star of tho west might yet rise in its glory,
And the land that was darkest, bo brightest in story.
I too shall be gone but my name shall be spoken
When Erin awakes, and her fetters arc broken ;
Some Minstrel will come, in the summer eve's gleaming,
When Ercedom’s young light cn his spirit is beaming,
And bend o’er my grave with a tear of emotion,
Where calm Avon-Lueo seeks the kisses of ocean ;
Or plant a wild wreath, from the hanks of that river,
O’er the heart, and the harp, that are sleeping for ever.
15


THE OCEAN.
[BYRON.]
Tiieee is a pleasure in the pathless 'vootls.
There is a rapture on the lonely shore,
There is society where none intrudes,
By the deep sea, and music in its roar:
I love not Han the less, but Nature more,
From these our interviews, in which I steal
From all I may be, or have been before,
To mingle with the Universe, and feel
What I can ne’er express, yet can not all conceal.
801 l on, thou deep and dark blue ocean—roll!
Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain ;
Man marks the earth with ruin—his control
Stops with the shore; —upon thy watery plain
The wrecks are all thy deed, nor doth remain
A shadow of man’s ravage, save his own,
When for a moment, like a drop of rain,
He sinks into thy depths, with bubbling groan,
Without a grave, unknell’d, uncoffin’d, and unknown.
His steps are not upon thy paths,—thy fields
Are not a spoil for him, —thou dost arise
And shake him from thee; the vile strength he wield
For earth’s destruction thou dost all despise,
Spurning him from thy bosom to the skies,
And send’st him, shivering in thy playful spray.
And howling, to his Gods, where haply lies
His petty hope in some near port or bay,
And dashest him again to earth: —there let him lay.
The armaments which thunderstrike the walls
Of rock-built cities, bidding nations quake,
And monarchs tremble in their capitals,
The oak leviathans, whose huge ribs make
Their clay creator the vain title take
Of lord of thee, and arbiter of war;
These are thy toys, and, as the snowy flake,
They melt into thy yeast of waves, which mar
Alike the Armada’s pride, or spoils of Trafalgar.


Thy shores are empires, changed in all save thee—
. Assyria, Greece, Home, Carthage, what are they ?
Thy waters wasted them while they were free,
And many a tyrant since; their shores obey
The stranger, slave, or savage; their decay
Has dried op realms to deserts:—not so thou,
Unchangeable save to thy wild wave’s play—
Time writes no wrinkle on thine azure brow,
Such as creation’s dawn beheld, thou rollest now*


ORATORICAL READINGS.
THE FAMOUS REPLY TO THE COUNSEL OF WARREN HASTINGS.
[BURKE.]
[Burke's remarks, says the author of “Ways and Words of Men of Letters,” on
the habits and history of India Kid been angrily discussed by the opposing
counsel. They bad charged him with attempting to perplex the cause by
carrying the public mind into the mystic absurdities of Indian ceremonial, by
images of ancient mythology, and by romances on the triumphs of Tamerlane
and Gengis Khan. Those charges peculiarly roused the indignation of the
great accuser, and, we agree with Dr. Croly, whose “ Life of burke” we would
stronglv recomn end for perusal to all who are interested in this great man,
that the whole of Burke’s speeches scarcely contain a liner burst of oratorical
rage than his answer]
Thex will show you, they say, that Gengis Khan, Kouli Khan, and
Tamerlane, destroyed ten thousand times more people in battle than
this man did. Good Heavens ! have they run mad? Have they lost
their senses in their guilt P Hid they ever expect that wo meant to
compare this man to Gengis Khan, Kouli Khan, or Tamerlane ? To
compare a clerk in a bureau j to compare a fraudulent bullock-con-
tractor—for we could show that his first elementary malversations were
in carrying on fraudulent bullock-contracts, which contracts were taken
from him-with shame and disgrace, and restored with greater shame
and disgrace—to compare him with the conquerors of the world ? W o
never said he was a tiger and a lion; no, we said ho was a tceasel and
a rat. AVliat we said wn?, that he had desolated countries by the same
means that plagues of his description have produced similar desola-
tions. "We said that lie, a fraudulent bollock-contractor, exalted to
great and unmerited powers, can do move mischief than all the lions
and tigers in the world. "We know that a swarm of locusts, however
individually despicable, can render a country more desolate than Gengis
Khan or Tamerlane. "When God Almighty chose to humble the pride
and presumption of Pharaoh, and bring him to shame, He did not
•effect his purpose with tigers and lions. He sent lice, mice, frogs, and
everything loathsome and contemptible, to pollute and destroy the
country. Think of this, my Lords, and of your listening here to their long
account of Tamerlane’s camp of two hundred thousand people, and of
Ins building a pyramid at Bagdad with the heads of ninety thousand
of his prisoners.


THE COMMON INFORMER.
[CURRAN.]
I speak of what your own eyes have seen, day after day, during the
course of this commission, from the bos where you are now sitting ;
the number of horrid miscreants who avowed upon their oaths that
they had come from the very seat of Government —from the Castle,
where they had been worked upon by the fear of death and the hopes
of compensation to give evidence against their fellows, —that the mild
and wholesome councils of this Government are holden over these
catacombs of living death, where the wretch that is buried a man lies
till his heart has had time to fester and dissolve, and then is dug up a
witness. Is this fancy, oris it fact? Have you not seen him, after
his resurrection from that tomb, and after having been dug cut of the
region of death and corruption, make his appearance upon the table,
the living image of life and death, and the supremo arbiter of both?
Have you not marked when he entered how the stormy wave of the
multitude retired at his approach? Have you not marked how the
human heart bowed to the supremacy of his power in the undissomblcd
homage of deferential "horror? How his glance, liko the lightning of
heaven, seemed to rive the body of the accused, and mark it for the grave,
while his voice warned the devoted wretch of woe and death —a death
which no innocence can escape, no art elude, no force resist, no anti-
dote prevent? There was once an antidote—a juror’s oath ; but even
that adamantine chain, that bound the integrity of man to the throne
of eternal justice, is solved and melted in t lie breath that issues from
the informer’s mouth; conscience swings from her moorings, and the
appalled and frighted juror consults his own safety in the surrender of
his victim. 1
THE PROSECUTION OF WARREN HASTINGS.
[BURKE.]
Hotiiino i 3 more fake than that despotism is the constitution of
any country in Asia. Will your Lordships submit to hear the corrupt
practices of mankind made the principles of government ? Was there
ever heard that a governor would dure to heap all the evil practices,
all the cruelties, oppressions, extortions, corruptions, briberies—of all
the ferocious usurpers, desperate robbers, thieves, cheats, and jugglers,
that ever had office from one end of Asia to another —and consolidating
all this heap of the crimes and absurdities of barbarous domination


into one code, establish it as the whole duty of an English governor?
He have arbitrary power ! My Lords, the East India Company have
not arbitrary power to give him. The King has not arbitrary power to
give him. Your Lordships have not, nor the Commons, nor the whole
Legislature. We have no arbitrary power to give, because arbitrary
power is a thing which neither any man can hold, nor any man give.
No man can lawfully govern himself according to his own will, much
less can one person be governed by the will of another. We are all
born in subjection; all born equally, high and low, governors and
governed; in subjection to one great, immutable, pre-existent law,
prior to all our devices, antecedent to our very existence ; by which we
are knit and connected in the eternal frame of the universe. Tins
great law does not arise from our conventions and compacts —all the
force and sanction they have. Every good gilt is of God! All power
is of God! And He who has given the power, and from whom alone
it originates, will never suffer the exercise of it to be practiced upon
any less solid foundation than the power itself.
SEE FAMOUS REPLY TO THE DUKE OF GRAFTON.
[LORD THURLOW.]
[The duke had, in the Hru?e of Lords, reproached Lord Thurlow with his ple-
beian extraction, and his recent admission to the peerage. Lord Thurlow rose
from the woolsack, and advanced slowly to the place from which the chancellor
addresses the house; then fixing his eye upon tue duke, spoke as follows :—]
My lords, I am amazed, yes, my lords, I am amazed at his grace’s
speeeh. The noble duke cannot look before him, behind him, or on
either side of him, without seeing some noble peer who owes his seat
in this house to his successful exertions in the profession to which I
belong. Does he not fed that it is as honourable to owe it to these,
as to being the accident of an accident ? To all these noble lords, the
language of the noble duke is as applicable and as insulting as it is to
myself. But I do not fear to meet it single and alone. No one
venerates the peerage more than I do. But, my lords, I must say
that the peerage solicited me, not I the peerage.
Nay, more, I can and will say, that, as a peer of parliament, as
speaker of this right honourable house, as keeper of the great seal, as
guardian of his majesty’s conscience, as lord high chancellor of Eng-
land, nay, even in that character alone in which the noble duke -would
think it an affront to be considered, but which character none can deny
me, as a Man, I am at this moment as respectable, I beg leave to add,
as much respected, as the proudest peer I now look down upon.


AGAINST EMPLOYING INDIANS IN THE WAR WITH AMERICA.
[LORD CHATHAM.]
[Delivered in the House of Peers, on our employing mercenary troops and Indians
in the war with America.]
I caknot, my lords, I will not, join in congratulation on misfortune
and disgrace. This, my lords, is a perilous and tremendous moment.
It is not a time for adulation ; the smoothness of flattery cannot save
us in this rugged and awful crisis. It is now necessary to instruct the
throne in the language of truth. Wo must, if possible, dispel the
delusion and darkness which envelop it, and display, in its full danger
and genuine colours, the ruin which is brought to our doors. Can
ministers still presume to expect support in their infatuation ? Can
parliament be so dead to its dignity and duty, as to give their support
to measures thus obtruded and forced upon them ? Measures, my lords,
which have reduced this late flourishing empire to scorn and con-
tempt ! “ But yesterday, and Britain might have stood against the
world; now, none so poor as to do her reverence.” The people, whom
we at first despised as rebels, but whom we now acknowledge as
enemies, are abetted against ns, supplied with every military store,
have their interest consulted and their ambassadors entertained by our
inveterate enemy —and ministers do not, and dare not, interpose with
dignity or effect. The desperate state of our army abroad is in part
known. No man more highly esteems and honours the British troops
than Ido; I know their virtues and their valour; I know they can
achieve anything but impossibilities ; and X know that the conquest of
British America is an impossibility. You cannot, my lords, you can-
not conquer America. What is your present situation there? We do
not know the worst; but we know that in three campaigns we have
done nothing, and suffered much. You may swell every expense,
accumulate every assistance, and extend your traffic to the shambles of
every German despot: your attempts will bo for ever vain and
impotent—doubly so, indeed, from this mercenary aid on which you
rely; for it irritates, to an incurable resentment, the minds of cur
adversaries, to overrun them with the mercenary sons of rapine a 1
plunder, devoting them and their possessions to the rapacity of hire-
ling cruelty. If I were an American, as lam an Englishman, while a
foreign troop was landed in my country, I never would lay down my
arms —never, never, never!
But, my lords, who is the man that, in addition to the disgraces and
mischiefs of the war, has dared to authorise and associate to our arms
the tomahawk and soalping-knifo of the savage ?—to call into civilised
alliance the wild and inhuman inhabitant of the woods ? —to delegate
to the merciless Indian the defence of disputed rights, and to wage the
horrors of his barbarous war against our brethren ? My lords, these
enormities cry aloud for redress and punishment. But, my lords, this
barbarous measure has been defended, not only on the principles of
policy and necessity, but also on those of morality ; “ for it is perfectly


allowable,” says Lord Suffolk, “to use all the means which God and
nature hare put into our hands.” lam astonished, I am shocked, to
hear such principles confessed ; to hear them avowed in this house, or
in this country. My lords, I did not intend to encroach so much on
your attention, but I cannot repress my indignation—l feel myself
impelled to speak. My lords, we are called upon as members of this
house, as men, as Christians, to protest against such horrible barbarity!
—“That God and nature have put into our hands I” "What ideas of
God and nature that noble lord may entertain, I know not; but I
know, that such detestable principles are equally abhorrent to religion
and humanity. What! to attribute the sacred sanction of God and
nature to the massacres of the Indian scalping-knife! to the cannibal
savage, torturing, murdering, devouring, drinking the blood of his
mangled victims! Such notions shock every precept of morality,
every feeling of humanity, every sentiment of honour. These abomi-
nable principles, and this more abominablcavowal of them, demand
the most decisive indignation.
I call upon that right reverend, and this most learned bench, to
vindicate the religion of their God, to support the justice of their
country. I call upon the bishops, to interpose the unsullied sanctity
of their lawn ; upon the judges, to interpose the purity of their
ermine, to save ,us from this pollution. I call upon the honour
of your lordships, to reverence the dignity of your ancestors,
and to maintain your own. I call upon the spirit and humanity of
my country, to vindicate the national character. I invoke the genius
of the constitution. From the tapestry that adorns these walls, the
immortal ancestor of this noble lord frowns with indignation at the
disgrace of his country. In vain did ho defend the liberty, and
establish the religion of Britain, against the tyranny of Home, if these
worse than popish cruelties and inquisitorial practices are endured
among us. To send forth the merciless cannibal, thirsting for blood !
against whom?—your Protestant brethren! —to lay waste their
country, to desolate their dwellings, and extirpate their race and name,
by the aid and instrumentality of these horrible hounds of war!
Spain can no longer boast pre-eminence in barbarity. She armed
herself with blood-hounds, to extirpate the wretched natives of Mexico ;
we, more ruthless, loose these dogs of war against our countrymen in
America, endeared to us by every tie that can sanctify humanity. I
solemnly call upon your lordships, and upon every order of men in the
state, to stamp upon this infamous procedure the indelible stigma of the
public abhorrence. More particularly, I call upon the holy prelates of
our religion to do away this iniquity ; let them perform a lustration, to
purify the country from this deep and deadly sin. My lords, lam old
and weak, and at present unable to say more; but my feelings and
indignation were too strong to have said less. I could not have slept
this night in my bed, nor even reposed my head upon my pillow,
without giving vent to my eternal abhorrence of such enormous and
preposterous principles.


PERORATION TO SPEECH IN DEFENCE OF MR. MAGEE.
[DANIEL O'CONNELL.]
We live in a new era, —a melancholy era—in which perfidy and
profligacy are sanctioned by high authority: the base violation of
plighted faith, the deep stain of dishonour, infidelity in love, treachery
in friendship, the abandonment of every principle, and the adoption of
every frivolity and of every vice that can excite hatred combined with
ridicule, —all, all this, and more, may be seen around us ; and yet it is
believed, it is expected, that this system is fated to be eternal. Gentle-
men, wo shall all weep the insane delusion; and, in the terrific mo-
ments of retaliation, you know not, you cannot know, how soon or how
bitterly “ the ingredients of your poisoned chalice may be commended
to your own lips.”
Is there amongst you any one friend to freedom ? Is there amongst
you one man who esteems equal and impartial justice—who values the
people’s rights as the foundation of private happiness, and who con-
siders life as no boon without liberty ? Is there amongst you one
friend to the constitution —one man who hates oppression? If there
be, Mr. Magee appeals to his kindred mind, and expects an acquittal.
There are amongst you men of great religious zeal —of much public
piety. Are you sincere ? Do you believe what you profess ? With
all this zeal, with all this piety, is there any conscience amongst you ?
Is there any terror of violating your oaths ? Are ye hypocrites, or
docs genuine religion inspire you ? If you are sincere, if you have
conscience, if your oaths can control your interests, then Mr. Magee
confidently expects an acquittal.
If amongst you there be cherished one ray of pure religion—if
amongst you there glow a single spark of liberty—if I have alarmed
religion, or roused the spirit of freedom in one breast amongst you,
Air. Magee is safe, and his country is served ; but, if there be none—
if you be slaves and hypocrites —he will await your verdict, and de-
spise it!
ON CATHOLIC EMANCIPATION.
[SHELL.]
You have been told by Lord Wlnchibca that the Catholic religion is
the adversary of freedom. It may occur to you, perhaps, that his
lordship affords a proof in his own person, that a passion for Protest-
antism and a love of liberty arc not inseparably associated; but with-
out instituting too minute or embarrassing an inquiry into the services
to freedom, which in the course of his political life have been conferred
by my Lord Winchilsca, and putting aside all personal considerations
connected with the accuser, let me proceed to the accusation.
Calumniators of Catholicism, have you read the history of your conn*


try? Of the charges against the religion of Ireland, the annals of England
afford the confutation. The body of your common law was given by
the Catholic Alfred. He gave you your judges, your magistrates,
your high sheriffs—(you, Sir, hold your office, and have called this
great Assembly, by virtue of his institutions) —your courts of justice,
your elective system, and, the great bulwark of your liberties, the trial
by jury. When Englishmen peruse the chronicles of their glory, their
hearts beat high with exultation, their emotions are profoundly stirred,
and their souls are ardently expanded. Where is the English boy,
who reads the story of his great, island, whose pulse does not beat at
the name of Runnemede, and whoso nature is not deeply thrilled at the
contemplation of that great incident, when the mitred Langton, with
his uplifted crosier, confronted the tyrant, whose sceptre shook in his
trembling hand, and extorted what you have so justly called the Great,
and what, I trust in God, you will have cause to designate as your
everlasting Charter? It was by a Catholic Pontiff that the foundation-
stone in the temple of liberty was laid ; and it was at the altars of that
religion, which you are accustomed to consider as the handmaid of
oppression, that the architects of the constitution knelt down. Who
conferred upon the people the right of self-taxation, and fixed, if ho
did not create, the representation of the people? The Catholic
Edward the Eirst; while, in the reign of Edward the Third, perfection
was given to the representative system, parliaments were annually
called, and the statute against constructive treason was enacted. It is
false, foully, infamously false, that the Catholic religion, the religion of
your forefathers, the religion of seven millions of your fellow-subjects,
has been the auxiliary of debasement, and that to its influences the
suppression of British freedom can, in a single instance, be referred.
WITHOUT HOLINESS HO MAN SHALL SEE THE LORD.
[REV. EDWARD IRVING.]
It is sure as death and destiny, that if you awake not from this
infatuation of custom and pleasure at tlio calls of God your Saviour,
the habitations of dismal cruelty, endless days and nights of sorrow
shall be your doom. Could I lift the curtain which shrouds eternity
from the eye of time, and disclose the lazar-house of eternal death,
what sleeper of you would not start at the chaos of commingled
grief? Dives, surrounded with his eastern pomp and luxury, little
dreamt that he was to awaken in torment and crave a drop of water to
cool his tongue. What business has any forgetter of God with any
better fare ? There is no purgatory to purge away the spiritual dross
your spirits are encrusted with and make you clean for heaven. It is
not true that after a season of endurance, the prince of the bottomless
pit will hand you at length into heaven. Without holiness no man can


eee God: without Christ no man can attain to holiness. Yet conscious
that you are unholy—deriving no mediation from Christ —deceiving
yourselves with no respite nor alleviation of punishment—here you are,
listless, lethargic, and immovable.
# # * # #
Alen and brethren! is this always to continue, or is it to have
an end? If you are resolved to brave it out, then make ready
for a proof to make nature shudder and quake to her inmost
recesses. Can ye stand and brave Omnipotence to do his ut-
most? In this world, where power is muffled with mercy, there
are a thousand inflictions which ye could not brave. Could ye
stand all that was laid upon patient Job?—possessions, sons, daugh-
ters, health reaved away, then hope benighted, and the light of heaven
removed, and fellowship of friends, and almighty displays of power
and wrath ? The hardy band of Roman soldiers —and who so stout-
hearted as the Romans ?—swooned every man of them at the sight of
one of God’s visions. "What could ye, were God’s judgment-seat
displayed, his justice no longer restrained, and his retribution no
longer delayed, every fleet minister of execution ready harnessed at his
post, and hell opening wide its mouth, insatiable as the grave, and
grimmer than the image of death ? Arraigned, self-condemned, singled
out of every crime, solitary, unbefriended, ono among thousands;
life’s pleasures at an end, the world’s vision faded, God’s anger re-
vealed, sentence passed, judgment proceeding, and the pit opening on
you, as the earth on Korah’s company, to receive you quick. Can you
stand this? can you think to brave it? Then, verily, ye are mad, or
callous as the nether millstone.


DRAMATIC READINGS.
THE SCENE BETWEEN THE TWO SHALES AND PETER.
From the “Blind Beggar of Bethnal Green.”
[JAMES SHERIDAN KNOWLES.]
OLD SMALL. His kennel never likes year chained dog,
And there are men like dogs, who loathe the thing,
Howe’er it profit them, to which you tie them ;
Who, like your dog, would forfeit house and mess
To break their chain, and forage for a bone.
What if I take the collar from his neck,
And leave him, like the prodigal of old,
To his own will, till sad experience proves
That freedom’s is the bitterest mastery.
It shall be so. He cannot come to worse,
He may to better. I will do it straight.
Tinier Torso Small and Petie.
YOUNG S. Good morning, father!
Old S. Morning, dog! ’tis noon.
Young S. Well, then, good noon!
Old S. Hor morning, noon, nor night,
Thou bringest good to me; so wish me none;
Where hast thou been ?
Young S. Hard by, at Master All-gain’s,
Old S. And what about ?
Young S. Playing at loggats, sir.
Old S. At loggats ? Spendthrift! Idler ! Play at pence,
Shillings, and pounds!
Young S. I do what’s next to that, —
Play for them, sir.
Old S. To lose them, curl to lose them; .
Hast thou not lost to-day ?
Young S. Ho, by my troth.
I’m winner, save a halfpenny, by a groat;
And should have doubled that, but for foul play.
But three wo wanted, and the howl was mine—


There stood the loggats, sir, a glorious sight,
Ami only three to score I and here stood X—•
There’s not a lad in all ‘Whitechapel, sir,
Is such a hand at loggats! —Here stood I,
With victory in hand, sure as the bowl
With which I thus took aim—A steady aim
Is half the game at loggats, sir—You mind
We wanted only three; the bowl was mine •
There stood the loggats; here stood I—they say
I have an air at loggats! —Thus I stand,
My left leg planted like a buttress, so—
My body poised upon the right, with kneo
Bent neither more nor less; I’d like you, sir, '
To sec me play at loggats—Look, sir
Old S. Pshaw!
Come, throw the howl, and make an end.
Young S. An end
I should have made on’t, had I throwui the bowl!
Old S. What hinder’d thee?
Young S. A needle-full of thread!
A nail of tape! a button-mould! apiece
Of list 1 the vapour of a smoothing-board!
Thus, as I said, I held the bowl —’Twas all
But thrown. Ke’er out of cannon-mouth look’d shot
More certain of its aim, than from my hand
The bowl look’d at the loggats. In a twink
Sis of the nine at least were lying low!
“Stop!” cries a snivelling tailor; “Master Small,
’Xis not your turn to play” —The pair of shears,
To clip me so, and thus cut up the game!
Old S. Kow mark me, Thomas Small; thou’rt twenty-one!
What art thou master of?
Young S. Of quarter-staff,
Backets, and fives.—Pm capital at fives!—
Hop but the ball, I’m sure to make it fly
Like bullet from a gun.—l play at bowls
And quoits. —At quoits I’m famous for a ringer!—
And then I’ll putt the stone with any man.
Old S. Master thou art, I know, of idleness!
But name to me the craft thou’rfc master o£
Art fit to he a turner ?
Young S. Burn the lathe!
Old S. A cooper ?
Young S. Sooner I’d he staved to death!
Old S. A smith?
Young S. As lievc you’d hammer out my brains I
Old S. A tailor?
Y'oung S. Slay me with a needle first!
Old S. What then art fit to be ?


Young S. A gentleman!
Old S. A gentleman? Thou scarce canst read 1
Young S. What then ?
That’s nothing in a gentleman!
Old S. Thou wril’st —
But such a hand, the clerk’s a cunning ono
That makes it out.
Young S. That’s like a gentleman!
Old S. Thou canst not cipher. Hand thee in a bill
Of twenty items, and ’twill puzzle thee
To add it up.
Young S. That’s quite the gentleman !
Bather, thou truly saidst I’m twenty-one,
And ho that’s twenty-one by law’s a man ;
So I’m a man, and as a man am free.
I’m master now of handsome twenty pounds,
Left to me by my godfather; to them
Add thou what grace thy graciousness may please,
And, in my own way, let me try the world.
Old S. Thou’rt like a wayward horse that will not break t
The training thee’s all labour, profit none, —
And thrift of fruitless toil’s to give it up.
Thy will would have thee free before thine age;
Thine age, like a false friend, now backs thy will;
Both are too strong for me, and so I yield.
Wait for me. I’ll be with you presently. [Old Small goes out.
Young S. Does he consent, and am I free indeed ?
Hew bonds I fear’d to curb me in new rights,
And he takes off the old.—l thrive apace.
Host hopeful setting out 1 So fair begun
Must needs fair ending have 1
Petee. You play’d that game
Of loggats passing well.
Young S. I play’d a game —
But not at loggats, Peter. Sever more
I’ll play at loggats ! Peter, nought I’ve done
But walk, since morning, up and down Cheapside,
Beasting my eyes on ladies of the court
And its precincts, that come to bargain there.
O Peter, homely are the silks they wear
To their more silken looks! A city coif
Hath twice their pride 1 Ho tossing of the head;
Ho turning of the shoulder, in disdain;
But eyes that drop when they your glances catch,
As if to let you gaze 1 Peter, I’ll make
My fortune 1
Petee. Prithee, how ?
Young S. How try and guess!
Petee. I could not guess, were I to try a week!


Young S. Peter, thou cansfc bo shrewd. Look at me, Peter;
Sean me from head to foot. Premising, now,
Thou knew’st me not, wouldst take me for the son
Of Gilbert Small, the pin-maker?
Petek. More like
Pd take you for the son of Walter Husk,
The baker, to the east of Aldersgato.
Young S. A baker’s son ! A crust hath pith, as much
As thou host wit! Take me for son of him!
Petek. He’s tall, and so art. thou.
Young S. What’s tall ?—What’s tall!
Pronounce me son unto a barber’s polo,
Because ’tis tall! To say a man is tall
Is nothing, Peter! Look at me again,
And guess what way I’ll make my fortune. There,—
I fancy that’s a leg.
Petek. It is a leg!
Youko S. And thereunto’s a foot.
Petek. Yea is there, of
A verity!
Young S. Go to You flatter, now.
You think me vain; but lam not vain, although
I have a leg and foot, —ay, and a face
Moreover!
Peter. Certainly you have a face.
He’d have a face who'd say thou hadst not one.
Young S. Thou hast a wit, good Peter. Show thee but
A thing, thou see’st it.
Enter Old Shall unpercsired.
Look at my waist!
Now lift your eye a little farther up,
And ponder how my shoulders spread! Dost seo?
Now on the whole —to speak it modestly—
Taking me altogether, am 1 not
A very personable man ? Now, Peter,
How shall I make my fortune ?—Why, you fool!
By love!
Old S. [coming forward.'] Who marries thee, loves not herself:
She goes a voyage in a fair-weather bark,
That scuds while wind and current favour it,
But, in itself, hath no sea-worthiness
To stand their buffeting ! Here, have thy wish;
ThouTt find no niggard hand has fill’d that purse.
I give it thee to feed thy wantonness;
But, e’en for that, I’d have thee chary on’t!
There’s not a piece in it that’s not made up
Of grains of fractions, every one of which
Was slowly gather'd by thy father’s thrift,


And hoarded by his abstinence! It holds—
How many minutes, torn from needful sleep!
How many customary wants, denied !
How many throbs of doubting—sighs of care,
Laid out for nothing through thy waywardness!
But take it with a blessing ! —Fare thee well!
Thou never yet couldst suit thee, Thomas, to
Thy father’s house; but, should there come the time,
Thou know’st the door, that still was open to thee!
[Old Small goes out.
Young- S. Peter, I’ll stay at home. The good old maul
lie loves me, Peter! Take him back the purse,
And say I’ll stay at homo.
PeteE. And keep at home ?
"Wait like his ledger on the desk?
YoungS. I will! —
That is—l would.
Petee. And fellows, if I could.
Young S. I fear it docs.
Petee. What’s got, return’d, may not be got again.
Young S. Peter, you counsel like an oracle !
Petee. You’ve rubb’d your eyes till they are red.
Young S. Indeed ?
Petee. Look in the glass!
Young S. A pity not to make
Alv fortune, Peter! Give mo back the purse.
I’ll make my fortune ! Go and get my trunk,
And bring it after mo to Cripplegate.
Thou saidst, as I came in, thy place was lost
On my account. I’ll find for thee a now one. [Petee goes out.
There’s no controlling fate ; and fate, I see,
By love, has destined me to make my fortune.
So farewell to my father’s house ! I could
Bo sad at bidding it good'bye —but will nnt.
I’ll think on nought but how we’ll meet again,
When love fulfils what fate decrees for me;
Bids Thomas Small a golden wedding hail,
And scuds him home a very gentleman! [Young Small goes out.


THE DEFIANCE SCENE FROM THE KINGMAKER.
EDWARD AND WARWICK.
[FRANKLIN.]
Edw. Let me have no intruders; above all,
Keep Warwick from my sight. —
Miter Waewiok.
Wab. Behold him here;
No welcome guest it seems, unless I ask
My lord ot Suffolk’s leave —there was a time
When Warwick wanted not his aid to gain
Admission here.
Edw. There was a time, perhaps,
When Warwick more desir’d, and more—deserv’d it.
Wab. Never; I’ve been a foolish, faithful slave.
All my best years; the morning of my life
Hath been devoted to your service: what
Are now the fruits ? Disgrace and infamy!
My spotless name, which never yet the breath '■
Of calumny had tainted, made the mock
Eor foreign fools to carp at; but ’tis fit
Who trust in princes should be thus rewarded.
Edw. I thought, my lord, I had full well repaid
Your services with honours, wealth, and pow’r
Unlimited: thy all-directing hand
Guided in secret ev’ry latent wheel
Of government, and mov’d the whole machine:
Warwick was all in all, and pow’rless Edward
Stood like a cipher in the great account.
Wab. Who gave that cipher worth, and seated thee
On England’s throne ? Thy undistinguish’d name
Had rotted in the dust from whence it sprang,
And moulder’d in oblivion, had not Warwick
Dug from its sordid mine the useless ore,
And stamp’d it with a diadem. Thou know’st,
This wretched country, doom’d perhaps like Home
To fall by its own sell-destroying hand,
Toss’d for so many years in the rough sea
Of civil discord, but for me had perish’d.
In that distressful hour I seiz’d the helm,
Bade the rough waves subside in peace, and steer'd
Your shatter’d vessel safe into the harbour.
You may despise, perhaps, that useless aid,
Which you no longer want; but know, proud youth,
He who forgets a friend deserves a foe.
Edtv. Know too, reproach for benefits receiv’d
Bays ev’ry debt, and cancels obligation.


War. Why that indeed is frugal honesty;
A thrifty, saving knowledge : when the debt
Grows burdensome, and cannot be discharg’d,
A sponge will wipe out all, and cost you nothing.
Edw. When you have counted o’er the num’rous train
Of mighty gifts your bounty lavish’d on mo,
You may remember next the injuries,
Which I have done you ; let me know them all,
And I will make you ample satisfaction.
War. Thou canst not: thou hast robb’d me of a jewel
It is not in thy power to restore ;
I was the first, shall future annals say,
That broke the sacred bond of public trust,
And mutual confidence ; ambassadors
In after times, mere instruments, perhaps,
Of venal statesmen, shall rccal my name
To witness that they want not an example,
And plead my guilt to sanctify their own.
Amidst the herd of mercenary slaves
That haunt your court, could none be found but Warwick
To be the shameless herald of a lie ?
Edw. And wouldst thou turn the vile reproach on mo
If I have broke my faith, and stain’d the name
Of England, thank thy own pernicious counsels
That urg’d me to it, and extorted from me
A cold consent to what my heart ahhorr’d.
War. I’ve been abus’d, insulted, and betray’d $
Aly injur'd honour cries aloud for vengeance !
Her wounds will never close.
Erw. These gusts of passion
Will but inflame them. If I have been right
Inform’d, my lord, besides these dang’rous scars
Of bleeding honour, you have other wounds
As deep, though not so fatal; such, perhaps.
As none hut fair Elizabeth can cure.
War. Elizabeth!
Euw. Nay, start not; I have cause
To wonder most: I little thought indeed,
When Warwick told me I might learn to love,
He was himself so able to instruct mo :
Hut I’ve discover’d all —
War. And so have I.
Too well I know thy breach of friendship there,
Thy fruitless base endeavours to supplant mo.
EdW. I scorn it, Sir—Elizabeth hath charms,
And I have equal right with you t* admire them;
Nor see I ought so godlike in the form,
So all-commanding in the name of Warwick,
That he alone should revel in the charms
Of beauty, and monopolize perfection.
I knew not of your love.


War. By Heav’n, his false!
You knew it all, and meanly took occasion,
While I was busied in the noble offieo
Your grace thought fit to honour me withal,
To tamper with a weak unguarded woman,
To bribe her passions high, and basely steal
A treasure, which your kingdom could not purchase.
Edw. How know you i hat ? But be it as it may,
I have a right; nor will I tamely yield
My claim to happiness, the privilege
To choose the partner of my throne aud bed;
It is a branch of my prerogative.
War. Prerogative! what's that? the boast of tyrants.
A borrow’d jewel, glitt’ring in the crown
With specious lustre, lent but to betray :
You had it, Sir, and hold it—from the people.
Edw. And therefore do I prize it: X wouhl guard
Their liberties, and they shall strengthen mine;
But when proud Paction and her rebel crew
Insult their sov’reign, trample on his laws,
And bid defiance to his pow’r, the people,
In justice to themselves, will then defend
His cause, and vindicate the rights they gave.
War. Go to your darling people, then; for soon,
If I mistake not, ’twill be needful; try
Their boasted zeal, and see if one of them
Will dare to lift his arm up in your cause
If I forbid them.
Edw. Is it so, my lord ?
Then mark my words : I’ve been your slave too long,
And you have rul’d mo with a rod of iron ;
But henceforth know, proud peer, I am thy master,
And will be so ; the king who delegates
His pow’r to others’ hands but ill deserves
The crown he wears.
War. Look well then to your own,
It sits but loosely on your head; for know
The man who injur’d Warwick never pass’d
IJnpunish’d yet.
Edw. Nor he who threaten’d Edward —
You may repent it, Sir —my guards there —seize
This traitor, and convey him to the Tow’r;
There let him learn obedience.
EARL OF WARWICK.


SCENE FROM THE PROVOST OF BRUGES.
[LOVELL.]
Scene.—A Sail in the Chateau of Bertnlphe.
Bee. All’s oyer, and all’s known! —l have soar’d high,
Bat, like the Grecian boy, my waxen wings
Are melted in a moment, and I fall,
Down, down, to utter ruin.
Enter Bouchard, hastily,
Bou. Bertnlphe, am I a Serf ?
Bee. Why! now thou rarest.
Bou. Fly not from the point,
But answer me ; am I a Serf, Bertnlphe?
Bee. There’s not a Noble living in all Flanders
Can boast a purer ancestry.
Bou. I know it!
But I have mixed their lofty blood with thine.
’Tis there the blow would reach me, —’tis through thee.
Say,—art thou free ?
Bee. {undecidedly). Free!—Yes.
Bou. Torture me not;
But tell me—art thou free ?
Bee. lam for lam a man!
Bou. By Heaven, if thus thou playest with my words,
Thou’lt drive my frenzy to some desperate act
My reason will repent 1 Wert thou born noble?
Bee. {calmly). No! —Never clasp thy hands in idle rage,
But listen! I was born of humble stock—
Since now ’tis useless to affect concealment —
Serfs—as your Nobles call them: but I found
That in my breast which might have tilled a king’s,
A heart as proud as ever chafed at bondage.
When manhood had braced up my limbs, I left
My adopted home —it was the old Philipo’s—
For both my parents died: this was the tio
Gave him such power on me: I left my country—
I tied the soil they would have chained mo to,
And join’d the foreign wars. In my first tight
I cleft a Noble to the waist. How now!
I cried; is this a Serf? Another fell!
’Twas strange a Serf should mow down knights like grass:
My fortune smiled —I rose to a command,
And still was conqueror, till my fame so grew,
That Nobles flock’d to tight beneath my banner.
Oh! then how the Serf smiled! I join’d the council,
And baffled haughty princes, crafty statesmen—


All of most noble blond; —yet none could stand
Before the Serf; until, at length, the Karl,
Even Charles himself, besought my powerful arm,
On Baldwin’s death, to prop his infant cause.
I placed him on the throne—l—l—Bertulpho!
I placed him —held him there 1 Now, tell me, boy,
Where is the drop of blood within these veins
That speaks its baseness ? or, if none, confess
Heaven made no Serfs, but only man’s device j
To trample on his fellows!
Bon. I confess
That you are great, wise, I believe you good!
But you have wrong’d me foully—sunk me, crush’d me,
Blasted the honour of my noble house—
Degraded—lost me. Heavens! Bouchard a Serf!
Villain! this was a plot from the beginning—
A trick, to gild with my more noble name
Your own base metal; and you angled for me
With a girl’s smiles; —your daughter for a bait.
Beb. (with fury). Bouchard I—But1 —But no, you are angry—l forgive you,
’Twas not your heart spake that! go, I forgive you.
Bon. Oh! you are wondrous calm amid the ruin
That you have wrought! Yet why should it seem strange ?
’Tis nature in you —you were bred to it.
Go, do your master’s bidding—dig bis fields—
Crouch, fawn, and flatter, for the crust that feeds you.
I cannot do this ; I was boru a Noble,
Hy father’s blood is stirring in my veins,
And bids me nobly die! Bertulphe, farewell! (yoitfer.)
Bee. Stay! I command you!
Bon. What! a Serf already,
To bo commanded!
Bee. Yes, with such fond sway
As fathers exercise upon their sons!
Thou art my son, Bouchard; I had no boy,
Till I chose thee as such, and loved thee so,
Nor loved theo thanklessly. Come, come, enough
Of childish raving. Now we’ll talk like men.
Thou think’st our state is hopeless;—’tis not so;
This law is but a fanciful caprice
That cannot bear enforcement; it it could,
T’would not be first let loose upon his friends :
Or even could this be, I have deserved
Too well of Charles to meet with such return:
Or grant him even willing, where’s the proof?
A dotard’s ravings in the hour of death,
When the tongue speaks without the sense’s guidance.
See you not this ? Go to! go to! thou art frighted
With such a phantom would not scare a child.


Edit. O misery! to cling to hopes like these.
Once having been so great.
Bee. Look you, Bouchard, —
’Tis idle to repine, ’tis base, ’tis girlish !
Bind all your friends with double bonds around you,
And meet the peril boldly. This remember,
That thou and I are one: not all thy power
Can shake me off; we stand or fall together.
Bon. Too well I see it.
Bee. Let us then be friends!
Boir. Friends ?
Bee. Yes, disunion will effect far more
Than all our foes can compass. Cease these sighs 5
Off with childish sorrow! By my soul!
I took thee for a man, —but now I think
Thou art some whining girl. Where is thy spirit?
Botr. Lost, with my honour. The Serf weighs me down.
I feel its influence. But I will not drag
On this degraded life (going).
Bee. Then hear me, Seef!
Since thou wilt be a slave, and so wilt die,
Go, give this triumph to thy foes, and let them
Eaiso oyer thee a mocking monument,
And say—Here lies Bouchard, the Serf of Thancmar!
Botr. Of Thancmar ?
Bee. Ay! ’twas on his father’s land
My father dwelt. If we are Serfs, Bouchard,
He is our master ; ho thy lord—thy wife’s!
How dost thou ask wherefore I hated him ?
Botr. There needed only this!
Bee. Wilt thou die his Serf?
Bou. No!—not if living through the heaviest ills
That fate can pour, or trembling nature bear,
Will give one hope of vengeance.
Bee. Bravely said!
It shall. Thy hand ! Good! Now look holdly on
The danger thou wmuldst conquer, as thou’dst look
Upon a foe in battle : and remember,
Great minds arc mightiest upon great occasions.
Go,—leave the rest to me—and, chance what may,
Think nothing lost till wo desert ourselves.
Boit. I will expect you,—look you fail me not. [Brif.
Bek. I have turn’d his headlong passion for awhile,
And must employ the interval: but how ?
Heaven guide me! for my own distracted sense
Knows not what course to take, —but, overpower’d,
Loses its early strength, and palsied, sinks !


THU CONSPIRACY SCENE FROM JULIUS CÆSAR.
[SHAKSPERE.]
. Re-enter Lucius.
Luc. Sir, ’tis your brother Cassius at the door,
Who doth, desire to see you.
Buu. Is he alone?
3/UC. Ko, sir, there are more with him.
33 ru. Do yon know them ?
Luc. Ko, sir ; their hats arc pluck’d about their cars,
And half their faces buried in their cloaks,
That by no means I may discover them
33y any mark of favour.
Butt. Let ’em enter. [Exit Lucius,
They are the faction. O conspiracy,
Sbamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
When evils are most free ? O, then by day
Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, conspiracy;
Hide it in smiles and affability :
Tor if thou path thy native semblance on,
Kot Erebus itself were dim enough
To hide thee from prevention.
Enter the conspirators , Cassius, Casca, Decius, Cinxa, Aluiellus
Cimber, and TiiEßcmus.
Cas. I think we are too bold upon your rest:
Good morrow, Brutus; do wo trouble you ?
BiiU. I have been up this hour, awake all night.
Know I these men that come along with you ?
Cas. Yes, every man of them, and no man hero
But honours you; and every one doth wish
Yow had but that opinion of yourself
Which every noble Xioman bears of you.
This is Trebonius.
Bror. He is welcome hither.
Cas. This, Becius Brutus.
Bru. Ho is welcome too.
Cas. This, Casca; this, China; and this, Metellus Clmber.
Bru. They are all welcome.
What watchful cares do interpose themselves
Betwixt your eyes and night?
Cas. Shall I entreat a word? \_Brntus and Cassius whisper,
Dec. Hero lies the cast: doth not the day break here ?
Casca. Ko.
Cin. O, pardon, sir, it doth; and yon gray lines
That fret the clouds arc messengers of day.
Casca. You shall confess that you arc both deceived.
Here, as I point my sword, the sun. arises,


Which is a great way growing on the south,
Weighing the youthful season of the year.
Some two months hence up higher toward the north
He first presents his fire; and the high east
Stands, as the Capitol, directly here.
Bee. Give me your hands all over, one hy one.
Cas. And let us swear our resolution.
Bee. No, not an oath: if not the face of men,
The sufferance of our souls, the time’s abuse, —
If these bo motives weak, break elf betimes.
And every man hence to his idle bed;
So let high-sighted tyranny range on,
Till each man drop by lottery. But if these,
As I am sure they do, bear fire enough
To kindle cowards and to steel with valour
The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen,
What need we any spur but our own cause)
To prick us to redress ? what other bond
Than secret Homans, that have spoke the word,
And will not palter ? and what other oath
Thau honesty to honesty engaged,
That this shall be, or we will fall for it ?
Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous,
Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls
That welcome wrongs; unto bad causes swear
Such creatures as men doubt; but do not stain
The even virtue of our enterprise,
Nor the insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
To think that or our cause or our performance
Did need an oath ; when every drop of blood
That every Homan bears, and nobly bears,
Is guilty of a several bastardy,
If he do break the smallest particle
Of any promise that hath pass’d from him.
Cas. But what of Cicero ? shall we sound him ?
I think he will stand very strong with us.
Casca. Let us not leave him out.
Cur. No, by no mean?.
Met. O, let us have him, far his silver hairs
Will purchase us a good opinion,
And buy men’s voices to commend our deeds:
It shall be said, his judgement ruled our hands;
Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
But all be buried in his gravity.
Bee. O, name him not: let us not break with him;
Dor he will never follow any thing
That other men begin.
Cas. Then leave him out.
Casca. Indeed he is not fit.
Dec. Shall no man else be touch’d but only Cmsar?


Cas. Deems, well urged: I think it is not meet,
Mart Antony, so well beloved of Csesar,
Should outlive Cccsar: we shall find of him
A shrewd contriver; and, you know, his means,
If he improve them, may well stretch so far
As to annoy us all: which to prevent,
Let Antony and Cccsar fall together.
Beu. Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
To cut the head off and then hack the limbs,
Like wrath in death and envy afterwards;
Dor Antony is but a limb of Csesar:
Let us be sacrillcers, but not butchers, Caius.
We all stand up against the spirit of Csesar;
And in the spirit of men there is no blood :
O, that we then could come by Ccesar’s spirit.
And not dismember Cccsar! But, alas,
Cccsar must bleed for it! And, gentle friends,
Let’s kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;
Let’s carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
Not hew him as a carcass fit for hqunds :
And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
Stir up their servants to an act of rage,
And after seem to chide ’em. This shall make
Our purpose necessary and not envious :
Which so appearing to the common eyes,
We shall bo call’d purgers, not murderers.
And for Mark Antony, think not of him ;
Dor ho can do no more than Cccsar’a arm
When Cccsar’s head is off.
Cas. Yet I fear him ;
Dor in the ingrafted love he bears to Cccsar —
Bed. Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him;
If he lovo Cccsar, all that he can do
Is to himself, take thought and die for Cccsar :
And that were much he should ; for he is given
To sports, to wildness and much company.
Tueb. There is no fear in him ; let him not die ;
Dor he will live, and laugh at this hereafter. \Chclc strikes.
Bun. Peace! count the clock.
Cas. The clock hath stricken three.
Teeb. ’Tis time to part.
Cas. But it is doubtful yet,
Whether Cccsar will come forth to-day, or no;
Dor he is superstitious grown of late,
Quite from the main opinion he held once
Of fantasy, of dreams and ceremonies:
It may be, these apparent prodigies,
The unacoustom’d terror of this night.
And the persuasion of his augurers,
May hold him from tho Capitol to-day.


Dec. Hcvcr fear that: if he ho so resolved,
I can o’ersway him ; for he loves to hear
That unicorns may be betray’d with trees.
And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
Dions with toils and men with flatterers ;
Hut when I tell him he hates flatterers,
lie says he docs, being then most flattered.
Let me work ;
For I can give his humour the true bent,
And I will bring him to the Capitol.
Cas. Hay, we will all of us bo there to fetch him.
Bru. By the eighth hour: is that the uttermost?
CIN. Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
Met. Caius Ligarius doth bear Cccsar hard,
Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey :
I wonder none of you have thought of him,
Brtj, How, good Metellus, go along by him!
He loves me well, and I have given him reasons;
Send him hut hither, and I’ll fashion him.
Cas. The morning comes upon’s: we'll leave you, Brutus.
And, friends, disperse yourselves ; but all remember
What you have said, and show yourselves true Romans.
BiiU. Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily ;
Let not our looks put on our purposes,
But bear it as our Roman actors do,
With untired spirits and formal constancy j
And so good morrow to you every one. ["Exeunt all but Brutus,
THE QUARREL SCENE FROM DOUGLAS.
[HOME.]
Glen. His port I love: he’s in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roared.—
Has Normal seen the troops?
Kory. The setting sun
With yellow radiance lighted all the rale;
And, as the warriors moved, each polished helm,
Corslet, or spear, glanced back his gilded beams.
The hill they climbed, and, halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, towering, they seem’d
A host angelic, clad in burning arms.
Oxen. Thou talk’stit well; no leader of our host
In sounds more lofty speaks of glorious war.
Kory. If I shall e’er acquire a leader’s name,
My speech will be less ardent. Hovelty
How prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Yenls itself freely ; since no part is mine
Of praise pertaining to the great in arms.
£ Aside .


Glen. You wrong yourself, brave sir; your martial deeds
Have ranked you with the great. But mark me, Eorval;
Lord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these soldiers, counsel you
Give them all honour ; seem not to command ;
Else they will hardly brook your late-sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.
Hour. Sir, —I have been accustomed, all my days,
To hear and speak the plain and simple truth;
And though I have been told that there are men
Who borrow friendship’s tongue to speak their scorn.
Yet in such language I am little skilled:
Therefore, I thank Glenalvon for his counsel,
Although it sounded harshly! Why remind
He of my birth obscure? Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms ?
Glen. I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I see is great.
Eoev. My pride!
Glen. Suppress it, as you wish to prosper.
Your pride’s excessive. Yet, for Randolph's sake,
I will not leave you to its rash direction.
If thus you swell and frown at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a shepherd’s scorn ?
If out. A shepherd’s scorn!
Glen. Yes; if you presume
To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in secret, “You’re no match for me!”
What will become of you ?
NoeT. Hast thou no fears for tby presumptuous self?
Glen. Ha ! dost thou threaten me !
Hour. Didst thou not hear ?
Glen. Unwillingly X did; a nobler foe
Had not been questioned thus ; But such as thou——
Eoet. Whom dost thou think me ?
Glen. Horval.
Koet. So X am
And who is Rorval in Glcnalvon’s eyes ?
Glen. A peasant’s son, a wandering beggar boy;
At best no more, even if bo speaks the truth.
XfOEY. Ealso as thou art, dost thou suspect my truth f
Glen. Thy truth ! thou’rt all a lie; and basely false
Is the vain-glorious talo tbou told’st to Randolph.
Uoev. If I were chained, unarmed, or bed-rid old.
Perhaps I should revile ; but, as I am,
I have no tongue to rail. The humble Korval
Is of a race —who strive not but with deeds !
Did 1 not fear to freeze thy shallow valour,


And mate tlieo sink too soon beneath my sword,
I’d tell thee—what thou art? I know thee well!
Gees'. Dost thou not know Glenalvon, born to command
Ten thousand slaves like thee ?
Noev. Villain, no more!
Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To have defied thee in another cause;
But Heaven accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady Eandolph’s wrongs !
[Both draw their sword.:.
['Lord Baudotph, as he advances] Hold! I command you both!
The man that stirs
Makes mo his foe.
Noev. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly sounded, noble Randolph.
Glen. Hoar him, my lord ; he’s wondrous condescending!
Mark the humility of Shepherd Norval!
Noev. Now you may scoff in safety. [ Sheathes his sword.
Loed Ran. Speak not thus
Taunting each other, but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel; then I judge betwixt you.
Noev. Nay, my good lord, though I revere you much,
My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blush to speak—l will not, cannot speak
The opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege lord of my dear native land
I owe a subject’s homage; but even him
And his high arbitration I’d reject.
Within my bosom reigns another lord—
Honour! sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble Randolph,
Revoke your favours, and let Norval go
Hence as he came; alone —but not dishonoured !
Loed Ran. Thus far I’ll mediate with impartial voice;
The ancient foe of Caledonia’s land
Now waves his banner o’er her frighted Colds:
Suspend your purpose till your country’s arms
Repel tho bold invader j then decide
the private quarrel.
Glen. I agree to this.
Noey. And I. [Lord Bandalpti retires,
Glen. Norval.
Let not our variance mar the social hour
Nor wrong the hospitality of Randolph.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate
Shall stain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our strife disturb the gentle dame.
Noev. Think not so lightly, sir, of my resentment ;
When we contend again, our strife is mortal.


TEE DUNGEON SCENE FROM PIZARRO.
[SHERIDAN.]
Sent. Who’s there? answer quietly! who’s there ?
Eon. {without), A friar come to visit your prisoner.
Hater Eonna, disguised as a Monk.
Eon. Inform me, friend—is not Alonzo, the Spanish prisoner, con-
fined in this dungeon ?
Sent. He is.
Eon. I must speak with him.
Sent. You must not. [Stopping Mm tmth Ms spear.
Eon. He is my friend.
Sent. Hot if he were your brother.
Eon. What is to be his fate ?
Sent. He dies at sunrise.
Eon. Ha! then lam come in time.
Sent. Just —to witness his death.
Eon. Soldier, I must speak with him.
Sent. Back, back! It is impossible!
Eon. I do entreat thee but for one moment!
Sent. You entreat in vain; my orders are most strict.
Eon. Even now, I saw a messenger go hence.
Sent. He brought a pass, which wo are all accustomed to obey.
Eon. Look on this wedge of massive gold—look on these precious
gems. In thy own land they will be wealth for thee and thine beyond
thy hope or wish. Take them—they are thine. Let me but pass one
minute with Alonzo.
Sent. Away! wouldst thou corrupt me ? —me! an old Castilian! I
know my duty better.
Eon. Soldier! hast thou a wife ?
Sent. I have.
Eon. Hast thou children ?
Sent. Eour—honest, lovely hoys.
Eon. Where didst thou leave them ?
Sent. In my native village—even in the cot where myself was
born.
Eon. Dost thou love thy children and thy wife ?
Sent. Do I love them! God knows my heart—l do.
Eon. Soldier! —imagine thou wert doomed to die a cruel death in
this strange land; what would be thy last request ?
Sent. That some of my comrades should carry my dying blessing
to my wife and children.
Eon. Oh, hut if that comrade was at thy prison gate—and should
there be told—thy fellow-soldier dies at sunrise—yet thou shalt not
for a moment see him—nor shalt thou bear his dying blessing to his
poor children or his wretched wife—what wouldst thou think of him,
who thus could drive thy comrade from the door ?


Sent. How!
Rox. Alonzo has a wife and child—X am come but to receive for
her and for her babe the last blessing of my friend.
THE MOUNTAIN SCENE FROM WILLIAM TELL.
[JAMES SHERIDAN KNOWLES.]
Texl. Te crags and peaks Pm with you once again!
I hold to you the hands you first beheld,
To show they still are tree. Methinks I hear
A spirit in your echoes answer me,
And bid your tenant welcome home, again!
Hail! —Hail! O sacred forms, how proud you look!
How high you lift your heads into the sky!
How huge you are ! how mighty, and how free I
How do you look, for all your bared brows,
More gorgeously mnjcstical than kings
Whose loaded coronets exhaust the mine!
Ye are the things that tower—that shine —whoso smile
Makes glad—whose frown is terrible —whose forms.
Robed or unrobed, do all the impress wear
Of awe divine —whose subject never kneels
In mockery, because it is your boast
To keep him free! Ye guards of liberty,
Pm with you once again!—l call to you
With all my voice! I hold my hands to yon
To show they still are free ! I rush to you
As though I could embrace you !
4* * * # 4.: o ©
Scaling yonder peak,
I saw an eagle wheeling near its brow:
O’er the abyss his broad expanded wings
Lay calm and motionless upon the air,
As if he floated there without their aid,
By the solo act of his unlorded will,
That buoy’d him proudly up. Instinctively
I strung my bow; yet kept he rounding still
His airy circle, as in the delight
Of measuring the ample range beneath,
And round about, absorb’d, he heeded not
The death that threaten’d him ! —I could not shoot !
’Twas liberty. I turn’d the shaft aside,
And let him soar away!


TEE ATTRACTIVE YOUNG LADY.
[TYRRELL.]
Dramatis persona; Fauxkiakd, Belcoue, Delejteee, lIiESDEir.
J Enter Belcoue and Faulklakd, meeting.
Fat lx. What, Beloour ! How are you, mvTricnd ? You look each
Bel. No! do I ?
Faulk. Do you! Why, you are but the shadow of what you were.
Some little attachment, eh !
Bel. Well, to confess it, I am horribly in love : lost, utterly lost, to
a lady, or rather, an angel, with rich dark hair, a fair complexion,
sparkling eyes, lips like rubies, teeth like pearls, a voice like a nightin-
gale, a figure like a fairy, and a fortune of ten thousand pounds.
Faulk. You don’t say so!
Bel. Don’t X : but X do, though. She has the softness of Psyche,
the beauty of Venus, the presence of Juno, the virtue of Diana, Un-
wisdom of Minerva, and— and—ten thousand pounds.
Faulk. Then I suppose you are engaged to her ?
Bel. Yes —that is, no. Partially, not altogether.
Faulk Have you proposed ?
Bel. No, not proposed; but insinuated.
Faulk. And she received the insinuation favourably.
Bel. Certainly.
Faulk. Then she said—
Bel. No, she didn’t. She said nothing; but she did—oh, she did—
Faulk. What did she do ?
Bel. Why, she smiled ; such a smile! like “ morn o’er the rosy East
advancing.”
Faulk. Perfectly satisfactory.
Bel. Well, I must own, I am a little uneasy ; but persevering atten-
tion and unlimited profession, will, I trust, at length—•
Faulk. Carry oil' the ten thousand pounds, oh ! In the mean-
time, I can sympathise with yon. lam in lore, under similar cireiirn-
etances, with a lady of fortune, who, I believe, regards mo with a
favourable eye ; who, like your lady-love, sings like a nightingale, looks
like a fairy, dances like a zephyr, and sometimes frowns like a thunder-
storm; though, for myself, I like her all the better for that, she dints
it so prettily. In fact, she is all you described your lady, but ten times
more enchanting.
Bel. Impossible! mine is a perfect woman !
Faulk. And mine a perfect angel!
Bel. Mine has all the charms of Venus ; such a foot and ancle; oh,
you should see her dance the Schottisehe!
Faulk. And mine has the charms of Venus, with those of Juno
and Minerva into the bargain.
Bel. But my adored has such a mind; she understands Greek—


that is, the alphabet; she thinlcs she once read “ Locke on the Under-
standing” ; she has thoroughly sifted the Corn question; she plays
Jullien’s Quadrilles at sight j and whist like an old dowager of seventy.
Baulk. But mine knows—oh, I don’t know what she don’t know.
Bel. My beloved has such a name, so musical.
Battle. Oh, if you talk of names, I am sure you can’t surpass
mine there. What think you of Charlotte Amelia Caroline Augusta
Clara Georgiana Bitz-Urse ?
Bel. Say that name again!
Battle. Thank you, my lungs are only moderately strong. Ido not
wish to exhaust them.
Bel. Did you say Charlotte Amelia Caroline Augusta Clara Geor-
giana Bitz-Urse ?
Battle. Yes! what’s the matter?
Bel. Why, that is the lady to whom I am paying my addresses!
Battle. What, the lady that was ten times more angelic than
mine ? oh, impossible!
Bel. It is not only possible, but true.
Baulk. My dear Belcour, surely you jest?
Bel. Kb, there is a boundary in jesting, which no gentleman over
passes. I was never more in earnest. That lady lam determined shall
become my wife.
Baulk. Determined! she may refuse you.
Bel. Kot so ; for that which we have fixedly resolved shall happen,
usually does; the daring man is always the successful one.
Baulk. Then hear me, Belcour! That lady lam resolved, shall, if
possible, become my wife, and I would sooner see her in her coffin, or
lie stark and cold in my own (sent there by the hand of a friend), than
she shall be yours.
’Enter Delemeee.
Del. Baulkland! Belcour! how are you, my friends; give me joy,
gentlemen.
Bel. Joy! why what has dbourred ?
Del. That which shall crown my youth with happiness, and add
comfort and brilliancy to my ago. I am a crowned king, and though
my province is the smallest, it is the richest in the world ; a woman’s
heart. In short, I am married to a lady of youth, beauty, talent and
fortune. I ran away with her a week ago, and we have now returned
to ask forgiveness of her uncle, with whom she lived, and on whom
her future depends.
Bel. and Baulk, {together) Her name ?
Del. Charlotte Bitz-Urse.
Bel. What! Charlotte Amelia Caroline Augusta Clara Georgiana
Bitz-Urse ?
Del. The same. You know her then ?
Bel. Know her! I intended to marry her!
Baulk. And so did I. Belcour, we are both done.
Bel. To a certainty ; wo have been quarrelling about the shadow,
while another was quietly enjoying the substance.


Dei. Gentlemen, what is the meaning of this ? Do you moan that
you have both been suitors for the hand of my wife ?
Bel. Yes, and you had better take care of her, or you may lose
her yet.
Del. No fear of that. I place my trust in the honor and modesty
of the sex, and that is, I think, equal even to your arts and fasci-
nations ; but, should that fail, remember, the man that wins a woman
should have a ready arm to protect her; and, should it be needed,
mine will not be wanting.
Bel. Well, well, wo will not quarrel; you are fortunate, but I for-
give you for it. May the world profit by my example.
Baulk. And I too; but I cannot forget that voice like a nightingale,
figure like a fairy;—eh, Belcour ?
Bel. No, or the ten thousand pounds!
Baulk. All, who have we here ?
Enter Marsden, with a News-paper.
What, Marsden ! with a face as long as a lawyer’s bill, or the list of
state pensioners!
Baulk, and Del. ( together ). Why, Marsden, what’s the matter ?
Maes. Matter enough. X have been following a lady for the last
three years. I loved her devotedly ; would have married her any hour
of the day or night, and here, in the public papers, I find an account
of her elopement with a young fellow without a guinea. I wish I
could come across his path ; I’d—that I would!
Del. What’s her name ?
Maes. I’ll read you the account; it’s very short. I have read it
fifty times to-day, to see if I was deceived, but no such chance.
{Reads.) —“ On Saturday last, at an early hour, Miss Charlotte Amelia
Caroline Augusta Clara Georgiana Bitz-Crse —
Del. My wife ! )
Bel. My enchantress ! > with rapidity.
Baulk. My deceiver! }
Maes. You did it, did you ?
Del. Yes, but go on.
Bel. and Baulk, {together). Go on.
Maes, {reading), “ Eloped from the house of her Uncle, with a
gentleman to whom she has long been secretly attached. The lady was
reported to have been worth ten thousand pounds at the death of her
Uncle, Mr. Edward Bitz-Urse; but that gentleman, on account of his
niece’s disobedience, has struck her name out of his will.”
Del. The deuce he has!
Bel. Delemere, I give you joy!
Baulk. Delemere, I congratulate you!
Maks. And I sincerely ; but I’d change places with you now.
Bel. May you enjoy your newly-acquired property!
Baulk. Don’t dissipate your ten thousand pounds!
Maes. Love in a cottage! Well, don’t bo cast down, Delemere;
there’s many a man would give his ears for your position.
17


Del. Gentlemen, jest on. It is not pleasant to be suddenly bereft
of expectations of fortune, and I confess I regret the loss; but that
which I never toiled for, it does not break my heart to resign. I can
discern some beauty in a woman though her purse be empty; nor
shall I forget that she is my wife, because her pecuniary expectations
are blighted. Wealth may give a brilliancy and polish to life, but the
want of it neither deprives it of happiness or dignity. Heaven has
blessed me with peace of mind, and health of person, and while I
possess these, I may despise the vicissitudes of fortune. And, gentle-
men {to Eel. and Faulk.), when next you both fall in love with the
same lady, take care that she is not secretly engaged beforehand. And
you, Marsden, do not again follow a lady for three years ; but if you
really love her, propose on the first opportunity, and marry her on
the second. And {to the audience) if our little dialogue has taught a
lesson of energy on the one side, and of tranquil contentment on the
other, we are satisfied and grateful.
CASSIO WHEN DISMISSED BY OTHELLO.
[SHAKSPERE.]
Taoo. What, are you hurt, lieutenant ?
Cas. Ay, past all surgery.
lago. Marry, heaven forbid!
Cas. Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost my repu-
tation ! I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is
bestial. My reputation, lago, ray reputation!
lago. As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some
bodily wound; there is more sense in that than in reputation.
Reputation is an idle and most false imposition: oft got with-
out merit, and lost without deserving; you have lost no reputation at
all, unless you repute yourself such a loser. What, man! there are
ways to recover the general again : you are but now cast in his mood,
a punishment more in policy than in malice ; even so as one would beat
his offenceless dog to affright an imperious lion : sue to him again, and
he’s yours.
Cas. I would rather sue to he despised than to deceive so good a
commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer.
Drunk ? and speak parrot ? and squabble ? swagger ? swear ? and
discourse fustian with one’s own shadow ? O thou invisible spirit of
wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call thee devil!
lago. What was he that you followed with your sword? What
had he done to you ?
Cas. I know not.
lago. Is’t possible ?


Cas. I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly ; a
quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O God, that men should put an
enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains! that wo should,
with joy, pleasance, revel aud applause, transform, ourselves into
beasts!
lago. Why, but you are now well enough; how came you thus
recovered ?
Cas. It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the devil
wrath; one unperfectness shows mo another, to make me frankly
despise myself.
lago. Como you are too severe a moraler : as the time, the place,
and the condition of this country stands, I could heartily wish
this had not befallen; but since it is as it is, mend it for your
own good. .
Cas. I will ask him for my place again ; he shall tell me lam a
drunkard! Had las many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would
stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and pre-
sently a beast! O strange ! Every inordinate cup is unblessed and
the ingredient is a devil.
lago. Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well
used : exclaim no more against it. And, good lieutenant, I think you
think I love you,
Cas. I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!
lago. You or any man living may be drunk at a time, man. I’ll
tell you what you shall do. Our general’s wife is now the general: I
may say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted and given up him-
self to the contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and
graces; confess yourself freely to her ; importune her help to put you
in your place again: she is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a dis-
position, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is
requested: this broken joint between you and her husband entreat her
to splinter; and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this crack
of your love shall grow stronger than it was before.
Cas. You advise mo well.
lago. I protest, iu the sincerity of love aud honest kindness.
Cas. I think it freely ; and betimes in the morning I will beseech the
virtuous Hesdemona to undertake for me: lam desperate of my for-
tunes if they cheek me here.
lago. You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant; I must to the
watch.
Cas. Good night, honest lago. [EjciC.


THE CANVASSING SCENE FROM HONEY.
[BULWER LYTTON.]
Eve. A levee, as usual. Good day. Ah, Tabouret, your designs
for the draperies ; very well. And what do you want, Air. Crimson ?
Ceim. Sir, if you’d let me take your portrait, it would make my
fortune. Every one says you’re the finest judge of paintings.
Eve. Of paintings! paintings ! Are you sure I’m a judge of
paintings ?
Ceim. Oh, sir, didn’t you buy the great Correggio for £4,000?
Eve. True —I see. So £4,000 makes me an excellent judge of
paintings. I’ll call on you, Mr. Crimson, —good day. Mr. Grab—
oh, you’re the publisher who once refused me £5 for a poem ? You
are right, it was a sad doggerel.
Geae. Doggerel! Mr. Evelyn, it was sublime! But times were
bad then.
Eve. Tory had times with me.
Geab. But now, sir, if you will give me the preference, I’ll push it,
sir,—l’ll push it! I only publish for poets in high life, sir; and a
gentleman of your station ought to bo pushed!—£soo for the poem,
sir.
Eve. £5OO when I don’t want it, where £3 once would have seemed
a fortune.
“ How I am rich, what vaine in the lines !
How the wit brightens—how the sense refines I’*
[Turns to the rest who surround Mm.
Kite. Thirty young horses from Yorkshire, sir !
Patent [showing drmvi»g~\. The Evelyn vis-a-vis !
Maceinch [showing drawing~\. The Evelyn salver!
Feantz [opening his bundle, and with dignity ]. Sarc, I have brought
de coat—de great Evelyn coat.
Eve. Oh, go to that is, go home! Make me as celebrated for
vis-a-vis, salvers, furniture, and coats, as I already am for painting, and
shortly shall be for poetry. I resign myself to you —go!
[Exeunt Maceinch, Patent, etc.
Enter Stout.
Eve. Stout, you look heated !
Stout. I hear you have just bought the great Groginhole property.
Eve. It is true. Sharp says it’s a bargain.
Stout. Well, my dear friend Hopkins, member for Groginhole, can’t
live another month —but the interests of mankind forbid regret for
individuals! The patriot Popkins intends to start for the borough
the instant Hopkins is dead !—your interest will secure his election !
now is your time ! put yourself forward in the march of enlighten-
ment ! By all that is bigoted, here comes Glossmore !


SCENE IX.
Stout, Glossmoee, Evelyn ; Shahp still atlas desl\
Gloss. So lucky to find you at home ! Hopkins, of Groginhole is
not long for this world. Popkins, the brewer, is already canvassing
underhand (so very ungentlemanlike!). Keep your interest for young
Lord Cipher—a most valuable candidate. This is an awful moment—
the constitution depends on his return' Vote for Cipher,
Stout. Popkins is your man I
Eve [musingly ]. Cipher and Popkins —Popkins and Cipher! En-
lightenment and Popkins—Cipher and the Constitution] lam puz-
zled ! Stout, lam not known at Groginhole.
Stout. Your property's known there !
Eve. But purity of election—independence of votes—
Stout. To bo sure; Cipher bribes abominably. Frustrate his
schemes —preserve the liberties of the borough—turn every man out
of his house who votes against enlightenment and Popkins!
Eve. Eight! —down with those who take the liberty to admire any
liberty except our liberty ! That is liberty!
Gloss. Cipher has a stake in the country —will have £50,000 a
year—Cipher will never give a vote without considering beforehand
how people of £50,000 a year will be affected by the motion.
Eve. flight; for as without law there would bo no property, so to
be the law for property is the only proper property of law ]—That
is law r I
Stout. Popkins is all for economy—there’s a sad waste of the public
money —they give the Speaker £5,000 a year, when I’ve a brother-in-
law who takes the chair at the vestry, and who assures me confidentially
he’d consent to be speaker for half the money ?
Gloss. Enough, Mr. Stout. —Mr. Evelyn has to'o much at stake for
a leveller.
Stout. And too much sense for a bigot.
Eve. Mr. Evelyn has no politics at all !— Did you ever play at
battledore ?
Both. Battledore?
Eve. Battledore I— that is a contest between two parties ; both par-
ties knock about something with singular skill —something is kept up
—high—low —here—there—everywhere —nowhere ! How grave are
the players ! how anxious the bystanders! how noisy the battledores !
But when this something falls to the ground, only fancy —it’s nothing
but cork and feather I Go, and play by yourselves —I’m no hand
at it 1
Stout \aside~\. Sad ignorance ! —Aristocrat!
Gloss, Heartless principles I—Parvenu !
Stout. Then you don’t go against us ? — l’ll bring Popkins to-
morrow.
Gloss. Keep yourself free till I present Cipher to you.
269
DRAMATIC HEADINGS.


Stout. I must go to inquire after Hopkins. The return of Popkins
will be an era in history. [ Exit.
Gloss. I must be off to the club—the eyes of the country are upon
Groginhole. If Cipher fail, the constitution is gone ! [Exit.
Eye. Both sides alike ! Money versus Man ! —Sharp, come here —
let me look at j'ou! You are my agent, my lawyer, ray man of busi-
ness. I believe you honest; —but what is honesty?—where does it
exist ?—in what part of us ?
Siiaep. In the heart, I suppose, sir.
Eve. Mr. Sharp, it exists in the breeches-pocket! Observe: I lay
this piece of yellow earth on the table—l contemplate you both; the
man there —the gold here ! How, there is many a man in those streets
honest as you are, who moves, thinks, feels and reasons as well as we
do; excellent in form—imperishable in soul; who if his pockets were
three days empty, would sell thought, reason, body, and soul too, for
that little coin ! Is that the fault of the man ? —no! it is the fault
of mankind ? God made man; behold what mankind have made
a god.
SCENE BETWEEN GRAVES AND EVELYN
[BULWER LYTTON.]
Eye. Graves, of all my new friends—and tlieir name is Legion—you
are the only one X esteem; there is sympathy between us—wo take
the same views of life. lam cordially glad to see you!
Geayes [groaning]. All! why should you be glad to see a man so
miserable ?
Eye. Because I am miserable myself.
Graves. You! Pshaw! you have not been condemned to lose a
wife!
Eye. But, plague on it, man, I may bo condemned to take one!—
Sit down, and listen. I want a confidant! —Left fatherless, when yet
a boy, my poor mother grudged herself food to give me education.
Some one had told her that learning was better than house and land—
that’s a lie, Graves.
Geayes. A scandalous lie, Evelyn!
Eve. On the strength of that lie I was put to school—sent to
college, a sizar. Do you know what a sizar is ? In pride ho is a
gentleman —in knowledge he is a scholar—and he crawls about, amidst
gentlemen and scholars, with the livery of a pauper on his back! I
carried off the great prizes—l became distinguished—l looked to a
high degree, leading to a fellowship; that is, an independence for
myself—a home for my mother. One day a young lord insulted me —
I retorted —he struck me—refused apology—refused redress. I was a
sizar!—a Pariah ! —a thing to ie struck! Sir, I was at least a man,
and I horsewhipped him in the hall before the eyes of the whole
College! A few days, and the lord’s chastisement was forgotten. The


next day the sizar was expelled—the career of a life blasted! That is
the difference between Rich and Poor: it takes a whirlwind to move
the one—a breath may uproot the other! I came to London. As
long as my mother lived, I had one to toil for; and I did toil—did
hope—did struggle to be something yet. She died, and then, some-
how, my spirit broke—l resigned myself to my fate; the Alps aboro
me seemed too high to ascend—l ceased to care what became of me.
At last I submitted to be the poor relation —the hanger-on and
gentleman-lackey of Sir John Vesey. But I had an object in that—
there was one in that house whom 1 had loved at the first sight.
G bates. And were you loved again ?
Eve. I fancied it, and was deceived. Uot an hour before I inherited
this mighty wealth I confessed my love, and was rejected because I
was poor. Ifow, mark: you remember the letter which Sharp gave
me when the will was read ?
Graves. Perfectly; what were the contents ?
Eve. After hints, cautions, and admonitions —half in irony, half in
earnest (Ah, poor Mordaunt had known the world !), it proceeded—
but I’ll read it to you:—“ Having selected you as my heir, because I
think money a trust to be placed where it seems likely to be best em-
ployed, I now—not impose a condition, but ask a favour. If you
have formed no other and insuperable attachment, I could wish to
suggest your choice: my two nearest female relations are my niece
Georgina, and my third cousin, Clara Douglas, the daughter of a once
dear friend. If you could see in either of these one whom you could
make your wife, such would be a marriage that, if I live long enough
to return to England, I would seek to bring about before I die.” 3ly
friend, this is not a legal condition—the fortune docs not rest on it;
yet, need I say that my gratitude considers it a moral obligation ?
Several months have elapsed since thus called upon —I ought now to
decide: you hear the names—Clara Douglas, is the woman who
rejected me!
Graves. But now she would accept you!
Eve. And do you think I am so base a slave to passion, that I
would owe to my gold what was denied to my affection?
Graves. But you must choose one, in common gratitude; you
ought to do so—yes, there you are right. Besides, you are constantly
at the house —the world observes it: you must have raised hopes in
one of the girls. Yes; it is time to decide between her whom you
love and her whom you do not!
Eve. Of the two, then, I would rather marry where I should exact
the least. A marriage, to which each can bring sober esteem and calm
regard, may not be happiness, but it may be content. But to marry
one whom you could adore, and whoso heart is closed to you—to
yearn for the treasure, and only to claim the casket —to worship the
statue that you never may warm to life—Oh! such a marriage would
bo a hell, the more terrible because Paradise was in sight.
Graves. Georgina is pretty, but vain and frivolous. — [A,sale.] But
he has no right to be fastidious—he has never known Maria! —
f Aloud, j Yes, my dear friend, now I think on it, you mill be as


wretched as myself!—When you are married, wo will mingle our
groans together!
Eve. You may misjudge Georgina; she may have a nobler nature
than appears ou the surface. On the day, but before the hour, in
which the will was read, a letter, in a strange or disguised hand, signed
''From an unknown friend to Alfred. Evelyn,” and enclosing what to
a girl would have been a considerable sum, was sent to a poor woman
for whom I had implored charity, and whoso address I had only given
to Georgina.
Geaves. Why not assure yourself ?
Eve. Because I have not dared- Eor sometimes, against mv reason,
I have hoped that it might he Clara! [taking a letter from his bosom
and looking at it]. Ho, I can’t recognize the hand. Graves, I detest
that girl.,
Geaves. Who? Georgina?
Eve. So; Clara! But I’ve already, thank Heaven! taken some
revenge upon her. Come nearer.— [Whispers.'] I've bribed Sharp to
say that Mordauut’s letter to mo contained a codicil leaving Clara
Douglas £20,000.
Gkavis. And didn’t it ? How odd, (hen, not to have mentioned
her in las will!
Eve. One of his caprices: besides, Sir John wrote him word that
Bady Franklin had adopted her. But I’m glad of it—l’ve paid the
money—sire’s no more a dependent. Ho one can insult her now —she
owes it all to me, and does not guess it, man—docs not guess it!—
owes it to mo—mo, whom she rejected ; —me, the poor scholar!—Ha !
ha ! —there’s some spite in that, ch ?
Geaves. You’re a line fellow, Evelyn, and we understand each
other. Perhaps Clara may have seen the address, and dictated this
letter after all!
Eve. Do you think so ?— l’ll go to the house this instant!
Geaves. Eh? Humph! Then I’ll go with you. That Bady
Franklin is a lino woman! If she were not so gay, I think—l
could
Eve. Ho, no ; don’t think any such thing; women are even worse
than men.
Geaves. True; to love is a boy’s madness!
Eve. To feel is to suffer.
Geaves. To hope is to be deceived.
Eve. I Lave done with romance !
Geaves. Mine is buried with Maria!
Eve. If Ciara did but write this
Geaves. Make haste, or Bady Erankliu will he out!—A valo of
tears!—a vale of tears!
Eve. A vale of tears, indeed ! [Exeunt.
Re-enter Gr.AVES/br his hat.
Geaves. And I left my hat behind me! Just like my luck ! If I
had been bred a hatter, little boys would have come into the world
without heads.® [Exit,
* For tliis tuelar.cboJv jest Mr. Graves is indebted to a poor Italian poe t.


HUMOUROUS HEADINGS.
THE OUTWITTED LANDLORD.
A GOOD AMERICAN STORY.
[ANON.]
In a quiet little Ohio village, many years ago, there was a tavern
where the stages always changed, and the passengers expected to get
breakfast. The landlord of this hotel was noted for his tricks upon
travellers, who were allowed to get fairly seated at the table, when the
driver, after taking what ho wanted, would blow his horn and sing out,
“Stage ready, gentlemen! all aboard—all aboard!” Upon this the
passengers were obliged to hurry out and take their scats, leaving a
scarcely-tasted breakfast behind them, for which, however, they had to
pay over fifty cents. One day, when the stage was approaching the
house of this obliging host, a passenger remarked that he had often
heard of the landlord’s trick, and was afraid they would not be able
to get any breakfast.
“ What 1 how! no breakfast?” exclaimed the rest.
“ Exactly so, gents; and so you may as well keep your seats and
dollars.”
“ Don’t they expect passengers to breakfast ?”
“ Oh, yes! they expect you to breakfast, but not to cat it. lam
under the impression that there is an understanding between the
landlord and driver, that, for various and sundry drinks, ete., the latter
undertakes to start before you can scarcely commence eating.”
“ Why, wot on airth air yew talkin’ ’bout ? Ef yew oalkcrlate I’m
goin’ to pay ‘four ninepences’ fur my breakfuss ant not get the vallec
on’t, yew air mistaken !” said a voice from the back seat, the owner of
which was one Ilczekiab Spalding. “ I’m goin’ tew get my breakfuss
yere, and not pay ' nary red ’ till 1 dew.”
“ Very well, then you’ll be left behind.”
“ Not as yew knows on, I won’t!”
“Well, we’ll see,” said the other, as the stage drove up to the door,
and the landlord, ready to do the “hospitable,” says —
“ breakfast just ready, gents! Take a wash, gents ? Here’s water,
basins, towels, and soap.”
After performing their ablutions, they all proceeded to the dining-
room, and commenced a fierce onslaught upon the edibles, though
Hezekiah took his time. Scarcely had they tasted their coffee, when
they heard the unwelcome sound of the horn, and the driver exclaim —
“Stage ready!” Uprise eight grumbling passengers, pay their fifty
cents, and take their scats.


“All aboard, gents ?” inquired the host.
“ One missing,” paid they.
Proceeding to the dining-room, the host finds Hezekiah very
coolly helping himself to an immense piece of steal:, the size of “a
horse’s lip.”
“You’ll bo left, sir—stage is going to sfarfc!”
‘iWal, I haint got nothin* tew say agin it.”
“ Can’t wait, sir,” cries the coachman ; “ bettor take your seat.”
“I’ll be gaul-darned if I dew, nuther, till I’ve got my breakfuss ! I
paid for it, and I’m goin’ to get the vallce on’t ! and if you calkerlate
I aint, yew air mistaken.”
So the stage did start, and left Ilez, who continued his attack on the
things before him. Biscuits, colfec, steaks, etc., etc.,disappeared rapidly
before the eyes of the astonished landlord.
“Say, squire, them there cakes is ’ lout East; fetch up nuther grist
on’em. You,” to the waiter, “nuther cup uv that air coffee.. Pass
them eggs. Raise yew’reown pork, squire? This is mazin’nice ham.
Land ’bout yeare tolerable cheap ? Haint got much maple timber in
these carts, hey ye? Dewin’ right smart trade, squire, I calkerlate.
Don’t iay yew’re own eggs, dew ye ?”
And thus Hez kept quizzing the landlord till he had made a hearty
meal.
“Say, squire, now Pm ’bout tew conclude payin’ my devowers tew
this ere table; but if yew’d jest give us a bowl o* bread and milk tew
sorter toss off with, I’d be much obleeged tew ye.”
So out goes landlord and waiter for the bowl, milk, and bread, and
set them before Hez.
“ Spewn tew, cf yew please.”
But no spoon could bo found. Landlord was sure he bad plenty of
silver ones lying on the table when the stage stopped.
“ Say yew! dew yew think them passengers is goin’ to pay yew for
a breakfuss, and not git no compensashnn V ’
“ Ah! What IDo you think any of the passengers took them ?”
“Dew I THINE? No, I don’t think, but I’m eartin. Ef they air
all as green as yew ’bout here, I’m goin* tew locate immediately and
tew wonst.”
The landlord rushes out to the stable, and starts a man off after the
stage, which had gone about three miles. The man overtakes the
stage, and says something to the driver in a low tone. He imme-
diately turns back, and on arriving at the hotel, Hez comes out to take
his seat, and says—
“ How air yew, gents ? I’m rotten glad to see yew.”
“ Can you point out the man you think has the spoons ?” asked the
landlord.
“ Pint him out ? Sartinly, ken. Say, squire ! I paid you four
ninepences for a breakfuss, and I calkerlate I got the vallee on’t 2
Yew’ll find them spevvns in the coffee-pot!”
“ Go a-head !■—all aboard, driver !’’


MRS. CAUDLE’S UMBRELLA LECTURE.
[DOUGLAS JERROLD.]
ME. CAUDLE HAS LENT AN ACQUAINTANCE THE FAMILY UMBEELLA.
“ That’s the third umbrella gone since Christmas ? What were
you to do ? Why let him go home in the rain, to be sure. I’m very
certain there was nothing about him that could spoil. Take cold,
indeed! He doesn’t look like one of the sort to take cold. Besides,
he’d hare better taken cold then take our only umbrella. Do you
hear the rain, Mr. Caudle? I say, do you hear the rain? And as
I’m alive, if it isn’t St. Swithin’s day! Do you hear it against the
windows? Nonsense; you don’t impose upon me. You can’t be
asleep with such a shower as that! Do you hear it, I say ? Oh, you
do hear it! Well, that’s a pretty flood, I think, to last for six weeks;
and no stirring all the time out of the house. Pooh! don’t think mo
a fool, Mr. Caudle. Don’t insult me. ITe return the umbrella! Any-
body would think you were born yesterday. As if anybody ever did
return an umbrella! There —do you hear it? Worse and worse!
Cats and dogs, and for six weeks —always sis weeks. And no
umbrella!
“ I should like to know how the children are to go to school to-
morrow? They shan’t go through such weather, I’m determined.
So: they shall stop at home and never learn anything—the blessed
creatures!—sooner than go and get wet. And when they grow up, I
wonder who they’ll have to thank for knowing nothing—who, indeed,
but their father ? People who can’t feel for their own children ought
never to be fathers.
“ But I know why you lent the umbrella. Oh, yes ; I know very
well. I was going out to tea at dear mother’s to-morrow —you knew
that; and you did it on purpose. Don’t tell me; you hate me to go
there, and take every mean advantage to hinder me. But don’t you
think it, Mr. Caudle. No, sir; if it comes down in buckets-full, I’ll
go ail the more. No: and I won't have a cab. Where do you think
the money’s to come from? You’ve got nice high notions at that
club of yours. A cab, indeed! Cost me sixteen-pence at least—six-
teen-pence ! two-and-eightpence, for there’s back again. Cabs, indeed!
I should like to know who’s to pay for ’em ; I can’t pay for ’em, and
I’m sure you can’t, if you go on as you do ; throwing away your
property, and beggaring your children —buying umbrellas !
“Do you hear the rain, Mr. Caudle ? I say, do you hear it ? But
I don’t care —I’ll go to mother’s to-morrow : I will; and what’s more,
I’ll walk every step of the way, —and you know that will give mo my
death. Don’t call me a foolish woman, it’s you that’s the foolish man.
You know I can’t wear clogs; and with no umbrella, the wet’s sura
to give me a cold —it always does. But what do you care for that?
Nothing at all. I may bo laid up for what you care, as I dare say I
shall—and a pretty doctor’s bill there’ll be. I hope there will! It
will teach you to lend your umbrellas again. I shouldn’t wonder if I


caught my death j yes : and that’s what you lent the umbrella for.
Of course!
“ Nice clothes, I shall get too, trapesing through weather like this.
My gown and bonnet will be spoilt quite. Needn't I wear 'em then ?
Indeed, Air. Caudle, I shall wear ’em. No, sir, I’m not going out a
dowdy to please you or anybody else. Gracious knows! it isn’t often
that I step over the threshold; indeed, I might as well be a slave at
once, —better, I should say. lint when I do go out, Air. Caudle, I
choose to go like a lady. Oh! that rain—if it isn’t enough to break
in the windows.
“Ugh! Ido look forward with dread for to-morrow! How lam
to go to mother’s I’m sure I can’t tell. But if I die, I’ll do it. No,
sir; I won’t borrow an umbrella. No; and you shan’t buy one.
Now, Air. Caudle, only listen to this : if you bring home another um-
brella, I'll throw it in the street. I’ll have my own umbrella, or none
at all.
“Ha! and it was only last week I had a new nozzle put to that
umbrella. I’m sure, if I’d have known as much as Ido now, it might
have gone without one for me. Paying for new nozzles, for other
people to laugh at you. Oh, it’s all very well for you—you can, go to
sleep. You’ve no thought of your poor patient wife, and your own
dear children. You think of nothing but lending umbrellas I
“ Alcn,indeed! —call themselves lords of the creation I —pretty lords,
when they can’t even take care of an umbrella!
“I know that walk to-morrow will be the death of me. But that’s
what you want—then you may go to your club, and do as you like—
and then, nicely my poor dear children will be used—but then, sir,
then you’ll bo happy. Oh, don’t tell me ! I know you will. Else
you’d never have lent the umbrella!
“ You have to go on Thursday about that summons; and, of course,
you can’t go. No, indeed, you don't go without the umbrella. You
may lose the debt for what I care—it won’t be so much as spoiling
your clothes—better lose it: people deserve to lose debts who lend
umbrellas!
“And I should like to know how I’m to go to mother’s without
the umbrella? Oh, don’t tell mo that I said I zvould go—that’s
nothing to do with it ; nothing at all. She’ll think I’m neglecting
her, and the little money we were to have, we shan’t have at all—-
because we’ve no umbrella.
“The children, too! Hear tilings! They’U be sopping wet: for
they shan’t stop at home—they shan’t lose their learning; it’s all their
lather will leave ’em, I’m sure. But they shall go to school. Don’t
tell me I said they shouldn’t: you are so aggravating, Caudle; you’d
spoil the temper of an angel. They shall go to school; mark that.
And if they get their deaths of cold, it’s not my fault —I didn’t lend
the umbrella.”
“At length,” writes Caudle, <e l fell asleep ; and dreamt that the sky
was turned into green calico, with whalebone ribs; that, in fact, the
whole world turned round under a tremendous umbrella 1”


KING JOHN AND THE ABEOT OF CANTERBURY.
[PERCY'S RELIQUES.]
[The common popular ballad of “King John and the Abbot’* seems to bare been
abridged and modernised, about the time of James 1., from one much old»*r,
?»nd entitled, “ King John and the Bishop of Canterbury.” According to Dr.
Kimbault, “the story of this ballad may be found in the adventures of
‘Howie-glass/ originally printed in the lower Saxon dialect, 1-IS3, but trans-
lated into English, and printed by Copland in the following century. It is
also in ‘ El Patrauuclo,’ a collection of Spanish novels, 1570.”]
An ancient story He tell you anon
Of a notable prince, that was called King John ;
And he ruled England with maine and with might,
Eor he did great wrong, and maintein’d little right.
And He tell you a story, a story so merryc,
Concerning the Abbot of Canterburye ;
How for his house-keeping and high renowne,
They rode poste for him to fair London towne.
An hundred men, the king did heare say,
The abbot kept in his house every day ;
And fifty golde chaynes, without any doubt,
In velvet coates waited the abbot about.
How now, father abbot, I heare it of thee,
Thou keepcst a farre better house than mco,
And for thy house-keeping and high renowne,
I feare thou work’st treason against my crown.
My liege, quo* the ahbot, I would it were knownc,
I never spend nothing, but what is my owno ;
And I trust, your grace will doe mo no deere,*
Eor spending of my own true-gotten gecro.
Yes, yes, father abbot, thy fault it is highe,
And now for the same thou needcsb must dye ;
Eor except thou canst answer me questions three,
Thy head shall be smitten from thy bodie.
And first, quo’ the king, when I’m in this stead,
"With my crowne of golde so fairo on my head,
Among all my liege-men so noble of birthe,
Thou must tell me to one penny what I am worthe.
Secondlye, tell me, without any doubt,
How soone I may ride the whole world about.
And at tbe third question thou must not shrink,
Hut tell me hero truly what I do think.
* Deere— hurt.


O, these are hard questions for my shallow witt,
Nor I cannot answer your grace as yet:
But if you will give mo but three weekes’ space,
lie do my endeavour to answer your grace.
Now three weeks’ space to thee will I give,
And that is the longest time thou hast to live ;
For if thou dost not answer my questions three,
Thy lands and thy livings are forfeit to mee.
Away rode the abbot all sad at that word,
And he rode to Cambridge, and Oxenford ;
But never a doctor there was so wise,
That could with his learning an answer devise.
Then home rode the abbot of comfort so cold,
And he mett his shepheard a going to fold :
How now, my lord abbot, you are welcome home ;
What newes do you bring us from good King John ?
“Sad newes, sad newes, shepheard, I must give;
That I have but three days more to live;
For if I do not answer him questions three,
My head will be smitten from my bodie.
The first is to tell him there in that stead,
With his crowne of golde so fair on his head,
Among all his liege men so noble of birth,
To within one penny of what he is worth.
The seconde, to tell him, without any doubt,
How soone he may ride this whole world about:
And at the third question 1 must not shrinkc.
But tell him there truly what he does thinke.”
Now chearo up, sire abbot, did you never hear yet,
That a fool ho may learn a wise* man witt ?
Lend me horse, and serving men, and your apparel,
And I’ll ride to London to answero your quarrel.
Nay frowno not, if it hath bin told unto mee,
I am like your lordship, as ever may bee :
And if you will but lend me your gowne,
There is none shall knowe us at fair London towne.
Now horses, and serving-men thou shalt have,
With sumptuous array most gallant and brave ;
With crozier, and miter, and rochet, and Code,
Fit to appeare ’fore our fader the pope.


Now welcome, sire abbot, the king he did say,
’Tis 'well thou’rt come bach to keepo thy day ;
Tor and if thou canst answer my questions three,
Thy life and thy living both saved shall bee.
And first, when thou seest me here in this stead,
With my crown of golde so fair on my head,
Among all my liege-men so noble of birthe,
Toil me to one penny what I am worth.
“For thirty pence our Saviour was sold
Amonge the false Jewes, as I have bin told ;
And twenty-nine is the wortli of thee,
For I thinke thou art one penny worser than hoe.”
The king he laughed, and swore by St. Bittel,*
I did not think I had been worth so littel!
Now secondly tell me, without any doubt,
How soone I may ride this whole world about.
“ You must rise with the sun, and ride with the same,
Until the next morning he riseth againe;
And then your grace need not make any doubt,
But in twenty-four hours you’ll ride it about.”
The king he laughed, and swore by St. Jonc,
I did not think it could be gone so soone!
—Now from the third question thou must not shrink?,
But tell me here truly what I do thinke.
“ Yea, that shall I do, and make your grace merry ;
You thinke I’m the abbot of Canterbury j
But I’m his poor shepheard, as plain you may sec,
That am come to beg pardon for him and for mcc.”
The king he laughed, and swore by the masse,
He make time lord abbot this day in his place I
“Nowe noyc, my liege, be not in such speede,
For alacke I can neither write no readc.”
Four nobles a weeke then I will give thee,
For this merry jest thou hast showne unto mcc;
And tell the old abbot, when thou comest home,
Thou hast brought him a pardon from good king John.
* Meaning probably Bt. Botolph.


THE HON. MS. SUCKLETHUMBKIN'S STORY.
[INGOLDSBY.]
THE EXECUTION.
A SPORTING ANECDOTE.
My Lord Tomnoddy got up one day ;
It was half after two, lie had nothing to do.
So his Lordship rang for his cabriolet.
Tiger Tim Was clean of limb,
His boots were polish’d, his jacket was trim •
With a very smart tie in his smart cravat,
And a smart cockade on the top of his hat;
Tallest of boys, or shortest of men,
He stood in his stockings just four foot ten ;
And he ask’d, as he held the door on the swing,
“Pray, did your Lordship please to ring ?”
My Lord Tomnoddy he raised his head,
And thus to Tiger Tim he said,
“ Malibran’s dead, Huvemay’s fled,
Taglioni has not yet arrived in her stead ;
Tiger Tim, come tell me true,
What may a Nobleman find to do ?”
Tim look’d up, and Tim look’d down,
He paused, and he put on a thoughtful frown,
And he held up his hat, and he peep’d in the crown;
He bit his lip, and he scratch’d his head,
He let go the handle, and thus he said,
As the door, released, behind him bang’d :
" An’t please you, my Lord, there’s a man to be bang’d.”
My Lord Tomnoddy jump’d up at the news,
“ Bun to M‘Fuze, And Lieutenant Tregooze,
And run to Sir Carnaby Jenks, of the Blues.
Bope-dancers a score I’ve seen before—
Madame Sacchi, Antonio, and Master Black-more ;
But to see a man swing At the end of a string,
With his neck in a noose, will be quite a new tiling,”
My Lord Tomnoddy stept into his cab —
Hark rifle green, witb a lining of drab ;
Through street and through square,
His high-trotting marc,
Like one of Ducrow’s, goes pawing the air.


Adown Piccadilly and Waterloo Place
Went the high-trotting mare at a very quick pace;
Site produced some alarm, But did no great harm,
Save frightening a nurse with a child on her arm,
Spattering with clay Two urchins at play,
Knocking down—very much to the sweeper’s dismay—
An old woman who wouldn’t get out of the way,
And upsetting a stall Near Exeter Hall,
Which made all the pious Church-Mission folks squall.
But eastward afar Through Temple Bar,
My Lord Tomnoddy directs his car;
Never heeding their squalls,
Or their calls, or their bawls,
lie passes by Waithman’s Emporium for shawls,
And, merely just catching a glimpse of St. Paul’s,
Turn’s down the Old Bailey,
Where in front of the gaol, ho
Pulls up at the door of the gin-shop, and gaily
Cries, “ What must I fork out to-night, my trump, /
For the whole first-floor of the Magpie and Stump ?“ p
I'
The clock strikes Twelve—it is dark midnight—
Yet the Magpie and Stump is one blaze of light.
The parties are met; The tables are set;
There is “punch,” “ cold ivWwut" “hot with," heavy wot,
Alo-glasses and jugs, And rummers and mugs,
And sand on the floor, without carpets or rugs,
Cold fowl and cigars, Pickled onions in jars,
Welsh rabbits and kidneys—rare work for the jaws:—
And very large lobsters, with very large claws ;
And there is M'Fuze, And Lieutenant Tregooze }
And there is Sir Carnaby Jenka, of the Blues,
All como to see a man “ die in his shoes!”
The clock strikes One! Supper is done,
And Sir Carnaby Jcnks is full of his fun,
Singing “ Jolly companions every one!”
My Lord Tomnoddy Is drinking gin-toddy,
And laughing at ev’ry thing and ev’ry body.—
The clock strikes Two! and the clock strikes Three!
—“Who so merry, so merry as we?”
Save Captain M'Fuze, Who is taking a snooze,
While Sir Carnaby Jeuks is busy at work,
Blacking hia nose with a piece of burnt cork.
The clock strikes Four!— Round the debtors’ door
Are gather’d a couple of thousand or more;


As many await At the press-yard gate,
Till slowly its folding doors open, and straight
The mob divides, and between their ranks
A waggon comes loaded with posts and with plants.
The do eh strikes Five! The Sheriffs arrive,
And the crowd is so great that the street seems alive;
But Sir Carnaby Jenks Blinks, and winks,
A candle burns down in the socket, and stinks.
Lieutenant Tregooze Is dreaming of Jews,
And acceptances all the bill-brokers refuse;
My Lord Tomnoddy Has drunk all his toddy,
And just as the dawn is beginning to peep.
The whole of the party are fast asleep.
Sweetly, oh! sweetly, the morning breaks,
With roseate streaks,
Like the first faint blush on a maiden’s checks;
Seem’d as that mild and clear blue sky
Smiled upon all things far and high,
On all—save the wretch condemn’d to die!
Alack! that ever so fair a Sun,
As that which its course has now begun,
Should rise on such a scene of misery 1—
Should gild with rays so light and free
That dismal, dark-frowning Gallows-tree !
And hark!—a sound comes, big with fate;
The clock from St. Sepulchre’s tower strikes —Eight!—
List to that low funereal bell:
It is toiling, alas! a living man’s knell!—
And see! —from-forth that opening door
They come—He steps that threshold o’er
Who never shall tread upon threshold more!
—God! ’tis a fearsome thing to see
That pale wan man’s mute agony, —
The glare of that wild, despairing eye,
How bent on the crowd, now turn’d to the sky
As though ’twere scanning, in doubt and in fear,
The path of the Spirit’s unknown career:
Those pinion’d arms, those hands that ne’er
Shall be lifted again,—not even in prayer;
That heaving chest!—Enough—’tis done!
The bolt has fallen! —the spirit is gone—
Eor weal or for woe is known but to One!—
—Oh! ’twas a fearsome sight!—Ah me!
A deed to shudder at, —not to see.


Again that clock! ’tis time, s tis time!
The hour is past: with its earliest chime
The cord is severed, the lifeless clay
By “dungeon villains” is borne away:
Nino L—’twas the last concluding stroke !
And then—my Lord Tomnoddy awoke!
And Trcgooze and Sir Carnaby Jenks arose,
And Captain M’Fuzc, with the black on his nose:
And they stared at each other, as much as to say
“ Hollo! Hollo! Here’s a rum Go!
Why, Captain!—my Lord!—Here’s the devil to pay J
The fellow’s been cut down and taken away!
What’s to be done ? We’ve missed all the fun !
Why, they’ll laugh at and quiz us all over the town,
Wo are all of us done so uncommonly brown!”
What teas to bo done ? —’twas perfectly plain
That they could not well hang the man over again:
What teas to bo done ?—The man was dead!
Nought could be done—nought could be said;
So—my Lord Tomnoddy went home to bed!
SAM WELLER'S VALENTINE.
[CHASMS DICKERS.]
Mn. Weixee having obtained leave of absence from Hr. Pickwick,
who, in his then state of excitement and worry was by no means dis-
pleased at being left alone, set forth, long before the appointed hour,
and having plenty of time at his disposal, sauntered down as far as the
Mansion House, where he paused and contemplated, with a face of
great calmness and philosophy, the numerous cads and drivers of short
stages who assemble near that famous place of resort, to the great
terror and confusion of the old-lady population of these realms. Having
loitered here, for half an hour or so, Mr. Weller turned, and began
wending his way towards Leadenhall Market, through a variety of bye
streets and courts. As he was sauntering away his spare time, and
stopped to look at almost every object that met his gaze, it is by no
means surprising that Mr. Weller should have paused before a small
stationer’s and print-seller’s window ; but without further explanation
it does appear surprising that his eyes should have no sooner rested on
certain pictures which were exposed for sale therein, than he gave a
sudden start, smote his right leg with great vehemence, and exclaimed
with energy, “If it hadn’t been for this, I should ha’ forgot all about
it, till it was too late!”
The particular picture on which Sam Weller’s eyes were fixed, as ha


paid this, was a highly coloured representation of a couplo of human
hearts skewered together with an arrow, cooking before a cheerful fire,
while a male and female cannibal in modern attire : the gentleman
being clad in a blue coat and white trousers, and the lady in a deep
red pelisse with aparasol of the same : were approaching the meal with
hungry eyes, up a serpentine gravel path leading thereunto. A
decidedly indelicate young gentleman, in a pair of wings and nothing
else, was depicted as superintending the cooking; a representation of the
spire of the church in Langham Place, London, appeared in the distance;
and the whole formed a “ valentine,” of which, as a written inscription
in the window testified, there was a large assortment within, which the
shopkeeper pledged himself to dispose of, to his countrymen generally,
at the reduced rate of one and sixpence each.
“I should ha’ forgot it; I should certainly ha* forgot it!” said
Sam; so saying, he at once stepped into the stationer’s shop, and
requested to be served with a sheet of the best gilt-edged letter-paper,
and a hard-nibbed pen -which could be warranted not to splutter.
These articles having been promply supplied, he walked on direct
towards Leadenhall Market at a good round pace, very different from
his recent lingering one. Looking round him, he there beheld a sign-
board on which the painter’s art had delineated something remotely
resembling a cerulean elephant with an aquiline nose in lieu of trunk.
Rightly conjecturing that this was the Blue Boar himself, he stepped
into the house, and inquired concerning his parent.
“He won’t bo hero this three quarters of an hour or more,” said the
young lady who superintended the domestic arrangements of the Blue
Boar.
44 Wery good, my dear,” replied Sam. 44 Let me have nine
penn’orth o’ brandy and water luke, and the inkstand, will you miss ?”
The brandy and water luke, and the inkstand, having been carried
into the little parlour, and the young lady having carefully flattened
down the coals to prevent their blazing, and carried away the poker to
preclude the possibility of the fire being stirred, without the full privity
and concurrence of the Blue Boar being first had and obtained, Sam
Weller sat himself down in a box near the stove, and pulled out the sheet
of gilt-edged letter-paper, and the hard-nibbed pen. Then looking care-
fully at the pen to see that there were no hairs in it, and dusting down
the table, so that there might be no crumbs of bread under the paper,
Sam tucked up the cuffs of his coat, squared his elbows, and composed
himself to write.
To ladies and gentlemen who are not in the habit of devoting them-
selves practically to the science of penmanship, writing a letter is no
very easy task j it being always considered necessary in such cases for
the writer to recline his head on his left arm, so as to place his eyes as
nearly as possible on a level with the paper, while glancing sideways
at the letters he is constructing, to form with his tongue imaginary
characters to correspond. These motions, although unquestionably of
the greatest assistance to original composition, retard in some degree
the progress of Jhe writer j and Sura had unconsciously been a fuL


hour and a half writing words in small text, smearing out wrong letters
with Ids little finger, and putting in new ones which required going
over very often to render them visible through the old blots, when ho
was roused by the opening of tho door and the entrance of his
parent.
“ Yell, Sammy,” said the father,
“Veil, my Prooshan Blue,” responded the son,laying down his pen.
“What’s the last bulletin about mother-in-law?”
“ Mrs. Yeller passed a very good night, but is uncommon perverse,
and unpleasant this mornin’. Signed upon oath, S. Teller, Esquire,
Senior. That’s the last vuu as was issued, Sammy,” replied Mr. Weller
untying his shawl.
“ No better yet ?” inquired Sam.
“All tho symptoms aggerawated,” replied Mr. Weller, shaking his
head. “But wot’s that, you’ro a doin’ of? Pursuit of knowledge
under difficulties, Sammy ?”
“ I’ve done now," said Sam with slight embarrassment; “ I’ve been
a writin’.”
“So I see,” replied Mr. Weller. “Not to any young ’ooman, I
hope, Sammy ?”
“ Why it’s no nso a sayin’ it ain’t,” replied Sam. “It's a valen-
tine.”
“A what!" exclaimed Mr. Weller, apparently horror-stricken by
the word.
“ A valentine,” replied Sam.
“Samivel, Saraivcl,” said Mr, Weller, in reproachful accents, “I
didn’t think you’d ha’ done it. Alter the •warnin’ you’ve had o’ your
father’s wicious propensities ; arter all I’ve said to you upon this hero
wery subject; arter actiwally seem’ and bein’ in tho company o’ your
own mother-in-law, vieh I should ha’ thought wos a moral lesson as no
man could never ha’ forgotten to his dyin’ day ! I didn’t think you’d
ha’ done it, Sammy, I didn’t think you’d ha’ done it!” These
reflections were too much for tho good old man. He raised Sam’s
tumbler to his lips and drank off its contents.
“ AYot’s the matter now ?” said Sam.
“ Ncv’r mind, Sammy,” replied Mr. Weller, “it’ll boa wery agonizin’
trial to me at my time of life, but I’m pretty tough, that's vun con-
solation, as the wery old turkey remarked wen the farmer said ho wos
afeerd lie should be obliged to kill him for the London market.”
“ Wot’ll be a trial?” inquired Sam.
“ To sec you married, Sammy—to see you a dilluded victim, and
flunkin' in your innocence that it’s all wery capital,” replied Mr.
Weller, “it’s a dreadful trial to a father’s feolin’s, that ’ore,
Sammy.”
“ Nonsense,” said Sam. “ I ain’t a goin’ to get married, don’t you
fret yourself about that; I know you’ro a judgo of these things.
Order in your pipe, and I'll read you the letter. There!”
We cannot distinctly say whether it was the prospect of the pipe,
or tho consolatory reflection that a fatal disposition to get married ran


in the family and couldn’t bo helped, which calmed Sir. "Weller’s
feelings, and caused his grief to subside. Wo should bo rather dis-
posed to say that the result was attained by combining the two sources
of consolation, for he repeated the second in a low tone, very fre-
quently; ringing the bell meanwhile, to order in the first. Ho then
divested himself of his upper coat; and lighting the pipe and placing
himself in front of the fire with his back towards it, so that lie could
feel its full heat, and recline against the mantelpiece at the same time,
turned towards Sam, and, with a countenance greatly mollified by the
softening influence of tobacco, requested him to “fire away,”
Sam dipped his pen into the ink to be ready for any corrections, and
began with a very theatrical air :
“‘Lovely ”
“ Stop,” said Mr. Weller, ringing the bell. “ A double glass o’ the
invariable, my dear.”
“Very well, sir,” replied the girl; "who with great quickness
appeared, vanished, returned, and disappeared.
“They seem to know jour ways here,” observed Sam.
“Yes,” replied his father, “I’ve been here’before, in my time. Go
on, Sammy.”
“ ‘Lovely crcctur,’ ” repeated Sam.
“’Xain’t in poetry, is it ?” interposed his father.
“ No, no,” replied Sam.
“Worry glad to hear it,” said Mr. Weller. “Poetry’s unnat’ral;
no man ever talked poetry ’cepfc a beadle on boxin’ day, or Warren’s
blackin’, or Howland’s oil, or some o* them low fellows ; never you let
yourself down to talk poetry, my boy. Begin agin, Sammy.”
Mr. Weller resumed his pipe with critical solemnity, and Sam once
more commenced, and read as follows.
“ ‘Lovely crcctur i feel myself a dammed’—
“That ain’t proper,” said Mr. Weller, taking his pipe from his
mouth.
“No; it ain’t c dammed’,” observed Sam, holding the letter up to
the light, “it’s ‘shamed,’ there’s a blot there—‘l feel myself
ashamed.’ ”
“ Werry good,” said Mr. Weller. “Go on.”
“ ‘ Teel myself ashamed, and completely cir— ’ I forget what this
here W’ord is,” said Sam, scratching his head with the pen, in vain
attempts to remember.
“ Why don’t you look at it, then ?” inquired Mr. Weller.
“So I am a lookin’ at it,” replied Sam, “ but there’s another blot.
Here’s a * c,* and a ‘ i,’ and a ‘ d.’ **
“ Circumwented, p’haps,” suggested Mr. Weller.
“No, it ain’t that,” said Sam, “ circumscribed •, that’s it.”
“ That ain’t as good a word as circumwented, Sammy,” said Mr.
Weller, gravely.
“Think not?” said Sam.
“Nothin* like it,” replied his father.
“Hut don’t you think it means more ?” inquired Sam,


“Tell p’raps it is a more tenderer word,’’| said Mr. Weller, after a
few moments’ reflection. “Go on, Sammy.”
Feel myself ashamed and completely circumscribed in a dressiu’
of you, for you are a nice gal and nothin’ but it.’ ’ ’
“ That’s a werry pretty sentiment,” said the elder Mr. Weller, re-
moving his pipe to make way for the remark.
“ Yes, I think it is rayfcher good,” observed Sam, highly flattered.
“ Wot I like in that ’ere stylo of writin’,” said the elder Mr. Weller,
is, that there ain’t no callin’ names in it, —no Wonuses, nor nothin’
o’ that kind. Wot’s the good o’ callin’ a young ’oomaa a Wenus or a
angel, Sammy ?”
“ Ah! what, indeed ?” replied Sara.
“ You might jist as well call her a griffin, or a unicorn, or a king's
arms at once, which is worry well known to bo a col-lection o’ fabulous
animals,” added Mr, Weller.
“ Just as well,” replied Sam.
“ Drive on, Sammy,” said Mr. Weller.
Sam complied with the request, and proceeded as follows; his father
continuing to smoke, with a mixed expression of wisdom and com-
placency, which was particularly edifying.
“ ‘Afore I see you, I thought all women was alike.’,”
“ So they are,” observed the elder Mr. Weller, parenthetically.
‘“But now,’ continued Sam, ‘ now I find what a rog’lar soft-headed,
ink-red’lous turnip I must ha’ been; for there ain’t nobody like you,
though I like you better than nothin’ at all.’ I thought it best to
make that rayther strong,” said Sam, looking up.
Mr. Weller nodded approvingly, and Sam resumed.
‘“So I take the privilege of the day, Mary, my dear—as the
gen’l’m’n in difficulties did, yen ho Talked out of a Sunday,—to tell
you that the first and only time I see you, your likeness was took on
my hart in much quicker time and brighter colours than ever a likeness
was took by the profeel macheen (wieh p’raps you may hare hcerd on
Mary my dear) altho it does finish a portrait and put the frame and
glass on complete, with a hook at the end to hang it up by, and all in
two minutes and a quarter.’ ”
“I am afeerd that werges on the poetical, Sammy,” said Mr. Weller,
dubiously.
“Ho it don’t,”replied Sam, reading on very quickly, to avoid con-
testing the point:
“ ‘ Except of mo Mary my dear as your valentine and think over
what I’ve said.—My dear Mary I will now conclude.’ That’s all,”
said Sam.
“ That’s rather a sudden pull up, ain’t it, Sammy ?” inquired Mr.
Weller.
“Hot a bit on it,” said Sam; “she’ll vish there wos more, and
tint’s the great art o’ letter writin’.”
“Well,” said Mr. Weller, “there’s somethin’in that; and I wish
your mother-in-law hid only conduct her conversation on the same
gen-ted principle. Ain’t you a goin’ to sign it?”


“ That’s the difficulty,” said Sam ; “ I don’t know what to sign it.”
“Sign it, Teller,” said the oldest surviving proprietor of that
name.
“Won’t do,” said Sam. “Hover sign a walentine with your own
name.”
“Sign it ‘ Pickvick,’ then,” said Mr. Weller; “it’s a werrygool
name, and a easy one to spell.”
“ Tho wery tiling,” said Sam. “I could end with a worse; what
do you think ?”
“I don’t like it, Sara,” rejoined Mr. Weller. “I never know’d a
respectable coachman as wrote poetry, ’ccpt one, as made an affectin’
copy o* werses tho night afore lie wos hung for a highway robbery ;
and he wos only a Cambervell man, so even that’s no rule.”
But Sam was not to bo dissuaded from the poetical idea that had
occurred to him, so ho signed the letter,
“Your love-sick
Pickwick.”
And having folded it, in a very intricate manner, squeezed a down-hill
direction in one corner; “To Mary, Housemaid, at Mr. Hopkins’s
Major’s, Ipswich, Suffolk and put it into his pocket, wafered, and
ready for the General Post.
PADDY THE PIPER.
[SAMUEL LOVER.]
The only introduction I shall attempt to the following “extrava-
ganza" is, to request the reader to suppose it to be delivered by a
Ifolicking Irish pleasant, in the richese brogue, and most dramatic
manner.
“I’ll tell you, sir, a mighty quaro story, and it’s as thrue as I'm
standing hero, and that’s no lie :
“It was in the time of the ’ruction * whin the long summer days,
like many a fine fellow’s precious life, was cut short by raison of the
martial law—that wouldn’t let a decent boy be out in the evenin’, good
or bad; for whin the day’s work was over, divil a one of uz dar go to
meet a frind over a glass, or a girl at tiro dance, but must go
home, and shut ourselves up, and never budge, nor rise latch, nor
dbraw lioult, until the morning kera agin.
“W ell, to come to mystery:—’Twas aftlicr nightfall, and we wor
siftin’ round the fire, and the praties wor boilin’, and the noggin* 0 f
butthermilk was standiu’ ready for our suppers, whin a nock tern to
the door.
* Insurrection.


“ "Whisht!’ says my father, Micro’s tho sojers como upon us now,*
says he; ‘bad luck to thim, the villians, I’m afeared they seen a
glimmer of the fire through the crack in the door,’ says lie.
“ ‘ No, s says my mother, ‘for I’m afther hangiu’ an owld sack and
my new petticoat agin it, a while ago.’
“‘Well, whisht, anyhow,’ says my father, ‘for there’s a knock
agin ♦/ and we all held our tongues till another thump kera to the
door.
“ ‘ Oh, it’s a folly to purtind any more,* says my father— 4 they’re too
cute to be put off that-a-way/ says he. ‘ Go, Shamus/ says he to me,
‘and see who’s in it.’
“ ‘ How can I see who’s in it in tho dark?’ says I.
“‘Well,’ says he, ‘light the candle thin, and sec who’s in it, but
don’t open the door, for your life, barrin’ they brake it in,’ says he,
‘ exceptin’ to the sojers, and spake thim fair, if it’s thim.’
“ So with that I wint to the door, and there was another knock,
“‘Who’s there?’ says I,
“ ‘ It’s me,* says he.
“ ‘ Who are you ?’ says I.
“ ‘ A frind,’ says he.
“*BaithersJdnl says I—‘who are you at all r*
‘‘Arrah! don’t you know me ?’ says he.
“ ‘ Divil a taste,’ says I.
“ ‘ Sure I’m Paddy the Piper,* says he.
“ ‘ Oh, thunder an turf,* says I, ‘ is it you, Paddy, that’s in it r’
Sorra one else,’ says he.
“ ‘ And what brought you at this hour ?’ says I.
“‘By gar,* says he, ‘I didn’t like goin’ tho roun’ by the road,*
says he, ‘ and so X kern, the short cut, and that’s what delayed me,’
says he.
“ ‘ Oh, murtherl’ says I — 4 Paddy, I wouldn’t bo in your shoes for
the king’s ransom,’ says I; ‘for you know yourself it’s a bangin’
matther to he cotched out these times,* says I.
“‘Sure! know that/ says he, ‘and that’s what I kern to you for/
says ho; ‘so let mo in for owld acquaintance sake/ says poor
Paddy.
“ ‘ Oh, by this and that/ says I, ‘I darn’t open the door for the
wido world ; and sure you know it; and throth, if the Husshians or
tho Ycos* ketches you/ says I, ‘ they’ll murtlier you, as sure as your
name’s Paddy.’
“‘Many thanks to you/ says he, ‘for your good inlintions; but
plase the pigs, I hope it’s not the likes o’ that is in store for me,
any how.’
“‘Faix then/says I, ‘you had betther lose no time in hidin’ your-
self/ says I; ‘ for, throth I toll you, it’s a short thrial and a long rope
the Husshians would be afther givin’ you—for they’ve no justice, and
less rnarcy, the villians I*
* Yeomen.


“‘Faith thin, more’s the raison you should let mo in, Shamus/says
poor Paddy.
“ * It’s a folly to talk/ says I, ‘ I darn’fc open the door.*
“‘Oh then, millia murther!’says Paddy, 4 what’ll become of mo at
all at all?’ says he.
“‘Go aff into the shed/says I, ‘bellin’ tho house, where the cow
is, and there there’s an iligant lock o’ straw, that you may go
sleep in/ says I, 4 and a fine bed it id be for a lord, let alone a
piper.’
<c So off Paddy set to hide in tho shed, and throth it wint to our
hearts to refuse him, and turn him away from the door, more by token
when the praties was ready—for sure the bit and the sup is always
welkim to the poor thraveller. Well, we all wint to bed, and Paddy
hid himself in the cow-house ; and now I must tell you how it was
with Paddy :
“You see, afther sleeping for some time, Paddy wakened up, thinkin’
it was mornin’, but it wasn’t mornin’ at all, but only tho light o’ the
moon that desaved him; but at all evints, he wanted to ho stirrin’
airly, bekasc he was goiu’ off to the town hard by, it bein’ fair day, to
pick up a few ha’pence with his pipes—for the divil a betther piper
was in all tho counthry round, nor Paddy; and every one gave it up
to Paddy that he was iligant an the pipes, and played ‘Jinny bang’d
the Weaver/ beyant tellin’, and the ‘lTaro in the Corn/ that you’d
think the very dogs was in it, and the horsemen ridin’ like mad.
“ Well, as I w r as sayin’, he set off to go to tho fair, and he wint
mcandherin’ along through the fields, but he didn’t go far, antil
climbin’ up through a hedge, when he was cornin’ out at t’other side,
his head kem plump agin somethin’ that made the fire flash out iv his
eyes. So with that he looks up—and what do you think it was,
Lord bo marciful to uz, but a corpse bangin’ out of a branch of a
three.
“ ‘ Oh, the top o’ the mornin’ to you, sir/ says Paddy, ‘ and is that
the way with you, my poor fellow? throth you tuk a start out o’me/
says poor Paddy; and ’tw'as three for him, for it would make tho
heart of a stouter man nor Paddy jump, to see the like, and to think of
a Chrishthan crathur being hanged up, all as one as a dog.
“Ifow, ’twas tho rebels that banged this chap—bekase, you see, the
corpse had good clothes an him, and that’s the raison that one might
know it was the rebels—by raison that the Ilusshians and the Orange-
men never hanged any body wid good clothes an him, but only the
poor and deGnceless crathurs, like uz ; so, as I said before. Paddy
knew well it was tho hoys that had done it; ‘and/ says Paddy, cyiu’
the corpse, ‘ by my sowl, thin, but you hare a beautiful pair o’ boots
an you/ says he, ‘and it’s what I’m thinkin’ you won’t have any great
use for thim no more; and sure it’s a shame for tho likes o* me/ says
he, ‘ the best piper in the sivin counties, to be trampin’ wid a pair of
owld brogues not worth three traneens , and a corpse with such an
iligant pair o’ boots, that wants some one to wear thim. So, with
that, Paddy lays hould of him by the boots, and began a pullin’ at


thim, but they wor mighty stiff; and whether it was by raison of their
bein’ so tight, or the branch of the three a-jiggin’ up an down, all as
one as a weighdee buckettee, an not lettln' Paddy coteh any right
houlfc o’ thim—he could get no adcantage o’ thim at all—and at last
begevitup, and was goin’ away, whin lookin’ behind him agin, the
sight of the iligant flue boots was too much for him, and ho turned
back, determined to have the boots, any how, by fair means or foul;
and I’m loath to tel! you now how he got them —for indeed it was a
dirty turn, and throtli it w as the only dirty turn I ever knew Paddy to
bo guilty ay; and you see it was this a-way ; ’pon my sowl, be pulled
out a big knife, and, by the same token, it was a knife with a fine buck-
handle, and a murtherin’ big blade, that an uncle o’ mine, that was a
gardener at the lord’s, made Paddy a prisint ay; and, more by token,
it was not the first mischief that knife done, for it cut love between
thim, that was the best of frinds before; and sure t’was the wondher
of every one, that two knowledgeable men, that ought to know
betther, would do the likes, and give and take sharp steel in frindship ;
but I’m forgettiu’—well, he outs with his knife, and what docs ho do,
hut he cuts off the legs of tho corpse ; ‘and,’ says ho, ‘I can taka off
the boots at my convaynienoo ;’ and throth it was, as I said before, a
dirty turn.
“ Well, sir, ho tucked the logs undher his arms, and at that minit
the moon peeped out from behind a cloud —‘ Oh !is it there you are ?’
fays lie to tile moon, for ho was an impidint chap—and thin, seem’
that he made a mistake, and that the moon-light dcccavod him, and
that it wasn’t the early dawn, as he conoeaved ; and bein’ freken’d foe
fear himself might be notched and thratod like the poor corpse he was
nfther a malthreating, if he was found walking tho coantUry at that
time —by gar, he turned about, ami walked back ogiu to tho cow-
house, and, hidin’ the corpse’s legs in the Ethraw, X’addy wint to sleep
agin. But what do you think ? Paddy was not long there antil tho
sojers came in airnest, and, by the powers, they carried off Paddy—
and faith it was only sarvin’ him right for what bo done to the poor
corpse.
“Well, whin tho mornin’ kem, my father says to me, ‘Go, Shamus,’
says he, ‘to the shed, and bid poor Paddy come in, and take share
o’ the praties, for, I go bail, he’s ready for his brcakqnest by this, any
bow?’
“ Well, out I wint to tbo cow-bonso, and called out ‘Paddy!’ and
aftber callin’ three or four times, and gettin’ no answer, X wint in, and
called agin, and dickins an answer I got still. Tatthar-an-agers !’ says
I, ‘ Paddy, where are you at all at all?’ and 60, castin’ my eyes about
tbo shed, I seen two feet sticking out from undher the hapo o’ straw —
‘ Musha! thin,’ says I, ‘ bad luck to you, Paddy, but you’re fond of a
warm corner, and maybe you haven't made yourself as snug as a
flay in a blanket ? but I’ll disturb your dhrames, I’m flunkin',’ says
I, and with that I laid bould of his heels, (as I thought, God help
me,) and givin’ a good pull to waken him, as I intinded, away I win!,
head over heels, and my brains was a’most knocked out agin the wall.


“ Well, whin I recovered myself, there I was, an the broad o’ my
bach, and two things stickin’ out o’ my hands like a pair o’ Husshian’s
horae-pist’ls—and I thought the sight ’id lave my eyes, when I seen
they wor two morlial logs.
“My jew’l, I threw them down like a hot pratee, and jumpin’ up, I
roared out millia murther. ‘ Oh, you murtherin’ vidian,’ says I,
shakin’ my (Ist at the cow— ‘ Oh you unnath’ral lasle’ says I, ‘you’ve
ate poor Paddy, you thievin’ eannible, you’re worse than a nergar,’
says I; ‘and bad luck to you, how dainty you are, that nothin’’id
servo you for your supper, but the best piper in Ireland. Weirasthm !
weiraslhru! what’ll the whole counthry say to such an unnath’ral
murther ? and you lookin’ as innocent there as a lamb, and atin’ your
hay as quiet as if nothin’ happened.’ With that, I run out—for,
tbroth, I didn’t like to be near her —and goiu’ into the house, I tould
them all about it.
“ ‘ Arrah ! be aisy,’ says my father.
“ ‘ Bad luck to the lie I tell you,’ says I.
“ 4 Is it ate Paddy ?’ says they.
“ ‘ Divil a doubt of it,’ says I.
“‘Are you sure, Shamus?’ says my mother.
‘“I wish I was as sure of a new pair o’ brogue?,’ says I. ‘Bad
luck to the bit she has left iv him but his two legs.’
“ ‘ And do you tell me she ate the pipes too ?’ says roy father.
“ ‘ By gor, I b’lieve so,’ says I.
“ ‘ Oh, the divil fly away wid her,’ says he, ‘ what a cruel taste she
has for music!’
“‘Arrah!’ says my mother, ‘don’t be cursin’ the cow, that gives the
milk to the ehildher.’
“ ‘ Yis, I will,’ says my father, ‘ why shouldn’t I curse such an
unnath’rat baste ?’
“ ‘ You oughtn’t to curse any livin’ thing that’s undher your roof,’
says my mother.
“‘By my sow], thin,’ says my father, ‘she shan’t be undher my roof
any more ; for I’ll sind her to the fair this minit,’ says he, ‘ and sell
her for whatever she’ll bring. Go a(f,’ says he, ‘Shamus, tho minit
you’ve ate your breakquest, and dhrive her to the fair.’
“ ‘ Throth, I don’t like to dhrive her,’ says I.
“ ‘ Arrah, don’t bo makin’ a gommagh of yourself,’ says ho.
“‘ Faith, I don’t,’ says I.
“ ‘ Well, like or no like,’ says he, ‘ you must dhrive her.’
“‘Sure, father,’ says I, ‘you could take more care iv her your-
eclf.’
“ ‘That’s mighty good,’ says he, ‘to keep a dog, and hark myself;’
and, faith, I rec’llected the sayin’ from that hour; —‘let me have no
more words about it,’ says he, ‘ but bo aff wid you.’
“ So, aif I wint—and it’s no lie I’m tellin’, whin I say it was sore
agin my will I had anything to do with such a villian of a baste.
But, hovvsomever, I cut a bravo long wattle, that I might dhrive the
man-ater iv a thief, as she was, without bein’ near her, at all at all.


'•"Well, away we wint along the road, and mighty throng it wuz wid
the boys and the girls—and, in short, all aorta, rich and poor, high and
low, crowdin’ to the fair.
“ ‘ God save you,’ says one to me.
“ ‘ God save you kindly,’ says I.
“ ‘ That’s a fine baste you’re dhrivin,’ says he.
“‘ Throth she is,’ says I j though it wint agin my heart to say a good
word for the likes of her.
“ 1 It’s to the fair you’re goin’, I suppose,’ says he, * with the baste ?’
(He was a snug-lookin’ farmer, ridin’ a purty little gray hack.)
“‘Faith, thin you’re right enough,’ says I, ‘it is to the fair I’m
goin’.’
“ ‘ What do you expcc’ for her r’ says he.
“ ‘ Faith, thin, myscl doesn’t know,’ says I—and that was thruo
enough, you see, bokaso I was bewildhered like about the baste
entirely.
“ ‘ That’s a quaro way to be goin’ to market,’ says he, ‘ and not to
know what you expcc’ for your baste.’
“ ‘ Oeh,’ says I—not likin’ to let him suspiot there was anything
wrong wid her —‘ Ooh,’ says I, in a careless sort of a way, ‘ sure no one
can tell what a baste ’ll bring, antil they come to the fair,’ says I, ‘ and
see what price is goin’.’
“ ‘ Indeed, that’s nath’ral enough,’ says ho. ‘ Eat if you wor bid a
fair price before you coma to the fair, sure you might as well take it,’
says he.
“ ‘ Oh, I’ve no objection in life,’ says I.
“ ‘ Well, thin, what ’ill you ax for her I” sa.ys ho.
“ ‘Why, thin, I wouldn’t like to bo om-aysonablo,’ says I—(for the
thruth was, you know I wanted to get rid of her) —‘ and so I’ll take
four pounds for her,’ says I, ‘ and no less.’
“‘ No less )’ says he.
“ ‘ Why, sure that's chape enough,’ says I.
“‘Throthit is,’ says he; ‘and I’m thinking it’s too chape, it is,’
says he; ‘for if there wasn’t somethin’ the matter, it’s not for that
you’d bo scllin’ the fine milch cow, as she is to all appearance.’
“ ‘ Indeed thin,’ says I, ‘ upon my conscience, she is a fine milch
cow.’
“Maybe,’ says he, ‘she’s gone off her milk, in regard that she
doson’t feed well ?’
“‘Och, by this and that,' says I, ‘in regard of foodin’there’s not
tiio likes of her in Ireland; so make your mind aisy—and if you like
her for the money, you may have her.’
“ ‘ Why, indeed, I’m not in a hurry,’ says he, ‘ and I’ll wait to sco
how they go in the fair.’
“ 1 With all my heart,’ says I, purtendin’ to be no ways consarned—
but in throth I began to bo afeard that the people was socin’ somethin’
unnath’ral about her, and that we’d never get rid of her, at all at all.
At last we kem to the fair, and a great sight o’ people was in it—
throth, you’d think the whole world was there, let alone the staudius


o’ gingerbread and iligant rlbbins, and matins of beautiful gownds,
and pitcli-and-toss, and merry-go-rounds, and tints with the best av
dhriuk in tliim, and the fiddles playin’ up t’ incourage the boys and
girls; but I never minded thim at all, but dctarmint to sell the thievin’
rogue av a cow afore I’d mind any divarshin in life ; so an I dhriv
her into the thick av the fair, whin all of a suddint, as I kcm to the
door av a tint, up struck the pipes to the tune av ‘ lather-Jack-
‘Welsli,’ and my jew’l, in a minit the cow cock’d her oars, and was
matin a dart at the tint.
“ ‘ Oh, murtherl’ says I, to the boys standin’ by, 'hould her,’says I,
‘ iioulcl her—she ate one piper already, the vagabone, and, bad luck to
her, she wants another now.’
“ ‘ Is it a cow for to ate a piper ?’ says one o’ thim.
“ ‘Not a word o’ lie in it, for I seen his corpse myself, and nothin’
left but the two legs,’ says I; ‘ and it’s a folly to be sthriviu’ to hide it,
for I see sbo’ll never lave it aff—as poor Paddy Grogan knows to his
cost, Lord bo merciful to him.’
“ ‘ Who's that takin’ my name in vain ?’ says a voice in the crowd j
and with that, shovin’ the throng a one side, who should I see but
Paddy Grogan, to all appearance.
Oh, hould him too,’ says I; ‘keep him av me, for it’s not him-
self at all, but his ghost,’ says I, ‘ for ho was kilt last night to my sartin
knowledge, every inch av him, all to his legs.’
“ Well sir, with that, Paddy —for it was Paddy himself, as it kem
out afther—fell a laughin’, that you’d think his sides ’ud split j and
whin he kcm to himself, he ups and he tould uz how it was, as I
towld you already; and the likes av the fun they made ay me was
beyant tellin’, for wrongfully misdoubtin’ the poor cow, and layin’
the blame iv atin’ a piper an her. So we all wint into the tint to have
it explained, and by gor it took a full gallon o’ sper’ts t’ explain it;
and we dhrank health and long lifo to Paddy and the cow, and Paddy
played that day beyant all fellin’, and many a one said the likes was
never licerd before nor sence, even from Paddy himself—and av eoorse
die poor slandhered cow was dhruv home agin, and many a quiet day
she had wid us afther that; and whin she died, tbroth my father had
sitch a regard for the poor thing, that bo had her skinned, and an
iligant pair of breeches made out iv her hide, and it’s in the family to
this day. and isn’t it mighty remarkable it is, what I’m goin’ to tell
you now, but it’a as thrue as I’m here, that from that day out, any
one that has thim breeches an, the minit a pair o’ pipes sthrikes up,
they can’t rest, but goes jiggin’ and jiggin’ in their sate, and never
stops as long as the pipes are playin’ —and there,” said he, slapping the
garment in question that covered his sinewy limb, with a spank of his
brawny hand that might have startled nerves more tender than mine—
“there, them is the very breeches that’s an me now, and a line pair
they are this minit.”
The foregoing story I heard related by a gentleman, who said he
was not aware to whom tho original authorship was attributable.


MR. CAUDLE IS MADE A MASON.
[DOUGLAS JERROLD.]
CAEBXX HAS BEES MADE A MASON. —MES. CAUDLE IKDIOKAKI AND
CtTEIOUS.
“How, Mr Caudle—Mr. Caudle,-1 say: oil! you can’t bo asleep
already, X know—now, what I mean to say is this; there’s no use,
none at all, in our haring any disturbance about the matter; but, at
last my mind’s made up, Mr. Caudle; I shall leave you. Either I
know all you've been doing to-night, or to-morrow morning I quit tho
house. So, no; there’s an end of tho marriage-state, I think—an end
of all confidence between man and wife—if a husband’s to have secrets
and keep ’em all to himself Pretty secrets they must be, when his
own wife can’t know ’em ! Hot fit for any decent person to know, I’m
sure, if that’s the case. How, Caudle, don’t let us quarrel; there’s a
good soul, tell me what’s it all about ? A pack of nonsense, I daro
eay ; still —not that I care much about it—still, I should like to know.
There’s a dear. Eh? Oh, don’t tell mo there’s nothing in it: I
know better. I’m not a fool, Mr. Caudle; X know there’s a good deal
in it. How, Caudle; just fell me a little bit of it. I’m sure I’d tell
you anything. Ton know I would. Well ?
“Caudle, you’re enough to vex a saint! How, don’t you think
you’re going to sleep; because you’re not. Do you suppose I’d ever
suffered you to go and be made a mason, if I didn’t suppose I was to
know the secret, too? Hot that it’s anything to know, I dare say;
and that’s why I’m determined to know it.
“But I know what it is; oh yes, there can be no doubt. The
secret is, to ill-use poor women ; to tyrannise over ’em ; to make ’em
your slaves; especially your wives. It must bo something of the sort,
or you wouldn’t be ashamed to have it known. What’s right and
proper never need be done in secret. It’s an insult to a woman for a
man to be a free-mason, and let his wife know nothing of it. But, poor
soul! she’s sure to know it somehow—for nice husbands they all make.
Yes, yes ; a part of tho secret is to think better of all the world than
their own wives and families. I’m sure men have quite enough to care
for —that is, if they act properly—to care for them they have at home.
They can’t have much care to spare for tho world besides.
“ And I suppose they call you Brother Caudle ? A pretty brother,
indeed! Going and dressing yourself up in an apron like a turnpike
man—for that’s what you look like. And I should like to know what
the apron’s for ? There must be something in it not very respectable,
I’m sure. Well, I only wish I was Queen for a day or two. I’d put
an end to free-masonry, and all such trumpery, I know.
“How, come, Caudle; don’t let’s quarrel. Eh! You’re not in
pain, dear? What’s it all about ? What are you lying laughing there
at ? But I’m a fool to trouble my head about you.


“And you’re not going to let mo know the secret, oh? You mean
to say, —you’re not? Now, Caudle, yon know it's a hard matter to
put me in a passion—not that I care about the secret itself: no, X
wouldn’t give a button to know it, for it’s all nonsense I’m sure. It
isn’t the secret I care about: it’s the slight, Mr. Caudle; it’s the
studied insult that a man pays to Iris wife, when ho thinks of going
through the world keeping something to himself which he won’t , let
her know. Man and wife one, indeed! I should like to know how
that can be when a man’s a mason—when ho keeps a secret that sets
him and his wife apart ? Ha, you men make the laws, and so you
take good care to have all the best of ’em to yourselves; otherwise a
woman ought to be allowed a divorce when a man becomes a mason:
when he’s got a sort of corner-cupboard in his heart—a secret place in
his mind—that his poor wife isn't allowed to rummage!
“ Caudle, you shan’t close your eyes for a week —no, you shan’t—
unless you tell me some of it. Come, there’s a good creature; there’s
a love. I’m sure, Caudle, I wouldn’t refuse you anything—and you
know it, or ought to know it by this time. I only wish I had a secret!
To whom should I think of confiding it, but to my dear husband ? I
should bo miserable to keep it to myself, and you know it. Now,
Caudle ?
“ Was there ever such a man? A man, indeed! A brute!—yes,
Mr. Caudle, an unfeeling, brutal creature, when you might oblige mo,
and you won’t. I’m sure I don’t object to your being a mason ; not
at all, Caudle; I dare say it’s a very good thing ; I dare say it is—it’s
only your making a secret of it that vexes me. But you’ll tell me—
you’ll tell your own Margaret ? You won’t! You’re a wretch, Mr.
Caudle.
“But I know why: oh, yes, I can toll. The fact is, you’re ashamed
to let me know wd;at a fool they’ve been making of you. That’s it.
You, at your time of life—the father of a family! I should bo
ashamed of myself, Caudle.
“And I suppose you’ll bo going to what you call your Lodge every
night, now ? Lodge, indeed! Pretty place it must he, where they
don’t admit women. Nice goings on, I dare say. Then you call one
another brethren. Brethren! I’m sure you’d relations enough, you
didn’t want any more.
“ But I know what all this masonry’s about. It’s only an excuse to
get away from your wives and families, that you may feast and drink
together, that’s all. That’s the secret. And to abuse women, —as if
they were inferior animals, and not to be trusted. That’s the secret;
and nothing else.
“Now, Caudle, don’t let us quarrel. Yes, I know you’re in pain.
Still, Caudle, my love; Caudle! Dearest, I say ! Caudle !’’
“ I recollect nothing more,” says Caudle, “fori had eaten a hearty
supper, and somehow became oblivious.”


THE UNTIMELY END OF THE "INWENTER O' THE PATENT-
NEVER'LEAVIN'-OFF SASSAGE STEAM-INGINE."
[DICKENS.]
The mysterious disappearance of this 'speotable tradesman took
place, four year ago. He was the master o’ that 'ere shop, sir, and the
inwenter o’ the patent-never-leaviu’-off sassage steam-ingine, as ud
swaller up a pavin’ stone if you put it too near, and grind it into sas-
sages as easy as if it was a tender young babby. Wery proud o’ that
machine he was, as it was nat’ral he should be ; and he’d stand down
in the cellar a lookin’ at it, when it was in full play, till he got quite
melancholy with joy. A wery happy man he’d ha’ been, sir, in the
procession o’ that ’ere ingine and two more lovely hinfants besides, if it
hadn’t been for his wife, who was a most ow-dacious wixin. She was
always a follerin’ him about, and dinnin’ in his ears, ’till at last he
couldn’t stand it no longer. “I’ll tell you what it is, my dear,” he
says one day ; “If you persewere in this here sort of amusement,”
he says, “I’m blessed if I don’t go away to ’Mcrrikerj and that’s
all about it.” “ You’re a idle willin,” says she, “ and I wish the ’Mer-
rikins joy of their hargin.” Arter wioh she keeps on abusin’ of him
for half an hour, and then runs into the little parlour behind the
shop, sets to a screamin’, says he’ll be the death on her, and falls
in a fit, which lasts for three good hours—one o’ them fits wich is
all screamin’ and kickin’. Well, next mornin’, the husband was
missin’. He hadn’t taken nothin’ from the till, —hadn’t even put
on his great-coat —so it was quite clear he warn’t gone to ’Merriker.
Didn’t come back next day ; didn’t come hack next week; Missis
had bills printed, sayin’ that, if he’d come back, he should he for-
given everythin’, (which was very liberal, seein’ that he hadn’t done
nothin’ at all,) all the canals was dragged, and for two months arter-
wards wenever a body turned up, it was carried, as a reg’lar thing,
straight off to the sassage shop. Hows’ever none on ’em answered,
so they gave out that he’d run avay, and she kept on the bis’ncss.
One Saturday night, a little thin old genTm’n comes into the shop
in a great passion and says, “Are you the missis o’ this here shop?”
“ Yes I am,” says she. “ Well, ma’am,” says he, “ then I’ve justlooked
in to say, that me and my family ain’t a goin’ to be choaked for nothin’ ;
and more than that, ma’am,” he says, “ you’ll allow me to observe, that
as you don’t use the primest parts of the meat in the manafacter o’ sas-
sages, I think you’d find beef come nearly as cheap as buttons.” “As
buttons, sir!” says she. “Buttons, ma’am,” says the little old gentle-
man, unfolding a bit of paper, and skewin’ twenty or thirty halves o’
buttons. “ Nice seasonin’ for sassages, is trousers’ buttons, ma’am.”
“ They’re my husband’s buttons!” says the widder, beginnin’ to faint.
“ What!” screams the little old genTm’n, turnin’ wery pale. “ I see
it all,” says the widder; “in a fit of temporary insanity he rashly con-
verted his-self into sassages!” And so he had, or else he’d been draw’d
into the ingine ; but however that might ha’ been, the little old gen’-
I’m’n, who had been remarkably partial to sassages all his life, rushed
out o’ the shop in a wild state, and was never heerd on, artervards 1”
19


THE CAPTAIN'S WHISKERS.
[ANON.]
A certain Swiss Captain of Grenadiers, whoso company had been
cashiered, was determined, since Mars had no more employment for
him, to try if he could not procure a commission in the corps of Venus;
or, in other words, if he could not get a wife: and, as he had no money
of his own, he reasoned, and reasoned very justly, it was quite neces-
sary his intended should have enough for them both.
The captain was one of those kind of heroes to whom the epithet
hectoring blade might readily bo applied ; he was nearly six feet high,
with a long sword, and flerccly-formcd hat; add to which, he was
allowed to have the most martial pair of whiskers of any grenadier in
the company to which he belonged. To curl these whiskers, to comb
and twist them round his fore-finger, and to admire them in the glass,
formed the chief occupation and delight of his life. A man of these
accomplishments, with the addilion of bronze and rhodomontades, of
which he had a superfluity, stands at all times, and in all countries, a
good chance with the ladies, as the experience of I know' not how many
thousand years has confirmed. Accordingly, after a diligent attention
and artful inquiry, a young lady was found, exactly such a one as we
may well suppose a person with his views would be glad to find. She
was tolerably handsome, not more than three-and-twenty, with a good
fortune ; and, what was the best part of the story, this fortune was
entirely at her own disposal.
Our captain, who thought now or never was the time, having first
found means to introduce himself as a suitor, was incessant in his endea-
vours to carry his cause. His tongue was eternally running in praise
of her super-superlative, never-to-be-described charms; and in the
hyperbolical account of the flames, darts, and daggers, by which his
lungs, liver, and midriff were burnt up, transfixed, and gnawn away.
He who in writing a song to his sweetheart, described his heart to be
without one drop of gravy like an overdone mutton chop, was a fool at
a simile when compared to our hero.
One day, as he was ranting, kneeling, and beseeching his goddess to
send him an errand to pluck the diamond from the nose of the Great
Mogul, and present it to her divinityship, or suffer him to step and steal
the empress of China’s enchantment slipper, or the queen of Sheba’s
cockatoo, as a small testimony of what he would undertake to prove his
love ; she, after a little hesitation, addressed him thus :
“ The protestations which you daily make, captain, as well as what
you say at present, convince mo there is nothing you would not do to
oblige me : I therefore do not find much difficulty in telling you lam
willing to be yours, if you will perform one thing which I stall request
you.”
“ Tell me, immaculate angel,” cried our son of gunpowder, “ Tell
me what it is, though, before you speak, bo certain it is already done.
Is it to find the seal of Solomon ? to catch the pheenix ? to draw your


chariot to church with unicorns? what is the impossible act I will not
undertake ?”
“ No, captain,” replied the fair one: “ I shall enjoin nothing impos-
sible. The thing I desire you can do with the utmost ease. It will not
cost you five minutes’ trouble. Yet, were it not for your so positive
assurances, X should, from what I have observed, almost doubt of your
compliance.”
“Ah! madam,” returned he, “ wrong not your slave thus ; deem it
impossible that ho who eats happiness and drinks immortal life from
the light of your eyes, can ever demur the thousandth part of a semi-
second to secure your omnipotent behests : speak, say, what, empress of
my parched entrails, what must I perform ?”
“ Nay, for that matter it is a mere trifle; only cut off your whiskers,
captain, that’s all!”
“ Madam!” (Be so kind, reader, as to imagine the captain’s utter
astonishment.) “My whiskers! cut off my whiskers! excuse me ; cut
off my whiskers, madam! anything else, anything that mind can or
cannot imagine, or tongue describe. Bid me fetch you X’rester John’s
beard a hair at the time, and it’s done. But for my whiskers, you
must grant me a salvo there.”
“And why so, good captain? Surely any gentleman who had but
the tithe part of the passion you express, would not stand upon such a
trifle.”
“A trifle, madam? my whiskers a trifle ? no, madam, no! my whis-
kers are no trifle. Had I hut a single regiment of fellows whiskered
like me, I myself would be the Grand Turk of Constantinople. My
whiskers, madam, are the last things I should have supposed you
would have wished me to sacrifice. There is not a woman, married or
single, maid, wife, or widow, that docs not admire my whiskers.”
“ May be so, sir; but if you marry mo, you must cut them off.”
“ And is there no other way ? Must I never hope to be happy with
you unless I part with my whiskers ?”
“ Never.”
“Why then, madam, farewell: I would not part with a single hair
of my whiskers, if Catharine tho Czarina, empress of all the Xlussias,
would make me king of the Calmueks ; and so good morning to you.”
Had all the young ladies in like circumstances equal penetration,
they might generally rid themselves with equal ease of the interested
and unprincipled coxcombs by whom they are pestered. They all have
their whiskers, and seek for fortunes, to be able to cultivate, not cut
them off.


SPEECH-DAY.
MIMIC PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE.
BY
T. P. HILL.
Order or the Day.—The honourable member for Talkington to mores
—“ That this Ilov.se do noto taTce into consideration the best means
of improving the oratorical powers of its members.”
The proceedings begin by the Clerk or the House proclaiming the
arrival of “ Mr. Speaker.”
On the entrance of the Speaker lion, members rise and bow ; the
Speaker reciprocates the compliment, and takes the chair. lion, mem-
bers sit.
The Speaker.—Gentlemen of this honourable House, —Allow me
to express the gratification which I feel in meeting this Parliament at
the opening of its first session, and at the beginning, it is to bo hoped,
of a series of debates calculated to advance the character, dignity, and
usefulness of every gentleman I have now the honour to address.
{Hear, hear.) The ground of satisfaction which I feel, and now ven-
ture to express, is this: I see before me what I think may be legi-
timately regarded as a fair, free, and full representation, as nearly as
possible, of a rising class of young gentlemen who, on the present
occasion, and in time to come, will, it is my firm conviction, reflect
credit on themselves and the public institutions of the country.
{Cheers.)*
Opener.—The wish, Sir, that has just escaped your lips in reference
to the mode in which our deliberations should be conducted, will, I feel
# The Speakcrof the House of Commons announces the name of every hon.
member vrho rises to address the chair.


confident, find an echo in the breast of every member of this House.
{Sear, hear.) The object sought to be accomplished by the resolution
lam about to move, is one which ought to commend itself to all who
seek to raise the tone of Parliamentary debate, and augment the effect
of senatorial eloquence. {Sear.) That both are open to considerable
reform must be apparent to every hon. member who has ever paid a
visit to what is technically known as “another place.” {Sear, hear,
and laughter.) But in order that all doubt on this matter, if there bo
any, may be set at rest, I will mention a fact which came under my own
observation during the recent Parliamentary elections. {Sear, hear)
In the course of an address to his constituents, a well-known radical
member of the House of Commons was charged with having been under
the influence of the drowsy god in that sometimes very soporific arena.
(Oh! oh! Same! name! and laughter.) Do honourable members
doubt the fact? {Yes.) Why, Sir, the orator to whom I allude not
only admitted the fact, but ho justified —aye! and even gloried in it.
{Oh ! oh! and, Soto t hom ?) How ? In the most clear, emphatic,
and satisfactory manner. This bold, outspoken radical told his con-
stituents that they might talk of opium, laudanum, alcohol, and every
other hoi a teetotaller detested, but of all the things to send a man to
sleep ever conceived, heard of, or oven dreamed of, there was nothing
so well calculated to produce that result as some of the speeches in tho
House of Commons. (Sear, hear, and loud laughter.) He admitted
frankly, and without reservation, that during the passing of tho “ Con-
solidated Iniquities”—( renewed laughter) —he had, together with tho
Secretary and the Attorney-General, surrendered himself a willing
captive to the overtures of Somnus. (Laughter.) To prevent such
sleepy propensities creeping into this honourable House ought surely
to be an object of earnest solicitude. {Sear, hear.) I have, therefore,
much pleasure in rising to open this debate. Sir, it has been asserted
that oratory is a gift of nature, and therefore cannot be acquired by
art. To this mistaken impression—an impression which unfortunately
largely prevails —I have no hesitation in attributing the wretched deli-
very which obtains with so many public speakers. {Sear, hear, and
So, no.) Honourable members may shout “ No, no” as loud as they
like, and as long as they like, but I say “ Yes, yes.” Success in oratory
is owing to [Second Speaker. —lmpudence!]—of which, Sir
(pointing to the interrupting member), you seem to have an abundant
stock. (Laughter, and cries of Order, order ! Chair, chair !)
Second Speaker. —Sir, I rise to order. {Scar, hear) The conduct
of tho honourable member for Talkington is highly unparliamentary.
(Sear, hear, from the Opposition)
The Speaker. —The hon. member is clearly out of order in imputing
“impudence” to any hon. member of this House. {Sear, hear, and
cries of Withdraw! tcithdraw !)
Opener. —l bow at once to the ruling of tho chair. {Sear, hear.)
I mistook and misinterpreted my hon. friend’s meaning. The offensive
expression is unconditionally withdrawn. (Cheers)
Second Speaker. —l am perfectly satisfied. An affront so hand


somely acknowledged becomes a favour. ( Cheers from ilia Minis-
terialists.)
Opekee. —Sir, as this unexpected interruption lias slightly disturbed
the current of my thoughts, I will at this stage of the debate content
myself with taking the sense of the House on the resolution as it stands,
reserving to myself the right of reply to any arguments which may bo
brought forward against the course proposed to be pursued. (H 'ear,
hear.) I move; “That this House do now take into consideration the
best means of improving the oratorical powers of its members.”
{Cheers.)
Thied Speakee. —In rising to second the resolution of my honour-
able friend the member for Talldngton, it is not, Mr. Speaker, my in-
tention to address the House at any length. ( Ironical cries of Hear,
hear, and a laugh) The resolution speaks of the best means of pro-
moting oratorical excellence. Now, it must be obvious to the most
careless observer that a speech to be favourably received, —to reach the
end for which it is made, —must he well heard ; now, Sir, no speaker
can bo well heard unless, in the first place, he utters what he has to
say clearly and distinctly— {Hear, hear) —but it is perfectly clear from
what has been advanced by tho hon. member on my left, that Parlia-
mentary speakers in particular—and I think I may venture the length
of saying—public speakers in general, in the great majority of instances,
fail in this most essential requisite of effective speaking. {Hear, hear.)
Are we, therefore, surprised to learn that the representatives of tho
people are frequently discovered sleeping over the business of the
country ? {Hear, hear) Can wo affect to bo astonished that Parlia-
mentary oratory is, with rare exceptions, so lightly regarded by those
who are compelled to listen to it ? {Hear, hear) Why, Sir, good
public speaking is so rare that even in the British Senate one can
count the names of the men worthy of being called orators on his
fingers. {True, true) Why is all this? {Hear, hear) Simply
because our unfledged would-be Cicero’s indulge in the ridiculous delu-
sion that it takes less pains to make an orator than it does to make a
tinker. {Oh! oh! and laughter) The only means, Sir, in my judg-
ment, which will help forward the improvement sought for in the
motion now before the House is to insist that clear and distinct speech
shall be regarded as an indispensable qualification for all who, through
the medium of tho voice, aspire to represent tho feelings and vindicate
the rights of tho people in the senate of the country. {Cheers.) Hold-
ing these views, 1 have much pleasure in seconding the resolution of
my honourable friend. {Hear, hear.)
The Speakee. —Tho question before tho House is—“ That this
House do now take into consideration tho best means of improving tho
oratorical powers of its members.”
Poueiii Speakee. —Sir, tho somniferous speech of the opener of
this debate, and the self-asserting “bosh”— [Order, order; chair.)
PiEin Speakee. — l submit, Sir, that the hon. member is altogether
out of “ order” in designating any Parliamentary speech as “ bosh.”
{Laughter, and query)


The Speaker. —Well, I am hardly clear upon (ho point.
{Laughter.)
Firm Speaker. —l am alluding to what takes place in this House,
Mr. Speaker; not to what occurs in another place. {A laugh.)
The Speaker.—Oh, yes—l ece, I see. Here the word is exceed-
ingly unparliamentary. {Hear, hear, hear.) It must be withdrawn.
( 'Withdraw , withdraw.)
Fourth Speaker. —Then, Sir, I will substitute the word “rot”—
{Oh, oh; Order, order; Chair, chair, and confusion.)
The Speaker. —Eeally the honourable member seems to forget
what is due to this House.
Fourth Speaker. —Well, then, I’ll say “ twaddle.” {Order, order;
Sergeant-at-Arms, Sergeant-at-Arms.)
■The Speaker. —lf this kind of thing is continued, I must exercise
my authority. {Loud cheers and cries of Withdraw, withdraw.)
Fourth Speaker. —Eeally, Mr. Speaker, honourable members
appear to be particularly thin-skinned. However, if it will throw oil
on the troubled waters of Parliament, I will withdraw the words “ bosh,”
“rot,” and “ twaddle,” and in their place substitute the milder, but at
the same time more expressive term of humbug. {Order, order, and
great confusion.)
Sixth Speaker. —Mr. Speaker—Sir, the hon. member for Assurance
having persisted in setting your ruling at defiance, I now formally move
that, as a punishment for his unparliamentary conduct, he bo handed
over to the custody of the Sergeant-at-Arms, and kept there during the
remainder of the debate. {Hear, hear.)
Seventh Speaker. — Sir, I beg to second that proposition.
The Speaker. —lt has boon moved and seconded that the hon. mem-
ber for Assurance
Eighth Speaker. —l beg to move as an amendment that the hon.
member be at once called upon to apologise to the House. That, Sir,
I think will answer all purposes. {Hear, hear.)
Ninth Speaker. — As this is the hon. member’s first offence, I will
second the amendment. {Hear.)
The Speaker. —lt has been moved and seconded, “ that as a punish-
ment for his unparliamentary conduct, the hon. member for Assurance
be handed over to the custody of the Sergeant-at-Arms, and kept there
during the remainder of this debate,” to which it has been moved as
an amendment, “ that the hon. member be called upon to apologise to
the House.” I will now put the amendment. Those who are in favour
of it will please to say “Aye”—on the contrary, “Ho.” {The voices
of the “ Ages" preponderate.)
The Speaker. —The “Ayes” have it. {Cheers.) The honourable
member for Assurance will, no doubt, see the necessity of immediately
meeting the views of the House.
Fourth Speaker.. —Now that I have had time to think over the
matter lam quite willing to confess that in the heat of the moment I
forgot the arena in which I was speaking. {Hear, hear.) All I can
say, Sir, is, that I regret what has occurred. I hope this will satisfy


loth sides of the House. {Hear, hear, from loth sides.) Before I
resume my seat, I may, perhaps, be permitted to male one remark.
{Hear, hear.) The hon. member who seconded the resolution dwelt, in
iny judgment, too strongly upon the alleged defects of our parliamentary
orators. {No, no.) I certainly am not accustomed to listen to any of
the speeches which are made in Parliament, but, judging from the reports
which appear in the public prints, I think they will contrast favourably
with those made in any Assembly in the world. To me matter is every-
thing—manner nothing. {Oh! oh!)
Tenth Speaker. —The hon. member who has just sat down seems
to have formed no conception of the number and variety of the quali-
fications essential for effective public speaking. {Hear, hear.) He
tells us that he has had the sublime patience to read the reports of cer-
tain speeches in the daily journals, and he jumps to the conclusion
that we are a nation of orators. (Fourth Speaker. — No, no.) The
honourable member appears to be perfectly oblivious to the fact that a
spoken oration is one thing and a reported speech another. {Hear,
hear.) Why, Sir, it is notorious that the reports which appear in the
newspapers contain many things which hon. members will admit they
did not say, and many things which they wish they had said. (Laugh-
ter.) Depend upon it that those great pillars of the fourth estate—the
reporters—have the manufacturing of many more good speeches than
they usually get credit for. {Hear, hear, and laughter.) To form an
estimate of an orator’s powers by merely reading the reports which
appear in the newspapers is equal in absurdity to the illustrious feat of
the aspiring youth who declared his name to be Nerval on the Gram-
pian Hills, and who fought and conquered ere a sword was drawn.
{Loud laughter.) Why, Sir, if all the defects in logic, style and deli-
very which characterise many of our public speakers could be embalmed
in immortal type by a first-class short-hand writer, the speech-photo-
graph would exhibit something so singularly original as to entitle it to
be stuffed as a curiosity and sent to the British Museum. ( Loud
laughter.)
Eleventh Speaker. —Mr. Speaker—Sir, I am glad to know that
the views entertained by the hon. member who seconded the resolution
now before the House have received the confirmation of the greatest
writer on speech the world has ever known. {Hear, hear!) Quinc-
tilian, whose “ Institutes” contain the most valuable advice any public
speaker can wish to receive, proves to a demonstration that a mode-
rately well-composed address recommended by an effective delivery
will ever carry more weight with it than the best oration badly delivered.
{Hear, hear.) Delivery, Sir, is not a speculative science to be learned
from precept —it is a practical art to be taught. (Hear, hear.) It is
not a thing to be known —it is a thing to be done ; — {Hear, hear) —
and for the correction of faults, but more especially for the attainment
of excellence, the aid of art is indispensable. I have shown you that
this opinion was held by Quinctilian, and I, no Quinctilian —( laughter
and cheers) —hold the same. (Hear, hear.)
Twelfth Speaker. —Sir, in contradistinction to what has fallen


from the last speaker, who with an air of modest originality it was
quite exhilarating to behold, informed the House that he was no Quinc-
tilian —( laughter ) —I maintain that the keystone of the arch of ora-
torical excellence is knowledge. (. Hear, hear,') In a pretentious,
shallow, and sensational age like the present, this truth cannot be too
strongly asserted. For the want of a well-stored mind, flowers of
rhetoric, however fragrant their perfume—musical intonation, however
enamouring the sound —will never compensate. (Hear, hear.) The
speaker who is intent upon the manner of his delivery will lose sight
of his matter, whereas if the mind is fixed on the latter, the former
may be safely entrusted to the promptings of nature. (Oh! oh!)
Oratory is a gift, and any attempt to acquire it by means of art will
only have the effect of making a speaker pedantic and unnatural.
(Loud cries of Oh ! oh !)
Thirteenth Speaker.—Mr. Speaker—The hon. member who has
just addressed the House has made some very commonplace remarks
on the value of knowledge. {Hear.) Well, Sir, who disputes its
importance? (Hear, hear.) We all agree that knowledge is power,
Hut how is it power ? Why, in its successful application. (Rear,
hear.) Now, Sir, just imagine a man with his head crammed full of
Greek and Latin, Logic and Mathematics, Moral Philosophy and
Political Economy, and, in short, with the spoils of every Science and
of every Art. He stands up to explain what he knows before a large,
miscellaneous audience. Well, Sir, how does this great scholar deport
himself? Why, he frequently whines, hesitates, sniffles, drones, drawls,
and sometimes even grunts. (“ Too true,” and laughter.) Of what
use to him, as a public speaker, is all his boasted knowledge? (Hear,
hear, “ That's the way to put itf Order.) The people, instead of
being pleased and instructed, become tired and disgusted ; the hall is
soon emptied, and the light of the knowledge-box incontinently extin-
guished. (Hear, hear, hear.) Why is all this ? Simply, because the
speaker has been labouring all his life to acquire learning, and has
contemptuously refrained from cultivating and improving the faculty
of imparting it. (Cheers.) Aided by art, knowledge, in the bands of
the orator, is indeed powerful; without it, powerless. (Loud cheers .)
Fourteenth Speaker.—Sir, I agree with every word which has
just fallen from my eloquent and argumentative friend. I know of no
fay of judging of the future but by the past; and, judging by the
past, I would ask the honourable member who objected to tho cultiva-
tion of a good delivery on the ground that it was likely to make a
speaker pedantic and unnatural, what there has been in the history of
public speaking to justify his objection ? (Hear, hear, hear.) Why,
Sir, tho voice of experience is dead against him. (Hear, hear , and
Ho, no.) The honourable member for Lismalshire says, * No, no.**
Then, Sir, I will try to prove that he is wrong. (Hear, hear.) What
does history say upon the subject ? (Hear.) Why* it tells us that
vocal power, whether employed in speech or song, requires —like e\ ery
other faculty, physical as well as mental—to be systematically trained
before it can be perfectly developed or successfully practised. (Hear,


heart hear) Asa man’s intellect is enlarged by tbe constant reception
of knowledge—as the faculties of his memory are improved by study
and practice —as his {esthetic tastes are trained and cultivated by the
contemplation of the graceful and the beautiful in art—so also, even in
a higher degree, is the faculty of speaking improved by studying the
great models of antiquity and the rules founded on them for our
guidance. ( Hear , hear.) lienee, the more science was extended and
literature cultivated —the more refined the tastes of a nation or polished
its manners—the more the Art of Speaking was enforced and prac-
tised. (Cheers) Where, I would ask, were Science and Eloquence
cultivated as in Greece ? (Hear, hear) When did Philosophy and
Oratory flourish as in the high and palmy days of Home ? (Hear,
hear) Who roused the multitude like Demosthenes ? ( Hear, hear)
Who spoke like Cicero ? ( Rear , hear) Yet the world never beheld
an ago when the Art of Speaking was more cultivated and practised
than in theirs. (Loud cheers) As in ancient times, so in our own
day and within our own experience—the greater and mere renowned
the orator, the more was he distinguished for the study and practice of
the Elocutionary Art; and I ask, Sir, without fear of contradiction,
did that study and practice make these great men unnatural ? ( Hear ,
hear) Were Demosthenes and Cicero unnatural? (Hear, hear)
Were Chatham, Mansfield, Whitefleld and O’Connell, or are the Earl
of Derby, Lord Brougham, Gladstone and Disraeli unnatural ? (Loud
cries of Hear, hear , hear) No, Sir, success in every art, and especially
in that art which enables a man to illustrate the Music, and the Paint-
ing, and the Statuary of Speech —no matter what the natural talent —
can only be acquired by, as all experience proves it to be the product
of, downright hard work and determined perseverance. Without
labour excellence is denied to man. (Loud cheers from all sides of the
House)
Fifteenth Speaker. — l am of opinion, Mr. Speaker, that an orator
owes his success chiefly to confidence. (Oh! oh! and Question, ques-
tion) Honourable members may cry “question,” “question,” but I
submit, Sir, that this is the question. (Hear, hear, from the Opposition)
To speak in the presence of a large and brilliant assembly—to face a
formidable battery of bonnets — (Question, question. Order, order !)
Sixteenth Speaker. —l rise to order, Sir. The hon. member has
no right to import bonnets into this debate. (Oh !oh ! lauyhter ; and
Order, order)
Seventeenth Speaker. —l, too, rise to order. Sir, lam astonished
—nay, I am shocked —that any member of this honourable Uouso
should be guilty of making a remark calculated to give offence to the
ladies. (Loud cheers and great laughter) If anything were calculated
to smooth down the asperities of debate it would be the presence
not only of bonnets but of the beautiful faces which they adorn. ( Hear ,
hear; laughter—amidst which the Sixteenth Speaker rises)
Sixteenth Speaker. —lf the honourable member continues to talk
in this strain I shall move that he be forth with dubbed as the “ Parlia*
mentary lady-killer.” (Laughter ; Order , order ; Chair , chair)


Seventeenth Speaker.—lf there bo one member of this House
more than another who is in the habifc of using language calculated to
throw tlie apple of discord amongst us, and thereby to create scenes
highly derogatory to the dignity of this assembly, it is the honourable
member whoso offensive insinuation lias called me to the floor. When
I see a man trampling upon ail those rules of order— (Chair, chair;
Order, order.)
Eighteenth Speaker.—Really, Air. Speaker, if this kind of alter-
cation is permitted to continue, wo shall once more require the assistance
of the Sergcant-at-Arms. (Order, order.)
Nineteenth Speaker.—X rise to order. (Hear, hear.) Certain
members, I see, are determined to put down everything like freedom
of debate. I protest against such a proceeding on personal as well as
political grounds— (Hear, hear) —a proceeding which is as disgraceful
to the House as it is detrimental to the best interests of the country.
(Hear, hear; laughter; and “Go on “ go on”) "Why is my honour-
able friend to be cramped in giving utterance to his opinions P (Hear,
hear.) If the honourable member opposite feels himself aggrieved
let him come forward like a man and ask for an explanation— (cheers)
—but do not let him shelter himself behind a friend from the retort he
himself has provoked, by a mean and dastardly appeal to the Speaker.
(Loud cries of Chair, chair; Order, order. Several members rise and
appeal to the Speaker, great confusion.)
Mr. Speaker.—lt is quite time that those undignified proceedings
should be put a stop to. (Hear, hear.) During the whole course of my
Parliamentary experience—in olllco and out of office—there has never
been such an exhibition as the one we have just witnessed. (Hear,
hear .) Every member, so long as he confines himself to Parliamentary
language, has a right to be heard ; but when such epithets as “ mean,’*
and “dastardly” are employed, it becomes my duty to tell the honour-
able member who uses them that he has been guilty of conduct highly
inconsistent with the dignity and rules of this honourable House. The
words “ mean and dastardly” must be immediately withdrawn. (Hear,
hear, from all sides of the House.)
Nineteenth Speaker.—Allow me to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that
I used the words complained of in a Pickwickian sense. (Oh! oh!) I
never for a moment doubted my honourable friend’s courage or his
honour. (Cries of Withdraw, withdraw.) My explanation amounts
to, and is intended as a withdrawal.
Sixteenth Speaker.—l should like to have yourruling, Sir, on the
importation of “bonnets” into our proceedings. (Hear, hear.)
Speaker.—Oh! certainly. There is no difficulty on that point. The
word ** bonnet” is strictly Parliamentary. (Laughter.)
Fifteenth Speaker.—Since your ruling is in my favour, I pre-
sume, Sir, that I may continue my speech. (Hear, hear; Go on, go on.)
I have said that, in my opinion, an orator owes his success to con-
fidence. (Hear, hear ; Ho, no.) To speak in the presence of a largo
and miscellaneous audience—to face a formidable battery of bonnets
—( laughter , and Hear, hear) —and the flashing artillery concealed be


neath them—{“ That'll do ; That'll do;” and loud laughter) —to brave
an army of fastidious critics and watchful reporters prepared to
pounce upon your mistakes, and gibbet the same before the colony in
the columns of the press, is an ordeal requiring a far larger amount of
confidence than men generally possess—( Hear, hear ; Ro, no, and Yes ,
yes.) Taking this view of the question, are we surprised that some ot
our most gifted public writers have failed as public speakers ? Did not
Addison fail ? (Rear.) Did not Cowper fail ? ( Uear y hear.) Have
not many other men, equally renowned for genius, learning and phi-
losophy, failed as public speakers ? (Rear, hear .) Indeed, it may be
said that the great kings of the Pen have been proverbially timid
in the matter of tongue-wagging. (Laughter.) Intellect is retiring,
shallowness is demonstrative. (Oh loh I Rear, hear .) Do honour-
able members doubt the fact? (Yes, yes.) Then ( pointing to the
Ministerial benches) answer me these questions. Who are the speakers
most frequently on their legs ? Are they the most scholarly ? (Rear.)
Are they the most statesmanlike ? (Rear, hear.) Are they the most
logical ? (Rear, hear.) Are they not, on the contrary, men pro-
verbially notorious for avast acreage of cheek — (laughter) —men whose
confidence in their own powers is the first thing, the second thing, the
third thing, and everything. (Oh !oh ! and laughter.) But, Sir, the
very quality I deem so essential in others is so much wanting in myself,
that for fear of breaking down, I will at once bring my speech to a
close. (Rear, hear; and laughter.)
Twentieth Speaker.—The honourable member for Verbosity has
given the House abundant evidence of his fitness to represent that
lively constituency. (Loud laughter.) Ho began his speech by talk-
ing about confidence. He ended it with a reference to fear. (Rear,
Icear.) Now, Sir, if confidence be, as he asserts, the foundation of all
oratorical success, he himself ought to be one of the greatest orators
ancient or modem times ever produced— (laughter) —for I do not
know any gentleman among all my acquaintances, nor have I ever read
of any one, who possesses more confidence, or who is more ready to
display it, than the honourable member who represents the old and
well-known borough of Verbosity. (Loud laughter .) And yet, despite
this does his speech prove ? (Rear, hear.) Simply
this: That a man may bo confident —aye!—even to the borders of
effrontery —without being either argumentative or oratorical. (Rear y
hear, hear.) Sir, lam astonished to hear any intelligent man lay down
such preposterous dogmas in this House or in this country. (Ironical
cries of Rear, hear,from hon. members for Verbosity.) It’s all very very
well for the hon. member to cry out “ hear, hear,” but I tell him to his
beard that it’s all “ there, there.” (Cries of “ why, he's got no beard f
followed by shouts of laughter.) Well, then, I withdraw the offensive
expression, (i ßenewed laughter.) When I think, Sir, of orators like
Demosthenes and Cicero, ruling by their oratory the passions and
destinies of nations —when I call to mind statesmen like Pitt and Can-
ning, securing and controlling by their eloquence the rights and liberties
of Englishmen—when I think of advocates like Erskine and Eollett


vindicating in “thoughts winch breathe and in words that burn,” the
interests—aye!—and even the lives of their clients —am I to be told
that their oratorical triumphs were merely the result of what the
honourable member for Verbosity is pleased to denominate “confi-
dence.” ( Cheers .) Is their genius to be overlooked ? {Hear, hear.)
Is their learning to be disregarded ? {Hear, hear.) Is their eloquence
to be ignored? (Hear, hear.) Are we to forget the labour and the
mens divinior which made them great, and assert that all their greatness
arose from confidence ? (Cheers.) No, Sir; such an assertion is as
absurd as it is false, an assertion which could only have emanated from
a man who has nothing to recommend him but the qualification of
which the lion, member for Verbosity is the modest representative.
( Cheers, laughter, and cries of Reply, reply.)
Twenty-fiest Speaker. —Having listened carefully to this debate,
I will now, with a view of giving a practical form to what I conceive to
be the general impression of the House, move as an amendment, that
all the words after “That” in the original resolution be omitted, with
the view of inserting the following words; —“ This House being anxious
to do all in its power to protect the English language from suffering
outrage at the hands of any of its members hereby resolves that no
gentleman shall be eligible for a seat in this House who is ignorant
of what is due to the letter H or the general proprieties of correct
speech.” (Hear, hear; and loud laughter.)
Twenty-second Speaker. —Bad spellers, Sir, are plucked at the
University, and I see no reason why bad speakers should not be plucked
by Parliament. I have, therefore, much pleasure in seconding the
amendment. ( Laughter, and cries of Reply, reply.)
Opener (in reply). —Sir, I am exceedingly glad that this debate has
taken place, inasmuch as it has cleared the ground of many miscon-
ceptions, and led to some sound and practical suggestions. (Hear,
hear.) I think it will be generally admitted that a first-class public
speaker should be one who is able to convince the judgment, dazzle
the imagination, and inflame the passions— {hear, hear) —not, Sir, that
we can ever expect to find all these qualifications in their highest per-
fection united in the same individual. (Hear, hear.) Of the two
great models of eloquence in antiquity the Athenian orator excelled in
the first and third, and the Homan orator in the second and third.
(Hear.) Now, although we cannot hope to emulate Demosthenes, or
rival Cicero, yet we can all avoid vulgarities, and protect the language
of Shakspere, Burke, and Scott from profanation. (Cheers.) If,
therefore, what has been advanced to-night shall have the effect of
inducing hon. members to consider the importance of public speaking,
and to study the great models, I shall rejoice. (Hear, hear.) Let us,
however, be upon our guard against being led away by mere mere-
tricious ornament. (Hear, hear.) Let us remember that nothing will
ever serve as a substitute for patience, labour, and a thorough mastery
of detail. (Hear, hear, hear.) The gorge rises at a man who stops to
play with trifles, when there is work before him, and business to be
done. (Cheers.) But, Sir, let us never be shamed out of a generous


pursuit by any sneers at eloquence or orators. {Hear, hear) logi-
cians have reasoned acutely to prove that all reasoning is fallacious.
{Bear, hear.) Rhetoricians have eloquently declaimed against the use
of eloquence. {Bear, hear.) Nature refutes such miserable quibbling.
{Cheers.) As long as the Gospel has to bo preached by ministers; —
as long as rights have to be maintained by advocates—as long as our
civil and religious liberties have to be upheld by the representatives of
the people, so long will mankind prize that power of speech, which at
the bar may save lives —which in the senate may save nations—and
•which, in its loftiest vocation, in the pulpit, may save immortal souls.
{Loud cheering from all sides of the Bouse.)
The Speaker. —The motion before the House is:—“That this
House do now take into consideration the best means of improving the
oratorical powers of its members.” Since which it has been moved, as
an amendment, that all the words after “ that” be omitted, with the
view of inserting the following words :—“ This House, being anxious
to do all in its power to protect the English language from outrage at
the hands of any of its members, hereby resolves that no gentleman
shall be eligible for a seat in this House who is ignorant of what is
due to the letter 11, or the general proprieties of correct speech.” The
question before the House, therefore, is that the words proposed to be
omitted stand part of the original resolution. Those who are of this
opinion say “ Aye on the contrary, “ No.” [ The “ Noes" prepon-
derate.'] I think the “Noes” have it. {Divide, divide, divide .) Do
I understand that a division is called for ? (Hes, yes) “ Ayes” to the
right; “Noes” to the left.
[The tellers talce a note of the “ Ayes" and the “ Noes ,” and place
the same in the hands of the Cleric of the Bouse, who announces the
numbers.]
The Speaker. —The original resolution is lost. {Cheers) The
question before the House, therefore, is ; —“That this House, being
anxious to do all in its power to protect the English language from out-
rage at the hands of any of its members, hereby resolves that no gen-
tleman shall bo eligible for a seat in this House who is ignorant of
what is duo to the letter H, or to the general proprieties of correct
speech.” Those who are of this opinion will please to say “ Aye”—
{all say "Aye")— on the contrary “No.” Carried unanimously.
{Loud cheers.)
The CniES Seoeetaet. — I move that this House do now adjourn.
{Bear, hear.)
Tub Leader op the Opposition.—l second that proposition.
The Speaker. —lt has been moved and seconded that this House do
now adjourn. Hon. members in favour of the motion will please to
say “Aye” {all say "Aye") —on the contrary “No.” The House
stands adjourned. {The Bouse adjourns)


OPINIONS OF THE COLONIAL PRESS
OF THE
ORATORICAL TRAINER.
“Seems to us to do all that mere boot-teaching can do to mate good
readers and speakers. Considerable judgment and taste are displayed
in the selection of examples for exercise.”— Argun.
“ A very well and c arc full y-am\ n g c d book. All persons wishing to
improve themselves in the much-neglected art of elocution, may study it
to advantage.”— Age.
“ A neater and more compact manual of the much-neglected art of
oratory we do not know in the whole compass of English school-
literature. It is a true pocket companion for any aspiring youth who
is emulous of distinction as a public speaker at the Bar, in the Senate,
or in the Pulpit.”— Melbourne Herald.
“Can confidently assert that it contains more useful hints and
directions and judiciously-selected extracts, than many works upon
elocution of a far more pretentious description.” — Examiner.
“ Carefully prepared, and deserves a large circulation. The book, as
a whole, is highly creditable to our friend Mr. llxil, and to his pub-
lisher, Mr. Eobeetson, and we hope both will be repaid and encou-
raged by a very large circulation.” — Australian Evangelist.
“Wehave carefully examined this hook, and have great pleasure
in giving it hearty recommendation. The subject to which the work
is devoted is of great and growing importance. Simply to read
carefully through this volume would be an improving and suggestive
lesson to probably every man in this colony, and to all public speakers
The Oeatokioae Xeaisee would prove a valuable vade mecum.” —
Christian Times,


“We unhesitatingly commend The Oratorical Trainee to the
attention of teachers, on account of its cheapness, its accuracy, and its
general suitableness to the purposes of tuition.” — Melbourne National
Review,
“ Admirably adapted for the purpose for which it was compiled.”—
eelong Advertiser.
“ Greatly superior to the general run of ‘ Speakers,’ ‘ Eeaders,’ and
.Elocutionists,’ and cannot fail to prove useful to every one who wishes
to develop the powers of the organs of speech.” — Ballarat Star.
“We strongly commend to all who have an ambition to speak the
English tongue as it should be spoken, a perusal of this little and
inexpensive work.” — Bendigo Advertiser.
“ Well adapted as a text book, for the use of masters and pupils.
The rules given are clear and judicious, and the illustrations are good
specimens for practice. — Sydney Morning Herald.
“We recommend the book not only to youth generally, but to public
speakers at large, and particularly to nine-tenths of the ministers of
religion, whoso reading and delivery are deformed to such an extent as
to deteriorate the matter they have to utter.”— Launceston Examiner.
“ Contains all the rules which can be possibly required by persons
learning elocution from written directions.”— South Australian Register,
“ The work before us embodies the whole philosophy of Mr. Hill’s
system. It is skilfully wrought out, and illustrated by such a number
of examples, that apart from its special character as an elocutionary
treatise, the volume is well worth its cost as a miscellaneous reading
book.” — South Australian Advertiser,
“ Particularly simple and concise in its style, and possesses the
merit of being easy of comprehension by all classes of readers. The
appendix contains a variety of well-selected illustrations of sufficient
interest to render it an acceptable volume in the library. In a country
like this, where every second man is called upon on some occasion or
another to express bis views on public questions, such a book is par-
ticularly useful.”— Canterbury (New Zealand) Paper.
“ In putting forth a second edition, Mr. Hill has very judiciously
taken the opportunity of considerably enlarging his book. The fresh
additions consist of some new chapters on the practice of the art
itself, and some fresh selections from the newest works of living authors.
Foot notes have also been added wherever the text required fuller
elucidation or illustration. Thus, Mr. Hill incorporates many of the
most valuable suggestions contained in Dean Alford’s little book on
the ‘ Queen’s English,’ published only the other day. He adds many
invaluable hints on correct gesture, earnestness, enunciation, and other
points essential to a good delivery. He quotes Thackeray’s beauti-
fully-written ‘Roundabout Paper,’on poor Tom Hood. He gives us


O'Connell’s scathing invective against Mr. Benjamin Disraeli, and
Sir Robert Peel’s annihilating attack on William Cobbett. In
brief, he brings the workup till the very living hour in which he writes.
There is not a page, not a paragraph in it, that is not stamped with the
broad imprint of freshness and originality. As the book now stands,
we can honestly assert it to be very much superior to any other treatise
on practical oratory in the English language. It is far simpler in the
matter of rules ancC directions than our old school acquaintance, Sheri-
dan Knowles’s ‘ Elocution.’ It is not overlaid with difficult directions
and hackneyed quotations like every other school-elocution book we
know. Mr, Hill is, above all things, both comprehensive and precise.
He does not inflict a superfluous line on his pupils or his readers. The
result is that he has produced a work which is not alone a complete
epitome of the science of public speaking, it is a very amusing book
into the bargain. Every one who possesses a copy of the first edition
ought also to procure a copy of this second edition, and all lovers of
good wholesome English reading ought to buy the book for its choice
gems of prose and poetry, its neat and sparkling critical remarks, and
its very amusing illustrations of common faults and blunders in all
kinds of speech, colloquial and formal. We hope the sale of the
second edition will even exceed that of the first; and we are very sure
that when Mr. Hill has exhausted his Australian public, there is
another public of almost indefinite extent awaiting him in the old
country.”— Weekly Beviexv and Messenger, April 23, 1864.
“Mr. Hill has treated his subject in a manner which renders his
production a most valuable hand-book for all who desire to perfect
themselves in the art of public speaking or public reading. Although
the ‘Trainer’ contains only 182 pages, it is so comprehensive in the
treatment of the various elements of oratory, that it will be accepted
as a most invaluable vade mecum by those whose lot it is to speak
before large assemblies. It is also an admirable elementary treatise for
the use of schools.” — Mount Alexander Mail , April 2G, 1864.
“We are glad that Mr. Hill’s excellent volume has reached a
second edition, and it is gratifying to learn that a thousand copies, or
the whole of the first edition, have been sold. Mr. H. gives full
instruction on all the points needful for good and effective reading and
speaking ; and the patient, diligent student of his book cannot fail to
derive great benefit. The selections under the headings * Declamation *
and * Recitation ’ are excellent. For a book to reach a second edition
in Victoria is in itself an event worth recording. We have had occa-
sion to speak well of Mr. Hill’s book on former occasions, and its re-
appearance is a proof that our estimation is that of the public gene-
rally.”—Australian Evangelist, May 3, 1865.
“The second edition of Mr. T. P. Hill’s * Oratorical Trainer,’ a
system of vocal culture, has just reached us. The work strikes us as
being one of the best treatises ©n the subject which has been written.
The extracts from distinguished authors are numerous, judiciously
selected, and unhackneyed.”— Ballarat Star , April 25, 1864.
20


“We have with much pleasure, and we hope with some benefit,
perused it, and we must say that we have never felt more warranted in
endorsing the approval of others than we have now in expressing our
entire concurrence with the high encomiums passed upon this work
by the press of the other colonies. Prom its title, it might be supposed
that it was not a book calculated for general use, but we believe that
every young lad would be benefited by having its advice impressed on
his memory. The rules laid down for clear, distinct, and emphatic
pronunciation are admirable, and to every one that aims at talking,
reading, or addressing a public audience in a fluent and forcible manner,
we can cordially recommend this little work.” —Queensland Daily
Guardian , May 25, 1861.
“It is founded on the plan of Enfield’s ‘ Speaker,’ so familiar to
us in our school days, but the pieces are selected with infinitely more
taste and judgment, and the work is a vast improvement on that anti-
quated and somewhat musty production. A compilation like the one
in question cannot fail to prove a great boon, not only to those who are
desirous of improving themselves in the delightful art of reading aloud
with correctness and taste, but also to those who have not the means of
a ready access to a large collection of books, as they will find, ready to
their hand, a choice collection of pieces remarkable for interest and
beauty of language. A plain and easily-comprehended code of in-
structions for the student of the art of elocution is prefixed to the
volume.” —Lyitelton Times, May 28,186-1.
THE END.
HARBILD, PRINTER, LONDON.






