

The
AUSTRALIAN
FEDERATION
OF WOMENS
SOCIETIES.




THE
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION
OF WOMEN’S SOCIETIES
(Affiliated with the International Woman Suffrage Alliance)
HEADQUARTERS
81, PIER STREET, PERTH
WESTERN AUSTRALIA




A. F. W. S
THE AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION
OF WOMEN’S SOCIETIES
was formed in 1921 to link up women’s organizations
within The Commonwealth of Australia which make
“ equal citizenship ” a strong public plank in their
platform.
This Federation is affiliated with The International
Women Suffrage Alliance. Australia has been provision-
ally represented upon the I.W.S.A. since that Alliance
was founded in 1902 by Mrs. Carrie Chapman Catt in
Washington, U.S.A. Miss Vida Goldstein was sent by a
number of women’s societies in Australia to represent
Australia on the occasion of the founding of the new
Alliance and she acted as its first Secretary. Foreseeing
the great importance of the movement she at once secured
provisional affiliation for Australia. During succeeding
years The Victorian Society, of which she was President,
maintained the affiliation at its own charges, while throw-
ing the power of delegation open to the whole of Australia.
By the constitution of The I.W.S.A. each Nation is
entitled to send twelve delegates and twelve proxies to
every Congress held by the Alliance. At first the number
of delegates from Australia was very small, e.g. : one to
Copenhagen in 1906 (Mrs. Madge Donohoe) , one to


Amsterdam in 1908 (Mrs. Madge Donohoe) ; two to
London in 1909 (Mrs. Madge Donohoe and Miss Lille
Cowley of Sydney) ; four to Geneva in 1920 (Miss Vida
Goldstein of Melbourne, Mrs. Nicholls and Lady Holder
of Adelaide, and Miss H. Newcomb, and as alternates.
Miss Margaret Hodge and Miss Holder). But in 1923 at
the Ninth Congress of the I.W.S.A. at Rome, there were
nine delegates regularly chosen in Australia and sent with
full voting powers. These delegates were : Mrs. Risch-
bieth, J.P., Mrs. Jamieson-Wilhams, M.A., Miss E. A.
Allen, 8.A., Mrs. Emily Bennett, J.P., Counsellor E.
Clapham, Miss Stella George, Mrs. Giblin, Mrs. A. E.
Joyner, and Dr. Ethel Remfry Morris, M.Sc.
This remarkable advance was due to the formation, in the
interim, of The Australian Federation of Women’s Soci-
eties. During these years 1913-1923 the work of the
British Dominions Women Citizens’ Union (inaugurated
by Miss Newcomb and Miss Hodge) had brought Aus-
tralia into closer connection with the other self-governing
Dominions and with India as regards work for equal
citizenship within the Empire. By the constitution of the
League of Nations, 1919, Australia gained National
Status and it was felt that women’s organizations should
be brought into line with the altered conditions.
In consequence the Australian Societies formerly united
in The B.D.W.C.U. combined with some others and
formed The Australian Federation. The new Federation


at once secured regular affiliation with the International
Woman Suffrage Alliance and set to work to kindle a
wider Interest in the cause in all the six states of the
Commonwealth. There is now, therefore, a central body
in Australia which can secure representation of Australian
women on any International body of women.
The work of the B.D.W.C.U. was taken over in 1922-1923
by the British Overseas Committee of the International
Woman Suffrage Alliance, on the 8.0. C. which meets
monthly, or oftener when required, Australia, like the
other Dominions, has two representatives. The
Australian representatives have been chosen by The
A.F.W.S. and are invested with full voting powers.
Accredited members of Overseas Societies are welcomed
at the meetings of the 8.0. C. as visitors.
At the suggestion of the I.W.S.A. the Australian Federa-
tion took united action upon the following important
matters :
(a) It urged that at least one of the three delegates
from the Commonwealth to the League of Nations
Assembly be an Australian woman.
(b) It brought before the Women’s Societies the neces-
sity of introducing “ Reciprocal Legislation ’ to
improve the position of deserted wives within the
Empire and asked them to press their respective
Governments, where necessary, to bring such
measures into force.


(c) It urged General Smuts to take steps to enfranchise
the women of South Africa.
A closer study of these and similar questions must con-
vince every one of the immense possibilities which co-
operation within the Empire and within its self-governing
parts opens for all societies working to secure Equality
of Citizenship.”
Many of our social laws, both within the Commonwealth
and within The Empire require co-ordinating.
The Prime Minister of Australia was approached on
behalf of The A.F.W.S. during his visit to London in
connection with the Imperial Conference (September
1923). He expressed his deep interest in the question of
the civic status of women, recognizing the important share
which they have in the social and political development
of the Empire. He wrote :
“ Australia may fairly claim to be one of the countries
which has led the way in granting to women full
rights of citizenship and the example set by Australian
women in the exercise of their rights has been full of
encouragement for other countries to follow in our
footsteps.”
The Australian Federation of Women’s Societies links up
the women throughout Australia. Through the British
Overseas Committee The Australian Federation links the
women of Australia with the women of the various parts


of the British Empire. By its affiliation with the Inter-
national Woman Suffrage Alliance the Australian Federa-
tion unites Australia with the women of all Nations who
are working for the cause of equal citizenship and for all
that enfranchisement means for the welfare of Humanity.
The Headquarters of the British Overseas Committee
are at 11 Adam Street, Adelphi, London, W.C.2.
Chairman : Mrs. Corbett Ashby. Treasurer : Mrs.
M. E. Sadd Brown. Hon. Secretary, Hospitality Com-
mittee : Miss D. Solomon.
The Officers of the Australian Federation of Women’s
Societies are :
President: Mrs, Bessie M. Rischbieth, J.P. (Western
Australia).
Vice-Presidents : Mrs. E. W. NICHOLLS, J.P. (South
Australia).
Mrs. Carvosso (Queensland).
Mrs. Jamieson-Williams, M.A. (New
South Wales).
Mrs. J. G. Edwards (Tasmania).
Hon. Secretary : Miss M. King (Western Australia).
The Headquarters of the A.F.W.S. are at:
81 Pier Street, Perth, Western Australia.


THE AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION OF
WOMEN’S SOCIETIES AT THE
BRITISH EMPIRE EXHIBITION
The A.F.W.S. has appointed eight delegates to the Conferences,
etc., of the International Woman Suffrage Alliance which are to
take place in connection with the British Empire Exhibition to be
held at Wembley this year. The names of the delegates and the
societies to which they belong are as follows :
(1) Dr. Grace Boelke, Women’s Union of Service, New
South Wales.
(2) Dr. Ethel Remfry Morris, M.Sc., Women’s Union
of Service, New South Wales.
(3) Miss Rhodes, Reform League, New South Wales.
(4) Mrs. Edith Waterworth, Women’s Non-Party
Association, Tasmania.
(5) Miss Allen, 8.A., Women’s Non-Party Association,
South Australia.
(6) Miss Constance Davey, M.A., Women’s Non-Party
Association, South Australia.
(7) Mrs. H. G. Flower, Women’s Service Guild, West
Australia.
(8) Mrs. Thompson, Women’s Service Guild, West
Australia.
These delegates will take an active part in the work of the
British Overseas Committee’s Pavilion at the Exhibition,
where they hope to welcome many friends.
Mrs. Holman is the Patron of the Australian Section.
The Pavilion is No. 30 North, Eastern Section,
near The British Government Buildings.
London, March, 1924.




T. H WILLIAMS ft COMPy
«7*/• PtMONVILLR RB.
LONDON. N.l.
