

THE
LEVERIAN MUSEUM.
UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF
THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES
The Dukes Of Dumberland and Brunswick.
THIS MUSEUM
CONTAINS MANY THOUSANDS OF
NATURAL CURIOSITIES,
OF
QUADRUPEDS, BIRDS, FISH,
REPTILES, INSECTS,
MINERALS, SHELLS, FOSSILS, AND COINS.
THIS CATALOGUE
Gives a brief and faithful description of objects worthy
particular attention in the Museum.
Printed by D. Cartwright, 91, Bartholomew Close, West Smithfield, London.


ADDRESS.
SIMPSON SEAMAN,
THE PROPRIETOR,
Begs leave to state, that he has fitted it up in the most
elegant manner possible, and he trusts that the lovers of
Natural History will here find a fund of rational amuse-
ment, in observing Nature in its different habits faithfully
copied. Those Ladies and Gentlemen who have been
entertained by contemplating the surprising Curiosities of
Nature, will have an opportunity, with the assistance of
this little Treatise, to communicate to their Friends a por-
tion of the delight they experienced; for next to the grati-
fication of beholding what is strange or beautiful, is the
pleasure of recounting the wonders we have seen.
The Proprietor has spent more than twenty years in
unwearied application, sparing no expence to render this
Exhibition deserving public attention; and trusts that a
liberal and enlightened public, considering the vast ex-
pence of collecting and conveying from place to place,
will not think the Terms of Admission otherwise than
moderate.
ADMITTANCE.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Is.— Servants and Children , 6d. each.


THE
LEVERIAN MUSEUM.
No. 1. SWORD FISH. ( Xiphias Gladius.) The fish
in the Museum was caught in the river Orwell, and the only
one ever before exhibited in England; is eleven feet in length,
it weighed upwards of three hundred weight. The Sword
Fish is found in most parts that are frequented by whales, to
which it is a most terrible enemy. At the sight of this
animal, say navigators, the whale seems agitated in an ex-
traordinary manner, leaping from the water as if with af-
fright. The Sword Fish destroys the whale by piercing it
with its sword; the sea is soon dyed with blood, proceeding
from the wounds of the whale, while that enormous animal
vainly endeavours to overcome its invader, by striking it on
the surface of the water with its tail, making a report, at
each blow, louder than that of a cannon.
2. The CASSOWARY, or EMEW, is almost as big as
the Ostrich. The feathers of this bird are all double, two
coming out of the same quill, and lying the one upon the
other, and of a blackish colour ; these feathers have that
form and situation, that to those that behold the bird afar
off, its skin appears to be covered not with feathers, but
only with hairs. It is a gentle natured bird, and easily
tamed. Inhabits the Molucca Islands.
3. GREAT-EARED OWL. ( Strix Bubo.) This bird
is said to inhabit mountainous and rocky situations. It
preys on hares, rabbits, and other small animals. This spe-
cies is often described as the Horned Owl from Hudson’s
Bay, but is more common in Norway, and has been shot in
England.
4. LITTLE OWL. (Strix Passerina.) This elegant
specie of Owl is the smallest in England, and seldom to be
met with. It is found at Hudson’s Bay, and has been re-
ceived from the West Indies.
5. SILVER-HEADED VULTURE. It is said this
bird has an excellent sagacity of smelling above all other
birds, so that it can perceive the savour of dead carcases
from afar. The ancients have delivered, that the Vulture is
content only with dead carcases, abstaining from the rapine
and slaughter of living animals. But some moderns affirm,
that it pursues living birds, and preys upon living fawns,
hares, kids, lambs, &c. It is an inhabitant of Africa.
a 2


0. BOA SERPENT. There are several species of this
enormous reptile. They are all terrible for their magnitude
and bite, but destitute of venom. This serpent, to which
the following observations shall be confined, is twenty-eight
feet in length, and its thickness in proportion. The Oriental
Indians, Malays, Ceylonese, &c. adore this monstrous
production of nature, and use the skin for clothes; they
do not even reject the flesh, which by some writers is said
to be not unwholesome. The Ring Boa frequents caves
and thick forests, where it conceals itself, sometimes rolled
round the body of a tree, till its prey comes within its
reach. When it seizes animals, especially of the larger
kind, it perfectly twists itself round them, so as effectually
to involve their body, and impede their motions ; while by
the vast force of its circular muscles it breaks and bruises
all their bones ; after having destroyed life, it licks the skin
all over to facilitate deglutition; this process reduces its
victim to a shapeless shining mass, when beginning at the
lower extremity, it gradually sucks in the body. The Boa
has been observed for a long time with the horns of a stag
sticking out of its mouth, these being too large and compli-
cated for it to swallow, as well as too hard for it to digest.
When exasperated, it makes a loud hissing noise.
7. COMMON SNIPE, ( Scolopax Gallinage.) This
is a plentiful species in most parts of England, and is found
in high as well as low situations.
8. JACK SNIPE. ( Scolopax Gallinula.) This species
of Snipe is not so numerous as the common ; is a more
solitary bird, and never known to be gregarious; nor is it
known to remain in this country during the breeding season.
9. GOAT-SUCKER. ( Caprimulgus .) This bird visits
us in May, and departs again in September. It makes no
nest, but lays its eggs on the bare ground, amongst fern or
heath, sometimes in nut stubs near the ground, and lays two
beautiful eggs, whitish, elegantly marbled with light brown
and ash colour.
10. Male and Female RED GROUSE. (Tetrao Scoticus.)
This bird is only to be met with in the extensive uncul-
tivated wastes covered with heath, particularly the most
mountainous situations; is driven from the south by culti-
vation. The mountains of Wales are now the most southern
parts these birds are found in ; are not uncommon in
Yorkshire, but no where so plentiful as in the Highlands of
Scotland, where the moors are unbounded.
11. WATER RATS. ( Mm . Amphibius.) The Water


Rat never frequents houses, but is always found on the
banks of rivers, ditches, and ponds. It feeds on small fish,
frogs, insects, and sometimes roots. It swims and dives
admirably well, and continues long under water.
11. ARMADILLO. The Armadillo is an inhabitant of
South America, and is perfectly harmless and inoffensive,
presenting only its covering by way of repelling external
injuries, and never seeking to molest other animals.
12. NUMIDTAN CRANE. This species obtains the
different appellations of the buffoon bird, and the demoi-
selle or lady; for no sooner does it perceive itself noticed,
than it begins to dance or curvet, and to exhibit a variety of
gesticulations, but whether these antic tricks proceed from
vanity or fear, is yet undecided.
13“ MARTEN. ( Mastela Maries.) This is the most
beautiful of all the British beasts of prey ; when taken
young, it is easily tamed, is extremely playful, and in con-
stant good humour. It preys on game of all kinds, and
principally inhabits woods.
14. GREY OWLS. (Strix Stridula.) This Owl
inhabits woods, and breeds in hollow trees, lays two eggs of
a dirty white. It feeds on young hares, young rabbits, rats
and mice.
15. LUMP FISH. (Cyclopterns Lumpus.) Great
numbers of these fish are found in the Greenland seas. It
is sometimes caught on our coasts, but seldom eaten, being
insipid.
16. WOODCOCK. ( Scolopax Kusticola.) These
birds appear with us in October ; they generally come to us
with Northerly or Easterly winds : they are more plentiful
in Wales and Ireland than in England.
17. TURTLE DOVE. ( Columba Turin.) The Turtle
visits this country in the spring, and remigrates in Sep-
tember. It chiefly inhabits thick vroods; These birds seem
to be more plentiful in Kent than any other country.
18. PARROT. Linnaeus makes forty-seven species in
the beautiful family of Parrots, and probably he has not
described more than half of them. Of all foreign birds,
the Parrot is best known in this country, and is most ad-
mired, nor without reason, as it unites the greatest beauty
with the greatest docility. Its voice more exactly resembles
the human than that of any other bird.
19. CARDINAL GROSSBEAK. This species is a
native of several parts of North America, and from the


superiority of its song, has obtained the appellation of the
Nightingale of that continent.
20. PURPLE GRAKLE. ( Gracula Quiscala .) The
farmers of Virginia and Pennsylvania took infinite pains to
destroy and drive them from those provinces for feeding on
their rice; the consequence was, that their crops were de-
stroyed by a caterpillar which these birds would have eaten.
21. HONEY BIRD. ( Cuculus Indicator.) Is found
in Africa.
22. BIRDS of PARADISE. These birds have been
more celebrated for the false and imaginary qualities which
are attributed to them, than for their real and truly remark-
able properties. It has been reported of them, that they
are naturally without legs, and are perpetually upon the
wing, even while they sleep, and they subsist entirely upon
vapour and dew, with a variety of other assertions equally
false and ridiculous. The natives, who make a trade of
killing and selling these birds to the Europeans, when they
have taken a number, their usual method is to gut them and
cut off their legs ; they then run a hot iron into the body,
which dries up the internal moisture, and filling the cavity
with spices, sell them to the Europeans.
23. AVOSETT, ( Recurverostra Avosetta.) This bird
breeds in the fens of Lincolnshire, Romney Marsh, in
Kent, and on some parts of the Suffolk const; it feeds on
worms and marine insects, which it scoops out of the mud
or sand.
24. REDWINGS. (Turdus Iliacus.) This bird is a
migrative species, coming to us in great flocks about the
latter end of September. It is said to breed in Norway and
Sweden.
25. FIELDFARE. ( Turdus Pilaris .) This is a
migrative species, visits us in October, and remains till the
beginning of April. Its food is the fruit of the Hawthorn,
worms, and insects.
26. ERMINE, ( Mustela Ermincc.) This animal when
brown is called the Stoat. It changes its color in winter,
and becomes white, except the end of the tail, which
remains black.
27. STARES or STARLINGS. (Sturnus Vulgaris.)
This bird is plentiful in all parts of England; breeds in
hollow trees, towers, ruins, cliffs, and often in high rocks
over the sea.
28. CUCKOO destroying a NEST of WAGTAILS.
(Cuculus Canorus.) This bird comes to us early in the


spring, and almost invariably leaves us by the first of July.
The food of the Cuckoo is chiefly insects.
29. GUIANA. An inhabitant of the East Indies, and
like all the Lizard tribe, is very harmless: its flesh is eaten
by the natives, and said to be a great delicacy.
30. HUMMING BIRDS with their NESTS. (Tro *
chilus.) Among the beautiful varieties of the feathered
race, there are but few that equal the brilliancy of colouring
displayed by these little animals. This genus contains
twenty-one different species; they are inhabitants of the
warmer climates of America.
31. COLE TITMICE and NEST. ( Parus Ater ,)
The Colemouse is not so plentiful a species as the Marsh,
keeps more in woods, and seems to Jive entirely on insects.
32. BEE-EATERS. ( Meriopi api Ster .) The common
Bee Eater is the only one out of twenty-three known
species that has ever made its appearance in England. It
does not appear to have been noticed in England till within
these few years. In the third volume of the Linnaean
Transactions, an account is given of one having been shot
at Mattishall, in the county of Norfolk. They are common
in the South of France and Italy.
33. LONG-EARED BAT. ( Vespertilio Auristus .)
The principal distinction between this and the common Bat
is the ears : in this they are above an inch long, within
each of these is a less ear.
34. COMMON BAT. (Vespertilio Murinus.) This
species of Bat is very common in England; it makes its
appearance early in the summer, and begins its flight in
the dusk of the evening in quest of insects. The Bat
brings only two young at a time, which it suckles from two
teats placed on the breast.
35. GREAT BAT. A species first discovered by
M. de Buffbn, since that in Flintshire, and other parts of
England. It ranges high in the air for food, and retires
early in the summer.
36. COMMON MOUSE. (Mus, Musculus.) This
little timid animal inhabits houses, barns, and corn stacks.
37. LONG-TAILED FIELD MOUSE. {Mus. Syl-
vaticus.)
38. SHORT-TAILED FIELD MOUSE. (Mus. Agres-
tis.) These Mice live in banks and hedges, and often
burrow under ground.
39. Male and Female BEARDED TITMICE. (Parus
Biarmicus.) This bird is very little known, though it breeds


with us, and continues the whole year. It is found amongst
the reeds between Dunwich and Lowestoft, in Suffolk.
40. WATER RAIL. (Rallus Aquations.) This bird
continues with us the whole year, and by many is erro-
neously believed to be the Land Rail metamorphosed, which
they say takes place in the autumn, not knowing perhaps
that bird leaves this country at that season. It is found in
most parts of Europe frequenting rivulets.
41. LONG-EARED OWL. (Strix Otus.) This bird
frequents large woods, and is partial to fir, box, or holly
plantations, where it conceals itself by day amongst the
evergreen foliage.
42. SHORT-EARED OWL, (Strix Brachyotis.) This
bird comes to us in October, about the time the Woodcock
makes its appearance, and departs the same time with
that bird in March ; hence it derives the name of Woodcock
Owl.
43. WHITE OWL. ( Strix Flammea.) This bird
resorts chiefly in barns for the sake of mice, its principal
food. It breeds in old decayed trees, and lays four white
eggs.
44. GREEN SANDPIPER. ( Ochropus I'ringa .)
This is a scarce solitary bird, it frequents shallow streams,
comes to us in September, and departs northward in April
to breed.
45. SISKINS. (Fringilla Spinus.) These birds are
common in various parts of Europe, and seen in large and
at other times in small numbers ; it is not known to breed
with us, nor from whence it comes.
46. ARABIAN THRUSH. A solitary bird of that
country.
47. YELLOW BUNTINGS with NEST and YOUNG,
[Emberiza Citrindla.) This is one of the most common
indigenous birds of this country. In winter it assembles in
flocks with other granivorous birds.
48. A ELLOW-BREAS FED TOUCAN, ( Ramphastos
Tucanus.) This bird, so formidable in appearance, is quite
harmless and gentle; it feeds principally upon pepper,
which it devours very greedily, gorging itself in such a
manner that it voids it crude and uncocted ; this however
is no objection to the natives using it again ; they even
prefer it to that which is fresh gathered from the tree, and
seem persuaded that the heat and strength is qualified by
the bird, and that all its noxious qualities are thus exhausted.
It is a native of South America.


49. SCARLET-BREASTED ORIOLE. This bird is a
native of Bengal.
50. BLUE and GREEN PAROQUET.
51. RED-LEGGED PARTRIDGES, male and female,
with their YOUNG. ( Tetrao Rufus.) These birds are very
common in some parts of Suffolk; on the estates of the
Marquis of Hertford and Lord Rendlesham, they are more
numerous than the common Partridge.
52. HARE. ( Lepus Timidus.) An animal common in
all parts of Europe. In winter it turns white in the
Northern countries.
53. COMMON CAT.
54. Male and Female REDWINGS, vide No. 24.
55. YELLOW-HEADED ORIOLE. An inhabitant of
North America.
56. BOTANY BAY FINCH.
67. BADGER. (Ursus Meles.) The Badger is a soli-
tary animal, digging for itself a long winding hole in the
earth ; as it is naturally averse to the light, it seldom quits
this retreat till the night. It lives on young rabbits, young
birds, and eggs from their nests. It is remarkable for its
cleanliness. The Fox, taking advantage of this quality,
often takes possession of the Badger’s hole, by depositing
its excrements at the entrance thereof, which is so offensive
to the Badger that he seeks a new retreat.
68. GOLDEN PLOVER. ( Charadrius Pluvialis.)
This bird is found in most parts of the known world. With
us it chiefly inhabits heaths, moors, and downs; in severe
weather the sea coast.
59. GARGANEY. (Anas Quenjuedula.) Whether this
bird ever breeds with us is not ascertained ; it is found in
our decoy ponds in the month of April, and is called the
Summer Teal.
60. GREAT BALTIMORE ORIOLE. An inhabitant
of the woods in North America.
01. WOOD WRENS. (Motacilla Crochilus.) This
bird visits us in April, and departs again in September.
62. JAVA HARE. This animal is said to be very
numerous in that Island, and in no other part of the world.
63. MARTEN and PARTRIDGE. (Mustela Maries.)
This is the most beautiful of all the British beasts of prey;
when taken young is easily tamed, is extremely playful, and
in constant good humour. It preys on game of all kinds,
and principally inhabits woods.


• TANAGER. This beautiful bird is an
inhabitant of South America.
65. PIGMY CURLEW. ( Scolopax Pigmea.) This is
a very rare bird, only two seem to appear on record ; one
was killed in Holland, and the other near Sandwich in Kent.
The bird in the Museum was shot near Yarmouth.
66.
f HENHARRIER. (Falco Cyneas.)
\ FEMALE or RINGTAIL. (Falco Pyyargus.)
Various are the opinions concerning these birds: some
authors have ever considered them as male and female;
others as two distinct species. By dissection the Henharrier
has always proved to be a male bird. These birds are com-
mon m England, and build their nests on the ground, under
a furze bush ; lay two eggs.
CINEREOUS SHRIKE. (Lanius Excubitor.)
Um is a scarce species in England, said to breed in some
0 our mountainous situations, coming in March and depart-
ing m September. When it has killed its prey, it fixes it to
a thorn, for the purpose of pulling it to pieces.
68. DOTTRELLS. (Ckaradrius Morinellus.) The
Dottrell appears to make this country a resting place in its
migratory flights to and from its breeding place. It is seen
on some of our downs, heaths, and moors, in April, and
again in September.
69. REDSHANKS. (Scolopax Calidris.) This bird is
common on our shores in winter, and breeds in our marshes
adjacent to the sea coast. It lays four eggs like the Lap-
wing’s, but smaller. V
70. NUTHATCHES. ( Sitta Europcea.) This species
remains with us the whole year, but is a local bird, and not
to be tound in several parts of the kingdom.
GOLDEN ORIOLE. (Oriolus Galbula.) There
are but few instances of this bird being found in England.
It is found in various parts of the European Continent
during the Summer months; it is supposed to Winter in
Africa.
WOODPECKER. An inhabitant of most
parts of that country.
1 BUZZARDS, ( Falco JEruginosus,) with
ieir OUNG, in their curious downy covering before the
a^ e u ranCe feathers. This bird frequents moors
an airen situations; it preys on rabbits, frogs, and lizards,
its nest is made on the ground amongst short wood, furze,
or tern ; and lays four eggs perfectly white.


74. CREEPERS. ( Certhia .) These birds bear a
strong resemblance to the Humming Bird. They are dis-
persed over every part of the world, while the Humming
Birds are confined to America.
75. AFRICAN ROLLER. (Coraces Africa.) An ex-
ample of the vivid plumage of this family.
76. TABUAN LORY. Inhabits the Friendly Islands.
77. NONPAREIL PARROT. Inhabits New Holland.
78. TYGER SNAKE. A native of the East Indies.
79. SACRED KING-FISHER. Inhabits Botany Bay.
80. GREEN HUMMING BIRDS. Inhabit Surinam.
81. BLACK and WHITE BUTCHER BIRD. A na-
tive of Surinam.
82. AFRICAN PIG. Remarkable for its being striped
lilco the Zcbrd.
83. PERSLYN ORIOLE. ( Oriolus Persians.) An
inhabitant of the Persian deserts.
84. COMMON GALINULE. ( Fulica Chloropus.) This
bird is common in rivers of this kingdom. In the act of
diving, its wings are used as fins.
85. SPOTTED WOODPECKERS. (Picus Major.)
The Spotted Woodpecker is less frequent in England than
the Green ; its habits and manners are nearly the same.
86. RINGTAIL and YOUNG, vide No. 66.
87. GREY WAGTAILS. ( Motacilla Bodrula.) It
visits us in September and departs in April; it is a solitary
bird, frequenting watery places, especially small shallow
streams, for the sake of Insects, on which it feeds.
88. GROSSBEAK. {Loxia Coccothraustes.) This bird
usually visits England in the Autumn, and continues till
April; but there have been instances of its breeding here.
89. BLACK-HEADED GULL. ( Larus Ridibundus.)
These birds lose the black on the head in the winter, and do
not assume it again till the breeding season.
90. HERRING GULL. ( Fiscus Larus.) The Herring
Gull is found plentiful on all our shores, and in the Northern
parts of Europe.
91. COMMON GULL. {Larus Canus.) These birds
are often seen with Rooks in severe weather, and follow the
plough for the sake of Worms.
92. WINTER GULL. {Larus Hyhurnm.) These birds
are common on all our shores.
93. BLACK-BILLED AUK. (Alca Pica.) This is
only found on our coasts in winter.


94. LITTLE PENGUIN. ( Aptenodytes Minor.) In-
habits New Zealand.
95. PARTRIDGES and YOUNG. ( Tetrao Perdrix.)
This bird is found in all parts of England where corn is
cultivated, but never at any great distance from arable land ;
upon the barren mountains of the north it is never seen.
96. YOUNG PUMA LION, whelped at Glasgow, July
the 25th, 1819 ; being the first Puma Lion ever whelped in
Britain.
97. GREY DOTTRELL. This bird inhabits heaths,
moors, and downs.
98. RABBITS. (Cuniculus.) They were formerly
natives of Spain; were first introduced there from Africa.
Rabbits are most prolific of all animals; they will breed
seven times a year, and bring eight young each time; on a
supposition that this happens regularly during four years,
their numbers will amount to 1,274,841.
99. THICK-KNEED BUSTARDS. (Charadrius CEdic-
nemus.) This is a migrative species, making its appearance
with us the latter end of April; it frequents hilly open situ-
ations, mostly heaths or warrens.
100. KING-FISHER. ( Alcedo Ispeda.) The King-fisher
frequents small rivulets, where it breeds. It makes its nest
in the hole of a bank with small fish bones, which it ejects
some time before the female begins to lay ; this matter is
mixed with the earth. The female lays seven white trans-
parent eggs.
101. LITTLE AUK. ( Alca Alle.) This bird is seldom
to be met with in England, but is common in Greenland,
where it breeds, and lays two eggs, different from others of
the genus, which lay but one : these are larger than those
of a Pigeon, of a bluish white. The winter residence of
this bird is unknown; it is probable it lives at sea, in some
more temperate climate remote from land.
102. GREEN WOODPECKERS. (Pious Viridris.)
This species is not uncommon about most of the wooded
parts of England; its food is entirely insects. Wood-
peckers are seen climbing up a tree, but never down.
108. This singular bird was shot in Suffolk, but to what
species it belongs is not yet ascertained.
104. PAINTED FINCH. A native of Carolina.
105. BLUE MANAKIN. Inhabits South America.
106. BANANA BIRD. Is dispersed through the
regions of Carolina and Brazil.


107. CRIMSON CREEPER. Inhabits the Sand-
wich Islands.
108. RED-HEADED WOODPECKER. A native of
America
109. YOUNG SHARK. (Sqnalus.) This fish is the
dread of the sailors in hot climates, where they constantly
attend the ships in expectation of what may drop overboard.
Swimmers often perish by them; sometimes they lose an arm
or leg, and sometimes are bit quite asunder, serving but for
two morsels for this ravenous animal. The young animal in
the Museum was caught in the River Orwell.
110. PORCUPINE FISH. {Diodon Hystrix.) In point
of habit or external appearance, the remarkable genius
Diodon may be said to connect, in some degree, the tribe of
fishes with that of the spiny quadrupeds, such as the Por-
cupines and Hedge-hogs: it is also allied in a similar manner
to the Echine, or Sea Urchins. It is a native of the Indian
and American Seas, and is sometimes eaten by the inha-
bitants of the West Indies.
111. HORNED TRUNK FISH. (Ostracion Cornutus .)
This extraordinary fish is often found in the Indian and
American Seas.
112. PIPE FISH. ( Syngnathus A cm .) This fish visits
our shores in summer. It is sometimes called the Sea
Adder.
113. SHOVELLER. ( Anas Clypeata.) This bird is
sometimes met with in England, but by no means common.
It is said some remain in France during the breeding season.
114. GOLDEN EYE. (Anas Clangula .) This bird
visits us in winter, and feeds chiefly in rivers contiguous to
the sea; sometimes killed in fresh waters more remote, is a
quick diver, and not easily shot, except on the wing.
115. BREAM. ( Cyprinus Brama .) The Bream is an
inhabitant of the deep parts of still rivers. It is a fish little
esteemed, being very insipid.
116. GATTORUGINE. This curious fish was first dis-
covered to be a British fish by the Rev. Mr. Williams,
who found it on the Anglesea coast,
117. ERMINE and ROBINS.
118. HUMMING BIRDS with nest, vide No. 30.
119. BLACK WOODPECKER. (Ficus Martins.) It
is doubtful whether this bird was ever found in England; is
common in many parts of the European continent, but no
B


where so plentiful as in Germany. It has all the habits of
the Green Woodpecker.
120. PRATENCOLE. { Glareola .) An inhabitant of
Austria.
321. Non-descript.
122. BULLFINCHES. (Loxia Pyrrhula.) The
Bullfinch is not migratory, but frequents our woods all the
year.
123. WEASEL. (Mustela Vulgaris.) This is the least
of the Weasel kind, and like the rest is very destructive to
young birds, poultry, and rabbits, besides a great devourer
of eggs.
124. SANDERLING. ( Charadrius Calidris.)
125. GRASSHOPPER WARBLER. (Sylvia Locus-
tella.) It is not a plentiful species, but probably appears
less so by its habit of concealing itself amongst furze,
126. PIED FLYCATCHER. ( Musicapa Atricapilla.)
It is said to be indigenous to England. It is however very
local, and by no means plentiful : but is spoken of as an
inhabitant of Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Derbyshire.
127. SPOTTED SANDPIPER. ( Tringa Macularia.)
This species of Sandpiper is seldom met with in England ;
it is said to inhabit North America.
128. HOODED CROW. ( Cornix Cinerea.) The
Hooded Crow visits the Southern parts of this kingdom in
October, and retires northward to breed in the beginning: of
April.
129. MAGPIE. (Corms Pica.) A well known bird
in all parts of England ; it continues with us the whole
year.
130. JACKDAW. ( Corvus Monedula.) These birds
are common in all parts of England; also found in Den-
mark, France, and Germany.
131. GRES'! ED PHEASANT. (Phasianus Cristatus.)
Native of South America.
132. RED PHALAROPE. ( Tringa Hyperhorea.)
Taken at Sanda in Orkney. The summer plumage of the
common Phalarope.
133. BITTERN, ( Ardea Stellaris.) The Bittern is by
no means a plentiful species. In the breeding season it is
only found in the less frequented reedy marshes and swampy
moors well clothed with rushes.
134. COOT. ( Fulica Atra.) The Coot is a very
common bird in this country, and continues the whole year.


135. CURLEW. ( Scolopax Arquata .) The Curlew
is common on most parts of our coast in winter, and some
few remain in the south in summer, but do not breed.
136. RED-THROATED DIVER. ( Colymbus Septen-
trionalis.) This bird is said to breed in the northern parts
of Scotland, but rarely visits the southern parts of England,
except in very severe seasons.
137. SPECKLED DIVER. ( Colymbus Stellatus .) It
is the most common species found in this country.
138. EIDER DUCK. (Anas Molissima.) It is found
plentiful on the Earn Islands on the coast of Northum-
berland.
139. HARLEQUIN DUCK. (Anas Histrionica .) This
bird is an inhabitant of the more northern parts of the
world. It is found in Russia, Iceland, and Greenland.
140. PINTAIL DUCK. (Anas Acuta.) This bird is
frequently taken in our decoys in winter, and sold by the
name of Sea-Pheasant.
141. FOX. (Vulpes.) The Fox is produced in most
countries, nor does one of them differ much in size from
another, but greatly in colour. In Muscovy some of them
are black, some white, and others red.
142. MERLIN. (Falco (Esalon .) This is the smallest
of the Falcon genus ; is exceedingly rapid on wing. This
bird visits the South of England in October. It breeds in
Scotland.
143. TIT LARKS. (Alauda Pratensis .) This bird is
common in most parts of the kingdom; it is partial to
barren situations.
144. EASTERN CUCKOO. ( Cuculus Orientalis.)
An inhabitant of China.
145. GOLDEN PLOVER. ( Charadrius Pluvialis .)
This bird is found in most parts of the known world; with
us it chiefly inhabits heaths, moors, and downs.
146. YELLOW BUNTINGS and YOUNG.
147. INDIAN SERPENT. This species is nine feet in
length, and inhabits China.
148. RATTLE SNAKE. (Crotalus Durissimus.) The
Rattle Snake is bred in America, and in no parts of the old
world; some are six feet in length, but their usual size is
four or five feet. The certain death which ensues from this
creature’s bite, makes a solitude wherever it is heard. The
very instant the wound is inflicted, though small in itself,
it appears more painful than the sting of a bee; this pain
b 2


which is so suddenly felt, far from abating, grows every
moment more excruciating and dangerous ; the limb swells,
the venom reaches the head, which is soon of a monstrous
size, the eyes are red and fiery, the heart beats quick with
frequent interruptions, the pain becomes insupportable, and
some expire under it in five or six hours; but others who
are of stronger constitutions, survive the agony for a few
hours longer, only to sink under a general mortification,
which ensues, and corrupts the whole body.
149. LONG-TAILED TITMICE and NEST. (Parus
Caudatus .) This bird is very common in all parts of
England.
150. SAND MARTINS and NEST. ( Hirundo Ripa-
ria.) The Sand Martin is not so plentiful, and is more
local than the other species.
151. POLECAT. ( Putorius.) The Polecat is de-
structive to young game of all kinds, and to poultry ; it
generally resides in woods, and burrows for security among
the roots of some large trees.
152. DUbKY GREBE. (Colymbus Obscurus .) This
bird is scarce in England; it breeds in the fens of Lin-
colnshire.
153. CRESTED GREBE. ( Colymbus Obscurus .) This
bird is indigenous to England; breeds in the meres of
Shropshire and Cheshire, and in the fens of Lincolnshire.
154. BUNTINGS and NEST. ( Emberiza Miliaria.)
This bird is common in all parts of England.
155. TIT LARKS and NEST.
150. MERGANSER. (Mergus.) These birds some-
times appear in the South of England in winter, but more
frequently in the north; they are said to breed in Scotland,
in some of the rocks.
157. POCHARD. (Anas Ferina.) This species is
frequently in our decoys in winter, but is not known to
breed with us.
158. HOBBY. (Falco Subbuteo.) This is a migrative
species, visiting us in the spring, and leaves us in October
159. RED BREASTED TANAGER.
160. WIN CHATS and NEST. (Motacilla Rubetra.)
This is a migrative species, appearing with us in April,
inhabiting the same places as the Stonechat.
161.. STONECHAT S and NEST. (Motacilla Rubicola.)
This bird remains with us the whole year, and frequents
commons and furzy places.


162. LONG EARED OWL.
163. YOUNG CUCKOO.
164. RINGDOVE. (Columba Palumbus.) I his bird
is indigenous to this Island. In winter they assemble in
laree flocks, and constantly resort to woods to roost.
165. HEDGE HOGS or URCHINS. ( Erinaceus .)
The Hedge Hog is a nocturnal animal, keeping retired in
the day. It feeds on roots, worms, fruit, insects, dead
carcases, and eggs; of the last of which it is a great de-
stroyer. It lies under the reproach of sucking cows, but
the smallness of its mouth renders that impossible.
166. MADAGASCAR or VAMPY RE BAT. (Vesper-
tilio Vampyrus.) These Bats are common in the islands ot
the East Indies. They are carnivorous and ferocious.
This iTthe Bat to which Linnams applies the title of Vam-
pyre, on the supposition of its being the species of which
so many extraordinary accounts have been given relative to
its power of sucking the blood of men and cattle ; such is
the account of authors who have described it. Ihe Bat in
the Museum was kept alive at Yarmouth, and contrary to
what has been asserted, found very harmless ; it refused
animal food, and fed on fruits and vegetables; it slept with
its head downwards, wrapping its wings round its body m
the form of a mantle. This Bat, with its wings extended,
measures 35 inches. . , , ,
167. MORILLONS. ( Anas Glaucion.) Although a
bird of the Duck kind has been given under this denomi-
nation by a variety of authors of repute, it is doubtfu
whether it is not a variety of the Golden-Eye.
168. WOOD BUZZARDS, vide No, 99.
169. ARCTIC GULLS. ( Larus Parasiticus .) 1 his
is a fierce and rapacious species, attacking whatever ap-
proaches its nest, and the arts they make use of to decoy
an intruder from its neighbourhood, exceed those of any
other bird. They never fish for themselves like other Gulls,
but watch the Kittiwake, &c. and as soon as they observe
they have taken their prey, attack them, and by striking
them on the back, oblige them to disgorge the fish they have
just taken, and with wonderful adroitness and rapidity catch
it a few yards in its descent towards the water.
170. LESSER TERN. ( Sterna Minuta.) Ihis bird
has all the habits of the common Tern, but not so numerous.
171. REDSHANKS and YOUNG.
172. GOLDEN PHEASANTS, male and female.
b 3


( Phasianus Pictus .) This elegant species of Pheasant is a
native of China, it is often kept by gentlemen in this country ;
its habits are the same as the common Pheasant; its only
difference is the variation in the colour of its plumage.
173. WHITE WAGTAILS. ( Motacilla Alba.) In
winter these birds change their abode, but do not quit the
kingdom.
RINGED PLOVERS. ( Charadrius Iliaticilla.)
Ihis bird is plentiful on all the coasts of England.
175. This group of birds consist of the Surinam King
Fisher, Long-tailed Titmouse, Reed Bunting, Wryneck,
Baltimore Butcher Bird, Persian Fly-catcher, Snow Bunting
and Siskins.
176. CINEREOUS SHRIKE.
177. RED-BACKED SHRIKES and YOUNG. (La-
nius Collurio.) This bird visits us in May, and departs in
September; chiefly haunts inclosed moist situations.
178. INDIAN LARK. A native of many of the Indian
Islands. ' t
179. CAVIES. Natives of Guinea, hence they are
called Guinea Pigs.
180. BRAMBLING. (Fringilla Montifringilla.) These
birds are frequently seen in winter in large flocks on the
coasts of Kent and Sussex.
181. FIELD LARKS. (Alauda Minor.)
182. NIGHTINGALES and NEST. Motacilla Lus-
cinia.) Though this bird appears with us in April, it is said
to be found only as far north as Yorkshire.
183. WINCHATS and NEST.
“f THRUSH. A native of that country.
185. FOUMART or FERRET. The Foumart is origi-
nally a native of Africa. ®
*BB-, CHAFFINCHES and NEST. (Fringilla Calebs.)
Ihis bird is common in all parts of England.
ZV lB7 \ WAGTAILS a «d NEST. (Motacilla
September^* 18 V ' SltS US April, and mi £ rates a gain «
188. TOADS. (Ranaßvfo.) The Toad is an inoffensive
animal, and by no means poisonous, as has been asserted.
It lies torpid during the winter, choosing for its retreat either
the hollow root of a tree or cleft of a rock, where it is found
m a state of seeming insensibility. It has been found in
the heart of a tree alive and healthy, without the smallest
entrance or egress ; supposed to have been there more than
seventy years.


189. LIZARDS. ( Laverta Agilis .) Lizards are a class
of animals differently ranked by different authors. Ray
classes them with quadrupeds; Linuaeus with serpents;
and Brisson makes a distinct class of themselves. Lizards
are perfectly harmless ; their food is insects.
190. WHIP SNAKE. The bite of this animal is
poisonous ; it is a native of the East Indies.
191. COMMON SNAKE. ( Coluber Natrix.) This
species of reptile is perfectly inoffensive ; it preys on frogs,
insects, worms, and mice.
192. CROCODILES, vide No. 483.
193. SPARROWHAWK. {Falco Nisus.) This is a
very common species in most of the enclosed parts of the
kingdom.
194. RING OUZEL. ( Turdns Torquatm.) The Ring
Ouzel is a scarce bird in England, migrating from one part
to another. It is generally believed they do not winter with
us, but are known to breed in Scotland and the north of
England.
195. JACK SNIPES.
196. This group consists of the Marsh Titmouse, Bearded
Titmouse, Blue Titmouse, Cole Titmouse, Long-tailed Tit-
mouse, Thrush, Creeper, Cross-bill, Green Finch, Lesser
Redpole, Bullfinch, Tit Lark, Greater Redpole, Nightingale,
Chaffinch, Nuthatch, Grey Wren, and Canary Birds.
197. REED BUNTINGS. ( Fringilla Schoeniclus.)
This is a common bird, frequenting the sides of rivers.
198. LESSER REDPOLE. ( Fringilla Rinaria.) This
bird is common in the southern parts of England during
winter ; at this season it is gregarious.
199. PIED PHEASANT. A variety of the common
200. AFRICAN PHEASANT. This beautiful bird is
an inhabitant of the interior of Africa.
201. HONEY BUZZARD. ( Falco Apivorus.) This
appears to be a very rare species.
202. RINGTAIL, vide No. 66. .
203. WRYNECKS. ( Yunx Torquilla .) This bird
appears with us in April. It is not uncommon in the
southern and eastern parts of the kingdom, but it is more
scarce westward, and rarely found in Cornwall.
204. REDSTARTS and NEST. (Motacilla Fhceni-
curus.) This bird visits us in April, and leaves us in
September.


205. PEREGRINE FALCON. (Peregrinus Falco.)
This bird is seldom to be met with ; is bold and powerful,
and was much esteemed by Falconers. It breeds in rocks*
on the north-coast of England and Wales.
206. MANAKIN. An inhabitant of the warmer cli-
mates.
207. BEE EATER. From Africa.
208. GERENDER SERPENT. To this animal the
inhabitants of the coasts of Mosambique pay divine ho-
nours, and while their deity lies coiled up, the people fall
upon their faces before it with the most serious adoration.
209. The GREAT BOA. (Boa Constrictor.) This is
a species of the largest kind in the world. The bite of the
Serpent is not poisonous, for when it encounters any large
quadruped, it is by the strong folds of the body, and the
fierce verberations of the tail, that the enemy is destroyed;
by this twining round, and drawing the knot with convulsive*
energy, this enormous reptile breaks every bone in the
quadruped’s body, and then at one morsel devours its prey.
It is a native of Africa, India, and South America.
210. BLIND WORM or SLOW WORM. (Anguis
Fragilis.) The motion of this serpent is slow; from which,
and from the smallness of its eyes, are derived its names ;
like others of the genus it lies torpid during the winter.
211. SUPERB FINCH. A native of Botany Bay.
212. LESSER PARROT. From the West Indies.
214. CANARY BIRDS. Ihese birds were first brought
from the Canary Islands,
215. Non-descript.
216. OCEANIC FLYING-FISH. ('Exoccetus Evolans.)
The fishes of this genus, which are few in number, are
remarkable for the extreme length and size of their pec-
toral fins, by which they are enabled to spring from the
water, and support a kind of temporary flight, or continued
motion through the air, to the distance of 2 or 3000 feet;
when the fins become dry, they are obliged to commit them-
selves to their own element. The fish here described is an
inhabitant of the American and Indian seas, and is occasion-
ally observed in the Mediterranean. The celebrated Bonnet
considered this species of fish as forming a kind of connect-
ing link between fishes and birds, similar to that which Bats
may be supposed to form between birds and quadrupeds
217. YOUNG ALLIGATOR, vide No. 392.
218. TUFTED DUCK. (Anas Fuligula.) The Tufted


Duck is not common with us in winter. Is found in all the
northern parts of Europe as far as Norway.
219. TEAL. ( Anas Crecca .) The Teal is the smallest
of the Duck tribe ; it comes to us in winter, and frequents
our fresh waters.
220. GANNET or SOLAN GOOSE. (Pelicanus Bas-
sanus.) The Gannet is found plentiful on the coast of
Scotland; it lays but one egg, on the most inaccessible
parts of the highest rocks.
221. CINEREOUS GOTWIT. ( Scolopax Canescens .)
This is a scarce bird, visiting our coasts only in summer.
222. RED GOTWIT. (Scolopax Lapponica .) This is
a rare species in England, and to be found only in summer;
it is said to be plentiful in some parts of America.
223. RUFFS. ( Tringa Pugnax.) These birds are
found in the Isle of Ely and Lincolnshire, where they are
taken in snares and fattened for the table. They are remark-
able for always differing in plumage, being impossible to find
two alike. The females are called Reeves, which the fowlers
avoid taking, that their numbers may not be diminished.
224. KESTREL. ( Falco Tinnunculus.) This beautiful
species of Hawk is very common; continues with us the
whole year, feeds principally on mice.
225. WHIMBREL. ( Scolopax Phceopus.) This is a
migrative species, visiting our coasts in May, where it is
called the May-bird.
226. WEASEL, vide No. 123.
227. WATER RAT.
228. SPARROW HAWK and PARTRIDGE.
229. TOURACO. This elegant bird is a native of
Africa; it subsists on fruits and vegetables, and has a shrill
piercing voice.
230. PARROQUET. From South America.
231. HARE and LEVERETS.
232. DUN-DIVER. ( Mergus Castor .) This bird is
considered by some to be the female Gooseander, but on
dissection there have been found male birds. This bird is
common in Germany, and breeds in the lakes of the more
northern parts of the world.
233. BLACK GUILLEMOT. (Colymhus Grille.)
These birds are frequent in the north, on the Farn Islands;
and in Scotland, in the Hebrides.
234. AMADAVAD. This bird is a native of China, and
is often brought to this country alive.


235. AMERICAN BEE-EATERS.
236. AFRICAN CREEPERS.
237. BLUE TITMICE and NEST. ( Parus Cccruleus.)
This bird is found in every part of Europe.
238. SPARROW HAWK and LEVERET.
239. DOTTERELS, vide No. 68.
240. CAYENNE GOAT SUCKER. This is the largest
of that genus, and is called the Grand Goat-sucker. In-
habits South America.
241. MOOR BUZZARD.
242. MARTIN and RABBITS.
243. GOAT-SUCKER, vide No. 9.
244. ROUGH LEGGED FALCON. This species of
Falcon is seldom seen in this country, it has occasionally
been met with on the rabbit warrens in the counties of
Norfolk and Suffolk.
245. THROSTLES. (Turdus Mmicus.) The Throstle
remains in England the whole year, but is supposed to quit
the more northern parts in winter.
246. JAMAICA LIZARD.
247. WINCHATS and NEST.
248. WHITE CROW. This singular bird was taken
near Coventry, Warwickshire.
249. TOAD. From Surinam; this monstrous produc-
tion of nature is eaten by the natives of that country.
250. OTTER and YOUNG. (Mustela Luiea.J The
Otter swims and dives with great celerity, and is destructive
to fish, being its principal food. In rivers it is always ob-
served to swim against the stream to meet its prey. It forms
its habitation under ground, on the banks of some river or
lake, and always makes the entrance of its hole under water;
works upwards to the surface of the earth, and makes a
minute orifice for the admission of air.
251. BULLFINCH.
252. WOOD GROUSE. (Tetrao Urogallus.J These
birds are become very rare in this kingdom, a few only are
to be met with in the north of Scotland. It is common in
the pine forests of Norway and Lapland.
253. FOX and MALLARD.
254. LEOPARD. An animal of the feline kind pos-
sessing all the voracious and destructive powers of that tribe
of animals. It inhabits Senegal, Guinea, China, and Arabia.
The Leopard devours almost every beast of the forest; and
when these fail, they descend to the domestic herds among
the cultivated parts of Lower Guinea.


255. WINCHATS and NEST.
256. SPOTTED WOODPECKER.
257. SNOW BUNTING. ( Emberiza Nivalis.) These
birds appear on our eastern coasts in large flocks during the
winter. Some few are said to remain on the highest moun-
tains in Scotland,
258. FIELD LARKS and NEST.
259. SKY LARKS. (Alauda Arvensis.) This bird is
common in the greater parts of this kingdom.
260. GREATER PETTYCHAPS. ( Motacilla Hor-
tensis.) This bird arrives here about the latter end of April;
it chiefly inhabits thick hedges.
261. WOOD WRENS and NEST. (Sylvia Sylvi-
cola.) This is a migrative species, appearing with us in
April; it is so similar to the Yellow Wren that it is but little
-noticed.
262. NIGHTINGALES and NEST.
263. CAYENNE BUTCHER-BIRD. ( Lanius Cay-
anus.) In manners resembles our Butcher-Bird.
264. GLOSSY THRUSH. This bird is a native of
Africa, where it is esteemed for its song as well as beauty.
265. BOHEMIAN CHATTERER. ( Ampelis Gar-
rulus.) This is a rare bird, a few visiting this country in
severe winters.
266. WHIDAH BIRD. This singular formed bird is
an inhabitant of that part of the African coast.
267. STORMY PETEREL. (Procellaria Pelagica.)
The Stormy Peterel is rarely seen on our shores. The body
is of so oily a nature, that if a wick is drawn through from
the mouth to the vent, and lighted, it will burn as a lamp ;
and is said to be actually used for that purpose in the Ferroe
Islands. .
268. GREY SANDPIPER. ( Squatarola Tnnga.) This
is a very scarce British bird, not found here in the summer
months, and of course retires northward to breed; frequents
the sea shores only. Said to be found in Siberia and Caro-
lina in large flocks.
269. BLACK GROUSE. ( Tetrao Tetrix.) The Black
Grouse is at present chiefly confined to the more northern
parts of this kingdom, population and culture having driven
them from the south; is plentiful on the highlands of Scot-
v
270. WINTER GULL. (Larus Hybernus.) These are
common on all our shores.


271. KNOTS. ( Tringa Canutus.) This species is
chiefly confined to the fens in Lincolnshire, Isle of Ely, and
a few other places.
272. WOOD LARK. (Alauda Arhorea.') The Wood
Lark is by no means a plentiful species, but is met with
in most parts of the kingdom sparingly.
273. LESSER SPOTTED WOODPECKERS. {Picus
Minor.) This is by much the scarcest species : it possesses
all the habits of the Green Woodpecker.
274. NUTHATCHES and NEST.
275. GREY WAGTAILS and NEST.
276. REDBREASTS and YOUNG. ( Motacilla Rube-
cula.) This bird is common in all parts of England, and an
inhabitant of the greater part of the European continent.
277. Non-descript FINCHES from Asia.
278. SPOTTED SNIPE, or CAMBRIDGE GOTWIT.
(Scolopax Totanns.) A few specimens of this bird only
have been taken in this country; it frequents the sea most
in winter.
279. LESSER PETTYCHAPS.
280. BRAMBLING.
281. CAPE COLA. From the Cape of Good Hope.
282. GALINULE CRAKE. (Rallus Crex.J This is a
migrative species, appearing with us in April, and departing
in October. It makes a singular noise, resembling that of a
comb when the finger is drawn along the teeth, and which is
used as a decoy.
283. WHITE THROATS and NEST. ( Motacilla
Sylvia.) This is a very common species, visiting all parts of
the kingdom in April, and departs again in September.
284. LESSER REDPOLES and NEST.
285. REDBREAST and YOUNG.
286. SANDPIPER. ( Tringa Hypolencos.) This bird
visits this country in the spring, and frequents our lakes
and rivers.
287. HEDGE WARBLERS and NEST. {Motacilla
Modularis.) This bird is found in all parts of England,
and continues the whole year.
288. BLUE and BUFF MACAW.
289. GOLDEN CRESTED WRENS. {Motacilla
Regulus.) This elegant species of warbler is the smallest
British bird ; it principally inhabits fir plantations, and con-
tinues here the whole year.
290. SANDPIPERS.


. 291. TIT LARKS and NEST.
292. WATER OUZEL. (Turdus Cinclus.) This spe-
cies is a retired solitary bird, rarely seen but on the banks of
rapid rocky rivers or streams of water, particularly in the
mountainous parts of Scotland and Wales. It is certainly
a most curious and singular circumstance, that a bird not
apparently in the least formed for diving should pursue its
prey under water, living chiefly on small fish and aquatic
insects. It cannot, however, swim on the surface.
293 LONG-TAILED TITMICE.
294. REDBREASTS and NESTS.
295. BLACK CAPS. ( Sylvia Atricapilla .) This
bird migrates, visiting us in the spring, and returning in
September.
296. CARASAW. This beautiful bird is a species of
Turkey, domesticated in the West Indies.
297. CARP. ( Cyprinus Carpio.) This is one of the
naturalized fish of our country, inhabiting pools and still rivers.
298. CREEPERS. (Certhia Familiaris.) This bird
continues with us the whole year.
299. CROSS-BILL. ( Loxia Curvirostra.) This bird
has been known to breed in the pleasure grounds of Natha-
niel Lee Acton, Esq. Livermere, Suffolk; it is a constant
inhabitant of the northern parts of Europe.
300. CARRION CROW. ( Cortus Corone.) The
Crow is a bold bird, always at war with the lesser species of
Hawks; it feeds on flesh, insects, and grain.
301. ROCK DOVE. (Columba (Enas.) This bird
breeds in caverns on our coasts, ruined edifices, and some-
times in holes of decayed trees.
302. CINEREOUS EAGLE. (Falco Albicilla.) This
bird inhabits Scotland and the Orkneys, also Russia, Sweden,
and Denmark. It preyson land animals, fish,and aquaticbirds.
303. SPOTTED FLYCATCHERS. ( Muscicapa Grisola.)
304. GOLDEN THRUSH. This beautiful bird is a
native of South America.
305. GOLDFINCHES. (Fringilla Carduelis.) This
bird is common in all parts of England; it continues with
us the whole year.
306. LITTLE GREBE. ( Podiceps Minor.) This
bird js common in small rivers, where it breeds. In large
rivers it is often devoured by pike and trout while diving.
307. GREEN SANDPIPER. (Tringa Ochorpus.) This
is a scarce solitary bird ;it frequents shallow streams, •
c ' •


308. GREEN GROSBEAK. (Loxia Chloris.) This
bird is common in all parts of England.
309. WHITE-WINGED GROSBEAK. An inhabitant
of Italy.
310. HOOPOE. (Upupa Epops.) This bird is seldom
met with in England, occasionally visiting us in the autumn,
its food is insects and worms. It is found plentifully in the
deserts of Russia and Tartary, also in France and Germany,
311. JAYS and YOUNG, ( Cortms Glandarius .) A bird
common in all parts of the kingdom where there is woody
ground.
312. SPOTTED KINGFISHER. It frequents the
rivers of North America.
313. LAPWINGS. (Tringa Vanellus .) This bird is
common in most parts of the kingdom. It breeds upon
heaths and fens, and lays four eggs.
314. MARSH TITMICE. ( Par us Palustris.) This
bird is not so common as the Blue Titmouse.
315. MOLE. (Taiga.) The Mole breeds in spring,
and brings four at a time; it makes its nest of moss, and
that always under the largest hillock.
316. PERSIAN ORIOLE. (Persicus Oriolus.) An
inhabitant of the Persian deserts.
, OYSTER CATCHER. {Hccmatopus Ostralegus .)
This bird is common on all our shores, but never quits the
sea-coasts. In winter they assemble in small flocks.
318. LESSER PETTYCHAPS. (Sylvia Eippolais.)
This is the first species of warbler that pays its annual
visits to us in the spring. It is a busy restless bird, always
active among the trees and bushes in search of insects.
319. PTARMIGAN. ( Teirao Lagopus.) It is a very
local species with us, confined to the loftiest mountains of
the north : some few are yet found to the south of the
Tweed, but is more plentiful on some of the Highlands of
Scotland, from which it rarely or never descends, even in
the severest season, when nothing but snow is to be seen,
320. PUFFIN. (Alca Arctica.) These birds appear
on many parts of our rocky coasts about the middle of
April, and begin to breed about the middle of May.
321. PURRES. ( Tringa Cinclus .) The Purre is found
on all our coasts during winter, but seems most partial to
the flat sandy shore.
322. QUAIL. ( Tetrao Coturnix.) This species of
Partridge is found in all parts of the old world, but not in
America. It is a bold bird, and is frequently used in China


for fighting, as we do our Game Cocks. With us they ap-
pear in the beginning of May, and leave us in October.
323. SHOVELLER.
324. CRESTED SHAG. ( Pelicanus Cristatus.) This
bird builds its nest on the highest parts of the cliffs that
overhang the sea on the coasts of Wales and Scotland.
325. SOLAN GOOSE.
326. GAD WALL, ( Anas Streptera.) This species of
Duck is but rarely met with in this country.
327. SCAUP DUCK. {Anas Marila .) These birds are
common in most of our salt water rivers during winter. They
take their name from feeding on scaup, or broken shell fish.
328. SCOTER. {Anas Nigra.) This bird is allowed
in the Romish Church to be eaten in Lent. It is an excel-
lent diver, said to live almost constantly at sea. It is found
in most of the northern parts of the world.
329. PURPLE SANDPIPER. {Tringa Nigricans.)
This is a solitary bird, a few only are met with on our shores-
-330. LITTLE BUSTARD. ( Otis Tetrax.) This beau-
tiful bird is found in many parts of Europe, but no where
common ; two or three instances only are on record of its
being killed in this kingdom. The bird in the Museum was
shot at Rendlesham, Suffolk, in 1824.
331. PROMEROPS. From Africa.
332. GARGANEY.
333. WOOD LARK, ( Alauda Arborea.)
334. VELVET DUCK. ( Anas Fusca.) This is by no
means a common species; a few visiting this country in
severe winters.
335. RUFF and REEVE.
336 and 337, contain a variety of Eggs of some of the
rare British birds.
338. BROWN LINNETS.
339. CINEREOUS SHRIKE.
340. LITTLE AUK.
341. STINT.
342. SANDERLING. ( Charadrius Calidris.). The
Sanderling is found on many of our shores, where it flocks
together with the Purres, but is not so plentiful a species.
343. RED SANDPIPER. {Tringa Islandicus.) This bird
is clearly ascertained to be the Knot in the summer plumage.
344. KING of the VULTURES. {Vultur Papa.) Vul-
tures are the most ravenous of the feathered tribe, gene-
rally devouring only such animals as are dying, or found
{c 2


dead and putrid. Their sense of smelling is so exquisite,
that they are able to scent a dead carcass at an amazing
distance. In some of the battles of the East, where vast
slaughter takes place of horse and men, voracious animals
crowd to the field from all quarters, of which Jackalls and
Vultures are the chief.
345. -GOLDFINCHES.
346. A pair of non-descripts.
347. MALE and FEMALE PHEASANTS, with their
YOUNG. ( Phasianus Colchicus.) The Pheasant is found par-
tially in most parts of England, but not so plentiful in the
north, and rarely seen in Scotland. This bird does not appear
to pair, but the female hides her nest from the male. It is
generally believed the Pheasant and Domestic Fowl will breed
together; if so, possibly the colour of the spurious breed
would depend much on that of the common fowl. It is
more probable the Pied Pheasant first originated from the
Common Pheasant and White Indian Pheasant.
- 348. WHITE or GREENLAND BEAR, and BOA
CONSTRICTOR SERPENT. The White Bear differs
greatly, both in figure and dimensions, from the Brown Bear
of the Alps, and the Black Bear of North America; it is
carnivorous, treacherous, and cruel; it principally lives on
fish. Seals, and dead Whales; White Bears seldom remove
far from the shore; sometimes, however, they are seen on
ice floats several leagues at sea, and are often transported
in this manner to Iceland, where they no sooner arrive than
all the natives are in arms to destroy them. For description
of the Serpent, see No. 209.
349. GREATER REDPOLES. ( Fringilla Cannabina.)
These birds chiefly resort on furzy commons.
350. RING OUZEL. ( Turdus Turquatus.) The Ring
Ouzel is a scarce bird in England, migrating from one
part to another. It is generally believed they do not winter
with us, but are known to breed in Scotland, and in the
north of England.
351. ROACH. ( Cyprinus Rutilus.) This fish is
common in most of our deep still rivers.
352. ROLLER. ( Coracias Garrula .) There are very
few instances of this bird being found in England. It is
found in Germany, Sicily, and Malta.
353. SCOTER.
354. SEAL. ( Pacha Vitulina .) The Seal rs an
excellent swimmer and ready diver, feeds on most sorts ot
fish which it can master ; it sleeps on rocks surrounded by


the sea, and if disturbed by any thing, takes care to tumble
over the rocks into the sea.
350. CHIMNEY SWALLOW. (Ihrundo Rmtica.)
The Swallow seems to be known in all parts ot the world.
It is supposed to winter in Senegal, and probably many
other warm dim fCyprinmTinea.) The Tench has by
some been caned the physician of the fish, and that the
Zeis so healing that the wounded apply it as a styptic.
It loves still waters, and is rarely found river ®- ..
357. ORANGE-HEADED TANAGER. From Brazil.
358. MALABAR SHRIKE. ' .
359 v VIPER. (Colubar Berus.J Vipers are found m
many parts of this Island, but the dry, stony, and particu-
chalky countries abound with them. The four canine
teeth are placed two on each side the upper jaw ; these
instruments of poison are long, crooked, and moveable, and
can be raised a P nd depressed at pleasure; they are hollow
from the point to their base, near which is a gland that
secretes prepares, and lodges the poison, and the same
actiorTthat gfves the wound, forces from this gland through
the tooth the fatal juice into it. The symptoms of the
venom, if the wound be neglected, are very terrible ; it first
causes an acute pain in the place affected attended with a
swelling, first red, afterwards livid, which by degrees sprea
to the Neighbouring parts, faintness and sickness at the
stomach, bilious convulsive vomiting, of
in consequence of these, death itseb. But the violence ot
the symptoms depend much on the size or rage ot the
animal or depth or situation of the wound. The most
certain remedy for its bite is olive oil applied to the wound,
and a quantity taken inwardly.
300. Silver and Copper Roman Goins.
361 and 302. Ancient British Silver Coins.
303. Ancient Copper Coins.
364 and 365. Provincial Coins.
366. BLUE-CRESTED JAY. (Corvus Cnstatus.J A
native of South America. ' ~
367. PAROQUET. From the East Ind es.
368 TURTLE DOVE. ( Columba furturj
369! CRESTED SHRIKE.
370 GREEN FINCHES from Botany Bay.
:!!?• OSPREY. (Taka Halicetus.l Th.s spec.es .s
rareW met with in England; it res.des oh.efly near water,
J c 3


especially large rivers. Its principal food is fish, which it
catches with great dexterity, by pouncing on them with vast
rapidity* and carries them off in its talons.
372. PAROQUET. Prom the West Indies.
373. SPOTTED KINGFISHER. From North America.
374. LESSER TERN.
375. SANDWICH TERNS. (Sterna Boysii.) This
bird was first noticed by Mr. Boys of Sandwich, where it is
not uncommon, and communicated to Dr. Lath am, who first
published an account of it.
. 376. SANDPIPER.
377. FAWN of the WHITE INDIAN DEER.
4 378. SPOON BILL, { Platalea Leuporodia.) This
bird is rarely met with in England.
378. COMMON TERN. (. Sterna Hirundo.) This
bird visits us in summer; is found in great abundance on
our eastern shores.
380. WHEATEARS. ( Sylvia (EnantheO This bird is
a migrative species, appearing with us in March. It princi*
cipally frequents rabbit-warrens; and makes its nest in a
deserted rabbit-burrow.
381. WIDGEON, ( Anas Penelope.) The Widgeon
is found in most parts of Europe; it breeds in the more
northern parts ; visits this country in. the autumn.
382. WRENS and, NEST. {Sylvia Troglodytes.)
This species of Warbler is . common in all parts of
England.
383. REED WRENS. ( Sylvia Arundinacea.) This
is a migrative species; is said to be found in the fens of
Lincolnshire, and on the banks of the river Colne in
Buckinghamshire.
384. GREAT SNIPE.. (Scolopax Major.) This
species is rarely mot with in England ; it was first described
by Mr. Pennant.
385. SWIFT. {Hirundo Apus.j The Swift makes its
appearance with us in May. It is said to inhabit the greater
parts of the old Continent.
386. LANNER. ( Falco Lanarius.) This is a very
bold bird, and was formerly used in falconry. It is now
clearly ascertained to be the Peregrine Falcon in young
plumage.
387. SQUIRRELS. (Sciurus Vvlgfifis,) This animal is
remarkably neat, lively, active, and provident; never leaves
its food to chance, but secures in some hollow tree a vast
magazine of nuts for winter provision. In the summer it


feeds on buds and young shoots, and is paiticularly fond
of those of the fir and pine, and also of the young cones.
It makes its nest of moss between the fork of two branches,
and brings four or five young at a time.
388. KITE. {Falco Milvus.) The Kite generally breeds
in wooded mountainous countries : its motion in the air
distinguishes it from all other birds, being so smooth and
even as to be scarcely perceptible ; from thence is derived
the old name of Glead. Lord Bacon observes, that when
Kites fly high, it portends fair and dry weather. The tail
of this kind is sufficient to distinguish it from all other
British birds of prey, being forked. Pliny thinks that the
invention of the rudder arose from the observation of the
various motions of that part when the Kite was steering
through the air; certain it is, that the most useful arts were
originally copied from animals, however we may now have
improved upon them.
389., PATAGONIAN RATS.
390. GUILLEMOT. ( Uria Troile.) These birds
are found in amazing numbers on the high cliffs on several
of our coasts. They are very simple birds, for notwith-
standing they are shot at, and see their companions killed
by them, they will not quit the rock.
391. RAZOR BILL. ( Aka Torda .) These birds
frequent the highest rocks that impend over the sea, where
they form a grotesque appearance, sitting close together in
rows one above the other.
392. ALLIGATOR. Is a creature that hveth on land
and water. Its body is rough, being covered with a rind so
thick, firm, and strong, that it is almost impenetrable
by any dart or spear. By reason of the shortness of the
legs, its pace is very slow, therefore it is not very difficult
for a man to escape from it by flight, especially if he does
not go straight forward, but turns and winds out of the
direct path, for the Alligator is so hard and stiff, that it
cannot easily turn and wind after him. It inhabits the
West Indies. .
393. SEA WOLF. Is taken at the mouth of the Elbe;
it is of a very voracious nature, and furnished with very
destructive teeth.
394. GOTWIT. (Scolopax JEyocephala .) These birds
are in small flocks on our coasts in September, and conti-
nue with us the whole winter; they walk on the open
lands like the Curlew, and feed on insects.


395. GREENFINCHES.
396. ZEBRA CRAB.
397. BLACK BACKED GULL. (Larus Marinue.)
These birds frequent our coasts in small numbers,'and breed
in the highest cliffs. It feeds not only on fish, but, like the
Raven, very greedily devours carrion.
398. LOACH.
399. BLACK GUILLEMOT.
400. RED BREASTED MERGANSER. (Mergus
Serrator.) • This bird rarely migrates farther south than the
Firth of Forth.
401. FERRUGINUS DUCK. ( Anas Rnfa.) Mr.
Pennant says we do not find it mentioned by any writer
except Linnseus, who took his description from Rudbeck’s
paintings, and adds, that it is found, though rarely, in the
Swedish rivers. This bird was taken in a decoy at Iken,
Suffolk.
402. CORNISH CHOUGH. (Corvus Graculus.') This
species is but thinly scattered over this kingdom, a few only
are found on the coasts of Kent, Cornwall, Carnarvonshire,
and Anglesea. It builds its nest in high cliffs, and lays four
or five eggs, white, spotted with dirty yellow.
403. NORTHERN DIVER. (Colymbns Glacialis.)
These birds inhabit the northern parts of this island ; live
chiefly at sea, and feed on fish. There is no doubt but the
Great Loon (Mergus Stellatus ) is the young of this bird.
404. FULMER. ( Forcellaria Glacialis .) This spe-
cies inhabits the Isle of St. Kilda. No bird is of equal use
to the islanders as this ; the Fulmer furnishes them with
oil for their lamps, down for their beds, a delicacy for their
tables, a balm for their wounds, and a medicine for their
distempers.
405. BLACK-TOED GULL. (Cepplius.) A few of
these birds are to be met with in the north of Scotland. It
is the opinion of many naturalists to be the young of the
Arctic Gull.
406. SMEW. ( Mergus Alhellus.) This bird appears
to be more rare than formerly, a few only are seen in severe
winters.
407. STONE CURLEW.
408. SEA SWALLOW.
■ 409. BOAT BILL. It inhabits South America.
410. TURNSTONES. (Tringa Morinellus .) These
birds take their name from their method of searching for


food bv turning up small stones with their bills to get at
tlmbsects thaf Jk under them They are found
east coast of this kingdom in small companies of foui or five.
410 TWITES, or MOUNTAIN LINNETS. [Lenaria
Montana .) These birds visit the eastern coast of this king-
dom in December, and depart again in March. It is afa
liar bird and more easily tamed than the common Linnet.
418. SPOTTED GALLINULE. (Rallus Porzana.)
This* species is not very frequent in Great Britain, t in-
habits the sides of small streams, concealing itself ambng
th 414 edS pUFFINS. (Alca Arctica.) These birds frequent
the coasts of several parts of Great Bnt^ n ps a "^ r e el i s n l e’
but no place in greater numbers than
off the coast of Anglesea where their flocks may be
compared to swarms of bees for multitude. Thwe‘
of passage; resort thither in April, and dispossessing the
rabbits o g f their holes, occupy them till August, f
all disappear. They lay but one egg, w ie,
size of that of a hen. ,
415. LESSER PARROT. From Bermuda.
41(j CRESTED SHRIKE. From Peru.
41?’. SILKY CHATTERER. From North America.
418. MEXICAN TOUCAN,
aio RUBY HUMMING-BIRD.
So SWALLOW-TAILED HUMMING-BIRD-
*Z. EGRETS, MALE and FEMALE, (Ardca Ga r-
zetta ) This is one of the smallest, as well as the most
elegant of the Heron tribe: its shape is delicate, and the
plumage white as snow; but what constitute its P" nc T
beauty are the soft, silky, flowing plumes on the head
breast, and shoulders; they consist of single slender shafts
thinlv set with pairs of fine soft threads, which float on the
shghLst b7eath P of air. Those which arise from the should-
ers* are extended over the back, and flow beyond the taj .
These plumes were formerly used to decorate the helmets
of warriors: they are now applied to a gentler and better
purpose, in ornamenting the head-dresses P
ladies, and the turbans of the Persians and Turks,
found in almost every temperate and warm chmate
40Q SUN FISH. (Ostracnan Lcevis.) Ihisnsn grows
to atry large size. When boiled, it has been observed to
turn into a glutinous substance.


423. RAIL. From Mexico.
Amertca. GREAT TOUCAN * From the interior of South
ton nf’ih A k LP^ NE o HARI ?; < Le P us Var iabilis.J On the very
fnLlth 6 t lB;heS l ? cott,sh m °untains with the Ptarmigans is
Ind 1?“* beaut,ful S P QCI S S of Hare. It is very easily tamed,
. mO / 6 familiar than the common Hare.
427. INDUN SPOTT ED DEER.
428. ITALIAN MONK BIRD.
429. SCOPS OWL.
* WEEVIL BIRD - Inhabits Mexico.
432* ?nS M AN AKIN . From Bermuda.
433' / C « CK ?°‘. Inhabits S °uth America.
4 33. SWIFT. (thrundo Apus.) This appears in our
country about fourteen days later than the Sand Martin
but d'fFers greatly in the time of its departure, retiring inva-
gStnir' 6 of ** *** &
434. SHIELDUCKS. ( Anas Tadorna.) These birds
frequent the sea coast, and breed in rabbit-holes.
k.-j 3 ( Motacilla Phoenicurus.) This
eh^rvZT 8 Wth US ° . m the Sprinff and summer, and is
S SEA LARK W * Ni & htin gule.
437. SEAL.
438. GREENSHANK. (Scolopax Glottis.) This species
is not numerous in England. I have found it in small flocks
county of Essex. ““ “ adjaCei “ the sea shore in the
439. MISTEE TKRraH. {Tardus Major.) This is
distinguished from al! the kind by its superioi size. It may
be obse rv ed that this is the largest bird, British or Foreign
(within our knowledge), that sings, or has any harmony in
note, the notes of all superior being either screaming,
cr '? r cbattenn £» &c. the pigeon kind excepted.
, Contain V T „f eat variet y of the most rare aud
beautiful species of BRITISH BUTTERFLIES & MOTHS:
creatures whose elegance and variety of beauty demand our
admiration. Ignorance long imagined them the spon-
rhlnZ* Pr ° dUCt,ol |. °, f Putrifying matter and undesigning
m Ca V SBS as llttle able to form an animal as to create
a worm ; but the discoveries of naturalists rectified that
mistake, and proved them to proceed from parents like


themselves, after a constant, though wonderful order of
generation. The pregnant female with unerring sagacity
deposits her eggs in some secure concealment, where the
infant brood may find as soon as hatched immediate and
proper sustenance; here they feed and thrive, and cast off
several skins, till arrived at full growth, when every species
in a manner peculiar to itself, is changed into an Aurelia ;
whence in due time a Moth or Butterfly issues forth, arrayed
with all the glories of its parent. This too partakes of the
joy of love, lays eggs, and dies. And thus one race suc-
ceeds another in an uniform and unadulterated manner
441. GREY SANDPIPER.
442. MEXICAN KINGFISHER.
443. SISKINS. (Fringilla Spinus.)
444. LAPWINGS.
445. CANADENSIS. These birds are found in various
parts of North America.
446. SMYRNA KINGFISHER.
447. BENGAL KINGFISHER.
448. GOAT-SUCKER.
449. GOSHAWK. (Falco Palumbarius.) The Gos-
hawk was in esteem among Falconers, and flown at cranes,
geese, pheasants, and partridges: is found in the North of
Scotland.
450. EARED GREBE. This is the most rare of this
species : has been taken in the counties of Norfolk, Suffolk
and Lincoln.
451. GOLDEN PHEASANTS.
452. VAMPIRE.
453. ARCTIC GULLS.
454. FLYCATCHER. (Muscicapa Grisola.) The
Flycatcher is a bird of passage, appears in the spring
breeds with us, and retires in August.
455. CAMELION. The Camelion has continued as
it were blown up for two hours together, and then he grows
less and less, insensibly, for the dilation is always more
quick and visible than the contraction ; in this last state he
appears extremely lean, and the spine of the back sharp,'
and all his ribs may be told; the skin is very cold to the
touch; and notwithstanding he appears so lean, there is
no feeling the beating of the heart; the surface of the
skin is unequal, and has a grain not unlike shagreen, but very
soft, because each eminence is as smooth asif it were polished.
456. BLACK TERNS. (Sterna Fissipes.) This species,


like the rest of the Terns, frequents the sea shores in
summer, but its habits and manners are somewhat different.
It does not associate with them.
457. CROSS BILLS.
458. MERGANSER.
459. RAVEN. ( Corvus Corax.) The Raven is well
known in all parts of the world, and in times of ignorance
and superstition, was considered as ominous, foretelling
future events by its horrid croakings, and announcing
impending calamities.
460. MOOR BUZZARD.
461. CRESTED GREBE.
462. PERUVIAN TOUCAN.
463. TREE SPARROW. ( Fringilla Montana.) This
species is sometimes met with in Yorkshire, Lancashire,
also in Lincolnshire and Suffolk.
464. DARTFORD WARBLER. ( Sylvia Dartfordiensis.)
This seems to be rare in this country, and owes its name
with us to the accident of a pair of them having been seen
near Dartford in Kent, a few years ago; since that, many
have been taken near Dartford, and winter with us.
465. BOA SERPENT.
466. MEXICAN TOUCAN.
467. REDSHANKS.
468. WATER OUZEL.
469. Non-descript.
470. SEDGE WARBLER. ( Sylvia Salicaria.) This
bird is found where reeds and sedges grow, it likewise fre-
quents the sides of rivers and ponds where there is covert.
471. EAGLE OWL. ( Strix Bubo.) This is the
largest of the Owl genus, being almost equal in size to an
Eagle, and has a powerful as well as dignified look. These
birds are sometimes met with in the northern Scottish
isles, where they prey upon Rabbits and Grouse.
472. SOLITARY THRUSH. ( Turdus Solitarius.)
Latham says this bird is frequent in France, Italy, the Isles
of the Mediterranean and the Archipelago, and other parts
of Europe.
473. MOUNTAIN FINCH.
474. ROCK LARK. ( Alauda Campestris.) This bird
is mostly met with among the rocks on the promontories
and isles near the sea shore.
475. CAPE COLA. This bird is found plentiful in
the wooded parts of the Cape of Good Hope. _


476. FIELD LARK. (Alauda Minor ) This bird fre-
quents woods and plantations. Its note is full, clear, and
melodious, and peculiar to its kind.
477. GRASSHOPPER WARBLER. (Sylvia Locustella.J
This bird is seldom seen, and is best known by the length-
ened grinding or sibulous noise which it is heard to make
about the dusk of a still summer’s evening.
478. LION and LIONESS. The Lion is the noblest and
most tremendous of all animals; his form and appearance
are strikingly bold and majestic, his large head and shaggy
pendant main, his strength of limb and formidable coun-
tenance, exhibit a picture of terrific grandeur; his voice
when irritated is a horrible roar. He usually preys on horses
and other large animals, and does not often attack mankind.
So prodigious is its strength, that a single stroke of its paw
is sufficient to break the back of a horse. The seizing upon
its prey is generally accompanied with a loud and tremendous
roar. When in quest of food, his roaring is even said to
resemble distant thunder. He does not willingly attack any
animal openly, unless provoked, or extremely hungry 3 in the
latter case he is said to see no danger, and to be repelled by
no resistance. The method in which he takes his prey is
almost always to spring or throw himself upon it with one
bound from the place of his concealment. The Romans
frequently exhibited these animals in their public shows.
Hanno, a Carthagenian, is said to have been the first person
who tamed a Lion 5 and he was condemned to die for what his
fellow citizens deemed so great a crime. They asserted that
the republic had to fear the worst of consequences from a
man who had been able to subdue so much ferocity. The
Lion has often been known to despise contemptible enemies,
and even to spare the lives of such creatures as have been
thrown to him for the purpose of being devoured. In con-
finement they each devour about four pounds weight of raw
flesh every day.
479. BADGER.
480. JAVA HARE.
481. BLACK GROUSE. ,
482. NUTCRACKER. (Corvus Caryocatacies.J There
are very few instances known of this bird having been seen
in England j .it is more common in Germany, and is found
also in Sweden and Denmark, and frequents the most
mountainous parts of these countries. The bird in the
Museum was shot in the parish of Holton, Suffolk, in
D


June, 1824. Pennant mentions but one being killed in this
kingdom.
483. CROCODILE. Of this terrible animal there are
two kinds j the Crocodile, properly so called, and the Cay-
man or Alligator. The distinctions usually made between
those animals are these 5 the body of the Crocodile is more
slender than that of the Alligator, its snout runs off tapering
from the head, like that of a greyhound, while that of the
other is indented like the nose of a lapdog. The Crocodile
has also a much wider swallow, and is of an ash colour. It
seldom leaves the water, except when pressed by hunger, or
to deposit its eggs. Its usual method is to float upon the
surface, and seize whatever animals come within its reach j
but when this method fails, it then goes closer to the bank.
Disappointed of its fishy prey, it there waits, covered up
among the sedges, in patient expectation of some land
animal that may come to drink. It then seizes the victim
at a spring, and having secured the creature with both
teeth and claws, it drags it into the water, and instantly sinks
with it to the bottom. It sometimes happens that the crea-
ture the Crocodile has thus surprised, escapes from its grasp
wounded, and makes off from the river side. In such a case
the tyrant pursues with all its force, and often seizes it a
second time j for, though seemingly heavy, the Crocodile
runs with great celerity. In this manner it is sometimes
seen above half a mile from the bank, in pursuit of an animal,
wounded beyond the power of escaping, and then dragging
it back to the river side, where it feasts in security. There
is no animal, but man alone, that can combat it with suc-
cess. We are assured by Labat, that a negro, with no
other weapons than a knife in his hand, and his left arm
wrapped round with a cow’s hide, ventures boldly to attack
the animal in his own element. As soon as he approaches
the Crocodile, he presents his left arm, which the animal
swallows most greedily ; but sticking in his throat, the
negro has time to give him several stabs under the throat ■,
and the water getting in at the mouth, which is involun-
tarily open, the creature is soon bloated up as big as a tun,
and expires,
485. MEXICAN ORIOLE,
486. WOOD SHRIKE. Inhabits Mexico.
487. CRESTED WOODPECKER. Inhabits Africa.
488. RED-HEADED FINCHES. From Trinidad.
489. YACOU. From South America.


490. SWALLOW-TAILED GOATSUCKER. This
extraordinary formed bird is from the interior of South
America.
491. YELLOW - BREASTED TOUCAN. From
Mexico.
49*2. FLYING SQUIRREL. From North America.
493. HARLEQUIN SNAKE. From Mexico.
494. RED-TAILED MONKEY. Inhabits the woods
on the banks of the river Amazon.
495. STRAITED MONKEY. From Brazil.
496. BLUE-FACED SATYR, It inhabits the hottest
parts of Africa, and lives on succulent fruits and nuts.
They are extremely dexterous in throwing the fruit from one
to another.
497- RING-TAILED MONKEY. Is found in Cochin,
China, and in the Island of Madagascar.
498. COMMON MONKEY: Is a native of Barbary,
and other northern parts of Africa, Arabia, and Persia.
499. LION MONKEY. This beautiful little animal
is a native of Guinea, is very gentle and lively, feeds on
fruits, vegetables, and insects.
500. GENNET. They are said to be very cleanly and
industrious, and to keep houses perfectly clear from rats
and mice, which cannot endure their smell. Inhabit Turkey.
501. ICHNEUMON. This animal has a universal
appetite for carnage, and a great variety of powers to pro-
cure it. Rats, mice, birds, serpents, lizards, and insects
are all equally pursued. It attacks every living thing which
it is able to overcome, and indiscriminately preys on flesh of
all kinds.
502. JAVA RAT.
503. LAPLAND RAT.
504. AMERICAN HARE.
505. PANTHER.
506. STURGEON. Sturgeons are found in the Euro-
pean and American Seas; they are not voracious fish, but
evidently live by suction,
507. CASSOWARY’S EGG.
508. SAW FISH.
509. DOLPHIN. This fish inhabits the European
and Pacific Oceans. The flesh, though tolerably well
tasted, is dry and insipid, the best parts are near the head,
it is seldom eaten but when young and tender. Dolphins
are said to change their color before they die, and again
after they are dead.
d 2


510. VIOLET or HORSE-SHOE CRAB. An inha-
bitant of the Indian Seas,
511. YOUNG of the SEA TURTLE.
512. SOLDIER CRAB. From the East Indies.
513. BARGE. This fish is taken plentifully on the
coasts of Cornwall and Devon.
514. A species of Trout called the HOPPER.
515. GREY GURNARD.
516. RED MULLET. This is a delicious fish, taken
on the western coast in the months of July and August.
517. MACKEREL.
518. GOURD FISH.
519. Fresh-water CRAW FISH.
520. SPIDER CRAB.
521. JOHN DOREE. This fish lives in all climates,
being found, according to different authors, at Brazil, Jamaica,
the Antilles, the East Indies, and Malta.
522. WRATH.
623. BULLHEAD.
524. ROCK LING.
525. FLYING GURNARD.
626. PILCHARD.
527. CRAW FISH
525, RIBLED BILL TOUCAN. This bird is a native
of Guinea and Brazil.
529. HORNBILL TOUCAN. This bird is found on
the Coast of Malabar. It feeds on fruit and vegetables.
550. BRAZILIAN WOODPECKER.
531. BUFF HEADED WOODPECKER, from America.
532. LITTLE BITTERN. (.Ardia Minuta.) This rare
bird is said to be found only in solitary marshes. The bird
in the Museum was shot near Hern Bay, Kent.
533. OSTRICH’S EGG.
534. MONITOR LIZARD, from Jamaica.


INSECTS.
535. Blue Argus from China
536. Egyptian Locusts
537. American Locusts
538. Brazilian Insects.
539. Elephant Beetle
540. Rhinoceros Beetle
541. Hercules Beetle
542. Sentipede
543. Scorpion
544. Tarantula Spider
545. British Butterflies
546. Chinese Insects
547. British Butterflies & Moths
548. South American Butterflies
549. British Butterflies & Moths
550. Brazilian Butterflies
551. British Butterflies & Moths
552. British Beetles
553. New Zealand Moth
554. Atlas Moth, from China
555. Brazilian Butterflies
556. South American Butterflies
557. British Butterflies
558. British Moths
559. Death’s Head Moth
560. Butterflies from the South
Sea Islands
561. Mole Cricket
562. Stag Horned Beetle
563. Swallow-tail
564. Long White
565. Small White
566. Green-veined White
567. Wood White
568. Black-veined White
569. Orange Tip
570. Clouded Yellow
571. Clouded Sulphur
572. Pale Clouded Yellow
573. Brimstone
574. Ringlet ’
575. Small Ringlet
576. Small Heath
577. Peacock
578. Purple Emperor
579. Painted Lady
580. Grayling
581. Marbled White
582. Wall
583. Speckled Wood
584. Meadow Brown
585. Large Heath
586. Comma
587. Small Tortoiseshell
588. Large Tortoiseshell
589. White Admiral
590. Red Admiral
591. Silver-washed Fritillary
592. Dark green Fritillary
593. Queen of Spain Fritillary
594. High brown Fritillary
595. Pearl-bordered Fritillary
596. Small Pearl-bordered Fri-
tillary
597. Pearl-bordered likeness
Fritillary
598. Glanvill Fritillary
599. Greasy Fritillary
600. Duke of Burgundy Fn-
tillary
601. Brown Hairstreak
602. Black Hairstreak
603. Purple Hairstreak
604. Green Hairstreak
605. Large Copper
606. Common Copper
607. Chalk-hill Blue
608. Pink Argus
609. Clifden Blue
610. Common Blue
D 3


611. Light Blue
612. Silver-studded Blue
613. Brown Argus
614. Azure Blue
615. Mazarine Blue
616. Small Blue
617. Silver-spotted Skipper
618. Large Skipper
619. Small Skipper
620. Dingy Skipper
621. Grizzled Skipper
622. Dragon Flies
MINERALS, &c
623. Arragonite
624. Oxide of Iron
625. Asbestos
626. Sulphuret of Iron
627. Crystallized Quartz
628. Chalcedony
629. Opal
630. Fluor, various
631. Carbonate of Lime
632. Native Copper
633. Carbonate of Copper
634. Arseniate of Copper
635. Sulphuret of Copper
636. Copper Pyrites
637. Blistered Manganese
638. Felspar
639. Specular Iron
640. Gypsum
641. Load Stone
642. Mundic
643. Mica
644. Talc
645. Satin Spar
646. Peacock Coal
647. Petrifaction
648. Flame Stone
649. Mineral Pitch
650. Moss Agates
651. Sand Agates
652. Scotch Pebbles
653. Egyptian Pebbles
654. Tin Ore
655. Lead Ore
656. Schorle
SHELLS.
657. Fawn Needle
658. Tiger Spire
659. Embroidered Crane
660. Rusty Screw
661. Ribbed Screw
662. Scaly Chiton
663. Brindled Tellen
664. Muriated Pinna
665. Red Solen
666. Pease-cod Razor Sheath
667 Common English Pecten
668. Thorny Oyster
669. Toothed Wedge Shell
670. Common Eatable Cockle
671. Ass’s-ear Alotus
672. Pelican’s-foot Alotus
673. Thorny Woodcock
674. Aculcated Triplex
675. Staircase Trochus
676. Hammer Oyster
677. Shuttle Shell
678. British Shells
679. Apple Snail
680. Ram’s-horn Snail


681» Ear Shell
682. Spider Shell
683. Harp Shell
684. Paper Nautilus
685. Chambered Nautilus
686. Spiral Nautilus
687. Mosaic Cone
688. Hebrew Cone
689. Nutmeg Cowry
690. Black - a - moor’s Tooth
Cowry
691. Mouse Cowry
692. White Bulla or Dipper
693. Common Olive
694. Music Volute
695. Bishop’s Mitre
696. Wide Mouth Scoop
697. Ribbed Tun
698. Draft-board Helmet
699. Melon Shells
700. Helmet Shells
701. Camp Shells
A VARIETY OF ARTICLES FROM THE
SOUTH SEA ISLANDS, &c.
702. The HEAD of an OTAHEITAN CHIEFTAIN,
curiously embalmed in a manner entirely unknown to Euro-
peans, where the benignity of the countenance, peculiar to
the tribe, is finely expressed ■; the silky black hair, olive
complexion, and tattooing of the whole face, present an inte-
resting object.
703. The HEAD of a NEW ZEALAND CHIEFTAIN.
The ferocity of his countenance, the short bristly hair on the
front, contrasted with the long stiff curls on the back part of
the head, the amocoed face, high cheek bones, and thick lips of
this Warrior, have a terrific appearance.
704. SPECIMENS of the CLOTH of the OTAHEITANS,
formed from the fibrous bark of the mulberry tree, beaten
into its present state by a kind of mallet,, and cemented by a
kind of glue made of the Hibiscus Esculentus.
705. A FLY WHISP, formed of a peculiarly hard wood,
and beautifully ornamented with carving done by muscle
shells ; it is used for brushing off the musquitoes.
706. A singularly elegant HEAD DRESS, formed from the
skin of a bird peculiar to the Society Islands.
707. The BELT of a WARRIOR, made by fibres of the
cocoa nut, ornamented with the teeth and jaw-bones of small
animals.
708. A beautiful OTAHEITAN HEAD-DRESS, formed
by the fibres of the cocoa nut, and feathers of the European


Fowls, introduced into that country by Captain Cook on his
last visit.
709. A PAIR of SHOES from New Zealand.
710. A beautiful APRON, composed of the pafilla, perforata,
and fibres of the cocoa nut, worn by women of distinction in
New Zealand.
711. The TATTOOING INSTRUMENT used by the
natives of Otaheite.
712. A NECKLACE, formed of animal bones and small
shells, from New Zealand.
713. A THIGH ORNAMENT of a chieftain of Otaheite.
714. A THIGH ORNAMENT of a person of less dis-
tinction.
713. A THIGH ORNAMENT of a common person.
716. A HEAD DRESS, most beautifully wrought with
human hair from Otaheite.
717. A HEAD DRESS from New Zealand, made with the
hair of a Negro.
718. An ORNAMENTAL COMB, beautifully wrought with
fibres of the cocoa nut.
719. An INDIAN WAR RATTLE.
720. EAR DROPS, taken from Tippo Saib’s party.
721. Various kinds of FISH HOOKS, used by the
Otaheitans.
722. A FEATHERED HELMET, worn in battle by the
New Zealanders.
723. CHINESE SHOES.
724. LITTLE BITTERN. ( Ardea Minnta.) This bird was
shot near Hern Bay, in Kent.
725. BROWN CUCKOO, from Trinidad.
726. WHITE-THROATED TOUCAN, from the interior of
Mexico.
727. YACOU, a native of South Araeri ca.


LINES
Addressed to the Head of the Otaheitan Chieftain.
Wert thou a Chieftain of a distant shore"?
Did Valour’s blood flow through thy shrunken veins"?
Did minions call thee great, in days of yore.
And huzza thy career through gore-staiu’d plains 1
What mean the curious indented lines,
The segments and the circles on thy face ?
Were they the meed for which Ambition pines 1
Or emblems of thy country, rank, or race f
Thy hair is all dishevell’d—ebon locks
Hang o’er thy olive brow, and others seem
Thy shoulders to have mantled, ere the knocks
Of Tomahawk and Battle Axe they dream.
Thy fev’rish dream of glory clos’d in death,
Thy scalp displays two ghastly wounds, the bone
Shining, white, compact, lies firm beneath,
As when thou struggling heav’st the dying groan.
But now all motionless before me lies
This Otaheitan Head,—and when I seek
Knowledge whereon I long might moralize.
Not one response can the dried casement make.
The skull long tenantless, o’er sea and laud
Has pass’d unconscious through their varying scenes ;
Alike the verdant plain, the fading strand.
And all the wide expanse which intervenes.


Or I would ask, ’midst all thy travels past
Has ought more lovely to thine eyes appear’d
Than those deep shades wherein thy hut was cast.
And infant frame to hardy manhood rear’d 1
Have the proud arts and sciences we boast,
The heights of learning which we proudly soar,
The long solicitude of thought they cost,
Increas’d of happiness our meagre store 1
Or with thy banana and bread fruit tree,
Thy fish and cocoa nuts, wert thou as blest,
With simpler food, in ruder life as we,
„ Who are of countless luxuries possest 1
And thou hast pass’d the portals of the grave ;
O ! say—do there distinctions still survive 1
Are vengeful tyrants here, there called the brave 1
Or scorn d as bloody monsters do they live 1
Are sages there, contemplative still seen,
O’er states beyond that state they long have pass’d ?
Or are their brows for ever now serene,
la spheres which eternity will last ?
And is, 0 ! say, th’ Almighty there enshrin’d
In glory, far our thoughts above ;
Beneficent alike to all mankind.
Whose lives were spent in meriting his love 1
In vain I question thee, thou monument
Of what was valiant—frail mortality !
But now a brainless skull whose walls are rent
By time, and mould’ring into kindred clay !


AN ADDRESS TO THE MUSEUM.
By the REV. W. HARRISON.
Pv more, Oct. 30,1824.
SEAMAN, a tributary lay
Thy beauteous scenes demand,
Which ’midst the wonders of the day,
Without an equal stand.
Struck with emotions of delight.
At what therein I view’d,
I could have tarried through the night,
With pleasure still renew’d.
There meet what every soil bestows,
From India’s burning zone,
To where stern winter piles his snows,
Around his arctic throne;
Affording all the traveller’s joy,
Without his toils and frights.
Which but too oft the bliss destroy
That novelty excites.
From the equator to the pole
Enraptur’d fancy runs.
Unfrozen at her Northern goal;
Unburnt with torrid suns.
There tame the lordly lion dwells.
And thirsts for blood no more ;
Nor fills the air with dying yells,
Or death-denouncing roar.
There harmless alligators lay.
As by their native Nile,
And round his vainly-struggling prey
The serpent twists his coil.
And there, with neither need or cause
Of fear or fortitude,
The tattle snake distends his jaws,
With poison’d fangs endu’d.
With open mouth the pard appears,
In attitude to kill,
While from his coil the viper rears.
As meditating ill.
The sword fish there his station keeps,
Array’d in shining mail,
No more the tyrant of the deeps,
Or terror of the whale.


But surely such a tribe of birds
Ne’er in one group appear’d.
As this delightful scene affords,
Since Noah’s ark was clear’d :
From the wild ostrich swift and tall,
Down to the humming race;
With thousands not so large or small.
To fill the middle space.
There too the flying fish, and bat.
With Nature’s plan accord,
This joins the fowl and fish, while that
Unites the beast and bird.
What insects too arrest our eyes.
Of every class and name,
Which for their beauty, form, and size.
Our admiration claim.
From these *, that once in countless swarms
Were messengers of wrath.
To those whose diminutive forms
Enliven every path.
In short, where’er our optics turn.
New wonders we explore;
And latent beauties still discern.
Which past unseen before.
But while this well connected plan
So gratifies the view.
Let us beware of giving man
What is his Maker’s due.
Though honour to the artist’s skill,
Is but his lawful meed,
Our praise ascending higher still,
Should up to God proceed.
If these so fair and perfect seem,
How unconceiv’d, unheard.
Must be the power of the Supreme,
Who form’d them with a ward.
They are thy works, Almighty Sire !
And teach us more and more.
What time we wonder and admire,
To wonder and adore I
W. HARRISON.
To Mr. Seaman,
Leverian Museum, Ely.
D. Cartwright, Printer, 91, Bartholomew Close.
* Locusts.
