

THE TRUE FACTS OF
Australia’s Greatest
COMMONWEALTH (ILLUSTRATED) 2nd EDITION
EILEEN WALSH
Double
Murder
Mystery
Act. Set. CUMMING
THE
BURNING
QUESTION.
Who murdered Act. Sgt. Cumming
and Mrs Eileen Walsh at Brisbane
23rd DECEMBER, 1926?
£500 Reward for a Solution
1/-
HERE. AND
EVERYWHERE




All Rights Reserved by the Sole Distributors throughout Australia.
NIELSEN & SIMMONS,
562, Stanley Street, South Brisbane.
’phone: J 4081. Box 875 L, G.P.O.
PREFACE.
As long as life and memory last, it will be patent that “Aus-
tralia’s Greatest Double Murder Mystery” was the'outcome of an
illegal love affair between Eileen Gladys Walsh, a married woman,
and Acting-Sergeant Marquis Cumming, of the Queensland Police
Force, when death struck the guilty pair in a last embrace on the
evening of the 23rd December, 1926, in the Railway Reserve near
the Brisbane Gaol, and thus wrote “finish” to a frightful double
murder.
All efforts of the police have so far proved of no avail, neither
did the magisterial enquiry held at Brisbane in June, 1927, reveal
sufficient prima facie evidence to present an indictment against any
person or persons of premeditated murder.
The evidence given at the police enquiry by the various wit-
nesses in some instances was very conflicting, and tended to con-
clude that some party or other did not volunteer all their matter-
of-fact knowledge of the gruesome tragedy.
No reward has been offered up to date by the Queensland Gov-
ernment, nor has it ever been suggested. “Smith’s Weekly,” how-
ever, has offered £5OO for a solution. The police are ceaseless in
their investigations. Meanwhile the depositions of the tragedy are
held up at the Crown Law Office, and the mystery of who murdered
Acting-Sergeant Cumming and Mrs. Walsh deepens with the passage
of time.
In my efforts to publish a strictly authentic account of all the
facts pertaining to the tragedy, I have in no way endeavoured to
criticise them, or to condemn them, but to understand them.
F. J.


“Oh, Death, Where Is Thy Sting.”
Acting Sergeant Marquis Cumming.


“Oh, Grave, Where Is Thy Victory.”
Mrs. Eileen Gladys Walsh.


Australia’s
Greatest
Double
Murder
Mystery.
A/Sgt. Cumming.
The lifeless form of Acting Police Sergeant Cumming, well-
known throughout Brisbane and District, and the stark body of Mrs.
Eileen Gladys Walsh were discovered lying side by side on a grassy
patch in a paddock near the Brisbane Gaol in the early morning of
the 24th December, 1926.
At the back of the head of each body a gaping wound revealed
where a bullet had crashed through the skull, and it was evident
that the pair had been surprised in a guilty love embrace and shot
dead where they lay.
Murder, and murder of a most shocking nature had been
enacted within a stone’s throw of Boggo Road Gaol, the bleak home
of homicidal men and women.
The first train from Sunnybank, thronged with cheery passen-
gers who were bound for the City before the hustle and bustle of
Xmas Eve shopping commenced, had hardly pulled into Park Road
station when it ran abreast of the scene of an atrocious crime.
Train Driver Mead and Fireman Turner, with eyes fixed on the
signal just ahead, noticed fhe ominously still forms of a man and
woman stretched out in the paddock near the line.
The one swift glance they got of the blanched and upturned
faces caused them to suspect that here was death in its most grue-
some aspect.
When the train drew in at Park Road station, they hastened to
communicate what they saw to the Station Master, and with all
possible speed that official got into touch with the police.
Immediately posses of detectives, plain clothes constables and
uniform police were rushed to the scene, and when they got there
the worst fears of the train driver and fireman were confirmed.
The police found the body of Acting Sergeant Cumming and
Mrs. Walsh lying side by side. The pallid faces of the pair were
turned towards the sky. They were stretched out with their feet
towards the railway line, and their heads pointing in the direction
of the Boggo Road Gaol wall.


The clothes of both victims were disarranged and the heads
were encircled by pools of blood.
Dr. Espie Dods, Government Medical Officer, was called to the
scene. He examined the bodies and found that a bullet had entered
the back of each skull, penetrating the brain and causing instan-
taneous death.
Obviously the pair had been surprised in an illicit attitude and
it was patent that whoever committed the murder had crept up
behind them and with two swift shots despatched them both from
this earth.
There was no sign of a struggle. Sergeant Cumming, it is
presumed, was shot first. With a frantic, desperate gesture, he
tried to rise, but fell on his back and moved no more.
The killing of the woman obviously came a moment later. She
too must have made a vain effort to get up in order to try and
escape the assassin’s bullet, but the revolver, it appears, was quickly
thrust against the back of her head and the trigger pressed.
Like her paramour, she at once fell to the ground never to rise
again.
The spot where the crime was committed is a well-know rendez-
vous for canoodling couples.
As a trysting place it is, in fact, a most uninviting centre, sur-
rounded as it is by unpretentious factory sheds frowned upon by
the high walls of the famous gaol and skirted by a rubbish strewn
track which is called Railway Reserve.
The railway line passes along the edge of the paddock and a
scrub covered enbankment leads us to the rails at one end of the
Reserve, while the other end is cut off short by a paling fence, on the
other side of which the resident area of that locality begins.
It was around these boundaries that the police cordon was
speedily drawn. Uniformed men guarded every accessible point of
the Reserve, and the C.I. Branch, under the supervision of Inspector
Lipp, from Roma Street, began minutely to examine- every yard of
the ground for spent revolver cartridges and every other particle
of evidence that, might lead to the discovery of a tangible clue.
Meanwhile, Black Tracker Corporal Munro anxiously and closely
followed by police officers was busily searching around like a hound
on the trail for any tell-tale footprints.
At times the aboriginal crept on all fours around spots where
tracks were likely to have been left. Then he would rise, walk a
few steps in one direction, only to return to his starting point,
baffled.
The dark skinned sleuth met obstacles at every turn. Tracking
in the bush ?s a comparatively easy matter compared with the track-
ing he was called upon to do at this scene, for what footprints he
did come across told him nothing.
However, towards 11 a.m., the search of the constables who
were seeking for spent shells was rewarded. Not many yards from
where the bodies were lying two recently exploded automatic
revolver cartridges were found.
What motive lay at the back of the crime ? That was the ques-
tion which then confronted the police.


It was revealed that the murdered woman was living apart
from her husband, and that the murdered man was no recent
acquaintance of hers.
Although the police officer was a married man, living with his
wife and four children at Wilton Street, Woolloongabba, he was
known to have had frequent conversations with the dead woman,
who resided with her mother at Stephens Road, South Brisbane.
Soon after the discovery of the two spent bullets, word was
brought that a tramway man had on the previous evening distinctly
heard three shots. Detectives were sent post haste to locate this
man, and the story that three shots had in fact been fired was
repeated.
Bearing this in mind, the theory was formed that whoever had
inflicted the fatal wounds had afterwards turned the gun upon
himself. In consequence, an exhaustive search was then commenced
for a third body.
The nearby mud dumps, the bushes surrounding the paddock,
gullies, and all conceivable hiding places were combed by those who
composed quite a small army of police searchers. But no trace of a
third person was found.
During the earlier part of these investigations, the two stiff
corpses, gauntly stretched out on the blook-soaked grassy bed, lay
unprotected from the growing force of the sun, presenting a ghastly
spectacle.
The tresses of the woman were matted, and the blouse which
covered her shoulders was stained a deep red. Round the collar
of the sergeant’s uniform blood had congealed, and his right arm
was stretched outwards as if to indicate that he had made an effort
to strike round at his sudden attacker.
It was a sight unfit to see, and when crowds of curious people
began to gather at the fence, a tarpaulin was sent for and was
thrown across the disfigured bodies.
Soon afterwards an undertaker’s waggon was driven down to
the paddock, and the bodies of the murdered pair were lifted into it
and driven away to the morgue.
When the news of the sergeant’s terrible end was carried to his
home, there was a scene of grief which beggars description.
As in all homes at this time of the year, there existed on that
fateful evening in that Cumming household a'spirit of good cheer
and fanciful anticipation of the coming joys and festivities of Xmas.
Sergeant Cumming was expected home soon after 10 p.m., which
was the hour that his duties ended at the South Brisbane Police
Station. But when the hands of the clock reached and passed that
hour, there was no sound of the familiar footsteps on the path that
leads to home.
The grim realisation that they would never again hear those
footsteps or the voice they knew so well never for an instant dawned
upon the imagination of his wife and children who awaited his
homecoming.
Eleven o’clock was reached and then midnight came and passed.
The agony of suspense became unbearable for the wife, who, at
least, was familiar with the vicissitudes of a policeman’s life, and


Womanlike, imagined her husband in all manner of dangers.
That he was even then stretched out stiff and stark with glassy
eyes peering towards the starry sky and his body growing cold with
the chill of death was a fact that she did not learn until the next
morning.
At the South Brisbane Police Station fears for the safety of
the sergeant were also entertained. When he failed to report, his
fellow officers began to make inquiries as to where he might have
gone.
There were several probabilities. For all they knew he might
have arrested someone and made his way to the City watchhouse,
but inquiry in that direction proved fruitless.
On the other hand, it was reasoned that he might have been
the victim of a street accident or some other case of bodily distress,
in which event he would have been conveyed to the General Hos-
pital, but no trace was found of him there.
Eventually alarm for his safety became acute and an emissary
was sent to his home to find out if anything was there known of
his movements.
It was soon evident that something quite unforseen had befallen
Cumming.
Throughout the night the search for the missing sergeant was
continued. Police patrolled the streets searching in every corner
without avail.
When dawn came he was still absent, and there was no word
of him.
The movements of the slayer immediately prior to the firing of
the fatal bullets provides a fertile field for conjecture.
The absence of any incriminating footprints around the spot
where the bodies were found would suggest the probability that the
murderer had crept stealthily along the railway track. A heap of
stones some four feet high that had been tipped on the ground adja-
cent to the line and near the fatal scene would have provided a handy
hiding place for any would be attacker, and it is a possibility that
the killer crept from behind this screen and worked his way behind
the couple. \
It is obvious that the shots'were fired from behind, and the sugges-
tion that the murderer quietly worked his way up to the pair is
thoroughly supported by the fact that the spent cartridges were
found in the earth some few yards behind the bodies.
After the identification of the bodies the whereabouts of Walsh,
the husband of the slain woman concerned the investigators and detec-
tives were dispatched to likely places in an effort to find him.
At lunch time he was met by a detective in a City Street. He
was detained and questioned. Walsh is well knowm in South Bris-
bane, where he has lived for several years. His wife and he parted
about two years ago, and while she retained custody of her two child-
ren he boarded with friends in the same district. The children are
aged 4 and 6 years respectively.
When Acting Sergeant Cumming took Mrs. Eileen Walsh into
the secluded paddock near Boggo Road Gaol on the evening of
December 23rd, 1926, he was wearing a police belt to which was


attached a pair of handcuffs and a bunch of keys.
After he and his guilty paramour had been murdered, the belt
and the handcuffs and keys were missing, and, it is assumed, stolen
by the murderer. Who is the man or woman who knows the secret
hiding place of those articles? Why were the keys stolen, and where
are they now to be found? Who kndws?
Those are among the vital questions engaging the close attention
of the Brisbane Criminal Investigation Branch in their endeavour to
solve the suggestive circumstance in a case of vice and tragedy which
may even yet go down to history as Australia’s greatest double
Murder Mystery so astounding and baffling are the features associated
with it. .
The many intrigues that Acting Sergeant Marquis Cumming
has had with women here and elsewhere is providing an extensive
field for detectives who are seeking the motive which brought about
his murder.
It appears clear as crystal however, that he was done to death
by someone who had a reason to resent his gay lothario habits, some-
one who had cause to bitterly deplore the Sergeant’s guilty relations
to certain w r omen or a certain woman. But the task of tracing these
several “affairs” in an effort to locate the motives for the dastardly
crime which shocked the whole community on Christmas Eve is exert-
ing all the ingenuity of the C. 1.8. men who are on the case.
Several lines of enquiry have been followed, but most have proved
fruitless. The detectives have eagerly set out upon many courses of
investigation to find, at some disturbing point, that they are. con-
fronted by certain circumstances which throw their theories out of
line and force them to go back and start all over again.
Exasperating as it all is, the C.I. Branch men are patiently carry-
ing on yet steadily every hypothesis which was at first thought to be
a probability is being discarded and the line of enquiry is consistently
thinning down with the passage of time.
A study of Sergeant Cumming’s past history has become an essen-
tial factor in the efforts to trace the crime to its source.
He was known to be man of lady killing ways with a roving eye
and an appreciation for a neatly turned ankle. Evidence was gained
that he even went so far as to desert his beat in order to keep a tryst
with some female of his chance acquaintance.
Hence it would not be likely to trouble him much if he had to
forsake his duty for a little while for the purpose of meeting Mrs.
Walsh,, and of going for a stroll with her when he should have been
going his official rounds on the night of his death.
That he had known and familiarised himself with Mrs. Walsh for
some time previously is well substantiated by something which became
known to investigators soon after the double murder.
Mrs. Walsh had walked down to a letter box at Woolloongabba
and posted a Christmas card to Cumming on the very evening that
she went with him to their death.
This Christmas card was addressed to him at the South Brisbane
police station, and it was delivered’there, though by the time it
reached its destination he was a still corpse. However that Christ-
mas greeting couched in the pleasant language of the festive season


of goodwill was merely an incidental in the expansive features of
the case. . . , , , .
The other discovery, that of the missing belt and keys over-
shadows all others. t
It is known that Cumming wore a wide regulation belt around
his waist while in uniform.
Attached to his belt vrere a pair of handcuffs and a bunch ot keys,
and the keys belonged to a box in which he kept papers of a private
nature
The box in turn was kept by him at his home. He always had it
locked, and its contents was apparently unknown to anyone but him-
Cumming was wearing this belt with the handcuffs and keys on
the night he met Mrs. Walsh—the night in which they were shot dead.
It is assumed that it was not until they had been lying on the
grass together for some time that he removed the belt. After taking
it off he evidently put it down on the ground beside him, and the belt
with the handcuffs and keys were presumably lying handy to his
touch when the murderer crept upon the guilty pair and fired the
revolver bullets into them.
Then, with the two dead bodies at his or her feet, the murderer
whether a man or a woman, seems to have stooped and picked up
the belt before the hasty, stealthy get-away was effected.
Why were the belt and keys taken?
What significance lies in the murderer’s risky theft of a heavy
and inconvenient article which could lead to his or her betrayal and
capture by the police ? , x ,. A ..
There is one distinctive theory which has presented itself. Who-
ever committed the murder knew of the existence of the keys, and
was keenly desirous of gaining access to some closed secret to which
the keys were the open sesame. #
Where the belt and the keys are now is a matter of considerable
importance, and the ceaseless hunt for them is being continued by
the detectives. .
There is none to say that Cumming did not have some other
secret store for his documents, and the discovery of the keys might
even now give a line as to what motive was behind the slaying, and
point a way to where the murderer is to be found.
The box that Cumming kept at his home was searched by the
police soon after the crime had been committed. There was no keys
available of course, and the police had to force the box open. This
revealed to them a number of confidential documents, but there was
nothing there which would give them a lead in their efforts to trace
the killer. . __
But what might mean nothing of great importance to the detec-
tives, when the papers in the box were rumaged might have been
thought to mean something of considerable moment in the life of
Cumming’s enemy.
Grass has formed its soft couches over the graves of the two
illicit lovers, Marquis Cumming and Mrs. Eileen Walsh, and in taking
the grim secret of their slayer with them to their bed of everlasting
sleep, they left a puzzle for the minds of criminal investigators which


has few parallels in the history of Australian crime.
There might have been several debased persons who would have
rejoiced to see Cumming lying dead, for his duty as a policeman
brought him in touch with many of the lowest human class, and there
were some whose respect for him as a man was lost in the light of his
“affairs” with women, whose fidelity was not beyond question—whose
virtue was not above suspicion, but a powerful motive must be
sought to explain the promptings that surged through some human
breast with force enough to incite an act of premeditated wilful
murder.
Cumming in the past had knowingly trifled with love, and perhaps
ruined the love of someone else.
As love is the most acute of passions and akin to hate it seemed
a certainty that his murderer, and the murderer of the woman with
whom he was philandering would come from the ranks of those who
has cause to regard his “affairs” with terrible bitterness.
In Mount Morgan, where Cumming had been stationed previously,
he gained the reputation of a “Lady Killer” of first class sheikish
dimensions, and his associations with a popular vamp there kept him
late at night and distracted his mind from his work.
He afterwards transferred his affections to someone else, and it
became an open secret, that he sent money to a woman whom he had
made his temporary mistress.
As a responsible member of the police force, Cumming was some-
what upset about the latter discovery, for if his intrigues of love had
reached the ears of his departmental chiefs, he would have been
plunged into a veritable sea of hot water.
His transfer to another centre removed him from the influence
of pouting lips and trim ankles in Mount Morgan, but his Don Juan
notions were with him wherever he went, and his reputation as a
man of many lovers followed him everywhere.
When he became stationed at South Brisbane, he played the
same dangerous game right under the eyes of his Superior Officers.
What then if he left a flourishing germ of hate in the breast of
some outraged lover ? What if he fed the fires of his own ruination
in the mind of some incensed person who wished for his undoing and
planned a terrible retribution.
It seems the likely happened. Obviously there was someone who
saw Cumming meet Mrs. Walsh that eventful evening to follow them
to the paddock, then to the spot where they reclined on the grass and
crept upon them as they were locked closely in each others arms, it was
certainly the feat of someone who had premeditated the murder.
POLICE APOLOGIA.
A magisterial inquiry into the deaths of Mrs. Walsh and Ser-
geant Cumming was opened at Brisbane during the last week of
May—five months after the tragedy—before Mr. Staines, Inquiry
Magistrate.
Sub-Inspector Meldon, Chief of the Criminal Investigation
Branch, who conducted the inquiry, before calling evidence, said:
“The delay of this inquiry has not been undue, and no attempt
was made to deceive the press. He was referring to a publication
in the “Truth” newspaper, demanding that both in justice to the


public and the police who investigated the murders the inquiry
should be immediately held. We have had to follow many avenues
of investigation, some of them demanding the greatest tact and
delicacy.”
The Magistrate, commenting on Sub-Inspector Meldon’s state-
ment, said that it was only right that complete investigation should
be made before an inquiry was held, otherwise the object of the
inquiry would be defeated.
It was a privilege of anyone to ask for an inquiry by giving
Bub-inspector Meldon
him a requisition. An inquiry could not be withheld. “It is my
custom,” Mr. Staines added, “to admit to these inquiries parties or
representatives of parties involved, so long as they are not suspected
of the deed. Is anyone under suspicion?” Inspector Meldon (hesi-
tatingly), “No.” .
Mr. W. T. King, Messrs. Delaney and King, Solicitors, appeared
in the interests of Theresa Jane Cumming, widow, and Marquis D.
J. Stanley Cumming, son of Sergeant Cummings. Mr. W. J. Ken-
nedy, Solicitor, appeared on behalf of Mr, J. S. Walsh, husband of
the murdered woman.


THE INQUIRY.
It was made clear at the inquiry, instituted to place before the
publie all available facts and opinions concerning the double mur-
der of Cumming and Walsh, that the police have been baffled.
Extraordinary evidence was given by Theresa Jane Cumming,
wife of the dead police officer. She admitted that for years, jealousy
of her penchant for the capture and conquest of other women’s
affections had acquitted her to take exceptional steps against him.
Magistrate A. Staines.
She had once fired a shot when he came home one night from, as
she suspected, another woman’s arms. She had searched his private
papers, and to discover that he was the father of a child to a girl out
of wedlock. She had repeatedly tracked him when he went out,
and she had caused a disturbance at a Brisbane dance hall on dis-
covering him there in the company of one of his many light o’ loves.
There were other incidents.
She denied she was in any way responsible for the murder of
her husband and Mrs. Walsh. With lowered eyes—a veiled figure
in black of deepest mourning—gravely answered “No” when Sub-
Inspector Meldon asked her the pertinent question.


Many love letters written and received by Cumming are in the
hands of the detectives, and in one of these, written shortly before
his death, he tells one of his numerous seraglio of sweethearts that
his home life was “Heir’ morning, noon and night.
The last serious difference, she said, occurred just before the
tragedy, when Cumming threatened to put his 22 years old son,
Stanley, out of the home.
So wide were the illicit amours of the dead police sergeant,
that dozens of women have been interrogated by the detectives in
the course of investigation. Amazing things were revealed by
many of his widely scattered harem of sweethearts.
Some are young girls, but most of them are married women,
Mrs. Cumming during her evidence.
none of whose names have been nor will be revealed, in order that
no happy household would be soundered, the good names of respect-
able families impugned and tragedy follow tragedy tenfold.
A police photograph of the bodies as found on the early morn-
ing of December the 24th, 1926, revealed the crime in all its ghastly
reality. She and he lay beside each other in a grotesque attitude.
As if in the shock of death he had flung himself from her
embrace, only to die beside her, his nakedness and hers starkly
defying the world to tell a charitable lie on their behalf.
An early theory, that possibly the murderer, in passion. of
white hot jealousy, had deliberately arranged the bodies to. bring
this posthumous shame upon both of them, found no. weight in con-
sidered medical opinion. They were killed at the height of emotion
in an enrapturous embrace.
Acting Sergeant William Gilbert Bonus, the first sworn witness
deposed. Cumming was in charge of the second relief on December
23rd, and was due off duty at 10 p.m. Cumming’s non-appearance
caused a search, but*it was unsuccessful. __


About 7.45 a.m., the Woolloongabba police telephoned the dis-
covery of the dead couple near the railway line between Park Road
and Dutton Park stations.
Fireman Taylor, who discovered the bodies whilst his train
was waiting for an “all clear” signal to move into Park Road, had
called out to them, “Wake up.” Receiving no response, Taylor
got off the train and walked towards them to discover the perpetra-
tion of a gruesome tragedy. Returning to his train, he informed
the Station Master at Park Road, who telephoned the police. When
witness and four policemen went to the scene, they found officers
from Woolloongabba already there.
Cumming was lying on his back, Avith his legs fully extended
and his feet separated about 10 inches. His arms were lying at his
sides. He was dressed in regulation uniform and the tunic was
unbuttoned and opened out a few inches. His braces were undone
at the front of the trousers and drawn up about his chest. The
shirt and flannel were up around his waist. His nether garments
were down about his knees. The clothing about the neck and
shoulders were saturated with blood and his head was lying in a
pool of blood. Mrs. Walsh was on Cumming’s left hand side, on
her back and parallel to his body.
Blood was oozing from Mrs. Walsh’s face near the right nostril
and directly under the right eye. Her head was in a pool of blood.
She was clad in a brown cotton frock, white underskirt, singlet,
black stockings and shoes, fugi silk undergarments and a whitish
coloured hat. She had her hat on. Blood saturated it and the upper
portion of her clothes.
The clothes were disarranged, leaving her in a semi-nude state.
A police blue uniform cap was laying on the ground, top up,
about nine inches from Mrs. Walsh’s left hand. Inspector Meldon
questioned Bonus on the discovery. Was it clear to you whether
the cap had been placed there or whether it had fallen there ?
Bonus: To me it had been placed there.
Was there a search made for tracks?
Yes.
What was the result ?
When I was there there was no result. The ground was of a
hard, stony nature and there were no tracks discerned at or near
the bodies.
About ten feet from Walsh’s head, at an angle, was found a
spent automatic cartridge and in the same direction about four
feet 'further away was a second.
Dr. Dods, at the post mortem, extracted an automatic bullet
from •Cumming’s skull. There were two wounds in Walsh’s head,
one near the right nostril, the other at the back of the neck. I
found no trace of Cumming’s belt, keys, or handcuffs.
Witness knew nothing about the private lives of either Cum-
ming or Walsh. He knew Mrs. Walsh was in receipt of relief rations
from South Brisbane station, and that Cumming sometimes would
be there acting in the capacity of relief officer.
There was no sign of a struggle at the scene. When Dr. Espie
Dods, G.M.O. began to describe in detail the position of the bodies,


Mrs. Gumming hastened out of earshot, and did not return to the
court room until the doctor had finished his evidence, in which he
declared that the bullet which hit Cumming injured his spine. The
cause of death was a gunshot wound in the neck.
The cause of death in the case of Mrs. Walsh was a gunshot
wound in the face.
Inspector Meldon: Would death be instantaneous in each case?
Yes.
What position would you say Cumming was in when he was
shot? Lying down on his face.
Would the person who fired the shot be in close proximity?
Standing nearby. Mrs. Walsh, I think, was probably shot when she
was sitting up. It all depends upon the position of the person who
fired.
Assuming that the person who shot Cumming was standing up
at the back of Cumming when he was shot, then to shoot Mrs.
Walsh, she must have been sitting up.
From what you have seen on examination, what position would
you consider Cumming and Mrs. Walsh were in when he was shot?
They were embracing.
Would the position in which you saw the bodies at the scene
be natural iu the circumstances? They were consistent.
There was nothing to indicate that there was any skill necessary
in shooting the couple. They were close together. The fact of the
two shells found in a line
indicate that the two shots were fired by the one person from the
same position.
In a draughty corridor near the court a lonely figure, veiled
and clad in black of deepest mourning, sat far away from other
waiting witnesses. She regarded, with a sharp and apprehensive
eye, all who came near her, even such casual individuals as wan-
dered by whose languid air stamped them plainly as harmless civil
servants.
Her dress denoted grief, her manner and alertness was conspicu-
ously alien to grief. She was Theresa Jane Cumming, waiting to be
called to explain all her movements on the night of the mur-
ders and to tell the court some astonishing things. Taking the wit-
ness box, she said her husband was on good terms with herself and
their family at the time of his death. The afternoon. before his
murder she spent some time buying Xmas presents for him.
One of their little girls gave it to him with love from mother
and the family, at the tea table that night. After tea Cumming
left home to resume duty. Mrs. Cumming and her boy, Stanley,
aged 22, also went out, but not together.
She went to see her mother in Constance Street, Valley, arriv-
ing about 8 o ’clock. She remained until about 9.15, and then walked
to the Valley, had a look at McWhirter’s, and caught the Ipswich
Road tram at the Valley Junction.
Going through Stanley Street, she saw by the South Brisbane
Town Hall that it was a quarter to ten. She arrived home about
10.5. Stanley was then the only one out. As usual, she prepared
her husband’s supper and then started to read. At 11.30 she went


to her room. She switched on the light and walked out on to the
balcony, thinking that she might see her husband, who should have
been off duty at 10 o’clock.
Just then she saw two police officers coming up the street, and
she was disappointed to find that one of them was not her husband.
She went to her room and to bed. She dozed off to sleep, but
about 12 midnight she was awakened by a knock at the door. It
was Sub-Inspector Bergin, who told her that her husband was miss-
ing but not to be alarmed as he might have been called away some-
where. The Inspector then left.
About twenty minutes later Stanley came in. She left her
room and said to him, “Oh, Stanley, I’m glad you have come
home. ’ ’ She told him of Inspector Bergin’s visit.
About two or three in the morning a policeman called and
stated that no trace of her husband kad been found. That affected
her and she took a bad turn. The policeman and Stanley went down
to the hotel at the Woolloongabba corner and got her some brandy.
After that she went to sleep.
She woke early and went out without waking the others. She
found that nothing had been discovered. Later in the morning,
Constable Sullivan called and said to her, “Sergeant Cumming has
been found behind Boggo Road shot.” She lost control of herself
and Sullivan stayed until some neighbours who heard the voice
came in.
Shortly afterwards two detectives came to the house. One of
them, whom she thought was Detective Corbett, said to her, “We
might as well tell you the lot.”
The detectives then told her that there was a woman in the
case, and that she had been found shot with her husband. They
mentioned then that his belt was missing and asked about his
revolver.
He opened a little brief bag and found Cumming’s revolver
there. It was fully loaded.
Detective Corbett unloaded it. Mrs. Cumming said, “I went to
the morgue, and there saw my husband’s body. I also saw the
body of a woman whom I had never seen before. I was told that
she had been found with my husband.
Inspector Meldon: Do you remember saying anything at the
morgue? No, I don’t.
My son and I went to the undertaker to arrange the funeral.
Meldon: Detective Campbell called on you several times? Yes.
Meldon: Do you recollect Detective Campbell taking charge of an
automatic pistol and some cartridges from a room at your horned
Yes.
Do you remember saying to Campbell at the morgue, “It is
terrible. I have often told him that he would meet with a sudden
end?” Mrs. Cumming hesitated.
Inspector Meldon: You then commenced to cry. Do you remem-
ber anything like that taking place? He was a man of very daring
disposition.
Mr. King: On this occasion.


Inspector Meldon: On this occasion do yon remember saying it?
Mr. King: You either do or you don’t.
Mr. Meldon: Did you say, “It is terrible. I have often told
him that he would meet with a sudden end. I knew it would come
to this. I have warned him that he would meet a terrible end. I
don’t remember saying that. Might you have said it? I don t know.
Magistrate: This was at the morgue. ■ * _
Inspector Meldon: Yes. Did you turn to the body, Mrs.
Cumming and say, ‘ ‘ Daddy, I knew it would come to thi3._ I hay e
warned you that you would meet with a terrible end? No. Uo
you remember kissing the body on the forehead? Yes. Did you
say, “Daddy, God forgive you? No, I did not say that.
Inspector Meldon: Where was your husband stationed before
he came to South Brisbane? Mareeba, Capella, Emerald, Mt.
Morgan and Nambour. He came to Brisbane about four yeara ago.
You had some trouble —domestic trouble, some years ago ? Where,
anywhere? The first trouble was at Mount Morgan. At all other
places your life was comparatively happy? Very happy.
The first sign of any domestic trouble was at Mount Morgan.
Yes. When was that ? About five years ago.
He was in charge at Mount Morgan for about six months and
he was instructed to live in the senior sergeant’s quarters? Yes.
And he desired not to? Yes. Did any friction crop up there? I
CaU Inspector Meldon: Do you know this woman? If your worship
pleases I will submit this name on a piece of paper.
The paper was passed to Mrs. Cumming, and she answered,
“Yes I knew her.” Was this particular woman sending vegetables
and things up to your house? Yes. Wjhat happened?. At first she
denied it, and then she said that she had sent them in return for
kindnesses he had done her. _
At another time you found something at home? Yes. The same
woman? Another one. Where? Nambour. What was it? He got
a letter one morning and left it when he went out. • You suspected
he was intriguing with some woman? Mrs. Cumming hesitated.
Inspector Meldon: Don’t say so if you did not. I would not
. At this particular time did you suspect that he was
going out with women? Yes, I did. But all the same when he
came home he used to say that he, was with men friends.
Inspector Meldon: Did you suspect him? Yes.
Do you remember a woman related to your husband by marriage
staying at your house there for a while? Yes.
An unpleasant thing happened ? I remonstrated with him about
going out The relative suggested having some music and we agreed
■ but my husband was all dressed to go out? I said to him, “You are
going out?” He said: “Yes.” I asked him: “Won’t you stay with
us this evening?” He said: “No, lam going out.” With that he went
downstairs. , . ~ , . .
There was a piece of canvas hanging over the top ot the stairs,
I leaned over the balustrade to speak to him and it hit him on the
head. He must have thought I did it purposely.


He was a very quick tempered man and rushing up the stairs he
grabbed me by the shoulders and pushed me against the wall. Our
visitor said: “Oh Mark, don’t hit Tottie.” Tottie meant me. He
then let me go and went out.
She was very upset and decided that she would give him a fright.
She got his revolver and waited with their visitor on the verandah.
Whefn he came home about an hour later she fired into the garden as
he came into the gate. She then threw the revolver away.
Sub. Inspector Meldon: You did not fire at him ? >
Mrs. Cumming: No.
Did you load the revolver or was it already loaded ? It is always
loaded. I don’t know anything about revolvers. Did you say to
your visitor: “I won’t let him come in again alive?” No.
Did any other quarrels crop up in Mount Morgan about other
women? No. The things I have already referred to did not cause
rows in my home.
But you were upset? Yes. lam very sorry to have to mention
them, for he was a good man—and Mrs. Cumming burst into tears
but not for long. Restraining herself in a few seconds she told Sub.
Inspector Meldon that after their removal to South Brisbane in
October, 1921, she saw her husband take some letters from his pocket
and put them on the table. That would be in the following July.
One of the letters, she noticed, was in a woman’s handwriting,
but she did not read any of them at the time. Her husband subse-
quently put them in a box, which he locked. She later opened the
box, because of the woman’s handwriting she had seen.
Did you learn from that letter that your husband was the father
of another woman’s child? (Hesitatingly), Yes.
Did you replace the letter? No. You kept it? Yes.
Did you say to your husband: “ I have found out all secrets now
if I had waited for 20 years, I could not have learned more?” Yes.
Did he demand the letter from you? Yes, and I refused to give
it to him. Did you accuse him of being the fater of this illegitimate
child? Yes, but he denied it. I retained the letter. Did you tell
your husband that you would go for a judicial separation and con-
sult your solicitor? Yes.
Did Stanley shortly after procure a signed statement from the
woman that your husband was the father of her child? Yes.
But you afterwards destroyed the statement? Yes.
Did your husband become annoyed over Stanley’s actions? Yes.
One night a little later, he came home after having had some
drink and he faced you both saying: “I could shoot the pair of you?”
Yes.
He slid his hand towards his hip pocket where he usually kept
his revolver, and you said to him: “Daddy, there is no necessity for
that?” Yes. Then he stopped.
The next night he had another quarrel with Stanley, and Stanley
left home? Yes, he was away a few weeks. You made that difference
up ? Yes.
Do you remember when you were living at Gladstone Road that
you suspected your husband of going out one night to meet a woman ?
Yes, ..... . .. . .


And you followed him? Yes.
Mrs. Cumming said that she followed her husband to a house
in Annerley Road. There she found him in a room sitting on the
edge of a bed talking to a man and a woman. He said to her, “What
brought you here?” and she replied: “If you can find time to come
here, you can find time to come out with me.” She then left him.
Do you remember one Sunday about three months prior to his
death, he said he had a lot of writing to do before going on duty,
and that he would have to go to the station early? Yes. I was
suspicious of him, and about an hour to an hofir and a half later I
went down to the station. I was told he was not due in until ten
to ten.
Did you wait at the station from about 9.30 and see your husband
coming down Grey Street from Vulture Street? Yes. Did you say
to your husband this is a pleasant surprise for you? Yes.
He made no reply, but passed by into the station? Yes.
Did you go inside and say to him I just came down to see if you
were telling the truth, and I am now satisfied that what you said was
all lies? Yes. He told me that I had better clear out and go home.
Do you remember your husband going to the Trocadero on New
Year’s Eve, 1924? Yes.
Mrs. Cumming said that she spent the earlier part of that night
at the Cremorne Theatre and then she went to the Trocadero to watch
the dancing. She approached her husband and said: “You see, I
am here anyway.” He told her that if she didn’t go home he would
have to put her out. Later she saw her son there and he took her
home. ! '
Did you go to Mr. Herbert, the manager of the Trocadero, the
next day and apologise for what had happened the previous night ?
Yes. Did you tell Mr. Herbert that your husband was a disgrace to
you? No. 1
If he said you did? It is wrong. Did you tell him that he did
not support you? No. Did you say to Herbert that the way
your husband was carrying on he deserved to be shot? No.
Did you remember about two months prior to his death, your
husband after being on night duty got up hurriedly about mid-day
one day, and refusing lunch went out? Yes, and in civilian clothes.
Did you go out later yourself ? Yes. Why ? On business, but
I was also suspicious.
About where your husband had gone and with whom? Yes. I
went down near His Majesty’s.
After being there for a short while did you see your husband
come out of the dress circle entrance? Yes; and he glanced back
over his shoulder, and he was joined by a woman who was following
him.
You got Stanley from his work, and you saw your husband and
the woman together in a cafe in Edward Street ? Yes.
Did you walk up to the woman and say, “Do you know whom
you are with?” Yes. The woman said “No.”
At that you said, “This man is my husband,” and she got up
and walked out? Yes. I followed her out and left my husband in


the cafe. She told me that she had never seen him in the pictures.
He asked her to have afternoon tea with him.
Did the woman say, “Don’t make any fuss about it because of
my crippled child? Yes.
Did you say then, “I am as pleased as if I got a fiver to have
caught him with a woman, as he is always telling me that he was
out with men pals ?
There was a little hesitation and refreshing of memory, and
then Mrs. Cumming said, “Yes, I said that.”
Sub-Inspector Meldon: Your son followed the woman to a street
at Dutton Park, 'but then lost sight of her? Yes.
My husband had always told me that he had been going out
with gentlemen friends, but now I could see that he had been tell-
ing me an untruth. He said that he had only met the woman by
accident in the pictures, but I did not believe him.
Some night later did Stanley tell you that he had
seen your husband with the same woman in Melbourne Street. Yes.
And the woman had two children with her? Yes.
His father saw him getting a good look at them and saying,
“Are you following me?” he made a run at him? Yes. Stanley
then made off across the road and arrived home? Yes.
The next morning did your husband say, ‘.‘l’m going to make
new rules here. Stanley will have to get out by January 1,” and
he was annoyed? Yes. I then said Stanley would not go. He
had done nothing wrong. It was he who had done wrong, and he
ought to be ashamed of himself to mention such a thing.
Was this the last incident where you had a quarrel or differ-
ence with your husband prior to his death? Yes.
At your home on the night of the tragedy there were two
revolvers? I did not know if there were any revolvers. You knew
your son had an automatic pistol? Yes.
Have you at times warned your husband bf the danger he was
running by carrying on with women in his position! I have warned
him.
He said to you, “It would take a smart man to catch me? ” Yes.
There has been no trace found of your husband’s handcuffs,
keys and belt ? No.
Did you ever say that your husband got what he deserved?
In a very subdued tone: No, I did not.
To Detective Henderson: No, I did not.
Letters written by her husband to women and received by him
from women were handed to Mrs. Gumming. She glanced over
them and her face noticeably paled.
Sub-Inspector Meldon: You see by those letters which you say
have been written by your husband, that his home life was unhappy?
The Sub-Inspector (directly and suddenly) i Do you know who
shot your husband? I only wish I did. Or the deceased Mrs.
Walsh? She was a perfect stranger to me.
Sub-Inspector Meldon: You do not know who shot your husband
or Mrs. Walsh?
Mrs. Camming: No,


Have you any reason to suspect any person or persons of having
shot your husband or Mrs. Walsh? I have not.
To return to the Trocadero incident. Are you sure that you
did not say to the manager that your husband ought to be shot for
the way he was carrying on? I did not say it.
Please yourself whether you answer this question or not. Did
you have anything to do with the cause of your husband’s death?
Nothing whatever.
And can you give any more information or throw any light on
the cause of the death of the deceased? Nothing whatever. Mrs.
Cumming then left the *box.
The adjournment until Monday saw the opening of the exam-
Stanley Gumming.
ination of the eldest son, Marquis David James Stanley Cumming.
He said that he had spent the night of December 23 from 7 to 8
o’clock until 11.30 in the company of a young lady. He had then
made his way home as quickly as possible arriving at 12.15 a.m.
One of the features of the evidence of Marquis David James
Stanley Cumming, son of the dead sergeant, was the extraordinary
number of things he appeared not to recollect.
It transpired that when the detectives first questioned him as
to any part he might have played in the circumstances surround-
ing the murder of his father and Eileen Walsh, he was only too
anxious to inform the C.I. men all about his father’s affairs with
various women. . , •
* ‘ I was rather keen on supplying that information to the police
he told the court, “but a remarkable change came over him after


he had got, from some unnamed person what was purported to be
legal advice. ”
He had partly completed a frank statement to the detectives,
but when later aske<f to continue it, he refused to do so, which the
detectives considered a very queer stand for him to have adopted.
rMr. Meldon: Why were you not frank about the matter and
keep your word to give the police every possible assistance ?
Cumming? I had legal advice.
Did your mother, in the presence of the detectives, say, “I
won’t go near your office or make any statement, I have told you
all I know about the matter. You won’t find the murderer here ?
I don’t recollect that.
Well, then, do you recollect you yourself saying to Detective
Henderson, “I’ve just come to my senses. I’m not going to say
any more. I’m sorry I told you so much?” No, I don’t recollect
that.
There was a good deal more that young Cumming said he did
not recollect, and as Mr. Meldon pursued his inquiries, it became
clear that the youth suffered from a faulty memory.
Mr. Meldon: Do you remember your mother saying, “He,”
meaning your father, “has got his just deserts and I will say no
more. I don’t want Stanley to go over to your office again. You
had him over 10 hours on Sunday and I have had legal advice and
will say no more. It Appears you are inclined to make us out guilty ?
No. I don’t recollect that. Do you deny then that, your mother
said this? I do not deny \hat, she might have said it.
Then did your uncle (your father’s brother) say that they and
you had been advised to keep away from the detective office? Ido
not remember.
You refused to answer any questions yourself? Yes.
That was very unsatisfactory. Did you not realise that it was
absolutely necessary that the detective should question you in
order to clear up the mystery of the murders ? I realise that now.
And you are now giving the court frank answers to the questions ?
Yes, before I thought I had told the detective all I could.
You were not the one investigating. It was proper for you to
answer any reasonable questions put to you.
Mr. King: He was only carrying out his solicitor’s advice.
But later Mr. King was at pains to make it clear to the court that
he wasn’t the solicitor who advised the Cumming family to adopt a
policy of passive obstruction to the police.
Young Cumming then went on to detail how he had traced a
woman whom he suspected his father was carrying on with. He said
that he discovered her identity by a ruse, and then directly taxed her
with having engaged in an affair with Cumming.
From this woman he succeeded he said in getting a signed confes-
sion, admitting that Acting Sergeant Cumming was the father of an
illegitimate child to her. ) *
Mr. Meldon: Where is that confession now? I do not know, I
understand it was destroyed.
Did you speak to your father about this woman? Yes. He said:
“Any man might make a mistake once. I hope you’ll overlook it.”


I said: “1 have decided to overlook it but I hope you’ll mend your
ways.” He said he would.
The witness then went on to say that up till disclosures, some
time prior to the murder, he thought his father was living a straight
life. The Mount Morgan incident occurred in 1924.
Apparently though Cumming never forgot his son s move in
discovering his liaison with the mother of his illegitimate child. One
night early in 1925, the father came home and putting his hand on
his hip pocket said to him and to his mother: “I could shoot the two
of you if I liked. ” ,
“I was frightened at this,” young Oummmg told the court and
ran outside. . . ,
Later the son left the house and went to live at a boarding house
in Stephens Road, South Brisbane.
Mr. Meldon: Why ? I wanted a change.
What was wrong with your home? Nothing, I preferred the
company of strangers for a while.
You didn’t leave because of domestic trouble or through rows
with your father ? No. .
Mr. Meldon (sharply): Are you sure? People don t desert their
homes like that. Mother thought perhaps I left because of trouble
with father. t
You didn’t go for the good of your health. Did you have any
girl friends at this time? No.
So you mean to say then that your mother is incorrect when she
has sworn that the reason for your leaving home was due to trouble
with your father over what you had found in connection with the
woman at Mount Morgan? It is incorrect.
How long did you stay away from home ? About a month.
Who induced you to come back ? Did you get sick so quickly of
your preference for the company of strangers? My mother induced
me to come back.
So she could induce you to come back though she could not induce
you to stay at home in the first place? Did your father never tell
you to leave the house? No. He told my mother, but I don’t re-
member if she ever told me what reasons he gave for wanting me to
get out.
And you still persist in saying that you left home of your own
accord and not because of family strife? Yes.
Mr. Meldon handed the witness letters written by Cumming to
one of his flames in which reference is made to the son in uncompli-
mentary terms.
The letters were published by “Truth,” and in one of them Cum-
ming announced his intention of ejecting his son from the home in
the New Year.
These aspersions the son described to the court as a “tissue of
lies.”
Mr. Meldon: Did your mother come to you one afternoon at
work and tell you something, and as a result of that did you go to a
cafe in Edward Street and find your father there in company with a
woman? Yes.


Young Cumming then described how he had approached the
woman. ...
‘‘ It is pretty rotten having to leave work to witness a thing like
this,” the son told the woman.
I have only just met him, she said. Threatening to call a police-
man if she did not comply, young Cumming demanded her name
and address and she said that she was a Mrs. , of Dutton Park,
and he hired a taxi and followed her.
She got out he said at Annerley Road, and he overtook her on
foot. He told her that she had lied to him when she gave her name
and address* and he announced his intention of following her to see
where she lived.
Mr. Meldon: Did you say to that woman: “My father is no
good. He has been causing a lot of trouble at home and a man ought
to well do for him!,” I did not say that, Inspector it is a lie.
The witness told the court that the woman had given him the
slip. She had pointed out a house as the one where she lived and he
watched her as she walked towards it. But she passed the house and
ran around the corner and disappeared.
A few days later he was returning from a visit to a friend when
he saw his father standing talking to a woman in Melbourne Street.
He crossed over the road to see who the woman was when his father
made a rush at him across the street. “Are you following me?” the
father demanded to know.
“What did you chase Stanley for last night?” his mother asked
his father when he came home, and his father replied that the son
should not follow him.
Mr. Meldon: Yet in view of all this you still maintain that you
did not le'ave home because of trouble with your father, and that you
were on good terms with him? Yes.
Mr. Meldon: It appears to me that you are not telling the truth.
Mr. Meldon looked the witness hard in the eye: “Do you know who
shot your father?” he asked.
“I do not. I wish I did know.” “Or Eileen Walsh?” “No.’
Have you any reason to suspect anyone who would shoot them ?
“I don’t know of anyone who would, I came to the conclusion
that someone connected with the woman or women or that someone
who had a fancy for the woman who was shot, must have done it.”
The matter of a fancy, Mr. Meldon remarked drily cuts both
ways. ‘ ‘ Have you told us everything you know ?’ *
Mrs. Cumming who was sitting in the court room during her
son’s testimony began to weep and she never looked from the table
when these direct questions were being asked and answered.
The son said that he was telling everything he knew, and he added
that so far as he knew his father had no enemies. He protested that
he had never followed his father, and added that the only time his
mother had followed her dead husband to his knowledge, was on the
occasion when she found him with the woman in a cafe in Edward
Street.
“Did you,” Mr. Meldon asked, “either directly or indirectly
have anything to do with causing the deaths of your father or Eileen
Walsh?” “No,” replied the son.


Young Gumming *s automatic pistol was produced in court, and
the expert evidence of Joseph M. Bauman, gunsmith, established it
as a fact beyond doubt that the pistol was not used by the mur-
derer.
Essential differences were explained by Mr. Bauman as to the
peculiarities of the striking pin in various pistols. And he seemed
to make it clear that a gun is no longer a safe weapon for murderers,
for it apparently is possible to establish definitely whether a shot
was or was not fired from any particular pistol or revolver.
In this case the imprint of the striking pin on the two shells
found near the bodies and the imprint on shells experimentally
fired from young Cumming’s pistol materially differed.
Further, a microscopic examination of the bullet recovered from
the dead policeman’s head and those tested in the son’s gun re-
vealed that the weapon used by the murderer was cleaned, whereas
the son’s gun was badly rusted. The tests were carried out very
shortly after the discovery of the crime.
Samuel Walsh.
The evidence given by James Samuel Walsh, and it was corro-
borated by several other people, completely established his alibi as
to his whereabouts on the night of the crime.


• lie was at Wynnum and though he was among those on whom
early in the investigations suspicion fell, he was completely able to
clear himself. He had known Eileen Walsh from her girlhood,
and told the court that she was almost 30 years of age at the time
of her death and was the mother of two children. There was, he
added, one child which they had before he married her, but it had
died.
They had been separated since July, 1924, and the last occasion
on which he had seen her before her death was in October last.
He denied that he had ever ill-treated her and maintained that
he was on friendly terms with her. The reason, he said, for the
breaking up of the borne, was his mother-in-law.
He had.no idea, he said, that she even knew Cumming and had
never suspected her of being on intimate terms with any other man.
Mr. Meldon: Have you ever assaulted your wife ? —Never.
Are you sure? Hid you ever threaten her with a razor? —No.
Absolutely sure? —Oh, years ago, before the war, and long before
our marriage, she had gone out with another man.
Did you do anything with the razor?—l just told her I’d cut
her throat. I never meant it and we made the row up.
Walsh added that he had no idea who committed the murders,
and said that there was no one whom he suspected.
Mary Christie, dressed in black, mother of Eileen Walsh, was
not of such an unsuspecting nature as her daughter’s husband. She
lives with her son and two daughters at 55, Stephen’s Road, South
Brisbane.
Her evidence was remarkable in several respects, particularly
when she detailed a conversation which she swore she had with
Mrs. Cumming shortly after the tragedy.
Her daughter Eileen, she said, apparently had not anticipated
meeting Cumming or anyone else on the night of the tragedy, for,
dressed in ordinary house clothes, she went out about eight o’clock
to post a letter.
She had asked her niece—Ruby Jones, aged 13—to accompany
her up the road to the pillar-box, but the child was too tired. Eileen
Walsh never came home again.
Mrs. Christie described how the family unsuccessfully searched
for her when her absence became prolonged, and the fact that she
was missing was reported to the police at 2.30 the following morn-
ing.
The mother learned of the tragedy next day.
The following day, early on Christmas afternoon, Mrs. Cum-
ming and her young girl called at Mrs. Christie’s place.
“I came,” Mrs. Cumming said, according to Mrs. Christie, “to
offer you my sympathy; I don’t know whether you will accept it or
not.” “I do,” was the reply, “and I’m awfully sorry for you.”
“Where is the body?” Mrs. Cumming wanted to know. “It
was buried yesterday afternoon.”
“You got rid of her quick enough, didn’t you?” is the offensive
response attributed to Mrs. Cumming by the witness.
Mrs. Cumming* she said, was very curious to know whether
Cumming had ever been drinking or playing cards at the Christie


hoine. “No,” said Mrs. Christie, “and she says that Mrs. Cumming
retorted that “if it wasn’t you, it must be someone else.”
“I’ve always warned my husband,” she told the witness, “that
this would be his end, and he laughed and said it would be a good
man that would get him.”
“Evidently, the good man got him, but it was from the back,”
said Mrs. Christie. ‘ r >h hi silt
Mrs. Cumming then said, “He was always so fond of beautiful
women and girls, but let him go and look at them lying at the
Morgue 24 hours afterwards with the paint and powder tiff.”
Mrs. Christie retorted that her daughter, Eileen' "Walsh, had no
. , • , "'»m HM-fl VfW* -rft f,
occasion to use paint or powder.
“It was a strange coincidence,” observed Mrs. Cumming,
‘ ‘ that was the only night he went out without his revolver and left
it at home on the table. Are you aware that his belt, handcuffs
and keys were missing?”
She appeared to reflect for a moment. “Don’t you think the
husband did it (meaning Walsh), or did he pay somebody else to do
it?”
Mrs. Christie retorted that Walsh had not money to pay anyone
to do such a terrible crime..
“My idea in coming up here,” pursued Mrs. Cumming, “was
to see what kind of people you are. She snapped her fingers and
said, ‘I don’t give that for him or his relatives.’ ”
Mr. Meldon asked Mrs. Christie if she could give the court any
idea who committed the murder,
“I don’t know who shot my daughter or Cumming,” ihe re-
plied. “I have a suspicion that the person who shot Cumming and
my daughter, in my opinion, was someone who knew he was un-
armed that night.”
When Mr. King took objection to this reply, Mrs. Christie
obligingly amended her statement, and said that she would not
indicate whom she suspected as it was only a suspicion.”
Mrs. Christie stridently asserted that her daughter was never
Cumming’s mistress, and in an angry tone sbe insisted that Walsh
had for all his denials assaulted Eileen, and ;that it was because of
an attack made upon her by him that she leftvhim, . [( „ <
Madeline Jones, a married sister of the dead Eileen, divorced
from her husband, said that it was a peculiar thing that Eileen’s
wedding ring was missing from her finger when she saw the body
at the morgue. She said that she had never known her sifter to go
without her ring except on one occasion whep she h,ad put it in
pawn.
Remarkable evidence was given by a man who knew Cumming
well and who claimed to have seen him in the company of a woman
answering the description of Eileen Walsh on the night of the
double murder.
He detailed how he had seen the pair walk by his house and
how two phantom figures had followed them. He fixed a time for
these happenings, and it remained for later witnesses to deepen the
mystery by marked disagreement in the hour.


He was James Jamieson, a waterside worker, living at 131,
Annerley-road, South Brisbane, who finished work at the New Farm
Wharf at 8.45 p.m. on December 23, and who caught a tram home
to Dutton Park at 13 minutes to nine.
He got home, he says, at 9.26 p.m., and it was while walking
from the tram to his gate that he noticed two figures standing in
the dark about 15 yards from his house.
“As I went inside my gate,” he said, “I noticed that the pair
seemed to be anxious as if they were looking for someone they
expected would come that way. They looked one way one moment,
and then sharply turned to look in the other direction. ’ ’
Anyway, their conduct was sufficiently unusual to arouse the
interest of Mr. Jamieson who, as soon as he got inside his gate, hid
himself in the dark and watched them.
Mr. Meldon: “Were they men?”—“From their dress they
appeared to be men. One was taller than the other —about five
feet nine, and was dressed in a grey suit and a felt hat. The
shorter figure was in dark clothes and also wore a felt hat.”
The witness then noticed Cumming walking along the centre of
the road in the company of a woman.
“I am positive that it was Cumming,” Mr. Jamieson assured
the court; “I had known him for two years.”
Cumming was in uniform, with his tunic unbuttoned. The
woman, who was on the far side of him, was short, stout and thick
set. They walked down Annerley-road towards Woolloongabba, but
turned to the right and went up the goal lane leading to Burke-
street.”
Mi. Meldon: “You know where the bodies were found; was
that the place they were heading for?”—“Yes.”
“As Cumming and the woman were passing my place,” Mr.
Jamieson went on, “the two figures shifted their position and walked
towards me on to the footpath and stood about two yards from me.
I did not hear them speak.”
, “The taller of the two, as I said, was a well-built man, about
five feet nine, stout, and dressed in dark grey, and he wore no vest.
He was not a heavy man. lam 13 stone eight, and consider he
would be a couple of stone lighter than I. ’ ’
Mr. Meldon: “Was he a man?”—“He appeared to be a man.”
The second man, Mr. Jamieson said, was a couple of inches
shorter than his companion. His hat was pulled well over the eyes
and he wore no vest. Both were clean shaven.
“When Cumming and the woman got about 30 yards along the
road past my house,” Mr. Jamieson said, “the two figures crossed
the road and followed them. They walked quickly. And as Cum-
ming and the woman turned up the gaol lane they followed them
faster still. ’ *
Mr. Jamieson went to bed at 9.45 p.m., and shortly afterwards
he heard two shots fired in quick succession. He remarked to his
wife that someone must be escaping from the gaol.
Fully five minutes afterwards a motor car came down the
(street.
Mr, Meldon; “Could you recognise any of those men again?”—


I think I could recognise the taller of the two if I saw them again,
but I have not seen either of them since.”
b rom the demeanour of these people, you were sure that they
were watching for somebody?”—“Yes, and from their actions on
the appearance of Gumming and the woman, I was certain they were
waiting for one or both.”
Jamieson was asked to look at Walsh. “He is not either of the
men I saw.” Young Gumming was asked to stand up in the court.
“The taller of the two men I saw that night,” said witness,
“was similar to him in build, but I cannot swear that this man was
he.”
Mrs. Gumming stood up too. “I did not see Mrs. Gumming
that night,” said Mr. Jamieson, “but I could not say whether she
was there or not.”
Mr. Meldon: “If a person like Mrs. Gumming were dressed in
man’s clothes, would you recognise her again in women’s clothes?—
I hardly think so.
Was it possible that these two persons you saw shot Sergeant
Gumming and Mrs. Walsh?—Quite possible.
You believed at the time you saw them that they were two men?
—Yes.
Mr. Meldon : Did you ever think of the possibility of one of them
being a woman, thinking things over after that night?—Yes; I
thought that one might have been a woman dressed as a man.
Mr. Staines: When did that possibility occur to you?—Next
day, after hearing of the tragedy.
Mr. Meldon: What made you think that?—The walk of the
shorter of the two persons. I noticed while walking with my wife
what short steps women take, and something in that reminded me
of the gait of the smaller of the two people who followed Gumming
and Mrs. Walsh.
Slightly awed by the proceedings though there was nothing
majestic about them, William August Witt, aged 16, told the court
that his mother kept a shop in Annerley-road, and that he knew
both Gumming and Mrs. Walsh, who used to come to the shop.
About 8 30 on the night of the tragedy he saw Cumming walk-
ing towards the gaol. An hour later he heard two shots in quick
succession, and remarked jokingly to his brother: “I suppose some-
body has shot himself.’
Allowing for reasonable error in the judgment of time, it is
hard to reconcile the evidence of Jamieson and Witt with that of
Stanley Crane, a master painter, who, when driving his car along
Annerley-road towards the city at ten past nine on the same even-
ing, saw two mysterious people near the scene of the tragedy.
'Of course, it is possible that the persons Mr. Crane saw, how-
ever furtive their actions- —had nothing to do with the crime.
For Mr. Crane says that at half-past nine he saw a man running
across the road from the gaol reserve. The man, as he ran, repeat-
edly looked back over his shoulder as if in fear of some pursuer.
He crossed the headlights of Mr. Crane’s car, and Mr. Crane said he
saw the man plainly. He was excited. He was a tall and slightlv
built man of about six feet in height.


EXCLUSIVE PHOTOGRAPH
of the scene of murder
Taken before removal of bodies which are covered by
tarpaulin (see white X)
7.15 a.m. December 24th, 1926
Reading from left to right: Sen-Sgt. Handlin, P.C. Constable Alford, Act. Sgt, Bonus, P.C. Constable O’Sullivan, Detective
Gooch, Detective Moore and Sub-Inspector Lipp (the latter in charge of investigations on the spot.)


Mr. Crane went on to describe the man as a clean-shaven, sallow
person, who had not recently shaved.
Mr. Crane then described how he noticed, as his car approached
the railway bridge, a man peering across the road from a dark place
from where the other man had come.
He said that the man appeared to be watching if anyone were
following the running figure.
The second man was about five feet three, slightly built, (and
was dressed in a dark suit which was very much too large for him.
Mr. King: Are you absolutely sure that the time you saw these
people was ten past nine ? —Absolutely.
To further confuse the hour, Signalman Leonard John said that
while on duty in the Park-road signal box on the evening of Decem-
ber 23, he heard two reports, as of revolver shots, from the direction
of the reserve where the bodies were found.
The reserve was only 350 yards from the signal box, and he said
that 12 seconds after the first two shots were fired in quick suc-
cession, he heard a third and duller report.
He could not fix the time, but it was somewhere between 9.15
and 10 o’clock.
Some illuminating sidelights on both the character of ‘Gumming
and Mrs. Gumming were tendered by Joseph Lionel Herbert, manag-
ing director of the Trocadero Dansant, Melbourne Street.
I knew Cumming, said Mr. Herbert, and 1 remember an occasion
about 18 months prior to his death, when a disturbance occurred in
the vestibule of the Trocadero.
Cumming was one of the police on duty there that night, and 1
was surprised to hear that he was having a row with his wife. I
protested to Cumming that his duty was to prevent trouble, not to
cause it.
And he replied: “All right, Mr. Herbert; it is only my wife,
and I will see that she gets out of this place.”
The witness then described an interview he had with Mrs. Cum-
ming the following morning, when she called upon him to apologise
for her conduct of the previous evening.
Mr. Herbert remembered that the woman had described her
troubles to him, and that she obviously was very upset.
She was crying half the time she was talking to me, he said,
and she threatened to go to the Commissioner of Police with her
troubles and have him dismissed from the Force.
I advised her against that course. She then told me that she
had for long had trouble with him through his going out with girls
and women.
Mrs. Cumming then asked the dance hall manager what he
thought of her husband.
“I don’t think I can help you in that,” he replied.
“Don’t you think he ought to be shot?” she said.
And he answered, “I am not a judge, but don’t you do it.”
It was on Mr. Herbert’s complaint to the Senior-Sergeant at
South Brisbane that Cumming and another constable were relieved
from duty at the Trocadero, the complaint of the management being


that Cumming, instead of attending to his duty, was always to be
found in some corner talking to girls.
Gumming also frequently visited the place in plain clothes in
off-duty hours. He never came in the company of women, but he
seemed to have no difficulty in finding plenty of genial feminine
companions.
In view of the importance of the evidence given by Mrs. Christie,
Mrs. Cumming was recalled for examination upon it.
She practically gave point blank denial of Mrs. Christie’s state-
ment.
She said on Christmas afternoon she had gone to the funeral
parlour to view the body of her husband, but that when she got
there she was told that the corpse of her husband “had gone
through a process,” and she was advised not to see it.
She then decided to call on Mrs. Christie to offer her sympathy
on the death of her daughter, Eileen Walsh.
As to the conversation which Mrs. Christie says took place
between them, Mrs. Cumming denied that she made any of the un-
pleasant and suggestive remarks attributed to her.
Mr. Meldon: Then, according to you, although you were the
person that called on Mrs. Christie, you did none of the talking !
The conversation was not long.
Mrs. Cumming began to weep.
“I’m not going to be condemned,” she said.
She went on to say: “They say if it was not through him she
would never have been there, and I say if it was not through her
he would not have been there. I would like to say more, but I won’t ;
I do not want to hurt anybody’s feelings.”
Mr. Staines: Say all you want to say now, and never mind about
hurting anybody’s feelings. We don’t want you to go away from
the inquiry and tell people that you have left anything unsaid
through not having had a chance to say it.
“I say the ones who did it were callous to do what they did,”
said Mrs. Cumming, still crying. “I will say I do not believe that
my husband was killed in the position he was found. Ido not be-
lieve it. The bodies were put that way and the clothes were dis-
arranged by the murderer. People who would shoot two people
like that are inhuman.”
Mrs. Cumming also denied saying to Mr. Herbert that her hus-
band deserved to be shot.
Mr. Meldon: Did you ever follow your husband!—Yes, I did.
I went to a house in Annerley-road after him, and I also went to the
Trocadero.
Mrs. Cumming added that all she hoped was that the murderer
would be discovered and brought to justice. “It will be satisfactory
to everybody,” she said.
Mr. Staines directed Mrs. Cumming to remove her hat, and it
was seen, and noted on the depositions, that her hair was cut short.
She was asked how long her hair had been cropped, and she
replied that she had it done about a year ago.
Mrs. Cumming was then measured, and her height found to be
5 feet inches. Her weight was given at list. 3 lb.


First witness on Thursday was Mrs. Fanny Louisa Howden, a
widow, and the 86-year-old mother of Mrs. Cumming. She was
enfeebled by her advanced age, and had much difficulty in standing
up while taking the oath. She read the formula deliberately and
painstakingly.
She said that she lived in Jane-street, Fortitude Valley, but at
the time of the tragedy she resided at Mrs. Gregory’s place m Con-
stance-street, of the same suburb. Her daughter was married to
Acting-Sergeant Cumming.
Mrs. Howden said that she remembered the night of December
23. Her daughter, Mrs. Cumming, came to see her and arrived
between 7 and 8 o’clock.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Can you fix the time definitely?—To the
best of my belief that is the time she came.
It may have been 7.30 ?—No, no. Not as late as that, only a few
minutes after seven. Mrs. Gregory’s clock was striking the hour, and
a few minutes after my daughter came.
Mrs. Howden, continuing, said that Mrs. Cumming stayed with
her for a couple of hours discussing Christmas festivities and presents
she had bought that day. Mrs. Cumming was going to send her
children next day to take the old lady to the Valley. It was getting
on for 10 o ’clock when she left.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Are you just guessing the time?—Oh,
dear, no! We had a clock in the house.
Can you say what time then? —My memory is getting faulty, I
am 76 years old.
Mrs. Cumming: She is 86 your Worship.
Mr. Staines: Just a moment.
It was eventually decided that Mrs. Cumming’s mother was 86
years of age, and had been in Australia 66 years.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Can you say exactly what time Mrs. Cum-
ming left ? —I could not, because I did not look at the clock. That is
my judgment.
Further questioning elicited that she remembered an interview
with Detective Henderson shortly after the tragedy, when details of
her daughter’s movements were discussed . She did not recollect tell-
ing him that Mrs. Cumming had left her place about nine o ’clock or a
little after.
She was positive that it was 10 o ’clock because she mentioned that
her daughter ought to go before T. C. Beirne’s lights went out, and
they were extinguished at 10 o’clock.
Sub-inspector Meldon: You may have told him that it was nine
o’clock?—l don’t think so.
Mrs. Howden said that next day her daughter and Stanley called.
She could see that something had happened because of the way Mrs.
Cumming was dressed and because of her manner. She was then told
of the murder.
“God bless and save us!” rejoined the old woman, “Who shot
him ? ’ ’
Mrs. Cumming replied, “I don’t know, here is a paper.”
Stanley then put his hand on his grandmother’s shoulder and


said, “Don’t be frightened, granny!” He and Mrs. Gumming then
left.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Did your daughter at any time tell you
that she was unhappy with her husband or that she had had any
trouble with him? —She never told me about her troubles. When I
visited them he treated me respectfully. I have nothing to say against
the man at all.
Was your daughter unhappy ? —I could not tell you. They didn’t
tell me about it if they had a tiff. I never knew if they ever had any.
Was Mrs. Cumming alone when she came to see you?—Yes.
Was there anyone else in the house? —I could not say whether
there was or not.
Her evidence completed, Mrs. Howden curtseyed to the Bench
with an old-world courtliness, and said, “Good morning, gentlemen!”
Mrs. Cumming, who had gazed moodily at the floor during the
major part of her mother’s period in the witness box, assisted the old
lady to leave, and was thereafter absent for the remainder of the pro-
ceedings on Thursday.
Francis Beauchamp Waygood, a motorman of the Tramways ser-
vice, fixed the time of the shots at about 9.15 o’clock on the night of
the 23rd.
He had just reached his home in Tottenham-street, South Bris-
bane, and had taken off his cap, when he heard three automatic pistol
shots, two fired rapidly, and one after an interval of less than a minute.
Waygood remarked to his wife that there was another South-side
tragedy or an escape from the gaol.
Because of his experience with firearms in the army during the
war, he was convinced that the shots issued from an automatic pistol.
His house was about 100 yards from the scene of the tragedy. He
went out on to his front verandah, but saw nobody about.
Evidence of Cumming’s movements for some time prior to his
tragic death was given by Senior-sergeant Caulfield, officer in charge
of South Brisbane police station. He said that Cumming was very
punctual and a sober man.
Cumming paraded at two o’clock in the afternoon to take charge
of the second relief.
He had under his supervision four constables, and received special
instruction to be in the vicinity of Victoria Place.
There was a great deal of traffic about at the time, owing to the
Christmas crowds, and there was also an unruly element to keep an
eye on.
Caulfield did not see Cumming wearing his belt with handcuffs
and keys attached, but felt morally certain that he wore them.
A search for them after death had failed to locate the missing
articles. The key of the handcuffs, No. 15, was found on him.
The scene of the tragedy was in the Woolloongabba police division,
said Caulfield, and Cumming had no duties which would take him
there.
A search of the office records had revealed that Cumming had
signed relief tickets for Mrs. Walsh in January last year, at the time
when he was second in charge of that station.
It had also been established, he continued, that the deceased Act-


ing-Sergeant had been on duty at the Trocadero dance ball on the
night of October 13.
Caulfield also made enquiries in his division with regard to pur-
chasers of firearms during the month of December, but they had led
to no result.
Intriguing evidence was given by Walter Frederick Hawgood, a
self-possessed young man, who is assistant in the pawnbroking estab-
lishment of Samuel Hawgood at George-street.
According to Hawgood, between 4.30 and 5.15 p.m. on December
23, the day of the tragedy, a man came into the shop and wanted to
buy a pistol.
Hawgood went to a drawer and took out one which he showed to
the client, who without demur, took it for 32/6, tendering two £1
notes.
The buyer was a “bushy-looking man who needed a shave, and
was described by Hawgood as being about 6ft. tall, thin, sharp fea-
tured, and apparently about 40 years of age.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Did he examine the pistol? —No, he just
took it.
Did you show him any of the fine points?—No.
Mr. King: How long was he in the shop?—About five minutes.
How did he speak?—With an Australian accent as far as I knew.
He had the Australian twang.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Did you notice anything about his de-
meanor ? —He seemed to be in the deuce of a hurry! It seemed as if
he wanted a pistol and then to get out again.
Did he appear normal or excited?—He appeared to be in a ter-
rible hurry and did not examine the pistol.
You showed him the weapon, told him the price, and he bought
it? —Yes.
Hawgood said that the pistol was an F.N. 25.20. It would be
smaller than a 32 calibre shown him by Sub-Inspector Meldon. The
bore was smaller. It was of the same type, however.
The purchaser was wearing a blue serge suit and a felt hat.
He had not seen the man since, he said, and the pistol had been
traced back in the shop records, showing that it was a 25.20 bore
automatic.
Frederick Slaughter, a retired coachbuilder, of James-street,
Highgate Hill, accounted for the movements of F. C. Christie, brother
of Mrs. Walsh, on the night of the tragedy.
Elgin Kobert James Menzies, a motor driver, of Gibb-street,
Wynnum, deposed that he had been in the company of Walsh, hus-
band of the female victim of the murder, until 8.30 o’clock on the
night of the shooting. A man named Harry Morris had also been
with them.
Important evidence, bearing on the whereabouts at the time of
the murder, of Stanley Cumming, son of the deceased, was tendered
by Josephine Clutterbuck, a vivacious, attractive-looking young
woman, who gave her address as Warwick, and her occupation as a
domestic.
She had known Stanley for about 10 months, she said, and on
the night previous to the murder he had called at her place of employ


ment, the boarding-house of Mrs. Melican, in Merivale-street, South
Brisbane. It was then arranged that they should go to a show on the
following evening.
Stanley met her about 7.45 o’clock on the fatal night, outside the
house, and they walked across the bridge into Queen-street. There
they stopped for a while while she did her hair in a doorway, while
Cumming, jnr. went into a tobacconist’s shop to buy a cigar.
They continued their way to the Empire Theatre, where young
Cumming bought tickets, and they went in, their seats being in the
front row of the dress circle.
After the show they went into an adjoining shop where they con-
sumed a soft drink each, and then strolled back to South Brisbane by
way of the bridge again.
They went under a school building and sat on a form for some
time, the time of their arrival there being about 11 o ’clock.
After about half am hour they went next door, that being the
place where she was employed, and they stood outside taking for
about a quarter of a hour. When she got inside she noticed by a clock
in her room that the time was 11.45 p.m.
The girl and Stanley chanced a quick glance and a smile across
the court room.
The Sub-inspector continued his questioning.
She told Stanley, she said, that she was going home to Warwick
next day for Christmas, and promised to ring him up on the follow-
ing Wednesday.
She did not return, however, having been asked by her employer
to remain, on account of the advent of extra boarders. She heard of
the tragedy on the day after it had happened.
Next time she saw Stanley Cumming was otuside the C. 1.8. office
on the following Sunday night about 10 o’clock, when she went there
in company with* Stanley’s uncle.
“He did not tell me anything in connection with the tragedy,”
she said.
Sub-inspector Meldon: But he must have told you something.
Witness: He just said, “We have lost the whole support of our
family. It is a terrible blow to mother and the family.”
She left her place of employment on the night following the 23rd,
she added, about midnight.
Some'of the boarders were a bit rowdy and some had drink
in them. She went to Mrs. Hagen’s place, but returned to her job
subsequently. ; ‘ .*•
Looking at some theatre butts, Josephine said that at the theatre
Stanley had wanted to throw them away, but she had asked for them
and kept them. She was not sure of the colour of those produced in
court, however.
She had no reason to doubt that they were the tickets, which she
had handed to detectives when interrogated. The butts were dated
December 23, and were for two seats in A row.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Are you absolutely sure that Stanley
Cumming was not out of your company from 7.45 p.m. until 11.45
p.m. on the night of December 23 ?—Quite certain.
For no period whatever ? —No. t


Mr. King: They were both lucky she kept the tickets!
With the appearance of Detective Acting-sergeant James Hen-
derson in the witness-box, the first outline of the investigations of the
police were made known.
Searching in their inquiries, and widespread in their ramifica-
tions, it became apparent that supreme tact had been used in the
questioning—delicate questioning—of a number of females, known
to be the consorts of the police Lothario.
He knew the late Acting-sergeant Cumming, he related. On the
Detective-Sergeant Henderson.
morning of the 24th of December he had been advised of the death
of that officer together with a woman, and had taken part in the in-
vestigation into the double murder.
Together with Sub-inspector Meldon and a number of detectives
he had gone to the scene of the tragedy. He had made an examina-
tion of the spot where the bodies had been found, and of the surround-
ing land.


A black tracker, George Munro, had also made a search, but
found no tracks which would give an indication of anyone connected
with the crime.
There were no signs of a struggle, he continued. There were no
tracks discernible, as the ground was hard, bare, and dry. There
were no tracks to show how the two deceased had entered the reserve.
A search had been made for the handcutfs, belt and keys of the
dead sergeant. A thorough look around had been made by several
police officers, but up to date no trace had been found of the missing
articles.
« Underneath the head of Mrs. Walsh the ground had been sieved
in an attempt to find the bullet which had passed through her head.
A search was also made of the surrounding ground for some distance
away from where the bodies had been lying.
Detective Henderson visited the house where Mrs. Walsh had
lived at Stevens-road, South Brisbane. There he saw Mrs. Christie,
mother of deceased, Mrs. Christie’s daughter, named Mrs. Jones, and
another woman. He visited Mrs. Walsh’s room and turned it over
thoroughly, as other detectives did to the rest of the house.
They found nothing which would be of any assistance. He re-
ceived certain information in connection with Mrs. Walsh’s husband,
and next day he was located at the Labour Bureau and taken to the
C. 1.8.
He was interrogated until midnight. During that inquiry he
had recounted his movements of the previous day. His statements
were checked off with statements made-to other detectives by certain
other people.
Early in the afternoon Walsh was taken to the Morgue, where
he was shown the bodies of the deceased.
“I said to him, do you know who this is?” said Detective Hen-
derson.
Walsh replied, “Yes, that is my wife,” and then began to cry
and said, “Poor Eileen, I swear to God that youi did not meet your
death at my hands. ’ ’
Henderson said to him, “Have you any idea who was the cause
of death ?’ ’ and he replied, ‘ ‘ No. I don’t know of anyone who would
have done such a thing.”
Walsh recognised the body of Gumming, and said that he had
known by sight the former sergeant at South Brisbane. He did not
know that his wife had been on intimate terms with Cumming.
On the following day, Christmas Day, Henderson and Detective
Campbell set out to locate the woman mentioned as being at a pic-
ture show with Cumming—the woman whom Stanley Cumming had
followed to Dutton Park. She was closely questioned.
He had verified her movements on the night of the murder, and
had ascertained that she was not in the vicinity of the scene of the
murder. She had gone to her home about 8.30 o’clock and had pass-
ed the evening with friends.
During the course of interrogation by the detectives he found
that on three occasions she had visited an allotment near the scene of
the tragedy with Cumming.
It was about 100 yards from the place where he eventually met


with his violent death. On each of those visits she had given herself
to him, the last time being on the night of December 21.
It had been ascertained that her method of meeting him was to
go to the tram terminus at Dutton Park at a certain time, and Cum-
ming would be waiting for her. They used to enter the vacant allot-
ment on the eastern side of the Brisbane gaol.
The woman further told him that Cumming used to remove his
belt with the handcuffs and keys on it and place them aside.
On the conclusion of their nocturnal excursions he would walk
until they were within 100 yards of the tramline and he would then
tell her to go ahead and take a tram.
It was understood that Cumming followed in a later tramcar.
She would not see him again that night.
She mentioned the night of the picture show incident, and told
of a conversant which she said she had had with Stanley Cumming,
son of her lover.
Stanley, she said, told her, “My father is no damn good. He
has been causing a lot of trouble at home. A man ought to
well do time for him! ’ ’
At that time, she continued, she was looking in the direction of
Brisbane gaol, which she could see from where they were standing.
Detective Henderson followed up this report by visiting the spot for
himself, and was satisfied that he could obtain an excellent view of
the gaol from there.
Inquiries were also made with regard to the woman’s husband
and his movements on the 23rd. He was out of Queensland on that
date, and had not been back since.
A woman at Mount Morgan was also the recipient of attention
from the detectives. She was the writer of a letter found by Mrs.
Cumming, and the mother of a child by Cumming.
“She was thoroughly interrogated,” said Detective Henderson,
“and admitted having written that letter found by Cumming’s wife.
She said she had been interviewed by Clumming’s son and that she
had made a statement to him.”
The detective found from her that she had consorted with Cum-
ming on several occasions, and she had handed letters from Cumming
to the police.
Most startling was the allegation that she made concerning the
contents of a letter from her illicit lover, in which he had written,
“Don’t be surprised if something terrible happens to me, and if it
does it will be my wife or my son will do it! ”
That letter she did not have in her possession, as she had destroy-
ed it. Her movements on the 23rd of December had been the subject
of inquiry, and the detective was satisfied that she was not in Bris-
bane on that date.
Regarding her husband, inquiries had also been set afoot, and
it bad been established that he was hundreds of miles from Queens-
land’s capital on the night of the murder.
It was also found that the woman had no other male relatives
who might take a violent interest in her doings with Cumming. Nor
were there any male admirers concerned.
Detective Henderson went on to say that the woman at Mount


Morgan detailed a number of instances in which she had met Cum-
ming away from her own house, and she detailed what happened on
their various illicit excursions.
Cumming, she said, argued that it was better for a man, when
he was out with a woman, to get in an open paddock so that they
could see anybody who would be likely to come on them by surprise,
in which ease he could then put up a fight.
During the interview with Detective Henderson this woman
said that Cumming frequently wrote to her and in his letters he com-
plained bitterly of his treatment in his home from his wife and son,
Stanley, and he claimed that they had frequently threatened to shoot
him.
When on his furlough of six months Cumming told her also
not to be surprised if he was shot, and if so, it would be in the dark,
and it would be “one of them” (meaning his wife and son).
Cumming said that he had experienced “hell” at home on ac-
count of his love affair with her. He complained very much that his
son, Stanley, had picked the lock of his private box, and had found
a letter she had written to him.
He told her that he always carried the keys with him, but since
Stanley had discovered the letter, he had kept his correspondence at
his locker in the South Brisbane police station.
Letters from this woman had actually been found in that locker,
said Detective Henderson. No letters were found in the tin trunk
at Cumming’s house.
In the police station locker were also found letters from other
w'omen.
Cumming told the woman at Mount Morgan that “they” (Mrs.
Cumming and Stanley) had two pistols.
The woman had very strong affection for Cumming, she confessed.
She described her feelings towards her lover as those of “passionate
love ” for him.
She also told the police that she would have left her husband
and gone to live with him only for the position that Cumming was
in.
He, for his part, was also deeply attached to her, as his passion-
ate and burning letters indicated.
In the early part of the inquiry, when the Cumming family was
being closely watched and interrogated, the detectives found two pis-
tols and a number of cartridges for each in the home.
These were taken to the detective office and subjected to tests
and comparision with the shells found at the scene of the tragedy
and which caused the deaths of Cumming and Mrs. Walsh.
The test revealed that the weapons found in the Cumming home
could not be connected with the slaying of the two victims.
In addition, the story of Josephine Clutterbuck was minutely
examined, and as far as possible checked off. It had been found that
the tickets of which the girl had kept the butts and which she gave
to the detectives had been purchased and used on the night of Decem-
ber 23, at the Empire Theatre.
Then Detective Henderson outlined his remarkable interviews


with Mrs. Cumming and son Stanley at their home, and their refusal
to give information at one particular stage.
Mrs. Cumming was at home on the afternoon of the 26th, he
said, when they called. Stanley was present, as was also Mr. David
Cumming, brother of the murdered man. The latter was a farmer,
of Kingaroy, and had come to Brisbane on the day after the killing.
The wife of the dead sergeant was in an excitable state of mind,
and before entering into conversation with them ordered David Cum-
ming out of the house, saying, ‘‘We don’t want you to listen to what
is going on.”
“It has got nothing to do with you,” she told him “This is pri-
vate business we are talking, just wait outside. ’ 1
He did.
Detective Henderson then questioned Mrs. Cumming as to her
knowledge of the tragedy, and asked her about her movements on
that night. She said that she was visiting her mother.
She became further excited and said, “I am satisfied that some-
body from the underworld has done this. All policemen have enem-
ies. My husband was all that a husband could be in his home. He
never stopped out at night and used to give me all his money.
“I am quite satisfied that he has been trapped into this,” she
continued. “He would never have gone in uniform to a place like
that with a woman. He has often told me that he had to visit that
place on account of complaints having been received of fellows hang-
ing about there.”
“What I want to know is how the police didn’t find the body
before daylight. They couldn’t have looked very far.”
“You won’t find the murderer on this side, you will find him on
the woman’s side.”
The detective said that it was necessary for them to go into the
matter from all sides. He also advised her that no advice had been
received by her husband to go to that spot.
Mrs. Cumming thereupon showed some annoyance and was dis-
inclined to say much. She was not very communicative, he said.
He then had a conversation with Stanley, and said, “I would
like you to come over to the detective office with me. I want to get
a complete statement from you as to what you can tell me about your
movements and anything you might know of the evening of the mur-
der.”
Stanley said that he would get his coat on and go with him right
away. He left for the detective office and remained with the officers
for the remainder of the day. After going over the matter verbally,
an effort was made to reduce the statement to type-written matter.
About 10 o’clock Stanley expressed a desire to go home, and the
detectives thought this request reasonable, so he left about 10.30
o’clock, promising to call next day to complete the partially-finished
statement.
He did not keep that appointment, so that night Detectives Hen-
derson and Campbell went to the house. They were unable to see
him, so they left word with David Cumming that they wished to see
Stanley at the office next morning.
Stanley did not turn up. , ,


About mid-day, therefore, the detectives went to the house again.
Mrs. Gumming, Stanley, and David Cumming w£re inside to re-
ceive them when they entered, and it was clear to the detectives that
they were hostile in their attitude towards them.
Mrs. Cumming greeted them at the door, and Henderson said
that he had come to see Stanley. He had promised to come to the
detective office the day before, and had failed to do so. They wanted
him to complete the statement made to them.
Then Mrs. Cumming said: “It is no good of you coming here.
We have told you all we know about the thing. Why don’t you go
somewhere else with your inquiry?”
Henderson replied, “We have got to make every possible in-
quiry into this matter, and it is in the interests of justice, as well as
of yourself, that you should tell us everything you know that might
have led up to it. * ’
“I don’t want Stanley to go over to your office any more,” she
rejoined. “You had him there for 10 hours on Sunday. As far as
lam concerned, lam finished with the matter. He (her husband)
has got his deserts, and that is the end of it.”
“I am not going near your office, and I am not going to say any
more. I have had legal advice on the matter.”
Henderson asked who had given her this advice, but she at first
declined to say. Subsequently she said that a solicitor named Mr.
McGrath, junr., had given her that advice.
The detective interviewed the solicitor, who denied having done
anything of the sort.
Mrs. Cumming after that conversation, walked away, so the de-
tective asked Stanley whether he was going to complete his state-
ment.
Stanley replied, “No. We have seen a solicitor. I am not
going to answer any further questions. You had me there long
enough on Sunday. I told you all I know.”
“I am just beginning to get my senses now. lam sorry I told
you as much as I did. ’ *
Mrs. Cumming had also complained, “Why are you coming here
to us? It looks as if you are trying to make us out guilty?”
Henderson replied, “We are not trying to make you out guilty,
but your attitude now would not impress anyone that you are not
guilty!”
Stanley eventually decided to present himself at the detective
office, and made an appointment for 2 o’clock of that afternoon. He
did come to the office as promised, but made his appearance about
7.30 o’clock that night.
When Stanley was asked questions that night he refused to
answer them.
He said, “I have come here to clear myself, but I am not going
to answer any questions.”
Many queries were put to him, but he remained mute. It was
pointed out that he was taking up a very foolish attitude, but he
still remained silent.
It was also pointed out that he had nothing to fear if he was
innocent and had nothing to hide, but even this suggestion failed to
loosen his tongue. So he was allowed to go.


The detectives had been unable to go any further with inquiries
from him since that time Until the statement made by him at the
inquiry.
Mrs. Cumming was also interviewed, but took up the same atti-
tude. She would neither go to the detective office nor make a state-
ment. " ~ , .
Subsequently, acting on the advice of another solicitor, she came
to the C. 1.8. on January 4, and made a lengthy statement, and said
that she was sorry for her previous stand.
It took four days to compile that statement.
In the course of the inquiry she denied parts of what she had
told them at the C. 1.8. office, said Detective Henderson.
She had previously said, “I have often pointed out and warned
him (Cumming), of the dangers he was running by carrying on with
these women in the position he held. ’ ’
Another thing she had told the detectives was that her husband
was angry with Stanley for having obtained a statement from the
woman at Mount Morgan about the illegitimate child.
She denied having said those things now, said the detective.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Was it ascertained that Cumming had
had a number of illicit relationships with women? Yes, quite a
number, in Mount Morgan and South Brisbane. Some of the women
were married, some were single.
Correspondence from numerous women were found in the dead
man’s locker. It could not be definitely established that Cumming
had had immoral relations with Mrs, Walsh prior to the night of
December 23.
The woman’s character had also been investigated, and except
for Cumming, there was no evidence in the slightest to show that she
had been playing loose with other men.
Very extensive inquiries were undertaken, and the aid of police,
interstate as well as all over Queensland was enlisted.
Two men who had been seen waiting round about South Bris-
bane police station on the fatal night had been located, but it had
been proved beyond all doubt that they had been waiting for some-
one else—not Cumming.
Detective Henderson ventured the opinion that the time of the
tragedy would be between 9.15 and 9.40 o’clock at night. The bodies,
when found, appeared to have been dead for some hours.
He thought that the evidence of Miss Clutterbuek, who said she
had been in Stanley’s company that night, was truthful. He had
been unable to disprove anything she had said.
Detective Kenneth Campbell, of the Brisbane C.1.D., was one of
the investigators despatched to the scene of the crime after the bodies
had been found.
A part of his duty on that day was to make a search of the sur-
rounding ground for the handcuffs, keys, and belt of the murdered
police sergeant. He had also looked for fir earns, but his search had
proved unavailing.
About three o’clock that afternoon he told the inquiry, he saw
Mrs. Cumming and her son, Stanley, at the C. 1.8. office and took
them to the morgue to show them the bodies of the murdered couple.


On the way Mrs. Cumming said : ‘ ‘ This is terrible. I have often
warned him that he would meet with a sudden end, but he would
take no notice of me. ’ ’
On arrival at the morgue Mrs. Cumming, when she was shown
her husband ’s body, cried out: —
‘ ‘ Oh, daddy, daddy, I knew you would come to this. I warned
you that you would meet with a terrible end. ’ ’
She kissed him on the forehead several times and said: “Daddy
God forgive you.”
She then expressed a desire to see the body of the woman, con*
Detective Campbell.
tinued the detective, and when the face of Mrs. Walsh was uncover-
ed she looked at it and said to Stanley, who was on the opposite side
of the slab:
i “This is not the woman he was with at the pictures, she is too
stout. ”
Mrs. Cumming then had a closer look at Mrs. Walsh’s features
and said:
“It is a bit like her, only she is too stout.” ■ .


She then turned to her husband’s body and asked where he was
shot. She was informed that it was in the back of the head.
She did not look at it, but turned around and said: “It is the
woman’s fault. I hate all women. ’ ’
Again she turned to Cumming’s body, kissed him on the brow,
and reiterated: ‘ ‘ Daddy, God forgive you! ’ ’
Turning to the body of her husband’s paramour, Mrs Gumming
burst out: “As to you I will say nothing. ’’
Mrs. Cumming, Stanley, and the police officers returned to the
C. 1.8., where she was questioned, said the officer.
She informed the detective that she had had a great deal of
trouble with her husband.
He would never take me out,” she said bitterly. “He used to
go out on his own. I caught him coming out of a picture show with
a woman, and I followed them into a cafe in Edward-street. ”
“I caught him red-handed. The woman jumped up and left him.
Stanley was waiting outside for her. He asked her if she had been
out with him before.”
“She said that she had not, but that she had seen him often on
the Dutton Park trams.”
Stanley, it appears, asked her for her name and address, and
she said that she lived at Dutton Park. She got on to an Ipswich-
road tram with Cumming, junior, following her, but he lost sight
of her.
Mrs. Qumming also said that the last time she had seen her hus-
band alive was about 6.30 on the night of the murder, when he was
having tea at home.
In a further statement she said that she went out that night
about 7.30 and went to her mother’s place at the Valley. As she
was coming home she passed the South Brisbane Police Station about
a quarter to ten.
She nearly got off tjie tram to wait for her husband, as he would
be coming off duty at ten o’clock.
“I am sorry now that I didn’t,” she said.
The detective took possession of a locked tin trunk which was
in Cumming’s own room, and took it to the C. 1.8.
As it was locked and there was no key, he forced it, and it was
found to contain clothes, private papers and bank slips, but no com-
promising letters.
,He also examined the locker at the South Brisbane Police Station,
and there he found a quantity of letters, Christmas cards, and a
woman’s undergarment.
The undergarment was shown to Mrs. Cumming, but it did not
belong to her. The owner had never been located.
The letters found were all from women.
Detective Campbell was assigned to the delicate task of investi-
gating the movements of different people on the night of the double
tragedy, he related. Apart from women with whom it was known
that Cumming had had relationships, all those suspected of illicit
entanglements were also interrogated and their movements traced
and carefully sifted.
The inquiry was then adjourned until Tuesday morning, when
other witnesses will be examined.


GERALD McGRATH, Solicitor’s Clerk.


Mr. McGrath, solicitor’s clerk, as soon as his name was called,
said that he was not compelled to go into the witness-box. and
would therefore not do so.
Mr. Staines: I do not understand you.
Mr. McGrath: I have received a sub-poena, but I refuse to go
into the box.
Mr. Staines: I think you will agree with me that a witness
can be called upon to give evidence in any court.
McGrath: I plead the privilege between a solicitor and his
client.
Mr. Staines: You are not in the nature of a person who may
be suspected of a crime, and so far may refuse to go into the box.
You can only take the question of privilege when you get there and
questions are asked.
McGrath: I have not been called upon yet.
Sub-inspector Meldon: I will call upon you. I cannot under-
stand why Mr. McGrath has taken up this attitude.
Mr. Staines pointed out that McGrath was entitled to plead
privilege if it applied in the questions put by the sub-inspector.
‘‘ I call on him at this stage, I have no desire to -prolong this
expensive inquiry,” said the sub-inspector. “The questions I want
to put to him are very simple.”
Mr. Staines: Quite right.
Sub-inspector Meldon: I call on him in the interests of justice.
The lawyer then went into the box, and took the oath. He
gave his full name as Gerald McGrath, and said that he was an
articled law clerk, to the firm of W. J. McGrath.
He said that he knew Mrs. Cumming and her son Stanley, not
personally, but professionally.
Then the witness began a long series of refusals to answer
questions, in each raising the point that under privilege he could
not divulge “office secrets” or anything that took place between
solicitor or client.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Did both Mrs. Cumming and her son
Stanley, call on you in December last?
McGrath: I refuse to answer that question.
Mr. Staines: Is any interview, apart from what took place,
privileged?—-Between the office and a client, yes.
But an interview is not a privilege!—l am an articled clerk,
bound to my principal, and I bind myself not to discuss any office
business. All articled clerks are bound in the same way.
In office secrets, but not office business?—Yes, I submit it is,
your Worship.
Apart from what takes place?—Yes.
If W. J. McGrath, sen., came here, would he be privileged
to refuse to answer? —-Yes, I certainly think that he would.
You are no more privileged than W. J. McGrath!—l think so.
I have spoken to Mr. McGrath, and he has informed me that it
is office business.
The mere fact of them coming to the office apart from an inter-
view? —Yes.
Mr. Staines expressed himself as unable to agree with the wit-


ness, although he thought that certain parts of the interview would
come under the heading of privilege.
Asking the Bench to view the matter in the light of him being
purely an articled clerk working for § principal, Mr. McGrath *Said
he could not disclose the fact that anyone came to his office at all.
Sub-inspector Meldon: I would like to ask this question, and
get his answer, and I want to follow with another question. Ido
not care what his answer is, but I want to get it done: —
Did Mrs. Gumming call on you professionally after the 23rd
of December?
McGrath: You mean, did she call at the office?
Sub-inspector Meldon: I don’t care whether it was at the office.
—I refuse to answer on the grounds that that is privilege between
solicitor and client, not to disclose any communication or matters
that took place between solicitor and client, and that I am only an
articled clerk.
Was Mrs. Cumming a client of your firm at any period since
December 23?—1 refuse to answer, on the same grounds.
Did you advise Mrs. Cumming since that date? —I refuse to
answer that question
I have not finished yet. Did you advise her not to answer
any questions put to her by the police in connection with the mur-
der?—l refuse to answer, on the same grounds.
Did you advise Stanley Cumming since December 23 not to
answer any questions put to him by the police, including detectives,
respecting the murder?—l refuse to answer.
Did you tell Detective Henderson at the C. 1.8. since the date
of the murder that you did not advise Mrs. Cumming to refuse
to answer questions ? —I was never asked that question!
Yes or no? —I was never asked that question.
The sub-inspector carried the questions further with a view
to leading the witness up to the interview with Detective Hender-
son, and got McGrath to admit that he had called at the C. 1.8.
after the date of 4he double tragedy.
It was for the purpose of getting a look at some documents, the
property of Acting-sergeant Cumming, and at that time held by the
police.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Did Detective Henderson ask you any
questions regarding Mrs. Cumming having told him that she would
not answer any inquiries because you had advised her not to do
so?
McGrath (hesitating): To my knowledge on the day I saw
Mr. Henderson he did not ask me any question concerning Mrs.
Cumming.
Turning to Mr. Staines, McGrath said he could easily clear the
matter up. The question asked him, he averred, had been about
the son Stanley Cumming.
Sub-inspector Meldon: I wish that he would give his answer
to the questions!
McGrath: I wanted to save time.
Sub-inspector Meldon: You are not saving time! —The question
he asked me was about her son Stanley.


Is that your answer?—Yes.
What were the questions he asked you about Stanley?—
Whether I had advised Stanley not to make a statement to the
police.
What did you tell Detective Henderson? —I refuse to answer
that question. (After a pause) Oh, no! I can answer that. —That
I did not advise Stanley to that effect.
That is what you told Detective Henderson ? Is that correct ?
—(slowly) Yes.
Having secured this admission, Sub-inspector Meldon asked
whether McGrath had seen Mrs. Cumming and her son since De-
cember 23, and was told several times. The interviews—some of
them—had taken place in the streets or about the Supreme Court.
‘All right, Mr. McGrath!” said the sub-inspector; “did you
see them professionally together?”
“I refuse to answer.”
Sub-inspector Meldon: Do you refuse to answer whether Mrs.
Cumming and her son Stanley, called on you professionally after
December 23?—1 haven’t been asked that question yet.
lam asking you now. You are intent on wasting a lot of
time. —I am not.
Mr. Staines: He is entitled to refuse to answer on the grounds
of privilege if his contention is bona fide.
Sub-inspector Meldon (sarcastically): Yes if it is! (To
McGrath) I have put the question, and you are not going to tell
me how to put it. You are here to abide by what his Worship
directs!
Mr. Staines: Answer ‘Yes” or “No.” You have been asked.
Do you refuse?
McGrath: I am not trying to waste the time of the Court
Mr. Staines: If there is privilege you are entitled to bring it
forward, no matter what anybody says.
Witness said that he would refuse to answer that question as
it had not yet been put to him. Mr. Staines ruled that it had
been put in the form asked by Sub-inspector Meldon. McGrath
thereupon refused to answer it.
Sub-inspector Meldon: That is not the answer!
The Sub-inspector: There is no answer to my question. Wit-
ness has not said “Yes” or “No.”
Mr. Staines: He takes up the ground of privilege. I will have
to decide whether he will have to answer it or not; in other words,
whether he carries his professional capacity wherever he goes. Is
that the substance of your answer, Mr. McGrath ?
Sub-inspector Meldon: It is not!
McGrath: You say that Igo professionally anywhere. That
is not correct.
Mr. Staines: I thought that was the attitude you took up. You
may refuse to be interviewed outside your office.
Sub-inspector Meldon: I would insist on an answer to the
question, yes or no.
Mr. Staines: I am afraid I cannot at this stage.
Sub-inspector Meldon; What, as to whether to refuse to answer


a question! He is not committing a /breach of etiquette at all. I
am not asking anything between solicitor and client. lam ask-
ing whether he refuses to say whether they called on him in a
professional capacity.
Mr. Staines: That is the question of privilege.
On asking for a ruling on that question there and then, the
Sub-inspector was informed by Mr. Staines that a decision could
not be given at that juncture.
Mr. King said that if it was a question of privilege not to
answer, the magistrate would have to decide. McGrath could
keep on refusing to answer questions.
In this invigorating style the inquiry dragged its way through
the morning. At last, in desperation, the Sub-inspector asked
McGrath some definite questions, with a promise from Mr. Staines
that a ruling on the point at issue would be given later.
Sub-inspector Meldon: You have told us that you did not
advise Stanley Cumming to that effect?
McGrath: It would be better if I put it
Sub-inspector Meldon: I was going to put another question.
I want to have that clear. —To the best of my knowledge, I did
not tell Detective Henderson that I advised Stanley not to make a
statement to the police.
Mr. Staines: To the best of your knowledge! You won’t go
further than that?—l can’t, your Worship. ,
Sub-inspector Meldon: Is that a qualification? It makes it
just the opposite, now. I understood from you that you told
Detective Henderson that you did not advise Stanley not to make a
statement.—Not that way. I didn’t tell
Mr. Staines: Not to make a statement?
Sub-inspb,ctor Meldon: Is that correct? That contradicts.
What did you tell Detective Henderson?
McGrath: I told him that I did not advise Stanley Cumming
not to make a statement to the police.
Did you tell him that in response to a question put by him?—
Yes.
Did Henderson ask you if you had advised Mrs. Cumming not
to answer any questions? Or make a statement to the police con-
cerning the murders of Acting-sergeant Cumming and Mrs. Walsh?
—Detective Henderson never asked me that question.
The same question was being raised again, without result.
The inquiry had resolved itself into a fencing match between the
Sub-inspector and the witness, whose caution in replying to ques-
tions was prolonging the course of the investigation.
Again McGrath was asked whether he had called at the C. 1.8.
and whether he has inquired for Detective Henderson at the counter.
After some hesitation, the witness acknowledged that to the
best of his knowledge he had asked for “Detective Meldon” on
the day that he paid a visit to detective headquarters.
Sub-inspector Meldon: And on that day you saw me? —Yes.
McGrath, it appeared, informed the detective that he was
acting for Mrs. Cumming and her son, and asked to see certain
papers relating to the deceased’s estate. These documents the


police had taken from the Cumming household on the day follow-
ing the tragedy.
Returning to the attack, Sub-inspector Meldon asked:
Did Detective Henderson say: “She (Mrs. Cumming) told
me you were acting for her and that you had advised her and
the son not to answer any questions to any of the police”! Did
he do that?
McGrath: I am compelled to answer that question, “Yes” and
“No.”
Well, answer it fully!—Detective Henderson did tell me that
Mrs. Cumming had told him that I was acting for her. He then
asked me if I had advised Stanley not to make a statement to the
police.
What did you say?—l have already answered that question.
I told him that I did not advise Stanley Cumming not to make a
statement to the police.
Did the detective say to you: “She (Mrs. Cumming) told
me you were acting for her, and that you had advised her not
to answer any questions put to her by the police”?—He did not
ask me that question.
Did you reply: “Certainly not, I wouldn’t do that!”? —I did
not.
Did Detective Henderson say to you: “You will have to see
Sub-inspector Meldon about the documents”? And did he then
take you into my office —show you I mean, not take?—Yes.
You saw me there?—Yes.
Did I ask you if you had advised Mrs. Cumming and her son
not to answer any questions put to her by the detectives or make
a statement? —No.
And did you tell me that you did not? —As to going to your
office with Henderson, he went into the room, and approximately
five seconds later he beckoned to me from your office to come in.
I was standing in an adjoining room and saw Mr. Henderson from
where I was.
What about it? —You asked me did Henderson take me in!
It was quite clear, and you are very, very technical, Mr.
McGrath!—Pardon me, Mr. Meldon!
More minutes sped by, while the lawyer argued about the
meaning of “going in” with Detective Henderson.
Fed-up, the Sub-inspector wearily asked: “Well, what is the
answer to my main question?”
McGrath replied: “No.”
He admitted that during his interview with the Sub-inspector
there were only the two of them there, Detective Henderson having
retired. ,
Sub-inspector: You deny that I asked you anything like that
about advising Mrs. Cumming or her son about not making a state-
ment to the detectives or answering questions?—Deny what?
The question was repeated, and Sub-inspector reiterated: Do
you deny that I asked?
After a long hesitation, McGrath replied: “Yes.”
Sub-inspector Meldon became slightly exasperated, and said:


“If I go into the witness box and swear that I did, I am lying?”
McGrath answered: “Either that or your memory is tricking
you.”
“And the same applies to Detective Henderson if he swears
it in the witness box?” asked the Sub-inspector.
“The same would apply,” rejoined the witness.
Sub-inspector Meldon: He is lying or his memory is tricking
him! Let me ask you to answer the question as it is put, Mr.
McGrath. lam asking regarding Mrs. Cumming.
Did you know that prior to this interview with the detective
at the C. 1.8. office that he and Detective Campbell made enquiries
at your father’s office concerning Mrs. Cumming and her son hav-
ing been there?—Yes.
Do you know that your father told them that there was no
record in the books of the Cummings as clients?—No, I didn’t
know.
Had you heard it? —No.
Would you be surprised to know that your father had told
the detectives that? —Very much so.
Would you be surprised to know that Mrs. Cumming refused
on December 28 to make a statement or answer questions, that she
had had solicitor’s advice, and that I instructed two detectives to
interview the solicitors, whose name was given as McGrath?—
(after a long pause)—l don’t know what it has got to do with it.
I have nothing to do with those instructions!
I know that. Have you any reason to doubt that I did give
those instructions ?—Oh, no!
The Sub-inspector asked whether Mrs. Cummings’ name should
have appeared on the clients’ book in McGrath’s office, and was
informed that that was so if the clerk whose duty it was to enter
it was there. ,
Sub-inspector Meldon: I don’t suppose you know of any reason
why I should say—and am prepared to substantiate on oath—that
you did tell me that you did not advise Mrs. Cumming and her son
not to answer any questions or make a statement to the detectives
if you did not tell me? —(hesitatingly) I don’t know of a personal
reason.
Personal, professional, or any other way, I want you to look
at it as widely as you can—l don’t know of any other reason
than that your memory might have tricked you.
Have you any reason to believe that I have a defective memory ?
—No. Our memories are equal
Don’t compare them, please, don’t. How do you arrive at
that? —We are both able, with full capacity for memory, except my
brain is better than yours! lam younger.
You are younger! How much, do you know? —Er, no-o-o.
Well, what are you basing your opinion on? —Well, perhaps
I am younger.
Do you know anything about whether my memory has slipped
or not?—Er, I don’t know (haltingly). No more than the average
person.


You don’t know anything about me at all!—I don’t see what
that has to do with it.
You will before we finish! What about Detective Henderson,
is there any reason why he should say—and has sworn—that you
did tell him that you did not advise Mrs. Cumming not to make
a statement or answer questions?—Not that I know of.
McGrath, under a barrage of questions from the Sub-inspector
was constrained to admit that he had known Detective Henderson
as a member of the and that as far as he knew, that officer
was dependable.
There was a pause, and then McGrath, addressing Sub-inspector
Meldon, asked: Are you suggesting that I am not?
Sub-inspector Meldon (with marked sarcasm): Where did you
get that inspiration from? There is nothing that I have said!
Continuing his questions, he asked whether McGrath had been
in Finney, Isles’, to see Stanley Cumming to collect a professional
fee for advice given to that client.
McGrath refused to answer.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Did you go other than in your profes-
sional capacity to have an interview with Stanley?—No.
If Mrs. Cumming is prepared to state and substantiate on oath
that you did advise her not to make a statement or answer questions
would she be correct?—l refuse to answer.
Do you think that a good course under the circumstances of
this inquiry?—ln the first place, I do not know what has been dis-
closed at this inquiry.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Well!
McGrath added that the business he did at the office of W. J.
McGrath was private and confidential, and that, he thought, was
good reason for his attitude.
Sub-inspector Meldon: Even though your client or ex-client
has given as her reasons that she acted on the advice of a solicitor
in not answering, and that you were the solicitor?—l have not
said so. I have refused to answer this question.
Mr. Staines (to the Siib-inspector): You are putting it in as a
statement of fact.
McGrath: It is another way of trying to get out of me what
took place at that interview, or alleged interview. I submit that
the question is not fair. I refuse to answer it.
The Sub-inspector intimated that he had gone as far as he
could with McGrath until the Bench gave a decision on the point
of law concerning privilege.
Mr. Staines said: “The question of privilege operates as to all
matters between solicitor and client as well as client and solicitor
and his clerks insofar as they are acting as agents or intermediaries
between him and his client.”
McGrath: Thank you, your Worship.
Mr. Staines: That does not apply to the matter of the bare
fact of the interview as against what takes place at an interview.
McGrath: I must admit the fact of an interview?
Mr. Staines: Yes.
Thus advised, McGrath adopted a more conciliatory attitude


than he had done in the morning, and told Sub-inspector Meldon
that he had interviews with the Cummings subsequent to the mur-
der.
As far as he could remember, there had been about six or
seven interviews with Mrs. Cumming, and three with Stanley, both
parties being at some of those interviews.
Some of them were about the administration of the estate of
the murdered man, he volunteered.
Sub-inspector Meldon: You have told us .a little more now.
Are you prepared to tell us the lot ? —As far as I can.
You won’t tell us the lot?—No, I am not able to.
Even though Mrs. Cumming gives her consent? —I would still
refuse.
The evidence of McGrath having concluded, he was handed
his statement to sign, but he scrutinised it carefully before attach-
ing his signature.
Detective Henderson went into the box again, and swore that
he had had an interview with McGrath at the 0.1.8. office, at which
that solicitor had informed him that he had not given Mrs. Cumming
or Stanley advice not to make statements or answer questions.
On December 30, the detectives had called again, he proceeded,
Jbut McGrath was out, so they spoke to W. J. McGrath, who in-
formed them that there was no record of the Cummings in his
clients’ book. He thought that they had come to the wrong office.
Sub-inspector Meldon then asked the witness about his enquir-
ies into the Cumming-Wialsh murder, concerning firearms and
vendors of those weapons, but the Court was informed that the
investigations had been negative, and that nobody thought to have
had a possible connection with the crime had bought an automatic
of the kind which had perpetrated the shooting.
In reply to Mr. King, Detective Henderson said that the men
seen by the witness Crane might have had something to do with the
slaying of the police officer and his consort of that night, although
he did not think it very probable.
Of course, they could have walked to the scene of the murder
in 10 minutes from where they had been seen.
In his opinion, Cumming had met Mrs. Walsh at or near the
terminus of Annerley and Stephens roads. That would have been
about half-past eight.
Mr. King suggested, and the detective agreed, that the motive
for the murder might have been the outraged feelings of a husband
with whose wife Cumming had had immoral relations.
The detective also admitted that not all the women with whom
Cumming had misconducted himself had been traced, and that
only those definitely known to have been his mistresses had been
examined, and their movements and those of their husbands had
been traced on the night of the murder.
It was stated by him in addition that the main reason for the
names of those women not being made public was that tragedy
might eventuate in their families if the fact that they had beem
loose in their conduct with Cumming was known.


When the inquiry was resumed on Friday, Mrs. Gumming was
the first witness called upon to give evidence.
She said that on December 29, as far as she could remember,
she had called upon Gerald McGrath in connection with the mur-
ders.
He had advised her not to answer any questions from the
police or to make a statement to them.
She had no objection, she added, to him divulging to the
inquiry the advice, he had given her.
“My interview with him was so brief that there was nothing
in it,” she said.
In reply to Sub-inspector .Meldon Mrs. Cumming said that she
had no complaint to make about the investigating detectives in any
of their interviews with her or Stanley. As a matter of fact, she
had made no suggestion of that kind during the course of the in-
quiry.
Mr. King: Are you willing for Mr. McGrath to give all the
contents of any interviews that you had with him?
Mrs. Cumming: Certainly.
Sub-inspector Meldon went into the box with the object of
refuting the evidence given by McGrath on Tuesday. The officer
said that he was in charge of the C. 1.8., Brisbane.
About the end of December, he continued, Detective Hender-
son told him that McGrath wished to see him. McGrath came into
his office and said that he was acting for Mrs. Cumming and her
son, and that he desired to inspect certain documents of the mur-
dered man.
“During the course of that interview,” added the Sub-inspec-
tor, “I told Mr. McGrath that Mrs. Cumming and her son had
informed the detectives that they would not come to the C. 1.8.
office or answer any further questions or make a statement respect-
ing the murder of Acting-sergeant Cumming and the woman
Walsh.
“I told him that Mrs. Cumming had stated that he (McGrath)
had advised her not to do so, and I asked him if this was correct.
“Mr. McGrath replied, ‘No, I never gave her that advice!’ ”
The interview ended soon afterwards.
Sub-inspector Meldon said that the suggestion of McGrath
that his memory would be tricking him (the Sub-inspector), or
that he was speaking untruthfully was not correct with regard to
the interview between the officer and the solicitor at the C. 1.8.
Detective Henderson was recalled, and in answer to Mr. King,
said that he was quite satisfied that Mrs. Cumming had told him
that her solicitor—McGrath —had advised her not to make a state-
ment.
Regarding the evidence of Mrs. Howden, mother of Mrs. Cum-
ming, the detective said he had no reasonable ground to disbelieve
her.
He told Sub-inspector Meldon, in answer to further questions,
that he had interviewed Mrs. Melican, proprietress of a boarding-
house where Josephine Clutterbuck worked.
The C. 1.8. had received an anonymous letter respecting Mrs.


Meliean, intimating that she had some information. When the
detective saw her and her son and made inquiries from them he
had obtained no information which would assist his investigations,
he continued. He also spoke to other residents of the house.
He found nothing in his investigations which would contradict
anything that Josephine Clutterbuck had told him. He had gone
to the house where the girl worked with a view to testing the
credibility of the story told him by the girl.
All rurnours received by the C. 1.8. concerning the circum-
stances surrounding the deaths of Acting-sergeant Cumming and
Mrs. Walsh had been run down, he told the inquiry.
Can you say what parts of the Cumming house were searched?
—lt was all searched.
Inside? —Yes, as well as the ground outside and underneath
the house.
He added that all receptacles inside the house had been care-
fully looked into and an extensive search made. He and Detective
Campbell had undertaken that examination on the day after the
tragedy.
Sub-inspector Meldon: What were you .searching for?—We
searched with a view to finding the handcuffs, keys, and belt
missing from the person of Cumming after he had been found dead.
We also looked for any weapons apart from those which had been
handed to the C. 1.8.
Mr. King: Searches were also made at other places than the
Cumming house for those things?—Oh, yes.
iFrom the evidence of another woman, he said, Cummings was
in the habit of taking his belt off, and would probably be lying on
the ground some little distance away from them.
No doubt the belt, handcuffs, and keys had been destroyed or
hidden in a place where they would never be found.
Mr. King: Mrs. Cumming says that he wore his handcuffs loose,
and never on the belt. Would you be surprised to know that?
Mrs. Cumming: He always carried his revolver in the hip pocket.
Recalled, Detective Campbell told Mr. King that he believed the
evidence of Josephine Clutterbuck.
He could not disprove the statement that Stanley had been with
her, and thought that his movements on the night of the murder had
been accounted for from about 7.30 p.m. until some time after 11
o’clock the same night.
Mr. King: Do you believe that they had anything to do with
the murder.
Detective Campbell (after a long pause): That is a hard ques-
tion. They may have.
! Have you any,doubt that Mrs. Cumming went to the home of
her mother at the Valley on the night of the killing? I have not
been able to prove otherwise.
You have no doubt? I have not been able to disprove it.
And that she stayed there until some time about 9 o’clock or a
little later, and passed the South Brisbane Town Hall on her way
home about 9.45 o’clock? I have not been able to disprove it.
Evidence in the inquiry then concluded. Mr. Staines suggested


that the Sub-inspector ask for an adjournment sine die. It was not
thought that there would be other witnesses.
Prior to the termination of the proceedings Mr. King intimated
that he would like to say a few words. Permission having been
granted, he told the Court that in his opinion the system under which
the inquiry was held was antiquated and obsolete.
He wished to stress the point that on the night of the murder
there were surely other persons in the lonely reserve whose evidence,
if they came forward, would materially assist the police to sheet the
crime home.
Those persons who were there no doubt had reasons for not
coming forward, and doubtless they did. not wish to disclose the fact
that they had been in the reserve at night.
Certain things had been said against Mrs. Cumming and Stanley
which could not have been said in a police court.
Mr. Staines pointed out that it was necessary for the inquiry
court to have wide latitude.
Mr. King: It means that you give people a weapon to attack
persons who cannot reply, with detriment to the reputations of those
attacked. , ■ ■?
He added that it was possible for the public to be unconsciously
biased by what was said at the inquiry. The system was wrong.
So the inquiry closed, with the proviso that it might be re-opened
if necessary.


IN CONCLUSION.
As the magisterial inquiry concerning the murder of Acting Ser-
geant Oumming and Mrs. Eileen Walsh proceeded the mystery of the
crime deepened.
The police placed all their cards on the table, and though remark-
able evidence was given by various witnesses, their testimony tended
rather to confuse the issue than to clarify it.
Nothing tangible was elicited .which might with any degree
of certainty indicate the man or woman who, on the even-
ing of December 23 last, crept upon Cumming and Mrs. Walsh in a
reserve near Boggo-proad Gaol and shot them dead as they were
embraced in guilty passion.
Two figures were seen to follow the policeman and his consort and
the shots whch ended forever their amorous pleasantries were heard
by several people.
The possibility of one of these phantom figures being a woman
dressed in man’s clothing was closely considered.
The dead man’s son, Stanley Cumming, was examined, and his
mother was again questioned about extraordinary remarks which wit-
nesses allege she made concerning her husband and the fate that he
deserved. To almost all of these allegations she gave denials.
Though the time of the murder has been placed within the com-
pass between nine and ten o’clock that fateful evening, there are dis-
parities as to the moment when the shots rang out.
It was possible, a witness said at the inquiry, that the shorter of
the two figures which trailed Cumming and Mrs. Walsh to their doom
was a woman in man’s clothing.
He could not identify Mrs. Cumming as either of the persons he
saw, but young Cumming was the build of the taller of the pair.
Mrs. Cumming was asked to uncover her head, in view of the pos-
sibility that a woman dressed as a man was a party to the murders.
It was noted on the depositions that her hair was cut short.
Her height and weight were also taken.
Mrs. Cumming wept when Mr. Meldon, of the C.I. Branch,
directly asked her son whether he killed his father or Eileen Walsh.
The son sturdily denied that he was even remotely connected with
the crime.
He also denied that he left home on account of his father.
Though nothing was adducted as to why such lies should have
been told, Mrs. Cumming described as lies all statements which she
is said to have made to witnesses indicating violence of emotion.
“I never said he ought to be shot,” she said.
According to information given to detectives by one of Cumming’s
illicit lovers, on three occasions she had been with Cumming to a vacant
allotment near where he was eventually found dead with Mrs. Walsh.
This raises the interesting point that Cumming may have been
known to have frequented this ill-fated locality of his stealthy love
affairs, and that someone may have turned this knowledge to terrible
profits.
The time of the murder has been fixed at between 9.15 and 9.40
o’clock on the night of December 23. Evidence tendered by Josephine
Clutterbuck, a domestic servant, of Warwick, purported to show that


Stanley Cnmming had been in her company from 7.45 p.m. until nearly
midnight on the fatal evening, and that he had never left her side.
Other evidence disclosed that his movements could be traced
right through until the vicinity of midnight.
The day following the murder, a Christmas card addressed to
Acting Sergeant Cumming was delivered at the South Brisbane police
station.
It had a printed verse and bore the simple signature, “From
Eileen.”
The writing was subsequently identified as that of Mrs. Walsh.
“A Merry Christmas.”
The writer and the recipient met their deaths together. Neither
lived to see the dawn of that day of “Peace on Earth and Goodwill to
all Men. ’ ’
! THE END.




MMte Press Limited, Printers,
Mar? Street, Brisbane,
