

+u**. ■ *BtZ£SS^Bj^^mE&^ , J*&jtfcjjf!-- , : ' ;p'< 11 -. - \ , rllffli' -\ h .-. ;
■ -'
Melancholy and Dreadful Loss of the
AMPHITRITE.
Hound from Woolwich to Botany Bay, with 103 Female Convict* and i 2 Children, together
with a Crew of I(j, being- in the whole I 3() souls; of which 133 [enslied in the -dreadful Gale
of Saturday, the 31st of August. 1833, off Boulogne.
d 10ME list you gallant Englishmen, who ramble at
V ' your ease,
While 1 unfold concerning of the dangers of the seas:
It's of the ship, the Amphitrite, with 108 females,
With children, crew, and cargo, boys, bound down to
New South Wales.
Tvvas August on the 35th we sailed from Woolwich
shore, (ed sore,
Leaving our friends behind us, whose hearts were griev-
Aloug the shore away we bore, till friends.were out of
sight, (of the Amphitrite.
Crying, fare you well, each bright young girl, on board
We sailed away without delay & arrived 3 off Dunger-
ness, (tress,
When we arrived at port Bologne it fill'd us with dis-
On Friday morning the 4th day it was a dreadful sight,
Surrounded by a dreadful gale was the dreadful Amp-
hitrite,,
Our Captain found she was near aground, her anchor
did let go, (fate you'll know !
Crying, set your main and topsails, boys, or voon ycuT
The raging sea ran mountains high, the tempest did u»
nite, (Amphitrite.
Poor souls in vain did shriek with pain, on board of the
At 3 o'clock in the afternoon we were put to a stand,
Our fatal ship she ran aground upon a bank of sand;
Poor children round their parents hung, who tore their
hair with fright, (Amphitrite.
To think that they should end their days on board of the
Our moments they were ending fast, and all prepared
to die, " (cry;
Down on our bended knees did fall, and loud for mercy
Our ship she gave a dreadful roll, and soon went out of
sight, " - (of the Amphitrite.
Their shrieks and criestnust reach the skiesf on aboard
Great praise belongs unto the French who Tied us all to
save;
Our Captain he was obstinate to brave the stormy wave,
But he vveiT down among the rest to swim the briny sea,
Tne rocks beneath the briny deep his pillow for to be.
Poor souD were toss'd, and all were lost, but two poor
lads and me, sea i
For on a spar we reached the shore and cleaved the ra-
But one exhausted by the wave he died that very night,
So only two's saved from the crew of the fatal Amphi-
trite. . ' ' £
So now the Amphitrite is gene, her passengers & crew,
So think upon the sailor bold that wWI the jacket blue;
God gave relief to end the grief of those distracted quite,
Lamenting sore for those no more onboard of theAraph-
itrite.
J. Catnaeh, Printer, 2, &3, Monmouth-coiirt,
7 Dials.
