

£9l. 3 2.
The
Chinese Idea Of
The Second Self
E. T. C. Werner


THE CHINESE IDEA OF THE
SECOND SELF
E. T. C. WERNER,
H.B.M. Consul, Foochow (retired),
Barrister-at-law, Middle Temple,
late member of the Chinese Government
Historiographical Bureau, Peking, etc.
The Shanghai Times
Publishers
Shanghai


&L '{' r l cy»A^>
FISC* CJc ,
// ?2


The Chinese Idea Of The
Second Self
E. T. C. Werner
[A paper read at the meeting of the Things
Chinese Society, Peking ( Peip’ing ), May 26th, 1931.]
By investigating the
hidden meaning of things, men enter into the myster-
ies, in order that they may put their studies to
practical use.—gf.
While many people in the West, and a few in
the East, doubt if they have a soul, the average
Chinese is convinced that he has not only several but
may even possess as many as a hundred or more (see
p. 33-84). Lest this should sound alarming, especially to
those who find one soul quite enough to care for, I
hasten to add that this large army of souls can be
boiled down to a much smaller number. I propose,
therefore, to serve up to you this evening, not a ban-
quet, not even a square meal, but merely a sakuska
of boiled soul. A native of Kilkenny would pronounce
the last word “sowl,” and it might be well if that
Hibernicism became general in order to obviate any


risk of confusing that mysterious entity, so often
blessed or condemned according to the reaction we
exhibit toward people and things in our environment,
with the flat and bony fish we see gasping for dear
life in two inches of water in the fishmongers’ tubs
in Chinese cities.
It has been said that “soul” is only a geographical
expression. I think we shall find it is something more
than that.
Let us begin at the beginning—at the real begin-
ning. (All previous writers on this subject have begun
in the middle.) It will not be questioned that mankind
in general, the Chinese included, must have thought
about their relationship to their environment long
before they were able to record their impressions in
writing; a fortiori, long before they could form and
put in writing abstract philosophical or metaphysical
statements or arguments regarding their physical and
mental selves and the existence of and relations be-
tween the seen and the unseen worlds. We have, in
fact, ample evidence of this in the records concerning
primitive tribes in various parts of the world who
have crude ideas on this very important problem, but
who yet are so far from being capable of abstract
thought, much less argument, that, for example, they
cannot even reckon the number of oxen in their herds;
as among the Damaras, the African nomads and
cattle-rearers, who “puzzle very much after five (in
counting), because no spare hand remains to grasp
and secure the fingers that are required for units,”
and who “discover the loss of one of the herd, not
by the number of the herd being diminished, but by
the absence of a face they know.”


Primitive man speaks of that which he sees, and
testifies from that which he knows from actual obser-
vation and experience, and his interpretation thereof
is the same interpretation we should make had we
remained in the same social state. His simple facul-
ties are active. His conceptions of general facts are
deficient. He does not foresee distant results. He
lacks abstract ideas. He has no notions of definiteness,
of truth, of scepticism, of criticism. His imagination is
not concerned with construction, but with reminis-
cence only.
Origin of The Idea of a Second Self
Applying this general postulate to our present
subject, we find that the idea of the second self arises
naturally from the experiences of a primitive mind
incapable as yet of interpreting them scientifically.
Stooping down to drink from the placid pool, the
primitive man sees in the water something which
moves its lips and eyes as he moves his, twists its
nose in harmony with his own, and so on. Its form
and outline are identical with his. It is, in fact, a
duplicate of himself, his second self. No interpretation
could, under the circumstances, be more natural, for
he has no knowledge of the laws of optics, of catoptrics
or dioptrics. Similarly, when he goes to sleep, he
“sees” (as we incorrectly say, for his eyes are closed
to light) himself doing various things—perhaps slay-
ing an enemy, or even doing things he is usually
incapable of doing, such as flying through the air,
taking his head off and putting it on again, lifting an
elephant in each hand, or jumping over a mountain.
On waking, he finds himself not in the air, but
on his bed, just as he was before his body undertook
those strange aeronautical or other feats. What, then,


has happened? How does he explain these curious
phenomena? Why, simply in the most natural way
possible. He is no hypocrite. He does not wilfully
deceive himself. He regards himself as of dualistic
constitution: a logical deduction from his experiences.
His second self, the “doppelganger,” or “double,” of
the old legends, inhabiting his corporeal body during
his waking hours, may, during sleep, fainting,* etc.,
leave that body and perform all sorts of wonderful
exploits. This explanation receives confirmation from
the dualism he sees in the world around him.
Duality
There is heaven and earth, night and day, male
and female, heavy and light, hard and soft. Clouds,
comets, lightnings, rainbows, fogs, mirages, now
appear and then disappear—or conceal themselves.
Fossil remains are further evidence of transmutation
from one substance to another. Eggs change into
birds, tadpoles into frogs, caterpillars into butterflies.
Shadows are actual existences, they dance attendance
on their owners on bright days, but may be separate
also, as in the case of the shadow of a cloud moving
along a mountainside, thus giving rise to the notion of
apparent and unapparent states of being. That their
true nature is not understood is shown by the belief
that a shadow may be made to turn in the opposite
direction. The idea of duality resulting from reflec-
tions we have already noticed; though not always
visible, the existence of the second self may be easily
proved by merely looking in the pool. Further, the
second self is not a movie only, but a talkie also; for
is not the echo its voice? The second self may even
♦Even at the present day the Chinese will speak of a faint
as hsiao ssu, d* “small death.”


at times be seen stealing out of a grave in the shape
of a fox. All these ideas come naturally to the mind
of the primitive man from his actual experiences.f
There is no suggestion even of his broaching any
subtle metaphysical explanations. And I would ask
you to note especially this dualistic conception, so
simple, so universal, and so appropriate to the primi-
tive mind, because it is right here, and not in the lie
of civilization, that we will find the essence and solution
of the problem and frame the conclusion to which I
will come at the end of this paper.
Dualism and The Soul
It is in dualism, then, that we find the origin of
the idea of the second self. This other self is at
first conceived as no less material than the original.
Being merely at first regarded as a concrete duplicate
of the corporeal body, what right have we to call it a
soul? We have, as yet, no right to do so. Something
else must happen. The mere fact of duality—the
facts that there is a sky above him and earth under
his feet, that the day is bright and the night dark,
that he has a double following him about everywhere,
etc., do not put into the primitive man’s mind the idea
that he is possessed of a soul. He does not, for example,
regard the earth as his body and the sky or heaven as
his soul. At first he regards himself merely as of a
fThe conception of dualism was, of course, much earlier
than the time of the I ching jj , Classic of Mutations, to
which some authors, Chinese and foreign, have attributed it;
nevertheless, the character i JJ, consisting of jih H, sun, and
yueh JJ, moon, is a good instance of the dualistic idea, as also
are yang Hg and yin |f£ (p. 19), which came to mean ‘sun’ and
‘moon’ respectively.


dual material nature. The transition in idea from the
corporeal to the incorporeal is gradual.
It is first noticed that the second self has some
small but nevertheless real superiority in movement,
etc., over what, for distinction’s sake, I will call the
first-self. Then, also, the second selves (of himself
and others) seen in dreams may cease to be dreamt
about. They become impermanent. They die. Thus
the first attempts (to put it that way) to establish a
permanent consciousness of the supernatural aborts,
fails.
Whence, then, comes the idea of a permanently-
existing spirit or soul? Note, first, that having the
added powers just referred to, the double seen in
dreams, etc., becomes an object of fear and therefore
to be propitiated. Hence, when a corpse is buried, food
and drink are placed in or on the grave, in order that
the second self may not suffer when it returns to the
body and vent its anger on the living. The perpetu-
ation of these sacrifices, added to the evidence furnish-
ed by language (which in its primitive forms fails to
distinguish shade, shadow, ghost, air, life, soul, etc.,)
tends to establish the idea of a permanently-existing
ghost or spirit. There thus arises in thought a more
marked line of demarcation between natural and
supernatural beings.
The Kuei fa
Now, what the primitive Chinese saw in the pool,
or the shadow which he noticed following him every-
where and imitating his every action, or the “double”
of himself he saw in his dreams,* he called his kuei
♦An interesting example of this is Viscount Chien ffi of
Chao fit (Chao Chien-tzu g T ) roaming about heaven, and
his adventures there, as related in the Lun heng |$ |g, Ch. XVII.


%. There were, in his experience, at first only those
two; his hsing % form, or shen body, and his
kuei %, second self or double—his corporeal body
and his other-self. He did not at that time know or
speak of a shen jif (see p. 8), or even of a kuei-shen
jS, W- In spite of the assertions in Chinese and
foreign literature, I maintain that this “double” was
at first regarded as material, and that there was at
first no idea of a shen ft Though the books speak of
kuei and shen as if these two were conceived
by the earliest Chinese simultaneously and primordial-
ly, I contend that no proof of this can be produced.
Confucius, indeed, implies this, in his sentence, “after
it was established that there were two constituent
parts of the soul” (Li chi Ufa, Sect. Chi I 11. 3).
The soul was at first single, and was the “double” or
second self that we saw could wander away from the
body during sleep, etc. In course of time it became (as
already stated) less concrete and more incorporeal and
ethereal. The duality to which I called attention con-
sisted not in the union of the kuei >1 and the shen ft
but in this relation between the material corporeal
body and the material (later regarded as im-
material) kuei 51. Further—a point which has also
been overlooked—the kuei 5l was not originally evil,
though it came to be regarded as such later on. A
kuei % threw no shadow. It was not so courageous
as a man, for the latter feared a kuei jjg, only three-
tenths, whereas a kuei % feared a man seven-tenths.
With reference to the use of the word “soul” as
here and elsewhere applied to the kuei %, it must
be borne in mind (1) that at first it was a corporeal
double only, and not a soul in the modem sense of
the word, and (2) that its use in the singular must
be read in the light of the idea of dualism as shown in


the latter part of the diagram on pages 19 and 20. Fur-
ther, the word is rightly applicable only after the death
of the person or other being whose p’o fa (see pages 20
and 29) is, through his death, transformed into a kuei
fa ; the word “death” including, besides what we know
as permanent death, also the temporary or (“small”)
death which occurs when, according to Chinese
eschatology, the hun xfa and p’o (fa temporarily separ-
ate, as in cases of swoon, etc.
As a rider to the above statements, it may be
noted that the kuei fa (as far as the evidence goes)
must have become dematerialized, in scholarly if not
also in popular thought, before the beginning of
Chinese recorded history.
Why did the primitive Chinese call this entity, so
like him and so closely associated with him, kuei fa}
Analysis of the character in its earliest form would
seem to give us the picture of a man with a mark
annexed to it indicating doubt or mystery, much as
we might write "man?” followed by a mark of inter-
rogation, This suggestion of mine would show that he
was puzzled in speaking to his family or his neigh-
bours; he could not call this thing a man, as then
people would think he was referring to his own or
someone else’s material fleshly body. So he merely
put a mark of interrogation, and left it at that. It
will be as well to add that others have regarded kuei
fa as merely a vaporous silhouette of the deceased,
and it is so regarded by some eminent authorities. It
may be so, but after all the difference is not great, for
the element of mystery or uncertainty is present in
either case.
The sages (of old), according to Confucius, invent-
ed the names shen and kuei fa, and so overawed


the people. The authenticity of the passage is open
to question, but the bestowal of names shows that the
things (or ideas) on which they were bestowed pre-
existed. That, of course, should go without saying, for
the idea, first of the kuei si, and later of the shin jjjji,
must have prevailed long before the more advanced
intellectual state implied in the classical writings.
Still another explanation is that the character
kuei >l, represents a man \ with the head of a
spectre 01, combined with the sign selfish,
“because the yin [!£ breath, of which the kuei jg,
consists, can cause injury” (Shuo wen ix.i).
But this did not satisfy later and more inquisitive
minds. They wanted more light on the subject, and as
a result of their cogitations they concluded that the
sound kuei (in the third tone) was to be inter-
preted as kuei (in the first tone) —each, of course,
with its appropriate written character—and that this
mysterious entity was to be understood as having kuei
|§, returned, i.e., to the other world whence it was
supposed originally to have emanated. This is the
explanation put forth by Lieh Tzu -f- and the
Taoist theorists, the idea of returning being grounded
and maintained in the sense of the newly-married
daughter returning after marriage on a visit to those
—her parents—on whom she was dependent. But,
personally, it seems to me that, having regard to its
origin as noted at the beginning of this paper, it is
more reasonable to interpret the return as being at
first regarded as having been made to the body, as
e.g., in sleep, when the second self returns the body
awakes. Perhaps the one idea was primordial and the
other a later conceptual development. Note incident-
ally, that we say “he came to himself,” after fainting,
etc.


Later on still, the etymological explanation under-
goes a further development, and the word kuei is
interpreted in the sense of a dependant, one who
depends upon someone (in this case, the survivors) for
sustenance—food and drink, which the latter duly
place by the corpse and afterwards on or in the coffin
and grave.
Of course, the primitive person in question would
want to say something about the mysterious appari-
tion long before he was able td put his idea about it
in writing, i.e., to draw a pictogram of it; and whe-
ther, when he said kuei % or kuei |§ (whatever was
the equivalent sound in those prehistoric times) he
intended to convey the idea of a man followed by a
mark of interrogation, or that of a spirit returning
either to its body or to the other world, we may never
be able to determine, but I think it may reasonably
be maintained that the evolutionary steps I have
indicated in the process are not unjustifiable, in that,
at least, they seem to fit the facts as far as these are
known. The idea of dependence could not of course
have been entertained at the very earliest stage, for
the double had not yet become a dependant.
In the sixty unforgiving minutes allotted to these
papers by the Society’s rules, it is impossible to follow
out so vast a subject in detail. I here merely briefly
note the general course of the development of the main
ideas.
Primitive Language Indefinite
Primitive language confuses such ideas as breath,
spirit, shadow, ghost, etc. Therefore, since animals
and birds breathe, animals and birds have souls. They
have shadows even as man has. Hence, also, the idea
that these are their souls. Plants cast shadows; there-


fore they too have souls. And so on through the whole
gamut of pretty well all existing things: giving us
the clue to plant-animal-bird- and nature-worship in
general.
Souls and Their Evolution
There are thus these several classes of souls:—
first the souls of human beings—those of deceased
parents and relatives; those of remoter ancestors
(vaguer than those just mentioned); the wandering
doubles of persons asleep or in other states of un-
consciousness or semi-consciousness; the souls of
friends and enemies; and then those of animals, plants,
and inert objects.
We saw that, originally, the soul is conceived as
equally substantial with the body. The further steps
in soul evolution are:—the second-self grows gradually
less substantial; first, it is solid, then semi-solid, then
aeriform, then ethereal; until, finally, it is merely
stated to exist.
If its owner was good, his kuei % might become
a shen jjs. A kuei jg, could become a shen jjs, but
a shen fj) could never become a kuei jig,. There was
no hell or other place of torment; these are Taoist,
Buddhist, and Christian clemencies. The wicked were
punished at once. They became immediately extinct:
the kuei-shen % Is, the aristocracy of the manes (in-
cluding all those who had lived good lives) survived
at least temporarily: at least, that is, as long as they
received and were sustained by the charity (whether
this was a duty or not) of the living, or as long as
they could gain a livelihood by their industry. This
was, however, only a temporary survival which was
sooner or later put an end to by inanition, the second
death.


Neither was there a paradise, in the sense in
which we use the word. The disembodied soul, if it
belonged to his Court, became a guest of the Sovereign
on high, “during His Majesty’s pleasure,” and no
longer. This early Chinese belief (about 500 8.C.)
closely resembles that of the Hindus of the same epoch.
It was Walter Bagehot, I think, who said that
democracy and the grave were alike in this, that they
took but did not give. This may apply to Chinese
democracy, but it does not apply to the Chinese grave.
The popular theory was that every dead person sur-
vived at first as a kuei , a greedy spectre dependent
upon offerings. If these were not supplied to him, he
gained a livelihood by stealing. The relatives made
their offerings to him annually, and left it at that.
They had done their duty, and it was up to the kuei
to see to the rest.
Here we have to notice a difference between the
popular and the scholarly belief. The former considers
that both the kuei % and the shin ft> require feeding,
just as the Greek ghosts could not live without their
blood cocktails. The latter holds that, having no
corporeal body, neither of them does. Yet the shin
jpf, even for the latter, was not a mere nothing, for
it was supposed to enjoy the sacrifices made to it.
A disembodied spirit could re-enter its own or any
other body, as long as the latter had not become
corrupt, which reminds us, among other legends, of
that of T’ieh-kuai Li one of the Eight
Genii, Pa Hsien A $l, usually called the Eight
linmortals (though they were not immortal).
Souls, according to Chinese and most primitive
ideas, are not necessarily immortal; in fact, we may
say none is. We find also a very interesting moral


precept, namely, the one above referred to, that only
the souls of the good survive, those of the evil becom-
ing either immediately or soon extinct.
[To those who would like a most interesting half-
hour’s reading of an argument against the theory of
the survival of the dead I would recommend Chapter
20 of the Lun heng by Wang Ch’ung
the infidel scholar (A. D. 27-97) of the Hou Han
dynasty, who is said “to have shown more reason in
abolishing the native superstitions than all the other
Chinese philosophers together.” At any rate, his work
is one of the most fascinating in all the vast body of
Chinese literature.]
That the corpse itself is no negligible quantity is
shown, for example, by it being occasionally carried
into battle, as also by it being disinterred and behead-
ed or beaten by those possessed of savage revengeful
spirits. Its value is also shown by the idea that a
noble or scholar’s corpse may eventually be trans-
formed into principles of morality or ethics —an idea
surely uniquely Chinese!
The tendency is thus to the gradual and per-
manent elimination of evil—a doctrine which would
be completely consonant with that of the “improving
universe” of the most modern Western hedonists, of
whom Varisco has perhaps presented the case as con-
vincingly as any other philosopher. The kuei
however, were liable to quicker death than the shen
A dead kuei was called a chi, (also read chan
and chien ), a dead devil. When a man dies he be-
comes a kuei when a kuei dies it becomes a
chi jen ssu wei kuei, kuei ssu wei chi A


Unfortunately, the “good” are very generally
identified with the fat, sleek, wealthy, and powerful,
the poor beggar in rags being supposed to be suffering
for his or her sins. The world in general has always
been grossly sycophantic, toadying to the powerful
and rich, and despising the poor and suffering:—
“For many guests hath Cana,
Gethsemane but one.”
But since these die also, eventually both they and
the kuei jg, become extinct in the long run, which
would seem to square matters up—after a fashion.
Be this as it may, the system would seem to be less
disproportionately unjust than that of eternal Paradise
on the one hand, and eternal torment on the other.
Now, what I have so far said shows us, of course,
a quite primitive type of thought operating in a primi-
tive environment. Yet it is the seed from which
sprang all the elaborate religious and theological
theories and dogmas which have occupied so large
and so important a place in human thought throughout
the ages, and still occupy it.
Into these vast and most fascinating fields we
must refrain from straying, since though closely
related, they are beyond the scope of our present
subject. Yet I may perhaps be allowed to digress for
just a minute on two points. One is that the separa-
tion of the second from the first self—the soul from
the body, in sleep, coma, death (the true nature of
which was not then understood) —gives rise to
attempts to tempt it back again, just as we see the
Chinese holding the empty cage and making offerings
of seed, etc., to the escaped thrush, i (There is a
special tree, called fan hun shu jjjj, the tree
which recalls the soul.) Therein we see the germ of


offerings and sacrifices to spirits and gods.
The other is, that if we yield to the temptation
to cross the frontier at this point and explore the
vast territory of Religion—that unkillable thing which
so many try to murder—we enter not only a field of
most interesting study but one of hot polemics. This
needs no insisting on. No clearer instance of the keen
and passionate discussions which must inevitably arise
when once the fields of Religion and Ethics are in-
vaded, could well be found than in the burden of a
recent novel*, the sales of which already number
several millions of copies, that the Christian com-
mand to love your enemies and do good to them that
hate you and persecute you (an idea which I have
found the Chinese reject with scorn) implies not only
that a man should forgive the murderer of his own
child, but that he should protect and provide for him
for the rest of his days.
Chinese Cosmogony
But to return. As time went on, the Chinese
elaborated this simple idea of the second self and
devised some quite subtle theories concerning it.
These later theories are all that is included in
foreign and also native treatises on the subject. The
course I follow is, however, I submit perhaps more
scientific, including the whole tree and its roots, not
merely some of the later branches. A hint of these
later Chinese theories is given in the books which,
for want of detailed knowledge of the contents of those
which preceded them, we regard as their earliest
literature; but the elaborated theories themselves be-
long to later times, chiefly those of the late Chou jSJ
the Han jH, T’ang and Sung sfc periods. In them
*The Lost Child, by Rahel Sanzara.


we find the dualistic theory persisting. It is only later
that we note the rise of monism, at any rate as a
definite, reasoned philosophical theory.
We proceed, therefore, to note the later develop-
ments of the primitive idea of the soul in China.
A second self implies a first-self. Whence came
this first-self? For an answer we must go to Chinese
cosmogony. In early times, of course, the Chinese
knew nothing of the modern theory which traces the
evolutionary steps from nebula to man. According to
the Chinese theory, the Universe originated in
Nothing; before the Universe came into existence
Nothing (with a capital N) existed. The existence
of Nothing seems to my lesser and limited intelligence
a contradiction; so I will here merely note the curious
agreement (we might say, on nothing but Nothing!)
between these early Chinese ideas and that of Profes-
sor Einstein, who, I believe, replies to seekers after a
solution of this problem by saying that the idea can
be conceived by the soul (presumably the second self),
though not by the mind —a statement to which it is
impossible for anyone not an Einstein to attach any
meaning.
Possibly Einstein had been reading Chuang Tzu
who, seeing that there could not be any such
existence as non-existence, and also that wu implies
relativity, suggested that it were better to use the
term wu-wu M “non-existing non-existence,”
i.e., not conditional non-existence, but absolute non-
existence—a subtle dianoetic argument of the kind in
which Chinese dialecticians have always taken great
delight.
However, as we are dealing here with Chinese
ideas, we posit Nothing as the starting-point. The
process of change and evolution out of the Unknown


and the ultimate return into it, all the way from
Nothing through the various stages down to the post-
mortem second selves (our friends the kuei jig, and the
shen jpiji) may best be represented diagrammatically.
A preliminary remark is, however, necessary.
The diagram (which, I submit, puts Chinese cosmogony
in a nutshell and, I think, more clearly, concisely and
completely than has yet been done) shows not Nothing,
but Tao jg at the starting-post. Too jg, on which
single word my late and learned colleague Thomas
Watters wrote a chapter of 92 pages of close print,
means, in this case, the Cause, Reason, etc., but as in
the cosmological scheme it exists only in its operation
in relation to existence and is followed by Wu
Nothing, it must be regarded not so much as part
of the cosmogony itself as the Principle on which the
Universe came into being. Apart from essential
matter there is no Tao jg. In thus positing a cause
as indispensable, the Chinese philosophers are in
agreement with those modern Western thinkers who
contend that there must be a cause, but that it is
unknowable; though, with the exception of Einstein
and his school, they do not go back to Nothing. We
therefore put Tao jg first, though the fact that
Nothing (with a capital N) follows it, shows that the
original statement is correct and unaffected thereby.
This is the diagram:—
From all Eternity*
was
}g Tao,
*“Thou wast ere yet the Lights were set,
A Whisper in the Void:
Thou shalt be sung by planets young
When this is clean destroyed.”


the Cause, the Reason, the Principle, the Way that
Cannot be Walked, the Name that Cannot be Named,
the Unknowable.
In the beginning
was
Wu,
Nothing (nothing in which Too was not), or Wu-wu
Non-existing Non-existence, or Wu-chi $$ gj
No Limit (which reason can find).
From this emanated
s|i 's[ Hun-tun,
Chaos, which is synonymous with
■jfc igi Tai-chi,
the Great Ultimate, the Grand Ridge-pole, the Primal
Monad (a mingled potentiality of Form, Breath, and
Substance).
In this there took place a great change called
± U T’ai-i,
the Great Change, and there was
T’ai-ch’u,
the Great Starting (the beginning of % Hsing, Form),
which caused
T’ai-shih,


the Great Beginning (the inception of % Ch’i,
Breath), which was followed by
±. r M T’airsu,
the Great Blank (the first formation of -g Chih,
Substance), which originated
is Liang I,
the two primary symbols representing
Yin
(formerly called ti|i
K’un ), the negative
principle or modality,
H Yang
(formerly called $£
Ch’ien), the positive
principle or modality,
which, by their interaction, produced
3s.n Wu Hsing,
the Five Forces (* shui, water, huo, fire, mu,
wood, ■s> chin, metal, ± t’u, earth), from which,
through this interaction and the coming together of
the kuei and the shen elements permeating the yin
and the yang, resulted
& % Wan Wu,
all things that are, including
\ Jen,
Man, who is composed of
& Yin,
from which he derives
Hi Yang,
from which he derives


Ch’i P’o, the o
Seven Emotions 1 : ( Mhsi,
joy, nu, anger, % 3’
ai, grief, ‘jfj chu, fear,
ai, love, e, hatred, K
'ifc yu , desire), ?
which on his death
{i.e., when his is| hun
and p’o separate) des-
cend to the earth and be-
come
>U Kuei,
a dependant, preta,
ghoul, goblin, vampire,
or devil,
which (post-Classical-
ly only) dies compara-
tively soon and becomes
Ui
<D
O
o
3
&.
a-
<D
P 5
ci-
ts'
m Chi,
a dead devil.
>
Ha
c -
a>
fa-
te
p
<r*~
13-
H isl San Hun, the
Three Spiritual Energies:
(1) M ch’i, breath, that
in which the jiiji shen is
manifested and which
manifests itself on high
as ming, bright spirit;
(2) c-hing, energy or
essence—pji hsin shen,
the spiritousness of the
heart, whose actual ob-
servable manifestation
is H ling; and (3) jpi(i
shen, spiritousness or
spiritual energy (to be
distinguished from jpij)
shen, infra),
which on his death
{i.e., when his %% hun
and £jj| p’o separate) as-
cend to heaven and be-
come
fjj Shen,
a spirit, fairy, ghost,
genie, angel, or god,
which dies eventually,
though much later than
the kuei % and generally
only after a very long
period of time (though
popularly regarded as
immortal). There is,
apparently, no special
name for a dead shen flip.


Lao Tzu’s ideas are totally different from
those of the Confucian school. In the Tao-te ching
M {Han dynasty) we find a simpler system
which, also positing- Tao as the starting-point, de-
duces from it Ku Shen fjj, the Spirit of the Valley,
pu ssu which never dies, from which is derived
(or, according to some interpretations, which is the
sa,me as) Hsiian P’in the Mysterious Mother,
who gave origin to I Tu —the Permanent Indeter-
minate, from which resulted all things that are, man-
kind included. Tao sheng I jj| ££ I sheng
Erh —gfeH. Erh sheng San San sheng Wan
Wu H M Too gave birth to One (the Begin-
ning), One to Two (the yin and yang (S§), Two
to Three {pien hua change), Three to All
Things {wan wu fg, %).
There are still other systems of cosmogony, in-
cluding the popular fantastic fairy tale of P’an Ku
■£, but the one I have delineated above is the
one generally accepted.
We thus see that, quite early, the Chinese sages
endeavoured to establish a connection between the
Cosmos and the soul of man on one side, and man’s
character, senses, passions and mental faculties on
the other.
After the yin yang |%[y| theory had been con-
ceived, the kuei was affiliated to the yin and the
shen jjifji to the yang (though indirectly, as we shall
see presently). For the Universe, formed of the yin
and the yang , itself had these two souls. It is
possible that, in the native ideas, there was a shen jps
before the yin-yang g|-ism was invented; but I can
find nothing to fix definitely which had the priority.
Of course, a Chinese scholar will argue that as soon as
there was a human being there were ipso facto both


kuei % and shen but that, of course, hinges on the
point whether in the beginning there was, as I submit,
a kuei only—a single second self. If it were con-
tended that, though the second self was at first single,
it was called kuei % when the first-self was evil, and
shen when it was good, that would not be a solution
of the problem, for there would still be only one self—
not to mention the absence of the yin and yang
to affiliate it to.
Thus we see that, following the period of Chaos
and the cosmogonical birth-throes, the supremacy of
the Universe was shared between the yin 1% (con-
stituted of an infinity of kuei %) and the yang
(composed of myriads of shen fji)—the two ultimate
powers of Nature, or, we may say, souls of the Uni-
verse, the great regulators of the Cosmos, which cause
the phenomena of creation, evolution, and dissolution.
These two produce man, giving him the qualities or
essence or virtue of Heaven and Earth. They do this
by their interaction: yin yang chih chiao
and kuei shen chih hui #, the union of the
animal and intelligent souls, plus wu hsing chih hsiu
ch’i yeh 3 i 4f £ M ■&, the finest subtle matter,
or breath, of the five forces or energies—as we might
say, there must be breathed into this union or com-
bination the breath of life.
The Ch’ien Lung editors of the Li chi |g ffi
add to their cosmology that the two ultimate forces
in their fundamental character are called yin (s=£ and
yang H; as they develop their power, they are called
kuei % and shen jfs; as they become substantial or
active they are called wu hsing 3£ tf, the five forces.
The all-pervading influence of the yin and the
yang is in reality exercised by the kuei % and the


shen jpi{i, simply on account of their being the con-
stituents of these two powers. In fact, they were
promoted by the ancient philosophers to the rank of
agents of the yin |!£ and the yang j%, filling the
Universe in all its parts. The creation and metamor-
phosis of living beings consisted in a never-stopping
effusion by the universal yin and yang |§ of doses
of their own substance, paired with a continual re-
absorption of those doses; that is, “birth” and “death.”
It must always be remembered that the terms
kuei fg and shen jjis, though frequently used of a
man’s “souls” during his lifetime (as will be seen
again later on), relate —or at least came in time to
relate—only to supernatural states (see diagram,
supra) . The correct idea, however, can only be framed
when it is coupled with the already-noted Chinese ideas
of partial and temporary death, in which the p’o (ijg and
the hun jj|are partially or temporarily separated, and
so cause such conditions as fainting, catalepsy, etc.
De Groot (Religious System of China, iv. 3) says
that the ancient Chinese philosophy “deemed man to
be a compound of two substances, viz., a kueifg and
a sfeenfiiji”. This is an error, for kuei sg,and$ g,and shen jp#
are not substances,they have no form, and, strictly
speaking (as just noted), man is not composed of
them, or, these names are not applicable to him, until
after he is dead; and not even then, for after death
they separate and go their respective ways.
Personally, I see no reason why (after this separa-
tion has taken place) we should not render the two
terms by devil and angel respectively, as long as we
exclude from our minds the anthropomorphism in-
separable from them in Christian theology.
In connection with this word kioei and with
reference to what I said at the beginning, it is interest-


ing to note that in later cosmogoly it is yin ]!£, which
at first meant shadow, as opposed to yang |j§, light.
Also that yin is said to have existed before yang
H (though the cosmologies differ).
Kuei % and Shen jjiiji
Now man, thus produced, retains the properties
of his progenitors—he has the material form ( hsing
J&) from the earth, and indwelling in that hsing
he has a hsin ifj, the physical heart, the source of
activity, which is the seat of the mind. This hsin
is the habitat of the dual, immaterial, formless souls,
kuei and shen jjiiji. Note, again, this duality—the
relation of man to terrestrial matter on the one hand,
and to immaterial celestial spirituality on the other.
Note, also, the duality of his spiritual nature. Accord-
ing to the more primitive idea (following the primordial
one of the body and its corporeal double: p. 4), this
duality was that of the body and the mind; according
to the later ideas, this duality remains, but the mind
itself also has become differentiated by addition of the
shen jjiiji.
Regarding these ideas of kuei % and shen jjiiji some
further explanation is necessary. Man’s hsin we
noted, is, according to the developed Chinese idea,
composed of two parts, a superior, subtle soul and an
inferior denser soul. Thus, a deceased person,
originally called kuei j&, came to be called kuei-shen
jjif, a kuei % who has become shen jjiiji, i.e., spiritu-
alized or joined the class of spirits regarded as worthy
of honour, the original class of kuei having now
lost its former status.
The combination shen-kuei jjiiji means those of
the genii who are kuei l ; kuei-shen $1 jjiiji, those of
the deceased who are genii. Putting kuei in the


genitive thus retains the original natural order; but
the opposite order, shen-kuei j,'d, also occurs, show-
ing that the spiritualized soul may degenerate.
The souls of men of distinction, of those who had
been fleshy in physique and educated morally, sur-
vived: an idea found also among various primitive
tribes in other parts of the world who believe that
only the chiefs possess souls; in fact, it may be said
that in Ancient China none but the feudal lords had
souls in the true sense of the word. The manes to
whom gome dignity was ascribed in the other world,
living on offerings made to them by those still in this
world, were known by this term kuei-shen % those
among the kuei % who had become shen jjis. This
implies that there were kuei % who did not become
shen )#. The dignified souls were also called shen-
ming fjfl. those among the shen who were in-
telligent. This implies that there were shen who
had ceased to be intelligent.
The logical deduction is, that the souls of those
who were neither aristocratic, nor learned, nor pos-
sessed of much adipose tissue, and those of these
categories who were deprived of offerings, did not
survive, at any rate permanently.*
Once freed from the “mortal coil”, the soul could
enter other bodies, and work real havoc there. Thus
what is one man’s meat is another man’s poison; or,
to be quite up to date, we may say, what is one man’s
*ln that curious fantasy, Andre Maurois’ Le Peseur d’Ames,
a doctor, weighing a human body just before and just after
death, finds that the soul weighs seventeen-hundredths of a
milligram. Truly an extravagant idea, not to be taken serious-
ly, but strangely in keeping with the Chinese ideas as to the
sizes, weights, colours, etc., of souls.


gold is another man’s silver ( Cf . LunHeng f§, Ch.
XVI, case of Po Yu But this brings us to
the vast subject of transmigration and metempsy-
chosis—far too wide a field to delve in here.
Origin of the Shen jpfji
We have noted the origin of the kuei >1- We
have now to note the origin of the shen In the
P’ei wen yiin fu fff (which, by the way, is the
most extensive lexicographical work ever published)
I find the word as an abstract noun, as a concrete noun,
and as an adjective. Of four hundred quotations from
standard Chinese authors, three-eighths give shen
in the abstract, and five-eighths in the concrete form.
In the former sense the word means spirit, most fre-
quently the human spirit. In the latter, the concrete
sense, the word is used to denote spectre, ghost,
sprite, fairy, elf, genius, and spirit. There is in the
whole category no single instance to justify the trans-
lation “God” in the Christian sense, which has been
given to it by so many foreign writers. The meaning
to be deduced from the quotations is that of spirit,
and the work itself defines it as ling f£, spirit or
spiritual; the two being thus interchangeable terms.
As to its origin, we must remember that the yin
and yang were not primordial ideas, but date
only from the Chou jlfj Period. Therefore, shen jjts
could not be ascribed to or derived from yang
before the former existed in Chinese philosophy, which
proves the fallacy perpetrated by those who speak
of shen as primordial.
The character shen jjis is very old, though not
one of the oldest. In its original form it meant light-
ning. Later, a radical was added and it was then
composed of two parts, tk and —the radical part
shih yfk, relating to religious matters, divine, and the


phonetic shin to extend. The first may have been
an attempt to picture a ghost, but has now the mean-
ing of to show, reveal, manifest—meanings derived
from the primitive idea that ghosts, etc., manifest
their existence and their influence; a divine mani-
festation, in modern language. The second part, shin
l£, may originally, as some authors suggest, have
been merely a representation of the idea of “soul”
by its sound (an onomatope), and the radical was
later on affixed to define it more clearly; but Chinese
scholars interpret it in the sense of shin expan-
sion, dilatation, as e.g., Wang Ch’ung ]£ (in Lun
hing Ch. 20, Lun ssu SE, Discussing death),
who says shin chi shin yeh jjis i.e., shin $$
signifies dilatation, shin jpf. And he adds: “Then
dilatation repeats itself endlessly, for when it is finish-
ed it begins anew, shin fu wu i, chung irh fu shih
$ ® n B & rfn m *6)-”
The P'ei win yiin fu || defines the word
directly only once, and that in the sense of ling fg,
spirit {supra). A quotation is given from the I-hsi
tz’u H , A Continuation of the Classic of Muta-
tions, namely, Yin yang pu ts’i chih wei shin I>£
HI If “the inscrutableness or unfathom-
ableness of the yin Ks and yang (the superior and
inferior principles of nature) is called shin
mysterious”. Thus the essence of the word would
seem, to be spirit, whether abstract or concrete, intel-
ligence, mind, etc., and inscrutable, unfathomable,
miraculous, etc., as though the work of spiritual
beings. And throughout the enormous number of
quotations from Chinese literature of almost all times
given in the work referred to, this meaning stands
out clearly.
The disembodied spirit is afterwards united with
the kuei sg, so that we find the term kuei-shin jjsiji


{supra, p. 24), and this is used much more frequently
than shen-kuei j'g. showing again the priority of
the kuei >[2,. Before this union, some living beings
at death became kuei and others shen jfiijJ. When
the union has taken place, the kuei %, or anima, re-
presents the yin [!£, and the shen jp|, or animus, the
yang principle of Nature. The former representing
the animal soul, the passions or lower part of human
nature, now has acquired a lower and less honourable
status than the former, which represents the higher
part of the organism.
San Hun Ch’i P’o -b $1
Thus far we have seen the yin [>£ and the yang
producing man, with the resulting kuei jg, and
shen jji|. We have now to notice an intermediate
stage. It seems to me that these new ideas now to be
considered must have been the outcome of enquiries as
to the means by which man’s yin and yang be-
came kuei Jg, and shen Some explanation of the
machinery seems to have been called for. Emanating
from the yin |s|r and the yang the kuei and shen
jps retained their original names and general character
throughout the Classical Period, and continued to re-
tain them; but after the close of that period we find
two other terms in use. These are hun and p’o 6j|.
The ideograms show them to be species of kuei jig,,
or of the nature of, or in some way related to, the
original second self, thus showing their later origin.
Ko Hung H gjt (fourth century A.D.) is the first to
mention them in his work Pao-p’u Tzu $} # -p, and
this relative lateness and absence of classical patron-
age may be the reason why so little is generally
known about them.
About this time, then, the philosophers posited
between man’s yang and his shen three hun sj|


(san hun i%), and between his yin [>£ and his kuei
4 seven p’o 6j| {ch’i p’o ) (see diagram). Hun
$| is defined as jen chih ching shen yeh A ff 1$
man’s spiritual intellectual activity. The Yuan
ming poo % I*l says: Hun means to circulate,
i.e., the hun ijt! moves incessantly about outside the
body and dominates the passions. The character it
gives for “circulate” is fa fa, which I find in no edi-
tion of K’ang Hsi gg nor in the Ku wen ch’i tzu
"S' but which is a familiar abbreviation of
yiin fa, confused, mixed, tangled. The hun i% only
appears in the newly-born child after the p’o ($L or
animal soul, by gradual condensation of inhaled air,
and its arrival is known from the infant’s first cry;
but the infant is not regarded as possessing a hun
until it has uttered its first laugh—has shown that
it is capable of joy, pleasure, or perhaps of seeing a
joke. Possibly that is the origin of the admirable
and greatly developed sense of humour we find in all
Chinese. Yet, as we saw, birth itself consists of an
infusion of hun and p’o as death results from
their separation. The idea evidently is, that unless
the hun is added to the p’o there is no birth.
The after-life fate of the hun i% varies according to
neo-Confucianist, Buddhist, or Taoist eschatology:
it is dispersed, reincarnated, or lives in the lower world,
respectively. Generally, it is held that the three hun
becoming shen jjif, all go to the heights. Others
maintain that of the three one goes to the lower world,
one to the grave, and the third takes up its abode in
the spirit tablet.
The animal soul is thus prior, intelligence only
developing with the passing of the years. But the
hun is not complete before the age of thirty; up
till that age a man is not supposed to have courage.
It alone is generally regarded as the true soul. When


the man dies, it (as we have just seen) ascends to
heaven and becomes a shen jjiijt, more or less immortal.
The p’o s|“is the soul which prompts or urges
{p’o the man (in whom it dwells) in such a way
as to make him manifest himself. It has the
mastery of the natural character.” It is the
supraliminal self; is born of the sperm, and
as already noted, exists before the hun i%. It is
material. As man comes into being through the
union of spirit and matter, so separation of the hun sJI
and the p’o means death. On death, the p’o des-
cends to the ground and becomes a kuei fg. When the
kuei fg dies it becomes chi a dead kuei $g {supra);
but this is not a classical expression or doctrine, for
in the Classics no kuei $g dies.
Thus the hun %% or yang [i§ soul governs the
passions of the person in whom it dwells, and his
p’o or yin [!£ soul governs his heaven-born natural
character. This is congruous with the statement of
Pan Ku (g that the passions appertain to the yin
i.e., to the part of the universe which is naturally
checked and counterpoised by the yang [ig-, and that
man’s natural character emanates from the yang
the operation of which is constantly counteracted and
bridled by the yin |!£ (iv. 24).
The soul of man was by no means identified with
his instinct or character; nor was it considered as
the origin thereof. But all the ancient writers are
not unanimous. However, it is important to notice
this on account of the persistent dualism expressed.
Why Three and Seven?
But why these apparently peculiar numbers—
three and seven? The Classics speak only of shen


and kuei Not until the Han (about the end of
the Ch’ien Han |!j s|),' as already noted, do we read
of the division of the hun into three and the p’o
into seven parts. It is this, I think, that gives us a
clue.
The division would seem to be of Taoist origin.
Ask our Chinese friends why there should be three
hun eS| and seven p’o Sfa, and the answer in ninety
cases out of a hundred is, “There are three hun S||
and seven p’o which cuts but little ice. Others
tell us simply where the hun and p’o fift go to
when separated from the body, and usually tell us
incorrectly, for the three hunifa are not regarded by
the best Chinese scholars as destined for Heaven,
Earth and the grave respectively. Very few can
even give, offhand, the names of these ten.
So, to get something more substantial, we consult
the Taoist work Huang t’ing ching Jfg s£, The
Classic of the Yellow Pavilion, which names the three
hun s|as the ch’i M. (or hsi breath, ching fg
energy or essence, and shen jjjf, spirit, and the seven
p’o && as hsi ||, joy, nu anger, ai grief, chit
jg, fear, e jg, hatred, and yii desire.
A few (chiefly Taoist) writers confine the
terms p’o 6fa and hun to the post-mortem states.
The three hun ifa, on death of the individual,
ascend to heaven and become a shen jps. The
p’o Sfa are sometimes called Ch’i Ch’ing , Seven
Feelings, or Emotions. The senses or passions
of man, during life also called the ch’i ch’ing
, are not inborn, but acquired through learning
and training, so on death go to the earth and become
a kuei jg,; but if man is good, they can acquire a good
nature and also ascend to heaven. But, generally, the


p’o (|i| descend to the earth and become a kuei
Various eschatological works give different versions:
in fact, the beliefs and theories on these points vary
according as 1 you are a Confucianist, Buddhist, Taoist,
or merely a common or garden lay philosopher.
It will be as well to give here a brief definition
of some of the more frequently recurring accessory
terms.
The c king is hsin shin yeh ifr sl, the shin
fptji of the heart, or shin ling yeh fiiji f| tjj,, the ling
f| of the shin It may be called vital energy
(when we feel a bit slack we say we “mei-yu ching-
shin’ ’ & % m). and has been defined as a force
or fluid that dwells in man constituting the working
energy of his soul, its effective power. Souls devoid
of it cannot manifest their existence, much as the
electric bulb in the dark is only made manifest by the
current.
The ling f|| is the actual observable manifestation
of the ching its effective operation, its spiritous-
ness. The original meaning of the character is seen
in its earliest form, where it was written fg, depicting
an offering of gems to induce rain; the later form
showing the wu sorcerer, himself engaged in the
priestly function. In the Ta tai It jjjg we find
yang chih ching-ch’i yiieh shin, yin chih ching-ch'i
yileh ling PJ? % &El jp# ;£ %0 M, the
yang’s spiritual soul is called shin jjiiji, the yin’s
spiritual soul is called ling f|.
The ch’i “breath”, as Confucius stated, is that
in which the shin is manifested. “While the bones
and flesh moulder in the ground and mysteriously
become earth of the fields, the ch’i issues forth


and manifests itself on high as a shining light, and
doing so becomes ming {s, bright, a bright spirit,
relapsing at death into the main source of
light from which it sprang. We may compare it with
the Greek pneuma or the ichor, or ethereal fluid, of
Greek mythology. That the shen jpf and the ming (10
are not identical is apparent from Confucius’ term
shen-ming Pfl, the ming Pfl of the shen )#.
These various terms are also at times used in
combination, such as shen-hun i%, shen-ming
jjiip 50, ching-ch’i M, ching-shen >Jsj| jfs, etc., with
corresponding modifications of meaning.
Besides these ten, the Chinese also ascribe a
shen jfitji to each of the five viscera of the human body,
thus making fifteen souls-in-ordinary, as we may call
them.
Note, incidentally, that hun being good and
p’o evil, man’s nature is regarded as seven-tenths
evil and only three-tenths good, which is probably a
shrewd estimate of the nature of human beings in
general (present companies, of course, excepted. No
doubt we are all composed of seven hun sj| and three
p’o 6J|, or even of ten hun and no p’o (ij| at all—
or think we are, at any rate).
The original theory was extended until every
organ, every sense, and every significant part of the
body had its soul, and received a special name accord-
ingly. One Taoist work, the Yiin chi ch’i ch’ien H %
-b Sit goes 80 ar as t° give the surnames, names
and cognomina of three dozen shen of sundry parts
of the body, even adding particulars about their size,
stature, dress, and hats! And some Chinese medical
writers ascribe to man pai Shen 'gf i.e., an


indefinite number of souls or soul-parts which move
about in his body, causing different effects in different
parts according to the year of his life. Thus, at
twenty-five they locate themselves in the forehead,
when a boil or ulcer there would be highly dangerous,
an effusion of blood being promptly fatal.
There exists this multiplicity, but for all practical
purposes the Chinese “soul” is composed of ifie san
hun H *5l and ch’i p’o Jc the viscera ana other
souls being but comparatively seldom referred to. In
the popular mind, a human being is composed of these
ten parts.
We may just note in passing that the hunjfa and
the p’o 6|| are regarded as frequently, perhaps more
often than not, at war with each other. When a man’s
better nature prevails, the hun ssl succeed in suppress-
ing the p’o and vice versa; much as the mercury
rises and falls in a hairpin-shaped barometer. But of
course, though the p’o fij| may so suppress the hun Ss|
as nearly to extinguish it, and vice versa, the combat
cannot continue a outrance, exterminating or annihilat-
ing one or the other, for then the man himself would
die —his essential components would be lacking ( supra,
p. 29).
Another theory, which is stated in some foreign
books on China, and which looks plausible until care-
fully examined, is that hun J 5& and p’o fij| are only
names for the shen jjitjt and kuei particles of which
the pin and yang% are said to be composed. This
might be argued on a modem metaphysical basis,
regarding all that exists as composed ultimately of
electrons (though modern scientists do not divide these
into male and female, etc., they may do so eventually,
for the mutual antagonisms some of them display


would seem to point in that direction), but we are
dealing here with a Chinese system, or systems, of
thought which knew nothing of the constitution of
matter as now understood. The idea, therefore, is not
acceptable, because in that case there would be no need
of any change of name, and human emotions and pas-
sions, etc., are not attributable to the component
particles of space. We know, for example, that in the
material Universe we find no such thing as the inferior
sentiment of revenge. If further evidence were need-
ed, we find it in the fact that the shen jpf of the sari
hun H Sj| and the shen jjiiji into which these change
are two quite different things.
We therefore conclude that the hun and p’o
are something quite different from the kuei
and shen constituents of the yin |s£ and the yang
il, and became so through the amalgamation of these
two to form man, thus necessitating a special nomen-
clature.
The_ names hun and p’o ($| represent the
functioning of the yin |s£ and yang |s|| in man, rather
than divisions of them as popularly supposed. And
these functions seem to have become multiplied, much
as we find in other cases, through a necessity for
division of labour.
Many Functions Many Functionaries
We thus get a clue to the multiplicity of souls
mentioned at the outset of this paper. Many functions
require many functionaries, and though the earlier
view probably was that the multiple functions were
the functions of one or perhaps two souls, by the
popular mind at least, this large army would be
thought of as spiritual or vapoury separate existences,
or possibly as subordinates, or messengers, such as


t’ing-ch’ai H, belonging to the principal soul, the
soul in China differing from! the Western soul in
being useful rather than ornamental.
Focussing The Picture
Bringing this soulful picture to a focus, we see
first the kuei J®,, originating as already explained;
then the birth in the Chou JU Period of the yin yang
theory, followed by the conception of the shen
then the interpolation of the seven p’o §||, and
the three hun S&; thus giving us the usual average
ten souls, though, as we have seen, the number is by
no means limited to this figure. And, finally, the
change of these, at death, into the kuei % and the
shen Toward the end of the Chou jU dynasty
the shen jfis became more vulgar—less honourable—
but that is another story.
Well, it may be asked, if on death the individual’s
ten constituent parts or functions, in the proportion of
seven and three respectively, are divided into kuei
and shen jjiiji, what becomes of the individuality, of the
individual himself? The answer is simple. He is not
supposed to be in two places (or even in ten) at once.
Being composed of yin and yang if he had
led a good life, in other words, strictly observed all
Confucian precepts, his yang m goes to join the yang
of heaven, but continues to exist as his (we may
say, him); his yin goes back to the yin of earth
and his identification with it ceases. On the other
hand, he who has not conformed to the said precepts
loses his yang || and retains (until his second death,
that is) his yin individuality.
Did time permit, this would be the place to
elaborate and illustrate the subject by numerous and
varied legends relating to kuei kuei-shen fj>,


shin jjis, hun and p’o but time does not permit,
and I fear I have already exhausted your patience.
Having spoken so much of cosmogony, the necessity
for speeding up becomes all the more obligatory when
we recall the assertion of some astronomers that the
Earth may split into two parts at any moment, perhaps
leaving the lecturer on one and his audience on the
other!
An interesting page might also be added showing
how easily the idea of kuei % and shin may arise
through misinterpreted language, mistaken observa-
tion, etc., of which numerous stories are related in
Ying Shao’s M BJ] Fing-su Tung JU, }j| (A.D. 130-
40).
The Origin of Religion
Some seven years ago, I had the honour of reading
before this Society a paper on the origin of the
Chinese priesthood. In the present paper I deal with
the origin of the raison (fitre of the priest, namely,
the origin of Chinese religion (as already noted)
which, of course, had the same origin as all other
religions.
Whilst philosophers in the West are agreed on
this point, that all religions had one origin, they are
not all agreed as to what that origin was. This
difference of opinion narrows itself down to two
theories, so that we are here confronted with the
polemic, Animism versus the Ghost Theory, or Theory
of the Second Self. Briefly put, these are, respectively,
the theory that the idea of the soul (followed
by those of a future life, heaven, hell, etc.)
originates in the way described in this paper;
whereas, on the other hand, the animists contend
that primitive man regards everything of every


kind as being primordially animated, though they
do not tell us how the animation came to be,
whilst at the same time they admit that the primitive
brain is incapable of any such abstract conceptions.
Theories apart, the evidence, to be found in innumer-
able works on primitive man, is all in favour of the
former (usually known as the ghost theory), and dead
against the animistic theory. Thus, both deductively
and inductively the latter is ruled out. The idea of
universal animation exists, but it is secondary and not
primordial.
De Groot’s Fallacy
In his large work in six volumes, entitled The
Religious System of China, De Groot at first adopted
the animistic theory. He begins, in the first chapter
of the first volume, with an account of the customs
relating to decease, funeral rites and burial. That is
putting the cart before the horse, for religion may be
said to end rather than begin in the grave. Vols. I,
II and 111 should have been omitted altogether, with
the exception of Part II of Vol. I, which deals with
the Ideas of Resurrection, and this Part should have
been placed about the middle of Vol. VI. Vol. IV,
dealing with the Soul in Philosophy and Folk-concep-
tion, and Vol. V. Part 11, dealing with Demonology, are
rightly included, but Vol. V, Part 111, dealing with
Sorcery, and the whole of Vol. VI, dealing with Exor-
cism and the Priesthood, do not rightly fall under the
heading of Religion.
The gaps in the work, thus emasculated, should
have been filled by chapters on the origin of the
religious idea, the ideas of sleep, dreams, swoon, etc.,
death, another life, and so on, through the various
intermediate changes, to the idea of ancestor worship,


polytheism, monotheism, and from that to all the long
gamut of isms of one kind or another, whose name is
legion.
Later on, De Groot seems to have become aware
of the ghost theory and inclined to adopt it as being
more in accordance with the evidence, but obviously
was in the dilemma that this would make the latter
part of his wbrk inconsistent with the former (as
indeed it is). Struggling in the bog in which he found
himself, he seems to have gone wild—enough so, at
least, eventually to land himself in the tremendous
howler, that Herbert Spencer, the consistent expound-
er of the ghost theory, to use his (De Groot’s words)
“put Animism in the foreground of his system as the
beginning of all human* religion of whatever kind”!
I do not hereby undervalue De Groot’s very in-
teresting and valuable work. I merely indicate that
either its title or the body of the work should have
been altered in order to make these consistent with
each other.
“My Goats”
You will ask what all this has to do with the
Chinese idea of the second self. Which reminds me
of the tale of the young goat-herd in Ancient Greece,
whose goats had been stolen. He managed to engage
the services of a lawyer, who argued his case before
the judge. When the lawyer had been holding forth
for about two hours he paused, and the young goat-
herd remarked: “Please, Sir, will you now speak about
my goats?”
I would, however, plead that there is no need to
“return to our muttons” fas the French do not say),
♦Why “human”?


for the quite valid reason that we are right at “our
muttons” now. It is just here, in this idea of the
second self, the germ of the soul and of the god, that
religion is born, and was then quite a simple, innocent
child compared with its enormous and elaborate after-
growth, complications, inconsistencies, deceptions, and
worse. It is only when the priest comes on the scene
—and he does so quite early—that the lying and deceit
begin, and charms, incantations, oaths, divination, ex-
orcism, jugglery, sorcery, injustice and cruelty follow,
and initiate a most terrible chapter in the history of
mankind.
The Primitive Man Was Right
What then is the conclusion of the whole matter?
Surprising though it may be to those who do not study
these things in the x-ray light of science and philoso-
phy, the conclusion I wish to submit to you is, that the
primitive man was right. He was right, though he
had not the scientific knowledge which would have
enabled him to interpret his observations correctly. As
said Coheleth the Preacher, “there is no new thing
under the sun.” It will be remembered that, more
than once in this paper, I emphasized the dualistic na-
ture of the primitive man’s idea of himself and his
mind, his second self, then only known to him as an
actual, visible duplicate of his corporeal body, but
later, as we saw, admitted to be mysterious and
spiritual.
Now that is the very conclusion not only of the
most modern philosophy, but of all philosophy
throughout the ages; or rather, let me put it this way:
we admit the existence of the brain, and we admit the
existence of something we call consciousness, but all
the best intellects of all the centuries, all the skill, all


the wit and wisdom, all the thought, all the dialectic,
ratiocination, polemic, subtle logic, and metaphysical
casuistry of all thinkers throughout all the ages have
never succeeded in uniting these two. To quote old
Omar Khayyam:—
“Myself when young did eagerly frequent
Doctor and saint, and heard great argument
About it and about, but evermore
Came out by the same door wherein I went.”
Brain and Mind
Not only are we absolutely incapable of explaining
the connnection (if any exist) between the two, but
psychology gives us very good grounds for believing
that this problem never can be solved. The mystery
completely baffles us. Mind, as I have written before,
is unique in this, that it is the only case in which we
have nothing to study the problem with but itself. The
existence of other minds is only inferred, not known.
We are here confronted with one of the greatest of all
enigmas, regarding which we can only in all humility
express our absolute and entire ignorance.
I said that the primitive man was right in his
dualistic conception, and I will now add that he was
right also in his view of the intermittent character of
consciousness. When he says that his second self
goes away and returns, that is exactly what happens
with our consciousness when we go to sleep or faint
or fall into a trance of shorter or longer duration. So
that, of sixty years of human life the second self
resides in the body for forty, or less. We may put it
less crudely, but we are no nearer a solution of the ulti-
mate mystery than the earliest cogitators were.
In this connection it is interesting to note Prof.
Hollingworth’s theory that sleep is merely a “vestigial


stupor” which ought to be got rid of. It certainly
would save much time and trouble not to have to go
to bed at night or get up in the morning, and in these
degenerate socialistic times makers of beds and
pyjamas could be taken care of by the grandmotherly
State.
Until, then, a solution of this probably insoluble
problem is found, we are justified in adhering to our
belief in this dualism of our nature, in the separate
though closely associated existences of body and mind,
of our first and second selves. This will lead us to a
very important, nay, vital deduction.
A Scintilla of Truth
But, you will justly rejoin, how can the primitive
man be right when the very foundation of his idea of
the second self is wrong? That idea is founded on
shadows, reflections, dreams. These we know are un-
real —not separate beings, not second selves. The idea
of the second self founded on them is an idea only.
How is it, then, that we can posit this ultimate reality,
when the conception on which it is based was utterly
untrue ?
Unexpected though it may be, the answer is that
a way out of the dilemma is to be found in the fact
that the primitive man’s conception was not altogether
false. It contained a scintilla of truth, namely, that
the power manifested in consciousness is a form,
though differently conditioned, of the power which
manifests itself beyond consciousness.
The primitive man, hurling a huge stone at his
enemy, experiences a sense of effort. When an earth-
quake dislodges a boulder and sends it hurtling down
the mountain-side, he quite logically ascribes its


change of place to the action of a being possessing
sufficient power to effect the observed result. The
boulder, theretofore quiescent, did not move of itself.
Now it is careering down the mountain-side. The
analogy between it and the stone he hurled at his
enemy is complete. His mental repertory is not lack-
ing, in all conscience, in agencies of the required kind,
human and sub-human (such, for example, as a giant
or a dragon). What more natural and logical than to
suppose that waves are caused by a dragon galloping
under the water, or an earthquake by the wrigglings
of one under the ground!*
As we advance from this our primitive mental
state to one which is more scientific, we no longer in-
terpret the idea of force anthropomorphically. The
notion of objective force becomes further dissociated
from the force known as such in consciousness, until,
by the highest types of mind, all physical changes
whatever, are interpreted in terms of force, though,
since we lack any other symbol, force is throughout
conceived in terms of the internal energy which we
know as muscular effort. We cannot escape the con-
clusion that the two are but different modes of the
same, for each is capable of generating the other.
Thus the “second self” (consciousness) is a differently-
*Psychologists know that the thoughts of the young child
and of primitive man resemble each other in that they are
concerned only with things which can be seen, heard, touched,
etc. (as distinguished from the religious consciousness, which
concerns itself with what lies beyond the sphere of sense).
Whilst I am revising this proof I read in a London journal the
following passage:—“The little boy was seeing the sea for the
first time. He gazed at it earnestly for a while and then,
turning to his mother, remarked gravely, ‘I ’spects it’s the
fishes that make it wobble.’ ”


conditioned form of the Power manifested throughout
the Universe. The energy which drives galaxies of
stars at a terrific speed through Space, when it lights
up our material brains (which, until then, may be com-
pared to an electric bulb before the current is turned
on) and so spiritualizes them (imbues them with shen
fjJ, we may say), is called consciousness. Our second
selves are thus affiliated to the Infinite and Eternal
Energy from which all things proceed. This is just
what the Chinese cosmogolists do (see p. 21).
And after all, what are our bodies? They are
composed of water and gas, and are valued at less than
five shillings in English money. How much more
wonderful a thing is the mind! We may say of it
that throughout all the depths of infinite space nothing
of equal value is known to us. You may hide a thing
in the earth, but it may be found; hide a thing in the
mind, and it may never be found. The mind can travel
to the outermost star quicker than light—quite a re-
spectable rate of motion (c/. “The Time taken up
by Cerebral Operations,” in Mind, Vol. XI, 1886), but
the body cannot get there at all. The mind reveals
to us ever more and more beautiful things, from elec-
trons and atoms to unimaginably vast stellar uni-
verses, all active, all apparently working to some end,
we know not what.
Life Everlasting
We come back, then, to the point from which there
is no escape, that our nature, judged by the most
penetrating scientific and philosophical tests, is dualis-
tic, that each conscious being has a second self, and
on this conclusion, if I read the riddle aright, we may
confidently base our firm belief and justifiable hope of
everlasting life, which hope we have as an anchor of


the soul, the invisible shen both sure and steadfast;
the things which are seen being temporal, but those
which are not seen being eternal—remembering
always that no one in this room, no one in this world,
has done anything to deserve so great, so greatly dis-
proportionate and so entirely gratuitous a gift as im-
mortality. This is a matter which concerns us very
nearly, and the fairminded will not pass it by. If it
has no foundation, the whole of Religion crashes to
the ground.
We came out of the Infinite Unknown and into
it we must eventually return. And knowing, as we
now do, that the Universe is more spiritualistic than
materialistic, we may regard our minds—our second
selves —as having emerged from the Infinite Mind, ex-
panding from that unity into the dualism of body and
mind, going through all the multiplications and com-
plications of evolution from birth to death, and finally
dissolving once more — kuei- |§-ing—into, to be one
with, the Infinite and Eternal, but incomprehensible,
Energy by which all things are perhaps created
(though the idea of creation always raises the question
of the creation of the creator), certainly evolved, sus-
tained, and finally reclaimed into itself as its own for
evermore. One of the very latest theories of matter
posits it as an expansion, or inflation, (a shen of
space. With cessation of the inflation there is relapse
into that out of which it grew.
We need not deny the existence of anything
merely because we do not see it. Things are not
always what they seem. A cat sees no colour, to it
everything is either black or white, a bee sees every-
thing either blue or yellow, a fish sees red, green, and
yellow objects all as yellow, while apes and dogs, in


common with human beings, see the whole of the blue-
yellow-red-green series.
In a Universe that is so mysterious that it would
almost seem that even antinomies may be true, it is
a comparatively simple concept that this ultimate re-
union may be a reunion also with our loved ones who,
to quote old Omar once more, —
“Have drunk their cup a round or two before,
And one by one crept silently to rest,”
—who have passed on to what, in an evolving universe,
cannot but be a higher and better sphere. In another
place {Autumn Leaves, pp. 483-4), I have reasoned
that if, in the universe, things were different from
what they are they must have been worse. Thus, in
the light of this argument at least, we may regard
death, not as a dismal night, but as a brilliant dawn,
when we shall see —
“Those angel faces smile,
Which we have loved long since, and lost awhile.”
Given an infinite and eternal universe, which is
the more mysterious the more it is thought about, to
deny the possibility of this would be unphilosophical;
though this possibility must be considered in relation
to the possibility (even probability) presently to be
mentioned, that incorporeal (spiritual) is better than
corporeal existence.
Mind Before Matter
We are apt to think—l may put it much stronger:
the whole world is under the delusion —that we look
with our material, corporeal eyes out on to the uni-
verse of matter and spirit. What is really taking
place is, that we are looking with our spirit, our mind,


on to the world of phenomena, including our bodily
selves. Mere matter, flesh and blood or water and
gas, can see nothing. Thus it would be more strictly
correct to call our bodies our second selves and our
minds our first-selves. Since without the mind the
body is useless; since it is the mind which governs the
body; the mind has every right to the first place. But
to avoid confusion it is best to retain the former order,
at least until the truth is more generally recognized.
My view—contrary to that usually held and embodied
in works on psychology—is, that the mind was before
the body, and therefore is entitled to the priority title
of first-self. Instead of our bodies or brains having
captured a piece or a certain quantity of spirit, the fact
(or what I submit must be a fact) is that a piece or a
certain amount of spirit has taken up its abode tempor-
arily in this agitated conglomeration of electrons dash-
ing hither and thither at a terrific pace, like a wild
animal in a cage, and showing most extraordinary and
interesting sympathies and antipathies; and when,
after life’s fitful fever, the conglomeration at last suc-
ceeds in. shaking itself to pieces—manages to break
through the bars of its cage—relapses or returns (kuei
|§) into the Infinite and Eternal Spirit from which
it came, and which is its eternal, spiritual home:—
“Never the Spirit was bom;
The Spirit shall cease to be never;
Never the time it was not,
End and beginning are dreams,
Birthless and deathless and changeless
Abideth the Spirit for ever:
Death hath not touched it at all,
Dead though the house of it seems.”
On this view, our bodies are merely houses oc-
cupied by our minds on three-score-and-ten years—


more or less, but not much more—leases. H'ow pre-
carious is the tenancy is shown by the fact that a blow,
extreme grief, or even bad news may cause the tenant
to quit the tenement without giving notice (there be-
ing no contract) Immediately and for ever.
The Universe Forever Active
This Infinite and Eternal Energy—l use the ad-
jectives advisedly, because the alternative would be a
stagnating and perhaps a dying universe—this Infinite
and Eternal Energy which caused, and causes, all that
was, is, or can be, will forever be doing new things. It
is forever active. It will show to us more and more
of its marvellous mysteries—as to the man in Goethe’s
Dream of Infinity —for it had no beginning and can
have no end. To use Goethe’s words: “End is there none
to the Universe of God—lo, also there is no begin-
ning.”
Therefore all progress grows sacred with wonder-
ing expectation. We and the world may go forth from
each old year into the new, certain that in that new
year there will be for us some new inspiration which
will open for us some novel life, something better
than the best experience of life, and better than our
conceptions of the immortality we hanker after. And
so from life to life, worlds without end; or perhaps
one uninterrupted life everlasting.
The Dewdrop and the Sea
The idea I have endeavoured to set forth in this
brief sketch of a vast subject could not be better put
than it has been in that beautiful poem, The Light of
Asia, in which Prince Siddartha, leaving his palace,
beholding the poor and the maimed, realizing the pain
and misery of this life, confronted for the first time


with the fact of death, and hearing the moans of the
devas—
“We are the voices of the wandering wind
Which seek for rest, but rest can never find,
Lo, as the wind is, so is mortal life
A groin, a sigh, a sob, a storm, a strife,”
—determines to renounce all his state and pomp and
wealth—the vanities and cruelties, hypocrisies and
lies —and devote himself to the salvation of all living
creatures. In this poem the individual about to enter
Nirvana (“where the Silence lives”) —we may here
say the soul or second self—is symbolized as the dew-
drop on the lotus-leaf floating on the great sea. It
came from the infinite ocean of Eternity, and realizes
perfection only when reunited with it:—
“The Dew is on the lotus!—Rise, Great Sun!
And lift my leaf and mix me with the wave.
Om mani padme hum, the Sunrise comes!
The Dewdrop slips into the shining Sea!”


WORKS BY E. T. C. WERNER
Descriptive Sociology—Chinese.
China of the Chinese.
Chinese Ditties.
Myths and Legends of China.
Autumn Leaves (sociological, sinological, philosophical,
metaphysical, and autobiographical).
A Dictionary of Chinese Mythology (in the Press).
Chinese Weapons (Extra vol. N. China Branch, Royal
Asiatic Society).
Pamphlets.
A Journey North and East of Peking.
The Great Wall of China.
An Index to Consular and Marriage Fee Tables
Herbert Spencer.
The Mischief-working Metric System.
The Chinese Idea of the Second Self.
Revision.
Dyer Ball’s Things Chinese (sth edition).
Translation.
Wieger’s Histoire des Croyances religieuses et des
Opinions philosophiques en Chine.
Wieger’s La Chine k Travers les Ages.
Printed by The Shanghai Times.
