

111111111111111111111111111111111 l
THE COMING BATTLE
Christianity’s Riddle
Ireland’s ''oJilf Struggle
A
CHALLENGE
to the
POPE
from an
IRISHWOMAN
BY
(Mrs.) ELIZABETH Me SWEENEY
A Roman Catholic Woman
' Born in Leix (Queen’s County), Ireland
90 GORDON STREET, PADDINGTON
iiiiaimiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiunliiitiiiiiiMiiiii
% T


iiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiii
lIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIhIIIIIIIIIIIIIiDIIIIimiIIIII
AUTHOR OF THE
FOLLOWING:
“Woman, Church and
Press.’
Second:
“Jesus, the Jews and the
Irish.”
Third:
‘'lreland and her Three Eng-
lish-made Gods.’
Fourth:
‘'Godly Miracle of Child-
birth.”
Fifth:
“Open Letter to Archbishop
Mannix, of Melbourne, and
Cardinal O’Donnell, of Bel-
fast.”
Sixth:
“Open Letter Concerning
Bishop Sheehan, Parnell,
Paper Money, and the
Loaves and Fishes of Ire-
land.”
Seventh:
"Open Letter Commenting
on Ireland and Sex.”
Eighth:
THE COMING BATTLE
CHRISTIANITY’S RIDDLE
IRELAND’S STRUGGLE
A Challenge to the
POPE
from an
IRISHWOMAN.
mmmimimiimiimmimmiiimimiiu mi


Thoughtful, observing people say Ireland, through her
sons, is the key to all England’s greatness.
It’s a long time ago now since Ireland’s sons shut their
eyes, closed their minds and threw down their war weapons
to prepare at the bidding of an Italian for Holy Com-
munion.
In the firm belief that our priests and bishops could
turn the bread and wine into the body and blood of the Jew
we call Christ—presuming they have the power—isn’t it
revolting to eat the flesh and drink the blood of a Jew?
Doesn’t it smack of cannibalism?
From that day to this Holy Communion hasn’t helped
us to regain our lost ground. It took very many days for
these hundreds of Ireland’s sons to comply with the rules
of the Church, preparing, receiving and giving thanks for
Holy Communion.
All within earshot of Cromwell’s men, who were bat-
tering down the walls of Kilkenny, ruining Ireland, uphold-
ing England’s greatness.
Then we have Edmund Burke, who spoke for sixteen
hours at a stretch without stopping in the House of
Commons. In very telling language this son of Ireland
accuses France of every immoral depravity, of every crime
on earth, and upholds England’s greatness.
It is said the English wearied of his eloquence. The
double trick peeps out here. Our priests and bishops praise
this traitor Burke.
Behold Ramsay MacDonald, an offshoot of the Celtic
race, whose slogan was “Gaels, shoulder to shoulder!” Eng-
land has corrupted him; she corrupts everyone who goes
near her. Ramsay is helping England to conquer America.
All other points raised on this subject is mere moonshine.
This and this only is England’s aim.
One would think the natural cry of a “canny Scott”
ought to be HANDS OFF SCOTLAND. During the war
I heard Scotchmen say, “Whoever fights for England, it
should nae be a Scotchman.”
With the Irish and their firebrands (her great weapon
for world conquering) as tools on American soil, the Yankee
may get a bit of a go.
There is great misunderstanding by calling Catholicism
our own old Faith. It’s nothing of the kind. What a brazen
lie!


By accepting this and designating ourselves in hateful,
spiteful, bitter-as-gall sectarian names and creeds like the
words Roman, Orange and Protestant, we fail in our purpose
and bring about the three firebrands.
In the person of Henry Grattan, a cultivated Irish
gentleman of the first magnitude, can be seen how highly
dangerous it is for a spiritualised people like the Celtic race
to accept any outside sectarian issues. He honestly believed
Protestantism to be the panacea for all Ireland’s ills.
Ostentatiously, his fight was on behalf of Ireland, while
all the time his fighting and his bitterness arose through the
Protestant firebrand. It outbalanced all other considera-
tions. He became an anti-Catholie. With closed mind and
blinding fury he ignored the minor details. He was wholly
engrossed with the firebrand. He forgot to notice that Eng-
land WAS NOT SINCERE.
So while forging ahead the key to England’s greatness
dear old Grattan fell in the mud, leaving Ireland in agony.
We all—Orange, Protestant, and Roman alike—sub-
consciously or instinctively know, though rarely giving it
expression, that the outside sectarian issues are false. Though
false, when mixed with politics, they reach the soul. Our
Irish spiritualised souls are God’s weapons. We are suffer-
ing in our souls as well as our bodies for the freedom of
our people.
Witness the Robert Emmet vision. Why Emmet ap-
peared in a vision to me I don’t know. That it happened I
do know, and if no one believes me then I can’t help that.
Nobody seems to know exactly what is occurring at the
back of sleep. As the poet said:—
“For death had illumined the land of sleep and his
lifeless body lay
A worn-out fretter that the soul had broken and
thrown away.”
It’s well to be a bit sceptical about things we don’t
know; it leads to discussion and brings a little added
knowledge.


We do know the soul, spirit or mind—call it what we
may—is all-powerful for the movements of our body and
our ability to accept, to receive and retain knowledge. This
being so, it’s hard to think that the self-same soul, spirit or
mind are wholly inactive in a sphere that we call the next
world.
The treacherous Englishmen who were mixed up in Irish
politics turned traitors to Ireland (every Englishman mixing
in Irish politics must of necessity he a traitor one way or
another) at the time of Grattan’s failure, thereby giving
the enemy a chance to pretend to do more good for THOSE
HOIRISH. Thus the Orangeman was brought on the scene,
the man who so constantly advises us to read the Bible.
Good, sound advice, I admit, but I’m afraid he doesn’t
read it himself.
In some ways the Irish Orangeman isn’t much different
from other Irishmen.
If the Bible were read they are all keen enough and
clever enough to see through the whole trick.
There was a pliable puppet wanted as a go-between
the head and the tail. As head and front for continuing the
scheme stands the Pope.
So likewise of all men in the world we have the proper
tail—the Garrison Triumph, the Irish Garrison man who so
blatantly honours English paper money and flagrantly dis-
honours his own.
A curious enigma, nevertheless quite true. A Pope
would have a very poor grip on Ireland only through the
instrumentality or agency of this tail. Talk about the lion’s
tail or the tail of the scorpion (poor, harmless beasts).
When the helmeted garrison Irishman stands erect and
gives the word of command, law and order, as well as the
recognised authority of kings and popes is all set aside.
More than half of our puny, vacillating go-betweens all
over the globe will pretend to be drunk, stagger to the
platform and cry out, ‘‘ To Hell with the Pope! ’ ’
I told you they didn’t read the Bible. Had the Bible
been read, the mentality would be different. They’d find
themselves solemnly and religiously soliloquising whether
Hell wouldn’t be a very nice spot for Orange Lodge Masters
and a few Baden Powell Irish Chief Scouters.


They would agree to the suggestion to build a newer
and a hotter Hell for the Irish garrison man.
“Hello there! Hello! Is that you, Molly Doolan? Look
here, Molly, you and persons like you possess a great power.
Take Paddy Dwyer, for instance. Isn’t he splendid at the
mimicking ?
“Where’s all your Irish wit gone? Well, why not use
it on the garrison top notcher? He pretends to hate the
Pope; at the same time he supports and protects the Pope.
Incidentally, through the Pope Italy gets supported and
protected against all comers.
“Had I the gift of Irish wit and ridicule I’d lash out at
all such as he. He knows Italy gets quick absolution when
she tramples on triple alliances and sidesteps Italian virtue.
“Paddy Dwyer’s Irish wit could tear him to pieces.
“See, Molly, there’s a case in point right here where I
sit. An Irish girl, and a Mac. at that, with two brothers
priests, all the way from old staunch Donegal. She worked
for Ireland against England. England six times arrested
her and put her in gaol. A changed front, she marries an
Englishman, kisses and embraces the conqueror; tells all
outsiders ‘he’s the best man in the world.’
“Molly dear, what would you call that girl? What’s
that you said? You’d call her an Irish patriot!
“GOOD GOD! With a sigh I again say GOOD GOD!
We’d be honouring and saying masses-for- ; a ijice old cup of
tea. I’d call her a traitress and a gaolbird.
“Good-bye." Ring off. Throw horn away.
A friend of mine (20th January, 1930), a namesake of
Paddy Dwyer’s, has drawn my attention to Rev. Father
Tuomey’s little work on Ireland. It’s well worth reading.
He appears to have a turn for collecting figures. I wish he
would look into this and give us an idea how many false
patriots We have honoured and said masses for.
In a letter from Molly, Paddy says: “It’s advisable to
not expect too much from the Irishmen, they’re every bit
as bad as the girls.”
From the tone of the letter he must have met somebody
tike Barney Dogherty, whom I struck up against in San
Francisco.


He was always crying out, “My wife’s a lovely Kentish
woman.’’
Poor Barney, to his sorrow, knew all such marriages
were a mistake and kept saying this, anxious to show some
excuse. The Irishmen never forgive an Irish girl’s side-
step in what he calls virtue.
How quickly and softly they condone it with the Eng-
lish woman after falling into her arms.
I warn you all, it’s surer than death—yea, much surer
than any death.
The outside race who handle Irish virgins and maiden
men of Ireland will eventually HANDLE, OWN AND
CONTROL IRELAND.
Absent-minded and thoughtless Irishmen are greatly to
blame.
Englishmen with or without understand
the Initiative Rite, making marriagg qMck and easy on the
part of the girl.
When these things happen, intelligent Irish girls often
spend a whole lifetime wondering what’s wrong with their
own countrymen, or why on earth they themselves were
allowed to drift—even assisted—into the ranks of the enemy.
Sarah Curran and Marconi’s wife are cases in point, as
well as many others who could be named.
Tell us, why was the beauty of the Irish facial expression
required as a fundamental picture or groundwork for
Christianity ?
Instead of throwing rotten eggs on the stage, as I have
seen in New York, better learn their hidden motive in put-
ting such a lying scarecrow on the stage. Too long we have
suffered this daylight facial robbery.
Why so much reticence on the Initiative Rite? It’s the
first and most religious rite; it’s her first actual knowledge
of a God. Her virgin blood is spilt. Her next step in Godly


lore is the miracle of childbirth. , then the breast. Without
the breast ALL is lost; the child has no mother, the man has
no wife. Our virgin blood is spilt in this sacrifice, spilt by
the outsider to the great disadvantage of Ireland.
Irishmen can and must see it was the Lord’s intention
that this be in the interest of her land and her race. Isn’t
it a Godly rite ? Isn’t it universal, embracing all mankind ?
Whereas our religions are a fabricated human afterthought,
not universal, each embracing a separate sect.
Dead silence on these vital subjects is very destructive.
In a kind of way hinted at only in the confessional. For
hundreds of years we have faithfully practised the confes-
sional as handed down to us. It doesn’t lead to a remedy.
I notify all Irish writers to respond to the call of the
SPIRITUALISED EMMET.
Prove we’re worthy descendants of our scholarly and saintly
ancestors. Find Christianity’s RIDDLE in the coming
BATTLE.
A Challengesto the POPE from an
rfpKHWOMAN.
(Mrs.) Elizabeth McSweeney, nee Campion.
We ought to be ashamed of ourselves to put the word
Catholic in front of the phrase Irish Boy Scouters. The word
Irish is sufficient, equal to any end or purpose. We must
not allow the word Irish to play second fiddle.
This is one way our bigger enemy—the .Papal Court—
has of killing Ireland and keeping the Roman firebrand in
good working order.
As time goes on, her long-plotted pet scheme, an Orange
God, gets established.
Immediately following the great Daniel O’Connell
appears on the horizon armed to the teeth with an all-absorb-
ing Catholic Emancipation Act. A Catholic Emancipation
Act was no concern of Ireland’s. Ireland is not a Catholic
country; Ireland never was a Catholic country.
The first spiritualised blood was spilt for hundreds of
years in opposing Catholicism and its false foundation.. Then
the scene changes. For hundreds and hundreds of years we
became tools to butcher and slaughter one another. Rivers


of human blood, fighting for and against the word Catholic.
without inquiring how or why it was brought into our land.
Had she been Catholic the Act would not be required.
I’m just now reading a little book called “Ireland’s
Fight for the Mass. ” one of the thousands of little 2d.
and 3d. books written by Jesuits and Capuchins, writers
who never loose an opportunity to give Ireland a kick.
England’s motto re hide and seek: Smother everything
except the Union Jack. Keep it in sight always.
It was a Capuchin who first set the example to our Irish
youth to go “on the run,’’ said “run” invariably leading to
finding themselves poor exiles stranded on a foreign shore,
never again to behold their own native land.
Lord, what fools we are!
Seeing and knowing that it’s no sin for a Capuchin to
put Irish youth “on the run,” how can it be a sin for an
Irish mother to teach her boy to stand his ground and put
the Capuchin “on the run”?
Then again, in their thousands of cheap publications
they never omit to remind the world and remind ourselves of
what they call our “PAGAN IRISH ANCESTORS.”
Shall Ibe mute ? Nay! Nay! I, as well as other Irish
women, claim the same right as Archbishop Mannix, Wolfe,
Tone, or any other living man or dead hero to do our whole
undivided best for our native land.
Holding these principles, I not only object, but I call
upon every Irish woman all over the world to object. We
never had a Pagan in Ireland until we accepted the Jesuits
(S.J.’s) and Capuchins. They never taught us how to ex-
change the products of our land with one another, thereby
creating an Irish money exchange that would be acceptable
all over the world.
Ask Mr. T. Kennedy (Chairman, Dublin Group, Credit
Reform Movement), yet for its own use it is a great com-
mercial organisation, never losing sight of even a single
penny.
Talking of sin, sure the most deadly mortal sin we can
commit is by keeping silent. We have nothing to fear.
Our affairs are all open and aboveboard. Not so with Eng-
land, she has to hide everything. She makes a law for
herself and her possessions. The hiding machine is brought
into play.


All the good in,such a law is effectively and deliberately
squeezed out of it before it is allowed to function in a
British possession.
Then take the great sexual liberty that the people prac-
tice on every inch of England’s soil.
When these tabooed questions are mooted, where there
are Irish listeners, NOTICE the English man and woman
utter not a syllable; mouths get padlocked.
Ah! me; thou, too, Dan. Notwithstanding, thou didst
know the double chicanery better than Grattan, still thou
didst allow thyself to be held back or spurred on as suited
R.C. prelates, prelates who were then, as now and always
were, willing to move Heaven and earth to keep the Roman
firebrand alive. Nobody at the time knew this better than
Dan himself, yet he fell into their net.
When emerging from the trap thou didst appear like
unto a tool and a bostoon. He prostituted the Godly gift of
Irish oratory. Year in and year out he thundered, he
roared, he screeched, until at last he sways the ever-
increasing multitudes into the belief that Jesus Christ and
His Mother Mary could do nothing at all.
The POWER AND THE GLORY ALL RESTED WITH
ENGLAND AND ENGLAND’S HOUSE OF COMMONS.
Is it any wonder people say, “England would rather
lose all her possessions than lose Ireland’’?
In or out of a dictionary, in or out of a Bible you can’t
find language more powerful or more fitted for the upkeep
of a foreign would-be conqueror, this language brought
about by one of Ireland’s sons for the upholding of Eng-
land’s greatness.
Foreign titles are heavy and hard to bear. It matters
not what amount of money a man may have, or how much
book-learning he has acquired, the moment he turns away
from his nationality, for loyalty or piety or any other
pretext, he becomes the POOREST OF THE POOR.
Why should we suffer so long ? Oh! why, why must it
last as long as this? Why should Pentecost stand? Why
should it be forced on outsiders? It’s only a Jewish festival
England never enters a war alone, why should we?
Emmet evidently held the power to inspire. I never
ONCE thought of doing as I am until he pointed the way.


Anything done is done through the vision. I seek no dis-
play, so place me where you like, or place me not all if the
committee so wish.
Robert Emmet born 1778,
Crucified 20th September, 1803.
Please place the above in a good position on the temple.
There could always be found plenty of money to uphold
the Pope and the Irish garrison man; none available to
show Ireland’s sons and daughters their lordly Shannon,
with its twelve miles wide at its mouth, seeking the kisses
of ocean.
Behold the language of one of our sons (Casement) who
didn’t carry a sectarian firebrand in his breast pocket!
“The key to the Atlantic Ocean is deposited in Cork
Harbour. The foundation stone of the British Empire is
in Ireland. Ireland, Germany, and the Freedom of the Seas.”
These things ought to be read by all of us.
I was a slip of a girl, about 11 or 12 years old, when I
heard three or four old women whispering to one another,
how on the eve of an election a priest tried hard to raise
the ire of the Catholics up against the Orangemen. Finding
all his eloquence a failure, this Jesuit priest whispered to
a leader of the other side, “Bring out the Orange Band.”
On the first sound of the drum out they fly, and the
bl—dy strife goes on and on, and is carried into all our
living actions.
Talk about running after picture shows. Every Irish-
man and Irishwoman is capable of picturing in his or her
own mind the disastrous results of sending our little children
for religious instruction or any other instruction to monsters
with such maliciously trained minds.
On this basis our Confessional is dangerous and
nauseating. The same thing is happening to-day. Send
De Yalera up to Belfast, get him arrested, and keep the
game going.
Something similar to this can be seen in “An
Phoblacht,” August 10, 1929, page 1, column 7, the Re-
public, 31 Exchequer Street, Dublin. Price 2d.
At a dance in St. Mary’s Hall, Bulcrana, the hall is
managed by a Father W. O’Doherty, P.P., Buncrana.
O’Doherty knows the game and can be depended upon to
do the required whispering to keep the game alive.


Hundreds of years back Ireland’s sons started the out-
side greatness of “Mighty England” by accepting her paper
money to buy their own bread and butter, ignoring the
fact that an Almighty God had overabundantly supplied our
own land with all our material and spiritual requirements.
The Irish snake LIB is like the Irish Pagan LIE. There
was never a snake in Ireland until the man we call St.
Patrick trod the soil therein.
More power to the Waterford people; they put him out
NECK AND CROP. It was high time. Nothing could be
got out of him, only a continual preaching of his own Hellish
remark, “Put Latin to Latin and kill the Gael.”
Have we anything in common with those foreign mon-
grelised saints? Didn’t the enemy push them in on us?
Aren’t they used as an angel of death to destroy our own
saints who are the natural spontaneous product of our own
spiritualised Irish soil? We had our own saints with us
long before the bringing about of the murderous Christian
era.
Since our Waterford forefathers laid hands on Patrick
nobody knows from that good day to this where he went
to or what became of him, like unto Father Murphy’s dis-
appearance from the Wexford Army. Query: Did Father
Murphy overtake Father Roach, who turned tail on the self-
same Wexford Army?
Ireland’s sons shut their eyes and closed their minds
to the numerous meanings for the English word “VIRTUE,”
accepting only the one that suited the enemy to be used
as a black or a white mark for or against Ireland’s native
daughters.
The fashion in gods, like other fashions, was always
varied and uncertain.
“The Sacred Snake,” as he is called in our Bibles, was
the god in some countries during certain periods in past
time. This snake was thundered forth as the Great High
God who spoke to Eve in the garden of Eden re the apple
tree fake.
Our own old saints, like our own old religion, is not
mentioned now. Aren’t we satisfied with Patrick? Yea!
We are more than satisfied. Haven’t we an annual proces-
sion in his honour? Under the joy and glory of such a
procession we are soft enough to allow Archbishop Kelly’s


crushing imperialistic and conscriptionistic ideas to dis-
appear. We are carrying the fool farther while we keep
putting “Latin to Latin” on our altars wherever we go.
Woe to our sons, woe, woe - to the beaten.
Through our half-hearted rejection of the snake
And our incomplete acceptance of the Jew,
Ireland is slashed by English and Roman hire-
lings between the two.
Taking us as a human family, we can’t go wrong in
recognising Labour, Love, Truth and Light as Eternities
in the “Eternal Purpose.”
Patriotism as we Irish practice it is a poor remedy
against sectarian firebrands.
Henry Grattan, the aristocrat, might not be the best
example.
Here’s another, hoping it will be useful; I met this
man in the Sydney Domain, a Protestant from the County
Mayo. This man was, and is, apparently a good patriot. I
was willing to send him to Ireland. All went well for the
cause for a while.
One day in debate I said: “ Oh! Mr. Dodwell, we want
the priests yet a while.” He threw his hands in the air
crying out, “Give up the Irishwoman who says she wants
her priest!” and ran away from me, giving me no show at
an explanation.
I wanted to point out how arrogant Protestant intoler-
ance is, also how his great patriotism never led him to say,
“Give up the Irishwoman who wants her Church of Eng-
land minister!”
1 might flog away as much as I liked at Romanism or
Orangeism and all went well, but the moment I drew my
pen through Protestantism up flew the blood—yes, it flew
through the spout. This blood, if calmly and piously
sprinkled on the Emmet doorstep, might help to bring about
a change, perhaps a remedy.
The firebrand did its deadly work. I, too, like the
others, was compelled to fall in the mud leaving Ireland in
agony.
We’ll never know anything worth knowing or worth
doing until we take into account the conditions of our own
people on our own soil.


Peasants are more useful and less slave-minded than
either popes or clergymen.
Information or book-learning is not as good as experi-
ence.
We have a lot to learn. England, too, has a lot to learn.
If she doesn’t learn she’ll go under. Nobody wants her
under. Still, in the face of the whole world knowing her
hidden brutalities to the Irish race, there is a much more
pressing need than her going under—that is, no solitary
human being, whatever his belief or colour of skin may be,
MUST NOT BE LEFT UNDER HER.. She has proven
herself unworthy.
The brutality of Catholic clergy over subjugated peoples
euphemistically called by some persons “British posses-
sions, ’’ is not yet a thing of the past. All our Irish troubles
are of human production.
Why, oh! why in the name of all that’s high and holy
do men like Bishop Sheean and Father O’Flaherty run away
from Ireland? I heard the latter at Michael Dwyer’s
memorial in Waverley on Easter Sunday, 1929.
They have the two languages. There is abundance of
work for them to do in Ireland. Let them start and set the
example to priests, parsons, nuns and parents of Ireland.
Find the house that has the Irish language, then take the
children of the nearest neighbour who hasn’t the language
into the house where it is spoken.
Take a few toys, a little fruit and lollies. Practice the
enunciating of the Irish and English for half an hour or
longer every day for three or four days a week. Alternate
houses can be visited as suits parents. By this method our
language can be surely and inexpensively spread all over
Ireland.
Under the tender age of seven years little children can
learn to fluently speak two or more languages if required.
After the enunciating, about (8) eight years old is the time
to go to school. By-lingual preferred, and should be pro-
vided, making Irish compulsory, holding on to the English.
It’s a point gained on the enemy.
Without the Irish, English duplicity can talk everything
away. By giving the enunciating to infant life all the
trouble is over; the language battle is won. Stopping the


enunciating in infant life was, and is, the foundation for its
destruction, giving the enemy a chance to say, “It’s dead
and useless.”
Patrick Pearse, the bogus language man, worked hard
on behalf of its destruction. He was always laughing,
glorying in the fact that the Irish couldn’t see what he was
up to. He stopped a stray bullet in Dublin. Now we acclaim
this bogus language man an Irish patriot.
God, save the mark!
The simple way, or, in other words, the less elaborately
you go about this infantile enunciating the more successful
you will be.
The writer has seen it work and regrets she hasn’t means
or assistance enough to give it a start.
Mr. Justice Higgins’ large-hearted gift of Godly Irish
generosity—twenty thousand pounds —will in all probability
have the same result, viz., to reach and glorify the few, while
it will be very successfully kept back from the multitudes.
The multitudes will never have it until infant life does the
enunciating. All attempts to build a structure without at-
tending to the foundation will be a failure.
The Pope says that “Absolute liberty of discussion is
inadmissible because it can easily degenerate into a veiled
form of propaganda.”
You bet there is full liberty of discussion between
Mussolini and the Pope, as can be seen in a lengthy report
in the Cork “Examiner” of Thursday, June 6, 1929. Yes.
the Pope and Mussolini will stand together; they will club
together; they will plan and discuss and plot together.
I beg and beseech of my patient, long-sulfering, unhappy
countrymen to have no doubts whatever about what these
two gentlemen will do. While keeping the trick up their
sleeves they will most vehemently swear to each other that
they will take very good care that the “Hail! Mary busi-
ness” that flickered out in Palestine before it was taken to
Italy and Romanised will not do with Italy what it did with
Ireland. In Ireland it was made to take the place of our
own old Irish faith; the foundation got upset. All the
powers that be, as well as our own poor fatherless fathers,
keep fastening this false foundation on to us.
Supposing we take the Pope at what he says, then there
is all the more reason that it should be taken away from


few sectarian spies and placed in the hands of the
multitude.
“Of two evils take the least.” We hold full power over
the sectarian spy. Teach this spy he’s at a dangerous calling.
Lord, what softies we are! Why not demand the priests
and bishops to come out and turn the bailiff and black and
tan into a hare or a rabbit, as they so often threatened to do
with us when children, chilling our little hearts and knock-
ing five years’ growth out of us? They either can or can’t
do this. Like the spy, let it be tested and stopped.
We are horrified about Birkenhead’s betrayal of the
Treaty. At the signing of the Treaty he was foremost in
protesting that Article XII. must lead to the abolition of
the boundary.
When the “Treaty” was safely on the Statute Book he
began the betrayal which ended in completely removing
Article XII. from the “Treaty.”
While we remain one-sided in our thoughts we will be
always in agony through the hidden tricks of the Birken-
heads and the ignorance of the Popes.
Put our own house in order. Look to our own betrayals
of one another. Did Birkenhead betray England? Did he
betray any one man, woman or child of English blood?
We get the very motherhood of Ireland to work a be-
trayal dodge on her own offspring. At their earliest infancy
they are doomed to a life-long apprenticeship of the double
chicanery trade. She looks neither to the right nor the left.
She accepts the English fabricated word pushed in on her,
that, indeed, the child had a “calling” for the work.
Without using our own brain and thinking power any
pretext is good enough.
Aren’t we working a betrayal on the very God when
we criminally waste and destroy the only means He gave us
for bringing forth the man who is to save Ireland? I think
it was a Cecil, a betraying English diplomat. When they
were puzzled what to call one of their hidden schemes, he
said; “Get our friends, the R.C. prelates, to call it a sin.
The word sin is the only thing to bring the cowardly Irish-
man to his knees and send him hunting after a confessional
box.”
The above paragraph from “A Secret History of Eng-
land.” It and other valuable works were lost in a Fiji
hurricane over fifty years ago.


Which of their fiendish minds invented the confessional
box? His malicious manner of using the word “cowardly”
stuck in my gizzard ALWAYS.
We, the Irish multitudes, we hold complete power over
the R.C. prelates and the meaningless word SIN.
“Misguided Irish fusiliers,
Your sires in chains, your sons in tears,
Why shed your blood to bind the free
And Ireland craving liberty?
“You shed your blood on vine-clad Spain,
At Waterloo you bled in vain;
Your bayonets stopped the Imperial Guard,
And serfdom since is your reward.
“Misguided, martyred, mournful race,
Yours was the victory and disgrace.
With Wellington you swept that plain,
With Blucher firm did you remain.
“At break of day you led the van
That crushed your friend the Corsican.
Whence and why to-day from out their silent stone,
Fitzgerald, Emmet and Wolfe Tone
Beseech you lay your martial hand
Or strike for your own native land.”
We ought to talk about outside betrayals while we shut
our eyes to the cowardly betrayal of our own offspring.
What a mean advantage we took of their helpless condition
and hindered them of enunciating their own classical lan-
guage ! No power, religious or political, on earth or in
Heaven could enforce this against the will of an Irish
motherhood.
Then scheming fellows who “LAY ON THE JAM” call
us virtuous. Ba! Ba! Are we blameless?
Now I have it gleaned on good authority, through the
connivance of R.C. prelates and an Englishman named Cook :
Miss Mary MacSwiney, sister of the self-martyred late Lord
Mayor of Cork, was induced to put the baneful word
“Catholic” into the Republican manifesto. This has been
done with malice aforethought to annihilate the Irish
Republic.


It will be poor satisfaction when we, the Irish multi-
tudes, wait for Father o’Flannigan’s next three hundred
years to be told that Mary MacSwiney was a tool and a
bostoon.
Is it proving the lamb or the lion-hearted waiting that
we, the Irish multitudes, hide our flag and keep on paying
up and glorifying these religious spies instead of chastising
them?
The tyranny of the class known as Catholic priests over
subjugated races, euphoniously called by some persons
“British Possessions,” is not yet a thing of the past.
When I took the flag of a United Ireland into the
churches what an ungodly priest I met! Finding I was
alone and entirely without any following, he tyrannised over
me.
I regret not knowing this priest’s name—anyone inter-
ested can find out. He was the priest to say ten o’clock
Mass on Easter Sunday, 1929 at St. Mary’s Cathedral. Seeing
a miniature flag pinned to my cloak, he made an attempt to
pull the cloak off my back. In a commanding, dictatorial
voice he repeatedly said: “Take down that flag! Take down
that flag!”
Somehow I didn’t obey. Something came to me that
made me work the harder to keep it flying.
He throws off the mask. Then with a changed face,
looking very much like an infuriated wild beast, he tore the
flag from my hand, ran up the church, and put it in hiding.
Hot foot I ran through the crowded church after him, cry-
ing, “Hello, Mr., give me my flag! Archbishop Mannix blest
that flag!”
He turned round sharply and said, “Who do you call
Mister?”
The minute he said that I knew he wasn’t aware that
the word father is not -used all over Ulster to the present
day. Mr. and Rev. Mr. is applied to the priest just the same
as to other clergymen by Catholics as well as non-Catholics.
Does he know the importance that attaches to a single word?
Does he know the world-wide issues that follow the
simply and accidentally-uttered joke or “half joke whole
earnest,” as we say in Ireland.
He wouldn’t be such a sectarian firebrand if he knew
that the word “father” was used in a contemptuous man-
ner to hurl at the head of a woman-hater.


Again I cry out, Lord, Lord, what fools we are! With-
out putting the searchlight on we create untold numbers of
these mutilated human beings who are neither men nor
women.
The Catholic slow, tormenting, insinuating method of
bringing about this mutilation makes our religious sons
much more injurious to Ireland than the eunuchs are to
Turkey.
In the midst of all his ignorance he knows how to kill
Ireland. He knows the game. He knows the power and
penetration of the EYE OVER THE EAR. He is well aware
if all the English were to hide the Union Jack all talk, all
prayers, all pleadings and implorings for God’s help would
be in vain. No matter how long continued, the Union Jack
would go under. Yet this priest is daring enough, blas-
phemous enough, treacherous and perfidious and traitorous
enough to stand on what he calls the altar of God and hide
the flag of a United Ireland.
It was a Celt, a man of our own race, born in Edin-
burgh, who taught the French how to use their own paper
money.
A man of our own heart and kidney, a Cork merchant
named Flynn, started an Irish money exchange. Flynn’s
financial instincts couldn’t flourish or spread in an Irish
atmosphere of three alien religions.
The Slovakians have persevered, and in a short period
of ten years since the late war they have stabilised their
own paper currency. The Slovakians set all the Pope’s
commands aside. They allow and encourage their priests to
marry, thereby keeping their manhood intact.
The Pope, to bolster up his own claim when counting
numbers, puts his tongue in his check and barefacedly calls
all such people Catholics.
What a howl if this happened in Ireland! The Pope
would roar out like a wolf-dog that we be all excommuni-
cated.
Then again, behold, observe:
Through no chance whatever
In the cutting of the leather.
Does a Pope excommunicate anything or anybody that
he thinks might result disastrously to England?


An Irishman can go all over the world and shoot down
every one of England’s enemies and still be supplied with
loads and lashions of absolution and holy communion. But
the moment my brother Pat or my brother Mick shoots down
one of Ireland’s enemies in a most extraordinary manner,
with an entire absence of common decency, a pope pounces
down on my brother Pat and pounces down on my brother
Mick and excommunicates him.
Now, sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. I
recommend that it’s up to us Irish to excommunicate the
Pope and put a stop to the double chicanery, the shifts and
the tricks that’s being practised against our land and our
race. No nation or church can hinder us doing this if we
so wish, then why not do it?
The finger of God is pointing to us in this direction for
hundreds of years past.
Taking truth by the forelock, we must admit we don’t
know how many gods there are, but we do know there is
only one Ireland, one race, one nation, no matter how
many gods or religions we may believe in. Hence for every
man, woman and child born therein there is only one
nationality.
I’m not a Healyite or a Parnellite, nor any other
“ite”; I am an anti-mutilated Ireland with a patched-up
Ulster somewhere in the background. Make no mistake
about me; I am a straight-up-and-down Irish subject advo-
cating a Republican form of government for a United
Ireland.
Mixing up personalities with nationality weakens the
latter and leads to strife.
It’s like the Pope’s impudence to criticise any Irish-
woman’s failing or so-called sin in the face of an intelligent
Europe looking on, who use the thinking principle and know
our history from the beginning. No wonder they wouldn’t
have a sensitive spiritualised Irishman for a Pope. It takes a
thick-skinned Italian to do such things and suit the tricky
chair.
Ireland’s sons were the first to give and ennoble Eng-
land’s paper money with outside power. Ireland’s sons
didn’t give Ireland’s paper money a ghost of a show. They
killed it outright when they put it in their pipes and smoked
it, leaving England’s paper money to slowly but surely gain
full sway.


The most urgent task is to stabilise or, in other words,
to give our own Irish paper money confidence in our own
land. Until this is done nothing can be done. Perseverance
amongst ourselves, regardless of outsiders, will bring about
the desired effect.
All liquid wealth is brought about through the medium
or intervening of exchange. A couple of dozen absolutely
reliable persons are indispensable to carefully watch the
turnover, etc., etc.
We want no external help. A little practice and soon
well see normal trade, sound finance, and individual saving,
all possible and within our grasp. I see England is again
side-stenping the gold standard. Take no notice. Nobody
knows better than England herself that our Irish paper
money for domestic use is as good as any gold standard,
with a fund for outside requirements. It and the language
is what’s wanted. You all know it’s wanted. When a thing
is wanted it’s never too late to start. Never forget how they
upset the foundation. This knowledge will help us to win
out.
Mr. McGilligan, Minister for External Affairs in Dublin,
speaks about what the good Popes, innocent and otherwise,
did for Ireland. He calls them an “Illustrious line of
Pontiffs. ’ ’ Had he called them a band of Pontius Pilates it
would be more applicable to our experience and present con-
dition. Innocent Popes, indeed! Did anyone ever hear the
like ?
Does Mr. McGilligan know that from the very first Pope
to the last they have all, without an exception, acquiesced
in the brazen lie? The truth about Ireland isn’t in one of
them. Is he aware that every time the Irish lost a battle
the Vatican illuminated every window in her building ? Does
McGilligan know it was innocent Popes and other “sur-
pliced ruffians” who, with Elizabeth, conceived the living
yet deadly plot to destroy the O’Neills of Ulster?
Great Scott! The O’Neills of Ulster, the pride of our
race. We are poor, indeed, without the O’Neills of Ulster.
For hundreds of years we haven’t been able to replace them.
No Ulster, no Ireland. The only bit of innocence about
the whole business is what McGilligan himself possesses.
It’s highly dangerous to have an innocent man like
McGilligan in the Dublin Dail trading with the English
through the medium of the English language, with its


duplicities, inaccuracies, abominations and insinuating insin-
cerities. He ought to go up to Ulster, even though he walked
barefoot to the border. He’ll have something to do to find
the mentality of men like Sir James Craig, Earls of Upper
Ossory and others.
There is still a class of Irishmen in that locality whom I
call “uppishers and aloofers.” They are like the ungodly
priest who bumped up against me in St. Mary’s Cathedral.
They know how to kill Ireland. Those Irishmen—like the
priest—are well aware that their uppishness and aloofness
from the rank and file is very injurious to themselves and
to the cause. Instead of killing Ireland, they can use their
WILL POWER and kill the blackguardish mentality they
have so long and so glaringly encouraged.
Please, gentlemen, do this, or, like the religious spies,
you’ll have to be chastised. The remedy for Ireland lies with
ourselves. We run a risk of losing our country and becom-
ing second-hand slaves.
The root of this disastrous risk lies in the manner we
look up to the Papal Court. Here again McGilligan says:
“In the days of Elizabeth the Papal Court was the great
refuge of exiled Irish leaders.”
To anyone keen enough and honest to Ireland it’s easy
to see. Roman refuge for exiled Irish leaders was intended
as the forerunner to the prison and the poorhouse for the
Irish race.
It would take more than two Elizabeths to do as much
havoc in Ireland as the Papal Court did and is still doing.
Behold! Rinucinni, head man from the Papal Court,
stealing into O’Neill’s tent to consummate and finish the plot
previously conceived between himself and Elizabeth that
he must take the Macs, and the O’h’s out of Ireland, the very
man whom soft Irishmen keep praising.
It’s sign enough these outside religions are all false for
Ireland, or we would be able to use them as a completing
force for the country, instead of, as at present, in spite of all
our patriotism, they remain a competing force against the
country.
The Great God Pan is not dead. Notice the Pan
American God was the God who heard the prayer of the


American and quick and lively helped the Americans to
get rid of England.
Let us encourage the Pan Celtic ideal with a Murphy
as representative of all our own saints and dead heroes for
a Redeemer.
Before closing my eyes in death, I feel it my duty to say
a few words about the glamour that is supposed to attach to
female life born in Ireland as compared with female life
born in other countries. I can’t endorse this impossible
ideal. All female life is born divine without desire of the
flesh. Sexual contact is a thing wholly apart from the
female mind.
When we look into the mysterious and supreme com-
bination of God and Nature, we know that the nature in
God couldn’t alter this; the God in nature wouldn’t alter it.
The glamour was wrongfully foisted on to us, causing
us to create a mournful atmosphere leading to misunder-
standings that keep us weeping, quarrelling, even fighting,
over the impossible ideal to the neglect of all things possible.
The near approach of female divine love to a living God
can be seen when attended to by the hand and mind of
developed motherhood in its action on the step-father. I
doubt if there be a living male whose love is pure enough
to react in like manner on the step-mother.
By keeping the female womb pure and Godly it becomes
the NATION BUILDER.
Following contact with the flesh, a great uncontrollable
desire grips the heart and soul of a healthy grown woman—
the desire for offspring. Each last little mite tugging at
her breast is the loving link that keeps the family together
and brings the Godly desire for another little mite.
On this special point we in Ireland heed not its Godly
aspect, looking only to our self-imposed so-called disgrace.
Said disgrace we pass on to the second and third genera-
tion, prolonging the agony.
All men and women deprived of their natural birthright
STAND DIVORCED. Divine love bids defiance to all
divorce laws and lengthens the span of life. The divorced
soon die.
On the side of the mother the mysterious “ two-in-on,e ”
have become divine. She’d part with all her children, with


all her possessions sooner than part with the father of the
children.
Speak up! We had the mind and the tongue before we
had the pen.
With their tricky spelling, hair-splitting reasons, and
other devices in their specially-provided schools, our teach-
ers have been pretty successful in their effort to kill the
power of the pen in us.
Our priests are very mean running away from Ireland
opening schools in opposition to the Australian. The Aus-
tralian school is good enough for the Australian child.
Would to God they’d left us our own Irish schools.
We might well be called virtuous Irish mothers had we
taught and kept in practice the power of silent prayer, it
being the most sacred, with a silent God setting the example.
We needn’t go to far-fetched Rome to find “surpliced
ruffians” telling lies about Ireland. Here’s a man of our
own heart and kidney—the Lord Bishop of Rapho. Dr.
McNeely, in the Republican paper ‘‘an Ploblacht,” Novem-
ber 2, 1929, page 5, column 3, stands on the altar of God.
He hides our flag and works a lying betrayal on us. These
priests and bishops hate us and hate our flag. They’d rather
see the devil out of Hell going into the churches than see
the flag of a United Ireland. Is it because their parents
betrayed them? Is it out of sheer vengeance they are doing
this? Perhaps this is why they never raised their voices
against a mutilated Ireland.
One noble exception—Dr. Mannix, of Melbourne. Lately
there’s been a padlock suddenly and mysteriously fastened
on to the mouth of our beloved Mannix.
The writer sees a very large crowd of upspringing Irish
all eagerly searching for the key to fit that specially-designed
and unique padlock.
Born 1841, almost 90 years of age, and feeling an
approaching death, just one or two more final remarks.
When all is said and done, it’s us Irish with our
firebrands WHO, during each religious and political move,
allow and enable the enemy outside to take a firmer grip of
the inside; the self-same Irish, the self-same firebrands that
England is using as tools to conquer the world. Neverthe-
less, we are still the salt of the earth.


Whatever else ye may do, DON’T SURRENDER. Life’s
meaning for the entire Irish race will be lost if we loose our
hold upon Ireland.
Isn’t it downright madness to hanker after English
money bags and stubbornly refuse to establish Irish money
bags? The more we handle the former the poorer we be-
come. The reverse happens when we handle our own, the
richer we become.
America and Russia, the two greatest powers; these are
the people to help humanity. They have recognised Polish
paper currency established by the Poles a few years ago.
We’re no Ishmael, we’ll be recognised; NOT until we
ourselves first recognise it. This is just what the high-toned
Irishmen didn’t do. They put their own paper currency in
their pipes and smoked it.
Put the searchlight on every move, prepare, make ready,
wake up, sharpen all the tools and use them for Ireland!
The Emmet Temple will be a great help. It will provide
an honourable breakaway from the firebrands.
A fatherless father, the man we call the Pope, he who
gets his living by construing, animadverting on, and selling
the word Catholic. He is often called ‘ ‘ Our Holy Father, the
Pope.”
Can there be in the English language a more deceiving
phrase? I guess not. He must think the Irish a pack of
ignorant fools to believe the untruth that Catholicism is
the same all over the world. Why, sure it’s not the same all
over Ireland.. Even if we leave Ulster out, then it’s not the
same all over the remaining counties.
Wolfe Tone and his colleagues got hampered by the
Catholicism that was amongst the Irish of the Pale and
some other counties. He became confused and puzzled,
especially as they pushed it vigorously. Numerous mutilated
ecclesiastics kept yelling out, “It’s our own old faith!” He
found it perplexing; it hindered him.
By these tactics our two enemies, England and Rome,
betrayed us, corrupted our spirituality and led us, the Irish
people, to support the false foundation. Thus Tone failed,
leaving Ireland in agony.
It’s difficult to explain this voluminous subject in the
pages of a few small pamphlets, but, on behalf of my native


Irish race and my native Irish soil, I hereby challenge the
Pope as to the truth of every word I have spoken and written
on this subject.
(Mrs.) Elizabeth McSw r eeney,
Maiden name Campion.
P.S. —I here record my memory of fact as an eye-
witness.
Fully four hundred able-bodied Irishmen who were
standing round the chapel yard in Rathdowney waiting to
hear Mass suddenly beoame as dumb and as powerless as four
hundred Egyptian mummies while looking on, as an emissary
from Rome, in the person of Father Cody, P.P., pulled out
a whip and flogged a woman until the bonnet flew in tatters
off her head. The victim’s name was Dillon. Not a finger
nor a voice was raised in her defence, notwithstanding she
was the proud possessor of the two most holy words in the
language exclusively applied to woman—she was a WIFE
and a MOTHER.
No race on earth —no, nor there never was a race on
or of this earth who hate spies and informers with so bitter
a hate as we do. Yet we passively bear with the religious
spies and informers even when incased in a brute as is
demonstrated by Cody.
Rome is England’s best ally, worth all the other allies
for her wielding of Ireland.
Take the two nations single handed without allies in
deadly conflict. Every one of “Mighty England’s” armies
wouldn’t be able to so completely subdue the four hundred
as Rome did with a TWO-LEGGED UNIT, PROVING
ROME to be the bigger enemy.
We’ll have to do what the brave people of Westmeath
did a few weeks ago. They seized a spy and securely tied
him to a post in front of the chapel gate.
Now, ye rising Irish generations, put the TRICOLOUR
up. It’s the flag of a United Ireland. Give it the PER-
SONAL TOUCH. Expose it to the powerful penetration of
the eye. Pin or sew it on your breasts and on the breasts
of your children. Keep it up, and keep searching for that
key.
There must be found an Irish priest who will put his
craftily administered oath aside and follow in the footsteps
of Archbishop Mannix.


BAR very few exceptions, the ecclesiastics, male and
female, as well as others who follow and hang on to the
three firebrands for a living, for prestige or for piety, these
can be all found in Ireland.
I swear before an Almighty High God, so far as Ireland
is concerned - they are all useless wasters.
Hoping some of our boasted Irish scholars who are so
clever at passing specifically-arranged examinations will
handle this narrative and tell us why it was essential for
the foundation of Christianity to rob two races of their
facial expression.
Paint out the vulturous nasal appendage of the Jew.
Paint in the redheaded, cocknosed stage Irishman. Again
I say, too long we have suffered this facial daylight robbery.
It’s the English who are the redheaded race. The Danes
provided the nasal deformity.
Latest bulletin from Republican Headquarters, 31 Ex-
chequer Street, Dublin, “an Phoblacht’’ (the Republic),
December 14, 1929, page 5, column 1:
“The English Roman god was mortally wounded here
last night. He didn’t like the Black and Tans. In trying to
escape he met his Waterloo.
“People are now wondering whether it was me brother
Mick or me brother Pat who fired the fatal shot that killed
him.”
WORK FOR THE FUTURE HISTORIAN.
England and Rome have conspired against us. “An eye
for an eye and a tooth for a tooth,” says the Lord.
The words “Foreign Mission” are very useful for sec-
tarian diplomacy.
What we call the sacrifice of the Mass is only in re-
membrance of an old Jewish festival of long-standing. When
the goats were rounded up to be fattened for the feast one
was put into captivity. On the eve of their annual feast, the
Jewish High Priest confessed what he thought were the
sins of the people to this captive goat. Whereupon the
goat got his freedom; he was allowed to escape into the
wilderness. From this sprang and was handed down to us
the old-time honoured slogan, “The Scapegoat.”


The word “goat” was let off lightly, having only
Israelitish sins to bear. The word “Christ,” alter replacing
the word “goat,” was loaded down with the sins of the
world.
The words “immaculate-conception” could be scouted;
it could be scoffed at; it could be ridiculed and laughed at
for eighteen hundred and fifty-four years. (See “Catholic
Press,” 13/2/1930.)
Now, in the name of all justice, all Godliness, all reason
and commonsense, why should we lose our hold upon Ireland
because an Italian Catholic, a Pope, tells a clique of maiden
men to call it a sin?
The goat having the power to change its sex may have
had something in common with the old idea of an atonement
for what they called sin.
In the new era drastic changes took place. The people
and not the High Priest were got to do the confessing.
From the word “Christ” (CRISNR JESSU. Yiddish) to
the elongated word “Christianity” was a very easy step.
The snake god mentioned on page 12 was honoured
with the sobriquet of “Legless Being.”
In or about this time, hundreds of years after the open-
ing, the words “Legless Being” dropped out and the words
“Supreme Being” was slipped in to enable the manipu-
lators to carry on the work.
Now began the work of getting us to bow the knee, to
sing the praises, and, after a while, even to fight for the
Marys and the Josephs of the Jewish race, unconsciously,
or as we say in Ireland, unbeknown to ourselves, causing us
to neglect our own saintly Druids and Druidess.
It’s marvellous how tenaciously and complaisantly the
descendants of saints and scholars cling to the changes that
were craftily woven into the elongated word. Morning, noon
and night we run after these mock sacrifices. Not a whimper
out of any one of us about the real sacrifice—the sacrifice
of our own ENTIRE IRISH RACE.
In this year, 1930, the words “Little brother” have been
used as a “scapegoat” for the sins of the financial banking
scare promoters of Sydney, N.S.W.
ASK LANG, HE KNOWS!
Suppression and changes are still rife. Is it any wonder
we’re good at raising lying editors, lying Cosgraves and
lying prelates, to wit, Dr. Collier, Bishop of Ossory?


We’re a long time gobbling lies, since a cunning
Rinuecini or one of his ilk changed the word Paladins to
the word Patrick. Behold how we stick like grim death to
the religious aliases!
It would help to bring about a remedy. In the first
instance, the remedy rests with ourselves. Let us be honest
to these prelates. Give over calling them the Most Revd.
Bishop so-and-so. Call these prelates what they are—
common liars to the injury of our native land.
What a pity the Editor of “an Ploblacht” isn’t aware
of the actual happenings of RINUCCINI, Elizabeth and
the O’NEILLS. He is in the position to unite and to teach.
We’re a unique race—free to give, free to take. The
spirit of Ireland is to give more than we take. The Pope
knows this; he also knows how to do the take. Taking a
vile advantage of this generous trait in our character, he
sends £3,000 to the poor of Ireland, while he extracts and
takes £40,000 from the said poor.
Just think and see what a wonderful people we Irish
are at this hour of great enlightenment.
We drive the honest, truthful, gifted Shawn O’Casey
out. We take the lying, treacherous NUNCIO in.
No speeches for the Nuncio (see “Catholic Press,”
27/3/1930).
A Nuncio is pre-eminently the “Real Mackay” to do
the mischievous whisperings; it’s his job.
It takes a wise man to play the foo'l.
Kilkenny Confederation, Moryah. Kilkenny must have
an inexhaustible supply of wise men. They have proven
their wisdom hundreds of years ago.
Now, like the dog to his vomit, they return to their
darling Confederation. No, not at all; there is some error.
It’s to their old Kilkenny contaminating scheme that
hoodwinked the O’Neills and led them into the Rinuecini
trap.
E. McS.
P.P.S. —O ye Kilkenny wise men, why keep on glorifying
the thing that deceived us?
The Easter-week Martyrs died for the Flag, NOT for the Lily.
They gave us our Flag. The Lily is a got-up scheme to hide and
kill our Flag.
E. McS.


Some time ago in North America I spoke on
two subjects—first, “WOMAN, CHURCH and
PRESS”; secondly, “JESUS, the JEWS, and the
IRISH.” A report of three hundred words con-
gratulating me on my efforts in trying to fix things
appeared in the “New York Herald,” America’s
leading newspaper.
The following translated from the South
American Spanish:—
Extract from “La Nacion,”
Buenos Ayres.
“The Irish community celebrated yester-
ST. PATRICK’S DAY.
“There was a banquet attended by many
people.
'‘Mrs. McSweeney also made a speech
that deeply moved all people present. She
was warmly applauded, and the cheers con-
tinued for quite a long time.”


On a Sunday afternoon in 1922 in Hyde Park,
London, I heard an ordained minister of the High
Church of England declare most emphatically
‘‘that the Methodists were not Christians.” I asked,
“Were the Irish Catholics Christians?” He an-
swered: “Yes, yes, certainly.” “Then what about
the Orangemen?” I queried. He hesitated and
said: “I’ll answer that later.” I regret not hearing
his opinion—the boat I was travelling by left for
Australia during the week.
Talk about puzzles. It’s a great puzzle to me
to know which of the English schemers coined that
intriguing and deceitful phrase, “The Irish Free
State.”
