

THE
RETURN
OF THE
ANZACS
BY
LAVENDER LINTER


This poem is dedicated by the author, with every
sentiment of esteem and veneration, to the noble
army of Australian citizen soldiers who have exem-
plified, in a most striking manner, that valour on
the field of war may be followed by modest stillness
and humility in the piping times of peace.
Eastward the noble ship has ploughed her way
Through deep, blue seas and oceans rolling high,
And now at morn in some sweet, sheltered bay,
She lies in peace beneath an Austral sky.
With firm, proud step, an Anzac treads her deck,
The light of joy illumes his fair, young face:
No more of dangers past his soul shall reck,
Nor look away to far-off years of grace.
With him the kindling moment —now —is all;
Earth's highest truth stands naked to his eye;
He sees 'tis best to yield him to the thrall
Of those deep things that swift are passing by.
And so, when comrades speak in accents grave
Of scenes now past on Europe's fateful shore,
His eyes still sweep across the tiny wave
That bars his footsteps to his father's door.
And till the word which bids the good ship speed
Once more upon her way is heard again,
He sits him down, and takes his oaten reed,
And plays an air which lures men to his strain.
The air is redolent of mighty trees,
Which grow upon the banks of some full stream;
Of wattie-bloom soft swaying in the breeze.
And festooned creepers in the sun's bright beam,
And fertile vales, o'er which the golden grain
Stands high to fill the toiler's heart with pride;
And fruit and grass upon the sweeping plain,
And wildnowers blooming on a mountain side.
And when the last, low note has died away
Upon the face of those deep waters bright,
He lays aside his reed, and sings his lay
To his loved land that lies before his sight:
"All hail to thee, my native land,
That rises to my sight;
Bright oceans lave thy circling strand,
Thy mountains stand in light.
"The bloom of youth is on thy cheek,
Eove glows in thy sweet eye,
As some fair bride, with aspect meek,
Thy sylvan ranges lie.
"To waken joys for maids and swains,
Thy golden wattles grow,
And far away, through sweeping plains,
Thy lordly rivers flow.
"As keen to see tliy beauty's sway
The ocean burst his band,
And sleeps in many a tranquil bay
Along thy golden strand.
"No fleeting gleam of martial fame
Can add to thy delight:
Thou art as fair as when earth came
From ocean's bed and night.
"To thee in boundless, heaving tide
My love now flows along;
In thee I joy, as in a bride,
To thee I sing my song."
Soft murmurs of applause from comrades near
Greet his sweet song, and wistful eyes are cast
Across the bay, till one, to folly dear,
Assumes the reed and sings of scenes now past.
The love of mirth stirs in his reckless heart,
The light of mirth shines in his roguish eye;
He sings of one whom he misnames a "tart,"
And who deceived him as the hours went by.
It was a wild and mirth-provoking strain,
At which his comrades roared their deep delight
Yet some laughed loudly to conceal the pain
Of hopeless love that rose before their sight.
"I left old France in a dinkum trance,
With scratches to remind me,
When I awoke, with a soft, sad shock,
I'd left the war behind me;
A Sister said, as I lay in bed,
In dear, old, merry Blighty,
'Get up, old man, as fast as you can,
And don this little nighty.'
"When I was well I went for a spell
Somewhere in Piccadilly,
And lost my heart to a gay, young 'tart,'
Which was extremely silly;
Around my waist, to my bloomin' taste,
She slipped an arm so lily,
I thought the snow from the plains below
Had come to Piccadilly.
"With childlike air, she oft kissed me there,
And made me feel so kindly;
I thought my heart would break for the 'tart'
I'd leave in tears behind me;
And oft she said, as she laid her head,
With its fair curls, beside me,
'l'll rue the day that you go away,
Whatever may betide me.'
"And when word came to my gay, young flame,
She soon would lose her Billy,
She wept aloud in sight of the crowd,
And called me her 'dear Willy';
And, blow me tight, if she wasn't right,
I was a willy-nilly;
She pinched my purse, and left me to curse
My luck in Piccadilly."
The Return of the Anzacs.


And when the laughter died along the bay,
A youth of stalwart frame and ruddy face,
Whose home amid the Gippsland mountains lay,
Sang his rude song with no attempt at grace.
"At the hour of milking there's nothing but lilting,
Lilting of songs that are soft, sweet, and gay;
For fortune no longer at pleasure is tilting;
Home are the lads who for years were away.
"At the hour of drinking there's nothing but
clinking—
Clinking of glasses that sparkle with wine:
And though Mum is wmiung, my Dad keeps on
drinking
Health to his laddie, and health, too, to thine.
"At the hour of gloaming there's nothing but
roaming,
Roaming with lassies both lovely and gay,
And none thinks of groaning or weeping or
moaning,
Home are the lads who for years were away.
"At the hour of shearing there's nothing but
jeering,
Jeering at lads who to war would not go;
But who kept 011 leering and shouting and cheering
As though big words would lay the foemen low."
And there was one among the merry band
Who fetched his blood from Israel's noble breed,
And who, from love of his dear, native land,
Went forth to fight in her deep hour of need.
But with his love of home there also grew
In sweet accord a keen desire for gain,
A predilection which becomes a Jew,
Or Scot from Aberdeen, or roving Dane.
To him they gave the reed, and when his eye
Had run along its slender form, with care
He ran his hand along, then heaved a sigh,
And slow assumed a sad, dejected air.
"Alas," said he, "I think 'tis scarcely meet
That this fine reed, which is so near divine,
And oft has shed the soul of music sweet,
Should fall so swiftly into hands line mine.
"But, by your leave, I'll keep it till I know
What is its worth in pure Australian gold,
And meanwhile sing to make your proud blood flow
In its red channels, sluggish, thick, and cold.
"The poets may sing of the bright bird's wing,
Of stream and vale and hill;
But I sing the song of the golden throng
Of coins my pockets fill:
To the god of wealth, in sickness and health,
I pay the tribute dear,
As I count my gains, wrung from tears and pains,
For I'm a profiteer.
"I smile in the morn when the price of corn
Advances ten per cent.,
1 laugh at midday when the papers say
There's a big rise in rent;
I am wild with mirth at the evening's birth,
When up go wine and beer;
By the midnight hour I'm drunk with power,
As suits a profiteer.
"When the big guns roar on the Flemish shore,
And Death his wallet fills,
I laugh at the fools in the gory pools,
Whose kindred pay my bills;
As the heroes fight by day and by night,
And fill the world with din,
I ply the old trade my fathers made,
And rake the dollars in.
"And I care not, I, if the orphans cry
When there is lack of bread,
And the widow seeks from the shrunken cheeks
To wipe the tears they shed;
The walls of their lair may be low and bare,
Their beds may be hard and small;
But my heart is gay, by night and by day.
Mine are the profits all.
"I lend my new car to the big bazaar,
Wfiere women sell their toys;
In the Mayor's sight I offer my mite
For comforts for the boys;
When the lads get praise in some soaring phrase,
I storm and shout and cheer,
But I bless the day that they went away,
For I'm a profiteer.
"My doctrines may hold with the love of gold,
But not with the love of home;
Yet the tenets of all the creeds I hold
From Palestine to Rome,
And deep in my heart I love the Hun's part,
In spite of gibe and jeer;
'Tis the law of man, let him take who can,
And I'm a profiteer."
A silence deep as death upon them fell,
A sense of wrong in their young bosoms glowed,
Till one who loved his fallen comrades well
Tuned his low voice, and smooth these accents
flowed.
"Soft as the fall of the dew is their sleep,
And fair as the clime where their mem'ry dwells,
By the shore, where the ocean's proud waves sweep
High, onward, in joy to the Dardanelles.
"And deep as their sleep is the shade that falls
From the graceful pine and the cypress tree,
When the noonday sun on the sweet wind calls
To sing o'er the graves by the deep, blue sea.
"No matron or maid from our own fair clime
May bedeck the graves with a floweret bright,
Fond emblem that fades ere the flight of time
Leaves it to die in the dew of the night.
"Yet ages unborn shall revere the bier
Of our sires and sons who for freedom bled,
And see through the gleam of the gushing tear
Eternal honour bloom above their bed."
A padre then assumed the simple reed,
And tuned his voice to sing fti soaring strain
The thoughts which form of praise the fitting meed
For victory on mountain wall and plain.
THE RETURN OF THE ANZACS.


HYMN OF VICTORY.
Lord God, by Whom our monarchs reign,
By Whom our princes nobly live.
By Whom in arms we still maintain
The empire Thou hast deigned to give.
From Thee alone high honour flows,
To Thee alone is due the praise,
That we, for triumph o'er our foes.
In glad and soaring accents raise.
Thy tempest rends the granite rock,
And cleaves the pathless sea in twain;
To meet the whirlwind's dreadful shock
The hoary mountains rise in vain;
And what is man that he should dare
To draw the sword against Thy laws,
And in his arrogance to swear
Deep enmity against Thy cause?
In pride of power the foemen came;
Their legions burst their ancient bands,
To add yet more to their high fame,
They devastated many lands;
Through deeds more foul than ocean's slime,
Down to the depths our children went;
The foemen hymned their loathsome crime,
And blasphemy the heavens rent.
In patience Thou didst wait, O Lord,
The heavy years dragged slow away,
And darker deeds defiled the sword,
New horrors filled each closing day;
At length, O Lord, Thou didst arise,
Thy shining turned our night to day,
And happv omens filled the skies,
That Thou hadst sealed our ancient sway.
By Israel's plains and lofty hills,
Where Jordan's sacred waters flow,
Our foemen fled as mountain rills,
And melted as the summer snow;
To wreak their ire on loyal Rome,
As wolves that rush upon the fold,
In pride our foemen left their home.
And died on Alpine mountains cold.
The rivers of the West beheld
The tide of war arise in vain;
Thy hand the flowing waters held,
And drew them back.o'er hill and plain;
And when their strength had ebbed away,
And we were as the boundless sea;
Thou savedst them in mercy's day,
For Thou, O Lord, art mce than we.
Our fathers knew 'Thee in their day,
And gloried to be known of Thee;
To them on land Thou gavest sway;
Thou gavest sway upon the sea:
The gates of all our foes are Thine:
To us in grace Thou gavest all;
By waving palm and lofty pine,
We hold them still in our deep thrall.
As is our triumph now, O Lord,
So shall it be through all the years;
Our sons shall sway the victor's sword
In spite of all their doubts and fears:
The seer, in high, prophetic strain,
Sang of the fate that waits us yet:
We shall be great till Thou dost reign
Through Thine own Son on Olivet.
And when the hymn of praise had died away,
The Anzacs begged the padre for a song
Of that sweet Peace who now has set her sway
The whole wide world and rolling sea along.
PEACE,
East called to West, the South invoked the North,
To arms the heroes of the nations sprang;
With sounds of war the distant islands rang,
In serried ranks the ends of earth came forth.
With seas of blood and boundless treasure spent,
The guerdon of high victory was bought,
The stars for us in their steep courses fought,
And potent aid the winds and billows lent.
And He, from Whom alone high honour flows,
Who in his balance weighs the deeds of men,
And recompenses to them all again,
Gave us great victory o'er all our foes.
In her lone banishment, sweet, gentle Peace,
Prom whose soft eyes the tears of sorrow fall.
Now hears with joy the voice of victory call
For her to come and from her sorrows cease.
In snow-white mantle clad, she swift descends,
Fair garlands of white flowers her temples grace,
And winsome smiles enwreath her primrose face,
While earthwards she her gentle hands extends.
A milk-white dove sits on her lily hand,
With outstretched wings as ready to obey,
And mount the glowing heights of perfect day
At primal sound of that fair maid's command.
And now the dove on high spreads out her wings,
The blood-soaked earth assumes its native hue;
And ocean's waves roll on in unstained blue,
While new-born hope o'er all its glories flings.
Broad streams of balm from many fragrant springs
Flow forth to heal the world's deep wounds anew,
And pity's tears the deep-set scars bedew,
And rob the wounds of all their bitter stings.
Stern eyes that blazed with bitter scorn and hate,
Soft eyes that late were dim through boding fears.
Aglow with love, look forward to the years
When men shall meet as brothers at the gate.
The zephyrs tune their slender notes to sing,
In melody the sunlit rivers flow;
To speak the joy of meaner things below
The fountains gush, and modest flowerets spring.
And who shall say in worlds beyond our ken
No note of joy awakes to swell the song,
That breaks the whole wide earth and sea along.
In that sweet Peace has come to us again.
LAVENDER LINTER.
THE RETURN OF THE ANZACS.


Printed by
J. T. PICKEN & SON.
408-418 La Trobe Street, Melbourne,


./6.
<7.<&.
/£*
_
L /i7 cSi& *%p5^*™y>f'
// cy
/ <-
■ yp
S>
