

THE
ACONCAGUA TIMES
PUBLISHED DURING A
VOYAGE
From ADELAIDE, July 17, 1879
To PLYMOUTH , August 26, 1879
PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO.
LONDON AND EDINBURGH
1879




Officers
on BOARD
%\)e “Aconcagua.”
daptew*
Gr. N. CONLAN, Esq.
ifirot Officer—G. F. DIXON, Esq.
ftfrirti Officer—J. J. DE GARDOQUI, Esq,
SeconP Officer —M. H. MOELE, Esq. JFourtf? Officer —C. KIEKHAM, Esq.
CTljief GEnemeer*
J. EESKINE.
Doctor*
JPurser*
Dr. EENTOUL.
J. POWER, Esq.


LIST OF PASSENGERS
ON BOARD
C i)t Steamer "Aconcagua.”
Rev. H. A. Mason and Mrs.
Mason and infant.
Mrs. W. Mason.
C. Ross.
C. Bohrsmann.
Mr, and Mrs. Rigby.
L. Jacobs.
Miss Isherwood.
J. D. Buchanan.
J. H. Ormerod.
Lieut. Archer, R.hT.
Dr. Duke.
Mr. and Mrs, Stockwell and
four children.
C. Abbott.
Miss Marsh.
Miss J, C. Rowe.
W. Williamson.
H. C. M‘Douall.
Mrs. Brugman and two children.
P. S. Abrahams.
Miss Jones.
C. D. Zahel
Mr. and Mrs. Scouller and three
children.
Halliday.
J, Shea.
Mr. and Mrs. Doughty and child.
Miss Doughty.
SALOON
Mr. and Mrs. Bathgate.
Mr. and Mrs. Moody.
S. G. Dyer.
C. E. Elliot.
M. P. Elliot.
T. Millar.
Mr. and Mrs. Allan.
SECOND-CLASS
J. Shiels.
J. Lees.
J. Rayner.
M. Ryder.
C. F. Maxwell,
H. Scott.
S. Watson.
J. Kelly.
Captain J. D. Shand.
Mr. and Mrs. Hodgson.
James Mash.
H. Bertie.
Mrs. Treloar.
C. R. Wright.
Mrs. Hoskins.
A. Laver.
J. B. Siddall.
PASSENGERS
Mr. and Mrs. Scott and infant,
T. Walker.
Rev. J. Storie and Mrs. Storie.
J. Rogers.
PASSENGERS
Miss Babington.
Miss Reynolds.
A. B. Cockburn.
J. Henderson.
G. B. Moon.
Mrs. M'Gregor.
R. Sutton.
Captain Carey.
Mrs. Fotheringham.
W. E. Lloyd.
G. Affleck.
A. Durchbach.
J. P. Day.
Mrs, M‘Keown.
Miss MKeown.
Miss Alcock.
R. L, Poole.
Mr. and Mrs. J, Green.
Miss Greville.
Mrs. Ashborn.
A. Alvers.
E. Budden.
D. Colville.
J. D. Johnston.
J. Lawson.
Mrs. and Miss Byles.
Miss R. Hills.
Mrs. and Miss Lord.


CJe Aconcagua 'Clines.
AUGUST
2, 1879.
NOTICE.
SUNDAY SERVICES—
Morning Service: On Poop, 10.15 A,M>
Afternoon Service: Forecastle, 3 p.m.
Evening Service: Second-class Saloon, 7 p.m.
fTIHE “Aconcagua Times” is undertaken at
A the request of our fellow-passengers to be
the Journal of this our floating commonwealth.
In politics, its principles will be strictly Conser-
vative. It will support by its influence the
government, the discipline, the good order of
the organised society in which for six weeks we
are here to live. It will endeavour to record
from day to day the state of the weather, the
progress made by the ship, the events that stir
in our small community; and may be kept by
some in friendly recollection of associations
casually formed, but valued; and of incidents
that have taken some of the unavoidable
monotony from a shoreless voyage; a record
of the present; a memento in coming years of
the past.
It will be a medium for advertising events
theatrical, musical, educational, religious, in
which all in the ship may desire to participate.
It will also be found a convenient vehicle for
clever genius to drive off in with a gratified smile,
while posing the intellect with subtle surprise
and acrostic questions, or snapping off sharp and
unexpected puns. It may be found an exercising
ground for poetic aspirations, and here some
future laureate may first mount his Pegasus and
canter up the lesser steeps of Parnassus. Here,
too, may be aired the thoughts of some rising
man on the great questions of the day or the
hour; an incipient statesman may tell his aspira-
tions; a silent philosopher unfold his dawning
system; a man of science proclaim his latest
discoveries; and even from his downy chair the
tired official, resting from his graver labours —a
Gladstone, a Disraeli, a Brougham in disguise—
may throw off jets of sparkling fun, or favour
this moving generation with the results of
a learned leisure that the citizens of the
“ Aconcagua ” will not willingly let die.
We bespeak, then, for this new venture a
kindly help from all quarters, and a generous
reception.
Homeward Bound is indeed a pleasing thought,
ploughing swiftly across the mighty ocean in a
well-found steamer of large dimensions. There
is something almost intoxicating in the very
laziness of the life, sitting or lounging on the
deck, smoking the quiet weed, “Sweet solace
of man’s solitary hours,” watching the flying fish
and other wonders of the deep, and being lulled
to sleep by the soft and soothing winds. We
are travelling homewards to dear old England,
the country which we are justly proud of, the
country whose “Flag has braved a thousand
years the battle and the breeze,” our island
home, fair land" which gave us birth. Of course
sea life has its sours as well as sweets. We
have to contend with the capricious elements,
the heavy gale, the relentless pent-up ire of the
ocean; or perhaps we are discomforted by the
ungenial rays of a tropical sun, but through the
dark cloud we see the “ silver lining,” and take
comfort in the words, “ Homeward Bound; ” and
we can almost picture to ourselves taking in the
pilot, wending up the Channel, passing the Fore-
lands, entering the river, arriving at Graves-
end, and meeting those who are near and dear
to us.


We are travelling onwards, and are steadily
distancing old England’s sister colony, the land
which she dearly loves. We are living together
for a time like a little world to ourselves on the
vast expanse of space. We are making friends
which partings cannot obliterate, and which time
cannot efface. Kindness, unselfishness, and a
love of doing good to those around us, are indeed
the essentials of a happy voyage. There is one
thought which would suggest itself to everybody
respecting “ Homeward Bounders,” —Do all
equally welcome their advent to the old country 1
Can all land on England’s shore with the same
joyous feelings 1 May not there be some rankling
thorn, some disquietude, some fleeting cloud to
dim the sky and darken the bright horizon,
such as loss of money, loss of health, loss of
friends? Be that as it may, dark clouds are
often fraught with many blessings. Our voyage,
so far, has indeed been prosperous and happy,
and doubtless will continue so; and we cordially
wish all our readers every success, every happi-
ness, and a joyful re-union with their friends
when this their “Homeward Bound” voyage
is over; and to those who are returning to the
sister colony we would say, “ May you always
be prosperous and happy ! ”
EnctUents of tfj e
Sunday Services. —The morning service on
the poop was conducted by the Rev. Mr. Storie.
He preached from the Scripture, Matt. viii. i.
In the afternoon there was service of worship on
the forecastle. Hymns were sung from the col-
lection of Sankey. An address was delivered
by the Rev. Mr. Storie from the text, Rom. i.
16. In the evening there was a third diet of
divine service in the second-class saloon. The
singing, as led by the choir, was very efficient.
The Rev. Mr. Mason read prayers and preached.
Lecture. —On Monday evening there was a
lecture, astronomical and scientific, by the Eev.
Mr. Storie in the steerage cabin. The attendance
was very large; the lecture, illustrated by dia-
grams, was listened to with great attention, and
apparently appreciated by an interested and in-
telligent audience.
Steamship Sighted. —On Wednesday fore-
noon, just after breakfast, a steamship was
sighted. In reply to signals it was ascertained
that she was the Cyphrenes from England, loaded
with exhibits for the Sydney Exhibition. She
was steaming rapidly, and seemed a vessel of
about 2000 tons.
Lecture. — A lecture was delivered on Wednes-
day evening, by Mr. Walker, on the French
Revolution. It proved very interesting, but was
greatly interrupted by the interference of the
steerage passengers.
Thursday. We spent a very delightful
evening in the second-class saloon. That part
of the ship is specially endowed with musical
gifts, and even “ the man who hath no music in
his soul,” or only a little, must have felt the
peculiar charm of such a social meeting amid the
monotony of our sea life. A rich and tasteful
programme having been prepared, the captain
and officers of the ship invited, the attendance
of their fellow-passengers solicited, and our
reporters specially favoured with an invite and
a programme, the result of course was a bumper
house; and hot though the night was, yet so
well ventilated was the saloon, and so favour-
ably did the executants secure the sympathy of
their audience, that none seemed willing or con-
strained to leave till the whole programme of
twenty pieces was gone through. On the piano
Miss Marsh performed with taste and execution.


Among the gentlemen, Mr. Bertie, with his fine
cultured voice; Mr, Cecil, vigorous and strong;
Mr. Arthur, with his well-chosen popular songs;
Mr. Wright, the master of ceremonies and the
master of Jeanie’s heart; and Mr. Lees, with his
humorous comicalities, were in themselves a ban-
nered host; but sustained by the feminine power
of Miss Greville, and the tender sweet notes of
Miss Eayner, the musical company succeeded in
achieving a triumphant success. Miss Eayner
was twice encored, and but for a feeling of mercy
other encores would have been demanded. Mr.
Siddall undertook the accompaniments through-
out, and this he did with great skill. At the
close of the concert the Eev. Mr. Storie rose and
said he was sure they would not be willing to
part without expressing their gratitude for so
pure and genial an evening’s entertainment, and
for the kindness and courtesy of the commander
of the ship in doing so much to forward and
patronise it. Captain Conlan then came forward,
and in a few well-chosen words stated the enjoy-
ment that all present had experienced, and
moved a vote of thanks to the ladies and gentle-
men who had provided it. This motion was
seconded by Mr. Bathgate, and on leaving three
cheers were given for the performers and one
hearty cheer more for the captain. With the
National Anthem the evening’s entertainment
concluded. The “ Times ” desires another such.
Friday. —This day has been specially distin-
guished by the number of flying-fish skimming
along the surface, pursued by the benitis. There
was also seen a shoal of porpoises. The heat was
very great, but tempered towards evening by a
refreshing breath of air. Sea like glass. Sunset
very striking in its banks of dull-looking clouds;
the flashing eye of fire, gleaming as from a fur-
nace; and the fine tints of green and other
colours.
Efje (£ssa|rist.
A BRIEF ESSAY ON THE SCREW.
The word “ Screw ” is a generic term, whatever
that may mean; I believe it signifies that there
are more screws in the world than one, a fact to
which all who have any experience in life will
cheerfully testify. The oldest historical mention
of the screw is an invention by one Archy Medes.
Who he was, and what he was, I do not know,
my schoolmistress not having passed the Cam-
bridge Examinations, but I infer he must have
been Archy, the bold king of the Medes, whose
inscription has not yet been found by Nineveh
Layard, but, as he was a regular brick, I have
no doubt all about him will be discovered among
the remains of the other bricks by and by. It
is said that Archy Medes’ screw was for raising
water, a totally different use from the modern
screw which is for pouring liquor down. Archy
had no bottles, but kept his wine in leathern
bags, so that it could be neither corked nor
casked. We have always heard there is nothing
like leather, especially the wine called “ black
strap,” which is suited for leathern palates. The
modern screw is for drawing with. It therefore
belongs to the fine arts. Indeed a proper use of
it paints the human face divine of a rosy com-
plexion, just like a glorious sunrise in the mighty
Indian Ocean, although I never could get up
early enough to see one. A pocket edition of
the screw is sometimes called “The Young Man’s
Best Companion,” but if they would pocket an
advice from me it would be not to be too fond
of such a companion. There are other screws I
have heard of. My mother said of a rich uncle
who died and left her his blessing only, that he
was an old screw. He was certainly screwed
tight enough at last. And here I may say to all
who get screwed when living, they are hastening
on the time when they too will be screwed more
tight than ever they were. But this is moralis-
ing, a process to be abjured in weekly journals.


My brother Bob mentioned another screw. He
said that a horse that Ginger the dealer sold him
was a regular screw. I have heard of still an-
other during the last few days which I highly
esteem. It is that of the good ship Aconcagua ,
which does not draw, but is a propeller, driving
us against wind and tide. It is not unfamiliar
with Bass either, but that is only when it is in
straits. It is said also that lately it went steady
against a “ Eip,” but I do not care to inquire
more particularly about such a broken-down
swell. It is also said that that man is a bene-
factor to his country who makes two blades of
grass grow where one grew before, but I say that
Captain Conlan will be a greater benefactor to
his countrymen, according to my judgment, if he
make the blades of his screw grow so lively as to
enable us to pass through the chops of the
Channel and enjoy a South Down mutton chop
in forty days from Adelaide. May his shadow
never be less ! Binnacle.
N.B. —Awfully excruciating. —E. F. S.
“WE DID NOT CATCH THAT GOLD.”
On a raw October evening in the year 18 —, we
found ourselves a jolly party on board one of the
steamboats bound for South Africa. Of course,
we had a motive in view, and that was decidedly
a pecuniary one. Gold, filthy lucre, was what we
were in search of. At the time of our starting,
everything looked brilliant, everything prosper-
ous —indeed, I was informed that by investing a
little money “judiciously” (?), I should realise
500 per cent. No sane person could hardly ex-
pect such favourable results, but after weighing
the pros and cons, I resolved to venture, expect-
ing to line my pockets with the precious metal
at no very distant date. We were all, I think,
mutual in our ideas as to the undoubted stability
of the concern which we had organised. Our
party consisted of about six all told. When I
speak of our party, I mean those on the active
list, those who were actually leaving England,
though on our share register were a few sleeping
partners, who had invested their money, and
were left to dream of future deer parks and
boundless riches. We called in at Madeira after
a fair passage, though we encountered roughish
weather in the Bay. On our landing at that
lovely island, so sanguine were we of our ultimate
success, that after imbibing sundry liquors at an
hotel, we came to the conclusion that we should
be in a position to give a ball there in less than
eighteen months, regardless of expense, to cele-
brate our successful return. Leaving Madeira we
had a good run to the Cape, thirty-four days from
England (quick in those days). During the pas-
sage we held various meetings, proposing and pass-
ing many resolutions, and if they led to nothing
tangible, we certainly looked knowing, and the
minutes of the meetings were duly registered.
We had on board a large quantity of machinery,
which we were importing at no small expense.
But what did it signify, when success was con-
sidered a moral certainty ? At Cape Town we
stayed a few days, and then proceeded to
D’Urban, Port hiatal, calling in at Algoa Bay
on the way.
(To he continued.)
Poetic (Extracts*
THE KING’S DAUGHTER.
“ It was a lord and gentle maid
Sat in a greenwood bower;
And thus the brave Sir Alfred said
To the greenwood’s fairest flower:
“ I have loved thee well, sweet Eosalie;
I have loved a year and a day;
But another fate is in store for me,
And I must not longer stay.
“ I have loved thee well, sweet Eosalie—
With thee I could live and die ;
But thou art a maiden of low degree,
And of princely race am I.


“ Thou art a cottage maiden, love;
And knowest not thy own pedigree;
And I must marry the king’s daughter,
For she is betrothed to me.”
There was a smile on Rosalie’s lips,
But a tear in her blue eyes shone; —
The smile was all for her lover’s fate,
The tear perchance for her own.
And down fell her ringlets of chestnut hair,
• Down in a shower of gold;
And she hid her face in her lover’s arms
With feelings best left untold.
Then slowly rose she in her bower,
With something of pride and of scorn,
And she looked like a tall and dewy flower,
That lifts up its head to the morn.
She flung her golden ringlets aside,
And a deep blush crimsoned her cheek ;
“ Heaven bless thee, Alfred, and thy young bride !
Heaven give you the joy you seek !
“ Thou wert not born for a cottage maid,
FTor yet for a maiden of low degree;
Thou wilt find thy mate in the king’s daughter,
Forget and forgive thy Rosalie.”
Sir Alfred has flung him upon his steed,
But he rides at a laggard pace ;
Of the road he is going he takes no heed,
And a deadly paleness is on his face.
Sir Alfred is come to the king’s palace,
And slowly Sir Alfred has lighted down,
He sighed when he thought of the king’s daughter,
He sighed when he thought of her father’s
crown.
“ Oh ! that my home were the greenwood bower,
Under the shelter of a greenwood tree!
Oh ! that my sword had been all my dower !
All my possessions—Rosalie ! ”
Sir Alfred has entered the royal hall
Midst a thousand nobles in rich array;
But he, that was once more gay than all,
Has never, I ween, one word to say.
The king, he sat on his royal throne,
And his hair was grey, but his arm it was
strong ;
“ Good cousin,” he said in a jocund tone—
“ls it thou or thy steed that has stayed so long 1
“ But it boots not now—bring forth the bride !
Thou hast never yet my daughter seen ;
A woful fate it is thine to bide,
For her hair is red, and her eyes are green.”
The bride came forth in a costly veil,
And nought of her face could Alfred see;
But his cheek grew yet more deadly pale,
And he fell down faltering on his knee.
“Pardon, pardon, my liege, my king !
But let me speak while yet I am free;
But were she fair as the flowers pf spring,
To thy daughter.l never may husband be.”
Lightning flashed from the king’s blue eye,
And thunder spoke in his angry tone:
“ Then, the death of a traitor thou shalt die !
And thy marriage peal shall be torture’s moan.”
“ I never feared to die, Sir King,
But my plighted faith I fear to break;
I never feared the grave’s deep rest,
But the pangs of conscience I fear to wake.”
Out then spake the king’s daughter,
And haughtily spoke she :
“If Sir Alfred is vowed to another love,
He shall never be claimed by me !
“ If Sir Alfred is vowed to another love—
Why, let the knight go free ;
Let him give his hand to his other love,
There are hundreds as good as he ! ”
With a careless touch she threw back her veil,
As if it by chance might be :
And who do you think was the king’s daughter 1
His own, his long-loved Rosalie !
First he stood like a marble stone,
And she like a lily sweet;
Then a sunny smile o’er his features shone,
And then he was at her feet.


Cf n Corner*
THE “AKONKAGYER” AND ’ER
PASSBNJERS.
Sum weeks ago, praps three or fore,
I took a sudden noshun,
To see my English frens wuns moar,
And kross the briny oshun.
I like Orstralyer, no its werth,
But wood no longer lag there;
So orf I went and took a birth
Abord the ATcorikagyer.
In goin rownd to Melburn town
We ad sum orful wether,
The ship kept pichin up and down
As if she wos a fether.
From Melburn then we saled away,
And, kosting by the shear,
We ankered in Saint Yinsun’s Bey,
Rite orf the Semmerfor.
At Adelaid our Kapten ses,
We’ll start now for the Looin ;
And this we rownded in fore days,
Wich wosn’t long a-dooin.
Sum ladies wos so orful sik,
It set my stummik ’eavin;
They koodn’t not a mossel pik
Till they the South wos leavin.
Our hossifers is orful swells,
With gold on lais and buttons,
They tog for dinner, that’s two bels,
The time that soots the gluttons.
We’ve other navel men abowt
The ship, if you shood serch ’er;
There’s Carey, oo’s so jolly stowt,
Besides Leftenant Archer.
Of Parsons we ’ave two on bord,
To ’elp us on to glory; j
The wun’s a Mason, on my word,
The other e’s a Story.
Then Rigby’s ere, a lanky kove,
Mustarcher’d, and with glarses;
And ladies, too, for those oo luv
Flertashun with the larses.
We’ve babies, oh, and wen they squeels
At nite it’s werry orrid ;
Their misses in the kuddy meels,
Altho’ their births is forrard.
With blew books, pens, and paper owt,
Judge Bathgate sits a stooin;
And Walker orfen tries to spowt
Bout wot the spirits dooin.
We’ve lots of singin koves abowt,
Ross, Bohrsmann, Cockburn, Allan ;
And don’t they owl and borl and showt,
And so does yung Buchanan.
I’ll say no moar, at leest not now,
Lest I your pashuns vex ;
My ortergraf will tell as ow
I wrote this Pleesman X.
TO GLOB, M.A.
Lady, very fair are you,
And your eyes are very blue,
And your hose.
Your noble brow is like the snow,
And the various things you know
Goodness knows!
The sweet rose-flush on your cheek,
And your Algebra and Greek,'
Perfect are!
And that loving lustrous eye
Recognises in the sky
Every star.
If by some arrangement dual,
I were Adams mixt with Whewell,
Then, some day,
Might I as suitor boldly come
To so fair an Artium
Magistra.


SALTATOR [SALT(I)'ATB'ER] AND
THE PUNIS (H)-ME(A)NT.
ist Yersb [sentimental).
The swift Aconcagua is bound to go,
The waves Affleck with hoary foam;
Like arrows from the Archer's bow,
In All[ie)an strife, the winds do roam.
2D Verse [after Ingoldsby).
Now list to this Storie, not mentioned in
Maury,
As it was related to me;
Though from North of the Foray, don’t think
me too borey,
Care y[e) for a tale of the sea ?
3D Verse.
On board, a traveller at the Bathgate bare,
Moody and Moon[y) was he;
With a Duke- ly air and a Scott-ish stare
He Walke[r)- d him too and frae.
4th Verse.
“ Too late ! too late ! ” the bathman cried,
“ ’Tis after eight; most noble mate,
A bath you’ll be denied,
Or I shall lose my rate.”
sth Verse,
With a Masonic air and Jacobite glare
He turned him round and said :
“ Oh, I feel, I feel like a great big bear,
A bear with a sore, sore head.”
6th Verse.
Then he of the towels aboard this bark,
A little advice gave he:
“ The early lark from bed does hark,
His pattern you’ll take surelie.”
7TH Verse.
So with dejected glide and dumpy strife,
He with the certain ( Sutton) air,
With un-a Lloyd pride and body so dried,
He hie’d him to his lair.
Moral.
In house, ship, camp, or hall,
Rules as strict as these there he,
Or else we all are sure to fall
To habits without industrie.
Printer’s Devil.
A LAMENT.-FROM A SYDNEYITE.
When first I flew to my sweet love,
A thousand miles seemed one;
What matter if the waves were wild,
Within me shone the sun.
What matter if the waves were wild,
And white the cold sea’s crest,
If I might reach where summer smiled
The haven her breast.
But now that far from her I go,
Light of my lonely dreams,
Since every step is sad and slow,
One mile a thousand seems.
But having thy ring before my gaze,
Though a thousand miles away,
The sun will lend her gladdening rays,
Cheering me onwards day by day.
Nautical Ecprt
To the Editors.
Gentlemen, —We have been able to con-
gratulate ourselves hitherto on the remarkable
absence of rain during our present voyage. The
accompanying table is intended to give some
idea of our movements :
TO MELBOURNE.
Winds. Courses. £ ist - v Lat Long. Temp.
Run. Noon. Noon. Noon.
W. Various 271 37-52 8. 149-24 E. 56
N.W. „ 247 38-36 145'1 50
July 6
» 7


ADELAIDE
the north-east all the year round, and during the
summer months, south of Ras-abu-deraji, there
is rarely a lull. As in the Gulf of Aden, in
August, land breezes of the same unpleasant
nature are felt.
144-10 E.
139-39
138-26
b ,
87-39 S.
37-18
July 12
» 13
N.W.
N.W.
N.N.W.
Various
FROM
ADELAIDE
SUEZ.
In the Gulf of Suez a hazy horizon is a sure
sign of a breeze, also if the tops of Mounts Tor
and Sinai, where the Israelites crossed over, be
slightly obscured by a light mist, it is a sure indi-
cation of a coming breeze; but smooth water and
fine weather is met with as a general rule, though
in August long calms and gentle zephyrs may be
expected; too much attention in avoiding the
sun’s rays cannot be paid whilst passing through
these warm regions. Jack Ropeyarn.
35-28 S.
35-33
136-42 E
131-2
July 17
„ 18
Various
S. 89 W.
S. 88 W.
E.S.B.
Various
N. 49 W.
N. 51 W.
N. 50 W.
N. 61 W.
N. 50 W.
N. 51 W.
N. 50 W.
N. 54 W.
N. 50 W.
N. 52 W.
N. 54 W.
S.E.
E.N.E,
Variable
s.e!s.
s.
Calm
~ 31
Aug. 1
4462—T0tal Distance run from Adelaide.
Jack
Ropeyarn.
O&VS anti
prospective flEeatfjer,
Message from Abroad. —lt is said that an
Attache of the embassy from the Court of
Neptune has been making inquiry as to the
number of trespassers on board who have not as
yet paid their respects to his Sea-green Majesty,
and that a list of names has been made out.
The Gulf of Aden in August.
Strong westerly and south-westerly winds pre-
vail ; in the evening after wind dies away, heavy
land squalls accompanied with sand and dust.
There is always a long and heavy swell along
the Arabian coast during this month.
“ Old Clo’ ! ” —Ladies and gentlemen have
now cast otf their ordinary garments and taken
to lighter wear; —a famous chance for any one
who will give the highest price for old clothes.
The land squalls are experienced from mid-
night to daybreak, and their severest force lasts
about one hour, followed by a calm; these
squalls are always very oppressive and disagree-
able.
teeojjttanfca*
The Red Sea.
The heat that is experienced by travellers
through this sea is, with the exception of the
Persian Gulf, the hottest in the world, for in
the present month the thermometer rises to
105° in the shade.
BURIED CITIES.
Cease, tyrant, cease to oppress me,
Your threats can no longer appal;
My ransom I ask not, nor deign I
One tear to shed over my pall.
Hurricanes and heavy storms are almost un-
known to this sea, but fresh gales and main-top-
gallant-sail breezes often occur between Suez and
Jiddah, the most prevailing winds being from
My streets are empty; remember, however,
my past glory.


ENIGMA.
Let us look more closely at it,
’Tis a very ugly word;
One that must make us shudder
Whenever it is heard.
It is not always wicked,
Yet ever must he had;
And tells of sin and suffering,
Enough to make one sad.
Let’s see if we can’t mind it—
’Tis possible we may,
If only we divide it
In some new-fashioned way.
They say it is a compound word,
And that is very true;
And then they decompound it—
Which of course they’re free to do.
But why, of the twelve letters,
Do they take but the first three,
And leave the nine remaining
As bad as they can be 1
Suppose, instead of three and nine,
We make it four and eight,
You’ll say ’twill make no difference,
At least none very great.
But only see the consequence,
’Tis all that need be done,
To turn this mass of madness
To unmitigated fun.
It clears off swords and pistols,
Prescriptions, bowie knives,
And all those horrid instruments
By which men lose their lives.
Now Nature’s voice no more is drowned,
Again she will be heard ;
The ringing sound of merriment
Compressed within this word.
Yes, four and eight’s the way, my friends,
Let this he yours and mine,
Though tigers, Turks, and termagants,
Rejoice in three and nine.
Lord Macaulay.
CONUNDRUM.
What is the difference between a lady’s sum-
mer attire worn in winter, and a tooth that has
lately been extracted ?
PUN-lENDA.
Sirs, —For the last two weeks I have heard
nothing talked of more than the Red Sea. The
air is mfolent with remarks on this seeming
dreadful sea. I have read very little about it,
some people I see red from discussing this awful
portion of the mighty deep. This sea has one
redeeming quality, for it dried up when told to
(which is more than many people will do), to
let a seasoned lot of Israelites go over dry-footed.
No doubt we shall all be reduced to skeletons ;
or I should not have been so ready to let the
secret out. —Yours, Jack Eaves.
INFORMATION REQUIRED.
A young man on taking up the Bill of Fare
this morning at breakfast, observed that amongst
the viands for his gullibility there was one
termed “ Tomatoed Steak.” He would like to
know if one of the bullocks has been led
“To (a) Martyred Stake.” The young inquirer
has not since been heard of, and it is supposed
that sudden death has put an end to his (and
others’) sufferings.


gtofterttsements*
FOR SALE.
A BOX containing one dozen Superior Linen-
faced Paper Collars, Second-hand. As
these articles have been used one side, turned
inside out, and worn, and then india-rubbered
before their final use, they will be sold cheap
as a bargain without reserve. —Apply at the
Dust-bin.
A SECOND-HAND Silk Umbrella, rather
I*- dilapidated, warranted to let the rain in,
but might easily be utilised as a walking stick.
No reasonable offer refused,—Apply, office of
this paper.
LOST AND FOUND.
f OST, on the poop, a Heart.—Finder please
" apply, Cabin, No. 1000.
Amusements*
Under the Patronage of Commander Conlan and the Officers of S.S. “ Aconcagua .”
THE /cCOpCAGUA DRAMATIC AND OfERATIC ©OMfANY
Beg to announce that their First Appearance will take place on
MONDAY, 4th AUGUST, 1879.
On which occasion will be given a Selection of Songs and Glees by the
“ACONCAGUA MELLIFLUOUS WARBLERS.”
(Their First Appearance.)
To be followed by the Screaming Farce !
MY DRESS BOOTS.
The following tremendous array of Talent has been expressly engaged regardless of expense :
Mr. Marmaduke Mivins, Signor Georgio Allani.
(A Gentleman of a Bilious Temperament.) (From Theatre Royal, Timbuctoo.)
Mr. Tamberlik Brown, Signor Samuelo Rigboni.
(Attached to Music and his Mustachios.) (From Common Garden Theatre.)
Bob, Mr. Bayly Cockburn.
(A Waiter on Providence.) (Renowned for his Tragic Perfor-
mances at the Old Bailey.)
Mrs. Mivins, Lieut. Herbert Archer.
(A Strong-minded Female with majestic (h)air.) (Of the Queen's Navee.)
Cblbstina, Madame Rose Moodbb,
(A lackadaisical young Lady strongly attached to Hims (Hymns).) (No connection with Moody ASankey.)
Jemima Ann, Mdlle. Marie Renoldi.
(A Slavey with a strong Matrimonial turn.) (From Drury Lane or any other lane.)
Landlord, Servants, Waiters, &c., by their Cousins, their Sisters, and their Aunts.
Musical Mis-director and Stage Mis-manager Signor Georgio Allani.
Hatches open at 7 o’clock. Concert to commence at 8 p.m.
Prices of Admission —American Chairs, Camp Stools, and Lockers, Free. Children, Half-Price.
Boats can he ordered for 10 o’clock a.m.


Clje Aconcagua Cunes.
AUGUST 9, 1879.
NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
(1.) Writers of communications for the “Times” will
please to give their names with their articles, not
necessarily for publication, but as a guarantee of
good faith.
(2.) No depreciating articles can be admitted. It is
the desire of this office to speak the best of every
one. We may as well state the simple facts.
We have just commenced; our funds are low;
we cannot afford to make an enemy, nor to lose a
subscriber.
TTAPPILY, in spite of the miserable forebod-
ings of Jack Ropeyarn, in our last issue, as
to the long and oppressive swells, and the land
squalls, so intensely disagreeable, that we should
experience in the Gulf of Aden, we have sailed
through it and experienced none. Tester morn-
ing we faced the entrance of the Red Sea, and,
instead of a temperature in the shade at 105°
and a heavy lull, we have had a breeze blowing
cold from the African shore. The gentlemen com-
plained that the water in their morning bath was
chill, while the ladies positively suggested that
theirs had been iced for their cooling and their
comfort. We may well lift our hearts in thank-
ful gratitude for the goodness and the mercy
that have followed us. So far, our voyage has
been one of a hundred. From Adelaide we have
made a distance of 6200 miles, and have not
been delayed either by storm or misfortune.
Through the Gidjoh of Aden we have sailed, and
have not been GwgulpliQd in blanket of mist nor
in tropical torrent. On the Red Sea we have
entered and not yet reddened before threatening
storm nor under blazing heat. But stopping
short in this hideous course of lest tread-
ing too closely in the gate of a notorious dignitary
on board, we expose ourselves to some coarse
perhaps even an application of the
iced shower hath , we proceed. Here we are
entering, many of us for the first time, on the
navigation of a sea whose coasts and waters have
been the scenes of the grandest and most influen-
tial movements of the ancient world. Here, on
our right, stretches out the long shore line of
Arabia, Araby the blessed, Araby the rocky.
Here, near us, lies the city of Mocha; here,
further on, is Mecca—the holy shrine of pilgrim-
age for the last thousand years to millions; here
the great iconoclastic prophet was born, and lived
and taught, and founded a faith, and left a sacred
Book that is still cherished as the Bible of a
great portion of the human race; from here issued
the force that so long contested the possession of
the “Holy City,” that subjugated the second
Rome, and forced their victorious marches into
the heart of Spain; here, to this day, the patient
camel stoops to its burden, and caravans traverse
the desert wastes. And further on, closing and
frowning down on its burning tracts, will soon
be seen by us the Mount from whose quaking
summit spoke the voice of God to man ;—“ I am
the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out
of the land of Egypt and from the house of bond-
age. Thou shalt have no other god before me.”
Great sights on that side and moving strong
emotions! On the left, though it does not
touch the shore, lies Abyssinia; interesting to
some from their early recollections of Samuel
Johnson’s one didactic tale; to all from the recent
exciting campaign and the heroism of our English
soldiers. Nubia comes next—a land still almost
unexplored; then Egypt—the land of the Nile,
of the Sphynx, of the Pyramids, of the Pharaohs,
of Israel’s captivity and deliverance, of Haroun-
al-Raschid and the “ Arabian Nights,” which, in
the judgment of many of us, no nights have since
come up to; of the grandest engineering achieve


ment of the present age; the land of a swindling
despot and an insolvent treasury, which may
soon compel England, or England and France, to
take and govern it as their own. And, as we
reach its northern limit, what imagination will
not be quickened into an awful solemnity by the
impression that we may he safely sailing over the
very spot where the sea was cleft by the almighty
arm of a guiding God, and that beneath us lie
buried the baffled hosts of a persecuting nation
with their king. May we all on board have
health and safety, and may the future of our
voyage prosper as the past has done.
Dailu Journal
Saturday, 2 d August . —The important event
of this day was, of course, our own publication—
the natalitia, the birthday of the “Aconcagua
Times.” We need scarcely announce the fact
that the office was besieged by an anxious crowd
from early dawn. Their curiosity for news was
satisfied immediately after breakfast, when our
first number got into the hands of our numerous
constituents, and, we need scarcely say, gave
immense satisfaction to the many contributors
whose articles were honoured by insertion, as
well as to a numerous body of interested readers
and appreciative audiences. We have reason to
believe that our next issue is expected with a
whetted appetite. A second event, but of minor
importance, was our meeting during the night
with the monsoon. It blew from the W.S.W.,
and, in the opinion of land folks, somewhat
lustily, with heavy rain, which, as all the port-
holes were open, beat into the cabins on the
windward side, and gave a caution to their inha-
bitants.
Sunday.— There was morning service on the
► O
poop, conducted by the Rev. Mr. Mason; a
service of song from Moody and Sankey’s Hymns
at 3 p.m. in the forecastle, and an address by the
Rev. Mr. Mason; evening service in the second-
class saloon, conducted by the Rev. Mr. Storie.
A good deal of quiet, undemonstrative sickness
prevailing through the ship.
Monday. —During the night some flying fish
leaped on board. The ship was stayed under
canvas for upwards of three hours—from 9 a.m.
till 12.20 p.m. —to pack the shaft, and in con-
sequence the distance done was small only
223 miles. The wind increased considerably
towards night, the awning was taken down, and
heavy rains fell. In consequence of this, the
theatrical manager and several members of his
troupe being otherwise engaged, the performance
advertised was unavoidably postponed.
Tuesday. —The night, as it advanced, became
quieter, and towards morning the weather was
beautiful, but the improvement was deceptive.
After breakfast the wind increased, and the sea
began to work a good deal. We had some diffi-
culty in keeping the perpendicular on deck ; and
things began to move uneasily in the saloon.
An occasional dash of water broke over the decks,
and created considerable amusement, especially
to those who were not drenched.
Wednesday. Began with severity. The
wind, which had kept the'ship in uneasy motion
at night, freshened in the morning from 6 to 8
into something like half a gale, and, while the
canvas was being taken in to allow the ship to
make its proper course, the foresail split up.
The wind continued high, if not increasing, till
we sighted land. This we did about twenty
minutes to four o’clock. It looked a bold moun-
tainous range, rising direct from the sea, and
apparently about 12 or 15 miles off. This was
the Nogal Land, a portion of the country of
the Somauli. At 5 o’clock the ship was passing
Cape Guardafui, with its three projecting and
pointed heads. The country looked desolate,


treeless, and uninhabited, composed of rocks of
soft shale and sandstone, with one or two downs
of barren sand sloping into the sea. But, if the
day began with severity, it ended deliciously.
So soon as we got under shelter of land, the
wind abated, the sea fell, malaria disappeared,
and passengers—male and female —came crowd-
ing to the deck. We are now within the Gulf
of Aden. Later in the evening we sighted a
steamer, supposed to he the steamer conveying
the fortnightly Bombay mails. Shall we pass
her 1 We did pass her. She was not the Bom-
bay mail.
Thursday. The day beautiful, calm and
mild. A number of dead locusts in the sea
passing the ship. One living was caught on
hoard; three inches long; colour reddish; a
voracious mouth; powerful limbs; long and
beautifully marked wings. The day was one of
excitement in expectation of the evening’s amuse-
ment. This came off —Concert and Farce—
under distinguished patronage, and proved a com-
plete success. But, as we had a special reporter
from the office present, we leave it to him to
furnish the particulars in full.
Friday. —This morning began early with some
anxiety to the sleeping partners. Soon after
midnight the screw stopped; then occasional
thumpings were heard and felt, as if the steam-
hammer were performing some awful repairs;
then, as some of us were putting on our slippers
to find the meaning of the catastrophe, the ship
began moving at a snail’s pace. This lasted for
about three hours and a half. The explanation
wo had was a relief. The ship had made its
distance, and Captain Conlan slowed her in the
foggy morning till daylight might reveal her
hearings. To us between six and seven o’clock
there was a glorious sight—the great rock of
Aden rising majestically from the sea. It seemed
one vast mass of basalt, and was followed by a
succession of grand picturesque rocks and moun-
tains, all apparently volcanic, and in some the
basalt rising into sharp columnar points. Here
we saw a large steamer making at first apparently
for the same course as ourselves, but she seemed
to turn suddenly round and sail hack. So we
lost a race! In face of all the miserable fore-
bodings, this morning was positively cold. The
bathers declare that the water was chill, as if it
had been iced. The wind and heat increased
perceptibly towards the afternoon. About 4 p.m.
all passengers were on deck. We were then
entering the straits of Bah-el-Mandeb. On our
right towered two rocky islands—the first having
four rocky summits, the second, Perin—a long
stretch of hill and shoal, sinking here and there
into sandy hays. On this (at the nearest end)
stood out conspicuous the lighthouse with its
signal staff, round it a pile of stone building that
looked like a fortification; on the middle a second
military building with a range of barracks. The
island is in the British possession. Here there
are two channels—the one between the two
islands, the other between the island of Perin
and the mainland. The ship took this second.
As we were steaming through it we saw a large
flock of sea-birds busy at dinner. Some of our
passengers were no doubt surprised to find that
the red- sea gulls are in reality not red, but very
like other gulls, perhaps of a little darker grey.
At 6 o’clock we cast anchor. The reason, we
understand, was that there is a coral reef some
60 miles off, and that it would be unsafe to
attempt to pass except in daylight. We remain
therefore at anchor until 2 a,m.
Incidents of tfje SEeeft*
On Thursday last “ The Aconcagua Musical and
Dramatic Company ” gave their first performance,
under the patronage of Captain Conlan and the
officers of the vessel. Our worthy skipper had
in the kindest manner afforded every facility;


and Mr. Dixon, chief officer, personally interested
himself in fitting up a stage on deck, with the
aid of flags, canvas, &c. The second-class saloon
passengers, and also the editors and reporters of
the “ Aconcagua Times,” were specially invited,
and at eight o’clock all available space for the
spectators was filled to overflowing. On the
raising (or rather we should say the withdrawing)
of the curtain, the interior of the stage was
exposed, with the various performers of the
musical part of the programme in full view.
The concert then commenced by the rendering
of selections from Offenbach’s Opera Bouffe
“Genevieve de Brabant,” on the piano. Mr,
C. Bohrsmann, the pianist, acquitted himself in
this, and in accompanying the songs (which he
did almost entirely), in a tasteful and efficient
manner. The glee, “Hail, Smiling Morn,” by
Spofforth, was then sung by a number of ladies
and gentlemen, designated in the bills as the
“Aconcagua Mellifluous Warblers.” This and
the other glee, sung later on in the evening, “ All
Among the Barley,” were both rendered very
effectively, and received with much favour. The
first song on the programme, “ Still I love thee,”
introduced Mr. Buchanan to the audience. This
is one of the many sweet Christy Minstrel
melodies, and was very fairly sung, and the
effect was brightened by a chorus well rendered
by the same ladies and gentlemen who had pre-
viously sung in the glee. A pretty effect was
introduced by repeating the last chorus pianis-
simo. Miss Reynolds then sang to her own
accompaniment Sullivan’s “ Once Again,” and on
the audience demanding an encore, she treated
them to a beautiful song by Barri, called “A
Golden Dream.” This young lady was most
warmly received. After the glee, “ All Among
the Barley,” came a new and spirited hunting
song, “ Drink, Puppy, Drink,” capitally sung by
Mr. Dixon, the chief officer. The glee party
trotted out the lively chorus, and a tremendous
encore ensued; in response to which Mr. Dixon
sang another new, quaint, and effective song,
“Twickenham Ferry.” Last, but not least,
Claribel’s well-known song, “We’d better bide
a wee,” was undertaken by Mrs. Rigby. This
lady’s voice possesses the true musical ring, and
she sings with very great feeling. Her song was
so beautifully rendered as to call forth a unani-
mous encore, to which she responded by singing
another favourite song, “ Thy Face,” by Marriott,
which was given with great grace and expres-
sion. Yilbre’s “ Heavenward March,” performed
on the piano by Mr. Bohrsmann, brought the
concert portion to a close. Mr. Allan conducted
the glees and directed. The whole passed off
most successfully. The only drawbacks arose
from the difficulty of making the voices tell at a
distance, on account of the absorbent qualities of
the stage in which the concert was given, and
from the extreme heat of the weather, which
rendered the exertions of the fair vocalists so
much more trying.
MY DRESS BOOTS.
THE PLOT.
The labyrinth of this plot is here explained to
those who had the misfortune to fail to hear any
of those pungent witticisms that fell from the
actors’ and impromptu speakers’ lips, or who were
too far behind amongst the “ gods.” The plot
is this:—
Mr. Mivins (Mr. Allan) having a sort of
cockney idea that he is a sportsman, sallies forth
to slay any game in the Midland Counties; but
fails to bag the wary “ Tom-tit,” and returns to
the inn occupied temporarily by his second wife
(Lieut. Archer, R.H.) and his romantic daughter,
Celestina (Mrs. Moody). On arriving at home,
foot-worn and hungry, he is surprised by the
operatic shakes of a stranger, Brown (Mr. Sam
Rigby), who is on his way to a concert at Leam-
ington, but his Dress Boots having been sur-
reptitiously purloined by Bob (Mr. Cockburn),
for the furtherance of a prearranged dance with
the object of his affections, Jemima Ann (Miss


Reynolds), and one of the dress boots being
dropped in the drawing-room in the struggle
between Mr. Mivins and Bob, is afterwards
claimed by Brown, who of course wants his boots
in order to be in time for his concert.
The series of explanations that are required
are as follows:
(i.) Mr, Mivins requires his breakfast, and
answers to his jealous inquiries respecting his
wife and daughter.
(2.) Bob, the dress boots that he has used
under cover of the dark.
(3.) Jemima, Mr. Mivins’ consent to the
sudden offer of marriage from Bob.
(4.) Mrs. Mivins, a bottle of the Instantaneous
Hair Dye, without which her raven capillary
organs would fail to hold Mr. Mivins within her
thrall, and the invention of the dye is the
building up of Brown’s fortune.
(5.) Brown, a haircutter by trade, but an
air enchanter daily, and mighty for his own and
the public good.
(6.) Celestina, a romantic sensational “ Miss ”
fresh from school, who having, unknown to
Brown, formed a hidden attachment to him,
betrays her emotion.
After the plot is cleared Brown proposes to
Celestina and is accepted by the father.
Jemima and Bob have also appeared to accept
the fact that it is as cheap for two to live
together in lonely matrimonial company as apart.
Mr. Brown, who is rather of the money-
grubbing kind, for his own convenience marries
Celestina, and Mr. Mivins once more embraces
the full-blown charms of his wife.
After an interval of fifteen minutes the
curtain was lifted to the performance of that
farce now known as “My Dress Boots.” Mr.
Marmaduke Mivins (Mr. Allan) had the trying
task of breaking the ice of the piece, as it were,
by being the only occupant of the stage at the
commencement; but he acquitted himself in this
and throughout right well, and gained the well-
merited applause of the audience. The next
character to appear was Bob (Mr. Cockburn) as a
waiter; his costume and delivery were good, and
he evidently possesses dramatic talent.
On Bob’s and Mr. Mivins withdrawal from
the stage, the boards were then trodden by Mr.
Mivins other half, Mrs. Mivins (Lieut. Archer,
R.H.). This lady was evidently of the strong-
minded persuasion; her get-up, hair, and figure
caused much merriment, and enhanced the fun
of the piece considerably.
Mrs. Mivins’ amiable and gushing daughter,
Celestina (Mrs. Moody), then appeared, most
appropriately dressed, and sustained her part of
the romantic, love-stricken young lady capitally.
Their servant, Jemima Ann (Miss Reynolds),
was performed with the utmost dclat, and the
rounds of applause showed how well the audience
appreciated the splendid acting of this young
lady; and it is to be hoped that this rising star
will attain a higher altitude that will yet dazzle
us by her rays. The last and indeed most
eminent character of Mr. Brown (Mr. Sam
Rigby) was undertaken with genuine warmth,
although this gentleman had been most indis-
posed by the heat; yet, sooner than see the
whole fabric fall to the ground, he pluckily, like
knight of old, determined to do or die.
However, he did and dyed without becoming
a sacrificial corpse (as Mr. Mantilini has it), and
kept the audience in roars of laughter from his
entry to his exit. Speeches of approbation were
made and responded to by Captain Conlan,
Messrs. Wright, ‘Bathgate, and Allan. The
impromptu speech of our witty judge, with its
teeming puns, caused endless laughter; and after
a most excellent speech from Mr. Allan, the
whole proceedings were brought to a termination
by cheers for our genial commander, and the
National Anthem.


&iuct(otica*
A TWEEDSIDB STORY.
(Never before published.)
A country surgeon has a hard life of it, and
often for very little return. Country people are
busy during the day and the horses are occupied,
hut at night when they watch over an invalid they
are apt to get afraid, and then off goes man and
horse for the doctor, Avho is roused out of his
bed to face all weathers. Dr. W., of St. Honan’s,
was one of the best of his kind, always ready,
willing, and patient. He had, according to his
own account, some marvellous adventures in his
midnight rides, and he told his stories about
them so often, he came to believe them himself.
One of them is worth repeating. He said he
had been sent for one stormy night to go across
the river to the neighbouring parish of Traquair.
He put on his heavy topcoat, which had capacious
side-pockets. When he came to the ford the
river was in a heavy flood. The doctor’s huma-
nity got the better of his caution, and in he and
his stout galloway plunged. To use his own
words, “Well, sirs,'when we got to mid-stream,
Maggie was swimming, and at that moment I
received a great drive on my right side from
something in the water. I lost my balance in
the saddle, and without doubt would have been
swept away and drowned, but at that instant I
received another drive on my left side which
knocked me into the saddle again, and after some
exertion Maggie and I got safely ashore on the
other side. Now, would you believe it, but it is
a fact, that when I came off the mare to shake
myself, I found a ten-pouiid salmon in each of
my greatcoat pockets ! ”
PHILOLOGY.
* A grammar-school rector in Scotland, upon
an examination-day, asked the geography class
what was the sea to the south of Europe.
Getting no answer, he asked what a lady did
when she adopted a child? A little urchin
shouted out, to the satisfaction of all present,
“ Made-it-her-ain-yin.”
“WE DID NOT CATCH THAT GOLD.”
[Continued from page 6.)
On arriving in Natal Bay we immediately
landed, and were conveyed by a short line of rail
to the sandy town of D’XJrban. Apartments were
secured, pending our getting our goods together
necessary for our trip into the interior. We had
an immense assortment of beads, buttons, knives,
and articles of clothing for bartering with the
Kaffirs, and were well armed with guns, revolvers,
and breech-loading rifles, to say nothing of mur-
derous-looking bowie-knives. The day at last
arrived for a start, so we sent our waggons on in
front and followed leisurely ourselves later on, on
horseback, I had purchased a nice strong little
cob, about 14 hands, which I called “Damply.”
It had only recently been broken in, and as I
was not an accomplished equestrian (for I rode
like a sack), I thought it prudent to let it have
its own way, anyhow for a bit, which resulted in
my being thrown off into a thorn bush. After
about four days’ tracking, Peitermaritzburg was
reached, the waggons occasionally breaking down
on the road. We encamped for a short time,
and I endeavoured to give my colleagues a change
of diet in the shape of pancakes, which proved
a failure, for I only turned out one the thickness
of the frying-pan, very sweet and greasy ; and
Avith difficulty I quieted my friends Avith the
apology of “ cooking under disadvantages,” for
it Avas by a logAvood fire and raining in buckets
full, and I had to keep my pipe alight as Avell.
From Maritzburg Ave proceeded for the Tugela
River, crossing the Umgeni, Mooi, and Bushman
Rivers. At Tugela I stayed a night and met a
friend (?), who managed to persuade me that my
saddle (a ucav one) Avas unsuitable for “Dumpty,”
Avhich led to an exchange for a very inferior


article, I caught my party up next morning
eighteen miles ahead, having dropt my purse on
the way. Crossing the “ Drakensberg ” range,
we arrived at “ Harrismith,” a wretched-looking
town in the Free State, the country being devoid
of trees and very stony. Leaving “ Harrismith,”
we found that all our horses had strayed, which
caused some delay; Potschefstroom was next
reached, a sweetly pretty little place, consisting
of a feAV white houses and surrounded by rivulets
and willow trees. The next place we made for
was the “ Mariko ” River, through the Transvaal
Republic, and then it was a case of farewell to
all civilisation, and we soon got into the Lion
Country, which necessitated our kraaling our
cattle and knee-haltering our horses. Leaving
“ Mariko ” River we proceeded for “ Machin’s ”
kraal, a powerful chief, who could bring 45,000
fighting men into the field. We received a
message to appear before “ his sable majesty,”
so we outspanned at his kraal after travelling
over the vilest roads, swarms of locusts being
met with. We sat down to breakfast off a tough
goat, and had hardly commenced when the king
appeared himself, waddling along, and attended
by a large suite of the dirtiest-looking Kaffirs,
who sat down cobbler fashion round our table.
Need I say, a little toilet vinegar would have
been acceptable 1 “ Machin ” did not seem at all
at sea, for he quietly, without being asked, sat
down at our table and helped himself, and he
had indeed a terrible appetite; chop after chop
disappeared, and, like Dickens’ Oliver Twist, he
had the impertinence to ask for more. The king
then suggested that some liquor would not be
amiss, so we made him a present of a bottle of
gin, with which he was delighted. We were
then politely told that each of us must pay E 1
in gold as a fee for entering on his territory. Of
course we had to comply; but this was not all,
—the greedy monarch wanted a present; ho de-
manded one of our guns, which we could not, or
rather would not, part with; we, however, quieted
him by giving him a revolver, but not till we
had shown him its deadly qualities. A knife
and a shirt were also supplied him at his own
request; he afterwards showed his gratitude by
presenting us with a goat, and also an elephant’s
tusk (value about El) \ the former he came to
help to eat, and the latter he endeavoured to take
away again. At last we got away from our
savage host and shaped our course for the
“ Malapi.” On leaving, we found that one of
our oxen had been stolen, and had actually been
driven some miles away, and we recovered it only
by paying a fine—evidently another considerate
act of the Kaffir chief. We were, on the whole,
dreadfully unfortunate with our cattle, for several
died of the lung disease as well as from other
causes, and over a dozen took to their heels one
fine night and bolted away, either frightened by
lions or not satisfied with their position. We
also lost nearly all our horses, “ Dumpty ” being
one of the first victims to lung disease. It is
most prevalent in parts of South Africa, and,
generally terminates fatally. After a journey of
upwards of three months, in which we encountered
many mishaps, such as waggons breaking down,
tyres flying off, and other casualties, we arrived
at the “ Diggings.”
(To he continued.)
poetic Extracts*
PETITION OF THE LETTER H.
Whereas by you I have been driven
From house, from home, from hope, from heaven,
And used, without one just pretence,
With arrogance and insolence,
And placed by your most learned society
In evil, anguish, and anxiety:
I hereby claim full restitution,
And beg you’ll mend your elocution.
Reply.
Whereas we’ve rescued you, ingrate,
From hell, from horror, and from hate ,


From heart-ache, horse-pond, and from halter,
And consecrated yon in altar,
And placed you where you ne’er should he,
In honour and in honesty:
We think you need no restitution,
And will not change our elocution.
t poet's Corner*
AS VIRGIN SNOW ON MOUNTAIN
PEAK.
0 Nellie dear, sweet sister mine !
Oft in remembrance keep
One whose love for thee was pure
As virgin snow on mountain peak.
And when your heart has formed new ties
Midst England’s happy homes,
Oh, keep one little chord of love
For him who on the deep still roams.
But should the cares and strifes of life
Thy gentle form oppress,
Oh, then recall the loving words
Of hearts that love no less.
And should it be your happy lot
To find life’s pleasures full,
Oh, don’t forget in your joyous times
Dear friends you’ve left in other climes.
RAVINGS OF ONE TURNED MAD
BY THE LENGTH OF THE
“ACONCAGUA’S” TRIP.
In aftertimes ’twill come to pass,
That is, if it don’t prove a farce,
That, as through this wild waste there strays
A ship that might have missed her stays
(Not those by which we know young maids
To Nature’s graces give such aids),
She’ll find, fixed fast unto a mast,
The records of this gloomy past.
I first to you these records give,
That you may pass them through a sieve,
And thus their dismal truth will ’pear
As light of diamond pure and clear.
From Australia’s sunny land we’ve gone,
On us a tropic sun has shone;
That sun has in much mischief been,
As follows will be seen.
’Mong other things it has, I fear,
Brought a Marsh unto a Pool too near;
In fact, there is a JSos-in now,
That makes two safe on the ’Cagua’s bow.
But is this not a reason weak
Why an Ash-horn in a wood should speak 1
The sun, whose heat I did Allot
To hatching of some other plot,
On its own master turned at last,
And smote him with a fiery blast;
But that did not stop a shattered barque,
Rig-hy a man from Noah’s ark,
From beating us on our homeward way
By just a year and half a day.
That will show you how we went
When on a rapid passage bent.
“ Five to one ! could Rowe as fast; ”
Exasperate, cries Jones at last.
The Keel-lies, on the ocean rocked,
That Shield by Ocean’s waves is mocked;
Side-all with me who do not mind,
For she will Buck-anon ye’ll find;
And so ’twas understood from Shand.
When, lo ! upon our bow a strand, ,
“ Tish-a-wood,” a son of Judah cries,
On its calm shore a Ray-r Her dies.
Says Con-land, “On shore*we see,
Build there a house for ye and me.”
A Mason then came to the brunt,
And built a house with Storied front.
So thus upon that island free
There’s still a home safe from the sea.
Should on these lines a jury sit
By the Bath-gate to post a writ,


I hope that Archer will not shoot
An arrow sharp, straight at their root;
For if that the case should he,
I fear ’twould he the end of me,
And “ to kick the bucket,” I’d he free.
Ward, No. 800,000,000.
THE OLD, OLD TALE.
Decorously affectionate,
Impassioned, doubtless, but sedate,
They pace together
The quiet foot-worn deck,
Oblivious of storm and wreck,
’Mid sweet July weather.
Gravely gallant, demurely chaste,
They saunter, soberly embraced,
A pair of plovers;
Struck surely by that dreadful dart,
The “ dart ” that used to rhyme with heart,
In cypress covers.
Studying, incurious of the rod,
A volume of the period,
They take their pastime;
Hot much it matters what they read !
All books are manuals, at need,
In Cupid’s class-time.
It matters not! The work is Love’s,
The quill that Avrit it was a dove’s,
A gushing turtle’s.
The author, a most sweet young sage,
Effused about his every page
A scent of myrtles.
On that you see this couple here
Are battening, without any fear
Of indigestion.
He has a moment stopped their task,
And looks as if about to ask
A certain question.
The old, old tale ! “ Yes ”or“Ho ” ?
Is love to come 1 is life to go 1 —
The great Romancer
Has laid his plot so passing well,
That it is easy to foretell
The Lady’s answer.
To Cabin No, 1000.
THE INTERMEJET KONSERT.
Last week I dropt into the bag
A lot of lokal rimes,
And these wos kopid in our rag,
The “Akonkagyer Times,”
Fresh subjiks now I’ll try to seek
Of things wot rownd us pass;
We’ll take the konsert of last week,
Give by the second-klass.
The skipper nnd the first-klassers
Wos speshally invited;
Rcpawters, too, and hossifers,
All sed they’d be delited.
With flags and lamps our jolli tars
The kabin maid agio;
The third-klass look’d thru irun bars,
Kwite eeger for the sho.
Then fust Miss Marsh a toon did
Upon the old peanner,
Then men and wimmen sung aAvay
In different sawts 0’ manner.
Wun Mr. Wright, their grate M.C.,
Kaim out at ev’ry chanse,
Ballad or nigger minstrelsee
He up and down did danse.
Next Bertie sang, a reglar swell,
With wiskers like Dundreery,
His pipe is thin, but truth to tell,
His eerers didn’t weery.
A gent Avot ad a big red beerd
He dremt he wos a child;
His singin ain’t the best I’ve eerd,
The toon, tho, wosn’t spiled.


Date.
Winds.
Course.
Dist.
Run.
Lat.
Noon.
Long.
Noon.
Temp.
Noon.
Aug/2
Calms and
light W.G.
N. 54 W.
277
1-32 N.
65 26 E.
83
„ 3
S.W.G.
N. 56 W.
272
4-4
61-39
82
.. 4
S.W.G.
N. 54 W.
223
6'14
58 40
83
■. 5
S.W.G.
N. 54 W.
256
8'46
55-13
77
>. 6
S.W. &S.G.
N. 51 W.
235
1113
52-10
76
.. 7
W.G. & Var.
Various
276
12 21
47-46
87
,, 8
NN.W.G.
Various
209
12-28
44-13
76 to 87
Siddall and Cecil did full well,
anti (fHntis*
Miss Greville lowd sung she,
Miss Rayner did so sweetly tell
“We’d better bide a wee.”
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
Then Lees a komik song did sing
“ How happy!” exclaimed this child of air,
“ Are the holy spirits who wander there,
’Mid flowers that never shall fade or fall;
Tho’ mine are the gardens of earth and sea,
And the stars themselves have flowers for me,
One blossom of heaven outblooms them all.”
Abowt the trechrus oshun,
Wich peeple up and down did fling
With its unplesant moshun.
The kabin bein dreadful ot,
With many folks stuf’d up,
Ask me why this flower doth show
They kindly offer’d eech a tot
Of plesant klaret kup.
So yellow green, so sickly, too;
Ask me why the stalk is weak
The singin dun, the skipper rose
And bending, yet it doth not break.
And mooved a voat of thanks;
Then Bathgate stood upon ’is tose
To speek of Neptune’s pranks.
This little world,
This precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves us in the office of a wall,
Or as a moat defensive to a house,
But, ark ! the dinna bell is rung,
The time at wich we pecks ;
I’ll say no moar, my song is sung,
Against the envy of less happier lands,
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm !
The very sepulchres be tenantless
Yore’s truly,
Of their heroic dwellers : dost thou flow,
Old Tiber! through a marble wilderness 1
Plbesman X.
Rise, with thy yellow waves, and mantle her
distress.
Nautical Ecport*
A father cruel and a step-dame false,
A foolish suitor to a wedded lady
That hath her husband banished. Oh, that
husband,
FROM ADELAIDE TO SUEZ.
My supreme crown of grief; and those repeated
Yexations of it! Had I been stolen
As my two brothers, happy.
ANSWERS TO “ EXCOGITANDA.”
Enigma, by Macaulay :
Manslaughter —Man’s laughter.
Buried Cities :
The strong south-westerly winds had a depress-
ing effect on our passengers, the result of which
is apparent in our publication of this week.
i. Tyre. 2. Palmyra. 3. Dover.
Conundrum :
One is too thin , the other is tooth-out.
Jack Ropeyarn.


SCRAPS OP PUN.
Christy Minstrels. —Sambo: “I say, Pedro,
now that the Cap’n is not going for to go to
See-lon, but is making straight tracks for the
Red Sea, what tune should we play ? ” P. ;
“I’m blest if I know, Sambo; perhaps ‘Yankee
Doodle.’” S.: “You’re a doodle, Pedro.” P;
“Well, then, ‘All in the Downs.’” S.: “0
Pedro ! why should we be in the downs when
we’re beating P. and 0. into fixins ? ” P.; “ 0
Sambo! me’s got him. The tune we should play
is ‘ The Galle I left behind me!’ ”
Police Court. —We understand that Mr.
Engine, of the “Aconcagua,” was thoroughly
screwed last Monday, in fact, quite tight. Police-
man X. declines, however, to lay an information,
as he says Mr. Engine’s doings have been very
regular of late; and he expects that, from the
overhaul he has just got, there will be nothing
loose in his conduct in the future.
ORIGINAL RIDDLE.
Among the crew of compound words,
You’ll own I have a part;
My name in this is but in thirds,
I was designed by art.
At breakfast, dinner, tea, &c.,
Between the plates I make a stand;
A place at table is for me,
I’m ornamental though not grand.
And thus in these few lines I name
A thing in great request;
To gourmands known, though not to fame
So now don’t give it best.


Cfjc Aconcagua Ctmes.
AUGUST 23, 1879.
NOW that we are facing the Bay of Biscay,
and almost within sight of dear old Eng-
land once more, it is our pleasant duty to repeat
our congratulations, and it becomes our painful
duty to say to our fellow-passengers, Good-bye.
At their request we undertook the office which
we have endeavoured, under some difficulties, to
discharge—to give the daily run and bearings of
the ship; to chronicle daily events; to report
the amusements provided, the instructions at-
tempted, the religious services in which most
of us took part; and to provide a medium for
the effervescing fun and genius of the ship. If
the matter in our columns has not been brilliant,
our readers will please to lay a portion of the
blame on the trying weather, that has pressed
even the liveliest temperament into lassitude.
But such as it is, we believe that “ The Times ”
has brought us more together, has provided some-
thing to do, something to speak of, something to
help reminiscence; and if there has been some
free joking, and some lines of rollicking fun, we
are sure that it was all in the best good-nature,
as we know that it has all been taken in good
part. The voyage from first to last has been
one of unusual and unexpected comfort. The
parties in both saloons have enjoyed pleasant
social intercourse. There have been no disagree-
ments that led to unpleasant issues; the stewards
and stewardess have been most attentive to their
duties; the berths have been kept clean, well
aired, and fresh; our “careful” captain has
driven the ship hard and straight, and the engines
have worked assiduously. We have never shipped
a sea in this long voyage, and we are now likely
to touch the English shore, as was anticipated
from the first, on the fortieth day from leaving
Adelaide. All this is much to say. We may not
have seen many people, but we have sighted
many lands; and we have sighted none where
England has no possession, and Englishmen no
homes. We understand somewhat better the
geography of our empire, the marvellous com-
merce and the majestic power of our nation,
and we take home a deeper impression of the
dignity and responsibilities of a British man —
born to obey, but born to command. We part,
not as the strangers we first met, but with a
friendly interest in each other’s future, and with
the hope, if not to meet again, to hear at least
something of the welfare of all, with whom we
have now traversed nearly half a world.
The Editors.
©atlg Journal*
Saturday, 9 th August. —This morning we
were fairly within the Red Sea. The heat cer-
tainly was not yet unbearable. We lifted anchor
and steamed off about 2 a.m. About 10 a.m.
passed on the port side two bold and striking
rocks. They stood alone; blocks apparently of
sandstone and clay, pushed up from the bottom
by the same volcanic influence that has been at
work in old times through all this sea. Passed
during the day several other small islands that
seemed to be composed of sand and sandstone,
with occasional patches of a dark green scrub.
Sunday, 10 th August. — There was morning
service on the poop, conducted by the Rev. Mr.
Storie; a service of song on the forecastle in the
afternoon, and an evening service in the second-
class saloon, both conducted by the Rev. Mr.
Mason. During the forenoon we passed a steam-
ship bound from Pondicherry for Marseilles.
We do pass everything in front of us. For the
first time observed a reddish tinge in the water;


this may be caused by the reflected glow of an
ardent sun. But what has given rise to the
designation “ Eed Sea ” 1
In the evening about 8 o’clock the captain
startled us by having a fire ball thrown over-
board. The effect was startling ;we kept watch-
ing it for many minutes from the poop, as it
continued burning in our wake on the surface of
the water. The Pole-star and George’s Wain
have been now visible for some nights. Many
of the passengers were seen gazing at the con-
stellation ; some who had never seen it, others
who had not for ten or twenty years. A tent
was prepared for the ladies on deck.
Monday, 11th August. —The night had not
been unbearably hot; but the sun rose bright,
the sky without a cloud; and during the fore-
noon the heat increased severely, most of the
young men lying along the deck, under the boats,
on every sheltered and airy spot. Before noon,
however, a breeze commenced from the west;
and at lunch time, while we were all below, the
captain had the hose to play on the awning and
the deck; and the effect was a very refreshing
coolness. The day was monotonous throughout;
one sail seen in the morning; some floating sea-
weed ; a glimpse of distant land in the east.
We are now more than half way through the
Red Sea. Two of our passengers, a lady and
gentleman, have been suffering severely.
Tuesday, 12th August. —The night close and
sultry. About 6 a.m. a breeze from the east;
and about the same hour a lighthouse was seen
on what was understood to be a coral reef. The
forenoon still hot and close; at 12.30, awning
and deck drenched with water. At 3 o’clock a
hawk was seen perched on the stern flagstaff.
At 6 p.m. the-great range of the Egyptian moun-
tains came distinctly into view; a grand, bold,
but most sterile outline of country. Towards
sunset the land was of a strong red colour, as
well as the sky resting immediately on the high
lands—heavy lurid heat. Along this district were
the retreats of the old Egyptian monks and
eremites, Simon Stylites, St. Anthony, the
professed followers of St. Paul, and the Baptist,
&c., seeking in these awful solitudes an escape
from the dissolute society and contamination of
the professing members of the Christian Church
in the great cities of Africa, such as Alexandria,
Hippo, Carthage, Cyrene.
Wednesday, 13th August. —The early night
insufferably close, damp, muggy; no great pro-
spect of sleep; but towards morning a fresh, cool
breeze came from the east. The ship slowed;
we were sailing now within land on both sides.
About 5 a.m. saw what was believed to be the
summit of Mount Sinai; about 8 a.m. passed
lighthouse on Egyptian shore. Here both the
stretches of land and the hills seem masses of
sand and sandstone. During the afternoon
numbers of the Egyptian boats, named “ dhows,”
with their long yards and sloping sail, were seen
moving about. Reached Suez at 5 p.m. Here
the scene became animated. The inspecting
officers came off in a fine boat covered by a
handsome awning, manned by 13 men, and
towed to the ship by a small steam tug. After
this we were beset with nearly a dozen boats;
from these there came rushing up our com-
panion any number of men, some nearly naked,
some respectably dressed—with grapes, photo-
graphs, and other merchandise. The men of one
boat filled with splendid water melons got into
frightful convulsions and rhapsodies, because, as
our propeller moved a little, they were dragged
from their hold on us, and so could do no trade.
Some of us were disappointed too. Three or
four of these small merchants have remained on
board, and are doing a roaring trade in photos,
fezzes, cameos, Maltese lace, and other small
decorations. As we moved off into the canal,
saw in the distance a dromedary trotting very fast,
some rider on its back. Early in the night we
moored.


Thursday, 14 th August. —Early morning a
good deal disturbed by the unmooring of our
immense cables; while very soon we have to
moor again to let a steamer pass. The rule of
the canal is that the vessel which first arrives at
a station remains there till any ship under weigh
arrives and passes. There is a constant use of
the telegraph. The night had begun close and
hot; but towards morning the air became ab-
solutely cold. At half-past nine entered the
great Bitter Lake; and here we steamed nearly
full speed, while here a now steamer of Green’s
fleet, full of passengers for Australia, crossed us.
We had a near view, almost rubbing shoulders,
and we cheered each other lustily. About an
hour after we sailed past the steamer, which had
got into the canal before us at Suez; our pas-
sengers cheered lustily on passing her. At half-
past twelve again entered the canal proper. At
the point of entrance there was a pretty residence,
having a garden and shrubbery, fresh and green,
with a splendid show of ripe grapes. There was
a signal staff, and two officers standing on a
pontoon. Passed a small fishing station; two
or three small huts and two small boats. The
men were hanging about; two women peeped
curiously after us; but one man, naked all but
his head and loins, with three or four nearly
naked hoys, rushed alongside the ship for nearly
two miles, shouting out, “ White biscuit for
Johnny,” and picking up such bits and small
coins as were thrown out to them. In the
evening passed a working station on the canal,
at which forty or fifty men were employed wheel-
ing sand up the steep bank. They had not
much clothing to encumber them; but they
seemed powerful fellows, and were working with
a will. Six or eight camels were carrying away
the sand in baskets on their backs. These men,
we are told, get from 2 to 2\ francs a day.
They live on fish, bread of coarse bran, and
other provisions brought daily by a small steamer,
and at from 3d. to 6d. a day. A gentleman,
who has" resided ten years in Egypt, tells us
that the whole land is full of canals for irriga-
tion ; that every portion of its soil would produce
richly, but that the Government have been
exacting three bushels out of every four raised,
and so discouraged labour and filled the land
with beggary. There is a story told that, while
the canal was being made, the Viceroy was in-
vited to visit the works. Struck with the crowd
of men, ho inquired if all these men were his
subjects, and, on being told they were, he
ordered out a pair of cannon, fired two dis-
charges of grapeshot into the midst of the naked
men, covered the ground with some hundreds of
dead and mangled; and so demonstrated that
these poor wretches were Egyptian subjects, and
he the Heaven-anointed!
At Ismailia we changed pilots; these are
provided by the canal commissioners, and well
they may. Our ship pays canal dues to the
amount of Here the canal meets the
railway; here, too, is a palace of the Viceroy,
large, square, with twelve windows on each side.
Anchored again in the early evening. Here a
few of our passengers went ashore for a ramble;
they left the ship at seven, intending to return
on board at eight o’clock ; but they were kept
waiting for a boat till twenty minutes of ten,
shouting from the shore, and thought to be
a few noisy “Johnnies” begging for “white
biscuit.”
P.S. —The price of a good camel is about AlO-
- feed costs nothing; he browses on the rough,
prickly, green bush that grows in small patches
out of the sand.
Eriday, 15 th August. — This has been an
exciting day. Port Said was sighted from early
morning. The view of it from the canal is very
picturesque. We cast anchor close to the shore
shortly after nine o’clock, and the order was to
be on board again by 2 p.m. The passengers
were all on the alert. Boats from the shore
crowded to the ship’s side. We went in one
with an awning. They charged us 6d. each, the


regular thing being 3d. Soon as landed we
were beset by a crowd of boys, offering for sale
walking canes with mouthpiece and bowl for
smoking, beads, fans, shells, &c.; one man offer-
ing white poodles, which he affirmed to be
Maltese poodles. Lots of fellows offering to act
as guides; others with donkeys and a bit of
dirty stuffing on the back, pressing on us the
deliciousness of a trot through the streets. These
donkeys are rather handsome, smaller than ours,
but with thinner, cleaner legs, and they run well.
Our party escaped with small detriment. Two
small boys attached themselves to us, and we
walked under their escort through the chief
streets. Up the main business street, visiting
some of the chief shops and bazaars; purchasing
some Maltese lace, photos, and cigarettes; look-
ing into some of the music saloons, where, even
at that early hour, orchestras, chiefly composed of
women, were in full operation ; saw shampooing,
tinning, gambling, and were assailed by invita-
tions from almost every shop. We then made
for the Arabian quarter, which we found mean,
squalid, offensive. Saw the Mosque and then
the Greek Church, very much out of repair;
then into the Greek quarter, where was a row of
comfortable wooden houses, tiled, and closely
shuttered; then the Grand Hotel of the Nether-
lands, where we enjoyed a quiet and comfortable
lounge in the billiard-room; cool, delicious; we
had here some refreshment; drinking of the
water of the Nile, well iced; but we found it
not at all deteriorated by a mixture of good
claret. We passed in our peregrinations a large
engineering establishment, with a ship repairing
in its dock; and a gas factory. Some of the
signs struck us with amusement or surprise; on
one poor shop a sign pictorial or anti-hieroglyphic;
on another, information, in English, French, and
Italian, that it was a wine and spirit shop,
the Greek being oinojpneumatopoleion. Having
secured some melons and grapes, we were on
board again, with only small damage in the way
of “ backsheesh,” by one o’clock. Another party
from the ship fared badly. They fell into the
hands of a guide who, after leading them to this
shop and that of his own special partisans, and
showing them the few sights of the place, made
them disgorge 2 s. a head for his services, there being
seven of the party. This scoundrel had 14s. from
them for two hours’ work. The ship was cleared
by two o’clock. We were immediately under
way, and into the Mediterranean, and got rid
of our pilot at 3 p.m.
Saturday, x 6th August. Quiet; nothing
stirring; one fellow, a stowaway, has got on
board. He seems a strong, active fellow; an
Arab or Egyptian. Ho doubt the captain will
find work for him. Passengers lying all day
along the decks, suffering from the past day’s
heat, fatigue, and excitement.
Sunday, 17 th August. —Muster roll as usual
at 10.30. The captain present at the call, and
seemed a good deal excited. He spoke to the
men severely; said that the conduct of some of
them had been careless and bad; and that they
might depend on it, if this conduct was con-
tinued, he would punish. This was understood
to be aimed chiefly at some of the firemen—one
fellow was in irons. He came on board at Port
Said very drunk, bringing with him two bottles
of brandy. In his madness he leapt overboard,
and was rescued and shipped again by the crew
of a passing boat. There were the usual religious
services; morning on the poop, conducted by the
Rev. Mr. Mason; in the afternoon a service of
song, with an address by Mr. Mason; in the
evening, service in the second-class saloon, con-
ducted by the Kev. Mr. Storie. In these ser-
vices we were much indebted as usual to Messrs.
Bohrsmann and Siddall, who have always pre-
sided so efficiently at the harmonium. The men
were twice in the afternoon summoned by the
fire-bell to exercise with the hose and fire
extinguishers, and some of them strongly and
publicly rebuked.


Monday, 18 th August . — The night as warm
as in the Red Sea; the forenoon extremely
close; only two or three steamers and ships seen
in the distance. No land visible till about
11 p.m. ;we were abreast of Malta. Its lights
were sighted from the deck.
Tuesday, 19 th August. —Did a good run,
upwards of 300 miles; and between 8 and
9 a.m. were passing the small rocky island
of Santellaria, a penal settlement belonging
formerly to Sardinia. About 10 a.m. sighted
what we believed to be Cape Bon on the coast
of Africa. Two or three rocky islands were
passed by. Kept the African coast in sight;
and now we were in the highway of commerce,
as many as six or seven ships being within sight.
At three o’clock abreast the Cani Rock, with its
lighthouse.
Wednesday, 20 th August. Lost sight of
land; forenoon very sultry, no ships in sight.
Unmitigatedly dull. Expected things to brighten
in the evening, as a concert, with capital pro-
gramme, had been announced by our friends in
the second-class saloon. This hope was, how-
ever, marred and disappointed by the gathering
of a heavy fog. During dinner the fog-horn
sounded again and again with its dismal blasts.
We stopped for a time, and then for an hour went
on slowly. Happily the fog cleared off in the
course of an hour, and wo resumed our speed again.
Thursday, 21st August. —Moving on at full
speed. Began in the afternoon to sight or pass
a few sailing vessels and steamers; but between
two and three o’clock we sighted the grand
mountain range in the south of Spain, termi-
nating in what we belierved was Cape de Gata;
and here the sea became quite animated. Several
steamers were seen making along the shore, and
many ships full dressed in canvas. As many as
24 were counted at one time on the larboard
side. We are now within about 150 miles of
Gibraltar.
Friday, 22 d August. —Early this morning we
were all astir, for we expected to reach Gibraltar
before sunrise. Between three and four the two
lights—one steady from the rock, the revolving
on the African shore—both were visible ; and as
daylight began we had our view of this grand
fortress. Approaching from the east, you are
disappointed; but as we looked back, after
passing it, its terraced form and grand impor-
tance became clearly evident. The city lying
near its foot was seen shortly after; and we
steamed on, feeling the pride of Englishmen,
through these ancient gates of Hercules into the
ocean beyond. There has been a little wind, but
the sea wonderfully smooth; kept the Spanish
coast for a considerable time well in view; high
mountainous land. Between 10 and 11 p.m.
passed St. Vincent.
Saturday, 23d August. —Steamed on well
during the night, but met a fog between 6 and
7 a.m. Came then into the midst of a fleet of
small Portuguese fishing-boats—so or 60 visible
between us and the shore. Found at breakfast
time that we were steaming on towards the
shore, near the mouth of the Tagus. Here we
signalled, and then made off again. The land
rose in a bold, rocky eminence. No less than
three steamships of some size were here in view
between us and the shore. Sailed till twelve
along a low coast, dotted with towns and build-
ings; at 12.30 saw clearly in front five masses
of rock rising in the sea, one of them having a
lighthouse, about 8 or 10 miles from the land.
Sunday, 24th August. —A quiet day; under-
stood to have passed Cape Finisterre about 11
forenoon. No sight of land all day. Bay of


Biscay had been on its best behaviour. Sea
calm and smooth, little motion on the ship.
Monday, 25 th August. — About 4 p.m, we
passed the Isle of Ushant; here were two light-
houses—one high, painted black and white like
a steamer’s funnel; the other, towards the west,
much lower, and of white stone. At 8 o’clock
evening there was a concert in the saloon. A few
of the second-class passengers availed themselves
of the invitation, but the saloon was far from
being full. The performers were Mesdames
Mason, Rigby, Miss Reynolds, and Messrs.
Bohrsmann, Buchanan, and Ross. Mr. Allan
acted as conductor. At the close Mr, Bathgate
made a witty and telling speech, calling forth an
expression of gratification from the audience.
He was supported by a few Avords from Mr.
Wright. The concert ended with the National
Anthem.
Tuesday, 2 6th August. —This morning the
ship was early astir. We reached Plymouth
about 2.30 a.m. Here we delivered a mail,
and several of our passengers landed. We saAV
before leaving the lie of the city and the port,
the tAvo batteries, and the shipping. Steamed off
about half-past four, with a strong wind right
aft. We bowled along at the rate of nearly 16
knots; about luncheon time Avere passing the
Isle of Wight, the sea high, and the ship cer-
tainly rolling a good deal; but sailing vessels
Avere running Avith half their canvas, and small
steamers dipping as though they Avould plunge
under Avater. It is said that if Ave go on at this
rate we may be at Gravesend by 5 a.m. to-morroA\ r .
All the ladies below, only one or tAvo of us
Avalking the poop. Passed Beechy Head at
5.30 p.m., the lights at Hastings at 8 p.m. ; Avere
passing Dover about 9.30, the lights rising from
the city up on the hill very picturesque; the
tAvo electric lights blazing like two eyes of fire;
then the Goodwin lights, and so along the coast
till at 9 a.m. of Wednesday, the 27th August,
we entered again, through its richest and most
crowded gateway, our dear fatherland, thanking
our God with grateful hearts for His mercies,
His guidance, and His care.
Encttmtts of tfje
SECOND-CLASS SALOON CONCERT.
■ On Thursday night, the 21st of August, the
concert promised in the second-class saloon came
off, and Avith great The officers of the ship
and the saloon passengers having received special
invitations, the spacious cabin and passages lead-
ing to it Avere crowded. The programme, con-
taining twenty-one pieces, Avas Avell varied and
admirable. It began Avith a duet effectively
executed by the Misses Marsh and Greville.
Then came a glee, “ See our Oars,” in Avhich was
united all the musical talent of the saloon. Then
a solo, “ Strangers yet,” Avhich was well sung and
much applauded, by Mr. Cecil. After him came
Mr. Bertie in the song “Yesterday,” with his
clear, fine, but perhaps too modest voice. Next,
Miss Rayner gave us, in notes touching and sweet,
“Half-Mast High,” shoAving that her heart is
Avith the sailors. After her Mr. Arthur led off
the song “ Don’t Porget to Dream of Me,” and was
supported by a full and effective chorus. Miss
Greville sung, Avith much applause, “ Liquid
Gem,” and Mr. Wright’s first song this evening
Avas “ Thy Yoice is Near,” Avhich Ave need not say
Avas given Avith vigour and effect. But the gem,
undoubtedly, of this part of the programme Avas
the duet by Messrs. Cecil and Bertie, “ What
are the Wild Waves Saying?” except perhaps
that it concluded Avith a comic song, “ Ten
Minutes too Late,” which Mr. Lees gave Avith such
perfect gravity and such distinct articulation, that
the effect was irresistible, and an encore loudly
demanded, but, finally, this was not insisted on,
as Mr. Lees had to repeat, by special request, one


of his favourite songs later in the evening. After
an interval of ten minutes the entertainment was
resumed. Mr. Shiels now came to the piano and
played the “ Del-Cou Te,” from Norma, with such
exquisite touch and expression that he was rap-
turously received and an encore demanded; to
this he responded by giving us “ Home, Sweet
Home.” Mr. Arthur followed, and again in full
chorus, with the beautiful song, “Dreaming of
Home and Mother.” The second song of Miss
Greville was “ Truth in Absence,” and to this she
gave so much expression, by her clear voice and
distinct pronunciation, that she was obliged to
come back for another, singing now, very archly
and clearly,'the favourite song, “Winning the
Gloves,” We had then “ The Tar’s Farewell ” by
Mr. Cecil, and the entertainment was now diver-
sified by the recitation of a few passages from
Aytoun’s “Mary Queen of Scots” by Mr.
M‘DoualL We were then favoured by another
song from Miss Rayner, “ When Sparrows Build,”
a beautiful song, and nicely given. From this
scene of domestic peace we had a sudden rebound,
the grand battle-call, “ Scots wha ha’e,” given by
Mr. Wright with such manly vigour as to make
the blood beat, and nerve the arm to strike the
oppressor low. Mr. Bertie then sung finely and
tenderly “Eileen Alannah,” but he scarcely let
out his voice with sufficient vigour to fill the
room. And now came the piece that brought
down the house, a duet by Miss Greville and
Mr. Wright, “ Money Matters Serious,” in which
the singing and the acting was so serious, so
comic, and so clear, as to evoke a clamour of
applause; and in consequence the piece was in
part repeated. Mr. Lees, in his serio-comic
style, gave us then the song, “ He Always Came
Home to Tea; ” and, by special request, his melo-
dious objection to the “ Up and Down Motion
of the Unresting Ocean.” The concert terminated
about half-past ten with the National Anthem.
A pleasant evening, for which we all are, or ought
to be, grateful; and both singers and audience
must unite in gratefully recognising the efficient
assistance rendered during the whole evening by
Mr. Siddall at the piano.
SALOON CONCERT.
Last evening (Monday, 25th August) the first-
class passengers determined to celebrate the com-
pletion of the passage to the old country by a
final concert, to be given in their saloon. With
this object invitations were sent to and accepted
by the second-class, but the captain and officers
were prevented, by the calls of duty, from attend-
ing. A very excellent programme was gone
through, and the performance, with hardly any
exception, was really very good. Mr. Bohrsmann
gave as the opening piece selections from Trova-
tore, tastefully performed. During the evening
a number of glees were sung by ladies and
gentlemen in very good style, notably Steven-
son’s sparkling composition “ See our Oars,” and
Muller’s “May-Day,” a beautiful specimen of
that composer’s powers. Miss Reynolds sang
two songs, “ Don’t Forget Me ” and “ I Love my
Love,” and was heartily encored. Mrs, Rigby
also in her songs, “ Thy Voice is Near ” and
“ When Sparrows Build,” completely gained the
sympathy of the audience by the expression
with which they were rendered. Mr. Buchanan
contributed two sweet Christy Minstrel songs,
and Lieutenant Archer sang the well-known
“Nancy Lee,” to which a rattling chorus was
given, and also Blockley’s ballad “To-morrow.”
The duet “ Convent Bells ” was prettily rendered
by Mrs. Mason and Miss Reynolds, and another
duet, “ Friendship,” by Messrs. Ross and Buch-
anan, was equally well received. Mr. Allan,
who acted as conductor, then called upon the
whole audience to join them in singing “ Home,
Sweet Home ” and “ God Save the Queen,” as
being appropriate to the occasion, the old
country being only three or four hours’ distant.
This was heartily responded to, and brought a
highly successful entertainment to a close. At
the conclusion Mr. Bathgate rose, and, in a


humorous speech, expressed the gratification
these pleasant reunions in both saloons had
afforded, and moved a vote of thanks to Mr.
Allan and his coadjutors, which was seconded by
Mr. Wright, and carried by acclamation. In the
course of his remarks Mr. Bathgate mentioned
that he had that day been informed that Plees-
man X., whose comic rhymes had been for some
weeks creating great amusement in our news-
paper, and whose identity no one could discover,
was no other than Mr. Allan, the conductor of
the evening. Mr. Allan, in returning thanks,
stated that he had been well supported by the
ladies and gentlemen around him, a special meed
of praise being due to Mr. Bohrsmann for his
valuable assistance on the piano. Mr. Allan
added that his verses as Pleesman X. had all
been written in simple fun, and he trusted that
they would be taken in good part by all parties
referred to.
“A NARROW ESCAPE.”
H.M.S. “Galatea” had a narrow escape fif-
teen years ago from total loss on the Cani Rocks.
Prussia having attacked Denmark about the
rightful possession of the provinces of Schleswig-
Holstein, which caused England to warmly
espouse the cause of Denmark, war therefore
seemed imminent between England and Prussia.
It having been determined that the further occu-
pation of the citadel of Corfu by British troops
was not necessary, it was decided to abandon
that place to the Greeks, and convey our troops
from there to England with all despatch, in time
for use against our possible enemy.
To carry out this, H.M.S. “Galatea,” and
H.M. troop-ships “ Himalaya,” “ Orontes,” and
“ Tamar,” were told off to proceed to Corfu and
back at full speed. The “Galatea” was steering
for the Cani Rocks on her return journey with a
portion of these troops, under the command of
Major V . The total number of souls on
board was 1500, which included officers and
soldiers, wives and families. The masthead-man
having sighted the lighthouse, reported that fact
by hailing the officer of the watch, which the
latter answered. The course of the frigate was
not altered, as it was intended to approach the
lighthouse till within a mile, and then deviate to
clear the rocks, and then resume the former
course.
It was a lovely afternoon, like Tuesday last,
only that the wind was blowing strongly in just
the opposite direction. The band was playing
spirited waltzes, &c., to which the officers and
ladies were dancing aft, and the men and their
friends forward. All were enjoying the fun to
the utmost. The officer of the watch, being
fond of that pastime, most improperly left the
bridge and joined in the giddy throng. On, on
rushed the noble ship to within a hundred yards
of the rocks, her-speed at that time being
knots. A supernumerary sailor, who was taking
passage, and who was lounging over the bows,
observed the frightful danger, rushed aft and
yelled out, “For God’s sake, put the helm hard
down or we are lost.” The captain jumped up,
looked over the side, and shouted “ Hard a-port!”
which was instantly done. The stately frigate
paid off quickly to her helm, and there, under
where the bows of the ship would have been two
minutes later, were the jagged outlying rocks
with the foam bubbling and hissing over them.
The women fainted, the children shrieked, the
strongest of men’s faces blanched to an ashen
hue, and all was confusion. It was an instant of
suspense, when a moment is a lifetime. “ Will
she clear them all ?” is the universal cry. “Yes
or No?” “Life or death?” But the proverbial
little cherub that sits up aloft again came to the
front, and the frigate shot past with railway
speed, with the seething rocks abreast her main-
mast and counter, clear into safer waters. Once
out of danger, a relief to the pent-up feelings was
given way to, women cried with long sobs of
gladness and embraced each other, and men
heaved deep-drawn breaths.
Had the “ Galatea ” struck whilst proceeding


at this great speed, and being a wooden ship
with no water-tight compartments, the inevitable
result would have been, that the ponderous masts
and yards would have snapped short off, falling
on the crowded decks, crushing hundreds. The
ship would have instantly sunk, dragging down
all her boats with her, leaving what had been
but a few minutes before a joyous crowd of
friends, grappling with each other as foes in the
treacherous water, in deadly embrace for dear
life; so with the exception of the landing of per-
haps one or two hardy swimmers, an apparently
hard-hearted matter-of-fact paragraph would have
appeared in the newspapers under the, alas ! too
frequent, heading of: —“ Ships Missing—H.M.S.
Galatea.”
“WE DID NOT CATCH THAT GOLD.”
(Continued from page 19.)
Arriving at the Diggings, we immediately
secured a suitable piece of ground, where we
pitched our tents, and set the Kaffirs to
work building straw huts, and for some days
we were very busy. Shooting parties were
formed, which were generally successful, one
of them actually bagging in one day two rhino-
ceros and a camelopard, besides buck, and they
came in very acceptable ; the flesh of the former
was of a dark colour, and rather strong in
flavour; the camelopard was simply delicious.
A bull-buffalo also was killed by a friend of
mine, who attacked it most pluckily on foot,
and though the infuriated beast was mortally
wounded, and charged him several times, yet he
stuck to his foe, which succumbed after having
received no less than eleven bullets; the eating
of the bull was by no means an easy task, as it
was terribly tough, I contented myself with the
tamer sport of shooting partridges and pheasants
with my muzzle-loader, though I generally carried
my rifle for protection. Indeed, though even
after small game, it was almost essential, as at
any time one might be liable to he looked up by
an inquisitive rhinoceros, possibly even by the
king of the forest—the noble lion ! They were
located about 5 to 13 miles from our encamp-
ment, but at nights they often came unpleasantly
close. We started sinking shafts, and sent parties
away prospecting for gold, but we had something
far more important to look into; we had to con-
sider the financial state of our affairs—“the
sinews of trade.” It had all been outgoings,
with little or no incomings, and the question that
arose was, were we able to carry on without a
considerable addition to our capital? Meetings
were called, and our liabilities were found to be
far larger than our assets; a good-natured man
took some of our shares, but paid for them in
goods; and another man took a share, and, I
believe, lent his waggon and oxen in lieu of pay-
ment. Gold there was, and certainly in many
places in payable quantities, but we lacked the
capital and the proper machinery to bring the
undertaking to a successful issue. Later on I
fell ill with a severe attack of bronchitis, besides
intermittent fever, but, thanks to the kind
attention I received, I managed under difficulties
to pull through. When I was getting nearly
convalescent, I took a constitutional walk in the
bed of a river, and, to my horror, turning round
a bend, I found myself dangerously close to two
huge, full-sized, black-maned lions. Luckily I
was unarmed, for I might have been tempted to
fire on them, which would entailed great risk.
Attacking lions is no sinecure, great presence of
mind, an iron nerve, and a faultless aim, being
absolutely necessary. I stared at the brutes
straight in the face; not from presence of mind,
not from bravery, for I was in a blue stew, and
wished that the earth could swallow me up;
indeed I am not ashamed to say that I must
have looked a most dejected-looking being, but,
somehow or other, instinct made me take the
bold course; I held my ground, and was immov-
able as the mounted sentries to be seen daily at


the Horse Guards; but to make matters worse the
lions walked slowly towards me, and I, not caring
for a closer interview, walked slowly backwards
with my head over my right shoulder, making,
at the same time, for the bank of the river, which
I luckily reached. I then made a rush for it on
all fours through the brushwood, weeds, and thorn
bushes, getting up the steep bank and rolling
down the other side, and then I ran home to my
encampment as hard as I could manage to toddle.
I was certainly favoured by the bush and the
darkness setting in. When I arrived I looked
ashy pale, and had to take a nobbier of gin before
I could relate my adventures, which were not at
first credited, until the very same night we were
troubled with lions, which surrounded our en-
campment and kept us up firing guns and
cracking stock whips all night, and we saw one
disappointed-looking animal next morning about
200 yards off. Our huts were very neatly made
of straw and bamboo, the floors being polished.
We had quite a little village—a hut for dining
in, an office, huts for our party, and convenient
workshops, and a large storehouse, in which we
kept various articles for trading, such as ostrich
feathers, elephants’ tusks, beads, and provisions.
Of course we made a little money by trading, but
not sufficient to materially help us. My health
kept more or less indifferent, and I retired from
the business, and before I got half way down
country my own private assets were ss. I travelled
with one waggon drawn by fourteen oxen, and
had three white men as passengers. We made a
fairly good passage, coming through the pretty
little town of Pretoria, and thence on to Potschef-
stroom, where I stopped for a few days and then
went on with another party. While at Potschef-
stroom I met with a severe accident, being
heavily thrown from a runaway horse, my head
coming into collision with a curbstone and laying
me insensible. I shortly returned to England,
with hardly a rag to my back, a wiser but a
poorer man; certainly we all lost, and so “we
did not catch that gold.”
Efje Poet’s Corner*
ODE TO LIZZIE.
Dear Liz, with golden hair and bright blue eye,
Bedecked with ribbon choice and rare;
The thought of thee calls forth from me a sigh,
Oh, would that my thoughts were wandering
here.
Perhaps, dear girl, a thought may come
And touch thine active fertile brain,
Of one who now is quickly nearing home,
One who to you would ever he the same.
But oh, dear Liz, should wary tempter rise
And claim a warm abode within thine heart,
What should I say, bereft of such a prize 1
How could I live were you and I to part 1
Life would be wretched, and I would onward soar,
And leave the place we have so often been;
Parting, dear Liz, with thee for evermore —
Tho’ lost to sight, still fresh to memory green.
But oh, dear Liz ! I know that thou art true,
True as the steel that is wielded against the foe ;
That love will brighten to its loveliest hue;
Where’er you are my heart shall surely go.
THE KUDDY KONSBRT.
Last Thursday week as ever wos,
The Kapten ses to me,
“ The play’s to be to nite—that’s poz—
You’d better kum and see.”
So up I went, and goodness me,
The staij it wos a site,
Maid up of flags of each kuntree,
With lamps to giv a lite.
In front of awl the skipper wos,
As if e’d bin a king;
Next Bathgate and his missus, cos
They koodn’t eer em sing.


At eight o’klok they dru the rag,
That there mite be no laggin,
Then Bohrsmann played, and didn’t flag,
From Jinny Yeev de Brabbin.
Sum glees wos sung, if I’m not rong,
By worhlers korld mellyflewus,
They gave a korus to eech song,
And maid themselves konspikewus.
Buchanan quaik’d, the truth to tell,
But Dixon trolled it gaily,
Rigby and Reynolds sang so well,
We ope to ear em daily.
After the konsert kaim the play,
And this wos very funny,
For Mrs. Mivins, she I say
Alone wos werth the munny.
Old Mivins raiv’d, and stawm’d, and swoar,
And maid isself an ass,
Bekos a hoot wos on the floar,
Wile Brown did giv im sarce.
The waiter Boh and Celestine,
Wos good, I’ll take my Davy ;
Jemina Ann, she jist did shine
In er part as a slavey.
Leftenant Archer’s stunnin rig
Kawsed rores and skreems of larfter,
And those oo sor is pyborld wig
Will nare forgit im after.
Long Rigby ad a splendid part,
And acted it rite well;
The Avords e ad’nt kAvite by art,
But still e maid it tell.
The Kapten rose, when all wos dun,
And sed we’d ad a treet.
Old Bathgate showted many a pun,
Wich much applors did meet.
Then Allan ad to spowt a bit,
God save the Kwene kaim nex,
Which finished up, and so you’ll git
Xo moar from
Pleesman X.
PLEESMAN X.’S FAREWELL,
With best respects,
I, Pleesman X.,
Xow write to take my leave ;
I can’t be found,
And you he hound
I’m laughing in my sleeve.
Of all I’ve writ,
There’s not a hit
That ought to give offence ;
It’s only fun
When all is done—
I trust to your good sense.
Tho’ sad at heart,
We now must part
And go our several ways,
But still you’ll find
We’ll hear in mind
Our forty pleasant days.
Our thanks are due
First place to you,
Our very careful skipper;
The world across
Without a loss
You’ve brought us in your clipper.
Our worthy chief
We leave with grief,
A gentleman is he ;
And all the rest
I say with zest
Are jolly chaps at sea.
Xoav Bathgate’s books
Go to their nooks—
We lose his puns for aye;
And Allan’s glees
By hes and shes
Our ears no longer try.
Xo more w r e’ll see
The great Storie
With fez cap like a Turk ;


And Mason gay
Must drop his play
And fairly set to work.
Poor Mr, Jacob
Needn’t wake up,
Revoking when at whist;
Nor Walker bore
With spirits’ lore,
For there’ll be none to list.
Our Mr. Scott
Must leave his cot,
In which he loves to lie ;
And Dr. Duke,
With pleasant look,
Must wish us all good-bye.
If Dyer live,
He’s sure to give
His mind to print our “ Times; ”
Then Moody’s ken
Of ships and men
Will show beside my rhymes.
Adieu to all,
Both great and small —
To Elliot’s arguing tone;
To Henderson,
Our little one,
Onr hoy of twenty stone.
To Affleck gray,
Who smokes all day,
To Carey’s jovial face,
To Rigby’s pranks,
And Moon’s long shanks,
To Rogers’ solid pace.
To Sutton’s dread
Of great Sea Red,
To Archer’s wig and dress,
To silly loons,
Who’ve been such spoons,
As all could see, I guess.
To Ormerod,
Who needs a prod,
To liven up his manner;
There’s none can bring
Such taste to sing
The song Eileen Alannah.
Good-bye, old ship,
We’ve had our trip,
And male and female sex
Will all agree
It’s been a spree,
And so says
Pleesman X.
THE VOYAGE OF THE
“ACONCAGUA.”
From fair Australia’s sunny wave-beat shore,
The “ Aconcagua ” boldly takes her way;
She fears nor wind nor wave, nor ocean’s roar,
On day by day.
With fav’ring breeze dread Leeuwin’s Cape is
passed,
Now fare-thee-well! our chosen Island home !
Thy fading shores from sight receding fast,
Onward we roam.
Our trackless path leads on thro’ Indian main;
Long weary days, with Tropic heat oppressed;
In languor wrapt, we seek relief in vain,
But find no rest.
At length fierce Afric’s coast is ope to view;
Thro’ Aden’s Gulf we plough our weary way;
The straits are reached, and straightway passing
through,
We wait for day. ,
Now northward through the Red Sea speed we
fast,
’Mid coral reefs and isles of sombre hue;
Dreading the sandy storm and arid blast,
The treach’rous dew.


FROM ADELAIDE TO SUEZ AND PLYMOUTH.
Date.
Winds.
Course.
Dist.
Run.
Lat.
Noon.
Long.
Noon.
Temp,
i Noon.
Aug.
9
N.W. & Var.
Various
166
14-20-N.
42-34 E.
90
10
N.W.
N. 32'48 W.
258
17-57
40-9
91
11
N.N.E.&Var.
N. 31-33 W.
273
21-50
37-38
91
12
W. & N.W.
N. 29-37 W.
277
25-52
35-9
86
13
Variable
Various
237
29 3
32-49
85
14
N. & Var.
93
In Suez Canal
88
15
Variable
48
To Port Said
84
16
250
32-41
28-10
80
17
N.W.
N. 73-40W.
273
33-58
22-59
79
18
N. 71-37 W.
307
35-36
17-4
82
19
N.W. <fc Var.
N. 72-26 W.
304
37-08
11-4
81
20
Variable
Various
306
37-24
4-49
87
21
W.
S. 83 W.
296
36-44
1-18 W.
80
22
1N.W.
Various
276
36-13
6-52
75
23
N.
249
39 11
9-35
69
24
Variable.
269
43 33
7-14
72
25
W.G
N. 27 E.
288
47 49
601
68
26
8.W.G.
Various.
256
50-26
1-57
66
27
W.G.
”
318
S.W. India Docks.
64
Jack Ropbyarn.
Great Sol’s relentless rays our senses try,
Exhaust our strength, and leave us weak and
worn;
At night, with fevered limbs, we sleepless lie,
And dread the morn.
At eve, the sun in lurid clouds is lost,
And Luna’s silver face shines clear and bright;
The Bear appears, but our Australian Cross
Is lost to sight.
0 Sea of Bible lore ! who, ages back,
Engulfed proud Pharaoh and his mighty host,
In thought we trace the chosen people’s track
Along thy coast.
Egypt is reached, and through its famed Canal,
Midst lakes and sandy banks we wend our way;
Mixed nations greet us with their strange cabal,
Turn where we may.
With eager joy the Great Sea meets our view,
Whose azure wavelets lave the shores of
Greece,
Italia, Turkey, Spain, and Afric too,
And never cease.
What mem’ries crowd the brain of wars oft told,
When Greek met Turk, and Spaniard fought
the Moor;
Of Malta’s famous warrior knights so bold,
Their battles o’er.
Too soon we’ll bid these stirring scenes adieu !
Gibraltar’s far-famed rock will next be past;
The broad Atlantic then will meet our view,
An ocean vast!
May He who holds the waters in His hand
Still guide us midst the dangers of the sea,
Until we come at last to that dear land
Where we would be.
Nautical Eeport.
LOST AND FOUND
LOST, Five Pounds. —Hot weather is sup-
posed to be the thief. He is promised
forgiveness on condition that he instantly quit
the vicinity of the Aconcagua.
anti (JHntis.
There is a word of plural number,
A foe to sleep and quiet slumber.
If to that word you add an S,
How strange the metamorphosis.
What plural was, is plural now no more;
What bitter was, is sweeter than before.
(Signed) Africanus.
Answer.— Cares-s.


A Scotch skipper, on being asked if the ship
was nearing the Monsoons, mechanically an-
swered : —“Eh ! Mon, soon ! ”
Curious Thought. —That the present month
is next September.
We communicate the fact that Pleesman X.
was seen flirting with a young lady while bn his
beat, and ho is warned that if he is seen doing
so again, his conduct will be reported to Sub-
Inspector Allan.
A correspondent writes suggesting that the
time may now be come for the history of the
Australian colonies being written, and especially
that of N.S. Wales; and expresses the hope
that a Macaulay may soon rise up to perform
this task in the same masterly style in which a
portion of the English annals has been depicted
by that master of style and imagination. We
cordially join in the hope that the day for this
achievement is near.
DOUBLE ACROSTICS.
Bards sublime,
Whose distant footsteps echo
Through the corridors of time.
In Man’s dwellings he became a thing
Restless and worn and stem and wearisome;
Drooped as a wild-born falcon with clipped wing,
To whom the boundless air alone were home.
Then came his fit again, which, to o’ercome,
As eagerly the barred-up bird will beat
His breast and beak against his wiry dome,
Till the blood tinge his plumage, so the heat
Of his impeded soul would through his bosom eat.
Light as any wind that blows,
So fleetly did she stir,
The flower she stept on dipt and rose,
And turned to look at her.
A voice as of the cherub choir
Gales from blooming Eden bear.
He had lived for his love, for his country he died,
They were all that to life had entwined him,
Nor soon will the tears of his country be dried,
Nor long will his love be behind him.
Then rest thee, Fair, in Ravensclaigh,
Why tempt the gloomy Firth to-day 1
Notice.
Additional copies can be obtained by applying to
SAM DYER, Esq., 38 Bblsize Square, London, N.W.
PRINTED BY BALLANTVNF, HANSON AND CO., EDINBURGH AMD LONDON.


