

•it
* ' ; /• ■" . I'
.■■( !.' - . , ■- =-. v ■ - •&&•■■ '*■—;*.■.-:*; *t •■ SS: jSt& «Ss£& ip: se»?f £■•• ■'%•'■■',<?' ■, ~r PV; '
- -■: ■;■ ' $£4%?:
, <• ■: * ■
■
■ -:- ■' .n.-, l>&
; •: > . •
•• . '-■ ' '• '■' , ■■'**■'- -v ,’" ■^*'^v , f•'•*■ ’'■'• ’A ‘v>’"' v^L'S^l-- ' v ~v>i-> •**■**& <a" r '' V • “Slfe’.? 1 -' '^^vi"'. l *' - V' .(' J '' S*V' : - '-V :•* -
>•' r .:;- f.>; >• : *1 •'■•• * ■' -?sar-V-.
.
- :?&•; &*k - t ■
y : -*~ s.>
. v-• - : h\ : - : 5 .«.:• . ’
A *&s.'••' .s%■ ip. ;• *:v
' |^£: ijjj-// $g Pt^•V'* i S t^ v '• .-•
'
■■-• ■M ■ gg| .|sp# •■.;■•-• :• i£*■ ffirJfc£--■ »r; a •.-4 •:. ■:. : * ■:•-• -
■
.:■.’ - ' ;rW&i®'sg*« ■ '■■■■'■%'■■-..y
. ■ - -■• . ■• -,... .■- ■ . '-> ■-'. :-J A 2<ws^^w^HM® s^lßME^»wnßto", ! ; !lK»s»? i spS* ,'"
■’
.
■ ; •• •
c - ' '• '?*£•' ''-. v' v , - •-' •.--V l ’ .>fe>'fr■ *■ • 'J>.v^:i‘- ; -Js-"waL>■ ' y •■. J v■'-"•■
■ .'■ • :. . ' • ■ --■ ■
; ■-• ■
; ■ :-• #i
• •••
,&■ f'&LjSii&nKM HeSSS^fe-. fe~:i‘.^
™at-j
' y • v'. ■ -J* ''.j-t 'v >. • z3h - : c 'Z'S
?!^]g»Kßasß«nßffiCTafaß9!g
V . . •:' ■ m^\rl v ■ •'■
.-■- v-i ,fV4 S?»S 7^Vaa
•;: , t c :\;:;;-..
■
■P^'^ISSS






"THE STUDENT'S GUIDE TO SENIOR ENGLISH"
By Phyllis M. Wheeler & R. D. Walshe
The Manager,
'Phone enquiries 54-8243
Looseleaf Textbooks,
57 Woronora Crescent,
WEST COMO, N.S.W.
Please forward
copy/copies to the following address:
Name
Address
State
for which £
is enclosed. (Price £1 per copy, post free; discount not allowable.)
the STUDENT’S
GUIDE to
THE AUTHORS are already known for
their junior secondary text, 'Mastering
Words', published in 1961 (Cheshires,
6/-). Their new senior book is an am-
bitious attempt to present the formal
side of English in a way which, they
believe, will enable students to cover
twice as much ground in the time that
has hitherto been allotted to this im-
portant part of the course.
SENIOR ENGLISH
A STEP FORWARD IN ENGLISH TEACHING
This book emphasises the need for English students to improve their written expression and
vocabulary.
Its central aim is to double the number of expression exercises that students can handle in the
school year.
It has striven to achieve this through a unique presentation of expression work, arranged in
weekly units.
An examination of the Contents page (opposite) shows that an abundance of material is avail-
able in this large book.
A complete year's work in poetry appreciation is also included, along with guides to the other
main forms of literature.
Students will find an orderly progression throughout the course, an immense amount of
practical work, a scheme of revision reminders, spaces to insert many answers instead of
tediously re-writing exercises, interesting passages from classical and modern writings, an
original course in Clear Thinking, and other features.
Suitable for N.S.W., Victorian and Queensland syllabuses.
ORDER FORM
The looseleaf format of this book offers advantages in manipulation of sheets, addition of data, and low cost. The format makes
it necessary for us to despatch direct to you instead of through retail booksellers. We forward by mail, road or rail within 24
hours of receipt of your order. The book is not available through retail shops.


CONTENTS
About this Book and how it may be used 4
English Expression in the First Senior Year 5-94
30 UNITS, each of three pages, as follows:
Ist page Composition alternately with Comprehension and/or Precis Clearer Thinking
2nd page The Writer’s Tools A Point of Style Word Origins Proverbs and Sayings
Punctuation Rules and Examples Sentence Correction (with grammar)
3rd page Spelling and Vocabulary (50 words) Word Manipulation Word Substitution
Eliminating a Jarring Word Selecting an Apt Word Selecting a Preposition
English Expression in the Second Senior Year 95-134
20 UNITS, each of two pages, as follows:
Ist page Composition Comprehension and/or Precis
2nd page Spelling and Vocabulary (50 words) Word Manipulation A Point of Style
Ward Origins Punctuation Exercises Sentence Correction
The Study of Poetry 135-160
• 30 UNITS, each with an exercise, as follows
1. The General Approach.
2. Theme and Content.
3. Theme and Content (continued).
4. Language—figures of speech.
5. Language—imagery, symbolism, etc.
6. Language—exercise.
7. Language—repetition, alliteration, etc.
8. Form—rhythm and metre.
9. Form—rhyme and stanza patterns.
10. Revision—exercise.
11. Kinds—narrative, ballad, epic.
12. Kinds —song lyric, sonnet (Italian).
13. Kinds—sonnet (English).
14. Kinds—ode.
15. Kinds—elegy.
16. Kinds —idyll.
17. Exercise—‘Alidade’ (Sitwell).
18. Exercise —‘Bare Almond Trees’ (Lawrence).
19. Exercise—‘Storm on Lake Geneva’ (Byron).
20. Exercise —‘Standardization’ (Hope).
21. Essay—‘South of My Days’ (Wright).
22. Exercise—‘Tintern Abbey’ (Wordsworth).
23. Exercise—Sonnets (Hopkins).
24. History—Early and Elizabethan.
25. History—The Seventeenth Century.
26. History—The Eighteenth Century.
27. History—The Romantics.
28. History —The Victorians.
29. History—The Twentieth Century.
30. History—Australia.
Guides to the Study of Literature 161-176
1. The General Approach 161
2. The Novel 162
3. The Short Story 168
4. Drama 169
5. The Essay 174
A Minimum Grammar 177
Introduction to Phonetics 180
Word Origins Reference List 182
Advanced Vocabulary List (Optional) 184
Miscellaneous Sentences for Correction 186
An Approach to Clearer Thinking 188
Index 191
THIS IS THE CONTENTS PAGE OF THE BOOK


SPELLING/VOCABULARY
pilgrimage registry academic alcohol embarrass
outrageous revelry sympathetic alien embarrassment
changeable etiquette apathetic pedestrian acknowledge
manageable gaiety corruption dissect acknowledgement
serviceable liveliest corruptible diverge susceptible
replaceable audible nutrition concede contemptible
vengeance chaos nutritious concussion inexhaustible
correlation dilemma snobbish precede irresistible
metre aghast counterfeit satisfactorily aggression
accessible rhythm skilful massacre assassination
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix; replaceable,
audible,
corruptible
2. Show possession: everyone else troubles, the Davis house, ladies hats.
3. Change to nouns: lively , academic
concede
4. Change to adjectives: chaos , alcohol
rapture
5. Write synonyms for: inexhaustible , contemptible
outrageous
cherish
6. Write antonyms for: apathy , alien
7. Delete wrong word: We deliver on every alternative/alternate day.
There was collision/collusion between them in their crime.
The bankruptcy court has declared them insolvent/insoluble.
8. Complete this table:
INFINITIVE PAST TENSE
PAST PART.
INFINITIVE PAST TENSE
to forbid
PAST PART.
to draw
to drink
to drive
to eat
to flow
to go
to lead
to mow
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1. He is the one qualified
2. He is covetous
the job.
For a decade the villagers in the mountain region sup-
ported the bandit gangs, concealing them and giving
information to aid their attacks on the valley. Only by
quartering troops in every village could the authorities
set about the of the bandits,
(oppression, repression, suppression, quelling)
his neighbour’s goods.
3. Let us partake
refreshments.
4. I would like to confide
5. Scones are preferable
meringues.
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
SUBSTITUTE a word for;
1. simulation, genuineness, feigning, pretence.
2. depravity, corruption, rectitude, degeneracy.
3. innocuous, pernicious, baneful, noxious.
4. grisly, attractive, repellent, detestable.
I. Aiding those in need
2. Exam for entry to university
3. A suspension of hostilities
4. Bringing back to life
5. garish, tawdry, sober, ostentatious.
5. Feigning illness to avoid work
REVISE UNIT 13
WORK IN BLUE CORRECT IN RED


NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA, QUEENSLAND
LEAVING CERTIFICATE AND MATRICULATION COURSES
THE
STUDENT’S GUIDE
SENIOR ENGLISH
PHYLLIS M. WHEELER
R. D. WALSHE
This looseleaf textbook is not available in retail shops
but can be purchased for £1 post free on application to the
Sole Distributors:
LOOSELEAF TEXTBOOKS
57 WORONORA CRESCENT, WEST COMO, N.S.W.
’Phone; 54-8243


THE AUTHORS
This book is the product of a partnership which began at Sutherland High School in 1958 when the authors planned a senior English
course and resolved to improve it year by year.
Mrs, Wheeler graduated from Sydney University as Bachelor of Arts with honours in English in 1956; Diploma of Education from
Sydney Teachers’College, 1957. Taught at Sutherland and Port Hacking High Schools 1958-62. Co-author with R. D. Walshe of
‘Mastering Words’ (Cheshires, 1961), an English text for three years of the junior secondary school.
Mr. Walshe graduated from Sydney University with honours in History, 1950; Sydney Teachers’ College Diploma of Education 1951.
Taught English and History at Sutherland and Port Hacking High Schools 1952-63. Contributor to various educational books and
journals. Co-author with Peter O’Meara and Don Shirley of ‘How to Study Better’, Author of ‘The Student’s Guide to World History,
1789-1960’. Chairman, 1962-3, of the History Teachers’ Association, and Convenor of its Teaching Method and Examining Sub-
Committee.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Especially we wish to thank colleagues from Sutherland
and Port Hacking High Schools for their assistance over
the years with many problems of English teaching. Two
subject masters, Mr. G. M. Twogood and Mr. G. H.
Booth, deserve thanks for the scope they allowed us in
programming and experimenting. Mr. Jack Cooke
helped greatly by producing much of our material in its
original duplicated form. Mr. Roy Johnston helped to
condense the ‘Minimum Grammar’ to its irreducibly
brief proportions. Mr. Oliver Fiala influenced both of
us by his enthusiasm for drama, and we are grateful to
him and to Mr. E. D. Gaskell both one-time col-
leagues of ours on the Port Hacking English staff for
permission to use the chart from their excellent ‘Drama
in Action’. We owe a good deal to the interest shown
in our work by Mr. Inspector D. Bowra. The English-
History Bulletin and the publications of the English
Teachers’ Association have been useful sources of ideas.
Mr. Don Munro, Lecturer in English at Kelvin Grove
Teachers’ College, Brisbane, generously contributed the
succinct chapter on phonetics. Mr. Doug White and
several Victorian friends helped with the 30-unit series
on Clearer Thinking. Mr. Kerry Wheeler has been
candid critic as well as proofreader. Mrs. Lorraine Stott
has carried out the art work.
The following authors and publishers have kindly
granted permission for the reproduction of extracts from
their works; Laurence Pollinger and the estate of the
late Mrs. Frieda Lawrence for ‘Bare Almond Trees’, by
D. H. Lawrence; Gerald Duckworth & Co. for ‘Aubade’,
by Dame Edith Sitwell; Angus & Robertson Ltd. for
The Crabs’, by Brian Vrepont, ‘The Five Visions of
Captain Cook’, by Kenneth Slessor, and, with the author,
for ‘Mirage’, by Douglas Stewart; Meanjin Press for
‘South of My Days’, by Judith Wright, from ‘The Mov-
ing Image’; the Society of Authors and Dr. John Mase-
field for ‘Reynard the Fox’; Faber and Faber for ‘The
Express’, by Stephen Spender, from his ‘Collected
Poems’; Hogarth Press for ‘Beleaguered Cities’, by F. L.
Lucas, from ‘Time and Memory’; Edwards & Shaw and
Professor A. D. Hope for ‘Standardization’, from ‘The
Wandering Islands’; J. M. Dent & Sons Ltd. for ‘Con-
versation About Christmas’, by Dylan Thomas, from ‘A
Prospect of the Sea’; Leonard Woolf for ‘Oliver Gold-
smith’, by Virginia Woolf, from ‘The Captain’s Death-
bed’; John Murray for the extract from ‘Nothing Like
Science’, by Magnus Pyke; the Editor of ‘The Sydney
Morning Herald’ for a number of editorial extracts; the
Editor of the British Broadcasting Commission’s ‘The
Listener’ for a number of extracts from articles; the
Victorian Education Department and the Queensland
Education Department for permission to quote from
public examination papers; and the New South Wales
Education Department for permission to quote from
public examination papers (subject to acknowledgement
that ‘the copyright of these examination papers is vested
in Her Majesty’).
—P.M.W., R.D.W.
Registered in Australia for transmission by Post as a Book
Copyright by R. D. Walshe
Printed in Australia by Studio Press, 355 Sussex Street, Sydney
First Printing; January, 1964


CONTENTS
About this Book and how it may be used 4
English Expression in the First Senior Year 5-94
30 UNITS, each of three pages, as follows:
Ist page Composition alternately with Comprehension and/or Precis Clearer Thinking
2nd page The Writer’s Tools A Point of Style Word Origins Proverbs and Sayings
Punctuation Rules and Examples Sentence Correction (with grammar)
3rd page Spelling and Vocabulary (50 words) Word Manipulation Word Substitution
Eliminating a Jarring Word Selecting an Apt Word Selecting a Preposition
English Expression in the Second Senior Year 95-134
20 UNITS, each of two pages, as follows;
Ist page Composition Comprehension and/or Precis
2nd page Spelling and Vocabulary (50 words) Word Manipulation A Point of Style
Word Origins Punctuation Exercises Sentence Correction
The Study of Poetry 135-160
• 30 UNITS, each with an exercise, as follows
1. The General Approach.
2. Theme and Content.
3. Theme and Content (continued).
4. Language—figures of speech.
5. Language—imagery, symbolism, etc.
6. Language—exercise.
7. Language—repetition, alliteration, etc.
8. Form—rhythm and metre.
9. Form—rhyme and stanza patterns.
10. Revision—exercise.
11. Kinds—narrative, ballad, epic.
12. Kinds—song lyric, sonnet (Italian).
13. Kinds—sonnet (English).
14. Kinds—ode.
15. Kinds—elegy.
16. Kinds —idyll.
17. Exercise—‘Aubade’ (Sitwell).
18. Exercise—‘Bare Almond Trees’ (Lawrence).
19. Exercise—‘Storm on Lake Geneva’ (Byron).
20. Exercise—‘Standardization’ (Hope).
21. Essay—‘South of My Days’(Wright).
22. Exercise—‘Tintern Abbey’ (Wordsworth).
23. Exercise—Sonnets (Hopkins).
24. History—Early and Elizabethan.
25. History—The Seventeenth Century.
26. History—The Eighteenth Century.
27. History—The Romantics.
28. History—The Victorians.
29. History—The Twentieth Century.
30. History—Australia.
Guides to the Study of Literature 161-176
1. The General Approach 161
2. The Novel 162
3. The Short Story 168
4. Drama 169
5. The Essay 174
A Minimum Grammar 177
Introduction to Phonetics 180
Word Origins Reference List 182
Advanced Vocabulary List (Optional) 184
Miscellaneous Sentences for Correction 186
An Approach to Clearer Thinking 188
Index 191


ABOUT THIS BOOK —AND HOW IT MAY BE USED
‘English is not a subject: English is everything ,’ declared
the writer, Mr. L. A. G. Strong. ‘English is what we say
and what we think.’ The aim of this book is to provide
scope for learning this ‘subject which is not a subject’
through many activities through reading books and
discussing ideas, through writing down one’s ideas,
through studying models of the finest English, through
doing specific word exercises, and through cultivating
mental flexibility in the handling of problems, which is
basic to thinking for whatever purpose. In arranging the
book we have striven to present exercises and informa-
tion in a way which will enable students to do at least
twice as much work in the time that has hitherto been
allotted to the formal side of English.
ARRANGEMENT IN UNITS. The many kinds of
Expression exercises (usually scattered throughout the
separate chapters of English textbooks) are here grouped
in weekly units for ease of handling. We have judged
that 30 units might be treated in the first senior year
and 20 units in the second, when study of literature
becomes heavy.
METHOD. Three-quarters of the book is concerned
with Expression exercises. Many answers can be filled
in on the pages of the book instead of tediously writing
out the whole of the exercises in a separate work-book.
Students are advised to attempt all of these answer-only
exercises. As to the other types of exercises, only the
teacher can say, week by week, how many should be
covered. Any exercises that the student has not time to
work, he should at least read.
REVISION. A strong framework of revision is built
into the book. Word Skill Pages should be worked in
blue ink and corrected in red so that past errors can be
seen at a glance when revising. Revision reminders have
been placed throughout the Units. The studies at the
back of the book, on Literature, Grammar, Phonetics,
Word Origins and Clearer Thinking, are in a sense
revision summaries. Moreover, the looseleaf format
enables pages to be grouped as desired for revision and
extra pages to be interleaved.
COMPOSITION . . . COMPREHENSION and/or
PRECIS. These will be found in alternate Units of the
first year of the course. The English teacher’s heavy
burden of marking will be eased if some of the Compre-
hension passages, or parts of them, can be collectively
marked in class. It is for the teacher to say how many of
the Composition exercises can be managed, and whether
he will treat a given passage as Comprehension or as
Precis, or as both.
CLEARER THINKING. Knowing that students often
find this part of the course difficult, we have striven to
keep it brief and interesting. The general approach
which is summarized on p. 188 can be of considerable
help in evaluating an argument, but it will need to be
re-studied several times as the course progresses. Where
this topic is not featured by the curriculum, it is hoped
that students will nevertheless read and ponder the
lessons.
LITERARY GUIDES. It is not intended that these
should supplant book-length studies of literature such as
Boas & Smith’s ‘Enjoyment of Literature’, Treble &
Vallin’s‘Realms of Gold’ or Grahame Little’s‘Approach
to Literature’. The Guides can, however, provide a
brief, initial background to the students’ reading and, it
is hoped, whet the appetite for a deeper study.
POETRY COURSE. The attempt has been made to
blend the traditional kind of study of poetry with
modern approaches to appreciation and also with a
number of modern poems. It is hoped that students will
not restrict themselves to the course, but will read other
poetry widely for pleasure.
PHONETICS. That this subject can be so adequately
compressed into two pages should be a striking demon-
stration to students that they can easily master it.
Students can score full marks in the phonetics section
of the Queensland examination paper provided they
make a modest effort in study, yet all too often this
section is handled badly.
SENTENCE CORRECTION. There are 300 sentences
for correction in the first year of the course. In each of
the 30 Units a rule is treated, followed by five sentences
which only require marking out an incorrect word, then
a further five require that reasons be given for correc-
tions. In the second year of the course there are 200
sentences to be corrected, and there are additional sen-
tences on pp. 186-7. While many sentences have been
culled from students’ work, about one hundred have
been modelled on sentences drawn from senior final
examination papers of the state departments of educa-
tion.
WORD ORIGINS. Throughout the Units are brief
notes and exercises on Word Origins. On pp. 182-3
will be found a Reference List which will assist in the
working out of exercises and will facilitate quick
revision.
SPELLING AND VOCABULARY. Each word list of
the 50 Units contains 50 words in five columns, suggest-
ing daily attention to ten words. Students will ensure
that they inspect each word carefully if they lightly place
a pencil mark between syllables; disjtinct, pleas|ur]al
ble, black | fel] low. Every unfamiliar word or difficult
spelling should be underlined in red so that it will stand
out for revision. The most difficult spellings are
repeated, the last two words in every column being
drawn from the list preceding it by three, e.g., Unit 4
repeats ten words from Unit 1. The last two lists of the
course are test ones made up from all preceding lists.
The lists contain 2,000 words for senior students. They
have been carefully selected after consulting the word
grading of spelling authorities of several English-speak-
ing countries, the senior lists of state departments of
education in Australia, and our own five-year collection
of errors made by senior students. A weekly spelling
test is advisable. Indeed, marks can profitably be allo-
cated to test the weekly working of all exercises in every


THE FIRST SENIOR YEAR
Unit 1 : EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
WHAT TO WRITE Since you are an intelligent
human being, you should be prepared to think about
any subject and to experiment with ways of expressing
your thoughts. If you cannot think of anything to say
about some topics of discussion, the fault probably lies
with you, not with the topic. However, it is to be
expected that some topics are more attractive to you
than others, and obviously you will always work better
on a topic that appeals to you, particularly in examina-
tions. Thus your first step is to choose your subject
wisely, so that you can write with sincerity.
HOW TO WRITE It is not enough simply to keep
writing until you have produced the required length: it
is often much easier to write a long piece of work than
a brief one. Your reader must feel that you have said
all you want to say about the topic and that you have
said something worthwhile. You must plan your ideas
coherently. Too many students, like the foolish axeman
who was too busy to sharpen his axe, maintain that they
have no time to make a complete plan when writing a
composition. Such a statement is silly, of course: if you
have no time to write to a definite plan, you certainly
will not have the time to write your essay without a plan,
unless you are prepared to run the risk of irrelevance
and incomplete thinking. How much time is available
for planning? In most examinations thirty-five minutes
can be allowed for the whole composition. Of this, five
to ten minutes can be given to organizing one’s rush of
ideas. Fifteen to twenty minutes are then spent in writ-
ing the composition of one-and-a-half to two pages. A
further five to ten minutes must be given to reading over
and polishing.
As an exercise in planning, let us consider the subject
‘Roads’. Short titles like this give you great scope in
your choice of ideas. Here are some of the thoughts
that immediately rush to mind:
history; pioneers; highways; country roads; travel;
curves and hills; processions; traffic; lanes; city roads;
coastal roads; dust; mud; swagmen; hitch-hikers;
mountain roads.
Obviously these ideas have not yet been organized, but
at least by writing them down as fast as they come to
mind we have forced our thoughts into the topic. The
next step is to sort such ideas into general groups. Here
it could become an historical -)- traveller + bystander
point of view, thus:
History pioneers or other trail-blazers; events of
interest which have taken place on the road; the
importance of particular roads to the life of the dis-
trict or country.
Travel— roads in country, city, mountain or coastal
areas; dust; mud; traffic.
Bystander—curves; hills; bends; processions; swag-
men; hitch-hikers.
Draw up plans like this for the following topics, then
choose one plan and expand it into a composition: The
World of Books; Speed; ‘Safety First’ as a motto for life.
CLEARER THINKING
THERE’S A NEED FOR IT! Thinking is hard work.
That is why most people avoid sustained thinking. It is
so much easier to drowse, to daydream, to feel, to be
emotional, or to ‘eat, drink and be merry’. ‘There is no
expedient to which a man will not resort to avoid the
real labour of thinking,’ remarked Sir Joshua Reynolds
rather despondently. Yet no-one would dare to state
otherwise than that clear thinking is vitally necessary to
us all.
We live in a world full of problems international,
national, local and personal problems. Many observers
believe that life is becoming more complicated with
every passing year. Everything is developing rapidly,
changing rapidly, and demanding that we adjust our-
selves no less rapidly. If only to cope personally with
this situation, we cannot do without clear thinking. We
need it still more if we would contribute to making our
part of the world a better place—instead of being like
the Gilbert and Sullivan character who sings:
‘And I always voted at my party’s call,
And 1 never thought of thinking for myself at all.’
Clear thinking is always thinking with a purpose. Is it
too much to say that most people drift rather aimlessly
through life, only thinking hard when events oblige them
to do so? Some people, on the other hand, see life and
its problems as a vital challenge, or even as an adven-
ture, and they use their reasoning power to master their
problems confidently. In the following episodes of this
course we shall look at (i) the nature of thinking and
reasoning, (ii) some of the causes of unclear thinking,
(iii) what makes a clear argument, (iv) common fallacies
in arguing, (v) dangerous and misleading arguments,
and (vi) the need to act on clear thinking. You will find
the whole course summarized briefly at the end of the
book.
DISCUSS
1. ‘Material progress has outstripped mental progress
—and the position is getting worse all the time.’
2. How much of life is concerned with problem-solving
(which requires reasoning)?
EXERCISE. No problem confronting a student is more
pressing than that of how to study effectively, balancing
daily homework with regular revision. Contribute to
the solving of this problem by reasoning out a pro-
gramme of weekly study activities to which you could
try to adhere during this term. In working it out, be
conscious of the large number of choices that present
themselves at every step.


ENGLISH PROVERBS Explain concisely:
I. A bad penny always turns up.
2, A drowning man will catch at a straw.
3, A house divided against itself cannot stand.
4, A rolling stone gathers no moss.
5. A rose by any other name would smell as sweet.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
ANECDOTE: From originally meaning ‘an item of
gossip’, this has come to mean in literature a brief narra-
tion of a striking incident or revelation of character.
It can come from history or from the writer’s own
experience, or it can be invented to arouse interest in his
story.
ALLUSION: Many writers, particularly essayists, add
to their own ideas by referring to other writers, the
Bible, classical mythology, phrases in the original Greek
or Latin, and also to history.
e.g., ‘Tacitus reporteth that amongst certain barbarous
(Montaigne, as an introduction to his essay, ‘Of Thumbs’)
A POINT OF STYLE
VERBOSITY: A superfluity of words, usually long and
complicated, in difficult sentences.
e.g., ‘Scintillate, scintillate, globule vivific,
How can I fathom your nature specific?’
(Twinkle, twinkle, little star,
How I wonder what you are!)
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
THE BEGINNING OF LANGUAGE ... It is through
the languages of different peoples that we see the most
faithful representation of the changing fortunes and the
varying interests of mankind. A living language con-
tinually adjusts to the life of its people; thus its varia-
tions, its refusal to follow rules exactly, should be no
more exasperating to us than the variations in human
nature. All languages are thought to have developed
from a dialect spoken in the New Stone Age by tribes
we have called Indo-European. As these tribes divided
to scatter around the earth, so the language divided and
developed in different ways in new and isolated regions.
The rules of a language are never constant until that
language has ceased to be a means of everyday com-
munication. When that happens, we say that the
language has become a ‘dead’ instrument, like classic
Greek and Latin.
SENTENCE CORRECTION
RULE: A verb must agree with its subject in person and
number.
e.g., A case of bananas (was, were) stolen.
UNDERLINE THE SUBJECT AND THE CORRECT VERB:
1. The exhibition of manufactured goods (is, are)
drawing great crowds.
2. The ropes tying the crate (was, were) snapped on
the wharves.
3. The crowd of sightseers (give, gives) the officials a
tough job.
4. Both of them (know, knows) who is to blame.
5. Heavy falls of snow sometimes (cause, causes)
landslides.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. The principal attraction of parties are the oppor-
tunities to meet good friends.
7. A splendid set of books containing mainly novels
and plays have been donated to our school library.
8. In the distance was seen the lines of approaching
troops, moving steadily onward.
9. The most hopeful sign in the international situa-
tion are the more numerous conferences that are
seriously striving to overcome the world’s hunger
problems.
10. The skeleton of an aborigine was found digging in
our garden. (For further examples of this type of
sentence, see Rule 6.)
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
The following passage contains all the punctuation
marks used in English, though it does not show the many
uses to which they can be put. Note them here, and
resolve at the outset of this course to be watchful of
punctuation in what you read, and meticulous in
punctuating what you write.
Peter, who matriculated last year, found difficulty in
deciding on a career; in fact, he spoke of taking up
farming instead of going to the university as his teachers
advised him.
‘Your results suggest a course in Arts,’ his headmaster
had said, ‘or perhaps in Law —or even in Economics.
It is in the verbal, non-mathematical subjects that you
are strongest, don’t you agree?’
‘lndeed, yes!’ broke in Peter’s father. ‘When he handled
“Macbeth” so well last year, 1 was pleasantly surprised.
In the Arts Faculty he can choose (1 hope he will see the
wisdom of it) from a list of interesting courses; English,
History, Modern Languages, Psychology, and Educa-


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 1
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
prison receive someone stories suppose
yacht whether worse storeys surprise
polish weather address aeroplane answer
accident absence would coarse creek
coming careful anyone course creak
puzzle forgetting gentle helpful hoping
awful balloon beginning beware brought
centre island knew knitted library
enough buses lose meant hinder
bury piece loose loosen hindrance
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: prison,
helpful,
, balloon
hindered
2. Turn into a person: polish , yacht
3. Put a stroke between the syllables of; accident, library, hindrance.
4. Change to nouns: bury
, modify , suppose
, advantage , error
5. Change to adjectives: absence
6. Write synonyms for: puzzle , absurdity , object
7. Write antonyms for: coarse , loosen
, hindrance
, sheep , basis
8. Give the plural of: hero
, beau baron
9. What is the feminine of: actor
10. Delete wrong word; A good band can create a martial/marshal spirit.
Oranges are rare/scarce this summer.
A triumphant/triumphal procession celebrated the victory
SELECT THE APT WORD
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. They warned us
entering the cave.
The secretary of the club was asked to appear before
the board of management, which was concerned at an
evident leakage of funds. Before the enquiry could take
place, however, he , taking
most of the club’s bank reserves.
2. The shop is adjacent
3. I looked
the station.
the file for his name.
4. He is getting used
5. I take pleasure
interruptions.
(departed, left, absconded, decamped)
arriving early.
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
SUBSTITUTE a noun (ending in -ARY) for:
I. An opponent
1. apathetic, ardent, fervent, passionate.
2. arrogant, modest, haughty, supercilious.
3. renowned, obscure, illustrious, eminent.
4. rigorous, stringent, slack, inflexible.
2. A helping organisation
3. Storage place for grain
4. Tidal mouth of a river
5. Refuge for wild-life
5. frugal, prodigal, thrifty, parsimonious.


COMPREHENSION IN THE SENIOR SCHOOL
IS IT NEW? You have been required to do compre-
hension exercises, under a variety of names, from your
very early schooldays and, although they have been
growing more difficult each year, no doubt you have
found little difficulty in understanding the passages you
have had so far. Your main problem has probably been
the comprehension of the set questions rather than the
passages themselves —in puzzling out exactly what the
examiner requires! Thus, this aspect of your senior work
will not be new to you in form but the passages and the
responses expected of you will become increasingly
complex.
WHY YOU SHOULD DO IT Comprehension gives
you an opportunity to show your ability to express your
thoughts clearly, concisely and precisely (there is a
difference) when dealing with discussion material. It
provides a formal exercise in a most important study
skill: the power to read and comprehend what you read
without undue or artificial effort.
HOW YOU SHOULD DO IT
1. Attempt all questions, however unsatisfied with
your answer you may be. Even the meanings of
quite unfamiliar words can be inferred with some
success if their context of sentence and paragraph
is studied.
2. Number all questions and their parts clearly.
3. It is unnecessary and time-wasting to repeat the
wording of the question in your answer.
4. All answers should be at least one complete sen-
tence, unless a simple definition is asked for. It is
then permissible to use a single word or phrase as
an answer, but always define a noun by a noun, a
verb by a verb, etc.
e.g., notoriety—a reputation for evil or unsavoury
actions.
NOT notoriety —doing evil things.
5. Unless length is specified, e.g., Tn a short para-
graph . . .’ or ‘ln several sentences . . .’, keep your
answers as brief as possible while still answering
all aspects of the questions. Watch for questions
with more than one part to be answered.
6. You are often asked to express an opinion about
the effectiveness of the writer’s argument, evidence
or attitude to his subject. Always give clear reasons
for your opinion, summarizing or quoting from the
passage.
7. When asked to comment on the, writer’s style, be
quite sure you are aware of his purpose and judge
him by the appropriateness of his method for
achieving this purpose.
8. When asked to ‘Distinguish between . . .’ two
words or phrases, take care to bring out the shades
of meaning.
e.g., One’s ‘character’ implies one’s real qualities,
whereas one’s ‘reputation’ rests on the quali-
ties that other people think one possesses.
9. When asked to comment on a figure of speech, to
‘give the force of . . or ‘discuss the effect of . .
a word or phrase, you should give its literal mean-
ing and then show how that meaning is applied by
the writer to create a particular effect in the
passage.
10. The bracketed numbers you will see after each
question are merely a suggested marking scale to
show you the approximate difficulty of each ques-
tion and thus the amount of time that might be
spent in doing it.
CLEARER THINKING
WHAT IS THINKING? The brain is a fantastic com-
puter consisting of some ten thousand million cells. It
has a vast capacity for recording data, manipulating it,
and making clever associations or computations. It is
capable of working quickly and accurately but, like a
machine, it only works well in the hands of a careful
operator. A slapdash operator gets poor results from
a machine because he neglects to feed the right material
into it, allows parts of it to go ungreased and rusty, and
fails to check the quality of the output. It is very much
the same with the brain.
Your brain will think clearly when you operate it care-
fully. Of course, the thinking we refer to here is reason-
ing, not daydreaming, wild imagination or even simple
remembering. All reasoned thinking is done by manipu-
lating memories. The need for such thinking arises the
moment we are confronted by a problem or difficulty
for which there is no ready solution; or, to put it another
way, reasoning is called forth by situations which can-
not be met in a routine manner.
Probably the most precious asset of a clear thinker is
mental flexibility, by which we mean the ability to see a
large number of choices in any problem-situation, and
to select the best of these while putting aside all tempta-
tions to prefer some long-held idea or prejudice. ‘You
are never too old to learn,’ declares a well-known
proverb; but unfortunately some people are too fixed
and comfortable in their thinking to be able to learn new
things or solve life’s problems by using their powers of
reasoning.
DISCUSS
1. ‘Thinking is the manipulation of memory traces m
the brain. One might say that the brain is a memory
machine which solves problems by the application
of past experience.’
2. ‘No two minds really think alike, because each per-
son’s manner of thinking is the product of a life
experience which is his and his alone. This is one
reason why people differ on even simple matters,’
EXERCISE. See at end of the Clearer Thinking section
of Unit 10.


ENGLISH PROVERBS Explain concisely;
1. Among the blind the one-eyed man is king.
2. As a man makes his bed so he must lie.
3. Barking dogs seldom bite.
4. Better to wear out than rust out.
5. Brevity is the soul of wit.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
ANTITHESIS: A sharp contrast of ideas, one balanced
against the other. This device is often used by essayists
to emphasise the pattern of their argument.
e.g., (Brutus’s speech to the crowd)
‘Had you rather Caesar were living, and die all
slaves, than that Caesar were dead, to live all free
men?’
(from Julius Caesar, hy Shakespeare)
‘The conversation of most men is disagreeable, not
so much for want of wit and learning, as of good
breeding and discretion.’
(from Jack Lizard, by Steele)
A POINT OF STYLE
ABSTRACTIONS: Guard against the over-use of com-
plex abstract nouns. They are the chief factor in most
verbosity.
e.g., ‘The completion of the construction of the building
depends upon the availability of easy access to
additional financial sources.’ (We cannot finish the
house until we have more money.)
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
LANGUAGE STUDY . . . Scholars and laymen find
much to interest them in the study of language. Some
follow the study of word sounds or phonology (some-
times called phonetics); some prefer to deal with the
structure of each language as a whole, known as
philology; others study the origin of the meaning of a
word and the change in meaning over a long period of
time, etymology; and others again are interested in the
reasons for, and the changes in, certain ways of spelling
words, or orthography.
All the technical terms mentioned above are a good
indication of the debt English owes to the art and science
of Ancient Greece. The ‘logy’ ending of three of them
comes from Greek ‘logos’ (knowledge); the ‘ic’ ending
denotes ‘belonging to’; ‘graphy’ comes from ‘grapho’ (I
write); ‘phono’ means ‘sound’; ‘philo’ means ‘love of ;
‘etymo’ comes from ‘etumos’ (true); and ‘ortho’ means
‘correct’.
In this section of our course, we shall be concentrating
on the etymology of our language, and we think that you
will find it both interesting and instructive.
RULE: When a plural noun is in fact the name for a
single thing it requires a singular verb.
e.g., ‘Gulliver’s Travels’ (give, gives) me great pleasure.
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT VERB:
1. The United States (is, are) the largest industrial
producer.
2. News about them (was, were) received eagerly.
3. '‘The Three Musketeers’ (was, were) popular with
film-goers.
4. In that sentence, ‘sheep’ (is, are) a plural.
5. The Three Sisters (is, are) Katoomba’s best-known
landmark. (N. 8.: There is room for disagreement
about this one. Why?)
EXCEPTIONS TO THE RULE: All these require a
plural verb bellows, pincers, premises, proceeds,
scissors, shears, statistics, sods, thanks, tongs, tweezers.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so);
6. The father of the lost girl said that his thanks is due
to the drover who eventually found her.
7. Only a limited quantity of bottles and copper
scraps are collected by our scout troop each year,
for we have little time.
8. Two thousand dollars are too much for a trip
around the world.
9. The knife was sharp but the scissors was blunt.
10. I have just suffered the indignity of being charged
for dangerous driving for the first time this week.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Capitals.
We need punctuation to make our meaning clear; it is
as much a part of composition as are words and
grammar. In succeeding Units we shall give examples
of typical uses of punctuation marks.
Capital letters must be used for:
1. Proper nouns, whether single words or phrases,
e.g., Egbert, Second World War, Wednesday sth.
2. Titles of books, ships, houses, etc.
e.g., ‘Brave New World’, ‘Albatross’, ‘Emohruo’;
but articles, prepositions and conjunctions in titles
do NOT take capitals unless they begin the title,
e.g., ‘The Playboy of the Western World’, ‘To the
Lighthouse’.
3. The first word of direct speech.
e.g., She exclaimed, ‘What an impossible man!’


Unit 2
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
canvas gaily debt angrily truly
canvass camera bough interesting o’clock
bicycle impatient expedition tease argue
eerie accept forecast queue argument
acre announce haversack ballet entirely
diary choose injury audience mystery
actual adherence ancient favourite delicious
chocolate design promptly programme fierce
ghost fasten Britain until lovable
cheerful cargoes channel villain piercing
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: favour, lovable, interesting
2. Turn into a person; bicycle
, debt , Britain
3. Write homonyms for; queue
, bough , prize
4. Change to nouns: accept , choose , allege
5. Change to adjectives: expedition , injury .mystery
6. Spell the plural of; ally alley , axis
7. Write synonyms for: eerie , fasten , abominable
8. Write antonyms for; cheerful , truly , debt
9. What is the feminine of: adventurer , earl , god
10. Delete wrong word: We gained access/excess to the hospital.
I think we should accept/except his offer.
We ought to adjoin/adjourn this meeting.
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
I. Will you look the address?
2. Don’t keep looking my shoulder.
3, Please look his complaint.
4. You must look
yourself.
5. Police will look
the crime.
SELECT THE APT WORD
Some people find it hard to take even simple advice.
Thus it is with Della an apparently intelligent girl.
Despite frequent warnings, last week-end, not to stand
in the boat, she continued doing so until she
(overturned, capsized, upset, overbalanced)
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
1. artifice, guile, candour, stratagem.
2. daunt, intimidate, dishearten, embolden.
3. designate, generalise, specify, indicate.
4. diffident, timid, brash, bashful.
5. isolation, seclusion, solitude, sociability.
SUBSTITUTE a word for a person who:
1. Keeps a firm’s financial records
2. Acts as agent in share dealings
3. Directly supervises workers
4. Checks a firm’s accounts
5. Fails to meet his debts


The first problems to be faced in a senior course are the
new kinds of composition demanded of you. Every
essay-type assignment in every subject depends on the
same basic principles of composition.
ESSAY TYPES In your junior lessons you have
probably concentrated on topics needing narrative or
descriptive treatment. While you are not as likely to be
given essay topics of pure narrative or description in
senior work, the skills of each method are still most use-
ful. You will, for instance, have to indicate briefly the
plots of novels, plays or short stories set for study; you
may wish to use a short story or anecdote in your own
compositions to illustrate some point of argument; and
you will most certainly require the art of description in
your character studies from literature. First, let us
revise the narrative composition.
NARRATIVE Study the following passage from
‘The Moonstone’, a clever detective novel by Wilkie
Collins. The company are at dinner and the conversa-
tion turns to anatomy. One guest, a Mrs. Threadgall,
whose husband has been long dead, mentions that he
was most interested in the subject. Another guest,
ignorant of the fact that his listener is a widow, proceeds
to destroy the calm atmosphere around the table:
‘ “They have got some remarkably fine skeletons lately
at the College of Surgeons,” says Mr. Candy, across the
table, in a loud, cheerful voice. “I strongly recommend
the Professor, ma’am, when he next has an hour to
spare, to pay them a visit.”
‘You might have heard a pin fall. The company (out of
respect to the Professor’s memory) all sat speechless.
I was behind Mrs. Threadgall at the time, plying her
confidentially with a glass of hock. She dropped her
head, and said in a very low voice, “My beloved hus-
band is no more.”
‘Unlucky Mr. Candy, hearing nothing, and miles away
from suspecting the truth, went on across,the table
louder and politer than ever.
‘ “The Professor may not be aware,” says he, “that the
card of a member of the College will admit him, on any
day but Sunday, between the hours of ten and four.”
‘Mrs. Threadgall dropped her head right into her breast
and, in a lower voice still, repeated the solemn words,
“My beloved husband is no more.”
‘I winked hard at Mr. Candy across the table. Miss
Rachael touched his arm. My lady looked unutterable
things at him. Quite useless! On he went with a cor-
diality that there was no stopping anyhow. “I shall be
delighted,” says he, “to send the Professor my card, if
you will oblige me by mentioning his present address.”
‘ “His present address, sir, is the grave,” says Mrs.
Threadgall, suddenly losing her temper, and speaking
with an emphasis and a fury that made the glasses ring
again. “The Professor has been dead these ten years!” ’
Notice the natural flow of conversation, the carefully
emphasized facts which make the situation credible
Mr. Candy’s ‘loud, cheerful voice’ and Mrs. Thread-
gall’s ‘very low’ reply—and the passing comment on
the reactions of the other diners. To be interesting,
narrative must be alive, must create the atmosphere and
state the important facts as clearly and economically as
possible.
EXERCISE In about a page, tell the story of somfe
family incident you remember for its excitement, its
humour or its sadness. Strive to bring out the vividness
or significance of the events.
CLEARER THINKING
AN EXAMPLE OF CAREFUL THINKING. What
are the steps in problem-solving? Commonscnse sug-
gests, first, that I should look closely at the problem
situation. Why did my ten apparently healthy fowls die
last night? It is necessary to inspect the bodies, the
fowlyard and everything with which they had contact.
Second, suggest some tentative solutions and, third, test
them. A mysterious disease? No other birds in the dis-
trict have been affected, not even the neighbour’s fowls,
which are on the other side of the fence. Poison in the
water or the feed? Chemical analysis shows nothing.
Anything unusual or peculiar happen yesterday? I did
leave the gate open by mistake for a couple of hours;
but that only meant the fowls were in the vegetable gar-
den, chopping it up. Must be something else but
what? Nothing else. ... So, back to the raid on the
garden. Something poisonous in the garden? I haven’t
been using chemical fertilisers. What did the fowls
mainly attack? Those lush green rhubarb leaves. What
harm could that do them? Enquiries reveal that rhubarb
leaves contain a concentration of oxalic acid which is
toxic to fowls. That must be it!
This commonscnse approach is in essence the scientific
method of reasoning. Let us express the steps in a little
more detail. (1) Recognise the problem and define it.
(2) Gather together all data relating, however remotely,
to the problem. (3) Survey the data thoroughly and get
a tentative solution (or hypothesis or ‘bright idea’).
(4) Carefully test this hypothesis before accepting it as
the solution of the problem. (5) Even when you do
accept a solution, keep your mind open for a still better
one. (6) Determine what action you should take now
you have found a solution.
DISCUSS
1. What is science?
2. ‘Scientific method is merely the application of
trained and organized commonsense.’
EXERCISE. Today the cause of malaria is well known,
but for centuries it was attributed to ‘bad air’ associated
with marshes. Using the steps in scientific method, show
how our ancestors approached the right solution but did
not attain it.


1. To climb on someone’s bandwaggon.
2. To play second fiddle.
3. To set someone on a pedestal.
4. To stand by with folded arms.
5. To turn the other cheek.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
PERSONIFICATION: This device is really a kind of
metaphor. It endows objects, animals or abstract ideas
with human qualities.
e.g., ‘Stern daughter of the voice of God.’
(from To Duty, by Wordsworth)
‘But look, the morn in russet mantle clad.
Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastern hill.’
(from Hamlet, by Shakespeare)
A POINT OF STYLE
‘THAN’ or ‘WHEN’?: ‘Than’ is misused in a subordinate
clause following ‘barely . . .’, ‘scarcely . . .’ and
‘hardly
e.g., ‘He had barely managed to mount the horse than
it started to buck.’ (Wrong)
‘He had barely managed to mount the horse when
it started to buck.’ (Right)
CORRECT THE SENTENCES WHICH ARE WRONGLY
PHRASED:
1. Scarcely had she entered the room than all heads
turned to watch her.
2. They had hardly reached shelter than the storm
broke.
3. It was a fiercer storm than any other they could
remember.
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
OUR DEBT TO LATIN . . . Much of Greek learning
was adopted by the Romans and incorporated into the
Latin language. In fact, many of the Greek terms in our
own language came to English through Latin, just as
many Latin terms came through French or Italian, both
direct descendants of Latin. The Roman occupation of
England in 55 b.c. gave Latin a direct influence on our
language and it still survives in modern English,
although there have often been modifications of spelling
and meaning. Much of the difficulty of English spelling
is the result of the efforts of Renaissance scholars to
model the English of the Middle Ages on Latin words
similar in appearance or meaning. Thus Old English
‘iland’ became modern ‘island’ because of Latin ‘insula’,
although the ‘s’ was never pronounced; and Old English
‘sithe’ became modern ‘scythe’ because of Latin ‘scin-
dere to cut’, and the ‘c’ was likewise never pro-
nounced. Latin grammatical terms and word construc-
tion also wielded a great influence on English, often
with most artificial results. But usage the everyday
speech of the people usually guards against over-
active scholarship and the language retains its balance.
RULE: A collective noun takes a singular verb, unless
we wish to indicate all the members of the group.
e.g., The committee is to meet early next month.
The committee are at loggerheads over the issue.
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT VERB:
1. The crowd (was, were) a record.
2. The crowd (is, are) starting to fight among them-
selves.
3. Parliament (was, were) in uproar last night.
4. The team (offer, offers) their suggestions to the
coach.
5. Our class (has, have) a reputation for quietness.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. The gang was nearly all caught; in fact, only three
escaped.
7. The eminent historian together with his two col-
leagues are due to arrive by air next Monday.
8. What are really troublesome are the millions of
bush flies.
9. The British cabinet show marvellous resolution in
the face of the scandal.
10. Examine our goods before you buy; you’ll never
regret it.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Full Stops.
Of all punctuation marks, the full stop is the most sig-
nificant. Some students have great difficulty in deciding
whether to use a full stop or to be content with yet
another comma. On occasions throughout this book you
are advised to avoid long, rambling sentences. If you
find yourself wondering whether to end the sentence or
carry on with a comma, please prefer to use a full stop.
You will be right more often than not.
Full stops must be used:
1. To complete all sentences, unless an exclamation or
question mark is required.
2. To mark abbreviations. (This rule, however, has
steadily given way to the principle that no full stop
need be used when the last letter of the abbreviation
is also the last letter of .the complete word, e.g.,
Mr Kennedy, Park Ave, Pty Ltd. This means that
half or more of the abbreviations in common use do
not need a full stop. Do we need also to mention
that when a sentence ends with an abbreviation, only
one full stop is required?


WORD MANIPULATION 1 Supply a prefix:
completely.
realised,
judge
2. Turn into a person: parachute
., tunnel
, language
3. Put a stroke between the syllables of; Christian, stealthily, refrigerator.
4. Change to nouns; accused , convince
, sober
5. Change to adjectives; excitement
. tumult
, vehicle
6. Spell the plural of: journey
, bamboo
, nucleus
7. Write synonyms for; stealthily
, adroitness
, amazed
8. Write antonyms for; confusion
, brittle
, anxious
9. What is the feminine of: cockerel
,, colt
, ram
10. Delete wrong word; The conductor raised his batten/baton.
I would advise/advice you to accept.
It has adversely affected/effected their morale.
WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 3
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
smoky confusion travel envelope judg(e)ment
woollen stealthily traveller christened enrol
Christian language travelling proceeded enrolment
treasure completely refrigerator realised enrolled
permission adjoin adroitness shovel dinghy
gallop autumn parachute shovelled grease
galloped agreeable accused jewel garage
tunnel practically amazement jewellery schooner
tunnelling opinion commit mysterious vehicle
label photograph committed excitement wharves
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. 1 prefer cars
SELECT THE APT WORD
trains.
When we assembled the engine we found to our dismay
that it would not even start. An expert, to whom we
had to resort, pointed out a wrongly connected tube
which he described as a vital
2. Please carry
3. I’d rather walk
4. It is good
a thorough enquiry.
of the engine.
him to offer to help.
(part, component, aspect, section, piece)
5. Flo has a talent
mischief.
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. obscure, manifest, obvious, apparent.
2. frivolous, sage, rational, judicious.
3. langour, vivacity, torpor, lassitude.
4. docile, self-willed, tractable, submissive.
5. plaintive, doleful, animated, wistful.
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. Refusing to obey a superior
2. Passing the winter in sleep
3. Foretelling future events
4. The practice of spying
5. Inscription on a tomb


COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
In this first Comprehension exercise, we present sug-
gested answers to the questions, merely to show the kind
of information expected in each case. Read and discuss
the passage and the answers:
THE “GRAND OLD MAN”
‘The old statesman was now entering upon the penulti-
mate year of his enormous career. He, who. had once
been the rising hope of the stern and unbending Tories,
had at length emerged, after a lifetime of transmutations,
as the champion of militant democracy. He was at the
apex of his power. His great rival was dead; he stood
pre-eminent in the eye of the nation; he enjoyed the
applause, the confidence, the admiration, the adoration
even, of multitudes.
‘Yet—such was the peculiar character of the man, and
such the intensity of the feelings he called forth—at this
very moment, at the height of his popularity, he was
distrusted and loathed; already an unparalleled ani-
mosity was gathering its forces against him.
‘For, indeed, there was something in his nature which
invited which demanded the clashing reactions of
passionate extremes. It was easy to worship Mr. Glad-
stone: to see in him the perfect model of the upright
man—the man of virtue and religion—the man whose
whole life had been devoted to the application of high
principles to affairs of state —the man, too, whose sense
of right and justice was invigorated and ennobled by an
enthusiastic heart. It was also easy to detest him as a
hypocrite, to despise him as a demagogue, and to dread
him as a crafty manipulator of men and things for the
purpose of his own ambition.
‘lt might have been supposed that one or other of these
conflicting judgements must have been palpably absurd,
that nothing short of gross prejudice or wilful blindness
on one side or another could reconcile such contradic-
tory conceptions of a single human being. But it was
not so; the elements were so mixed in Mr. Gladstone
that his bitterest enemies (and his enemies were never
mild) and his warmest friends (and his friends were
never tepid) could justify, with equal plausibility, their
denunciations or their praises. What, then, was the
truth?’ (324 words)
(from Eminent Victorians, by Lytton Strachey)
COMPREHENSION questions and answers;
(a) Explain the meaning of these words as used in the
passage: animosity, manipulator, invigorated, plausi-
bility, denunciations. (2i)
—‘animosity’ is a sense of deep antagonism, likely
in this case to issue in strong political opposition
to Mr. Gladstone.
—‘manipulator’, in politics, is one who craftily uses
people and arranges situations to suit his personal
ambitions.
—‘invigorated’ means strengthened, charged with
new energy.
—‘plausibility’ is a false appearance of reasonable-
—‘denunciations’ are strong expressions of condem-
nation.
(b) ‘Tories’ is a term for the Conservative Party in
British politics. Can you suggest a reason for their
being described as ‘stern and unbending’? (1)
As the name ‘conservative’ suggests, the Tories
stood for keeping England as it was, with no
changes from the status quo; they were men who
would not swerve from this purpose.
(c) What do you understand by the term ‘militant
democracy’? (2)
‘Militant’ does not mean military, but actively strug-
gling, or aggressively forceful. ‘Democracy’ means
government by the whole people with the rights of
minorities safeguarded. Taken together here, the
two words mean those people in England who were
struggling to make the government fully representa-
tive of the whole people, especially by securing the
right to vote for all men (universal franchise).
(d) What is the force of ‘even’, near the end of the first
paragraph? (21)
‘Even’ adds emphasis in a most effective way. The
writer has arranged his description so that it rises
excitingly to a climax. To go a step further than
‘admiration’ of a political figure is not easy. ‘Adora-
tion’ on its own would perhaps have seemed exag-
gerated, being a word usually reserved for one who
is loved in a very personal or religious way; by the
addition of ‘even’, the writer has suggested that he
realizes he is using the word in an unusual context
but feels, in the circumstances, that he is justified.
(e) Distinguish between ‘distrusted’ and ‘loathed’. (2)
While ‘distrust’ means to have no faith in or to feel
suspicious of a person, ‘loathe’ means to have ex-
treme dislike or abhorrence.
(f) Explain clearly: ‘There was something in his nature
which invited the clashing reactions of passionate
extremes.’ (2)
The sentence means that people received widely
varying, even opposite, impressions of Gladstone’s
character.
(g) What do you think is meant by: ‘lt was easy to wor-
ship Mr. Gladstone’? (1)
The word ‘worship’ carries on the idea already sug-
gested by ‘adoration’. It is perhaps not meant to be
taken in its literal sense, but is used to suggest
further the ‘passionate extremes’ of opinion about
Gladstone. It may even be meant to criticize the too
hasty acceptance of Gladstone’s virtues by some of
his supporters.
(h) Explain: hypocrite, demagogue. (2)
A hypocrite is one who gives a false impression of
virtue, or one who is insincere, saying one thing and
doing something quite different. A demagogue is
one who makes public gestures and promises which
he has no ability and perhaps no wish to fulfil.
CLEARER THINKING. Turn to p. 185.


1. Circumstances alter cases.
2. Experience is the best teacher.
3. Cut your coat according to your cloth.
4. Discretion is the better part of valour.
5. Don’t cut off your nose to spite your face.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
1. SIMILE: A comparison of two things, using ‘like’
or ‘as’.
e.g., The sea is calm, reflecting the sky like a gigantic
mirror.
2. METAPHOR: A comparison of two things, without
using ‘like’ or ‘as’.
e.g., The road was a ribbon of moonlight, looping
the purple moor. The captain is a lion of courage
when faced with great odds.
Identify the similes and metaphors in:
• He was as swift as lightning.
• Cowardly, he is a man of straw.
• So like a shattered column lay the king.
• Tom’s as silly as a clown these days.
A POINT OF STYLE
A MIXED METAPHOR is a lapse in which two or more
incongruous metaphors are placed side by side. Meta-
phors are good when they add vividness to our expres-
sion, but they appear clumsy when we ‘mix’ them.
Study these two examples and say why one is correct
and the other is clumsy;
A. He was always cautious in navigating the river of
life, avoiding the shallows and steering towards his
chosen port.
B. He was always cautious in navigating the river of
life, taking care not to upset the applecart.
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
HOW ENGLISH CAME TO ENGLAND . . . When
the Romans left Britain in 410 a.d. the native Britons
(of Celtic stock) were again in control but not for
long. Of the many Germanic ‘barbarian’ tribes which
were steadily penetrating the Roman Empire, three
small groups successfully raided Britain and settled
there: the Angles from Schleswig, the Saxons from Hol-
stein, and the Jutes from Jutland. (From ‘Angles’, of
course, comes ‘English’.) The Britons, as such, disap-
peared from England, and so did their language, though
it survives in the west as Welsh. The language of the
invaders was always ENGLISH, though each of the
three groups spoke it as a distinct dialect. Dialect is the
special manner of speech of people in a particular area,
and as the centuries passed other dialects emerged. The
Norman Conquest of 1066 gave the dialects many diffi-
culties, but English proved its flexibility by absorbing a
host of French (Norman) words and becoming the
richer for them. By the thirteenth century one dialect,
that of the East Midlands, gained prominence over the
rest. This was not very surprising, for it was the
language spoken in the City of London and at the court
and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge.
RULE: When a subject is followed by ‘as well as’, ‘and
not’ or ‘with’, a singular verb is required.
e.g., India, as well as Pakistan, (is are) to attend.
UNDERLINE THE SUBJECT AND THE CORRECT VERB:
1. Jack, and not Jill, (was, were) to blame.
2. The general, with his several aides, proudly (enters,
enter) the hall.
3. The chairman, as well as the secretary, (was, were)
thanked by the members.
4. The sow, with her ten piglets, (was, were) drowned
by the flood.
5. His father, as well as his mother, often (comes,
come) to see him.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. The foreign minister, as well as. his leading
advisers, have arrived to prepare for the summit
conference.
7. After a monarch is enthroned, the celebrations and
the offering of homage remains to be enacted.
8. A fleet of destroyers and submarines are approach-
ing Sydney Heads.
9. Those are his pair of scissors, but it will be all
right to use my shears which are on the table.
10. The young farmer soon learnt how to breed better
pigs than his father.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES The Comma.
Here are the main uses of the comma:
1. Commas mark off opening phrases.
e.g., Hearing the noise, the hunter turned sharply.
2. Commas indicate a pause within a sentence.
e.g., I want to be helpful, though I’m not sure what
you want.
3. Commas indicate words omitted within a sentence.
e.g., Others are afraid to speak forthrightly; you,
never.


WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a
prefix; necessary,
patience,
essential
2. Turn into a person: parliament
, blasphemy
, election
3. Write homonyms for: cellar
, racquet
, storeys
4. Change to nouns: exhausted
, excellent
, strangle
5 Change to adjectives; explosion
, deceit
, merit
6. Spell the plurals of: volcano
, negro
, banjo
7. Write synonyms for: necessary
, agreement
, accomplish
8. Write antonyms for; safety
, serious
, tremendous
9. What is the feminine of: proprietor
, negro
, widower
10, Delete wrong word; He is adverse/averse to smoking before breakfast.
We made our way across the border/boarder.
We rowed across to the isle/aisle.
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
cushion business explosion excellent essential
aborigine eventually buoy serious accompanied
civilisation exhausted scythe erected election
necessary safety village appetite funnel
patience boundary stony athletics parliament
original affluent woolly racquet parliamentary
adventurous conqueror speech referee tremendous
blasphemy disguised cellar tobacco successful
centre receive balloon coarse hindrance
prison whether surprise storeys suppose
SELECT THE APT WORD
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. I have no authority
2. We are happy
children.
We seemed to drive for hours along the red-dust road
in burning midday heat. Imagine how our spirits
revived when, in flashing over a crest, we
for a few seconds a yellow strip of sand and the sparkle
of the blue sea.
the agreement.
the house for a key.
3. 1 must break
4. Both are persistent
5. She is keen
their studies.
(saw, witnessed, beheld, perceived, glimpsed)
becoming a nurse.
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
SUBSTITUTE an adjective (ending in -OUS) for:
1. Flesh-eating
1. accord, contention, controversy, conflict.
2. zealous, listless, fervent, zestful.
2. Rebellious at sea
3. Boringly unvaried
3. tedious, wearisome, exhilarating, tiresome.
4. effrontery, impudence, brazenness, bashfulness.
5. dogmatic, moderate, imperious, dictatorial.
4. Craving another’s possessions
5. Being everywhere at once
WORK IN BLUE CORRECT IN RED


COMPOSITION
DESCRIPTION In Unit 3 we noted that good nar-
rative must be realistic; it must present a scene and
characters as quickly and as smoothly as possible. This
time we shall consider the qualities of good description.
Look at the following passage from ‘Bleak House’, by
Charles Dickens. The heroine, Esther Summerson, has
just caught a glimpse of old Mr. Turveydrop, a gentle-
man who considers that it is beneath the dignity of a
gentleman to do anything but show himself off to the
admiring populace; he is most jealous of preserving his
youthful style:
‘He was a fat old gentleman with a false complexion,
false teeth, false whiskers, and a wig. He had a fur
collar, and he had a padded breast to his coat, which
only wanted a star or a broad blue ribbon to be com-
plete. He was pinched in, and swelled out, and got up,
and strapped down, as much as he could possibly bear.
He had such a neckcloth on (puffing his very eyes out of
their natural shape), and his chin and even his ears so
sunk into it, that it seemed as though he must inevitably
double up, if it were cast loose. He had, under his arm,
a hat of great size and weight, shelving downwards
from the crown to the brim; and in his hand a pair of
white gloves, with which he flapped it, as he stood
poised on one leg, in a high-shouldered, round elbowed
state of elegance not to be surpassed. He had a cane,
he had an eyeglass, he had a snuff-box, he had rings, he
had wristbands, he had everything but any touch of
nature; he was not like youth, he was not like age, he
was not like anything in the world but a model of
Deportment.
‘ “Father! A visitor. Miss Jellyby’s friend, Miss Sum-
merson.”
‘ “Distinguished,” said Mr. Turveydrop, “by Miss Sum-
merson’s presence.” As he bowed to me in that tight
state, I almost believe 1 saw creases come into the
whites of his eyes.’
Notice the variety of detail in this pen-portrait. It seems
almost incredible that Dickens should have made him
up, so lifelike is he in every posture. Although you are
so often commanded to vary your sentence structure,
see how effectively Dickens repeats ‘he was . . .’, ‘he
had . . .’to create a feeling of overwhelming ornamenta-
tion. The language is simple, the order of description
is concise and methodical, and the ridicule of Mr. Tur-
veydrop’s artificiality is assured by such phrases as ‘got
up, and strapped down’ and ‘creases come into the
whites of his eyes’.
EXERCISE Write two or three paragraphs of
description about (a) a person you know; (b) rain; (c) a
cat; (d) Christmas Eve. Concentrate on making the
scene as real and vivid as you possibly can. Strive for
exact and fresh adjectives and phrases: do not content
yourself with saying that eyes are blue, rain is cold or
cats are dignified. Think of a definite impression you
have had of each topic, then describe it exactly as it
affects you.
CLEARER THINKING
EXAMINING AN ARGUMENT. In life as well as in
the study of clear thinking we are largely concerned
with judging the worth of people’s arguments. By
‘argument’ here we mean not a wild and worthless dis-
pute between two persons who hold rigid opinions that
were not arrived at by reasoning; rather we mean serious
points of view that are urged upon us by people who
want to persuade or convince us that they are right.
Some people have expressed doubt about the value of
argument. The German writer Goethe, for example,
declared: ‘lt is always better to say right out what you
think without trying to prove anything much: for all
proofs are only variations of our opinions, and the con-
trary-minded listen neither to one nor the other.’ We
do not agree with this. We believe that society benefits
from a clash of views. Argument can be an antidote to
mental sluggishness; it can stimulate us to think harder,
to detect our prejudices and to learn new things.
In later units of this book we shall point out many things
about the nature of good argument. Meanwhile, here is
a general guide to the examination of any argument to
which you are exposed or which you yourself have
elaborated.
1. Scan the whole argument (to gain a general impres-
sion of what its author is arguing for or against).
2. Briefly note persuasive devices (e.g., flattery) (dis-
tinguishing between moderate persuasion and that
excess which indicates dishonesty, fanaticism, etc.).
3. Reject any irrelevancies.
4. Be crystal clear about the major contention (or
theme) and the main points of the argument.
5. Deal with these as arguments to be judged. (This is
your most important task.)
6. Express your judgement carefully
DISCUSS
1. ‘Argument is much more likely to confirm people in
their; existing opinions and prejudices than to con-
vert them to a different point of view.’
2. While we shall in the future go into many aspects of
good argument, consider now what should be the
main ingredients of good argument.
EXERCISE Apply the six points above to any page
of argument, or to a short address by a member of the
class.


1. Every man has his price.
2. Cowards die many times before their death.
3. Faint heart never won fair lady.
4. Familiarity breeds contempt.
5. The Lord helps those who help themselves.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
ALLEGORY: A narrative describing events and per-
sons on one level while also possessing a deeper level of
meaning or a symbolic significance, e.g., ‘The Pilgrim’s
Progress’ and The Faerie Queene’.
PARABLE: A similar method of narrative, but this
always has a moral purpose, while allegory can be used
simply to arouse delight. All of Christ’s parables illus-
trate this definition. They have been colourfully called
‘earthly stories with heavenly meanings’.
A POINT OF STYLE
DEFINITION: You are required to give careful defini-
tions in many of your studies, particularly in your
answers to English Comprehension, and you should
therefore practise the art of concise, unambiguous state-
ment. (The exercise on English Proverbs above is very
helpful in this regard.) A good general rule is to try to
define a term or phrase in the same form, i.e., a noun by
a noun or phrase, an adjective by an adjective and so on.
e.g., CHARlTY—Kindness to or care for unfortunate
people.
(Not: When you are kind to others.)
IMPROVE THE FOLLOWING DEFINITIONS
1. A spade is to dig with.
2. Fear is when you are scared of something.
3. A tyre is the part of the wheel that is not made of
metal.
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
HOW WORDS TRAVEL . . . Apart from the wide-
spread influence of Latin and Greek, there are many
other influences for change that have worked on
language.
1. EXPLORATION. The Spaniards and the English
explorers of the Americas brought back words such
as ‘tobacco’, ‘cocoa’, ‘tomato’, ‘mocassin’ and ‘toma-
hawk’.
2. TRADE. To this influence can be attributed most
of the Arabic, Persian and other Eastern words in
our language, such as ‘cotton’, ‘lemon’, ‘taffeta’,
‘arsenic’, ‘silk’ and ‘teak’.
3. SETTLEMENT and CONQUEST. We have already
mentioned the Danish and Saxon, Roman and Nor-
man conquests of Britain, but there were also the
English settlements in America, India, Africa and
Australia which account for words such as ‘squaw’,
‘shampoo’, ‘veldt’ and ‘corroboree’, taken from the
native speech of each region.
RULE: Two or more singular subjects joined by ‘and’
require a plural verb.
e.g., A boy and a girl (has, have) tied for first place.
UNDERLINE THE SUBJECTS AND THE CORRECT VERB:
1. Drizzling rain and bitter cold (impede, impedes)
the runners.
2. Bill and his mate (agree, agrees), but Ido not.
3. The earth and the sky (seem, seems) to meet at the
horizon.
4. Port-side and starboard-side often (confuse, con-
fuses) landlubbers.
5. The strength of the gorilla and the speed of the
jaguar (is, are) well known.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. The golden eagle and the swallow attains one
hundred miles an hour and are the fastest creatures
in the world.
7. The cheetah, with the gazelle not far behind, are
the fastest of the land-bound creatures.
8. In every respect ‘Things To Come’ reach the height
of great literature.
9. Hamlet’s inability to make up his mind and poor
Ophelia’s ineffectualness results in a crisis of in-
action.
10. The girl was told by the old woman to pull up her
garter.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Commas
Many writers say that they have more difficulty using
commas properly than they have with other punctua-
tion marks. Perhaps this explains why some letter-
writers ‘solve’ the comma problem by—leaving out all
commas! On the other hand, a class of people, conscien-
tious and diligent, put in far too many commas. The
art of punctuating largely consists in using just enough
commas as will assist our prose to convey its message,
but not so many as will check the flow of reading. Like
every art, this one can only be learnt by a lot of prac-
tice; in the meantime, it is best that you should use
rather more commas than less. If in doubt as to
whether a comma should be used or left out, use it.
Here are some examples which, we think, either rightly
use or rightly leave out the comma (in marking off open-
ing phrases or clauses). See if you agree . . .
1. In the beginning the earth was without form and
2. On the other hand, you must consider Jim.
3. In the circumstances it seemed necessary to go.
4. He bowls well, but his fielding is shocking.
5. He bowls badly but he shows interest in improving.
6. He bowls badly, and I don’t think he will improve.
7. Trapped on the ledge, Tom could only call for help.
8. Despite good intentions he has failed again.
9. When the speaker sat, the audience applauded.
10. At the end of the day she was exhausted.


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 5
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
spacious accurate quarrel marvel control
kennel accuracy quarrelsome marvellous controlled
occupants deliberate quarrelled laughter controllable
traffic competition quarrelling warfare chorus
initial except occasion rebel exhibition
courteous suspicious occasionally rebellious quarter
professional screech artificial recess principal
compliment intelligence dictionary sufficient principle
diary haversack queue canvas delicious
adherence Britain truly programme argument
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix:
2. Turn into a person: adherence
sufficient
courteous,
accurate,
chorus
, suspicion
3. Put a stroke between the syllables of: intelligence
occasionally, quarter.
4. Change to nouns: deliberate
5. Change to adjectives: compliment
6. Spell the plurals of; money
7. Write synonyms for; deliberate
8. Write antonyms for; spacious
9. What is the contraction of; do not
, artificial , impetuous
, chorus , funeral
, buffalo , radius
, sufficient
, ardent
, artificial
, conservative
, who is
, they are
10. Delete wrong word: The sand on this beach is course/coarse.
They are already/all ready to leave.
Thomas Edison was an ingenious/ingenuous inventor.
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
In some of the new states of Africa, anti-white feeling
could grow into bitter race hatred comparable to the
anti-negro spirit in southern U.S.A. This fear prompted
Kenyatta at a recent public meeting to
his Mau Mau followers to be tolerant.
1. You may send the children
2. There is a big difference
3. I was impressed
errands.
our ages.
her efficiency.
4. You will become accustomed
5. Those boots are appropriate
her ways.
(tell, advise, urge, recommend, exhort)
hiking.
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
1. staid, sober, frivolous, sedate.
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. Giving false evidence on oath
2. Publishing malicious reports of a
2. impassioned, placid, fervid, vehement.
3. praise, appreciate, extol, revile.
4. despise, venerate, revere, cherish.
5. propitious, malignant, favourable, clement.
person
3. The bringer of a law-suit
4. The person charged at law
5. One who appeals to a higher court


Unit 6; EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
WHAT IS A PRECIS? It is a summary of the most
important ideas in a given passage, and is presented as
a good piece of prose. As a general guide, the precis is
about one-third of the length of the original passage.
WHY WRITE A PRECIS? There is a longstanding
controversy as to whether the precis or the comprehen-
sion exercise is superior in the teaching of the skills of
reading and understanding. Some teachers argue that
precis is artificial in that we do not take notes from a
book or speaker and then write these out as a passage
of properly paragraphed prose; we simply leave them as
notes. These teachers believe that the specific questions
asked by a comprehension exercise are the best means
of assessing understanding. Other teachers believe that
the precis tests all that the comprehension tests —and
more. It requires a grasp of the passage as a whole, an
ability to extract the essentials from it, and an ability to
express these in good prose. They point out that it is
not uncommon business procedure for an executive to
give his secretary a series of main points which she
must enlarge and compose as a fluent but concise letter.
In our opinion, there is a place for both precis and com-
prehension exercises. Most of the passages in this book
can be treated by either method, or by both methods.
HOW TO WRITE A PRECIS
1. Your precis should reduce the length of the original
passage by at least two-thirds.
2. Every important idea must be retained, preferably
in the order in which it appears in the original.
Make notes of these ideas after you have read the
passage a couple of times.
3. Every unimportant point, including details, illustra-
tions and anecdotes, should be discarded.
4. Write a draft precis to check that your presentation
of ideas is correct and that the emphasis still occurs
in the same place as in the original.
5. Although you should aim to be as brief as possible,
guard against being so condensed that you obscure
the point of the passage.
6. Try to preserve the tone or feeling of the original,
particularly if it is deliberately humorous, ironic or
biassed.
7, Check your draft for expression errors, repetitions
and vague phrasing; then write your final precis.
IN THIS COURSE your teacher will decide whether
to treat the passages as precis or as comprehension, or
to add a precis after the comprehension questions have
been answered.
EXAMPLE Look back to the Unit 4 Comprehen-
sion passage. When each paragraph is analysed, we are
left with a summary something like this:
Paragraph I —Mr. Gladstone was (a) almost at the
end of his enormous career, and (b) at the peak of
his power and influence.
Paragraph 2 —Yet his character was such that he
aroused as much distrust and loathing as he did
admiration.
Paragraph 3 —Some people could as easily worship
him for his high principles and enthusiasm as others
could detest him as a hypocrite, demagogue and
ambitious manipulator.
Paragraph 4 These extremes seem absurd, but
each group could justify its attitude by instancing
aspects of his character. What was the truth?
Try this as an exercise now . . . Combine these ideas in
a passage of continuous prose—at first as a draft. Use
about 110 words. Then check and improve the draft,
and write your final precis.
CLEARER THINKING
FAULTY OBSERVATION. Since thinking is the
manipulation of memories, it is basic to clear thinking
that the great host of observations we ourselves make
should be accurate ones. (Let us use ‘observations’ to
include not only seeing but our other sense perceptions
—touching, tasting, smelling and hearing.)
Some years ago a professor was giving a lecture at the
University of Berlin when two students began shouting
at each other. One drew a revolver and fired a shot
before order could be restored. Naturally enough, the
lecture room was thrown into uproar. The professor
then announced that the incident had been deliberately
staged. He asked the students to write an account of
what they had seen and heard. The accounts varied
widely; things were instanced that never happened;
essential parts of the little drama were omitted—and so
on. All these students were what is called ‘eyewitnesses’;
all were making an honest effort to recall what they
observed; yet the smallest number of errors was 26 per
cent, the largest was 80 per cent!
Sometimes our minds simply do not recall things we
apparently looked at. We are likely to recall pleasant
rather than unpleasant features. We all tend to interpret
what we see in terms of our past experience, instead of
seeing things as they are now. After all, random
thoughts are continually flowing through our subcon-
scious minds. They are pulling our attention away from
the present, diminishing our chances of observing clearly
and objectively. Plainly enough, even direct observa-
tion may not be reliable.
DISCUSS
1. T know what happened, because I was there.’
2. ‘None so blind as those that will not see.’
3. ‘None so deaf as those that will not hear.’
EXERCISES Try to summon up a clear mental
picture of your father’s face. Try to recall all the things
you observed yesterday.


ENGLISH SAYINGS Explain concisely
1. To keep one’s ear to the ground.
2. To throw dust in another’s eyes.
3. To burn one’s fingers.
4. To shake the dust of a place from one’s feet.
5. To live from hand to mouth.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
HYPERBOLE: Deliberate exaggeration to achieve a
startling effect, or to emphasise some point.
e.g., ‘The streets ran blood after the rebellion.’
‘Not all the water in the rough rude sea
Can wash the balm from an anointed king.’
(from Richard 11, by Shakespeare)
A POINT OF STYLE
AGREEMENT OF TENSES; The tense of a subordi-
nate clause is always adjusted to the time sequence of
the principal clause, so that a present tense requires
another present, a present perfect or a simple future,
while a past tense requires another past, a past perfect
or a conditional tense.
e.g., ‘He knows that he will be sent for.’
‘He knew that he would be sent for
T hope he has gone now.’
T hoped he had gone by then.’
Note the error of tense sequence in the following:
‘I never have and never shall speak to him.’ (The perfect
tense must have ‘spoken’ following ‘never have’ if it is
to be complete.)
EXCEPTION; The tenses need not be adjusted if the
subordinate clause states something which is universally
true or which has not yet occurred at the time of writing.
e.g., ‘He was always aware that death comes without
warning.’
‘The President warned that there is still no real
peace among mankind.
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
SCIENCE AND CULTURE . . . These exert a con-
siderable influence through study, research and creative
art. Modern science has turned to Greek to provide
terms for its many new discoveries, since a vocabulary
based on a single language which has roots in many
others has universal recognition for exact definition.
Similarly, many musical terms are Italian, many mathe-
matical words are Arabic, and many words of modern
fashion are French, because each of these countries
made a considerable contribution to these particular arts.
e.g., thermometer, psychology, forte, dolce, algebra,
lingerie.
RULE: Do not be ambiguous (by writing a sentence that
has two possible meanings).
e.g., We saw a snake driving along yesterday.
EXPLAIN THE AMBIGUITY IN THE FOLLOWING:
1. We sat for lunch beside a tree and ate it.
2. Morgan saw a rival black flag hoisted with a smile
oEcontempt.
3. We noticed several dead fish walking along the
beach.
4. Leaping into the saddle the horse plunged through
the flames.
5. An Alice Springs clergyman has advertised for a
camel to do the work of a minister.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. The unification of Italy as well as that of Germany
are regarded as great events of the nineteenth
century.
7. A great deal of hope and joy exist in the world,
though we sometimes forget this.
8. The theatre audience, panicking at the news, was
now rushing for every exit that could be found.
9. Marilyn, like all her sisters and her aunts, have
that gorgeous red hair.
10. In Lismore court today a drover was charged with
drunken horse riding.
(Sydney Morning Herald. 3/7/63)
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Commas.
The comma has many uses in punctuating direct speech.
Here are some of them . . .
1. He said, ‘Come to our house to-night.’
2. ‘Come to our house to-night,’ he said.
3. ‘Come to our house to-night,’ he said, ‘and we shall
make you welcome.’
4. He said, ‘Come to our house to-night,’ and they
accepted his invitation gratefully.
PUNCTUATE THE FOLLOWING:
1. There it goes she said as the great liner left the
wharf.
2. Coming in from the light he whispered menacingly
come out wherever you are.
3. Peter muttered I wanted to break it anyway as his
father scolded him.
4. As he left the meeting the Prime Minister remarked
I have never had such an enthusiastic audience and
he looked very pleased.
5. I know that it is a shock coming so quickly after the
death of your brother said the policeman trying to
be sympathetic.
6. The lecturer declared Henry Fielding although he
was a magistrate himself had a thoughtful sympathy
for criminals and other people with weak con-
sciences and this sympathy is obvious in his novels.
7. Take the first turn to the right said the shopkeeper
pointing in a northerly direction and you cannot
miss it.


Unit 6
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
amusement amorphous caution medicine anniversary
contrary exceedingly cautious sheriff ceremonies
fiery weird catitiously spoonful hungrily
gorgeous disease imitation temperature extravagance
murmuring gypsy recipe torture exhibit
permanent nuisance scissors sovereign generous
precious peasant soften sovereignty generosity
clumsily terrific shriek bazaar pageant
autumn agreeable dinghy vehicle shovelled
galloped wharves stealthily jewellery enrolment
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix:
2. Turn into a person; torture
generous, cautious,
permanent
exhibit , murmur
3. Put a stroke between the syllables of: exceedingly
anniversary, generosity.
4. Change to nouns: stealthily
5. Change to adjectives; ceremony
6. Spell the plurals of: tragedy
7. Write synonyms for: weird
8. Write antonyms for: cautious
9. What is the contraction of; it is
infer , languid
imitation , multitude
oasis , corps
arduous , affable
precious , cursory
you are , we are
10. Delete wrong word: What they say is all together/altogether absurd.
The candles were placed on the alter/altar.
I shall infer/imply that we want prompt delivery.
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1. The fish tasted
onions.
For three years the people of our township were agog
with excitement at the prospect of a railway being built
right through the main street and thence across the
adjacent mountain range. The project was, however,
dropped because of difficulties.
2. Profits have fallen
those of last year.
the contrary, I never do.
4. That is different
5. He will translate it
the original sample.
(irksome, challenging, insuperable, annoying)
Indonesian.
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. foolhardy, impetuous, precipitate, cautious.
2. despondent, forlorn, elated, dejected.
3. impertinent, officious, impudent, courteous.
4. fidelity, devotion, faithlessness, constancy.
5. impute, attribute, vindicate, ascribe.
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. False name, concealing identity
2. Assumed name of an author
3. Name of author not known
4. Book on one’s own life
5. Name given in familiarity or jest


EXPOSITION This form of expression explains or
clarifies a problem, an experiment, an action or a
method. It is the manner of the lecturer or demonstra-
tor. Obviously, it requires scrupulous accuracy and
careful sequence of ideas if the reader is to gain the best
assistance from the instructions or if he is to judge the
knowledge shown. Examine the following passage, as
an explanation of the whale’s use of its tail:
‘lt is a little significant that, while one sperm-whale
only fights another sperm-whale with his head and jaw,
nevertheless, in his conflicts with man, he chiefly and
contemptuously uses his tail. In striking at a boat, he
swiftly curves away his flukes from it, and the blow is
only inflicted by the recoil. If it be made in the unob-
structed air, especially if it descend to its mark, the
stroke is then simply irresistible. No ribs of man or boat
can withstand it. Your only salvation lies in eluding it;
but if it comes sideways through the opposing water,
then partly owing to the light buoyancy of the whale-
boat, and the elasticity of its materials, a cracked rib or
a dashed plank or two, a sort of stitch in the side, is
generally the most serious result. These submerged side
blows are so often received in the fishery, that they are
accounted mere child’s play.’
(from Moby Dick, by Herman Melville)
EXERCISE In a paragraph, explain (a) how the
elephant uses its trunk; or (b) what a library has to
offer; or (c) how to manage an examination paper.
ARGUMENT AND PERSUASION These two
skills are the most likely ones to be used to any extent
in senior composition. They differ from the simple
exposition in that as well as informing a person about
something they strive to secure that person’s agreement.
The distinction is sometimes made between an argument
which is seen as a factual appeal to reason, and per-
suasion which is seen as an appeal to the emotions or
to prejudice or to self interest of the less worthwhile
variety. Plainly, by this definition, argument is a good
thing and persuasion is rather suspect. The distinction
is easy to make in theory; it is much less easy in practice
(see the discussion of The Arts of Persuasion in the
Clearer Thinking section of Unit 15).
You may be asked to make a case for or against, or to
examine both sides of a debatable subject and then
give your own judgement. You will probably not be
able to cover the whole subject, but what you do say
must be confidently expressed, with several carefully
chosen examples to illustrate your main points. Plan-
ning is, as always, most important. As well as noting
ideas that support your own point of view, you will
benefit from considering the other side and attempting
to meet its possible arguments. In the following passage,
G. K. Chesterton deplores the modern age, its jazz
music and its over-sophisticated attitudes:
T do not demand a high place in English letters for
the chorus of my youth which ran “Beer, beer, glori-
ous beer, fill yourself right up to here”, but I do say
that nobody, after consuming any number of cock-
tails, has yet been inspired to cry aloud anything so
spirited and spontaneous and direct. The poetry
inspired by cocktails is timid and tortuous and self-
conscious and indirect. And in the age of jazz and
cocktails, men either write songs that cannot possibly
be sung, or leave off writing songs and write frag-
ments of a demented diary instead.’
Notice how the writer disarms possible criticism of his
own work by admitting that some of it is hardly im-
mortal in theme or tone, and how he then hammers
home the point that modern poetry is insignificant
because it lacks gusto. Listen to the bold confidence
echoed in the heavy ‘d’ alliteration of ‘a demented diary
instead’. Is this ‘reasoned argument’ or ‘persuasion’?
EXERCISE Make up a case (a) for the present
examination system; (b) against the keeping of animals
in captivity; (c) for the retention of the Monarchy in
England.
CLEARER THINKING
SAFEGUARDS AGAINST FAULTY OBSERVA-
TION. Since it is so difficult to recollect precisely what
we have observed, even a few minutes afterwards, how
much more difficult is recollection after months or years
have elapsed! Do you remember the last time you lost
something? And how you had to struggle to remember
where you had been, and where you were when you
remembered having that thing last?
It is thus important for us, on occasions, to try to ‘get
the facts straight’ facts that we vaguely remember
having observed. It is basic for us to be aware how
liable we are to error, and, equally, to be aware that the
testimony of others is liable to contain unconscious
errors. Especially we should be wary of observations
that were made a good while ago. If possible, we should
check whether an observation was casual or deliberate,
whether a written record of it was made at the time,
whether there were other observers, and whether all
observers are agreed on the essentials of what they
observed.
DISCUSS
1. Until the 15th century people declared, ‘Obviously
the earth is flat, because you can see that it is.’
2. If a person claims to be reporting a ‘fact of observa-
tion’ (e.g., he witnessed a traffic accident), what
reservations would you be entitled to hold regarding
his testimony?
EXERCISE Two or three members of your class
could stage a brief incident. The class could then list the
main things that took place and check the accuracy of
the accounts.


1. He that pays the piper calls the tune.
2. He runs with the hare and hunts with the hounds.
3. If the cap fits, wear it.
4. If wishes were horses, beggars would ride.
5. It is better to travel hopefully than to arrive.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
CLIMAX: ‘A ladder’ of thought, with ideas arranged in
a mounting order of importance. This can occur in a
single sentence, in a paragraph or in a whole work, such
as a novel, play or essay.
e.g., ‘As Caesar lov’d me, I weep for him; as he was
fortunate, 1 rejoice at it; as he was valiant, I honour
him; but—as he was ambitious, I slew him.’
(from Julius Caesar, by Shakespeare)
A POINT OF STYLE
THE USE OF EMPHATIC PRONOUNS: These must
always be used in conjunction with another pronoun.
They should not be left to stand on their own as subjects
or objects of a verb.
e.g,, ‘Tom and myself went to the theatre.’ (Wrong)
‘Tom and I went to the theatre.’ (Right)
‘They spoke to him and myself at once.’ (Wrong)
‘They spoke to him and me at once.’ (Right)
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
USING YOUR DICTIONARY . . . Although we shall
deal with the most common etymologies of English in
this course, you can often increase your knowledge
simply by looking up a word in your dictionary. The
Pocket Oxford Dictionary is reasonably priced for
students and, as well as giving clear definitions of word
meaning and use, usually indicates the etymology in
square brackets, thus; [Gk] for Greek, [L] for Latin,
[FJ for French and so on. If the word depends on only
part of a foreign word for its meaning, it may be shown
as ‘evade—escape from, avoid . . . [L vado go]’.
From your dictionary, find the etymology (origin) of
these words:
pyjama
steppe
kindergarten
yacht
flannel
barbecue
malefactor
kapok
catastrophe
taboo
RULE: A phrasal opening should be followed by its
subject (to avoid ambiguity),
e.g., Jumping up in a hurry, the inkbottle overturned.
(Wrong)
Jumping up in a hurry, he overturned the ink-
bottle. (Right)
CORRECT THE FOLLOWING:
1. Sailing down the harbour, a sidewind blew the
yacht off course.
2. Trapped in the vault, the police easily arrested the
robber.
3. Coming home last night, the storm blew down the
wires.
4. Irritated beyond words, a good spanking was given
the child by her mother.
5. Hurled from his feet, the blast deposited him in the
middle of the road.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. Excited at the prospect of seeing them again, the
car at last came to a hurried stop outside their
home.
7. The screams of the trapped animal, piercing the
still night, was painful to her.
8. The climate of California is as good as Australia.
9. Napoleon, with his soldiers, were battling the
dreadful snows of Russia.
10. The teacher told Jim that he was the biggest fool
in the room.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Commas.
The following sentences illustrate the confusion that can
arise when commas are omitted. (Insert the commas.)
1. Many if not most of the answers are wrong.
2. She doesn’t like me and Sally knows why.
3. After clearing these off the table may be used.
4. If you have seen the doctor before you notify the
girl at the desk.
5. We struggled along the corridor being crowded.
6. As soon as they entered the room was plunged into
darkness.
7. To the young people of forty or more often show
intolerance.
8. Della’s accident was a shock for the family had
been expecting her at any moment.
9. While mother was cooking the baby wandered
away.
10. My deepest wish to visit Alice Springs has not been
realised.


accommodation
wholesale
treacherous
guarantee
monotonous
ambition
advertisement
ambitious
recommendation
cheque
interrupted
burglar
whereabouts
lightening
picturesque
lightning
essential
patience
erected
parliamentary
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix;
conduct,
original.
interrupted
2. Turn into the feminine: emneror
. conductor
, millionaire
3. To three words in the lists above, ‘less’ can be added; ,
4. Change to nouns: vivacious
, interrupted
, decompose
5. Change to adjectives: amateur
, luxury
, hazard
6. Spell the plurals of: echo
, stimulus
, hypothesis
7. Write synonyms for: monotonous
, guarantee
, bewilder
8. Write antonyms for: fatigued
,convex
, desist
9. What is the contraction of; 1 am
, could not
, who will
10. Delete wrong word; He made an illusion/allusion to Shakespeare.
WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 7
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
glamour
glamorous
melodious
vivacious
orchestra
absolutely
emperor
original
speech
conductor
particularly
physical
amateur
fatigued
bruise
jealousy
eventually
excellent
luxury
millionaire
heiress
exquisite
weight
trespasser
calendar
receipt
conqueror
boundary
The lawyer sited/cited definite facts in evidence.
I counsel/council you to study it carefully.
SELECT THE APT WORD
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. You never get angry
2. 1 thought it was evident
3. Visitors are confused
4. He is shy
children.
Do not put off till tomorrow what you can do today.
This is one of the golden rules of life and study.
Unfortunately, it is not uncommon to find students who,
instead of getting the work done now, continually
his looks.
all those signs,
asking for help.
5. He encouraged me
giving exhibitions.
(delay, avoid, procrastinate, postpone)
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
SUBSTITUTE an adjective (ending in -AL) for:
1. Concerning the law
1. unobtrusive, flagrant, glaring, outrageous.
2. garnish, adorn, embellish, spoil.
2. Endowed with reason
3. Scrupulous about time
4. Not taking sides
3. delectable, savoury, repugnant, palatable.
4. harass, tantalise, enliven, exasperate.
5. termination, inception, inauguration, initiation. 5. A spendthrift


COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
PRESIDENTS AND LOBSTERS
The President of Brazil has sent a strong personal note
to President de Gaulle; the Brazilian Navy has had all
shore leave cancelled; and the Brazilian Foreign Minis-
ter has warned that Franco-Brazilian relations may be
seriously impaired. France, for her part, has sent a
warship speeding to the coasts of Brazil to uphold her
‘lawful rights’, and to show that she cannot be intimi-
dated. The cause of all this international furore?
Lobsters.
French lobster boats have been at work off the Brazilian
coast, and the Brazilians say they are poaching. The
French say they are not. There is murky and acrimoni-
ous argument over territorial waters, the continental
shelf and whether or not lobsters walk— apparently a
point of substance. To be sure, two Brazilian news-
papers have asserted that the lobsters are only a blind
and that the French are really stealing radioactive sand
from Brazilian beaches, but this can be discounted. Who
will believe that a Frenchman would prefer a handful
of monazite to a prime lobster?
Nevertheless, while the idea of lobsters creating an
international incident has its funny side, the dispute is
symptomatic of a serious and world-wide problem
which has by no means left Australia untouched—the
decline of established fishing grounds, caused partly by
over-fishing and partly by changes in the natural habits
of shoals. This has had two conflicting results. Nations
are extending their own territorial waters in order to
protect home fishing industries, and at the same time
increasing ‘distant-water’ fishing operations. But the
distant water fisher fleets, as the French lobstermen are
finding, come up against other nations’ territorial waters
protection measures. The clashes which have occurred
from the Faroes to the Kuriles show the mounting need
for the international agreement which has so far proved
elusive. (294 words)
(from a minor editorial. The Sydney Morning Herald, 25/2/63)
COMPREHENSION questions;
Paragraph I
(a) Explain: impaired; intimidated; international furore.
(U)
(b) How effective is this paragraph as an introduction?
(2)
(c) Why is ‘lawful rights’ enclosed by inverted commas?
(1)
Paragraph II
(d) Explain: poaching; acrimonious. (1)
(e) How effective is the writer’s use of ‘murky’ to de-
scribe the argument? (1)
(f) What is the force of ‘apparently’ in its context? (1)
(g) To what quality of Frenchmen does the final sen-
tence of this paragraph refer? (1)
Paragraph 111
(h) What is the ‘serious and world-wide problem’ and
how has it occurred? (2)
(i) What attempts are being made to solve the problem
by individual nations and why are these attempts
unsuccessful? (H)
(j) What is meant by ‘elusive’? (1)
GENERAL
(k) How would you describe the writer’s tone in the
passage? Is it the same throughout? (2)
CLEARER THINKING
A RELIABLE MEMORY? Man’s wonderful memory
gives him a huge advantage over all animals, for it per-
mits him to store up his own experience and to learn
from the experience of others. He succeeds in mastering
his part of the world according, largely, to the success
with which he manipulates his memories. Unfortunately,
he often forgets much that he would like to remember,
and his memories are all more or less distorted insofar
as each person’s brain records experience and lessons
somewhat differently from the way others’ do. Even if
the memory is good, wishes and prejudices can intro-
duce distortions of which the person is blissfully
unaware.
When we discussed Observation we found that it could
not be dissociated from Memory because in reporting
something that we observed we must use our memory
of what we observed—even if it was only ten minutes or
two seconds ago! Basic, then, to clear thinking is an
understanding of the limitations of reliance on memory,
whether our own or others’.
Modern psychology has devoted a lot of attention to
memory. One psychologist cautioned thus: ‘Remember
that about half of the new matter presented (in a class
lesson) is forgotten after the first half-hour, two-thirds
in nine hours, three-quarters after six days, and four-
fifths after a month’ (Felix Arnold, ‘Attention and
Interest’, p. 242).
DISCUSS
1. Does the quotation from Arnold tally with your
experience? It is necessary to add that much of the
forgetting he speaks about is not complete: revision
of a lesson can quickly recall much of it, retrieving
and deepening the temporarily forgotten memory
traces.
2. ‘The tendency of people is to remember only what
th’ey want to remember.’
EXERCISE Try to recall as much as you can of
what was said at last week’s school assembly.


1. Make haste slowly.
2. Marry in haste, repent at leisure.
3. Necessity is the mother of invention.
4. Nothing succeeds like success.
5. Laugh and the world laughs with you, weep and
you weep alone.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
ANTICLIMAX (BATHOS); This is the opposite of
climax and, although at times achieved unwittingly by
poor writers, it is often used deliberately to create a
comic or satiric effect.
e.g., (on the loss of a curl)
‘No louder shrieks to pitying heav’n are cast,
When husbands, or when lapdogs, breathe their
(from The Rape of the Lock, by Pope)
A POINT OF STYLE
USE OF ‘ONE’: When you use the impersonal pronoun
‘one’ you should follow the correct sequence of form,
e.g., ‘One should always follow one’s own principles.’
NOT ‘One should always follow his own principles.’
N. 8.: The other impersonal pronouns, such as ‘anyone’,
‘everyone’, ‘no-one’ and ‘everybody’, are followed, as a
grammatical convention, by the singular, masculine
personal pronouns ‘he’, ‘him’ and ‘his’, even when femi-
nine persons may be understood in the context. The
consistent use of ‘his or her’ is clumsy; the use of the
plural pronoun ‘their’ is quite wrong.
e.g., ‘Everyone scrambled for his seat in the hall.’
NOT ‘Everyone scrambled for their seat in the hall.’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
PREFIXES ... In the following units you will find
some rapid revision of English, Greek and Latin prefixes
which you probably learnt in junior classes.
1. AFTER—as in aftermath, afternoon, afterglow.
Give TWO more
2. BY—originally ‘near’ or ‘beside’, then spreading to
the idea of ‘secondary’ or ‘out of the way’,
e.g., bystander, by-way, by-product, by-play.
Give TWO more
3. FORE—before, as in forehead, forewarned, fore-
noon.
Give THREE more
4. MID —middle, as in midnight, midway, midwinter.
Give TWO more
5. MIS —wrong, as in misdeed, mislead, misbehave.
Give THREE more
6. WlTH—against or away, as in withdraw, withhold.
Give ONE more
RULE: When two singular subjects are joined by ‘either
. . . or’ or ‘neither . . . nor’, they take a singular verb.
When they are plural they take a plural verb. When one
is singular and the other plural, the verb agrees with the
nearer subject (and it is generally desirable to arrange
for the plural subject to be nearer to the verb),
e.g., Neither Menzies nor Calwell is to speak on this
Either Liberals or Laborites are running that
meeting.
Neither the pen nor the books were found.
Neither my cousins nor I am able to come to-
morrow.
UNDERLINE THE SUBJECT AND THE CORRECT VERB:
1. Neither the tall boy nor the short (is, are) here
today.
2. Either U.S.A. or Russia usually (win, wins) most
Olympic events.
3. Neither my brother nor his friends (is, are) inter-
4. Either Margaret or Mariana (has, have) to decide.
5. Neither your brothers nor 1 (are, is, am) willing.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. I feel certain that either Smith or Deckhouse know
more about this than you imagine.
7. The number of bodgies around the milk-bars grow
alarmingly every year.
8. A pair of shears were found in the long grass.
9. It was not for Mary or for Ito raise an objection.
10. He fired a revolver at the policeman’s head which
he kept in his pocket.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Question marks.
The main difficulty with question marks is remembering
to use them but remember we must! Consider the
following:
1. Question marks must be used after all direct ques-
tions, whether in direct speech or in ordinary
expression.
e.g., ‘Are you ready?’ asked the starter.
Hamlet was furious. What could he do to
avenge his father?
What immortal hand or eye
Could frame thy fearful symmetry? (Blake)
2. Do not use question marks when the question is
made part of reported speech. Such indirect ques-
tions require a full stop only,
e.g., He asked them how to get to Collins Street.
He wondered what to do.
He asked why the meeting had been cancelled.
3. Do not confuse explamations with questions,
e.g., Oh, isn’t it wonderful!
How could you do such a thing!
These obviously do not require answers.
PUNCTUATE THE FOLLOWING:
1. Isn’t he marvellous
2. Jenny asked why has the picnic been postponed
3. Jenny asked why the picnic had been postponed
4. Why has the picnic been postponed asked Jenny
5. They wondered what would happen when the
teacher returned


SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1. War broke when 1 was abroad.
2. They are intent getting good passes.
3. He is good understanding foreigners.
4. The sailors conferred one another.
5. Some people take him a fool.
One day the Yugoslav town of Skopje was a sunny,
busy, peaceful place; the next, it lay in ruins. Thousands
were buried beneath rubble as an earthquake demolished
it. The startled and horrified
the whole world.
(catastrophe, disaster, accident, misfortune)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
SUBSTITUTE a word for a person who:
1. fortuitous, random, accidental, planned.
1.
Desires to keep existing system
2. enrapture, captivate, repulse, enthral.
2.
Desires gradual improvements
3. industrious, slothful, diligent, assiduous.
3.
Desires swift, drastic change
4. virtuous, diabolical, infernal, fiendish.
4.
Upholds private ownership of firms
5. languid, listless, animated, lethargic.
5.
Advocates social ownership
28 REVISE UNIT 3
WORK IN BLUE — CORRECT IN RED
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
michief inquisitive endeavour pamphlet antipathy
michievous vague pneumonia cannon stationary
valley viciously analysis equipment stationery
neighbour indelible analyst equipped ammunition
reservoir mention doubtful barrel worshipped
trough epidemic efficient artillery cemetery
earnest infectious efficiency unique knowledge
shepherd penicillin military disciple knowledgeable
traffic accuracy quarrel control quarter
courteously suspicious quarrelled sufficient occasionally
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix; efficient, equipped,
2. To three words in the lists above, ‘ness’ can be added:
discipline
3. Write the plural of; analysis , cannon valley
4. Change to nouns; sufficient
5. Change to adverbs; accuracy
6. Spell the singular of; strata
7. Write synonyms for: baffle
8. Write antonyms for: earnest
9. What is the contraction of; they have
, refute , avoid
~ military . chronic
, torpedoes
, phenomena
, dearth
,concur
, vague , doubtful
, have not , of the clock
10, Delete wrong word: That gadget is a devise/device for recording bird-calls.
He is an eminent/imminent authority on the weather.
That approach has led/lead others to disaster.


Unit 9: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
PRESENTING MATERIAL Some of the main
methods of presenting your ideas, whatever type of
essay you are writing, are these:
1. By order of time. This is suitable for narrative and
discussion of the history or development of subjects
like roads, ships and nations.
2. By illustration and example. Here every paragraph
has a clear topic sentence which is developed by
reference to, say, real life, or literary, classical or
biblical persons, or historical events. Of course,
each illustration is carefully chosen to give weight to
your argument.
3. By enumeration, as in the description of Mr. Turvey-
drop in a previous unit. Point after point is presented
in an orderly, detailed development.
4. By making clear the causes and effects or results
referred to in the topic sentence, e.g.,
Tt is not surprising that modern man has tended
to break down under the strain of modern life.
Technical and scientific advances have changed our
way of life out of all recognition in a mere twenty
or thirty years. Man is now faced with an entirely
new kind of insecurity —that of total annihilation,
whether through deliberate malice or through a
tragic mistake. He has also to face the problems
which are as old as his race—the search for food,
shelter, affection and a sense of purpose. Place all
these conflicting worries together and one recog-
nises a crippling burden.’
5. By definition, e.g.,
‘Entertainment, in so much as it is a distraction
from our real concern in life, becomes of secondary
importance after all. Its weapons, radio, film and
television, the theatre and the opera, the ballet and
the sportsfield, can only entertain us if we are con-
tent to be passive, accepting the interpretation of
life being played out before us.’
6. By comparison and/or contrast. In the first, we
usually emphasize the qualities two persons, objects,
literary works have in common, though we also refer
to their differences; in the latter, we emphasize the
points of difference.
EXERCISE Compare and/or contrast radio drama
with stage drama. In your answer, try to use some of the
methods described in 1-5 above as paragraph structures.
OR Compare and/or contrast two characters from
a novel you have just read.
checked, but that of other people whom we probably
do not even know. Wc cannot do without other people’s
experience because modern society has accumulated
vast knowledge from the past and uses the services of
innumerable specialists.
We all know something about discriminating between
practical directions (e.g., 'This machine is operated by
manipulating these switches’) and biassed opinions
(e.g., ‘Blogg’s breakfast food is definitely the best on the
market’). In between these extremes, however, there
exists a lot of testimony or evidence about which we
have to be careful. We know that there are bad
observers who are certain to give inaccurate evidence.
We know that all memories are subject to a degree of
forgetfulness and distortion. There are also people who
cannot resist the temptation to embroider a story in
order to impress others. All too many newspapers tend
to give sensational or snippety accounts. And there is a
minority of people who, for some personal advantage,
do not hesitate to try to mislead deliberately.
How may we then be watchful of the evidence of others?
If possible the sources of evidence should be checked:
find who initiated it. This would at once kill rumour
and gossip of the ‘They say . . .’ or T’ve heard . . .’
variety. If no source can be found, you might decide
that the evidence is not fact but opinion. If the source
is located, then you must estimate its reliability. You
may critically enquire about things that may have been
overlooked or omitted. You may also seek corrobora-
tion of the evidence by appealing to another source.
Moreover, as your experience grows you will increas-
ingly rely on your own commonsense answer to the
question, Ts all this probable?’.
‘Facts’ (or ‘evidence’ or ‘testimony’) may be said to be
strong when independent observers agree about them;
when the general reliability of the source is well-known;
when they can be verified, as by further observation or
experiment; when many observations or tests have been
carried out; and when these ‘facts’ are in agreement with
the general body of knowledge.
DISCUSS
I. ‘Women are bad drivers.’
2. ‘They say Indonesia will attack eastern New Guinea
within five years.’
3. A newspaper reported that 500 men went on strike
at a motor factory. This was a correct but partial
account. What else might a reader have expected to
be told?
CLEARER THINKING
RELIABLE EVIDENCE? Most of the ideas upon
which our decisions and actions are based come to us
from others, second-hand or twentieth-hand; it is not
our own observation and experience that has then to be
EXERCISE Several History textbooks in common
use in Australian secondary schools give conflicting
figures on the number of people who received the right-
to-vote in Britain by the Reform Act of 1832. How
would you check on the ‘facts’ presented by these
books?


1. To let someone have his head.
2. To take something to heart.
3. To discover someone’s Achilles’ heel.
4. To die in harness.
5. To wash your dirty linen in public.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
ANALOGY: Used to show the similarity of people or
things in some characteristics or effects,
e.g., ‘Knowledge is to the mind what light is to the eye.’
‘What Donne was to the poetry of the seventeenth
century, Hopkins was to the poetry of the early
twentieth century.’
NOTE the different phrasing of similes, metaphors and
analogy. Identify the following sentences:
Knowledge is the light of the mind.
A good book is the lifeblood of a master spirit.
Like a painter mixing new colours, the con-
ductor blends every section of his orchestra into
harmony.
Study is to the true scholar what bread is to the
hungry.
A POINT OF STYLE
VERBIAGE: This is really the result of verbosity. Be
on your guard against such phrases as ‘in these circum-
stances’, ‘in that condition’, ‘in so far as’ and ‘with
regard to’. Watch for the unnecessary Latinising of
simple words such as ‘use’ (utilise), ‘symbol’ (symbolisa-
tion).
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
PREFIXES . . . Study the following:
1. UN(I) —one, as in unanimous, university.
Give THREE more
2. DU(O)- —two, as in duet, dual.
BI(S) —two, as in bisect, biscuit (lit. twice cooked).
Give another example of each
3. TRl—three, as in trio, tripod, triplet.
Give TWO more
4. QUA —four, as in quart, quarter, quadrangle.
Give TWO more
5. OCT—eight, as in octet, octave, octogenarian.
Give TWO more
6. DEC—ten, as in decade, decimal, decimate.
What is a decathlon? Why is December so called?
RULE: ‘Each’, ‘every’, ‘either’, ‘neither’, ‘everybody’,
‘anybody’, ‘nobody’ and ‘none’ are singular and require
related verbs and pronouns to be likewise singular,
e.g., Every man and woman (was, were) ready to go.
UNDERLINE THE SUBJECT AND THE CORRECT VERB
OR PRONOUN:
1. Each of the boys (take, takes) (their, his) lunch to
school.
2. Neither of the men (was, were) at all interested.
3. Anybody in (his, their) right senses would do the
4. Every word and gesture (reveal, reveals) a lot about
character.
5. Everybody (is, are) asked to bring (his, their) own
lunch.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. Have either of your friends come yet?
7. When she or her sister come to visit us we are
always pleased.
8. In that passage, ‘suds’, in my opinion, are plural.
9. Do you seriously think that Beryl talks just like
10. We watched with quiet pleasure the rowing boats
row up and down.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Exclamation marks
To denote excitement, surprise, forcefulness or a short
command, the exclamation mark is used.
e.g., What a world!
Strike me pink!
Get moving at once!
Halt!
She’s divine!
Oh, wake up to yourself!
Despite all you say, I saw the flying saucer!
PUNCTUATE THE FOLLOWING WITH A FULL STOP,
QUESTION MARK OR EXCLAMATION MARK;
1. Are you finished already
2. He asked whether the class had finished
3. What a life
4. How exciting it is
5. How exciting is it
6. What will you do for a living
7. What you will do for a living
8. Gerry asked what you would do for a living
9. Is he coming today
10. Larry asked whether the holiday would be fine


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 9
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
salary licence celebrate curious commentary
foreign license kerosene curiosity ventilation
elaborate compulsory liquor benefit consumption
opponent squall liquefy benefited emergency
courageous propellers withheld benefiting fortunately
diagram quay enamel beneficial superintendent
wholly marriage canoe singeing eucalyptus
penetrate chimneys canoeing gauge fascinating
gorgeous weird hungrily sovereignty extravagance
murmuring spoonful sheriff medicine generosity
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: penetrable, ventilated,
2. Turn into a person; canoe , benefit , consumption
fortunately
3. Put a stroke between the syllables of: singeing, fascinating, superintendent.
4. Change to nouns: compulsory
5. Change to adjectives: diagram
6. Spell the plurals of: lat;va
7. Write synonyms for; fascinating
8. Write antonyms for: elaborate
9. Show possession: the woman bag, the women
propel , elaborate
generosity , audacity-
cargo , mosquito
haphazard , blatant
invigorate , lucid
bags, the children toys.
10. Delete wrong word: He has renewed his car license/licence.
1 shall try to elicit/illicit the reasons from him.
Defeat has damaged the morale/moral of the troops.
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. We think you are too critical him.
2. I am hope of passing the exam.
3. Subordinates are responsible the manager.
4. You will soon get adjusted French.
the author.
5. She become acquainted
SELECT THE APT WORD
A paltry man and poor of mind is he who mocks at all
things, declares an old saying. Today these cautionary
words need to be directed at the numerous
so surly and bitter, who see nothing worthwhile in
society or the world at large.
(sneerers, cynics, pessimists, doubters)
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
1. ingenuous, artless, deceptive, candid.
2. infatuated, unperturbed, captivated, beguiled.
3. furtive, frank, covert, evasive.
4. astute, sagacious, discriminating, shallow.
5. verbose, laconic, pithy, curt.
SUBSTITUTE a word for;
1. Advocate of women’s rights
2. Deprive of the right-to-vote
3. Exclamation interrupting a speech
4. One who dies for his faith
5. Concerning empire or emperor


Unit 10; EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
A NIGHT AMONG THE PINES
Night is a dead monotonous period under a roof; but in
the open world it passes lightly, with its stars and dews
and perfumes, and the hours are marked by changes in
the face of Nature. What seems a kind of temporal
death to people choked between walls and curtains, is
only a light and living slumber to the man who sleeps
afield. All night long he can hear Nature breathing
deeply and freely; even as she takes her rest she turns
and smiles; and there is one stirring hour unknown to
those who dwell in houses, when a wakeful influence
goes abroad over the sleeping hemisphere, and all the
outdoor world are on their feet. It is then that the cock
first crows, not this time to announce the dawn, but like
a cheerful watchman speeding the course of the night.
Cattle awake on the meadows; sheep break their fast on
dewy hillsides, and change to a new lair among the
ferns; and houseless men, who have lain down with the
fowls, open their dim eyes and behold the beauty of the
night.
At what inaudible summons, at what gentle touch of
Nature, are all these sleepers thus recalled in the same
hour to life? Do the stars rain down an influence, or do
we share some thrill of mother earth below our resting
bodies? Even shepherds and old country-folk, who are
the deepest read in these arcana, have not a guess as to
the means and purpose of this nightly resurrection.
Towards two in the morning they declare the thing takes
place; and neither know nor inquire further. And at
least it is a pleasant incident. We are disturbed in our
slumber, only, like the luxurious Montaigne, ‘that we
may the better and more sensibly relish it’. We have a
moment to look upon the stars, and there is a special
pleasure for some minds in the reflection that we share
the impulse with all outdoor creatures in our neighbour-
hood, that we have escaped out of the Bastille of civili-
zation, and are become, for the time being, a mere kindly
animal and a sheep of Nature’s flock. (359 words)
(from Travels with a Donkey, by R. L. Stevenson)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) Explain: temporal; resurrection. (2)
(b) Why is night a ‘dead monotonous period under a
roof’? (1)
(c) What is the force of the word ‘choked’ in ‘people
choked between walls and curtains’? (1)
(d) What figure of speech is used to describe Nature in
the passage? (1)
(e) How effective is the simile describing the first cock-
crow? (2)
(f) Why arc the eyes of the ‘houseless men’ described
as ‘dim’ as they wake? (1)
(g) How successful is the first paragraph in creating an
image of friendly darkness? (2)
(h) ‘Arcana’ means ‘mysteries’. What is referred to here
by the word? (1)
(i) What is meant by ‘sensibly’ in this context? (1)
(j) Comment on the ideas and the expression of the
final sentence. (3)
CLEARER THINKING
SPEAKING THE SAME LANGUAGE. Since no two
people think alike, no two people can speak the same
language. Speaking the same language means much
more than making use of a common stock of words: it
means using words which have exactly the same shade
of meaning for the persons who are communicating
with each other. Do you think that if you began to talk
to your fellow students about Progress or Fun or Charity
or Romance they would understand and feel precisely
the way you do about such ideas?
We shall have more to say from time to time about the
misuse of words. For the moment, let us realise that in
any discussions words may arise which are vague, or
general, or liable to be misunderstood. The speaker has
a responsibility to strive to make clear the shade of
meaning he intends; the listener’s responsibility is to put
aside his preconceptions as much as he can and try to
appreciate the speaker’s meaning; both speaker and
listener are well advised to define plainly the most
important of the terms they use.
DISCUSS
1. Russian Communists declare their system of govern-
ment to be more democratic than the American
system. Probably most Americans would laugh at
this. Explain the point of view of both sides.
2. What do you mean by ‘democratic’?
3. In the Cold War conflict that has gone on since the
end of the Second World War these terms have been
used to describe the U.S.S.R. and U.S.A. and their
allies: East, West, the camp of peace, warmongers,
imperialists, Red butchers, capitalists, commies,
freedom-lovers, democrats, totalitarians, free world,
police states, the force of the future. . . . Who would
use each of these terms —and with what intent?
EXERCISE Next time you get involved in an argu-
ment about ideas, note the main words or terms that are
being used, and urge that before the argument goes any
further the meaning of these words or terms should be
clarified to the satisfaction of both sides.
(Sec Unit 2.) Here is a word game that demonstrates
the importance of mental flexibility in problem solving.
These letters, T-E-R-A-L-B-A-Y, spell a common
English word. To find it you will probably have to
attempt a great number of combinations unless you
are lucky. It has kept a lot of people awake at night,
including Queen Victoria. If it enrages you, or if you
think there isn’t a solution, you could, as a last resort,
write to us and ask.


1. Possession is nine-tenths of the law.
2. The Devil finds work for idle hands.
3. Speak of a man as you find him.
4. Still waters run deep.
5. Forbidden fruit tastes sweetest.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
PARADOX; A statement which seems, at first reading,
to be contradictory, but which contains truth when
examined carefully.
e.g., ‘The Child is father of the Man.’
‘The best way to learn a subject is to teach it.’
A POINT OF STYLE
RELATIVE PRONOUNS (AGREEMENT): You may
remember that a relative pronoun agrees with its antece-
dent in person, number and gender. Study the following
sentences and say why the verb is plural;
1 . He is one of those cricketers who play best when the
position of their team is critical.
2. They belong to one of those societies which insist
on keeping all procedure quite secret.
3. Shaw was one of the writers who chose the stage as
a platform for social criticism.
PUT A CROSS BESIDE THE SENTENCES WHICH ARE
CORRECT:
1. One of the players were hurt before lunch.
2. He was one of the players who were leaving the
field.
3. They met one writer who was covering the tour.
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
PREFIXES . . . Study the following:
1. CENT —hundred, as in centenary, century.
Give THREE more
2. PRE—before, as in prefix, pre-arranged.
Give THREE more
3. DE—away from, as in deduce, detract, despite.
Give ONE more
4. INTER —between, as in international, intercede.
Give ONE more
5. IN(TRA) (TRO) —into, as in introduce, intramural.
Give ONE more
6. IN—not, as in insufficient, insecure, impossible.
Give THREE more
RULE: ‘Either’ is used for two; ‘any one’ for more than
two. ‘Each other’ is used for two; ‘one another’ for
more than two.
e.g., (Either, any one) of the two books will do.
(Either, any one) of the seven boys may go.
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT ONE:
1. (Any one, either) of the twins may know the
answer.
2. (Either, any one) of the triplets will take the
message.
3. The three contenders had agreed to talk to (each
other, one another).
4. (Either, any one) of the points of the triangle may
be used in this example.
5. My male and female goldfish never fight (each
other, one another).
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. Everyone is sure to be tempted to buy either of
those three Siamese kittens.
7. Of the passengers on the ‘Dunbar’, all but one was
lost in the dreadful wreck.
8. The orchestra, to everyone’s delight, are to perform
in our town next week.
9. Snarling defiance, the trainer’s whip did not seem to
affect the big cat.
10. On Sundays our minister always goes to visit those
who are ill after the service.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Inverted commas.
1. Quotation marks or inverted commas are used at the
beginning and end of direct speech. It is a matter of
taste whether we use “double-quotes” or ‘single-
quotes’. In handwritten material, we believe, the
former are preferable, because there is a danger of
single-quotes not being seen; but in printed material
this danger does not arise, and publishers increas-
ingly favour single-quotes.
2. Quotation marks are used to mark off quoted words,
phrases, sentences or paragraphs. Where a passage
of several paragraphs is quoted, each new paragraph
should be introduced by inverted commas, but only
the final paragraph needs these marks at the end.
e.g., ‘lt was a brilliant April morning . . .
‘We had to get the plough ready . . .
‘The day passed uneventfully . . .’
3. Beware of using quotations awkwardly when they
are not complete sentences. Mould a quotation into
your own sentence.
e.g., It is awkward to say In his poem, ‘Upon
Westminster Bridge’, Wordsworth describes
London as ‘all that mighty heart is lying still’.
It is better to say—ln his poem, ‘Upon West-
minster Bridge’, Wordsworth describes London
as ‘that mighty heart’ which was ‘lying still’ in
the early morning calm.


Unit 10
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
commotion disaster parallel precise assimilation
evaporate disastrous paralleled precis definite
exhale extremely leveller origin definitely
cylinder leisure levelling solely definition
collision labour descend challenge approximately
literature labourer descent eruption mountainous
humour laborious descendant psalm extraordinary
humorous acquainted medi(a)eval official acceptance
ambitious cheque receipt treacherous monotonous
glamorous fatigue calendar advertisement accommodation
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix; acquainted, definite,
precise
2. Turn into a person; mountain , psalm
, origin
3. Put a stroke between the syllables of: disastrous, laborious, extraordinary.
4. Change to nouns; acquainted
, exhale , authentic
5. Change to adjectives: cylinder
, literature , bestiality
6. Spell the plurals of; studio
, octopus , erratum
7. Write synonyms for; commotion
. disaster . absolve
, extraordinary , boastful
8. Write antonyms for: humorous
9. Show possession: our country flag, those countries flags, Tom Jones bag.
10. Delete wrong word: I see that your/you’re ready at last.
Tell me who’s/whose going tomorrow?
The snake slid into it’s/its hole.
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1. You are responsible
2. Adjacent tl
these breakages.
Most of the parents who attended the meeting were
prepared to listen to both sides of the fluoride dispute.
A noisy minority, however, interjected so persistently
that they the meeting, causing
wrangling to break out all over the hall.
the tuckshop is the sports-store.
3. He seems confident
4. I have deprived you
5. Your book is marred
an easy victory.
all privileges.
(disturbed, disrupted, breached, ruptured)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. inhibit, restrain, stimulate, curb.
2. epitome, extension, abridgement, synopsis.
3. indispensable, requisite, essential, superfluous.
4. equable, variable, unruffled, serene.
5. incompatible, inharmonious, congenial, discordant.
SUBSTITUTE a verb (ending in -IFY) for;
1. To give evidence
2. To make clear
3. To compensate for damage
4. To make good an error
5. To slander


Unit 11: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
REVISION: THE SENTENCE. By now you will have
realised that the numerous exercises on points of style,
the ‘writer’s tools’ and correction of faulty sentences are
all part of your learning the art of composition. There-
fore we shall not deal with sentence faults in this section
but rather with the ways in which good sentences may
be composed.
The basic forms of sentences are simple (one clause
only), compound (two or more principal clauses) and
complex (a principal clause with one or more sub-
ordinate clauses). In complex sentences the writer may
choose to place his principal clause first, followed by
any number of subordinate clauses. Such a construc-
tion is called a loose sentence and is always easy to fol-
low because the most important idea is stated early and
does not run the risk of being lost in a number of pre-
ceding clauses. The one drawback to loose sentence
structure is the falling away of interest and attention
once the main idea has been stated. Some sentences
reverse the order of clauses and place the main idea last,
and this construction is called a periodic sentence. Such
a sentence commands attention and indeed concentra-
tion by holding the main idea until the end. It can be
an extremely successful method of achieving emphasis
and dignity in serious prose. In very long sentences, the
main idea may be placed in the middle of the subordin-
ate ideas to avoid vagueness and to preserve some kind
of balance.
EXERCISES; Comment on the structure of the follow-
ing sentences:
1. Shakespeare must have looked upon mankind with
perspicacity, in the highest degree curious and atten-
tive. (Johnson)
2. To listen to a loud noise which is noisy enough to
make speech inaudible, and not noisy enough to
make silence conventional, is a strangling cross-
purposes of contradiction. (Chesterton)
3. For the most wild, yet most homely narrative which
1 am about to pen, I neither expect nor solicit belief.
(Poe)
4. At the same time, and step by step with this increase
in the definition and intensity of what we feel which
accompanies our growing age, another change takes
place in the sphere of intellect, by which all things
are transformed and seen through theories and asso-
ciations as through coloured windows. (Stevenson)
5. 1 knew that 1 was hit and leaned over and put my
hand on my knee. My knee wasn’t there. (Heming-
ASSIGNMENT: Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) What use is History?
(b) 'We shall not establish a better society until there
is a return to discipline in the home.’
(c) Do you consider that theatres and other places of
entertainment should be open on Sundays?
CLEARER THINKING
VAGUE AND SPECIFIC, ABSTRACT AND CON-
CRETE, The ‘dictionary meaning’ of a word is no
more than a general meaning; no dictionary could pos-
sibly give all the shades of meaning that attach to words.
Synonyms are not words with exactly the same meaning;
they are words with roughly similar meanings. A dic-
tionary gives ‘fraud’, ‘deception’ and ‘illegality’ as syno-
nyms, but a thoughtful writer would want to use each of
these words in a context appropriate to it alone. That is
why we strive always for the Apt Word, preferring a
specific word to a vague one, a ‘concrete’ word to an
abstract one, and explaining what we mean when w'e
have to use terms such as ‘democracy’, ‘the people’,
‘citizenship’, ‘conscience’, ‘the electors’ duty’ and many
more.
DISCUSS; (1) Words that have more than one well-
known meaning, e.g., character, country, belief.
(2) Words that can be substituted for comparatively
neutral ones to achieve an emotional twist, e.g., daring/'
reckless, drinker/alcoholic, talk/wind-bagging, enthu-
siast/fanatic.
EXERCISE: Compare the choice of words in these
extracts from letters sent by competing firms to pros-
pective clients.
(A) Give us an opportunity to help you to help your-
self. Dumbleton’s, the friendly firm, is always at your
service. We can put our long years of experience at your
disposal. No matter what class of work concerns you—
we can do it at the best prices in the trade. Deal with
Dumbleton’s, where the customer is always right.
(B) We can help our clients in various ways. At 24-
hours notice we can get a representative to you with
samples and price lists. He will give you a definite
delivery date and can discuss our quantity discounts.
If you need specialist advice before ordering, a member
of our technical staff will call. Test our quotations—
you will find them keen. Our service is as handy to you
as your telephone. Ring XE 9876.


1. There is a time for all things.
2. Sweet are the uses of adversity.
3. The child is father of the man.
4. The road to hell is paved with good intentions.
5. The end justifies the means.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
SATIRE: The ridicule or humorous disapproval of
stupid customs, social mannerisms or particular persons.
To have literary worth, a satire must have apt humour
and cleverness of expression; if it lacks such stylistic
refinements, it is mere abuse.
e.g., Swift’s ‘Gulliver’s Travels’ is a satire of the English
society of his day; Pope’s ‘The Dunciad’, as its name
suggests, is a satire of stupidity and of the stupid people
he knew.
A POINT OF STYLE
ELEGANCIES: These are sometimes words which are
thought to be ‘more genteel’ than words in common use;
sometimes they are euphemisms and sometimes they are
completely incorrect in meaning. If you are writing of
everyday things and events, you will do well to choose
everyday words rather than attempt to dignify ordinary
actions by pompous language.
WRITE A SIMPLER WORD ALONGSIDE EACH OF THE
FOLLOWING:
assist imbibe
at this juncture indisposed
attire partake of
endeavour peruse
epistle repast
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
PREFIXES . . . Study the following;
1. MONO—one, as in monologue, monometer.
Give TWO more
2. A(D) —to, as in adhere, advance, accept.
Give TWO more
3. UN —not, as in unfair, unusual, unfit.
Give THREE more
4. CO(M)(L) —with, as in co-operate, colleague.
Give THREE more
5. NON—not, as in nonsense, nonconformist.
Give THREE more
6. E(X)(F) —out, as in elect, efface, exit.
Give TWO more
RULE; The verb ‘to be’ (am, are, is, was, etc.) takes the
same case after as before it.
e.g., It is (I, me).
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT PRONOUN:
1. I know that it was (he, him) who did it.
2. That is (she, her) of whom the headmistress spoke.
3. If it were (I, me), I should have disagreed.
4. It was not (we, us) who stole the town hall clock.
5. It was (them, they) who were selected for the tour.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. This much is certain: lam not as old as her, nor is
she as tall as me.
7. Each of the youths filled their shirt-fronts with the
stolen fruit and began to climb the fence.
8. You will find, as many students have, that good
notes are invaluable in any course.
9. Whom do you think they were?
10. I was very alarmed when I heard that you nar-
rowly escaped a violent death on the road last
week.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Inverted commas
(continued)
1. Inverted commas are used around the titles of all
novels, plays, poems and other publications:
‘War and Peace’, ‘As You Like It’, ‘Autumn’.
2. Quite acceptable nowadays is the practice of substi-
tuting for such inverted commas a line under the
complete title: War and Peace.
3. In writing your essays of literary criticism, it is
important that you take care with inverted commas
(or underlining).
e.g., Macbeth puzzles me (i.e., the man).
‘Macbeth’ puzzles me (i.e., the play).
4. Printers prefer, as a rule, to use italic script for titles,
and also for foreign words or phrases (unless these
have become familiar enough to be accepted into
English).
5. Occasionally we need to make a quotation within a
quotation. Notice the confusion that can arise:
‘Derek asked his brother to buy that new disc,
‘Beading with the Beatles’,’ I told them.
The confusion is ended when we present the title
with double inverted commas (if we are using single
ones), or underlined, or in italics, e.g.,
T enjoyed “Macbeth” more than “Julius Caesar”,’
he said.


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 11
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
ascent abolish prefer conscious accidentally
ascend abolition preference conscience bumptious
ascendancy catalogue preferable conscientious hopefully
ascension resource preferred innocent collapsible
gnarled casualty allege innocuous condemn
gnash apology allegation detention regrettable
savagery apologised deceit refer subterranean
delight innovation unnoticed referred allegiance
vicious epidemic endeavour equipped worshipped
michievous infectious vague efficiency pamphlet
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix; deceived, apologetic, catalogued
2. To three words in the lists above, ‘ful’ can be added:
3. Put a stroke between the syllables of; bumptious, subterranean, conscientious.
4. Change to nouns: condemn , hilarious , delude
5. Change to adjectives: affectation , bounty hallucination
6. Spell the plurals of: silo , criterion , halo
7. Write synonyms for: regrettable , divulge , garnish
8. Write antonyms for: deceit , indolent , segregate
9. Show possession: Bill Davis car, the mouse tail, two mice tails.
10. Delete wrong word: The courtier greeted the princess respectively/respectfully
As time passed/past they grew anxious.
He was welcomed formerly/formally into the club.
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. You are deserving more praise.
his criticism.
2. I was aggravated
3. Do not accede his request.
4. Payment makes me dependent him.
5. Bombay was afflicted polio.
SELECT THE APT WORD
Woolly and muddled thinking is unfortunately not rare.
Yesterday I heard a youth say that his brother had
caught flu germs walking in the open-air at night. This
particular form of careless expression is best labelled
(unclearness, vagueness, absurdity, ambiguity)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. severe, lavish, profuse, abundant.
2. elated, depressed, exultant, exhilarated.
3. precarious, dubious, assured, hazardous.
4. fawning, self-reliant, obsequious, servile.
5. sardonic, scornful, approving, derisive.
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. Art of negotiating with other nations
2. Prevent supplies reaching a country
3. A warlike attitude
4. Final warning to a country
5. Sum paid by a defeated country


Unit 12: EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
DISGRACEFUL SCENE IN LONDON
(On the occasion of Queen Elizabeth being booed in London
during the Stale visit by Greek Royalty.)
The involvement of Queen Elizabeth in a hostile demon-
stration unprecedented in English history in this century
is a doubly dismaying event. It was a direct and brutal
insult to a warm and lovable lady, far more distressing
to her than to her guests. It was a deliberate attempt to
involve in politics a Monarch whose sense of duty and
integrity have always led her scrupulously to avoid such
an involvement. Further it was an attempt, by a particu-
larly cowardly kind of blackmail, to influence the
foreign policy and relationships of the British Govern-
ment, which must always be concerned to protect the
dignity and good name of the Crown.
The ostensible motive for this behaviour is concern
about Greece’s political prisoners men who fought
under the Communist Markos in the civil war of
1947-49. Although in this connection too little is heard
about Communist atrocities in that savage struggle,
there is wide regret in democratic countries that the
Greek Government, long firmly established, has not
declared a political amnesty and released the 950 Com-
munists in its prisons. However, as the calculating
among the British demonstrators must know, the last
way to encourage the Greek Government to hurry in
releasing them is to submit Greek Royalty to a com-
paign of abuse and insult.
But then it is very doubtful whether the demonstrators
really care about the liberty of the Greek Communists.
Their primary concern seems to be protest —the more
disorderly the better—for its own sake. And there can-
not be the slightest doubt that they are being organized
and exploited by those with vested interests in civil dis-
order, contempt for the law, the embarrassment of any
but Communist authorities, and the disruption of
Western morale. (284 words)
(from an editorial. The Sydney Morning Herald, 13/7/63)
COMPREHENSION questions:
Paragraph I
(a) Explain: unprecedented; integrity; scrupulously. (3)
(b) How was the action ‘a particularly cowardly kind of
blackmail’? (2)
Paragraph II
(c) Explain: ostensible; atrocities. (2)
(d) What is meant by ‘a political amnesty’? What is to
be the result of the amnesty here? (2)
(e) Is the demonstration likely to achieve its aim? Give
a reason for your answer. (1)
Paragraph 111
(f) What does the writer consider to be the motive of
the demonstrators? (1)
(g) Explain: exploited; vested interests in civil disorder.
(2)
(h) How is such a demonstration likely to disrupt
Western morale? (2)
CLEARER THINKING
RATIONALIZATION. What is your ideal of clear
thinking? Probably, it is not different from ours: you
would like to see everybody calmly contemplating the
problems of the world, studying all the factors involved,
and then arriving at the best possible solutions.
Unfortunately, we are a long way from realizing this
ideal—chiefly because people are seldom able to take a
calm detached view of their problems. We have seen
how faults can arise in observation, in memory, and in
the language with which we communicate between one
another. But even if observation, memory and language
gave us no trouble, we should still have the tendency
that is in all of us for our ‘hearts to dictate to our
heads’— for our desires, our feelings, our habits and,
in general, our self-interest to rule our reason. That is
what psychologists call ‘rationalization’. Let us look at
some examples.
In /Esop’s famous fable, the fox desired the grapes
hanging overhead, and he thought them to be lush,
delicious; when he failed to reach them, he thought up
‘reasons’ as to why he really did not want them—they
were sour grapes! All of us are tempted to put off tasks
that are odious—and to find ‘reasons’ that justify our
procrastination (I’ll take it easy tonight, then I’ll be
fresher for study tomorrow night!). All of us tend, too, to
impose our wishes upon events. This is the well-known
habit of ‘wishful thinking’, as when I don’t take a rain-
coat because 1 ‘think’ it will get fine —but really I have
not carefully assessed the weather; carrying the coat is
a nuisance, so 1 rationalize about the weather turning to
fine.
Shortly after the assassination of President Kennedy
a correspondent reported from the city of Dallas:
‘Nearly everybody here believes that Lee Oswald shot
the President. And nearly everybody believes Oswald
was only a cog in a vicious conspiracy. The Right
blames the Left. The Left blames the Right.’ (S.M.H.,
28/1 1/63.)
DISCUSS; (1) How does the Dallas example highlight
the human tendency towards rationalization?
(2) ‘Everyone has been guilty at some time or other
of wishful thinking.’
EXERCISE. (1) Think of a brief example of wishful
thinking; (2) give a more detailed example of rationali-
zation in which a person (or committee, or government,
etc.) selects from a mass of evidence only those things
that suit him.


1. To put one’s pride in one’s pocket.
2. To live under petticoat government.
3. To pull oneself up by the shoe-strings (or boot-
straps).
4. To cut the ground from under a person’s feet.
5. To make a mountain out of a mole-hill.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
IRONY: A statement which seems to say the opposite
of what is really meant, there being something in the
tone or manner of the speaker, or in the context of a
written statement, to indicate the real intention.
e.g., ‘He was my friend, faithful and just to me:
But Brutus says he was ambitious;
And Brutus is an honourable man.'
(Mark Antony’s oration over Caesar)
DRAMATIC IRONY; This occurs in drama or the
novel when the audience or the reader perceives a sig-
nificance of meaning which is not realised by the charac-
ters.
e.g., ‘A little water clears us of this deed.’
(Lady Macbeth speaking of the murder)
A POINT OF STYLE
CIRCUMLOCUTION: This literally means ‘speaking
around’. Thus any expression which flounders along,
never becoming concise, always just on the edge of clear
thought, is circumlocution. Frequently it suffers from
unnecessary repetition of ideas, simply because the
writer or speaker is unsure of his argument.
e.g., ‘Lassitude seems to be a word unknown to the
vocabulary of the swallows.’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
PREFIXES . . . Study the following:
1. RE—back, again, as in revert, retell, resign.
Give THREE more
2. PRO—forward, as in propose, produce, proceed.
Give TWO more
(Sometimes ‘instead of, as in pronoun)
3, D 1S —apart, as in divert, dismiss, discern,
not, as in dislike, discontinue.
Give ONE of each
4. SUB —under, as in subnormal, subordinate.
Give TWO more
5. TRANS —across, over, as in transport, translate.
Give ONE more
6. TELE —far off, as in television, telephone.
Give TWO more
7. CIR(CUM) —around, as in circumlocution, circle.
Give TWO more
RULE: Use 'shall' after T and ‘we'; otherwise use
'will'. (Sec exception in the next Unit.)
e.g,, I (shall, will) leave now.
He (shall, will) go soon.
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT WORD:
1. We (shall, will) soon meet.
2. You (shall, will) hear from me in due course.
3. I (shall, will) probably sec him tomorrow.
4. They (shall, will) be the first to benefit.
5. We (shall, will) arrive in the afternoon.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so);
6. You shall sec me standing at the corner pro-
vided you are not late.
7. Every man among them were experts in their
respective fields of agricultural science.
8. The repeated attacks on our shipping was a cause
of deep anxiety.
9. No one but her could possibly have done such an
infernally stupid thing.
10. Mrs. Beatton paints the house as well as her
husband.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Direct Speech,
The rule for the use of inverted commas around direct
speech is a simple one: inverted commas begin and end
all spoken passages. Study the punctuation of the fol-
lowing examples.
(a) ‘Every student should arrange good conditions for
home-study,’ declared the teacher.
(b) ‘Every student,’ declared the teacher, 'should
arrange good conditions for home-study.'
(c) ‘Good conditions are essential for home-study,"
declared the teacher. ‘Every student should try to
secure them.’
(d) ‘Good conditions are essential,’ declared the teacher.
‘Every student should try to improve on what he
has. Effective home-study is impossible amidst
noise and confusion.’
REMEMBER;
1. A new speaker is always given a new paragraph,
even if he says only a few words.
2. When one speaker continues for more than one
paragraph, each paragraph begins with inverted
commas, but only the last paragraph is closed with
inverted commas.


SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1. Irrespective your views, I’m going.
2. This does not admit a second opinion.
3. He is desirous meeting you.
4. He will inflict Bob the maximum sentence.
5. Negligence is indicative his attitude.
The writer’s art consists largely in making a message
simple, clear and attractive. An example of what I
mean is Christ’s of the sower,
which conveys profound ideas that at once capture the
attention of everybody.
(fable, myth, story, parable, allegory)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. agreement, discrepancy, inconsistency, difference.
1. Thought out beforehand
2. seditious, rebellious, loyal, subversive.
2. An associate in a crime
3. tact, crudeness, discretion, prudence.
3. Failure to exercise due care
4. acknowledge, recant, retract, disclaim.
4. Completely freed from blame
5. ennui, buoyancy, boredom, langour.
5. Settlement by mutual concessions
40 REVISE UNIT 7
WORK IN BLUE — CORRECT IN RED
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
mattress occur councillor transferred piteous
scarcity occurred counsellor transference organisation
pedal occurrence detach confiscate existence
conceit compelled consistently indulge unnecessary
postpone miniature hesitate indulgence accomplice
impostor sphere convenience penniless accomplish
conceivable emigration considerable sculptor accompaniment
establish committee occupied sculpture accompanied
foreign kerosene medicine benefited emergency
gauge propellers sovereignty curiosity liquor
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: conceivable,
consistent,
considerable
2. Turn into a person: emigration , occupied
, accompanied
3. To. three words in the lists above, ‘ment’ can be added;
4. Change to nouns: compel , consistent
~ confiscate
, residue
5. Change to adjectives; hesitate , sphere
6. Spell the plurals of: kidney , stimulus.
~ hippopotamus
, assurance
7. Write synonyms for: accomplish , impostor
8. Write antonyms for: scarcity , conceit ...
, expansion
9. Show possession; the fly wing, the flies wings, the princess gown.
10. Delete wrong word; He liked to gambol/gamble at cards.
Take care or the flames will envelope/envelop you.
Why don’t you lay/lie down for a while?


Unit 13: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
Sentences, whatever their structure, vary in length, in
opening and in order of words. You need to be very
sure of the effect you wish to create when you consider
what form your sentences will take. A succession of
short sentences is jerky to read and lacks a sense of
continuity because the frequent full stops keep inter-
rupting the flow of thought. On the other hand, such
abruptness may be required to create a feeling of ten-
sion or intense emotion or shock. Certainly a single
short sentence can have a shattering effect on the atmos-
phere of the passage. Longer sentences, while they
help to suggest a smoothness of expression and a sure-
ness of thought, do have their pitfalls. Make sure that
you do not separate the subject from its verb so far that
you lose sight of the required construction; beware of a
string of ‘ands’ or ‘buts’ which present a very boring
pattern to the mind; avoid linking ideas which have no
real connection; it is much better to write a short, uni-
fied sentence than a long unconnected one. Try to vary
your sentence openings by using adjectives, adverbs,
participles or phrases. You may wish to emphasize a
point by repeating it, but beware of unnecessary repe-
tition in a single sentence. You may like to experiment
with exclamations or questions as a way of attracting
your reader’s attention, but avoid over-use of such
devices. You may even try the effect of inversion of the
subject, as in ‘Quite unprepared for such an exacting
task and suffering a speech impediment that caused him
extreme nervousness, came George VI to the throne.’
STUDY the variations in the sentences below:
1. (Of a hot day) Now blinds are let down, and doors
thrown open, and flannel waistcoats left off, and
cold meat preferred to hot, and wonder expressed
why tea continues so refreshing, and people delight
to sliver lettuces into bowls, and apprentices water
doorways with tin canisters that lay several atoms of
dust. (Hunt)
2. As long as you are journeying in the interior of the
desert you have no particular point to make for as
your resting-place. (Kinglake)
3. What a piece of work is man! (Shakespeare)
4. The world is ashamed of being virtuous —my uncle
Toby knew little of the world; and therefore when
he felt he was in love with widow Wadman, he had
no conception that the thing was any more to be
made a mystery of, than if Mrs. Wadman had given
him a cut with a gap’d knife across his finger: had it
been otherwise—yet as he ever looked upon Trim as
a humble friend; and saw fresh reasons every day of
his life to treat him as such—it would have made no
variation in the manner in which he informed him of
the affair.
T am in love, corporal!’ quoth my uncle Toby.
(Sterne)
ASSIGNMENT. Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) How I should like to be taught English (or any
other subject you wish).
(b) Man’s use of fire.
(c) If you were able to ask for three wishes to come
true, what would you ask for? Give your reasons for
your choice.
CLEARER THINKING
ON GUARD AGAINST RATIONALIZATION. From
your previous discussion of rationalization, you have
perhaps begun to see how easy it is to find ‘reasons’—
for anything! In the twentieth century we have had
massive examples of this when most of the peoples in
the warring nations have found ‘reasons’ for justifying
their particular side. In elections, all too many people
vote not according to a considered judgement of policies
and parties but according to the way their parents voted,
or the way other people of a similar income vote, and
so on.
A distinguished thinker, James Harvey Robinson, has
said; ‘Few of us take the pains to study the origin of our
cherished convictions; indeed, we have a natural repug-
nance to so doing. We like to continue to believe what
we have been accustomed to accept as true, and the
resentment aroused when doubt is cast upon any of our
assumptions leads us to seek every manner of excuse for
clinging to them. The result is that most of our so-called
reasoning consists in finding arguments for going on
believing as we already do.’ (‘The Mind in the Making’,
p. 82.)
How may we guard against the tendency to rational-
ise? The first need is to be clearly aware that such a
tendency exists. Second, we need to cultivate the prac-
tice of self-appraisal, the capacity to (as it were) see
ourselves from a distance. Or, as Bobbie Bums put it:
‘O wad some PowT the giftie gie us
To see oursels as others see us!’
Third, we need an open mind, open to examine new
ideas and to close down firmly on everything worthwhile
that comes its way. Fourth, we need what is all too
rare —the ability to listen to others. Fifth, we need to
apply all the rules we know about reasoning. This is a
lot to ask, but nothing less can hope to be satisfactory.
DISCUSS. (1) ‘What we need is not so much an open
mind as an attitude of distrust towards our own ideas.’
(2) ‘Our thinking should be cool, slow and detached, so
that our feelings are unable to override our reason.’
EXERCISE. Here is an exercise essentially to be carried
out in a private hour. Consider the term ‘self-appraisal’.
Can you spend an hour seeing yourself ‘as others see
you’? Especially, note your common wishes, feelings,
and emotions, and resolve that these will not uncon-
sciously colour your thinking. Resolve that each prob-
lem will be assessed critically, and that a reasoned
decision will be made.


1. There is no time like the present.
2. The wish is father to the thought.
3. To be forewarned is to be forearmed.
4. There is many a true word spoken in jest.
5. There is many a slip between cup and lip.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
SARCASM; A sharp, bitter statement, intended to hurt
or belittle the victim. This should not be confused with
irony: sarcasm says exactly what it means, whereas
irony says the opposite of what it means.
e g., ‘lf dullness were the chief qualification for a politi-
cian, he would be the leader of his party.’
Eric Partridge, in ‘Usage and Abusage’, shows the dis-
tinction between irony and sarcasm thus:
‘ln Locke’s “If ideas were innate, it would save much
trouble to many worthy persons”, worthy is ironical; the
principal clause as a whole is sarcastic—as is also the
complete sentence.’
A POINT OF STYLE
USE OF SUBJUNCTIVE; Verbs are used in the sub-
junctive mood to express desire or supposition which is
not expected to become fact. When it is used without
an auxiliary verb, the subjunctive takes the plural form
of the indicative.
e.g., ‘lf I were you, 1 should complain to them.’
‘lf he were king, you would be queen.’
‘1 insist that he forget the problem.’
‘lt is necessary that she remain at home.’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
PREFIXES . . . Study the following:
1. ANTl—against, as in anticlimax, anti-T.B.
Give ONE more
2. ANTE—before, as in antecedant, anticipate.
Give ONE more
3. BENE—well, as in beneficial, benefactor.
Give TWO more
4. CON(COUNTER) against, as in contradict,
counteract.
Give TWO more
5. OB(OF)(OP) against, as in offend, obstruct,
oppose.
Give ONE of each
6. POST —after, as in postscript, postdate, postpone.
Give ONE more
7. SE—apart, away, as in secrete, seclude, separate.
Give ONE more
8. A(N) —without, as in apathy, anonymous, anarchy.
Give ONE more
RULE: To achieve emphasis, reverse the normal use of
‘shall’ and ‘will’.
e.g., I (shall, will) defeat you!
They (shall, will) certainly win!
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT WORD:
1. You (shall, will) hear from me without fail!
2. I (shall, will) crash through your opposition!
3. I promise you, 1 (shall, will) be on time.
4. They (shall, will) not pass!
5. She (shall, will) be disgraced before the whole
school!
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. We shall storm and take the fort by dusk or die in
the attempt.
7. Though I had high hopes, it is you who are to go,
not me.
8. I’ve spoken to everyone except he, and 1 have not
yet found a clue.
9. Indonesia, as well as China, have decided to oppose
Malaysia.
10. Corporal punishment should be restricted to
parents.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Apostrophes.
The commonest use of the apostrophe is in showing
possession, as in ‘Don’s book’. This we shall treat in
Unit 14. Here, meanwhile, are examples of the other
uses of the apostrophe:
1. To indicate omission of a letter or letters, or of a
figure or figures, e.g.,
I’ve, he’s, don’t, it’ll, he’d, o’clock, ’tis, tarn o’
shanter; I was born in ’4B; a veteran of the ’l4-’lB
N. 8.; Usage has eliminated some apostrophes. There
was a time when we wrote ’bus, ’plane and ’phone
being conscious that these were contractions of omnibus,
telephone and aeroplane. Today, the apostrophe is no
longer required.
2. To denote plurals of letters and figures.
e.g., Dot your i’s and cross your t’s; the Depression
of the 1930’5.
N. 8.; Usage appears to be determining that we shall
write: the four M.P.s, the seven B.A.s. There was a
time when an apostrophe was written before the s,
though no possession was involved.


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 13
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
survey separate ballot technical dilapidated
surveyor separable balloted technician contributor
umbrella fibre slaughter technique flannelette
shrubbery fibrous budget technology peculiarity
tragedy moustache suicide boycott venture
asphalt illiterate physician sever venturesome
detergent pavilion fidgety severe persevere
personnel schedule bulletin colonel perseverance
literature laborious descendant eruption acquainted
humorous disastrous parallel challenge extraordinary
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix; scheduled, separable,
paralleled
2. Write antonyms for: tragedy , peculiar , humorous
3. What is the feminine of; bachelor , tragedian , masseur
4. Change to nouns; illiterate , frugal , dilapidated
5. Change to adjectives: tragedy , suicide
6. Spell the plurals of: piano , salmon
7. Write synonyms for: sever.
technology
curriculum
severe , venturesome
8. Write homonyms for; profit , freeze , gorilla
9. Show possession: a hero welcome, a gentleman valet, those gentlemen hats.
10. Delete wrong word: Mr. Calwell moved a censor/censure against the government,
He paid her a gracious compliment/complement.
Pat is a good friend in times of adversary/adversity.
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
I. He is deficient commonsense.
2. Suffering made him impervious pain.
3. This makes you eligible a prize.
4. I shall dispense his services.
5. Your drunkenness left me devoid pride.
SELECT THE APT WORD
Sailing in the Bight is notoriously hazardous. We were
deterred when the evening brought gusty winds and
sweeps of rain and great thunder. On such a
night it would have been the height of folly to put out to
(disturbed, disorderly, violent, turbulent)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. eradicate, extirpate, preserve, annihilate.
2. synonymous, dissimilar, equivalent, interchangeable.
3. discretion, rashness, prudence, wariness.
4. uphold, renounce, relinquish, abjure.
5. sanguine, despondent, optimistic, buoyant.
SUBSTITUTE a verb (ending in -ATE) for
1. To point out
2. To give up a throne
3. To destroy utterly
4. To make young again
5. To free from blame


Unit 14: EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
THINGS TO COME
Science fiction currently enjoys enormous popularity.
It has also become academically respectable. In a talk
on ‘Novels about the Future’ Mr, Laurence Lerner sees
the ‘straight’ prophetic novel as laying far less stress on
technology for its own sake than science fiction—but
the dividing line is more difficult to draw than one might
think. Indeed, one can say that the good science fiction
writer, having created his menace or technological ‘gim-
mick’, ought then to concern himself not with scientific
or pseudo-scientific explanations but with its effect on
the human beings in his story: and if his story contains
no human beings, then probably only the hardened
addict will take much interest in it. A surprising amount
of good science fiction is still written not by scientists
but by old-fashioned humanists who, one sometimes
feels, are as genuinely lost in their own strange worlds
as their characters are. Even H. G. Wells, a scientist by
training, always began by placing real people in real
settings, persuading us into the unknown via the known,
and ended by stressing that the victories of science are
all victories not of the machine but of the human mind.
Mr. Lerner contrasts science fiction with novels which
use the future in order to say something—usually some-
thing grim about the present (as the old Roman
satirists used the past in order to castigate the present).
It is of course true that in ‘Nineteen Eighty Four’
Orwell, in describing his nightmare London of the
future, was merely exaggerating the discomforts of
London at the end of the second world war.- As Mr.
Lerner says, why assume that things are always going
to get worse? We have simply replaced the Victorian
belief in progress with our own fear of deterioration and
annihilation.
As Wilfred Owen said, all the artist can do is to warn.
He is not trying to warn us of the possible outcomes of
our own folly but is rather saying: Tf the world we know
suddenly vanished, how would we react?’ Perhaps the
fascination of the genre lies in its optimism, in its
demonstration of man’s technical mastery over space
and time—a mastery which we see unfolded in real life
every day, while the powerful political nightmares of
Orwell remain in the imagination whence they sprang.
(380 words)
(from an editorial in The Listener, 26/7/62.)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) What is meant by the phrase ‘academically respec-
table?’ (2)
(b) What is the difference between science fiction and a
novel that is merely set in the future? (1)
(c) What is a gimmick? What is meant by it here? (2)
(d) Explain ‘pseudo’ in the word ‘pseudo-scientific’. (1)
(e) What is meant by a ‘hardened addict’ of science
fiction? (2)
(f) Explain ‘castigate’. (1)
(g) What is ‘annihilation’? Why are we so afraid today?
(2)
(h) The word ‘genre’ refers to science fiction. What
does it mean? (1)
(i) In your own words, explain why science fiction
appeals to modern readers. (3)
CLEARER THINKING
EXAMINING AN ARGUMENT. Many speeches, de-
bates and other forms of sustained argument contain
examples of both good and bad reasoning. Evaluate the
following extract from a speech, using the general guide
given in Unit 5 for the examination of an argument.
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Australians who have the welfare of their country at
heart have long agreed that it is damaging to our future
prospects to have more than half of our population
concentrated in a handful of coastal cities. Let us move
on from talking about this to acting to forcing the
tired men of Canberra to see decentralization as our
number one priority!
Only last week, alas, we had the spectacle of a minis-
ter of the Crown advocating that Federal funds should
be spent on alleviating the parking problem in Mel-
bourne. Not a word did he say about the crying need
of the country areas for vastly expanded road networks.
The hostility of Indonesia to Malaysia has reminded
us that Australia stands in a precarious relationship
with a number of new Asian powers. Any such power
possessing an effective navy could destroy seven or eight
of our coastal cities and thereby tear the heart out of
our defence industries. If, on the other hand, we stimu-
lated the growth of a large number of country towns,
establishing industries in them, no aggressor could
achieve such a knock-out victory over us.
The economists tell us that nations prosper when
numerous small cities and large towns are scattered
throughout the countryside. This is the alternative to
our crazy pattern of a single giant metropolis with a
vast countryside which lacks substantial towns. Manu-
facturing industry must be brought into the country
centres so that machine goods and primary produce
exchange readily and locally—to the mutual benefit of
the farmers and the manufacturers. Only this can pro-
vide young people in the rural areas with job oppor-
tunities which they are obliged at present to seek in the
distant metropolis.


1
conduct
2
respect
3
convenient
4
circle
5
legal
6
ennial
7
vene
1. Too many cooks spoil the broth.
2. Trust in God and keep your powder dry.
3. Virtue is its own reward.
4. Well begun is half done.
5. If it’s worth doing, it’s worth doing well.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
INNUENDO: A hint or insinuation, usually derogatory,
which suggests an idea indirectly.
e.g., ‘The bookmaker made a fortune on the state’s race-
courses and left part of his wealth to his brother—
a research chemist!’
‘The overwhelming victory for the Government
party in the election surprised nobody who had
studied the distribution of electorates.’
A POINT OF STYLE
AMBIGUITY; This has been dealt with in the sentence
correction exercises of Units 6 and 7, but we repeat it
here as it is such a vital point of style to remember.
Take particular care with participles and the placement
of phrases. Make sure that every pronoun used has a
clear reference to some noun or pronoun in the sentence.
e.g., ‘He told the judge that he had made a mistake.’
The second ‘he’ is ambiguous since it is not clear
whether the judge or the man speaking to him has made
the mistake.
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
PREFIXES . . . Study the following:
1. HYPER—above, beyond, as in hyperbole.
Give ONE more
2. MALE—bad, as in malformed, malefactor.
Give TWO more
3. EXTRA—beyond, as in extramural, extracurricular.
Give TWO more
4. SEMl—half, partly, as in semi-conscious.
Give TWO more
5. POLY, MULTI many, as in polysyllabic, multi-
tude.
Add to gamy; lingual.
What does each word mean?
REVISION: Add prefixes to the following and give the
meaning of the complete word:
RULE: When, in comparisons, the verb is understood
after ‘as’ or ‘than’, the pronoun must always be in the
nominative form.
e.g., My brother is taller than (I, me) (am).
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT PRONOUN:
1. You resisted him as much as (I, me).
2. They tried as hard as (we, us).
3. I left later than (her, she).
4. We hurried much more than (they, them).
5. You are not more modest than (I, me).
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. Normally not as fast as him, she kept pace with
him successfully today.
7. Ido not say that either of these men are guilty, but
I do say that each of them know something about
the crime.
8. Tom, like me, believes that it is her who will attend
the reception in Jean’s absence.
9. Your appearance, as well as your manner of speak-
ing to subordinates, are not in your favour.
10. If all the impurities are not removed from this
flour, it will deprive the bread of its good reputa-
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
Apostrophes (Possessive).
Some students continually have difficulty with the ’s,
although a little thought about method would soon solve
the problem for all time. Take your pick from these
alternative methods:
1. THE EASIEST WAY. There was no apostrophe in
our language centuries ago. Possession had to be
indicated by adding -es to a noun as in a knightes
armour or a daeges work (a day’s work). The -es
was always sounded as a full syllable. Because this
was slow and clumsy, the e was gradually dropped
and an apostrophe was used to mark its omission.
The remaining s could thus be joined to the previous
syllable. Hence, ’s became the sign of possession,
and we can state this rule for its use: to show posses-
sion add ’s to singular and plural nouns, but omit
the s if you get a clumsy sound (it is then understood
to be there but is not sounded). This is so simple
that you might not believe that it works. There is
another, more analytical, method of reaching the
same result.
2. ANOTHER WAY. Add’s to singular nouns and
only the apostrophe to plural nouns (a bird’s nest;
three birds’ nests). There are important exceptions
to this rule.
(a) ’s is added to plural nouns that do not end in s
(women’s, sheep’s, geese’s).
(b) only the apostrophe is added to singular nouns
when the addition of an s gives a clumsy sound
(Jesus’ sake, Archimedes’ principle, Mr. Men-
zies’ speech).


SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1 . Speed is essential our success.
2. You are gloating my misfortune.
3. Davies is skilled his trade.
4. She is sensitive good music.
5. The disease made him immune further attack.
For a whole week a dreadful storm lashed the ship
carrying the Robinsons. When it
they found to their consternation that they had been
deserted by the crew, all of whom had put to sea in
small boats.
(subsided, diminished, waned, ebbed, abated)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
SUBSTITUTE a word for;
1. intrepid, craven, dauntless, valiant.
1 . The right to vote
2. aberration, deviation, normality, divergence.
2. Law-making part of government
3. fretful, placid, petulant, peevish.
3. A bill passed by parliament
4. circumspect, prudent, careless, judicious.
4. Citizens’ vote on a special issue
5. temerity, caution, precipitancy, rashness.
5. Belief in change without revolution
46 REVISE UNIT 9
WORK IN BLUE — CORRECT IN RED
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
allot fulfil install deter propaganda
allotment fulfilment installation deterred bereavement
allotted fulfilled instalment deterrent cigarette
allocate professor doctor electricity ambassador
distil sponsor supervisor electrician mannequin
bachelor surgeon masseur solicitor chiropodist
lieutenant lawyer playwright musician governor
pensioner optician satellite gossiped government
gnarled casualty allege condemn conscience
abolition apology conscious collapsible conscientious
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: fulfilled,
dispensable,
deterred
2. Turn into a person: distil , apology
3. Put a stroke between the syllables of; playwright, installation, electrician.
propaganda
4. Change to nouns: allocate , inspire
reclaim
5. Change to adjectives; optician , calamity
veracity
6. Spell the plurals of: merino , dingo
parenthesis
outlandish
7. Write synonyms for: demonstrate , calamity
8. Write antonyms for: dejected .garbled
veracity
9. Show possession; two girls cases, Charles birthday, Tom Moss farm
10. Delete wrong word: He is a man of high principles/principals.
The mantle/mantel of leadership has fallen on him.
1 practice/practise the piano regularly.


Unit 15: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
REVISION: THE PARAGRAPH. If every paragraph
is well planned, the composition as a whole will be
well planned and the writer’s theme will emerge fully
developed to a satisfying conclusion. To test the unity
of a paragraph you could think out its essence in a single
sentence; thereby you ensure that superfluous material
has not intruded. You may prefer to play safe and
always begin a paragraph with its topic sentence. As in
the construction of the loose sentence, this method is
sure to keep you within the limits you have set for the
subject.
We cannot consider a paragraph in isolation; it gains
much of its real significance through its relationship
with the ideas in the preceding and following para-
graphs. In every paragraph except the first, you need to
consider whether your opening word, phrase or sen-
tence smoothly bridges the gap between the two sections
of your argument.
Far too often does one find in senior composition that
an excellent idea, which has been forgotten in its appro-
priate paragraph, has been thrust into a later para-
graph. As you write, keep glancing back at the com-
pleted paragraphs before beginning new ones and you
will maintain control .over the continuity of your argu-
ment.
EXERCISE. Below are sets of final sentences in para-
graphs followed by the first sentences of the next para-
graph. Notice how they are linked.
1. (The Psychological Danger of Advertising.) On any
but the shortest of short-term views, the engineering
of consent can be relied upon to breed apathy and a
feeling of impotence, at first baffled, ultimately
resentful.
1 am inclined to think that these feelings of
resentment which we know to be aroused in the long
run by any form of mass persuasion represent the
one ray of hope in our present situation. . . .
(from The Listener, 16/3/61)
2. (Dress) A French woman is a perfect architect in
dress . . . she conforms to general fashion only when
it happens not to be repugnant to private beauty.
Our ladies, on the contrary, seem to have no
other standard for grace but the run of the town . . .
(from On Dress, by Goldsmith)
3. (Malaysia) But for Australians it also signifies the
virtual withdrawal of British authority from Asia.
It means that Australia is now a lonely Western
Power amid Asian Powers.
That is one reason why we can be glad that
Malaysia is what it is.
( S.M.H. 16/9/63)
ASSIGNMENT. Write a paragraph of at least five sen-
tences on THREE of the following: (a) Happiness;
(b) The Door-to-Door Salesman; (c) 1 enjoy Western
films because . . . ; (d) A Discarded Hat; (e) Keeping a
Diary; (f) A Baby Discovering His Hands.
CLEARER THINKING
THE ARTS OF PERSUASION. In recent years there
has been a great deal of experimental and practical
hypnosis. It has established beyond doubt the immense
suggestibility of the human mind. We imbibe ideas, atti-
tudes and mannerisms all too easily from our environ-
ment. This has its good side in that we learn a lot of
things without needing always to make a conscious
effort; but it has a bad side, too, in that we are unreason-
ably influenced by other people’s talk and actions even
to the extent of taking on ‘conditioned’ personalities
which are undoubtedly different from the personalities
we would have if we consciously moulded them for
ourselves.
Persuasive forces surround us: people, newspapers,
books, radio, television and—the most calculating per-
suader of all—advertising. All lay claim to our atten-
tion. They want to win us to some point of view. Noth-
ing is more certain than that this state of affairs will
continue and steadily intensify. We cannot but accept
as a reality that the persuaders will go on trying to
influence us by presenting their views as forcefully as
they can.
We have already stated (Unit 5) that in examining an
argument persuasive devices should be noted—-briefly,
so that they do not deflect attention from the main task,
which is to assess the central points of the argument.
The arts of the persuaders take many, and sometimes
subtle, forms. They may use emotive language, appeal-
ing to our emotions rather than our reason. They will
probably appeal to our strongest self-interests, as when
an advertiser says, ‘You deserve the added leisure
which Winkle’s Washing Machine brings you.’ They
may use repetition, as does the politician or advertiser
with his slogan. If they are subtle they may appeal to
our intellects, making a show of special knowledge and
claiming to be impartial. They may flatter, entreat,
gently chide or make a show of earnestness.
Any or all of this is to be expected. We must learn to
distinguish between a moderate amount of persuasion
and that excessive amount which indicates prejudice or
dishonesty—or over-zealousness to ‘get at us’.
DISCUSS; (1) ‘Persuasive forces surround us.’
(2) ‘The advertiser is the most calculating persuader of
(3) ‘We must learn to distinguish between moderate
and excessive persuasion.’
EXERCISE. Make a list of the main persuaders in your
environment. Which of these do you consider to be most
effective? What arts*of persuasion seem to you to get the
best results?


ENGLISH SAYINGS Explain concisely:
1. To live on the edge of a volcano.
2. To put one’s hand to the plough.
3. To sell (someone) down the river.
4. To sit on the fence.
5. To be at the end of one’s tether.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
OXYMORON: A phrase which contains a paradox
within two words. This is a useful device for dramatic
emphasis on an idea.
e.g., ‘Parting is such sweet sorrow.’
(from Romeo and Juliet)
‘And faith unfaithful kept him falsely true.’
A POINT OF STYLE
‘LITERALLY’; This word is often misused with comic
results. It should not be relied upon for emphasis. Its
real meaning is ‘exactly’.
Thus, to say that ‘an army marches literally on its
stomach’ is to create a highly undignified image in the
mind of your reader; if ‘the comedian literally brought
down the house’ with his jokes, then his audience was
presumably buried in rubble!
WHICH IS CORRECT?:
1. It was literally raining cats and dogs.
2. Civil war can mean that brother is literally fighting
with brother.
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
SUFFIXES . . . The following denote a person who does
whatever the root word signifies. Give an example for
each of the following:
1. -er,-ar,-ier,-or:
2. -ster, -man, -wright:
3. -ain, -an, -eer;
4. -ant, -ent, -ee:
5. -ist, -ic, -art;
SUFFIXES . . . The following denote a state or condi-
tion. Give an example of each:
1. -craft, -dom, fare;
2. -hood, -ness, -ship:
3. -ance, -ence, -ice:
4. -ment, -mony, -ery:
5. -tude, -ty, -ure:
6. -asm, -ism, -ion:
SUFFIXES . . . The following form adjectives. Give an
example of each:
1. -en, -ern, -ful:
2. -ish, -like, -some:
3. -less, -able, -ent:
4. -ary, -ate, -ese;
5. -esque, -ile, -ive:
6. -ous, -ory, -ine:
RULE: A relative pronoun agrees with its antecedent in
person and number, but takes its case from its own
clause. (N. 8.: ‘Who’ is the nominative form, ‘whom’ is
the objective.)
e.g., Here is the man (who, whom) has done so much
for me.
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT RELATIVE PRONOUN:
1. He is the lad, they say, (who, whom) we were told
about.
2. I can never tell (who, whom) is responsible for the
noise.
3. Here comes Tom (who, whom), we have heard, is
soon to go abroad.
4. I quite like those new neighbours (who, whom) you
mistrust.
5. Roosevelt and Churchill, (who, whom) led their
countries in the war, had rather different personali-
ties.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. Jack is one of those fellows who is never happy.
7. None of us enjoy having our weaknesses pointed
out in front of others.
8. Disturbed by the noise, an investigation revealed
that it was only a stray cow outside my door.
9. Neither Russia nor China seem ready to com-
promise in the dispute over what true Marxism is.
10. When the flats caught fire the occupants sought
cover in their pyjamas.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
Apostrophes (Possessive).
To reinforce what was said about the apostrophe in the
previous Unit, here are examples of its use. They will
repay study if you think of the rule that underlies their
use.
1. For Jesus’ sake, for goodness’ sake, for peace’ sake.
2. For Jones’s sake, for Phyllis’s sake, for Thomas’s
3. Sophocles’ plays, Dickens’ work, Moses’ vision.
4. The princess’s gown, Mr. Ross’s car, Bess’s birthday.
5. Elizabeth I’s reign; brother-in-law’s car; King
George 111 of England’s failure to hold his American
colonies; Ralph, Dan and Harry’s trip; the Home-
owners’ Insurance Co.’s profits; an old mate of my
father’s.
N. 8.: Possessive pronouns—mine, yours, ours, his, hers,
theirs, its—never take an apostrophe. Remember, above
all, that it’s is an abbreviation of ‘it is’ and has nothing
to do with possession.


3. Write homonyms for: brooch
, populace
, pouring
4. Change to nouns; immobile
. dissimilar
, acquire
5. Change to adjectives: symbol
, illusion
, repetition
6. Spell the plurals of; potato
, deer
, ratio
7. Write synonyms for: useless
, fundamental
, loathsome
8. Write antonyms for: genial
, spurious
, alluring
9. Show possession; one sheep
tail, ten sheep tails; Moses orders.
10. Delete wrong word; His win was a creditable/credible performance.
After the climb, their appetites were veracious/voracious.
His vile behaviour is contemptuous/contemptible.
WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 15
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
conjure
grimace
metre
symbol
access
accessible
heartily
proving
conceit
occurred
rhyme
rhythm
among
basically
cascade
useless
transferred
impostor
skilful
immobile
mercantile
khaki
camouflage
besiege
aggression
massacre
indulge
committee
aghast
fiend
suppress
martyr
illusion
manufacture
revolution
cruellest
accomplish
existence
repetition
therefore
fundamental
dissimilar
satisfactory
counterfeit
undoubtedly
assassination
penniless
emigration
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: accessible, proving,
rhythmical
2. Turn into a person; conjured
, revolution , rhyme
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1. He was indifferent
appeals for mercy.
Sometimes, it seems, even the most dignified politicians
lose sight of important and urgent issues, and they fall
to like small children over
things that appear trivial or absurd to the public at large.
2. Pride kept him independent
3. The snake recoiled
any help.
the dog.
(fighting, feuding, bickering, quarrelling)
4. Margarine may be substituted
5. This yarn is reminiscent
butter.
my childhood.
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
1. lavish, profuse, stinted, abundant.
2. exigency, crisis, emergency, normality.
3. quiescent, placid, tranquil, dynamic.
4. mundane, heavenly, temporal, secular.
5. conciseness, circumlocution, verbiage, redundancy.
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. Not able to be explained
2. Happening after one’s death
3. To rid of bacteria
4. List of business at a meeting
5. Incapable of error


Unit 16: EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
ANZUS AND INDONESIA
It was no accident that the Prime Minister made his
statement pledging the Government to a greater defence
effort only a fortnight before the meeting of the ANZUS
Council which begins in Wellington today. The new
defence programme will make Australia’s position much
stronger than it was at last year’s meeting in Canberra,
when the Australian Government was seriously em-
barrassed by plain indications that Washington felt this
country was not shouldering a fair burden of regional
defence.
The principal assurance which Australia needs from
ANZUS has been offered publicly in advance by Mr.
Averell Harriman, who gave an unqualified pledge that
the United States would fight to defend eastern New
Guinea. It is true that the ANZUS Treaty specifically
refers to ‘island territories’ in the Pacific, but no threat
from Indonesia was envisaged when the treaty was
signed, and America’s reluctance to take a stand against
Indonesia over West New Guinea caused justified un-
easiness about the American attitude on eastern New
Guinea. Mr. Harriman’s public clarification of Ameri-
can intentions will be welcomed by all Australians.
It should also have a salutary effect in Djakarta and
help to strengthen President Soekarno’s apparent con-
version to the view that the pattern of armed aggression
against the Dutch cannot safely be repeated. There is
no doubt that the United States was jolted out of the
comfortable attitude that Indonesia was only pursuing
its legitimate aspirations in West New Guinea by
Djakarta’s belligerent stance on Malaysia and has been
further influenced by its declared intention to flout the
self-determination clauses of the 1962 agreement with
the Netherlands.
Hitherto the United States has been entirely preoccu-
pied in South-East Asia with Communist aggression,
and has based its policies towards Indonesia on the
premise that any concession was worth making which
strengthened the hands of the anti-Communists in the
Djakarta Government. A new element has been intro-
duced into ANZUS planning. (312 words)
(from an editorial, The Sydney Morning Herald, 5/6/63)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) What reason has been suggested for the Australian
Government’s increased commitments for defence?
(1)
(b) What figure of speech is used in ‘this country was
not shouldering a fair burden of regional defence’?
(2)
(c) What assurance does Australia need from the
United States? (1)
(d) Explain: unqualified; specifically; clarification. (3)
(e) What event in New Guinea caused Australian
uneasiness? (1)
(f) Explain ‘salutary’. Why should the U.S. pledge have
a salutary effect in Djakarta? (2)
(g) Put in your own words: ‘only pursuing its legitimate
aspirations’. (2)
(h) What is meant by a ‘belligerent stance’? (1)
(i) What has been the previous U.S. policy towards
Indonesia and how has it changed? (2)
CLEARER THINKING
DEALING WITH IRRELEVANCIES. Whilst our
most important task in tackling an argument is to judge
the worth of the main points, there are times when the
main points are obscured by side issues, distractions,
digressions, or, in a word, irrelevancies. A clear thinker
is able to ‘stick to the point’, but when the thinker is
vague, confused, unconsciously rationalizing or con-
sciously dishonest, then irrelevancies are likely to be
present.
Some forms of irrelevancy are well-known. The ‘grass-
hopper mind’ jumps from point to point, never stopping
long enough to solve any problem. The emotional ‘slider’
leaves the main issues to take up minor ones which
yield more dramatic effects. There is a type of person
who ‘clutches at a straw’, introducing new issues to save
an argument that is going against him. There is that
banal ‘thinker’ who reduces every argument to an in-
sistence on conformity with commonplace opinions and
right-thinking attitudes. And doubtless you can think of
other such types.
Read this brief and rather extreme statement, and
answer the questions at the end.
‘You say that we should revise our traditional immigra-
tion policy because it gives offence to our Asian neigh-
bours to hear that we want to keep Australia white.
I, too, am in favour of cultivating friendship with Asia.
But I am not going to forget that I am a patriotic
Australian. I hope that there are still enough patriots in
this country to see that we don’t throw away a prin-
ciple that was struggled for by our fathers. We don’t
want the trouble here that the Americans are having
over negroes. Malaysia has a mixture of races, and there
is always trouble among them. The Chinese in Malaysia
are bound to come out on top. Look at the way they
are increasing! And when Red China is a powerful
industrial and nuclear power things will be hard for us
in this part of the world. What we want is more spend-
ing on defence.’
EXERCISE. What precisely is the issue in dispute?
How has the speaker taken the matter to an extreme,
assuming probably much more than was intended by the
person who proposed a revision of immigration policy?
How has the speaker ‘appealed to distracting senti-
ments’? How has the speaker failed to ‘stick to the
point’?


1. When in Rome do as the Romans do.
2. Where there’s a will there’s a way.
3. Where there’s life there’s hope.
4. Why keep a dog and bark yourself?
5. Whom the gods would destroy, they first make mad.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
EUPHEMISM; An expression which softens a harsh
fact by creating a more pleasant image. (This device
can be abused by writers if they always prefer to shun
the blunt truth. Such persistent toning down of un-
pleasant details weakens the effect of their argument.
G. K. Chesterton calls this the device of ‘evil euphe-
mism’.)
e.g., ‘The king’s life is moving peacefully to its close.’
A POINT OF STYLE
EXAGGERATION: Although we have seen that there
is an effective use for exaggeration (hyperbole) if care-
fully phrased to emphasise some dramatic aspect of a
scene, unnecessary exaggeration merely weakens the
effect of all words used. Such pointless hyperbole is a
common weakness of the young, so beware!
REWRITE THE FOLLOWING IN MORE RESTRAINED
TERMS:
T had a simply fabulous time at the dance, although at
first I wished I was a thousand miles away because
there wasn’t a single face I knew. Then, all at once,
there were dozens of boys all asking me to dance at the
same time. I was absolutely breathless by supper-time.
I’m quite sure that I didn’t stop dancing the whole time.’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
ROOT WORDS . . . These are so-called because they
have given rise to a number of English words and,
although the original meaning may be varied somewhat,
the root or essential meaning can be traced back to these
basic words.
1. AGO (ACT-): act, do, as in agent, active, action.
Give ONE more
2. CEDO (CESS-): go, yield, as in excess, accede.
Give THREE more
3. CAPIO (CAPT-); take, hold, as in accept, intercept.
Give TWO more
4. CURRO (CURS): run, as in courier, discourse.
Give TWO more
5. DICO (DICT); say, as in dictation, predict.
Give THREE more
RULE; Place a relative pronoun as close as possible to
its antecedent.
e.g., The soldier called on the colonel at General Head-
quarters who arranged for his transfer. (Incorrect)
At General Headquarters, the soldier called on the
colonel who arranged for his transfer. (Correct)
RE-ARRANGE, BRINGING THE RELATIVE PRONOUN
CLOSE TO ITS ANTECEDENT:
1. Absurd rumours have been circulated about both
these politicians, which are quite slanderous.
2. He was trapped in that bushfire and burnt badly,
that destroyed seventeen homes.
3. We visited the pioneers’ graves who opened this
valley over a hundred years ago.
4. There is the native standing beside the palmtree
whom they arrested for head-hunting.
5. I had to enter the room, intending to get my hat,
which was crowded with visitors.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so);
6. The United Nations Organisation is threatened by
financial crisis, which is the world’s only hope of
peace.
7. It is politicians like him who we are betrayed by
again and again.
8. In this hospital you will find many chronic invalids
such as me.
9. The three marathon runners finished without a
spurt and the latter looked even more fatigued than
the other two.
10. My father will not be at work today as he has acute
rheumatism and has gone to bed with a lotion.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Colons.
1. It has been said that the most important function of
the colon is to deliver the goods that were prepared
in the first part of the sentence,
e.g., This is the full list: three bullocks, twelve sheep,
fifteen pigs and sixty rabbits.
2. You will never need to use ‘namely’ or ‘viz.’ if you
make use of the helpful colon. It is especially
valuable at examination time if you are bursting
with facts on a topic but have only a little time to
set them down in an essay ;
e.g., In order to find the main cause of Napoleon’s
overthrow, we must examine several factors: his
failure to create an effective navy; the war-weariness
of the French people; the stubborn opposition of the
Spaniards; [and as many other ‘fact-packed’ points
as you care to enumerate].
3. The colon may be used to introduce a quotation,
especially when a verb of saying (he said, she de-
clared) is not used.
e.g., Shakespeare’s view is: ‘Brevity is the soul of
wit.’ It leaves nothing to doubt: ‘Abandon hope all
ye who enter here.’


Unit 16
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
intrusion acquit adolescent develop dependable
vogue acquittal delinquent development interference
recital forfeit equivalent eloquence correspondence
subtle translator eminent catastrophe independent
adjacent conspirator prevalent creditable independence
movable reverence carnivorous supremacy convalescent
irritable diligence delicacy repentant achievement
likeable competent democracy significant immigrant
detergent schedule fidgety technique peculiarity
tragedy separate balloted dilapidated perseverance
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix; subtle,
delicate,
creditable
2. Show possession: for heaven sake, for Jesus sake, for Ross sake
3. Change to nouns: dependable
4. Change to adjectives: democracy
5. Write synonyms for: catastrophe
6. Write antonyms for; subtle
subtle , profound
brevity , contend
competent
develop
, eminent
~ achievement
7. Delete wrong word; He is illegible/eligible for the job.
It is a momentous/momentary event for the nation.
She takes only a superfluous/superficial view of politics.
8. Complete this table (giving the 3rd person, singular, past tense, and the past participle);
INFINITIVE PAST TENSE
to break broke
PAST PART.
INFINITIVE PAST TENSE
to show showed
PAST PART.
broken
shown
to arise
to awake
to bear
to behold
to bend
to bind
to bite
to bleed
to blow
to beat
to become
to begin
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1. I expect to benefit
2. All of us are liable
3. They are incapable
4. I forbid you to pry
5. He has aptitude
the deal.
This world would be the better for a sharp reduction in
the daily output of pointless talk. At social gatherings
one meets too often the woman
whose tongue wags so incessantly as to make everyone
wish to escape from the room.
(talkative, loquacious, garrulous, fluent, wordy)
taking action.
my affairs.
muddling through.
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. diffuse, succinct, laconic, concise.
SUBSTITUTE an adjective (ending in -ENT) for:
I. Free from any control
2. pertinent, relevant, apposite, inappropriate.
3. sedulous, indolent, assiduous, diligent.
4. hackneyed, trite, original, stereotyped.
5. exuberant, profuse, restrained, overflowing.
2. Driving away insects
3. Of the highest quality
4. About to happen soon
5. Recovering after illness


OPENING PARAGRAPHS. In essays and short stories
particularly, the impact of the opening paragraph is vital
to the success of the whole work. When you are required
to write a composition of only three or four hundred
words, you cannot afford to spend one hundred words
leading up to the subject. The first paragraph should
indicate the scope of your essay, should show clearly the
line of discussion you intend to follow and, if possible,
should arrest the reader’s attention by a striking turn of
phrase, a well-expressed idea, or a pertinent anecdote.
Study the following openings by accomplished writers:
EXAMPLES:
1. Revenge is a kind of wild justice, which the more
man’s nature runs to, the more ought law to weed
it out: . . .
(Bacon, Of Revenge)
2. lam sitting under tall trees, with a great wind boil-
ing like surf about the tops of them, so that their
living load of leaves rocks and roars in something
that is at once exultation and agony.
(Chesterton, The Wind and the Trees)
3. Of course I shall not pretend to consider it any
matter for wonder, that the extraordinary case of
M. Valdemar has excited discussion. It would have
been a miracle had it not especially under the
circumstances.
(Poe, The Facts in the Case of M. Valdemar)
CLOSING PARAGRAPHS. These, like the opening
paragraphs, have a particularly heavy responsibility in
the success of the essay or short story. They must meet
all demands for information by firmly concluding the
argument of the preceding paragraphs and they should
leave the reader feeling fully satisfied. Above all, a
conclusion must be confident. We have probably all
heard someone, after quite a creditable speech in public,
say something like, ‘Well, 1 think that’s all for now’ or
T can’t think of anything more to say so I’d better sit
down’. He is quite right, of course, but what a dismal
ending to a promising performance! Beware of doing
this sort of thing in your essays. Below are the con-
clusions for the essays or stories mentioned in the
examples above.
1. Public revenges are for the most part fortunate; as
that for the death of Caesar; for the death of Per-
tinax; for the death of Henry 111 of France; and
many more. But in private revenges it is not so; nay,
rather vindictive persons live the life of witches;
who, as they are mischievous, so end they unfortu-
2. I get up from under the trees, for the wind and the
slight rain have ceased. The trees stand up like
golden pillars in a clear sunlight. The tossing of the
trees and the blowing of the wind have ceased
simultaneously. So I suppose there are still modern
philosophers who will maintain that the trees make
the wind.
3. As I rapidly made the mesmeric passes, amid ejacu-
lations of ‘dead! dead!’ absolutely bursting from the
tongue and not from the lips of the sufferer, his
whole frame at once—within the space of a single
minute, or even less, shrunk —crumbled—absolutely
rotted away beneath my hands. Upon the bed,
before that whole company, there lay a nearly liquid
mass of loathsome—of detestable putridity.
EXERCISE. Set out a plan of paragraphs for ONE of
the following topics, then write a complete closing para-
graph in which you gather together the points you
planned to make; perhaps you can achieve a final
striking expression of your opinion, as by using a quo-
tation to round off your thought:
(a) Ambition; (b) That children should be paid for
household chores; (c) The necessity of learning basic
first aid; (d) Modern travel.
CLEARER THINKING
OMISSIONS AND OVERSIMPLIFICATIONS. We
have seen that an irrelevancy is dangerous in that it
deflects attention from the central issues of an argument.
Just as dangerous is the omission of important facts
and the suppression of evidence. We are entitled to
ask for more facts when a proposition is made to us.
Plainly, it is foolish to sign a contract after hearing only
the salesman’s gloss of his product’s virtues. It has been
said that a person can make out a good case for anything
by dwelling solely on its favourable aspects—and cer-
tainly a skilful debater can at a moment’s notice present
an attractive case for either side of an argument. Propa-
ganda in totalitarian countries builds up a one-sided
picture of dynamic progress and public enthusiasm: all
references to lack of freedom, shortages and other de-
ficiencies are suppressed. We must beware of omissions!
A special form of omission is the simplification—or, as
it is commonly called, the oversimplification. This is
achieved by ignoring part of the available facts. For
example, we have heard each of the following views
advanced as ‘explanations’ of the Allied victory in
World War II: American industrial productivity was
overwhelming; the Russians tore the heart out of
Hitler’s war machine; the spirit of free peoples will
always triumph; we gained ascendancy in the air.
Obviously, a satisfactory explanation of the allied vic-
tory would embrace all of these factors as well as others.
DISCUSS: (1) Many everyday judgements are too
rough-and-ready to be reliable.
(2) By its nature propaganda suppresses part of the
truth—the part that is unfavourable to the propagandist.
(3) A debater has a lot in common with a propagandist.
EXERCISE. Think up an instance of (a) a dangerous
omission of facts or evidence, (b) an oversimplification.


1. You are never too old to learn.
2. Work won’t kill you, but worry will.
3. You can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear.
4. You can’t make an omelette without breaking eggs.
5. You can dig your grave with your teeth.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
RHETORICAL QUESTION: A question which is
asked simply to create an effect, without expectation of
an answer.
e.g., ‘What mother would kill her own child?’
‘Who would not fear imprisonment?’
A POINT OF STYLE
USE OF ‘ONLY’; The placement of this word needs
much care. Study the following examples:
1. ‘He only heard the evidence yesterday.’
The sentence is ambiguous in three possible ways.
Note the variations below —
(a) Only he heard the evidence yesterday.
(b) He heard only the evidence yesterday.
(c) He heard the evidence only yesterday.
2. ‘The captain only was confident of riding out the
storm.’
Here awkwardness and ambiguity can be avoided by
substituting ‘alone’ for ‘only’.
3. ‘lt was nothing only a twig snapping.’
‘Only’ is here used incorrectly for ‘but’
4. ‘He likes no-one in the class, only Peter.’
Here ‘only’ is incorrectly used for ‘except’.
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
ROOT WORDS . . . Study the following:
1. CLAUDO (clos): shut, close, as in disclose, con-
clude.
Give TWO more
2. FERO (LAT): bear, carry, as in translate, prefer.
Give THREE more
3. DUCO (DUCT): lead, as in deduct, introduce.
Give THREE more
4. FACIO (FACT); make, do, as in manufacture, per-
fect.
Give TWO more
5. VERTO (VERS): turn, as in revert, convert, aver-
sion.
Give TWO more
RULE; The relative pronoun ‘which’ should not be used
to refer to a whole clause.
e.g., The child ran onto the road, which was dreadful.
(Incorrect)
NOTE WHAT IS WRONG IN THE FOLLOWING:
1. I quietened the children, which brought general
relief.
2. He began to rant and rave, which was irritating.
3. I won the contest, which was more than I hoped.
4. He hated negroes, which was the same as his
father.
5. They crowded into the lift, which was a foolish
thing to do.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. While killing the rat, which greatly excited all the
children, he stumbled and fell on his nose.
7. One feature of a democracy is that everybody have
a right to vote.
8. It is our earnest desire to elect someone whom we
know will undertake their work in a responsible
spirit.
9. In this suburb the dwellings are easily the smallest
and most shabbiest in the city.
10. I shall spend the winter vacation shooting at my
hunting lodge.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Semicolons.
Despite its name, a semicolon is not a half-colon; it is a
punctuation mark in its own right. Someone called it a
‘weak full stop’, which is not bad for a rough definition;
indeed, you will find that a semicolon can almost always
be replaced by a full stop, though not without a loss of
subtlety. More precisely, a semicolon is a strong punc-
tuation mark which separates two ideas yet stresses their
close relationship by holding them together within one
sentence. To give an analogy: a dining room needs to
be separated from a kitchen, but the two must be as
close together as possible, permitting an easy movement
between each. Just as these rooms are separate, but
closely connected, so two ideas may be separated but
closely connected—by a semicolon. . . . Examine the
semicolons in the first two sentences of this paragraph,
and then examine them in the following examples.
1. I warned you that you were courting danger; I said
so more than once.
2. The assassination of President Kennedy appalled
him; in a sense, it left him stunned.
3. Do not ask me to do that; do not presume on my
patience.
4. That is the right answer; it is exactly what was
wanted.
5. It is absurd to suggest a change of plans now;
scarcely two hours have passed since we made the
decision.


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 17
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
tyrant colossal influential digestible confidential
tyranny estuary pasteurise feasible maritime
intellectual nuclear emphasise enforceable commensurate
moral curable criticism enclosure disapproval
dependant exemption acquire audacity contemporary
trivial recognition incredible acceptable constitution
rehearsal emotion convertible souvenir contradiction
momentary dawdle permissible wastage measurable
fulfil install deterred distil satellite
electrician allotted gossiped government instalment
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix; moral, curable, measurable
2. Show possession: Phyllis coat, Achilles heel, Thomas report.
3. Change to nouns: nuclear , acquire , colossal
4. Change to adjectives; contradiction , audacity , tyrant
5. Write synonyms for: emphasise , feasible , alacrity
6. Write antonyms for: trivial , dawdle , candour
7. Delete wrong word: He preceded/proceeded to show me how.
That for once he will be on time is feasible/plausible.
Her capacity/ability to make fine sponges is well known.
8. Complete this table:
PRESENT PAST TENSE
is
PAST PART.
PRESENT
catches
PAST TENSE
PAST PART.
breeds
brings
bursts
buys
chooses
clings
comes
costs
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. I am addicted marijuana.
2. Try to prevail the conductor.
3. You will abide the judge’s decision.
4. He took action appropriate the situation.
5. His account is consistent
SELECT THE APT WORD
Mahomet’s teachings captured the idealism of the Arab
world. In their thousands men came forward, burning
with zeal to the prophet’s teachings
among the infidels and convert them to the service of
‘the one true god’, Allah.
(spread, scatter, diffuse, disseminate)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. faith, scepticism, incredulity, doubt.
2. qualm, compunction, scruple, heedlessness.
3. carousal, sobriety, revelry, orgy.
4. debauch, debase, deprave, dignify.
5. perverse, stubborn, tractable, wayward.
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. A major economic slump
2. A minor economic slump
3. Exchanging goods without money
4. A tax on imports
5. Government’s account of finances


Unit 18: EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
OLIVER GOLDSMITH
A new public had come into existence with new de-
mands. Everybody was turning reader. The writer, if he
had ceased to dine with the nobility, had become the
friend and instructor of a vast congregation of ordinary
men and women. They demanded essays as well as
encyclopedias. They allowed their writers a freedom
which the old aristocracy had never permitted. As Gold-
smith said, the writer could now ‘refuse invitations to
dinner’; he ‘could wear just such clothes as men gener-
ally wear’ and ‘he can bravely assert the dignity of inde-
pendence’. Goldsmith by temper and training was
peculiarly fitted to take advantage of the new state of
things. He was a man of lively intelligence and out-
spoken good sense. He had the born writer’s gift of
being in touch with the thing itself and not with the
outer husks of words. There was something shrewd and
objective in his temper which fitted him admirably to
preach little sermons and wing little satires. If he had
little education and no learning, he had a large and
varied stock of experience to draw on. He had knocked
about the world. He had seen Leydon and Paris and
Padua as a foot traveller sees famous cities. But his
travels, far from plunging him into reverie or giving
him a passion for the solitudes and sublimities of nature,
had served to make him relish human society better and
had proved how slight are the differences between man
and man. He preferred to call himself a Citizen of the
World rather than an Englishman. . . .
It is this detached attitude and width of view that give
Goldsmith his peculiar flavour as an essayist. Other
writers pack their pages fuller and bring us into closer
touch with themselves. Goldsmith, on the other hand,
keeps just on the edge of the crowd so that we can hear
what the common people are saying and note their
humours. . . . And here his novelist’s gift stood him in
good stead. If he thinks he thinks in the round. An idea
at once dresses itself up in flesh and blood and becomes
a human being. (352 words)
(from an essay in The Captain's Death Bed,
by Virginia Woolf)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) Using your knowledge of the period in which Gold-
smith was writing, give a reason for the writer
becoming ‘the friend and instructor of a vast con-
gregation of men and women.’ (2)
(b) Do you consider it important that a writer possess
‘the dignity of independence’? Why? (1)
(c) Explain ‘he had the born writer’s gift of being in
touch with the thing itself. (2)
(d) Comment on the effect of the phrase, ‘the outer
husks of words’. (2)
(e) Explain: shrewd; objective; relish. (11)
(f) Distinguish between ‘education’ and ‘learning’. (2)
(g) What do you understand by the colloquial phrase
‘he had knocked about the world’? (11)
(i) In your own words, summarize the qualities that
Virginia Woolf discusses in the second paragraph
as she assesses Goldsmith’s skill as an essayist. (3)
CLEARER THINKING
THE MAIN POINTS. On several occasions we have
emphasized that our chief responsibility in tackling an
argument is to judge the worth of the main points and
not to be distracted by irrelevancies, persuasive devices
or heaps of verbiage. The first step is to be absolutely
clear as to what the main points are. In this Unit, let us
look at the following argument then simply write down
the main points as straightforwardly as possible. Only
accept points which you consider are appropriate to
the central issue of the argument. (If you wish to make
more of this exercise, you may also comment on the
effectiveness of these points.)
No-one but an arch-conservative could oppose the in-
troduction of decimal coinage. I admit that conserva-
tives are always with us, and that they, too, have a
democratic right to their opinion, but progressives must
always strive to move the world forward despite the
deadweight of conservatism.
The fact of the matter is that Britain, Australia and a
very few other countries are the only ones that use
sterling. We are isolated by our clumsy currency from
the decimal coinage which has become the ‘common
language’ of business and tourism throughout most of
the world. In these conditions our export prospects are
suffering because foreign nations find our special ‘ster-
ling language’ unintelligible.
The decimal system is used in scientific calculation
and in most engineering work. It can only be to our
advantage to bring our currency system into line with
these expanding fields.
Above all, the decimal system is simpler. The man in
the street can make calculations more readily. In the
schools a mathematical revolution will be enacted, for
children will calculate much better by thoroughly
decimal methods.
I admit that certain difficulties have to be overcome if
we are to make this change. Who is afraid of difficulties?
As to the expense involved, let us take the long view and
see that the manifold advantages of the change will lead
to greater efficiency and innumerable economies such
as will more than compensate for initial costs.


ENGLISH SAYINGS Explain concisely
1. To blow hot and cold.
2. To burn the midnight oil.
3. To add fuel to the flames.
4. To hide one’s light under a bushel.
5. To have a storm in a tea-cup.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
EPIGRAM: A short, pointed statement, often using
antithesis or paradox.
e.g., ‘His silence is more eloquent than words.’
(from Heroes and Hero-Worship, by Carlyle)
‘True ease in writing comes from art, not chance,
As those move easiest who have learned to dance.’
(from Essay on Criticism, by Pope)
A POINT OF STYLE
BATHOS (ANTICLIMAX): This has been shown in
the section on ‘The Writer’s Tools’ as a deliberate effect
in satire or farce. It deserves a note here since writers
occasionally fall into its trap when they intend to be
most serious or dramatic.
e.g., ‘You have turned my children against me, poisoned
my wife’s love for me, ruined my business and alienated
all my friends. Take care lest you go too far!’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
ROOT WORDS . . . Study the following;
1. DOCEO (DOCT); teach, as in doctrine.
How does ‘docile’ fit in here?
2. GRAPHO: write, as in autograph, biography.
What is orthography? calligraphy?
3. MITTO (MISS): send, as in permit, missive.
Give THREE more
4. TENEO (TENT): hold, as in tenable, contain,
tenant.
Give THREE more
5. VIDEO (VIS): see, as in vision, provide.
Give THREE more
6. SCRIBO (SCRIPT); write, as in transcribe, script.
Give THREE more
RULE: Although, as Churchill playfully put it, ‘The
preposition is a word you never end a sentence with’,
most authorities sanction its use at the end of a sentence
if it ‘sounds comfortable’ (Fowler). Indeed, it needs to
be said that educated speakers and writers end sentences
with prepositions whenever they find it natural to do so.
e.g., 1 will not be made fun of! (Reasonable)
This cliff is the point which we can best look
from. (Clumsy)
SAY WHETHER YOU THINK THESE ENDINGS
ARE REASONABLE OR CLUMSY:
1. I shall see that the matter is taken care of.
2. He is not a person to be laughed at.
3. This is a matter I will not put up with.
4. Whom did you ask for?
5. Below are the two headings the words should be
grouped under.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. That old rule about never ending a sentence with
a preposition is one up with which we should not
put.
7. A considerable amount of old newspaper and old
rags are salvaged every year, and this is good for
the economy.
8. There can be no doubt that it was him who tried to
shoot de Gaulle.
9. I will leave you now, but, make no mistake, I shall
return.
10. It is believed that Hitler was killed in a bomb
shelter by some historians.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Semicolons (cont.).
As well as studying the examples given in Unit 17,
study these uses of the semicolon:
1. In a snowstorm, the friendliest objects lose their
familiarity; well-known paths merge into a sea of
white powder; pot-holes and ditches plot to swallow
the unwary traveller; trees and fences fade into driv-
ing mist.
2. The day was blue, gold, glorious; sunny, without
being hot; breezy, but by no means windy; filled,
everywhere, with the balmy scent of wattles, then in
loveliest bloom.
3. So flat and treeless was the plain that one had to fight
a persistent drowsiness arising from boredom; the
foothills, when we reached them, were a welcome
relief.
4. Diana liked him; she tolerated his friends; she
resented his parents; she deplored his drinking
habits.
5. She would mix metaphors as readily as mix cakes:
he was a Jack-of-all-trades; he was a rolling stone
that gathered no moss; he was a Will o’ the wisp; he
was a Johnny-come-lately who was certain to leave
at the drop of a hat.


8. Complete this table:
INFINITIVE
PAST TENSE
PAST PART.
INFINITIVE
PAST TENSE
PAST PART.
to do
to draw
to drink
to drive
to eat
to fall
to forbid
to fly
to flow
to go
to lead
to mow
Unit 18
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/VOCABULARY '
pilgrimage registry academic alcohol embarrass
outrageous revelry sympathetic alien embarrassment
changeable etiquette apathetic pedestrian acknowledge
manageable gaiety corruption dissect acknowledgement
serviceable liveliest corruptible diverge susceptible
replaceable audible nutrition concede contemptible
vengeance chaos nutritious concussion inexhaustible
correlation dilemma snobbish precede irresistible
metre aghast counterfeit satisfactorily aggression
accessible rhythm skilful massacre assassination
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix; replaceable, audible, corruptible
2. Show possession: everyone else troubles, the Davis house, ladies hats.
3. Change to nouns: lively
4. Change to adjectives: chaos , alcohol
5. Write synonyms for: inexhaustible
academic , concede
, rapture
, contemptible , outrageous
6. Write antonyms for: apathy , alien , cherish
7. Delete wrong word: We deliver on every alternative/alternate day.
There was collision/collusion between them in their crime.
The bankruptcy court has declared them insolvent/insoluble.
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
the job.
For a decade the villagers in the mountain region sup-
ported the bandit gangs, concealing them and giving
information to aid their attacks on the valley. Only by
quartering troops in every village could the authorities
set about the of the bandits.
(oppression, repression, suppression, quelling)
1. He is the one qualified
2. He is covetous
his neighbour’s goods.
3. Let us partake
refreshments.
4. I would like to confide
5. Scones are preferable
meringues.
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. simulation, genuineness, feigning, pretence.
2. depravity, corruption, rectitude, degeneracy.
3. innocuous, pernicious, baneful, noxious.
4. grisly, attractive, repellent, detestable.
1. Aiding those in need
2. Exam for entry to university
3. A suspension of hostilities
4. Bringing back to life
5. Feigning illness to avoid work
5. garish, tawdry, sober, ostentatious.


Unit 19: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
REVIEW. What needs to be emphasized in the con-
struction of essays?
1. A wise choice of subject to satisfy your own in-
terests as far as possible.
2. Careful consideration of the chosen topic to avoid
misinterpretation or forgetting part of the question.
3. Accurate planning of paragraphs, both in content
and order.
4. The use of variety in sentence construction; the im-
portance of clear topic sentences; and the need for
smooth linkage of the various stages of your argu-
ment.
5. Coherence and orderly presentation of thought. If
you want your reader to understand and appre-
ciate your opinion, you should do him the courtesy
of showing him that you have thoroughly prepared
your ideas.
6. The opening and closing paragraphs are both em-
phatic sections of your argument. Do your best to
make them ‘sell’ your ideas attractively.
7. The length of paragraphs is determined by the
amount of information you are prepared to offer at
each stage of your argument. Do not throw away a
good point of view by restricting it to a series of
general statements; that way you will soon run out
of ideas. Remember that a single sentence para-
graph is a deliberate device for achieving emphasis
and, as such, should be used only rarely. Do not be
influenced by the increasingly common journalistic
habit of writing single-sentence paragraphs.
George Orwell, an excellent craftsman of language, said
that ‘Good prose is like a window pane’. Do you under-
stand what he meant? Think about it carefully. The
same writer makes these points about the skill of
writing:
‘(a) Never use a metaphor, simile or other figure of
speech which you are used to seeing in print.
(b) Never use a long word where a short one will do.
(c) If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it
out.
(d) Never use the passive where you can use the
active.
(e) Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word or a
jargon word if you can think of an everyday
English equivalent.
(f) Break any of these rules sooner than say anything
outright barbarous.’
ASSIGNMENT. Discuss ONE of the following topics;
(a) The scientists have unleashed a whirlwind and lost
control; (b) Is twenty-one the best age to be given the
vote?; (c) Our responsibility to our community.
CLEARER THINKING
ACCEPTABLE OR QUESTIONABLE? When a per-
son presents ideas to us, we do not need, in the name of
clear thinking, to question everything he says, or to
demand proof. Discussion would be impossible! Experi-
ence teaches us to discriminate between what is accept-
able (or possible) and what is questionable.
We may accept (or allow to pass) points of argument
that are self-evident or trivial or unlikely to affect the
main contentions. Usually we have to take an argument
as it stands and assess it on its merits —that is, on the
internal evidence of a given passage or speech. Only on
rare occasions will we take the trouble to research into
the contentions of an argument, as by checking facts in
a library or by interviewing an authority.
Examine the following passage and decide what should
be allowed to pass and what should be questioned:
The great medical discoveries of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries have done much to extend the
average expectation of life and to improve the standard
of health. Yet there is still a great deal of sickness even
in advanced communities like our own, and this fact
suggests strongly that health is not to be secured by the
doctor’s remedies alone.
Most doctors are concerned with attacking disease when
it appears in people. We would all profit from the
devoting of more attention to the prevention of disease.
I do not mean simply keeping our environment hygienic
—important though that is. I mean, above all, that we
should try to live more healthful lives so that we become
better fitted to resist disease which is always around,
anyway. Here I think there should be attention to
exercise, diet and mental attitude.
Exercise is vital to us all. Without it we grow flabby
and stale. Governments would need to spend much less
on hospitals if they spent a little more on encouraging
people to take up swimimng, which is the finest exercise
of all.
But exercise without sensible diet is not likely to suc-
ceed. On the whole, we eat too much, and we do not
eat enough that is really healthful. The great swimmer,
Murray Rose, is a demonstration of the fact that a
vegetarian diet could improve any community’s health.
The trouble is that people like meat and will not deny
themselves even harmful things.
As well as exercise and diet, mental attitude is im-
portant. In general, an optimist lives longer than a
pessimist, a man of faith lives longer than an atheist.
We all need to improve our interest and joy in living.


ENGLISH PROVERBS Explain concisely:
1. Blood is thicker than water.
2. You can have too much of a good thing.
3. A soft answer turneth away wrath.
4. A tale never loses in the telling.
5. Don’t keep all your eggs in one basket.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
APOSTROPHE: An address to a person, dead or
absent, or an object which is personified.
e.g., ‘Milton! thou shouldst be living at this hour!’
(from Milton, by Wordsworth)
‘Death! be not proud . . .’
(from Death, by Donne)
A POINT OF STYLE
TAUTOLOGY: This is a fault of expression where the
same idea is expressed twice.
e.g., ‘He referred back to his earlier statement.’
‘Carol and lan are two twins.’
‘Both councils agreed to co-operate together.’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
ROOT WORDS . . . Study the following:
1. SPECIO (SPECT): see, as in perspective, aspect,
despite.
Give TWO more
2. TRAHO (TRACT); pull, draw, as in retract, con-
tract, trace.
Give THREE more
3. PONO (POS) (POUND): place, as in propose,
impose, depot.
Give THREE more
4. ARCHO: rule, as in monarchy, hierarchy.
Give ONE more
How does ‘architect’ fit in here?
5. ANTHROPOS: man, as in anthropology, misan-
thropist.
Give ONE more
6. PHILOS; one who loves, as in philology (love of
words).
Give ONE more
7. THEOS: God, as in theology, atheist.
Give the meaning of monotheism; pantheism.
RULE: Do not use unnecessary prepositions (or
adverbs).
e.g., We ascended (up) the hillside.
PUT BRACKETS AROUND THE UNNECESSARY
PREPOSITION:
1. There they go, crossing over the street.
2. We divided up the money amongst all present.
3. They were awarded with prizes for their effort.
4. They hoisted him up into the saddle.
5. Christ descended down into Galilee.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. Using an elaborate system of ropes they lowered
him down to the valley floor.
7. Frankly, I don’t believe that either of the children,
despite all their fuss, are really keen to sit for
hours fishing.
8. It was them and not me who made this mess.
9. Here comes the Leader of the Opposition whom,
it is rumoured, will shortly move a censure on the
Government.
10. India has a grave food problem because she has a
huge population and not enough space to grow it.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Semicolons (cont.)
As well as studying the examples given in Units 17 and
18, study these uses of the semicolon:
1. The prospect scared him; yet he remained deter-
mined.
2. As a friend he was dependable; as an enemy he
was dangerous.
3. Envy me, if you will; slander me, you cannot.
4. The dog lay slumped on the bank; it had collapsed
after its swim.
5. You ought to go; poor Terry is too ill.
6. His promotion has been confirmed; furthermore,
his work has been highly commended.
7. I told him that 1 would not; nevertheless, he has
asked me once again.
8. He’s an irresponsible fellow; however, I can’t help
liking him.
9. I have tried hard; indeed, 1 could not have tried
harder.
10. One reason is that I did not study; another, that I
prefer sport.


WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix; adequate, conspicuous,
2. Show possession: Bess scarf, Bill Hollis bat, the Thames banks
3. Change to nouns: impetuous , contagious , deficient
4. Change to adjectives: persuasion , lustre , astronomy
5. Write synonyms for: adequate , conspicuous , exasperation
6. Write antonyms for: temporary , vigilance , austerity
7. Delete wrong word: The book is dull to the point of being illegible/unreadable.
The bank promoted him for trustfulness/trustworthiness.
An agnostic/atheist denies the existence of God.
8. Complete this table:
INFINITIVE PASTTENSE PAST PART, INFINITIVE PASTTENSE
to hang (clothes) to soring
advantageous
PAST PART.
to hang (a man)
to slay
to lie (down)
to speak
to lay (place down)
to strive
to mow
to swim
to shear
to swing
Unit 19
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
decapitate retaliate recommend adjourn advantageous
college disintegrate discipline lustre comprehensive
querulous affectionate contagious teetotaller infatuation
privilege adequate bilious vegetarian dissatisfied
anticipate wondrous conspicuous astronomy dissatisfaction
controversy deficit impetuous astrology exasperation
controversial deficient persuasion philosophy livelihood
exaggerate temporarily apostle psychology vigilance
subtle acquittal adolescent develop interference
movable irritable forfeit development independent
SELECT THE APT WORD
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. That is detrimental
our scheme.
Forty years after the tragic civil war, conditions were, if
anything, worse than before. Most of the people lived
in hovels and arduously scratched a meagre living from
the soil. Their old rebel spirit was broken; they had
become resigned to their
2. This parable is relevant
3. I could easily prevail
my misfortune.
4. The stricken bull was tenacious
5. You must reconcile yourself
losing.
(pain, anguish, distress, misery, torment)
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
SUBSTITUTE an adjective (ending in -ANT) for:
1. Destitute of knowledge
1. rapt, inattentive, engrossed, entranced.
2. disparage, commend, deprecate, decry.
3. galling, soothing, vexatious, irritating.
2. Continuing without ceasing
3. Respecting beliefs of others
4. Wandering from the subject
5. Sorry for a misdeed
4. presumptuous, arrogant, unassuming, bumptious.
5. indigence, destitution, sufficiency, dearth.


Unit 20: EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
THE COLD WAR WITHIN THE COLD WAR
The West, watching with a half incredulous fascination
the development of the crack in the ‘monolithic struc-
ture’ of world Communism, has been wisely cautious in
assessing its significance and permanence. Good reason
for caution remains the ties which bind the Com-
munist world in hostility to the West are as yet stronger
than the divisive forces operating within that shadowed
arena. Mr Kruschev’s crude warning that divisions
would be forgotten if ‘a capitalist snout’ was thrust into
Communist affairs still has validity.
But equally there is no longer much doubt that the
ideological quarrel between Moscow and Peking has
passed the point where a reconciliation is possible under
existing leaderships and that from this great conse-
quences, as yet incalculable, will flow. Rarely in history
has a conference between allies to iron out differences
been approached under worse auspices than Friday’s
meeting in Moscow.
There may be a gesture towards papering over the
crack; of the cement to mend it there is no sign. The
reality of this week’s confrontation may well be a
further hardening of positions which already appear
inflexible. If that proves to be the case, then the Com-
munist world faces the prospect of one of those bitter
and implacable struggles for dominance to which politi-
cal movements based on ideological dogma are espe-
cially prone. And at the heart of the schism must be, as
always, the need of both factions to win the support of
the faithful.
This need can be better served by works than theologi-
cal disputation, and it is here that the West will feel the
impact of the cold war within the cold war. Under the
compulsion to still the doubts of wavering clients
attracted by Peking’s appeal to orthodoxy, to demon-
strate that peaceful co-existence is not just a heretical
slogan but an effective policy, Moscow may seek to
profit from a rapprochement with the West which, by
easing tensions, would open the way to internal eco-
nomic advances. It is significant that Russia has agreed
to hold talks with Britain and the United States on a
nuclear treaty only a week after the Sino-Soviet meeting.
(349 words)
(from an editorial, The Sydney Morning Herald, 3/7/63)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) What is meant by the ‘monolithic structure’ of world
communism? (2)
(b) Why should the West be cautious in assessing the
extent of the strained relations between China and
Russia? (1)
(c) What is the force of the metaphor, ‘that shadowed
arena’? (2)
(d) What is an ideological quarrel? (2)
(e) Explain: validity; auspices; implacable; factions. (2)
(f) In what way has the writer given the third para-
graph a religious flavour? (2)
(g) Put into your own words the first sentence of the
fourth paragraph. (2)
(h) Why is the slogan of peaceful co-existence described
as heretical? (2)
CLEARER THINKING
GENERALIZATION. Our success as thinkers depends
very much on our ability to make good generalizations.
Charles Darwin, the famous biologist, observed that a
white cat with blue eyes was deaf. He did not at once
declare that all white cats with blue eyes are deaf; he
observed other cases, he wrote to various authorities for
information, and at length, having checked many in-
stances and found no exceptions, he announced: ‘All
white cats with blue eyes are deaf.’ This is a generali-
sation, arrived at by scientifically cautious means.
This process of generalization (or induction) is a stan-
dard procedure of the scientist. Before he announces
his generalization he goes through a long period of
testing it, during which time he calls it an hypothesis—
an idea that might or might not be true. Most scientists
work with material things that can be subjected to
laboratory tests, and a good scientist prides himself on
the thoroughness with which he tests an hypothesis.
In everyday life we are continually obliged to make
generalizations, but we are not so well provided as the
scientist; we have not much time to devote to a problem,
we probably have no special training in dealing with
most problems, and we certainly have no well-equipped
laboratory.
We travelled to the city recently with a taxi-driver who
kept up a running commentary on other drivers. Unable
to pass a car travelling on the crown of the road, he
declared bitterly, ‘Must be a foreigner; think they
own the road; won’t move over for anyone.’ When a
woman driver failed to give a hand-signal, he informed
us: ‘Got to watch when you’re behind a woman driver
—they never give hand signals.’ When the taxi passed
what was perhaps a Chinese student on a motor-scooter,
the taxi-driver said, ‘Beats me how they give those
Chinese a licence! At the markets yesterday I saw one
of them trying to back a Fiat into a space that would
have taken a double-decker—and he just couldn’t get
in.’
This extreme (but true) example is typical of poor
thinking which is not uncommon in society. On the
basis of a very few observations —or even on just one—
a sweeping generalization is erected.
DISCUSS: (1) What is a generalization?
(2) When does an hypothesis become a scientific gener-
alization?
(3) ‘The tendency to generalize on a few cases is one
of the most deplorable forms of poor thinking.’
EXERCISE. Make a list of half a dozen popular
generalizations which are of doubtful truth.


1. Do not wear out your welcome.
2. First impressions last the longest.
3. Fools rush in where angels fear to tread.
4. Give him an inch and he’ll take a yard.
5. God made the country; man made the town.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
METONYMY; This is really a change of name where a
particular characteristic or object is made to stand for
the person or thing possessing it.
e.g., ‘They swear allegiance to the Crown’ (King).
‘She took her vows’ (became a nun).
SYNECDOCHE; This is often confused with metonymy
and indeed may be used as an alternative for it. The
only difference lies in definition synecdoche should
correctly refer to a statement where a part stands for the
whole.
e.g., ‘All hands on deck!’
‘Clancy’s droving thirty head to the south.’
A POINT OF STYLE
GENERALISATION; Be very careful when using
words like ‘all’, ‘every’, ‘always’ and ‘never’. Although
some generalisations are true, others are open to ques-
tion and may be criticised as sweeping statements.
e.g., ‘All men must breathe to live.’ (Right)
‘All redheads have violent tempers.’ (Sweeping
statement)
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
ROOT WORDS . . . Study the following:
1. PHONE: voice, sound, as in telephone, phonetics.
Give the meaning of euphony; cacaphony.
2. AUDIO: hear, as in auditorium, audience.
Give TWO more
3. DOMINUS: master, as in dominate, domineer.
Give TWO more
4. FRANCO (FRACT): break, as in fragile, infringe.
Give TWO more
5. VENIO (VENT): come, as in prevent, intervene.
Give THREE more
RULE; When pronouns follow prepositions they must
take the objective form.
e.g., They said these were for you and (me, 1).
(N. 8.: Pronouns in apposition with nouns take the case
of those nouns, e.g., (1) We players can decide; (2) The
decision has been left to us players.)
UNDERLINE THE PREPOSITION AND THE
CORRECT WORD:
1. With you and (I, me), the child will be safe.
2. Had it not been for (they, them), you would have
perished.
3. This will be no trouble to Beryl and (I, me).
4. It is for (he, him), not (she, her).
5. They have decided to go with you and (I, me).
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. There are the blackberries which are to be divided
among Nick, Gerry, Ralph and I.
7. No-one else among my friends are as boring as
Frank can be.
8. I feel sure it was them whom I saw.
9. I picked up the books, which was just in time, for
my employer entered at that moment to see if 1
was working.
10. My son, Bill, is in love with one of the local girls
whom he wishes to marry.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Semicolons (cont.)
As well as studying the examples given in Units 17,18
and 19, study these uses of the semicolon:
1. The members of the committee promise that they
will uphold the rules of the club; that they will
encourage new members to work for charity; that
they will donate 10 per cent of their salaries to the
hospital fund; and that they will give three months
notice of resignation.
2. This town has no harbour; it was built on uninterest-
ingly flat ground; yet the planting of avenues of
trees has saved it from dullness.
3. Many items were purchased: a large tent and lean-
to; a folding table and four folding chairs; a range
of cooking utensils and cutlery; all manner of tin-
ned goods; and sundry groceries.
4. If you are able, come at once; if not, write; if you
have no time to write, send a telegram.
5. ‘There is tears for his love; joy for his fortune;
honour for his valour: and death for his ambition.’
(Shakespeare: Julius Caesar)


WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix:
significance,
comparable,
prejudiced
2. Show possession: George I crown, Xerxes
army, a fox brush.
3. Change to nouns: feudal
... , effusive
, alluvial
4. Change to adjectives: architecture
... , prejudice
, residue
5. Write synonyms for: sanctity
,annoyance
, caustic
h Write antonyms for: detrimental
. effusive
, crucial
7. Delete wrong word; You are defective/deficient in common sense.
The exhibition was a notable/notorious success.
My brother is quite disinterested/uninterested in bees.
8. Complete this table:
INFINITIVE PAST TENSE PAST PART.
INFINITIVE PAST TENSE
PAST PART.
to seek
to thrive
to show
to throw
to sing
to tread
to take
to wear
to tear
to weep
to teach
to write
Unit 20
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
prejudice architecture comparable effusive thoroughfare
significance sanctity comparative petition remembrance
annoyance detrimental anonymous seize maintenance
demolition bankruptcy alluvial siege appetizing
planned monetary artesian squatters cauliflower
tomorrow apostrophe deciduous carpentry porridge
scholarship colloquial perennial wrought circumference
antique campaign feudal height perpendicular
rehearsal nuclear influential feasible souvenir
intellectual colossal criticism constitution contemporary
■ - -
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1. I shall abstain
liquor henceforth.
He was always eager for novelty and sensation. Accord-
ingly, his habits of reading and study suffered. He
glossed many books, but he never studied any of them.
Today, in consequence, he has a
of many things, a deep understanding of none.
2. Please do not jesort
3. Kindly refrain
violence.
shouting.
4. Do not persist
5. She is susceptible
defying me.
asthma.
(glimmer, inkling, smattering, hotpotch)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. rabid, frantic, rational, frenetic.
SUBSTITUTE one word for:
1. Deliberate killing of a person
2. Accidental killing of a person
3. Killing a public figure
2. militant, acquiescent, combative, contentious.
3. discordant, compatible, inconsistent, incongruous.
4. ephemeral, transient, evanescent, enduring.
5. garrulous,,reserved, loquacious, verbose.
4. Killing a king
5. Killing a new-born child


HOW TO WRITE AN EDUCATED’ LETTER.
Although commonsense will guide you in most cases,
there are certain conventions in the setting out of formal
letters. Study the following examples:
10 River Road,
HEATHCOTE,
N.S.W.
Bth January, 1964.
The Personnel Manager,
Blank and Sons Pty Ltd,
Box 4329, G.P.0.,
SYDNEY.
Dear Sir,
1 wish to apply for the position of cadet journalist,
advertised in The Sydney Morning Herald’ on Satur-
day, 4th January, 1964.
I have just gained my Leaving Certificate at the ex-
amination held in November, 1963, passing in English
(Hons II), French (A), General Mathematics (A), His-
tory (B), Biology (B) and Economics (B). As 1 have
only just left school, 1 have had no experience in other
positions, but 1 have been a reporter for the School
Magazine for the last three years.
1 am sixteen years of age, Australian born of Hun-
garian parents now naturalized Australians. I completed
my secondary schooling at Heathcote High School.
I enclose copies of references from my headmaster,
Mr G. Whalan, and from my parish clergyman, Rev.
J. Coutts. 1 shall be happy to provide any further infor-
mation you may require.
Yours faithfully,
(personal signature)
(Miss) RUBI HORVATH.
78 Browning Street,
CARLTON.
Victoria.
sth March, 1964.
The Accountant,
Jolson Emporium,
Elizabeth Street,
MELBOURNE.
Dear Sir,
Overdue Payment of Account.
In reply to your letter (WM/RM, 34:1, 2/3/64)
requesting payment of £ll/19/6 for the month of
December, I wish to point out that this amount was
paid on 21st February. I realise that this is probably a
minor clerical oversight on the part of your staff and
enclose the receipt sent to me last week (27/2/64).
1 trust that this will clarify the position.
Yours faithfully,
(personal signature)
(Mrs) OLIVE BALLARD,
ASSIGNMENT. Choose an advertisement for a vacant
position from your local newspaper, and make up a
reply. Be particularly accurate in the setting out.
CLEARER THINKING
TESTING A GENERALIZATION. In Unit 20 wc dis-
cussed the importance of generalizations in thinking,
and the danger of making hasty generalizations. To
generalize is to infer that what has been observed to be
true of individual facts or cases is true also of all the
other facts or cases—that is, of the ones that have not
been observed.
When wc meet with generalizations in an argument wc
should first apply our general principle of deciding
whether to accept the point (e.g., to let it pass as being
self-evident) or to question it. If we decide on the latter
course, wc ought to submit the generalization to these
questions:
(a) Have enough instances been observed?
(b) Have the observed instances been studied in a
variety of conditions?
(c) Have conflicting instances been overlooked?
For centuries there has been an ugly tendency to anti-
Semitism in European history. This reached a climax
with the atrocities of Hitler’s Nazi Party against the
Jews, some six million of whom were exterminated by
firing squads and in gas ovens. Before these barbarities
reached great proportions Nazi propaganda conditioned
many German minds to believe the most extravagant
generalizations about Jews: they were parasites on the
nation; they added nothing to true culture; they were
despicably immoral; and so forth. Under the totali-
tarian regime, Germans who knew that all this was
rubbish were forbidden to say so. Had it been possible
to subject these generalizations to the test suggested in
the three questions above, they would quickly have been
seen to be absurd.
Mostly we have to contend with more subtle generaliza-
tions than those which Hitler propounded. It is very
important that we know how to test any that occupy an
important place in an argument.
DISCUSS: (1) ‘People who can’t look you in the eye
are not to be trusted.’
(2) ‘Women, on the average, live longer than men.’
EXERCISE. Subject this generalization to a critical
examination: ‘Australians are a sport-loving people.’


1. To see which way the wind is blowing.
2. 'To bite off more than one can chew.
3. To take a leaf out of someone’s book.
4. To burn the candle at both ends.
5. To hand it to someone on a plate.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
PARODY (and BURLESQUE): These are to a com-
plete work what caricature is to a character. They are
deliberate imitations of serious works in literature and
they seek to ridicule both characters and events by
exaggerating them beyond all reasonable limits.
e.g., Pope’s poem, ‘The Rape of the Lock’, where he
models the taking of a curl from a young girl’s
head on the scale of the ancient classic tales of the
abduction of young women by enemy soldiers.
Fielding’s novel, ‘Joseph Andrews’, which is a rol-
licking parody of Richardson’s ‘Pamela’.
A POINT OF STYLE
REDUNDANCY: This term describes the use of too
many words —a superfluity. It is a close synonym of
‘verbosity’. (Tautology, defined in Unit 19, is akin to
redundancy, but should be distinguished from it.)
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
ROOT WORDS . . . Study the following:
1. ORTHO: straight, correct, as in orthodox, orthog-
raphy.
Give the meaning of ‘orthodontist’.
2. GEO: of the earth, as in geography, geometry.
Give ONE other
3. HYDRO: water, as in dehydrate, hydraulic.
Give ONE more
4. MEGA: great, as in megaphone.
What is megalomania?
5. TECHNO: art, skill, as in technique, technology.
What do we mean by ‘technical terms’?
6. PHOBIA; fear, as in Anglophobe (dislike, fear of
the English).
Give the words for a fear of water; fear of closed-in
spaces:
RULE: Pronouns must always agree in number with
their subject.
e.g., This is the finest brand of car in the world. (They,
it) (has, have) become justifiably popular.
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT WORD:
1. Although the opossum is protected by law, stupid
people still hunt (them, it) mercilessly.
2. Germany has had an astonishing recovery since the
war. (They, she, it) (have, has) been the scene of
tremendous reconstruction.
3. The co-authors have finished the book, but it will
take a while to get (them, it) on the market.
4. The cargo consisted of meat and tallow. (They, it)
(was, were) lost when the ship sank.
5. Hitler’s blitzkrieg relied heavily on the tank, but
(they, it) (were, was) not always as effective as he
hoped.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. The jet-airliner has revolutionised air transport;
they travel at great heights and fantastic speeds.
7. The compere put the question to the four members
of the panel, but neither of them were able to
answer it.
8. Neither London nor New York are able to equal
Tokyo in population.
9. Napoleon’s use of artillery, like his new tactics of
manoeuvre, were very successful in the Italian cam-
paign.
10. Erected in memory of Jill Heapy accidentally shot
as a mark of affection by her loving husband.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Brackets and Dashes.
A parenthesis (plural: parentheses) is an insertion into
a sentence of words that are not basic to the sentence —
secondary material, which perhaps modifies or explains
a point, but does not determine the general sense of the
sentence. Such a parenthesis is indicated by brackets
( ) or dashes . Since both forms have come to be
of about the same value today, it is a matter of opinion
as to which of them you use. Most writers seem to
prefer the dash because it is less disruptive of a sentence
than is the bracket. Generally speaking, they should be
used sparingly.
REMEMBER: A sentence must make sense even if the
parenthesis is removed. Study some examples . . .
1. Exercise is essential for the youth, and therefore I
suggest most headmasters would insist that
Greg should play regular sport.
2. You must realise and how can I say it strongly
enough?—that fast driving is a form of insanity.
3. That play is wonderful—yes, quite wonderful!
4. There he was—the President himself.
5. I have travelled (never mind the reason) continu-
ously for three days and nights.
6. He has entered (the great idiot) to drive his car in a
racing event.
7. I know a writer (he is not an Australian, it’s true)
who could write a good account of the Kimberleys.
8. In his recent book (not the best seller) he dealt with
professional fishermen.


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 21
SPELLING/ VOC ABUL ARY“
carriage petticoat pneumatic amplifier interrogative
forehead pyjamas opaque believe questionnaire
grammar agility precipitate doctrine co-ordination
recognise handicap velocity amethyst resuscitation
shining hygiene admiralty debatable constellation
crescendo empirical dominion belligerent allowed
fantasia absorption billiards apparatus biscuit
impromptu inflammable canal culture capitalism
gaiety susceptible alcohol inexhaustible irresistible
correlation dilemma sympathetic etiquette embarrass
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: believe, co-ordinated,
allowed
2. Put a stroke between the syllables of: crescendo, questionnaire, resuscitation.
3. Change to nouns: interrogate
, prolong , empirical
4. Change to adjectives: fantasia
, doctrine , capitalism
5. Write synonyms for: impromptu , precipitate , astute
6. Write antonyms for: opaque
, commendable , agility
7. Delete wrong word: Java enjoys an equitable/equable climate.
It happened/transpired that he had known all the time.
Such rumours are harmful to my character/reputation.
8. Complete this table on the Degrees of Comparison of Adjectives:
POSITIVE COMPARATIVE
tall
SUPERLATIVE
POSITIVE COMPARATIVE
far
SUPERLATIVE
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. He was profuse his apologies.
2. It was similar the sample.
3. You are oblivious my distress.
4. He was sympathetic their claims.
5. I always'instil this rule them.
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. repugnant, agreeable, distasteful, offensive.
2. desultory, steady, irregular, cursory.
3. agreeable, nauseous, noisome, loathsome.
4. obstinate, tractable, amenable, compliant.
5. reparation, indemnity, compensation, appropriation.
SELECT THE APT WORD
He began panning for gold as a week-end amusement.
Then, as happens to people who become
with gambling, he was quite carried away by the lure of
‘striking it rich’. His family has not heard from him
for several years.
(attracted, obsessed, fixated, pre-occupied)
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. Soldier hired by foreign country
2. A nation’s reserve military force
3. Disguising a military position
4. Cannot be taken by enemy attack
5. Diameter of bore of a gun


Unit 22: EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
INSPIRATION OR CHANCE
We are inclined to be overawed nowadays by the doc-
trine that our genes and our early environment have so
entirely conditioned us that any choice you make, any
action you take, is—you being you—inevitable; free
will is an illusion; every choice or action is predeter-
mined by a continuous line of cause and effect within
you. Coincidence breaks that line, or seems to, because
it represents an intervention of the unpredictable; it
says, ‘one thing does not necessarily lead to another’:
it proffers a meeting, a relationship, which cannot be
accounted for by any rational theory. As though two
engines, running obediently on two different sets of
metals, should leap the tracks, puff across the country-
side towards each other, and touch buffers; pure, charm-
ing, absurd-chance!
As a poet, 1 have a special reason for respecting chance.
The conception of a poem is an extraordinarily chancy
thing. A year or two ago, I was brooding a lot about
possessions: how, when 1 was young, I thought one
should travel light; I detested my elders’ passion to
possess things— and to possess pepole, and the belief
(It’s a good deal more common now) that to possess a
car, a telly, a semi-detached, etc., etc., somehow in-
creases not just one’s status but one’s value as a human
being. I felt that the pleasure of having is a very poor
substitute for the joy of living. But now I find myself
rather fond of possessions; and I notice that, the older
one gets, the more attached to them one becomes—as
if they were extensions of one’s personality. And it
struck me how strange it is that I should become more
involved with possessions the nearer I approach to
death—to the journey which 1 have to travel light.
1 was thinking on those lines when, quite unbidden, out
of the blue, some words came into my head; ‘Stream-
lined whales and hulls’. Now what on earth had that to
do with the subject of my meditation? But the phrase
soon expanded itself into ‘Think of streamlined whales
and hulls Accumulating barnacles By moving long
enough immersed In their own element’. And there 1
had the beginnings of a poem about accumulating pos-
sessions, which would never have been conceived if that
phrase ‘streamlined whales and hulls’ had not by some
lucky chance wandered into my head. (393 words)
(from an article. The Gracious Guard’, by
Cecil Day Lewis, in The Listener, 1/6/61)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) Explain: environment; illusion; rational. (H)
(b) Put into your own words the writer’s definition of
coincidence. (2)
(c) What example does he give us of the charm and
absurdity of chance? Is it effective? Why (H)
(d) Distinguish between ‘status’ and ‘value’ in the
phrase ‘not just one’s status but one’s value as a
human being’. (2)
(e) In what way does the writer consider that man’s
desire for possessions is strange? (1)
(f) As the passage is taken from a broadcast talk, there
are a number of purely colloquial phrases used by
Day Lewis. Make a list of them and give an opinion
about their effect on the passage. (3)
(g) How does coincidence affect a poet? (1)
CLEARER THINKING
AVOIDING OVERSTATEMENT. Teachers who
mark exam papers are aware of the ease with which
pupils slip into overstatements in their desire to be
definite. ‘Napoleon’s fleet was completely destroyed at
Trafalgar.’ ‘The French people believe that . . .’ Such
overstatements or ‘sweeping statements’ instead of being
impressive betray at once the limited, superficial 'know-
ledge' of a writer.
Some people —you can probably think of examples—
are given to exaggeration. They must continually ‘speak
in the superlative’ in order to create some conversational
effect. This, unfortunately, is not confined to people who
go fishing! It is an irritating as well as a misleading
habit.
T have observed that in several instances such-and-such
is the case’, a careful thinker will say. Or he will limit
his generalizations with words such as ‘often’, ‘usually’,
‘many’, ‘nearly all’, or ‘a large proportion’. He may be
aware of the immense variety of human types and
behaviour, and in his generalizations about people he
will probably say, ‘ln my experience, such-and-such is
the way people act.’
Cautiousness of this kind has limits. It may become a
kind of defence mechanism for a person who is merely
indefinite and vague. His favourite word will probably
be ‘some’, because it will at least be true of a small num-
ber of cases. As well as having a responsibility to avoid
overstatement, we need also to be as precise as we pos-
sibly can—and ‘some’ can be altogether too indefinite.
DISCUSS: (1) What is meant by ‘speaking in the super-
lative’?
(2) ‘Youth is a time of complete irresponsibility.’
(3) ‘Americans brag too much.’
EXERCISE. Re-write this passage so that you modify
its generalizations to a point where you believe it would
be acceptable to a careful thinker.
Examinations are dreaded by students! Understandably
so, for examinations mean cramming for long hours
and for weeks on end. They produce tension which ulti-
mately depresses the growing generation, depriving
them of the mental vitality that they are asked to
exhibit in the exam room. Exams prevent students from
learning a subject for its own sake. Teachers are obliged
to coach for the exam instead of teaching their subject
as a worthy extension of a student’s experience.


1. None so blind as those that will not see.
2. Health is not valued till sickness comes.
3. Keep your mouth shut and your ears open.
4. Men make houses, women make homes.
5. No man is a hero to his valet.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
CARICATURE; This is similar to the method of car-
toonists, whereby a particular characteristic of appear-
ance or, in literature, of temperament is exaggerated for
emphasis. Dickens’ characters are nearly all caricatured
when he wishes to achieve a comic effect.
e.g., Uriah Heep and his humility; Mr. Micawber and
his belief that ‘something will turn up’.
A POINT OF STYLE
COLLOQUIALISM: As its name suggests, this is
expression which is found in the spoken language. It is
more formal than slang, but rarely acceptable in written
expression unless it is used deliberately to portray
character or to suggest everyday speech.
e.g., ‘He’s a great mate to me.’
‘That’s for sure!’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
ROOT WORDS . . . Study the following;
1. VOC: call, as in vocal, revoke.
Give ONE more
2. TANG (TACT): touch, as in tangible, intact.
Give ONE more
3. LEGO (LECT): choose, read, as in elect, eligible.
Give ONE more
4. PELLO (PULS): drive, push, as in compel, impulse.
Give THREE more
5. AMO (AMAT): love, like, as in amorous, amiable.
How does ‘amateur’ fit in here?
6. SPIR(O): breathe, as in respiration, expire.
How does ‘aspire’ fit in here?
‘lnspiration’ belongs here because it was believed
that the gods really breathed their genius into poets
and other artists.
RULE: Do not use double negatives; do not use
‘scarcely’ or ‘hardly’ with a negative; and do not use
double comparatives or double superlatives.
e.g., 1 don’t never want to see you.
There weren’t hardly any spectators.
Her dress was more lovelier than mine.
It was the most cheeriest party I’ve attended.
CORRECT BY ELIMINATING AN UNWANTED WORD:
1. We didn’t buy (none, any) of the goods we saw.
2. You will not do no such thing!
3. The poor fellow is the most saddest case I know.
4. There wasn’t scarcely any time left.
5. From the first, the Common Market’s future was
hardly never in doubt.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so);
6. There is a more darker shade in a different
material.
7. Each person when asked for their views on fluoride
stated their fears in no uncertain terms.
8. It would be foolish to scale up that cliff-face in this
bitter weather.
9. I am sure that had it not been for she I’d have
starved to death.
10. Tommy, go and ask Mrs, Jackson how old Mr.
Jackson is.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES Hyphens.
No-one can state definite rules about hyphens. There is
no agreement, for example, as to whether we should
write; ‘commonsense’, ‘common-sense’, or ‘common
sense’. Should we write ‘full-stop’ or ‘full stop’, ‘semi-
colon’ or ‘semicolon’? The Oxford Dictionary gives
‘housemaid’, but then gives ‘parlour-maid’. From the
14th to the 17th century people wrote ‘no body’; in the
18th century they wrote ‘no-body’; today they write
‘nobody’. Those commonly used words, ‘today’, ‘tonight’
and ‘tomorrow’ are best written as one word, though one
still finds them hyphenated.
The tendency of usefully paired words is for them to
become joined. No doubt we should all help to hasten
this process, as in ‘bushfire’, ‘semicolon’, ‘heartbreak’,
‘notebook’, ‘looseleaf, ‘wallpaper’, and many more.
It is surely undesirable, however, to depart from
hyphenating words such as these: ‘apple-pie’, ‘ill-tem-
pered’, ‘over-liberal’, ‘sharp-pointed’, ‘thick-skinned’,
‘walnut-shell’, ‘editor-in-chief, ‘fun-loving’, ‘out-of-date’.
CONCERNING THE DIVIDING OF WORDS. Here
are some useful principles on dividing words when you
get to the end of a line;
1. In general, try to avoid dividing words.
2. Never divide a word of one syllable.
3. In handwritten work it ought to be possible, also, to
avoid dividing a word of two syllables.
4. When dividing a word of more than two syllables,
do so according to syllables and be sure that a
reasonable unit of pronunciation is carried down to
the next line, e.g., clar-ity, defence-less, cock-erel,
certificate, vol-cano, marvel-lous, guard-ian. (Al-
ways have at least three letters to carry over to the
next line.)


5.
This does not absolve you responsibility.
(boaster, pedagogue, braggart, pedant)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. repudiate, disavow, renounce, espouse.
2. detraction, calumny, commendation, backbiting.
3. intrinsic, extraneous, inherent, essential.
4. subservient, submissive, servile, independent.
5. propitiate, aggravate, conciliate, appease.
SUBSTITUTE an adjective (ending in -ABLE) for:
1. Igniting easily
2. Can’t be done without
3. l-'it to be dwelt in
’4. Quite certain to happen
5. Ready to make welcome
70
REVISE UNIT 7,17
WORK IN BLUE — CORRECT IN RED
Unit 22
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
abandon biography evolution council kaleidoscope
abandoned journalism knuckle counsel missionary
fanatical aching justifiable operate elementary
picnicking improvise buttress impulsive laboratory
cabinet ferocious admission navigable domesticity
jazz ferocity kookaburra indicator masquerade
ignoble enabled impudence hysterical administrator
dictator guardian cathedral delegate exigency
exaggerate adequate bilious recommend persuasion
querulous deficient temporarily psychology vigilance
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: justifiable, operative, possess
2. Write the plural of: manifesto
, synopsis , plateau
3. Change to nouns: improvise
, hysterical , justifiable
4. Change to adjectives: biography
, evolution , administrator
5. Write synonyms for: ignoble , guardian , elucidate
6. Write antonyms for: ferocity
, impudence , elementary
7. Delete wrong word: Let us collaborate/corroborate to write the book.
He gets a wage/salary of £2,000 per year.
The crowd listened to the Pope in reverend/reverent silence.
8. Complete this table on the Degrees of Comparison of Adjectives:
POSITIVE COMPARATIVE
tiny
SUPERLATIVE
POSITIVE COMPARATIVE
some
SUPERLATIVE
tremendous
many
comfortable
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. They were enveloped smoke.
2. Replace him a faster forward.
3. He was appreciative what I had done.
4. Shakespeare was contemporary Jonson.
SELECT THE APT WORD
Some people carry knowledge easily and modestly;
others cannot resist being ostentatious. Perhaps the
most irritating person is the
who continually inflicts his special branch of learning on
everyone, tediously uttering rules and formulas.


SOCIAL CORRESPONDENCE. In these days of the
telephone, social letters have diminished in number.
There are still some occasions when a written reply is
necessary and creates a favourable impression.
1. FORMAL INVITATIONS—It is good manners to
reply in the same form as the invitation, although a
more personal reply may be written if you have to refuse
the invitation. Please observe the date when a reply has
been requested.
EXAMPLE:
Mr. Peter Johnson
thanks Mr. and Mrs. C. L. Bates and has pleasure
in accepting their kind invitation to attend
the wedding of their daughter, Marie,
on Saturday, 9th August, at 4 p.m.
2. SYMPATHY. If you should receive a formal expres-
sion of sympathy in the third person, as in the invitation
above, you should reply in the third person in a similar
pattern. All letters of sympathy or congratulation should
be acknowledged. It is your task to decide how formal
each one should be, depending on the type of letter you
receive from each person.
3. THANKS. It is a matter of courtesy to write a ‘bread
and butter’ letter to acknowledge any hospitality that
has been offered to you. Such letters need not be formal;
you can decide how well you know the person con-
cerned and adjust the tone of your letter accordingly.
But the letter should be written. If you have been stay-
ing with a friend of your own age at her parents’ home,
then the letter should go to her mother, as the person
with the greatest responsibility in entertaining you.
Gifts that have been sent to you by mail or delivery
should be acknowledged by letter, although gifts given
to you personally can best be acknowledged on the spot.
Most people would not require a further written expres-
sion of thanks. You should remember that the letter
needs to be written to satisfy the sender of the gift that
you have received it. It is most awkward when one does
not know whether one’s gift has gone astray or whether
one’s very casual friend is simply too lazy or forgetful to
acknowledge it.
ASSIGNMENT. Write a letter of thanks to an older
person whom you know reasonably well. Include some
personal or family news which may be of interest,
but do not let your letter become too disjointed or
colloquial.
CLEARER THINKING
THINGS WE TAKE FOR GRANTED. The philoso-
pher Descartes declared that it would be good if people
questioned everything at least once in their lives. This
is asking a great deal! Even if we limit ‘everything’ to
everything-we-at-present-believe, it would mean a huge
effort of review, for we all hold a host of opinions, atti-
tudes and beliefs. We are really conscious of only a
small part of these; most of them we take for granted.
Not only religious and political beliefs are involved
here, but also our thoughts and feelings about acquain-
tances, the opposite sex, people in different age groups,
other nationalities, various classes or categories in
society—and so on, almost endlessly.
When we enter a discussion or argument we bring these
opinions, attitudes and beliefs with us. We enter them
in the discussion either as consciously held ideas or,
more likely, as assumptions which we do not think need
proving. They have been for so long a part of our men-
tal furniture that it does not occur to us to question
them; but we must not be surprised if somebody else
finds our assumptions unacceptable and asks us for
reasons or proof.
Some assumptions are likely to be held in common by
all of us. For example, we are not likely to stop a per-
son who is talking about healthful practices and ques-
tion whether exercise and a balanced diet are of value
to human beings.
Other assumptions rest upon our own individual or
subjective thoughts and feelings. Thus, geraniums to me
are more beautiful than dahlias; Bach is more significant
than Brahms; holidaying is more desirable than tinker-
ing with engines. You may have a host of different
assumptions or values from mine. In discussion we
might, if pressed, advance one or two ‘reasons’ to sub-
stantiate our views, but this is an area where argument
is most difficult. We might agree that these are ‘matters
of opinion’, or that they ‘depend on experience’. Only a
person who is willing to experience new things is likely
to change his assumptions in such matters.
There are some assumptions, however, that must be
detected and challenged in discussions. For example,
someone may be discussing aborigines or negroes in a
disparaging way. Rather than continue to hear specific
instances of their behaviour you may decide that under-
lying this person’s attitude is an assumption that dark-
skinned people are inferior to whites. So you bounce
this into ‘the open by asking a challenging question. It is
the presence of such ‘unspoken assumptions’ that makes
progress in many arguments difficult. Unless we get
down to these assumptions the argument is likely to be
of a superficial kind.
DISCUSSION: (1) What is an assumption?
(2) What is the danger of ‘unspoken assumptions’ in a
discussion or controversy?
(3) What do you think of Descartes’ opinion?
EXERCISE. Above we have mentioned three groups
of assumptions: (a) those that are likely to be commonly
accepted, (b) those that we perceive to be so highly
subjective as to be ‘matters of opinion’, (c) those that
need challenging in argument. Think of an example of
each of these.


e.g., the radiant bride
to learn the ropes
to explore every avenue
the psychological moment
the worthy gentleman
cut and dried
black as night
spick and span
without more ado
the happy couple
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
USING YOUR DICTIONARY
the following words:
. . . Find the origin of
1. ealleon
2. blitz
3. prima donna
4. pariah
5. hurricane
6. fiord
7. canoe
8. goulash
9. ccisha
10. easel
72
1. Union is strength.
2. The leopard cannot change his spots,
3. The proof of the pudding is in the eating.
4. Time and tide wait for no man.
5. My head will never save my legs
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
PUN: Although this device is often criticised as ‘the
lowest form of wit’, it is useful for achieving a comic or
startling effect if the writer is careful to use it only
sparingly. The pun is a deliberate play on words, some-
times using a word that may suggest several meanings or
sometimes using words with the same sound but differ-
ent meanings.
e.g., ‘He keeps his spirits up by pouring spirits down.’
A POINT OF STYLE
CLICHE: This is a worn-out or hackneyed phrase
which has been used so often that it has lost all power
to attract the eye or excite the mind.
RULE; ‘Less’ is used for quantity, ‘fewer’ for number,
e.g., He ate (less, fewer) pie than usual.
He ate (less, fewer) pies than usual.
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT WORD:
1. There are (less, fewer) people watching the match
this week.
2. I have (less, fewer) inclination to work than I used
to have.
3. We milk (less, fewer) cows in winter than in
summer.
4. I have (less, fewer) things to do than ever before.
5. We caught (less, fewer) fish than on any previous
holiday.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. I notice less clouds in the sky this month than
there were last month.
7. News were received that the proceeds of the func-
tion was to be handed to the Lord Mayor.
8. I sent it to she because they implied that it was too
expensive for you and I.
9. Nervously tearing open the letter the contents spilt
all over the philatelist’s lap.
10. Don’t kill your wife with work let electricity
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
Important abbreviations.
These are worth knowing clearly:
A. ABBREVIATIONS FROM LATIN
etc.: et cetera and so forth. (Use sparingly; and
never say ‘. . . pens, pencils and etc.’)
e.g.; exempli gratia—for example.
i.e.: id est —that is.
viz.; videlicet—namely, thus.
cf.: confer—compare with.
q.v.; quod vide—which you should consult.
et al.: et alii—and others.
et seq.: et sequens—and what follows.
c. (or ca.): circa—approximately.
v. (or vs.); versus—against.
N.B .: nota bene —note well.
P.S.: post scriptum—written afterwards,
ibid.: ibidem—from the same place.
B. SOME OTHER USEFUL ABBREVIATIONS
(these are usually permissible in critical essays)
bk. —book.
vol. —volume.
ch. (or chap.) —chapter.
p. —page (pp.—pages).
1. —line (11. —lines).
v. —verse.
sc. —scene.
anon. —anonymous.
ff.—and the following pages (or lines).
n.d. —no date given.
b. —born (e.g., b. 1933).


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 23
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
amendment quantities sensible prophecy abbreviation
pacificism talent abattoirs prophesy caricature
reception yolk walnut receptacle disarmament
yield panelling border vexation coincidence
altogether excel disdainful swollen amalgamate
crisis fugitive fastidious discretion whittled
crises salmon guer(r)illa expediency quarantine
welfare sandwich you’re urgency participation
prejudice bankruptcy seize comparable maintenance
campaign apostrophe perennial feudal remembrance
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: sensible,
discretion,
, passer-by
, profane
, vexation
, disdain
, despicable
expedient
2. Write the plural of: salmon , tornado
3. Change to nouns: amalgamate , seize
4. Change to adjectives: discretion , coincidence
5. Write synonyms for: talent , fastidious
6. Write antonyms for; swollen , pacific
7. Delete wrong word: I prophecy/prophesy that it will soon rain.
Coffee is a mild stimulus/stimulant.
We have made an intense/intensive search for it.
8. Complete this table on Degrees of Comparison of Adjectives;
POSITIVE COMPARATIVE
wealthy
SUPERLATIVE
POSITIVE COMPARATIVE
kindly
SUPERLATIVE
peculiar
hard-working
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. He is often inconsistent
2. Do not comply
3. The Paris mob converged
4. 1 felt a deep abhorrence
5. We prefer the camera
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
1. transgress, infringe, violate, comply.
2. implacable, lenient, unrelenting, inexorable.
3. desecrate, sanctify, profane, defile.
4. querulous, peevish, imperturbable, fretful.
5. baleful, noxious, beneficent, pernicious.
his beliefs,
his demand,
the Bastille.
the spider.
the gun.
SELECT THE APT WORD
On the Saturday after new tenants moved into the
corner house there was a wild party such as this neigh-
bourhood has never before known. It became so
—what with shouting and
arguments and singing in drunken chorus—that several
residents complained to the police.
(raucous, uproarious, boisterous, tempestuous)
SUBSTITUTE a word for;
1. One who keeps bees
2. One who walks in sleep
3. One who makes maps
4. One who makes barrels
5. One who studies weather


Unit 24: EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
CO-EXISTENCE?
President Kennedy’s announcement at the American
University, Washington, of a meeting in Moscow to dis-
cuss a nuclear tests ban seems to have been inserted
only recently in an address which has, quite evidently,
been maturing for a long time in his mind.
For while there has not been, as the President said,
any change in the American resistance to an expansion
of Communism, there have been changes in the Ameri-
can estimate of developments in the Soviet Union and
in the Communist world. Yet most of the language of
the cold war has remained unchanged, has become
stereotyped and official and popular reactions to news
from the East have become mechanical. We on our part
and the Russians on their part have raised higher than
the Iron Curtain an impenetrable fog of suspicion.
For Kennedy and for Kruschev, the notion that either
of the two rival nuclear Powers can bury the other has
become nonsensical. All that are left of the old slogans
are the tired old words themselves. In the age of nuclear
parity, there is no alternative to co-existence.
In effect, the President has said to Kruschev that since,
in the nuclear age, we have to co-exist, crusading which
might involve armed violence must be abandoned. If
both Powers are to live, they will have to learn to let
live. The President’s way of stating these governing
truths was admirable. It was not only lucid and un-
timorous, but it was couched in the kind of language
which ought to be used in talking to and about the
Russians. It was the language of self-confidence and self-
respect, of resolution and magnanimity. (271 words)
(from a leading article, The Sydney Morning Herald,
17/6/63)
COMPREHENSION questions
(a) In your own words, give the reason for President
Kennedy’s suggestion for nuclear test ban talks. (2)
(b) What is meant by ‘popular reactions to news from
the East have become mechanical’? (2)
(c) What is meant by ‘the Iron Curtain’? (3)
(d) Explain ‘stereotyped’. (1)
(e) What is the force of the phrase ‘an impenetrable fog
of suspicion’? What figure of speech is used here?
(2)
(f) How is this an age of ‘nuclear parity’? (2)
(g) Explain; lucid, untimorous; magnanimity. (3)
CLEARER THINKING
ANALOGIES. What is an analogy? It is a special kind
of comparison. It says, in effect, because two things are
obviously alike in many ways they must also be alike in
a particular way which we desire to indicate. For ex-
ample, ‘your school-work is similar to your father’s job,
and just as he must take good care of his tools-of-trade
so you must take good care of your books which are
your tools-of-trade.’
No-one is likely to question an analogy such as that. A
science lecturer may strive to explain the structure of the
atom by means of an analogy with the solar system.
A headmaster, in calling for adherence to school rules
may liken the school to a family. Analogies of these
kinds are useful forms of explanation.
But a danger arises when an analogy is pressed too far
—when the comparison of two things results in an asser-
tion that they are more similar than is in fact true (or,
worse, that they are identical). For example, in an
analogy between a father of a family and the govern-
ment of a nation it may be asserted that just as a
father can prescribe his children’s religion and morals
so a government should have this right over all its
people.
It is not possible to prescribe a simple rule for the detec-
tion of a false analogy. We can, however, be guided by
the general principle that the analogy, the comparison,
must not be pressed too far. We must look closely at
what the analogy suggests, and protest if the analogy is
leading us into something forced or unreal.
DISCUSS; (1) What is an anology?
(2) What is a false analogy?
(3) School prefects have been likened to the members
of the teaching staff and have even been called ‘junior
members of the staff. To what extent is this a useful
analogy, if at all? At what point in such a comparison
would the analogy break down?
EXERCISE; Read this analogy and criticize it:
A citizen is a member of a team —the big national team.
He should be prepared to forgo all his personal whims
and inclinations so that he can become an effective unit
of the team. Individualism always mars a team’s effort
and throws it into confusion. All individuals must there-
fore conform with their training in team movements
and each unit must instantly comply with the directions
of the coach and the captain—that is to say, they must
obediently practise what the government in its wisdom
has prescribed for their education and what it prescribes
for them when they enter the business world. A per-
fectly co-ordinated team under strong, decisive leader-
ship would mean a nation capable of giving a good
account of itself in the ruggedly competitive inter-
national arena.


1. To sugar the pill.
2. To fall between two stools.
3. Let him stew in his own juice.
4. To be born with a silver spoon in one’s mouth.
5. To take something with a grain of salt.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
LITOTES (or MEIOSIS): A statement which is the
opposite of hyperbole; it achieves emphasis by deliber-
ate understatement. Some novelists use this device to
suggest a character’s strength of mind or his unassum-
ing courage.
e.g., ‘The Battle of Britain was no picnic.
‘Not a few Australians owe their livelihood to
primary industry.’
A POINT OF STYLE
SLANG; This term refers to highly colloquial language,
usually considered unrefined or even uneducated in com-
parison with standard expression. It is extremely subject
to change and probably nothing dates different genera-
tions in society so completely as their slang.
e.g., bloke for man
dough for money
quack for doctor
quid for pound (£1)
Perhaps you know other examples?
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
Give the simple noun to correspond with the following
adjectives: e.g., ocular—eye.
1. aural 6. paternal
2. oral 7. virile
3. mental 8. lunar
4. domestic 9. feminine
5. urban 10. veracious
SENTENCE CORRECTION
RULE: ‘Between’ two things; ‘among’ more than two.
e.g., A grave dispute has arisen (between, among)
Russia and China.
There is little unity (between, among) the African
powers.
1. He distributed the money (between, among) the
four boys.
2. Friendly relations exist (between, among) the two
teams.
3. I walked (between, among) the many flower beds.
4. There is another quarrel (between, among) the
twins.
5. Differences exist (between, among) the peoples of
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. The chief posts in government went to the aristo-
crats; furthermore, the King divided all the land
between them.
7. I am quite certain that the minister and not his
fellow parliamentarians are to blame.
8. Neither your money nor your influence are going
tb be of any value to you now.
9. You will do as you are told and I shall see to
10. Most bosses do not care how the workers live so
long as they get wealthy quickly.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
Study the punctuation in this famous passage from
‘Oliver Twist’, by Charles Dickens (1812-70):
A council was held; lots were cast who should walk
up to the master after supper that evening, and ask for
more; and it fell to Oliver Twist.
The evening arrived; the boys took their places. The
master, in his cook’s uniform, stationed himself at the
copper; his pauper assistants ranged themselves behind
him; the gruel was served out; and a long grace was said
over the short commons. The gruel disappeared; the
boys whispered each other, and winked at Oliver;
while his next neighbours nudged him. Child as he was,
he was desperate with hunger, and reckless with misery.
He rose from the table; and advancing to the master,
basin and spoon in hand, somewhat alarmed at his own
temerity;
‘Please, sir, I want some more.’
The master was a fat, healthy man;' but he turned
very pale. He gazed in stupefied astonishment on the
small rebel for some seconds, and then clung for sup-
port to the copper. The assistants were paralysed with
wonder; the boys with fear.
‘What! said the master at length, in a faint voice.
‘Please, sir,’ replied Oliver, T want some more.’ . . .
‘For more!’ said Mr. Limbkins. ‘Compose yourself,
Bumble, and answer me distinctly. Do I understand that
he asked for more, after he had eaten the supper
allotted by the dietary?’
‘He did, sir,’ replied Bumble.
‘That boy will be hung,’ said the gentleman in the
white waistcoat. T know that boy will be hung.’


Unit 24
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/VOCABULARY ""
apparent impertinent journeying ideas humanitarian
luminous mountaineer oddities ideology synonymous
role syringe synthetic rumour nationalisation
turmoil around aroused consequence romanticism
passionate chemically hypocrisy wreak mythology
chaffeur pasture dyeing (vb. dye) peaceable impracticable
asylum bribery burdened virtual handkerchief
juvenile variable wouldn’t trousseau xylophone
hygiene pneumatic inflammable crescendo resuscitation
agility absorption amethyst recognise belligerent
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: passionate,
variable,
obtrusive
2. Show possession: the duchess party, parents day, for goodness sake
3. Change to nouns: synthetic , complacent
concoct
4. Change to adjectives; myth , hypocrisy
ideology
5. Delete wrong word: He discussed it in a forceful/forcible manner.
She works hard to keep an aged dependent/dependant.
My boss has given me a big raise/rise in pay.
6. Pair with a synonym in the column below:
turmoil, hypocrisy, apparent, augment, condone,
depravity, articulate, complacency—
satisfaction
confusion
evident
deceit
enlarge
degeneracy
sanction
distinct
7. Pair with an antonym in the column below:
ungracious, extemporary, god-like, unhurried, homo-
geneous, changeable, paltry, uneducated—
benign
diabolical
premeditated
immutable
hectic
formidable
heterogeneous
erudite
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
The British election of 1950 was marked by bitter
clashes between the Labour and Conservative parties.
On a drive through London’s East End we passed a
dozen orators, each vehemently
1. Water is composed
2. Delivery is consequent
3. You must conform
4. Love is incompatible
5. You should capitalise
hydrogen and oxygen.
your advice.
the rules.
selfishness.
the election of his party.
such an opportunity.
(recommending, favouring, suggesting, advocating)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. generous, self-seeking, exalted, magnanimous.
2. mitigate, aggravate, alleviate, abate.
3. imperious, dictatorial, subservient, authoritarian.
4. probity, depravity, rectitude, integrity.
1. Pithy or pointed saying
2. A poem of lamentation
3. Long poem on traditional hero(es)
4. Speech at the end of play
5. enervate, enfeeble, debilitate, invigorate.
5. Concluding part of a speech


STYLE. When you are asked to discuss the style of a
passage, you are expected to examine such things as the
manner in which the writer has phrased his thoughts,
his selection of simple everyday language or his prefer-
ence for figurative, complex expression, his attitude to
his subject, whether it be serious, formal, fanciful or
satiric, and so on. You should also study his sentence
structure to ascertain whether he leans towards long,
discursive sentences or the pithy, short ones. His
arrangement of paragraphs and argument-links are also
interesting as an indication of the way his mind works.
Consider the following passage: (Gulliver is captured)
I lay down on the grass, which was very short and soft,
where I slept sounder than ever I remember to have
done in my life, and, as I reckoned, above nine hours;
for when 1 waked, it was just daylight. 1 attempted to
rise but was not able to stir: for, as I happened to lie on
my back, 1 found my arms and legs were strongly
fastened on each side to the ground; and my hair, which
was long and thick, tied down in the same manner. I
likewise felt several ligatures across my body, from my
arm-pits to my thighs. I could only look upwards; the
sun began to grow hot, and the light offended my eyes.
I heard a confused noise about me, but in the posture
1 lay, could see nothing except the sky. In a little time
1 felt something alive moving on my left leg, which
advancing gently forward over my breast, came almost
up to my chin; when bending my eyes downwards as
much as I could, I perceived it to be a human creature
not six inches high, with a bow and arrow in his hands,
and a quiver at his back. In the meantime, I felt at least
forty more of the same kind (as I conjectured) following
the first. I was in the utmost astonishment, and roared
so loud, that they all ran back in a fright; and some of
them, as 1 was afterwards told, were hurt with the falls
they got by leaping from my sides upon the ground.
(from Gulliver's Travels, by Swift)
Comment on the style of the passage as a piece of narra-
tive.
ASSIGNMENT. Write a brief account of the life and/or
personality of the bravest or most contented person you
have ever met; OR discuss the truth and weakness in
each of these sayings—Fie who hesitates is lost; more
haste, less speed; OR discuss the advantages and dis-
advantages of co-education.
CLEARER THINKING
DEDUCTION. Deduction means applying a general
rule to a particular case. For example: never cross a
road without looking both ways; here is a road I want
to cross, so 1 had better look both ways. In other words,
a deduction is the putting into practice of the generali-
zations that we have been speaking about since Unit 20.
The great French naturalist Cuvier had a genius for
making pioneer generalizations about the animal and
plant worlds. One of his simpler ones was: ‘No animals
with horns and hoofs eat flesh.’ Armed with this gen-
eralization, a person who knew nothing about, say,
goats could deduce that he would not be eaten by these
creatures.
In classes on logic a great deal of time is spent in teach-
ing students to make correct deductions. They are told
to set out the problem in special form which is called a
syllogism. It goes like this:
All sharp tools must be handled carefully;
This is a sharp tool;
Therefore it must be handled carefully.
This example makes deduction look obvious and easy.
But trouble —bad reasoning—can enter when this sort
of thing happens;
All fish are cold-blooded;
This creature is cold-blooded;
Therefore this creature is a fish.
But the creature turns out to be a reptile! Where, then,
did an error in reasoning creep in? Where is the fallacy
in these other examples:
People who miss the bus must take a taxi;
There are people in a taxi;
They must have missed the bus.
A good citizen never throws papers on the road;
I never throw papers on the road;
Therefore I am a good citizen.
Killing a man is murder;
Capital punishment means killing a man;
Therefore the State is a murderer.
Anyone who cheats deserves to fail;
But he does not cheat;
Therefore he ought to have passed.
DISCUSSION. From your discussion of the above ex-
amples you will begin to see that there are several ways
in which error can creep into our deductive reasoning.
We shall discuss these further in the next Unit.
EXERCISE. We have said that deduction is a par-
ticular application of a general principle—it is a matter
of reasoning from the general to the particular. This sort
of thing goes on continually in our lives. Think of half
a dozen instances involving everyday actions of yours.
In each case say what the general principle is, then state
the particular deduction you made from it.


1. When the cat is away the mice will play.
2. Where there’s a will there’s a way.
3. You can’t eat your cake and have it.
4. A good conscience is a soft pillow.
5. A word to the wise is quite enough.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
HYPALLAGE; This is a figure of speech in which the
natural relationship of two elements in a proposition are
reversed without changing the essential meaning.
e.g., ‘Let’s apply the wound to the water.’
‘The ground came up and hit me.’
A POINT OF STYLE
‘OWING’ or ‘DUE’?: These words are often confused
and, indeed, modern usage may soon make them inter-
changeable. Until such use is officially recognised, how-
ever, you should distinguish between them as follows:
OWING:
debt, e.g., ‘There is five pounds owing on your bill.’
reason, e.g., ‘We missed the plane, owing to the
taxi’s puncture.’
DUE:
time, e.g., ‘The train'is due at eight.’
obligation, e.g., ‘Thanks are due to the speaker for
coming tonight.’ ‘He will receive his due reward.’
‘Due’ is an adjective and therefore must always refer to
a noun or pronoun. If used loosely to mean ‘because’,
it can frequently cause ambiguity,
e.g., T left the scene of the accident, due to my being in
a hurry.’
The emphasised phrase presumably refers to the reason
for leaving, but it seems to refer to the reason for the
accident, that noun being closest to ‘due’.
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
WORDS AND THEIR STORY; SABOTAGE This
comes from the French sabot (shoe), which became a
slang word for a poor tool or a bad workman, thence
to mean working badly and, finally, to ruin work
deliberately. It may also have acquired this meaning
from the practice of peasants who stamped down the
crops of an unjust master. Again, wooden clogs in
Belgium and Holland were sometimes thrust into
machines by protesting workers during the early period
of the Industrial Revolution.
RULE; ‘May’ gives permission; ‘can’ denotes ability.
e.g., (Can, may) I go to see ‘A Murder a Minute’,daddy?
I am sure I (can, may) climb that mountain.
UNDERLINE THE CORRECT WORD:
1. (Can, may) I put the next question?
2. You (can, may) do as you please.
3. 1 (can, may) agree with him on most issues.
4. They (can, may) leave when their homework is
finished.
5. We shall ask if we (can, may) have some money.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. Can Igo to the beach when I have finished mowing
the lawn?
7. Neither America nor Russia seem very willing to
share their atom secrets.
8. There wasn’t hardly any gold left at Ballarat uy
1900.
9. The most wettest place in the world is Cherrapunji
in Assam, where rainfall averages nearly 500
inches a year.
10. A mad dog was killed by a party of hunters which
had bitten two children and killed many sheep.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
Thomas de Quincey (1785-1859) became in his youth
addicted to opium. In his ‘Confessions of an English
Opium Eater’, he tells of his nightmarish experiences
with the drug. Study this extract:
Under the connecting feeling of tropical heat and
vertical sunlights, I brought together all creatures, birds,
beasts, reptiles, all trees and plants, usages and appear-
ances, that are found in all tropical regions, and
assembled them together in China or Hindostan. From
kindred feelings, I soon brought Egypt and her gods
under the same law. I was stared at, hooted at, grinned
at, chattered at, by monkeys, by paroquets, by cocka-
toos. I ran into pagodas, and was fixed for centuries at
the summit, or in secret rooms; I was the idol; I was the
priest; I was worshipped; I was sacrificed. I fled from
the wrath of Brama through all the forests of Asia;
Vishnu hated me; Seeva lay in wait for me. I came
suddenly upon Isis and Osiris: I had done a deed, they
said, which the ibis and the crocodile trembled at.
Thousands of years I lived and was buried in stone
coffins, with mummies and sphinxes, in narrow cham-
bers at the heart of eternal pyramids. I was kissed, with
cancerous kisses by crocodiles, and was laid, con-
founded, with all unutterable abortions, amongst reeds
and Nilotic mud.


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 25
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
auxiliary frolic wilful synagogue peculiarities
peasantry frolicked drought proclaim tunnelled
drawer dynasty irreligious proclamation urbanisation
wield irrigation luxurious irresolute penitence
gullible mystified mutual hydraulic penitentiary
duchess overrun noxious righteous exuberance
sniveller riotous overture surpass peninsula
isolation prohibition irremovable withhold peninsular
abandoned aching indicator operate masquerade
picnicking ferocity hysterical elementary domesticity
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: surpassed, penitent,
palatable
2. Write the plurals of: brother-in-law , bucketful , chassis
3. Change to nouns: mystified , wilful , abandoned
4. Change to adjectives: dynasty , oracle , abstain
5. Delete wrong word; The two merchants bargained/contracted over the price.
We must try to exterminate/eradicate the rabbits.
They carefully demolished/dismantled the machine for the museum.
6. Pair with a synonym in the column below:
mutual, proclaim, irresolute, surpass, withhold,
righteous, peculiar, penitent—
strange
restrain
reciprocal
outshine
upright
announce
hesitant
regretful
7. Pair with an antonym in the column below:
noxious, exuberant, luxurious, inept, satisfied,
wordy, lackadaisical, poverty—
harmless
competent
insatiable
simple
methodical
opulence
laconic
apathetic
SELECT THE APT WORD
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
Pierre sustained a grievous head wound at Waterloo and
lay for two weeks in a state of mingled torpor and
delirium. When he recovered he had quite forgotten
the events preceding the battle, nor did he
them until a full month later.
1. He is proficient
public speaking,
a celebration.
2. This is the occasion
3. Avoid negligence
your studies.
4. The theory is incongruous
5. His father is a connoisseur
the facts.
(remember, recollect, recall, retrace)
SUBSTITUTE an adjective (ending in -IBLE) for:
1. Able to be bent
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
1. quibble, confront, equivocate, evade
2. incessant, intermittent, interminable, unremitting.
3. motley, heterogeneous, diverse, uniform.
4. encumbrance, incentive, hindrance, impediment.
5. extemporaneous, premeditated, extempore,
2. Able to be heard
3. Able to be read
4. Able to be seen
5. Able to be touched
impromptu.


Unit 26: EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
ADVERTISING AND OUR LIVES
‘People are only human. Let’s keep them that way. Let’s
resist any suggestion that they are statistics or card-
board cutouts or unseen unknowns. People are people.’
This is the authentic voice of the ‘adman’—the reliance
upon what is suggested rather than upon what is stated;
the beguiling intimacy of tone; the bland assumption of
manipulative power; the condescending relish of human
frailty. What 1 quoted was in fact the eye-catching head-
ing of an advertisement for an advertising agency, a
form of copy-writing which surely distils for us the
quintessential spirit of modern mass-persuasion. And in
addition to the overt motivation we can detect in this
example a certain defensiveness of posture —an aware-
ness of growing public uneasiness over the potency and
pervasiveness in our society of psychological manipula-
tion.
1 believe this wide-spread anxiety is justified, even
though the grounds for it are sometimes misconceived.
The classic case against advertising is not concerned
primarily with its influence in persuading people to
spend their money upon this rather than that. The
legitimate ground for disquiet is rather its indirect
effect upon the quality of the individual’s experience,
its tendency to stereotype the capacity for emotional
response in a way which lowers the level upon which we
live and is therefore in a profound sense dehumanizing.
In saying this I have in mind not merely the fact that
the impulses which advertising finds it profitable to play
upon are often discreditable ones fear, unthinking
conformity, upward striving to get ahead of the Joneses,
or the credulous appetite for pseudo-scientific murnbo-
jumbo. 1 would stress even more the advertiser’s
ingenuity in linking his product with ideas and images
which are in themselves innocuous, pleasurable, even
commendable. . . . Language itself is de-sensitised, a
casualty to that stunning-with-superlatives which inflates
the first puff at a cigarette to the status of ‘ecstasy.’
(305 words)
(from an article hy Frank Whitehead, The Listener, 16/3/61)
COMPREHENSION questions;
(a) Explain; authentic; bland; quintessential; pervasive-
ness. (2)
(b) How effective is the introductory quotation? Com-
ment on the success of the structure of the first
paragraph. (3)
(c) Put in your own words ‘our society of psychological
manipulation’. (2)
(d) What do the majority of people dislike in adver-
tising? (I)
(e) What does the writer consider to be a much greater
danger? (1)
(f) Express in your own words ‘unthinking conformity’.
(1)
(g) Explain: ingenuity; innocuous. (2)
(h) What is advertising doing to the language’s capacity
for a wide range of expression? (1)
(i) Give your opinion of the writer’s argument. Is he
right, is he a prophet or merely an alarmist? (2)
CLEARER THINKING
BUT IS IT REALLY SO? In Unit 25 we looked at
Deduction and the formal way a logician sets out his
deductive argument (a syllogism). In medieval times
learned men attached great significance to the syllogism:
they believed it to be the most important act of reaspn-
ing and the chief way of acquiring knowledge. This
attitude arose from the outlook of those times which
held that all the general truths about the universe were
either already known or divinely withheld. Everyone
knew, for example, that the world was fiat, that it was
the centre of the universe, that the sun and other
heavenly bodies revolved around it, and so on. Hence
it was no use trying to discover new generalizations
(induction); all that men coqld do was to apply the exist-
ing general principles to particular things (deduction).
This view has been swept aside by the centuries of
scientific activity that followed the middle ages. Science
develops mainly by setting up generalizations which it
calls hypotheses. Only when it gets to testing these
hypotheses is deductive reasoning employed.
How about the doubtful syllogisms which aroused our
criticism in the last Unit? Let us take a further example:
Loreigners have funny ways;
He is a foreigner;
Therefore he has funny ways.
The conclusion is logically flawless. But commonsense
tells us that something is not quite right. If we look at
that first proposition we would do well to ask the simple
question: ‘But is it really so?’ And of course it is not.
In fact, we are back with that common fallacy, the
Unwarranted Assumption (see Unit 23). A fallacy may
also arise from the middle term of the syllogism, as in
this example:
All poisons are harmful;
Alcohol is a poison;
Therefore alcohol is harmful.
Applying our test question, ‘But is it really so?’ we
would force the exponent of these views to moderate
his sweeping statement that alcohol is a poison, obliging
him to qualify by saying that only in a certain quantity
does alcohol become a harmful poison.
DISCUSS: Why is it useful to bear in mind the ques-
tion, ‘But is it really so?’ when propositions are brought
before us?
EXERCISE. Examine these syllogisms and assess
whether you can accept the premises (the first two
parts).
(a) Christmas is a religious festival;
The Parkinsons are not religious;
Therefore they should not celebrate Christmas,
(b) Americans are a generous people;
He is an American;
Therefore he is a generous person.


I. Adam’s ale is the best brew.
2. Bad excuses are worse than none.
3. Beware of no man more than oneself.
4. Books and friends should be few but good.
5. Fingers were made before forks.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
FLASH-BACK: A device in literature (or the film)
where the opening scenes present a particular situation
which is then explained by going back into the past and
re-living the events which helped to create the opening
situation.
A POINT OF STYLE
The two faults outlined below are rather errors of
speech than of writing.
1. MALAPROPISM: This is a ludicrous misuse of a
word, usually by confusing it with another very simi-
lar in form though not in meaning. The error was
given its name by Sheridan in his play ‘The Rivals’,
for which he created Mrs. Malaprop (from the
French for an inappropriate or irrelevant remark).
e.g., ‘They were dismayed by the predicament (pre-
diction) that storms would follow the heat
wave.’
‘She confessed a reversion (aversion) to
spiders.’
2. SPOONERISM: The nervous habit of transposing
the initial letters of words, thus—‘Australia’s hopes
received a blushing crow when both opening bats-
men were out for no score.’ An unfortunate
preacher who often lapsed in such a way, the Rev.
W. A. Spooner, gave his name to this rather
humorous error.
e.g., ‘Allow me to sew you to your sheet.’
‘You have hissed every mystery lesson.’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
WORDS AND THEIR STORY
OSTRACISE—This comes from the Greek word for a
shell or potsherd, upon which the citizens of a city-state
would record their vote as to whether a certain person
should be banished from society.
MORTGAGE—This is literally a death pledge. When
the heir to an estate wished to borrow money, he would
sign a pledge that the money would be repaid when he
inherited his estate, i.e., when his father died.
RULE: Do not use an adjective as an adverb.
e.g., The job was done easier today than yesterday.
(Should be ‘more easily’)
CORRECT THE FOLLOWING:
1. I can work quicker than you.
2. You must dress yourself more colourful
3. I was real sorry for him.
4. Must you walk so slow?
5. The boxer fought fiercer than ever.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. A great amount of ignorance and confusion prevail
among the nations at present.
7. 1 firmly believe that either India or Pakistan will
some day give way in their difficult Kashmir dis-
pute.
8. Less than half a dozen members of the team took
the trouble to come to practice.
9. Jack Donohoe was strolling between the mountain
gums when the troopers started shooting.
10. The dead man was discovered near the spot where
he was thrown from his horse by a small girl who
was passing by.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
Study this extract from ‘Wuthering Heights’, the great
novel by Emily Bronte (1818-48):
‘Nelly, is that you?’
It was a deep voice, and foreign in tone; yet there was
something in the manner of pronouncing my name which
made it sound familiar. I turned about to discover who
spoke, fearfully; for the doors were shut, and I had
seen nobody on approaching the steps. Something stirred
in the porch; and, moving nearer, I distinguished a tall
man dressed in dark clothes, with dark face and hair.
He leant against the side, and held his fingers on the
latch as if intending to open for himself. ‘Who can it
be?’ I thought. ‘Mr. Earnshaw? Oh, no! The voice has
no resemblance to his.’
T have waited here an hour,’ he resumed, while 1
continued staring; ‘and the whole of that time all round
has been as still as death. I dared not enter. You do
not know me? Look, I’m not a stranger!’
A ray fell on his features; the cheeks were sallow, and
half covered with black whiskers; the brows lowering,
the eyes deep set and singular. I remembered the eyes.
‘What!’ I cried, uncertain whether to regard him as a
worldly visitor, and 1 raised my hands in amazement.
‘What! you come back? Is it really you? Is it?’
‘Yes, Heathcliff,’ he replied . . .


Unit 26
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
sumptuous hurriedly irrelevant humble perceptible
compact wherein luscious humility guillotine
issuing italicise siphon municipal noticeable
ancestry awkward upheaval scientific rottenness
charcoal commodity implicit mortgage injunction
bluish bushel distinguish traditional similarity
distributor erosion enumerate assumption invidious
vacuum customary currency signature irreconcilable
reception excel prophesy panelling quarantine
abattoirs expediency urgency altogether receptacle
WORD MANIPULATION I. Supply a prefix: distinguished,
2. Put a stroke between the syllables of: hurriedly, invidious, irreconcilable.
3. Change to nouns: italicise .enumerate
4. Change to adjectives: erosion , lament
distinguishable,
perceptible
, implicit
, spasm
5. Delete wrong word; Vitamins are a preventive/preventative of disease.
There is a childish/childlike innocence about the rector.
His fiance/fiancee is younger than he.
6. Pair with a synonym in the column below:
customary, irrelevant, invidious, sumptuous, com-
pact, irreconcilable, lucid, lucrative—
condensed
usual
odious
unrelated
inconsistent
clear
profitable
lavish
7. Pair with an antonym in the column below:
awkward, luscious, humble, distinguished, notice-
able, morose, trite, vehement—
unsavoury
obscure
cheerful
moderate
original
inconspicuous
proud
graceful
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. Burma seceded
2. The three ladies conversed
3. Your error consists
4. That is derogatory
5. I cannot acquiesce
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
1. latent, potential, inherent, manifest.
2. staid, effervescent, volatile, buoyant.
3. redundancy, superfluity, depiction, surfeit.
4. ignominious, opprobrious, shameful, creditable.
5. piquant, insipid, pungent, spirited.
the Empire,
themselves.
scorning advice,
my good name,
such a proposal.
SELECT THE APT WORD
In springtime there are only light breezes along the
southern coast. We had made no provision for this, so
our flimsy sails scarcely caught their impulse. When at
length we reached Adelaide I ransacked the chandlers’
shops in an effort to very large sails,
(get, procure, secure, obtain, acquire)
SUBSTITUTE a word for:
1. The study of coins
2. The study of fish
3. The collecting of stamps
4. The study of the skin
5. The study of fossils


Unit 27: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
STYLE. Read the following passage from a modern
writer whose prose is often as musical and as vivid as
his poetry. What comment would you make on his
ability to create a scene that lives in your memory as
vividly as his childhood Christmases live in his own
mind. Examine the sentence structure, the imagery, the
suggestion of strange happenings from the child’s point
of view, and the child’s own feelings.
CONVERSATION ABOUT CHRISTMAS
Small Boy; What did you do after dinner?
Self: The Uncles sat in front of the fire, took off their
collars, loosened all buttons, put their large moist hands
over their watch-chains, groaned a little, and slept.
Mothers, aunts, and sisters scuttled to and fro, bearing
tureens. The dog was sick. Auntie Beattie had to have
three aspirins, but Auntie Hannah, who liked port, stood
in the middle of the snowbound back-yard, singing like
a big-bosomed thrush. 1 would blow up balloons to see
how big they would blow up to; and, when they burst,
which they all did, the Uncles jumped and rumbled. In
the rich and heavy afternoon, the Uncles breathing like
dolphins and the snow descending, I would sit in the
front room, among festoons and Chinese lanterns, and
nibble at dates, and try to make a model man-o’-war,
following the Instructions for Little Engineers, and pro-
duce what might be mistaken for a sea-going tram. And
then, at Christmas tea, the recovered Uncles would be
jolly over their mincepies; and the great iced cake
loomed in the centre of the table like a marble grave.
Auntie Hannah laced her tea with rum, because it was
only once a year. And in the evening there was Music.
An uncle played the fiddle, a cousin sang ‘Cherry Ripe’,
and another uncle sang ‘Drake’s Drum’. It was very
warm in the little house. Auntie Hannah, who had got
on to the parsnip wine, sang a song about Rejected
Love, and Bleeding Hearts, and Death, and then an-
other in which she said that her Heart was like a Bird’s
Nest; and then everybody laughed again, and then 1
went to bed. Looking through my bedroom window,
out into the moonlight and the flying unending smoke-
coloured snow, I could see the lights in the windows of
all the other houses on our hill, and hear the music
rising from them up the long, steadily falling night. 1
turned the gas down, I got into bed. 1 said some words
to the close and holy darkness, and then I slept.
(from A Prospect of the Sea, by Dylan Thomas)
ASSIGNMENT. Discuss ONE of the following; (a) The
Menace of Noise; (b) The Compensations of a Rainy
Day; (c) ‘The sending of greeting cards is a foolish
custom’. What is your answer?
CLEARER THINKING
DANGER AREAS. So far in this course wc have
looked at many of the problems that face a person who
wishes to think more clearly. Let us now try to review
the course as a whole. There have been two main
aspects; the individual (you) and his environment (the
people who are trying to influence you).
Wc assume here that you embrace an ideal of clear
thinking whereby you desire to do what you can to cope
with your own problems and not cause confusion to
other people by thinking fallaciously. You are now
aware of tne errors that can creep into observation
how even eye-witnesses can differ considerably in their
accounts of a certain event. You know that memory is
never perfect—that it can forget so much and distort so
easily. You know that language can play tricks—that it
sometimes impedes the communication of ideas and
confuses the thinking-out of problems. Most of all, you
are aware of that human tendency called rationalization
—allowing "the heart to rule the head’. All this is sober-
ing knowledge. But if it leads to more careful thinking,
of the cool, detached and flexible kind, it will be of great
aid to you. Not only will it bring you the satisfaction
that comes from capably handling your personal prob-
lems and being honest with yourself, but it will enable
you to cope successfully with the forces around you
that continually bid for your attention.
In this Unit we desire especially to have you discuss
‘the persuaders’ that beset everyone in modern society.
Remember that if you are thoroughly honest in your
thinking and strive to think as clearly as possible in
everything that you initiate, there still remains a respon-
sibility to examine what other people are saying—and
they may not be as honest or as clear thinking as you
are. Here is a series of questions to start you discussing:
DISCUSS: (1) What distinction did we draw earlier in
the course between reasoned argument and mere per-
suasion? (Remember that a reasoned argument may
make use of the arts of persuasion.)
(2) What are the motives and some of the main methods
of advertising?
(3) What are some of the techniques of the door-to-
door salesman (of encyclopaedias and other expensive
goods)?
W is the more influential, and why: newspapers,
(5) Discuss political propaganda, not omitting that it
at times ‘appeals to reason’ as well as using other
methods.


1. A feather in one’s cap.
2. The tail wags the dog.
3. To flog a dead horse.
4. To have other fish to fry.
5. To have an axe to grind.
1. It’s that hot today!
2. I was that disgusted that I walked out.
3. The astronaut was that weightless he bumped
around the cabin.
4. He loves surfing that much!
5. That much does he like jazz that he spends all his
money on records.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
PROLEPSIS: A figure of speech which transfers to the
present an event which has not yet occurred.
e.g., ‘The two assassins and their murdered lord rode
together towards the forest.’
‘Help! I am slain!’
SYLLEPSIS: The taking together of incongruous ideas,
usually for a comic effect or to create an anticlimax,
e.g., ‘She sat in tears and blue nylon.’
‘He lost his honour and his best hat.
A POINT OF STYLE
JARGON: Every trade, profession, science and art has
its own set of technical terms and its own idiom. While
the members of each particular group are quite aware
of the meaning of their own jargon, it may be quite unin-
telligible to people outside that group.
e.g., (NAVAL) ‘The yacht tacked to port.’
(SPORT) ‘He snicked the ball through slips.’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
WORDS AND THEIR STORY;
SACRlFlCE—Originally this meant to make something
holy. Since that which was made holy or sacred was
given over to the gods, the word then came to mean to
give up something, thus to lose it.
SACRILEGE This refers to the stealing of sacred
things and comes from ‘sacer holy’ plus ‘legere to
choose’.
NOTE: The spelling of this word and ‘privilege’ does not
conform to their pronunciation.
SENTENCE CORRECTION
RULE: ‘That’ should not be used as an adverb,
e.g., I was that tired I fell asleep, (Should be ‘so’)
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. We were that flabbergasted by his statement we
were quite speechless for a while.
7. Nobody in their right senses would have done this.
8. Johnson was surrounded by diplomats, which is
the way he always is lately.
9. You can go now, but see that your desks are
cleaned out so that you may begin afresh tomorrow.
10. I shall send over twenty boxes of cakes to the
school tomorrow.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
Study this extract from ‘Lavengro’, by George Borrow
(1803-81), in which one of the author’s experiences
with gypsies—the Rommany Chals—is related:
I now wandered along the heath, until 1 came to a
place where, beside a thick furze, sat a man, his eyes
fixed intently on the red ball of the setting sun.
‘That’s not you, Jasper?’
‘lndeed, brother!’
‘l’ve not seen you for years.’
‘How should you, brother?’
‘What brings you here?’
‘The fight, brother.’
‘Where are the tents?’
‘On the old spot, brother’ . . .
‘What is your opinion of death, Mr. Petulengro?’ said
1, as I sat down beside him . . .
‘Life is sweet, brother.’
‘Do you think so?’
‘Think so! There’s night and day, brother, both
sweet things; sun, moon, and stars, brother, all sweet
things; there is likewise a wind on the heath. Life is
very sweet, brother; who would wish to die?’
T would wish to die —’
‘You talk like a gorgio—which is the same as talking
like a fool—were you a Rommany Chal you would talk
wiser. Wish to die, indeed! —A Rommany Chal would
wish to live for ever!’
‘ln sickness, Jasper?’
‘There’s the sun and the stars, brother.’
‘ln blindness, Jasper?’
‘There’s the wind on the heath, brother; if I could
only feel that, I would gladly live for ever. Dosta, we’ll
now go to them tents and put on the gloves; and I’ll try
to make you feel what a sweet thing it is to be alive,
brother!’


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 27
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
adieu worsened abscess notorious drunkenness
hypnotise hastened inferred notoriety irresponsible
liberality monarchy morass good-bye communication
isosceles openness vaseline moneys nondescript
ligature revenue immerse traitorous illustrious
fury unroll unbelievable retriever panorama
furry ignition reverie illegality nasturtium
riveter symptom pantomime paralysis idolatrous
syringe ideology journeying apparent humanitarian
chauffeur impertinent trousseau hypocrisy synonymous
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: liberal, human,
2. Put a stroke between the syllables of: isosceles, unbelievable, nasturtium.
avowal
3. Change to nouns; inferred , idolatrous , renounce
4. Change to adjectives: symptom , paralysis , expedite
5. Delete wrong word: The revolt/revolution has brought into being a new social system.
A mentally retarded child is abormal/subnormal.
The earl declared his alliance/allegiance to the king.
6. Pair with a synonym in the column below:
inferred, morass, illustrious, nondescript, profound,
sardonic, droll, embellished—
unclassifiable
derisive
renowned
comical
abstruse
marsh
deduced
adorned
7. Pair with an antonym in the column below:
worsen, impotent, benevolent, invigorate, conscien-
tious, cautious, comprehensive, befog—
irresponsible
better
fragmentary
clarify
powerful
malevolent
enervate
venturesome
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1. The poem is representative
2. Titania was enamoured
Keats’ best.
A wave of relief swept the world when the negotiators
in Moscow reached agreement on the banning of most
kinds of nuclear testing. However, there arose a
doubt as to whether certain key governments would
the ass.
3. He has a high tolerance
4. 1 wish to dissent
the treaty drawn up by the
your ruling,
hard work.
negotiators.
(sanction, endorse, ratify, approve, uphold)
5. Silence is conducive
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
SUBSTITUTE a word for;
1. insidious, straightforward, intriguing, guileful.
2. fastidious, meticulous, finicky, negligent.
3. jubilant, dejected, exultant, rejoicing.
4. heinous, commendable, atrocious, nefarious.
5. vindicate, stigmatise, denounce, reproach.
1. Worship of objects, images
2. One holding unorthodox beliefs
3. Story with a religious moral
4. Manual of religious doctrine
5. The Mohemmedans’ bible


Unit 28: EXPRESSION
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
THE CONVALESCENT
To be sick is to enjoy monarchal prerogatives. Compare
the silent tread, and quiet ministry, almost by the eye
only, with which he is served —with the careless de-
meanour, the unceremonious goings in and out (slapping
of doors, or leaving them open) of the very same
attendants, when he is getting a little better —and you
will confess that from the bed of sickness (throne let me
rather call it) to the elbow-chair of convalescence, is a
fall from dignity, amounting to a deposition.
How convalescence shrinks a man back to his pristine
stature! where is now the space, which he occupied so
lately, in his own, in the family’s eye?
The scene of his regalities, his sick room, which was his
presence-chamber, where he lay and acted his despotic
fancies —how is it reduced to a common bed-room! The
trimness of the very bed has something petty and un-
meaning about it. It is made every day. How unlike to
that wavy, many-furrowed, oceanic surface, which it
presented so short a time since, when to make it was a
service not to be thought of at oftener than three or four
day revolutions, when the patient was with pain and
grief to be lifted for a little while out of it, to submit to
the encroachments of unwelcome neatness, and decen-
cies which his shaken frame deprecated; then to be lifted
into it again, for another three or four days’ respite, to
flounder it out of shape again, while every fresh furrow
was an historical record of some shifting posture, some
uneasy turning, some seeking for a little ease; and the
shrunken skin scarce told a truer story than the
crumpled coverlet.
Hushed are those mysterious sighs—those groans—so
much more awful, while we knew not from what caverns
of vast hidden suffering they proceeded. The Lernean
pangs are quenched. The ridle of sickness is solved; and
Philoctetes is become an ordinary personage.
(323 words)
(from an essay, "The Convalescent”, by Charles Lamb)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) What metaphor is sustained through the first para-
graph? Quote the words and phrases which suggest
it (2)
(b) Explain: prerogatives; demeanour; deposition. (3)
(c) How is convalescence different from sickness, as
regards the care bestowed on the patient? (2)
(d) Comment on the force of the metaphor in ‘that
wavy, many-furrowed, oceanic surface’. (2)
(c) Explain: encroachments; deprecated. (1)
(f) What impression do you get of Lamb’s illness? (1)
(g) How effectively is the device of hyperbole used
throughout the passage? (1)
(h) What effect on the tone of the passage is created by
the variety of punctuation used by Lamb? (2)
(i) Look up the references to ‘Lernean pangs’ and
‘Philoctetes’ in a dictionary of classical allusions. (1)
CLEARER THINKING
JUDGING AN ARGUMENT. Speeches, debates and
other forms of sustained argument usually contain ex-
amples of both clear and not-so-clear —and, at times,
bad—reasoning. Say whether the author of this passage
has at some times argued better than at others, and
give reasons for your opinions.
There is every reason why the spelling of English words
should be reformed. An excessive amount of the English
teacher’s time is given to teaching spelling, and instead
of being able to concentrate on the student’s style and
ideas in essay-writing the teacher has to spend half the
time searching for spelling errors. This state of affairs
could be changed in a twinkling by introducing phonetic
spelling.
Shakespeare never had to worry about spelling. He is
said to have spelt his own name in twelve different ways;
in other words, he did not care about spelling. Who will
say that his grasp of English suffered from not being
compelled to adhere to spelling by a dictionary?
It was only in the eighteenth century that pompous
Dr Johnson launched this spelling craze by compiling a
dictionary. Ever since then pedants have claimed there
is a ‘right spelling’ for every word—but what they mean
is Dr Johnson’s spelling. It is indefensible that we
should use spellings such as ‘island’, ‘knuckle’,
‘manoeuvre’ and so forth when the sound of these words
differs so greatly from their spelling.
Think of the huge saving of time in the primary school
if we moved over to phonetic spelling; the teaching of
reading would be absolutely simplified. But it is no good
trying to say this to an educational conservative. Con-
servatives just won’t countenance change. They are the
same people who hold up dress reform and everything
else that is progressive.
I know there are objections to spelling reform that must
be met. The cost of the change would soon be offset by
its many advantages. The phonetic system need not be
one that uses strange symbols; it could employ the
conventional alphabet. As to which pronounciation
should be agreed on, let it be standard Southern English
or else what a panel of experts lays down for Australian
conditions.


2.
inverted
7. intercede
3.
closet
8. philanthropy
1. Life is not all a bed of roses.
2. Half a loaf is better than no bread.
3. He laughs best who laughs last.
4. He that would command must serve
5. Give a fool enough rope and he will hang himself.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
REVISION; Identify the following figures of speech;
1. The young corporal commanded a hundred horse in
the raid on the city.
2. ‘O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy
victory?’
3. A gentleman in the crowd shouted that the speaker
was a fool and thus put him quite at his ease.
4. ‘Here thou, great Anna! whom three realms obey,
Do sometimes counsel take—and sometimes tea.’
5. A French woman is a perfect architect in dress.
A POINT OF STYLE
JOURNALESE: ‘English of a style featured by use of
colloquialisms, superficiality of thought or reasoning,
clever or sensational presentation of material, and evi-
dences of haste in composition, considered characteristic
of newspaper writing.’ (Webster’s Dictionary)
e.g. (on fluoridation), Tf it is not altogether a mystery,
it is at any rate so ill-defined as to enable both (Water)
Board and Councils to go on passing the buck.’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
REVISION: Give the root word of each of the follow-
1. introspection 6. provoke
4. amicable 9. expel
10. vision
5. proposition
SENTENCE CORRECTION
RULE; ‘Latter’ is the second of two things, ‘former’ is
the first of the two; but for more than two use ‘last’ and
‘first’.
e.g., He bought eggs and bacon, the (latter, last) cut in
rashers.
He bought bread, eggs and bacon, the (latter, last)
cut in rashers.
He bought eggs and bacon, the (former, first) being
brown ones.
1. Of Tom, Dick and Harry, the (latter, last) is the
most reliable.
2. We packed the bread and the butter, the (latter,
last) in plastic.
3. In a maths contest between girls and boys, the
(first, former) won.
4. Germany, Austria and Italy were allied, but the
(latter, last) deserted the alliance in 1914.
5. I think that if a wrestler fought a boxer, the (latter,
last) would win.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. In a firm European alliance we now have Germany,
France and Italy; the latter, however, faces grave
internal unrest.
7. I asked both the boys to do so, but none of them
could overcome their laziness.
8. Jack accompanied his brother to Newcastle where
he inspected a mine.
9. The lion is the king of beasts; they are found in
Africa, though in diminishing numbers.
10. We saw a funeral on the way to school this
morning.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
Study this extract, which is the opening of ‘Pride and
Prejudice’, the greatest of the novels of Jane Austen
(1775-1817):
It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single
man in possession of a good fortune must be in want
of a wife.
However little known the feelings or views of such a
man may be on his first entering a neighbourhood, this
truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding
families, that he is considered as the rightful property
of some one or other of their daughters.
‘My dear Mr. Bennet,’ said his lady to him one day,
‘have you heard that Netherfield Park is let at last?’
Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.
‘But it is,’ returned she; ‘for Mrs. Long has just been
here, and she told me all about it.’
Mr. Bennet made no answer.
‘Do not you want to know who has taken it?’ cried his
wife impatiently.
‘You want to tell me, and I have no objection to
hearing it.’
This was invitation enough.
‘Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that
Netherfield is taken by a young man of large fortune
from the north of England; that he came down on
Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was
so much (delighted with it that he agreed with Mr.
Morris immediately; that he is to take possession before
Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be in the
house by the end of next week.’
‘What is his name?’
‘Bingley’


Unit 28
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
resumption sanctuary reign solemn mechanisation
scheme medallion scandalous solemnity racketeering
recede sewerage ministry potential possessively
scarify propulsion prominence recur referendum
prosecutor meticulous stomach recurrence preliminary
guitar subsidy presbytery practitioner reliability
publicly repudiate stupefy metallurgy miscalculation
malcontent scavenger repression redemption relegate
gullible frolicked righteous withhold exuberance
auxiliary prohibition irremovable penitence peculiarities
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: reliable.
perfection,
, M.P
inherit
2. Write the plurals of: referendum , solo
3. Change to nouns: potential , relegate
, profuse
, ministry
4. Change to adjectives; redemption , scheme
5. Delete wrong word: Don is an amiable/amicable fellow.
I have persistently/consistently tried to gain a hearing.
He is continually/continuously finding fault with his wife.
6. Pair with a synonym in the column below:
sanctuary, repudiate, meticulous, scandalous, repres-
sion, solemn, potential, redemption—
over-scrupulous
latent
awesome
refuge
restraint
salvation
shameful
renounce
7. Pair with an antonym in the column below:
recede, detrimental, despicable, vexation, jocular,
repulsive, consoling, covetous —
admirable
advance
beneficial
saddening
generous
attractive
solemn
satisfaction
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
SELECT THE APT WORD
1. He mulls
people’s nasty remarks.
When Childers announced that he had discovered a cure
for one form of rheumatism he was widely condemned
as a quack, and one person even brought a law case
against him. His friend Barlow, however, was able to
2. Try to dissuade him
such a course.
3. Wallace was a contemporary
4. My arrival is contingent
5. The judge gave credence
Darwin.
many factors.
him by a laboratory proof of the cure,
(defend, acquit, vindicate, absolve, reprove)
his story.
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
1. vapid, pungent, insipid, spiritless.
2. aversion, antipathy, repugnance, affinity.
3. recalcitrant, obstinate, amenable, refractory.
4. reticent, taciturn, uncommunicative, assertive.
5. repentance, remorse, obduracy, penitence.
SUBSTITUTE an adjective (ending in -IOUS) for:
1. Widely but unfavourably known
2. Extremely talkative
3. Full of life and gaiety
4. Believing in omens and charms
5. Diligent in business or study


RESUME. We have reminded you of the vital import-
ance of planning your ideas in a composition. Finally
we would refer to the desirability of deciding in advance
what sort of structure your paragraphs will have. This
will depend on your interpretation of each question.
Once you have decided on your theme, your method of
attack should be fairly clear. Look at the two topics
below:
1. Sea Travel v. Air Travel.
THEME: What sea travel offers in relaxation, air travel
compensates for in a saving of time. The answer de-
pends on the traveller’s purpose in travelling.
STRUCTURE: Comparison and Contrast. Individual
paragraphs of examples.
2. Science in the Home.
THEME: New gadgets, labour-saving machines and
dangerous though efficient cleaning agents and poisons
demand a new level of care by the housewife.
STRUCTURE: Cause and effect. Individual paragraphs
of enumeration and examples.
Once the whole question is examined in your plan, you
should write your first draft as coherently as you can,
while not hindering your flow of ideas by too careful
revision as you go along. Once completed, this first
draft can be minutely criticized for errors or weaknesses:
1. Are there slips in grammar, spelling or punctuation?
2. Any redundant words or phrases?
3. Can a more apt word be used?
4. Can sentence construction be improved?
5. Is the paragraphing correct? (This should be de-
cided in your plan.)
6. Does the whole read smoothly?
7. Will another person follow every part of your argu-
ment?
Reading the essays of masterly writers is perhaps the
best way to absorb the possibilities of this form of
writing, and this is one of the reasons why the greatest
essayists in English literature are set for your study.
The editorials of responsible newspapers are usually
good examples of a workmanlike discussion of topical
events. If you feel that it is unreal to strive for the
results of great artists, set yourself an intermediate goal,
the ease of discussion to be found in good journalism.
ASSIGNMENT. Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) Tt is a waste of money to try to reach the moon.’
(b) The Delight (or Drudgery) of a Garden.
(c) ‘There is always something absurd about the past.’
JUDGING AN ARGUMENT. Examine the following
passage, then answer the questions set out below:
As soon as commercialism intrudes, decent principles
depart. This is why it is incomprehensible that the
government does not take a firm stand against the rising
tide of commercialized, professional sport. There was a
time when only boxing was professional. It attracted
the most unsavoury elements in the community and had
a generally corrupting effect, but it was permitted to
exist probably because society needs a safety-valve
for the release of its baser passions.
Today, however, professional sport assumes great
dimensions, having extended from boxing to practically
every field. We seem to have lost sight of the reason for
which sport exists: to develop a healthy mind in a
healthy body by providing forms of wholesome exercise
and relaxation. A truly responsible government would
strive with might and main to encourage the mass par-
ticipation of its people in active sport. 1 do not ask that
it put an end to the great sporting spectacles watched by
thousands, but 1 do say that mass participation is the
aspect that it should at all costs stimulate. But all our
sporting standards are today fixed by the big profes-
sional sporting associations which have a vested finan-
cial interest in the big spectacle and therefore a reason
for disparaging mass participation. In a word, the
money-grubbers are spoiling everything.
The Olympic Games show the high standards that
amateurism can attain. The desire for excellent perform-
ance can be satisfied by enthusiastic amateurs, without
squandering fantastic sums on a handful of profes-
sionals. Professionalism, indeed, by making a man a
full-time sportsman with lavish facilities at his disposal,
must always have the advantage over the part-time
amateur of small means. Thus it has a discouraging
effect on amateurism, and this in turn does harm to
general participation in sport.
It is a good thing that cricket remains free of profes-
sionalism in this country. Reports from England, where
professionalism is dominant, indicate that games are
ruined because they are mere duels between opposing
professionals. Moreover, gambling is part and parcel
of these professional contests, attracting the poorest
types to participate not in the sport but in the accom-
panying game of chance. The English situation shows
what is destined to happen here unless we have a gov-
ernment that ends, or at least limits drastically, pro-
fessionalism in sport.
(a) Briefly set out what the writer is arguing for and
against.
(b) State, with reasons, whether you think the writer’s
main argdments are sound and/or unsound (but do
not give your own views on sport).
(c) By what means other than reasoned argument (not
forgetting possible irrelevancies and omissions) has
the writer attempted to win over his readers?


ENGLISH PROVERBS Explain concisely.
1, It is a long road that has no turning.
2: It is easy to bear the misfortunes of others.
3. Never cross a bridge till you come to it.
4. Never look a gift horse in the mouth.
5. One man’s meat is another man’s poison.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
REVISION: Make up sentences of your own or use
quotations (other than those given as examples in this
course) to show the following devices;
1. metaphor.
2. simile.
6. hypallage.
7. apostrophe.
8. analogy.
3. personification,
4. euphemism.
5. metonymy.
9. pun.
10. antithesis.
A POINT OF STYLE
OFFICIALESE; This is the kind of verbosity so beloved
of Government departments and other institutions
swathed in red tape. As with the ‘genteelism’ disease, it
threatens to destroy good plain words in official circles,
e.g., ‘You are advised to effect a purchase of the volume
in question through the usual trade channels.’
(Go to a book-shop and buy the book you want.)
‘We are initiating organisational preliminaries for
the inaugural assemblage.’
(We are preparing for the first meeting.)
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
REVISION: Give the meaning of the prefixes in each
of the following;
1. intervention
2. submarine
3. hypersensitive
4. polygamy
5. bigamy
6. collaborate
7. controversy
8. monologue
9. automatic
10. archbishop
RULE; ‘Like’ should not be used as a conjunction.
(Strictly speaking, ‘like’ is a preposition and should not
be followed by a clause.)
e.g., He behaved like he was instructed. (Should be ‘as’)
CORRECT THE ERRORS IN THE FOLLOWING:
1. They will be greeted like they were royalty.
2. He behaved exactly like you would expect a bodgie
to behave.
3. I talked to them like they did not know anything.
4. Like my teacher showed me, I proved the calcula-
tion to him.
5. You passed your test like you had been driving for
years.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. It was just like you said: the fellow denied that he
knew anything about it.
7. If each school set their own examinations, it is no
wonder that their results differ.
8. The United States, together with Switzerland, have
undertaken to send aid to the peasants of Pakistan.
9. Say what you will, these kind of experiments are
getting us nowhere.
10. Wanted; wheelchair for an old gentleman of period
design.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
Study these extracts from the famous essay on ‘Self-
Reliance’ by Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803-82),
America’s great writer and philosopher:
1. In every work of genius we recognise our own
rejected thoughts; they come back to us with a
certain alienated majesty.
2. Trust thyself; every heart vibrates to that iron string.
3. It is easy in the world to live after the world’s
opinion; it is easy in solitude to live after our own;
but the great man is he who in the midst of the
crowd keeps with perfect sweetness the indepen-
dence of solitude.
4. Travelling is a fool’s paradise. Our first journeys
discover to us the indifference of places. At home I
dream that at Naples, at Rome, I can be intoxicated
with beauty, and lose my sadness. I pack my trunk,
embrace my friends, embark on the sea, and at last
wake up in Naples, and there beside me is the stern
fact, unrelenting, identical, that I fled from.
5. If our young men miscarry in their first enterprises,
they lose all heart. If the young merchant fails, men
say he is ruined. If the finest genius studies at one of
our colleges, and is not installed in an office within
one year ... it seems to his friends and to himself
that he is right in being disheartened, and in com-
plaining the rest of his life. A sturdy lad from
Hampshire or Vermont, who in turn tries all the
professions, who teams it, farms it, peddles, keeps a
school, preaches, edits a newspaper, goes to Con-
gress, buys a township, and so forth, in successive
years, and always, like a cat, falls on his feet, is
worth a hundred of these city dolls.
SENTENCE CORRECTION


WORD SKILL PAGE
Unit 29
SPFXLING/VOCABULARY '
abdicate negroes obsession avarice irresponsible
edict immaculate bludgeon avaricious tranquillity
ignorance pessimist callous periodical accommodate
beseech mortuary ecstasy untravelled unforgivable
calibre candidate harangue voluntarily orientation
galleon electoral facetious abridgement unparalleled
impunity harass deceitful boisterous sustenance
dahlia pharmacy ultimately calculation rheumatism
currency hurriedly vacuum anonymous perceptible
appetite irrelevant luscious irreconcilable noticeable
WORD MANIPULATION I. Supply a prefix; voluntary,
calculation,
oriented
2. Write the plurals of: specimen , nebula
antenna
3. Change to nouns; harass , irresponsible
serene
4. Change to adjectives; ecstasy , pharmacy
meditation
5. Delete wrong word; So credulous/credible is he, he believes pigs can fly.
The pen rolled into a small crevice/crevasse in the rock.
With long practice he has become a proficient/efficient player.
6. Pair with a synonym in the column below:
beseech, harass, harangue, abridgement, ardent,
aspersion, sardonic, indomitable —
unconquerable
fervent
derisive
badger
summary
diatribe
implore
calumny
7. Pair with an antonym in the column below:
callous, facetious, avaricious, boisterous, prodigal,
alluring, daunt, inertia—
dynamism
generous
sedate
parsimonious
sensitive
forbidding
hearten
SELECT THE APT WORD
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. Persistence is the opposite
2. Drugs are often inimical
3. She showed her chagrin
4. Snow transformed the scene
5. The campaign will culminate
apathy.
One day the smoke from the volcano turned to white.
This terrified the natives, for one of their legends
declared that white smoke portended disaster. Whole
villages decamped to the coast, not daring to ignore a
warning so
our well-being,
being overlooked.
a wonderland,
a public display.
(sinister, ominous, threatening, diabolical)
SUBSTITUTE a word for;
ELIMINATE the jarring word;
1. scurrilous, vituperative, abusive, complimentary.
2. nullify, quash, annul, validate.
1. One who studies the mind
2. One who studies diseases
3. One who studies insects
4. One who studies words
5. One who studies shells
3. vindictive, vengeful, compassionate, retaliatory.
4. moderate, inordinate, intemperate, gluttonous.
5. avaricious, prodigal, miserly, covetous.


Unit 30: EXPRESSION
PRECIS
The final unit in Clearer Thinking has required a larger
portion of this page than is normal and Comprehension
questions have been omitted this time. We suggest that
you precis the following passage, whether or not you
have been making use of the precis in earlier units.
THE PROBLEM PARENT
At the end of each University term students are asked
what they are arranging to do in the vacation. Their
answers reveal one of the saddest features of education:
the split between parents and children. Many of them
invent excuses for being at home as little as possible.
Sometimes this is because there is no quiet room to
work in, or because they need to earn money by taking
a job, but all too often it is because they find their
parents boring and unreasonable. And it is the same
with schoolchildren. It is not because their parents are
uneducated, but because they have ceased to learn. As a
result they cannot share the new wave of interests and
pleasures that absorb the young, nor can they com-
municate their own enthusiasms. Enormous numbers of
children are having more years of formal education than
their parents had, so the problem is a large one, and, as
more boys and girls go on to technical schools, training
colleges, and universities, it will continue to grow. The
strong ties of love and familiar concerns may still be
there, but unless the parents are able to share in the new
life of their children, home is going to be an uncomfort-
able place. The family is going to break in two; resentful
parents on the one hand; on the other, children who
look for understanding and entertainment to the almost
independent culture of their own age-group.
This is a problem that has been seen too long in terms
of the difficult child; it should be looked at also in the
light of the backward mother and the problem father.
It is a commonplace that delinquency and suicide may
be connected with the broken home but it should also be
recognised that there is a more widespread danger: the
boring home. (305 words)
(from an article by John Hale, in The Listener, 1/6/62)
CLEARER THINKING
JUDGING AN ARGUMENT. Attempt an evaluation
of the passage below, stating with reasons whether you
think the writer’s reasons are sound or unsound. In
addition to examining the argument in some detail,
indicate your opinion of it as a whole—ls it clear, well
put together, and so forth. Consider it as an argument,
setting aside, as much as possible, your own opinion of
the issue.
HISTORY SHOULD BE COMPULSORY
To doubt the importance of history in the Australian
community is rather like doubting the importance of air.
Though the present generation is impatient to rush into
the continually receding future, it cannot forever ignore
the past as though nothing had happened. We may lack
ancient castles and monuments in Australia, but we
more than make up for these with our spirit which is
imbued with ideas and ideals that come from the past.
Indeed, we are what we are because of our past.
Historical enquiry is limitless. It covers the substance of
many fields of knowledge. Every subject has its indi-
vidual history, and general history brings them all
together. The increasing specialization in our schools
and universities means that our young citizens learn
more and more about less and less. Only history can
link the specialized subjects together, enriching and
giving purpose to the sciences and the arts alike.
Even in a subject as abstract as mathematics much is to
be gained by an historical approach. The Scottish
mathematician, Glashier, has maintained that no sub-
ject has suffered more than his from being treated apart
from its history —from the time-space dimension from
which it grew. How much truer is this of the physical
sciences! To know the histories of their endeavours
saves us from taking our modern civilization too much
for granted.
Modern nations ignore the history of past nations at
their peril. They cannot permit their leaders to be
ignorant of the past. Only by a close study of the past
can policies for the future be shaped. The energies of a
people are released when history makes a people aware
of itself, exciting it to throw off conservatism and go
forward adventurously.
So many, then, are the uses of the study of history that
it is invaluable to all who wish to grapple with the socio-
political state of mankind. This is being seen increas-
ingly in the business world where more and more
executives are recruited from men and women who if
they have not made it their special study have at least
had their understanding of the economic life of the
community subtly touched and deepened by their read-
ings from history. So it is generally among the more
discerning and discriminating of employers, who are
concerned to have people about them with something
more than the bare knowledge and practice of the
techniques and skills of their work. It has indeed been
found that the more specialized training demanded of
employment can be better done against a background of
more general education, of which history might properly
be regarded as an essential element.
In general, then, the importance of history lies in what
it can do to us as citizens of the Australian and of a
world community. Its importance argues strongly for its
compulsory inclusion in teaching curricula, especially
in secondary schools. Taught with skill and understand-
ing, not as ‘a burden in the memory but an illumination
of the soul’ (Lord Acton), it can become, as we have
suggested, the integrating subject in the school curricu-
lum. History can and should create the intellectual
ferment that is one of the chief ends of education.


1. To be unable to see the wood for the trees.
2. To lead a person up the garden path.
3. To know how many beans make five.
4. To leave no stone unturned.
5. To have too many irons in the fire.
THE WRITER’S TOOLS
As we have reminded you during the Poetry Course, you
need not be unduly afraid of the rather strange-sounding
names of the devices we have been discussing in this
section of your senior work. By far the most important
ones to remember are simile, metaphor and personifica-
tion. Although literary purists may shudder at the
thought, it is worth remembering that the harder the
name of the device the less likely you are to have to use
or recognise it! The chief value of the study of such
devices lies in its evidence of the wide range of effects
available to the writer in English. The best way to
understand the use of such a variety of tools is to experi-
ment with them in class assignments or even in examina-
tions if you are confident of your ability.
A POINT OF STYLE
JINGLE; In prose, you should avoid unintentional
rhymes which are likely to ruin the serious effect of your
argument.
e.g., ‘An indulgent parent may increase a child’s wild-
ness.’
‘Agricultural research is focused on the locust this
year.’
ORIGINS OF ENGLISH
REVISION: Identify the root words of the following
words, give their meaning and the meaning of the com-
plete words:
1. versatile
2. fragment
3. exclusion
4. autograph
5. technology
6. hydrophobia
7. subtract
SENTENCE CORRECTION
RULE; A noun or pronoun used before a gerund
(verbal noun) requires possessive, not objective, case,
e.g., My parents object to (me, my) leaving before the
exams.
1. By (him, his) missing the train, he loses the con-
tract.
2. A previous engagement will prevent (me, my)
being present.
3. Mistrusting the natives, he would never agree to
(them, their) being granted equal status with whites.
4. Upon (him, his) arriving late the party began amid
general annoyance.
5. There is a strong chance of (their, them) agreeing
to come with us.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons for doing so):
6. The thought of him reaching Darwin ahead of us
filled us with apprehension.
7. A good bed, as well as good and reasonably priced
meals, are obtainable from most Canberra hotels.
8. There is no sign of an easing of the tension between
Israel and Egypt, which is a greaty pity, I believe.
9. I know the right things to do, and I approve them;
but it is always the worser course that I seem to
pursue.
10. The manager presented the gold watch to the
widow of the man who was drowned in recogni-
tion of the service he gave the company over many
years.
PUNCTUATION EXAMPLES
Our examples of punctuation have been drawn from
novelists and other literary men. They might as easily
have been drawn from the works of great scientists,
many of whom wrote excellent prose. For study now,
examine this passage from ‘The Principles of Psy-
chology’, by William James (1842-1910), the famous
American psychologist. He pleads the importance of
acting on one’s beliefs:
Seize the very first possible opportunity to act on
every resolution you make, and on every emotional
prompting you may experience in the direction of the
habits you aspire to gain. . . . When a resolve or fine
glow of feeling is allowed to evaporate without bearing
practical fruit it is worse than a chance lost; it works so
as positively to hinder future resolutions and emotions
from taking the normal path of discharge. There is no
more contemptible type of human character than that
of the nerveless sentimentalist and dreamer, who spends
his life in a weltering sea of sensibility and emotion, but
who never does a manly concrete deed. . . . The habit
of excessive novel-reading and theatre-going will pro-
duce true monsters in this line. The weeping of the
Russian lady over the fictitious personages in the play,
while her coachman is freezing to death on his seat
outside, is the sort of thing that everywhere happens on
a less glaring scale. . . . The remedy would be, never to
suffer one’s self to have an emotion at a concert, without
expressing it afterwards in some active way. Let the
expression be the least thing in the world speaking
genially to one’s grandmother, or giving up one’s seat
in a horse-car, if nothing more heroic offers—but let it
not fail to take place.


Unit 30
WORD SKILL PAGE
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
accentuate heresy led panic necessarily
lease abstinence palpitate panicky parenthesis
billeting effluent pandemonium panicked carburettor
legacy hearken balance vulnerable ecclesiastic
verbosity facile tenancy eiderdown legislative
regatta leprous accredited labyrinth dachshund
saleable regime signal sacrilege verification
banister vacillate adjudicate acquaintance unnecessarily
notoriety abscess retriever openness unbelievable
paralysis moneys traitorous drunkenness hypnotise
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: advisable, decision,
inclined
2. Show possession; Mr. Ross house, the two Rosses house, Joe Louis title.
3. Change to nouns: acquire , poignant , letl
, poignant , lethargic
4. Change to adjectives; corrosion , decision , penury
5. Delete wrong word: He is prone/supine on the floor looking at the ceiling.
Workers on strike are said to be militant/military.
The saint had a mysterious/mystic insight into spiritual things.
6. Pair with a synonym in the column below:
poignant, enigmatic, emancipation, derogatory, reti-
cent, circumspect, insidious* vehement—
passionate
cautious
painful
puzzling
treacherous
liberation
disparaging
taciturn
7. Pair with an antonym in the column below:
extremist, flexible, vigorous, fluctuation, affluent,
pernicious, fastidious, odious—
careless
pleasurable
moderate
stability
wholesome
rigid
insipid
impecunious
SELECT THE APT WORD
SUPPLY A PREPOSITION
1. He digressed
his prepared speech.
After graduating brilliantly he went to the Middle East,
where he remained for thirty years researching into
ancient civilisations. No-one knew as much as he about
the peoples of Anatolia. Learned folk all over the world
sought the views of this man.
2. The judge intervened
the case.
3. Your statement is tantamount
4. He immersed himself
a threat.
his studies.
5. The two boys connived
a misdemeanour.
(clever, intelligent, erudite, cultured, bookish)
ELIMINATE the jarring word:
SUBSTITUTE a word for
1. factious, recalcitrant, co-operative, dissident.
2. surreptitious, forthright, clandestine, stealthy.
3. macabre, benign, gruesome, grisly.
1. Deviation from the normal
2. Unsoundness of mind
3. An odd or peculiar person
4. Personal characteristic, peculiarity
5. Fallacious idea held despite
evidence
4. affirmation, renunciation, disavowal, repudiation.
5. sanctimonious, candid, hypocritical, deceitful.


THE FINAL YEAR—MATRICULATION
Unit 1 : EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
In about 1 i pages, discuss ONE of the following:
(a) The Ideally Planned Society’—Could I be happy
(b) The Role of Television in Education.
(c) Home Units—A Necessary Evil?
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
SCIENCE TO LIVE BY
Today there are large numbers of men and women who
earn their living at scientific pursuits. Many of these do
research, make minor discoveries and publish their
results in the scientific literature. It is from the gradual
accumulation of laborious detailed observations of new
facts that the fewer greater men may discern a new
principle by which science may indeed make a stride
forward. Most of the many diligent people do their jobs
as research workers as well as the rank and file of other
professions. But this is not to say that they always
appreciate what science is. Furthermore, as the mass of
detailed information increases, it becomes more and
more technical. Technical words have consequently
to •'be invented to describe the increasingly detailed
mechanisms with which professional scientists are deal-
ing. Inevitably these technical words are incompre-
hensible to ordinary people. And since many of those
who_ work in the laboratories do not really know why
they*are doing what they are and have never known that
science is anything more than the massing of more and
more of this particular kind of information, it is hardly
surprising that the whole thing becomes impenetrably
obscure to the laity.
The philosophy of science by which we conduct the
material affairs of our lives today says three important
things. Firstly, it says that a scientist may enquire about
anything. Its second essential feature is that the results
of its enquiries must be recorded and, as soon as a way
has been found to do so, recorded in quantitative terms
as weights, measurements, wavelengths, velocities, tem-
peratures, chemical composition, atomic configuration
—or what you will. The third tenet of science is that,
basing his conclusions on the recorded observations, the
scientist can set up a theory or hypothesis to explain the
facts he has recorded and measured.
But this philosophy has one or two uncomfortable con-
sequences for people who are prepared to face it
squarely. It is, of course, an intellectual philosophy!
We have gradually come to accept scientific conclusions
for certain aspects of our lives. We expect logical and
systematic researches to be carried out to develop new
drugs and antiseptics. We accept radar and polythene
plastics and we expect engineers to apply the scientific
principles of thermodynamics to the calculation of the
steam requirements of a new factory design. But this
logical, rational behaviour at times comes into collision
with illogical ‘human’ behaviour. Science, that is, with
its conclusions based on facts, must inevitably be
affronted by.traditions based on emotion or perhaps on
prejudice. We exhibit a split-personality when, as a
nation in a scientific age, we build new aeroplanes con-
taining every technical refinement scientific discovery
can suggest, and at the same time build new houses with
water-pipes running down the outside .walls where each
winter they freeze up and burst.
Just as science may ask questions about traditional
house-building, so also could it study the statement,
‘democracy is the most satisfactory form of govern-
ment’. This is for us a tribal assumption at the present
time, but it is by no means impossible to subject it to
scientific scrutiny. This could be done, for example, by
comparing a series of factors selected to indicate happi-
ness, prosperity, freedom from criminal activities, educa-
tional levels and so on in broadly comparable countries
governed under democratic and under non-democratic
systems. Of course we do not in practice do this sort
of thing with science. As I said before, we apply the
scientific philosophy only to the material things of life.
By restricting it thus we sometimes get into trouble. Our
electric bells ring very loudly and our jet planes travel
very fast —but we are occasionally at something of a
loss to know what to do with ourselves when the planes
have taken us to wherever it is they are going.
(642 words)
(from Nothing Like Science, by Magnus Pyke)
COMPREHENSION questions
(a) How does science proceed from one discovery to
another? (1)
(b) Why does it tend to become ‘impenetrably obscure’
to the ‘laity’ and what does ‘laity’ mean? (2)
(c) Explain; quantitative; velocities; tenet;
hypothesis. (2)
(d) What are the three aspects of scientific
philosophy? (1)
(e) What is meant by ‘the material affairs of our lives!?
What is the opposite? (2)
(f) What does ‘rational’ mean? What ‘logical, rational
behaviour’ is described here? (2)
(g) Why is science ‘affronted by traditions’? (1)
(h) What is meant by ‘a tribal assumption’? (1)
(i) How could democracy be tested scientifically? (1)
(j) What is the last sentence really saying? (2)


SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
acquired traverse
blameable
judicial
irretrievable
effervescence
fluctuation
accumulation
poignant
vigour
elasticity bacteria
vigorous
corrosion
feudalism
gazette
corrugate bacteriology
decision
negotiate
flexible
filthy annex(e)
percussion finally
extremist corrected
banqueting
excursion
vermilion
tingeing
scintillate
garrison
emancipation
vaccination
unmistakable
crippled extinction
adviser declaration
potential
solemn
ministry
resumption
practitioner
possessively
prominence
redemption
recurrence
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: decision,
2. Change to nouns: acquire . flexible
3. Write antonyms for: vigorous , extremist
4. Put a stroke between the syllables of: scintillate, irretrievable, effervescence.
advisable,
~ poignant
, finally
flexible
5. Delete wrong word: Tell Tom to leave/let go of the rope.
Faraday predicted that electricity would succeed/supersede steam.
One appointed to preach the gospel is an apostle/disciple.
A POINT OF STYLE
SPLIT INFINITIVE. This is the separation of ‘to’ and
its verb by an adverb or a phrase. Most authorities
seem to advise that such splitting should be avoided if
possible, but they add that splitting is allowable when
the sense of the sentence is thereby improved and when
the studied avoidance of splitting produces an obviously
artificial result. Here are three examples in which the
split infinitive ought to have been avoided, and three
others in which its use is defensible. Examine them
carefully.
A. He tried to despairingly clutch at the straw.
She was asked to quickly contact the police.
You are asked to carefully and without complaint
clean out your desks.
B. He is said to strongly advocate deep breathing.
It is better to openly admit a mistake.
We expect the union to at least defend the members’
wages.
WORD ORIGIN
SOME COMMON FOREIGN PHRASES
persona non grata —an unaccepted person (politically)
raison d’etre—reason for existence
status quo —the position unchanged
tour de force—a feat of strength or skill
tout a fait —completely
tout de suite—at once
verbatim—word for word
sang-froid—coolness in danger or difficulty
penchant—a liking or inclination for
savoir faire—knowing how to do things; tact
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. Their exclamations of bitter anger was received
with dismay by their hosts.
2. Smoke and dust frequently obliterates the harbour
from view.
3. None of the candidates were accepted by the
examiners.
4. I shall never listen to you again!
5. She is one of those women who never repeats a
story.
6. Haven’t you none at all? Not even on those rear
shelves?
7. Though we have less cows in the herd, there is
more jealousy between them as to which go
through the bails first.
8. Floods on the North Coast will prevent me open-
ing your celebrations, wrote the premier.
9. The mountaineers were too exhausted to take the
proper care they ought of their equipment.
10. A disease carrier is when a person harbours germs
without knowing it.
TENSE AGREEMENT
Delete the wrong verb in the following:
1. He rings/rang the bell furiously as five minutes
ticked by.
2. The prowler was walking round the house as if he
had/has every right to be there.
3. He refused to go as he thought it may/might rain.
4. She thought the plants would be washed away as it
has/had been raining for so long.


COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) Modern Amusements.
(b) ‘Man never improves on nature; he merely dis-
figures her.’
(c) Compulsory Sport in Schools.
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
THE INSPECTOR
The father of the Custom-House the patriarch, not
only of this little squad of officials, but, I am bold to say,
of the respectable body of the tide-waiters all over the
United States—was a certain permanent Inspector. He
might truly be termed a legitimate son of the revenue
system, dyed in the wool, or rather born in the purple;
since his sire, a Revolutionary colonel, and formerly
collector of the port, had created an office for him, and
appointed him to fill it, at a period of the early ages
which few living men can now remember. This Inspec-
tor, when 1 first knew him, was a man of fourscore
years, or thereabouts, and certainly one of the most
wonderful specimens of wintergreen that you would be
likely to discover in a lifetime’s search. With his florid
cheek, his compact figure, smartly arrayed in a bright-
buttoned blue coat, his brisk and vigorous step, and his
hale and hearty aspect, altogether he seemed not
young, indeed but a kind of new contrivance of
Mother Nature in the shape of man, whom age and
infirmity had no business to touch. His voice and laugh,
which perpetually re-echoed through the Custom-House,
had nothing of the tremulous quaver and cackle of an
old man’s utterance; they came strutting out of his
lungs, like the crow of a cock or the blast of a clarion.
Looking at him merely as an animal and there was
very little else to look at he was a most satisfactory
object, from the thorough healthfulness and wholesome-
ness of his system, and his capacity, at that extreme age,
to enjoy all, or nearly all, of the delights which he had
ever aimed at or conceived of. The careless security of
his life in the Custom-House, on a regular income, and
with but slight and infrequent apprehensions of removal,
had no doubt contributed to make time pass lightly over
him. The original and more potent causes, however,
lay in the rare perfection of his animal nature, the
moderate proportion of intellect, and the very trifling
admixture of moral and spiritual ingredients; these
latter qualities, indeed, being in barely enough measure
to keep the old gentleman from walking on all-fours.
He possessed no power of thought, no depth of feeling,
no troublesome sensibilities: nothing, in short, but a
few commonplace instincts which, aided by the cheerful
temper that grew inevitably out of his physical well-
being, did duty very respectably, and to general accep-
tance, in lieu of a heart. He had been the husband of
three wives, all long since dead; the father of twenty
children, most of whom, at every age of childhood or
maturity, had likewise returned to dust. Here, one
would suppose, might have been sorrow enough to
imbue the sunniest disposition through and through with
a sable tinge. Not so with our old Inspector! One brief
sigh sufficed to carry off the entire burden of these dis-
mal reminiscences. The next moment he was as ready
for sport as any unbreeched infant: far readier than the
Collector’s junior clerk, who at nineteen years was much
the older and graver man of the two.
I used to watch and study this patriarchal personage
with, I think, livelier curiosity than any other form of
humanity there presented to my notice. He was, in truth,
a rare phenomenon; so perfect, in one point of view; so
shallow, so delusive, so impalpable, such an absolute
nonentity, in every other. My conclusion was that he
had no soul, no heart, no mind; nothing, as I have
already said, but instincts; and yet, withal, so cunningly
had the few materials of his character been put together,
that there was no painful perception of deficiency, but,
on my part, an entire contentment with what I found in
him. It might be difficult—and it was so—to conceive
how he should exist hereafter, so earthly and sensuous
did he seem; but surely his existence here, admitting
that it was to terminate with his last breath, had not
been unkindly given; with no higher moral responsibili-
ties than the beasts of the field, but with a larger scope
of enjoyment than theirs, and with all their blessed
immunity from the dreariness and duskiness of age.
(716 words)
(from The Scarlet Letter, by Nathaniel Hawthorne)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) Explain; patriarch; florid; infirmity. (H)
(b) What is the meaning of ‘dyed in the wool’? How
does it describe the old man? (H)
(c) Comment on the force of the similes describing the
old man’s voice and laugh. (1)
(d) What is the meaning of: (i) ‘careless’ in the phrase
‘the careless security of his life’; and (ii) ‘apprehen-
sions’ in ‘infrequent apprehensions of removal’? (2)
(e) What does the writer mean by saying that the old
man’s moral and spiritual qualities were barely
enough ‘to keep the old gentleman from walking on
all fours’? (1)
(f) Comment on the effect of the word ‘sable’ in the
phrase ‘sorrow enough to imbue . . . with a sable
tinge’. (2)
(g) From what point of view was the old man per-
fect? (1)
(h) Explain the distinctions of meaning in ‘no soul, no
heart, no mind’. (3)
(i) Comment on the passage as a character study. (2)


SPELLING/VOCABULARY ——
acquiescence leisurely decisive capacity itinerary
decree biennial ludicrous capacious embodiment
cashier encompass transient jeopardy corroborate
ageing generally decrepit unanimous indefensible
executive decade theatre presentiment generalisation
certainly impoverish subtlety emissary subservience
flourish category impatience cartilage deficiencies
ceiling bargain affiliation defaulter phenomenon
beseech harass deceitful bludgeon avaricious
calibre electoral ecstasy facetious unparalleled
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: capable, subtle,
2. Change to adjectives: theatre
3. Write antonyms for; impoverish
4. Write the singular of; biennial , strata
5. Delete wrong word; The sermon was read by the canon/cannon.
Grant us delivery/deliverance from evil!
That smudge should be obliterated/eradicated from the page
affiliation
, phenomenon , deficiency
~ generally , leisurely .
, vertebrae
A POINT OF STYLE
SUPERLATIVES. Some adjectives become superlative
in degree by the addition of ‘most’ before the simple
form, others take ‘-est’ as a suffix. Avoid double super-
latives, the adding of ‘most’ to words which already have
a superlative sense; and avoid limiting adjectives which,
like ‘unique’, express an absolute idea.
CORRECT WHERE NECESSARY:
1. It is the most highest mountain I have seen.
2. The chair is rather unique in its design.
3. It is the most perfect view along the coast.
WORD ORIGIN
Give the definition for each of the words below (and in
brackets give the original meaning of the root of each):
1. revision
2. decapitate
3. indispensable
4. biology
5. chronology
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. The farm together with its stock and machinery go
under the auctioneer’s hammer next month.
2. There is an alsatian for sale which eats anything
and loves children.
3. Either of the four seasons in the tropics is attrac-
tive.
4. It was not me whom they were angry with.
5. I have less time and less opportunities than used to
be the case.
6. The money was divided among Legacy and the
Spastic Centre.
7. It was one of those balls that tempts a batsman to
take a risk.
8. Parliament has settled the question that it would
have metric currency.
9. I cannot help but feel that Napoleon did not fight
so much for France as by personal ambition.
10. It is hardly for you or I to say whom the judges
will think is the best entrant.
PUNCTUATE
Write out the following information as a correctly
punctuated address:
1. mr john brown care of the rex hotel the kingsway
cronulla.
2. messrs doodle and sons prince of wales building
gordon street oodnadatta.
3. miss elizabeth paterson 14 mowbray cres brisbane
qld.
4. mrs j t lang valley view bathurst rd lithgow.
5. rev p 1 thompson-the manse 28 cooper ave fremantle.


Unit 3: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) On Being a Celebrity Nowadays.
(b) Traffic has a stranglehold on modern cities.’
(c) The Ideal School-leaving Age.
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
A MAJOR STEP TOWARDS A PEACEFUL WORLD
The problems of achieving and safeguarding peace
between the Great Powers since 1945 have been so diffi-
cult, and the attempts to solve them so persistently fruit-
less, that caution has become a reflex reaction by
statesmen and commentators whenever hopes for settle-
ments have begun to rise. This realistic caution laces
the world-wide expressions of satisfaction which are
greeting the partial test ban treaty which has been
initialled in Moscow. Caution can be easily justified by
reference to the limited scope of the agreement, its nega-
tive nature, and the relative simplicity of the problems
which had to be solved to achieve it. As General'Nor-
stad, among others, has emphasised, the treaty is only a
step towards security; it does not give us security.
But, these reservations admitted, let it then be said that
this agreement is something more than the hints and
promises and ‘conciliatory gestures’ upon which man-
kind has had to found hopes for peace during practically
all the years of the cold war. It is a fact. It has legal
substance. And that substance confers immense and
specific benefits immediately upon mankind.
The first benefit concerns our health and that of pos-
terity. The treaty does not completely prevent continu-
ing pollution of the atmosphere. France is not a party
to it and is expected to continue its tests until about
1970; China is confidently expected to begin testing
soon. Nevertheless, the treaty will put a stop to continu-
ing significant pollution because neither France nor
China has the resources to conduct repeated tests of the
magnitude of those conducted by Russia and the United
States.
Further, there now exists a legal covenant to which all
nations can adhere, and to which great numbers of them
will adhere. Canada already leads the way. Their
adherence, an earnest of their good faith and idealism,
a criterion of civilisation itself, is bound to exert pres-
sure—which will not be less real because it is moral
pressure—upon France to restrict its tests to a minimum
and upon other Governments with nuclear ambitions,
except the fanatical leaders of isolated China, to think
very hard before they incur odium by initiating tests and
proliferating nuclear weapons.
These are real advances towards a peaceful world. A
third heartening but less calculable advance is the incen-
tive which the treaty gives to the Great Powers to seek
other agreements. The lesson of East-West negotiations
in the last fifteen years is that, whatever reason may
seem to dictate, agreements are not in fact obtainable
until agreements are wanted by both sides. If reason
alone was the determinant of agreement, we could have
had a treaty very like this one in 1959. Russia was not
prepared to accept President Eisenhower’s proposal for
a partial ban then —and America was not prepared in
1961 to accept a Soviet proposal linking a partial ban
with a moratorium on undetectable underground tests.
The very fact that Russia has now accepted a limited
ban without conditions is evidence of a change of heart
of a willingness to reach an agreement without an
unmatched gain. In that change of heart the West can
found rational hopes for further progress in diminishing
the tensions of the world. (535 words)
(from Sydney Morning Herald, 27/7/1963)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) What is the ‘major step towards a peaceful
world’? (1)
(b) What historical reasons are there for even this step
being accepted with caution? (1)
(c) Explain as they are used here: laces; relative;
reservations. (3)
(d) How is this agreement different from earlier
attempts at a solution of problems? (I)
(e) What is the most immediate benefit from the agree-
ment? (1)
(f) What fact reduces the importance of the danger
from France and China? (1)
(g) What is a covenant? How does the meaning of
‘earnest’ (as a noun) extend the idea of covenant? (2)
(h) How is the treaty ‘a criterion of civilisation
itself? (2)
(i) What is the writer’s attitude to China? How do you
know? (1)
(j) What is meant by ‘rational hopes’? (1)
(k) How would you describe the writer’s attitude to the
treaty? (1)


SPELLING/VOCABULARY "
acreage relinquish loquacious actor relevance
encore franchise replenish actress embezzlement
dense inaudible delusion irreparable spectacular
goddess centenary impropriety champagne chandelier
anoint centennial oppressive inaugurate monopolistic
huge barbarian hoeing demeanour encumbrance
missile horizon enmity gesticulate opportunities
denounce agitation catarrh chancellor encouragement
heresy effluent labyrinth panic carburettor
saleable abstinence adjudicate panicky unnecessarily
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: franchise, relevance,
demeanour
2. Change to nouns: dense , denounce , loquacious
3. Write synonyms for: huge , oppressive , spectacular
4. Show possession: the goddess temple, two actresses statements, King Louis crown.
5. Delete wrong word; The notes are counterfeit and hence valueless/invaluable.
That nagging woman is hypocritical/hypercritical of her husband.
Her comments on other women are seldom tactical/tactful.
A POINT OF STYLE
COMPARATIVES. Some adjectives become compara-
tive in degree by the addition of ‘-er’, others take ‘more’
in front of the simple form, e.g., ‘prettier’ and ‘more
attractive’. Do not use double comparatives; and do not
add ‘more’ to adjectives which are only used in the com-
parative sense. Adverbs may also be comparative. Do
not confuse them with comparative adjectives.
CORRECT WHERE NECESSARY;
1. The fox runs quicker than the hounds.
2. He is a more livelier companion than his sister.
3. This product is more superior to that one.
WORD ORIGIN
Using the following suffixes, make three nouns with
each one:
1. -hood;
2. -tude:
3. -mony
4. -ism:
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. Saltbush Bill’s flock is so dispersed that some will
never be found.
2. Before launching the attack on Poland, every detail
of military equipment was checked.
3. Who is the new boy from Echuca? I’m him.
4. Here comes the policeman whom, I believe,
rescued that boy from the ledge.
5. Can 1 drive the car please?
6. I’m that pleased 1 cannot hardly get my breath.
7. The police are anxious to interview a man whom,
they say, was at the scene of the crime.
8. It was while watching a theatre performance that
the bullet of the mad actor struck President Lin-
9. Seldom did he look at his wife’s portrait, which he
frequently did, without pangs of regret.
10. A new series of school broadcasts are to begin
next month.
DELETE WRONG WORD
1. They prefer a holiday in the country than/to a sea
cruise.
2. Do you know the man whom/who your parents have
invited?
3. She’s the girl whose/who’s painting was awarded
first prize.
4. Do you know whose/who’s coming tonight?
5. The afternoon tea was laid/lain on the small table.


Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) Mondays.
(b) The Advantages of Decimal Coinage
(c) ‘The optimist proclaims that we live in the best of
all possible worlds; and the pessimist fears this is
true.’
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
MANAGEMENT AND LABOUR IN AFRICA
During a visit to Central and Southern Africa lasi
summer I examined the ways in which employers
recruit African workers and mould them into an efficient
work force. 1 did not find that they were faced with
unusual, acute, almost intractable problems, as 1 had
expected. I thought I would see the pattern of behaviour
1 had witnessed in East Africa—one in which the transi-
tion from tribe to industry created conflict and bitterness
among Africans and endorsed the European image of
the lazy African. But I did not see that pattern. Instead
I saw tribal Africans making a swift, apparently fric-
tionless switch into industrial workers, so that in their
general attitudes to management and work they are
largely indistinguishable from workers in Britain. This
phenomenon raises significant industrial and social
issues. Are the workers I saw black Europeans? If they
are, how did it happen and what has become of their
traditional values?
The industrial labour force in Africa consists largely of
African wage labour and European employers, managers
and supervisors. The African labour speaks diverse
languages, is migratory, often illiterate and without
industrial skills. The European labour possesses none
of these deficiencies and generally acts towards the
African workers with an attitude of racial superiority.
This attitude is necessarily changing as the Africans
gain their political independence, but the change so far
is obvious only in the higher circles of politics and
industry.
But there is more to it than these objective factors indi-
cate. The African labour is employed in Western-type
industrial enterprises, yet when it first arrives for work
it has no understanding of the motivating forces of
individualism and accumulation on which the industry
is based. It does not comprehend such elements as
individual responsibility, initiative, incentive, punc-
tuality and discipline, for these do not figure in tradi-
tional African lives. When an African first sells his
labour he moves into an environment which has different
values and priorities from the one he has left. If he
does not make a satisfactory adjustment then it is
assumed that he will be indolent, a bad time-keeper,
prone to absenteeism, and generally unreliable.
Investigations in South, Central and West Africa, in
addition to my own, have shown that employers, if
they want to, can create stabilized, well disciplined
African labour forces in exactly the same way as can
employers in Britain. Labour turnover figures, absentee
rates and disciplinary behaviour among African
workers do not markedly differ from those of European
workers in comparable work situations.
The explanation of this phenomenon has little to do
with the attempts to commit Africans to European
values. The African worker behaves as his work situa-
tion demands that he should. When he moves from his
tribal home to industry he changes his role, and it is this
role that determines his industrial behaviour. One day
an African may be a subsistence farmer, the next a
miner, and when he is a miner he acts as miners do.
There is no question that he has renounced his values
or that he has been manipulated out of them. The
African culture is too deeply ingrained for that to
happen.
The worker carries his traditional attitudes with him,
but because he is not allowed to express them in the
workplace it appears that he has made the transition
easily. This is not so. He experiences difficulties, and
if they cannot find expression at work they must be
expressed elsewhere. Partly for this reason one sees so
much disruption, including aggression and violence, in
African urban life. (593 words)
(from an article by V. L. Allen in The Listener, 15/8/1963)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) What is the first impression, gained by the writer,
of Central and Southern workers? How does this
impression differ from that formed of Eastern
workers? (2)
(b) What is meant by the phrase ‘black Europeans’? (1)
(c) What are the disadvantages of African labour to the
employer? (1)
(d) Explain the phrase ‘the motivating forces of indi-
vidualism and accumulation’. (2)
(e) Distinguish between ‘initiative’ and ‘incentive’. (2)
(f) Give the meaning of: environment; priorities; indo-
lent. (U)
(g) How far does the responsibility of making the
African a good industrial worker rest with the
employer? (1)
(h) What is meant by ‘he changes his role’? (1)
(i) Has the African worker any problems in Western
employment? If so, what are they? (2)
(j) What impression do you receive of the writer’s
attitude to the African worker? (H)


SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
accede ukulele voluptuous eligible accelerator
neigh perplexity hereditary illegible persistent
bloc blockage lenient voracious cancellation
gaol quandary imminent hardihood ignominious
league immortal oblige lacquer eccentricity
obliterate obedience obligatory reference pseudonym
machinery pious rarity plague reconcilable
impartial magazine perfectible identifiable unpronounceable
annex(e) negotiate irretrievable vigour effervescence
elasticity blameable decision vigorous unmistakable
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: perfect, reconcilable, pious
2. Change to nouns: pious , voracious , ignominious
3. Write synonyms for: perplexity , obligatory , eccentricity
4. Spell the plurals of: quiz , hypothesis , series
5. Delete wrong word: Beautiful stalactites/stalagmites hung from the roof.
The heroine recites a prelude/prologue to introduce the play.
Her bazaar/bizarre choice of colours always causes comment.
A POINT OF STYLE
UNITY. Be very careful in your use of pronouns. Make
sure that all the rules of agreement and clear reference
are followed. ‘lt’ is a particularly abused word and is
wrongly used unless there is a clear noun of reference
in the sentence or paragraph. Criticise these uses of ‘it’;
‘The kangaroo is a fascinating specimen of Australian
fauna, but it is in danger of extinction because they are
considered pests by many graziers.’
‘She made no attempt to be polite and it was noticed
by the other guests.’
WORD ORIGIN
Supply a word to fit the definitions below and explain
the force of the prefix in each case;
1. having several wives
2. having one wife
3. having three angles.
4. instrument for taking temperature
5. water-generated power
6. a long-distance camera lens
7. the study of the sounds of speech
8. the story of one’s own life
9. hater of his fellow men
10. a period of ten years
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. The news of our times are very disturbing.
2. Either Ralph or Gerry have the key to the car.
3. We will join you tomorrow evening at cards.
4. I like prawns caught at Tuggerah Lakes which are
small, pink and sweet.
5. Of the two rivals, Israel and Egypt, the last is much
larger than the first.
6. I did it exactly like I was shown.
7. Can I eat this slice of melon?
8. If I was him I should act quite different.
9. Entering the saloon, the conviction came to him
that he was surrounded by enemies.
10. There is no reason to fear that the dangers have
not been foreseen and that safeguards have been
taken.
PUNCTUATE
1. My father an honourable man expected other men
to have the same principles as himself.
2. The party over everybody left wearily for home.
3. Macbeth is a sinister brooding character once he
becomes king.
4. He has lost his friends he doubts his wife and he is
prepared to use evil as his most powerful weapon.
REVISE LAST YEAR’S UNITS 7-8


COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) The most important happening of this century for
the future of mankind.
(b) Censorship of books and films.
(c) The purpose of education is ‘to teach pupils what
to enjoy, what to fight against and what to rever-
ence’.
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
NEW STAGE IN
U.S. RACE RELATIONS STRUGGLE
A number of American observers have detected in the
recent shameful disturbances in Birmingham and other
Southern cities plentiful evidence of a new pattern to the
struggle for civil rights.
These developments appear to be the result, essentially,
of a growing movement among the increasingly literate,
politically influential Negro population against the
Fabian policies of gradual desegregation which have
dominated liberal and Federal thinking in the last
decade. In practice, the Eisenhower and Kennedy
administrations have relied upon a process of legal vic-
tories in clashes between parochial Governments and
Negro organisations. The Federal Government has inter-
vened only where local authorities resorted flagrantly
and illegally to force to circumvent Supreme Court
decisions, as at Little Rock and Oxford. In each case
these interventions resulted in decisive victories for law
and order.
In theory there is a very great deal to be said for this
kind of gradualism; coercive means can corrupt good
ends, and it has always seemed important for the sake
of the Negroes themselves that desegregation should
develop and not be imposed. In practice, gradualism
has achieved a great deal. But unfortunately, these
achievements in the main are vindications of principle,
for instance in the admission of handfuls of Negroes to
Southern Universities. They have modified but not
removed ‘the line of opportunity’ separating Negroes
from whites.
The significance of the present disturbances is that a
new generation of Negroes is not satisfied with vindica-
tions of principle which still leave the mass of Negroes
at the mercy of social and economic discrimination. In
the wake of the legalistic gradualism comes the non-
violent campaign of men like Martin Luther King, as
instanced by boycotts of segregated buses, ‘sit-in’
demonstrations in restaurants and bars, and pickets.
These tactics are producing the kind of brutal retaliation
seen at Birmingham. The fear must now be that further
brutality will discredit non-violence and precipitate out-
breaks of mutual violence.
If this reasoning is valid —and there is as much evidence
in the North (e.g., in the violent crime in ‘desegregated’
Washington) as in the South to support it —there is a
clear responsibility upon the Administration to forsake
its position of benign aloofness from the arena. It must
lead the national campaign for the change of heart
which, complementing legal decisions, is needed to give
the Negroes justice and to avert violence. (389 words)
(from Sydney Morning Herald, 1/6/1963)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) Look up the meaning of ‘Fabian policies’. Why is
it used here? (1)
(b) Explain: ‘parochial’; ‘flagrantly’; decisive’. (3)
(c) Explain the force of the prefix in; ‘circumvent’;
‘intervention’. (1)
(d) What has been the Federal Government’s policy in
introducing desegregation? (1)
(e) Why has the Government relied on such a policy?(l)
(f) Put in your own words: ‘coercive means can corrupt
good ends’. (1)
(g) Distinguish between ‘develop’ and ‘impose’ in the
sentence ‘desegregation should develop and not be
imposed’. (1)
(h) What is the weakness of the present Federal
policy? (1)
(i) What is a ‘boycott’? (1)
(j) What is the danger of the brutal retaliation to recent
Negro demonstrations? (1)
(k) How effective is the use of the word ‘arena’ in the
final paragraph? (1)
(1) What does the phrase ‘benign aloofness’ suggest to
you? Is it a fair criticism of the Administration?
Why, or why not? (2)


SPELLING/VOCABULARY
allure substantial hypotenuse obsolete encyclopaedia
deplore aggravate census obsolescence hypochondria
burlesque gracious censorship isthmus environment
incense ennoble incision fragility automobile
chaotic inflexible honorary simultaneous jurisdiction
authority incautious honourable agrarian succession
socialism depression century agricultural enthusiastic
celebrity apparel depositor bronchitis channelling
decisive subtlety jeopardy itinerary indefensible
leisurely capacious acquiescence cartilage deficiencies
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: gracious, noble,
substantial
2. Change to adjectives: authority , incision , succession
3. Write antonyms for; deplore
4. What is the masculine of: spinster
5. Delete wrong word; The governor is an honorary/honourable member of this club.
The M.P. will canvas/canvass the opinions of his electorate.
His criticism distracted/detracted from his rival’s claims.
A POINT OF STYLE
USE OF ‘MORE’ AND ‘MOST’. Study these examples
and explanations:
1. ‘Napoleon was more brilliant than any politician of
his time.’ (Wrong)
This sentence cuts Napoleon out of the group in which
he attained eminence.
‘Napoleon was more brilliant than any other poli-
tician of his time.’ (Right)
2. ‘Shakespeare was the most inspired of all the other
Elizabethan dramatists.’ (Wrong)
Here Shakespeare is being described as superlative in a
group that does not include him.
‘Shakespeare was the most inspired of all the Eliza-
bethan dramatists.’ (Right)
WORD ORIGIN
CENSOR. In Roman times the censor combined the
tasks of property assessor, tax-collector, census-taker
and custodian of public morals. Today he has retained
only the last of those duties. He is now appointed to
examine films, books and plays for objectionable
material.
ARENA. In Roman times this word meant sand.
Gladiators fought in a sand-covered place, and the word
was gradually transferred to mean the scene of any
contest.
DIPLOMA. The modern diploma, the written record
of the attainment of a degree or some other course of
study, actually takes its name from a Greek verb ‘to
double’ and was a document folded once and, there-
fore, divided into two parts.
, aggravate , enthusiasm
, mistress , widow
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. Harold and the boy from Scots agrees, but Dennis
flatly disagrees.
2. Neither of the boys have shown any interest, and
this is not surprising.
3. You will do it at once or face dismissal!
4. The office was re-organised which led to three dis-
missals.
5. There seems little chance of me being able to accept
the invitation.
6. The dolphin is the most intelligent of creatures;
they almost talk to one another.
7. My father learnt me to play golf even in spite of his
being always busy.
8. According to statistics one-third of the people
suffer some form of malnutrition, which is prob-
ably true.
9. Another bullet struck the butt of his rifle, thus
saving his life a second time.
10. An endless stream of marchers have been passing
the Cenotaph since ten o’clock.
WHAT ... FOR?
This is an expression to be watched since it is often
used instead of ‘why’ and it can also create ambiguity.
Study the following;
What are you hurrying for?
What are you crying for?
What did you sell your car for?


COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) ‘Everyone in this country has an equal opportunity
to make a fortune.’
(b) The Aborigine’s Right to Full Citizenship.
(c) ‘Just as a man cannot be a leader for long if he is
not trusted, he cannot be a leader for long if he
cannot trust.’
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
MEN IN MOTOR-CARS
We are at last becoming fully aware of the high price
we are paying for letting motor-cars become such a
dominant element in our civilisation. The price includes
the ripping apart of our towns and cities by driving new
motor roads through them, the huge cost of road build-
ing, the waste of time and nervous energy resulting from
traffic congestion, the frustration of never being able to
find anywhere to park. Politicians, town-planners and
road-engineers are all busy trying to find ways of
improving this situation, but they are working on the
basis that the way we use motor-cars is a necessary part
of the pattern of modern life.
What happens if we take another view? The view that
a civilised life comes before the demands of any particu-
lar machine and that perhaps, instead of every kind of
planning automatically making way for the motor-car,
we should put ourselves first even if it means questioning
the way cars are now used. I am not disparaging their
usefulness. Nostalgia for the peaceful days before
motor-cars happened would be pointless now; the world
has changed because of them. But we have the choice
of either passively succumbing to them or making them
into a real asset —not, as now, a mixture of private asset
and public nuisance.
Nor am I advocating restrictive legislation. There has
been talk of the time coming soon when private motor-
ing might have to be forbidden in the centres of cities,
as the only way of easing congestion. This offers a
tempting way out to those would-be legislators who
think only in terms of imposing discipline on people;
but apart from the difficulty of administering such con-
trols I do not believe in legislation that runs dead against
ordinary people’s wishes and instincts. We must go
deeper, and it is just this matter of people’s wishes and
instincts that we need to think about. The motor-car has
achieved its dominant position because it provides an
outlet for all sorts of psychological needs that everyone
possesses. It has been given an inflated social and
psychological value that has no connection with its use-
fulness as a transport machine. This has come about
through several causes. One is the habit of regarding
motor-cars as a symbol of affluence. Another is pressure
from the industry, which to keep itself prosperous has
to persuade the public of the importance of not only
owning a motor-car (or several motor-cars) but of get-
ting if possible a new model each year, with the result
that, anyway in America, the discarded motor-cars, the
space they take up and the visual squalor they cause,
are becoming almost as much a problem as parking
those which are still in use.
But there are more personal reasons than these for the
all-pervading, uncritical cult of motor-car ownership.
The act of driving a car is one of the few outlets avail-
able to most people for their need to exercise personal
power and assert their individuality. Speedy and expert
handling of motor-cars is admired and glamorised. The
young have been taught to look with envy and hero-
worship at the fast driver—including the too-fast driver
—in a way they do not look at any other criminal, such
as the safe-breaker or the cat-burglar. (540 words)
(from an article by J. M. Richards in The Listener , 11/5/1961)
COMPREHENSION questions;
(a) What effects does the writer present of the domina-
tion of modern life by the motor-car? (2)
(b) What mistake is made by politicians, town-planners
and road-engineers? (1)
(c) Explain: ‘disparaging’; ‘nostalgia’; ‘passively suc-
cumbing’. (H)
(d) In what ways is the motor-car ‘a mixture of private
asset and public nuisance’? (2)
(e) Put in your own words: ‘a symbol of affluence’. (1)
(f) What ‘social and psychological value’ does the
writer attribute to the motor-car? What is the force
of the word ‘inflated’ as an indication of his personal
opinion? (2)
(g) How do the discarded vehicles create a ‘visual
squalor’? Do you consider that ‘squalor’ is too
extreme a word? Why, or why not? (2)
(h) What is the effect of the word ‘cult’ to describe the
general attitude to car ownership? Is there another
word in this paragraph which suggests the same feel-
ing? What is it? (1 i)
(i) How is the motorist able to assert his indi-
viduality? (1)
(j) What is the writer’s opinion of fast drivers? (1)


‘They were confident of, and determined to, succeed.’
T never have, and never shall, be guilty of swearing.’
WORD ORIGIN
In the word ‘contradiction’ the following parts can be
seen:
contra—prefix meaning ‘against’
diet-—from the Latin verb ‘to say’
ion — suffix denoting a noun
Discuss the parts of the words below:
1 . fracture
2. intangible
3. unrespectable
4. autocracy
5. physiology
6. psychiatric
7. immobilise
8. incriminate
, Q6 REVISE LAST 1
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
admissible aquatic transcend deference truculent
quisling recalcitrant bivouac deferred representative
barrier inauspicious gradient guttural superficiality
hoarse repellent indisputable superlative rehabilitation
aggressor insistent reciprocate ironical indestructible
indebted reactionary reciprocity suffocate grammatical
rarefy attempted character chloroform resuscitate
chrysalis staunchly statistics quiescence utilitarian
huge agitation demeanour delusion monopolistic
relinquish loquacious impropriety irreparable encumbrance
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: exact, pretentious, appropriation
, deference reciprocate
2. Change to adjectives: statistics
3. Write synonyms for: insistent
, indisputable , loquacious
4. Put a stroke between the syllables of quiescence, superficiality, utilitarian.
5. Delete wrong word: His urban/urbane manner wins him a large acquaintance.
She is an intensely imaginative/imaginary child.
His bravado/bravery won him general admiration.
A POINT OF STYLE
INCORRECT OMISSIONS. Beware of saving words at
the expense of grammatical correctness. The most com-
mon errors of this type are misuses of prepositions and
parts of verbs. Can you think of examples like these;
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. He told his brother he would have to leave early.
2. Either of our four girls can type ninety words a
minute.
3. They know more facts than me, but lam better at
analysis than them.
4. What did you bring that book up for me to be read
to out of for?
5. When that fellow speaks he never says nothing
really.
6. No one has less enemies than I.
7. The six of us swum the shark-infested river
because nobody has ever swum across it before.
8. Whilst attending to business in town, the traveller’s
car was stolen.
9. lam neither a wowser in theory or practice.
10. If he has broken the window, he deserved to be
punished.
PUNCTUATE
What are you hiding in that bag john asked his mother
hiding replied john nothing oh yes you are I can tell by
your face show me at once truly mother its nothing then
show me no its a secret dont you remember that its your
birthday tomorrow
REVISE LAST YEAR’S UNITS 11-12


COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) Compulsory School Uniforms.
(b) The Benefits of Travel.
(c) ‘A sense of humour is God’s greatest gift.’
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
MANKIND’S LAST FEW YEARS?
To Sir Robert Watson-Watt goes the credit of having
produced one of the most compelling and disturbing
books of a decade. When he says that the world has
until 1970 at most to save itself from nuclear self-
destruction, he clearly deserves attention.
In the course of 600 million years or so, man has come
a long way, but is still capable of infinite improvement
‘if he does not, in the folly of his pride, deny to his kind
their due inheritance of evolutionary enrichment
through future centuries of adaptation,’ Sir Robert
writes. What has brought man to his present predica-
ment where his only defence against unimaginably
destructive armaments (‘there is no armour plate which
will stay them,’ says Sir Robert) must be spun ‘from the
fragile and intangible fabric of man’s humanity to man’.
Man’s first savage ancestors never tasted the strong wine
of organised battle; they hunted, living hand-to-mouth,
and owned nothing to fight for. But when man first
sowed crops or kept herds the need for organised
defence and organised plunder was born. It grew and,
as ‘civilised’ man learned to live in villages and towns,
the simple arrow evolved at last into the atom bomb.
As a counter to war weaponry, Sir Robert would
encourage the responsible journalist as the necessary
communication channel between scientist and citizen.
‘The responsible journalist is a skilled and honest pro-
fessional interpreter. The responsible technologist is
not professionally trained to interpret even himself.’
Truth has been an early casualty in the nuclear war;
surely, for example, the adjective ‘clean’ in ‘clean bomb’
must be the masterword of irony in the English
language!
Away, then, with lies and distortions, and let us look
at Sir Robert’s catalogue of arms. The bomb that killed
100.000 at Hiroshima is, in today’s phrase, ‘a nominal
bomb’. The ‘improved’ weapon exploded at Bikini in
1954 released explosive energy 1,000 times greater. In
World War 111 a single Bikini-type bomb, ‘indubitably
obsolete’ by then, would destroy everything within 300
square miles—3oo of them would depopulate the U.S.,
4.000 would leave ‘a handful of humans ... on a mur-
dered globe’.
Sir Robert estimates that the U.S. already has a nuclear
stockpile of, or for, 100,000 bombs, Russia ‘something
quite near that number’, and Britain ‘about the amount
needed to kill off, without the aid of ally or antagonist,
the whole human race’. That catalogue does not include
the weapons of chemical and biological warfare, the
‘poor nations’ poison’, which would merely drive popu-
lations raving mad.
Does Sir Robert see any hope, any future for us? Only
if these things take place: relinquishment of war as an
instrument of national policy, and a consequent limita-
tion of sovereignty; a code of world law, supported by a
world court and a peace force; general and complete
disarmament; a campaign for universally legalised birth
control (as a counter to over-population). While there
might be some resentment about abandoning sovereign
rights, he says, citizens would quickly lose it when they
began to feel the benefits from the end of the arms race,
when a great tide of wealth became available for public
welfare. (517 words)
(from a book review in the Sydney Morning Herald, 27/4/1963)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) Why does Sir Robert call man’s pride his ‘folly’? (1)
(b) Express in your own words ‘their due inheritance of
evolutionary enrichment’. (1)
(c) What is the meaning of ‘intangible’? (1)
(d) Comment on the effect of the metaphor contained
in ‘spun “from the fragile and intangible fabric of
man’s humanity to man”.’ (2)
(e) Why has the writer enclosed the word ‘civilised’ in
inverted commas? (1)
(f) What does Sir Robert see as the task of the respon-
sible journalist? (1)
(g) Express the phrase ‘indubitably obsolete’ more
simply. (1)
(h) Why do you think the writer describes the world
after a possible nuclear war as ‘a murdered
globe’? (1)
(i) What is the force of the word ‘merely’ in the last
sentence of the second last paragraph? What literary
trick is the writer using here? (2)
(j) In what way is war ‘an instrument of national
policy’? (1)
(k) How feasible do you consider Sir Robert’s proposals
to be? Do you think he has convinced the reviewer
of the necessity for adopting his plan? How well has
he convinced you? (3)


WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix:
tolerant,
specific,
precise
2. Change to adjectives: torrent
, sympathy
, symphony
3. Write synonyms for: invincible
, decadent
, cantankerous
4. Write the singular of: analyses
, errata
, automata
SPELLING/ VOC ABUL ARY
adversity specimen annihilate derision chrysanthemum
deign banquet foreword derisive secondarily
tolerant granary inflation sympathy renaissance
invasion regeneration seditious cantankerous specifically
aisle corridor circuitous seclusion recriminations
citizen torrent interrogate theoretical superstition
civilian invincible annually chorister gramophone
barracks decadent annuity symphony clarification
quandary eligible voracious lacquer unpronounceable
imminent hereditary persistent accelerator eccentricity
5. Delete wrong word: His observation/observance of camp rules was commended
He gave a masterful/masterly exhibition of high-diving.
The barbarity/barbarism of the gang assault was appalling.
A POINT OF STYLE
VERB CONFUSION. While most verbs have the same
word for both past tense and past participle, there are a
number of important verbs that have different forms,
and these are often used wrongly.
PAST TENSE PAST PART.
rang rung
flew flown
spoke spoken
lay lain (to lie down)
lied lied (to tell lies)
laid laid (to lay)
DELETE THE WRONG WORD
1. The salesman had rang/rung the bell twice.
2. Many a truth is spoken/spoke in jest.
3. The hall rung/rang with loud applause.
4. He laid/lay down for a short rest.
5. She has lain/laid the books on the shelf.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. Having pitched the tent a fire was lighted and the
meal prepared.
2. If it were me, I’d certainly protest against his
ruling.
3. Do not ask me who the bell tolls for.
4. We entered into the theatre just after the lights
went out.
5. I shall divide this melon between the whole team.
6. Meg wants to know if she can have a slice of pie.
7. Have the girls showed you their new dresses?
8. Hamlet, he is rather a poet than a man of action,
and his theorising brings his downfall.
9. He ate heartily, and declared he was one of those
who never hesitate to gratify his appetites.
10. Anyone who has not brought their lunch have little
prospect of buying food at the baths.
WORD ORIGIN
SOME COMMON FOREIGN PHRASES
hors d’oeuvre—an appetiser
in loco parentis—in place of a parent
in toto —in the whole; totally
ipso facto—by that very fact
par excellence —above all others
per capita—per head (of population)
per se —by itself
laissez-faire—individual action without legal or political
restraint
nouveau riche—a newly rich person, usually without
culture or education
SENTENCE COMPLETION
Complete the following with clauses that will make
sentences as indicated by the brackets:
1. The politician promised to honour his promise
(Complex sentence).
2. When the travellers reached the river-bank,
(Periodic sentence).
3. I have always enjoyed listening to good music
(Compound sentence).
4. Dickens is a well-loved novelist . . . (Loose sen-
tence).


COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) The Good Old Days?
(b) ‘Advertising is the curse of modern society.’
(c) The Responsibility of the Press.
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
CHARLES LAMB
For himself, and from his own point of view, the exer-
cise of his gift, of his literary art, came to gild or sweeten
a life of monotonous labour, and seemed, as far as
regarded others, no very important thing; availing to
give them a little pleasure, and inform them a little,
chiefly in a retrospective manner, but in no way con-
cerned with the turning of the,tides of the great world.
And yet this very modesty, this unambitious way of
conceiving his work, has impressed. upon it a certain
exceptional enduringness. For of the remarkable English
writers contemporary with Lamb, many were greatly
pre-occupied with ideas of practice religious, moral,
political ideas which have since, in some sense or
other, entered permanently into the general conscious-
ness; and these having no longer any stimulus for a
generation provided with a different stock of ideas, the
writings of those who spent so much of themselves in
their propagation have lost, with posterity, something
of what they gained by them in immediate influence.
Coleridge, Wordsworth, Shelley even sharing so
largely in the unrest of their own age, and made per-
sonally more interesting thereby, yet, of their actual
work, surrender more to the mere course of time than
some of those who may have seemed to exercise them-
selves hardly at all in great matters, to have been little
serious, or a little indifferent, regarding them.
Of this number of the disinterested servants of litera-
ture, smaller in England than in France, Charles Lamb
is one. In the making of prose he realises the principle
of art for its own sake as completely as Keats in the
making of verse. And, working ever close to the con-
crete, to the details, great or small, of actual things,
books, persons, and with no part of them blurred to his
vision by the intervention of mere abstract theories, he
has reached an enduring moral effect also, in a sort of
boundless sympathy. . . . Such gift of appreciation
depends ... on the habitual apprehension of men’s life
as a whole —its organic wholeness, as extending even to
the least things in it—of its outward manner in connec-
tion with its inward temper; and it involves a fine percep-
tion of the congruities, the musical accordance between
humanity and its environment of custom, society, per-
sonal intercourse; as if all this, with its meetings, part-
ings, ceremony, gesture, tones of speech, were some
delicate instrument on which an expert performer is
playing.
These are some of the characteristics of Elia, one essen-
tially an essayist, and of the true family of Montaigne,
‘never judging,’ as he says, ‘system-wise of things, but
fastening on particulars’; saying all things as it were on
chance occasion only, and by way of pastime, yet suc-
ceeding thus ‘glimpse-wise’, in catching and recording
more frequently than others, ‘the gayest, happiest atti-
tude of things’. (474 words)
(from Charles Lamb, by Walter Pater)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) Why did Lamb take up writing as an essayist? (1)
(b) Explain: ‘in a retrospective manner’. (1)
(c) Put in your own words: ‘many (of his contem-
poraries) were greatly preoccupied with ideas of
practice’. (1)
(d) What is meant by ‘the general consciousness’? (1)
(e) Explain: (i) propagation; (ii) posterity. (1)
(f) Why has the work of Coleridge, Wordsworth and
Shelley suffered so much from the passage of
time? (1)
(g) Distinguish between ‘disinterested’ and ‘uninter-
ested’. Why does Pater describe Lamb as one of
‘the disinterested servants of literature’? (2)
(h) What is meant by ‘working ever close to the con-
crete’? (1)
(i) What is the meaning of ‘apprehension’ as used in
this passage? (1)
(j) What does the writer mean by the ‘inward temper’
of life? (1)
(k) ‘Elia’ was Lamb’s pseudonym as an essayist. From
your study of the development of the essay, what
comment would you make on the statement that
Lamb was one of ‘the true family of Montaigne’? (2)
(1) Put into your own words the phrase in bold type in
the final paragraph. (2)


SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
amenable pompous coalition grievance desiccated
inventor pomposity antagonise grievously barrenness
repartee coarsen foretell irremediable congratulations
instil investigate precarious incalculable silhouette
ambiguous policies barricade precipitous indescribable
pugnacity institution pretentious congregation disappointment
clergy sepulchre desecrate glycerine predicament
clerical palisade antiseptic demagogue subsidiary
chaotic incision depositor honorary succession
burlesque aggravate obsolete gracious simultaneous
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: ambiguous, affection, pronounceable
3. Write antonyms for: barren , pretentious , precarious
2. Change to adjectives: antagonise
pugnacity , inventor
4. Show possession: two children bikes, two girls
dolls, two womens handbags.
5. Delete wrong word: She titivated/titillated herself before going out to the guests.
He works most purposely/purposefully at his studies.
.Extremely hungry, he remained unsatisfied/dissatisfied by the meal.
A POINT OF STYLE
REDUNDANCY (of verbs and prepositions). All too
often, unnecessary words are used by a writer. Some-
times compound verbs are preferred to the simple infini-
tive, sometimes prepositions are added to verbs which
contain the sense of the preposition in their own
meaning.
e.g., T had intended to have called you.’ (Wrong)
T had intended to call you.’ (Right)
‘The Queen ascended up the steps.’ (Wrong)
‘The Queen ascended the steps.’ (Right)
Cross out the redundant words;
1. The children crossed over the road.
2. He wished he had have tried harder.
WORD ORIGIN
ANACHRONISM —literally ‘against time’.
It usually refers to a chronological error made by an
author when he introduces an object or custom not
known in the period of which he is writing. Shakespeare
does this often, e.g., Caesar says, ‘What is’t o’clock?’.
ASSASSIN. In the 11th century a fanatical group of
Moslems joined together to destroy all enemies of their
religious beliefs. They nerved themselves to do this
slaughter by taking hashish, an intoxicating drug. They
were given the nick-name hashishashan, which means in
Arabic ‘the hashish-eaters’. As the word was corrupted
by careless pronunciation, we now use ‘assassin’.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. Neither justice nor pity are to be expected of this
man.
2. I think I will hear from him before long.
3. You should take the left-hand road leading to
Canberra which is bitumened.
4. The sudden wail of the siren alarmed both Daisy
and she.
5. The losing runner struggled braver than ever in
the last lap.
6. Our cat has got sharp claws and climbs up trees
with ease.
7. Churchill paints that remarkable well that you
wonder when he took time off from a busy life to
learn.
8. We passed over roads that are always being con-
stantly patched.
9. It had been my wish to have called on you while
I was visiting Oodnadatta.
10. Please tell me whom you think is likely to win this
race.
PUNCTUATE
1. He refused to go against the peoples wishes.
2. Its the only solution to the problem.
3. Hes the man whos been given the position of secre-
tary to the club.
4. The childrens books have all been marked and re-
turned.
5. The ladies duties are hard to define in writing.


COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) ‘Schooldays are the happiest days of your life.’
(b) ‘The Australian landscape is depressingly monoto-
nous.’
(c) Set out the thoughts suggested to you by the remark
of the Duke of Edinburgh: ‘War, argument and
controversy are news. Peaceful co-operation is a
bore.’
in discovering the means of interesting the childish mind
enough to compel attention is characteristic of the good
teacher. If oral instruction does not gain a close atten-
tion, perhaps books will; if books fail, carpenters’ tools,
cooks’ tools, a lathe, an embroidery frame, or a forge
may succeed; if mechanical work does not rouse the
mental forces, perhaps drawing or modelling will; if all
other means fail, the training of the power of attention
may be begun through music. (398 words)
PRECIS
This passage is taken from the Victorian Matriculation
Examination for 1962. Students were asked to make a
precis of the extract in not more than 135 words.
Education for efficiency should impart the habit of
quick and concentrated attention. Without this habit
there can be no true economy of time. A prolonged
attention is not natural to children, and should not be
demanded of them; but quick and concentrated atten-
tion may be reasonably expected for brief intervals
from every child, and as the age increases the possible
period of close attention will grow longer and longer.
The difference between adults in mental efficiency is
chiefly a difference in this very power of concentrated
attention. The man who has this power will grasp
quickly new subjects presented to him, gratify people
who have business with him by giving them prompt and
effective attention, seize eagerly upon the contents of
books or papers which relate to the affair in hand, and
despatch his daily work, whatever its nature —mechani-
cal, commercial, scholarly or administrative. He will do
in one minute the work for which an inferior man will
need five minutes or five hours. He will effect in every
day of his life a great economy of time. His thoughts
will not be a rope of sand, but a chain of welded
links. The great thinkers and doers, philosophers and
inventors, soldiers and rulers are alike in possessing in
the highest degree this power of concentrated attention;
and in common men and women this is the most valu-
able of all mental qualities. To rouse, awake, inculcate
and train this power in the child and the youth should
be the principal object in education for efficiency. We
say of the child in whom this power does not seem to
exist that he cannot apply himself, that he cannot be
made to study, or that he does not set his mind at work.
For every such child the main problem is to discover
the means of interesting him in a mental occupation
enough to induce him to concentrate his attention. Skill
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS
Instead of Comprehension questions in this unit, we
print an extract from the examiners’ comments on
earlier comprehension papers in the N.S.W. Leaving
Certificate.
(1961) ‘Candidates perhaps still need to be reminded
not to write at too great a length in the comprehen-
sion question. Provided that all that is asked for is
given, there is no need for anything beyond quite
brief answers to the individual questions. Often two
or three lines will be sufficient. Yet it is worth remind-
ing candidates that where they are asked to explicate
a phrase, the explication must cover all elements
within that phrase.’
(1959) ‘. . . many strayed too far from the given
passage. The answer must be limited by the context
of the phrase under discussion. . . . The need to be
sensitive to the suggestions in words applies in inter-
preting the examiner’s words as well as those of the
test passage.’
(1957) ‘. . . Too many students apparently forget to
answer the second part of double-barrelled questions.
Often the two parts of such questions were answered
in a single statement. This was unobjectionable, so
long as the examiner could be sure that the candidate
was answering the whole question.’
(1956) ‘On the formal side the worst fault was the
failure to answer in a formally correct way. One does
not always insist on a sentence with subject and
predicate fully expressed, but at least one expects
congruity of word-form in simple answers: not “par-
donable-excused” but, as a minimum answer, “par-
donable-excusable”. Spelling has improved a little in
the last few years, but some useful words are still
commonly mis-spelt. We noticed again frequent mis-
spellings of:
emphasise, omission, definite, similes, separate,
vehicle, quite, satire, satirize, affect, effect, sen-
tence.’


SP1
ELLING/ VOCABULARY
anaesthesia
detestable
proprietary
appal
capricious
supplement
colleague
variegated
appalling
disappearance
application
insurgent
foremost
deteriorate
necessities
insulation
pinnacle
protrusion
plausible
indistinguishable
despotic
amenities
colliery
industriously
assessment
pigeon
prodigious
physiognomy
coerce
punctuality
baton
superfluous
inheritance
coercion
restitution
predecessor
paroxysm
devastated
apprentice
platitudinous
recalcitrant
aquatic
insistent
deferred
truculent
aggressor
repellent
bivouac
guttural
indestructible
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: credit, punctual, plausible
2. Change to nouns: capricious , deteriorate , superfluous
3. Write synonyms for: detestable , prodigious , coercion
4. Spell the plurals of; stimulus , basis , phenomenon
5. Delete wrong word: Pasteur invented/discovered the role of germs in disease.
A bigot is intolerable/intolerant of the beliefs of others.
Etymology/entomology is the study of the history of words.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
A POINT OF STYLE
UNITY. Sometimes unity is lost when the writer fails
to observe parallel or balanced constructions within the
sentence.
1. Every member of all the trade unions have to post
their voting slips by the end of the month.
2. We shall remember them, declared the speaker
emphatically.
e.g., ‘He was confident of success and becoming
famous.’ (FAME)
‘Good writing requires a wide vocabulary, clear
thought and knowing the rules of grammar.’ (A
KNOWLEDGE OF GRAMMAR)
3. You must stop interfering, which you should have
done ages ago.
4. It is not the lightning flashes that worries me.
5. Poor Ron was that tired he could not attend the
opening today.
6. Labor, Liberal and Country parties are competing,
the latter with fewer candidates than the former.
WORD ORIGIN
Make four words from each of the following prefixes;
7. He never has and never will be without friends.
8. No matter how much a person wins from gambling,
1. auto-;
they always want more.
9. Neither my habits nor constitution are improved by
your customs and climate.
10. We gathered wood and stacked it beside the door,
so that the fire could be replenished without leav-
ing the hut.
2. pro-:
3. mis-:
CHOOSE THE BEST DEFINITION
1. IMPETUOUS dangerous; stimulating; hasty;
necessary.
4. poly-:
2. IMPROMPTU —off-hand; punctual; on the spur of
the moment.
5. tele-;
3. IMPASSE —out of date; stubbornness; predicament
affording no solution.


Unit 10: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) Leisure.
(b) The Problem Child.
(c) ‘A Miss is as Good as a Mile.’
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
The following passage is taken from the Queensland
Senior Public Examination of 1958. The questions are
less numerous than for some of the passages you have
been given, but the style of the passage will require care-
ful thought before you attempt to answer the questions.
A bus took him to the West End, where, among the
crazy-coloured fountains of illumination, shattering the
blue dusk with green and crimson fire, he found the cafe
of his choice, a tea shop that had gone mad and turned
Babylonian, a white palace with ten thousand lights.
It towered above the other buildings like a citadel, which
indeed it was, the outpost of a new age, perhaps a new
barbarism, and behind the thin marble front were con-
crete and steel, just as behind the careless profusion of
luxury were millions of pence balanced to the last half-
penny. Somewhere in the background, hidden away,
behind the ten thousand lights and acres of white napery
and bewildering, glittering rows of teapots, behind the
thousand waitresses and cashbox girls and black-coated
floor managers and temperamental long-haired violinists,
behind the mounds of shimmering bonbons and multi-
coloured Viennese pastries, the cauldrons of stewed
steak, the vanloads of harlequin ices, were a few men
who went to work juggling with fractions of a farthing,
who knew how many units of electricity it took to finish
a steak-and-kidney pudding and how many minutes and
seconds a waitress (five-foot-four in height and in aver-
age health) would need to carry a tray of given weight
from the kitchen lift to the table in the far corner. In
short, there was a warm, sensuous, vulgar life flowering
in the upper storeys and cold science working in the
basement. Such was the gigantic tea shop into which
Turgis marched, in search not of more refreshment but
of all the enchantment of unfamiliar luxury. Perhaps he
knew in his heart that men have conquered half the
known world, looted whole kingdoms, and never arrived
at such luxury. (296 words)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) Explain: (i) ‘a tea shop that had gone mad and
turned Babylonian’; (ii) ‘napery’; (iii) ‘units of elec-
tricity’; (iv) ‘the enchantment of unfamiliar luxury’.
(b) This passage shows a contrast. In each of two
columns, headed ‘Luxury’ and ‘Science’, put down
five words and phrases showing the contrast.
(c) A waitress is described as ‘five-feet-four in height
and in average health’. Why are these facts men-
tioned?
(d) ‘Sensuous vulgar life.’ ‘Sensuous’ means appealing
to one or more of the five senses. Illustrate its mean-
ing from the passage. What does ‘vulgar’ mean in
this phrase?
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS
Below are the examiners’ comments on the general
faults in the 1961 N.S.W. L.C. Expression Paper:
‘lt is difficult to over-emphasise the necessity for care-
ful and conscientious study and practice in preparation
for this paper. It might reasonably be assumed that a
candidate who has reached the end of his secondary
school career could offer two pages of literate composi-
tion, handle a relatively simple piece of comprehension
and comment usefully on matters of usage and vocabu-
lary. Yet such an expectation is disappointed in an
alarmingly large number of cases and there seems to be
abundant evidence for the necessity of giving increased
and informed attention to the essentials of English
grammar and composition which are being tested here.
The essay question did not, in general, produce good
work. In particular, those candidates fared badly who
came forward with prepared topics and endeavoured to
twist the set topics to the line of their preparation. It
seems fair to remind candidates that this kind of pre-
paration is a disastrous approach to the essay question,
and that the only successful method of preparing for this
question is to make a real attempt to master the art of
simple, direct and relevant expression. Pomposity, pre-
tentiousness and bombast are no substitute for the arts
of clear thought, clear arrangement and clear expression.
If basic competence in these essentials is missing, no
good essay writing is possible.
On the formal side, performance was highly variable.
Too many candidates are woefully weak in handling
paragraphs, punctuation and organisation of argument;
even such elementary grammatical principles as concord,
sequence of tenses and the consistent use of the indefi-
nite pronoun too often proved beyond the grasp of some
candidates.’


WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix;
biassed,
compatible,
prudent
2. Change to adjectives: president
, diplomacy
, anarchy
3. Write antonyms for; animosity
, temporary
rigorous
4. What is the feminine of; emperor
, czar
, sultan
SPELLING/VOCABULARY
antiquity temporary malicious symmetry battalion
diaries dialogue presidency symmetrical diaphragm
bias(s)ed indispensable nauseous compatible insignificant
manacle manifesto poulterer delineate philanthropist
tertiary consolation dimension indifference refugee
animosity rhetorical memoir mercenary insufficiently
impugn diplomacy anarchy tobacconist foreknowledge
colonial incorruptible rigorous colonnade commercial
regeneration cantankerous seditious derision sympathy
decadent specimen annihilate symphony secondarily
5. Delete wrong word; That house is empty/vacant, awaiting tenants.
A large quantity/number of brumbies can be seen in the valley.
I will deny/refute your charges by calling witnesses.
A POINT OF STYLE
UNITY. Make sure that every sentence you write has
unified ideas. Too often the effect of the sentence is lost
by a throwing together of incongruous thoughts. Can
you think of some examples as obviously deplorable as
these ones?
‘He enjoys visiting his relations and his car is a stream-
lined sedan.’
‘Her hair is thick and curly and she is an excellent
tennis player.’
WORD ORIGIN
SOME COMMON FOREIGN PHRASES
corpus delicti—the essential facts of a crime or breach
of law
prima facie—the first appearance of the facts or
evidence
deus ex machina —an artificial or contrived solution of
a problem
en rapport —in agreement
fait accompli—an accomplished fact or deed
faux pas—a false act, more particularly a breach of eti-
quette or politeness; a social blunder
hoi poloi—the mass of society (disparaging)
comme il faut—as it should be
entente cordiale—a cordial ur ’ rstanding, agreement
non compos mentis—of an unsound mind
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. Either of those three seedlings is bound to flourish.
2. They are faster than me, but I am stronger than
them.
3. That is the cup which I am used to drinking my
coffee in.
4. His speech was a good one but he had scarcely
finished than the hooting began.
5. He ate the food like a hungry animal would
swallow it.
6. The headmaster objects strongly to me coming late.
7. One sheep was killed and two wounded by a dingo.
8. My brother has always been far more luckier than
I.
9. I never remember to have felt an event more deeply
than his death.
10. An abrupt change of temperature in the case of
some people are likely to cause colds.
PUNCTUATE
Insert three commas, two dashes and one apostrophe in
the following:
The latest rumour to be circulated suggests that the
accused mans brother really urged him to the crime
although and this is pure speculation he may not gain
even a small inheritance from the will estranged as he
was from the old man.


Unit 11: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) The Tyranny of Fashion.
(b) The Advantages and Disadvantages of Television
Drama as compared with Stage Drama.
(c) ‘The evil that men do lives after them; the good is
oft interred with their bones.’
COMPREHENSION and PRECIS
The following passage is taken from the Victorian
School Leaving Examination, 1962. You will notice
that, apart from a few phrases to be explained, the exer-
cise is a'precis. Use all your skill of comprehension to
answer it.
Just four short decades ago me voice of broadcasting
was little more than a whisper coming from half a dozen
experimental stations in Europe and America operated
by men inspired by an idea and a hope. A small but
equally devoted band of amateurs, who had painstak-
ingly created their own primitive receivers, were the only
ones to hear that whisper. Good music and up-to-date
news were not the objective for which these individuals
searched, but simply a few spoken words or a snatch of
unidentifiable music being hurled miraculously across
space.
Today broadcasting is one of our most important means
of mass communication. Over 9,000 transmitters and
more than 300 million receivers are available to bring
the voice of broadcasting into the lives of mankind.
Radio is an instantaneous and efficient method of keep-
ing people informed of important events no matter
where they occur. The listener in Japan can have reports
of a top-level conference over his local station in the
time it takes for interpretation and translation of the
proceedings directly by short wave from the United
Nations building in Geneva. The sports fan in Argen-
tina can follow the progress of his soccer team as easily
whether it is playing in Buenos Aires or at the Olympic
Games in Rome. It is also an inexpensive way of bring-
ing the world’s greatest music and drama directly into
the homes of a widely scattered audience.
Different countries have adopted different methods of
bringing the advantages of broadcasting to their peoples.
In the United States and most of South America the free
enterprise system prevails. Government interference is
kept to a minimum and the competitive spirit is relied
upon to provide a varied programme fare. Radio is
financed by the sale of time to advertisers. In most of
the rest of the world broadcasting is regarded as a public
service. The authorities seek to enable everyone tc
listen to one, two or three national programmes of
varied content. In order to bring some broadcasting to
every citizen, there is a tendency to establish stations fo?
even the remotest areas, although some of these wouh
be uneconomic by commercial standards. The cost 01
the service is met by licence fees on receivers, subsidized
where necessary from taxation. Some countries, like
Australia, use a combination of the two systems in order
to ensure that there will be, in addition to variety, both
adequate coverage and firm cultural standards.
(409 words)
(a) Show that you understand clearly the meaning of
the bold type phrases as they are used in this
passage. (4)
(b) Make a precis of the passage in not more than 140
words. (16)
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS
Below are the examiners’ comments on the standard of
composition in the 1957 L.C. Examination in N.S.W.;
‘To pass this test well candidates must be able to
draw on a vocabulary much more extensive than most
seem to possess. Even the best candidates seemed to
be content to play safe. The only departures from a
depressing uniformity in diction were colloquial uses of
such words as “type”, “grim” and “dumb”. Some
students used words with insufficient precision, as woolly
statements like “for the majority this opinion is real
and active” will show. Such statements as “This is
slightly true”, or “I have a tinge of dislike for” made
examiners wonder whether the candidate was revealing
the poverty of his vocabulary or his fear of expressing
a definite opinion. Redundancy was quite common. At
the Leaving Certificate level we might reasonably expect
freedom from “In my opinion I think” and “The main
reason why ... is because”. “Fact” often used redun-
dantly and “factor” used wrongly for “fact” merit
special mention. If we add a plea for more attention to
correct use of prepositions, nothing further need be said
about the words used other than their spelling.’


SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
ascetic naive all right mimic rudimentary
meagre bigoted all wrong mimicked vernacular
column mileage combatant scurrilous soliloquy
insignia foreign insinuate sagacious discernible
bayonet alleviate modelled insurrection combustible
minstrelsy epilogue locomotion equanimity hippopotamus
ingredients chimera incomparable conjecture complementary
acrimonious diphthong compensation petulant complimentary
instil barricade pretentious desiccated barrenness
silhouette precarious grievance precipitous subsidiary
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: tenable, satisfied, discernible
2. Change to nouns: naive , bigoted , sagacious
3. Write synonyms for; meagre , scurrilous , petulant
4. Put strokes between the syllables of: acrimonious, diphthong, soliloquy.
5. Delete wrong word: The house will be demolished/destroyed to make way for the road.
Agitators are fermenting/fomenting revolt among the people.
He is constrained/restrained by patriotism to enlist and fight.
A POINT OF STYLE
ALTERNATIVES. When using alternative phrases or
clauses, you should take care that the verb is correctly
placed. Study the following examples;
1. He must obey either the rules or resign. (Wrong)
Here ‘resign’ is incorrectly made an object of ‘obey’.
He must either obey the rules or resign. (Right)
2. They neither liked the subject nor the methods.
(Wrong)
The verb should refer to both phrases.
They liked neither the subject nor the methods.
(Right)
WORD ORIGIN
Supply three English words derived from each of the
Latin roots below:
1. doceo—l teach:
2. duco—I lead:
3. fero (latum) —I bear:
4. facio —I make, do:
5. scribo—l write;
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. No, it certainly wasn’t me who started that rumour.
2. It is fairly clear who the court will hold responsible.
3. At six o’clock we met up and went off for a drink.
4. The team is already scattered, some showering,
some dressing, and some having left.
5. In some areas, the kangaroo is said to be a pest;
but they usually don’t eat much.
6. That player is so clumsy that he cannot hardly
keep his feet in a straight run.
7. I was that hungry I almost died.
8. It has been completed quite satisfactory, thank you.
9. It is arguable whether butter may be quite satisfac-
torily substituted by margarine.
10. Nobody reading a satire will ever apply the writer’s
criticism to themselves personally.
USING ‘YOU’
Nowadays this pronoun is often used interchangeably
with the impersonal ‘one’, but such use is more appro-
priate in a colloquial context than in formal expression.
‘You’ needs careful handling if the reader is not to inter-
pret it as a reference to himself. Study the following:
To reach the school, you take the first turn past the
Town Hall. (This is a permissible use, since the use of
‘you’ makes the instruction more direct.)
When you read Owen’s poetry, you are revolted by the
horror of war. (Here, and in any statement involving an
expression of feeling, the use of ‘you’ runs the risk of
encouraging the reader to disagree with the writer’s
opinion.)


Unit 12: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) Dogs—A Man’s Best Friends?
(b) My Choice of a Career.
(c) The statement by George Bernard Shaw; ‘A lifetime
of happiness! No man alive could bear it; it would
be hell on earth.’
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
In these pages I attempt to recount some of the incidents
and impressions which form in my mind the story of the
coming upon mankind of the worst tragedy in its
tumultuous history. This presented itself not only in the
destruction of life and property inseparable from war.
There had been fearful slaughters of soldiers in the
First World War, and much of the accumulated treasure
of the nations was consumed. Still, apart from the
excesses of the Russian Revolution, the main fabric of
European civilisation remained erect at the close of the
struggle. When the storm and dust of the cannonade
passed suddenly away, the nations despite their enmities
could still recognise each other as historic racial per-
sonalities. The laws of war had on the whole been re-
spected. There was a common professional meeting-
ground between military men who had fought one
another. Vanquished and victors alike still preserved the
semblance of civilised States. A solemn Peace was made
which, apart from unenforceable financial aspects, con-
formed to the principles which in the Nineteenth Cen-
tury had increasingly regulated the relations of enlight-
ened peoples. The reign of law was proclaimed, and a
World Instrument was formed to guard us all, and
especially Europe, against a renewed convulsion.
In the Second World War every bond between man and
man was to perish. Crimes were committed by the
Germans under the Hitlerite domination, to which they
allowed themselves to be subjected, which find no equal
in scale and wickedness with any that have darkened the
human record. The wholesale massacre by systematised
processes of six or seven millions of men, women and
children in the German execution camps exceeds in
horror the rough and ready butcheries of Ghengis Khan,
and in scale reduces them to pigmy proportions. Deliber-
ate extermination of whole populations was contem-
plated and pursued by both Germany and Russia in the
Eastern war. The hideous process of bombarding open
cities from the air, once started by the Germans, was
repaid twentyfold by the ever-mounting power of the
Allies, and found its culmination in the use of the
atomic bombs which obliterated Hiroshima and Naga-
saki.
We have at length emerged from a scene of material ruin
and moral havoc the like of which had never darkened
the imagination of former centuries. After all that we
suffered and achieved we find ourselves still confronted
with problems and perils not less but far more formid-
able than those through which we have so narrowly
made our way. (414 words)
(from N.S.W. Leaving Certificate Examination
English Expression Paper, 1954)
COMPREHENSION questions:
Paragraph I
(a) What sorts of things are understood by ‘the accumu-
lated treasure of the nations’? (1)
(b) A great building is often called a fabric. What is
the force of the comparison: ‘the main fabric of
European civilisation remained erect’? (2)
(c) What is meant by ‘historic racial personalities’? (1)
(d) What is the implication of the word ‘semblance’? (1)
(e) Why ‘enlightened peoples’? (1)
(f) The last sentence refers to the League of Nations.
Why is it called a ‘World Instrument’? (1)
(g) Early in the first paragraph is there a contrast
announced that is not immediately developed? What
is it? (1)
Paragraph II
(h) How is the second paragraph related to the first? (1)
(i) How is the second paragraph developed? (1)
(j) What is the difference between the ‘systematised
processes’ and the ‘rough and ready butcheries’? (2)
Paragraph 111
(k) ‘Material ruin and moral havoc’—what is meant by
these words? (2)
(1) What picture is created in your mind by the words
‘through which we have so narrowly made our
way’? (1)


SPELLING/ V OC ABUL AR Y
assiduous surfeit incessant presume erroneous
vilify eradicate obeisance presumption concentrated
concept escapade compromise presumptuous negligible
beauteous magistrate behaviour compliance misconception
anxiety aversion equilibrium espionage antithesis
secular initiative garrulous conspiracy constituency
inevitable literacy infallible diphtheria magnanimous
concise especially homicide apoplexy conciliatory
pinnacle colleague inheritance coercion appal
anaesthesia prodigious protrusion punctuality predecessor
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: literacy, compromising, behave
2. Change to nouns: inevitable , garrulous , magnanimous
3. Write antonyms for: anxiety , surfeit , vilify
4. Write the singular of; memoranda , crises , desperadoes
5. Delete wrong word; She turned deadly/deathly pale on seeing him.
The enormity/enormousness of his crime shocked them.
It is reputed/reported that he tried to escape.
A POINT OF STYLE
MISUSE OF ‘WHEN’. Avoid the sort of definition
which attempts to equate a noun or adjective with an
adverbial clause introduced by ‘when’,
e.g., ‘Democracy is when the people are able to help
govern themselves.’
‘Credible is when a story can be believed.’
Always try to define a noun by another noun, an adjec-
tive by an adjective, and so on. If you cannot think
of a single word which provides an exact definition, use
a concise phrase. At all costs, avoid this clumsy use of
‘when’.
CORRECT (and improve) the two examples above and
these . . .
1. Macbeth’s downfall is when he deliberately accepts
evil as his weapon.
2. Satire is when the writer ridicules a person or some
aspect of society.
WORD ORIGIN
DOLLAR. Some coins have been called after their
place of origin, such as the florin from Florence. The
dollar was first a silver coin made from metal supplied
by miners in the Joachimsthal, a valley in Bohemia.
The coin was first known as a thaler and, as the word
migrated to many lands, it became a taler, a daler, and
finally a dollar.
EASEL. This word came to English from the language
of 17th century Dutch painters who gave the name of
Ezel to the four-legged framework on which they placed
their canvases. The word in Dutch means ‘a donkey’.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. France says she shall help Algeria if the French
settlers’ rights are guaranteed.
2. This is the cow with the crumpled horn which you
wanted to buy last year.
3. For he and I the expedition is a source of thrilling
anticipation.
4. Not only the inspector but the secretary of the
board visit every farm.
5. We have less sausages for the barbecue than usual.
6. The Indian sub-continent was divided in 1947
among India and Pakistan.
7. He was so fat that he could not hardly run.
8. Along the middle of the road a line of tall trees
were growing luxuriantly.
9. A means will have to be found to arrest the upward
tendency of retail price levels.
10. Who do you guess will take over as the next
Minister of War?
PUNCTUATE
Have you read silas marner by george eliot asked marie
no but I shall have to before the end of term its the
novel were supposed to study for the examinations youll
probably enjoy it I certainly did it gives a very sympa-
thetic picture of village life in the last century and its
plot is quite exciting


Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) The Importance of International Sport in the
Modern World.
(b) ‘Royal tours serve no useful purpose.’ Do you
agree? State your case.
(c) ‘ln international affairs, strength is better than
wisdom.’
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
In place of the old pleasures demanding intelligence and
personal initiative, we have vast organisations that pro-
vide us with ready-made distractions distractions
which demand from pleasure-seekers no personal par-
ticipation and no intellectual effort of any sort. To the
interminable democracies of the world a million cinemas
bring the same stale balderdash. There have always
been fourth-rate writers and dramatists; but their works,
in the past, quickly died without getting beyond the
boundaries of the city or country in which they
appeared. Today the inventions of the scenario-writer
go out across the whole world. Countless audiences
soak passively in the tepid bath of nonsense. No mental
effort is demanded of them; they need only sit and keep
their eyes open.
And if they want literature, there is the Press. Nomi-
nally, it is true, the Press exists to impart information.
But its true function is to provide, like the cinema, a
distraction which shall occupy the mind without
demanding of it the slightest effort or the fatigue of a
single thought. This function, it must be admitted, it
fulfils with an extraordinary success. It is possible to
go on for years and years, reading two papers every
working day and one on Sundays, without ever being
called upon to think or to make any other effort than to
move the eyes, not very attentively, down the printed
column.
Certain sections of the community still practise athletic
sports in which individual participation is demanded.
Great numbers of the middle and upper classes play golf
and tennis in person and, if they are sufficiently rich,
shoot birds and pursue the fox and go ski-ing in the
Alps. But the vast mass of the community has now
come even to sport vicariously, preferring the watching
of football to the fatigues and dangers of the actual
game. All classes, it is true, still dance; but dance, the
world over, the same steps to the same tunes. The
dance has been scrupulously sterilised of any local or
personal individuality.
The working hours of the day are already, for the great
majority of human beings, occupied in the performance
of purely mechanical tasks in which no mental effort, no
individuality, no initiative are required. And now, in
the hours of leisure, we turn to distractions as mechani-
cally stereotyped and demanding as little intelligence
and initiative as does our work. Add such leisure to
such work and the sum is a perfect day, which it is a
blessed relief to come to the end of.
Self-poisoned in this fashion, civilisation looks as though
it might easily decline into a kind of premature senility.
With a mind almost atrophied by lack of use, unable to
entertain itself and grown so wearily uninterested in the
ready-made distractions offered from without that noth-
ing but the grossest stimulants of ever-increasing
violence and crudity can move it, the democracy of the
future will sicken of a chronic and mortal boredom.
(485 words)
(from N.S.W. Leaving Certificate Examination
English Expression Paper, 1955)
COMPREHENSION questions:
Paragraph I
(a) What sort of thing has the writer in mind when he
refers to the ‘old pleasures demanding intelligence
and personal initiative’? (1)
(b) What is the difference in the writer’s mind between
a pleasure and a distraction? (1)
(c) ‘Soak passively in the tepid bath of nonsense.’ Do
you find this metaphor original and vivid? Why? (1)
Paragraph II
(d) What is the force of the word ‘nominally’? (1)
(e) Is there sarcasm in this paragraph? How is it
brought out? (1)
Paragraph 111
(f) How are sports classified in this paragraph? (1)
(g) What is the meaning of: (i) ‘scrupulously sterilized’;
(ii) ‘local or personal individuality? (2)
Paragraph IV
(h) ‘A perfect day.’ Is there a touch of sarcasm in this
remark? (1)
Paragraph V
(i) In what way would civilisation become ‘self-
poisoned’ and ‘decline into a kind of premature
senility’? (2)
(j) What are the ‘grossest stimulants’? What would be
the opposite of gross stimulants? (2)
(k) What is a ‘chronic and mortal boredom’? (1)
(l) Do you think the writer is an alarmist? (1)


SPELLING/ VOCABULARY “
assuage onerous aesthetic confer condescend
victuals heinous spontaneity conferred condescension
brusque mediocrity condolence conference inconceivable
evasion supersede omit euphemism exclamation
financial exchequer omitted irascible incontrovertible
excise sapphire miraculous filial consensus
omelette imperialism limousine excavation fermentation
exceptional parochial excessive connoisseur exaggeration
biassed dialogue malicious battalion foreknowledge
compatible temporary indispensable rhetorical incorruptible
__
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: polite, exceptional, accessible
2. Change to adjectives; evasion
3. Write synonyms for: brusque
, euphemism , mediocrity
, onerous , condolence
4. Show possession: John Keats poetry, Pat Jones home, the two Joneses houses.
5. Delete wrong word: Better wrapping will only add negligently/negligibly to the cost
Great composers never sink to the level of bathos/pathos.
He is the notorious/famous writer of travel books.
A POINT OF STYLE
POSSESSIVE PRONOUNS (mine, yours, his, hers,
ours, theirs, its). Note that none of them takes an
apostrophe to show possession. You should particularly
remember its. If you insert an apostrophe, you make
the abbreviation of ‘it is’.
PUNCTUATE WHERE NECESSARY;
‘The school is celebrating its centenary.’
‘lts the oldest school in the district.’
‘The Government should alter its policies.’
WORD ORIGIN
Give a clear definition of the following words and give
the meaning of the bold prefix or suffix:
1. anthropology
2. astrology
3. antagonism
4. orthography
5. cosmopolitan
6. claustrophobia
7. molecule
8. graduate
9. characterise
10. dramatist
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. 1 shall most certainly arrive early!
2. The War Minister told a lie publicly, which was
reprehensible.
3. The number of thugs prowling around Kings Cross
are frightening.
4. Our captain and theirs, having been friendly for
years, knows it will be a clean game.
5. Can I come with you?
6. Being a man of little or no education his speech is
surprisingly good.
7. We had hardly entered the jungle than we were
pounced upon.
8. Sightseers sat there watching the people sauntering
past and sipping coffee.
9. Many people among this crowd finds it impossible
to be fair to the umpire.
10. I think he would make a better ping-pong player
than any other sport.
INSERT CORRECT PREPOSITION
1. The police were concerned the leakage of
information.
2. His new novel has few different situations
his earlier one.
3. You may substitute one novel ten of the
poems set for study.
4. What do you expect a person like him?
5. lam responsible the smooth running of
the booking office.


Unit 14: EXPRESSION
almost feeling their way about, scarcely knowing where
they were, timidly crawling across motor-infested streets
with their hearts in their mouths, all the time perma-
nently ingraining their lungs with black filth. An able
man, Lord Curzon, skilful to gauge the British Idealist,
ever so absorbed in his own dream of comfort or of cash
that he is even blind to the world he lives in.
COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) Modern Art.
(b) Australia’s Role in Asia.
(c) ‘There should be no restrictions on the rights of the
(437 words)
individual.’
(from N.S.W. Leaving Certificate Examination
English Expression Paper, 1956)
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
There are few things that make one so doubtful about
the civilising power of England as our indifference to
the smoke problem in London. If we were Neapolitan
ragamuffins, who could lie in the sun with bare limbs,
sucking oranges, there would be nothing to say; under
such conditions indolence might be pardonable, almost
justified. But we English are feverishly active, we run
over the whole world, and we utilise all this energy to
build up the biggest and busiest city in the world. Yet
we have never created an atmosphere for our great city.
Mist is beautiful, with its power of radiant transforma-
tion, and London could never, under any circumstances,
and need never, be absolutely without mist; it is part of
the physical genius of our land, and even perhaps of the
spiritual genius of our people. But the black fogs of
London are mists soaked with preventable coal smoke;
their evils have been recognised from the first. Evelyn
protested against this ‘hellish and dismal cloud of sea-
coal’, and Charles II desired Evelyn to prepare a Bill
on this nuisance to put before Parliament. But there
the matter rested.
For three centuries we have been in the position of the
gentleman who could not prevent his dilapidated roof
from letting in the rain; for, as he pointed out, in wet
weather it was quite impossible to effect any repairs,
and in dry weather there was really nothing to complain
of. In the meanwhile this ‘cloud of sea-coal’ has con-
tinued to produce not only actual death and injury in
particular cases, but a general diminution of human
vitality and the wholesale destruction of plant life. It
eats away our most beautiful public buildings; it covers
everything and everybody with soot; it is responsible,
directly and indirectly, for a financial loss so vast and
manifold as to be incalculable.
Yesterday Lord Curzon delivered an address at the
Mansion House on the Beautiful London of the Future.
He dwelt eloquently on its noble buildings and its long
embankments, and its wide streets and its finely placed
statues. But of the smoke which nullifies and destroys
all these things, not a word! Yet, as he was speaking,
outside the Mansion House the people of London were
COMPREHENSION questions:
Paragraph I
(a) What apparent contradiction does the writer see in
the indifference of Englishmen to the problem of
smoke in London? (1)
(b) What is the difference in meaning between ‘pardon-
able’ and ‘justified’? (1)
(c) Is the reference to the ragamuffins of Naples really
appropriate? (Give reasons for your opinion.) (1)
(d) What is the point of the remark that mist is part
‘even perhaps of the spiritual genius of our
people’? (2)
Paragraph II
(e) What is the appropriateness of the reference to the
‘gentleman’ in the first sentence? (1)
(f) Are there any reasons for the use of ‘actual’ and ‘in
particular cases’, or could the words have been
omitted without weakening the sentence? (1)
(g) What is the difference in meaning between ‘vast’
and ‘manifold’ here? (1)
(h) Would this paragraph more suitably have been
made a continuation of the first? (Give reasons.) (1)
Paragraph 111
(i) Why does the writer bring in this reference to Lord
Curzon’s speech? To what extent has he previously
prepared for its introduction? (2)
(j) What is the difference in meaning here between
‘nullifies’ and ‘destroys’? (1)
(k) What is the force of the metaphor in ‘motor-
infested’? (1)
(1) Comment briefly on the devices in this paragraph
by which the writer tries to bring the passage to a
forceful conclusion. (2)


SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
auspicious intrigue übiquitous dishevel sedentary
dismissal melancholy confluent dishevelled excruciating
bureau obscene orthodox millennium consummate
bureaucracy intricacy marshalled excrescence exhilaration
fatalities expressible ordinance co-operation disinfectant
dispersal implement liqueur exonerate miscellaneous
expansion moccasin exploitation disembowelled conflagration
corps palliate incorporated assailant vicissitudes
na i ve bigoted sagacious scurrilous soliloquy
column combatant combustible ascetic insurrection
WORD MANIPULATION 1 . Supply a prefix; auspicious, co-operative, expressible
2. Change to nouns: obscene , palliate , miscellaneous
3. Write antonyms for: melancholy , exonerate , naive
4. Spell the plurals of; criterion , nebula , synthesis
5. Delete wrong word: We need publicity/propaganda to make our new product known.
Silks from Samarkand are esoteric/exotic merchandise.
A remedial/remediable defect has appeared in the gears.
A POINT OF STYLE
PRONOUN ORDER. When using more than one pro-
noun in a sentence, you should arrange them in the
following order: 3rd, 2nd, Ist.
e.g., ‘He, I and you have been chosen.’ (Wrong)
‘He, you and I have been chosen.’ (Right)
‘The prize was shared by me and her.’ (Wrong)
‘The prize was shared by her and me.’ (Right)
WORD ORIGIN
SOME COMMON FOREIGN PHRASES
ad infinitum—endlessly
ad lib —at pleasure (often used as a verb to indicate
speaking ‘off the cuff’)
ancien regime—the old order
a priori—from the earlier facts or position
bete noir—‘black sheep’; problem
bona fide —in good faith
contretemps—an embarrassing occurrence
coup d’etat—a decisive act in politics, especially a
seizure of power
infra dig.—beneath one’s dignity
a votre sante—to your good health
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. lam shorter than him, but she is taller than me.
2. What did you cut the book we put the pictures in
up for?
3. A crab is just as tasty if not tastier than oysters.
4. Do not hesitate to buy any of our flavoured milks
for each are delicious.
5. The mountaineer was that exhausted he dropped
from the cliff face.
6. The Army and Navy are disputing the allocations,
the first demanding a lot more funds than the latter.
7. I disagree and protest against your decision.
8. On the lower floor is all the pumping machinery,
control gauges and tanks.
9. These exercises are intended for the development
of flabby muscles.
10. The principal would and has taken action to dis-
cover whom should be responsible.
PUNCTUATE
Insert a colon, two semicolons and two apostrophes in
the following:
The reader cannot fail to notice these three qualities in
Popes verse a smoothness of rhythm that is never dis-
turbed a brilliance of satire that strips every good quality
from his victims character a facility in epigram that has
brought many of lines into common usage today.


Unit 15: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) The Qualities of a Good Film.
(b) ‘School-children today are not prepared to work;
they expect to be entertained.’
(c) ‘Too many cooks spoil the broth.’
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
(a) A man was blinded as the result of an assault in
1951, and awarded compensation of £11,500. His
two assailants, now out of prison, have been ordered
to pay five shillings a week each. The victim will
need to live another 442 years to collect the last
instalment. A bitter mockery! Have we no better
help to offer to the victims of violent crime?
(b) In our modern system of collective responsibility
for sickness and injury, we have evolved a machinery
for assuring compensation which could be well
extended to injuries criminally caused, affording
equal benefits to the man who falls from a ladder at
work and the man whose enemy pushes the ladder
from under him at home.
Modern finance is held together by sharing risks of
almost every kind. The private citizen, if he is
(c) provident, hedges himself round with insurance on
(d) all sides: whether he fears the arrival of twins, or
death, or a wet afternoon for the vicarage fete, he
seeks the aid of an insurance company. So universal
(f) is this practice that burglars have been known to
claim that they did no harm to the rightful owners,
(e) whose ‘sparklers’ were sure to be well covered.
This principle of clubbing together for mutual pro-
tection is venerable in British social life. Early law,
with its emphasis on compensation for the victim
of crime, could never have worked but for the
solidarity which laid upon the offender’s relatives
(sometimes to the sixth degree of cousinship) the
duty of paying up for his misdeeds. It may have
(g) been a weakening of the bonds of kinship that led
to the formation as at Exeter and Cambridge in
the eleventh century of guilds whose members
were pledged to provide wergild, or blood money,
for those who became liable to pay it.
(h) This system of sharing risks by potential offenders
(in contrast with our usual method whereby poten-
tial victims unite for mutual protection) has a
modem counterpart in the compulsory insurance
against third party risks for motorists; while the
barrow boys of the street markets are said to pay
their ‘obstruction’ fines from a common fund for the
purpose.
Failing some such supporting group, it is usually
futile for courts to award heavy damages for per-
sonal injuries; the isolated individual offender can
rarely make large amends. What, then, could be
done to provide the compensation which the victim
ought to receive?
It is old-fashioned now to quote Bentham, but on
the tendency of criminal law to pay scant attention
(i) to the needs of the victim, he puts it well; ‘Punish-
ment, which, if it goes beyond the limit of necessity,
is a pure evil, has been scattered with a prodigal
(j) hand. Satisfaction, which is purely a good, has
been dealt out with evident parsimony.’ He held
that ‘satisfaction’ should be drawn from the
offender’s property, but ‘if the offender is without
property ... it ought to be furnished out of the
public treasury, because it is an object of public
good and the security of all is interested in it’.
Is Bentham’s proposal useful today?
(k) Employers and workmen contribute to cover bene-
(l) fits after industrial accidents, and the logical way of
providing for criminally inflicted injuries would be
to tax every adult citizen to cover a risk to which
each is exposed. (547 words)
(from N.S.W. Leaving Certificate Examination
English Expression Paper, 1957)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) How would you describe the style of the first para-
graph? Why has the author chosen this style? (2)
(b) What do you understand by the phrase ‘collective
responsibility for sickness and injury’? (1)
(c) What is meant by ‘provident, hedges himself
round’? (1)
(d) What is the writer’s purpose in the words ‘the
arrival of twins, or death, or a wet afternoon at the
vicarage fete’? (1)
(e) What difference would it make to the effect of the
sentence if the word ‘diamonds’ were substituted for
‘sparklers’? (1)
(f) What comment would you make on the claim of the
burglars? (1)
(g) What is the ‘weakening of the bonds of kinship’?
How does the formation of guilds strengthen the
writer’s argument? (2)
(h) In what ways are the motorist, the barrow boys and
the criminal guilty of assault different as ‘potential
offenders’? (1)
(i) What is meant by the expressions: (i) ‘punishment,
which, if it goes beyond the limit of necessity, is a
pure evil’; (ii) ‘satisfaction, which is purely a good’
(‘satisfaction’ here means ‘compensation’)? (2)
(j) Why should Bentham suggest that satisfaction
should preferably be made from the offender’s own
funds? (1)
(k) What is the difference between Bentham’s proposal
and the proposal put forward by the author? (1)
(1) Do you agree that the author suggests the ‘logical
way’ of dealing with the problem? (1)


SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
arraign tariff
dispel perpetuity
expulsion succumb
inveigh misshapen
tacit pheasant
plaintiff telepathic
infuriate invariable
alternative extinguished
infallible anxiety
initiative eradicate
coalesce
politician
strychnine
perversion
sedulous
proficiency
liquorice
rhapsody
erroneous
incessant
allude
allusion
malleable
putrefaction
farcical
dispassionate
slovenly
sycophant
presumption
constituency
iridescence
disreputable
facilitate
complaisant
conveyance
solicitous
contemptuous
enthralment
assiduous
conciliatory
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: legitimate, retrievable, decipherable
2. Change to nouns; solicitous , infallible , conciliatory
3. Write synonyms for: sedulous , slovenly , succumb
4. What is the masculine of: duck , goose , filly
5. Delete wrong word; The luxurious/luxuriant vegetation makes progress difficult,
He searched the cupboard exhaustively/exhaustingly.
He knows many things, but he is illiterate/ignorant.
A POINT OF STYLE
UNFAIR TO ‘NICE’. Some words have been over-
worked simply because writers do not take the trouble
to think of a more precise word for their purpose. Some
of the most abused are ‘nice’, ‘get’ and ‘got’, ‘quite’,
‘idea’ and ‘fairly’.
SUGGEST BETTER WORDS THAN THESE:
1. The party should get to the Pole by April.
2. Have you got your reference?
3. She is very nice-looking.
4. That was a nice meal.
5. He is quite a good leader of men.
6. What is the idea of coming at this hour?
7. It is fairly hot this week.
8. He is a fairly careful driver.
(You may wish to change more than the bold word or
you may think that the word can be omitted.)
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. Here comes the farmer that I was telling you about.
2. The police are going to check up on his move-
ments.
3. The jury was unable to resolve their differences.
4. The serving was done and mother having called us
to the table we began the meal.
5. He drives not at all like his father showed him.
6. They were annoyed at him having left so early.
7. They will lose except they follow their coach’s
advice.
8. The reason I bought this car is because one can
easily obtain spare parts for it.
9. This machine produces cold air by collecting hot
air from the radiator; compresses it, and then let-
ting it expand so that it cools below freezing point.
10. The end result of the flood is not likely to be pro-
ductive of a serious loss.
WORD ORIGIN
HACKNEY. This was originally the name given to a
hired horse, then it was used to describe a vehicle
drawn by such a horse (hackney-cab). When a phrase
becomes over-worked like an old horse, it is also said
to be hackneyed.
GIMMICK. This word comes from the U.S.A., where
it was a slang term for any small device fitted to a
gambling machine to make it unfair. From that it
became any trick, particularly as used by entertainers.
CHANGING VOICE
Rewrite the following sentences, changing the verbs to
the passive voice;
1. Because the Prime Minister has called for renewed
effort in agricultural production, the vast wheatlands
in the west will require enlarged storage facilities.
2. Many employers now demand applicants with the
Leaving Certificate for positions which people with
lower qualifications could handle quite easily.


Unit 16; EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) Are Zoos Worthwhile?
(b) Ambition—Should it be desired or despised?
(c) ‘A little learning is a dangerous thing.’
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
If one listens to the remarks of the visitors in any of
the larger zoos one will frequently find that people
(a) are in the habit of wasting sentimental pity on ani-
mals that are completely contented with their lot,
while the genuine suffering which is to be found in
every zoological gardens may pass unnoticed.
People are specially apt to pity those animals which,
(b) owing to their particular emotional associations,
(c) play a prominent role in literature, like the night-
ingale, the lion or the eagle.
(d) The lion is an animal very often misrepresented in
(e) literature, both as to habitat and to character. The
(e) English call him King of the Jungle—thus relegat-
ing him to much too wet a locality, while the
Germans, with customary thoroughness, go to the
other climatic extreme and deposit him in the desert,
calling him ‘Wustenkonig’ (Desert King). In reality
he prefers the happy medium and lives in steppes or
treeless plains. His majesty of bearing, to which he
owes the first part of his title, is due to the simple
fact that, being a hunter of large animals of the
open plains, he habitually surveys the far distance
and disregards everything moving in the foreground.
The lion suffers less under close confinement than
most other carnivores of equal mental development,
for the simple reason that he has a lesser urge for
movement. To put it crudely, the lion is about the
laziest of the predatory beasts: he is indeed quite
(f) enviably indolent. Under natural conditions he
covers enormous distances, but obviously under
(f) pressure of hunger and not from any inward drive.
Therefore, it is seldom that a lion in captivity is
seen pacing restlessly to and fro in his cage, as
wolves and foxes will do for hours at a stretch. If
the pent-up drive for locomotion urges him, for
once, to walk up and down the length of his cage,
his movements bear the character of a leisurely after-
(f) dinner stroll and have nothing of the frantic haste
with which captive canine carnivores discharge their
frustrated urge to cover large distances.
(g) And now for the eagle! I hate to shatter the fabu-
lous illusions about this glorious bird, but I must
adhere to the truth: all true birds of prey are, com-
pared with passerines or parrots, extremely stupid
creatures. This applies particularly to the golden
eagle, ‘the eagle’ of our mountains and our poets,
which is one of the most stupid among them, much
more so indeed than any barnyard fowl. This, of
course, does not preclude this proud bird from being
(h) beautiful and impressive and embodying the very
essence of wild life; but here we have to deal with
the mental qualities of the creature, its supposed
love of freedom and its imaginery suffering in
captivity. (459 words)
(from N.S.W. Leaving Certificate Examination
English Expression Paper, 1958)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) What is meant by ‘sentimental pity’? (1)
(b) What do you think is the meaning of ‘emotional
associations’ here? (1)
(c) What special advantage have animals that play a
prominent part in literature? (1)
(d) Comment briefly on the arrangement and sequence
of ideas in the second paragraph. (2)
(e) What is the meaning of: (i) habitat; (ii) relegat-
ing? (1)
(f) What effect does the author wish to obtain by each
of the phrases: (i) enviably indolent; (ii) inward
drive; (iii) frantic haste? (3)
(g) Does the fourth paragraph contain a particularly
pointed comparison? What is it? (1)
(h) What does the author mean by ‘the very essence of
wild life’? (1)
(i) In what ways does the author use both the lion and
the eagle to illustrate the same point? (1)
(j) Do you find the evidence brought forward by the
author convincing? (1)
(k) What is the general attitude towards animals dis-
played by the author? (1)
(1) How would you describe (very briefly) the purpose
of the passage? (1)


SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
atrocious credentials credence dissident nonchalance
fluency impregnable scepticism dissension perspicacity
myrrh predilection arbitrary filament heterogeneous
squander stethoscope arbitrarily sanguinary stubborness
intercede incendiarism genealogy conversion grotesque
subpoena convulsion loiterer frivolous corporation
suppression interpretation fatiguing aristocracy sarsaparilla
inveigle panegyric dissipate coquette amelioration
brusque exchequer excessive euphemism inconceivable
omelette supersede irascible conferred condescension
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix; moderate, clement, reputable
2. Change to adjectives: convulsion , corporation , perspicacity
3. Write antonyms for; squander , sceptical , fatiguing
4. Put a stroke between the syllables of: subpoena, grotesque, heterogeneous.
5. Delete wrong word: Though a great preacher, he was an impracticable/impractical man.
She interpolated/interjected a sentence in the script of the play.
He judicially/judiciously decided not to speculate in oil search.
A POINT OF STYLE
TENSE AGREEMENT. Although this was treated last
year, it is so important that it warrants repetition. All
subordinate clauses should follow the general sequence
of the tense in the principal clause: a present tense
requires a present, present perfect or sirtiple future
tense; a past tense requires a past, past perfect or past
future tense.
e.g., ‘He has decided that he will go.’
‘He (had) decided that he would go.’
EXCEPTIONS;
1. If the subordinate clause contains a universal truth,
e.g., ‘Magellan proved that the world is round’, the
tense is not adjusted.
2. If the subordinate clause refers to an event which
has not yet occurred at the time of reporting, e.g.,
‘He said that he will leave tomorrow’, the tense is
not adjusted.
ALTHOUGH THESE EXCEPTIONS ARE ACCEPT-
ABLE, IT IS NOT INCORRECT TO ADJUST THE
TENSES HERE IF YOU PREFER.
WORD ORIGIN
ETIQUETTE —literally ‘a ticket’. Originally, this was
a notice (or ticket) posted outside a castle or palace to
announce the orders and duties of the day. From thus
meaning the observance of the ceremonies and manners
dictated by one’s feudal lord, etiquette has come to
mean the conventions of polite society.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. This is the architect responsible for designing those
fine homes who you wanted to meet.
2. A curious thing happened to Bill and I this after-
noon.
3. The headmaster is so keen that he, as well as the
coach, attend every game.
4. Either the blonde girl or her companion are con-
cealing it.
5. My favourite pet is a Siamese cat; they are affec-
tionate creatures.
6. I informed the policeman quietly that I had not
committed no crime whatsoever.
7. The reason why I shot her was because she kept
talking.
8. The prime minister has not, and probably never
will, introduce a bill on this issue.
9. The vote of thanks at the request of the chairman
was carried by hearty applause.
10. If Igo to the races I would probably have been
bored.
PUNCTUATE
My father had such a skirmishing cutting kind of a
slashing way with him in his disputations thrusting and
ripping and giving everyone a stroke to remember him
by in his turn that if there were twenty people in com-
pany in less than half an hour he was sure to have every
one of them against him
(from Tristram Shandy, by I. Sterne)


Unit 17: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) Write a letter to the editor of a prominent news-
paper, criticising the deficiencies in your suburb or
town.
(b) Consider the most important advances in home
architecture in the last twenty years.
(c) ‘A woman’s place is in the home.’
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
SCIENCE—THE CREATOR OR DESTROYER?
The sense of doom in us today is not a fear of
science; it is a fear of war. And the causes of war
(a) were not created by science; they do not differ in
kind from the known causes of the War of Jenkins’s
Ear or the Wars of the Roses, which were carried on
with only the most modest scientific aids. No,
science has not invented war; but it has turned it
into a very different thing. The people who distrust
it are not wrong. The man in the pub who says,
‘lt’ll wipe out the world,’ the woman in the queue
who says, ‘lt isn’t natural’ they do not express
(b) themselves very well; but what they are trying to say
does make sense. Science has enlarged the
mechanism of war, and it has distorted it. It has
done this in at least two ways.
First, science has obviously multiplied the power of
war-makers. The weapons of the moment can kill
more people more secretly and more unpleasantly
(c) than those of the past. This progress, as for want
of another word I must call it this progress has
been going on for some time; and for some time it
has been said, of each new weapon, that it is so
(d) destructive or so horrible that it will frighten people
into their wits, and force the nations to give up war
(e) for lack of cannon fodder. This hope has never
been fulfilled, and I know no one who takes refuge
in it today. The acts of men and women are not
dictated by such simple compulsions; and they them-
selves do not stand in any simple relation to the
(f) decisions of the nations they compose. Grapeshot
(e) and TNT and gas have not helped to outlaw war;
and I see no sign that the hydrogen bomb or a whiff
of bacteria will be more successful in making men
wise by compulsion.
Secondly, science at the same time has given the
(g) nations quite new occasions for failing out. I do not
mean such simple objectives as someone else’s
uranium mine, or a Pacific island which happens to
be knee deep in organic fertiliser. I do not even
mean merely other nations’ factories and skilled
(h) population. These are all parts of the surplus above
our simple needs which the skilled population itself
helps to create and which gives our civilisation its
character. And war in our world battens on this
surplus. This is the object of the greed of nations,
and this also gives them the leisure to train and the
means to arm for war. At bottom, we have remained
(i) individually too greedy to distribute our surplus, and
collectively too stupid to pile it up in any more use-
ful form than the traditional mountain of arms.
Science can claim to have created the surplus in our
(j) societies, and we know from the working day and
the working diet how greatly science has increased
this surplus in the last two hundred years. Science
(k) has created the surplus. Now put this year’s budget
beside the budget of 1750, anywhere in the world,
and you will see what we are doing with it.
(519 words)
(from N.S.W. Leaving Certificate Examination
English Expression Paper, 1959)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) What is the meaning of the phrase ‘they do not differ
in kind’? (1)
(b) ‘What they are trying to say does make sense.’
Express in your own words what you think the
people are trying to say. (1)
(c) What does the writer mean by saying ‘This progress,
as for want of another word I must call it’? (1)
(d) What is meant by the expression ‘frighten people
into their wits’? What means does the writer use to
make this expression striking’? (2)
(e) What is the meaning of the phrases: (i) ‘for lack of
cannon fodder’ and (ii) ‘to outlaw war’? (2)
(f) Why does the author choose the three items men-
tioned in the phrase ‘grapeshot and TNT and gas’,
and why does he mention them in that order? (Note:
TNT is the chemical used in shells, bombs and other
explosives.) (1)
(g) What is the difference between the ‘simple objec-
tives’ and the ‘new occasions for falling out’? (2)
(h) What is meant by ‘the surplus above our simple
needs’? (1)
(i) Say in your own words what the writer means by
saying: ‘individually too greedy to distribute our sur-
plus, and collectively too stupid to pile it up in any
more useful form than the traditional mountain of
arms’. (1)
(j) What does the writer mean by ‘the working day and
the working diet’? (1)
(k) What do you think is meant by the last sentence? (1)
(1) From this extract would you conclude that the
writer was— l
hostile to science?
hostile to those who criticise science?
a man who tries to take a balanced view?
a man who likes to take sides? (1)


SPELLING/VOCABULARY
abhorrence inoculate dissuade fallacy posthumous
feign reprehensible innuendo fallacious munificence
indict auspices rendezvous credulous inexpressible
stodgy impenetrable fortuitous longevity curriculum
atrocity plebeian corpuscle autonomy hieroglyphic
phlegm iniquitous atheistic fuchsia reminiscence
infinitely piquant ineffaceable culmination crystalline
fidelity indefeasible extraneous auctioneer furlough
intrigue excrescence intricacy obscene miscellaneous
auspicious übiquitous dishevelled millennium excruciating
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: fidelity,
feigned,
credulous
2. Change to adjectives: atrocity , phlegm
autonomy
fortuitous
3. Write synonyms for; iniquitous , extraneous
4. Write homonyms for; need , rest
bazaar
5. Delete wrong word: The Murray has overflowed/overflown its banks again.
Chiropody/chiropractic is manipulation of the spinal column.
He has a remarkable faculty/facility for remembering.
A POINT OF STYLE
CAN/MAY; SHOULD/WOULD. These verbs depend
for their use on particular situations. Study the
examples below:
1. I know 1 can swim across the pool.
‘Can’ indicates physical or mental ability.
2. He says (said) that I may (might) leave early.
‘May’ indicates permission. Note the past tense.
3. If I were you, 1 should complain about it.
‘Should’ denotes an intention for a first person sub-
ject.
4. He said that he would complain.
‘Would’ denotes an intention for a second or third
person subject.
5. 1 should leave now and you should begin your home-
work.
‘Should’ can be used for all three persons if it refers
to an obligation.
WORD ORIGIN
Give the definition of each of the words below and
explain the force of the prefix;
1. counteract
2. transmit
3. beneficial
4. biennial
5. emissary
What two meanings can you see in the word ‘bimonthly’?
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. Cook discovered the east coast, which was a
remarkable achievement.
2. From your account a large proportion of the dona-
tions were deducted for commission.
3. Has the Registrar and the Secretary seen your
application?
4. None are better than him though somebody might
think they are.
5. He has less to say than before and uses less long
words.
6. Our ten office girls were told to divide the bonus
between therm
7. They cannot go without they get their father’s per-
mission.
8. I have met both Don, Len and Ted, and 1 think the
latter is more friendly.
9. He is reading a letter to his cousin.
10. Some tennis players, as Dale and Benson, have
been awful temperamental of late.
CHOOSE THE BEST DEFINITION
1. CONTEND—scorn; assert; conquer; criticise.
2. EXPEDlTlON—experience; adventure; journey for
a specific purpose.
3. ACCESS —improvement; aid; summons; admittance
or passage.
4. IMMINENT —remaining within; powerful; famous;
dangerous; close at hand.


Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) How much more influence could women exert in
society?
(b) The Problem Child.
(c) Should Buildings of Historic Interest be Preserved?
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
YOUTH
(a) .. As for the boys and girls, the dear young abso-
lute beginners, I sometimes feel that if they only
knew this fact, this very simple fact, namely, how
powerful they really are, then they could rise up
overnight and enslave the old taxpayers, the whole
lot of them— . . .’
The young hero of Mr. Colin Maclnnes’s novel was
not far wrong. Since the war the youth of this
country have not taken over the Government, but
they have, by their numbers and vitality, their
spending power and their undoubted capacity for
mischief, asserted their right to be treated as a
separate class in the community which any Govern-
ment must take seriously.
The proof of this can be seen in a list of reports
(from the McNair Report in 1944 to the Albermarle
Report last week) which would already fill a shelf.
Not much has happened as a result, but the young
have not waited. They have adopted their own
clothes and their own language, their own leaders
and their own pastimes. They have even chosen
(b) their own names. From now on the teenagers are
here to stay.
In asserting these claims, the teenagers are perfectly
justified. The special needs and problems of adoles-
cents are recognised in every primitive society and
in most civilised societies at an early stage of their
development. Up to the eighteenth century the
(c) apprenticeship system in this country accepted in
principle (if not always in practice) the fact that
young people need more than simply to be taught a
trade; they need also some moral guidance, a special
status in the community, a distinctive dress and an
occasional opportunity for high jinks.
It was only with the dawn of the industrial revolu-
(d) tion that we began to treat boys and girls as children
until they left school and as little adults immediately
afterwards. This disastrous practice has been the
cause of untold suffering.
In recent weeks these facts have been brilliantly
analysed in two exceptionally able reports the
Crowther Report on secondary education and the
(g) Albermarle Report on the Youth Service. Yet what
do these reports propose? The Crowther Report
recommends that the school-leaving age should be
raised to sixteen, a valuable reform but one which
would leave boys and girls after sixteen in precisely
the same position as they are now. The more imagi-
native and far-reaching plan for county colleges,
where they would receive compulsory part-time
education after sixteen, is postponed for twenty
years.
(h) The Albermarle Report, good as it is, proposes
simply that the Government should now do what it
ought to have done when the Youth Service was
founded in 1944. The Minister for Education has
done well to accept its recommendations at once,
but what will this really mean? The trebling of a
diminutive grant, some more and better clubs, and
a modest increase in the number of trained youth
leaders.
Lord Pakenham is surely right in saying that a much
bolder approach to the problem is needed, an
(e) approach which will co-ordinate the proposals of all
the many reports on this subject. Youth clubs are
good and necessary, but they alone cannot give
(j) a sense of self-respect and pride to a boy or girl
who has failed to gain an apprenticeship and finds
himself or herself, at the age of sixteen, in a dull
and monotonous job with no escape for the girl
except marriage and no escape for the boy except
extravagant spending on trivialities. (571 words)
(from N.S.W. Leaving Certificate Examination
English Expression Paper, 1960)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) The passage is taken from the editorial of an
English Sunday newspaper. Name two characteris-
tics of the language in the opening quotation which
make it an effective introduction to the editorial. (2)
(b) ‘From now on the teenagers are here to stay.’
Explain this. State briefly the evidence on which the
writer makes this prediction. (2)
(c) ‘Accepted in principle (if not always in practice).’
What is meant by these words? (1)
(d) ‘We began to treat boys and girls as children until
they left school and as little adults immediately
afterwards.’ What is meant by this? (1)
(e) What is meant by the words: ‘an approach which
will co-ordinate the proposals of all the many reports
on this subject’? (1)
(f) Try to express in one sentence the essential prob-
lem dealt with in this editorial. (2)
(g) In what two points is the Crowther Report said to
be inadequate in proposing a solution to that prob-
lem? (2)
(h) What, according to the writer, will be the effects of
the proposals of the Albermarle Report? What is his
attitude to these proposals? (2)
(i) Which of the following statements are in accord
with the writer’s views?:
That the problem is urgent;
That it is temporary;
That it is on a large scale;
That it is capable of inexpensive solution;
That it is the result of youthful irresponsibility
and bad manners;
That it is more acutely in evidence now than in
the past;
That it is easily taken too seriously. (1)
(j) What sort of things, according to the writer, would
give ‘a sense of self-respect and pride’ to the boys
and girls mentioned? (1)


SPELLING/VOCABULARY
analogous hierarchy apparition reconnoitre haemorrhage
doggerel manoeuvrable divergence reconnaissance omniscient
oscillate oblique mis-spell corollary avoirdupois
monologue implacable ostensible incandescent supercilious
rescind plebiscite imperturbable lineaments conversational
impervious monstrosity ostentatious imperceptible flirtatious
precocious repertoire piccaninny tonsillitis convalescence
incumbent obsequious impermissible mignonette archaeologist
succumb tariff coalesce tacit iridescence
dispel politician proficiency farcical facilitate
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: incline
2. Change to nouns; precocious , obsequious
3. Write synonyms for: monstrous .obsequious
corruptible,
provident
, manoeuvrable
, rescind
4. Show possession; Jesus word, James tie, Elizabeth II reign.
5. Delete wrong word; There are less/fewer opportunities here than in Perth.
He is a sticker/stickler for courtesy to women.
She is punctual/punctilious in matters of etiquette.
A POINT OF STYLE
WORDS MISUSED. The following are three words
which are often wrongly used;
1. SUBSTITUTE—repIace.
e.g., NOT ‘The desks were substituted by tables.’
BUT ‘Tables were substituted for the desks.’
2. AGGRAVATE—to make worse.
e.g., NOT ‘His comments only aggravated me.’
BUT ‘The drought was aggravated by strong
winds.’
3. FACTOR versus FACT, OCCURRENCE,
ELEMENT.
e.g., ‘Unfair taxes were a factor in the decision of the
peasants to revolt.’ (Right)
‘Ants and blisters are accepted factors at bush
barbecues.’ (Wrong)
‘Jealousy is the prominent factor in her character.’
(Wrong)
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. What weapon did you murder him with?
2. ‘Hints on Foods’ are the best gift in the shop.
3. Don’t go to other pie-makers and be swindled;
come to us.
4. Any one of the twins can be sent on the errand.
5. You can leave when the work is completed.
6. They will have to dress themselves more bright and
cheery tomorrow.
7. I had scarcely eaten than the phone rang.
8. The instructor together with ten students and their
parents are visiting Lucas Heights.
9. The name of Rupert Brooke will never lose its
distinction, but if he had survived the war he may
have become one of our greatest poets.
10. When one player loses form, he is quickly substi-
tuted by another just as good.
WORD ORIGIN
BALLOT—literally ‘a little ball’. Early voting was done
by secretly placing a black or white ball in a container.
The white ball signified a vote for the person or pro-
posal, the black signified a vote against. Hence the
phrase ‘to blackball a member of a club’—to reject him.
CANDIDATE literally ‘robed in white’. In Roman
times, anyone who sought election to a particular office
or appointment wore a white toga to signify his purity
of character, sincerity and honesty. So also do we get
‘candid’ and ‘candour’.
PUNCTUATE
Keep this as a single sentence:
Everyone present enjoyed lady clonbronys confusion
except miss nugent who sat with her eyes bowed down
by penetrative shame during the whole of this scene she
was glad that lord colambre was not witness to it and
comforted herself with the hope that on the whole lady
clonbrony would be benefited by the pain she felt
(from The Absentee, by Marie Edgeworth)


Unit 19: EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) Legalised Gambling?
(b) ‘Christ has gone from Christmas and mankind sees
the great festival as merely another opportunity for
commercialism.’
(c) The Appeal of Gardens.
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
Behind the growth of the London waterside the docks
of London spread out unsuspected, smooth and placid,
lost amongst the buildings like dark lagoons hidden in a
thick forest. They lie concealed in the intricate growth
of houses with a few stalks of mast-heads here and there
overtopping the roof of some four-storey warehouse.
It is a strange conjunction this of roofs and mast-heads,
walls and yard-arms. I remember once having the
incongruity of the relation brought home to me in a
practical way. I was the chief officer of a fine ship, just
docked with a cargo of wool from Sydney after a ninety
days’ passage. In fact, we had not been in more than
half an hour and I was still busy making her fast to the
stone posts of a very narrow quay in front of a lofty
warehouse. An old man, with a grey whisker under the
chin and brass buttons on his pilot-cloth jacket, hurried
up along the quay hailing my ship by name. He was one
of those officials called berthing-masters not the one
who had berthed us, but another who, apparently, had
been busy securing a steamer at the other end of the
dock. 1 could see from afar his hard blue eyes staring at
us, as if fascinated, with a queer sort of absorption. I
wondered what that worthy sea-dog had found to criti-
cise in my ship’s rigging. And I, too, glanced aloft
anxiously. 1 could see nothing wrong there. But per-
haps that superannuated fellow-craftsman was simply
admiring the ship’s perfect order aloft, I thought, with
some secret pride; for the chief officer is responsible for
his ship’s appearance, and as to her outward condition
he is the man to praise or blame. Meantime the old salt
(‘ex-coasting skipper’ was writ large all over his person)
had hobbled up alongside in his bumpy, shiny boots and,
waving an arm, short and thick like the flipper of a seal,
terminated by a paw red as an uncooked beefsteak,
addressed the pool in a muffled, faint roaring voice, as
if a sample of every North-Sea fog of his life had been
permanently lodged in his throat; ‘Haul ’em round, Mr.
Mate!’ were his words. ‘lf you don’t look sharp, you’ll
have your topgallant yards through the windows of that
’ere warehouse presently!’ This was the only cause of
his interest in the ship’s beautiful spars. 1 own that for
a time I was struck dumb by the bizarre associations of
yard-arms and window-panes. To break windows is the
last thing one would think of in connection with a ship’s
topgallant yard, unless, indeed, one were an experienced
berthing-master in one of the London docks. This old
chap was doing his little share of the world’s work with
proper efficiency. His little blue eyes had made out the
danger many hundred yards off. His rheumaticky feet,
tired with balancing that squat body for many years
upon the decks of small coasters, and made sore by
miles of tramping upon the flagstones of the dock side,
had hurried up in time to avert a ridiculous catastrophe.
I answered him pettishly, I fear, and as if I had known
all about it before.
‘All right, all right! Can’t do everything at once.’
He remained nearby, muttering to himself till the yards
had been hauled round at my order, and then raised
again his foggy, thick voice:
‘None too soon,’ he observed, with a critical glance up
at the towering side of the warehouse. ‘That’s a half-
sovereign in your pocket, Mr. Mate. You should always
look first how you are for them windows before you
begin to breast in your ship to the quay.’
It was good advice. But one cannot think of everything
or foresee contacts of things apparently as remote as
stars and hop-poles. (624 words)
(from N.S.W. Leaving Certificate Examination
English Expression Paper, 1961)
COMPREHENSION questions:
(a) Suggest a suitable title for this passage. (1)
(b) Of what period is the author writing? Briefly give
your reasons for the dating you suggest. (1)
(c) What is meant by ‘a strange conjunction’ of roofs
and masts? In particular, why is the ‘conjunction’
strange? (2)
(d) Express in your own words the phrase ‘with a queer
sort of absorption’. (1)
(e) Why is the old man called ‘a superannuated fellow-
craftsman’? Explain both these words. (2)
(f) Explain the meaning of the following words and
phrases; (i) placid; (ii) writ large all over his person;
(iii) bizarre; (iv) coasters; (v) flagstones; (vi) pet-
tishly. (6)
(g) Write down two similes used in the passage.
(h) What other title is used of the chief officer of a
sailing ship? (1)


SPELLING/VOCABULARY
First revision-test list: One word from each of the preceding lists.
receive referred pyjamas vigorous colloquial
promptly conceit operate deficiency eradicate
travelling tragedy whittled relinquish aesthetic
conqueror lieutenant ideology persistent exhilaration
quarrelled rhythm frolicked hypotenuse farcical
murmuring movable luscious admissible scepticism
calendar contemporary inferred specimen posthumous
worshipped comparative solemn pomposity manoeuvre
curiosity exaggerate electoral pigeon piccaninny
challenge remembrance necessarily dialogue reconnaissance
WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix: permanent, conceivable, advantageous
2. Change to adjectives; tragedy.
3. Write antonyms for: solemn
, ideology , veracity
, vigorous , exaggerate
4. Spell the plural of: nucleus , torpedo , curriculum
5. Delete wrong word: Japan is addicted/subject to earthquakes.
I am grateful/gratified to find you so appreciative.
Angered by the remark, she precipitately/precipitously walked out.
A POINT OF STYLE
INCORRECT PREPOSITIONS. Last year’s exercises
on prepositions are worth revising. Here are a few
important points;
1. different from (not ‘to’; not ‘than’)
2. prefer to (not ‘than’).
3. comprise (not ‘of’).
4. aim at (not ‘for’).
5. oblivious of (not ‘to’)
CORRECT WHERE NECESSARY;
1. Negroes are no different than other people.
2. The meal comprised of three courses.
3. The meal consisted of three courses.
4. She was oblivious to the scenery.
WORD ORIGIN
Add a prefix to each of the following words and explain
the meaning of each prefix:
1 sanity
2 use
3 loyalty
4 tomb
5 symmetry
6 noble
7 valuable
8 national
9 marine
10 ... critical
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. She stooped down to pick up her handbag.
2. The company has declared their profit.
3. Father having said grace, the dinner began.
4. Both of us are capable, but not so capable as him.
5. Comparing the populations of Indonesia, Philip-
pines and Malaysia, one realises that the former is
much larger than the latter.
6. I was that hungry I could of ate a horse.
7. We heard the gulls crying on the sandbank, but
which did not sound unpleasant.
8. We can take Emily Bronte as an example of one
who travelled nowhere, read a great deal, and
thereby collected sufficient knowledge to write a
masterpiece.
9. Internationalism is fine in theory, but it is natural
for people to love their own country more.
10. Each of them are able to carry on where last year’s
players leave off.
DELETE WRONG WORD
1. We shall be able to finish quicker/more quickly
without the children.
2. It seems that he is more stupid/stupider than he
looks.
3. We have just seen the most unique chair in Adelaide.
4. The procession ascended up the cathedral steps.


Unit 20; EXPRESSION
COMPOSITION
Discuss ONE of the following:
(a) The Problems of Migration.
(b) ‘The overseas image of the “Dinkum Aussie” is a
complete myth.’
(c) ‘Children should be seen and not heard.’
COMPREHENSION and/or PRECIS
When I awoke again, many of the stars had disappeared;
only the stronger companions of the night still burned
visibly overhead; and away towards the east I saw a
faint haze of light upon the horizon, such as had been
the Milky Way when I was last awake. Day was at
hand. I lit my lantern, and by its glow-worm light put
on my boots and gaiters; then I broke up some bread
for Modestine, filled my can at the water-tap, and lit
my spirit-lamp to boil myself some chocolate. The blue
darkness lay long in the glade where I had so sweetly
slumbered; but soon there was a broad streak of orange
melting into gold along the mountain-tops of Vivarais.
A solemn glee possessed my mind at this gradual and
lovely coming in of day. I heard the runnel with delight;
I looked round me for something beautiful and unex-
pected; but the still black pine-trees, the hollow glade,
the munching ass, remained unchanged in figure.
Nothing had altered but the light, and that, indeed, shed
over all a spirit of life and of breathing peace, and
moved me to a strange exhilaration.
I drank my water-chocolate, which was hot if it was not
rich, and strolled here and there, and up and down
about the glade. While I was thus delaying, a gush of
steady wind, as long as a heavy sigh, poured direct out
of the quarter of the morning. It was cold, and set me
sneezing. The trees near at hand tossed their black
plumes in its passage; and I could see the thin distant
spires of pine along the edge of the hill rock slightly to
and fro against the golden east. Ten minutes after, the
sunlight spread at a gallop along the hillside, scattering
shadows and sparkles, and the day had come completely.
I hastened to prepare my pack, and tackle the steep
ascent that lay before me; but I had something on my
mind. It was only a fancy; yet a fancy will sometimes
be importunate. I had been most hospitably received
and punctually served in my green caravanserai. The
room was airy, the water excellent, and the dawn had
called me to a moment. I say nothing of the tapestries
or the inimitable ceiling, nor yet of the view which I
commanded from the windows; but I felt I was in some-
one’s debt for all this liberal entertainment. And so it
pleased me, in a half-laughing way, to leave pieces of
money on the turf as I went along, until I had left
enough for my night’s lodging. I trust they did not fall
to some rich and churlish drover. (447 words)
(from N.S.W. Leaving Certificate Examination
English Expression Paper, 1962)
COMPREHENSION questions;
(a) What four accessories, other than his food, his
clothing and his money, was the traveller carry-
ing? (1)
(b) A word used in the passage means a stream or a
creek. What is it? (1)
(c) You may not have seen the word ‘caravanserai’
before, but from the passage you should be able to
work out approximately what it means. Attempt a
definition. (1)
(d) What is meant by ‘the stronger companions of the
night’ (in the first sentence)? In particular, why are
the objects in question called ‘companions’? (2)
(e) What is meant by the ‘glow-worm’ light of the
lantern? (1)
(f) ‘A solemn glee possessed my mind.’ What does the
unusual phrase ‘solemn glee’ mean? (2)
(g) Why was the traveller’s drink not rich? (1)
(h) What is the meaning of ‘importunate’ (in the third
paragraph)? (1)
(i) What was the traveller’s importunate ‘fancy’? (1)
(j) What is meant by ‘the dawn had called me to a
moment’? (1)
(k) What were the ‘tapestries’ of the ‘caravanserai’? (1)
(1) What was the ‘inimitable ceiling’ of the ‘caravan-
serai’? (1)
(m) What kind of country was the traveller travers-
ing? (1)
EXAMINERS’ COMMENTS
Here is a final comment from examiners, treating faults
in the 1956 N.S.W. L.C. Expression Paper. We urge
you to look back to earlier units for other valuable
comments.
‘ln commenting upon punctuation, examiners were most
critical. There were fewer instances of the comma
separating simple subject and verb, but the error is still
being made by many candidates. Many, too, show no
evidence of familiarity with quotation marks, and the
semi-colon is the tool of a very few.
Finally, we make our annual plea for an onslaught on
the “one-sentence” paragraph. In the essays of weaker
candidates it is often found, but it is not confined to
those clearly unskilled in expression. Such measures as
are being taken to combat the influence of journalistic
practice are clearly inadequate.’


WORD MANIPULATION 1. Supply a prefix:
penetrable,
separable,
passionate
2. Change to adjectives: argument
, ecstasy
, repetition
3. Write synonyms for: michievous
, perseverance
, discussion
4. Spell the plurals of: analysis
, chateau
,fungus
SPELLING/ VOCABULARY
Second revision-test list: One word from each of the preceding lists.
yacht conscientious resuscitation unmistakable
argument impostor picnicking acquiescence
galloped perseverance abattoirs agitation
parliamentary fulfil chauffeur pseudonym
occasional repetition withhold obsolescence
generosity independence irreconcilable reciprocity
accommodation criticism drunkenness annihilate
mischievous embarrassment redemption silhouette
propellers privilege ecstasy anaesthesia
humorous colloquial sacrilege interference
soliloquy
diphtheria
condescension
vicissitudes
iridescence
dissension
reminiscence
haemorrhage
obsequious
omniscient
5. Delete wrong word: The old man is now inflicted/afflicted with rheumatism.
The inference/implication in your remarks is that I am stupid.
Supernatural belief has long pervaded/penetrated human thinking.
A POINT OF STYLE
AGREEMENT. Errors are very common in the use of
the demonstratives this, that, these, those before
nouns. They must agree in number with the noun they
precede.
e.g., These sort of books should be banned.’ (WRONG)
This sort of book should be banned.’ (RIGHT)
CORRECT WHERE NECESSARY:
1. I deplore those type of films.
2. This kind of story is popular with women.
3. Men dislike these styles of tie.
WORD ORIGIN
TOAST. In early times a snippet or piece of toasted
bread was put to float in a goblet of wine, and this
custom gradually gave its name to the practice of raising
one’s glass in honour of some person or cause-—thus, to
drink a toast. Similarly, the term was used to denote
social distinction the toast of the town because of
the number of toasts drunk in a person’s honour.
BARRACK. To shout remarks at players during such
games as football and cricket. It was taken to England
from Australia by visiting Test Match cricketers some
time after 1880. It seems to have come from the aborigi-
nal ‘borak’, meaning ‘to laugh or have fun at another’s
expense’.
DERRICK. This apparatus, for lifting heavy weights,
was given its name because of its resemblance to a
gallows. About the beginning of the 17th century, the
hangman at Tyburn Prison in England was called Der-
rick, and his name was transferred to his horrible place
of work.
CORRECT THESE SENTENCES (giving reasons)
1. No-one can know the meaning of friendship except
them who experience it.
2. My mates as well as lamin a lot of bother.
3. Neither heat nor cold are likely to influence this
experiment.
4. They shall arrive at six o’clock on Sunday.
5. Like I’ve been told before, I should have looked
both ways before crossing.
6. Them going to Goulburn at the time of us going,
does not worry me a bit.
7. Providing you come quietly, you won’t be hurt.
8. There was work for all hands, and which we
promptly set about.
9. Turning the corner at full speed, a rut in the road
caused the car to turn over.
10. lam one of those who cannot describe what 1 feel
about abstract art.
PUNCTUATE
At college his career was of course highly creditable
and here he prepared himself for public life into which
he was to be introduced by the patronage of his grand-
father lord binkie by studying the ancient and modern
orators with great assiduity and by speaking unceasingly
at the debating societies
(from Vanity Fair, by W. M. Thackeray)


SENIOR STUDIES IN POETRY
Unit 1 : THE GENERAL APPROACH
‘What good is poetry?’
‘Why go to so much trouble to say something in verse
when it could have been more easily said in prose?’ . . .
‘Why doesn’t the poet say what he really means?’
‘Who wants to try to understand such complicated ideas,
anyway?’
If these questions are a fair indication of your attitude
to this part of your course, we understand your point of
view. There is, however, such a wide range of poetry that
you must surely find something of interest and some
‘gems’ to remember always. There is also the examiner
whom you must satisfy. Poetry is such a large and
important part of literature that you must learn to apply
careful criticism to every poem studied, whether or not
you discover any personal appeal in it. In your senior
work you should learn as much as possible about the
techniques of poetry, for then your criticism will be
more likely to do justice to any kind of poem, ancient or
modern, simple or complex. It is not enough to express
a liking or a dislike for a poem on a first reading. Cer-
tainly, the poet may be at fault, but you cannot be sure
until you have done him the courtesy of attempting to
understand his aim, his ideas and his use of the poetic
tools of trade.
Since many of the technical aspects which will be dis-
cussed are those which distinguish verse from prose, you
should be reminded of an important fact: not all verse
is necessarily poetic, nor is all prose lacking in poetic
effect. Compare the two passages below and ask your-
self these questions:
(a) Which is the more worthwhile in content?
(b) Which is the more pleasing when read aloud? Why?
(c) Which contains a more skilful use of word associa-
tions?
(d) Which has the greater claim to be called poetic?
I like Aeroplane Jelly,
Aeroplane Jelly for me!
1 like it for dinner,
I like it for tea,
A little each day
Is a good recipe.
I like Aeroplane Jelly,
Aeroplane Jelly for me!
B. Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel
of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners,
nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful. But his
delight is in the law of the Lord; and in His law
doth he meditate day and night. And he shall be
like a tree planted by the river of water, that
bringeth forth his fruit in due season; his leaf also
shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall
prosper.
Your method of approach to any poem can be encom-
passed by three basic questions;
1. WHAT IS THE POET SAYING?
Search for his theme, perhaps his purpose or motive
in writing, and consider each idea in the poem’s
content or subject matter. How does each idea
relate to the poet’s theme?
2. HOW IS THE POET SAYING IT?
Examine the form or pattern, the mood or atmos-
phere or feeling which is created, and the devices of
sound and language.
3. WAS IT WORTH SAYING?
Your answer to this question has no real value until
you have carefully examined all the aspects of
Questions 1 and 2. Here you may say whether you
consider it a great poem of ideas or a beautiful
pattern of sound, a poem of wide appeal or one that
simply attracts you. If you have decided that it is a
poor piece of work, you may here re-state in a
general conclusion what you will have already shown
in detail in your study of Questions 1 and 2.
Later in the year you will be studying the historical
development of English poetry and you will be expected
to do some research into the background of the more
famous poets, but your greatest task is to train yourself
to appreciate, in the real sense of the word, poetry as a
worthwhile means of expression. It is hoped that you
will reach a stage where you do not wish to escape from
the poet. If you have been suspicious of poetry in the
past, we only ask you to give each poem a chance to
prove itself. Approach each new assignment with the
thought that you will find something memorable or
pleasing in the ideas or expression. If you already enjoy
some poetry, it is hoped that further study will deepen
your satisfaction and that you will also find it interesting
to discuss the technical reasons for its effectiveness.


Poetry Unit 2: THEME AND CONTENT
Really worthwhile poetry must have something signifi-
cant to say. As critics, our first task is to make very
sure we know exactly what the poet is saying. We must
be able to explain each idea as it is developed in the
poem and then consider whether all the ideas link
coherently, i.e., whether the poet’s thought is a unity.
You will find occasionally that the poet uses unfamiliar
words. It is your responsibility to check their meanings
if your reading is to be completely satisfactory. When
you have considered all the subject matter of a poem,
you must try to find the central idea or theme of the
work. Sometimes it is obvious, sometimes more subtle,
but only the theme will tell you why the poet thinks it
was worthwhile to write the poem. And you must
decide what the main idea is before you can proceed to
judge the poet’s method of saying it. The title is often
no indication of the real point of the poem. Beware of
saying, ‘The theme of the poem is about . . .’. A theme
must be a definite idea concerning the many aspects of
the world or human experience. The content or subject
matter may keep repeating the theme, or it may be a
pictorial or symbolic illustration of the theme. This will
become clearer to you as you study individual poems.
Consider the following Poems:
BELEAGUERED CITIES
F. L. Lucas
Build your houses, build your houses, build your towns,
Fell the woodland, to a gutter turn the brook,
Pave the meadows, pave the meadows, pave the downs,
Plant your bricks and mortar where the grasses shook,
The windswept grasses shook.
Build build your Babels black against the sky—
But mark yon small green blade, your stones between,
The single spy
Of that uncounted host you have outcast;
For with their tiny pennons waving green
They shall storm your streets at last.
Questions:
1. Explain literally: beleaguered; Babels; pennons;
storm.
2. To whom is the poem addressed?
3. Express the idea of the first five lines in your own
words.
4. What is mean by ‘your Babels’? Give two examples
in a modern city.
5. Why is the grass called ‘the single spy’?
6. What is the meaning of the last line?
7. What is Lucas’s theme?
8. Why does he use the word ‘plant’ in line 4?
9. What is the poet’s attitude to the work of man?
Quote from the poem to illustrate your opinion.
OZYMANDIAS
P. B. Shelley (1792-1822)
I met a traveller from an antique land
Who said; Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
Stand in the desert . . . Near them, on the sand,
Half sunk, a shattered visage lies, whose frown,
And wrinkled lip, and sneer of cold command,
Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things,
The hand that mocked them, and the heart that fed;
And on the pedestal these words appear;
‘My name is Ozymandias, king of kings,
Look on my works, ye mighty, and despair!
Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare,
The lone and level sands stretch far away.
Questions:
1. Explain: antique; visage.
2. In a single sentence, describe the picture shown in
the poem.
3. Note that ‘hand’ and ‘heart’ in line 8 are objects
of the verb ‘survive’. What is meant by lines 6-8?
4. What did Ozymandias intend his inscription to
mean?
5. What does the poet intend it to mean?
6. What is the theme of the poem?
7. Have the ideas in this poem anything in common
with Lucas’s poem?
8. What is the effect of the last three lines in illustrat-
ing the theme?
Poetry Unit 3 : THEME AND CONTENT (cont.)
POEMS OF WAR
The twentieth century has given poets much opportunity
to consider the impact and the after-effects of warfare.
The First World War, 1914-18, produced a number of
‘war-poets’, and it influenced them in two ways. At the
beginning of hostilities the young volunteers felt proud
to be able to fight for their country; ‘they went with
songs to battle’, as Laurence Binyon says in ‘For the
Fallen’, and they had little idea of the horrors in store
for them. Their ideals were nobly expressed by Rupert
Brooke, a soldier who died of illness on April 23, 1915.
As the war dragged on, however, the fighters became
disillusioned and nauseated by the senseless slaughter.
Poets like Siegfried Sassoon and Wilfred Owen gave
voice to their bitterness. Owen was killed in November,
1918, and was thus denied even a taste of the peace for
which he had fought. In the poems below you will be
able to compare their moods.


THE SOLDIER
Rupert Brooke (1887-1915)
If I should die, think only this of me:
That there’s some corner of a foreign field
That is forever England. There shall be
In that rich earth a richer dust concealed;
A dust whom England bore, shaped, made aware,
Gave, once, her flowers to love, her ways to roam,
A body of England’s, breathing English air,
Washed by the rivers, blest by suns of home.
And think, this heart, all evil shed away,
A pulse in the eternal mind, no less
Gives somewhere back the thoughts by England given;
Her sights and sounds; dreams happy as her day;
And laughter learnt of friends; and gentleness,
In hearts at peace, under an English heaven.
Questions:
(a) Do you consider anything about this poem particu-
larly warlike? If not, can you explain why it is
called ‘The Soldier’?
(b) What aspect of England is remembered in the first
stanza?
(c) How do the images (mental pictures) in the second
stanza differ from those in the first?
(d) Would you consider that the poet felt fighting was
worthwhile? Give clear reasons for your answer.
(e) What is Brooke’s attitude to death? How would
this affect his attitude to war?
(f) Express in your own words the theme of the poem.
FUTILITY
Wilfred Owen (1893-1918)
Move him out into the sun—
Gently its touch awoke him once,
At home, whispering of fields unsown.
Always it woke him, even in France,
Until this morning and this snow.
If anything might rouse him now
The kind old sun will know.
Think how it wakes the seeds —
Woke, once, the clays of a cold star.
Are limbs, so dear-achieved, are sides,
Full-nerved—still-warm—too hard to stir?
Was it for this the clay grew tall?
—O what made fatuous sunbeams toil
To break earth’s sleep at all?
Questions:
(a) Explain: futility; fatuous.
(b) Is the title appropriate? Why, or why not? Does it
give the theme?
(c) What is this poet’s attitude to death?
(d) Why are limbs described as ‘so dear-achieved’?
(e) Which ‘cold star’ was awakened to fertility by the
sun?
(f) What has this poem in common with ‘The Soldier’?
Poetry Unit 4: LANGUAGE SUGGESTION
FIGURES OF SPEECH
One of the most important ways in which the poet can
reveal the mood or inspiration which prompted him to
write a particular poem is through the atmosphere which
he creates by his choice of language. The language or
diction of poetry can be studied for the effect of single
words, of vivid phrases, or of whole lines or stanzas of
carefully sustained word pictures. To explain the
strongly suggestive meanings of words used by the poet,
the language of poetry is often called figurative, in con-
trast to the literal language of impersonal prose writing.
While the literal meaning of a word refers to its
dictionary or basic definition, figurative language derives
its name from the use of figures of speech. When the
poet uses these skilfully he creates a much wider range
of meaning for his language than can be secured by its
purely literal use. Figurative language is therefore of
importance in poetry. You must realise, however, that
the real test for the student is not that he should be able
to recognise figures of speech and name them accurately
(although that is expected), but that he should be able
to comment on their effectiveness in conveying the
message of the poem.
1. SIMILE; a direct comparison, beginning with
‘like’ or ‘as’—
e.g. (picture of a fat woman laughing)
‘. . . all the woman heaves
As a great elm with all its mound of leaves
Wallows before the storm . . .’
2. METAPHOR: an indirect or implied comparison—
e.g. (Shakespeare’s description of death)
‘That undiscover’d country from whose bourn
No traveller returns . . .’
3. PERSONIFICATION: the giving of human quali-
ties to non-human or non-living things—
e.g. (Shakespeare’s image of dawn)
‘But look, the dawn, in russet mantle clad,
Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastern hill.’
4. APOSTROPHE; address to a person absent, dead
or immortal, or to a non-living thing—
e.g. (from Wordsworth)
‘Milton! thou shouldst be living at this hour!
England hath need of thee.’
5. PARADOX: a seeming contradiction,,designed to
shock but containing an important truth when care-
fully studied—
e.g. (from Wordsworth again)
‘The child is father to the man.’


6. OXYMORON: a contradiction in two words—
e.g. (from Shakespeare)
‘Parting is such sweet sorrow.’
7. HYPERBOLE: deliberate exaggeration for dra-
matic effect —
e.g. (from Shakespeare)
‘Here’s the smell of blood still. All the perfumes of
Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.’
8. ANTITHESIS: balanced contrast for special
effect—
e.g. (Pope’s description of Man)
‘Created half to rise, and half to fall;
Great lord of all things, yet a prey to all;
The glory, jest and riddle of the world.’
9. EPIGRAM: a short pithy saying, often a single
line in poetry —
e.g. (Pope again, one of any number of examples
from his work)
‘True wit is Nature to advantage drest.’
As an exercise in applying the definitions of Unit 4,
read the extracts below and write a comment on their
effectiveness. Although such isolated lines fail to do
justice to the individual poems, they are good indica-
tions of the poet’s skill in manipulating language to
special effect.
A. (A fox is streaking away before the hounds at an
English hunt)
Like a rocket shot to a ship ashore
The lean red bolt of his body tore,
Like a ripple of wind running swift on grass;
Like a shadow on wheat when a cloud blows past.
Like a turn at the buoy in a cutter sailing
When the bright green gleam lips white at the
railing.
Like the April snake whipping back to sheath,
Like the gannets’ hurtle on fish beneath,
Like a kestrel chasing, like a sickle reaping,
Like all things swooping, like all things sweeping,
Like a hound for stay, like a stag for swift,
With his shadow beside like spinning drift.
(from Reynard the Fox, by John Masefield)
B. (A stormy night)
‘. . . Desperate eves,
when the wind-bitten hills turn’d violet
along their rims, . . . and the dead stones
lay battle-strewn before the iron wind.’
(from The Wanderer, by Christopher Brennan)
C. (Approaching winter)
‘. . . and now with treble soft
The red-breast whistles from a garden croft;
And gathering swallows twitter in the skies.’
(from To Autumn, by John Keats)
D. (Approaching old age)
‘That time of year thou mayst in me behold,
When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruin’d choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.’
(from Sonnets, by William Shakespeare)
Poetry Unit 5: LANGUAGE SUGGESTION (cont.)
IMAGERY, SYMBOLISM, ALLEGORY
As well as the use of formal figures of speech which can
be given definite technical labels, the poet has at his
command all the resources of the English language.
There is no one group of words which will fill every
poet’s need, nor are there any words which cannot be
used in poetry. The success of a word or phrase in
poetry depends on its suitability for its context.' As well
as its basic definition, a word may arouse a wide range
of associated meanings or connotations which affect the
mental impressions of the reader or listener. Thus the
poet needs to be as accurate as possible in his choice of
words in order to re-create in our minds the ideas and
feelings aroused in him by the subject of his poem.
1. IMAGERY—When the poet succeeds with words,
it is often because he has chosen words that arouse
a suitable image or picture in our imagination. It
may appeal to our intellect as a clever or startling
idea, or, more often, it may tantalise our sense of
taste, touch, smell, sight or hearing. Your task as a
critic is to be able to explain whether such imagery
is vivid or hackneyed, how it develops the content
or atmosphere of the poem, or how it is obscure
(perhaps because the required association of ideas is
too unexpected to create a clear picture).
2. SYMBOLISM —Sometimes a particular object or
image is used by the poet to stand for the same idea
over and over again. The Cross, for example, always
suggests Christianity; Eve is the symbol for all
women, and Adam for all men. The chief danger for
the poet is the possibility of his symbols becoming
too vague or too complicated to suggest any definite
interpretation to his readers. Both W. B. Yeats and
T. S. Eliot, two of the most influential poets of this
century, fall at times into this trap. A poem should
not need a set of explanatory notes before it can be
even partly understood.
3. ALLEGORY —Like the simile and the metaphor,
this is a comparison, but it is expanded into a story
which points a moral about life. The parables of
Jesus are really allegories; so is Swift’s ‘Gulliver’s
Travels’. The technique is more popular in prose
than in poetry, although there are often touches of
it in serious verse. It can always be enjoyed for the
narrative alone, but for the thoughtful reader there
is always the deeper level of meaning to be found.


Here is a simple illustration:
(a) Simile —lsrael is like a vine transplanted from
Egypt to Judea.
(b) Metaphor —lsrael is a vine transplanted from
Egypt to Judea.
(c) Allegory —God brought a vine from Egypt
and planted it in Judea.
THE PULLEY
George Herbert (1593-1633)
When God first made Man,
Having a glass of blessings standing by—
‘Let us,’ said He, ‘pour on him all we can;
Let the world’s riches, which dispersed lie,
Contract into a span.’
So strength first made a way,
Then beauty flowed, then wisdom, honour, pleasure;
When almost all was out, God made a stay,
Perceiving that, alone of all His treasure,
Rest in the bottom lay.
‘For if I should,’ said He,
‘Bestow this jewel also on my creature,
He would adore my gifts instead of me,
And rest in Nature, not the God of Nature;
So both should losers be.
Yet let him keep the rest,
But keep them with repining restlessness;
Let him be rich and weary, that at least,
If goodness lead him not, yet weariness
May toss him to my breast.’
Questions;
(a) Why is the poem called ‘The Pulley’? Would you
agree that the poet is using symbolism?
(b) How is the poem an allegory? Explain both levels
of meaning briefly.
(c) If man should Test in Nature’, how would both God
and he be losers?
(d) What is the meaning of ‘creature’ in stanza 3?
(e) Put in your own words the last two lines of the
poem. Comment on the effect of the verb ‘toss’.
Poetry Unit 6: LANGUAGE SUGGESTION (cont.)
EXERCISE
The following poem pictures Australia as most overseas
people think of it—a harsh country endlessly in conflict
with man. If you have little knowledge of the Outback,
you should still be able to use your imagination to do
justice to this poem’s effect.
MIRAGE
Douglas Stewart (b. 1913)
Not that he’d go as some indeed would run
Stumbling across the waste of hot red stone
Where like some crystal snake the heat-haze writhes
To drink that water that had not water’s look
(Oh gentle smile of the creek where green grass
flourished)
But rather was steel flame and purple smoke
Towering upon the horizon: some raw new-chum
Who soon enough would be pulling off his clothes
And raving in crazy circles till he perished
While the water that was not water flowed over him.
Not that for him! Only it had a way
Of seeming to creep through the saltbush greenish and
grey,
You could not see for the bushes where it ended,
Into what inlet now that silver flood—
Oh did not, could not creep, and was not water
But the glitter of sun on stone; and if it moved,
Why, keeping its place the enormous mirror shone
East, west and north with trees and hills suspended,
And steadfast behind no doubt it followed after
If you turned to look . . . but water was on, was on.
And indeed when it thrust some long hot steely tongue,
Between the sandhills where the red clouds hung,
Into that hollow basin was once a lake
It had some look of water; those green reflections
In long miraculous pools still left from the rain
Six months ago; why, water in all directions,
On the track, on the stones, on the sandhills, so near
you could touch.
And touch that moulten steel! As well mistake
That cloud of eaglehawk wheeling above the plain
For seagulls, seagulls—where the white foam on the
beach . . .
Never that he’d plunge—but they came close that lot,
And it was quiet now and it was hot.
There were one hundred seagulls flying inland
Barred gold and black, all watching the hard ground,
They had their eye on something; but so had he,
It welled up high and glittered all around,
And was no more, no more than that great tide
Where first he saw the cloud become an island
And many an island green with many a tree
Now high in air as still came on the flood.
You had to watch it for its trick of sneaking
Between the bushes while you weren’t looking
Or while you were; or jumping clean ten miles
In silver discs that flashed across the stones
And vanished or did not; or swelling, mounting
In such a wave that he must run at once.
Why it could come like that—but it was coming,
That rill of silver trickling down the hills,
But more but more, too many streams for counting,
Oh everywhere in one great wave was looming—


He splashed in shallow water to his knees.
Oh yet might make that island and those trees
Climb high in air if not too high for climbing
And he could drink at last in that great flood—
But had not water’s coolness, water’s taste,
O seared the tongue, ran fire through all his blood.
The hawks dropped down to watch him as he drank.
Some lost far voice cried ‘No!’ but he was swimming
And round and round, could no way sight the coast,
Until the bright flame took him and he sank.
Questions:
1. The poem falls into two main sections of crisis.
What are they, and where is the division?
2. How does the description of varying colours con-
tribute to the atmosphere?
3. What impression is created by the third line of
stanza 1?
4. What feeling is aroused by the use of such expres-
sions as ‘glitter’, ‘steel flame’, ‘steely tongue’ and
‘molten steel’?
5. Choose a metaphor from stanza 2 and comment on
its force?
6. How is the title’s meaning brought out in each
stanza?
7. What use of contrast is made to create the atmos-
phere of the poem? Where is it most effective?
Give reasons for your opinion.
8. In every stanza but the first the dash is used to
create a particular effect. Examine each example
and comment on the effect produced.
9. What impression is given of the mirage? Would
you agree that it has a personality? If so, what
is it?
10. Do you consider the poem a successful creation of
mood and imagery? In your answer, indicate your
idea of the poet’s motive and his degree of success.
Poetry Unit 7: LANGUAGE SUGGESTION (cont.)
DEVICES (TRICKS) OF SOUND
These could almost be called sound imagery, since the
poet uses them to echo the sense of his words and thus
enrich the complete effect of his poem. Sometimes they
are used in association with the more obvious verse
techniques of rhyme and rhythm; sometimes the poet
depends upon them alone to create an illusion of regu-
lar patterns in his verse. Since all poetry should be read
aloud to create its full effect, the poet’s success with the
sounds of the language is almost as important as the
meaning of the words he has chosen.
1. WORD OR PHRASE REPETITION: This trick
will often achieve a greater emphasis on key ideas
than rhythm can. For example:
‘Look at the stars! Look, look up at the skies!
O look at all the fire-folk sitting in the air!’
‘And in the hush of waters was the sound
Of pebbles rolling round;
Forever rolling with a hollow sound.’
2. ALLITERATION: This is the deliberate repetition
of the same consonants. It may occur at the begin-
ning, in the middle, or at the end of words. It can
help to suggest a variety of moods or tones —harsh
or soft, jarring or melodious. Comment on the effect
of the consonants in the following lines:
‘To catch the lulling mazy coralline roar
Of numberless caverns filled with singing seas.’
‘Build, build your Babels black against the sky.’
‘The moan of doves in immemorial elms,
And murmuring of innumerable bees.’
3. ASSONANCE; This is the deliberate repetition of
vowel sounds. Beware! A single vowel sound can
be spelt in several ways in English, e.g., ‘roar’, ‘bore’,
‘daughter’. Likewise, a single spelling can be pro-
nounced in several ways, e.g., ‘cough’, ‘bough’,
‘rough’. In the lines below, notice the feeling of
gloom conveyed by the long vowel sounds:
‘No sound
In the walls of the Halls where falls
The tread
Of the feet of the dead to the ground.
No sound:
Only the boom
Of the far Waterfall like Doom.’
4. ONOMATOPOEIA: This is the device of using
words whose sound echoes the sense of the words,
e.g., ‘drip’, ‘rattle’, ‘splash’. Notice the effect of the
words in bold type in the following lines:
‘Guard sounds a warning whistle, points to the clock
With brandished flag, and on his folded flock
Claps the last door: the monster grunts: ‘Enough!’
Tightening his load of links with pant and puff.’
(Can you hear the couplings straining between each
carriage as the deep vowel in ‘load’ changes to the
sharper sound of ‘links’?)
As a revision of the aspects of poetry raised in the units
so far, consider the following poem and answer the
questions below:


THE EXPRESS
Stephen Spender (b. 1909)
After the first powerful plain manifesto
The black statement of pistons, without more fuss
But gliding like a queen, she leaves the station.
Without bowing and with restrained unconcern
She passes the houses which humbly crowd outside,
The gasworks and at last the heavy page
Of death, printed by gravestones in the cemetery.
Beyond the town there lies the open country
Where, gathering speed, she acquires mystery,
The luminous self-possession of ships on ocean.
It is now she begins to sing—at first quite low,
Then loud, and at last with a jazzy madness —
The song of her whistle screaming at curves,
Of deafening tunnels, brakes, innumerable bolts.
And always light, aerial, underneath
Goes the elate metre of her wheels.
Steaming through metal landscape on her lines
She plunges new eras of wild happiness
Where speed throws up strange shapes, broad curves
And parallels clean like the steel of guns.
At last, further than Edinburgh or Rome,
Beyond the crest of the world, she reaches night
Where only a low streamline brightness
Of phosphorus on the tossing hills is white.
Ah, like a comet through flame she moves entranced
Wrapt in her music no bird song, nor, nor bough
Breaking with honey buds, shall ever equal.
Questions:
(a) What is the poet’s purpose in writing this poem? Is
there a theme? If so, express it in your own words.
(b) In one or two sentences, put down the subject
matter of the poem.
(c) How is personification used in the poem? Quote
from the poem to illustrate your answer. Do you
consider it suitable or extreme?
(d) Write down the three similes in the poem. Choose
the one you prefer and discuss its effectiveness.
(e) What is the figure of speech in ‘the heavy page of
death’, and how is the idea developed?
(f) What image is the poet trying to evoke by the phrase
‘the tossing hills’?
(g) What is meant by the line ‘the luminous self-
possession of ships on ocean’? How does it apply
to the train?
(h) What sound device is used in the word ‘manifesto’?
(i) Discuss the use and success of alliteration in lines
1-3.
(j) We have not yet discussed rhythm in detail, but you
should be able to hear what Spender tries to do with
rhythm in this poem. Read it aloud and comment
on the changes of pace.
Poetry Unit 8 : FORM
RHYTHM AND METRE
One of the most obvious differences between poetry and
prose is in their layout—it is usually possible to recog-
nise verse by simply looking at the printed page. The
arrangement of poetry depends on the poet’s choice of
a variety of forms; rhythm and metre, rhyme, line-
lengths, stanza patterns, and differing poetic types (such
as the sonnet). In the next few units you will find that
these formal aspects are discussed in technical terms
which may seem complicated and over-difficult to
memorise. Try to realise that these terms are the same
as mathematical or scientific symbols; it is possible to
appreciate the poet’s creation without them, but they
are extremely helpful, as a sort of critical short-hand, in
giving you an exact name for the effects you wish to
comment on.
RHYTHM: Even prose has a rhythm when spoken
aloud, for rhythm is the effect of stressed and unstressed
syllables in speech, even if that pattern is not completely
regular. The rhythm of prose is often varied according
to the words the speaker wishes to emphasise, e.g., ‘l’m
GOing to TOWN first” emphasises place, while ‘I’M
going to town first’ emphasises the person concerned.
FREE VERSE: The pattern of stress varies in every
line according to the thought and feeling at each stage
of the poem, e.g.,
‘Look up, and you see things flying
Between the day and the night;
Swallows with spools of dark thread sewing the shadows
together.’
(from Bat, by D. H. Lawrence)
(With such an absence of rhyme and such an irregular
pattern of stress, poetry of this kind seems hardly dif-
ferent from prose at all.)
SPRUNG RHYTHM: This is like free verse in its rejec-
tion of regular patterns of syllables, but it does retain a
regular number of stressed syllables in each line. Verse
using this rhythm may be read with speech stress, but
the poet manipulates each line to conform to a basic
pattern, e.g. (as in many nursery rhymes),
‘MARy, MARy, QUITE conTRARY, (4 stresses)
HOW does your GARden GROW? (3 stresses)
With SlLver BELLS and COCKIe SHELLS (4 stresses)
And PRETTy maids ALL in a ROW.’ (3 stresses)
METRE; This was grafted on to English verse from
classical poetry. Hence most of the technical names are
of Greek origin. In metre, the line of verse is divided
into a number of regular units or feet. Each metrical
pattern has its own special effect and thus the poet needs
to choose his rhythm carefully to blend with his mood;


1. lambic — the most versatile of metres, capable of a
wide range of moods;
The TRAVellers STAND in POOLS of WlNtry
LIGHT.’
2. Trochaic — a lightly moving rhythm which can be-
come monotonous if used without variation. In the
example below, however, the charm of the poem’s
sound lies in the sing-song effect:
‘GIVE me OF your BARK, O BIRCH -tree!
OF your YELLow BARK, O BIRCH-tree!’
3. Dactylic— a lilting dance-like metre of three syl-
lables, ending on two weak syllables:
‘DACtylic DAlNtiness LlLtirtg so PRETTiIy,
MOVES about FLUTTering RAther than WlTTily.’
4. Anapestic the most popular ‘galloping’ metre,
ending on a strong beat:
‘But we SLEEP by the ROPES of the CAMP, and
we RISE with a SHOUT and we TRAMP
With the SUN or the MOON for a LAMP, and
the SPRAY of the WIND in our HAtR.’
5. Amphibraic— a rocking metre, ending on a weak
syllable:
‘Then, HEIGH-ho, the HOLly!
This LIFE is most JOLly.’
6. Spondee —a metre rarely used for a whole poem,
although it is often used for an individual phrase to
give emphasis. It consists of two following syllables
each of which is equally stressed:
(a) ‘GIRLS SCREAM,
BOYS SHOUT,
DOGS BARK,
SCHOOL’S OUT.’
(b) ‘BLOW, BLOW, thou WlNter WIND,
Thou ART not SO unKIND
As MAN’S inGRAtiTUDE.’
EXERCISE
In the extracts below you are given a range of rhythmic
effects. Study each one carefully, decide whether it is
free verse, sprung rhythm or basically metrical. Identify
the particular metre used, if possible, and comment on
the kind of effect produced by each rhythm. Does it, for
example, contribute to the sense of urgency or of swift
action contained in the subject matter of the poem?
Does it echo the setting of the poem, stich as horses’
hooves, winds howling, seas moaning? Does it help to
create a suitable mood, solemn, light-hearted, mocking
or purposeful? Does the rhythm stand out as an impor-
tant part of the poem, or does it simply combine unob-
trusively with the word-music of the poem to create
pleasing expression?
N. 8.: There may often be phrases or whole lines within
a poem which do not conform to the general metre of
the poem. Such variation is used to avoid monotony or
to emphasise a word whose meaning is significant.
Therefore, always read poetfy naturally; nothing is
gained by forcing every line into a pattern.
A. ‘Haste thee, nymph, and bring with thee
Jest and youthful jollity,
Quips and cranks, and wanton wiles,
Nods and becks, and wreathed smiles,
Such as hang on Hebe’s cheek,
And love to live in dimple sleek;
Sport that wrinkled care derides,
And laughter holding both his sides.’
(from L’Allegro, by Milton)
B. ‘And the cattle we hunt, they are racing in front,
With a roar like the thunder of waves,
As the beat and the beat of our swift horses’ feet
Start the echoes away from their caves—
As the beat and the beat
Of our swift horses’ feet
Start the echoes away from their caves.’
(from The Song of the Cattle Hunters, by Kendall)
C. ‘lt is a beauteous evening, calm and free,
The holy time is quiet as a nun
Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
Is sinking down in its tranquillity;
The gentleness of heaven broods o’er the sea;
Listen! the mighty Being is awake,
And doth with his eternal motion make
A sound like thunder —everlastingly.’
(from To Evening, by Wordsworth)
D. ‘Here’s to the maiden of bashful fifteen!
Here’s to the widow of fifty!
Here’s to the flaunting extravagant queen;
And here’s to the housewife that’s thrifty!
Let the toast pass,
Drink to the lass!
I’ll warrant she’ll prove an excuse for the glass!
(from The School for Scandal, by Sheridan)
E. ‘So it’s shift, boys, shift, for there isn’t the slightest
doubt
That we’ve got to make a shift to the stations further
out,
With the pack-horse runnin’ after, for he follows like
a dog,
We must strike across the country at the old jig-jog.’
(from A Bushman's Song, by Paterson)
F. T think I could turn and live with animals, they are
so placid and self-contained,
I stand and look at them long and long.
They do not sweat and whine about their condition,
They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for
their sins,
They do not make me sick discussing their duty to
God,
Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with the
mania of owning things,
Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived
thousands of years ago,
Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole
earth.’
(from Song of Myself, by Whitman)


USE (AND ABUSE) OF RHYME
Rhyme is probably the best-recognised aspect of verse,
although not all good poetry has rhyme. The pattern of
rhyme in a poem is called its rhyme scheme, and in
written discussion you should use letters of the alphabet
to distinguish the variations, e.g.,
‘Ring out, wild bells, to the wild sky, (a)
The flying cloud, the frosty light: (b)
The year is dying in the night; (b)
Ring out, wild bells, and let him die.’ (a)
‘The splendour falls on castle walls (a)
And snowy summits old in story: (b)
The long light shakes across the lakes, (c)
And the wild cataract leaps in glory.’ (b)
In the first example, the end of each line rhymes with
another and each rhyme is masculine, i.e., consisting of
a single stressed syllable. In the second example, there
are only two lines rhyming and the rhyme in this case is
feminine, i.e., consisting of two syllables, the first of
which is stressed. Occasionally poets use a three-syl-
labled rhyme, but the effect is always frivolous and
should be restricted to light verse, i.e., from Ogden
Nash, the American humorist,
‘For not having tried to impress my girl, but being
naturaler with her and naturaler;
Now instead of having to marry and all that, I can con-
tinue to be a careless baturaler.’
Although the most usual form of rhyme is ‘end rhyme’
(syllables at the ends of lines), some poets will add, or
substitute, rhymes in the middle of lines, as in lines (a)
and (c) of the second example above. This is internal
rhyme’ and is preferred by some modern poets as less
obvious than the end rhymes.
Another device is ‘half’ or imperfect rhyme’, where the
words seem similar in appearance or sound, although
they do not exactly correspond, e.g.,
‘And by his smile, I knew that sullen Hall,
By his dead smile, I knew we stood in Hell.’
Poets often use this trick to suggest an atmosphere that
is frustrating or unsatisfactory, just as the rhyme is
unsatisfactory, although it is also popular as a more
subtle pattern than perfect rhyme.
When poetry contains no rhyme but has a definite
rhythm pattern, as in Shakespeare’s dramatic verse, it
is known as blank verse, e.g.,
‘The evil that men do lives after them,
The good is oft interred with their bones.’
This should not be confused with free verse, which has
no regular rhyme or rhythm and whose stanza form
varies with the thoughts of the poet.
Abuse of Rhyme. Unless the poet is trying to be odd
or amusing, his rhyme scheme should not be too obvious
or hackneyed. You should never feel, in a good poem,
that a word has been chosen simply because it rhymes
with another. Be wary of poems where the moonlight
‘gleams’ on murmuring ‘streams’, or where the ‘breeze’
is inevitably in the ‘trees’. The following example
comes from Wordsworth:
‘Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans;
“As sure as there’s a moon in heaven,”
Cries Betty, “he’ll be back again;
They’ll both be here—’tis almost ten—
Both will be here before eleven.” ’
A Note on Stanza Patterns. Although there are a
number of technical terms for different patterns, the
most useful ones for you to remember are the Quatrain
(four lines) and the Couplet (two lines). The latter name
is also given to pairs of rhyming lines within longer
poems. Some poets, of course, reject stanzas altogether,
or they divide their poems into stanzas of irregular
length, like paragraphs in prose. To the critic the stanza
pattern is merely further evidence of a regular or irregu-
lar form.
Metre varies in different poems according to the number
of heavy stresses or feet to each line. Such line patterns
have technical names.
A. Monometer —one stress, e.g.,
‘Thus I
Pass by.’
B. Dimeter— two stresses, e.g.,
‘What lovely things
Thy hand hath made.’
C. Trimeter— three stresses, e.g.,
‘ln summertime on Bredon
The bells they sound so clear.’
D. Tetrameter —four stresses, e.g.,
‘O young Lochinvar is come out of the west,
Through all the wide border his steed was the best.’
E. Pentameter— five stresses, e.g.,
‘Know then thyself, presume not God to scan;
The proper study of mankind is man.’
F. Hexameter— six stresses, e.g.,
‘And Death the sable smoke where vanishes the
flame.’
EXERCISE
You have so far answered specific questions about a
poem, as we have dealt in turn with theme, content,
mood, language and form. In this exercise you will be
expected to find your own material for commentary.


TO AUTUMN
John Keats (1795-1821)
Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness!
Close bosom-friend of the maturing sun;
Conspiring with him how to load and bless
With fruit the vines that round the thatch-eaves run;
To bend with apples the mossed cottage-trees,
And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core;
To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells
With a sweet kernel; to set budding more,
And still more, later flowers for the bees,
Until they think warm days will never cease,
For Summer has o’er-brimmed their clammy cells.
Who hath not seen thee oft amid thy store?
Sometimes whoever seeks abroad may find
Thee sitting careless on a granary floor,
Thy hair soft-lifted by the winnowing wind;
Or on a self-reaped furrow sound asleep,
Drowsed with the fume of poppies, while thy hook
Spares the next swath and all its twined flowers;
And sometimes like a gleaner thou dost keep
Steady thy laden head across a brook;
Or by a cider-press, with patient look,
Thou watchest the last oozings, hours by hours.
Where are the songs of Spring? Ay, where are they?
Think not of them, thou hast thy music too,
While barred clouds bloom the soft-dying day,
And touch the stubble-plains with rosy hue;
Then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn
Among the river sallows, borne aloft
Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies;
And full-grown lambs loud bleat from hilly bourn;
Hedge-crickets sing; and now with treble soft
The red-breast whistles from a garden-croft,
And gathering swallows twitter in the skies.
Questions:
(a) What is the poet’s theme? Or what is his attitude to
Autumn?
(b) Each stanza reveals another aspect of Autumn. In
a paragraph, discuss the content of the poem, show-
ing the different ideas in each stanza.
(c) Mark the heavy stresses in rhythm above the syl-
lables of the last two lines and identify the metre.
Then read through the poem again, watching for
variations of that rhythm; if you find any, comment
on the effect. Does the variation give special empha-
sis, or does it simply help to avoid monotony? Is the
rhythm suitable for the mood of the poem?
(d) Work out the rhyme scheme of stanza 2. Is it regu-
lar for the other stanzas as well?
(e) What figure of speech is used to describe Autumn?
Do you think it is effective? Give reasons.
(f) Discuss in detail the language of stanza 3. Consider
individual words for vividness and look for success-
ful imagery and use of colopr.
(g) What sound devices are used to create atmosphere?
Poetry Unit 10: REVISION
THE CRABS
Brian Vrepont (b. 1882)
The crabs are lunching;
An hour I’ve watched, and still they eat,
Pincering microcosms from the scaly rocks,
Timed to split-second mouth shutterings
Like Chinamen with chop-sticks;
No disrespect, but Asian they look,
And I on an overleaning rock am humbled.
Such industry is not mine,
Such battering I could not suffer.
The waves hiss and bury the feeders three feet deep,
Avalanches fall on their apparent frailty,
The rock bares, the sea sucks back,
And I laugh to see the crabs uninterruptedly feeding;
The littlest baby crab holds miraculously rock fast,
Centuried to sea-wash,
Insolently safe, insolently chop-stick lunching
Against the might of the sea.
I laugh, knowing crabs wiser than man;
When man, suicided from his home, the earth,
Shall see no lord sun spray gold on wave,
Nor moons come like vespers, go in full song,
Crabs still will ply their chop-sticks,
Knowing nor caring that man is dust.
Questions:
(a) What is the theme of the poem?
(b) In a paragraph, examine the subject matter of the
poem.
(c) Comment on the form of the poem; rhyme, rhythm,
line lengths, stanza patterns. Does the form suit the
content?
(d) If the word ‘microcosms’ is new to you, look it up
in the dictionary and explain why it is used here.
(e) What does the poet mean when he says ‘such
industry is not mine’?
(f) What has the poet done to the word ‘century’? What
does it mean in the poem?
(g) What is the force of the word ‘insolently’?
(h) What is meant by ‘man, suicided from his home, the
earth’?
(i) What image is created for you in lines three and
four of the last stanza?
(j) Does the poem, or parts of it, appeal to you? Why,
or why not? Do you even agree that it is poetry?
Revise all the material treated in these first ten units
before proceeding to the next sections.


Poetry Unit 11: FORM (cont.)
NARRATIVE VERSE
Poetry divides roughly into two sections; poems of
action and story or narrative verse, and poems of
thought and feeling or lyric verse. In this unit we shall
deal with the former.
BALLAD: This is the earliest type of narrative poem,
extremely simple in language, often with a refrain,
always with a definite rhythm and rhyme to help recita-
tion. Most English ballads are so old as to be anony-
mous, but some modern writers have imitated the spirit
of such verse, e.g., Oscar Wilde in ‘The Ballad of Read-
ing Gaol’ and John Masefield in ‘Reynard the Fox’.
EPIC; This is a narrative poem of much more solemnity
than the ballad. Its subject is legend or great heroes or
main events in a nation’s history. The word ‘epic’ may
be used as an adjective to describe such events. As
with the ballad, the poet’s treatment is objective (his
own feelings are not themselves the subject of the poem).
Exercise Below is a modern Australian poet’s re-
creation of part of our nation’s history. Cook has left
Botany Bay and is charting the north-east coast of
Queensland.
FIVE VISIONS OF CAPTAIN COOK—Vision II
Kenneth Slessor (b. 1901)
Flowers turned to stone! Not all the botany
Of Joseph Banks, hung pensive in a porthole,
Could find the Latin for this loveliness,
Could put the Barrier Reef in a glass box
Tagged by the horrid Gorgon squint
Of horticulture. Stone turned to flowers
It seemed—you’d snap a crystal twig,
One petal even of the water-garden,
And have it dying like a cherry-bough.
They’d sailed all day outside a coral hedge,
And half the night. Cook sailed at night,
Let there be reefs a fathom from the keel
And empty charts. The sailors didn’t ask,
Nor Joseph Banks. Who cared? It was the spell
Of Cook that lulled them, bade them turn below,
Kick off their sea-boots, puff themselves to sleep,
Though there were more shoals outside
Than teeth in a shark’s head. Cook snored loudest
himself.
One day, a mbrning of light airs and calms,
They slid towards a reef that would have knifed
Their boards to mash, and murdered every man.
So close it sucked them, one wave shook their keel,
The next blew past the coral. Three officers,
In gilt and buttons, languidly on deck
Pointed their sextants at the sun. One yawned,
One held a pencil, one put eye to lens;
Three very peaceful English mariners
Taking their sights for longitude.
I’ve never heard
Of sailors aching for the longitude
Of shipwrecks before or since. It was the spell
Of Cook did this, the phylacteries of Cook,
Men who ride broomsticks with a mesmerist
Mock the typhoon. So, too, it was with Cook.
Questions:
(a) What impression of Cook is created by the poet?
Comment on the sections referring to him.
(b) What metaphor is used to describe the coral and
what is the force of the reference to the Gorgon?
(c) How is the sense of danger conveyed in stanzas two
and three?
(d) Put the last two lines into your own words? Is it a
vivid idea?
(e) Why arc the sailors portrayed as so apathetic? How
does this image relate to the rest of the stanza?
(f) Do you consider this good poetry? Give your
reasons.
Poetry Unit 12: FORM (cont.)
LYRIC VERSE
Lyric verse can be divided into several kinds, each with
its own characteristics. However, all lyric verse is
marked by an intensely personal expression of thoughts
and feelings, hence it is highly subjective in treatment.
The ideas are usually limited to one or two which are
fully developed into a generalisation about life or human
behaviour. Originally, all lyrics were set to music
(played on the lyre), but since Elizabethan times the
definition has been widened until the only musical quali-
ties of these poems arise from their language.
SONG LYRIC; The name is self-explanatory. The most
luxuriant flowering of this lyric occurred during the six-
teenth and seventeenth centuries. Still popular today are
‘Cherry Ripe’, ‘Who is Sylvia?’ and ‘Drink to Me Only
with Thine Eyes’. .This form has since developed into
poems with titles like ‘Lines written . . .’ or ‘Thoughts
on . . .’.
SONNET; This is an extremely important poetic form.
It has a definite set of rules for structure and it has
proved most popular in English. Sonnets must contain
fourteen lines in iambic pentameter, although the lines
may be arranged in two main ways: Italian and English.


Nuns fret not at their convent’s narrow room;
(a)
And hermits arc contented with their cells;
(b)
And students with their pensive citadels;
(b)
Maids at the wheel, the weaver at his loom.
(a)
Sit blithe and happy; bees that soar for bloom.
(a)
High as the highest peak of Furness-fells,
(b)
Will murmur by the hour in foxglove bells;
(b)
In truth the prison, unto which we doom
(a)
Ourselves, no prison is: and hence for me.
(c)
In sundry moods, ’twas pastime to be bound
(d)
Within the Sonnet's scanty plot of ground;
(d)
Pleased if some souls (for such there needs must be)
(c)
Who have felt the weight of too much liberty.
(c)
Let me not to the marriage of true minds
(a)
Admit impediments. Love is not love
(b)
Which alters when it alteration finds.
(a)
Or bends with the remover to remove.
(b)
O no! It is an ever-fixed mark
(c)
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
(d)
It is the star to every wandering bark.
(c)
Love's not Time’s fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
(e)
Within his bending sickle’s compass come;
(f)
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks.
(e)
But bears it out ev’n to the edge of doom:
(f)
If this be error, and upon me proved.
(g)
1 never writ, nor no man ever loved.
(a)
Italian (Petrarchan) Form divided into an octave
(eight lines with a distinctive rhyme scheme) and a sestet
(six lines with a distinctive rhyme scheme). The poet
usually presents his idea (or motive) in the octave, fol-
lowed by a turn of thought (volta) at the ninth line, with
the sestet giving the general conclusion.
SONNET ON THE SONNET
William Wordsworth (1770-1850)
Should find brief solace there, as I have found. (d)
Questions:
(a) What is the theme of the poem?
(b) What is the importance of the many examples in
the octave?
(c) Is there a volta (turn of thought) in this sonnet?
Where does it occur?
(d) What are students’ ‘pensive citadels’?
(e) There is a good example of contrast of ideas in the
octave. What is it?
(f) Note the rhyme scheme; octave —abba, abba; sestet
—edd, ccd.
SONNET ON THE SEA
John Reals (1795-1821 )
It keeps eternal whispering around (a)
Desolate shores, and with its mighty swell (b)
Gluts twice ten thousand caverns, till the spell (b)
Of Hecate leaves them their old shadowy sound. (a)
Often ’tis in such gentle temper found, (a)
That scarcely will the very smallest shell (b)
Be moved for days from whence it sometime fell, (b)
When last the winds of heaven were unbound. (a)
Oh ye! who have your eye-balls vexed and tired, (c)
Feast them upon the wideness of the Sea; (d)
Oh ye! whose ears are dinned with uproar rude, (e)
Or fed too much with cloying melody,— (d)
Sit ye near some old cavern’s mouth and brood (e)
Until ye start, as if the sea-nymphs quired! (c)
Questions:
(a) What is the meaning of ’gluts’, ‘cloying’, ’quired’?
(b) Who was Hecate?
(c) What is the meaning of ’sometime’ and ‘rude’ here?
Shakespeare also used each word in this sense.
(d) What does the poet say about the sea in the octave?
(e) What is the message of the sestet? Is this the theme
of the sonnet?
(f) Can you find any phrases or lines where the sounds
of the words echo the sound of the sea? This is
imagery for the car as well as for the eye. Watch
for such effects in other poems.
Poetry Unit 13: FORM (cont.)
THE ENGLISH SONNET
Instead of the classical division of octave and sestet, the
English sonnet divides its fourteen lines into three
quatrains and a concluding couplet. There are minor
rhyme variations between the versions of Shakespeare
and Spenser.
SONNET No. CXVI
William Shakespeare (1564-1616)
Whose worth’s unknown, although his height
be taken.
Questions:
(a) What is the theme of the poem?
(b) Put the idea of each quatrain into your own words.
(c) ’Bark’ here means ‘ship’. What figure of speech is
used in this line?
(d) What does Time’s ‘bending sickle’ symbolise?
(e) Note the rhyme scheme. It is always the same for
Shakespeare’s sonnets.


ONE DAY 1 WROTE HER NAME
Edmund Spenser (1552-1599)
One day 1 wrote her name upon the strand; (a)
But came the waves and washed it away; (b)
Again I wrote it with a second hand, (a)
But came the tide and made my pains his prey. (b)
‘Vain man!' said she, ‘that dost in vain assay (b)
A mortal thing so to immortalise; (c)
For 1 myself shall like to this decay, (b)
And eke my name be wiped out likewise.’ (c)
‘Not so!’ quoth 1; ‘let baser things devise (c)
To die in dust, but you shall live by fame; (d)
My verse your virtues rare shall eternise, (c)
And in the heavens write your glorious name, — (d)
Where, when as death shall all the world subdue, (e)
Our love shall live, and later life renew,’ (e)
Questions:
(a) What is the theme of the poem?
(b) Put the idea of each quatrain into your own words.
(c) How does the poet describe the tide?
(d) Note the links in the rhyme scheme of each quatrain
of the sonnet.
GENERAL
1. Considering the sonnets you have studied, do you
think that the form is a useful one? How do its
limits really help the poet?
2. Since ideas must be kept to a minimum, the poet has
the opportunity to develop imagery and figurative
language. Read some more of Shakespeare’s son-
nets, as he is a master of this form.
3. Nearly every great poet has tried his hand at the
sonnet. Watch for them in anthologies and practise
recognition of the different versions.
4. You may find that some modern sonnets do not
follow the strict rhyme schemes given here, but they
are still basically sonnets in form, ideas and attitude.
Poetry Unit 14: FORM (cont.)
THE ODE
Another member of the family of lyric verse, the
modern ode is perhaps the least subjective of the group.
With some exceptions, it is usually rather solemn in
tone, sometimes majestic, always dignified and medita-
tive. It is frequently addressed to some personified
being or quality, e.g., music, duty, autumn, a skylark.
Odes may be regular or irregular in stanza structure.
The regular ode may be either in the classical sequence
of Pindar, whose odes fall into three sections, each of
three stanzas, or (and this is the most common English
form) it may simply repeat the same stanza pattern as
often as required. Keats’ ode, ‘To Autumn’, is a good
example of this type (see Unit 9). The irregular ode
varies in length of stanza, in rhythm and rhyme and in
line length, according to the effect required by the poet.
Whitman’s ode, ‘To a Locomotive in Winter’, shows a
successful use of variation of mood.
ODE TO THE WEST WIND
Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792-1822)
O wild West Wind, thou breath of Autumn’s being,
Thou, from whose unseen presence the leaves dead
Are driven, like ghosts from an enchanter fleeing,
Yellow, and black, and pale, and hectic red,
Pestilence-stricken multitudes: O thou,
Who chariotest to their wintry bed
The winged seeds, where they lie cold and low,
Each like a corpse within its grave, until
Thine azure sister of the spring shall blow
Her clarion o'er the dreaming earth, and fill
(Driving sweet buds like flocks to feed in air)
With living hues and odours plain and hill:
Wild spirit, which art moving everywhere,
Destroyer and preserver, hear, Oh hear!
Thou on whose stream, ’mid the steep sky’s commotion.
Loose clouds like earth's decaying leaves are shed,
Shook from the tangled boughs of Heaven and Ocean,
Angels of rain and lightning: there are spread
On the blue surface of thine airy surge,
Like the bright hair uplifted from the head
Of some fierce Mamad, ev’n from the dim verge
Of the horizon to the zenith’s height—
The locks of the approaching storm. Thou dirge
Of the dying year, to which this closing night
Will be the dome of a vast sepulchre,
Vaulted with all thy congregated might
Of vapours, from whose solid atmosphere
Black rain, and fire, and hail will burst: Oh hear!
If 1 were a dead leaf thou mightest bear;
If I were a swift cloud to fly with thee;
A wave to pant beneath thy power, and share
The impulse of thy strength, only less free
Than thou, O uncontrollable! If even
1 were as in my boyhood, and could be
The comrade of thy wanderings over heaven,
As then, when to outstrip thy skiey speed
Scarce seemed a vision; 1 would ne’er have striven
As thus with thee in prayer in my sore need.
Oh! lift me as a wave, a leaf, a cloud!
1 fall upon the thorns of life! 1 bleed!
A heavy weight of hours has chained and bowed
One too like thee: tameless, and swift, and proud.


Make me thy lyre, cv’n as the forest is;
What if my leaves are falling like its own!
The tumult of thy mighty harmonies
Will take from both a deep, autumnal tone,
Sweet, though in sadness. Be thou, spirit fierce,
My spirit! Be thou me, impetuous one!
Drive my dead thoughts over the universe
Like withered leaves to quicken a new birth!
And, by the incantation of this verse,
Scatter, as from an unextinguished hearth
Ashes and sparks, my words among mankind!
Be through my lips to unawaken’d Earth
The trumpet of a prophecy! O Wind!
If Winter comes, can Spring be far behind?
Questions:
(a) What qualities is the poet praising in the wind?
(b) What is the theme of the poem?
(c) Comment on the effect of one of the similes in
stanza 1.
(d) How successful is the phrase ‘Pestilence-stricken
multitudes’ as a description of the leaves? What
does it suggest to you?
(e) How is the wind both destroyer and preserver?
(f) How is stanza 2 linked with 1 in thought and
imagery?
(g) What is meant by ‘Thou dirge of the dying year’?
(h) What is the poet lamenting in his own life?
(i) How is stanza 4 linked with the rest of the poem?
(j) What is the real meaning of the last line?
Poetry Unit 15; FORM (cont.)
THE ELEGY
REQUIESCAT
Matthew Arnold (1822-1888)
This is a lyric form which has been adopted by English
verse as a mournful poem expressing a lament for the
dead or the poet’s longing for something or someone no
longer present. It is not rigid in rhyme or rhythm, and
these qualities should be unobtrusive enough to avoid
diverting attention from the thoughts expressed. An
elegy does not usually betray violent emotion; rather, a
gentle melancholy pervades it, and there is often,
towards the end, a gradual change from sorrow to joy,
as the poet re-affirms his faith in a future life. The most
famous elegy in our language is an impersonal one;
Gray’s ‘Elegy in a Country Churchyard’ does not deal
with a private loss, but gently muses on the lives of the
simple village folk. You should read the whole poem,
as it is an excellent example of the perfect marriage of
thought and word-music. Listen to the wistful, twilight
music in the following stanzas:
Strew on her roses, roses,
And never a spray of yew.
In quiet she reposes:
Ah! would that I did too.
Her mirth the world required:
She bathed it in smiles of glee
But her heart was tired, tired,
And now they let her be.
Her life was turning, turning,
In mazes of heat and sound.
But for peace her soul was yearning,
And now peace laps her round.
Her cabin’d, ample spirit,
It flutter’d, and fail’d for breath.
‘The curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd winds slowly o’er the lea,
Tonight it doth inherit.
The vasty Hall of Death.
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
REQUIESCAT
Oscar Wilde (1856-1900)
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds.’
Tread lightly, she is near
Under the snow,
Speak gently, she can hear
The daisies grow.
Below are two poems very similar in tone. In fact they
share the same title and they both mourn a lost woman,
whether wife or sweetheart. Discuss the language of
each poem, considering how it helps to create the atmos-
phere of loss and melancholy. Notice, too, how very
simple the chosen words are. There is no problem of
All her bright golden hair
Tarnished with rust,
She that was young and fair
Fallen to dust.
Lily-like, white as snow,
understanding here.
She hardly knew
She was a woman, so
Sweetly she grew.


Coffin-board, heavy stone,
Lie on her breast,
Peace, peace, she cannot hear
Lyre or sonnet,
All my life’s buried here,
Heap earth upon it.
I vex my heart alone,
She is at rest.
Poetry Unit 16: FORM (cont.)
THE IDYLL
This is a lyric, descriptive of a scene or a person in an
attractive setting of simplicity, usually of rustic (country)
charm. It echoes the romantic view of the peasant life
or of a legendary existence, as does Wordsworth’s The
Solitary Reaper’ or Arnold’s ‘The Forsaken Merman’.
MY WILL
A. C. Benson (1862-1925)
1 would live, if I had my will,
In an old stone grange on a Yorkshire hill;
Ivy-encircled, lichen-streaked,
Low and mullioned, gable-peaked,
With a velvet lawn, and a hedge of yew,
An apple orchard to saunter through,
Hyacinth-scented in spring’s clear prime,
And rich with roses in summer-time,
And a waft of heather over the hill,
Had I my will.
Over my tree-tops, grave and brown,
Slants the back of a breezy down;
Through my fields, by the covert edge,
A swift stream splashes from ledge to ledge
On to the hamlet, scattered, gray,
Where folk live leisurely day by day;
The same old faces about my walks;
Smiling welcomes and simple talks;
Innocent stories of Jack and Jill;
Had I my will.
How my thrushes should pipe ere noon,
Young birds learning the old birds’ tune;
Casements wide, when the eve is fair,
To drink the scents of the moonlit air.
Over the valley I’d see the lights
Of the lone hill-farms, on the upland heights;
And hear when the night is alert with rain,
The steady pulse of the labouring train,
With the measured gush of the merry rill,
Had I my will.
Then in the winter, when gusts pipe thin,
By a clear fire would 1 sit within,
Warm and dry in the ingle nook,
Reading at ease in a good grave book;
Under the lamp, as I sideways bend,
I’d scan the face of my well-loved friend;
Writing my verses with careless speed,
One at least would be pleased to read;
Thus sweet leisure my days should fill,
Had I my will.
Then when the last guest steps to my side;
—May it be summer, the windows wide, —
I would smile as the parson prayed,
Smile to think I was once afraid;
Death should beckon me, take my hand,
Smile at the door of the silent land,
Then the slumber, how good to sleep
Under the grass where the shadows creep,
Where the headstones slant on the wind-swept hill!
I shall have my will!
Questions:
(a) In a short paragraph, describe the poet’s idyllic wish.
(b) How does the first stanza appeal to your sense of
smell?
(c) What figure of speech is used in ‘Slants the back of
a breezy down’?
(d) What is meant by ‘lnnocent stories of Jack and Jill’?
(e) What sounds are evoked in stanza 3?
(f) How is the fear taken out of the poet’s picture of
death?
(g) Would you agree that the poet has created an idyll
(literally ‘a little picture’) for us in his imagination?
(h) Comment on the rhyme and rhythm of the poem.
(i) Comment on the success of the imagery and the
word-music in creating a sympathetic atmosphere.
GENERAL
Poems can, of course, be classified under other headings
than lyric or narrative. As you proceed with the criti-
cal exercises, you will find that you could group poems
of similar themes, or similar subject matter. You might
consider poems of similar form, as we did with the
sonnet and the elegy. Poems could suggest similar
moods or similar motives on the part of the poets.
All the work we have been doing on the technical
aspects of poetry may well give you an over-analytical
impression. It is difficult to avoid such an impression
when so many formal matters have to be discussed in
the senior English course. Try to keep clearly in mind
the main goal of poetry appreciation, which is to under-
stand what the poet is saying; his technique can then be
examined to see how it helps him to convey his thoughts
and feelings.


Poetry Unit 17: APPRECIATION
ONE MODERN POET
The poem below is by one of the most unconventional
poets of our time —Dame Edith Sitwell. She belongs to
a family of poets; both her brothers, Osbert and
Sacheverell, wrote verse, sometimes in collaboration
with her. She has tried to create strange, ‘modern’
sounds to reflect the modern life around her, and in a
number of her poems she has copied the rhythms of
modern dance tempos. She has made a recording of the
selection of poems from which ‘Aubade’ is taken, with
background music by Sir William Walton. It is quite
an experience to hear her rather sepulchral voice inton-
ing her own verse. The girl in this poem is probably a
housemaid, coming down to prepare early morning tea
for the household. The title comes from a French word
meaning ‘a dawn song’.
AUBADE
Edith Sitwell (b. 1887)
Jane, Jane,
Tall as a crane,
The morning light creaks down again.
Comb your cockscomb-ragged hair,
Jane, Jane, come down the stair.
Each dull blunt wooden stalactite
Of rain creaks, hardened by the light,
Sounding like an overtone
From some lonely world unknown.
But the creaking empty light
Will never harden into sight,
Will never penetrate your brain
With overtones like the blunt rain.
The light would show (if it could harden)
Eternities of kitchen garden,
Cockscomb flowers that none will pluck,
And wooden flowers that ’gin to cluck,
In the kitchen you must light
Flames as staring, red and white,
As carrots or as turnips, shining
Where the cold dawn light lies whining.
Cockscomb hair on the cold wind
Hangs limp, turns the milk’s weak mind
Jane, Jane,
Tali as a crane,
The morning light creaks down again!
Questions:
(a) Without quoting from the poem, describe Jane as
she appears to your mind’s eye.
(b) How effective is the simile ‘Tall as a crane’?
(c) What quality does Jane’s hair share with the back-
yard flowers, for them both to be called ‘cocks-
comb’?
(d) Every image in this poem is associated with the one
preceding it, as the poet tries to create the effect of
thoughts merging together in a sleepy mind. Why,
therefore, is the word ‘creaks’ used so often?
(e) What does the word ‘stalactite’ suggest about the
rain?
(f) What other line in the poem has led the poet to
compare flames with carrots and turnips?
(g) What do you think is meant by ‘the cold dawn light
lies whining’?
(h) How effective is the fragment of personification in
the phrase ‘the milk’s weak mind’? Does it add to
the unsatisfactory image of Jane?
(i) Comment on the suitability of the rhythm to the
sense of the verse.
(j) Comment on the success of any sound devices you
can find in the poem.
Poetry Unit 18: APPRECIATION (cont.)
D. H. LAWRENCE
The poet in this assignment was far better known for his
novels than his poetry. But D. H. Lawrence had an eye
for startling imagery and an ear for startling rhythms
which make his poetry interesting from a critical point
of view, even if you do not find it appealing. In the fol-
lowing poem you will notice that his imagery is quite the
opposite of the traditionally ‘poetic’ kind, for he is
describing natural things in terms of man-made
materials.
BARE ALMOND TREES
D. H. Lawrence (1885-1930)
Wet almond trees, in the rain,
Like iron sticking grimly out of earth;
Black almond trunks, in the rain,
Like iron implements, twisted, hideous, out of the earth,
Out of the deep, soft fledge of Sicilian winter-green,
Earth-grass uneatable,
Almond trunks curving blackly, iron-dark, climbing
the slopes.


Almond-tree, beneath the terrace rail,
Black, rusted, iron trunk,
You have welded your thin stems finer,
Like steel, like sensitive steel in the air,
Gray, lavender, sensitive steel, curving thinly and brittly
up in a parabola.
What arc you doing in the December rain?
Have you a strange electric sensitiveness in your
steel tips?
Do you feel the air for electric influences
Like some strange magnetic apparatus?
Do you take in messages, in some strange code,
From heaven’s wolfish, wandering electricity, that
prowls so constantly round Etna?
Do you take the whisper of sulphur from the air?
Do you hear the chemical accents of the sun?
Do you telephone the roar of the waters over the earth?
And from all this, do you make calculations?
Sicily, December’s Sicily in a mass of rain
With iron branching blackly, rusted like old, twisted
implements
And brandishing and stooping over earth’s wintry fledge,
climbing the slopes
Of uneatable soft green!
Questions:
(a) What aspect of the almond trees has caught the
poet’s attention? Briefly describe the mental image
you have of the landscape in the poem.
(b) What is your opinion of the simile Mike iron imple-
ments’? Show how the idea is developed through
the poem.
(c) What is a parabola? Is it an effective way of
describing the curve of a branch? Give a reason for
your opinion.
(d) In the third stanza, what does the poet imagine
about the trees? Show how he uses personification
in this stanza.
(e) How effective is the line 'From heaven’s wolfish,
wandering electricity, that prowls so constantly
around Etna’?
(f) You will have noticed that the rhythm, the line-
lengths and the stanza-lengths are quite irregular.
Can you sec any reason for the poet’s stanza divi-
sion? Is there a change of thought in each stanza?
If so, express.each section in your own words.
(g) To compensate for the lack of rhyme and regular
rhythm, the poet has used a great deal of repetition,
both of single words and of phrases. Show how these
repetitions not only provide a kind of pattern within
each stanza, but also help to link all the stanzas
together.
(h) Look for examples of assonance and alliteration
which also contribute to an effect of pattern in this
example of very free verse.
(i) Finally, give your own considered opinion of the
work. Do you agree that it is poetry? If so, what
makes it poetic? If not, to what do you object?
Poetry Unit 19: APPRECIATION (cont.)
LORD BYRON
The poem below is one of Lord Byron’s more serious
poems, without the bitterness against mankind which
distinguishes most of his work. Perhaps because of that
bitterness, which exiled him from human affection, he
found a deep sympathy in nature, particularly in its
strength and in its ability to shake off man’s control. As
a comparison with this poem you should read his poem,
'The Ocean’, two stanzas of which you will find below
this exercise.
STORM ON LAKE GENEVA
Lord Byron (1788-1824)
The sky is changed! —and such a change! Oh night,
And storm, and darkness, ye arc wondrous strong,
Yet lovely in your strength, as is the light
Of a dark eye in woman! Far along,
From peak to peak, the rattling crags among
Leaps the live thunder! Not from one lone cloud,
But every mountain now hath found a tongue,
And Jura answers, through her misty shroud,
Back to the joyous Alps, who call to her aloud!
And this is in the night!—Most glorious night!
Thou wert not sent for slumber! let me be
A sharer in thy fierce and far delight, —
A portion of the tempest and of thee!
How the lit lake shines, a phosphoric sea,
And the big rain comes dancing to the earth!
And now again 'tis black, —and now, the glee
Of the loud hills shakes with its mountain-mirth,
As if they did rejoice o’er a young earthquake’s birth.
Questions:
(a) What is the poet’s reaction to the storm? Do you
think there is a theme in the poem, or is it simply a
description of a scene?
(b) How does the poet emphasise the 'fierce and far
delight’ of the storm?
(e) Explain and comment on the aptness of the simile
in stanza 1.
(d) Comment on the success of the lines
'. . . Far along,
From peak to peak, the rattling crags among
Leaps the live thunder! . . .’
What poetic tricks are used and what is their effect?
What does the poet gain by reversing the natural
order of the sentence?
(e) How successful arc the lines
'How the lit lake shines, a phosphoric sea,
And the big rain comes dancing to the earth!’
Give reasons for your opinion.


(f) What effect does the poet’s use of the dash and the
exclamation mark have on the atmosphere of the
poem?
(g) How regular is the poem’s rhyme and rhythm?
Identify the metre and show where the poet
deliberately varies it for emphasis or for a sudden
change of pace. What do you notice about the last
line of each stanza?
(h) Give your opinion of the success of the total effect
of the poem, pointing out the qualities which appeal
to you most.
For interest, read the extract below:
‘Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean—roll!
Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain;
Man marks the earth with ruin—his control
Stops with the shore; upon the watery plain
The wrecks are all thy deed, nor doth remain
A shadow of man’s ravage, save his own,
When, for a moment, like a drop of rain,
He sinks into thy depths with bubbling groan,
Without a grave, unknell’d, uncoffin’d, and unknown.
Thou glorious mirror, where the Almighty’s form
Glasses itself in tempests; in all time, —
Calm or convulsed, in breeze, or gale, or storm,
Icing the Pole, or in the torrid clime
Dark-heaving—boundless, endless, and sublime,
The image of eternity, the throne
Of the Invisible; even from out thy slime
The monsters of the deep are made; each zone
Obeys thee; thou goest forth, dread, fathomless, alone.
Poetry Unit 20: APPRECIATION (cont.)
A MODERN AUSTRALIAN POET
The following poem is by a modern Australian poet.
His work is more subtle in thought and feeling than that
of the bush poets, and he is able to present a message
more appropriate for our complex everyday life.
STANDARDISATION
A. D, Hope (b. 1907)
When, darkly brooding on this Modern Age
the journalist with his marketable woes
fills up once more the inevitable page
of fatuous, flatulent, Sunday-paper prose;
whenever the green aesthete starts to whoop
with horror at the house not made with hands
and when from vacuum cleaners and tinned soup
another pure theosophist demands
rebirth in other, less industrial stars
where huge towns thrust up in synthetic stone
and films, and sleek miraculous motor cars
and celluloid and rubber are unknown;
when from his vegetable Sunday School
emerges with the neatly maudlin phrase
still one more Nature poet, to rant or drool
about the ‘Standardisation of the Race’;
1 see, stooping among her orchard trees
the old, sound, Earth, gathering her windfalls in,
broad in the hams and stiffening at the knees
pause, and 1 see her grave malicious grin.
For there is no manufacturer competes
with her in the mass production of shapes and things.
Over and over she gathers and repeats
the cast of a face, a million butterfly wings.
She does not tire of the pattern of a rose.
Her oldest tricks still catch us with surprise.
She cannot recall how long ago she chose
The streamlined hulls of fish, the snail’s long eyes,
Love, which still pours into its ancient mould
the lashing seed that grows to a man again,
from whom by the same processes unfold
unending generations of living men.
She has standardised his ultimate needs and pains.
Lost tribes in a lost language mutter in
his dreams: his science is tethered to their brains,
his guilt merely repeats Original Sin.
And beauty standing motionless before
her mirror sees behind her mile on mile,
a long queue in an unknown corridor,
anonymous faces plastered with her smile.
Questions:
(a) What is the meaning of the title? Expand it into a
clear statement of the theme.
(b) Comment on the force of
‘. . . the inevitable page
Of fatuous, flatulent, Sunday-paper prose
(c) Explain; aesthete; theosophist; maudlin.
(d) How do the first four stanzas of the poem relate to
the theme?
(e) What figure of speech is used to describe the earth
and how effective is it?
(f) What significance have the orchard trees in stanza 5?
(g) How effective is the phrase ‘the streamlined hulls of
fish’?
(h) What is meant by
‘Lost tribes in a lost language mutter in
his dreams; his science is tethered to their brains’?
(i) Do you consider that the final stanza fits in with the
mood of the rest of the poem? Give reasons for your
answer.
(j) Give your personal reaction to the poem. In what
ways do you consider it successful? Arc there any
sections which you find difficult?


We shall now expect you to graduate from answering
particular questions on the various aspects of each poem
to writing complete essays of appreciation. You should
not find this very difficult if you keep in mind the
method you have been practising in the previous exer-
cises. Remember to deal with the most important things
first, i.e., the theme and content. Make sure you show
the examiner that your understand, or have made a real
attempt to understand, the poet’s motive and ideas. You
may also indicate fairly early the type of poem, particu-
larly if it follows a definite structure such as the sonnet.
Make some comment on rhythm, line-lengths and
stanza-patterns if they are deliberately organised to
enhance or emphasise the ideas or mood of the poet.
Then you need to comment carefully on the effect of
the poet’s language, taking note of his use of poetic
devices such as figures of speech and tricks of sound.
You may want to discuss the emotional impact of the
words or their precision in expressing the thoughts of
the poet. Finally, you should give your own opinion of
the poet’s success, perhaps emphasising the qualities
you consider most worthwhile, perhaps comparing it
with other poems of similar content or mood.
Below, you are given a typical essay of appreciation. The
poem is by one of our most important modern Aus-
tralian poets. You might not have exactly the same
reaction to the poem as the writer of the essay; it is
given to you merely to show how each aspect of the
discussion can be blended into a coherent composition.
SOUTH OF MY DAYS
Judith Wright (b. 1915)
South of my days’ circle, part of my blood’s country,
rises that tableland, high delicate outline
of bony slopes wincing under the winter,
low trees blue-leaved and olive, outcropping, granite-
clean, lean, hungry country. The creek’s leaf-silenced,
willow-choked, the slope a tangle of medlar and
crabapple
branching over and under, blotched with a green lichen;
and the old cottage lurches in for shelter.
O cold the black-frost night. The walls draw in to the
warmth
and the old roof cracks its joints; the slung kettle
hisses a leak on the fire. Hardly to be believed that
summer
will turn up again some day in a wave of rambler roses,
thrust its hot face in here to tell another yarn—
a story old Dan can spin into a blanket against
the winter.
Seventy years of stories he clutches round his bones.
Seventy summers are hived in him like old honey.
Droving that year, Charleville to the Hunter,
nineteen-one it was, and the drought beginning;
sixty head left at the Mclntyre, the mud round them
hardened like iron; and the yellow boy died
in the sulky ahead with the gear, but the horse went on,
stopped at the Sandy Camp and waited in the evening.
It was the flies we seen first, swarming like bees.
Came to the Hunter, three hundred head of a thousand —
cruel to keep them alive—and the river was dust.
Or mustering up in the Bogongs in the autumn
when the blizzards came early. Brought them down;
we brought them down, what aren’t there yet.
Or driving for Cobb’s on the run up from Tamworth—
Thunderbolt at the top of Hungry Hill,
And I give him a wink, 1 wouldn’t wait long, Fred,
not if I was you; the troopers are just behind,
coming for that job at the Hillgrove. He went like a luny,
him on his big black horse.
Oh, they slide and they vanish
as he shuffles the years like a pack of conjuror’s cards.
True or not, it’s all the same; and the frost on the roof
cracks like a whip, and the back-log breaks into ash.
Wake, old man. This is winter, and the yarns are over.
No-one is listening.
South of my days’ circle
1 know it dark against the stars, the high lean country
full of old stories that still go walking in my sleep.
ESSAY
This poem, by an outstanding modern poet, is interest-
ing for many reasons. It manages to capture the spirit
and idiom of the bush balladists of the IB9o’s, yet it
speaks in the sophisticated manner of the modern poet
for whom, as a rule, the old style of writing was rather
crude and unpolished.
The title and the opening phrase at once provoke
interest and wonder. Probably Judith Wright is stand-
ing in the fields of her own farm, her ‘days’ circle’ of
work, and is looking reflectively towards the slopes of
the tableland which has always dominated the outlook
of the farmers of the foothills and the plain. There are
the slopes that have sheltered many a dream and many
an adventure, and have lent atmosphere to this region,
‘my blood’s country’. From here the poet’s thoughts
seem to go further—to the great age of the continent of
Australia; her images link the land with the age and
memories of old Dan. The country is ‘lean’ and ‘bony’, the
slope is ‘blotched with a green lichen’, even the cottage
is personified as an old man drawing in to the warmth.
So the theme emerges, of reverent communion with the
past, of the awareness that the memories and old
familiar stories of the country are bound up with our
lives —even though at times ‘no-one is listening’. The
land, like old Dan, has stored its memories; they are
‘hived . . . like old honey’.
The first and second stanzas create a scene and atmos-
phere out of which old Dan steps to tell his yarns. In
precise, condensed phrases, the poet presents pictures
that rise sharply in the imagination; ‘bony slopes winc-
ing under the winter’, ‘the old cottage lurches in for
shelter’ and the creek is ‘willow-choked’. Old Dan
AN EXAMPLE


clutches his memories like ‘a blanket against the winter’.
After the concise, poetic language of these stanzas,
Dan’s colloquial speech surprises us. He wants to tell
us his best anecdotes. He has known all the typical
aspects of Australia’s early days—droving, stock-riding,
the Cobb and Co. coaches and the bushrangers. He
speaks of a hard life in rugged country, and of des-
perate situations, yet there is no bitterness in his voice,
for all this is part of his ‘blood’s country’, too. He is
obviously proud to have known the great Thunderbolt
the picture is unforgettable of Dan at the top of
Hungry Hill, winking out of a cheery face at the bush-
ranger who gratefully receives the tip and dashes off,
‘like a luny’.
Dan’s stories pass, the ‘high lean country’ remains, and
the poet stands at the close, herself ‘dark against the
stars’, remembering and feeling so much feeling
deeply, in the blood.
This is free verse whose flexibility of structure allows
the poem to move from impression to impression as
memory ‘shuffles the years like a pack of conjuror’s
cards’. A regular rhythm and rhyme would surely have
marred the poet’s mood of wistfulness and wonder.
Although she denies herself these more obvious poetic
devices, she is able to create effective and subtle sound
patterns. The assonance of ‘clean, lean, hwngry, coantry’
and ‘bony slopes’ sharpens the clarity of her imagery
and frequently gives the impression of rhyme within a
line:
‘r/ses that tableland, h/gh delicate outl/ne’, and
‘The walls draw into the warmth’.
The verbs chosen are harsh-sounding, just as the
country is harsh; ‘choked’, ‘blotched’, ‘clutches’ and
‘thrust’. Judith Wright’s ability to find onomatopoeic
words makes a fresh appeal to our imagination: we
listen as the roof ‘cracks its joints’, the ‘slung kettle
hisses’ on the fire, the frost ‘cracks like a whip’, and
‘the back-log breaks’. The diction, to suit the alterna-
tion between the poet and old Dan, varies from poetic
to colloquial, but it is always pithy, always commend-
ably straightforward and uncontrived.
The poet’s skill lies in her ability to handle and mingle
both styles so convincingly. No image is unsatisfactory,
no trace of emotion is out of character with the theme.
A memorable poem, ‘South of My Days’ is certainly one
of the best from the modern school of Australian verse.
Poetry Unit 22: APPRECIATION (cont.)
EXERCISE
Write a critical appreciation of the following poem.
Read it carefully at least twice and then make brief
notes on the theme, content, form, mood and language
before you attempt to write your essay. Quote where
possible to illustrate your points, and pay particular
attention to your punctuation of titles and quotations.
LINES COMPOSED . . . ABOVE TINTERN ABBEY
William Wordsworth (1770-1850)
‘For nature then
(The coarser pleasures of my boyish days,
And their glad animal movements all gone by)
To me was all in all. —I cannot paint
What then 1 was. The sounding cataract
Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock,
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
Their colours and their forms, were then to me
An appetite; a feeling and a love,
That had no need of a remoter charm,
By thought supplied, nor any interest
Unborrowed from the eye.—That time is past,
And all its aching joys are now no more,
And all its dizzy raptures. Not for this
Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur; other gifts
Have followed; for such loss, 1 would believe,
Abundant recompense. For I have learned
To look on nature, not as in the hour
Of thoughtless youth; but hearing oftentimes
The still, sad music of humanity,
Not harsh nor grating, though of ample power
To chasten and subdue. And 1 have felt
A presence that disturbs me with the joy
Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
And the round ocean and the living air,
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man:
A motion and a spirit, that impels
All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still
A lover of the meadows and the woods,
And mountains; and of all that we behold
From this green earth; of all the mighty world
Of eye, and ear, —both what they half create,
And what perceive; well pleased to recognise
In nature and the language of the sense
The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse,
The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul
Of all my moral being . . .’


Poetry Unit 23: APPRECIATION (cont.)
G, M. HOPKINS
The poems below are examples of the work of one of
the most unusual poets of our language. Born in 1844,
Gerard Manley Hopkins cannot be called a modern poet
chronologically, for he died in 1889, long before most
poets began to experiment with free verse and variations
of traditional patterns. His poetry, however, was not
published until 1918, when it had a volcanic effect on
the work of other poets. His most startling characteris-
tic is his ‘sprung rhythm’ (mentioned in Unit 8): his
poetry frequently looks chaotic on the page, but once
it is read aloud the speech rhythm melody takes over
and arouses remarkable force of emotion and power.
Hopkins was hardly less unconventional in his manipu-
lation of language to create new images, fresh from the
mind and demanding new skills of interpretation on the
part of the reader. He was a devout Roman Catholic
and became a priest; his poetry reflects his worship of
Christ and many of his poems are dedicated to his Lord.
You may not like his work, but it will make you think
again, for none of it can be taken for granted or read
superficially. Write a critical appreciation of one of
these poems . . .
SPRING
G, M. Hopkins (1844-1889)
Nothing is so beautiful as spring—
When weeds, in wheels, shoot long and lovely and
Thrush’s eggs look like little low heavens, and thrush
Through the echoing timber does so rinse and wring
The ear, it strikes like lightnings to hear him sing;
The glassy peartree leaves and blooms, they brush
The descending blue; that blue is all in a rush
With richness; the racing lambs too have fair their fling.
What is all this juice and all this joy?
A strain of the earth’s sweet being in the beginning
In Eden garden.—Have, get, before it cloy,
Before it cloud, Christ, lord, and sour with sinning,
Innocent mind and Mayday in girl and boy,
Most, O maid’s child, thy choice and worthy the
winning.
GOD’S GRANDEUR
G. M. Hopkins
The world is charged with the grandeur of God.
It will flame out, like shining from shook foil;
It gathers to a greatness, like the ooze of oil
Crushed. Why do men then now not reck his rod?
Generations have trod, have trod, have trod;
And all is seared with trade; bleared, smeared with
toil;
And wears man’s smudge and shares man’s smell:
the soil
Is bare now, nor can foot feel, being shod.
And for all this, nature is never spent;
There lives the dearest freshness deep down things;
And though the last lights off the black West went
Oh, morning, at the brown brink eastward, springs—
Because the Holy Ghost over the bent
World broods with warm breast and with ah!
bright wings.
Poetry Unit 24: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT
THE EARLY PERIODS
In the following units we shall consider very briefly the
chief characteristics of each age of English poetry, with
a final unit on Australian poets. You will realise that
we can give only the bare outline of such a history, but
you should endeavour to read more fully into the back-
ground of each period for yourself. Your library is
sure to have a number of good textbooks of English
literature, and you may even find books dealing with
poetry only, or interesting biographies of the more
colourful poets.
MEDIEVAL POETRY: The only poet whose name you
should know in this period is Geoffrey Chaucer. His
long collection of narrative poetry, ‘The Canterbury
Tales’, is justly famous for its skill in a variety of story
forms, its keen observation of human nature, its good-
humoured criticism of the follies of fourteenth century
society, and its vivid descriptive power. You may find
an extract in one of your anthologies at school.
THE ELIZABETHANS: These writers belong to the
period from the accession of Elizabeth I in 1558 until
the beginning of the seventeenth century. Shakespeare,
of course, immediately comes to mind; apart from his
genius in developing the power and flexibility of
dramatic blank verse in his plays, his best legacy to
English poetry was his collection of sonnets. The sonnet
form had come to England, during the Italian Renais-
sance, in the poetry of Sir Thomas Wyatt. Many other
Elizabethans followed his lead in experimenting with the
sonnet, and the themes were nearly all concerned with
some aspect of love. Such pre-occupption with his fair
mistress was the Elizabethan poet’s answer to the
medieval tradition of courtly love and chivalry. Coupled
with this tradition was the Elizabethans’ delight in the
song-lyric. Most dramatists included songs in their
plays, and other poets wrote lyrics to music. The
language is simple and the ideas are straightforward so
as to be readily understood when sung. Marlowe and
Jonson follow Shakespeare in this tradition, and any
anthology will show a variety of lesser poets who were
also capable of creating beautiful sounds ‘and sweet
airs’.


There was, too, a feeling for narrative poetry about
romantic heroes, beautiful heroines and fairy-tale
adventures full of legendary dangers. Probably the best
example of this is Edmund Spenser’s The Faerie
Queene’, a loose allegory of the court of Elizabeth. In
this and in other serious poetry of the age can be seen
a feeling for language experiment. English had only
just won recognition as a scholarly form of expression,
and the poets were almost drunk with its possibilities.
Therefore, if you feel that, from a modern point of view,
the language of Shakespeare and Spenser is extravagant
and over-ornamented, you should remember that they
were not yet certain of what the language could do and
were perhaps a little over-excited about its potentialities.
Assignment: Write a biographical essay on either Shake-
speare or Spenser, including in your discussion the copy
of an extract or complete poem of at least ten lines and
discussing the content and language of the poem.
Reading: Read what you can, in anthologies, of the
poems of periods mentioned above.
Poetry Unit 25: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT (cont.)
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
Here we find a variety of poetic ‘schools’. The most
straightforward were the Cavalier group who continued
the tradition of courtly love lyrics from the Elizabethans.
Among these were Carew, Herrick, Lovelace and
Suckling.
Much more important was the growing religious
influence which began with the poetry of Donne (pro-
nounced Dun) and ended with the glorious achievement
of Milton. Lesser religious poets were Herbert (see
Unit 5) and Crashaw. Donne was to the seventeenth
century something of what Hopkins was to be to the
early twentieth century. He rebelled against the
romantic conventions of the love lyrics, rejected the
easy descriptions of unfailingly beautiful scenes, and
turned the perfect metre of Elizabethan verse upside
down. He was determined to be original in all things,
including his choice of diction, although here he often
runs the risk of being obscure through too great an effort
to be different. Such opening lines as ‘For God’s sake,
hold your tongue and let me love’ do produce a refresh-
ing change, however, from the excessive good manners
of the earlier love poems.
John Milton (1608-1674) shows in his poetry the surest
mingling of the Elizabethan influence from the Renais-
sance and the religious impulse of the Reformation. His
greatest work, ‘Paradise Lost’, is a massive poem in the
epic style and was written to justify the ways of God to
man. It tells the story of Satan’s fall from grace in
Heaven, of God’s creation of the earth and man, and of
Satan’s attempt to destroy Adam and Eve by causing
them to disobey God, Although it treats a great religi-
ous theme of our society, Milton’s poetry contains many
overtones from his classical education.
Assignment: Read all you can about Milton’s life—it is
a fascinating story. Read the two poems below and
write a critical appreciation of ONE of them.
From HOLY SONNETS
John Donne (1573-1631)
Death, be not proud, though some have called thee
Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so,
For those, whom thou think’st thou dost overthrow,
Die not, poor death, nor yet canst thou kill me.
From rest and sleep, which but thy pictures be,
Much pleasure then from thee, much more must flow,
And soonest our best men with thee do go,
Rest of their bones, and soul’s delivery.
Thou art slave to Fate, Chance, kings, and desperate
And dost with poison, war, and sickness dwell,
And poppy, or charms, can make us sleep as well,
And better than thy stroke; why swell’s! thou then?
One short sleep past, we wake eternally,
And death shall be no more; death, thou shall die.
ON SHAKESPEARE
John Milton (1608-1674)
What needs my Shakespeare for his honoured bones
The labour of an age in piled stones?
Or that his hallowed reliques should be hid
Under a star-ypointing pyramid?
Dear son of memory, great heir of fame,
What need’s! thou such weak witness of thy name?
Thou in our wonder and astonishment
Hast built thyself a live-long monument.
For whilst to th’ shame of slow-endeavouring art.
Thy easy numbers flow, and that each heart
Hath from the leaves of thy unvalued book
Those Delphic lines with deep impression took,
That thou, our fancy of itself bereaving,
Does make us marble with too much conceiving;
And so sepulchred in such pomp dost lie
That kings for such a tomb would wish to die.


Poetry Unit 26: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT (cont.)
THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
This was chiefly a period of the development of prose,
as can be seen in the history of the novel and the essay.
The poetry was affected by a prosaic attitude, and satiric
and didactic poetry prevailed. The writers of this period
were teaching themselves to reason rather than to
imagine, and emotional writing was highly suspect.
John Dryden and Alexander Pope are the giants of
poetry for the age. Their chief contribution to poetic
form is the Heroic Couplet, a very smooth and adaptable
pattern;
‘Know then thyself; presume not God to scan;
The proper study of mankind is man.’
The danger in the verse of the period was that it tended
to become too artificial and too easily copied by poor
poets with few worthwhile ideas. In the second half of
the century we find the more serious poets turning
against the impersonal approach of their contem-
poraries, looking for other forms in earlier literature
such as the ballad and the romance. There developed a
renewed interest in lyric verse and in natural descrip-
tion. Of this group, probably the most important are
Gray, Burns and Blake.
Assignment: Read the two poems below and write a
critical appreciation of one of them.
From SUMMER
Alexander Pope (1688-1744)
Where’er you walk, cool gales shall fan the glade;
Trees, where you sit, shall crowd into a shade;
Where’er you tread, the blushing flowers shall rise,
And all things flourish where you turn your eyes.
Oh! how I long with you to pass my days,
Invoke the Muses, and resound your praise!
Your praise the birds shall chant in ev’ry* grove,
And winds shall waft it to the pow’rs above,
But would you sing, and rival Orpheus’ strain,
The wond’ring forests soon should dance again;
The moving mountains hear the powerful call,
And headlong streams hang list’ning in their fall!
THE TIGER
William Blake (1757-1827)
Tiger! Tiger! burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand or eye
Could frame thy fearful symmetry?
In what distant deeps or skies
Burnt the fire of thine eyes?
On what wings dare he aspire?
What the hand dare seize the fire?
And what shoulder, and what art,
Could twist the sinews of thy heart?
And, when thy heart began to beat,
What dread hand? and what dread feet?
What the hammer? what the chain?
In what furnace was thy brain?
What the anvil? what dread grasp
Dare its deadly terrors clasp?
When the stars threw down their spears,
And watered heaven with their tears,
Did He smile His work to see?
Did He who made the lamb make thee?
Tiger! Tiger! burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand or eye
Dare frame thy fearful symmetry?
Poetry Unit 27: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT (cont.)
THE ROMANTICS
Heralded by the transition poets of the later eighteenth
century, came the full return to personal and emotional
poetry, with its emphasis on nature as the true standard
of beauty and as the symbol of all that is noble in life.
The new group of poets substituted once more the
imagination for reason as the spirit behind their poetry,
and once again literature had a new set of values and
techniques. The outstanding English Romantic poets
are Wordsworth and Coleridge, who initiated the new
movement with their publication of ‘Lyrical Ballads’,
followed in the next generation by Byron, Shelley and
Keats. As we have already had poems by all of these
except Coleridge in our previous assignments, you could
perhaps look back to see how important a place nature
holds in their imagination. Refer particularly to Words-
worth’s ‘Tintern Abbey’ to see how nature is the image
of the eternal for him. Coleridge is a rather strange
companion to the others, for he was not nearly so pro-
lific a poet and what poetry he did write is full of
strange imagery and mysterious legends. Read his best-
known poem, ‘The Rime of the Ancient Mariner’, to
see how he creates strange images and eerie atmos-
pheres.
Assignment: Find out as much as you can about the
lives of any TWO of the Romantic poets who interest
you.
Read this extract from Coleridge’s poem ‘Kubla Khan’
and comment on its poetic qualities.


KUBLA KHAN
Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834)
In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
A stately pleasure-dome decree:
Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
Through caverns measureless to man
Down to a sunless sea.
So twice five miles of fertile ground
With walls and towers were girdled round:
And there were gardens bright with sinuous rills,
Where blossomed many incense-bearing tree:
And here were forests ancient as the hills,
Enfolding sunny spots of greenery.
But oh! that deep romantic chasm which slanted
Down the green hill athwart a cedarn cover!
A savage place! as holy and enchanted
As e’er beneath a waning moon was haunted
By woman wailing for her demon lover!
And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething,
As if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing,
A mighty fountain momently was forced:
Amid whose swift half-intermitted burst
Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail,
Or chaffy grain beneath the thresher’s flail;
And mid these dancing rocks at once and ever
It flung up momently the sacred river.
Five miles meandering with a mazy motion
Through wood and dale the sacred river ran,
Then reached the caverns measureless to man,
And sank in Tumult to a lifeless ocean:
And ’mid this tumult Kubla heard from far
Ancestral voices prophesying war!
Poetry Unit 28: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT (cont.)
THE VICTORIANS
Following the lead of the Romantics, whom they
accepted as spiritual prophets, the poets of the second
half of the nineteenth century accepted the philosophy
of the earlier poets and developed it into a definite
moral code. Poetry tended to become thoughtful rather
than emotional, and these poets seemed to feel that they
were chosen to lead their contemporaries in fashioning
a better world. Most worthwhile studying are Tenny-
son, Robert and Elizabeth Browning, D. G. and
Christina Rossetti, Arnold, Morris and Swinburne.
Assignment: Read for yourself some of Browning’s
dramatic monologues to see that experiments with
language and rhythms were still going on.
Write a critical appreciation of the following extract
from ‘Ulysses’, by Tennyson. The great hero is old,
losing his sense of purpose, and he determines to make
one last effort of adventurous travel, for it is ‘not too
late to seek a newer world’. As you study it, try to see
the poet’s moral and its message to the modern world.
ULYSSES
Alfred, Lord Tennyson (1809-1892)
It little profits that an idle king,
By this still hearth, among these barren crags,
Match’d with an aged wife, 1 mete and dole
Unequal laws unto a savage race,
That hoard, and sleep, and feed, and know not me.
1 cannot rest from travel: 1 will drink
Life to the lees: all times I have enjoy’d
Greatly, have suffer’d greatly, both with those
That loved me, and alone; on shore, and when
Thro’ scudding drifts the rainy Hyades
Vext the dim sea: I am become a name;
For always roaming with a hungry heart
Much have I seen and known; cities of men
And manners, climates, councils, governments,
Myself not least, but honour’d of them all;
And drunk delight of battle with my peers,
Far on the ringing plains of windy Troy.
1 am a part of all that 1 have met;
Yet all experience is an arch wherethro’
Gleams that untravell’d world, whose margin fades
for ever and for ever when 1 move.
How dull it is to pause, to make an end,
To rust unburnish’d, not to shine in use!
As tho’ to breathe were life. Life piled on life
Were all too little, and of one to me
Little remains: but every hour is saved
From that eternal silence, something more,
A bringer of new things; and vile it were
For some three suns to store and hoard myself,
And this grey spirit yearning in desire
To follow knowledge, like a sinking star,
Beyond the utmost bound of human thought.
There lies the port: the vessel puffs her sail:
There gloom the dark broad seas. My mariners,
Souls that have toil’d, and wrought, and thought with
That ever with a frolic welcome took
The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed
Free hearts, free foreheads —you and I are old;
Old age hath yet his honour and his toil;
Death closes all: but something ere the end,
Some work of noble note, may yet be done,
Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods.
The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks:
The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep
Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends,
’Tis not too late to seek a newer world.


Push off, and sitting well in order smite
The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds
To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths
Of all the western stars, until 1 die.
It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:
It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,
And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.
Tho’ much is taken, much abides; and tho’
We are not now that strength which in old days
Moved earth and heaven; that which we are, we are;
One equal temper of heroic hearts,
Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.
Poetry Unit 29; HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT (cont.)
THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
Perhaps because of the vast number of critical changes
that have taken place in our social order during this
century, poetry has itself been subject to many currents
of ideas. In the early years the Victorian ideal of beauty
of language was carried on by Robert Bridges and
James Elroy Flecker, while Kipling was the voice of
Imperial England with its ‘far flung battle-line’ and its
"dominion over palm and pine’. Whatever might have
been the defects of his philosophy, Kipling’s verse had
a swing and a gusto that quite overpowered the elegance
of poets like Oscar Wilde and his fellows. At the same
time there were poets like the pessimistic A. E. Hous-
man and the disillusioned Thomas Hardy, and there
were the strange rhythms and language of Hopkins (see
Unit 23).
After the First World War, poets, influenced by the
bitter poetry of Owen and Sassoon, tended to see less
and less cause for hope for mankind in the modern
world. Here T. S. Eliot was able to begin his impressive
influence on modern poetry. His poem, ‘The Waste
Land’, seemed to voice all the sterility of modern life,
the crumbling of the institutions on which men had
depended for so long.
Perhaps in self-defence against the rapidity of change
in the world about them, many poets have subordinated
the importance of theme and ideas to subtle experimen-
tation with word meanings and sounds, with unconven-
tional imagery and rhythms. Edith Sitwell and D. H.
Lawrence arc two examples of this trend.
One of the most important symbolists of this century
was William Butler Yeats, an Irishman. His most com-
plex poetry is still not read with any confidence by the
majority of readers, but his feeling for rhythm and
atmosphere communicates itself even when the ideas are
elusive.
At thg present time there are many good poets in
English, but no one outstanding voice. T, S. Eliot seems
content to write no more; Masefield, the Poet Laureate,
is an old man and rarely writes unless for some state
occasion; Dylan Thomas, the Welsh writer, promised
great things before his premature death in 1953 at the
age of thirty-nine. For the rest, John Betjeman and
Norman Nicholson are perhaps the best known.
It may well be that poetry from other English-speaking
countries will predominate in influence over modern
English verse. Poets from America, South Africa and
Australia may be better equipped to speak in a new
voice. You should try to read some of the work of
Roy Campbell of Africa, of Robert Frost and E. A.
Robinson of America.
As we have set several modern poems in past assign-
ments, we shall not give another example here. We
suggest, rather, that you borrow a modern anthology of
verse and dip into it at random, observing the poet’s
choice of rhythm, language and subject. You will find
that the modern poet has accepted even ‘unpoetic’ sub-
ject matter and tried to make a creative piece of writing
from it. You may recognise echoes from other ages of
poetry, you will notice that not all poets are trying to
be unconventional, nor do all poets view the modern
world with disfavour or cynicism. Rather you will see
that poetry is as varied as the human nature that
creates it.
Poetry Unit 30: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT (cont.)
AUSTRALIA
Early Australian poets were inclined to feel that they
were exiled Englishmen rather than citizens of a new
land. Their poetry tended to emphasise the differences
between the two countries, dwelling on the harshness of
Australia and the seeming hostility of the land to its
new inhabitants. The verse of Adam Lindsay Gordon
shows this attitude at times.
The second period swung fully reverse to an aggressive
pride in the life of the outback in the verse of the bush
balladists, of whom the most notable were Henry
Lawson and A. B. (Banjo) Paterson. Sometimes written
in deliberate slang, calling up all the imagery which has
made Australia's reputation overseas, these poems
helped as much as any political movement to foster a
national spirit. But the Australia they described, of
bushrangers, shearers, drovers, diggers and swagmen,
is so largely changed today that there had to be a new
pattern in Australian verse.
Some such change began in the 1930’s with the impor-
tance given to the work of Christopher Brennan. He
opened the way for a varied school of modern poets
who manage to reveal their national identity without
necessarily emphasising the Australian scene. Above
all, the poets of today do not feel that they have to


describe Australia just because they happen to be Aus-
tralians. Certainly there are still many descriptive poems
about the Australian city and the outback, but there is
also a good selection of poems with more universal
themes. You have already had a taste of Judith Wright,
Hope, Slessor and Stewart. Others who are well worth
knowing are Robert Fitzgerald, Roland Robinson,
James McAuley and David Campbell. We suggest that
your best line of study is to obtain an anthology of
modern Australian poets, such as the Penguin or the
Boomerang Book.
Now, at the close, we remind you of the first unit of this
course, when we threw out the challenge of finding at
least some poetry that would appeal to you. Naturally
we hope that we have succeeded in adding to your
pleasure in this part of English literature. More impor-
tant, though, is the hope that through these assignments
you have been persuaded to find some congenial
thoughts in the work of men and women who have
experienced keenly the same joys and sorrows, the same
despair and wonder, as all men.
What, then, is serious poetry? It has been called the
language ‘of the imagination and the passions . . . there
is no thought or feeling that can have entered into the
mind of man, which he would be eager to communicate
to others, or to which they would listen with delight,
that is not a fit subject for poetry’. Obviously such a
definition includes poetry that is not necessarily solemn,
for we can listen with delight to pleasant sound or clever
patterning of sound or ideas. Why read and study
poetry? What can the poet do for you? An answer
comes from a poet whose prose was as musical as his
verse;
‘lf there shall ever arise a nation whose people
have forgotten poetry, or whose poets have forgot-
ten the people . . . though their city be greater than
Babylon of old, though they mine a league into the
earth or mount to the stars on wings what of
them? They will be a dark patch upon the world.’
(J. E. Flecker)


GUIDES TO LITERARY CRITICISM
1. THE GENERAL APPROACH
WHAT IS LITERARY CRITICISM?
I. A. Richards, in his ‘Principles of Literary Criti-
cism’, has this to say; ‘To set up as a critic is to set up
as a judge of values. For the arts are inevitably and
quite apart from any intention of the artist an appraisal
of existence. Matthew Arnold, when he said that poetry
is a criticism of life, was saying something so obvious
that it is constantly overlooked. The artist is concerned
with the record and perpetuation of the experiences
which seem to him most worth having.’ Thus when you
are asked to criticise a poem, novel, play, short story or
essay, you are asked to judge its significance as a record
of experience. Far more often than not, the particular
work with which you are concerned will describe situa-
tions and incidents far removed from the sort of life that
you and millions of other ordinary people know; the
characters may have many characteristics, temptations
and opportunities which are different from your own;
but, if the work of art is really great and deserves to
become immortal, you will feel that the artist has shown
a real part of life and has made some worthwhile
comment on its significance. In some instinctive way
you are able to recognize that the art form does mirror
life as it is lived by some people, and that these people,
however different they may be from you, have sufficient
human emotions and human reactions in given situa-
tions to establish their affinity with you as another
human being.
Literature is the art of describing life and human experi-
ence in words; the painter, the musician, the sculptor
and the choreographer have other media of description.
The writer may want to reform people or their institu-
tions, but this is seldom his main aim; more often, he is
interested in presenting experience as it appears to him.
As in all other forms of expression, he strives to say
things that are of universal interest. This obliges him to
be primarily concerned with his subject matter or con-
tent. But, if what he writes is to be called an art, then
his method of working, his manner or approach to his
theme, the personal characteristics which illuminate
his work, and the way he manipulates his chosen struc-
ture are all matters of great concern to him; such quali-
ties form his style and are of particular interest to the
literary critic.
If the critic is to judge any literary work sympatheti-
cally, he needs to have first an awareness of the funda-
mental requirements of each literary form: he must
know what to expect in a novel, a play, a poem, an
essay or a short story. Moreover, he should be aware
that each of these forms has a further set of divisions,
such as tragedy, comedy, farce or melodrama in plays.
He should also have some knowledge of other works in
the same literary form, so that he may compare or
contrast the one with the other. He needs to understand
the various periods in literary history if he is to realize
the importance and the relevance of the particular work
he is criticizing. Finally, he may find it helpful, and cer-
tainly will find it interesting, to learn a little of the life
of a particular writer; it is dangerous to attempt to
explain all aspects of a writer’s subject matter in the
light of what you know of his own life, but occasionally
it has significance, as in the social-problem novels of
H. G. Wells.
WHAT TO LOOK FOR
You should ask yourself these questions;
1. What is the subject of the work? (Titles often tell
little!)
2. What is the writer’s aim (purpose) in dealing with
the subject?
3. What is his theme (his principal attitude) about the
subject?
4. Since you cannot be sure (unless you know the
writer) just what he had in mind, can you justify
your opinions by reference to specific parts of the
work?
5. Are the characters life-like? Do they fit their place
in the work? Which are the important ones? Why
are the unimportant ones there? Is the gap between
the good and the bad too wide?
6. What of the setting? Is it the same throughout?
Does it vary as the characters travel? Is it an im-
portant feature of the subject matter or atmos-
phere, or is it merely an unobtrusive background?
7. Is the plot clearly unfolded? Are you sure of all
the crucial events? Is the climax an effective one?
Is the conclusion a satisfactory one for the writer’s
theme? (It may not necessarily satisfy your per-
sonal wishes for a happy ending.)
8. Which of the main aspects of literature is the most
important or the best portrayed in the work—plot,
characterization, setting, theme or style?
9. What are the writer’s chief strengths humour,
pathos, suspense, argument, description, dialogue,
male or female characters, developing scenes of
action or evoking compelling atmosphere?
10. What are the weaknesses of the work? Do they
affect your enjoyment or understanding of the
main body of ideas?
11. How wide would you say the work’s appeal is?
12. What is it that appeals to you, or that dissatisfies
you, in the work as a whole?


2. THE NOVEL
Any story, and therefore any novel, has five essential
elements: the series of happenings that constitute the
action of the story, planned by the author into an
organised plot; the people concerned with these hap-
penings, the characters; the time and place for all these
happenings, the setting; the idea or attitude which has
led the writer to the blending of these particular hap-
penings, characters and setting, the theme of the novel;
and finally, the method of narration and the character-
istic manner of expression revealed by the method, the
style of a particular writer.
The two most general distinctions of fiction are realism
and romance. Novels do not usually fall neatly into
one category or the other. Since all stories in fiction
are life rearranged to suit the novelists’ themes, the two
elements of romance and realism may be combined or
blended; but the blending will probably be so uneven
that the novel will suggest a general impression of
realism or of romance. Romantic fiction is not neces-
sarily more concerned with the ideas of love and court-
ship than is realism. The term ‘romance’ in literature
refers to the kind of fiction which portrays events that
are more adventurous, more dangerous or more mys-
terious than those in real life; such fiction, in its extreme
forms, idealizes its characters to such a degree that the
villains are contemptibly wicked or weak, the heroes
incredibly gallant, resourceful and noble-minded, and
the heroines magically beautiful, good, and beset by
overwhelming problems which need solving by the same
ingenious heroes. Such romance portrays life as we like
to imagine it could be if our clashing human characteris-
tics were more clearly differentiated. Thus fiction which
makes use of romance is enlarging life in order to show
us the effect of the basic emotions and drives of human
nature. It is often quite improbable, since no ordinary
person is likely to become involved with the scale of
experience portioned out to romantic characters, but it
is not necessarily beyond the grasp of our imagination.
And, since the imagination of man has always played
an essential part in his development, the place of roman-
tic fiction is as important as that of realistic writing.
In contrast, realistic novelists attempt to portray real
life, the everyday events that are shared by millions of
people. Such novels are not filled with the breathless
excitement of romances like ‘The Count of Monte
Cristo’ or ‘The Three Musketeers’, but they have their
own particular kinds of suspense and crisis, those of
ordinary life. Characters in realistic fiction are not
nearly so easily labelled as they are in romance; a mix-
ture of good and evil provides their reader-appeal, and
we are never quite sure which will triumph at any par-
ticular time; they never become stereotyped in the hands
of a master-craftsman, who has the inexhaustible range
of human nature to explore.
Early realism was moderate in its attempts to portray
ordinary life. Many writers in this century have taken
such writing a step further—to what is called natural-
ism. They do not avoid any unpleasant or ugly detail
that they consider will make their plot more realistic.
The problem in criticising the extremes of naturalistic
realism is that of deciding whether the writer has gone
too far in his attempts to show life in all its unpleasant
surroundings. Has he, by wallowing in profanity, infi-
delity, cruelty and perversion, really shown us life, or
is he choking in the kitchen sink and forgetting that
there are also restful living rooms and tranquil gardens?
We need to remember that the most realistic writing is
still subject to a writer’s principles of selection: it is
virtually impossible to portray every single event,
thought and feeling in the life of a man or woman. Thus,
Janies Joyce created an enormous novel portraying a
single day in the life of one man, but his ‘Ulysses’ is
nevertheless a planned work of art in which he empha-
sizes the most important happenings and manipulates
the characters to suit his desired effect. No matter what
the type of fiction, we are seeing other men’s views of
life, looking over their shoulders as they sketch in details
drawn from their imaginations or their memories.
THEME, The best novels do more than tell a story.
The great writer has an urge to express his ideas about
life, and he writes because he must; usually he does not
choose themes that he thinks people want to hear about,
but themes that he considers need to be expressed and
that will enrich his readers’ minds. There may be more
than one theme in a writer’s work, but there should still
be a main message to which all others are subordinated.
If you have difficulty in finding the theme of a novel,
ask yourself what the writer seems most determined to
tell you. Is it, as in ‘Silas Marner’, the idea of retribu-
tion in proportion to good and evil done? Is it, as in
‘The Forsyte Saga’, the agony of the English middle
class’s change from nineteenth century conservatism to
the confusion and absence of agreed values that mark
the twentieth century? Again, is it the idea of waste of
human talent, seen in the class struggle of Kipps in
Wells’ novel of the same name? Is man seen struggling
for love, security, recognition or tolerance; is he the vic-
tim of fate, circumstances, society or his fellow men?
Does the writer explore the effect of emotions or
environment on the human personality? If possible, you
should try to include some statement from the novel
itself in your wording of the theme.
PLOT. The writer’s skill in planning his story pattern, or
plot, is a good indication of his sureness as a literary
artist. Although some modern writers insist that life has
no story-like sequence and that any plot must be objec-
tionably artificial, it is difficult to imagine the novel as
a string of rather disconnected events, however realistic
they may be. After all, to call a plot artificial does not
tell us much; all art can be covered by such a word.
Some novels, particularly adventure or mystery stories,
are important for their plot rather than their characters;
the reader’s interest is centred on the sequence of events,
while the characters come and go without attracting
the reader to learn more about their development.
Any plot depends on conflict of some kind, perhaps man
against the widely varied challenges of his own environ


ment, or man against his fellow men, or, frequently in
modern novels with a psychological bias, man warring
with elements of his own personality. The presentation
of the situation, the environment and the characters in
the beginning of the novel is called the exposition or
the explaining of all the necessary raw materials that
will be blended into the conflict. A good plot will con-
tain an exposition that is not lengthy and confusing, nor
so scanty as to irritate by withholding important infor-
mation. In the awareness of the opposing forces in the
plot, the reader is plagued by suspense which the clever
artist maintains or varies as long or as often as he con-
siders it is enhancing his story. Even if we are fairly
certain of the outcome, as in the eventual marriage of
Elizabeth and Darcy in ‘Pride and Prejudice’, there is
still the gentle suspense of wondering how Jane Austen
will achieve such a conclusion after the lively antag-
onism which the two characters seem to feel for one
another in the beginning. The effect of suspense is much
more obvious in mystery stories, as in the incredible
story of the theft of ‘The Moonstone’ by Wilkie Collins.
The developing and maintaining of suspense results in a
series of minor crises, culminating in the climax or
turning point of the plot. From then on, the general
result begins to loom with a sort of inevitability, as in
‘Tess of the D’Urbervilles’, when Tess kills Alec
D’Urberville to warrant Angel’s forgiveness. Although
she is confident of happiness, we and Angel feel that the
conclusion is inescapable and that justice has only to
quicken its step to overtake and destroy Tess. Then
follows the resolution or gradual unravelling of the still
unexplained strands of the plot. This part of the writer’s
plan is sometimes called the catastrophe or the denoue-
ment (a French word meaning ‘the unknotting’); once
again, the writer must show his skill by concluding the
resolution neither too abruptly nor too slowly for satis-
faction of the questions that have formed in the reader’s
mind as he has been absorbing the story.
Just as literature may have more than one theme, so too
it may have more than one plot, depending on the num-
ber of groups in conflict. The device of linking several
plots within the one novel by means of characters com-
mon to each is known as the complex or multiple plot.
Provided that the novelist is able to control each one, a
multiple plot can provide more suspense and subtle
character effects than can a simple plot. Above all, a
plot must seem to live as a credible sequence of events.
There should be some recognizable aspect in the events,
the background or the characters. For instance, if ani-
mals are allowed to speak, they should also be treated
as human in their actions, as Kenneth Grahame does in
‘The Wind in the Willows’. If the setting or the plot is to
be fantastic, the characters should still be people
grappling with their new problems in human terms.
There are various methods of presentation of a plot. By
far the most common is narrative in the third person;
this gives the writer a chance to comment on the action
and the characters. First person narrative can be vivid
and convincing, although the writer needs to be very
careful to avoid any suggestion of self-righteousness or
conceit when the character is talking about himself.
There have also been novels written in the form of a
collection of letters (the epistolary method), sometimes
written by the one person, as in Richardson’s ‘Pamela’,
sometimes by different people, as in Smollett’s ‘Hum-
phrey Clinker’. This latter form can arouse much
interest, as it gives the author a chance to describe the
same events through the eyes of several different people.
Probably most plots are in a chronological sequence;
this is easy to follow and presents an orderly develop-
ment of character and suspense. However, some novel-
ists prefer to begin at a critical point and then ‘flash
back’ to fill in the details of the past which have given
rise to a current situation: this is sometimes called the
anticipatory method, and can be seen in Emily Bronte’s
‘Wuthering Heights’.
CHARACTER. No novel can exist without character.
However unsatisfactory a plot may be, there are always
people enacting it, coming into conflict with each other,
appraising their own and others’ behaviour. The critic
usually distinguishes principal (major) characters from
the subordinate (minor) characters, who may serve
many uses and provide moments of interest, but who
are never revealed in the fullness of their personalities.
Sometimes a minor character is given the role of a com-
mentator who voices the author’s ideas and theories.
Some characters are presented in a particular way dur-
ing the narrative and they fail to develop at all in the
working out of the novel. The qualities they begin with
are still the same at the end of the story. The more
interesting characters, however, are those who do de-
velop while we watch the working out of their hopes and
fears. Only as a character changes over a period of time
can we feel that he is convincingly human and interest-
ing. We can be more in sympathy with a villain whose
evil character is built up as we read than with a hero
who is presented in all his goodness but who does not
live for us. Again, the most appealing characters are
likely to be those who are shown with both good and
bad qualities, for we feel that such people are like our-
selves. If a character is developed fully or at least satis-
factorily enough to make him seem realistic as a human
being, we say that the writer has produced a character
‘in the round’, that is, we see many facets of the per-
sonality developing as a real, complex human being. If
the writer is content to use his characters simply for the
presentation of a few unchanging qualities, we say that
his characters are ‘flat’, that they do not develop as
people must under stress. When a few major qualities
of a ‘flat’ character are exaggerated out of all propor-
tion to the rest of his personality, usually for comic or
satiric effects, this is known as caricature, and the device
is the novelist’s version of the art of the cartoonist.
There are several ways in which the novelist is able to
show his characters developing. The most satisfactory
kind of character-portrayal is usually that of the charac-
ters themselves revealing their motives, emotions and
personalities through their actions and dialogue. The
reader is able to make up his own mind about the effect
of certain incidents and people on particular characters.
If the writer is not prepared to allow his characters to
reveal themselves, he may allow other characters to
describe them. If he describes them himself, he runs the
risk of killing our spontaneous interest in his characters,


since we do not like to be told what to think. If we
examine any great play, particularly one by Shake-
speare, we shall see at once how unnecessary it is for a
great writer to explain his characters instead of allowing
their own speech and actions to do so. Probably this
ability in characterization—this skill in revealing human
nature does more than anything else to determine
whether the writer has produced a great work of art.
The people who are involved in any novel remain in
our memories long after the details of the plot have
vanished.
SETTING (BACKGROUND). It is interesting to de-
cide how important the novelist’s choice of setting is to
the success of his book. It may be a strictly regional
setting, as in Hardy’s ‘Wessex’ novels, where the back-
ground of the heath is almost another character in the
plot, so strong is its influence on the people who live
there. It may be a particular historical or geographical
setting, such as the goldfields of early Australia or the
snowfields of Switzerland. It may be evoked as the
influence on the atmosphere of the novel, as in ‘Wuther-
ing Heights’, where the wild background reflects the
stormy passions aroused in the characters who are in
conflict in such a desolate place. Again, it may be the
author’s means of social criticism, as in ‘Oliver Twist’,
where Dickens emphasizes the harshness and cruelty of
low life in the London of his day by his description of
the work-house conditions and the haunts of the
habitual criminals among whom Oliver is thrown. There
may, on the other hand, be no particular significance
in the setting at all; the interest may be centred on the
characters alone and their conflicts may be capable of
taking place anywhere.
STYLE. Style, as has been mentioned elsewhere in this
course, is the manner in which a writer expresses him-
self. A novelist’s style affects his skill in plot construc-
tion, his ability to create successful characters, his
powers of description and his skill in argument. His
style may be affected by the period in which he lived
and by its literary customs and its conventions. It may
be affected by his nationality, which shows itself in his
characterization. But the greatest single influence on a
writer’s style is his own personality. He will be unable
to suggest emotions which he himself has not in some
degree experienced, and he will not be able to embrace
a wide range of subject matter if his experience has
been a limited one. We may find that a writer is excel-
lent in his portrayal of men but stilted or too idealistic
in his portrayal of women characters. One writer may
delight us for his humour, another grip us in tragedy or
mystery. One may revel in sensuous, descriptive pas-
sages; another in sharp, biting satire or in the witty
repartee of his characters. One may excel in ponderous,
overwhelming prose, While another has his strength in
the homely, colloquial speech of everyday people. You
should always try to assess a writer’s strengths and
weaknesses after you have read a novel. If you do this,
you will be well on the way to an appreciation of style.
Some knowledge of his life and of his historical period
will help you in making this assessment.
HISTORY OF THE NOVEL. The first prose tales that
showed the basic characteristics of the novel appeared
in the latter half of the seventeenth century. The most
important of these is John Bunyan’s ‘Pilgrim’s Progress’,
which tells in story form the troubles and difficulties of
the Christian soul in living a godly life and coming at
last to heaven. It is told (allegorically) as a journey
through life, and all the vices and virtues, the dangers
and the encouragements are personified and become
companions for Christian during his journey. Bunvan is
chiefly important for his clear, homely diction with its
overtones from the rhythms of the Authorized Version
of the Bible which had so recently been translated into
English and which had fired devout Christians with its
beauty. The end of Christian’s pilgrimage will indicate
the qualities of style in the work: ‘Here also they had
the city itself in view, and they thought they heard all
the bells therein to ring, to welcome them thereto. But
above all, the warm and joyful thoughts that they had
about their own dwelling there, with such company, and
that for ever and ever. Oh, by what tongue or pen can
their glorious joy be expressed! And thus they came up
to the gate.’
THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. Two of the earliest
novels to appear in this century, which saw the estab-
lishment of the novel as a distinct art form, were Daniel
Defoe’s ‘Robinson Crusoe’ (1719) and Jonathan
Swift’s ‘Gulliver’s Travels’ (1726). Each is a collection
of adventures which befell the main character as he
wandered about. Defoe was concerned with telling an
interesting tale, as a pleasant interlude from his work as
a hack journalist; Swift had the larger purpose of satiris-
ing the politics and the social conventions of his time.
Swift’s Gulliver voyages to the little people of Lilliput
and later to the giants of Brobdingnag, having astonish-
ing adventures which appeal to children for their
strangeness whilst having a deeper allegorical meaning
for adults. For the last of Gulliver’s voyages Swift con-
ceives a race of horses, the Houyhnhnms (pronounced
like a horse’s neigh), who kept a most degraded form of
human being as domestic animals which they called the
Yahoos. When Gulliver returns to the world of men, he
finds it very difficult to fraternize with his fellows, since
in them he sees all the disgusting qualities of the
Yahoos. ‘I am not in the least provoked at the sight of a
lawyer, a pickpocket, a colonel, a fool, a lord, a game-
ster, a politician, a whore-master, a physician, an evi-
dence, a suborner, an attorney, a traitor, or the like;
this is all according to the due course of things: but
when I behold a lump of deformity and diseases both
in body and in mind, smitten with pride, it immediately
breaks all the measure of my patience; neither shall I
ever be able to comprehend how such an animal and
such a vice could tally together.’
After these two fore-runners came the man known as
the father of the English novel, Samuel Richardson
(1689-1761). His first novel, ‘Pamela’, introduced a
closely knit plot to prose narrative and developed a deep
examination of character in the personality of Pamela,
a poor servant who is forced to protect herself against
the evil designs of her master, Mr Booby. The story is


told in the form of letters between Pamela and her
parents, and it was written by Richardson in the hope
that it would encourage young ladies of his own time to
be more virtuous and more circumspect in their dealings
with the opposite sex. He was, as one critic says,
■prudent and respectable to excess but he helped to fan
a mighty fire’. Another novel well worth reading is his
‘Clarissa Harlowe’, which also penetrates the mind of a
sorely tried heroine.
Richardson’s tendency to sentimentalism was rebuffed
by a great contemporary of his, Henry Fielding (1707-
54). Fielding determined to ridicule Pamela by writing
a similar novel about a supposed brother, Joseph
Andrews, who is assailed by a rich lady in the same way
as his sister has been. This novel, called a f ter its hero,
appeared in 1742, a year after ‘Pamela’. Clever as the
parody is, Fielding was too much an artist to limit his
work to a mere parody; his characters develop an
absorbing interest on their own account. His greatest
novel, ‘Tom Jones’ (1749), is a great step forward in
the art of characterization. Tom is no saintly hero, nor
is he an insensitive villain; he has his vices (or weak-
nesses rather) but he has his virtues too; above all, he
wants to be better. Fielding condemns his faults but is
sympathetic towards his human qualities. Tom is every
young man, trying Iffe for what it will offer, loving a
worthy girl whom he wants to marry but not immune to
the charms of less ladylike persons. Fielding is worth
reading for his breadth of vision of the human scene
and his robust skill in character and dialogue.
The other two giants of the eighteenth century are
Tobias Smollett (1721-71) and Laurence Sterne (1713-
68). Smollett was a cruder Fielding in his novels: he
has the same run of adventure which casts a young
hero into the bliss of marriage and security; but he lacks
the finer pen of the earlier novelist. ‘Roderick Random’
is best remembered for its scenes of the naval life of the
time in all its brutality. His last and best work, ‘Hum-
phrey Clinker’, provides a useful comparison with
Richardson’s novels, since Smollett uses the epistolary
method of narration. Sterne is remembered for ‘Tris-
tram Shandy’, a strange, whimsical and at time irritat-
ing novel of the day-to-day events in the life of an
ordinary man. Yet the book is anything but common-
place. The hero is not born until almost half the book
is written, and the plot is forever being held up for
seemingly irrelevant digressions. Sterne was the first to
explore the possibilities of psychological characteriza-
tion and the effects of unchronological narration. There
is much to be improved in the book as a work of art, but
its characters are immortal especially Mr Shandy,
with his uneven temper and his intellectual snobbery,
and Uncle Toby, one of the most delightful uncles in
fiction.
The eighteenth century, then, saw the rise of the novel
as a serious work of art; it established the art of orderly
narration and provided a pattern and structure which
was to be used and developed by ever increasing num-
bers of writers.
THE ROMANTIC PERIOD. In the last quarter of the
eighteenth century and the first quarter of the nineteenth,
the novel became increasingly concerned with portray-
ing intense feeling and an imaginative recreation of past
times and passions. Fanny Burney (1752-1840) in
‘Evelina’, Anne Radcliffe (1764-1822) in ‘The Mys-
teries of Udolpho’, and Maria Edgeworth (1767-1849)
in ‘Castle Rackrent’ were all exploring new fields and
achieving sureness in plot construction and characteri-
zation. From their experiments emerged the two great
novelists of this transition period, Scott and Austen.
Sir Walter Scott (1771-1832) developed his feeling for
history and local interest through a series of Scottish
novels, which include ‘Old Mortality’, ‘The Heart of
Midlothian’ and ‘Rob Roy’, He is a masterly creator of
plot and setting. Unfortunately, he was inclined to over-
describe in his attempt to arouse interest, with the result
that we often have to struggle through long opening
chapters in his work. Once in full swing, however, his
genius carries his readers along with him. His hope was,
as he said, ‘to amuse in one corner the pain of the
body; in another to relieve anxiety of mind; in a third
place to unwrinkle a brow bent with the furrows of
daily toil; in another to fill the place of bad thoughts or
to suggest better; in yet another to induce an idler to
study the history of his country; in all . . . to furnish
harmless amusement.’
Jane Austen (1775-1817) is quite a different artist.
She preserves the objectivity of the eighteenth century
by her brilliant characterization and her description of
the manners of village and small town life which she
knew so well. Hers is a world where mothers scheme for
eligible suitors for their daughters, where the greatest
crisis is a lovers’ quarrel and the greatest happiness a
smooth path to marriage. She has a biting capacity for
portraying the silly and affected mannerisms of her
society; even more importantly for her reputation as a
writer, she knows what she cannot do. There is no grand
passion in her novels, but they abound with scenes of
the hope and despair, shallowness and good humour
that we understand in our own lives, even though
Austen’s world has now disappeared. ‘Pride and Preju-
dice’, ‘Sense and Sensibility’, ‘Emma’ or any other of
her novels are worth reading, for, as Scott said of her
art: ‘That young lady has a talent for describing involve-
ments, feelings and characters of ordinary life . . . The
big bow-wow I can do myself like anyone going; but
the exquisite touch which renders commonplace things
and characters interesting from the truth of the descrip-
tion and the sentiment is denied me.’
THE VICTORIAN PERIOD. Many brilliant minds
contributed to the art of the Victorian novel. Dickens
and Thackeray immediately come to mind in contrast
with the three strange Bronte sisters, all accomplished
writers. Other novelists of the period are Bulwer Lytton
(The Last Days of Pompeii’), Benjamin Disraeli
(‘Sybil’), Mrs. Gaskell (‘Cranford’), Charles Kingsley
(‘Westward Ho!’), Charles Reade (‘The Cloister and
the Hearth’) and Wilkie Collins (The Moonstone’ and
The Woman in White’).
Charles Dickens (1812-70) is probably the best known
novelist in English literature. Even people who have


never read his books know of him and probably know
some of his characters by name. He is justly famous for
his powers of characterization. If Dickens seems at times
to be excessively concerned with social injustice we need
to remember that in his period the lot of the lower
classes, of women and of children was often harsh and
sordid compared to what we know today. Books like
‘David Copperfield', ‘Oliver Twist’, ‘Nicholas Nickleby’,
‘Bleak House’ and ‘A Christmas Carol’ have many
precious elements beside their social criticism. He is one
of the few writers in our language who are able to be
consistently and delightfully funny. Dickens is a master
of the comic scene and no student is really educated
until he can discuss at least one work by this versatile
and entertaining novelist.
William Makepeace Thackeray (1811-63) was as con-
cerned about the middle classes as Dickens was about
the lower. His most famous novel is ‘Vanity Fair’, whose
heroine, Becky Sharp, is determined to succeed in life,
whatever the methods she may have to use. Her experi-
ences are seen against the early nineteenth century
trends of an outworn aristocracy, a rising merchant
class and a developing sense of empire in England.
Some other novels by Thackeray worth reading are
‘Henry Esmond’ and ‘The Newcomes’. He was essen-
tially a realist, exposing the shallowness, snobbery and
affectation of his own society for, as he says in ‘Vanity
Fair’, ‘one is bound to speak the truth as far as one
knows it, whether one mounts a cap and bells or a
shovel-hat; and a deal of disagreeable matter must
come out in the course of such an undertaking’.
The Bronte sisters in their novels pass a strange com-
ment on the Victorian scene. Here were three girls,
isolated on the Yorkshire moors from direct contact
with cultured society. Charlotte’s brief experience as a
governess in Belgium was the most that any of them
saw of the world at large, so their fertile imaginations
had to compensate for narrowness of experience. G. K.
Chesterton says of Charlotte Bronte (1816-55): ‘Her
consciousness was in many ways Puritanical and even
prim, while her subconsciousness was a sea of passion;
or she might be compared to a baptist chapel built on a
volcano.’ Her best novel, ‘Jane Eyre’, is a perfect ex-
ample of this kind of paradox: the heroine as a drab
little governess is an essentially realistic character, while
the brooding, handsome, unfathomable Mr Rochester
is as romantic a hero as one could ask for, and
endowed moreover with a maniac wife; yet this passion-
ate hero is drawn to the unimposing Jane, against all
the rules of romance. It is a stirring book, as much for
its dramatic plot as for its contrasting characters.
Emily Bronte (1818-48) is the most fascinating of the
three sisters. Her novel ‘Wuthering Heights’, stands
alone in English literature in its testament of poetry in
emotion and intensity of conflict between human beings.
Although the extremes of passion endured by Catherine
and Heathcliff are probably felt by few, if any, real
people, there is an enduring truth in the reason for their
attraction for each other: they are drawn together by
overwhelming emotional forces which make it impos-
sible for them to be happy apart, while their conflicting
personalities make it just as impossible for them to be
happy together. So vital is their creator’s art that it
seems unbearable to be an onlooker in the more critical
scenes of ‘Wuthering Heights’; one feels that the
struggle is too intimate to be judged by outsiders.
The third sister, Ann (1820-49), was the least volcanic.
Her narrative skill is nonetheless considerable, as her
best novel, ‘Agnes Grey’, demonstrates. She would prob-
ably receive more attention by critics if she were not
perpetually overshadowed by her more tempestuous
sisters.
THE LATER VICTORIANS. As the nineteenth cen-
tury wore on, the range of the novel enlarged and its
depth in social criticism and human awareness ex-
tended. There was the exotic experience of George
Borrow (1803-81) in his Spanish gypsy books,
‘Lavengro’ and ‘The Romany Rye’; the intellectual
breadth of George Meredith (1828-1908) in ‘The
Ordeal of Richard Feverel’ and ‘The Egoist’; the satire
of Samuel Butler (1835-1902) in ‘The Way of All
Flesh’ and ‘Erehwon’; the industrious middle class com-
mentary of Anthony Trollope (1815-88) in ‘Barchester
Towers’ and ‘Framley Parsonage’ where he admitted
he portrayed ‘no heroism and no villainy . . , much
Church but more love-making’; the uncompromising
realism of Arnold Bennett (1867-1933) in ‘The Old
Wives’ Tale’ and ‘Anna of the Five Towns’; and there
were other writers, on whom we shall comment in a
little detail in the hope that you will read some of their
books this year.
George Eliot (1819-80) although contemporary with
the earlier Victorians, is more akin to the latter part of
the age, since in her novels there is a definite attempt at
psychological analysis of the characters, an enterprise
destined to become so common in twentieth century
literature. Among her novels, probably the most en-
joyable are ‘Silas Mamer’ and ‘The Mill on the Floss’.
Thomas Hardy (1840-1928) was a novelist intensely
preoccupied with the burden of Fate on the lives of
ordinary men and women. He achieved in the novel
the stark tragedy hitherto attempted only in the theatre,
and his understanding of human nature was the more
compelling since he deliberately restricted himself to
portraying the simple folk of the Wessex district. As
Drinkwater says, in ‘The Outline of Literature’, ‘A few
villages were enough for Jane Austen; the Lake Country
circumscribed without imprisoning Wordsworth; the
Yorkshire moorlands enclosed but could not enchain the
Brontes; Burns was no traveller. Thomas Hardy has
seen the kingdoms of the world, and their glory and
futility, from Egdon Heath.’ His early novel ‘Far From
the Madding Crowd’, is one of his most optimistic, and
his later one, ‘Tess of the D’Urbervilles’, one of the most
tragic, but through all of them is the sense of man using
all his powers to combat natural forces and hostile cir-
cumstances which seem forever in ambush to overcome
his attempts. Hardy, like Ibsen in modern drama,
established for the modern novel the theme of inevitable
suffering in the lives of human beings whose actions
hardly merit the weight of tragedy which falls to their
lot.


Robert Louis Stevenson (1850-94) and Rudyard Kip-
ling (1865-1936) deserve a special comment in this
course because of their appeal for younger readers.
Stevenson has assured himself a place in the history of
the novel for his masterly narrative skill; the natives of
Samoa who christened him Tusitala the Writer of
Tales were as clearly aware of his gift as were the
European literary critics. ‘Treasure Island’ and ‘Kid-
napped’ are excellent examples of his art as a novelist;
‘Travels with a Donkey’ shows his skill in writing the
personal essay; and ‘The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and
Mr Hyde’ holds its own among great mystery stories.
It is the fashion to deny Kipling any real place in serious
literature these days. He is dismissed as an imperialist’s
poet and a class-conscious novelist in days when both
imperialism and class-consciousness are dirty words. But,
if he accomplished nothing else, he was vigorous in
narration and strong in his vision of the challenges of
soldiering, pioneering and colonizing. This was an anti-
dote for the rather precious, introverted view of human
nature that was spreading through the writings of
artists like Oscar Wilde (1856-1900) whose novel,
‘The Picture of Dorian Grey’, is depressing in its view
of man’s nature.- ‘The Light that Lailed’ is a thoughtful,
if at times sentimental, study of blindness; ‘Kim’ is a
fascinating tale of Imperial India. Kipling’s stories for
children are read with enthusiasm by adults as well as
children; everybody should know the Jungle Books,
‘Stalky and Co.’, the ‘Just So Stories’ and ‘Captains
Courageous’.
H. G. Wells (1866-1946), in spite of his length of
experience of the modern world, remains a Victorian
novelist and perhaps the best answer to Kipling’s view
of li f e. Apart from his absorbing science fiction, like
‘The War of the Worlds’ and ‘The Time Machine’, he is
remembered for his novels of social criticism. However
glorious the image of Britain might be overseas, Wells
saw the injustices of the class system at home with all
its waste of human talent. ‘Mr Polly’ and ‘Kipps’ are
dated now in their social setting, and the problems they
expose have largely disappeared; but they preserve some
interest for their portrayal of ‘little people’ at the mercy
of circumstances they do not understand and cannot
alter.
John Galsworthy (1867-1933) likewise in his novels,
such as the series which make up ‘The Forsyte Saga’, is
examining a world which is changing so rapidly as to
cause anguish among the propertied classes whose
values are being overturned. His characterization is
brilliant. Soames, as well as being a typical Victorian
man of property, is also a universal figure, a man who
loves his wife in the same way as he loves his art
treasures and is unable to understand that Irene needs
more than this to be happy. Galsworthy is supreme in
dialogue and adept at setting a scene quickly and eco-
nomically; his criticism is just but it makes no specific
suggestions as to how society should be improved. He is
content to expose the weaknesses of society, but because
it is his society he seems after all to pity it and even to
sympathize with it.
Joseph Conrad (1857-1924) seems to stand alone in
English literature. He was Polish by birth, and his use of
English in his writing carries the language to new levels
of splendid experiment. A master of fascinating plots,
his forte is the sea and the life of seamen. 'The Nigger
of the Narcissus’, ‘Nostromo’ and ‘Lord Jim’ are among
his best works.
THE TWENTIETH CENTURY. At the beginning of
the century, the skill of the Victorians in straightfor-
ward novel structure had more or less exhausted the
possibilities of chronological narrative and ‘outside’
characterization. Modern writers who wanted to explore
new methods of presentation were drawn more and
more to the technique of describing events and charac-
ters through thought patterns in all their incoherence
and irrelevance. The most extreme followers of this
technique were Virginia Woolf (1882-1941) and James
Joyce (1882-1941). In ‘To the Lighthouse’ and ‘Mrs
Dalloway’, Woolf experimented with variations in time
sequence and the portrayal of characters through their
thoughts, with physical appearance shadowy and unim-
portant in contrast with the kind of character portrait
to be found in the nineteenth century novel. Joyce, with
his epic novel, ‘Ulysses’, carried the method to its limits.
The whole massive book is the narration of events in
the life of one man on a single day. Once such a com-
plex attempt has been made, it is difficult to imagine
another writer succeeding in equalling the range of this
novel, without being imitative. As one critic has it:
‘(ln “Ulysses”) the minute investigation of human be-
haviour in all its aspects —physical, psychological, and
moral—is taken as far as it can go while still remaining
within the bounds of coherence’ (Bergonzi, ‘The
Listener’, 19/9/63).
There are, however, writers who have preserved the
traditional form of the novel with its chronological nar-
rative and fully presented characters. They often choose
to be quite orthodox in their use of the form of the novel
while exhibiting originality in treating the problems of
our modern world. Novels like ‘Cry, the Beloved Coun-
try’ by Alan Paton, discussing the racial crisis of South
Africa, and ‘The Grapes of Wrath’ by John Steinbeck,
exposing the problems of dispossessed American farm-
ers, depend for their initial interest on analysis of topical
problems. In judging works such as these it is necessary
to remember that a novel, in order to be great, needs
some qualities which will appeal to mankind after the
problem which it treats has disappeared.
Grahame Greene is a good example, for young readers,
of the qualities of the typical modern novelist. A devout
Roman Catholic himself, he is fascinated with the possi-
bilities of the effect of religion in people’s lives. Even
when the novel is not openly concerned with a religious
problem, the references appear and always have a sig-
nificant bearing on the characterization. For light read-
ing, you could try ‘Loser Takes AH’; for tragic content
there is ‘The Power and the Glory’; ‘Brighton Rock’ is
a terrifying study of a young gang leader.
D. H. Lawrence (1885-1930) has steadily grown in the
estimation of most literary critics. He was a master of
emotional scenes and character conflict. If you feel at
times that he is emphasizing passion at the expense of
other aspects of character, you should realize that he


was trying to introduce a new freedom into the range of
experience of the novel. ‘Sons and Lovers’ is perhaps his
most artistic book and well worth reading.
Aldous Huxley, in ‘Brave New World’, and George
Orwell, in ‘Nineteen Eighty Four’, have each tried to
imagine what the world will be like after the new scien-
tific advances and the new political theories of this cen-
tury have shown their full influence on human nature.
Orwell’s ‘Animal Farm’ is a satirical treatment of the
possible effects of totalitarian government.
Ernest Hemingway developed a highly individual style
of writing in novels, like ‘A Farewell to Arms’, ‘For
Whom the Bell Tolls’ and ‘The Old Man and the Sea’.
His emphasis on the exotic life and on outdoor heroes
who refuse to be tied down by the conventions of society
is mirrored in the bare simplicity of his language. It is
to be hoped that the ease with which his stories are
transformed into films does not prevent recognition of
the excellence of his narrative skill.
Other writers you may be interested in are E. M.
Forster, Evelyn Waugh, Somerset Maugham and Joyce
Cary. A visit to a library or a bookshop will bring you
in touch with many more.
3. THE SHORT STORY
The short story has a more recent development than the
novel although its origin lies in the same desire to tell a
story, whether it is to entertain or instruct the readers or
to provide the author with a means of expressing what
he strongly feels or thinks. It is sometimes difficult to see
the difference between a long short story and a short
novel, a rough rule holds that a short story should be
able to be read at a single sitting; but more important
than the mere difference of length are the differences of
structure.
Edgar Allan Poe is credited with being the first writer
to formulate definite rules for the short story. His own
stories exhibited ‘the precision, orderliness, accuracy
and economy of a perfectly worked mathematical prob-
lem’ (Downs). While the length of a novel allows the
author some latitude in developing characters, in intro-
ducing essential information and in elaborating a set-
ting, the short story demands a much greater unity of
design. Poe stipulated that;
(a) it must create a single impression;
(b) thus it should be capable of being read at a single
sitting;
(c) not a word may be irrelevant, for every word must
contribute to the predesigned total effect of the
author;
(d) even the opening sentence must initiate this pre-
designed effect and be developed unswervingly
through the story;
(e) when the writer achieves his climax, the story
should end, with no explanations or secondary
effects;
(f) only characters that are absolutely essential to the
predesigned effect should be introduced and these
only developed to the extent required by the story.
Professor Brander Matthews says, ‘The short story is the
single effect, complete and self-contained, while the
novel is of necessity broken into a series of episodes. . . .
At its best it impresses the reader that it would be
spoiled if it were made larger.’ Robert Louis Stevenson
expressed his theory of the short story thus; ‘You may
take a plot and fit the characters to it, or you may take a
character and choose incidents to develop it, or, lastly,
. . . you may take a certain atmosphere and get actions
and persons to realize and express it.’ The short story
writer needs to take even more care than the novelist:
no scene, no dialogue, no action can be wasted. As we
are reminded in ‘The Enjoyment of Literature’ by Boas
and Smith, ‘The short story is, of course, more artistic
than the novel; it demands technical craftsmanship
which can be learned only after arduous practice. But
the point is that it can be learned. . . . The short story
is a test of the author’s craftsmanship; the novel of his
mind, and heart, and experience.’
Poe’s own stories are masterpieces of suspense, whether
of detection, horror, scientific experiment or retribution.
His collection of ‘Tales of Mystery and Imagination’ is
an excellent selection of the art of the short story. Look
at the openings of the following:
(a) ‘During the whole of a dull, dark, and soundless day
in the autumn of the year, when the clouds hung
oppressively low in the heavens, I had been passing
alone, on horseback, through a singularly dreary
tract of country; and at length found myself, as the
shades of the evening drew on, within view of the
melancholy House of Usher.’
(The Fall of the House of Usher)
(b) T cannot, for my soul, remember how, when, or
even precisely where, I first became acquainted with
the Lady Ligeia.’ ( Ligeia)
(c) ‘True! nervous, very, very dreadfully nervous I had
been and am; but why will you say that I am mad?’
(The Tell-tale Heart)
You will notice that the introduction wastes no time in
creating the scene or the atmosphere required for
packed attention. The same economy should mark the
whole of any good short story. Action develops quickly,
the crisis is created with the greatest precision, and then
quite sharply the story ends. This, anyway, is the general
pattern. You will encounter exceptions to this pattern,
and you must be prepared to consider each on its merits.
Other writers whom you should sample as artists of the
short story are Kipling, Stevenson, O. Henry, Nathaniel
Hawthorne, Sir James Barrie, Katherine Mansfield,
Somerset Maugham, and two who can only be read in
translations, Chekov of Russia and Guy de Maupassant
of France. Collections of short stories by a number of


authors are good to begin with, for you can compare
the types of stories and the various styles of the authors.
Ernest Hemingway has an important place in the
development of the modern short story, since he special-
ized in stories which seem unfinished or at least only
partly explained, although their effect is usually satis-
factory, at times electrifying. For Australian students, of
course, Henry Lawson’s short stories are quite properly
the starting-point; and you should try to read others as
well, such as Price Warung, Steele Rudd, Gavin Casey,
Dal Stivens, and many more, for the Australian short
story has been developed over a long period by capable
writers who have attained very high standards.
WHAT TO LOOK FOR: When studying the short
story, you should consider aspects such as these;
1. TITLE. Is it arresting? Does it suggest the main
impact of the story?
2. OPENING. Is the opening effective in arousing in-
terest and initiating the main element of the story?
If the opening seems drawn out, has the author a
special reason for this, or is it simply poor work-
manship?
3. DEVELOPMENT. What use is made of qualities
such as suspense and surprise? Are they effective?
Is there skilful foreshadowing of the ending?
Where is the climax? Are there any other crises?
4. CONCLUSION. Is it natural or artificial? Does it
use surprise? Were you prepared for it? If it is a
trick ending, can you find by re-reading the story
where the clues were suggested? Is anything left to
your imagination?
5. CHARACTERS. How many characters are intro-
duced? Are they all esential? Are they drawn with
equal emphasis? What is the method of characteri-
zation? Are they individuals or types? Are they
developed within the space of the story or do their
personalities remain static?
6. DIALOGUE. What use is made of it? Does it
seem natural?
7. SETTING. How important is it? Does it contribute
to the purpose of the story?
8. STYLE. Do you find any particular strengths or
weaknesses? Look at details such as sentence struc-
ture and then at the composition of the story as a
whole.
9. HUMOUR or SATIRE. For what reasons are they
used? Do they arise from situation, from character
or dialogue, or a combination of these?
10. REALISM or FANTASY or ROMANCE. Realism
and romance have been discussed in relation to the
novel and their qualities are the same for the short
story. Fantasy goes a long way beyond romance,
and you need to ask yourself whether the writer
has handled it appealingly or has made us feel
critical and incredulous.
4. DRAMA
The Greek term, Drama, meaning action, applies to a
form of literature intended to be interpreted for an
audience by actors who impersonate the characters,
speak the dialogue and perform the actions of the story.
The beginning and end of the business from the
author’s point of view,’ in Bernard Shaw’s words, ‘is the
art of making the audience believe that real things are
happening to real people.’ The dramatist is somewhat
more restricted than the novelist in giving his own
opinion of the problem he is presenting on stage. There
is no place for him to comment except through the
speeches of his characters. There are several main kinds
of drama, notably Tragedy, Comedy, Melodrama and
Farce.
TRAGEDY in the sense of the Greek classical drama-
tists was the catastrophe of a noble person’s ruin
through the workings of Fate on his life. He need not
have committed any crime or shown any weaknesses in
his own character to be utterly destroyed. The tragedy
lies not so much in the horror of his ruin as in the pity
we feel for the waste of his good qualities through that
ruin. The Elizabethan tragic dramatists, particularly
Shakespeare, carried the concept of tragedy further to
insist on some fault in the hero’s own character which
brings about his downfall. Circumstances and Fate may
play a part in the struggle, but the crucial weakness is
in the character himself. The Elizabethans also required
that the tragic hero should die to complete the tragic
action. It is rarely, however, that the death scene is the
most tragic part of the play. Usually the hero’s real
suffering, that of the mind or the emotions, has taken
place earlier and his death is a rounding off of the drama
and a release for the tortured spirit of the character. In
modern tragedy, notably that of Ibsen, there is a return
to the general idea of the Greeks, that circumstances
over which man has little or no control combine to crush
the human soul. The chief novelty of modern tragedy is
the elevation of the ordinary man to a tragic plane. For-
merly, the tragic hero was a king, prince or other great
leader whose fall was a catastrophe for many others
beside himself. Now playwrights see that there is also
tragedy in everyday lives.
COMEDY need not be hilariously funny; its chief
characteristic is a happy ending, no matter what difficul-
ties have been encountered during the play. Certainly
many comedies owe their charm to the wit and amuse-
ment of the dialogue, but they need not depend on
laughs for success. Comedy may satirize life, it may even
ridicule human nature, it may be romantic or it may
laugh at love. There are more likely to be ‘stock’ or


expected characters in comedy than in tragedy dis-
guised lovers and misunderstood suitors of lovely ladies,
domineering fathers or stupid mothers, witty com-
panions of the hero or coarse, farcical servants. It is
generally true to say that the main interest of a comedy
lies in its plot, and that the characters occupy less of our
attention than do those in a tragedy, simply because we
know that they are not in such desperate circumstances.
MELODRAMA is now considered quite comic, since its
situations, characters and dialogue are so exaggerated in
sensational emotion and events as to make them too
unrealistic for twentieth century theatre-goers. The
melodramas of the late nineteenth century were most
popular at that time, since they fitted the pervading
Victorian doctrines of clear-cut virtue and vice. The
good either die young or are rewarded spectacularly,
the evil are punished with a vengeance! A good example
is Mrs Henry Wood’s ‘East Lynne’, whose characters
were so typical of the melodrama that they have almost
become cliches. There is the upright husband, Archi-
bald; his spinster sister of the acid tongue, Miss Cor-
nelia; the villain, Sir Francis; and the deluded, foolish
but beautiful heroine, Lady Isobel. There is even a con-
sumptive child called Little Willie, who appropriately
dies and goes to heaven, breaking his parents’ hearts
and temporarily reconciling them through their distress.
FARCE, like melodrama, is not considered a serious
commentary on real life, however entertaining it may be
on the stage. Its situations, characters and dialogue arc
all presented in such an exaggerated way that the audi-
ence are laughing all the time. ‘Charley’s Aunt’ is a good
example in adult drama, while you may know lan Hay’s
‘The Crimson Coconut’ from your school plays.
As we remarked in dealing with the novel, any story —
and therefore any drama —has five essential elements:
the plot, the characters and the setting, all interacting to
develop the theme, while the method of narration and
plot structure, the skill in characterization and dialogue
and the ease of presentation of the play unite to show
the playwright’s literary-dramatic style. You should
refer to the earlier notes on plot, character, setting,
theme and style, as most of the points made there will
also apply to drama; but there are a few differences.
The plot of a play has to be much more unified than that
of a novel, since there is a limit to the space of time and
to the events in the characters’ lives which can be pre-
sented. Some plays depend on a single occasion; others,
like ‘Richard IT by Shakespeare, cover several years
but only refer to critical occasions during that time. The
conflict between characters is much more obvious when
they come to life before us on the stage; even if we are
only reading the play, the reliance on dialogue for
character portrayal seems to make the people concerned
so much more lifelike than in the more objective com-
mentary of the novel. Because of this intensifying of
characters on stage, such people are more vital and
interesting than people in everyday life; every quality
they possess is more definite, driving them into conflicts
with others. Shaw declared flatly, ‘No conflict, no
drama’. Thus, clashes of wills and ideas among charac-
ters is held to be indispensable. Yet conflict refers to
more than the physical kind. A character may be at war
with himself, as Macbeth is in the early part of the play,
or he may be antagonistic to his environment or his
fellow men as a whole group, instead of as individual
persons frustrating his career at various stages. Brune-
tiere, a serious critic of the drama, says, ‘There can be
no tragedy without a struggle, nor can there be genuine
emotion for the spectator unless something other and
greater than life is at stake’. Moreover, the events in any
struggle of wills must be credible and convincing within
the framework of the characterization. The hero is
often called the protagonist in the conflict; those who
oppose him are his antagonists.
A play develops through the same stages mentioned for
the novel, the exposition, the initial tension leading to
the various crises, and finally to the climax, followed by
the turning point and consequent falling off of tension
in the denouement. The diagram below shows the
approximate levels of interest and involvement of the
audience or the reader as the play develops.
Diagram showing the dramatic action of a play.


In technique, drama employs devices which require a
synthesis of the efforts of the author, the producer, the
actor, the designer, and sometimes even a composer. To
this extent, then, the dramatist is unable to ensure that
his work will be presented with the emphasis he expects
when he is writing it. A history of the widely differing
interpretations of Shakespeare’s plays over the centuries
shows the flexibility of dramatic conventions and their
effect on production. The Elizabethans had a permanent
three-section stage, consisting of a platform, an inner
stage and an upper stage, allowing immediate scene
changes to be made without the necessity for curtains.
Thus balcony scenes, scenes on castle battlements and
the like were staged quite naturally and without the
elaborate engineering required on a modern stage to
achieve the same effect. Similarly, the front platform, or
‘apron’ of the stage, jutted out into the audience area,
thus making soliloquies and whispered ‘asides’ appear
quite natural from the actors, without that effort to be
heard which modern actors make from their more
remote stages.
With the return of Charles II from his exile in France,
the theatre came under the influence of the French and
Italian stage conventions, with the introduction of the
square, or ‘picture-frame’, stage still used today. Increas-
ingly elaborate scenery and costume were incorporated
into stage production until we have the position as it is
today, with large teams handling the scenery, the
lighting, the costume and make-up, the sound effects
and the background music.
In our own time, the theatre has been challenged by
various younger kinds of drama—those of the film, the
radio and the television circuit. The film has outstripped
legitimate theatre in many aspects of realism; thus it can
show the actual settings for historical plots, it can pre-
sent vast crowd scenes which are impossible in the
limited space of the living stage, and it can create an
intimacy of emotion by close-up photography of the
changing expressions on a character’s face. But such
consistent realism has its drawbacks as a competitor
against the theatre. The audience tend to expect much
more action and suspense in a film than is demanded
on the stage —there is not the same degree of ‘willing
suspension of disbelief’ in a cinema as in a theatre.
The radio drama of our time has largely been content
to create its own world, without trying to compete with
the live theatre. It excels in plot and characterization
where sound effects and the listener’s imagination may
be allowed full play. One of the most successful radio
plays in English literature is Douglas Stewart’s ‘The
Fire on the Snow’, a gripping representation of the
fatal journey to the South Pole by Scott and his men.
The mind’s eye is able to conjure up scenes far more
terrifying than anything which could be shown on a
stage. Another interesting radio drama is Dylan
Thomas’s ‘Under Milk Wood’, where the voices of the
characters blend in patterns of sound like musical
harmony.
Television presents yet another avenue for dramatic
exploration. It can move with the rapidity of the film,
but it lacks the space of the cinematic screen for crowd
scenes; its real effect is in the success of close-up pho-
tography, where emotion can be conveyed in the most
realistic way, simply by letting the camera play on the
character’s face. Moreover, the intimacy of the living-
room theatre that is television is best suited for such
over-the-shoulder or face-to-face characterization. A
television production of ‘Macbeth’, for instance, fails to
create the full horror of the appearance of Banquo’s
ghost at the feast or the movement of Birnam Wood
towards Dunsinane, but it achieves to perfection the
analysis of character in Macbeth and Lady Macbeth, as
they each succumb to evil.
Shakespeare has been interpreted in all four media:
the film emphasizes the glorious spectacle of his crowd
scenes and battlegrounds, never satisfactorily presented
on stage; the radio gives full range to his poetry which
covers up the lack of visual scenery; the television pro-
duction emphasizes the humanity of his characters, as
their souls are laid bare before us in the everyday back-
ground of our own homes; the theatre, however, will
always have some greater magic than any of its rivals,
for there is nothing quite like the appearance of his
characters within the charmed circle of the ‘live’ stage.
When you consider a playwright’s style, you should
always consider the possible success of his work on
stage, for every good play should be ‘good theatre’. See
as many plays as you can, for that is the best way to
learn what to look for in good drama. Above all, do not
get weighed down by concern over the meaning of every
word in Shakespeare’s work (although your examina-
tions may tend to encourage such individual dissection).
Read him for the broad sweep of the story and for the
gripping interplay of characters, and then worry about
his language only so far as will sharpen your inter-
pretation of the plays. It is fairly true to say that the
great passages seldom offer any problems of interpre-
tation. You need mainly to assess the playwright’s skill
in dialogue, in character presentation and development,
in his choice of setting, his sense of climax and sus-
pense, and his handling of plot structure.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
MEDIEVAL AND PRE-RENAISSANCE DRAMA.
The Church used drama to teach the rules of the Chris-
tian life to the villagers and ordinary townsfolk who
were unable to read the Latin Bible of the time. These
plays were later taken up by the various trade guilds
who had their own particular series or cycle of plays
which were performed at different times of the year.
Those plays dealing with the life of Christ were called
mystery plays, and those dealing with the lives of the
many saints were called miracle plays. Both these kinds
of drama were followed by morality plays, where the
characters were merely personified virtues and vices
which struggled against one another for the possession
of man’s soul. The most famous of the moralities is
‘Everyman’, whose troubles are very similar to Bunyan’s
Christian in the later novel, ‘Pilgrim’s Progress’.
In the early sixteenth century, scholars wrote drama
modelled on the classic plays of Greece and Rome.


Our first tragedy was modelled on the classics and is
known as ‘Gorbuduc’; our first comedies, apart from the
rough farce introduced in the later miracles and morali-
ties, are ‘Gammer Gurton’s Needle’ and ‘Ralph Roister
Doister’,
THE ELIZABETHANS AND JACOBEANS. This
period saw the full development of tragedy and comedy
as mature art forms in English literature. We have
already discussed the difference between ancient and
Elizabethan tragedy. Comedy ranged from romantic
situations, as in ‘As You Like It’, through the fantasy
of ‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream’ and the comedy of
manners in ‘The Taming of the Shrew’ to the tragi-
comedy of plays like ‘Measure for Measure’, Beaumont
and Fletcher’s ‘Philaster’ and the satiric comedy of
humours, developed by Ben Jonson. The Elizabethans
believed that every man was composed of four main
humours or personality traits and one’s adjustment to
life depended on the balance of these qualities. Thus,
if one humour appeared to excess, a man might be a
coward, a trickster or a glutton, and so on.
William Shakespeare (1564-1616) towers above the
whole of English drama with his genius, and you should
read in a large history of literature an account of his life
and work. He perfected the line of dramatic blank verse,
the iambic pentameter, and he excelled in all forms of
drama; tragedy, comedy, farce (as in the workmen
scenes of ‘A Midsummer Night’s Dream’), romance,
history and the ‘dark’, almost tragic comedy of plays
such as ‘Measure for Measure’. His immortality lies in
his ability to portray a vast range of human emotion and
experience so powerfully and so truthfully that his
characters live for us today as human beings, whatever
their historical period may have been. He rarely con-
cocted an original plot, preferring to expand and en-
hance the stories already familiar on the Elizabethan
stage or in contemporary folklore and history. His work
endures for its dramatic intensity, its absorbing charac-
ter development, and its brilliant style.
Christopher Marlowe (1564-93) had a brief but spectacu-
lar dramatic career. Born at the same time as Shake-
speare, he was akin to his greater contemporary in a
feeling for dramatic poetry and intense emotion. In his
short life, he wrote two poems and four important plays.
‘Tamburlaine the Great’ is the story of an ancient con-
queror who defeated all his earthly enemies, only to be
defeated by the death of his beloved queen and his own
growing weakness in old age. The play is memorable for
its glorious rolling blank verse and its exotic situations,
as in Tamburlaine’s speech to his leaders:
‘ls it not brave to be a king, Techelles,
Usumcasane and Theridamas?
Is it not passing brave to be a king,
And ride in triumph through Persepolis?’
As Tamburlaine strives for power in physical things, so
Marlowe’s next hero, ‘Dr Faustus’ strives for intellectual
power and loses his own soul as recompense for his
immortal knowledge. It is a great tragedy of excellent
characterization. ‘The Jew of Malta’ is a portrait of evil,
while his only historical play, ‘Edward IF, paved the
way for Shakespeare’s greater histories.
Ben Jonson (1573-1637) was the scholar dramatist of
the Elizabethan period and his satiric criticism of human
weakness and folly is in vivid contrast to Shakespeare’s
more romantic exposition of human nature. Plays like
‘Volpone, or the Fox’ and ‘Every Man in His Humour’
are good indications of his genius.
There are minor dramatists who follow these three
giants in the transition period of the middle seventeenth
century. Beaumont and Fletcher have been mentioned;
Webster and Ford are other examples.
THE RESTORATION and THE EIGHTEENTH
CENTURY. After the execution of Charles I, the Puri-
tans ruled England and the theatres were closed as
immoral houses. With the Restoration of the monarchy
in 1660, the theatres reopened, under the influence of
French and Italian drama. The plays divided into
heroic dramas and comedies of the manners of the
times. The work of Shakespeare and his contemporaries
was still produced, but it was edited and purged of much
of its complexity of language and it lost some of its
dramatic force in the process. Some of the tragedies
were even given happy endings to increase their enter-
tainment.
The heroic dramas were rhymed tragedies, with improb-
able plots and characters performing impossible feats of
valour, behaving as punctilious gentlemen and incomp-
arable lovers. Dryden followed the trend for some time
with plays like ‘The Conquest of Granada’, but he
finally realized the dramatic realism of blank verse and
his ‘All for Love’ is a creditable version of the love story
of Cleopatra and Mark Antony.
The comedies of manners were by far the most success-
ful drama of the period. They exposed the loose morals,
the brilliant wit and the social antagonisms of the Res-
toration court and high society. Sheridan’s ‘The Rivals’
and ‘The Scandal’ are still excellent pieces of theatrical
production and witty effect, while Oliver Goldsmith’s
‘She Stoops to Conquer’ is probably one of the funniest
plays in English drama.
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. This period is a
mixed one for the fortunes of drama. The early years
were dominated by the poetry of the Romantics, who
were regarded as representing serious literature, while
the theatre was allowed to decline again to production
of pantomimes, farces and melodrama. The poets wrote
dramatic works in verse, but they never intended such
plays to appear on a stage. These works were known as
‘closet drama’, to be read as serious pieces of poetic
work without the artificial trappings of the stage. Among
these are Byron’s ‘Manfred’ and Shelley’s ‘The Cenci’
and ‘Prometheus Unbound’.
After about 1880, the influence of the Norwegian play-
wright, Henrik Ibsen (1828-1906), was felt in the
English theatre. Gone was the tinsel of melodrama with
all its impossible characterization and lack of purpose;
in its place rose a new drama-criticism of society and
its human problems. Ibsen shared with the novelists of


the late nineteenth century the faculty of perceiving
what follies were undermining the society of the day
and exposing them with pitiless clarity. In his plays is
the beginning of the tragedy of the little man, perhaps
oppressed by his fellows, perhaps overwhelmed by his
environment or by the social conventions tying him
down to a life for which he is unsuited and unprepared.
‘The Doll’s House’ and ‘The Wild Duck’ are good
examples of Ibsen’s work.
One of the English dramatists to be influenced by the
new philosophy in the theatre was George Bernard
Shaw (1856-1950). This grand old man of the theatre
lived through all the formative years of modern drama,
but his plays preserve a turn-of-the-century flavour. He
was determined to upset complacent thinking and reli-
ance on established institutions in society, and he saw
the stage as the best medium for shocking people into
an awareness of his arguments. His characters are rarely
fully developed in the sense that those of Shakespeare
take on a life of their own, but they are all admirably
suited to the argument he is presenting. His plays
develop a conflict of ideas whose resolution is presented
in a comic manner, where Ibsen chose tragedy. Shaw’s
dialogue assures him of long-lasting fame, in spite of the
fact that many of his ideas are no longer novel or
revolutionary. ‘Pygmalion’ is of course now well known
because of the musical version, ‘My Fair Lady’, and
many of his other serious comedies deserve student
reading for pleasure and instruction. ‘St Joan’ is an ex-
cellent example of modern drama’s mingling of tragedy
and comedy, as Joan of Arc comes to life as a forth-
right, amusing yet intensely compelling character, a
vibrantly alive person rather than a saint mystically
gazing to heaven. Other plays worth reading are ‘Man
and Superman’, ‘Back to Methuselah’, ‘Major Barbara’,
‘Caesar and Cleopatra’ and ‘Androcles and the Lion’.
Oscar Wilde (1854-1900) managed to capture the
humour and pathos of his age in a selection of plays
which range from the pure comedy of ‘The Importance
of Being Earnest’ through the social criticism of ‘Lady
Windermere’s Fan’ to the tragic overtones of ‘Salome’.
Once again English dialogue reflected the sparkle and
bite of Restoration comedy.
Two Irish dramatists, W. B. Yeats (1865-1939) and
J. M. Synge (1871-1909), took the folk lore and the
legends of their native land and wove them into pene-
trating plays. Yeats’ ‘The Land of Heart’s Desire’ is
like an adult fairy tale, while Synge’s work moves from
the banter of ‘The Playboy of the Western World’ to
the stark suffering of ‘Riders to the Sea’. Their reliance
on the common people for their characterization gave
their work an authentic flavour, which was in danger of
being lost to the cleverly spoken characters in plays like
Wilde’s.
MODERN DRAMA. In the twentieth century, there
has been much experimentation in drama as playwrights
seek to find a novel way of presenting the basic conflicts
of human nature. One-act plays have become popular
as dramatic equivalents of the short story in singleness
of purpose and effect; the old five-act structure has sur-
rendered to a three-act pattern of exposition, collision,
crisis and denouement presented much more economi-
cally than in the old plays, where sub-plots were so often
introduced to fill out the action.
John Galsworthy (1867-1933) wrote several interesting
problem plays, among them ‘Strife’, a study of worker
and employer relations, and ‘The Silver Box’, an argu-
ment that there is one law for the rich and another for
the poor. He does not offer any solution to the problem,
but is merely content to expose it.
Poetic drama has been rejuvenated for tragedy in the
work of T. S. Eliot (b. 1888), whose ‘Murder in the
Cathedral’ brought back the ancient Greeks’ device of
the chorus as a commentator on the action and a creator
of atmosphere. The women of Canterbury follow every
step of the martyrdom of the Archbishop. His later
plays, ‘The Cocktail Party’, ‘The Family Reunion’ and
‘The Confidential Clerk’ are all unusual in their kind of
verse and in their plots.
A younger follower of poetic drama is Christopher Fry
(b. 1907). His comedies are full of the joy of life
mingled with gentle satire of modern society. You should
read ‘A Phoenix too Frequent’ and ‘The Lady’s Not for
Burning’. An unusual play is ‘A Sleep of Prisoners’, a
wartime story of soldiers who, asleep in a church,
become in their dreams appropriate Biblical characters.
Of the many other good dramatists of this century we
have room to mention only two, and both Americans:
Eugene O’Neill (b. 1888) and Arthur Miller (b. 1915).
O’Neill was interested in experiments with dialogue and
character presentation. In The Hairy Ape’, the hero is
incapable of understanding his own problem, but the
audience can see his predicament clearly. The question
for the critic then becomes one of deciding whether a
hero can be tragic if he does not realize his own tragedy.
Other interesting plays are ‘The Emperor Jones’, ‘The
Great God Brown’ and ‘Mourning Becomes Electra’.
Miller has written for the stage and has also adapted
his own work for film scripts, so he is aware of the
problems of each kind of drama. You should try to read
‘The Death of a Salesman’ and ‘A View from the
Bridge’.


5. THE ESSAY
The essay has a long history, although its richest period
corresponds with the development of the novel, from
the eighteenth century to the present day. The name
itself comes from a French verb ‘essayer’— to try, or to
weigh in the balance and the essayist tries to present
an idea to his reader, weighing its importance or its
interest as he ponders its implications. The essay has
been called ‘a loose sally of the mind’, ‘a prose lyric’ or
‘a conversation in print’. All these definitions emphasize
the comparative brevity of the essayist’s argument, as
well as its relative informality in comparison with other
literary forms. It is, above all, the medium best suited
for a writer to express his own personality, unhindered
by the needs of characterization which limit him in the
novel, short story or drama.
The subject matter of the essay is unlimited; whatever
problems or mysteries exert the mind and imagination
of man are suitable material for the essayist to share
with his readers. It may be grave or gay, ironic or sar-
castic, critical or appreciative, realistic or fantastic. It
may reflect the spirit of the writer’s society, a topical
problem or a weighty philosophy, or it may limit itself
to the little things of life, those troubles and fears and
happinesses which are unaffected by political changes or
advancing centuries.
The distinctive quality of the essay as a literary form is
its characteristic treatment. Whatever its subject may
be, it should show the following features:
(a) Slightness and brevity—no attempt to deal with the
subject exhaustively, but rather an attempt to stimu-
late the mind to private thought.
(b) Spontaneity —the essay should seem to have sprung
from the mind effortlessly, in the full heat of
thought, just as one’s ideas flash forth in lively
conversation. The discussion should seem natural,
inviting the reader’s participation.
(c) Unity with all its ease and flexibility, the essay
must be controlled by the writer’s general purpose.
However discursive the essayist may be, neither he
nor his reader should lose the feeling that the essay
is more than idle talk.
(d) The personal element—the point of view of any
particular subject must reflect the personality of the
creator of that point of view. Thus, when Montaigne
declared that ‘lt is myselfe I pourtraye’, he was
stating a truth for all essayists, old or new.
Just as there is a wide range of subject matter in the
essay, so there is a wide variety of essay types. By far
the most popular, and the type which best fits the
characteristics expected in the essay, is the literary
personal essay. It may be scholarly, like those of Bacon
or Hazlitt; intimately emotional, like those of Lamb;
whimsical, like those of Oliver Wendell Holmes; or
frankly didactic, like those of Robert Louis Stevenson.
Such personal essays reflect most faithfully the per-
sonality of their writers and are the most interesting
from the point of view of style, since each writer is
striving to crystallize his own ideas or impressions of
extremely personal experiences.
The essay of manners is also a popular type, since it
reflects the changing society of every age. The essayist
sees his own community with the eyes of a serious critic
and chooses peculiar customs or foolish behaviour as
the subject of his work. He may satirize bitterly or gaily;
he may be content to expose a fault or he may suggest a
remedy for it. Whatever his method, his work is interest-
ing as a social document, quite apart from his skill in
entertainment.
The nature essay is very popular with writers who have
a poetic flavour to their prose, like J. E. Flecker or
Edward Thomas. Such writers delight in showing the
beauty of the seasons, the mountains or the countryside,
or even of earth’s strange and remote places. They do
not always confine themselves to description, however.
Aware of man’s ancient and intimate association with
nature, they write of it as evoking deeply spiritual
responses in man in ways that the literature of city
life finds hard to equal.
Because of the frequency and range of travelling today,
the travel essay has lost some of its appeal for the
general reader. Certainly travel books are numerous
but they are often more geographical than indicative of
the writer’s reactions to his new experiences. A travel-
ling writer needs to have a remarkably receptive mind
and the ability to analyse his impressions if his work is
to rise above mere journalism.
Since the Victorian period particularly, many writers
have turned to critical essays as expressions of personal
taste in literature, art or music. Some writers, like
Arnold, express a set of judgements for subjects like
poetry, setting their code of excellence against the ac-
cepted masters of the form. Pope did the same kind of
thing in verse in his ‘Essay on Criticism’. Other essayists
are content to express their delight in particular works
of art, trying to kindle in their readers a similar joy to
that which they have experienced. Such writing is called
appreciative criticism. Others again prefer to follow the
biography of an artist, trying to interpret his work in
terms of his own life. Such biographical criticism can
be misleading, since it attacks the problem of criticism
from the wrong angle and tends to forget the real con-
tent of the work of art by emphasizing highly conjec-
tural material.
In modern times, the essayist has tended to prefer im-
personal discussion of topical problems to personal ex-
amination of experiences. The essay has become a brief
comment on new business or scientific processes, new
political theories or new social situations. The essayist
has felt more compelled to explain our own world to us.
Thus the emphasis is on subject matter and correspond-
ing clarity and simplicity of style, rather than explora-
tion of whimsical stylistic effects for their own sake.
As you study different essays, you should keep in mind
a definite plan of attack. You may enlarge on the same
two general questions we suggested for the study of a


poem: what is the writer saying and how does he say it?
Like the poem, the essay is usually brief enough to per-
mit much more detailed criticism than is expected in the
study of the novel or the full-length play.
(a) THEME and PURPOSE Decide on the central
idea of the essay and express it briefly and simply. The
author may state his theme directly or may imply it
through his illustrations or examples; until you are sure
what it is you will be unable to judge the rest of the
essay.
(b) CONTENT —Keeping the theme and purpose in
mind, make an outline of the ideas in the argument of
the essay. You must have a detailed knowledge of what
the writer is saying. Consider the truth and significance
of the ideas. Are they universally true or have they only
limited application? Are there any fallacies put forward
as evidence for his point of view? Do you want to argue
with him, agree with him, add to his opinion or de-
nounce him? Make an effort to distinguish between fact
and opinion, reason and dogma, logic and fallacy. (The
Clearer Thinking sections of this book can help you
here!)
(c) STRUCTURE —Consider your outline of the con-
tent and determine the essayist’s skill in creating a uni-
fied whole from his ideas. Is his essav merely a string
of disconnected facts or is it a carefully constructed,
well-organized argument? Is the writer keeping his
theme in mind at all times? Does he digress (which is
not necessarily a bad thing), and do such digressions
break the train of thought?
(d) TREATMENT —How does the writer attract your
attention? Is his treatment serious or frivolous, ironic
or sarcastic, profound or shallow? Does he win your
sympathy for his subiect? Does he make use of his own
experience to illustrate his point of view? Does he eently
urge you to agree with him or is he excessively didactic
(insisting that you take your opinions from himi? Does
he show an awareness of other sides of the argument?
(e) STYLE —The most interesting aspect of a writer’s
style is the degree to which it reveals his own per-
sonality. From each essay, you should be able to decide
whether a writer is practical, humorous, serious, witty,
whimsical, gentle in argument or in approach to other
people, imaginative, sympathetic, observant or melan-
choly. How does his personality affect his argument?
See if you can find two essays on the same subject and
compare the differences in treatment and style.
As you fill in the details of style, you should first con-
sider the writer’s choice of words and phrases. These
will show the writer’s background and education, his
interests and the range of knowledge of his public. From
there, you may observe the organization of sentences,
whether they are long or short, carefully constructed or
rambling, abrupt or graceful, informal or mechanically
correct.
It is important, too, that you consider the organization
of paragraphs and the skill with which each paragraph
is fitted into the pattern of the whole essay. This has
been considered in more detail in your own composition
work and it will help your own planning if you examine
the methods of masterly essayists.
You may even consider what use the writer makes of
literary devices and how successful such devices are in
attracting attention or enriching the effect of his lan-
guage. Does the writer use illustration or examples to
any extent; is he fond of anecdotes or allusions?
Once you have dealt with all the detailed aspects of an
essay, you are in a good position to judge the writer’s
success in carrying out an examination of his theme.
Remember that every aspect of his content and his style
should be considered in the light of that theme and
purpose.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
BEFORE THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. The in-
ventor of the name ‘essay’ was a Frenchman, Michel
de Montaigne (1533-92), who set out to preserve his
experiences and examine his own thoughts by writing
them down. He was well read and had travelled widely
for those times, and his writings —a vastly entertaining
jumble of anecdotes, legends, strange customs, classical
knowledge and personal opinions—tell us much about
his period, but above all they reveal the kind of man he
was. His realization that Tt is myselfe I pourtraye’ set
the standard for the personal essayists who were to fol-
low him.
In England, the new form was accepted and developed
by Sir Francis Bacon (1561-1626) and Abraham Cow-
ley (1618-67). Bacon’s essays show his logical, scientific
approach to all problems; they were written to show
courtiers the way to success in public life. They are
memorable for their concentrated wisdom and logical,
pithy expression. Bacon is justly praised for his intro-
ductory sentences which invariably plunge into the sub-
ject and expose the heart of the argument at once.
Cowley shows much of the temper of Montaigne’s in-
formal attitude in his essays. His views are moderate
and reveal his learning without becoming too formal.
THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. The essay flourished
in the eighteenth century because of the volume of
journalism. For the first time, there was a wide reading
public who were ordinary men and women, without the
scholarly university education of Bacon and his learned
contemporaries. These new readers wanted to cultivate
their intelligence, to'be able to converse about the prob-
lems of the day and to improve their conduct to fit the
commonsense standards of good society, and the essay-
ists of the time were only too happy to offer such social
criticism and advice as seemed necessary. Richard
Steele (1672-1729) and Joseph Addison (1672-1719)
are probably the best-known writers of the period, and
Addison’s pose of ‘Mr Spectator’ indicates the extent of
his influence. He wanted to expose and reveal his own
society in all its foolishness and weakness, but he did


not necessarily preach obvious reforms; rather he was
content to leave reform to the good sense of his readers.
Apart from the social criticism of his work, his creation
of Sir Roger de Coverley and the friends at the coffee
house has left us a delightful legacy of the life of the
time, with the beginnings of characterization which was
to be developed by the novelists of the period. Addison
has moreover held his own as an example of a fine
English style. As Dr Johnson said of him:
‘Whoever wishes to attain an English style, familiar
but not coarse, and elegant but not ostentatious, must
give his days and nights to the volumes of Addison.’
Other writers of the same period are Jonathan Swift
(1667-1745), Samuel Johnson (1709-84) and Oliver
Goldsmith (1730-74). Swift is not strictly an essayist,
but his many prose works contributed to the develop-
ment of a clear, English prose style. Perhaps one of his
best examples of satiric argument is his ‘Modest Pro-
posal’, in which he examines the two basic problems of
Ireland: famine and over-population. Swift solemnly
suggests the fattening up of infants on mothers’ milk
until they are over twelve months of age, after which
time they may be sold as tender yearling meat! Johnson
is the great scholar of the period, best remembered for
his attempts to stabilize English spelling in his massive
Dictionary, but he wrote a number of essays under the
pen-name of Mr Rambler; they were serious works yet
personal to the limited extent that the rather pompous
Johnson could unbend to become intimate with his
readers. Goldsmith most nearly captures Addison’s
crown of well-bred urbanity in his essays, under the
guise of a Chinese student observing and commenting
on English life. For Goldsmith, the essay of manners
was the natural outlet of a would-be novelist; his essays
abound in brief pen-portraits, often far more life-like
than Addison’s portraits of his beloved Sir Roger.
THE ROMANTICS. Just as the Romantic poets turned
their backs on the impersonal approach of their eigh-
teenth century predecessors, so the essayists of the
period attempted to find a more personal level of self-
expression, culminating in the well-controlled intimacy
of Charles Lamb (1775-1834). Lamb, writing under the
pen-name of Elia, is aptly described by Legouis, in his
‘Short History of English Literature’: ‘The great mass of
humanity amid which he lived inspired a kind of writing
in which drollery was mixed with affection. In the very
streets of the city he found an inexhaustible source of
instruction and enjoyment, just as the Lake poets found
it in their valleys and streams. ... A fancy which . . .
ran readily to jests and puns gives a lively gaiety to his
pages, and counterbalances their bookish pedantry.’
Lamb is interested in the little personal things which are
not affected by social revolution and which reveal the
writer’s personality far more clearly than any other kind
of interest. Subjects like ‘Old China’, ‘The Praise of
Chimney Sweepers’ or ‘Dream Children’ stamp the
kindly, whimsical, ever-gentle and ever-cheerful Elia
forever in our minds.
William Hazlitt (1778-1830) was as harsh a critic as
Lamb was gentle. He echoes much of Bacon’s geometric
pattern of argument and terseness of expression and his
gift of satire is reminiscent of Swift’s works. Another
essayist of the same group, Leigh Hunt (1784-1859), is
frequently disparaged beside giants like Lamb and
Hazlitt, but his work is pleasant, interesting and enter-
taining in its friendliness. He was primarily a journalist
and this perhaps explains the tendency to superficiality
in his work; his chief skill is a smoothness of approach,
a sense of sharing experiences with the reader which is
perhaps a greater virtue in an essayist than is scholarly
discussion.
THE VICTORIANS. The essays of this period followed
the Romantic trend with the work of Stevenson (1850-
94), who mingled a personal approach with a deeper
awareness of moral values than his predecessors allowed
their work to show. More characteristic of the Victorian
spirit are the critical works of scholars like Thomas
Babington Macaulay (1800-59), Thomas Carlyle (1795-
1881), John Newman (1801-1890) and Matthew
Arnold (1822-1888). These writers all wrote a confi-
dent, mature English style, mingling the grace of Addi-
son with the scholarship of Johnson. The language had
developed as a truly flexible tool in the hands of the
poets and prose writers.
THE TWENTIETH CENTURY. The present age has
seen such a variety of essay types and writers’ styles that
it is difficult to single out any particular group of
writers who show a distinctively modern attitude. G. K.
Chesterton (1874-1936) and Hilaire Belloc (1870-
1953) both used humour to soften their criticism of
modern life and each of them seemed to see greater
beauty in the proven customs and ideas of past ages
than in the fads and fashions of the present day.
The writer who best reveals the intellectual approach of
the twentieth century is Aldous Huxley (1894-1963).
Famous for his novels, the brilliantly lucid Huxley has
also the essayist’s gifts and is able to express with ease
and charm the most difficult ideas in art, science and
religion. J. B. Priestley (b. 1894) is another such writer,
although his work tends to be less profoundly intellec-
tual. And many other men of literature in this modern
age have turned to the essay from time to time. But it is
not merely in the field of literary personal essays that
the form is being developed today. The essay, often
termed simply ‘an article’, has become the most popular
vehicle for discussion on a vast range of topics. Men of
science, of philosophy, of mechanics and so on, use the
essay to inform the general public of new processes or
ideals for which they and their fellow workers are
striving. Thus, in spite of the changing subject matter
and style, the essay retains its basic use as educated
conversation crystallized in writing.


1. DESCRIPTIVE
e.g., A huge wave. A blue sky.
2. PROPER
e.g., A French ship. Victorian schools.
3. DEFINITE NUMERICAL
e.g., Twelfth day. Twenty-one years.
4. INDEFINITE NUMERICAL
e.g., Several days. Any ideas.
5. QUANTITY
e.g., Little time. Great resolve.
6. INTERROGATIVE
7. DEMONSTRATIVE
8. DISTRIBUTIVE
(N.B.: These last three adjectives bear the same names as
pronouns (q.v.). The difference is that the pronouns stand
alone, while the adjectives are followed by a noun; e.g.,
That is mine [pronoun]. That book . . . [adjective].)
177
A MINIMUM GRAMMAR
1. NOUNS
PARSING; Kind, person, number, gender, case.
1. KIND
PROPER; Tom, Jones, India, ‘Herald’.
COMMON; boy, paper, salt, cushion.
ABSTRACT: joy, strength, speed, love.
COLLECTIVE: herd, army, jury, audience.
2. PERSON
FIRST: I, we, us, our (the person speaking).
SECOND: you, thou (the person spoken to).
THIRD: he, them, it (person or thing spoken about).
(N. 8.: These are really pronouns, but it is convenient to
treat them at this stage. All the nouns instanced under ‘kind’
above are in the third person—spoken about.)
3. NUMBER
SINGULAR; boy, Jones, child.
PLURAL; boys, Joneses, children
4, GENDER
MASCULINE; boy, rooster, uncle, Don.
FEMININE; girl, hen, aunt, Beryl.
NEUTER; table, beauty, Brisbane.
COMMON; people, they (masc. and fern, mixed).
MASCULINE or FEMININE; person, parent
(singular).
5. CASE (i.e., relationship to other words)
NOMINATIVE: when noun is subject of a verb.
OBJECTIVE; when noun is object of verb or prep.
POSSESSIVE: when noun owns something.
EXAMPLES OF CASE:
John hit the girls’ ball to the fence.
John : nominative case to ‘hit’.
girls’: possessive case owning ‘ball’.
ball: objective case governed by ‘hit’.
fence: objective case governed by ‘to’.
2. PRONOUNS
PARSING: Kind, person, number, gender, case.
(N. 8.: Pronouns, because they stand for nouns, are parsed
in the same way as nouns —see above. We shall now treat
only the different kinds of pronouns.)
1. PERSONAL
Person NOMINATIVE OBJECTIVE POSSESSIVE
Ist I, we me, us my, our
2nd you you your
3rd he, she, it, they him,her,it,them his, her, its, their
2. RELATIVE
who, whom, whose, which, that,
(also, ‘as’ after ‘such’ and ‘same’).
(N. 8.: Parsing of relative pronouns is slightly different
from that of other pronouns. Rule: Relative pronouns take
person, number and gender from their antecedent, but take
case from their own clause.
e.g., They saw the girls, who lost the bag.
who : Relative pronoun; third person, plural number,
feminine gender a/w antecedent girls ; nominative case
to lost.)
3. POSSESSIVE
mine, his, hers, ours, yours, theirs.
e.g., It is his. (N. 8.: Not followed by a noun.)
(N. 8.: Possessive pronouns are never in the possessive
case.)
4. EMPHATIC
myself, yourself, etc. (e.g., I myself will go).
5. REFLEXIVE
myself, yourself, etc. (e.g., I cut myself).
6. INTERROGATIVE
who, which, what, etc. (when asking questions),
e.g., Who said that? What is wrong?
7. DEMONSTRATIVE
this, that, these, those (when no noun follows),
e.g., This is mine. Those are my father’s.
8. DISTRIBUTIVE
each, every, either, neither, everyone, everybody.
3. ADJECTIVES
PARSING; Kind, degree, qualifying (a noun/pronoun).
(N. 8.: The three degrees of comparison of adjectives are:
positive, comparative, superlative; e.g., fine, finer, finest; good,
better, best; beautiful, more beautiful, most beautiful. We shall
now treat the different kinds of adjectives.)


4. ADVERBS
PARSING: Kind, degree, modifying (a vb./adj./adv.).
(N. 8.: Most adverbs are in the positive degree; the remainder
form comparative and superlative similarly to adjectives; e.g.,
early, earlier, earliest; safely, more safely, most safely. We shall
now treat the different kinds of adverbs.)
1. MANNER (tells how)
e.g., He walked steadily. He manages better.
2. TIME (tells when)
e.g., I’ll come soon. He’ll never manage.
3. PLACE (tells where)
e.g., They live nearby. He went below.
4. REASON (tells why)
e.g., I therefore screamed. Consequently, he left.
5. DEGREE (tells to what extent)
e.g., He’s so quiet. You are equally wrong.
6. NUMBER (tells in what order)
e.g., You may go first. Thirdly, I think
7. INTERROGATION (asks questions)
e.g., How are you? Why is it?
8. AFFIRMATION or NEGATION
e.g., Yes, certainly, surely; no, not, never.
(N. 8.: There is also a Relative Adverb which resembles a
Relative Pronoun in that it introduces an adjectival clause;
e.g., when, where, whence, why—as in ‘This is the place where
I live’.)
5. VERBS
DEFINITION; A finite verb is a verb with a subject; the sub-
ject is found by asking ‘who’ or ‘what’ in front of the verb.
PARSING: Finite verb, transitive or intransitive, person
and number agreeing with the subject, tense, voice,
mood.
1. FINITE VERB
may consist of one word (dogs bark) or an auxiliary
verb plus main verb (I am going, he may agree).
2. TRANSITIVE/INTRANSITIVE
(a) Transitive verbs must have a direct object (to
receive the action); e.g., The car struck the
fence. (Ask ‘whom’ or ‘what’ after the verb; if
there is a direct answer, the verb is transitive.)
(b) Intransitive verbs have no direct object (they
are complete in themselves); e.g,, The car
stopped. He walked towards the car.
(N. 8.: All passive verbs are transitive.)
3. PERSON & NUMBER a/w SUBJECT
e.g., We tried: Ist person, plu. number a/w ‘we’,
e.g., She lejf. 3rd person, sing, number a/w ‘she’.
4. TENSE
FUTURE
PRESENT PAST
Simple I eat I ate I shall eat
Continuous lam eating I was eating I shall be eating
Perfect I have eaten I had eaten I shall have eaten
5. VOICE
(a) Active voice—when the subject of the verb is
the doer of the action; e.g., Tom rang the bell.
(b) Passive voice—when the action is done to the
subject; e.g., Tom was hit by the ball.
(N. 8.; All passive verbs are transitive.)
6. MOOD
(N. 8.: Mood is the mode or form in which the action of
the verb is expressed.)
(a) Imperative—the verb expresses a command.
(b) Indicative —makes a statement, asks a ques-
(c) Subjunctive—expresses doubt, condition, wish,
purpose.
(AN EXAMPLE OF VERB PARSING: I went yesterday.
'Went': finite verb; intransitive; first person, singular num-
ber a/w ‘l’, past tense, active voice, indicative mood.)
6. VERBALS
(The term ‘verbals’ is used here to cover three categories of
words and phrases formed from verbs: infinitives, participles,
gerunds.)
1. INFINITIVES
to live, to run, to be, to have tried; i.e., ‘to’ plus
the verb forms an infinitive.
2. PARTICIPLES
(a) Present (end in ‘ing’)—loving, being loved.
(b) Past (often end in ‘ed’) —loved, beaten.
(c) Perfect —having loved, having been loved.
3. GERUNDS
(Whereas a participle is sometimes called a verbal-
adjective, a gerund may be called a verbal-noun.
Gerunds end in ‘ing’. Some grammarians prefer to
call gerunds abstract nouns.)
e.g., Writing is tedious. I like walking.
7. AUXILIARY VERBS
These are the the ‘helping verbs’ which help participles
and infinitives to form finite verbs.
have, be, shall, will, may, do
e.g., I have to go. 1 may decide. I am going.
8. ARTICLES
These are limiting adjectives which point out a noun.
Two kinds—
(a) Definite: the
(b) Indefinite: a, an
9. PREPOSITIONS
These show relationship between two other words (and
govern in the objective case the noun or pronoun that
follows the preposition)—
on, above, under, beside, in, to, at, of, etc.


These join words, phrases or clauses.
Two kinds—
(a) Co-ordinate (and, but) which join like words,
phrases or clauses; e.g., Jack and Jill; up the
steps and into the room; she disliked him but
she helped him.
(b) Subordinate (when, because, if, though, that,
etc.), which introduce adverbial clauses and
some noun clauses—see ‘Clauses’ below.
CONCERNING CLAUSES
DEFINITIONS: A clause is a group of words with a
subject and verb. A sentence containing only one verb
is called a Simple Sentence, e.g., Don is at work. This
becomes a Principal Clause when other clauses are
joined to it in a sentence, e.g., Don is at work, because
he has to make a living. When two principal clauses
are joined by ‘and’ or ‘but’, they are said to be Principal
Clauses in Co-ordination, e.g., Don is at work but he
would rather be at home. Clauses which depend on prin-
cipal clauses are called Subordinate Clauses and there
are three categories of these; noun, adjectival and
adverbial clauses. Below are examples of the main ones.
1. NOUN CLAUSES
(a) NOUN CLAUSE SUBJECT
e.g., What he said was proved wrong.
(b) NOUN CLAUSE OBJECT
e.g., They declared that he was wrong.
(introduced by relative pronouns or rel. adverbs)
e.g., He was hit by a car which did not stop
I remember the place where I was bom.
3. ADVERBIAL CLAUSES
(a) ADVERBIAL OF MANNER (introd. by ‘as’)
e.g., He performed as he had been shown.
(b) ADVERBIAL OF TIME (when, while, as,
since)
e.g., I will go when the winter comes.
(c) ADVERBIAL OF PLACE (where, wherever)
e.g., He camps wherever there is fishing.
(d) ADVERBIAL OF REASON (because, for,
as)
e.g., He works hard because he is ambitious.
(e) ADVERBIAL OF PURPOSE (so that, in
order that)
e.g., He trained so that he would win.
(f) ADVERBIAL OF RESULT (that)
e.g., It was so hot that the butter melted.
(g) ADVERBIAL OF CONDITION (if, unless,
whether)
e.g., He will do it if you pay him.
(h) ADVERBIAL OF CONCESSION (though,
although)
e.g., He went, although he resented it.
(i) ADVERBIAL OF DEGREE (as)
e.g., They are as funny as a tin of worms (is).
(j) ADVERBIAL OF COMPARISON (than)
e.g., No mountain is taller than Everest (is).


1. i:
feel
|fi:l|
brief
1 bri:fj
league
[li:g]
2. i
did
did |
inch
[intj J
sit
1 sit 1
3. e
seven
[ sev an |
steady
[stedi]
egg
[eg]
4. ss
sad
(seed]
atom
IretamJ
sand
[saend]
5. a:
task
| toisk]
calm
[ ko: m |
father
[fo:3a]
6. O
not
1 not]
trough
[trof]
bonds
[bondz |
7. O ;
all
[»:1]
caught
[ko:t]
broad
[broid]
8. u
good
[gud |
put
1 put j
woman
[wuman
9. u:
rude
i ru:d |
fruit
| fruit |
stool
[stud]
10. A
but
IbAtJ
blood
IblAd)
some
| si\.m]
11.9:
bird
1 ba:d |
colonel
|ka melj
curb
|ka:b|
12. a
butter
| bA.t a {
alone
[9 lounj
actor
| aekts]
7. DIPHTHONGS
13. ei
day
1 dei |
pain
[pein]
radio
| reidiou |
14. ou
fold
| fould |
home
[houm]
road
| roud |
15. ai
time
| taim |
pilot
[pallet]
knife
[naif]
16. au
now
[ nau |
aloud
| a laud]
crown
[kraun]
17. Di
boy
( boi |
coin
|koin)
noise
| no iz]
18. ia
ear
|ia]
weird
[wied]
idea
[aidie]
19. eo
fair
jffcs]
heir
lea]
where
[wes ]
20, oa
more
|moa J
pour
[poal
oar
foe]
21. u a
tour
|tua]
cure
[kjuSj
sewer
[sua]
PHONETICS
DEFINITION: Phonetics is the scientific study of the
sounds of speech.
1. In the study of phonetics, you must listen carefully
to the way words are pronounced. Pronunciation varies
from country to country, and the phonetician tries to
record the actual pronunciation heard in a particular
place whether Australia, England or some other part
of the world. For example, an Englishman may pro-
nounce the word economics as |i:k n miks], while
many Australians say [ek n miks].
2. Always remember to follow the method of the scien-
tist. Listen carefully to the word, analyse it into sounds,
and record it, using the symbols listed below. Just as a
chemist uses symbols to write down formulae, the
phonetician uses phonetic script to record sounds
accurately.
3. To the chemist, the symbols H 2 O represent the
formula for water. To the phonetician, the symbols
| k f J represent the word cough. The script used below
is the script of the International Phonetic Association.
4. REASONS FOR USING PHONETIC SCRIPT
The International Phonetic Alphabet is one in which
each symbol represents one sound value. This is not
true of the ordinary alphabet of twenty-six letters, as
you can see from these examples.
Examples:
(a) The same letters may represent different sounds,
cough |kof| enough fi:nA.f] through 10ru:J
task |td:sk| shake | J* eik | many (menij
tall | to ;1] snap f snaep ]
(b) A sound may be written in several different ways.
not [not] yacht [jot]
great IgreitJ mate | meit]
(c) Some letters are silent.
palm |pa:m| gnaw |nO:]
There are other inconsistencies in our spelling. You will
discover them as you listen to words and analyse them
into their individual sounds.
5. LEARNING THE PHONETIC ALPHABET
A knowledge of the phonetic alphabet will help you to
interpret the pronunciation systems of the many dic-
tionaries which use the TP.A. script.
The most useful dictionary for pronunciation is: Daniel
Jones: An English Pronouncing Dictionary (Dent).
The pronunciation here recorded is that of Southern
England, and it is as well to remember that there are
some alternative pronunciations used in Australia.
These are fully discussed in Professor A. G. Mitchell’s
The Pronunciation of English in Australia (Angus and
Robertson).
To help you learn the script, the symbols are listed
below. Key words are listed, and as so many symbols
resemble ordinary spelling, phonetic symbols are usually
enclosed in square brackets.
Example: phonetics [fanetiksj.
The script used here is called broad script. There are
some variations on it in some dictionaries, but it is the
basic one used.
6. VOWEL SOUNDS
NOTE: The two dots (:) placed after some symbols indicate that the sound is lengthened.


8. CONSONANTS
Most consonants are represented by their normal alpha-
betical letters. This can be seen from the examples
above.
The exceptions are:
22. B —thas in thin | 6 in] (breathed)
23. 5 =thas in then [Sen] (voiced)
24. J =shas in shame [ J eim]
25. tj =chas in choke [tj ouk]
26. 3 =sas in treasure [tre3® J
27. d 3 =j as in joke [d3ouk |
28. q =ngas in ring [rii]]
29. j =yas in yet [jet]
Note the following;
s is always as in set [set]
z is always as in zest [zest]
g is always as in get [get]
The other consonants are the same as in normal spelling:
p, b, t, d, k, f, v, r, h, 1, m, n, w.
9. DEFINITION OF VOWEL SOUND
A vowel sound is one in which the sound of the voice
comes from the mouth with no obstruction from tongue,
mouth or lips. It is uninterrupted.
10. DEFINITION OF DIPHTHONG
A diphthong is a combination of two vowel sounds in
which the tongue glides from the position for the first
sound into the position for the second.
Example: day |dei|
You will hear this clearly if you say the word day very
slowly. The glide from e to i will be apparent.
d...e . . . i
11. DEFINITION OF CONSONANT
In the production of a consonant, the sound issuing
from the mouth is either partially or completely stopped
by one of the organs of speech (such as tongue, lips,
teeth).
Example: tap |taepJ Tongue blocks sound, then re-
leases it.
gas | gaes J Back of tongue rises to soft
palate to block sound before
releasing it.
sat [ saet] The mouth is narrowed so that
the hissing sound is produced.
12. IMPORTANT; Although this script may look com-
plicated at first, it is not difficult to learn. Once the basic
principles are understood, a little practice every day
will make transcription easy. Also, in a very short time,
you will be able to interpret readily a dictionary such
as the one by Jones.
Students often practise the script in the following ways:
(a) Looking over a whole page of a phonetic dictionary
at a time, covering up the normal spelling.
(b) Taking slow dictation into phonetic script.
(c) Writing short letters in script.
(d) Writing nonsense words and poems in script (e.g.,
Jabberwocky).
13. EXERCISES
In the following exercises, transcribe exercise (a) into
ordinary spelling and exercise (b) into phonetic script.
Each set is based on one particular sound which will
occur several times.
1. (a) [si:] |fid] [si;t] |ki:J |hi:tj.
(b) The eastern breeze blows frequently.
2. (a) |pit] [nit] [sit] |rit] [lit).
(b) Skill in fiction is a difficult thing.
3. (a) [bed] [bred] fsed] |beriJ |pepa|.
(b) Ten men defended their friends.
4. (a) [kaet] [task] [rap] [kteptanj.
(b) Sit on the sand to listen to the band.
5. (a) [pa;fl] [gra;s] fkla:k] |a:fte] | pot:st |.
(b) The basket on the grass was left after the class.
6. (a) [not] |k 1 od] [boks] |koral[
(b) The doctor drank hot coffee.
7. (a) [ko;t| |dwo:f] |so:d] [wo:m| |so:tJ.
(b) All thought the water warm.
8. (a) [stud] [kufan| | bukj [wust9[ | kuk].
(b) The cook was good at cooking puddings.
9. (a) [bAf u;n] [inklu:d] |gru:p| |nu:n] [kanu:
(b) The blue pool was too cool.
10. (a) [wAnda] ftrAbl] [kAridVJ [rAf] [ 1 Aki
(b) The young son played the drum.
11. (a) |ta:m| [fa:m| [l»:n] [ba:dz] [fa:].
(b) The interpretation erred and the meeting was
adjourned.
12. (a) [9 task] [aekta] jpleio] [mernba] |abaut|.
(b) They agreed that it would be difficult to adjust.


WORD ORIGINS A SHORT REFERENCE LIST
PREFIXES—EngIish
a—in, on, as in abed, ahunting.
after —as in afternoon, afterglow.
be—used with verbs to intensify the meaning, as in
becalm, bedim
by—near, as in bypath, by-law.
fore—before, as in forecast, forefathers,
mid—middle, as in midway, midday,
mis—wrong, as in misbehave, mistrust,
out —out, or excelling, as in outlet, outrun,
over—as in overcoat, over-reach.
with—against or away, as in withdraw, withstand.
PREFIXES—Latin
a, ab —away from, as in absent, abdicate.
a, ad (becomes ac, af, ag, al, etc.) —to, as in attract.
ante —before, as in ancestor, antecedent.
bene —well, as in benefactor, benefit.
bis, bi—twice, as in biscuit (twice cooked), biennial.
circum—around, as in circumference, circuit.
co, com, co, etc. —with, as in co-operate, colleague.
contra, counter—against, as in contradict, counteract.
de—down, away, as in deduce, deceive.
di(s) —apart, as in dismiss, differ.
e, ex, ef—out of, as in eject, exile.
in, em, il, ir, etc. —into, as in induct, embrace, imprison.
in, etc. —not, as in impossible, incorrect,
inter—between, as in intervene, intercept.
per—through, as in perceive, persevere.
post—after, as in postscript, post-mortem.
pre—before, as in predecessor, predict.
pro—forward, instead of, as in pronoun, propose.
re(d) —back, as in reduce, replay (see also ‘retro’, as in
‘retrograde’).
se(d) —away, as in secede, separate.
sub, sue, sug, etc. —under, as in submarine, suffer,
suggest.
super—beyond, as in superfluous, surname.
trans —across, as in translate, transport.
ultra—beyond, as in ultra-modern, ultra-socialist.
PREFIXES—Greek
anti—against, as in anti-Christian, antidote,
arch —chief, as in archbishop.
di—two, as in dilemma, disyllable,
hemi—half, as in hemisphere.
hetero—different, as in heterogeneous,
homo—same, as in homogeneous,
hyper—excessively, as in hypersensitive,
hypo—under, as in hypocrite, hyphen,
mono-—one, as in monotone.
para—beside, against, as in parachute, parallel,
penta—five, as in pentagon, pentameter.
peri—around, as in perimeter,
poly—many, as in polygamous.
pro—before, as in prologue, programme,
proto—first, as in prototype, protozoa,
syn, syl, sym—with, as in sympathy, syllogism.
SUFFIXES—EngIish
1. Denoting person or agent (doer). Fill in a word for
each suffix.
ARD, ART, ER, AR, OR, lER, YER, STER, MAN, MONGER,
WRIGHT.
2. Denoting state or condition. Fill in an example for
each.
CRAFT, DOM, FARE, HOOD, LEDGE, NESS, RED, SHIP,
TH.
3. Forming adjectives. Give an example for each.
EN, ERN, WARD, FUL, ISH, LIKE, LY, SOME, LESS.
SUFFIXES—Latin
1. Denoting person or agent. Give an example for each.
AIN, AN, EN, EON, ANT, ENT, ARY, AR, ER, EER, lER,
OR, ATE, EE, ESS.
2. Denoting state or condition. Give an example for
each.
AGE, ACY, ANCE, ENCE, ATE, ICE, ISE, lON, MENT,
MONY, OUR, RY, TUDE, TY, URE.


3. Forming diminutives (smaller versions). Give an
example of each.
CULE, CLE, EL, ET, ETTE, LET, ULE.
4. Forming adjectives. Give an example of each.
AGE, ABLE, IBLE, AL, ANT, ENT, AR, ARY, ATE,
ESQUE, IC, IVE, OUS.
5. Forming verbs. Give an example of each.
ATE, FY, ISH, ITE, Y.
SUFFIXES—Greek
1. Denoting person or agent. Give an example of each.
AST, IST, IC, INE, OT.
2. Denoting state or condition. Give an example of
each.
ASM, ISM, Y.
3. Forming verb. Give four examples.
IZE (ISE).
ROOTS—Latin
act, ag—do, as in agent, action.
am, amat —love, as in amiable, amateur.
aud(it) —hear, as in audience.
cad, cas —fall, happen, as in cadence.
cap, ceive—take, seize, as in capture, perceive,
ced, cease—yield, as in concede.
cid—killer, as in homicide.
claus—close, as in seclude, disclosure,
corpus—body, as in corporal.
cur, cours—run, as in discourse, cursive,
don, dat —give, as in donation.
dic(t) —say, tell, as in diction, predict.
doc(t) —teach, as in doctrine.
duc(t) —lead, as in introduce.
fac(t), fic, fy—make, do, as in manufacture,
fer, lat—bear, carry, as in suffer, translate.
frang, fract—break, as in fracture,
homo—man, as in homicide,
jac, jec(t)—throw, as in eject, project,
junct—join, as in junction.
leg, lect—choose, read, as in select, lecture,
loqu, locut—speak, as in elocution,
mit, miss—send, let go, as in permit, dismiss,
ped—foot, as in pedestrian.
pell, puls—drive, push, as in expel, compel,
pend—hang, weigh, pay, as in dispense, suspend,
port —carry, as in transport.
reg, rect —royal, straight, right, as in direct, regal,
sci—know, as in science, conscience.
scrib, script—write, as in describe, inscription.
spect(at), spic—see, as in spectator.
tang, tact —touch, as in tangent.
temp(or)—time, as in temporal.
ten, tin, tain—hold, as in sustain, extend.
tra(ct) —draw, drag, as in attract, contract,
ven—come, as in intervene.
vid, vis—see, as in provide, vision,
viv, vit—live, as in vital.
voc(at) —call, as in vocal.
ROOTS—Greek
anthropo—human, as in anthropology,
auto —self, as in automatic.
bio—life, as in biology.
chrono—time, as in chronology,
crat, cracy—rule, as in democracy,
demo—people, as in democrat,
geo—earth, as in geology.
graph—writing, as in telegraph,
hydro—water, as in hydro-electric,
iso—equal, same, as in isosceles.
log(y)—speech, science, study, as in geology,
mega—great, as in megaphone.
meter—measure, as in barometer,
micro—small, as in microscope,
miso—hatred, as in misanthrope.
ortho—straight, correct, as in orthodox,
pan—all, as in pantheism.
patho—feeling, suffering, as in apathetic, pathology
phil—love, as in philanthropy.
phobia—fear, dislike, as in claustrophobia,
phono—sound, as in telephone.
scope—view, as in telescope,
tele—far off, as in television,
theo—god, as in theology.


SUPPLEMENTARY VOCABULARY LIST (Advanced)
brazen
impeccable
duplicity
fatuous
delectable
beatitude
vitiate
usury
charlatan
despondent
nepotism
cogent
schism
custodian
gruesome
consternation
equivocal
conformity
rustic
conventional
depredation
savant
destitution
anarchist
laudable
clique
albino
adjunct
vaunted
inveterate
maudlin
overt
somnolent
niggardly
overwrought
cajole
grisly
atrophy
effrontery
gamut
delude
criterion
secede
benevolence
indemnify
nexus
covert
polemical
contention
pathos
cogitate
impediment
compliance
unctuous
contravene
demoralise
exorbitant
dereliction
fortitude
inured
psychic
bulwark
akimbo
nullify
irksome
lugubrious
menial
tremulous
misapprehend
quibble
nonplussed
demur
erudition
baste
bombastic
zephyr
preamble
astringent
baneful
vagary
castigate
incongruous
desolation
baleful
degenerate
bedlam
gyrate
resonant
congenial
rectitude
diverse
wraith
disparage
fulsome
anecdote
manifest
digress
buffoon
recant
kudos
manifold
peevish
mitigate
parlous
rabid
pettish
raucous
sporadic
plaintive
repugnant
prowess
remorse
presentiment
reprobate
stratagem
trenchant
stringent
idiosyncrasy
clandestine
purloin
solace
tenuous
incursion
mediator
nocturnal
occult
amnesty
bizarre
felicity
eclectic
deprecate
connive
desultory
collusion
stricture
recondite
suppurate
pellucid
obstreperous
inculcate
attrition
rampage
placate
scrutinize
winsome
precept
remonstrate
preposterous
reticence
propriety
succinct
unequivocal
wistful
protege
accession
recluse
zenith
travesty
jettison
microcosm
prodigy
agnostic
archaic
biped
homily
factious
decorum
debacle
amicable
stigmatize
rampant
indefatigable
overweening
incubus
stultify
importunate
vicarious
pillage
replete
revile
specious
wheedle
psuedo
gauche
puerile
ennui
abrogate
nuance
obesity
clientele
admonish
reiterate
tutelage
subjugate
mentor
mummery
penchant
alimony
bauble
brochure
gourmand
emulation
critique
defection
aperient
redoubtable
paucity
stoical
recreant
verbiage
epitome
extirpate
salubrious
agglomeration
concatenation
altercation
counterpoint
refractory
debilitate
automation
frippery
monolith
extenuate
mercurial
invocation
obdurate
mortify
plutocrat
excoriate
presage
impalpable
mundane
execrable
norm
prognosis
appellant
obscurantism
beleaguer
ephemeral
interpolate
recumbent
sinecure
picaresque
monomania
hedonist
perfunctory
circumvent
pristine
imprecation
construe
therapeutic
dignitary
annotate
intangible
devolution
exacerbate
plagiarism
fractions
metabolism
omnipotent
ambidextrous
mnemonic
annuitant
vestigial
gumption
hegemony
moribund
vouchsafe
soporific
proscribe
connotation
juridical
opprobrium
cadaverous
gregarious
peremptory
sophistry
roisterer
peroration
machinations
precursor
histrionic
primordial
tantamount
resilient
rationale
inimical
deist
parlance
obloquy
autocracy
exorcise
misnomer
mordant
burgeon
invective
seance


SUPPLEMENTARY VOCABULARY LIST (Advanced)-cont’d
apostate
perfidious
sinuous
ceramics
immure
probity
noisome
patrician
nostrum
appendage
lambent
deleterious
carousal
ensconce
repartee
sonorous
plenitude
ostracize
prescience
immanent
premonition
syllogism
simian
truncated
meretricious
vociferous
impecunious
tyro
proselytize
translucent
pedagogy
sacrosanct
valedictory
retrogression
flagellation
recrudescence
transcendental
sequester
metamorphosis
pusillanimous
prerogative
talismanic
grandiloquent
homeopathy
somnambulist
phlegmatic
sanctimonious
temporal
vituperation
temporize
calligraphy
unconscionable
reverberate
indigenous
trepidation
penultimate
recapitulate
ramifications
holocaust
propinquity
ratiocination
sequestrate
juxtaposition
quintessence
protagonist
euthanasia
captions
zealot
pariah
umbrage
retribution
solecism
rancorous
puissance
splenetic
evanescent
proclivity
misanthrope
misogynist
sententious
metaphysical
nomenclature
legerdemain
nascent
surreptitious
promulgate
palpable
CLEARER THINKING
(carried over from Unit 4)
SPOTTING PREJUDICE: People use emotional or
‘coloured’ terms to laud what they like and to disparage
what they do not like, and we must be on the watch for
their prejudices. Discuss the prejudices revealed by
these two passages. Underline any ‘coloured’ terms.
(a) Soccer is not a game for mere musclemen. Infinite
skill is called for, and not only speed and endurance
must be in evidence, but the eye and the mind must
never leave the ball. It requires natural ability plus
years of arduous striving to reach the finest stan-
dards of the game. A team acts as a perfectly co-
ordinated machine, each player thinking only of his
contribution to the collective effort. This is why the
sight of eleven virtuosi exhibiting their finesse ranks
as one of the great joys of life.
(b) Any mug can play rugby. I don’t see any point in
crashing about the field in a battle of sheer weight
and brawn. It shouldn’t be necessary to coach
players in the game itself—better by far to give them
a course in commando tactics, judo, wrestling and
weight-lifting. Nor is there any real teamwork.
These ‘teams’ are in fact gangs, practised in basher
techniques. And as for the spectators, they are
exactly the same breed as you will find taking a
morbid interest in blood sports whenever they get
half a chance.
DISCUSS
1. What exactly is a prejudice?
2. What are some of the reasons why people acquire
prejudices?
3. How is prejudice an obstacle to clear thinking?
EXERCISE Following the pattern of the two
prejudiced opinions above, select a topic and write two
contrasting paragraphs.


MISCELLANEOUS SENTENCES FOR CORRECTION
1. Neither the fox, the rabbit nor the sparrow is
native to Australia.
2. Do your brother or your sister enjoy surfing?
3. Them that work hardest usually make the best
husbands.
4. Who do you consider to be the greatest contralto
of our time?
5. The weary soldiers drunk avidly at the well of the
oasis.
6. Are everyone gathered to watch this astonishing
magic?
7. Every story and article in the journal are illus-
trated.
8. Chalk is very different than cheese.
9. lam more and more convinced than ever that he
was guilty.
10. No sooner had the drover mustered the sheep
when rain began to fall.
11. He is one of those politicians who is always keen
to meet his constituents.
12. The fire-hoses were cut by onlookers, thus caus-
ing failure to extinguish the fire.
13. Why do you dislike me doing the things I do?
14. The reason why his speech was so poor was on
account of the audience’s hostility.
15. Indonesia never has and I hope never will make
claims on Eastern New Guinea.
16. I should appreciate the lend of your wheelbarrow
for the cement job.
17. Some of those whom he knew were capable were
sent to the new job.
18. So far from appreciating that, lam furious about
it.
19. He is the greatest forward of any footballer I have
seen.
20. Despite quarantine precautions.being taken, there
still remains risks in importing rhesus monkeys.
21. There would be fewer arguments if each side
knew what they were talking about.
22. They have to come with you and I.
23. Him and lamto go out this afternoon.
24. Careful attention to the details of your studies
guarantee good results.
25. Them who he is after will be found in Mitzi’s Bar.
26. This child will never get no bigger if it don’t
eat up.
27. Isn’t it lovely! All the children are going to go to
the picnic.
28. The Taj Mahal is the most unique structure of
its kind.
29. Coming down the mountain a gentle mist was
rising.
30. The first of a number of workable typewriters
were invented in 1867.
31. The new building at the Quay is as tall, if not
taller, than the Harbour Bridge.
32. Toni, in a characteristic mood, would not let
others play nor play herself.
33. Neither time nor tide wait for any man.
34. Many spectators fainted in their seats of the heat.
35. Always a great variety of reasons are given to
account for continual bad weather.
36. I concede that Einstein knows more than me
about physics.
37. To continually nag your husband is to court
violence.
38. He cannot by no means be permitted to tell.
39. Bushwalking is more preferable than spectator
sports.
40. That is the tallest building which I have been into.
41. They asked if they may go.
42. He laid down, laying on his back, and looked up
at the stars.
43. Brisbane, Mackay and Townsville are lovely
towns, but Cairns is the more lovely.
44. Those two hammers are identical to each other.
45. I’ve often noticed the affect of the sun on paint.
46. He tells them they are wrong, then he agreed with
them.
47. The bread was divided between the crowd by the
disciples.
48. But while tolerating surrealism, I confess I do
not enjoy it.
49. Without the drovers hardly being aware of any
danger, the flood swept down on their mob.
50. I hope to never again see as much rain as fell in
1963.
51. The poor fellow will never get no better.
52. The reason why he failed was because he did not
study.
53. Anyone at all are invited to this dance.
54. No one except he had any success.
55. They never have and never will choose a good
captain.
56. One woman was killed and two badly hurt.
57. Terribly frightened, his feet were rooted to the
ground.
58. You can leave five minutes early, as a special
concession.
59. That meat tastes badly.
60. We were that tired we could of laid on stone.
61. I did the job quicker than I’ve ever done it.


62. We had hardly arrived than we were asked for a
loan.
63. Because he was busy, he said that he would see
me after.
64. The fund was divided among Ceylon and Burma.
65. She looks like she is in a hurry.
66. They have not done it like they were shown.
67. He ate less pie and less scones than I expected.
68. She is undoubtedly the prettiest of the twins.
69. The weather today is more perfect than yester-
day’s.
70. Those two lads are always ready to help one
another.
71. Those sort of person don’t deserve to live.
72. I shall hide carefully so that I might elude my
pursuers.
73. We expected to have seen you yesterday.
74. This scheme is more preferable than that.
75. For three years I have never missed the bus,
which makes me proud.
76. My younger brother is as tall, perhaps taller.
than I.
77. Do you have any fresh parsley today?
78. One can only try to do his best.
79. He is a man of great tenacity, and who works
incessantly.
80. That is a skiff with great speed, and which has
won many races.
81. Bill and myself tried every method we knew.
82. There was very little to say as regards his speech.
83. I, Edgar and you will be able to go in the Ford.
84. He was asked as to what effect the explosion
would have on the weather.
85. The singer featured Schubert’s songs, also recited
poetry.
86. I find less difficulties in algebra than in geometry.
87. I never ate any food before I got here.
88. The mornings are chillier than last week.
89. He has become that lazy that we are tired of him.
90. Of France, Germany and Italy, it is the former
that desires to exclude Britain from the Common
market.
91. A tall range of mountains, crossed by only two
passes, extend across the island.
92. The King, accompanied by the Queen, were the
last to enter.
93. The team is now going aboard and they are wav-
ing to their friends.
94. Let you and Ido it before they arrive.
95. Please remember who you are talking about.
96. She invited my wife and Ito the party.
97. If I were him, I should be ashamed.
98. This is one of the best times that has been
recorded.
99. Everybody who comes can bring their own food.
100. She does not act like the instructor taught her.
101. This is the woman whom the police think can
help them.
102. He has been more successful than me.
103. Each boy will improve their writing by using a
proper pen.
104. People have and still do argue about it.
105. Neither of you have any claim on the treasure.
106. He has much tact and much friends.
107. Kelly is as good or better than O’Hara.
108. They done their study easier tonight than last
night.
109. The main pleasure in hikes are the chances to
observe good scenery.
110. That pair of trousers are in need of cleaning.
111. The vast crowd are standing silent in mourning
for President Kennedy.
112. Limping down the road, a car picked her up.
113. Neither citrus or stone fruit do well in this district.
114. lam sure it was him that I saw.
115. Have either of your three brothers written to you?
116. We will set out for town in a moment.
117. lam usually not as slow as him.
118. She now quite approves of the people who she
condemned last week.
119. We have read the journalist’s story who reported
the disaster.
120. He began to scream and yell which was discon-
certing to the robbers.
121. She lifted up the pram and descended down the
steps.
122. With you and lin charge, everything will go well.
123. This is the best television set you can buy, and
they are cheap.
124. There weren’t hardly any cabbages available after
the floods.
125. Mary has less fine qualities than Elaine.
126. She distributed the prizes between the five girls.
127. Can I leave early this afternoon, please?
128. I felt real sad about Don’s accident.
129. The baby was that tired she went to sleep at once.
130. Of painting, sculpture and pottery, I prefer the
latter.
131. You will be treated like you were a hero.
132. His friends protested against him going away.
133. I don’t never want to see that happen to you.
134. Both of those little imps knows how bad they
have been.
135. The word ‘trousers’ are a plural, don’t you think?


APPROACH TO CLEARER THINKING
A GENERAL GUIDE
CONTENTS
1. There’s a need for it!
2. What is thinking?
3. Example of careful thinking
4. Spotting prejudice . .
5. Examining an argument
6. Faulty observation
7. Safeguards against faulty observation
8. A reliable memory?
9. Reliable evidence
10. Speaking the same language
11. Vague and specific, abstract and concrete
12. Rationalization
13. On guard against rationalization
14. Examining an argument
15. The arts of persuasion . .
16. Dealing with irrelevancies
17. Omissions and oversimplifications
18. The main points
19. Acceptable or questionable?
20. Generalization
21. Testing a generalization
22. Avoiding overstatement
23. Things we take for granted
24. Analogies
25. Deduction
26. But is it really so?
27. Danger areas
28. Judging an argument
29. Judging an argument
30. Judging an argument
The aim of this short course on Clearer Thinking is to
equip the student with a simple but informed approach
to the handling of arguments. Early in the course
(Unit 5) a brief guide is provided for use in evaluating
exercises that teachers from time to time present. We
shall now re-state this guide in a developed form, mak-
ing use of a mnemonic so that the six steps can be
easily remembered:
1 . purvey the whole of the argument to gain those im-
portant first impressions of the author’s style (or
tone) and to grasp his theme or general conten-
tion.
2. Arts of persuasion can be briefly noted to ensure
that they do not unduly influence consideration of
the main points.
3. flatten irrelevancies to clear the way for a cool
appraisal of the main points.
4. f numerate the main points as by jotting them
down briefly, or underlining them in a passage.
5. 'J'est each of these as an argument whose soundness
or unsoundness must be determined. This is the
central task. Include consideration of whether
necessary data has been omitted.
6. Your overall judgement should be given at the end
of your answer.
It should go without saying that this is a general guide
only, and that it must be adapted to the requirements
of specific questions.
PERSONAL LIABILITY TO ERROR
The course begins by looking at the extent to which life
is made up of problems that call for clear thinking
(Unit 1). After glancing at the nature of thinking
(Unit 2), this view is considered: ‘Thinking is the
manipulation of memory traces in the brain; one might
say that the brain is a memory machine which solves
problems by the application of past experience.’ It is
suggested that the best asset of a clear thinker is mental
flexibility —-that is, the ability to see a large number of
choices in any problem-situation and to select the best
of these against all temptations to prefer some long-held
idea or prejudice. The need for such flexibility is shown
in the rigorous testing of scientific hypotheses (Unit 3).
A psychologist, N. L. Munn, expresses the point thus;
‘The reasoning process is more efficient when we
change direction frequently, seeking new inferences
when the one we have does not work’ (‘Psychology’,
p. 504). But flexibility is retarded by various human
weaknesses and errors of which prejudice is here ad-
vanced as an example (Unit 4).
Even in what might be called the mechanics of thinking,
errors can arise. They can arise in the apparently simple
The separate lessons of this course are here
brought together in a brief general statement. It
is hoped that several times during the course the
student will turn from the Unit lessons to study
this approach, so that the overall view is held in
mind at all stages.


act of observation (Unit 6). It is not uncommon for
eye-witnesses to disagree in their testimony. This be-
comes understandable when we realise that we do not
see with the eye alone but also with the mind. Nobel
Prize-winner Dr P. B. Medawar has declared: ‘There
is no such thing as unprejudiced observation. Every act
of observation we make is biassed. What we see or
otherwise sense is a function of what we have seen or
sensed in the past’ (‘The Listener’, 12/9/1963). To be
conscious that we are thus liable to error can keep us
from casual, careless observation. Especially it will
make us wary of insisting that we recall correctly
observations made a long time ago (Unit 7).
Of course, observation as Medawar speaks of it can-
not be dissociated from memory (Unit 8). British
psychologist F. C. Bartlett shows convincingly in his
book ‘Remembering’ that we remember things as we
think they should have been rather than as they were.
‘Remembering ... is hardly ever exact,’ he declares.
Basic, then, to clear thinking is an understanding of
the limitations of reliance on the memory, whether our
own or that of other people. One may say that the ten-
dency of people is to remember only what they want to
remember. However, we cannot do without the ideas
of other people, so we must at appropriate times check
their ‘facts’, check the sources of their information, and
require evidence and reasons for their arguments
(Unit 9).
In exchanging ideas, error can creep in through the
language we use (Unit 10). No two minds think alike —
if only because each attaches a different shade of
meaning to words. The differences can become extreme
when we use abstract words. We all have a responsi-
bility to be careful listeners, to define the main terms
we use in a discussion, and to prefer specific and con-
crete words to vague and abstract ones (Unit 11).
Even if we had no trouble with our powers of obser-
vation, our memories or our language, there would still
remain that powerful human tendency which psycholo-
gists call rationalization (Unit 12). In a sense, this is
the opposite of reasoning: it is a grasping of excuses to
defend existing prejudices; it is a glossing of the facts
to find justifications for what we like to do rather than
what we ought to do; it is the unprincipled manipulation
of ‘reasons’ to sanction self-gratification—in a word, it
is mental dishonesty, all the worse for being dishonesty
with oneself.
The Devil can cite scripture for his purpose; and man
can find ‘reasons’ to justify any course of thought or
action, however reprehensible. How may we, in pur-
suing the ideal of clear thinking, avoid the ever present
temptation to rationalize? (Unit 13). We need to be
quite clearly aware of the strength of this temptation.
We should cultivate the difficult art of honest self-
appraisal. We need an open-minded readiness to hear
new ideas and to give new experiences a trial. And, of
course, we must apply what we know of the rules of
reasoning. Remember that our general goal is to value
mental flexibility, to be able to survey all the main
factors of a problem, to think of as many choices or
solutions as possible, and then to select the best of these.
JUDGING THE ARGUMENTS OF OTHERS
In judging an argument we first need to be aware of
things that obscure the main points. Words themselves
may do this, especially when they come in torrents.
Some passages contain worthwhile ideas but are so
wordy that it is a difficult matter to locate them and
separate them from the verbiage. This can also be true
of a lot of private discussion; and it is certainly true of
the utterances of some, but by no means all, prominent
men—the ones who lend weight to Bernard Shaw’s quip
that ‘public life is the paradise of voluble windbags’.
We must be ruthless, then, in stripping an argument of
dispensable chatter. You may be surprised at how slight
and how simple is what remains!
Even more subtly than words alone, the arts of per-
suasion (Unit 15) may hide some of the main points
while concentrating on certain selected ones. This must
be allowed for. Whilst ever people feel strongly, believe
strongly, and strongly wish to win our approval of their
ideas and projects, they will use the most persuasive
means to capture and hold our attention. These means
are legion, including all manner of emotive language,
flattery, entreaty, earnestness, repetition of words or
ideas, appeals to common prejudices, appeals to our
strongest self-interests —even that most subtle appeal,
which addresses us as reasonable and thoughtful people
(perhaps with a few selected statistics and some scien-
tific terms thrown in). Any or all of this is to be ex-
pected. It is for us to learn to distinguish between a
moderate degree of persuasion and the excess which
betrays deep prejudice or dishonesty.
The main points of an argument may be obscured by
irrelevancies. These are likely to take a specific form
and be couched in persuasive terms aimed directly at
our personal interests, emotions and prejudices. In the
early stages of our analysis of an argument, we must set
these irrelevancies aside and criticize their author for
‘not sticking to the point’.
It is usually more difficult to detect an omission than an
irrelevancy. Omissions (Unit 17) are likely to be con-
cealed by glib verbiage. We are entitled to ask for more
facts, more evidence, whenever we sense that a propo-
sition is less than convincing. In our criticism of a
passage it is perfectly justifiable for us to say: ‘The
author makes no mention of such-and-such’ or ‘How
can this be discussed without reference to so-and-so’ or
‘Why is no evidence, or so little evidence, presented to
support such a vital and controversial aspect of his
case’. Apart from complete omissions, an argument may
suffer from oversimplifications (Unit 17), sweeping
statements (Unit 20), unwarranted assumptions (Unit
23), and bad analogies (Unit 24), all of which are
forms of omission of some part of a problem.
When we have worked out the main points of an
argument (Unit 18) we must decide which of them we
can accept (or allow to pass) and which we ought to
question (or contradict) (Unit 19). Only experience can
teach us how to discriminate. It is a pleasure to be
able to accept an argument when its author has rea-
soned well and presented convincing evidence. Other


arguments we may judge to be founded on self-evident
truths. As to the rest, the doubtful ones, we must
examine them critically.
SOME POINTS TO WATCH IN REASONING
To sum up the points so far treated; our success as
clear thinkers requires attention to the many things we
have discussed above, especially observation, memory,
language, avoidance of rationalization, and an ability to
evaluate the arguments of others. Thus far, while we
have entered a plea for mental flexibility in examining
all aspects of a problem, we have said little about for-
mal principles of correct reasoning. There are two
main sides to this—the making of generalizations (in-
duction) and the making of deductions from our
generalizations (Units 20-26).
The tendency to make facile generalizations on the basis
of a few observations is one of the commonest errors of
a poor thinker. A nimble mind is capable of throwing
up generalizations in great profusion, and this is a good
quality in itself—provided we do not hold these gen-
eralizations to be true before we test them. When a
scientist thinks of a generalization it may be after look-
ing at a host of individual cases or it may be after look-
ing at only a few. He may feel that he has done little
more than guess, or he may feel that he was in some
way inspired. Whatever the process by which he arrived
at his generalization, it is essential that he should test
it rigorously before proclaiming it to be a general truth.
So he calls his tentative generalization an hypothesis and
settles down to seeing whether he can find something
that will invalidate it. We, in the manner of the scien-
tist, are entitled to ask testing questions of any doubt-
ful generalization: (1) Have enough instances been
observed? (2) Have all observed instances been studied
in a variety of conditions? (3) Have conflicting instances
been overlooked? Of course, we are not as well
equipped as a scientist to test generalizations in this
scrupulous way, nor is there much time to do so in real
life. But certainly we can resolve to be on guard against
hasty generalizations, whether our own or those of
other people. Similarly, all overstatement and exaggera-
tion (Unit 22) is to be watched.
A lot of argument proceeds on a superficial level, or a
level of vague abstraction, because the parties con-
cerned have not taken the preliminary care to agree on
the terms they will use. This fault derives largely from
the fact that we enter the fray with opinions, attitudes
and beliefs that have been part of our mental furniture
for so long that we take them for granted; it does not
occur to us that they might need proving—they are the
assumptions that underlie the argument (Unit 23). Un-
less they are taken out, dusted, and exposed to critical
examination they will certainly impede progress in
argument. Some assumptions can be accepted as self-
evident, some may be tolerated as highly subjective
‘matters of opinion’, but others need to be challenged
because they are in fact basic to what the argument is
about.
Deductive reasoning takes place when we apply a gen-
eralization to a particular case (Unit 25). This is the
field in which syllogisms have long been prominent.
It is very doubtful if they help in the process of reason-
ing,* though they can help us to check some of our
conclusions. The most important thing in the common-
sense evaluation of a proposition, whether it is pre-
sented to us as a formal syllogism or not, is to question
the bases (the premises) of the proposition. Here it is
useful to ask the simple question, ‘But is it really so?’—
even when the propositions sound authoritative, confi-
dent or ‘obvious’. This device can be most effective in
bringing an argument ‘down to earth’, clarifying the
issues.
In conclusion, we have looked at some of the ‘danger
areas’ where the thinker should be especially alert in
avoiding errors (Unit 27), The last sections of the
course (Units 28-30) provide arguments for examina-
tion, and these contain many of the weaknesses and
failings that we have discussed.
It is to be hoped that a course in Clear Thinking has
presented to students an opportunity to choose between
two possible lines of action. One is epitomized by the
poet A. E. Housman thus:
‘Ale, man, ale’s the stuff to drink
For fellows whom it hurts to think.’
The other is expressed by novelist-philosopher Aldous
Huxley: ‘Perhaps the most valuable result of all educa-
tion is the ability to make yourself do the thing you
have to do when it should be done, whether you like it
or not.’
Clearer thinking can make a major contribution to the
achieving of Huxley’s educational goal. It is a self-
discipline that is rewarding for its own sake; it makes
for personal efficiency in a world which, despite great
material progress, goes on throwing up a host of prob-
lems for every one of us.
FOR FURTHER CONSIDERATION
It is hoped that students will further their study of clear
thinking by reading some of a number of good books
on the subject. A few of these may be mentioned:
‘Straight and Crooked Thinking’, by R. H. Thouless;
‘Clear Thinking’, by R. W. Jepson; ‘The Art of Clear
Thinking’, by Rudolf Flesch; ‘Thinkers at Work’, by A.
Boyce Gibson and A. A. Phillips; ‘Uncommon Common
Sense’, by Gwyneth M. Dow; ‘Clearer Thinking’, by
A. E. Mander; ‘Thinking to Some Purpose’, by L. Susan
Stebbing.
*Anyone wishing to pursue the problem of the syllogism might
look at Bertrand Russell’s views in ‘lntroduction to Mathe-
matical Philosophy’ (Allen & Unwin, 1948), p. 197; ‘. . . what
we mean to assert, to begin with, is only that the premises imply
the conclusion, not that premises and conclusion are actually
true; even the most traditional logic points out that the actual
truth of the premises is irrelevant to logic’.


INDEX
Abbreviations, 72
Abstractions, 9, 35
Addison, Joseph, 175
Adjectives, 177
Adverbs, 178
Allegory, 18, 138
Alliteration, 140
Allusion, 6
Ambiguity, 45
Anachronism, 110
Analogies, 30, 74, 189
Anecdote, 6
Anticlimax, 27, 57
Antithesis, 9, 138
Apostrophe, 42, 45, 48, 60
Apt word, 7, 35
Arguments, examining, 17, 44, 86,
89, 92, 188
Arnold, Matthew, 148, 149, 158,
161, 176
Articles, 178
Assonance, 140
Assumptions, 71, 189
Austen, Jane, 87, 165
Auxiliary verbs, 178
Bacon, Francis, 174-5
Ballad, 145
Barrie, Sir James, 168
Bartlett, F. C, 189
Bathos, 27, 57
Beaumont & Fletcher, 172
Belloc, Hilaire, 176
Bennett, Arnold, 166
Benson, A. C., 149
Betjeman, John, 159
Bible, 164
Binyon, Laurence, 136
Blake, William, 157
Boas & Smith, 4, 168
Borrow, George, 84, 166
Bracket, 66
Brennan, Christopher, 138, 159
Bridges, Robert, 159
Bronte sisters, 81, 166
Brooke, Rupert, 136-7
Browning, Robert & Elizabeth, 158
Bunyan, John, 164, 172
Burlesque, 66
Burney, Fanny, 165
Burns, Robert, 157
Butler, Samuel, 166
Byron, Lord, 151, 157, 173
Campbell, David, 160
Campbell, Roy, 159
Capitals, 9
Carew, Thomas, 156
Caricature, 69, 163
Carlyle, Thomas, 176
Cary, Joyce, 168
Casey, Gavin, 169
Catastrophe, 163
Character, 163
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 155
Chekov, A., 168
Chesterton, G. K., 176
Circumlocution, 39
170
Clearer Thinking, 4,5, 188-90
Cliche, 72
Climax, 24
Coleridge, S. T., 157-8
Collins, Wilkie, 163, 165
Colloquialism, 69
Colon, 51
Comedy, 169
Comma, 15, 18, 21, 24
Comparatives, 100
Composition, 4, 5
Comprehension, 4, 8
Conjunctions, 179
Conrad, Joseph, 167
Consonants, 180-1
Cowley, Abraham, 175
Crashaw, Richard, 156
Criticism, literary, 161
Dash, 66
Deduction, 77, 190
Definition, 18
Defoe, Daniel, 164
Denoument, 163
De Quincey, Thomas, 78
Dickens, Charles, 17, 75, 164-6
Dictionary, 24
Diphthongs, 180
Direct speech, 39
Disraeli, Benjamin, 165
Donne, John, 156
Dow, Gwyneth M., 190
Drama, 169-73
Due, 78
Dryden, John, 157, 172
Edgeworth, Maria, 130, 165
Elegancies, 36
Elegy, 148
Eliot, George, 166
Eliot, T. S., 159, 173
Emerson, R. W., 90
Epic, 145
Epigram, 57, 138
Epistolary, 163
Essay, 174
Euphemism, 51
Exaggeration, 51
Examiners’comments, 111, 113,
115, 133
Exclamation mark, 30
Farce, 170
Fielding, Henry, 165
Figures of speech, 90
Fitzgerald, Robert, 160
Flash-back technique, 81, 163
Flecker, J. E„ 159, 160, 174
Flesch, Rudolf, 190
Forster, E. M., 168
Frost, Robert, 159
Fry, Christopher, 173
Full stop, 12
Galsworthy, John, 167, 173
Gaskell, Mrs., 165
Generalizations, 62, 65, 189-90
Gerunds, 178
Gibson, A. Boyce, 190
Goldsmith, Oliver, 56, 172, 176
Gordon, Adam Lindsay, 159
Grammar, A Minimum, 177-9
Gray, Thomas, 148, 157
Greene, Grahame, 167
Hardy, Thomas, 159, 164, 166
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 97, 168
Hay, lan, 170
Hazlitt, William, 174-5
Hemingway, Ernest, 168-9
Henry, 0., 168
Herbert, George, 139, 156
Herrick, Robert, 156
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 174
Hope, A. D., 152, 160
Hopkins, G. M., 155, 159
Housman, A. E., 159, 190
Hunt, Leigh, 176
Huxley, Aldous, 168, 176, 190
Hypallage, 78
Hyperbole, 21, 51, 138
Hyphen, 69
Ibsen, Henrik, 166, 173
Imagery, 138
Infinitives, 96, 178
Innuendo, 45
Inverted commas, 33, 36, 39
Irony, 39
Irrelevancies, 50, 189
Jabberwocky, 181
James, William, 93
Jargon, 84-
Jepson, R. W., 190
Jingle, 93
Johnson, Dr., 176
Jones, Daniel, 180
Jonson, Ben, 155, 172
Journalese, 87
Joyce, James, 162, 167
Keats, John, 138, 144, 146, 157
Kendall, Henry, 142
Kingsley, Charles, 165
Kipling, Rudyard, 159, 167, 168


Language, speaking the same, 32,
35,189
Language study, 9
Lawrence, D. H., 141, 150, 159,
167
Lawson, Henry, 159, 169
Letter-writing, 65, 71
Lewis, C. Day, 68
Literal, 48
Literary criticism, 161
Literary guides, 4, 161-76
Litotes, 75
Little, Graham, 4
Lovelace, Richard, 156
Lucas, F. L., 136
Lyric verse, 145
Lytton, Bulwer, 165
Macauley, T. 8., 176
McCauley, James, 160
Malapropism, 81
Mander, A. E., 190
Mansfield, Katherine, 168
Marlowe, Christopher, 155, 172
Matthews, Brander, 168
Masefield, John, 138, 145, 159
Maugham, Somerset, 168
Maupassant, Guy de, 168
Medawar, P. 8., 189
Meiosis, 75
Melodrama, 170
Melville, Herman, 23
Memory, reliable, 26, 29, 189
Mental flexibility, 4, 188
Meredith, George, 166
Metaphor, 15, 30, 137
Method of using this book, 4
Metonymy, 63
Metre, 141
Miller, Arthur, 173
Milton, John, 142, 156
Mitchell, A. G., 180
Montaigne, M. de, 174-5
Morris, William, 158
Munn, N. L., 188
Narrative verse, 145
Newman, John, 176
Nouns, 177
Novel, 162-8
Observation, faulty, 20, 23, 189
Officialese, 90
Omissions, 53, 189
O’Neill, Eugene, 173
Only, 54
Onomatopoeia, 140
Orwell, George, 59, 168
Oversimplifications, 53, 189
Overstatement, 68, 190
Owen, Wilfred, 136-7, 159
Owing, 78
Oxymoron, 48, 138
Parable, 18
Paradox, 33, 137
Parody, 66
Participles, 178
Pater, Walter, 109
Paterson, A. 8., 142, 159
Paton, Alan, 167
Personification, 12, 137
Persuasion, the arts of, 47, 189
Phillips, A. A., 190
Phonetics, 4, 180-1
Plot, 162
Poe, Edgar Allan, 168
Poetry Course, 4, 135-60
Pope, Alexander, 27, 157
Possessive, 45, 48
Precis, 4, 20
Prefixes, 182-3
Priestley, J. 8., 176
Prejudice, 14
Prepositions, incorrect, 132
Prolepsis, 84
Pronouns, 24, 33, 177
Pun, 72
Punctuation, 6
Pyke, Magnus, 95
Question mark, 27
Radcliffe, Anne, 165
Rationalization, 38, 41, 189
Reade, Charles, 165
Redundancy, 66, 110
Repetition (poetry), 140
Revision, 4
Rhetorical question, 54
Rhyme, 143
Rhythm, 141
Richards, I. A., 161
Richardson, Samuel, 164-5
Robinson, E. A., 159
Robinson, Roland, 160
Roots, 182-3
Rossetti, D. G. & C., 158
Rudd, Steele, 169
Russell, Bertrand, 190
Sarcasm, 42
Sassoon, Siegfried, 136, 159
Satire, 36
Scott, Sir Walter, 165
Semicolon, 54, 57, 60, 63
Sentence correction, 4, 186-7
Setting, 164
Shakespeare, W., 134, 146, 155,
169-73
Shaw, G. 8,, 170, 173, 189
Shelley, P. 8., 136, 147, 157, 173
Sheridan, R. 8., 142, 172
Short Story, 168-9
Simile, 15, 30, 137
Sitwell, Edith, 150, 159
Slang, 75
Slessor, Kenneth, 145, 160
Smollett, Tobias, 165
Sonnet, 145
Spelling and Vocabulary, 4
Spelling tests, 4
Spender, Stephen, 141
Spenser, Edmund, 147, 156
Split infinitive, 96
Spoonerism, 81
Stebbing, L. Susan, 190
Steele, Richard, 175
Steinbeck, John, 167
Sterne, Laurence, 165
Stevenson, R. L., 32, 167, 168,
174-5
Stewart, Douglas, 139, 160, 171
Stivens, Dal, 169
Strachey, Lytton, 14
Strong, L. A. G., 4
Style, 164
Subjunctive, 42
Suckling, John, 156
Superlatives, 98
Swift, Jonathan, 77, 164, 176
Swinburne, A. C., 158
Syllepsis, 84
Syllogism, 77, 80, 190
Symbolism, 138
Synecdoche, 63
Synge, 173
Tautology, 60
Tennyson, Lord, 158
Tense agreement, 21, 96, 126
Thackeray, William Makepeace,
134,166
Than, or when, 12
Theme, 162
Thinking, what it is, 8
Thomas, Dylan, 83, 159, 171
Thomas, Edward, 174
Thouless, R. H., 190
Tragedy, 169
Treble & Vallins, 4
Trollope, Anthony, 166
Verbiage, 30
Verbs, Verbals, 178
Verbosity, 6
Vocabulary, 4
Vocabulary (Advanced), 184-5
Vowel sounds, 180-1
Vrepont, Brian, 144
Waugh, Evelyn, 168
Webster & Ford, 172
Wells, H. G„ 161, 167
Whitman, Walt, 142
Wilde, Oscar, 145, 148, 159, 167
173
Wood, Mrs. Henry, 170
Woolf, Virginia, 56, 167
Word origins, 4, 182-3
Wordsworth, W., 142, 143, 146,
149, 154,157
Wright, Judith, 153, 160
Wyatt, Sir Thomas, 155
Yeats, W. B„ 159, 173
