

THE
SHADOW
BY
LIONEL TERRY.


(J tr-^€L*sJ
/
/ , -
//
~J./tf-(jeefct4f Cc/fTer ritTsr V
''***#(*
**/*,*/**<* ** & **' M
”/KZ TTrilij 'YXcA> "*e r*77. y—
-4?/s sS<y/,6r*r*/eY **?
&&//**€ Afw fSrArf
ir par I.X~T“US>


THE SHADOW.
BY
LIONEL TERRY.
(Author’s Copyright)
A FA’A YEA.
When the Great Gold God, advancing, shall inherit all the earth.
When our country shall be governed by the slave,
When love and truth and honour shall be strangled at their birth.
And the noblest shall have won the felon's grave ;
When our land shall be polluted by the outcast of the earth,
When corruption rageth rampant at its root ,
When our leaders shun their duty for the halls of reckless mirth.
And blended blood shall bear its shameful fruit;
When our land shall seek defenders midst an alien kith and kin ,
And shall writhe beneath a scourge, of civil strife;
When a mighty hybrid nation shall have ~won the wage of sin;
Sparc us, O God, the bitter curse of life !
L. T.
AUCKLAND.
Wilson and Horton, Printers, Queen and Wyndham Streets.-
>• X 1004. 1 A«




To
my Brother Britons
I Dedicate this Work.
L. T.
July, 1904.


INTRODUCTION.
Although the question of alien immigration into the
British Empire has been frequently brought into prominence
during recent years, there are comparatively few people who
realize its tremendous importance.
This ignorance is partly due to the growing tendency of
the majority of people to avoid great questions because they
appear to be abstruse and complex, but the chief reason lies,
undoubtedly, in the fact that the press, throughout almost
the whole civilized world, is so completely under the
heel of the capitalist that it dare not make the truth known.
For it is the capitalist who is chiefly responsible for such
immigration. It enables him to work his great industries with
cheap labour, and, therefore, it is to his interest that the
people should be kept in the dark as to the evil consequences
arising therefrom.
And so perfectly is this blindfolding system
that the ignorance of one British colony of the internal
condition of another is’just as complete as it is amongst the
respective inhabitants of any one of them.
It is only when the veneer of seeming prosperity and
respectability is penetrated, and when one enters the ranks of
labour, that the terrible ravages created by the alien can be
properly appreciated.
The reader will not need to be reminded that the British
Empire is represented entirely by her labouring classes ; from
them she receives sustenance, and from them only she obtains
her strength in time of peril.


Take awa} r her rulers, princes, and governors, her
bishops, priests, and deacons, her lawyers, politicians, and
capitalists and she would still remain the British Empire ;
more so, in fact, because she would then be more repre-
sentative of the British race and of its interests.
I do not, of course, mean to imply that all these people
are superfluous—they may be very useful in guiding the
destiny and developing the resources of the Empire —but my
object is to show that, existing as they do upon the bounty
of the labouring classes, they are, in effect, the paid servants
of the Empire.
But the labouring classes constitute the very life of the
Empire ; without them the British Empire becomes non-
existent.
And that the labouring classes constituting the British
Empire must be composed wholly of British, or, at least, of
white people, is obvious for the following reasons :
1. That the natural hatred existing between the various
races of the world can never be eradicated by
civilization or any other means without the sacrifice
of racial purity.
2. That in cases where this natural hatred has become in
a measure smothered by unwholesome social con-
ditions and circumstances brought about by careless
and corrupt legislation, and have resulted in the
inter-marriage of white with black or coloured people,
the punishment exacted by Nature has been signally
severe, as is evidenced by the moral, mental, and
physical ill-health of cross-bred people throughout
the world.
3. That the morals, methods of living, religious beliefs
and general customs of the black and coloured races
are totally strange, and in man}- cases revolting,


to tlie white race, and therefore alien immigration
into British Possessions has a tendency to produce
degenerate habits and to lower the moral standard
amongst their white inhabitants.
4. That nothing is more conducive to the destruction of
the great sentiment, patriotism, upon which the life
of the Empire depends, than the presence of aliens
amongst British people.
5. That the employment of alien labour in British in-
dustrial and commercial enterprises represents a
criminal injustice to the British workman, who is
forced thereby into a competition for existence with
an opponent whose cheap and low methods of living
secure for him an overwhelming advantage, and
must inevitably result in his commercial and in-
dustrial supremac)".
6. That the employment of alien labour in the industries
of the Empire is the chief cause of the povert}y
crime, and general degeneracy existing throughout
the Empire.
7. That by the importation of alien races into the British
Empire their diseases are also imported, and leprosy,
bubonic plague, and cholera are a few of the terrible
scourges that have been spread in many parts of the
Empire in consequence thereof.
I merely give these reasons to make the subject clear to
the most doubting reader ; the first-mentioned one only is
necessary.
Nature has distinctly demonstrated that the strength of
any race, whether white, black, or yellow, depends upon its
purity.
The violation of the laws of Nature means death.


The British Empire is violating the laws of Nature, and
unless swift measures be taken to exclude and eradicate the
alien element the British Empire must die.
And the task of saving the Empire devolves upon the
labouring classes as the natural representatives of the Empire.
And upon the strength, determination, and unity of the
labouring classes depends the success of the struggle—the life
of the Empire.
For the rulers, princes, and governors, the bishops,
priests, and deacons of the British Empire have leagued
themselves with the forces of Mammon, for the protection of
the alien— the slaughter of the Empire.
I declare that the Government of the British Empire is
Jew-ridden and corrupt.
I declare that certain members of the House of Roths-
child are, and have been for many years past, the private
advisers of the British Cabinet, and that the De Beers
Diamond Mines Robbery, the Jameson Filibustering Ex-
pedition, the Boer War, and the now pending importation of
Chinese labour into South Africa, are all attributable to the
secret instigation of the Rothschilds, wdio are deeply interested
in South African mining and land securities.
In other words, the British Empire, as at present con-
ducted, may be compared to a Jabez Balfour or a Whitaker
Wright Company on a colossal scale.
The object of the company is to acquire gold.
The methods adopted by the company include fraud,
robbery, and murder.
The power of the company is unlimited—its chief forces
include the British Army, the British Navy, and the British
Parliament, all of which, being supported and paid by the
labouring classes, supply their services free of cost to the
company.


The chief imports of the company include undesirable
aliens, cheap labour, poverty, misery, crime, vice, disease,
plague, and gold. Its chief exports are truth, purity, honour,
health, justice, patriotism, and British blood.
The head office of the company is the United Kingdom,
its branch offices are represented by the British Possessions,
and its managing director is the Jew.
The conditions obtaining in the United Kingdom are too
well known to require more than passing comment here ; its
splendid traditions have been sacrificed to the usurer, its agri-
cultural element has been driven out, its ancient homes are
rapidly passing into the possession of the peacock capitalist
from foreign lands, its cities are overflowing with seething
corruption, luxurious vice, and fearful poverty ; and, in short,
its position is practically that of a plague-stricken loafer upon
the labouring classes of the world.
With regard to British Possessions, the most impor-
tant colony is, undoubtedly, Canada, and I will therefore give
a few interesting particulars concerning it.
The climate of Canada is eminently suitable for the pro-
duction of a healthy and vigorous white population, and her
resources can only be described as magnificent.
“Yes, Canada is indeed growing great and wealthy,” say
her sister colonies, when they learn from her gilt-edged
newspapers of the tremendous increase in her population, of
the thousands of acres of land that have been taken up, of the
number of mining licenses that have been granted and paid
for, and, above all, of the record surplus of revenue for the
year.
And, beyond a few disjointed remarks condescendingly
vouchsafed by the same corrupt press whenever anything
impossible of concealment occurs, what do her sister colonies
know of the internal rottenness of Canada.


Do they know that her political condition is second only
to that of the United States of America in point of corruption?
Have they heard of the locked-out British workmen who
were kept on the verge of starvation throughout a whole
bitter Canadian winter in order to compel them to work for
Chinaman’s wages ?
Did they read of the poor Scottish coal-miners who were
enticed by false pretences to emigrate to British Columbia by
the then Premier of that province, and who, when they
discovered the cruel trick that had been practised upon them,
with true British pluck preferred to wander penniless into
a foreign country rather than work with Chinamen for wages
upon which they could barely exist ?
Do they know of the Frazer River Fisheries dispute, in
which the military authorities were prevailed upon by a
capitalist-worshipping provincial government to protect the
cherished alien from the white man driven desperate ?
Do they know that the result to-day of that action is that
in place of a sturdy, healthy colony of white fishermen, the
very class of men so urgently required to supply the strength
of the Pacific Fleet, there exists on the banks of the Frazer
River a vast conglomeration of dark, dirty hovels, haunted
by the outcast of Asia ?
Do the newspapers of Canada inform the world that the
laws relating to the employment of alien labour have been
openly violated by the very men who are trusted and paid by
the people to uphold and enforce them ?
And yet these things are true.
About four years ago, in consequence of frequent
disturbances between white men and Asiatic aliens, a Royal
Commission was appointed by the Dominion Government to
enquire into the effect of Chinese and Japanese immigration
into British Columbia.


The evidence secured, in spite of rampant intimidation,
was antagonistic to the alien element ; and
the work of the Commission was nearly completed when the
Canadian Premier, Sir Wilfred Laurier, made the astounding
statement that, whatever the report of the Commission might
be, no legislation restricting Japanese immigration would be
allowed, as it would conflict with Imperial policy !
Imperial policy ! —to sacrifice Imperial interests !
Imperial policy ! to rob the Briton of his means of
livelihood, his birthright, and hand it over to the scum of the
earth !
It becomes almost impossible to write dispassionately of
such monstrous outrages as these.
I repeat now, what I stated before the Commission just
referred to, there is only one method of ridding the Empire
of the alien scourge, and that is revolution.
And revolution is inevitable when Britons awaken to the
peril which threatens them —provided that Britons exist.
But to return to the statement made by the Dominion
Premier ; how does it compare with the excuse tendered by
Mr. Lyttelton, the Colonial Secretary, in reply to the protest
made by the Australasian Colonies against the importation of
Chinese slavery into South Africa ?
His expressed opinion was that it would not be Imperial
policy to interfere with local views regarding the methods of
developing the industries of the Transvaal.
Surely, if the wishes of the inhabitants of a newly-
acquired colony, which has not even a representative
government, are to meet with Imperial respect, then the
people of such an old established colony as Canada should be
Imperially credited with knowing where their interests lie?


And what is the explanation of this barefaced contra-
diction in the Imperial policy?
Ask the managing director of the British Empire !
Moreover, let it be remembered by some, and stated for
the benefit of others, that the alleged desire for Chinese labour
in the South African gold mines was nothing but a concoction
of the most brazen and disgraceful character put forward by
the gold-worshipping class, assisted by their slavish satellites,
who, being mostly of the alien class themselves, had therefore
no compunction in cheating the Briton of his birthright.
The Chinese slavery outrage was perpetrated by means of
gross misrepresentation of facts combined with wholesale
bribery and intimidation.
And the people who are responsible are the people who
are interested in South African mining and land investments.
To conclude with the representative colony of the British
Empire :
This, then, is the vaunted prosperity of Canada : Gold
is pouring into her treasury from the Chinese head-tax; her
great mining, timber, and fishing industries are flourishing
under the cheap labour system ; aliens of every colour, creed,
and nationality, including the notorious capitalist classes of
the United States of America, are swarming over her borders
and seizing upon her resources with the avidity of vultures.
And the best and most resourceful province in the
Dominion of Canada is called British Columbia.
But its true name is Chinese Columbia.
And the annual revenue of the Dominion represents to a
great extent the proceeds (in paper manufactured from pulp)
from the sale of the heart’s blood of the British Empire.
The condition of Canada, as T have attempted to describe
it, represents to a greater or less extent that of the other


British Possesions, and therefore to describe each one sepa-
rately would entail unnecessary repetition.
And the condition of the British Empire is the condition
of the civilised world.
God is Gold.
For the capitalist controls the governments of civili-
zation (!); the armies, supported and paid by the labouring
classes for the protection of their interests, are at his
disposal—ready to become his hired assassins whenever he
wishes.
The capitalist is consumed with a wolfish craving for
gold, and to satisfy it he will sacrifice the lives of his fellow-
men without scruple. Recent events in the United States of
America and South Africa prove conclusively that nothing is
safe from him ; he may rob and murder with impunity, he
may wipe out an entire race of people, and no government on
earth can call him to account.
A more terrible battle than was ever waged with the
sword and gun has been for years past and is still raging
throughout the white world.
For commercial warfare is merciless, it knows no dis-
crimination ; men, women, and children are ruthlessly
slaughtered—done to death by the slow torture of a uni-
versal sweat-shop system.
It is a thousand times more merciful to kill a man by
Stabbing him with a knife, or shooting him with a gun, than
to kill his spirit, to crush out every spark of hope that is in
him, and to render him a mere soulless, aimless derelict,
with no feeling save one of burning hatred against his
murderers ; with no home but the slums, and with no object
in life save drink or crime. Yet this is the effect of the sweat-
shop system. In the United States of America, particularly,


thousands of drunkards, criminals, and lunatics are annually
manufactured by Mammon. Appalling" as it may appear, it
is nevertheless the incontestable truth that these poor people
are just as surely manufactured by the capitalists of that
country as were the notorious wooden nutmegs and hams ;
that the assassins and thieves bred in slum-land are morally
guiltless, and that the real perpetrators of the crimes which
frequently alarm and shock civilization are the capitalist
classes, and that, therefore, they and they alone should
expiate such crimes.
The children of the labouring classes are now brought
into a world in which they must either steal or starve.
And the instinct of life is strong.
But avarice was ever blind. The foolish disciples of
Mammon cannot see that, by thus sowing the seeds of death
amidst those upon whose labour they exist, they are but as a
man who, pendant betwixt earth and sky, is cutting the rope
which supports him.
And the alien immigrant will not be ever content to serve,
for he brings with him the craving born of the seed sown by
ages of despotism in his own country. Even now Chinese
and Japanese millionaires are springing up within the British
Empire ; even now thousands of British-born people are depen-
dent upon the alien for their daily bread.
( “ Britons never shall be slaves ! ”—Old song).
And yet we marvel at the decreasing birth-rate !
And yet we wonder why, with the prosperity of the
Empire (as shown by gold), we cannot raise men for the
Army and Navw !
fs not the man a traitor and a murderer, who, knowing
these things, reproduces his kind ?
Where is the Briton who would see the glorious traditions
of his race embodied in a nation of bastards ?


Where is the Briton who would bring fortli sons and
daughters to be the slaves of Asiatic aliens ?
Amongst the ancient records of Chinese victories there
exists one that possesses a terrible significance. The great
battles of the hoary Chinese Empire were not always waged
with the sword and spear, for at times its people would be
commanded by the Emperor to enter peacefully the land of
their enemies and to bow down to them and to become their
slaves, tilling the soil and tending their sheep and oxen,
building them great temples and palaces wherein they might
dwell in great comfort. And in due time the people of|that
country, having violated the laws of Nature by neglecting and
abusing the functions bestowed upon them by Nature, became
weakened by luxury and idleness and by the vice and crime
which are the offspring of luxury and idleness, so that their
men became as weak women and their land became a portion
of the mighty Chinese Empire.
In conclusion, I declare that every statement contained
herein is the truth ; that this work is the result of many
years of personal research in the United Kingdom, Canada,
Australia, South Africa, New Zealand, the United States of
America, and many minor parts of the world. In order to
obtain facts, I have visited slums, worked side by side with
aliens of various nationalities in stone quarries, coal mines,
fruit plantations, saw mills, and many other industrial
enterprises; I have studied the methods of living and general
characteristics of savage races and the effects produced upon
them by civilization ; in short, I have done everything that
I considered necessary to acquaint myself with my subject.
Trusting fervently that my brother Britons will be
convinced of the urgent necessity for immediate action,
I remain,
LIONEL TERRY.




THE SHADOW.
A.D. 2000.
A Condemnation and a Prophecy.
Britain ! thy name shall live in all the ages
A mighty warning for a future race !
Dong after thou hast won thy sins’ dread wages
Shall ring the story of thy life of glory,
Thy fatal avarice, thy downfall —thy disgrace.
Britain ! dost thou remember in the distant years
When thou, an island in the seas’ embrace,-
Held’st all th}- sons and all thy hopes and fears
Within the fastness of thy rugged coast ?
Then, Britain, then indeed thy glory blazed !
Then at th\- prowess stood the world amazed !
Then could’st thou more than empty fatness boast,
Thy greatness not the greatness of the hybrid fruit,
But wholesome, lusty, solid to the root.
Proud and defiant
Thou stood’st a mighty fortress with thine ocean moat,
Strong with the courage of thy noble sons,
Pure with thine unpolluted northern blood ;
Stern —self reliant ;
In war invincible ! in peace supreme !
Dost thou remember ere thou yet had’st sold
Thy sons for aliens and thy fame for gold
Thy ships, though built of wood were manned with men,
With men of iron courage ?


O Britain, then,
Woe to the foe who didst thy fleet defy
Or offer insult to thy majesty !
Thou didst not then protest with gentle words,
Or seek to find with whom thou could’st ally,
hire thou would’st dare in stronger terms reply !
Nay Britain, then
No craven fear just vengeance could allay,
But swiftly did thy fleet set sail away
To seek thy vile traducer in his lair !
Yea, then thou with the valour of thy sons
And with the clanging thunder of thy guns
Didst hurl the lie back full in his clatt’ring teeth,
And warn him to beware ere he again should dare
His venomed spite unsheath !
O thou depraved !
Hast thou forgot how once thy foes did gloat
Upon thy richness and thy seeming impotence,
And plan to plunder and to trample on thy throat
And hold thy sons enslaved ?
What mad hallucination, how wild a dream !
How swift dispelled !
How swift the tidings through thy country rang,
How swift from many a peaceful hamlet sprang
Thy sons of mettle —trusty, bronzed, and brawn —
Thy sons, with faces flashing vengeful scorn,
With grim resolve to utterly destroy,
Growling dull thunderings of savage joy,
Burst on and o’er them like a might}’ flood,
Bore them resistless, staggering, sweating blood,
And hurled them, howling, from thy sacred shore
With craven fear impelled
To trust the treach’rous deep than face thv warriors more.
The Shadow.


Britain ! glance backward through the mists of time !
Glance backward through the blackened clouds of crime !
Dost see thy people—happy, strong, and free—
Rejoicing o’er thy glorious victory ?
Gathered in noble hall and cottage small,
Passing the time with jovial jest and song,
Or clustered ’nealh the spreading greenwood tree
Or dancing on the sward with rustic glee ?
From tower and belfry, loud and clear and strong,
The bells ring forth their song of victory.
Britain ! no bloody riot clouds the happy day,
Not yet hath joy revealed the symbol of decay,
Not sret5 r et hath dawned the time
When peace was hailed with violence and crime !
Dost see the throng in yonder brilliant hall
Gathered around the laden banquet board ?
Dost hear, amidst the clinking cups, the call —
“ The toast ! the toast ! ” ?
Sudden —with one accord,
Springeth erect each guest, with cup held high ;
Reckless defiance gleams from every eye—
“ Saint George and Merrie Bngland !” is the cry.
Swiftly the cups are drained,
While from thy hills and valleys, swelling high,
The echoes wake in one loud, glad reply :
“ Saint George and Merrie England ! ” and sighing, die,
As doth the thrilling scene, and—thy glory, Britain !
O shame ! O bitter shame !
The noble hall doth boast an alien lord.
Thy sons are dead, or outcast of the earth ;
The land they loved, the land that gave them birth,
Unconquered by the sword,
Hath yielded, shameless, to the foeman’s gold !


O wherefore, Britain, wherefore didst thou not
Thus, at the zenith of thy glory, die ?
E’en had thy name, thy greatness, been forgot
Thou had’st not thus have lived a scathing lie !
Thou had’st not thus have opened wide thy gates
For all the plague-fraught offal of the earth,
For thugs and thieves and vicious profligates
Who fled the law of land that gave them birth !
Thou had’st not thus have wed to heathen lands
And raised a scourge of mongrel nations round thee
To claim tin- royal name, to plunge thine hands
In seething sin- to rob and murder those who trusted thee —
To suck thy blood in peace, in war to spurn thee
Or fight with thee for gold as they would fight against thee.
And yet thou dost but reap as thou hast sown,
The sin was thine alone ! —alone dost thou atone !
Dost thou remember, Britain, how thou didst obtain
All these possessions thou hast named thy Britains ?
How thou didst take upon thyself the Brand of Cain
To satiate a horde of grasping gluttons ?
For thou didst go unto the heathen lands
To preach the gospel of the gentle Christ ;
Yea, with the Holy Bible in thine hands
Didst thou set forth to wreak revolting crime !
The heathens hailed thine advent with delight
And sought to do that which found favour in thy sight,.
And thou didst find them simple, trusting, free,
Lavish of noble hospitality ;


Children of nature, chivalrous and bold,
They welcomed thee, and brought thee costly gifts
Of precious stones, of ivory and gold,
Of graven woods and skins of wild beasts ;
Yea, all the choicest treasures of their store
They brought to thee, and thou didst crave for more ;
Because that they were black thou didst assume
Thyself superior, entitled to condemn them ;
Because they trusted thee thou didst presume
To look on them as fools, and scheme to rob them.
And thou at length didst set abroad the news :
The gospel had been preached, the savage tamed.
Then all the pest-holes of the earth did vomit Jews,
Their base and treach’rous minds with greed inflamed !
And these did swear allegiance unto thee,
And in thy name went forth to cheat and steal;
And beads, and glitt’ring baubles, fair to see,
Unto the simple savage did reveal,
Who, dazzled, bought and paid a thousandfold
Their worth, in carven ivory or virgin gold.
Thus did thine own adopted Britons thrive ;
Thus did thy chosen people mass great wealth ;
But still unsatisfied, thou didst contrive
To gain possession of the land by stealth.
Yea, thou didst prosper in thy base conception
To cheat the innocent and bond the free,
And in exchange didst offer them protection
From those who were their friends, compared to thee.
And they, poor fools, they trusted thee and fell,
And thou didst rule them with an iron rod,
And thou didst turn their land into a hell
And seal it to thine own great golden god.


Oh, but thy wolfish cruelty mocketh words,
For thou didst pillage all that thou could’st find —
Their grain, their treasure, and their flocks and herds.
Yea, e’en the honour of their womankind !
Stung with the shamefulness of bitter wrong
They sought to free themselves, and turned upon thee,
But thou, thou great assassin, wcrt too strong,
And fire and sword complete the fearful tragedy.
O Britain, shame ! O bitter, bleeding shame !
The blood of Abel crieth to the skies !
And thou didst dare to seek to clear thy name,
To justify thy crime, with blackest lies.
Yea, thou didst dare their morals to assail,
To paint them to the world in fiendish guise.
Vain ! Vain ! O Britain !
Nought shall thy crime, nought shall thy lies avail.
The blood of Abel crieth to the skies !
Thus hast thou wrought, O Britain, and with these,
The ruined remnant of a noble race,
Sunken in drunkenness and reeking with disease,
Who haunt thy streets, a hideous disgrace ;
With these whom thou hast cheated and betrayed,
Whose spirit thou hast broken and depraved,
Who, dead to every pure and noble aim
Live but to emulate thy vices and thy crimes ;
Would’st thou with these fell tokens of thy shame
vSeek to ensure the prestige of thy name?
Thus hast thou wrought, O Britain, and with these
Incarnate fiends who did but claim thy name,
And penetrate to lands beyond the seas


To sate unholy lust and wreak revolting shame ;
Dost thou with these, outlawed of earth and hell,
Seek to uprear a race in whom thy trust shall dwell ?
Thus hast thou wrought, O Britain, and with these
Mongolian slaves, defiled beyond salvation,
Who thus infest thy land, the very lees
Of earth’s most sunken and degraded nation ;
These craven knaves who cringing friendship feign
Whilst bitter hatred seethes in every vein ;
Who, fawning, suck thy blood, the while they scheme
To pour their yellow millions o’er thy land ;
O Britain ! dost thou dream thine honour to redeem
With these, these plague-fraught, sin-spawned fiends
who stand
A ghastly monument to ancient shame,
The fell embodiment of all that doth proclaim
The dreadful frailt}' of the human frame.
Britain ! behold thy Britons!
Behold thy mongrel millions!
Dost thou with such as these for thy foundation
Seek to secure the safety of thy nation?
Dost trust the shackled slave to guard thy shores ?
Dost trust the craven knave to shield thy cause?
Dost thou on such as these thy name bestow,
Whose very breath reeks pestilence and woe ?
O thou debased !
What heav’nly power inspired thee thus to raise
In man all that was noblest, purest, most divine?
What hellish madness made, thee blight thy days
And left thee thus, to glut the loathly swine?
O thou corrupt, thou blasphemous abomination !
And thou dost dare, from out thy seething sin,


From out thy stinking swamp of black iniquity,
Drenched with the life-blood of thy murdered kin,
To rise, and boast thyself a great and godly nation !
Yea, thou art great !
Thy greatness nought but sin and shame can span ;
O thou art great with strife and lust and hate,
Yea, great with ever}'- vice that curseth man ;
O truly thou art great —as hell is great !
Yea, thou art godly !
Well dost thou fear thine own great golden god,
Well hast thou wrought to fill his fell commands ;
With zeal thou hast thy rightful god forgotten,
Save when it suited thee to traffic with His name
Or travesty His word to cleanse thine hands
And hide thy perfidy from other lands.
O thou hast wrought thyself a shroud of shame
To gain the favours of thy golden god ;
Yea ! thou hast sacrificed thine own begotten
Upon the altar of thy golden god !
O Britain scorned ! O torn and bleeding Britain !
O gasping straggler in the blackening gloom !
The shadow of thy sin encircleth o’er thee,
Triumphant death doth point thee to the tomb !
Yet know, O stumbler in the toils of doom,
That, though thy glory die thy name shall live,
Shall live amidst the drifting clouds of shame
Which, rolling blackly through eternal time,
Shall warn the makers of the future nations
That fearful fate avengeth fearful crime.
Yea ! though thy glory die thy shame shall live,
And shall thy name, by sin’s dread offspring borne,
Five on —a name of mockery and scorn !


O that such guilt thy memory should blot,
O that midst such disgrace thy hones should rot ;
O wherefore, Britain, wherefore didst thou not
Die, ere thou hadst forgot
Thy name was Britain ?




TO THE KING.
AN EXHORTATION.
I.
Hail ! thou King of all the Britains ! may thy life and reign be long;
As thy heart with kindness floweth, may thy government be
strong ;
May the God who led thy fathers guide thee in the cause of right,
Give thee strength and zeal to prosper British majestj- and might.
II.
We, thy subjects, greet thee thus, sire ; sons of those who fought
before ;
Sons of those who won their freedom midst the battle’s thund’rous
roar;
Sons of those who, scorning numbers, drove the Spaniard, howling,
home ;
’Gainst whose adamantine columns Gaul and Cossack dashed
like foam ;
Sons of those who made the Empire, sacrificing seas of gore,
So that Britain’s fame and glory might resound from shore to
shore,
In the heart of all the ages might re-echo evermore.
III.
Thou hast come to reign in season, when, enwrapped in fearful
gloom,
Mighty Britain strains and struggles in the toils of shameful doom.
We, thy subjects, proudly greet thee, guardian of our ancient race ;
Man of fortitude and wisdom, save thy nation from disgrace !


IV.
Know the fateful truth, O monarch, thou who hast the pow’r to
save,
Ere thy kingdom outraged, helpless, sinks dishonored to the
grave :
Bribery and foul corruption rampant rage throughout thy land ;
’Gainst the ruthless greed of Mammon, mighty Britain cannot
stand.
V.
They who hold the reins of commerce, spurred by' wolfish lust
for gold—
Bust which strangleth manhood, conscience, truth and honour,
justice, right—
Spurning laws of God and country, plotting treason black as night,
Have their brothers’ birthright bartered, have their country’s
life-blood sold !
VI.
See —advancing grim, relentless, as a scourge sent forth from hell,
Comes the blighting curse of Mammon in the white man’s land
to dwell —
Mongol, Ethiop, nameless horror, human brute from many a clime,
Vomitted from earth’s dark pest holes, bred of plague, disease,
and crime:
Swathed in rags and noisome odours, gaunt and fleshless, dwarfed
of limb,
Visaged like the grisly jackal seeking dead midst shadows dim ;
See the horde of drug-besotten, sin-begotten fiends of filth,
Swarming o’er thy nation’s bulwarks, pillaging thy nation’s
wealth !
VII.
Now through Britain’s veins of commerce, slaves, instead of white
men, toil ;
Now do slaves, instead of while men, tend the farms and till the
soil —


Slaves who barter for their kindred, slaves who worship gods of
stone,
Gather in the white man’s harvest, reap the fruits by white man
sown.
VIII.
Now midst Britain’s towns and cities springeth man}" a darksome
slum,
Haunted by the vile and vicious, of humanity the scum ;
Haunted by the poor and needy, by the palsied and the lame ;
Haunted by a nation’s errors, haunted by a nation’s shame !
IX.
Would’st thou know the depths of sorrow? would’st thou know
the depths of vice ?
Loathliest womb of blackest horror, fiendish plot and foul device ?
Would’st thou trace the birth of traitor? would’st thou trace the
source of shame ?
Here ! within thy nation’s borders, shielded by thy nation’s name !
Here ! amidst the slums’ dark shadows, here amidst the dregs
of hell,
Fell disease and plague enshrouded, here thy murdered kindred
dwell.
Dead ! yea, worse than dead, the}" linger, lost amid the fetid haze,
Sowing seeds for future harvest ere the outraged flesh decays.
X.
Where are now thy smiling homesteads, nestling midst the golden
corn ?
Ask of those who rule thy commerce, they who bear the Brand of
Cain !
Where are now thy lusty Britons, brave and trusty, bronzed and
brawn ?
Dost thou know of murdered murdered ere they yet were
born ?


XI.
Wilt thou know the truth, O monarch ? Church and State by
Mammon led !
Wilt thou know the truth, O monarch, ere the spark of hope be
dead ?
Have our martyrs died for slav’ry ? have our heroes fought in vain ?
Shall thy nation’s strength be strangled by the blighting lust
for gain ?
Shall the mighty British Empire, like a harlot steeped in shame,
Cast off they who carved her glory on the pinnacles of fame ?
Shall she cherish craven Mongol, cringing slave of Mammon bred ?
Shall she thus condemn her living and disgrace her mighty dead ?
XII.
Ne’er shall son of British matron count as brother, foreign slave !
Ne’er shall Britain’s proud defender thrive amid the sons of shame !
’Tis the law of all creation, fools are they the truth deny,
'Tis the law of God and Nature —racial hatred ne’er shall die !
’Twas engrafted in our fathers, nourished through the ages past,
’Twas the spur that won our freedom, ’twas the mould our glory
cast !
XIII.
Rise ! O King ! and purge thy country, drive the alien from thy
shores !
Spare nor gold nor zeal to compass this, thy nation’s sacred cause i
Be not swerved by traitors’ counsel, be not awed by threatened
strife —
Britain’s strength is Britain’s manhood, Britain’s blood is Britain’s
life?
XIV.
God and Purity thy watchword, all thy subjects’ prayers thy law ;
Strike ! and be thy nation’s Saviour, King of Britain evermore !
Strike ! and reign in all the ages ! Strike, if ’tis thy latest breath !
Strike ! O King ! ’tis God or Mammon / Strike / O King ! ’tis life
or death !
