

THE ACCLIMATISATION
HAEMLESS, USEFUL, INTERESTING, AND ORNAMENTAL,.
ANIMALS AND PLANTS,
BEING
gv l&pir Mmt. tit* f fitowplial
ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
ON MAY I3th, 1862
GEORGE WILLIAM FRANCIS, ESQ., F.H.S.,
DIRECTOR OE THE BOTANIC GARDEN.
' n The earth was made so various, that the mind
Of desultory man, studious of change
And pleased with variety, might be indulged.”
Cowpjs®.
Published by the Philosophical Society for Gratuitous Distribution.
PRINTED AT THE REGISTER AND OBSERVER GENERAL PRINTING
OFFICES, GRENFELL STREET.




THE ACCLIMATISATION
HABMLBSS. USEFUL, inteeesiim. and obnamental.
* ATTIf AT ft AND PLANTS,
The Acclimatisation Society of South Australia solicits the con-
tribution of harmless, useful, and beautiful birds and beasts, whether
native or foreign, especially of the larger marsupials and Australian
birds, species of deer, sheep, antelopes, squirrels, zebu, ostrich and
cassuary, singing birds, parrots, storks and cranes, doves and pigeons,
pheasants, partridges, grouse and other game birds, ducks and
geese; also, transactions and communications relative to the food
and treatment of animals in a state of domestication.
The Society will send in return desired animals, &c., if such can
be procured or spared from their stock.
ADELAIDE:
AT TB E REGISTER AND OBSERVER GENERAL
PRINTED at TIU, GRENFELL STREET-




THE ACCLIMATISATION
HARMLESS, USEFUL, INTERESTING, AND ORNAMENTAL,
ANIMALS AND PLANTS,
BEING
§apr Hal Mow ftoe JMtt#,
ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
ON MAY 13th, 1862,
GEORGE WILLIAM FRANCIS, ESQ., F.H.S.,
BIRECTOR OF THE BOTANIC GARDEN.
“ The earth was made so various, that the mind
Of desultory man, studious of change
And pleased with variety, might be indulged.”
Cowpee.
Published by the Philosophical Society for Gratuitous Distribution.
ADELAIDE:
PRINTED AT THE REGISTER AND OBSERVER GENERAL PRINTING
OFFICES, GRENFELL STREET.




% 6* S-7J
PREFACE.
The value of Acclimatisation Societies, and the success which
has attended their operations, particularly that of Victoria, induced
me to prepare the following Essay, in hopes that it might be the
means of initiating such a society in this colony, where, from the
nature of the climate, the agricultural character of the people, and
the large tracts of yet unoccupied land, there seems a favourable
scope for its operations.
It was read before the Philosophical Society of Adelaide on the
13th of May, 1862, with what result is seen in the report and pro-
ceedings annexed, and where the full aim of the Society is ex-
plained. It is now printed to inform the general public of the nature
of Acclimatisation Societies, and the claims they have upon public
patronage, with a view that a Society of this useful character may
be established here, with the full confidence that the future progress
and comfort of the colony will be thereby greatly promoted.
In addition to that read before the Society, this essay is explained
by foot-notes, and contains an additional paragraph relative to
planting the northern deserts.
George W. Francis.
m*S5 /w 97*5




ACCLIMATISATION.
So new to the world is the subject of acclimatisation, as no wun-
derstood, that it has little literature, and the advocates of it little
experience. All that can be said, therefore, is but to draw attention
to its utility, especially to the value of those public societies which
carry out its objects.
All that is at the present time known is contained in an article
in the Edinburgh Review of January, 1860 ; in two or three news-
paper letters by Mr. E. Wilson; and in the pamphlets published
by the Acclimatisation Society of Victoria, namely—a paper read
by Dr. Buckland before the Society of Arts in London, a lecture
given by Dr, Bennett at Sydney, a paper on the introduction of the
Alpaca by Mr. G. Ledger, and the rules and objects of the Accli-
matisation Society of Victoria.
I ought not, neither do I wish, to ignore these useful publications.
On the contrary, until more has been done and learned, a new writer
must of necessity draw upon the thoughts and facts therein re-
corded ; but I have endeavoured in this paper to give you my own
opinions both as to particular animals and to the general subject,
unbiassed by others. You may, perhaps, not agree with my views
and reflections, but, by giving them, I trust I shall elicit such dis-
cussion as will lead to truth. I have also endeavoured to make this
paper suggestive, that action, if advisable, may be led into a right
channel; and that we may, in the most efficient manner, lend our
aid in filling the wilds, the woods, and the waters of this noble
country with useful and beautiful creatures, for that is the especial
object of an acclimatisation society.
The correct meaning of the word acclimatisation is evidently the
process of rendering a plant or animal adapted to a climate different
to that natural to it. If brought from a similar climate it may be
introducing, domesticating, naturalising, but not strictly acclima-
tising.
In this limited sense it is rather doubtful if such a thing as accli-
matisation exists. Dr. J, Hooker and other scholars of eminence


maintain that such cannot take place, and that all our efforts but
show us what animals and plants are too tender to accommodate
themselves to new circumstances, and what others are so robust as
to live on in spite of change of air, of food, of heat, of drought, of
shelter, and of habits. All the examples that now strike me bear
out this opinion. There cannot be a better criterion than the
animals in menageries. The tropical ferre, the monkeys, the ser-
pents, the giraffes, the antelopes require, after years of confinement
and after some generations, the same warmth that they did at first.
Plants propagated from seed or from cuttings may live and flourish
for some years in a climate different from the country whence they
were brought—in a hotter climate, perhaps, if well watered ; in a
colder, if well sheltered; bye-and-bye, however, comes a frost, or
a hot wind, and then they die, as their progenitors would have done
a century ago. Thus the severe winter of 1860 in England killed
thousands of the tenderer roses; and, lest these should be considered
scarcely a fair example, it killed the whole of the plants in Britain
that were out of doors of the Gynerium argenteum , or Pampas
grass—“ Thus proving,” as Mr. Henderson, a well-known nursery-
man near London, says, “ that it is not adapted for the climate of
Britain.” It is true that better and more regular food may do
much—cross-breeding, perhaps, more—in rendering an animal
better adapted to our wants, more robust, swifter, more docile, of
better flesh, of softer fleece; but this is not acclimatisation. I
cannot but think that the word acclimatisation is not merely an
inconvenient word, but a misnomer as applied to these societies.
The word acclimation would be more English, and naturalization
or adaptation more correct.
The more modem acceptation of the term acclimatisation, how-
ever, allows a wider scope and more general interpretation. Dr.
Buckland describes it as the art of discovering beasts, birds, fishes,
insects, plants, and other natural products, and utilizing them in
places where they were unknown before. This, it must be admitted,
is a singular definition, and is the first time that I have heard dis-
covery called an art. However, let the word and the learned doctor’s
definition pass; and whether critically correct or not, we may allow
that such are the objects of an acclimatisation society; or, in other
words, it has for its aim the introduction, collection, propagation,
and distribution of innoxious animals and plants, whether adapted
for ornament or use. Of course under the word animal, here and
in other parts of this paper, unless otherwise indicated, I take the
term in its wide sense, and include the whole animal kingdom.
Thus, on the one hand, we may have the benefit of the productions


of other climes, and, on the other, we may contribute of our
abundance to less favoured localities. Thus countries and societies,
by mutual interchange of expense and labour, may derive a mutual
benefit, and the useful animals of the world be distributed through-
out the world.
To a certain extent this has already been done. All our domestic
animals have been thus introduced into and distributed through all
civilized countries—for example, the ox, the horse, the sheep, the
pig; though be it remembered, that Britain produced a native
breed of horned cattle, never however domesticated. A writer in
the Edinburgh Review of January, 1860 (supposed to be Mr.
Mitchell, now no more, but late Secretary of the Zoological Society
of London), states that the turkey in 1524, the musk duck in
1650, the gold pheasant in 1725, and the silver pheasant in 1740,
were the only additions to our domestic animals since the com-
mencement of the Christian era. I cannot by any means agree to
this. The musk duck and gold and silver pheasants, kept as they
are in aviaries, are no more to be considered domesticated than the
very numerous foreign birds, beasts, and fishes kept in various man-
ners within and around our habitations. To the above list, then, we
may surely add all parrots, canary birds, Java sparrows, the ring-
necked dove, the black swan, the Cereopsis and Chinese geese, the
Muscovy duck, the Guinea pig, the gold and silver fish, the Guinea
fowl or pintado, the silkworm, the peacock, Cochin China fowls, and
our old acquaintance the donkey. The carp and other fish were, it is
probable, introduced by the monks of the middle ages.
It may be thought that the zoological societies have the same
object as an acclimatisation society ; but it is not so. Their aim
and objects are the collection of animals for exhibition; or if
breeding and exchanging be practised, it seems to be merely
to keep up the stock of their own establishment. This undoubtedly
has its value; as without the zoological collections many of the
habits and characteristics of animals would still have been unknown,
and could have been learned only under uncertain and vague cir-
cumstances. These societies have done much to diffuse a know-
ledge of natural history, and have paved the way for other objects
such as an acclimating society aims at —the propagation and dis-
tribution of those creatures which are useful and interesting.
The savans of Paris first saw that a society of this kind might well
supplement the zoological collections; and M. Isidore St. Hilaire, that
great naturalist, now no more, moved the Imperial Government of
Franee to give its aid. This was yielded to, and a grant of land assigned
for it's operations ; subscriptions poured in; the subscribers included


no less than fourteen crowned heads, and almost all the nobility of
Europe. This was only seven or eight years ago, and already it
has met with marked success. A passage upon the subject of this
Society I quote from a pamphlet by Dr, Buckland, published by the
Acclimatisation Society of Victoria. He is reporting a speech
made by St. Hilaire to the members of the Paris Society. M. Hilaire
told them—“ That the Association they were about to form was, up
to that day, without an example; that it was to be composed of
agriculturists, naturalists, landholders, all the scientific men—not
only of France—but of every civilized country, all of whom would
aid in a work which required the help of everybody, because it was
for the good of everybody.” “ The prospect was,” he said, nothing
less than to people our fields, our forests, and our rivers with new
guests ; to increase and vary our alimentary resources ; and to
create other economical or additional products.”
The success of the society at Paris encouraged one at London.
This was established scarcely two years ago ; its first meeting was
held in October, 1860. It should be stated, in honour to Mr. Wilson,
of Victoria, that this London society originated in a powerful letter
that gentleman wrote on the subject of acclimatisation to the Times
newspaper, and which was followed up immediately afterwards by
Dr. Buckland, Mr. Crockford, Hon. Grantly Berkeley, &c. By
the energy of these gentlemen, and by the enthusiasm of other
spirited individuals in furnishing funds, it was fairly set agoing, and
promises to rival the Paris society in extent and utility.
Soon after this took place in London, a similar establishment was
founded in Victoria, with His Excellency Sir Plenty Barkly, K.C.8.,
as Patron ; Mr. Edward Wilson, as President; and the indefatigable
Dr. Mueller, as Vice-President; and from a list published by the
Society, I find the first year’s subscriptions and donations amounted
to £B9O 18s. 6d. The Victorian Government, moreover, have
allotted a large park of 700 acres of land near Melbourne for the use
of the Society, and, as a nucleus for their collections, have presented
it with most of the animals previously collected at their Botanic
Garden: thus to Victoria is due the honour of the first colonial
acclimatisation society. They have already introduced the camel
and other animals of the highest interest. The New South Wales
Government have purchased, at a cost of £15,000, Mr. Ledger’s
flock of alpacas and llamas ; and the Tasmanian Government have
taken under their charge the introduction of salmon, and have voted
£3,000 with that object, and I understand that 100,000 ova and
some fry of that king of fishes are now on their way to that colony.
The English society has no aid from the Government; but be


it remembered that in a large country like England, with a rich
aristocracy and enthusiastic naturalists, a Minister may well leave
the noblest pursuit to private enterprise ; but in a comparatively
small and struggling community, the fostering aid of a Government
is often tantamount to success ; and at a proper time, I doubt not,
we also, as well as the Victorians, if worthy of it, will receive
similar assistance.
There are some persons, perhaps, who think that we have already
all the best animals, and, consequently, that none other are needed.
They would, perhaps, hold this doctrine : —Sheep’s wool sells well;
what do we want alpacas for ? Sheep’s meat is very good; why
should we desire eland, deer, or antelope ? Cannot we have damper
and mutton one day, and for a change, mutton and damper the
next ? Such people would put a damper on anything ; and I am sorry
to believe that there are many such. Yet these men are the best
pioneers in a new country. Despising the luxuries of life, they are
better able to bear its privations; disregarding elegancies and even
comforts, they are the more content with the rude life of the bush ;
they add nothing to the refinements of the colony, yet they consti-
tute one of the main sources of its strength and progress. It is not
selfishness that guides them, neither is it apathy, but because they
cannot see the necessity cf any change. They think the three W’s
(wheat, wine, and wool) the only objects worthy the attention of
Australian husbandmen; but I can tell such persons that a time
will come—nay, I believe, is fast approaching —when they must
turn their attention to other resources —to other crops —to other
breeds of animals — addition to these undoubted elements of
success.
There is yet another class still more difficult to influence to good —
men who think not of the morrow —who feel no obligation to benefit
future races. Why, a man of this class would say, should he be
called upon to “ Advance Australia ?” he should leave it when rich
enough. Why should he regard the future wants of his children
and his grandchildren?—he had worked his own way up, so might
they. Why should he import animals, plant timber trees, build good
houses, raise vineyards, for others to enjoy ? In his ignorance, he
would repeat the well-known objection—“ Why should he do any-
thing for posterity; what had posterity , he would like to know,
done for him ?” Thus he grovels on, savage and selfish; willing
enough to screw out of his adopted country all the benefits he knows
how to procure, and leaving it at last without having conferred upon
it a single advantage.
Men such as these it is bootless to argue with—vain to appeal to;


but you whom I now address are not so narrow-minded and ignorant-
On the contrary, do we not all remember some especial fat haunch
of venison, the taste of which still lingers on the palate ?—or some
delicious grouse, or delicate lobster, or savoury hare ? And why
should we not have them all again ? And more, what objection
would there be to ransack the whole world for delicious tidbits ?
for stronger,, or swifter, or more enduring beasts of burden or
draught for finer fleeces? for birds of song or of beautiful
plumage ? New South Wales has 88 birds not found here, while
we have 16 peculiar to ourselves; Western Australia 36 not found
elsewhere; and Tasmania 32. How interesting and useful to
exchange all these ! How delightful, of a summer’s evening, to
hear the English blackbird, and in the morning the English sky-
lark? I should like to see again my old impudent friend the
sparrow, and the robin, and the wren; even the cuckoo would
remind us of merry England; and a run for a few miles over our
broken mountains after a wily old fox would be no bad sport (to
those who like it). Barring the old fox—which, I suppose, an
acclimatising society would eschew—it is their especial object to
introduce all the rest; obtaining them by gift, by purchase, or by
exchange. Fear not a paucity of objects for introduction ! I have
already mentioned the grouse, the lobster, and the hare. Of other
objects common in Britain, we might have the large Cornwall crab,
the partridge, the capercallie, the red-legged partridge, the bustard,
and numberless birds of song.
In giving an enumeration of the animals likely hereafter to be
valuable and likely to breed and thrive in our climate, I must adopt
some method, and treat each race somewhat in the order of its
importance. Beginning, then, with the antelopes and deer: —
Africa yields numerous varieties of the former tribe, all elegant
and good for food —rather dry and tough, perhaps, but so would be,
no doubt, a wild sheep from Tartary ; the eland, prince of all; the
koodo, the blessbok, and the beautiful springbok; the elegant aerial
gazelle of Arabia and Syria, scarcely two feet high, often much
less; the Dorcas gazelle of Africa of similar size; and the kleen-
bock, not a foot high. Of the deer tribe, we ought to have the
red deer of England and fallow deer of Barbary ; the beautiful axis
deer of India and the musk deer of China. I could scarcely re-
commend the North American elk, powerful and swift as it is,
nor the reindeer, nor the noble Wapiti deer ; they would perhaps
not live in this hot country; yet it is very probable that the Ceylon
elk would thrive and be useful. The same want of adaptability to
circumstances induces me to exclude from this catalogue the toucans,


the humming-birds, the birds of paradise, and many others. Even
the giraffe and ostrich I have much doubt about.
Next in order let me mention the alpaca tribe, the sheep, and
the goat, including the animals whose fleeces are valuable. Im-
portant as is the sheep, and to us especially worthy of all attention,
yet we make no attempt to introduce any of the numerous breeds
or species to be found in India, Cashmere, and China. Some of
them have fine long silky fleeces, valuable in themselves, and
valuable to produce mixed breeds with our present stock. There
is also the beautiful Wallachian or Cretan sheep, with black feet,
black face, beautiful horns, and long white silk-like fleece, of
hair rather than wool, which nearly reaches the ground. The
fat-tailed sheep, the four-horned sheep, the Peruvian sheep, and
many others, are worthy of attention and introduction. Mr. Graves
has already imported some Chinese sheep, which are doing well ;
and I have no doubt that this gentleman, now on a voyage to China,
will bring back several interesting additions to our fauna. I ought
not wholly to omit the goat—though I must confess I am very averse
to goats —they are such shocking bad gardeners ; but if we must
have them, it would surely be as well to encourage only the better
breeds, as the Cashmere goat, the Syrian goat, and the Angora. I
have a male of the latter species, obtained a year ago through the
kindness of Dr. Mueller; and I believe there are others in the
colony.
The alpaca. As a change of animal and of produce, much
has been said of late years relative to the llama, the alpaca, the
vicuna, and others of this tribe. An acclimatisation society would
naturally turn their attention to these animals. It is quite true
that the alpaca has been already introduced here and in the neigh-
bouring colonies of Victoria and Sydney—here by Mr. Salt, con-
signed to Mr. Haigh, of Port Lincoln, in 185 7, and to Mr. Moorhouse,
in 1858. Mr. Haigh, if I remember rightly, only reared one in
three and a half years —the rest all died ; and one (if not more) of
the old ones is now dead. Of Mr. Moorhouse’s flock of one male
and two females, only three lambs have been reared. In Sydney and
Melbourne a different result seems to have obtained. The flock
introduced into Sydney had increased from 283 in 1859 to 417 in
1861; and at Melbourne the flock of 19, in 1859, numbered 45 in
1861. The fleece of the alpaca, in its native country, weighs from
10 to 12 lbs. —in Sydney it is said to have yielded 26 lbs.; in both
cases the wool is suffered to grow two years. For my own part, I
do not imagine that we shall in this colony obtain that success or
derive that benefit which some have anticipated from the use of the


alpaca. At any rate, experiments must first be made as to its
breeding —as to the effect of the dry heat of our summer —hotter
and drier than in Victoria or New South Wales ; also' whether our
herbage will suit it, and what quantity it will consume as com-
pared to sheep; whether the care of it, also, is more expensive.
One great drawback certainly is, that as food it is far inferior to
mutton. I speak here of the alpaca; the llama and vicuna are
admittedly inferior. The llama has long coarse wool, the vicuna
has short wool like beaver skin, for which it has been substituted;
but the wool of the alpaca is tine, strong, silky, and from nine to
twelve inches long. The introduction of the alpaca to Melbourne
and Sydney -was through the means of Mr. George Ledger, who,
after great losses, great toil, and many years of constantly recurring
difficulties, succeeded in introducing a flock of these animals into
Sydney. *
Deferring for a few moments the consideration of the utility of the
camel, allow me to call your attention to that sluggish and patient
slave, the ox, which, with little intelligence and no gaity, slowly and
slothfully drags his load behind him—be it plough or dray—making
* In a discussion which arose after this paper was read, Dr. Gosse informed
the meeting of the introduction of llamas by Philip Levi, Esq., a fact I was not
previously aware of. Upon afterwards calling upon this gentleman, he informed
me that he purchased six llamas —two males and four females—in England ;
that they arrived here safely in the latter part of 1858, since which five youug
ones have been born, but three of the ewes died in lambing ; their lambs, how-
ever, were saved. He also lost one young one i thus his present stock is seven
instead of six, as at first—that is, an increase of one in three and a half years. Mr.
Levi thinks the most critical time with them is the time of lambing. It may
be that the heat renders their system too languid to expel the lamb, and thus
induces congestion and inflammatory action; or what is equally probable, that
they have been kept too well and without proper exercise, and they have become
too fat for the healthful performance of their functions and recovery from illness.
The natural condition of the animals of this kind is to wander over large tracts
of country of scanty herbage and continued cold. Their very hardihood and
thrift, under circumstances of privation, has been alleged as a great matter in
their favour. The reason of my doubts relative to the success of the alpaca in
South Australia is, that their natural habitat in Peru is near the limits of per-
petual snow. Mr. Ledger, in his pamphlet on the introduction of the alpaca,
into Sydney, congratulates himself that he, in that colony, had found a climate
similar in coldness to the Cordilleras, although we know that in New South
Wales the snow is only partial and evanescent; here we have no snow at all,
but intense heat. Mr, Ledger also says they only thrive upon a particular kind
of grass, which he has found in New South Wales. If this be the doub grass —
and I fancy it is, though he has not given the name of it —we have not that
variety of grass here, although we have a coarse species of the same genus, the
popular difference being that the Sydney variety is green all the year round,
our variety green only in the hotter months of summer. Even this is found


his driver as slow and sluggish as himself. I have often grieved over
the immense loss of time in employing our usual oxen, and still
more in seeing boys thus acquiring a movement, which may last
them through life, of two miles an hour. Might we not introduce
here, with advantage, the Brahmah breed of cattle ? The Brahmah
bull is a noble animal, might easily be procured, and by cross-
breeding, add to the strength and swiftness of our draught oxen.
This very large, very powerful, and gentle creature, is without the
waddling sidelong motion of our ordinary cattle; is very active,
and will travel with heavy draughts quite thirty miles a day at a
trot, as fast as a horse (some authors say much more, and that
their action is particularly fine). It must be confessed, however,
that they can leap high fences. I read somewhere (I believe, in
“ Knight’s Museum of Natural History”) of one that used to leap
out of his paddock every time he wanted to drink, and leap back
again when his thirst was satisfied. Two other fine species of the
ox are common in the Malay peninsula. The Cape buffalo and the
American bison might also be had, but I cannot speak of their
only in a few small patches chiefly around the city. The grass here is cynodon
dactylou ; the Indian durva or doub grass is cynodon linearis. What the
Peruvian grass called ichu may be I know not.
The day after reading this paper, I wrote to Mr. Haigh and Mr. Moorhouso
relative to the causes of their limited success. I have received no answer from
the former gentleman ; the latter writes as follows : —“ Dear Sir—ln obedience
to your request, I forward an account of the alpacas introduced into this colony
by Mr. Titus Salt and myself in 1858. Three were landed from the Orient in
September, 1858—one male and two females. In March, 1859, we had one
lamb born, which did well. In March, 1860, we had two lambs—one was still-
born and the other died when thirty two hours old ; it was the first lamb, and
the mother refused to allow it to suck, I bad an experienced shepherd to look
after it; we fed it with cow’s milk, but we failed in rearing it. In March, 1861,
we had two more lambs born. They were left to the care of the mothers. One
was trodden upon by its mother when two days old, and died—the other lived.
In March last we had two lambs. The first was left to the care of the mother,
and died in thirty hours. The second was fed with cow’s milk for five days,
and is now living. Prom the above it will be seen that out of seven lambs
there are only three reared. What has caused the failure? My impression is
that they were born at the wrong season of the year. The mothers had not
sufficient milk, and did not care about their young. I only clip these animals
every second year, and the average weight of fleece has been 10 lbs. 2 ozs. I
do not know what the wool has realized per pound, probably about 2s. 6d.
The climate appears to agree with the alpaca, the heat of summer and cold of
winter are borne equally well. They require little attention ; like goats, they
will go out and feed the whole day, and return home in the evening. As a
mercantile speculation I do not consider them so profitable as sheep. Their
flesh is of little use, as no shepherds would eat it, and they carry so little fat
that they would not pay for boiling down.—l am, Sir, Ac., M. Moobhoitse.”


comparative utility to us. But there is a small creature of this
tribe, said to be a variety of the Zebu or Brahmah cattle, that I
think would be very useful—l mean the pretty little Zebu, the
common cattle of China, some scarcely larger than a sheep, and
bearing the same relative proportion to its gigantic relation as a
London, dray-horse does to the Shetland or Timor pony. It is a
gentle, beautiful little creature, producing abundance of rich milk,
and thriving upon sorry fare. It is an animal that children may
handle, may milk and play with, and may here very rightly take the
place of the obnoxious goat. Its milk is sweet, rich, and nourishing,
and, without any strong flavour complained of in goat milk. The
cost of the Zebu for keep is little; it is not apt to wander; and
yields as much milk as an ordinary family will want.
But 1 fear I detain you too long by thus entering into detail;
I must proceed to birds. Of a useful class we must not omit the
secretary birds for the destruction of our snakes and reptiles. Our
dacelo, or laughing jackass, does this to some extent, but we might
employ with advantage the other. Insect-eating birds are always
wanted. Such are numerous of the birds of Europe ; and although
we have more than 150 birds native here that live chiefly, and most
of them entirely, on insects, yet we cannot have too many. We
might fqr this purpose get the various swallows, if they would live
through the voyage. The water-wagtail, the titmouse, and par-
ticularly the house-sparrow of England, A single pair is said to
destroy 30,000 insects per season; and while most of the insect-
eaters avoid the society of man, the swallow and the sparrow court
it. The latter are never found in the wilds or woods of a country,
but only near the habitation of man around cities or villages. As
birds of food or ornament remember the ortelan, the Jungle fowl,
the Impeyan pheasant, three or four other pheasants from India,
China, and Japan, one of which is nearly the size of a turkey
(Tragopan Hastingsii) ; Be eve’s pheasant, with tail feathers six
feet long, the crested Guinea fowl, the Curassow, the very numerous
species of ducks and geese (as the pretty little pigmy goose of North
Australia, not larger than a pigeon), the mandarin duck of China
(a splendid creature, which mates for life, and is to the Chinese an
emblem of conjugal fidelity), the wing-tailed duck, the widgeon, and
the summer duck of America.
Of pigeons we have already 21 native species, but many others
would be valuable, particularly the red-breasted pigeon of the South
Seas, and which I hope to obtain, by the assistance of Mr. Owen,
from the Fiji Islands, where, he tells me, they are numerous. The
great-crested pigeon of Borneo, as large as an ordinary domestic


fowl, and a curious one, I find thus described in Tennant’s Natural
History of Ceylon, and, after what is said of it, I think you will
agree with me that it would be most useful in some Australian
households. Mr. Tennant says, “ Chaleophaps Indicus Linn is a
pigeon of Ceylon, called by the natives neela cobeya, strikingly
elegant both in shape and plumage, is still more remarkable for the
singularly soothing effect of its low and harmonious voice. A gen-
tleman, who has spent many years in the Jungle, in describing this
bird, and of the effects of its melodious song, writes that “ its soft and
melancholy notes, as they come from some solitary place in the forest,
were the gentlest sounds that I had ever listened to. I can say with
truth that such has been the effect upon my nerves of the plaintive
murmurs of the neela cobeya that sometimes, when irritated, and
not without reason, by the perversity of some of my native fol-
lowers, the feeling has almost instantly subsided into placidity on
suddenly hearing the loving tones of these beautiful birds.”
Of other birds of mere beauty and interest, endless is the number
and variety. Would not the ostrich and the cassowary be highly
interesting, the flamingo, the hoopoe, the ibis, the orioles, the gold-
breasted trumpeter, the adjutant, the beautiful demoiselle or
Numidian crane, and the Caffre or crowned crane, the most beau-
tiful of all. The argus pheasant is a noble creature ; the macaw,
too, of Brazil and other places, would evidently flourish here, and
would be highly ornamental.
With this list we might go on without end, so numerous are the
beauties of animated nature. We might have spoken of fish and
of insects, of sea and land eels, of Crustacea. The late president of
the Acclimatisation Society of Paris states that there are in the
world 140,000 species of animals, and out of this vast collection
Europeans limit their attention to forty-three." 1
* At the meeting at which this paper was read, it was objected that, as we
could not get the food these creatures were accustomed to, we should fail in
supporting them, and that to import creatures and to turn them loose without
their knowing where to find food would be useless, if not cruel. No society
would do this ; they would first accustom the animals to new food and other
changes, and finally choose favourable times and places for their dispersion
As to finding appropriate food, that would he easy. Whatever the creatures
lived upon on shipboard would sustain them afterwards, though, perhaps, we
could find food still better adapted to their wants. Corn of different kinds and
sizes would feed all gallinaceous and passerine birds—all ducks and geese,
pigeons, &c.—grass and hay, or grass alone, all beasts proposed to be intro-
duced. As to insect birds, if we cannot give them gnats, they must content
themselves with mosquitoes. If they want English grasshoppers, we will
indulge them with locusts ; and from the avidity with which some of my birds
pick them up, I fancy they must be capital eating. Bird", I suppose, wil! not


If it be asked what we have to give in exchange for all these
things, the answer is easy. So different from all others are our
marsupial animals —as kangaroos, Avallabeys, and wombats—so
beautiful our parrots and finches—so singular and interesting others
of our birds, as the emu, the tallegalla, the leipoa, the musk duck,
the mountain duck, the black and white goose, the cereopsis, the
black swan, the laughing jackass, the wonga and bronze-winged
pigeons, the peaceful dove, &c., &c.—that they are always a welcome
exchange. As we are anxious to collect and distribute the creatures
of other countries, so other nations are desirous of procuring the
wonders of this our far-separated and favoured land. Thus an ac-
climatisation society must collect and breed these for distribution
equally with those which come from abroad.
- Besides, among botanists and naturalists there is always a
liberality of distribution, and a desire of assisting fellow ccollectors
without consideration so much to the quid pro quo, which throws a
great charm over their intercourse. Thus I have received for our
Botanic Garden, from Dr. Muller, several birds and an Angora goat,
with scarcely any return ; and I daily expect a female fallow deer
(having been promised by Dr. Everard a male of that species) and
an alpaca, as presents from the Acclimatisation Society of Mel-
bourne, and this valuable present is sent only by a kindly feeling to
myself in a small degree, but much more undoubtedly as a manifes-
tation of goodwill and friendliness to this colony.*'
descend to such small game as fleas, but of flies alone there are enough to satisfy
a host, and beetles, caterpillars, and moths they may feast upon ad libitum. If
insect birds cannot live upon such choice dainties as these, we can only wonder
at their stupidity; and say of them as the lady did some years ago of the
starving Irish—“ What silly people to die for want of bread; why could they
not eat biscuit ?” It is certainly right fairly to consider all objections and difii-
culties equally with the more favourable aspect of the question; and although
that of food is easily overcome, there are two drawbacks which it maybe very
difficult to surmount. The first is, the keeping alive some of the smaller insect-
eating birds through a long voyage, as the wren, the robin, and the nightingale;
and, secondly, the preservation of them when loose from their natural enemies,
as snakes, opposums, native cats, and boys. Larger animals would find enemies
in the dingo ; and it might be a future question whether this society could, by
offering a premium for the destruction of the noxious animals of the colony
add a double value to their operations. Some animals and birds would, of
course, always remain under the care of man, such as the ox and goat tribe, as
they would prove noxious if at large, and their value is dependent in a great
degree upon their state of domestication. •
* Much applause followed this passage, evidently as an acknowledgement of
the above present, and especially of the kindly feelings entertained towards us
by our neighbours.


The introduction of plants of a useful character also deserves se-
rious attention. It is the object of nurserymen and their collectors
to gather and transport oidy plants of beauty, and in this so much
has been done and is doing that an acclimating society may well
devote its energies to other things. Leaving also the plants in-
teresting only to the botanist, there is yet another class of them
peculiarly the object of such a society to collect and distribute.
These are the plants of utility, and first those upon which certain
animals thrive. The alpaca should have the coarse herbage of the
plateaus and mountains of Peru. The camel must crop its food
piece by piece from the thorny acacia, or it is spoiled by over-feeding.
The poor Arab keeps his camel in good condition and working order
by the commonest and sparsest food, and will give him water only
every three or four days, lest he should get into the bad habit of
wanting it every day. It is called, indeed, with truth, the patient
camel. Tied by the head to the tail of another camel, and with
another tied in like manner to himself, he will plod on his weary
way as stoical as to his state as his Mohammedan master, and thinks
that such, perhaps, is his fate; and I verily believe that if the head
of the first were tied to the tail of the last, the whole line would
toil on, not knowing that they were travelling in a circle :
Link after link the vital chain extends,
And the long line of camels never ends.
But remember how kind are the Turk and the Arab to dumb
creatures, and to the camel in particular; yet I know of no domes-
ticated animal more easily Irritated by bad usage, or more easily
spoiled by undue indulgence in food, than the camel, and his bite
is most severe. His pace is slow, and cannot be accelerated by
urging, although it may by kindness. What is it to him if the
traveller is tired and thirsty, and daylight waning ?—he will not
hasten out of his sluggish pace unless he smells water. Is the
country stony ?—he cannot travel. Are there no bushes ?—he
cannot feed. At best he is but a patient drone, much affected by
change of temperature and of food. The camel has several times
been introduced into Ceylon, but it has invariably died of a sort of
foot rot; and we have not forgotten the miserable condition of some
of poor Burke’s camels when they arrived here. Ido not know
whether these were some of the rum-drinking camels, nor how it
was that an Asiatic animal first got a liking to a West Indian drink,
nor yet could I ever ascertain if they took their toddy individually
or by proxy; but I do hope if the Acclimatisation Society should
import any, that it will not be such dissolute animals as the Vic-
torian. Let not this be understood in such a way as to discourage


our enterprising neighbours sending us any. It would much tend
to our credit, and wonderfully aid the teetotal movement, could we
reclaim a drunken darnel. I have alluded to the Bactrian camel or
beast of burden, and not to the dromedary, which seems to me a far
more valuable animal to us on account of its speed; yet it is no
joke either to mount or to ride this animal. He is mounted when
lying down, and, in getting up, suddenly raises his hind legs first—
thus is apt to throw his inexperienced rider over his head; and
this danger escaped, it is far from pleasant,
Without a bridle or a saddle,
To ride upon his hump astraddle.
But I have wandered from the subject of plants; from the camel-
thorn to the camel himself.
There are in America pasture-grasses, never brought even to
England; some of these would be very valuable. Indeed, of grasses
there are 1,800 species, most of them food for animals. In India
are several sorts which we have not, as the natchnee (Elusine
coracana) ; the bajree (penecillaria spicata) ; waree, or panicum
miliaceum. Dr. Bindley justly remarks that the grasses of Brazil
are of gigantic stature, yet perfectly tender and delicate. One of
these (panicum speciahile) grows six or seven feet high, while other
equally gigantic species constitute the field crops on the banks of
the Amazons. The gama grass (tripsacum dacty hides) has a great
reputation as fodder in Mexico, and the tussock grass of the Falk-
land Islands is said to be unrivalled. Dr. Bindley says—“ Some of
the reeds of Brazil, called Taquarussa, are living fountains; they
grow from thirty to forty feet high, with a diameter of six inches,
and are exceedingly grateful to hunters; for on cutting off such a
reed below a joint, the stem of the younger shoots is found to be
full of a cool liquid which quenches the most burning thirst.”
Hundreds of other objects might be introduced of great com-
mercial value, as the cinchona, the jalap, and the scammony; also
many sapindaceous plants produce fine fruit; as for example the
litchi of China and the wild prunes of the Cape of Good Hope.
It will be asked, why do not Botanic Gardens introduce these ?
and it may be answered, that they have their appointed scientific
objects; they accumulate a rich store for study and selection; they
aid in diffusing a knowledge of plants, scientifically and popularly ;
they foster a taste for gardening; they afford means for experi-
mental culture, give a rational amusement to the people, and
assistance to the botanist, the agriculturalist, and the student; they
introduce and distribute all the valuable novelties they can procure;
in fact, they do what they can. They have numerous friends, but


few helpers; many comparatively to admire, but few to aid. Their
funds will not allow them to have collectors in and
their influence is not sufficient to induce gentlemen of weight and
wealth in other places to search for and send the curiosities and
utilities of their country to strangers from whom they expect or
desire no return. How rarely kindred spirits of good are known to
each other! while Governors and Governments are too much
occupied with more important matters to write to other Govern-
ments, or even to consuls, for assistance; besides which, an obliga-
tion is hereby created which it might be impossible or inconvenient
to repay. But societies can do all this, as the horticultural and
zoological societies have done; they can have corresponding mem-
bers in all parts of the world, each materially assisting the society,
and the society no less aiding their objects; the same, indeed, as if all
the botanic gardens of the world were to send their respective riches
to one central spot, thence to be distributed throughout the globe.
An acclimatation society skims the cream from the more scientific
bodies; it would disregard equally the weeds of the botanist and
the reptiles of the zoologist. A society like this requires no con-
servatories, for it wants only those plants which are adapted to the
climate; it gets rid at once of the annoyance, the danger, and the
expense of the whole of the birds and beasts of prey; it refuses all
that is noxious, and aims to procure only that which is useful.
I trust I may here be allowed to say a word or two relative to
cropping the interior of Australia—a fit and most valuable object
for an acclimatisation society to pursue. Travellers into the central
deserts speak sometimes of grassy and woody country, but rarely
or never of objects fit for human food ; they allude to no fruits, no
roots, no pulse, no palatable esculent vegetable. It is reasonable to
suppose that some success would attend the distribution of certain
seeds. Travellers might take dates for food (and few things are
more nourishing), and tamarinds for physic (few things are better as a
preventive of the scurvy, or which better keep off febrile symptoms),
and scatter their seeds as they go along. For the same purpose
they might take the seeds of all kinds of melons, oranges, lemons,
guavas, loquats, gram, grain of many sorts—even slips of the pine-
apple and banana might be carried three or four hundred miles—
and the sugar-cane too. Cotton seed might be scattered; also
almonds, peach and other fruit stones, and the seeds of grapes.
Celery, lettuce, and some other things, might become deleterious
when they grow wild —but beetroot, and the cabbage and turnip,
never; and these will flourish in land somewhat salt, and if entirely
of sand. Surely some of these things would grow amd thrive, and


perhaps preserve the life and conduce to the comfort of many a future
traveller. Food for animals, in like manner, is not to be neglected ;
all the acacias may be eaten by the camel, all pulse and grain by the
horse. The same argument would hold good relative to plants
natural to particular localities. Should one that is valuable be
found, the discoverer should carry some seed of it to other localities
on his journey, having reasonable hope that his horses as well as
himself will derive a’meal from it at a future time. Let all explorers
do this, with or without authority, and good must come.
The utility of such a society being thus shown, it becomes me
to take notice of its requirements if established, and of its pro-
bable difficulties. First, then, of funds; donations thankfully re-
ceived seems to be the rule with all societies. In this case it would
be donations of money, donations of land and properties, and dona-
tions of animals. Subscriptions must aid, and would be valuable
independent of the positive sum subscribed, inasmuch as each sub-
scriber becomes a friend and a supporter. As to land: the French
Government and the Victorian Government have assisted the noble
object by noble grants: and I doubt not that at a proper time our
Government will do likewise.
1 trust a' matter closely connected with the subject will, before
long, be brought before Parliament, namely, an Act to prevent the
wanton destruction of our native animals. The emu is extinct in
Tasmania, and, from the barter carried on in its eggs, and the wanton
shooting of the birds, I fear that they will soon disappear here;
the tallegalla or native turkey is also becoming scarce. If the pre-
servation of native animals is desirable, how much more so that of
introduced creatures. Some time ago an English hare was wantonly
shot at the Reedbeds ; and similar, I fear, would be the fate of many
valuable animals if turned loose. This, it seems to me, is the greatest
obstacle to success. Should this be obviated by a stringent en-
actment, the Society would commence its labours with an almost
certainty of success, and put in action a power that hereafter might
stock our vast wilds with as many animals as Africa can boast.
In conclusion, let me express a hope that future generations may
hunt their deer, their giraffes, their antelopes, and their ostriches,
without either lions, tigers, or gorillas; that they may have, American
like, flocks of pigeons, without destructive herds of buffalo; that
they may have domestic fowls and game birds surpassing those com-
mon to us now; that they may have swifter bullocks, longer and
finer fleeced sheep than at present; with dromedaries traversing
the desert; and that desert itself, notwithstanding its drought,
teeming with animal and human food.


ACCLIMATISATION SOCIETY
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
ORIGIN.
At a numerous meeting of the Philosophical Society of
Adelaide, held 31 ay 13, 1862, His Excellency Sir Dominic Daly
in the chair, Mr. Francis read an interesting paper on the “ Intro-
duction and Acclimatisation of Animals and Plants.” After the
discussion which ensued, it was resolved to form a Society with
the above title, and a Provisional Committee of the following
gentlemen, with power to add to their number was appointed to
collect subscriptions and draw out necessary rules for its manage-
ment :
Hon. A. Forster, M.L.C. F. Bayer, Esq., M.D.
Hon. G. Tinline, M.L.C.
S. P. H. Wright, Esq.
J. H. Clark, Esq.
Charles Todd, Esq.
R. Inglehy, Esq.
G. W. Francis, Esq.,Hon. Sec.
It was also determined that the paper just read be, with the per-
mission of the author, printed at the expense of the Philosophical
Society, for gratuitous distribution, as a means of fostering the
object in view.
The Provisional Committee, in pursuance of the power vested in
them at the above meeting, thought it advisable to add to their
number the following gentlemen :
Hon. G. M.Waterhouse,M.L.C. Hon. S. Davenport, M.L.C.
Hon. G. F. Angas, M.L.C. Neville Blyth, Esq., M.P.
and, having carefully considered the objects and management
of an Acclimatisation Society, offer for the approval of the Sub-
scribers the following remarks and regulations.
OBJECTS.
The Society has for its objects the collection, propagation, and
distribution of all innoxious, useful, or ornamental beasts, birds,
fishes, insects, and plants—both foreign and Australian —and a
dissemination of a knowledge cf their habits, food, and treatment
in a state of domestication.
The Society hopes to accomplish this by procuring beasts, birds, &c., from
foreign countries by purchase, gift, or exchange; when procured, by ascertaining
their proper food and treatment, by domesticating them, increasing their number
by breeding, and in some cases improving them by cross-breeding; and by dis-
tributing the surplus stock either by letting them loose in appropriate localities,
or by giving them to such Societies and individual Subscribers as would most
tend to their safety or general dispersion. Native animals and birds would in
like manner be collected, protected, domesticated, and distributed. The
knowledge thus acquired, and otherwise, on the acclimatisation of animals,
would be as much as possible disseminated through the colony —by such meetings,
reports, and discussions as may from time time be found practicable and
judicious.


M cc^cf
PROPOSED RULES.
1. A Subscriber of one guinea and upwards annually shall be a Member of
the Society; a donation of £2O shall constitute a life membership; andanyperson
rendering special services to the Society, or distinguishing himself in connection
with its objects shall be eligible for honorary membership, and may be elected to
such by the Council, or by the Subscribers at any annual general meeting. The
annual subscription shall be payable in advance, and due on the Ist of July in each
year. A person desiring to become a Member must be nominated by another
Member, and pay one year’s subscription.
2. All the property of the Society, of what nature or kind soever, shall vest
in Trustees, to be appointed by the Council, for the use, purposes, and benefit
of the Society ; and in case of the dissolution of the Society at any time, all such
property remaining after the just debts of the Society are paid shall revert to
the Crown, and be placed in the Botanic Garden for the general benefit of the
public.
3. The Society shall be governed by a Council consisting of the President, the
Vice-President, Honorary Secretary, and 21 other Members, to be elected
by ballot at the first general meeting of the Society, of whom that half which
shall have attended the meetings of the Council the least number of times
shall retire at the end of the year, but be eligible for re-election—the said
Council meeting, at the least, once a month.
4. The Council shall have the sole management of the affairs of the Society
and control of its funds—shall have power to make by-laws and regulations,
and to appoint from themselves an Executive Committee consisting of the
Honorary Secretary and four other members, three of whom shall form a quorum.
5. Minutes shall be kept of all the proceedings of the Society.
6. All subscriptions or other monies payable to the Society shall be paid to
the Hon. Secretary, who shall forthwith place the same in a Bank, to be named
by the Council, to the credit of the Society, and no money shall be withdrawn
except by cheque signed by three of the Executive Committee, of whom the
Honorary Secretary shall be one.
7. The annual meeting shall be held in the month of October, for the election
of officers and other general business.
8. The Society shall hold periodical meetings, open to all Subscribers, at
which reports and communications relating to the objects of the Society,
prepared or approved by the Council, shall be read, and such discussions
encouraged as may be of value in propagating a knowledge of acclimatisation
amongst the Members and the public.
9. Upon receiving a requisition in writing, signed by twelve or more
Members of the Society, or upon a resolution of the Council, the Honorary
Secretary shall convene a special meeting of the Members, to be held within
fifteen days of the receipt by him of such requisition or resolution : provided
always, that such requisition or resolution, shall specify the subject to be con-
sidered at such meeting, and that subject only shall be discussed at such meeting.
10. Any annual or special meeting of the Society may add to or amend the
rules, provided a notice specifying the nature of such addition or amendment
shall have been given to the Honorary Secretary fifteen days before the holding
of such meeting. And such addition or amendment shall be valid if carried by
a majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members present at such meeting.
11, Any annual or special general meeting may dissolve the Society, provided
notice be given to such effect, and votes recorded as per Rule 10; but the Society
shall not be dissolved until such decision shall be confirmed at a subsequent
meeting by a like proportion of votes,




