

T7VF p
Bio
uu L
The Sister Alice Mary
Society of the Sacred Advent
A MEMOIR
The Bishop of North Queensland
(Reprinted from the “ Northern Churchman.”)
Price: One Shilling
Printed by T. Willmett & Sons, Pty., Ltd., Flinders Street, Townsville.


THE SISTER ALICE MARY, S.S.A.
One of the most devoted women who has
served the Church in Australia died on Thursday
December sth, 1946. It was The Sister Alice of the
S.S.A., only 2 months short of her 80th birthday.
She had been in frail health for the last 2 or 3 years,
but maintained her mental activity and her un-
quenchable gaiety of spirit. She took such exercise
as she could, working in the garden of the Com-
munity. That had always been her hobby for
her spare time, witness the garden at St. Anne’s.
I had just been making this very wonderful
lady the principal Subject of my speech to our
Schools in N.Q. for their Prize Days. In my ab-
sence the speech was delivered for me at each
School. Its last delivery was at S. Mary’s Her-
berton some 12 hours before her death. I made
it plain in that speech (for which see December
“N.C.” pages 7 and 8) that she was the inspiration
and the main spring of the work in secondary edu-
cation by the Church in North Queensland.


THE SISTER ALICE MARY




TTERE are the parts of my Speech required to
-*■ •I complete this brochure which commemorates
the lady through whom North Queensland got its
Church Schools. And but for her it would not have
.got them.
Christian Schools
"Soon after arrival in N.Q., I had said to myself
and to my friends, “We must secure for our child-
ren as fast as we can —for some of them at least—
an education which relates all subjects to the
greatest event in history, the Incarnation of God.
If that is in its right place everything else makes
sense, if it is not, then the other facts of history
are a jumble. They lead nowhere, and our efforts
to explain humanity and its doings and its destiny,
apart from the truth that God became man, lapse
into chaotic nonsense. And that being so, and
seeing the world so full of cruelty, conflict and
confusion, we should look upon the human race
with nothing but despair. Thank God we need not
•do that because God Himself has become Man,
and He can redeem and rectify and renew all
human life, all men and all nations, which, without
Him, would merely become worse and worse.
Well we did get our Schools, and each School’s
life centres at the Altar, and everything else ar-
ranges itself in relation to that, becoming clearer,
more intelligible and more hopeful all the time.
And so it is that, in the whole of our education,
«very other science pays its tribute to Theology—
the Queen of the sciences.
"It was one thing to decide to have Schools, but
another thing to get them. I went to the heads
of most of the big pastoral companies in Sydney
and Melbourne and told them what I wanted. One
man said, “You are 40 years too late, but here’s
£lOO, do what you can with it.” That same man,
when I visited him three years later said, "Oh,
come in, come in. Come and sit down, you have
•done the trick.” And so we had.


ui
o
*i ■ <
J 1 2 on
f “
■ I !
'/ uj
/ , i
|| *
... z
z
°
SB 1 “
>
«sr? z
:flEy <
LU
EwM> y
_i
BB*r <
oo
BHPS
m
h~
c£2
on
BSfifKS z
ii«i» h


Three Nuns
“St. Anne’s started in July, 1917, just on 30 years
ago, six months later St. Mary’s. I may say that
the appearance of Sister Alice, then 50, now 80,
in her Nun’s dress in Townsville, made something
of a sensation. The appearance of Sister Vernon
and Sister Frances made similar sensations.
As soon as the Girls’ Schools were started.
Sister Alice said to me, “Now you have got Girls*
Schools, but you have nothing for boys. We must
look after the boys.” I said, “We can’t start for
them with less than £10,000.” She said three
words, “Get the money.” I said, “I will try.” I
used in those days to work in my office from
4 till 11 p.m. writing hundreds of letters asking
people to help me with my Schools. Some did not
respond, but a good many did. I was encouraged
by some post deliveries that brought three or
four hundred pounds, but our resources were very
slender.
Philip and Charles Page
“But in 1919, Reginald Charles Halse, now our
Archbishop, went to England and got a £7,000 gift
from old Mr. Philip Page. He was 83. All he asked
was that he and his brother Charles should be re-
membered in perpetuity at the Boys’ School Altar,
And so they are indeed at All Souls’. He lived
more than another five years, so his gift came tO'
us quite free of succession duty. He was a fine
old Churchman and had worked hard all his life,
lived hard, and put together all he could for a
benefaction that might help Christian education
somewhere. Let us not forget Philip Page and
Charles Page.
Canon Halse
“As soon as the Girls’ Schools were started.
All Souls’ was started in Charters Towers. We
had the old racing stables, an old homestead—
Matlock House—and an old pub. We began with
30 boys. Make-shifts of every kind served our
needs. There was a second-hand dynamo for elec-
tric light, it used to go wrong fairly often, but the
Head Master (Canon Halse) would say, “I will
go and jiggle everything.” He would tinker up
the old machine with bits of string and wire and
it would go.


Blankets
“Yes, our outfit was impromptu and inadequate
but boys kept coming. Sister Alice had said to me,
“I will undertake the furnishing, I have some ex-
perience in that line. Give all the new money you
can get to the boys. We of the S.S.A. are ac-
customed to overdrafts, we shall pull through.”
St. Mary’s, as you know, was started by Sister
Rosa in January, 1918, and lived on an overdraft,
which she reduced by writing hundreds of letters
to her former School boys and girls in Brisbane.
They responded generously. St. Gabriel’s was
started in 1921, again largely on “tick”. But girls
kept flocking to School and we had to provide
for them. Sister Alice did the furnishing of All
Souls’, buying in the cheapest markets, and in one
market particularly cheap. We had had the pneu-
monic ’flu in Townsville in 1919, and she bought
all the influenza blankets and sent them to be
sterilized in the municipal oven, paying only 2/6
a pair for those blankets, and nobody knew where
they came from. Well it is 26 years ago and none
of the boys as yet are any the worse for having
slept in the influenza blankets —duly sterilized.
But I would not have mentioned that circumstance
at the time. Miss Marjorie Green, Mr. Smith and
their friends got going in 1925 to pull us out of
debt, by means of the Anglican Church Schools’
League. It has raised £25,000.
Catholicity
“I must give you some account of the sensation
caused in Townsville by the appearance of three
Anglican Nuns, who at first alarmed various solid
old citizens, who said they wanted a Protestant
religion, and wanted me to give it to them. I
said. “What is it?” and none of them could tell
me, and of course nobody can. I said, “Don’t you
worry, it’s all right, I am here to teach the Catholic
Faith, the whole of it, and these ladies have come
to help me.”
Girls Came to Their Own
“Sister Alice carried out transactions in things
more important than furniture and blankets.
Within a very short time she had gathered round
her at St. Anne’s many of the most promising


maidens in Townsville. They were delighted with
the School and more and more girls kept coming.
We bought up more and more houses by hook or
by crook. Somebody said to me, “This is break-
neck finance,” and I was afraid it might be. But
Sister Alice always re-assured me —she said, “The
money will come.” Anyhow we had the girls, more
and more of them, and the girls learned their les-
sons with eagerness—History, Music, Mathema-
tics, the Drama (Sister Vernon’s presentations of
Shakespeare are still a tradition in Townsville).
Yes, but the girls learnt more than that. They
were led to discover, through the teaching of the
Faith, their own superlative value. They knew
far better what they were worth than they had
ever known before. That did not make them
proud. No, it increased their humility, but added
every day to their charm. When the boys came
to dance at St. Anne’s they recognised they were
in the presence of girls possessing a dignity, a
gaiety, and a restraint which was new to them in
their experience of the girls they had known. The
boys had to live up to the new standard which the
girls had adopted. They could not expect to
find favour in the sight of Christian maidens un-
less they themselves accepted the ideals of the
Christian life.
St. Anne’s Leading
"I put that all very briefly, but it means that
St. Anne’s became a shining light and the most
popular institution in the City, and the boys and
everybody else had, so to speak, to “pull up their
socks” to be able to enjoy the charming society
afforded by St. Anne’s School. Twenty-nine years
of history has increased the reality and intensity
of that experience, and as I say it was Sister Alice
who insisted that we must provide a School for
the boys, and through her insistence and inspira-
tion it was done. And so the task we set out to
accomplish had been in some degree fulfilled. For
a fair number of boys and girls at least, we had
provided education of a kind which enabled them
to understand human life, human history, and the
surpassing importance of their own spiritual be-
ing. And consequently everything makes sense,”


Those ten paragraphs I have taken from my
speech. Now we must go back a bit, because I
have been anticipating.
“Begun, Continued and Ended”
Sister Alice came to Townsville in 1917, when
she was 50, and opened S. Anne’s in the one house
we then had in Wills Street. The School had no
Chapel, it used the Cathedral; and for its lessons,
the Synod Hall. But we kept on buying houses,
improving accommodation and adding to our num-
ber of Boarders and Day Girls.
As I indicated in the Speech quoted, the
financial struggle in the early days was severe, and
it sometimes frightened me, never Sister Alice.
I remember her going to our very good friend Mr.
William Heatley in January 1918, and asking him
to let her have beds and furniture on credit, to a
large amount, and saying to him “I cannot pay
anything at present, but I can begin paying in 6
months.” He said to her “Take whatever you
want. Sister, and pay when you can.” She recalled
that when I was visiting her a week before her
death, with no small satisfaction and gratitude.
That was generally the spirit in which Towns-
ville met her needs. The idea of having Nuns to
work among them was new to the people, but the
trust and confidence and admiration inspired by
Sister Alice’s remarkable personality was such that
the parents were thankful to entrust their daugh-
ters to her, and the professional men and trades-
men, were glad to do for her whatever she asked.
She was, in stature, 5 feet J inch, but she had the
dignity and command of a Queen, and the mag-
netic attraction of a Saint. I was reading this
to the Archbishop, and he said, “Yes, she often
reminded me of Queen Victoria, small, humble-
minded, and yet imperial.” With such a lady at
work and employing her wonderful powers of
faith and prayer, the best success of our enter-
prise was assured.
Sister Alice made great flocks of our Girls
happy through imparting to them the Faith she
held with such fervour, and by organising their
studies, games, swimming, dancing, dramatics and
the rest with such resource. And very soon, as
I said in my speech, she spurred us on to do the
same kind of thing for the Boys,


Everybody’s Confidante
Her activity didn’t stop there. Within a year
or two she appeared to know every thing about
every body. It was, I suppose, through the
Mothers of the Girls, who loved to sit and talk to
her in her office, that she gained touch with so
many family affairs. People opened out to her
about themselves and their friends. All kinds of
folk, when in trouble or perplexity, went to seek
her sympathy and counsel, and she was equal to
their needs. She would grasp at once the real
reason for their anxieties, and with her rapid intui-
tion would tell them how to act and how to pray.
To me Sister Alice was a kind of oracle. I soon
found myself unfolding to her all kinds of diocesan
pioblems, both about persons and things, some-
times perverse persons and sometimes very
troublesome things. With a quick and penetrating
intelligence she went to the heart of a matter, and
hei advice, guided by the spirit of understanding,
was reliable and often indeed inspired.
Many generations of our Girls hold Sister
Alice in grateful memory. She helped them to
gain a true devotion to God in their ’teens and so
to find the way in which they might walk safely
and bravely in a difficult world.
ihis is no more than a very short memoir, in-
you to thank God for His gift to us of an
inspiring friend and teacher, exercising a power
recognizably super-natural in virtue of her con-
secrated life.
Her period in St. Martin’s Hospital overlapped
mine and I saw a good deal of her during her last
3 Aveeks. Reminiscences crowded upon us. Five
days before her death she was particularly bright.
I had been able to find for her an Anthology of
Geoige MacDonalds writings by Mr. Clive Lewis
authors whom we both greatly valued. She was
as delighted with the book as a child with a prize.
We proceed to narrate some episodes in the
life of this dear lady.




TKe Small Beginning
Accommodation at St. Anne’s in the early days was very
meagre. It still is far from sufficient. We had to make
shift as best we could. The long room in the house at
the corner of Stokes and Walker Streets, became the Chapel,
but it would hardly hold the Boarders. Meals were then
taken on the narrow verandahs running round that house,
and now, after 30 years that is still the refectory, so to
speak. It is by no means convenient, and it is a defect
that ought to have been remedied long before to-day. I want
to see the business men of Townsvil'e provide a Dining
Hall for St. Anne’s.
Hortus Inclusus
We kept on buying houses against a rising market till
we had four of them.] The yard-spaces behind them were
a wilderness of rough bushes and weeds, with stacks of
old rubbish. The four yards together afforded some con-
siderable space, and furnished opportunity for Sister
Alice s favourite hobby— terraced gardens, pergolas, flower-
ing shrubs, rayne trees, tulip trees and great shady trees
with palms here and there, rapidly took the place of the
old desolation. And there were two tennis courts as well,
one of concrete. Nowdiere in Townsville is there a more at-
tractive pleasance. And the enclosed space has quite
wonderful acoustic properties. From the garden stage you
can heai quite distinct y children’s voices of only moderate
power. There is no better setting for open air meetings
of all kinds. The public enjoys the time spent in this
charming enclosure so near to the heart of the city, where
the genius of the Sister has caused the “desert to blossom
as the rose.” I always felt that it was typical of her to
have done that.
Once a year or so when boatloads of Cadets for the
Mercantile Marine came into Townsville Harbour, the
boys were invited to this charming resort to play tennis
with the girls. The society and the surroundings, after
many weeks at sea, made a paradise for them. Sister Alice
used to get grateful letters from parents in England to
say how happy the boys had been, visiting her school.
The Chapel
As I have said, the buildings are still inadequate, but
in 1929 we did get a Chapel. It cost only about £7OO, being
of fibrolite in timber frames. The design was Sister Alice’s
own and the interior is most pleasing and well proportioned.
The Saitctuary with its semi-circular arch combines dignity
and beauty quite remarkably.
I recall the occasion when I dedicated the Chapel, It
was on Prize Day, 1929. The programme of the evening
began with the Dedication attended by the girls and by
as many of the parents and visitors as were able to get in.
I took the opportunity in my speech to the School of
saying what the Chapel stood for. It gave meaning to the
whole place. Our education was based upon the Incarnation
of God, as the Central fact of human history, and here


at the heart of the School buildings was the Altar. I
further said that while the girls were looking forward to
their careers after they left school, and eagerly expecting
interests and adventures of many kinds, actually the lof-
tiest of all adventure lay before those who would feel
drawn to offer themselves for the “Religious Life”—
perhaps as members of the S.S.A. Within that Sanctuary
which we had just dedicated they would make spiritual
discoveries more remarkable and far more important than
would fall to the lot of others who might travel the globe
and soar into space. They would range through the realms
of the great and eternal realities, and their gains and win-
nings from those realms they would apply to the needs
of the children of God in the world around, in such man-
ner as to forward the salvation of many souls.
Sister Alice was much rejoiced to have the chapel where
the whole School—2oo or so—it’s more now—could wmrship.
It stood there as a symbol of the high calling in which
she was engaged, as the guide of many grateful children.
It would be both an observatory for the heavenly things,
the spiritual home of the mystic, and a power house
generating the forces to cope with and control life all
round, gay and serious, playful and tragic, merry and ar-
duous. Yes, she was pleased with the Chapel.
Exploration
Adventure for those who desire it, may be found in a
variety of ways—material, intellectual, spiritual, and
through any and every combination of the three.
The new member of the Alpine Club seeks to do a
record up the Matterhorn. The youthful airman will not
be satisfied till he has got going at 700 m.p.h. and has
climbed 80 miles into the stratosphere—and perhaps not
then. He will begin to think of inter-planetary naviga-
tion. The uninitiated, looking at the 30 dials and other
indicators and controls that confront the airman on the
panel (or is it a dashboard?) of his super-meteor, wonder
how on earth he can remember and manipulate all those
gadgets. He says “It’s simple enough.” To him, I suppose
it is, but not to you and me, and his fluent explanations
soon carry us out of our depth.
Then there are the realms of intellect. We may take
a tour, personally conducted by Sir Arthur Eddington
or the late Sir James Jeans—men who to the highest
scientific achievement add the gift' of vivid exposition—
a tour through the “Mysterious Universe,” catching as we
go, glimpses of startling phenomena. Awed by the depth
and range of the researches of such men, we recognise
the quality of genius, knowing the while that these daring
excursions and amazing discoveries demand brains of an
order very far beyond our own. Fleeting gleams of what
the scientists have found pass before our dazzled minds,
and are lost again. I met Sir Arthur Eddington in Trinity
College, Cambridge, in 1920, and in answer to my enquiry,
he very kindly told me in a few sentences that he was
satisfied as to the Einstein’s Generalized Theory of Re-
lativity. In 1919 he had gone to Brazil to observe the solar


eclipse along the path of totality. The rays from the stars
passing near the mass of the sun were found (from
photographs) to have been bent by twice as much as they
would have been if subject to ordinary gravitation. That
proved the Theory, and explained the Precession of Mer-
cury’s Nodes. No doubt it did, and for the moment I almost
saw what Sir Arthur was demonstrating—and a few
minutes later it was gone.
Or we read the writings of the great William Temple
handling subjects, the most profound, with a perfect lu-
cidity, and for the time we feel we are on the way to be-
coming philosophers, but not for long. The panorama rolls
up and the vision fades.
Mystics
I have touched upon certain realms of adventure
—remote, alluring and elusive, but there is a higher
one. It is the realm of the Spirit, constantly and
fruitfully explored by the Saints. We hear them speak of
their experiences, and momentary flashes breaking from
the unseen, visit our consciousness, glimmer like summer
lightning, and as soon, vanish.
“Whither is fled the visionary gleam ?
Where is it now, the glory and the dream?”
The Mystics speak of God, and He becomes intensely
real. In their words there is meaning, simple and yet pro-
found. We wish we could follow them in their wondrous
voyages—their dauntless scaling of the heavenly heights,
and alas, we have neither the gift nor the endurance. Yet
we are grateful for what they have tried to show us. and
we ask of God to increase our faith that we may follow
on to know Him. And while the high realms of cosmic ad-
venture and daring intellectual discovery are not going
to be accessible to most of us, yet the far more exalted
realm of the Spirit is open even to little children. ‘T thank
Thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast
hid these things from the wise, and prudent, and hast re-
vealed them unto babes, even so, Father, for so it seemed
good in Thy sight,” so spake Jesus. Can you or I claim
to have received that illuminating disclosure? It has been
offered to us, but perhaps we were too worldly wise, or too
cautious or too self complacent to desire it, and to pursue.
We were not obedient to the Heavenly vision.
One of the Brothers Minor of St. Francis—Giles a
ploughboy—continued long one day in prayer and medita-
tion, absorbed from earthly things. Coming back to earth
he said to his companions, “St. John the Divine knew very
little about God.” They were shocked to hear him speak
so of the great Apostle, and he explained, “We are here
on Monte Cetano. If the whole of it were composed of
grains of wheat and a bird were to come from afar and
carry away a few grains in its beak, that would be a figure
of the little St. John knew of God, in relation to what
there remains to know.” No doubt Brother Giles was
right, and he knew, as a beginner, enough to want to go
on seeking and finding.


One other example of the secrets of the Infinite which
await our learning:—
Thomas Aquinas
About 1232 a boy of eight who was a little lame, sat
on a grassy bank, out of breath, while his companions
went on with their game of rounders. An old Monk passed
and the boy plucked his robe and said, “Father, tell me
what is God like.’’ The other boys knew the “Pater”
and the “Ave” and said them duly, but perhaps did not
speculate about the unseen. This one did. I don’t know
how the Monk replied, but some 40 years later the boy—
Thomas of Aquinum—was writing his great work the
“Summa.” In 40 years he had learnt something of what
he desired to know of God. He wrote the “Summa” in two
years. It has taken the Dominicans 18 years to translate
it into English, and it fills 18 volumes. It is knowp as the
greatest theological work of the Middle Ages.
When St. Thomas was 49, one day he was missed from
the Refectory at noon. A Brother going to seek him at
4 p.m. found him tranced in his cell. Coming back to the
material world he said, “Tell no-one of this; I have seen
to-day what I cannot describe; all that I have thought or
have said or written is as nothing. I shall write no more,
and I shall not live long.” In a fortnight the great teacher
was dead, as we say. He had passed into the realm of
the great realities. All his life had been spent in finding
an answer to his eight-year-old question, and from his
findings he has left to us a great treasure of wisdom.
Our debt to the scientists is great indeed, but our debt
to the Saints is far greater. The truths that they have
found are eternally saving truths, while the discoveries of
science may alas be exploited for evil ends. If only all the
resources of science could be placed absolutely at the
disposal of the men and women of Faith, and exclusively
so, we should see a new creation.
Our Benefactors
I have made these reflections in order to suggest the
nature of our feeling towards persons who have gone far
into those regions of thought or of faith, of which we our-
selves know but little. We are beginners and at an ele-
mentary stage. They are the experts. We regard such
persons with respect and wonder and also with devout gra-
titude, for the discoveries they have made, whose fruits
become available to us all, though we cannot as yet follow
the prolonged strivings and patient processes by which
they arrived. We read the life of Madame Curie, and
watch her in that back street in Paris in a draughty,
leaking shed, stewing mullock from an Austrian mine for
four years on end in an old copper, and at length holding
in a test tube a substance that emitted a pale green glow.
It was polonium, and next came radium. There are re-
produced the facsimiles of her calculations in the higher
physics, that accompanied night by night her labours of
the day in her rough laboratory. And then one of us has
a skin cancer which would go on to eat away our tis-


sues, and it is cured in a few days by an application of ra-
dium. Our gratitude goes out to Marie Sklodovska, to
call her by her Polish name, and we are awed at the
mighty intellect combined with a terrible endurance by
which she secured her epoch making results. Because of
what she achieved at such cost we are healed of our
■diseases.
Even so, though even more so, we learn to regard the
triumphs of the Saints. The truth which they have found
about God and man becomes available for us. Through
their wise counsels we see what would, but for them, have
been hidden from us. They show us a light and we take
courage to go forward. A Christian must every day give
thanks for the incalculable debt he owes to the Saints and
to God for the Saints, as our Book of Common Prayer
puts it: —
“And here we give Thee most high praise and hearty
thanks for all thy Saints who have been the chosen vessels
of Thy grace and lights of the world in their several
generations.”
I was often conscious of a debt of that kind to Sister
Alice.
Earth and Heaven
The mystics have travelled by paths that are not marked
in any map, but they have returned with the treasures
of the regions which they have visited, and they invite
us to make use of that which we could not have found.
And the mystics are no dreamers; they know how to put
to practical use the transcendent truths that have been
revealed to them. The spiritual man or woman, they are
the ones to resort to in any material crisis. What
they have found in prayer they know how to use with de-
cisive effect in action.
Persons of lofty spiritual attainment find it very dif-
ficult, if not impossible, to describe to us the regions they
have explored, for the simple reason that our own spiritual
powers are very small and we cannot understand, but we
must not suppose that they have spent their time in vague
■dreamings or reveries unrelated to ordinary mortal af-
fairs. Ask one of these Christians of mystical attainment
to apply their powers to what we call simple practical
matters, and I think you will be amazed at the astonish-
ing efficiency which they are able to show you.
Pestilence
One such example in the career of Sister Alice I am
going to detail. It was the month of June, 1919. The
pneumonic ’flu which had emptied households in Sydney
was coming up the coast in rapid strides. The plague had
reached Rockhampton. Sister Alice said to me, “It will
be here, roughly, in ten days, and the municipality has
made no adequate provision for nursing those who may
be stricken down. Some emergency accommodation must
be devised at once. This School (St. Anne’s) would make
a very good hospital. I think we should at once offer to
the Mayor to transform it for such purpose. We could
take 70 or 80 patients. With two or three good nurses and


plenty of V.A.D’s we could care thoroughly for the sick.
I should be in charge of commissariat and do what else
I can for those who may be sent to us.” I said, “That is a
very fine and generous idea and you would carry it through
to perfection, but what shall we do with the girls of the
School who remain? A good many will be called home
by their anxious parents, away from the source of in-
fection, but what is to he done with the rest?” “Can’t you
guess?” said Sister Alice. “Oh, yes, I suppose I can,” I
rejoined. T think you mean they would take refuge in
Bishop’s Lodge.” “Yes,’ she said, “that is what they will
do.” “Right,” said I. “that’s a bargain: I will go to the
Mayor and offer him these premises.”
Quarantine
The quarantine rules were a bit sticky, and isolation
was to be formally enforced, but I soon made a bargain
with the Mayor and the Doctors that I should have access
to patients who might be treated in the School buildings
and that any other Ministers of Religion who were wanted
could have similar access. That meant that, in the event
of St. Anne’s being accepted for a hospital, I could enter
the place whenever I wished, could say Mass at the Altar
for the Sisters and their helpers. The Mayor was in doubt
about this as I talked to him in his room at the Town Hall.
In came old Dr. Humphrey, most kind and capable of
physicians but very deaf and rather brusque. The Mayor
was nervously .speaking of quarantine. So I shouted in
Dr. Humphrey’s ear, “If a person in the hospital wants a
priest, can he have one?” “Of course he can,” said Dr.
Humphrey. That settled that point. This enabled the
Mayor to decide to accept Sister Alice’s offer, and, at
very short notice, the premises of St. Anne’s were trans-
formed. Mrs. Humphrey was head nurse and the beds
and all necessary appliances were duly arranged—and only
just about in time. The epidemic fell upon us.
Good Nursing
The on’y accommodation which the municipality had
was the old Belgian Gardens School—worn out and ram-
shackle buildings. Both places were soon full of ’flu pa-
tients. I was Chaplain of both hospitals, and the con-
trast between the two was wholly in favour of St. Anne’s.
They sent us all the worst cases] We saved 97 out of
105—only eight casualties. Sister Alice moved serenely
in the midst of this assembly of the sick, reassured them
and consoled them, spending upon them all her power of
sympathy and seeing that all their needs were met.
There was one poor old fellow, a drover, who was cer-
tainly dying. Sister Alice sat with him and did what she
could to fortify his soul. He was devoted to her and longed
for the periods when she would come and visit him. When
his end was approaching he said, “I must have some beer.’
The beer was brought. He said, “Now, Sister, you must
have some too.” She had some ! That gave the old fellow
great pleasure before he departed this life.
The epidemic was short and sharp and the worst was
over in six weeks. The gratitude of the patients to Sister


Alice and her staff was unbounded. They were as effi-
ciently and kindly cared for as they could be, and, as I
say, we only lost eight out of 105. Meanwhile at Bishop's
Lodge I had the remainder of the girls who had not been
sent for by their parents to come home. Some of the
staff came with them and school went on. And a very merry
time we had, and none of them caught the pneumonic
'flu. They had the advantage of being removed by height
and space from the adjacent houses. I took precautions
of disinfecting, myself when coming in from the hospitals.
We thoroughly enjoyed ourselves. I meet some of the
girls to this day. They were then, say, 14; they are now
in their forties !
A Riot
But this period of affliction gave Sister Alice a notable
chance to show her versatile ability. The meatworkers.
at the Ross River, in the absence of the best of our men
at the war —demobilisation in June, 1919, was proceeding:
slowly—these meatworkers started a racket. When their
demands for higher wages were not immediately met, they
stampeded catPe from the yards. For this offence, four
of their leaders were arrested—-Kelly, Kearney, Thompson
and O’Malley. Note, all the best men were out of the:
country. What I am afraid I must call the dregs of labour
saw a grand opportunity to make a disturbance. It was
Petertide, June 29th. The revolutionary mob met under
the “tree of knowledge” and listened to inflammatory
speeches. They had also taken a good deal of alcoholic
liquor. Roused to frenzy, they broke into the rifle shops.
They had guns, and seized ammunition—fortunately the
wrong size for their weapons. Thus oddly armed they
streamed up Stoke Street towards St. Anne’s singing
the “Red Flag.” Diagonally opposite to St. Anne’s is the
Watch-house. The mob filled the street and shouted in
chorus: “We want Kelly; we want Kearney,” and threw
bricks at the roof of the Watch-house.
Sister Alice, in St. Anne’s Hospital across the road,,
said, “They can’t have Mr. Kelly, I have him in bed, his
temperature is 104°. This daring person had been removed
from jail to St. Anne’s because the pneumonic ’flu had over-
taken him and Sister Alice was nursing him with the great-
est care. The bombardment of the Watch-house continued
and miscellaneous firearms were discharged at its walls..
The police came to the door and said, "If you don’t stop
that, we shall fire,” and at length they discharged upon
the ground their service revolvers. They used five rounds..
The mob lost its head and let off its guns in all direc-
tions. Bullets were striking the walls of St. Anne’s. Sister
Alice and Sister Frances were in the main doorway when
the bombardment turned in their direction. Sister Frances
said, “I think we had better go inside,” and so they did.
Beds were on the north verandah and exposed to
the fusillade. Some unfortunate men, though in high
fever, crawled out of bed and hid beneath the
chests of drawers, and at length the tumult sub-
sided. The leaders of the mob brought an accusation
against the custodians of the Watch-house. They declared


that an innocent assembly of unarmed citizens were be-
ing butchered by a bloodthirsty police. That was a seri-
ous charge against the guardians of the law. It led ul-
timately to the appointment of a Royal Commission m
Townsville to investigate the accusation.— *
Legal Enquiry
Mr. Barry, a P.M. from Brisbane, came to conduct the
Commission. Mr. Salkeld was his examining barrister.
When this Court had been sitting for some days, the P.M.
sent for me, and he said, “You are no doubt aware of
the kind of evidence which has been given before my
Commission, and now. not to put too fine a point on it,
I want someone who will tell the truth and of whom it
will be known that they are telling the truth. I must ask
those ladies, the Sisters, to come and give evidence be-
fore the Court/’ I said “They prefer not to do that; it is
rather out of their line; they exist to heal the wounds of
society and public performances in police courts are not
agreeable to them.” Mr. Barry said again, “I must have
somebody who will tell the truth.” I went to the Sisters
and prevailed upon them to agree to appear in Court.
We all went down there together, and Sister Alice was
in the witness box, examined by Mr. Salkeld while I sat
below in the body of the Court. Said Mr. Salkeld to Sister
Alice, “You claim that there are bullet marks on the walls
of your hospital'—your School, and that they are new
marks, but may they not be old marks? In the roughcast
of your wall it is difficult to be sure they may not have
been there before. You think that the crowd was firing
at your building? Is there any certainty that those marks
were not there before?”
* From the Sister Frances I have her own recollec-
tions of the Riot on June 29th, 1919. In some small points
she corrects my narrative, so what she says is given here
to_ make the story quite exact. After 27 years minor de-
tails in my memory have become a trifle indistinct. But
there is no important divergence, so I let the two accounts
stand side by side:—
“I can tell you about the riot. It happened on a Sunday
evening. Sister Alice and I were sitting in our community
room, when we heard the tramping of men marching, and
sinister sounding singing. Sister Alice said, ‘That’s the
Red Flag; we were both at the front gate in a very short
time. It all happened very quickly after that; they pelted
the roof of the Watch-house with stones, and all was
noise and confusion. Sister Alice said ‘we must get the
sick men inside. They were sleeping on the verandah, and
it was not closed in as it is now. By the time we got there
most of the men were inside—one or two in corners—some
still remained on the verandah seeing all that was to be
seen. The shooting had begun by this time. I wanted
Sister Alice to come in, but she said she must get the
men in. I said they could get themselves in, and anyway


Convincing Evidence
Sister Alice replied, “I think I can throw light
on that subject. I sleep on the north-east veran-
dah of my School. In the early mornings between
five and six o’clock I have watched the labours of a hornet
building a nest of red clay upon the rough cast of the wall.
The insect worked diligently every day. and its nest was
as big as two fists. On the Saturday morning, the day of
the riot, someone, brushing past the wall, had knocked
the nest off, and I noted the yellow-red imprint of the
nest upon the surface of the wall. On the following morn-
ing I observed a bullet mark upon this spot which had.
been covered so recently. I take it that was a new mark."
Sensation in the Court! The lady had proved that the
crowd was an armed crowd, firing off real guns. And
here was the evidence of a projectile which had unmis-
takably hit the wall of the School during the riot. There
was really plenty of other evidence Decause fragments-
of bullets were extracted from the legs of persons who had
made up the crowd. A half empty revolver was found
upon the ground. The crowd, as I say, slightly drunk, had
completely lost its head and fired in all directions. How-
ever, the P.M. gave his verdict; —The crowd was an armed
crowd and the police were justified in discharging their
revolvers. And no police bullets appeared to have hurt
anybody. The bits extracted from the limbs of rioters
were of various patterns, hut none of them came from the
police revolvers. The police were fully exonerated from
any charge of improper use of their weapons! Some days
later a number of them went to visit Sister Alice. The
spokesman said, “Madam, we are deeply indebted to you;
your evidence cleared our characters of a serious charge,,
for which, if true, we would have suffered penalties. Your
we ought to be preparing for any wounded that might be-
brought in. Then the door bell rang furiously and a
wounded man was brought in.
“There were two men in that room next to the com-
munity room —-it used to be the library—one man was in
bed, the other sitting beside him. Sister suddenly thought
of these two men, and that they wouldn’t know' what all.
the commotion was about. She told the man in bed that the
strikers were trying to get Kelly and Kearney out of the
lock-up. The man smiled and said, “Kearney, not Kelly..
I’m Kelly.’ Kelly had pneumonic ’flu, and the man sitting
beside him was a plain clothes policeman. None of us
knew this till then. After that Sister Alice and Kelly had’
great discussions, each trying to convert the other.
There was a second bed in the room. Sister Alice said
to the plain clothes policeman, “You are tired out. Lie
down on that bed and get some rest. I can look after Mr.
Kelly.” The policeman gratefully agreed and went to sleep.
Sister Alice remained in charge of the truculent Mr. Kelly,
who redoubled his efforts to convert her to communism.
“She was very fearless all through that event, not con-
sidering her own safety, but helping everyone in every way-


-evidence established our characters. We wish to say that
we are perpared to do anything for you at any time.'’
Sister Alice thanked them cordially and said she would
not hesitate to call on them if she should be in need. The
moral effect of all this was good, as you may suppose.
A Bible
And here was a lady of undoubted spiritual attainment
stepping into an ugly crisis and settling a vexed question
with unruffled calm. Shortly, a clerk of the Court came
to St. Anne’s wishing to pay the Sisters their expenses as
witnesses, of £l/1/- each. Sister Alice said, “Oh, but we
don’t accept payment for our services; we have embraced
poverty.” The Clerk of the Court said. Oh, but you must
accept this money: it is the- law.” Sister Alice said, “In
that case, please take the £2/2/- and expend it upon the
purchase of a new Bible for the Court. The volume offered
to me for my salutation was not in a very healthy state.
If I have to kiss the Bible I like it to be a clean one.”
A new Bible was bought. And so we passed a somewhat
alarming crisis. The quiet figure of the Sister, sft. Jin.
moved through the piece with serene composure and settled
the affair for everybody. As I have observed, the moral
effect was good.
That is what I mean when I say. you may call a saint,
who has achieved spiritual detachment, into a scene of
tumult and disorder and the saint will show practical
ability in a very striking degree to end the disturbance.
Sidelights
As throwing light upon some of Sister Alice’s many
activities and her intensely sympathetic nature, here are
some notes which Sister Vernon has kindly sent me
“She had greatest sympathy with the ‘Down and Outs’.
When in charge of St. Margaret’s School she visited the
Women’s Prison and held a Bible class there every Sunday
afternoon. She also went regularly to the Diamantina
Hospital for Incurables and helped both men and women
patients in many ways. She was greatly beloved by Prison-
ers and Patients, Matron and Staff.”
That reminds me of an occasion when I had a lady
staying at my house who went suddenly, and rather vio-
lently, insane. I was away from home. Sister Alice hast-
ened to the Lodge and sat by the poor woman, who said
to her, in a semi-lucid interval, “I am a fly and you are
the Virgin Mary, you won’t let them hurt me,”
“You shall not be hurt,” she said, “and I’ve come to
help you to get well as soon as you can. You’ve been
having some strange bad dreams, but now you’ll go to
sleep and have good ones, and I shall sit here and see that
no one does you any harm”—or words to that affect. The
patient was soothed and slept and awoke calmed. After
a short spell in Goodna she completely recovered. But for
the reassuring presence of the Sister when the trouble
was at its height things might have gone badly. Contact
with a serene spirit brought to the sufferer refreshment
and freedom from fear. And to quote Sister Vernon again:
■“Sister Alice had great sympathj' with difficult children,


with all children, but especially, I think, with troublesome
children. She used to say, “A child will always respond
if reasoned with,” and she would treat a child as cour-
teously as a grown up person. She had an instinctive un-
derstanding of child-nature, and little children she espe-
cially loved and attracted. One secret of her influence was
her optimism. She invariably looked for the best and found
it in everyone and everything.
“More than once I have been in despair over some
hopeless confusion on the part of a child in History or
Literature and Sister Alice would laugh heartily and say,
‘But at any rate it’s something that she knows there was
such a character or such an event.’ She always tried to
find and foster anyone’s bent, and more than one girl has
owed her career in Music, Physical Culture, or Teaching
to her incentive.
“The spirit of adventure was always in her. She never
lost her enthusiasm. She was ever ready to take risks.
She had joined the S.S.A. when it was very small and very
poor. She was one of the gallant little band who battled
against difficulties and hardships now unknown. She lived
in the spirit of the School song ‘Keep on looking for the
bright bright sky,’ and of Browning, her ideal poet, who
‘never doubted clouds wmuld break.'"
There must be some memorial to Sister Alice
in Townsville. What about a Dining Hall at St.
Anne’s ! And yet her undying memorial will be
in the grateful souls of generations of girls to
whom she showed the way of life.
R. I. P.


3 1508 01462373 5
