

THE YARN OF THE
CLAIMANT.


CLARKE’S LITTLE MODELLER,
OR, HOW TO MAKE THE CARD-BOARD MODELS.
price Id. each, plain; 6d. coloured.
1 How to make a Model Village.
2 How to make a Model Railway.
3 A Model of Windsor Castle.
4 How to make a Model Farm.
5 A Model of a Wreck Ashore.
6 How to make a Model Race Course.
7 How to make a Model Cricket Field.
8 How to make a Model Watering Place
9 A Model of Shakspeare’s Birthplace,
to Shakspeare’s Birthplace, An Artist’s
Pilgrimage to Stratford-upon-Avon
11 Model of Anne Hathaway’s Cottage
12 Model of a Volunteer Review.
13 A Model of a Game of Croquet.
14 How to make a Model Drawing Room
15 Model Drawing Room Furniture.
16 How to make a Model Circus. •»
17 How to make a model Swiss Cottage.
18 A Model Zoological Gardens.
19 A Model of a Village in winter.
20 A Model of a Butcher’s Shop
21 A Model of a Fishmonger’s Shop.
22 A Model of a Water Mill.
23 \ How to make a Model Village.
24 | Large size, Part I & 2
25 ( How to make a Model Railway,
26 ( Large size. Part 1 & 2.
27 A Windmill at Work.
28 Homeward Bound
29 How to make a Model Velocipede,
30 How to make a Model Whale
Fishery
31 Punch’s Show and how to make it.
32 Punch and Judy; a Serio-Comical
Tragedy in Three Acts,
33 A Marionette Show and how to make it
34 Punch’s Show, —large size.
35 The Ghost! The Ghost ! Six Startling
Illusions,
36 A Dioramic Show, andhowto make it
37 A Chinese Show, and how to make it.
38 A Fairy Fountain.
39 The Automaton Leotard.
40 A Model Poultry Yard
41 A Cobbler’s Stall,
43 The Automaton! Sailor.
43 Harlequin at Home.
44 Punch’s Puzzle Proverbs.
45 The Automaton! Nigger,
46 The Magic Pantomime.
47 The Marionette Theatre.
48 The Magic Marionettes
49 The Magic Toymaker.
50 The Magic Donkeys.
51 Punch on Horseback.
52 The Magic Donkey Riders,
53 The Magic Ponies.
54 The Magic Jockeys.
55 The Magic Giant.
56 The Performing Monkey.
57 The Magic Niggers.
58 The Magic Punch and Judy.
59 The Magic Sailor.
60 The Dancing Toy Maker.
61 The Magic Fantoccini.
62 The Wonderful Binkite.
Each number contains full instructions, by following which a pretty Moda
may be constructed; and when nicely coloured and put together, the}
form a pleasing ornament to the study, and serve as an agreeable pas-
time for wet days and winter evenings. e
W» CLARKE & Co., 2, GARRICK STREET. COVENT GARDEN.




T'vvas in a 1< ne street, that 1 chanced to meet,
A seedy and gross fat man,
My arm lie seized, then he loudly sneezed,
And thus his queer yarn began -
Oh, I am a knight and a soldier brave,
And a butcher, burley and big,
And a shipwrecked crew, and a stockman too.
And a man up to every rig.




ilien he twitched his face, with a queer grimace,
As on him I cast my eye;
You may think me queer, but when all you hear,
i ou 11 wonder that here am I;
iOl I am a knight and a soldier brave,
And a butcher, burley and big;
And a shipwrecked crew, and a stockman too.
And a man up to every rig.




Though the world is base, you must pity my case,
For I have been cruelly used ;
And all I’ve gone through, I am sure now you kn7W,
Your aid it will not be refused ;
For I’m soon to be tried, and it can’t be denied,
That money I sorely need;
If your cash you hand out, there can t be a doubt*
From Newgate 1 thou shall be freed.


In a foreign land, in a city so grand.
My early years were passed,
With a tutor’s care, and a mother’s prayer—
Oh, joy too great to last.
For I was a knight, a Hampshire knight,
To a vast estate the heir,
And I ought to have been by my tenantry seen,
And brought up amidst them there.






And m boyish plays, I spent all my days.
Nor my mind to learning bent.
i*or a mild cigar I preferred by far
To studies Latin or Greek
And my schoolmates at cricket, or single wicket.
Had not for me long to seek.


A young man grown, in an Irish town,
As a soldier see me next,
With my epaulets bright, my sole delight,
In the ball-room oft perplexed.
Whilst my accent queer, made me the jeer
Of my comrades in the camp,
And a donkey one night, gave me a fright.
When I had put out the lamp.






I must now relate, with my cousin Kate,
How deeply in love I fell,
And how I in vain, tried to obtain.
My uncle’s consent as well.
I had been out to dine, and had ta’en too much wine,
As no doubt he too clearly saw,
For be sternly said, you shall never Kate wed,
Or e’er be my son-in-law.


Then I left my home, and alone did roam
For months in a foreign clime;
And, resigned to my lot, I had almost forgot.
The sorrows of my young prime.
When, alas ! one day, I sailed away
In a most unlucky ship ;
Near a coral reef, we came to grief,
And our anchor were forced to slip.






As we had no meat, we were forced to eat
Our shipmates one by one,
Until at the last, to appease my fast,
I ate the very last man.—
Then he twitched his face, with a (jueer grimace,—
And this is the reason why
I’m a shipwrecked crew, and a stockman too,
As you heard me just now reply.


When my last meal was done, and hope there seemed none,
A vessel then hove in sight;
I gave a faint cheer, for succour seemed near,
And I should be saved before night.
As the vessel neared, they close to me steered,
And I was soon on deck ;
And none ever knew, I had eaten the crew,
Who escaped from the sinking wreck.






When the ship reached port, as money ran short,
A butcher I then became;
In the bush I ranged, for my nature seemed changed.
And I also changed my name.—
Then he twitched his face, with a queer grimace—
I’m a butcher, hurley and big.
What I’ye had to endure, ’tis no wonder, sure,
I’m a man u* to mgr v§.


Then after a time, being still in my prime,
As a stockman I engaged;
And I grew so stout, that without a doubt.
At my size all felt amazed.
Then for home I sailed, but alas, I failed,
My title to make clear;
In this seedy raiment, you see the Claimant,
Beside you, hare*






In this seedy raiment, you see the Claimant,
Of whom you so oft have read, >
Having lost the trial—there’s no denial
That justice from earth has tied.
From my earliest youth I but speak the truth
I have been the sport of fate,
As you will allow, when my story you know,
If you’ll listen I’ll it relate.


For T am a knight, and a soldier brave.
And a butcher, burley and big;
And a shipwrecked crew, and a stockman too,
And a man up to every rig.
For some men have brains, but money they lack,
And oft those with money want brains;
Why should not the money the brainless possess,
Be ward one like me for hie pain* ?




Ko,v we were tempest tost, and our vessel we lost.
Nie went down in a fearful gale •
And sad to relate, such was the crew’s fate
J here is none left to tell the tale,
lor me and eight more, with a single oar,
.Escaped in a leaky boat •
And all day and night, it taxed all our might,
lo keep our frail bark afloat. “




Then b s meerschaum he smoked, and so strange he looked.
In a way that seemed queer to me,
That at once I replied, as the stranger I eyed,
I know not how it can be ;
1 hat you are a knight and a soldier brave,
And a butcher, hurley and big,
And a shipwrecked crew, and a stockman too.
And a man up to every rig.




€>•
7<f.
-00
Let no one be longer oppressed with the notion that his malady is incurable till
these purifying Pills have had a fair trial. A few doses will remove all disordered
actions, rouse the torpid liver, relieve the obstructed kidneys, cleanse impure blood,
and confer on every function healthful vigour.
BiliousTComplaints, and Sick Headache.
No organ in the human body is so liable to disorder as the liver. Remember when
nausea, flatulency, or acidity on the stomach warns us that digestion is not pro*
ceeding properly, that Holloway’s Pills give strength to every organ, speedily
remove all causes of Indigestion, inspissated bile and sick headache, and affect •
permanent cure.
Weakness and’ Debility.
In cases of debility, languor, and nervousness, generated by excess of any kind,
whether mental or physical, the effects of these Pills are in the highest degre#
bracing, renovating, and restorative. They drive from the system the mo-bid
causes of disease, re-establish the digestion, strengthen the nervous system, rais.
the Patient’s spirits, and bring back the frame to its pristine health and vigour
The Pills and Ointment are sold at Professor Holuowat’s Establishment, 533, Oxford
Stieet, London; also by nearly every respectable Vendor of Medicine throughout th.
Civilised World, in Boxes and Pots, at Is. 2s. 9d.,45. 6d., 11s., 225., & 335. each
Pull printed (Lrsctions are affixed to each Box and Pot, and can be had .n an
language, even in Turkish, Arabic, Armenian, Persian or Chines*


THE BOY’S OWN PANORAMAS.
Price Id. each, plain; 6 d. coloured, j.
1 John Gilpin, a Moving Panorama.
2 Jhe Diverting History of John Gilpin.
8 Lord Mayors’s Show, a Moving Pa-
norama.
4 Lord Mayor’s Day. A Poetical De-
scription ot the Panorama.
6 Dick Turpin, a Moving Panorama.
6 Turpin’s Ride to York. An Illustrated
Description of the Panorama.
T The Thames Embankment, from the
Houses of Parliament to Blaekfriars
Bridge.
8 The Volunteer Rifleman’s Exercises.
Mazeppa. A Moving Panorama.
10 Mazeppa, in Eight Tableaux. An Him.
trated Description of the Panorama
11 Her Majesty’s State Procession oa
Opening Parliament.
12 Punchinello. A Moving Panorama.
13 The Comical History of Punch and
Judy, a Poetical Description of the
Panorama.
14 Panorama of the Oxford and Cam.
bridge Boat Race, showing th«
Banks of the Thames from Putnej
to MortlaVe.
16 Panorama of Epsom Races.
16 Panorama of the Channel Flask
Several others in active preparation.
THE MAGIC DONKEYS. —Hoars ot daughter . mese wonaertu.
animals go through their extraordinary evolutions daily at 2, Garrick
Street, Covent Garden, from Ten tffl Six. The Pair sent Post free
for 14 stamps.
THE GALANTY SHOWMAN.
AN EVERLASTING FUND OF AMUSEMENT.
Price Id. each net.
1 A Galanty Show, and how to make it.
2 The Galanty Showman; Three Amus-
ing Dialogues for Acting.
8 Mother Goose, a Shadow Pantomime.
4 Mother Goose. Dialogue for ditto.
6 Punch in the Galanty Show.
6 Punch and Judy. Dialogue for ditto.
7 Stage Front lor Galanty Show.
8 Frame-work for Galanty Show.
9 The Broken Bridge. Characters.
•0 Dialogue lor the Broken Bridge.
i The Enraged Cobbler. Characters.
12 Dialogue for the Enraged Cobbler.
13 Billy Button. Characters.
14 Dialogue for Billy Button.
15 Sukey and the Cat. Characters.
16 Dialogue for Sukey and the Cat.
17 Billy Waters, the London Fiddler.
18 Dialogue for Billy Waters.
19 Barney and the Bull. Scenes and
Characters.
20 Dialogue for Barney and the Bull.
21 Ten Little Niggers. Characters.
22 Dialogue for Ten Little Niggers.
ANY SIX or THE ABOVE SENT POjT TREE fOR SEVEN STAMPS.
___________________
CLARKB & CO., 2, GARRICEf STREET, COYENT GARDEN, W.C


Elkin Mathews Ltd
Takeley
Bishops Stortford
Telegraph Muir Takeley 312
N 9 621
lath February, 1950.
J.A. Ferguson, Esq,,
C/o Industrial Commission of N.SiW.,
Q,ueen T s Square, Sydney,
New South Wales, Australia.
CATALOGUE 114.
420. TICHBORNE, The Yarn of the Claimant. £l. 10. 0.
Postage 2 . 0.
£l. 12s. Od.
Per Airmail Letter Post.


