





A GUIDE TO MELBOURNE.
History of the City.
foundation of the city, like that of the
colony, dates from the year 1835, when a
small party of-pioneer settlers from Laun-
in a fifty ton schooner, appropriately
(sy l» named the Enterprise, sailed up the Bay,
ei entered the Yarra, and ascending the river
4 until they had reached the Falls, anchored near
the site of the present Custom House on the 30th
® July, landed their horses, cattle and goods a short
time afterwards, and commenced operations by plough-
ing and sowing five acres of wheat. Upon or very near
the spot occupied by the offices of the National Mutual
Life Association, the first habitations were erected.
They consisted of two weatherboard huts with brick
chimney, and eight or ten hovels of sod. This dimin-
utive hamlet was called by its inhabitants “The settle-
ment.” It was embowered in trees, and five years
later, its appearance resembled that of an Indian vil-
lage ; for, although the valley running back from the
river, and now traversed by Elizabeth-street, had been
cleared and dotted over by cottages and gardens, the
eminences to the north, and east, and west, still waved
with trees; and the infant township was encircled by
a zone of park-like land picturesquely timbered, upon
which sheep grazed, and the milch kine brought over
by the settlers found plenty of nutritious pasturage.
By this time four places of worship had been erected,
besides a primitive gaol, a watchhouse, and a police


court; and the Secretary of State for the colonies had
proclaimed the place a free port. It had already—in
the year 1837—received the name of Melbourne, in
honour of the distinguished statesman of that name;
and at a land sale which had taken place in 1837, half-
acre lots in the best situations had averaged £42 each.
Forty years afterwards the same blocks were sold at
£7OO per foot. The first newspaper —a manuscript
one —was issued by John Pascoe Fawkner, upon New
Year’s Day, 1836; and the same energetic and enter-
prising pioneer opened the first inn, not many yards
eastward from the office of the National Mutual Life
Association already referred to. The first religious
service—that of the Church of England—was read
to a small congregation meeting in the open-air, on
the eastern slope of Batman’s Hill, which has since
disappeared. It took place in the month of April,
1830, and the officiating minister was a Wesleyan
clergyman named Orton. After that, the police magis-
trate, Captain Lonsdale, used to read the same service
every Sunday in the Court-house, until the arrival of
the first Church of England clergyman, the Rev. J. C.
Grylls, in October, 1838.
In the meantime pastoral settlement had been
gradually extending over the interior of the country;
and the production and exportation of wool were
assuming such large proportions, that Melbourne, as
the port of shipment, soon grew to be a place of some
importance. In the year 1836, it contained between
sixty and seventy families only. Ten years afterwards,
the census showed its population to be no less than
10,954, exclusive of 1397 persons residing in the
suburbs of Brighton, Richmond, Brunswick, and
Williamstown.
Then came the gold discoveries of 1851, occurring
almost simultaneously with the separation of what had
been designated as theprovince of Port Phillip from New
South Wales, and its erection into a separate colony,
henceforward to be known to the world as Victoria.


Long prior to that memorable event, however, muni-
cipal institutions had been conferred upon Melbourne,
and its corporation consisted of a mayor, four aider-
men, and twelve councillors. Mr. Henry Condell was
the first chief magistrate of the town, his three
colleagues as aldermen having been Messrs. William
Kerr, Andrew Russell, and Wm, H. Mortimer, while
the council consisted of the same gentlemen, and of
Messrs. John Dixon, George Beavor, J. T. Smith, John
Patterson, George James, D. S. Campbell, John Orr.
and J. P. Fawkner.
The first effect of the discovery of gold in Victoria
was to convert the town of Melbourne into a deserted
village, to depreciate the value of all real property,
and to fill the minds of timid people with gloomy fore-
bodings as to its future prospects; but the ultimate
result of the inevitable reaction was the transforma-
tion of the straggling town into a compact and popu-
lous city, extending its outskirts in all directions, and
expanding its trade and commerce to altogether
unlooked-for dimensions. Every description of pro-
perty and merchandise rose in value “ by leaps and
bounds.” Tens of thousands of immigrants poured in
from Europe and America. Fresh gold-fields were
opened up in rapid succession, and in two years the
exports of the precious metal were of the aggregate
value of twenty millions sterling. During the same in-
terval of time, the imports and exports of the colony
rose from less than two millions and a half to upwards of
twenty-sixmillions,itspopulationfrom 97,489 to 222,486,
and its general revenue from £392,455 to £3,235,546.
Much of this sudden shower of gold necessarily de-
scended upon the capital of Victoria. It stimulated
trade; it provoked enterprise; it encouraged,and almost
justified, the most extravagant estimates and expec-
tations of future progress and prosperity. The general
and municipal governments could afford to be liberal,
and even lavish, in their expenditure; and it seemed
as if the first governor, Mr. C. J. Latrobe, would be


able to repeat the boast of the Roman Emperor, and to
declare that he had found his capital of brick and left
it of marble. For a period of nearly ten years, during
which the yield of gold continued to maintain a very
nigh average, and until the annual immigration de-
clined from 94,000 to 27,000, and the emigration
exceeded the latter by nearly 9,000, the growth of
Melbourne was rapid in the extreme. Some of its
noblest institutions—the University and Free Public
Library—were founded and endowed; the city was
lighted with gas, and provided with an abundant
supply of pure water; and the work of renovation and
reconstruction was proceeded with in all the principal
thoroughfares; public parks and pleasure-grounds
were laid out and planted; the suburbs began to be
beautified by the erection of mansions and villa resi-
dences; and the leading features of the spacious and
handsome city of to-day were discernible amidst the
architectural transformations which Melbourne under-
went in that transitional epoch of its history.
General Plan of the City.
As originally laid out by the sagacious forethought
of Mr. Hoddle, the then Surveyor-General, who is still
living amongst us, Melbourne was intended to consist
of five broad thoroughfares, each one and a-half chains
wide, and running from east by north to west by
south, named Flinders, Collins, Bourke, Lonsdale, and
Latrobe streets respectively. Between these were four
rights-of-way, giving access to the gardens of the
habitations which lined the leading avenues of traffic:
but, when land became so valuable that every available
inch of space was seized upon for building purposes,
these rights-of-way were utilised for shops and ware-
houses; and Flinders-lane, Little Collins, Bourke and
Lonsdale streets assumed the aspect of busy thorough-
fares. Crossing these at right angles, and at regular
intervals, are nine arteries of communication, upon


which have been bestowed the appellations of Spencer,
King, William, Queen, Elizabeth, Swanston, Russell,
Stephen, and Spring streets—the first defining the
western, and the last the eastern boundary of the city
proper, which has the Yarra for its southern and
Victoria-street for its northern limit; whilst Elizabeth-
street bisects electoral Melbourne into two divisions,
each of which returns two members to the Legislative
Assembly. In the early days this thoroughfare,
occupying a valley between two gentle eminences, was
a natural gully which received the drainage of a
considerable extent of circumjacent land, and thus
formed—in the rainy season—the bed of a torrent
which emptied itself into the Yarra, near the Falls.
As it is, this street is sometimes rendered impassable
for foot-passengers, owing to the volume of the stream,
which overflows the roadway and the footpaths from
Bourke-street to Flinders-street.
What is true of most large cities, is true also of
Melbourne, that certain trades, professions and pur-
suits, have a tendency to localise themselves; so that
particular quarters appear to be the special habitat of
distinctive classes. Thus Collins-street east bears the
appropriate epithet of Doctors’ Commons, because it is
the chosen abode of the leading members of the medical
faculty. The four newspaper offices are all contiguous
to the Town Hall, above which is a cluster of churches
and of halls devoted to religious purposes. Commerce
and finance have found a home in Collins-street west,
where the banks, the fire and life insurance companies,
financial agencies, auction marts, sharebrokers’ offices,
the Hall of Commerce, the leading silversmiths, and the
head-quarters of the National Mutual Life Associa-
tion, have established themselves. Three theatres and
as many concert halls are to be found in close proxi-
mity to each other in Bourke-street east, where also
the coach and omnibus offices are permanently located;
while the cattle saleyards, and some of the largest
warehouses for wool and other country produce, are to


be met with in Bourke-street west. From Elizabeth-
street on the one side, to Spring-street on the other,
this thoroughfare after nightfall is thronged with
wayfarers, and its aspect at this period resembles that
of the Strand during the same hours. Three arcades, on
the south side, running through to Little Collins-street,
afford a favourite lounge up to ten o’clock; and on
Saturday evenings, owing to the influx of visitors from
the suburbs, the aspect of this part of the city is
animated in the extreme. It is the night upon which
the theatres are most numerously attended; and when
there is any special attraction at either of them, the con-
course of carriages, waggonettes and other vehicles
O ' oo
setting down visitors at the doors of those establish-
ments, and the tide of foot passengers pouring in at
their various entrances, present a scene which reminds
the visitor from England of what he has been accus-
tomed to witness in the Haymarket, London, on a
command night.
Flinders-lane is mercantile and manufacturing.
Warehouses of palatial dimensions rise to such an
altitude on either side of this narrow but busy
thoroughfare, as to create an artificial twilight in it
upon dull days; and the rights-of-way are filled with
waggons, drays and lorries, loading goods for the
country, or unloading them from the wharves. The
whirr of innumerable sewing; machines is heard from
the clothing factories; and the magnitude of the trans-
actions which are carried on in this quarter of the
city can only be properly appreciated by a leisurely
examination of the interior of one or two of the
largest of the soft-goods houses.
Flinders-street is nautical, and borrows its cha-
racter from the Custom House, the neighbouring
wharves, and the fleet of steamers and coasting ves-
sels lying in the Pool. Engineers, outfitters, produce
salesmen, shipchandlers, custom-house agents, and
persons engaged in occupations connected with the
mercantile marine, cluster round this portion of the


city, which corresponds to some extent with Lower
Thames-street in London; while the analogy is com-
pleted by the establishment of a public fish market
near Prince’s Bridge.
Places of Worship.
In the early days of the colony, the Government
for the time being bestowed upon the various religious
denominations of some of the best sites in and around
Melbourne, to erect places of worship upon. These
buildings were for the most part of a meagre and
unpretentious character, with a general tendency to
rivalry in the direction of ugliness. The plainer edifices
were of the packing case order of architecture, while
those of a more ambitious kind came within the cate-
gory of what is known in England as the “church-
wardens’ gothic” style of construction. . But, as Mel-
bourne increased in population and wealth, most of
these monuments of bad taste were demolished, and
commodious and handsome churches were erected in
their place. The original Protestant and Roman
Catholic cathedrals still remain ; the former, dedicated
to St. James, being situated in William-street, and
the latter, dedicated to St. Francis, standing at the
intersection of Lonsdale and Elizabeth streets; but
neither of them is an edifice to which we should be
anxious to direct the attention of the stranger. On the
other hand, a Roman Catholic cathedral, of noble
dimensions and suitable design, dedicated to St. Patrick,
is in process of erection on the Eastern Hill, where its
triple towers will constitute a prominent landmark
for miles around; and the foundations have been laid
of a Protestant cathedral, at the corner of Swanston
and Flinders streets, and close to the southern entrance
of the city, the site chosen being unfortunately one of
the lowest spots of ground in Melbourne. Conspicuous
among the ecclesiastical buildings which adorn the
city, are the Scots Church and that of the Independents,


which face each other, at opposite corners of Russell-
street and Collins-street east, and the Wesley Church
in Lonsdale-street east; while, in the immediate
vicinity of St. Patrick’s Church, Eastern Hill, are the
following places of worship:—St. Peter’s Church (Epis-
copalian), a Jewish Synagogue, an Independent or
Congregational Church, a Swedenborgian, a Unitarian,
a German Lutheran, a Baptist, and a Presbyterian—
the Chalmers—Church, A second Jewish Synagogue
will be found in Bourke-street west; a commodious
and well-attended Baptist Church in Collins-street
east; another large Presbyterian Church in William-
street ; while the Society of Friends, the Primitive
Methodists, the Bible Christians, the Disciples of
Christ, the Christian Brethren, the Particular Baptists,
the Irvingites, and the Welsh Calvinistic Methodists,
have provided themselves with places of worship in the
city or its suburbs. Many preachers of eminence are
to be found in the ranks of the clergy of all denomi-
nations ; the most popular as a general rule being those
who —like the Right Rev. Dr. Moorhouse, and the
Revs. Dr. Bromby, Samuel Chapman, Charles Strong,
and Canon Handheld, combine breadth of view with
intellectual culture and religious earnestness.
The University.
The University of Melbourne, which is situated in
Carlton, one of the northern suburbs of the city, owes
its foundation to the public spirit of its Chancellor, Sir
Redmond Barry, K.C.M.G., and to the liberality of a
former government composed chiehy of gentlemen who
been educated at one or other of the British Uni-
versities. It was established in 1853, endowed with
an income of £9OOO per annum, payable out of the
general revenue, and opened in October, 1855. Its
teaching staff consists of four professors, one Dean of
the faculty of law, and fifteen lecturers. It is
governed by a council and,senate, and affiliated to it


are a CLuVch of England and a Presbyterian college
One of the noblest features of the University, in its
architectural aspect, is the Wilson Hall, erected at a
cost of nearly £40,000 —the principal and interest
accruing from a munificent gift for that purpose from
the Hon. Sir Samuel Wilson, M.P. Attached to the
institution is a valuable and interesting Museum of
Natural Science, which is open to public inspection
free of charge, and the grounds of the University have
been laid out and planted with a view to facilitate the
study of botany, as well as to beautify the surround-
ings of this young and vigorous seat of learning.
The Public Library.
This noble institution occupies a solid block of land,
nearly two acres in extent, bounded by four streets on
the east side of Swanston-street, not far from the point
at which it is intersected by Lonsdale-street, and just
beyond the Melbourne Hospital. Like the University,
it may be said to have been indebted for its origin to
Sir Redmond Barry, the President of the Board of
Trustees, by whom it is governed. It was opened by
Major-General M‘Arthur, the Acting-Governor, on the
11th of February, 1856, and was gradually enlarged
in conformity with the original plans prepared by Mr.
Reed, the architect, until it assumed its present dimen-
sions, although these, important as they are, will be
greatly exceeded when the structure is completed. At
present, the main portion of the building comprises a
spacious reading-room, containing nearly 110,000
volumes of books, accessible to all comers from 10 a.m.
to 10 p.m.; a newspaper-room, equally free to the
public; the National Gallery, containing a choice
collection of works of art by modern masters, open
from 12 to 4 p.m. in the winter, and from 12 to 5 p.m.
in the summer; a School of Painting and School of
Design; Industrial and Technological Museum, com-
prehending schools of chemistry, metallurgy and


mineralogy, engineering and telegraphy; and a large
collection of casts from the antique. The Melbourne
Public Library is, we believe, the only one in the
world which is “free” in the broadest sense of the
word, and it is gratifying to add that the abuses of
this privilege are few and insignificant, relatively to
the enormous advantages it confers. It was visited by
266,839 persons in 3 879, while the number of visitors
to the Gallery and Museum was 407,205 in the same
period.
Academy of Arts.
The home of this institution is situated upon what
is known as the Water Tank Reserve, in the imme-
diate vicinity of St. Patrick’s Cathedral, on the
Eastern Hill. Established to promote the study and
practice of the fine arts, it holds an annual exhibition
of their works in a well-lighted chamber of somewhat
limited dimensions. Connected with the Academy,
which is managed by a president and council, is an
art union, on the London principle, by the instru-
mentality of which, numerous paintings and water-
colour-drawings, by local artists, are annually distri-
buted. Specimens of the work of the principal
members of the Academy will be found in the
Victorian Gallery of the International Exhibition.
Scientific, Literary, and Musical Associations.
The Royal Society of Victoria, founded for the
advancement of science, literature and art, with espe-
cial reference to the development of the resources of
the colony, holds its monthly meetings, during its
annual session, in the Society’s hall, facing the south
side of the Carlton Gardens. It has now been twenty-
three years in existence, possesses a good library, and
issues an annual volume of Transactions and Proceed-
ings. The musical associations of Melbourne are six
in number, and comprise the Philharmonic Society, the


Dramaticand Musical Association, the Melbourne Lieder-
tafel, the Metropolitan Liedertafel, the Musical Asso-
ciation of Victoria, and the South Melbourne Tonic
Sol-fa Association. The leading societies give concerts
periodically in the Town-hall, and there are very few
cities of the size of Melbourne in which music is culti-
vated by all classes of the community with greater
enthusiasm or success. Of what may be called
mutual improvement societies, organised for the
discussion of political, religious, literary, and scientific
subjects, there are upwards of twenty in the city and
its suburbs; while the Melbourne Athenaeum, and
numerous kindred institutions in and around the
metropolis, offer to their subscribers the use of well-
selected libraries, and of reading-rooms liberally sup-
plied with British and foreign and local newspapers
and periodicals. Special branches of the arts and
sciences are pursued under the auspices of the Aus-
tralian Health, the National Agricultural, the Horticul-
tural, the Horticultural Improvement, the Medical, the
Microscopical, the Pharmaceutical and the Zoological and
Acclimatisation Societies; while the Field Naturalists’
Club combines recreation with the study of nature.
The Government Observatory, situated in South Yarra,
possesses the largest telescope in the Southern Hemis-
phere, and is open to visitors on Wednesday afternoons
from two to four; while the Zoological Gardens, in the
Royal Park, are accessible to the public daily.
Theatres and Places of Amusement.
The first theatre in Melbourne was a wooden build-
ing, erected near the site of the present Bull and
Mouth Hotel, in Bourke-street. It was succeeded by
the Queen’s, in Queen-street, which is now used as a
carriage factory. The next in point of date was the
Amphitheatre, now the People’s Theatre, in Spring-
street. Then came Coppin’s Olympic, at the corner of
Lonsdale-street East and Stephen-street. It was par-


tially destroyed by fire, and is now a furniture ware-
house, Soon afterwards the Theatre Royal arose in
Bourke-street East, but was consumed by fire and
rebuilt. The Prince of Wales’s Theatre, opposite the
Melbourne Hospital, flourished for a time, but was
eventually dismantled, and transformed into a carriage
factory. The Hay market Theatre, covering the site
of the Eastern Arcade, enjoyed a successful though
brief career, and was accidentally burned down. A
similar fate overtook the Varieties, upon the site of
which the Opera House now stands; and the elegant
little Bijou, in Bourke-street east, is the eleventh
theatre erected in the city during the last forty years.
At present four are nightly open to the public, besides
St. George’s Hall, in which dramatic entertainments
are occasionally given. The Theatre Royal is usually
devoted to melodrama, with intervals of the legiti-
mate drama, when some “star” shines upon the boards.
It possesses the largest auditorium in Melbourne. The
Opera House is the house of the lyric drama, with
occasional seasons of high-class comedy. At the
People’s Theatre the entertainments resemble those
presented at the transpontine houses in London; and
the Bijou, under the stage management of Mr. Wybert
Reeve, appeals by its performances to the refined and
cultivated classes of society. Musical entertainments
are given in the Temperance Hall, Russell-street,
every Saturday evening. Every Thursday afternoon
and Saturday evening, organ recitals take place in
the Town-hall, and the same spacious building is
generally filled once or twice a month by three or
four thousand people attracted to a high-class concert;
while Glen’s Music-hall in Collins-street east is fre-
quently in requisition for chamber concerts of a superior
character.
During the summer season, and especially on Satur-
day afternoons, out-door sports are extremely popular;
and the Richmond Paddock is a favourite place of
resort There are nearly twenty cricket, nine rowing,


four bowling, two yacht, half-a-dozen foot-ball, two
coursing, one hunt, two racing, one base-ball, one
lacrosse and several rifle clubs; and a week rarely
elapses during the season, without some trial of skill
taking place, which draws thousands of spectators to
the arena of contest. Each suburb has its cricket
ground and bowling-green; and the upper Yarra, and
the lagoon in the Albert Park, Emerald Hill, present
an animated scene when aquatic races are in progress.
On the Cup-Day, which usually takes place on or
about the 9th of November, the Melbourne racecourse
at Flemington is the rendezvous of from seventy to
eighty thousand spectators ; and as the contour of the
ground is admirably adapted for exhibiting the magni-
tude of this great crowd, the spectacle it presents is
one sufficiently striking and imposing to leave a lasting
impression on the minds of even those visitors who are
familiar with the aspect of Epsom on the Derby, and of
Ascot on the Oaks Day.
Houses of Parliament.
Responsible government was conferred upon the
colony of Victoria in 1856, when the single chamber,
or Legislative Council, which had assembled in St.
Patrick’s Hall, Bourke-street west, since 1851, was
superseded by a Parliament, composed of two Cham-
bers, both elective, and consisting originally of ninety
members. Large sums of money were expended then
and have been expended since, in the erection of a
massive block of buildings for legislative purposes, in
Spring-street, facing the broad thoroughfare known as
Bourke-street east. A lofty flight of steps conducts
the visitor to a spacious entrance-hall of imposing
dimensions; on the right side of which is the elegant
Council Chamber, which bears a certain resemblance,
on a reduced scale, to the beautiful church of the
Madeleine in Paris. The Assembly meets in a corres-
ponding chamber on the left, plainer in its architectural


features, and furnished, like its compeer, with a raised
dais and canopied chair for the Speaker, a reporters’
and strangers’ galleries, and two others, for the recep-
tion of members of the other House, and of persons
admitted by order of the Speaker. In the rear of
the building, is a really fine library, containing about
50,000 volumes, which can be inspected by visitors
when the Houses are not sitting; and the general plan
of the entire edifice, which is very far from completion,
embraces committee, refreshment, smoking, billiard and
amusement rooms, with the necessary offices. It is
understood to have cost upwards of half a million
sterling already, and is a monument of financial ex-
travagance.
Public Parks and Gardens,
Melbourne is justly proud of the large spaces which
have been reserved for public recreation and enjoyment.
The city may be said to be environed by them. On
the north and west sides there are the Flagstaff-hill,
the Royal Park, and Carlton Gardens. To the east-
ward are the Treasury and Fitzroy Gardens, Studley
Park, the Survey Paddock, the Horticultural Society’s
Gardens, and Richmond Park; and southward lie the
Botanical Gardens, the Government House Domain,
and Fawkner and Albert Parks. Of these, the most
attractive to visitors are the Fitzroy and Botanical
Gardens; the former were laid out by Mr. Clement
Hodgkinson, the then Surveyor-General, and the latter
are being converted into a charmingly picturesque place
of resort, by Mr. Guilfoyle, the curator of them. They
are open to the public at all hours of the day, and the
value of these breathing-places, in and around a popu-
lous city, like Melbourne, can scarcely be over esti-
mated. Apart from their sanitary uses, as purifiers of
the atmosphere, umbrageous retreats like the Fitzroy
Gardens furnish a grateful refuge during the summer
months from the heat of the streets and the glare of


the sunshine reflected from the white houses and the
hot pavement. Avenues of elm, sycamore, pinus
insignis, and other exotic trees converge upon the
bridge crossing the shadowy fern-tree gully, which
traverses the grounds from north to south, and com-
pose green cloisters filled with a mellow twilight
atmosphere. Patches of brilliant colour enamel the
soft turf, while other flower-beds, filled with choice
plants, fringe some of the avenues and arrest the eye
by the charming variety of their forms, and the vivid
splendour of their luxuriant blooms. Copies of cele-
brated statues are placed in suitable positions, and a
band-pavilion, filled with instrumentalists, is the
centre of attraction to a crowd of music-loving visitors
on Saturday afternoons during the summer months.
In the Acclimatisation Society’s grounds in the
Poyal Park, accessible by a threepenny omnibus, the
visitor will find an interesting collection of living
animals introduced by that body; which, although it
has made a few mistakes, has laboured zealously and
successfully to enrich the fauna of Australia by the
addition to it of numerous quadrupeds, birds and
fishes, possessing a considerable economic value.
In another direction, omnibuses at the same fares
pass the gates of the Botanical Gardens, beautifully
situated on some rising ground, curving upward in a
semi-circular form from the banks of the river, opposite
Richmond Park. A lagoon, frequented by wild-fowl,
and studded by miniature islands, adds greatly to the
charm of these attractive gardens, in which will be
be found an epitome of the flora of the world, includ-
ing the Victoria Regia, and a fine collection of tropical
plants which flourish in the congenial heat and
moisture of the palm-house. On Saturday and Sunday
afternoons, in the summer-time, and on public holi-
days generally, the Botanical Gardens are usually
filled with visitors; and it may be mentioned as one
of the characteristics of the population of Melbourne
and its suburbs, that they exhibit a marked taste for


flowers and music—both being cultivated with an
ardour that borders on enthusiasm.
The gardens of the Horticultural Society, near Haw-
thorn, are mainly devoted to the culture of all attain-
able varieties of fruit; and the periodical shows of
that body, as well as those of the Horticultural Im-
provement Society, furnish incontestable proofs of the
high perfection to which floral, as well as fruit and
vegetable gardening has been brought in this colony.
Exhibition Building.
The Exhibition Building, erected at a cost of some-
thing like £300,000, occupies one of the most com-
manding sites in the immediate neighbourhood of
the city. Of its architectural pretensions, but little
can be said. Space for the exhibits has been the
main consideration, and beauty has been sacrificed to
magnitude. It is cruciform in design, a lofty dome
arising at the intersection of the nave and Hansept;
while, on the north side, have been erected a series of
annexes greatly exceeding in area the main structure.
A powerful organ, built in the colony, occupies the
west end of the nave, and in the northern transept a
fac simile of the German Emperor’s magnificent
pavilion symbolises very impressively the military
power of the re-established Empire, The galleries
which surround the principal portion of the building
are filled with works of art from Great Britain, France,
Germany, Austria, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium,
and this colony, and the general contents of the Exhi-
bition will be found to fully justify its claims to the
title of International. The main entrances to the
building are from Bathdowne-street on the west, and
Nicholson-street on the east. Gollingwood omnibuses
and waggonettes pass the gates in the last-named
street, and those running to Carlton go within a few
yards of the entrance to the gardens in Bathdowne-
street. All these vehicles have their terminus at the


south end of Elizabeth-street, and the fare is three-
pence. Visitors to the Exhibition will do well to
provide themselves with a plan of its contents, and to
map these out in sections, so as to substitute a system-
atic for a desultory method of inspection. By these
means much physical fatigue will be avoided, as well
as that strain upon the eyes, and that weariness, if not
confusion of mind, which necessarily result from the
rapid and superficial survey o'f a multiplicity of
objects, covering a great area of space, and producing
all the effects of a bewildering phantasmagoria upon
the senses.
Public Buildings.
Besides those already enumerated, there are others
which may be conveniently brought together under
one heading. Close by the Exhibition will be found
the Central Schools—a miracle of ugliness—the Trades’
Hall, the Hall of the Royal Society, Deutsche Turn
Halle, and the Hall of the Horticultural Improvement
Society. At the intersection of Bourke-street east
and Stephen-street, the Eastern Market block of
buildings covers a large area of ground, and is
only partially utilised. Opposite the Eastern Market,
at 169 Bourke-street, The National Mutual Life
Association has established a branch office for
the convenience of residents at the eastern end of
the city. In the Treasury Gardens in Spring-
street, the Chief-Secretary’s Office, the Government
Printing Office, and the screen-like structure, known
as the Treasury, are grouped together. On the
north side of Collins-street East, the Melbourne
Club rears its plain and substantial fagade; and
lower down, on the same side of the way, the
somewhat imposing dimensions of the Town Hall
arrest the eye of the visitor. It contains one of the
largest assembly halls in the world; at one end of
which a magnificent organ has been erected, at a cost


of £SOOO. Adjacent to this building is the City Police
Court. The Custom House is situated in Flinders-
street West, with the Government Savings Bank
contiguous to it; near to which is the Western Market.
This valuable block of land, which, five and twenty
years ago, was occupied by a few shanties, and the
ghost of a market, is now covered by a quadrangular
mass of offices, with frontages to four streets, while
the basement story, opening upon a square at a lower
level, with an entrance from Flinders-lane, is rented
by wholesale produce dealers. In the insurance, ship-
ping, mercantile and legal offices, which centre here,
no inconsiderable portion of the business of Melbourne
is transacted; and as the buildings have been substan-
tially erected on a 21 years’ lease, the property, when it
reverts to the corporation of Melbourne, as the ground
landlords, will yield a handsome revenue to the city,
which at present derives nearly £IOO,OOO per annum
from rates, tolls, and other sources of income. At the
north-eastern angle of this valuable block stand the
Offices of
The National Mutual Life Association,
notable in the civic history of the colony as having been
the first Mutual Life Office established in Victoria,
as also the first in the world to introduce theprinciple
of applying the surrender value of a policy in payment
of the premiums when default is made by the holder
of it, thus keeping the policy alive until the surrender
value is exhausted. It would be difficult to exaggerate
the value of this innovation, which combines practical
benevolence with justice to the insured, and equity to
the insurers. For it is usually at some critical period,
or during some trying but perhaps temporary reverse,
that payments are not made; and it is in an emer-
gency like this, that the office steps in and pro-
tects the interests of the unfortunate policy-holder,


Amount of policy
... £500
0 0
Bonus added
... 76
18 5
—
—
£576
18
5
Less overdue premiums ...
... 36
iat 6
„ interest thereon
4
1'3
40
13
9
Balance
£536
4
8
without detriment to those of the rest of the members,
and thus averts what might otherwise have proved a
disastrous sacrifice to the former. In order to illustrate
the operation of this novel and excellent feature in
life assurance, let us cite a case which actually
occurred. J. M. assured his life for £SOO, in 1869,
with the National Mutual, and paid his premiums
regularly until March, 1877, by which time he had
contributed sixteen half-yearly premiums, amounting
in the aggregate to £97 13s. 4d. Owing, however, to
the failure of his crops in three successive years, he
was disabled from paying any further premiums, and
he died upon the 27th of April, 1880. Up to that
date, six half-yearly instalments on his policy had
fallen due, and remained unpaid, but the surrender
value was sufficient to keep the policy in force, and at
his decease the account stood thus:—
And this was the sum which the directors had the
gratification of handing over to the bereaved widow
of the insured. Thus, although no premiums had been
paid to the office for three years, the whole of the
amount originally assured, and £36 4s. Bd. besides,
was paid to the relict of the deceased.
We think that an office which holds out such excep-
tional advantages to its members may fairly lay claim
to be one of the notabilia of the city of Melbourne;
and we cannot do better than recommend the reader
of this hand-book to visit the “ National Mutual,
No. 1, Market Buildings, Collins-street west,” and
take out a policy on his or her life.


The Banking establishments of Melbourne are more
handsomely lodged than any other financial or mer-
cantile institutions. Conspicuous among the buildings
in Collins-street East and West are the Banks of
Victoria, New South Wales, and Australasia, the
Union, the London Chartered, the National, the Com-
mercial, and the City of Melbourne. The Oriental
adorns the lower part of Queen-street, the English,
Scottish and Australian Chartered occupies a solidly
respectable edifice in Elizabeth-street South, and the
Colonial Bank will soon enter upon larger premises
at the corner of the same street and Little Collins-
street. Six other banking associations, and nearly
twenty insurance companies, not to speak of agencies,
have their offices in or near the commercial centre of
Melbourne, which may be taken to be the Hall of
Commerce, Collins-street West; for this comprehen-
sive institution may be said to combine within itself
the distinguishing features of the Royal Exchange,
Garraway’s Coffee House, and Capel Court, in the
British metropolis, just as that part of the leading
thoroughfare which lies between Swanston and
Elizabeth-streets may be likened to Cheapside, while
westward of Elizabeth-street to William-street we
have the analogue of Lombard-street, Threadneedle-
street and Cornhill,
The principal buildings in William-street are the
Australian Club, Menzies’ Hotel, the immense wool-
stores of R. Goldsbrough and Co., the Mint, and the
new Courts of Justice. The General Post Office,
Electric Telegraph Office, and Post Office Savings Bank
occupy a central position in Elizabeth-street; and in
the same busy thoroughfare, the spacious premises of
James M‘Ewan and Co. loom large upon the vision,
close to which are the premises of Messrs. M'Lean
Bros, and Rigg. Again turning into Collins-street
East, the architectural elevations of the buildings
occupied by Briscoe and Co., Allan and Co., Glen and
Co., Gunsler’s Cafe, and Mullen’s Library, strike the


eye of the stranger as indicative of the commercial
activity of their respective occupants; while the aspect
of that portion of the city between four and five o’clock
every afternoon in the summer, is one of extreme
animation, as it is the fashionable lounge of Mel-
bourne.
Besides the Clubs already mentioned, there are two,
the Athenaeum and the Yorick, both of which have
their quarters in the street just referred to. Of insti-
tutions which it is less pleasant to speak about, it will
suffice to mention the Melbourne Gaol at the north end
of Swanston-street, the Reformatory in the Royal Park,
Pentridge Prison at Coburg, and the huge Lunatic
Asylum, which dominates the landscape for miles
round, at Kew, and must impress the mind of the
stranger with the erroneous idea that we are rather
proud of the large number of insane persons main-
tained at the public expense, as well as of the palatial
structure reared at such an enormous cost for their
reception and protection.
It remains to speak of Government House, erected
on a commanding eminence about a mile south of the
city, and overlooking an extensive landscape as well as
a fine sea-view. Built in the modern Italian style,
but possessing no architectural features to challenge
admiration, it is sufficiently large to accommodate the
family of a nobleman or gentleman receiving twice the
salary paid to the Governor of Victoria; and says
more for our injudicious extravagance, than for our
good taste and discretion.
Charitable Institutions,
If great cities are favourable to the growth of civi-
lisation, to the stimulation of intellectual activity,
to the cultivation of the social virtues, to the advance-
ment of civil and religious liberty, to the organisation
of men for political reform, and to the multiplication


of refined enjoyments, it must be regretfully acknow-
ledged that they are also prolific of vice and misery.
But to alleviate the one and lessen the sum or mitigate
the consequences of the other, individual or associated
benevolence finds, in the midst of a large population,
an ever-enlarging sphere for the exercise of its practical
beneficence. It has done so in Melbourne; and there
are few forms of immorality or suffering, for which
counteractive or remedial agencies have not been
provided, either by the liberality of the State, or by
the spontaneous efforts of zealous philanthropists.
Besides the Kew Asylum for the Insane, to which
reference has already been made, there -are as many as
nine hospitals or free dispensaries for the relief of
physical maladies in and around this city. There is
the Melbourne Hospital, in Lonsdale-street; the Alfred
Hospital, in the Malvern-road, Prahran; an Inebriates’
Retreat, at Northcote; a Lying-in Hospital in Made-
line-street, Carlton; a Hospital for Children, in
Rathdowne-street, Carlton; an Eye and Ear, and a
Homoeopathic Hospital, in Spring-street; and a free
medical dispensary in each of the populous suburbs of
Richmond and Collingwood. Besides these, there is a
Deaf and Dumb Institution, near St. Kilda; an
Asylum and School for the Blind, in the St. Kilda
Road; a Benevolent Asylum, in Hotham; a Mag-
dalen Asylum, with which are connected indus-
trial and reformatory schools for female children,
conducted by the sisterhood of the Convent of the
Good Shepherd, at Abbotsford; a Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals; two Orphan
Asylums,the one,Protestant, at Brighton, and the other,
Roman Catholic, at Emerald Hill; a Sailors’ Home, in
Spencer-street; a Victorian Humane Society; a Ship-
wreck Relief Society; an Immigrants’ Aid Society,
affording shelter and relief to destitute persons; a
Female Refuge in Madeline-street; a House of Mercy,
in connection with the Convent in Nicholson-street;
a Governess’s Institute and Melbourne Home, in Little


Lonsdale-street West; an Infant Asylum, a Ladies’
Benevolent Society and Industrial Home; a Jewish
Philanthropic Society; a Hebrew Ladies’ Benevolent
Society; and something like a dozen district visiting
societies organised by benevolent ladies.
Public Conveyances.
Excepting that Melbourne and its suburbs are still
unsupplied with tramways, for which the width of
the streets and their rectilinear direction offer special
facilities, few metropolitan cities are better supplied
with the means of locomotion than the capital of Vic-
toria. From one omnibus terminus in Elizabeth-street
South, thirteen lines diverge to the different suburbs;
the vehicles belonging to each line having a distinctive
band of colour around the roof, and exhibiting after
nightfall a lamp of the same colour on the near side.
They continue running up till eleven o’clock at night,
at one uniform fare of threepence. Other lines, be-
longing to the same company, have their terminus near
the General Post Office, in Bourke-street East, while
omnibuses for Sandridge leave the office of the com-
pany, near the theatres, in the same street. Indepen-
dently of these, there are omnibuses which meet every
train at the Spencer-street terminus of our trunk rail-
way system, and traverse the city from east to west,
conveying passengers as far as the suburb of Fitzroy.
There are cab-stands facing the Union Bank, and
Scott’s Hotel, Collins-street West, the Melbourne Club,
in Collins-street East, and others in Bussell, Bourke,
Elizabeth, Swans ton, and Flinders streets. Wherever
practicable, a sign-board at each stand indicates the
destination of those vehicles which ply regularly at
stated intervals to certain localities, the charge being
threepence per passenger, up till eleven at night, after
which the fares increase according to the lateness of
the hour Cabs and waggonettes will also be found at


the railway termini. The following table of fares
may be found useful to visitors from the country, or
from the adjoining colonies:—
By Distance —For one or two persons, any distance not exceeding
one mile, cab, Is. ; carriage, 2s. For every half-mile beyond, cab,
6d. ; carriage, Is. For three or more persons, double the foregoing
rates. Half-fare is allowed back when the distance is more than two
miles from the stand.
By Time —For the first hour, cab, 3s. ; carriage, 6s. Every sub-
sequent hour, cab, 2s. 6d. ; carriage, ss, For the day of, twelve
hours, cab, £1 10s. ; carriage, £3.
Fares for Cabs in connection with Victorian Railways.—
Ordinary Journey—To or from Victorian Railways and Royal Mail,
Bourke-street, via Collins-street, 3d.; do. Builders’Arms, Fitzroy,
6d.; double fare from 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. By the Hour—First hour,
35.; every subsequent fifteen minutes, 9d. By Distance—Not ex-
ceeding one mile, one or two persons, Is.; do., three or more persons,
25.; for every half-mile beyond first mile, half the rate per mile ;
half-fare back allowed when over two miles from stand. By the Day
—For any twelve hours between 5 a.m. and 10 p.m., 305.; for call-
ing cab off stand, and not employing same, Is.
To the more distant suburbs, coaches run twice, or
oftener, daily. Drays stand for hire at the Queen’s
Wharf, Flinders-street West, at the Hobson’s Bay
Railway Station, in Flinders-street east, and in Swan-
ston-street South, while furniture-vans have their sta-
tion in Bussell-street, between Great and Little Collins
streets. The rendezvous of the suburban carriers is the
Clarence Hotel, at the corner of Collins and Elizabeth
streets ; and the same kind of business is transacted on
the same basis as the London Parcels Delivery Com-
pany, by Messrs. W. M'Culloch and Co., of Collins-street
West.
Railways,
At present, all the northern, eastern and western
lines of railway have their terminus at the Spencer-
street Station; from whence they radiate outwards
like the spokes of a wheel, bringing the metropolis
into communication with almost every town of impor-
tance in the colony, and reaching to the confines of


New South Wales on the one hand and of South
Australia on the other. With Sydney there will
shortly be uninterrupted communication by railway;
and Adelaide will also be linked with Melbourne by
the iron horse, at no very remote period. The fares on
the various trunk lines approximate, as a general rule,
to two pence per mile, first-class, and three half-pence
per mile, second-class.
The railway station in Flinders-street, near Prince’s
Bridge, is the starting point of the Gippsland line, as
that which faces Elizabeth-street is the metropolitan
terminus of those which run to the various suburbs, —
Sandridge, Emerald Hill and St. Kilda, Richmond and
Hawthorn, South Yarra, Prahran, Windsor, Elstern-
wick and Brighton, Hawksburn, Toorak, Malvern,
Caulfield and Oakleigh. To and from all these places
trains run at short intervals throughout the day, and
up to a sufficiently late hour of the night, to admit of
visitors to the theatre and the various places of amuse-
ment returning to their homes by train, after the close
of the performance. The Legislative Assembly is the
only House of public entertainment which does not
finish in time to enable the spectators to get away by
the last train; but although the admission is free and
the scenes enacted are occasionally amusing, most
people prefer the theatres.
Clubs.
Melbourne contains four of these institutions; of
two of which mention has already been made, —the
Melbourne Club, in Collins-street East, and the Austra-
lian Club in William-street. The latter is of compara-
tively recent origin ; while the former is an outgrowth
of the Port Phillip Club, the earliest organisation of the
kind in Melbourne. Both of them, without being
rigorously exclusive, are judiciously discriminating
with respect to the admission of new members; hospit-


able to strangers of character and position ; and suffi-
ciently high in their entrance fees and subscription to
exclude undesirable applicants for membership, as also
to provide for those who do belong to them those
advantages which are enjoyed by the habitues of simi-
lar clubs in Europe and America. The Athenaeum
Club in Collins-street East is frequented by the pro-
fessional and mercantile classes, and the Yorick Club,
near the Argus office, assimilates in character to the
Garrick Club in London, before the latter had been so
largely invaded by swelldom.
The Suburbs of Melbourne.
A visitor to this city from the country, from the
adjoining colonies, or from Europe or the United
States, would depart from it with a very inadequate
idea of the size of Melbourne, of its populousness, of
the rapid progress it has made during the last five-and-
twenty years more particularly, and of the large
amount of prosperity diffused among its people, if
he omitted to visit its suburbs. The metropolis
of Melbourne is not so much a city, as a congeries
of cities, for around it cluster fifteen municipalities;
and while the population of Melbourne proper does
not amount to more than 70,000, that of the
contiguous cities and boroughs approaches very
nearly 180,000; so that something like a quarter of a
million of inhabitants are concentrated within what
may be called the metropolitan district, the area of
which exceeds that of London; and if it should ever
be covered by as dense a wilderness of brick and
mortar, Melbourne will be more thickly populated than
the capital of Great Britain is at this moment. In
the mean time, it may be not inaptly compared to the
London of Shakespeare’s days; when districts which
have been absorbed and assimilated by that “huge
wen,” since the beginning of the present century, were


detached and separated from it by breadths of meadow
land, orchards and gardens; by crofts and copses,
by cricket fields and fragments of ancient forests.
So, disconnected with the metropolis of Victoria, and
interspaced by tracts of greenery, some of which still
retain their sylvan character, lie many of the suburbs
which encircle Melbourne; and for five or six miles
in almost every direction, the explorer of its out-
skirts will find much to interest him, and much to
admire in the detached residences, many of them
erected in the midst of moderately sized parks, and
others embowered in shrubberies and pleasure-grounds,
which will meet his view wherever he turns.
The undulating nature of the country, not altogether
unlike that which overlooks the valley of the Thames,
lends itself advantageously to the designs of the archi-
tect and of the landscape gardener; and every eminence
—as for example, at Toorak, Malvern, Hawthorn,
Kew, and Studley—is covered with mansions, villas,
or pretty cottages; and as the reticulation of the water
supply of Melbourne has been extended to a wide
radius, the cultivation of flowers and shrubs has been
rendered practicable under circumstances in which it
would have been otherwise impossible; and thus the
aspect of the suburbs we have just enumerated is
verdant and blooming during the hottest and driest
months of the year. Side by side with the vegetation
of temperate regions, flourish the plants of semi-
tropical latitudes. Intermingled with the fiery flowers
of the pomegranate, the rich rose clusters of the ole-
ander, the milk-white blossoms of the orange-tree, the
stately beauty of the camellia bushes, and the lavish
blooms of the rhododendron, the magnolias may be
seen to
Feed the air with their great creamy flowers,
And show the wind their rusted under-leaf;
while the familiar flora of the mother-country, with all
its wmalth of national, poetical and domestic associa-
tions, enriches the gardens of the opulent classes, and


spreads “a light o£ laughing flowers” over the little
plot of ground surrounding the domicile of the cottager.
From the high ground in some of the eastern suburbs
of Melbourne, fine views can be obtained of the city
itself and its immediate surroundings, or of the out-
lying country. Studley Park and the Botanical
Gardens both command an extensive prospect of Mel-
bourne and suburbs; and the outlook from Prospect
Hill, Kew, and from Malvern, is exceedingly pictur-
esque. The former recalls, in many of its features, the
view of the valley of the Thames from Richmond Hill;
while the scene from Malvern is not altogether unlike
that which is visible from Herne Hill, on the one side
of London, and from Highgate Archway on the other;
due allowance being made for the difference in magni-
tude of the two cities, between which a comparison is
thus instituted. Altogether there are few capitals—
always excepting Sydney and Hobart Town, each of
which resembles a jewel that has been rendered
matchless by its exquisite setting—which are more
fortunate, with respect to the natural picturesqueness
of their suburbs, than the metropolis of Victoria is.
Salubrity of Melbourne.
Although little has yet been accomplished for the
sanitation of the city, and nothing whatever in the way
of drainage; while the self-indulgent habits of the im-
provident classes, resulting from the extraordinary
and unaccustomed prosperity which poured down
upon them like a flood after the discovery of the gold-
fields, have necessarily exercised an unfavourable in-
fluence upon their health, —the salubrity of Melbourne
and its suburbs will bear comparison with that of the
most highly favoured towns and cities in the mother-
country. The rate of mortality in the former, taking
the mean of six years, is 20.86 for each 1000 of the
population; whereas the annual deaths in twenty-one


of the most populous places in the United Kingdom is*
25.28 per 1000. In the better class of suburbs around
Melbourne, it falls as low as 15 per 1000; while in the
country districts, it is barely 9 per 1000; and there
can be little doubt that, when the laws of health are
better understood, and the principles of sanitary
science more rigorously applied to human habitations
and personal conduct, the mean rate of mortality in
Melbourne and its suburbs will be much reduced.
Country and Seaside Excursions.
When the visitor is tired of sight-seeing in Mel-
bourne, he will find plenty of pleasant “ out-
ings” available by railway, coach, or steamboat.
If he prefers a trip on the water, four shillings
will frank him to Geelong and back, and
in the summer months, steamers ply regularly to
Queenscliff, at the entrance of the Heads, and to
Sorrento, on the opposite side of the Bay. The railway
time-tables will furnish him with a list of the places
within an easy distance of the city, as also with the
fares payable, and with the time occupied by the
journey. A coach leaves the Albion Hotel daily at
eight in the morning, for Healesville, Fernshaw, and
Marysville, townships situated in the midst of a beau-
tiful chain of mountains which cover the greater part
of an entire county, and offer to the angler, the sports-
man, the lover of the picturesque, the artist and the
valetudinarian, opportunities for rest and recreation of
a varied and invigorating character. The scenery
resembles that of the Apennines, rather than that of
the Alps, having more of the amenity of the former
than of the austere grandeur of the latter. Virgin
forests, in which the timber attains an altitude of two,
three, or even four hundred feet, clothe the sides and
plume the summits of a succession of mountain ranges,
in the midst of which rise innumerable springs of clear


and ice-cold water, which hurry downward through
dense clusters of overarching trees and matted under-
wood, to unite with other runnels in forming rivulets to
serve as affluents of the Watts, which, in its turn, pours
its waters into the Yarra. The atmosphere is brilliantly
transparent, and fragrant with the balsamic odours of
the aromatic shrubs which find a congenial habitat
in the moist gullies; and wherever a bend of the road
enables you to obtain a glimpse of the valley you have
left behind you, you see it lying like a plain of emerald,
through which the river winds its way in silvery folds.
The tourist will find good accommodation at the inns
in Fernshaw and Marysville; and from these points,
excursions can be made to the various points of interest
in the neighbourhood.
The fern-tree gullies, on the Dandenong Ranges, can
be visited in a single day, if required, and constitute a
favourite place of resort for pic-nic parties during the
hottest of the summer months, when the coolness of
the temperature at that elevation, the umbrageous
character of the foliage, and the purity of the moun-
tain springs, which
Come from haunts of coot and hern,
And make a sudden sally;
And sparkle out among the fern,
To bicker down a valley,
combine to render the spot a refreshing retreat from
the glare of the sun and the heat of the city.
To those who may feel inclined for more extended
excursions, and who have plenty of time at their dis-
posal, we can recommend a visit to Lome, on the sea
coast, at the foot of the Cape Otway Ranges; to Sale
and the Gippsland Lakes; to Colac, Carnperdown,
Hamilton, and Warrnambool in the West; to Beech-
worth and the Buffalo Ranges in the North-east; to
Ballarat and Sandhurst, as the chief centres of mining
industry; to the Grampians, in the North-west; and to
Western Port and Phillip Island, in the South; each of
these districts being easily accessible by coach or rail.


THE
NATIONAL MUTUAL
JTife Association of Australasia
LIMITED.
ESTABLISHED AUGUST, 1869.
Registered under the “Life Assurance Companies Act ISISas
a Company having secured Assets in Victoria.
Pimtcrs;
MATTHEW LANG, Esq., Chairman.
G. D. CARTER, Esq., M.P., Vice-Chairman.
JAMES FERGUSSON, Esq., M.P.
RICHARD JACK, Esq.
Hon. EDWARD LANGTON.
THOMAS MOUBRAY, Esq., J.P.
ANDREW NEWELL, Esq.
JEtMral
J. ROBERTSON, M.D. \ P. MOLONEY, M.E.
JUtuary anfc (Secretary:
JOHN M. TEMPLETON, J.P., Fellow of the Institute of Actuaries
of Great Britain and Ireland.
HEAD OFFICE: No- 1 MARKET BUILDINGS
Collins Street West, Melbourne.


NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
77 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
Directors:
EDWARD CHISHOLM, Esq. (Brown <b Co.), Chairman.
A. A. SMITH, Esq., Merchant.
D. G. E. ALSOP, Esq. (Harbottle, Biddulph & Alsop).
Resident Secretary:
HENRY F. FRANCIS.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH.
WAYMOUTH STREET, ADELAIDE.
Directors:
Hon. JOHN CARR, Chairman.
ALFRED BALLANTYNE, Esq. (Marwood <& Co.)
JOHN GORDON, Esq. (I). IV. Murray.)
WILLIAM JAMES MAG ARE Y, Esq., M.P.
H. C. E. MUECKE, Esq., J.P., German Vice-Consul.
Resident Secretary:
JOHN C. MINNS.
NEW ZEALAND BRANCH.
TEMPLE CHAMBERS,
FEATHERSTON STREET, WELLINGTON.
Directors;
EDWARD PEARCE, Esq., J.P., Chairman.
Hon. P. A. BUCKLEY, M.L.C.
R. M. GREENFIELD, Esq.
WILLIAM H. LEVIN, Esq., M.H.R.
JAMES SMITH, Esq.
Resident Secretary:
THOMAS SWAIN.
TASMANIA.
No. 1 DAYEY STREET, HOBART TOWN
General Agent for the Colony of 'Tasmania:
W. A. WEYMOUTH.


ESTABLISHMENT.
iHE establishment of the National Mutual
Life Association, in the year 1869, marked
a new era in the history of Life Assurance
practice. Up to that year all the Offices
**■ transacting Life Assurance business in the
colonies, did so on the old-fashioned principle that a
Policy should be null and void if any Premium re-
mained unpaid for the space of thirty days after it
was due. The injustice of this principle had been
recognised in the United States of America previous
to March, 1859, for in that month the Insurance
Commissioners of the State of Massachusetts urged
upon the Legislature the passage of a law to prevent
the forfeiture of policies for non-payment of premium
until the policy-holder had been insured for the term
equivalent to the value of the premiums previously
paid to the office. The efforts of the Commissioners
were ultimately successful, and the Massachusetts law
was passed in the early part of 1861. In drafting the
first prospectus of the National Mutual Life
Association, Mr. J. M. Templeton carefully con-
sidered the provisions of the Massachusetts law, and
discovered that the forfeiture of the policy was not
prevented but merely postponed by its operation. He
proposed, therefore, as a really effective non-forfeiture
clause, that a condition should be inserted in the
policies of the National Mutual, that when default
is made in the payment of a premium, and the
surrender value of the policy is sufficient to pay such
premium, then the Directors shall pay the premium,
and keep the policy in force for the benefit of the
person assured; the premium so paid remaining as a


debt against the policy, to be repaid, with interest at
the rate of 8 per cent, per annum, for the time during
which it remains a debt. The promoters adopted this
condition, and thus inaugurated a new era in the
practice of Life Assurance.
The Massachusetts law respecting forfeiture of
policies was a great stride in advance of the old
system, inasmuch as it secured to the policyholder a
further term of insurance after he had made default in
the payment of renewal premium; but the penalty for
default still remained the same—the absolute for-
feiture of the policy—except that the forfeiture was
fixed at a future date more or less remote from the
date of default according to the number of premiums
previously paid on the policy.
The National Mutual Non-Forfeiture Clause is an
immense improvement on the Massachusetts law, for
under its provisions not only is the policy kept in
force after default in paying the renewal premium,
but all the rights of the policyholder (including that
of renewal) are conserved until the surrender value of
the policy is exhausted, and this without any previous
a]>plication from the policyholder.
The sole credit attaching to the introduction of this
liberal principle into Life Assurance practice belongs
to Mr. J. M.Templeton, F.1.A., the actuar} r and secretary
of this office, who was the originator of the non-
forfeiture clause above referred to.
The introduction of this principle into the practice
of Life Assurance was in itself sufficient warrant for
the establishment of the National Mutual; but there
were other reasons which induced the promoters to
launch the institution. No attempt had previously
been made to establish a Mutual Life Assurance Office
in the colony of Victoria, and the only office professing
to assure lives on mutual principles within the colony
was conducted on principles very much at variance
with the true idea of Mutual Assurance. Not only did
the policies of that office contain the usual stringent


condition as to forfeiture to be found in the policies of
other companies, but in addition thereto, they con-
tained the unusual condition that the policy should be
null and void if the person assured were to die from
disease or injury the result of intemperance, or if it
were proved to the satisfaction of the board of direc-
tors, that the person assured had become of intem-
perate habits. In addition to this, their rule as to the
mode of dividing profits was very inequitable—giving
certain classes of members much larger bonuses than
their contributions warranted, to the manifest loss of
the other members. In other words, some of the
members received less than they were entitled to, in
order that other members might receive more. The
rule adopted by the National Mutual, and embodied
in the Articles of Association, was that the profits
should be divided among the members in proportion
to their contributions thereto. The principles of
Mutual Assurance w r ere strictly observed from the
first inception of the institution, no advantages being
given to the first members, who were admitted on
exactly the same terms as those upon which new
members may now enter.
Thus was the National Mutual Life Association
established—the first Mutual Office in the colony of
Victoria, and the first office in the world to introduce
into life policies a really effective non-forfeiture clause
for the protection of those who may omit to pay their
renewal premiums. Its great success up to the present
time has proved the soundness of its basis and the
equity of its principles, and the business has now been
extended to the other Australian colonies.
In framing the Articles of Association, reference was
made to the experience of the best life offices in Great
Britain and the United States of America, and wher-
ever a sound and liberal feature was found it was
adopted. The result is that the National Mutual
has been enabled to combine in one office all the
advantages to assurers which have been proved to be


consistent with security, and at the same time to
hedge the institution round with all the safeguards
which have been found necessary to stability and
success.
RATES OF PREMIUM.
The Tables at the end of this book contain the
Minimum Rates of Premium for unexceptionable lives
of the various ages specified. Healthy lives, who may
be engaged in hazardous occupations, or whose personal
or family history may disclose slightly unfavourable
circumstances, will be accepted at a higher rate of
premium.
AGE NEAREST BIRTHDAY.
The ages of Members are determined by the birth-
day nearest to the date of entry. In other Offices ages
are determined by the next succeeding birthday. Thus
a person aged thirty years and five months, would be
charged the Premium at age thirty, while in other
Offices he would be charged the rate at age thirty-one.
IMPORTANT SPECIAL FEATURE.
Careful inquiry is made by the Directors before
accepting proposals for Life Assurance, and every case
is decided on its merits. Should a proposal be ac-
cepted at a higher rate of Premium than the ordi-
nary rate for age, the Proposer will have the 'option
of paying his premiums at the ordinary rate for
age according to the tables; his Policy will then be


endorsed with a contingent debt equal to the present
value of the extra Premium sought to be charged.
£d o
This debt will be deducted from the sum assured if
the Member die under the average age, but if he attain
CD O 1
the average age the debt will be expunged, and he
will then be precisely in the same position as if he
had, in the first instance, been accepted without any
addition. By the operation of this feature no Member
is under the necessity of paying an extra Premium
throughout life on account of some physical defect
which he may outgrow, or some circumstance of family
history which may never affect him.
NON-FORFEITURE POLICIES.
In 1869, when it was announced that the Association
about to be established would apply the surrender
value of Policies in the payment of Premiums which
might be overdue from any cause whatever, and thus
keep the Policies in force for the benefit of the Policy-
holders, many persons took alarm at this evidence of
liberality on the part of a new office, and prophesied
utter failure. The promoters of the Association were
prepared for opposition to this feature, as it had never
previously been adopted by any Company or Society
doing Life Assurance business in these colonies, nor, so
far as could be ascertained, had it ever been adopted
by any Life Assurance Office in the world.
By an express condition, endorsed upon all its
Policies, and not dependent upon ambiguous statements
in circulars or prospectuses, this Association secures its
Members from all liability to loss arising from inability
to continue the payment of Premiums. By this condi-
tion a Policy is not allowed to lapse for the non-pay-
ment of Premium so long as it has a surrender value
sufficient to pay the Premium overdue, but the Direc-
tors are bound to pay the Premium out of the surren-


der value, and for this accommodation Members pay
interest at the rate of eight per cent, per annum.
As an illustration, J. W. P. assured his life in this
Office for £2OO in September, 1860, and paid his
Premiums regularly until December, 1872, when by
some means he forgot to pay the quarter’s Premium
then due, and the days of grace were allowed to expire
without payment being made. The Policy had a sur-
render value of about £5, and out of it the Directors of
the Association paid the Premium overdue, and the
Policy was thus kept in force. J. W. P. died, and his
widow received the full amount of the Policy, £2OO,
less the Premium advanced by the Directors, and one
shilling for interest thereupon.
The following is even a more striking illustration of
the beneficence of the non-forfeiture principle:—J. M.
assured his life with the National Mutual Life Associa-
tion in 1869, and paid his Premiums regularly until
March, 1877, by which time he had contributed sixteen
half-yearly payments, amounting to £97 13s. 4d.
Owing, however, to the failure of his crops in-three
successive years, he was unable to pay any further
Premiums, and died on 27th April, 1880. Up to that
date six half-yearly Premiums had become due and
remained unpaid, but the surrender value was sufficient
to keep the policy in force, and at his death his widow
received payment of £536 4s. Bd., as under:—
Sum assured ... ... ... £5OO 0 0
Bonus additions ... ... ... 76 18 5
£576 18 5
Less overdue Premiums ... £36 12 6
Interest thereon ... 4 1 3
40 13 9
£536 4 8
Thus, although no Premiums had been paid to the
Office for three years, the whole of the amount
originally assured, and £36 4s. Bd. besides, was paid to
the widow.


PROOF OF AGE.
Proof of Age must be furnished to the Directors, but
this is not insisted on previous to acceptance of the
risk. No preliminary difficulties are placed in the
way of immediate assurance, and persons assuring are
protected against mistakes. A Policy is not made
void by a misstatement of age, but by a specific con-
dition endorsed on all Policies, the amount assured and
bonus additions, equivalent to the actual Premiums
paid, are payable to the representatives of any deceased
Member who may have understated his age.
The age of persons assured will be admitted at any
time, on reasonable proof being submitted.
SURRENDER OF POLICIES.
If any Member, whose Policy has been in force for
two years, should, from any cause, wish to discontinue
the payment of Premiums, he may surrender his Policy
to the Association, and receive the surrender value of
the same in cash, or, in lieu thereof, he may receive a
paid-up Policy of equivalent value, such Policy being
exempt from the payment of Premiums, and entitled
to participate in the Profits. The surrender value of
Policies is fixed by the Directors, and may be ascer-
tained by application to the Secretary, on payment of
a fee of five shillings, which will be returned should
the surrender be carried through.
PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
Liberality in Settlement of Claims is a marked
characteristic of the Association. As there are no
Shareholders to share in its profits, interests adverse
to Policyholders cannot possibly arise, the Directors
simply occupying the position of arbitrators between


the Members, with no inducement to take from one
and give to another.
All Claims are payable within three calendar months
after the receipt of notice of the death of the person
assured, on satisfactory proof being given. In proving
the death of a Member, statutory declarations are
required upon forms furnished by the Association, from
the physician attending the deceased as to the cause of
death, and from a personal friend or acquaintance as to
the identity of deceased with the person assured. An
extract from the Register of Deaths, attested by the
Registrar-General of the colony in which the death took
place, must also be furnished. Instances may occur
wherein strictl}' legal proof cannot be obtained. In such
cases the Directors will receive as satisfactory such
reasonable evidence as a prudent man would require in
the payment of his own funds.
The practice of the Association is to pay claims
thirty days after satisfactory proof is given.
PROTECTION FROM CREDITORS.
The Directors call special attention to the following
extract from “ The Life Assurance Companies Act,
1873,” lately passed by the Victorian Legislature: —
Clause 37. —“ The property and interest of any
person, to the extent of One Thousand Pounds in the
whole, in any Policy or Policies of Assurance on his
own life, shall not be subject to be seized or taken in
execution under the process of any court, and, in the
event of the insolvency of such person, shall not vest
in the assignee or trustees of his estate, unless such
insolvency occurs within two years after the date of
the Policy, and on the death of such person shall not
be assets for the payment of his debts; but if he die
within two years after the date of the Policy, a por-
tion of the sum Assured, equal to the amount of Pre-
miums actually paid, shall be assets for the payment


of his debts. In this section the term insolvency
includes liquidation by arrangement and composition
with creditors under any Act now or hereafter to be
in force.”
From the above extract it will be seen that a Policy
of Assurance of an amount not exceeding One Thou-
sand Pounds (£1000) is not subject to the control of
creditors, and is not affected by the insolvency of the
Policy holder, unless such insolvency occurs within
two years after the date of the Policy. This great
boon, conferred by the Act of Parliament before re-
ferred to, adds much to the security of Life Assurance
as a provision for one’s family. A somewhat similar
provision is made by the laws of Tasmania and New
Zealand, and it is hoped that the Legislatures of the
other colonies will soon be induced to give the same
protection.
SETTLEMENT POLICIES.
This form of Policy has now for the first time been
introduced into the Australian Colonies. A husband
may effect an Assurance by which the Association will
undertake at his death to pay the interest of the sum
assured to his widow during her life, and at her
decease to divide the amount equally among his
children, or their representatives, or in whatever way
the Policy may set forth. The rate of interest to be
allowed to the widow will be determined by the
average rate realised on the whole funds of the Asso-
ciation from year to year; thus, if in any year after
the falling in of a Policy, the funds of the Association
should yield an average rate of 8 per cent., the widow
would receive 7 per cent, interest on the amount of
the Assurance.
This Application of Life Assurance commends itself
to persons desirous of making a safe and inexpensive
settlement for the benefit of their families.


No. of
Age at
Amount
Bonuses
Total Amount
Policy,
Entry.
Assured.
Added.
now Assured.
£
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
12
23
500
95
3
1
595
3
1
8
30
1000
183
10
1
1183
10
1
13
36
200
35
0
3
235
0
3
5
40
1000
172
13
6
1172
13
6
9
45
1000
168
6
10
1168
6
10
41
52
200
34
12
6
234
12
6
POLICIES IN FORCE
FOR FIVE YEARS,
351
17
200
23
8
6
223
8
6
332
22
500
56
7
10
556
7
10
406
30
200
21
10
4
221
10
4
346
35
1000
100
19
10
1100
19
10
368
42
500
49
6
5
549
6
5
446
53
200
20
14
7
220
14
7
SECOND INVESTIGATION AND DIVISION
OF PROFITS.
The second Actuarial Investigation of the affairs of
the Association was made at 30th September, 1877.
As the result of this investigation, the sum of
£lO,OOO was divided among the Members whose
Policies were dated previous to Ist October, 1876. At
the First Investigation in 1874, the sum of £3,098
13s. 4d. was divided among the Members whose
Policies were dated previous to Ist October, 1873. Up
to the end of the eighth year, therefore, the amount
divided among the Members was £13,098 13s. 4d., and
the following are examples of the Reversionary Bonuses
which have been added to Policies.
. SPECIMENS OF REVERSIONARY BONUSES ADDED TO POLICIES.
TABLE I.—Assurances for the Whole Term of Life.
POLICIES IN FORCE FOR EIGHT YEARS.


The number of Policies issued in each of the ten
years, the amounts assured, and the Annual Premium
income derivable therefrom, are exhibited in the
following;—
SUMMARY OF NEW BUSINESS TRANSACTED.
YEAR.
No, of
Policies
Issued.
Amount
Assured.
Annual Premiums.
85,400
32,450
60,670
92,780
108,200
270,722
161,000
202,250
245,565
488,420
£ s. d.
2,978 16 4
1,205 12 8
1,995 14 3
3,028 2 6
3,736 16 3
10,390 15 6
6,126 2 3
7,145 10 4
8,354 6 6
16,622 12 3
Single
Premium.
£ s. d.
Nil.
Nil.
Nil.
Nil.
INCREASE OF RESOURCES.
57 9 0
138 18 7
The Net Funds and Revenue have increased
the ten years as shown below
YEAR.
Funds.
1869 20th August (commencement)
1870 — 30th September
1871 „
1872 „
1873 „
1874 „
1875 ~ ~
1876 ~ ~
1877 „
18/8 ~ ~
1879 „
£ s. d.
781 3 5
2,283 IS 2
3,873 4 11
8,585 17 11
15,464 16 9
22,768 8 10
33,159 15 10
53,470 8 10
71,210 9 11
95,201 16 10
during
Annual Revenue.
£ S. d.
436 8 9
2,739 8 10
3,650 18 8
5,546 11 5
8,635 17 4
12,068 4 2
22,041 10 3
27,006 12 6
31,712 16 3
37,565 3 10
52,026 3 8


LOAN DEPARTMENT .
Loans on Policies. —The Directors are prepared to
lend to Members of the Association, on the security of
their Policies, any sum they may require from £5 up-
wards, but not to exceed nine-tenths of the surrender
value. A loan may be effected without formal appli-
cation to the Directors, by simply depositing the
Policy at the Head Office, the Secretary being em-
powered to advance the money at once. Interest will
be payable quarterly until the Principal is repaid.
Members’ Policies must have been in force for at least
two years before they can participate in this privilege.
Loans on Policies with Personal Security.—
Loans from £5O to £5OO, on Policies and approved per-
sonal security, will be granted by the Directors to per-
sons insuring their lives with the Association. The
Borrower must insure his life for double the amount of
the loan, and must find three persons to make them-
selves jointly and severally liable for the repayment
of the loan, with interest, and for the payment of Pre-
miums on the Policy. The loan must be repaid by
quarterly instalments (including principal and interest)
extending over any term not exceeding three years.
Forms of application may be obtained at the Head
Office, or at any of the Branch Offices of the Associ-
ation.
Loans on Mortgage. —The Directors will entertain
applications for Loans on Mortgage of Freehold Pro-
perty for fixed periods, at current rates of interest,
from any persons, whether Members of the Association
or not. At the option of the Borrower the Principal
may be repaid by quarterly instalments along with
the Interest.


TABLE 1 -
Premiums Payable During the Whole Term of Life, for the Assurance of £100, Payable After Death.
With full participation in Profits.
Or by Instalments.
Age.
Or by Instalments.
Age.
Yearly.
Half-Yearly.
Quarterly.
Half-Yearly.
Quarterly.
d
W
o
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
S.
d.
£
s.
d.
cj
16
1
13
7
0
17
2
0
8
8
39
2
19
9
1
10
G
0
15
5
5
17
I
14
4
0
17
G
0
8
10
40
3
1
6
1
11
5
0
15
11
18
1
15
1
0
17
11
0
9
1
41
3
3
6
1
12
5
0
1G
5
19
1
15
11
0
18
4
0
9
3
42
3
5
6
1
13
5
0
1G
11
20
1
l(j
9
0
18
9
0
9
6
43
3
7
8
1
14
G
0
17
6
O
21
1
17
7
0
19
2
0
9
8
44
3
9
11
1
15
8
0
18
1
22
1
18
5
0
19
7
0
9
11
45
3
12
4
1
1G
11
0
18
8
k;
23
1
19
4
1
0
1
0
10
2
46
3
14
11
1
18
3
0
19
4
24
2
0
3
1
0
7
0
10
5
47
3
17
8
1
19
9
1
0
1
t>
25
2
1
3
1
1
1
0
10
8
48
4
0
7
2
1
3
1
0
10
o
26
2
2
3
1
1
7
0
10
11
49
4
3
9
2
2
10
1
1
8
f
27
2
3
4
1
2
1
0
11
2
50
4
7
2
2
4
5
1
2
6
28
2
4
5
1
2
8
0
11
5
51
4
10
10
2
6
4
1
3
4
d
29
2
5
6
1
3
3
0
11
9
52
4
14
10
2
8
4
1
4
G
w
30
2
6
8
1
3
10
0
12
1
53
4
19
2
2
10
7
1
5
7
d
31
2
7
11
1
4
5
0
12
4
54
5
3
11
2
13
0
1
6
10
32
2
9
2
1
5
1
0
12
8
55
5
9
1
2
15
7
1
8
2
d
33
2
10
6
1
5
9
0
13
0
56
5
14
6
2
18
5
1
9
7
tr*
HH
34
2
11
10
1
6
5
0
13
4
57
6
0
1
3
1
3
1
11
0
*5
35
2
13
3
1
7
2
0
13
9
58
6
6
0
3
4
3
1
12
6
Q
36
2
14
9
1
7
11
0
14
2
59
6
12
3
3
7
6
1
14
2
o
37
2
16
4
1
8
9
0
14
7
60
6
18
10
3
10
10
1
15
11
38
2
18
0
1
9
7
0
15
0
61
7
5
11
3
14
5
1
17
8
Example.— A Man, aged 38, can
Insure his Life for £500 by the payment of £14 10s. every year during his life.
This premium
may be paid by Half-yearly instalments of £7
7s. lid., or by Quarterly instalments of £3 15s.


ASSURANCE PAYABLE DURING LIFE.
TABLE IV.
Endowment Assurances.
Annual Premiums for the Assurance of £lOO, Payable at the
Ayes of 33, 40, 43 and 30, or sooner in the event of Death,
WITH FULL PARTICIPATION IN PROFITS
or
Death.
or
Death.
Death.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. cl.
4 15 11
2 19 1
2 9 9
5 2 4
3 1 10
2 11 9
5 9 6
3 4 9
2 13 10
5 17 7
3 8 0
2 16 1
6 6 8
3 11 5
2 IS 6
6 17 0
3 15 1
3 1 1
7 8 10
3 19 2
3 3 10
8 2 6
4 3 7
3 6 10
8 18 6
4 8 4
3 10 0
9 17 5
4 13 8
3 13 6
4 19 6
3 17 3
5 5 11
4 1 3
5 13 2
4 5 8
6 1 2
4 10 6
6 10 3
4 15 10
7 0 7
5 1 8
7 12 5
5 8 1
8 6 1
5 15 4
9 2 1
6 3 5
10 1 0
6 12 6
7 2 10
7 14 8
8 8 4
9 4 4
10 3 3
Example. —A Man, aged 22, may take out a Policy for £3OO, payable to himself at
the age of 40, or to his heirs if he die before attaining that age, by paying
£l5 12s. every year until the Policy is paid.


g
• . I j'#H3OKITt(NM«OH(XINCONOOIOO)^O
?. X; “ -H rtH l-H
g pg . 10 co h 10 cj cc oo cc co h -h os j~- t-- oo o eo oo co to
~hH rH rtr HrH -£ :
*. rtH ■«
® £
(C . r jOOt'CONCOOt'OI'®O®I'O
p X! i-H O
iH _ -g to
ffl § ; : ; ; : ®
•e CD Q “ r-H l-H HH r-l ,-H rt I-H t®
fc 'rt tit H JO lO «5 U 5 CD CO t- 00 05 05 O -h>
w c i-H ce
(/) ®
M S • „: f® 05 OO)HC:CO ID CO d
neg 5 ** I
9 ® .t-MHOStcißOtf OO ; : ; : ; : ; : ; : &
Z ®Q " g
lJ g SrtiOlOCOffifflt-000000 S
ii- cc sS I! n
—_ C o
-J ,J »SC . jiKNOOIX f
r cn «© £ w t
g W Jo I *' a ZZ' a ' a i I ; : : : : : |
b tflt-MltlftO s
O ° I-H a
r P ►
Q C tS §
Z <! g g
Uj [jJ-SPh
CQ s - *
. _!HWiotHOWtHOfflHej®«wn«s«i-t«us g
s - 1 ®
n' O (-rS pg .00-H(MCO1CCOOO05-IINHco 00 O <M Ht t- 05 (M cs
Q Is N fi -•-•
Uj 7 H? g «rt I-H Ol (M <N Ol (M (M <M (M (M (N <M (M O) CO CO CO CO CC SC ®
C-3 ~ . £
w 'KJg
I ®-g . •OOOTfONOIOHHOOHINtHHOOIHMO t-
Cc . g § tg ~ HH HH I-H l-H hHhHhh^«
■> hD *0 S g 1
— |
co S® g «
W ? •S
J «t H XI
. uj
UJ e ® £ M
<1 s « Og .Iot-CSONT)|®OCIHC>:®O>«US 00CKOH®H "g
J_ CO p m HHHHH i-H hH rH rH hh g)
,o t crt(MiM(M(N<N(M!MC<iccroececcocccortH'ii<H : tirii l c
H-I ° g
2 " S
Si Og tc
r O r-H r-i rH
r Ph
r b a
3
I H
S g TH 0} CO rt< OCD 00 05 O *-< 01 CO OCOINOO OS O
H 4? OiOiOIOiOiDiOiOiOJCOCOCOCOCOWCOCOcOCOrf


Age next
Birthday.
At Age 14.
At Age 18.
At Age 21.
Age next
Birthday.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
1
6
1
10
4
6
0
3
8
3
1
2
6
14
8
4
13
5
3
13
7
2
3
7
9
8
5
1
9
3
19
6
3
4
8
7
9
5
11
2
4
6
0
4
5
9
9
8
6
2
2
4
13
4
5
6
10
17
1
6
14
10
5
1
7
6 !
7
12
12
3
7
9
10
5
11
I
7
8
14
19
1
8
7
9
6
2
0
8
9
18
4
7
9
9
8
6
14
8
9
10
10
17
1
7
9
8
10
11
12
12
2
8
7
7
11
12
14
19
0
9
9
6
12
13
18
4
6
10
16
10
13 !
14
12
12
0
14 |
15
14
18
10
15
16
IS
4
4
16 1
N.B. —The above Annual Premiums may be paid by Half-Yearly nr Quarterly Instal-
ments, of the same relative proportions as shown in Table I.
Example.— A Father may secure for his Son, now aged three, a Business Capital of
£1000. payable on his attaining the age of 21, by IS Annual Payments of
£39 15s. Should the Son die before attaining the age of 21, all the Premiums
paid will be returned.
TABLE B,
Endowments for Children.
Annual Premiums to Secure an Endowment of £lOO
ON THE LIFE OF A CHILD,
Payable on his Attaining the Ages of 14, 18 and 21,
WITH THE RETURN OF ALL PREMIUMS
Paid in the event of Death under the specified ages.
RETURNABLE SCALE,
WITH PARTICIPATION IN PROFITS.


TABLE C.
Immediate Annuity.
Payable Half-Yearly, which will he granted for every £lOO paid
to the Association .
■WITHOUT PARTICIPATION
PROFITS.
Age last
Birthday.
Males.
Males.
Females.
£ s. d.
6 14 2
£ s. d.
10 4 5
10 10 5
10 16 10
11 3 8
11 11 0
11 18 10
12 7 2
12 16 1
13 5 7
13 15 8
14 6 5
14 17 11
15 10 3
16 3 6
16 18 1
17 14 1
18 11 7
19 10 7
20 11 1
21 12 11
22 15 9
£ s. d.
9 1 10
6 15 8
9 6 11
6 17 3
9 12 5
6 18 II
9 18 5
7 0 10
10 4 II
7 2 11
10 11 11
7 5 3
10 19 5
7 7 10
11 7 6
7 10 8
11 16 3
7 13 8
12 5 8
7 16 10
12 15 9
8 0 2
13 6 6
8 3 8
13 18 0
8 7 4
14 10 4
8 112
15 3 9
8 15 2
15 18 4
8 19 4
16 14 5
9 3 9
17 12 3
9 8 5
18 12 1
9 13 5
19 12 5
9 18 9
8 17 1
20 13 9
NOTE.—The above Annuities are paid by instalments on the Ist day of January and
July in each year, commencing from the date of purchase, and ending vrith the
payment last preceding the death of the Annuitant.
Exampl*.— For an immediate payment of £5OO the Association will grant an
Annuity of £45 !)s. 2d., payable in equal portions Half-yearly, during the life
of a female aged 60 last birthday.


VICTORIA
Head Office : 1 Market Buildings
Alexandra ... T. Hall.
Alberton
W. R. King.
Ararat ... J. M‘Gibbony.
Avoca E. Kelley.
Ballarat ... J. W. Rail.
Bairnsdale
F. Pitts.
Beaufort
J. A. C. Wilson.
Belfast
G. W. Osburne.
Benalla
G. W. Hall.
Beechworth ... Jas. Ingram.
Bright $ j - J - Cunning-
bright ... ham.
Buninyong
J. Milner.
Camperdown .
J. H. Robinson.
Casterton
F. D’Amaral.
Castlemaine
J. A. James.
Oarisbrook
H. C. Clarkson.
Chbwton
T. Templeton.
Chiltern
J. T. Webb.
Clunes F. J. Mathews.
Creswick .. R. Barnes.
Colac J. Parkinson.
Coleraine ... James Bailey.
Cooper’s Creek
W. K. Borradale.
Craigie
T. R. L. Austin.
Dandenong ... M. Macpherson.
I W. G. Stephen-
Drouin son.
Daylesford
F. Rotanzi.
Dunolly
James Bell.
Donald
W. Sutcliff.
Eaglehawk
Hay Kirkwood.
E. Charlton ...
E. H. Miles.
Echuca E. Jones.
El Dorado ... G. A. Fealy.
Euroa ... ... Eli Johnson.
Geelong ... J. M. Anderson.
Hamilton
H. J. Bloomfield.
Heathcote
H. W. Fuller.
Horsham ... J. Cannington.
Hurdle Flat ... H. Robinson.
Inglewood
H. Macarthur.
Kyneton
G. A. Steinmeyer
Kilmore
J. Taylor.
Murtoa
Penshurst
Portland
Rochford
Rokewood
Taradale
Wat, hall a
Wodonga
Yambuk
LIST OF AGENTS.
Maryborough
Portarlington
Smythesdale
Tarnagulla
Warrnambool
WILLIAMSTOWN
!, Collins-street West, Melbourne.
Kirkstall ... T. R. Kean.
Koroit... ... F. Norman.
Kerang ... W. J. Davey.
Majorca ... T. R. L. Austin.
Maldon ... Thos. Hannay.
Mansfield \ Player and
( Kitchen.
A. Lowenstein.
Hampton and
Moe ... \ r ramp ton
( Brooke.
Mooroopna 1 Rev - W - Thom-
( son.
W. W. Martin.
Mortlake ... T. Montgomery.
Newbridge ... H. H. Fellows.
T. Smith.
T. M'Conachie.
D. M‘Andrew.
Queenscliff ... 0. C. Simpson.
Rochester j G ', F ' Chamber-
j lam.
J. Edwards.
C. W. Stanbrook.
Runnymede T. R. Rigbye,
Rupanyup ... W. Gust.
Rocky Lead ... 0. C. Phillips.
St. Arnaud ... W. L. Dash.
Sale G. Chapman, jun.
Sandhurst ... R. B. Fletcher.
H. Proctor.
Stawell .. W‘. J. Vance.
Shepparton j ">
T. W. Orwiu.
Thos. Comrie.
Traralgon ... T. J. Mattingley.
Terang ... M. Lang.
Wangaratta ... C. A. Rundle.
Walter Davies.
R. H. Cowl.
W. L. Ferrin.
A. Fredman.
T.C. P. Yockins.


Booligal |
Garrett and
Clancy.
Braidwood ...
G. F. Taylor.
Cahcoar
J. N. Corry.
CoGMA
J. E. P. Walker.
COROWA
A. A. Piggin.
COOTAMITNDRA...
E. Strongitharm.
COWRA
D. C. J. Donnelly.
Deniliquin ...
F. Harrison.
Dubbo
T. W. Heaydon.
Albury ... E. E. Morgan.
Armidale ... Charles Wilson.
Balranald ... Bowring Bros.
Bathurst ... J. M‘Phillamy.
Bingera ... J. Connolly,
Blayney \ Sa ™P s ° n and
( Perkins.
Boggabri ... 0. Haussmann.
Forbes... | Moore Bros, and
Goulburn ... W. Haymore,
Grafton ... T. Page.
Glen Innes ... Frank Marshall.
Grenfell ... J. L. Waugh.
Gol Gol ... W. B. Bradshaw.
SOUTH
Branch Office
Aberdeen and
Kooringa W. Pearce.
Angaston ... J. Heggie.
Booleroo
(Centre) ... C. Dyer.
~ r „ ( Carroll and Ful-
Border Town j larton-
Crystal Brook Wm. Carman.
Clarendon .. M. M ‘ Askill.
Currency Creek P. Kemp.
Edithburgh ... O. F. J. llechner.
Freeling j G - H - Lohr -
I mann.
Gawler ... J. T. Barker.
Gladstone ... J. E. Meylan.
Greenock ... J. A. G. Schache.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Branch Office: 77 Pitt-street, Sydney.
AUSTRALIA.
W 7 ay mouth-street.
Adelaide.
Gundagai ... S. Taylor.
Gunnedah ... J. J. Smyth.
jj VY 1 W. Turnbull and
/ Co.
Hillston ... C. H. Eorwood.
Howlong ... W. B. Wragge.
Inverell ... J. B. Brown.
Maitland ... C. F. Soiling.
Molong ... C. H. Evans.
Narrabri ... 0. Haussmann.
Narrandera ... A. J. S. Wehr,
Newcastle ... Joseph Creer.
Orange ... Josiah Parker.
Patterson ... W. Keppie.
Singleton ... J. Hutchison.
Tamworth ... A. Johnstone.
Tenterfield ... C. Geldart.
Tumut T. H. Corcoran.
Wagga Wagga Mair & Clayton.
Wellington ... S. Howie.
Wentworth ... Bowring Bros.
Wollombi ... J. H. Jones.
Wollongong ... D. M. Campbell.
Young ... { 'f™."*
Morphett Vale J. Hughes.
Meadows ... W. Ellis.
Morgan ... G. W. Chalklen.
Moculta ... H. E, Hentschke.
Mt. Barker ... A. Sexton.
Nairne A. Dunn.
Narracoorte ... W. M‘Eae, J.P.
Normanville ... J. Cornish.
Port Adelaide Capt. Brinsden.
Port Pirie ... James Port.
Port Broughton T. Baulderstone.
Port Augusta S. J. Mitchell.
Port M ‘Donnell Richard Jones.
Port Wallaroo J. T. Keats.
Port Victor ... W. H. Smith.
I Quokn ... ... T. H. Harris.


SOUTH
AUSTRALlA— continued.
Happy Valley Jno. Gibson.
Hallett ... P. Gillespie.
Hoyleton ... Jas. Johnson.
Kadina T. Ey.
Kingston ... Alex. Anderson,
Laura ... ... E. H. Gliddon.
Lucindale ... F. P. Ritchie.
Moonta J. Hocking.
Melrose ... J. W. Saunders.
~ ( Thos. Baulder-
Mundoora | stone .
Maitland ... B. Francis.
Mt. Gambier ... Barrett Bros.
NEW
ZEALAND.
Red Hill ... Wm. Bowden.
Strathalbyn ... C. Thomas.
Semaphore ... G. F. Ward.
Summertown ... W. H. Sitters.
Tanunda ... H. Hoffmann.
Warner Town H. Keightley.
Willunga ... C. Lipson.
Woodchester... C. J. Leonard.
Wonoka Cjrf.ek G. Jackson.
I G. E. Thread
Yongala j gold>
Yankalilla ... J. Cornish.
Branch Office: Temple Chambers,
Featherston-street, Wellington.
General Agents, with Sub-Agents in the various parts of their
Districts;
Ashburton ... S. Saunders, Ashburton.
. -vr \ John Milne (Milne & White), Queen-
Auckland and the North j street; Au^klailtL
Christchurch and North ( Acland, Campbell and Co., Hereford -
Canterbury ... ( street, Christchurch.
Dunedin and Central
Otago ... ... ... R. H, Leary, Princes-street, Dunedin.
Greytown Walter Bock, Greytown.
Hokitika and Westland ..
Invercargill and South- j Thomas Brodrick, Esk-street, Inver-
land | cargill.
Napier and Hawke’s Bay ..
Oamaru and Waitaki ... A. H. Maude, Oamaru.
Tauranga ... ... ... Jas. Horne (Horne & Reid) Tauranga.
Timaru and South Canter
bury ... ... ... W. Stericker, Timaru.
Wanganui ... Crawford, Campbell & Co., Wanganui.
AVESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Albany ... JohnMoir&Co.
Dongarra ... W. Linthorne.
Fremantle ... J. F. Fordham.
Geraldton & )
Jarrahdall ... Clarence Hicks.
Northampton... C. F. Hicks.
Perth H. G. Stirling.
Greenough > C. W. Gray.
Flats. \
TASMANIA.
Hobart Town j outk ; Wey ‘
Launceston ... J. Brickhill.


RAILWAYS.
Melbourne Terminus—Speneer-street:—
Melbourne to Echuca —ls6 miles. Through in seven hours.
Thence to Deniliquin, 45 miles. Branch from Castlemaine to
St. Arnaud. Ditto, Sandhurst to Inglewood —3o miles.
Melbourne to Wodonga —2os miles. Through in eight hours.
Branch from Wangaratta to Beechworth —26 miles. Springs
to Wahgunyah —l4 miles.
Melbourne to Williamstown —9* miles.
Melbourne to Geelong, Ballarat, Ararat and Stawell —l76 miles.
Through in eight hours. Branch from Ballarat to Mary-
borough and Avoca —s miles. Warrenheip to Gordons —l3
miles. Geelong to Oolac —5O miles. Geelong to Queenscliff—
-22f miles. Ararat to Portland —ll9J miles.
Melbourne to Sale, Gipps Land —llB miles— Melbourne Terminus,
Princes Bridge.
Melbourne and Hawthorn 1
Melbourne and Brighton f Melbourne Terminus,
Melbourne and St. Kilda | Flinders-street.
Melbourne and Sandridge )
(Time and Fare Tables issued monthly.)
Return Tickets are not issued on the Ballarat, Sandhurst, or North
Eastern lines. On the Suburban lines, Return Tickets are available
only for the day of issue.
Cabs run in connection with the Victorian Railways, Melbourne;
Ordinary Journey—To or from Victorian Railways and Royal Mail,
Bourke-street, 3d.; do. Fitzroy, 3d. By the hour—First hour, 35.; for
every subsequent 15 minutes, 9d. By distance —Not exceeding one
mile, one or two persons, Is.; do., three or more persons, 25.; for
every half-mile beyond the first mile, one half the rate per mile;
half-fare back allowed when over two miles from the Stand.


Overland Journey
TO AND FROM MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY.
MELBOURNE TO SYDNEY.
Miles.
Melbourne to Wodonga (Railway). Leave 2.55 p.m., arrive
10.50 p.m. Fares—lst Class, 315.; 2nd Class, 20s. 6d. ... 187
Wodonga to Gerogery {Coach). Leave for Albury on ar-
rival of train, thence in time for train leaving Gerogery
at 3 p.m. ... ... 19
Gerogery to Sydney (Railway). Leave 3.0 p.m., arrive
6.50 a.m. Fares—lst Class, ; 2nd Class, ... 368
Notes.— A train also leaves Melbourne for Wodonga at 6.10 a.m.
The Melbourne to Wodonga trains do not run on Sundays, and the
Gerogery to Sydney train does not run on Saturdays, but on Sun-
days instead. Sleeping cars are attached to all the through New-
South Wales trains.
Through Single Tickets, covering the journey from Melbourne to
Sydney and vice versd, are issued at £3 17s. 6d. each by Messrs.
Cobb and Co. The portion for the Railway part of the journey
must be exchanged at Melbourne and Gerogery respectively for
Railway tickets.
SYDNEY TO MELBOURNE.
Miles.
Sydney to Gerogery (Railway). Leave 7.30 p.m., arrive 11.0
a.m. next day. Fares—lst Class, ; 2nd Class, ... 368
Gerogery to Wodonga (Coach). Leave on arrival of train
at Gerogery, arriving at Wodonga at 3.40 p.m. Fare, 19
Wodonga to Melbourne (Railway). Leave 4.0 p.m,, arrive
11,30 p.m. Fares—lst Class, 315.; 2nd Class, 20s. 6d 187
Notes. —Sleeping cars are attached to all trains leaving Sydney.
The Sydney to Gerogery trains do not run on Sundays.
General Notes. —Coaches run seven days a week. Passengers
should book at Cobb at Co.’s Office, Melbourne and Sydney, before
starting.


Overland Journey
TO AND FROM ADELAIDE AND MELBOURNE.
(Daily Communication. )
MELBOURNE TO ADELAIDE. Miles.
Melbourne to Hamilton (Railway). Daily (Sundays ex-
cepted). Leave Melbourne 7 p.m., due Hamilton 4.11
a.xn. Fares—lst Class, 365. 6d.; 2nd Class, 245. 6d. ... 224
Hamilton to Narracoorte (Coach). Daily (Mondays excepted).
Leave 6 a.m., arrive at Narracoorte noon following day.
Fare, 40s. 112
Narracoorte to Kingston (Railway). Daily. Leave 12.30
p.m., due at Kingston 3.30 p.m. Fare, 11s. Id. ... ... 53
Kingston to Meningie (Coach). Daily. Leave 4 p.m., due
at Meningie 6 a.m. next day. Fare, 40s 98
Meningie to Milang (Steamer, across Lake). Daily. Leave
6.30a.m., due at Milang 10.30 a.m. Fare, 10s. ... 40
Milang to Adelaide (Coach). Daily. Leave at noon, due at
Adelaide 6.30 p.m. Fare, Bs. 48
Fare, £6 13s. 7d. 575
Through passengers stay one night at Penola.
ADELAIDE TO MELBOURNE. Miles.
Adelaide to Milang (Coach). Daily. Leave Adelaide 7 a.m.,
due Milang 12.30p.m. Fare, 8s 48
Milang to Meningie (Steamer, across Lake). Daily. Leave
Milang 1 p.m., due Meningie 5 p.m. Fare, 10s. ... ... 40
Meningie to Kingston (Coach). Daily. Leave Meningie 6
p.m., due at Kingston 8 a.m. following day. Fare, 40s. 98
Kingston to Narracoorte (Railway). Daily. Leave King-
ston 8.30 a.m., due at Narracoorte 11.30 a.m. Fare 11s.
Id. 53
Narracoorte to Hamilton (Coach). Daily (Saturdays ex-
cepted). Leave 12.30 p.m., due at Hamilton 11.30 a.m.
next day (break of five hours at Casterton). Fare, 40s. 112
Hamilton to Melbourne (Railway). Daily (Sundays ex-
cepted). Leave 12.47p.m., due in Melbourne 11.15 p.m.
Fare—lst Class, 365. 6d.; 2nd Class, 245. 6d 224
Through Journey Adelaide to Melbourne sixty-four
and a-quarter hours. Fare, £6 13s. 7d. ... ... ~. 575
Passengers for Melbourne leaving Adelaide on Fridays lose
one day at Penola.


Inland and Intercolonial Postage.
Within the Colony of Victoria — s. d.
Letters, for every £ oz., or fraction thereof ... ... 0 2
Note. —The Legislative Assembly in 1878 passed a resolu-
ion in favour of a Penny Postage throughout Victoria, which,
however, has not yet been acted upon.
Newspapers 0
Book Packets, &c., every 2 ozs., or fraction of 2 ozs. ... 0 1
To New South Wales, New Zealand, South Australia,
Queensland, Tasmania, and Western Australia—
Letters, for every \ oz., or fraction thereof ... ... 0 2
Newspapers 0 1
Book Packets, not exceeding loz 0 1
Do., not exceeding 2 ozs. ... ... ... ... ... 0 2
Do. do. 4 ozs. ... ... ... ... ... 0 4
Do., every additional 4 ozs., or fraction of 4 ozs. ... 0 4
To Fiji— s. d.
Letters, for every % oz., or fraction thereof 0 2
Newspapers 0 1
Book Packets, not exceeding 1 0z... ... ... ... 0 1
Do., not exceeding 2 ozs, ... ... ... ... ... 0 2
Do., every additional 2 ozs. ... ... ... ... 0 2
LATE LETTERS.
The following fees are charged upon letters posted after the time
appointed for closing the mails; —
INLAND LETTERS. S. d.
For any time not exceeding a quarter of an hour ... 0 2
If handed to the Railway Mail Guards, or posted in
the Railway Travelling Post-office ... ... ... 0 2
LETTERS BY PRIVATE SHIP.
Late fee on letters for despatch by private ship ... 0 2
ENGLISH MAILS BY R.M. CONTRACT STEAMERS.
For any time not exceeding one half-hour ... ... 0 3
~ beyond one half-hour ... ... ... 0 6
If posted on board the Mail Steamer ... ... ... 1 0
Late fees must be paid, in all cases, by stamps affixed to the
letters.


British and Foreign Postage.
Via Brindisi or San Francisco.
To Great Britain and Ireland — s. d.
Letters, not exceeding £ 0z.... ... ... ... ... 0 6
Do., for every additional £ oz., or fraction thereof .. 0 6
Newspapers 0 1
Do. not exceeding 4 ozs.
Do. for every additional 4 ozs., or fraction thereof
Book Packets, &c. , not exceeding 1 oz. ... ... ... 0 1
Do., exceeding 1 oz., but not exceeding 2 ozs. ... ... 0 2
Do., exceeding 2 ozs., but not exceeding 4 ozs. ... ... 0 4
Do., for every additional 4 ozs., or portion thereof ... 0 4
To United States (including California and Oregon)—
Via California.
Letters, not exceeding J oz., and for every additional | oz. 0 6
Newspapers 0 1
Book Packets, &c., under loz 0 1
Do., under 2 ozs ..0 2
Do. ~ 4 ozs. ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 4
Do., each additional 2 ozs., or fraction thereof... ... 0 2
To United States and British North America generally, in-
cluding Canada, British Columbia, New Brunswick, Newfound-
land, &c., &c. —
Via Brindisi or San Francisco.
s. d.
Letters, not exceeding | oz., and for every additional \ oz. 0 8
Newspapers, not exceeding 4 ozs. ... ... ... ... 0 2
Do. every additional 4 oz. ... ... ... 0 1
Do. via San Francisco, not exceeding 4 oz., 3d.;
and for every additional 4 ozs ... 0 3
Via San Francisco. Via Brindisi.
To United States— s. d. s. d.
Booh Packet*, &c., under loz 0 1 ... 0 3
Do., under 2 ozs. ... ... ... 0 2 ... 0 4
Do., under 2 ozs. ... ... ... 0 2 ... 0 4
Do. ~ 4 ozs. ... ... ... 0 4 ... 0 6
Do, ~ 6 ozs. ... ... ... 0 6 ...10
Do. ~ 8 ozs. ... 0 8 ...10
Do. „ 10 ozs. 010 ... 1 6
Do. „ 12 ozs. 10 ... 1 6
Do. ~ 14 ozs. 12 ...2 0
Do. ~ 16 ozs 14 ...2 0
If to North America, Canada, <&c., higher rates are charged.


BRITISH AND FOREIGN POSTAGE — continued.
To India, China, Japan, &c., via Galle or Torres Straits— s, d.
Letters —For every oz., or fraction thereof 1 0
Newspapers 0 1
Book Packets, &c, —l oz., Id.; 2 ozs., 2d.; every addi-
tional 2 ozs., 2d.
To France and Algeria—
Letters, via Marseilles, per \ oz Oil
Do., via Modane and Paris, per £oz ... 1 OJ
Do., via Southampton or San Francisco, not exceeding
SOZ 0 7\
Newspapers, via Marseilles 0 1
Do. via Modane and Paris ... ... ... 0 1
Do., via Southampton or San Francisco, not exceeding
4 ozs., 2d.; for every additional 4 ozs., Id.
To Germany—
Letters, via Italy, per % oz. ... ... 0 8|
Do. via Southampton or San Francisco, per £ oz. ... 0 7h
Newspapers, via Italy, not exceeding 2 ozs., 2£d.; for
every additional 2 ozs., l^d.
Do. via Southampton or San Francisco, not exceed-
ing 4 ozs., 2d.; for every additional 4 ozs., Id.
To Cape of Good Hope, Natal, &c.—
Letters, per £ oz., via Brindisi I „ ..
Do, do. via Southampton or San Francisco/
Do. do. via Aden and Zanzibar ' ... ... 1 4
Newspapers, via Brindisi and Southampton or San Fran-
cisco, not exceeding 4 ozs., 2d.; for every additional
4 ozs., Id.
Do. via Aden and Zanzibar, 2d.
TIMES OP DELIVERY BY
LETTER CARRIERS
SUBURBS
OP MELBOURNE,
Ist Delivery 2nd Delivery 3rd Delivery
Names of Places. Leaves Local Leaves Local Leaves Local
Office. Office. Office.
Brighton .. .. •• 2 /8.20 a.m. 5.15 p.m.
Brunswick, Collingwood, Emerald Hill, it I
Fitzroy, North Fitzroy, Flemington, g J
Richmond, Sandridge, Prahran, "g \ g a.m. Ip.m. 6 p.m.
South Yarra, St. Kilda, Carlton, " I
Hotham, Kew and Toorak .. £ \
No third delivery on Saturdays to any of the Suburbs. No second
delivery to Brighton, Brunswick, Flemington, Kew and Toorak.


European Mail Signals.
ARRIVALS.
When the arrival of the Mail via Galle is reported, the following
Signals are hoisted on the clock-tower at the General Post Office :
IF BY DAYLIGHT.
AFTER SUNSET.
Branch Mail Steamship off Ade- ) lied flag, with A in white in > R - i, e ht
laide .. .. .. .. f centre .. .. .. .. f 8 •
Mail Steamship off Cape Otway | W^[ ) e t ® ag ’ with 00 in red in | White light.
Mail Steamship entering Port > Blue flag, with Hin white in ) ....
Phillip Heads | centre | ame llgnc -
On arrival at the Post Office, a Red Pendant under the Blue Flag
with H in the centre is hoisted, and a Red Pendant only as soon as
the Delivery has commenced.
DEPARTURES.
On the day the mail steamer via, Suez is about to leave, a Red
Flag with A in the centre is hoisted.
Government of Victoria.
Governor-in-Chief and Vice-Admiral of Victoria ; The Marquis of
Normanby, K.C.M.G.
Aide-de-Camp : Lord Hervey Lepel Phipps.
Private Secretary : Capt. F. Le Patourel.
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL.
Chief Secretary and Treasurer ; The Hon. Graham Berry.
Attorney-General and Minister of Justice; The Hon. W. M. K. Vale.
Commissioner of Trade and Customs ; The Hon. A. T. Clark.
Minister of Mines: The Hon. H. R. Williams.
Minister of Public Instruction : The Hon. William Collard Smith.
President of the Board of Land and Works, Commissioner of
Crown Lands and Survey, and Minister of Agriculture: The Hon.
R. Richardson.
Commissioner of Railways and Roads, and Vice-President of the
Board of Land and Works: The Hon. J. B. Patterson.
Commissioner of Public Works, and Vice-President of the Board of
Land and Works: The Hon. G. D. Langridge.
Postmaster-General:
Clerk to Executive Council, R. Wadsworth, Esq.


Electric Telegraph.
Ordinary Hours of Business—B.3o a.m. to 8 p.m. The Melbourne
Branch Office, Custom-house, closes at 6 p.m. Special rates are
charged for private messages beyond these hours.
Victoria. — A uniform rate of Is. for 10 words, and Id. for each
word additional, is now charged for all messages to and from Mel-
bourne and any station in Victoria. [For further special information
regarding press and night messages, urgent private messages, &c.,
see back of telegram form.]
To New South Wales or South Australia messages can be for-
warded from any station in Victoria at a uniform rate of 2s. for 10
words, and 2d. for each word additional. Press messages, 100
words, or under, 35,, and for every additional 100 words, 3s.
Between 8 p.m. and 8.30 a.m., an additional charge of 50 per cent.
To Albury, Coi’owa, Howlong, and Moama (border stations), the
rate is only Is. for 10 words, and Id. per word additional.
To Queensland messages can be forwarded from any station in
Victoria, at a uniform rate of 3s. for 10 words, and 3d. for each
additional word. Press messages, half price.
To Tasmania messages can be sent from any station in Victoria at
a uniform charge of 6s. for the first 10 words, and 7d. each addi-
tional word. The signature and address to all messages forwarded
to Tasmania must not exceed 10 words, or the excess will be charged
for.
New Zealand. —Uniform charge of 10s. 6d. for first 10 words, and
Is. each additional word. Address and signature charged for as part
of message. Press messages, no reduction. All messages must be
prepaid. Telegrams should be handed in before 7.30 p.m. or they
will not reach their destination until next morning.
Western Australia. —Uniform rate of 3s. for first 10 words, and
3d. each additional word. Press messages, one-half above rates.
Melbourne, Port Darwin, and London
Telegraph.
SCALE OF CHARGES.
For telegrams, inclusive of names and addresses, from any station
in Victoria to places situated in the following countries :
Price per word.
& s. d.
Aden direct... ... ... ... ... ... 0 10 3
~ Vid Hong Kong ... ... ... ... 019 5
China—Hong Kong ... ... ... ~. ...0 8 1


MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, WELLINGTON.
61
TELEGRAPH— continued.
China—Shanghai and Amoy ...
Price per word.
& s. d.
... 0 9 9
,, Fid Suez
... 0 19
0
„ Cochin China...
... 0 6
10
Egypt and Cyprus
... 0 11
6
Europe direct
... 0 10
8
Europe, vid Hong Kong
... 0 16
5
India, via Madras —
West of Chittagong
... 0 7
11
East of Chittagong and Ceylon
... 0 8
1
Native Bunnah ...
... 0 8
3
India, via Rangoon—
West of Chittagong
... 0 8
1
East of Chittagong
... 0 7
11
Ceylon ...
... 0 8
4
Native Burmah ...
... 0 8
1
India, via Hong Kong—
West of Chittagong
... 0 18
7
East of Chittagong and Ceylon
... 0 18
10
Japan
... 0 12
4
Java
... 0 4
3
Malacca, vid Singapore
... 0 5
7
,, vid Penang
Manilla
... 0 6
5
... 0 9
a
Penang
... 0 5
7
Persia (vid Kurrachee)
... 0 10
1
Persian Gulf—Bushire
... 0 9
3
,, Gwadur, Jask, and Hen jam
... 0 9
3
Russia in Asia—1st Region
... 0 11
9
,, 2nd Region ...
... 0 12
8
Europe and Caucasus, vid Teheran
... 0 10
10
Asia, vid Teheran —1st and 2nd Regions
... 0 11
8
Singapore ...
... 0 5
7
Turkey in Asia, vid Suez —
Islands (except Rhodes) ...
... 0 11
7
Rhodes...
... 0 10
10
1st Region
... 0 11
2
2nd Region
... 0 11
5
Chios, vid Tyra cable
... 0 10
8
Turkey in Europe and Islands, vid Fao ...
... 0 9
10 •
,, Asia—1st Region ...
... 0 9
5
„ „ 2nd Region ...
... 0 9
8


Consuls and Consular Agents.
Austro-Hungarian.— Consul: L. Thoneman, 35 Market-street.
Belgium. —Consul-General; — G. Beckx, 58 Punt-road, South Yarra.
Consul for Victoria, Jules Renard.
Brazil. —Consul; J. B. Were, 80 Collins-street west.
Chili. —Consul; J. B. Were, 80 Collins-street west.
Denmark. — Consul: J. B. Were, k.c.d., 80 Collins-street west.
Yic-Consul, P. W. Were, 80 Collins-street west. Vice-Consul
(at Geelong): H. J. Henty.
France. —Consul: C. Fauconnet, 109 Collins-street west. Vice-
Consul: C. Moulun.
German Empire. —Consul: W. A. Brahe, 74 Queen-street.
Hawaii. —Consul-General, E. Reeve, Sydney. Consul: G. N.
Oakley, 49 Collins-street west.
Italy. —Consul-General for all Australian Colonies, New Zealand,
Tasmania, and Fiji; Chev. A. de Goyzueta. Vice-Consul: Henri
J. Hart, 1 Queen-street.
Netherlands. —Consul-General for all the Australian Colonies,
New Zealand, and Tasmania. Vice-Consul-General: Jonkheer
Daniel Ploos van Amstel. Acting-Consul; Jonkheer D. E.
Ploos van Amstel, 49 Collins-street west.
Peru. —Consul: J. B. Were, 80 Collins-street west. Vice-Consul:
F. Linden, Little Collins-street west.
Peruvian Consul-General in the Polynesian Islands: Don Manuel
Jose Palacois.
Portugal. —Consul-General: J. B. Were, 80 Collins-street west.
Consul (with general jurisdiction over all the Australian Colonies
and Tasmania): T. C. N. Cooper, Little Flinders-street east.
Russia. —Consul; James Damyon, Custom House.
Spain. —Vice-Consul: R. Murray Smith, 26 Queen-street.
Sweden and Norway.— Consul: J. B. Were, k.w., 80 Collins-street
west. Vice-Consul (for Melbourne): J. H. Were, 80 Collins-
street west. Vice-Consul (at Geelong): G. F. Belcher.
Swiss Confederation. —G, de Pury, 21 Queen-street.
United States. —Consul-General for all the Australian Colonies,
Tasmania, and New Zealand: O. M. Spencer. Vice-Consul;
S. P. Lord, 126 Collins-street west.
Venezuela.— Consul; S. M. Gibbs, 57 Chancery-lane.


Suburbs of Melbourne.
Alphington —Smiles. Cars run. at intervals; fare, 6d.
Ascot Vale —miles. ’Buses from Elizabeth-street; fare, 6d.
Also by rail; fare, 4d,
Brighton Beach — miles. Train from Flinders-street Station;
fare, Bd.
Brunswick —miles. Cars and omnibuses; fare, 3d.
Camberwell —ss miles. Train to Hawthorn from Flinders-street
Station; fare, 4d. ’Bus from Hawthorn, which meets all
trains; fare, 3d.
Carlton — miles. Cars and omnibuses; fare, 3d. At night,
white light in front.
Caulfield —s miles. Train from Flinders-street Station.
Collingwood— s miles. Cars and omnibuses; fare, 3d. Omnibuses
at night, white light in front.
Coburg — s miles. Cars and omnibuses from Elizabeth-street; fare
6d.
Elsternwick — 6 miles. Train from Flinders-street Station; fare,
Bd.
Emerald Hill —l£ miles. Train from Flinders-street Station;
fare, 3d. Also, cars and omnibuses from Swanston-street;
fare, 3d.
Essendon— 4| miles. Train from Spencer-street Station; fare, 9d.
Also, cars and omnibuses; fare, Is.
Fitzroy — l mile. Omnibuses from Spencer-street and Flinders-
street Stations; fare, 3d. Former at night, green light in
front; latter, white light.
Flemington —3 miles. Cars and omnibuses from Melbourne;
fare, 3d.
Footscray —32 miles. Trains from Spencer-street Station.
Fare, 6d.
Gardiner —6 miles. Train from Flinders-street Station to Wind-
sor ; fare, 4d. Thence by omnibus.
Hawthorn—3£ miles. Trains from Flinders-street Station; fare, 4d.
Heidelberg — B miles. Car from Britannia Hotel, Swanston-street;
three times a-day; fare, Is.
Hotham — l mile. Omnibus from Flinders-street Station; fare, 3d.
At night, green light at top.
Kew—4£ miles. Cars and omnibuses from General Post-office;
fare, 6d. Also, rail to Hawthorn, thence omnibus.


SUBURBS OF MELBOURNE— continued.
Northcote— 4 miles. Oars from Britannia Hotel, Swanston-street;
fare, 6d.
Malvern—sJ miles. Train from Flinders-street Station; fare, 6d.
Prahran— 3J miles. Train from Flinders-street Station ; fare, 4d,
Cars from Princes Bridge, and omnibuses from General Post-
office ; fare, 3d.
Richmond—lf miles. Train from Flinders-street Station. Cars
from corner of Swanston and Collins streets, and omnibuses from
General Post-office; fare, 3d. ’Bus at night, blue side light.
St. Kilda —3J miles. Train from Flinders-street; fare, 4d. Om-
nibus from Royal Arcade, Bourke-street East; fare, 4d.
Sandridge— 3 miles. Train from Flinders-street Station; fare, 4d.
Also cars and omnibuses; fare, 3d.
South Yarra —2 miles. Train from Flinders-street Station; fare,
3d. Cars from Princes Bridge and omnibuses from General Post-
office; fare, 3d.
Studley Park—2.) miles. Omnibuses from Flinders-street Station
to Simpson’s Road; fare, 3d.
Toorak —3£ miles. Train from Flinders-street Station to South
Yarra; fare, 3d. Thence bx’bus; fare, 3d.
Williamsto wn —9f miles. Spencer-street Station; fare,
9d.
Windsor —4 miles. Train fronrT'linders-street Station; fare, 4d.
Yarraville—4f miles. Train from Spencer-street Station; fare,
6d.
Population of Victoria.
The estimated population at the end of the year 1878 was
879,442. The increase of population during the year 1878 was
18,655. The number of marriages during the year was 5092 (the
total number of persons married being, of course, double that, viz.,
10,184). The total number of births was 26,581, and of deaths
12,702. The number of births to every thousand of the population
in 1878 was 30 - 59, being a smaller proportion of births than has
occurred in any year since 1868. There has also been a steady
decrease in the marriage rate since that year. The number of deaths
to every thousand of the population was 14 62 in 1878, a lower rate
than in any of the previous ten years, except 1871 and 1872.
M“Carron, Bird & Co., Printers, 37 Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.




Market Buildinqs, Collide Street West,
* And 169 BOURKE STREET EAST,
MELBOURNE.
AND AT
77 PITT STREET .. .. SYDNEY, N.S W,
WAYMOUTH STREET ADELAIDE, S.A.
FEATHERSTON STREET WELLINGTON, N,2.
