

THE CHINESE QUESTION.
To the Honourable Sir HENRY PARKES, M.L.A., Colonial
Secretary of New South Wales.
Per favour of the EVENING NEWS.
Dear Sir,— From newspaper reports, I observe that you intend
bringing in a bill to regulate the number of Chinese coming
into this colony—rather a ticklish question, allow me to ob-
serve—but it won’t be much of a task either, if you only
it sufficiently stringent, and the stringency consistent with the
circumstances of the case which, at this moment, so loudly de-
mand it in the interest of the general public. Having been
among Chinese for several years in Northern Queensland, I
thought my knowledge and experience of them might not, at
the present time, be unacceptable to you.
Allow me, then, to observe that we Britishers, as Jonathan
calls us, would have great repugnance and many compunctious
scruples ere we could make up our minds to assimilate with this
race, and though we might cheerfully adopt a black boy, yet, to
my mind, it would be a great struggle to have to affiliate with
the Chinese. I have no doubt, nevertheless, that the Chinese
nation, like every other nation on earth, has good as well as bad
a mongst them, but the working class that is sent or brought
here —they don’t come— seem, as a rule, the needy scum and
scrapings from all the slums and corners of the Flowery Land


Their morals, if they have any, don’t trouble them much, and had
Confucius been living- at the present lay, the serenity of his temper
and philosophhy would not only have been tried, perhaps beyond
endurance, but he would many a time have been well ashamed,
as well as disgusted, at the ways and doings of many of his
countrymen. Of course they are not all alike, and I have been
acquainted with several that conducted themselves in every way
just as correctly as we profess to do, and some of them who
were married to Europeans could not be kinder than they were
to their wives and families. And even the worst of them have
many commendable virtues which would, many a time, do us no
harm to imitate —for instance, they are Civil, Frugal, Economical,
Industrious, and, as Longfellow has it, they have any quantity of
patient Endurance, which the same author says is Godlike. But
the bulk of them who herd together are many a time worse than
the brute creation, and grossly immoral and filthy in the last
degree. I have said that the working Chinese are sent or brought
into these colonies, and this is the case, for companies or rich
men amongst themselves, send them in here, and to whom they are
bondsmen or serfs for a number of years —often for a period Of not
less than five years, and to whom every penny of their earnings
go except the merest pittance —just what deeds and feeds them ;
and these, their rice and clothes, almost all come from
China. This, then, plainly shows that they are not here as we
are. We come here to settle down, make the colony our home
>
sink any money we may make, or put it in circulation, and by
doing so, enrich the colony, and contribute our fair quota
of revenue to the colony. But does John do the same!
No, not a bit of him. He comes here, and gets the benefit
of our Government without helping to keep it up; he comes
here, hut not to settle down; he comes here to live off
us; he comes here to scratch and scrape up everything
even to the last sixpence, or the last spec of gold from
these colonies ; but does he sink these gains, or put them into
circulation as we do ? Certainly not, hut sends everything he
lays hands on into China. By doing this John gathers up our


riches, sends them into China, and thereby impoverishes these
colonies instead of enriching them. Nor is this ali, for as soon as
he can scrape up a little money on his own hook, he very soon
makes tracks and clears out again. Is this then a desirable race
to have amongst us ? I should think not, and I say no most
emphatically. It is true that we, or the A.S.N. Company, might
get Chinese labour for less than is usually paid here, but let us
see how long and how far this would benefit. Had the A.S.N.
Company been successful in their attempt to introduce Chinese
labour into their vessels, as they have a perfect right to do if they
choose, the question arises, would they have been benefited by it?
I reply no. They would not, for other competing companies
would have been compelled, in self-defence, to follow suit. This,
then, being the case, it would have been but a few months, at
most, ere they would all have been on the same level again, and
therefore no better off than when they started on their Chinese raid of
economy. But the matter does not rest here, for while their
purses were in no way improved, they would have ruined their
merchant navy for any case of emergency, by supplanting our
hearts of oak with a foreign mongrel race, who neither could nor
would stand by us if it came to be a case when every man was
expected to do his duty; and this then would be our present
humiliating position had the A.S.N. Company been successful in
introducing the yellow agony amongst us. This company was
quite funky, too, over what they called the strike, but I, who
have been an employer of labour for upwards of thirty years, say
that it was not a strike in the ordinary sense of the term —it
wasn’t a strike against a reduction of wages, nor a strike for a
rise of wages, but it was a strike of far greater importance, namely,
a strike of race against race, and a strike against the attempt to
get the thin end of the wedge in, and against being taken in
detail. Then, after viewing these matters in all their bearings ;
and although I regularly employ 120 hands myself, I say that
when it comes to be race against race—John or me—up goes my
shoulder too, and John must slide. It would scarcely be amusing
to think of us coming out here from the old country to settle


down and make the colony something worth while, and then
tamely allow ourselves to be shouldered aside by Chinamen.
No, no ! this won’t do; and lam proud to say that lam
one of those whose forefathers knew how to keep possession
o auld Scotland against all comers, aye, even against the
ancient Romans, though generalled and led by Agricola
himself. This being the case then it would ill become
me to permit John to do me out of my colonial inheritance,
W ver J soon would do were he permitted in here
unchecked. Again, were other industries to introduce Chinese
labour for cheapness, would we benefit by it ? I beg to say no •
for though we could get them for less wages thev wouldn’t be
consumers of our products, and it is a working class who would
be good customers to us that we want. Suppose I employed
them to produce tweeds, they wouldn’t wear the goods that I
was paying them to make, but would wear their own products,
as they invariably do, no matter where they are. They would
t erefore receive wages from me, not to benefit me again by
t eir spendings, hut to benefit their own country and country-
men,—most certainly not me nor mine. It might be said that
cheap wages would be a benefit, but I again ask where would
the benefit be, if we employed a race that wouldn’t consume
wat we produced ? And this is the way to look at the ques-
tion ; for it is an increase [of our working population wherein
our strength and prosperity lie, and any scheme by which we
could encourage and support this element would be the very
salvation of this colony. Cheap wages means little to spend;
cheap wages are all very well, and as a rule, very desirable
many a time, still they are not everything, for there are many
considerations besides; but suppose I had followed the A.S.N.
Company’s example, by using Chinese labour, what would I have
benefitted by it, I would like to ask ? Would my neighbour
manufacturers, in self-defence, not have followed suit? Most
certainly they would ; and this being the case, how long would
it have been before we were all on precisely the same level again
with one another ?In addition to being on the same wage level


again, we would have the disadvantage of having discharged our
old hands who were customers to us, and employed those who
would neither buy nor wear a single sixpennyworth of our stuff;
and it would be just the same with every other industry that
might employ Chinese labour. Again, had it been followed up
in this way by industries generally in employing this labour, how
long would this have been an English colony in anything hut
the name ?
Well, under all these circumstances and considerations the
question arises what is to be done ? To which I reply if you
cannot bar the colony against them, as undoubtedly it cannot'
yet you can place them under restrictions which to some extent
will act as a bar against their coming. The £lO poll-tax
imposed by Queensland is scarcely any barrier against the
influx of Chinese into that colony, nor would it be otherwise with
us with a £lO admission tax against them here; and the reason
is this, that the companies or rich men who send their country-
men into these colonies find it profitable to do so, notwithstanding
this payment; and depend upon it they will continue to pour
them in if they meet with no other and more stringent measures.
You have already hinted at some conditions, which I observe
you intend to impose, and I believe they are in the right direc-
tion ; but it just occurs to me that they don’t go far enough to
prove effectual; permit me to suggest a £lO annual poll tax, as
'veil as an admission poll tax of £lO, at any rate, an annual tax.
I base this annual tax on what is just, fair, and right, and will
show it presently. Every one is accorded equal privileges by
Government, and, in return, every one should contribute
equally to the Treasury. John consumes scarcely any
dutiable goods, consequently he cannot contribute his
quota of taxes to the Treasury the same as we do, and since
this is the case it is nothing but what is right to call upon
him to bear an annual poll tax equal to what we pay in
another way. Now the taxes here are fully £6 a head, but
as the one-half of the population will be children and youngsters
it follows that the adult population will have all the taxes to pay,


equal quite to £l2 per adult, and £lO annually would be letting
John down easily. Of course John would say, “Tax no good,
and me no savvy.” John has always plenty of no savvy when
he does not want to savvy. Some might say, « Oh, this is class
legislationbut I say it is no such thing, it is simply an exceptional
case met’m an exceptional manner. For many years I have ad-
vocated this annual poll-tax, and always thought the Queensland
Government would have to resort to it, and am of the same
opinion still. In Friday’s Herald I observe that an annual £l2
poll-tax is imposed on the Chinese in British Columbia, and quite
right too—they have got John’s correct measure there; and,
since such a tax is resorted to there, we needn’t bogle at a similar
measure here; and, were you only to introduce your bill with
such conditions embodied in it, I believe it would pass both
Houses with scarcely any opposition.
Yours truly,
J. VICARS.
Tweed Factory, Jan. 29th.
