



THE
MESSIAH RETEALED
TO A JEWESS;
OR, THE
MERCIFUL DEALINGS OF GOD
WITH
HANNAH NONMUS,
WHO WAS
BORN AT FRANKFORT, IN GERMANY,
AND
CONVERTED TO THE CHRISTIAN FAITH
IN
ENGLAND.
ISLE OF WIGHT:
PRINTED BY R. TILLING, NEWPORT;
And sold by Mr, W. Baynes, Paternoster-row, London; and
Mr. Sharp, Middle-street, Brighton.
1809.


ADVERTISEMENT.
The following narrative was, a few years
since, published by a gentleman who re-
ceived it from the hands of Mrs. Nonmus,
and who heard her relate, very circum-
stantially, the leading events recorded in it.
Mrs. Nonmus is well known, and highly
esteemed by persons ofthe greatest respecta-
bility. She resides at Bath, and has, for
many years, held fast the profession of her
faith ; she is now very old and infirm, and
the profits arising from the sale of this little
work will be devoted to her benefit. But
the principal motive for its re-publication
3s > under a divine blessing, to excite the


attention of the Jews to the glorious and
infinitely important subject of Christianity.
As a simple statement of facts it has some
claim to their regard ; and it is presumed
that they will candidly examine a religion
which many of their own people have
embraced, which professes to be built on
the foundation of their prophets, and which
alone can account for the singular fact of
their dispersion among the nations.


THE
MESSIAH REVEALED?
&. &
I WAS born of Jewish parents, who were strict
in their profession, and brought me up in the
same way. But I remember having a propen-
sity to the Gentiles as early as at eight years of
age, and that at that early period I preferred the
Gentile children, and made them my play-fel-
lows, although it was counted a great disgrace
by the Jews. Being one day, as usual, playing
with the Christian’s children in a garden, they re-
fused to take me home with them unless I would
mention the name of Jesus Christ , which I long
refused to do: at length, having obtained their
promise not to mention it to my family, I con-
sented, and did so. But my father was soon
informed of it, and vowed to me, if ever I did so
again, hell would most surely be my portion .
From these declarations I apprehended I had
done a great wickedness, and by way of penance,
of ray own accord, I hid tfiyself, fasted, and
B


bit my finger, till I brought blood, thinking
thereby to make atonement for my offence. But
my father was ever after that so fearful of my
inclining to the Christians that, contrary to the
custom of other Jews, he would never suffer me
to go to any school in Germany, for fear I should
be induced to read the New Testament. I
therefore- can write no language but Hebrew,
nor could I read any other till of late, and now
only in the Bible imperfectly. In short, I lived
strictly a Pharisee till about the age of nineteen,
and having (as I supposed) the fear of God
always in my heart, I resolved never to marry,
thinking thereby to live more pleasing to the
Almighty. But being at a ball (for the Jews
think such diversions no sin) I there met with
Jacob Nonmus, and a mutual attachment took
place between us. In a few days he came to my
father’s house; our regard for each other was
soon discovered by my father, and he forbid him
coming again on this busines. Upon this he,
being a doctor in the English army, returned to
England; and 1 provided myself with a consi-
derable sum of money, and soon followed him.
Soon after I came to England I learnt that
he was not so strict in his religion as I wished
him to be; therefore I resolved not to fulfil my
engagements with him. Full of these resolution*


I one night dreamed that I was to be an instru-
ment of bringing him to God, and that I should
have a son by him that should be a priest of
God. From this dream I inferred, that though
he was not so strict as I could wish, yet, as I
was a strict Pharisee, I might be designed by
Providence to bring him to be so likewise. I
flattered myself moreover that the son I dreamed
we were to have would be a Rabbi. From this
dream and interpretation I renewed my first
resolutions, and married him in the Synagogue*
Duke’s-place, London. From that time we lived
near sixteen years in good credit in Bishopsgate-
street, during which time I had twelve children.
But now it was my earnest prayer to God that I
might leave off child-bearing, that I might con-
stantly attend morning and evening at Syna-
gogue, and be more strict in my religion as a
Jewess. About this time I lost two of my chil-
dren by death, and my husband began to sink in
worldly circumstances. Upon this we removed
to Bath, where we continued six months to a
great disadvantage. From Bath we removed to
Bristol; and here, in the year 1771, he set up a
shop as an apothecary. But now our distresses
accumulated, and the troubles of my heart were
enlarged. I began to think more than ever of
rny soul, and how it would fare with me at death.
B 2


The world now appeared to me as nothing, yea,
worse than nothing, and vanity , My husband
perceived a change in me, and conceived it to
arise from loss of fortune; and by his conversa-
tion endeavoured to console me, telling me, that
matters would soon grow better. To which X
replied, that it was not this world but the next,
concerning which I was troubled.
This uneasiness about the state of my soul
continued and increased to such a degree that I
made several attempts to end my miserable life.
For I thought myself so great a sinner that I
must for ever despair of assistance from God.
Surely none can conceive what distress my poor
soul was now in ! I knew of no Saviour to whom
I might fly for peace and pardon; so that my
condition was truly deplorable. My husband
also concluded that I was mad, and watched me
so closely that (blessed be God!) my frequent
schemes for destroying myself were all defeated.
But oh ! the dreadful, powerful force of tempta-
tion! Perceiving that my husband watched me
closely I resolved to walk one evening to the
Hot-Wells, and there execute my desperate pur-
pose of suicide behind the Pump-room; for that
being a lonely place I thought nothing could
happen to prevent me. But, as the God of pro-
vidence would have it, when I came there I met


.a Jewess (Mrs. Solomon) who pressed me much
to come in, and drink tea with her. This I re-
fused; but she, observing me look strangely,
would not leave me, and inquired if I hud any
disagreement with my husband that troubled
me ? I assured her I had not. But finding her
follow me closely I consented to go to tea with
her, hoping afterwards that I might come away
alone. But, blessed be God! this plan was also
rendered abortive. While we were at tea two
young Jews came in (Mr. Abrahams and Mr.
Solomons) and pressed us much to go to the
play, there being, at that time, a company of
strollers at the Wells. This I protested against
in the strongest terms, being fully determined to
execute my purpose of self-destruction; but my
friends became so urgent that I thought the
only way to free myself from them was to go
thither; which, after much intreaty, I therefore
did, determining to come out as soon as possible
and execute my intention. The play was a
representation of the Devil and Dr. Faustus;
and on the devil seizing the doctor in this ficti-
tious representation, the idea struck me so forci-
bly that it would soon be my real case and
experience, if I executed my purpose, that I
fainted away, and was obliged to be carried to
my house, then on the quay. The agony of my
B 3


mind increased to such a degree that my hus-
band concluded I was out of my senses. I said
to him, “ My dear, I am not out of my senses,
but sec clearly that we must all perish, except
we repent, and have an atonement made; fori
am persuaded that the Jews in Bristol do not
worship God in spirit: they are a bad people.”
My husband answered, “ Make yourself easy
about that, my dear, I shall soon take you away
from Bristol.” Upon this my conviction wmre
off for a season; and I concluded that my senses
perhaps might have been somewhat impaired
through the greatness of my inmward grief. I
'> ... n
also*hearkened tfeo much to the insinuations or
■carnal friends, and conformed to, this present
vain World. This greatly damped my spiritual
concern for some time; but the Almighty (hav-
ing laid up mercy for me) hedged up my way,
and caused a great variety of diliiculties to break
in upon my husband in such a manner that he
was obliged to give up his apothecary’s shop,
and remove to King’s-head-court, Wine-street,
where he hoped for better success. But alas!
here he fell into greater perplexities, and at
length left Bristol, and went to Hannam. There
our goods were seized, and I was violently
ejected, in the absence of my husband, and
treated with much cruelty; so that I may truly


say, my sufferings were more than can be
expressed. But (glorious sufferings!) they led
me to see that sufferings, as well as patience,
must have their perfect work. Alter this insult
and oppression at Hannam we returned to Bris-
tol with scarce two changes of raiment left. But
the Lord provided a room for me at Mrs.
Young’s, Unity-street, Phi lip’s-plain. I preferred
this place because it was near a certain Jew,
with whom I thought I could keep my pass-
over.
This was in the year 1775; I now told my
husband it was time for me to go into High Ger-
many, and* have a Jewish atonement ny«de; and
itdded, moreover, that God was my salvation;
but this, *thoughT often told him'so, he did not
understand. However, this was often upon my
mind, although my darkness comprehended it
not. But, oh ! ho,w rich are God’s mercies in
bringing the blind by a way that they know not;
from worse than Egyptian darkness into his mar-
vellous light!
It was in this house that the agony of my mind
returned again, and so miserable was 1 that I
had no rest day or night. Now I did cry con-
tinually, “ 0 God, what wilt thou have me to do ?”
J’hen it was impressed upon my mind, as it I
had been used to hear the preaching of the Gen-
ii 4


tiles, which, though not true, was an impression
I could not get rid of, and which gave me great
concern, thinking it a great crime. Alas for me!
little did I suppose that I should suck the breasts
of consolation of that little sister who formerly
had no breasts (Sol. Song, viii. 8). But in this
house Jesus Christ was pleased to show me, as
he did the woman of Samaria, that he had the
water of life to give.
I had now left my husband, and taken this
lodging unknown to him, with an intention
shortly to return to High Germany, to have a
Jewish atohement made for my sins. But here
my husband found me, and here Jesus Christ
(glory be to his name] found me also. In this
same house was a young woman, Mrs. Young’s
daughter, who appeared much superior in her
'walk and conversation to any person I had ever
before met with. The uniformity of her beha-
viour much surprised me, and I often expressed
my astonishment to my husband, because she was
a Christian. I inquired one day, what religion
she professed; she said she belonged to Mr.
Wesley’s people at the room. I replied, ah! I
heard that was a wicked place.
But to return: I still found my mind restless
and unhappy as ever; and, in my distress, I have
often gone out into the streets, and looking up to


heaven, have called upon the Lord. And thiough
the ignorance and darkness of my mind, and
feeling the need of an intercessor, have hoped
that my husband’s dead father and mother (who
were esteemed good Jews) would pray for roe
in heaven; and I thought, that although I now
lived unhappily with my husband (from an idea
that prevailed in my ignorant mind, that I was
to be a sharer in the punishment of his sms), yet
his parents knew my motive for marrying their
son, namely, that I might (as an instrument)
bring him to his God; therefore 1 hoped, that
they would love and pray for me. Thus ray
reader may plainly see, that though I was in-
volved in thick darkness, I wanted a mediator, but
could not discern the right. I one day requested
of Ann Young, to read a chapter in the Bible,
which she did, but in the Old Testament; upon
which I requested her to read in the New Testa-
ment, she said she was afraid it would not he
agreeable to me; but I again desired her, and she
did. Upon mentioning Jesus Christ, 1 asked hef,
if that was her Messiah. She answered in the
affirmative. I argued with her, and asked her,
how she could believe him to be the Messiah,
that was born of a woman ? was the Son of God,
flesh and blood as we are? She answered, if he
was not the Son of God, we should all go to
13 a


hell. Upon this, Ann Young’s mother being
piesent, said to me, you will believe in him
too; I answered, “ God forbid.”—Ah ! said she,
Mrs. Nonmus, you want something, ask your God
for it, and he will give it to you. These words,
a our God struck me forcibly, I pondered in my
heart, and that night, after having
put my children to bed, I fgllowed the woman’s
advice; and, contrary to the custom of the Jews,
from an invincible inclination, fell on my knees ,
and implored pardon, and prayed, saying: “ Lord
Jehovah, God Almighty, if it please thee, grant
that it Jesus Christ is the Messiah, I may see and
believe it: it not, let me rather be cut off, and never
rise more. And I vowed in my mind, if it pleased
the Lord, I would never rise from my knees, till
I was convinced. After crying and praying for
about twoor three hours, I fell asleepon my knees
and dreamed— methought I was in a fine broad
road, which I fancied led to heaven, and seeing
two houses, one on the right hand, and the other
on the left, I resolved to inquire if I was right;
accordingly methought I knocked first at one,
and then at the other, and I was told at both
that I was wrong, and must return and go ano-
ther way. But it being so line and pleasant a
road, I was resolved to go on in it. After having
proceeded, however, a little further, I saw the


firmament open, and lightnings flashing out of it.
Upon which I .fell to the ground, and Jesus
Christ in his manhood, clothed in a white robe,
appeared before me; I saw also the wounds of
his crucifixion in his hands, and heard him say,
“ Arise, thy sins are forgiven thee, I am Jesus
Christ thy Messiah, believe in me, thou shalt her
saved.” Immediately I awoke, and sprung from
my knees rejoicing; then I awaked my children,
and compelled them to rise from their bed, and
commanded them to pray, telling them that
Jesus Christ was come into the world. But they
refused, saying their father had told them he
never had been, and that they knew I was mad,
for their father had told them so; hut I persisted,
and at length prevailed, and made them confess
the name of the Blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ,
and they prayed to him. My prayers and re-
joicings on this occasion were so loud, that they
were overheard by the whole house. Many
scriptures were now opened to my mind, which
to me before, were quite incomprehensible.
Particularly Isaiah xxviii. 10. “ Behold I lay in
Zion for a foundation stone,” &c. and Isaiah Ixiii.
1. “ Who is this that cometh from Edom,” ike.
In the morning I resolved to keep it a secret;
for after all, I found myself very loth to quit that
society which I and my husband were brought up
x BO


in. However, the Lord, in infinite goodness,
o\eicame this resolution, for that very day he
sent the young woman, Ann Young, to tell me,
that Sir Harry Trelawney would that evening
preach at Points Pool. I went to hear him; he
was the first Christian minister I ever heard.
During the sermon my mind was much harrassed
by the enemy of souls; he kept on suggesting
to me that there were many Jews present, and
they would see me among the Christians. By
this temptation my mind was so confused, that I
understood nothing of the sermon but this sweet
sentence of our blessed Lord, John vi. 37. “He
that corneth to me, I will in no wise cast out.”
These words, my precious Saviour was pleased to
apply to my very soul; and like the eunuch I
could say, “ I believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God.” I could say also, “ this is him
whom my soul loveth;” for I found him my
friend indeed! The hymn sung was, “ Come ye
sinners, poor and wretched,” &c. this I under-
stood by experience, and therefore was enabled
to take it to myself for comfort. Now was ful-
filled in me what the prophet says, Isaiah xlix.
10. “ Tor he that hath mercy on them shall
lead them, even by the springs of water shall he
guide them.”
On my return home, the people of the houge


told me that the same person would preach that
night in the Tabernacle. I was much struck
with the name Tabernacle, and was strongly
inclined to go, being much surprised to find such
a place among the Gentiles. But, its being on "a
Friday night, the Jewish Sabbath had com-
menced, and I reasoned with myself if I had not
better go to the Synagogue. But while I was
thus reasoning, and wishing to keep my con-
version secret, something (and I believe it was
the Holy Spirit) whispered within me, Go there
no more. So I went to the Tabernacle that
night, and Ann Young accompanied me, though
she belonged to Mr. Wesley’s room.
On entering the Tabernacle, we found Mr.
Kinsman was to preach, but I was so ignorant
that I did not know preaching from praying.
The text was Matth. vi. 6. “ Enter into thy
closet and shut thy door, and pray to thy Father
in secret, and thy father which seeth in secret,
himself shall reward thee openly.” I was much
affected, and cried out so loud, that I disturbed
the congregation, and Ann Young led me out;
but as soon as I recovered, I returned again, and
as I went in, a person passed by me, whom I
conceived to be a converted Jewess; her name
was Levy: I had often heard of her, but had
never seen her before. On my return into the


Tabernacle, I was again so affected by the power
of the word, that I was again obliged to go out
with Ann Young, and continued in the Court
till the congregation broke up, and then Mrs.
Levy came to me and said, “ Hath Jesus Christ
taken hold on you, my dear?” She had been
informed who I was; and upon that she thus ad-
dressed me, and told me, that Mr. Kinsman was
the person that was blessed to her conversion.
She desired me to come and see her the next
morning, but this 1 refused, and told her I must
keep my Sabbath. She replied, “Oh! ray dear,
you shall keep your Sabbath.” Upon this, after
much in treaty, I consented, we parted, and on
my return home I was much tempted by the
adversary, who persuaded me not to go among
the Gentiles. This distressed me greatly, inso-
much that I could hardly fulfil my engagement
with Mrs. Levy; for, like Nicodemus, I wanted
to keep my Christianity a secret, for fear of the
Jews, and my mind hankered after the Syna-
gogue. But blessed be the Lord, he sent these
sweet words home to my mind, Isaiah li. 7*
“ Fear not the reproach of men, neither be afraid
of their revilings.” And this sweet word also,
Chap. xlix. f 3. “ But thus saith the Lord, even
the captives of the mighty shall be taken away,
and the prey of the/terrible shall be delivered;


for I will contend with them that contend with
thee, and I will save thy children.” By this, the
Lord brought me on my knees before him, and
by his Spirit taught me what to ask of him. I
prayed unto him and said, “ Oh! teach me thy
ways! my ways are not thy ways, but Lord teach
me thy ways. ’ After this I was convinced, and
resolved to keep the Jewish Sabbath no more,
but to observe that precious day on which our
blessed Saviour arose from the dead. I was also
convinced that I ought to fulfil my promise to
Mrs. Levy, and accordingly I went to her the
next morning. Her husband was there, who also
was a Jew converted to Christ, and a man well
read in the Scriptures, and I found it a precious
meeting. He pointed out the promises to me,
which I had never seen before.
Lord’s-day following they took me with them
to Mr. Wesley’s room, and the preacher spoke
much of the Jews, and from that I concluded,
they had informed him of me, and that I was
there. Returning home, I refused their intreaties
of dining with them; for I had not lost my Jewish
notions of meats clean and. unclean ; and
1 was afraid they would ask me to eat of
things I then thought unclean; I therefore re-
tained home. I now fell on my knees, and
Squired of the Lord if I was in the way to hap-
Pmess, and he was graciously pleased to convince


me that I was. I continued to go to Mr. Wes-
ley’s room, and took a ticket from the society to
their class meeting.
The next Saturday I employed myself in
washing a few things for my children; the Jews
according to their custom of visiting on their
Sabbath, called on me, and observing my em-
ployment, asked if I knew what day it was; I
replied, “ yes, but my Sabbath is that day on
which the Son of God arose from the dead.”
Upon this, they began to curse and swear, and
went away. But rny husband being then at
Devizes, they wrote to him, and told him I w;;s
turned to the Gentiles. At this he was so
shocked that he fainted away, and was rendered
incapable of coming to me that day. But the
next day he came, and on his arrival he found
that I was at the Tabernacle. The people ol the
house were much alarmed at his coming, because
they knew they had been instrumental, in the
Lord’s hand, in bringing me to the Gospel. I hey
immediately informed me of his arrival; I calmly
told them not to be alarmed, but return and
inform him I was coming home. I then prayed
to my Redeemer, that he would teach me how
to speak the truth to my husband; he gave me
strength, and I met him in good spirits. He
inquired where I had been, I answered, “ In®
good place, and wish you had been with JE e *


He replied, “ God forbid that I should go among
the Gentiles!” and asked me, if it was possible
for me to believe in Jesus Christ? I answered,
yes; and told him, if I was tortured to death, I
hoped I should hold fast my confidence. When
he found he could not prevail on me, he bid me
quit the room, which I did; he then locked him-
self in, intending to destroy himself. But I, per-
ceiving his intention, got the door forced open,
and fell on his neck, and cried in Paul’s language
to the jailor, “Do thyself no harm.”—“ I will
make thee a better wife than ever I made thee
before.” But notwithstanding all my persuasions,
he resolved to take his children from me, and
leave me the next morning; but God stopped
him in his mad career.
That night he had an awful dream, and in con-
sequence of this dream, instead of leaving me, he
attended with me every opportunity in some
Christian place of worship, and was in fact con-
vinced that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, and from
that time never went to the Synagogue more.
So far , he left his former superstition ; —would
to God I could say more of him.
However, he attended with me three weeks at
Mr. Wesley’s room; and as we were going one
Tuesday night as usual, as soon as he was entered
1 told him I could go no further, but must go to


the Tabernacle; I did so, but on my coming
there I found the doors locked. However,
instead of going to Mr. Wesley’s room, I kept
knocking at the door; and as I stood there
knocking the Rev. Mr. Joss and his wife passed
by, and asked what I wanted there, and told me
there was no preaching there that night; but I
answered I must go there that night. They per-
ceived I was a foreigner, asked me what country
I was of, and I told them. He said he had heard
of me, and took me into the Tabernacle House,
and asked why I was so desirous of entering the
Tabernacle that night, telling me there was only
a private Society. On hearing that, I desired
him to'take me with them to their Society, but
he told me that strangers were not admitted. But
by importunity I at length prevailed, and he took
me with him. On entering the Society Room, I
w ? as so overjoyed that I clapped my hands, and
said, this is the place that I saw in a dream some
months before. I then earnestly desired to be
baptized; and the Soceity made many enquiries
about my conversion. The minister prayed for
me, and the next morning sent to the Rev.
Rowland Hill (then out of Bristol) that he
might come and baptize me. He came the
next week and gave out in the congregation on
the Lord’s-day, that on the then ensuing Monday


a Jewess and three of her children would be
baptized.
On my hearing the experience of the people
of God at the Society, I found it so much like
my own, that I thought they were all of the seed*
of Abraham ; and the relation of their experience
did me much good. I learnt thereby, the benefit of
Christian communion, and the relating and hearing
each others experience. But to return, the Jews
hearing that I was to be baptized crowded to the
Tabernacle to see the ceremony; and when they
had seen it, as I suspect, wrote away to my hus-
band’s friends in London immediately, without
either of our knowledge, and got them- to send
away seven of our children, whom we left with
them, to,>l suppose, High Germany; for, since
that time, I have never heard of either ot them
to this hour.
This was soon followed by a variety of changes
in our circumstances, which occasioned me
great trials. And at length my husband left me,
being so reduced that he was forced to go to sea
as a doctor, in order to maintain himself and his
family. Soon after his departure I received two
letters from him, which expressed his affection
to me, but since that I have never seen him or
heard from him to this hour. He left three chil-
di'en with me. The youngest of these was a


daughter, who died in the year 1785, and in the
eleventh of her age. lam persuaded she died
ha PPy ,n Lord. In her last illness, which
lasted eight days, she was ever crying out what a
einner she was, and intreated me to send for a
minister to come to her; I did so; when he came
he observed to her, she was but a child. She
replied, “ True! but I am a great sinner!” and
asked him, if there was forgiveness for her,
saying she had told many lies, and that she
had not liked to go to Tabernacle, but was
compelled to it by her mother. She begged him
to pray with her, that the Lord would have
mercy on her. He did so; and,at his departure,
through fatigue she fell asleep: on waking, she
called me, and asked me it I had given her up?
She also toid me, that she knew her sins were
forgiven her, and that Christ had washed her in
his blood. I asked her how she knew it ? she
replied, that she had been told so in her sleep.
She called for her Hymn Book, selected the
Pilgrim s Song, and requested it might be sung
at her funeral, telling me, that the two first
verses were suited to her situation, the first of
which is as follows:
Rise my soul, ami stretch thy wings,
Thy better portion trace j
Rise from transitory things,
T’wards Heaven thy native place...


After this she intreated me to give her up, and
console myself with the assurance that she was
only gone a little before me. I asked her why
she loved Jesus Christ? She replied,“ Because
he hath redeemed me.” Being asked if she was'
happy, she laid her hands on her breast, and
repeated these words, “ Happy, happy, happy I”
and the day following fell asleep in Jesus.
The death of this dear child was one of the
greatest trials to me that ever I met with (except
that of my own soul). But God of his infinite
mercy supported me. And I was persuaded,
that though the Lord had taken away this dear
child, he would send me home another; for I then
had a son (one of the three that my husband left
me) at sea. I had neither seen nor heard of him
for five years, nor was I certain by any intelligence
received from him, whether he was dead or alive.
One evening as I was at Lady Huntingdon’s
Chapel, a friend of mine came to me, and desired
me to stay after worship was over, for she had
something particular to say to me. I did so;
but before my friend could have time to tell me
to® expected news, which I was so desirous of
knowing, I asked her if it was news of my son
she had to tell me ? My friend was struck with
a stonishment at my inquiry, and thought some
Person had told me of it, but no creature had.


But how great was my surprise, when my sou
came to me, and said, “ Yes, my dear mother, I
am your son.” Think, dear .reader, what joy I
felt at that instant; and see how the Lord guides
the wheels of Providence to the comfort of those
that confide in him, and fulfils his gracious pro-
mise to his poor afflicted people. I could not
forbear crying out with David, “ O praise the
Lord for he is good, and his mercy endureth for
ever.” And with the father of the prodigal son
I was led to rejoice, that my son was alive; and
though once lost, yet now he was found, especi-
ally when he had informed me in what a mavel-
]ous manner he was delivered from imminent
danger and distress abroad.
But another trial came on: and that was how
to support my son now he was come, for he had
nothing to support himself. Then that Scrip-
ture came to my mind, that “ through much
tribulation we must enter the kingdom.” It was
also brought to my recollection, that the Children
of Israel were to eat the Paschal Lamb with
hitter herbs; and I can say I found it to be even
so* I trust I have often fed on the Paschal Lamb
for sinners slain, to the joy and comfort of nay
soul; but I have found there must be bitter
herbs too. And such as the following I wa»
obliged to taste of. From a state of affluence*


and the enjoyment of every worldly good, I was
now reduced to labour for my bread in the fol-
lowing manner: I made perfumery, and carried
it about the city to sell, to get a living for myself
and children. One Saturday, as I was sitting in'
James’s Market, a gentleman passed by me,
whom I knew not; but I thought it could be no
offence to askhim ifhe wouldbuy any of mygoods,
I did so, not thinking of giving any insult, nor
did I know what the gentleman’s business in the
market was; but by his imperious treatment he
*oon informed me; for coming immediately to
me, he with his stick knocked my basket of
perfumery out of ray hand, and spoiled all that I
had, and struck me several times, and turned me
out of the market. He then bid the constable
take me immediately to Bridewell; however, he
was not obeyed in this; but a mob arose about
me, and it happening to be the time when the
Jews were returning from Synagogue, they
heard the gentleman exclaim, “ Take her to
Bridewell!” they presently understood it was
me and began to triumph, saying, “ O! that’s
right; take her to Bridewell,” and many other
evil words did they utter. This gentleman I
afterwards understood was the Chamberlain of
the City. And thus the bitter herbs were ad-
ministered by Jew and Gentile, My reader may


believe me, my feelings were too pungent to be
here expressed. I was a stranger in a strange land,
reduced to poverty, forsaken by my husband, and
knew not a friend after the flesh that I could
speak to, though, blessed be God, I had some
spiritual friends; and glory to his divine name, the
Lord was present with me, and the blessed Jesus,
whom the Jews blasphemed, was the trust and
confidence, the joy and rejoicing of my heart.
But my flesh began to kick at the cross, and
did not like to take it up. I began to think of
leaving Bristol, in order to shift the cross, and to
be excused of following Christ through evil
report. But as I was thus thinking, that text
impressed my mind, “ I know thy works : behold
I have set before thee an open door, and no man
can shut it; for thou hast a little strength, and
hast kept my word, and hast not denied my
name.” These words surprised me, nor did I
know whether they were in the Scripture or no,
because I could not then read English. But, I
have found this sweet word verified since to my
comfort.
I remember the very day I received the above
insult, that I went to Mrs. Palmer’s, in Wine-
street, and sat down in her shop and cried. The
sight of this touching the good woman’s feelings,
she desired to know the cause of my trouble. I


told her what I had met with that day, and said
moreover, that I could not go in the streets to
sell my goods again if I starved. She said to me,
“ My dear, my door shall always be open to you,
and I will be your friend for ever, as far as it lie's
in my power.” And she hath hitherto been as good
t Ss her word; and not only she herself, but her
'family also have been very kind indeed; the Lord
reward them ten thousand fold. Now my
reader may see the infinite goodness of God to a
poor distressed*ereature, in finding me such a
seasonable friend. When the Israelites were
sorely oppressed by Taskmasters in Egypt, then
the Lord heard their cry and came down to
deliver them. And this lean say,when I was
sorely oppressed the Lord found a friend for me,
opened her heart to me, and her house for me,
and that day was a poor afflicted stranger relieved
and the Lord’s precious promise fulfilled, and
I have staid in Bristol ever since; and not
°nly so, but I have found the Lord hath not let
me want a friend, or friends, nor food to eat, nor
raiment to put on; but blessed be the Lord I
have each of these, which is a fulfilment of other
Precious promises of the Lord to me, and all that
b’uly trust in him.
Many other deliverances I have particularly
experienced at different times, as I needed them,
C


but I forbear to enlarge; only I would add, before
I close this account, that I have found trials none
of the least among false brethren. Paul says
(and I have often thought on it), “ Howbeit for
this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus
Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a
pattern to them which should hereafter believe on
him to life everlasting.” I may say to every Saint
what the Scripture hath said before me, that we
must be content to follow the Lord through
evil as well as good report. I have known more
than once, what it is to be watched over for evil,
by great professors that have spoken evil against
me, and such too, as I had not only done no evil
unto, but did more than once serve in times of
need. But what shall I say, I freely forgive them
and pray that the Lord may forgive them also.
And further, instead of hurting me, I humbly
trust it “ shall produce to me the peageable
fruits of righteousness, and the end eternal life.”
“ I myself (as Paul says) was before a blasphemer
and injurious, only I have obtained mercy,”
though the vilest sinner of Adam’s race. And
therefore I may well expect to share a part in the
calumny of slanderous tongues. I bless the Lord
for all my friends, and for all their friendship,
and I am persuaded the Lord will reward them;
I freely forgive all mine enemies, and may the


Lord forgive them also. He hath forgiven me
freely though a poor Jerusalem sinner, and I
would as freely forgive all that have any way
injured me.
A HYMN.
BY MRS. NONMUS.
Oh! come, ye saints, and sinners too.
To hear the Gospel sound.
Salvation is proclaim’d to you;
The trump is blown around.
Take up your cross and follow him.
Through good and ill report;
O come, ye saints, and to the Lamb,
Without the camp resort.
“ No cross, no crown,” we all know well,
The words that Jesus saith.
Press on, ye saints, and win the day.
Fight the good fight of faith.
Did Simon bear the cross alone.
And every saint go free ?
No, there’s a cross for every one,
And sure there’s one for me.
C 2


Tis Jesus Christ our risen Lord,
That calls us to the field:
He is our captain and our strength,
Our leader and our shield.
Mrs. Nonmus adds to the above account—l
cannot close this narrative without an affection-
ate address to my brethren the Jews. I would
therefore intreat them in Jehovah s name, se-
riously to consider what I am about to say.
The ever-blessed God having a design of mercy
for me, was pleased, in the depth of his infinite
providence, to bring me from High Germany to
England, as some of you know, and as all may
learn from the beginning of this pamphlet.
But, my brethren, I should not be a real dis-
ciple of my Saviour Jesus Christ, if I had not a
tender affection for you, and an ardent desire for
your salvation. My blessed Saviour prayed on
his cross for those very persons who had crucified
him. Luke xxiii. 24. And 1 esteem it my duty,
after his example, to offer up my prayers to God,
that his anger may be turned away from you,
and that you may be converted. How will you
escape if you neglect this great salvation ! Read
much the Holy Scriptures, and you will find they
all testify of him. Jeremiah says, in his days,
“ Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwel


safely; and this is his name whereby he shall be
called, the Loud our Righteousness.” And
I am fully convinced that this is spoken of the
Messiah, and that Jesus Christ, whom your fore-
fathers crucified, is the very person the prophet
means. Be assured of it, brethren, the Messiah
is come, and hath wrought out salvation for us,
and you may look in vain for another.
I believe that he is the Angel whom Jacob says
redeemed him from all evil, and the person whom
he invoked to bless the lads. Gen. xlviii. IG.
Jesus Christ is the promised spiritual seed of
Abraham, in whom all nations of the earth are to
be blessed. And he is the Shiloh that was to
come before the departing of the sceptre from
Judah ; and how can you at all gainsay it? Is
not the sceptre finally and totally departed ? and
if so, is this prophecy true or false? Let God be
true, if your Rabbins be found liars. Either the
Messiah must and did come before the departing
°f the sceptre from Judah, or else there is no
truth in the word pf God. But never was, nor
ever will there be one jot of the word of God
falsified. But you have been always looking for
a Messiah that God never promised, and which
y° u .will never find. Therefore I intreat you by
the mercies of God, and by all that is sacred and
good, believe, and say with the prophet Isaiah,
- C 3


chap. ix. 6, “ For unto us a child is born, unto
us a son is given, and the governmernt shall be
upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called
Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.” And
this Prince of Peace is Jesus Christ, who was
born of the blessed Virgin in the days of Herod,
in the town of Bethlehem, more than 1700 years
ago. He was sent a light to lighten the Gentiles
and to be the glory of his people Israel. And
were you once brought to glory in him, God would
again make you a glory in the earth, which I
earnestly pray for and cheerfully expect. lam
persuaded the Deliverer will come out of Zion,
and turn away ungodliness from Jacob.
You are now by the just judgment of God
driven from all nations for your sins,.and shut
up in ignorance and unbelief, yet God will in
mercy visit you, when once yoiu dieadful pie
judice against Christ is removed. But not till then
will you ever be a people and church ol God, as
you once were. While you blaspheme Christ,
and anathematize the Christians, God will con-
tinue to anathematize you. That he has cast
you out to the loathing of your persons these
1700 years and more, you cannot be so blind as
not to know, or so hardened as not to be sensible
of. And why doth the Lord deal thus wrathful^


with you ? Because you have rejected the Mes-
siah, of whom the prophets did write; therefore
hath God rejected you from being his people;
and the salvation that you have despised, God
hath mercifully given to the Gentiles; and,
blessed be his name, I have found it amongst
them.
Come then, my dear brethren, believe in the
Son of God, and he will make you everlastingly
happy. His ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all his paths are peace. And till you know
Christ as true 'Christians do, you cannot know
peace; for he is the Prince of Peace. I defy any
Jew in the world to point me out such pleasure
as that which the real Christian enjoys in and
through Christ Jesus. Therefore, again I say,
that unless jmu truly know Christ, and really
believe in him, you cannot know peace. How
should you ? For till that is your case, the
wrath of God abideth on you, and will for ever
abide, till your hearts are purified by faith in
Christ Jesus, who was born of the Virgin Mary,
and died on the cross to take away the sins of
his people. Believe me, brethren, these blas-
phemous accusations laid against Jesus Christ
by your Rabbins, are nothing but lies, that the
f ather of Lie* hath taught them, in order to
destroy your souls.
C 4


I beseech you, therefore, be no longer deceived
by them, but be intreated to read Moses and
the Prophets, and judge for yourselves; and you
cannot help being convinced that Jesus Christ is
the true and only Messiah, and that you look
in vain for another. Be persuaded to lay aside
your destructive prejudice, and read the New
Testament, and compare it with the Old, and
you y will find the most harmonious agreement
between them; so that you must be constrained
to say, it is all divine, and we have been de-
ceived. This I know by happy experience to
be a divine truth; and sure I am, that the Fa-
ther ol Mercies hath taught me; all the Jews
therefore are under a fatal delusion, and those
only who, embrace the true Messiah, as God
hath enabled me to do, shall be saved with an
everlasting salvation,
I therefore intreat and beseech you, no longer
to regard lying vanities, and forsake your own
mercies; but embrace the Saviour and his great
salvation, and you will be the happiest people
in the world. Do not be afraid or ashamed ot
frecpient Christian worship where Christ is
purely preached; for that is the means which
God hath appointed to teach us the way of sal-
vation. If therefore you wish to know God
aright, come and be taught according to his


own divine appointment; for this is the happy
means of conveying saving knowledge to the
soul.
Can you suppose that your God will ever
leave a soul that humbly and sincerely seeks
divine teaching from him, to embrace so vile an
imposture, as you falsely say Christianity is?
Doth he not say by the mouth of David, Psal.
xxv. 9. “ The meek will he guide in judgment,
and the meek will he teach his way.” And
again, verse 14. “ The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and he will shew them
his covenant?” Now can this be true, if God
leaves such persons as these to embrace a cursed
delusion? But can you produce one single in-
stance in which he ever did? lam sure you
cannot. On the other hand, lam a living wit-
ness to the contrary, and many thousands more,
both Jews and Gentiles, who have been taught
of God himself to embrace Jesus Christ, and the
gospel of his grace, and this hath made them
most blessed and happy, in the midst of the
most awful torments, and death itself; and can
you any longer be so worse than blind, as to
think this a delusion? Your own reason and
conscience must tell you it is no deception, but
true and real. How then will you escape the
dreadful curse of God, if you continue to reject


Jesus Christ? When this divine Jehovah Jesus
shall come in the clouds of Heaven, taking’ ven-
geance on all that obey not his gospel, shall you
escape? Rather will you not woefully wail be-
cause of him ? For, remember, he will not stand
at your tribunal then; you will not see him on
the cross to scofl at him then. No: it will be
your turn to be judged as malefactors* and he
will be your judge. And if his blood is not
now the blood of atonement for your sins; it
will then be on you as Abel’s blood was on
Cain, with a tenfold vengeance that will sink
you to the nethermost Hell. God of his infinite
mercy prevent it, and may he give you eyes to
see, and hearts to understand what the prophets
have said concerning Jesug Christ, that his blood
may not come upon you in vengeance to con-
demn you, but in mercy to save you!
My dearest brethren, do not imagine that all
who profess Christianity are real Christians; by
no means-: they only are true Christians who
have learnt of Jesus Christ to deny “ all ungod-
liness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present evil
world;” any thing short of this is not Christianity.
Every real Christian has his heart and life puri-
fied by a true faith in Christ Jesus; and this faith
in Christ teaches the persons who have it to de


part from all iniquity; and they shew in their
lives and conversation, that they are blessed with
the same faith, as faithful Abraham was, and
may the Lord bless you all with it!
And remember, brethren, they that are Christs
real disciples receive him as their King and
Sovereign as well as their Saviour, therefore you
will not see them breaking the Christian Sab-
bath, or getting drunk, or living in any sin that
is condemned in the Old Testament or the New,
but they receive all the Word of God for their
rule of life, as well as the articles of their faith.
Such persons as these are real Christians; and
such Christians may God make every one of you,
for Jesus Christ’s sake! Amen.
And now I would drop a word to you, dear
people of our Lord Jesus Christ, who have truly
known him, and really believed in him., My
dearest friends, I plainly perceive it is not tor
any merit or worthiness in us that we are saved
from the wrath of God, and from the. worst of
delusion. No—l plainly see it is grace only to
which I am indebted for the whole ot my salva-
tion from first to last. I see myself a vile Jeiu-
salem sinner, and I know nothing ot God, or sal-
vation by Christ, but what he was graciously
pleased to teach me. I find, after twelve years


expeiicnce, I must still go to Jesus as a poor
helpless hell-deserving creature, having nothing
in myself but sin and misery. And when I thus
go to him, though I have nothing in myself, then
I see tnat in him I have all things, and therefore
not unto me, not unto me, but to thy name, dear
Jesus, be all the glory, for thy mercy and thy
truth’s sake!
I see and feel I never should have turned
Chiistian unless Jesus Christ had turned me;
and theiefore it must be grace alone that saves
me; and the same grace that saves me, saves all
the people of God. It was free grace chose us
in Christ Jesus before the world was made ; and
free unmerited love that influenced Jesus to die
for us; and it is sovereign goodness that moves
the Holy Spirit to work upon and in us, and
Wty blood of sprinkling unto us. And
therefore, I thus conclude : God the Father
freely loves us; God the Son freely redeems us;
and God the Holy Spirit freely sanctifies us:
thus our salvation is wholly, fully, and entirely of
grace and free electing love. Therefore,
Tho’ Infidels may laugh,
And Pharisee* may rail;
The Lord’s elect shall still be safe,
Nor can they ever fail.


It is this that secures our calling by efficacious
grace,, and leads us to Jesus for righteousness to
justify, and grace to sanctify us wholly, body, soul,
and spirit; and for strength to persevere in the
ways of God, till we come to the glory of God iru
Heaven. And aU this is infallibly secured to
every believing soul, by the eternal unchangeable
purpose of God.
God’s people are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, a peculiar people; predestinated unto
salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and
belief of the truth; created in Christ Jesus unto
good works. The people of God are predesti-
nated to a saving faith in Christ, and a righteous
life as the way, and to certain, eternal salvation
as the end. They do not live and die in sin.
No—it is impossible, they are chosen to holiness
as much as to happiness. Divine grace causes us
to pant and pray as much for the one as the
other; and God will hear our prayer, and grant
our request. Therefore let the weak say I am
strong, and the fearful join with me and sing,
« Now let my soul arise,
*• And tread the tempter down :
“ My Captain leads me forth,
“ To conquest and a crown :
u The feeblest saint shall win the day,
“ Though Death and Hell obstruct the way.


These are the precious truths upon which my
soul now lives, and by them I hope triumphantly
to die, and go to Heaven to know them better.
Amen.
THE END.
Printed by R. Tilling, Newport, Isle of Wight,


