

THE
GRIFFILWRAITH
Being an Independent Criticism of the
Methods and Manoeuvres of the
Queensland Coalition Govern-
ment, 1890-1893.
BY A. G. STEPHENS
Author of “ Why North Queensland Wants Separation,” etc., etc.
PRICE—ONE SHILLING
BRISBANE:
A. J. ROSS & CO., PRINTERS, 26 QUEEN STREET.
MDCCCXCIII.




THE
GRIFFILWRAITH
BEING
AN INDEPENDENT CRITICISM
OF THE
METHODS AND MANCEUVRES
OF THE
Queensland Coalition Government,
1890-93.
BY A. G. STEPHENS
Author of “ Why North Queensland Wants Separationetc., etc.
Brisbane :
A. J. ROSS & CO., PRINTERS, 26 QUEEN STREET.
ATDCCCXCIH.


DEDICATION.
TO THE 25,000 ELECTORS WHO HAVE NO VOTES.
Gentlemen. —The Parliamentary election approaches. Many
persons will address the electors who have votes : 1 prefer to address
you, who have none.
You have the best of all reasons for believing me —I am not
trying to make anything out of you. I do not “ solicit your vote
and interest ” —in the first place, because I am not a candidate for
Parliament; and in the second place, because you have no vote and
interest to solicit. That, of course, is your fault; but it is not my
misfortune.
I leave some sympathy with you, for I have no vote or interest
myself. It is true that I was born in Queensland : that for nearly
thirty years l hare lived in Queensland; that J hope to die in
Queensland. But my profession as a journalist frequently obliges me
to travel about Queensland.; and though that may sharpen my
intellect, and enlarge my experience, and increase my capacity as an
elector, it also prevents me from using my capacity. This is my mis-
fortune, yet l cannot persuade myself it is my fault.
m
Nevertheless, as a Queenslander, I cannot help taking an interest
in the administration of government in Queensland. This is natural;
though the electoral law considers it improper. Perhaps you take an
interest too ? If you do, you may like to know my thoughts, as L
would like to know yours. They are true thoughts—that is, they may
be right or wrong, but I honestly believe they are right. If you
think they are a little wrong, it does not matter much to you, since I
have no vote. If you think they are a good deal wrong, it does not
matter at all to me, since you have no votes. You see there are com-
pensations.
No one indeed compensates me for bothering my head about the
Coalition Government ; though somebody might compensate me for not
bothering. But then, of course lam a comparatively young man ;
and the foolish young notions about the duty of a citizen to his
native country have not yet left me. Possibly in time 1 may be con-
tent when the country is misgoverned, to shrug my shoulders and be
silent. In the meantime, gentlemen, I cannot help remaining,
Yours faithfully,
A. G. STEPHENS.
Toowoomba, March 25, 1893.


THE GRIFFILWRAITH.
I.—BEFORE THE COALITION.
IN the year 1888 Queensland was sick and tired of the Griffith
Government. Its administration had been a conspicuous
failure, and it had contrived to disgust every party in turn.
Squatters and sugar-planters, farmers and miners, capitalists
and labourers were eager for its downfall. The shuffling policy
of the Premier—all hesitation and half-measures —had confirmed
the estimate of his powers previously formed by unbiassed
thinkers. An acute and subtle lawyer, an adept in all the little
intricacies of Bill-drafting and the technical business of legis-
lation, an able critic of other men’s minds and a keen analyst
of othei’ men’s motives, Sir Samuel Griffith lacks the broad
grasp of affairs, the comprehensive farsight, and the capacity
to subordinate non-essential details to essential principles,
which characterise the statesman.
When the general election forced upon the Griffith Govern-
ment a hasty abdication, and they reluctantly descended from
the high places of Ministerial office, there was an almost
universal sigh of relief at the lifting of the incubus. A large
section of the Press sang a lusty paean of thanksgiving, and the
electors, spurning the caresses of the old love, flung themselves
eagerly into the arms of the new. The country was pining for
the change, though in places the personal influence of old
representatives succeeded in resisting the onset of the flowing
tide. Nevertheless, there was fresh life and vigour in the body
politic. The formation of what was called an Australian National
Party aided the revulsion of feeling which spurned the servile Im-
perialism of Sir Samuel Griffith* ; and though the party did not
long outlast the elections, its wholesome influence gave to
* Imperialism, we take it, would be the enthusiastic support of any
measure by which the colonies would be bound to the Imperial Government
in financial chains, or by which the colonies would be compelled to pay tri-
bute towards Imperial Defence without the slightest control of the expendi-
ture of the tribute. —Brisbane Courier , May 8, 1888.


election warfare a patriotic aim and impulse wliich lifted people
high above the common rut of selfishness, and purged the colony
of much sickly impurity of thought and conduct.
As Premier in the new Ministry, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith
commanded a good majority, and though the situation was
critical the omens were auspicious. Sir Samuel Griffith had a
difficult part to play. Ousted from the chief position in a
weak and unpopular Government , he had to make head against a
strong and popular one. When he recovered from the shock
of overthrow, and cast about for expedients to regain the place
from which he had been so rudely tumbled, the first that com-
mended itself to him was to pander to the Labour Party. He
adopted the role of the working-man’s friend, and wrote
magazine articles pointing out that the modern labourer was
defrauded of his due share of the world’s wealth.! In 1890 he
introduced a Bill to regulate the hours of labour by making the
working day consist of eight hours, and during the discussion
on the Chinese Restriction Bill he showed himself more extreme
than the extremists, upbraiding the Ministry with sacrificing the
interests of the colony to a desire to please Lord Knutsford
and the Colonial Office. The first result of this policy was the
alienation of a powerful section of his adherents, including Mr.
*l. R. Dickson and Mr. P. T. Brentnall, who by the middle of
1889 were in open antagonism to their whilom leader.
Before this, however, a trifling incident, involving an
important principle, resulted in the recall of Governor
Musgrave. The Cabinet recommended remission of the
sentence of a criminal found g'uilty of larceny. The Governor
refused to give effect to the recommendation, and the Ministry
resigned. Sir Samuel Griffith supported the Governor, and
stood forward as the champion of Imperial authority against
the people’s representatives. He was asked to form a new
Ministry, but found himself unable. The matter was referred
to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, who decided that the
Ministry was right and the Governor wrong, and laid down the
precedent that in matters of internal administration the will of
the popular Executive must be paramount.
Among the most important measures which occupied the
attention of the new Parliament were the Government
Bills which transferred to Commissioners the control of
the Civil Service, and of the Public Departments of Lands
and Railways. At the end of the session of 1888 Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith resigned his offices as Premier and
t The relation between labour and capital constitutes one of the great
difficulties of the day. I look to the recognition of the principle that a share
of the profits of productive labour belongs of right to the labourer as of the
greatest importance in the future adjustment of those relations. —Sir S. W.
Griffith, March 8, 1888.


Treasurer, and left the colony on a trip to Japan. 111-health
was the reason given for this step. Mr. Mor*ehead became
Premier, and Mr. Pattison was made Colonial Treasurer.
Governor Norman arrived in April, and his speech at. the re-
opening of Parliament in May contained no mutterings of
thunder. Calm pleasure at the results of the past and serene
contemplation of the progress of the future —these were its
contents ; and to all appearance the Governor might be some
gentle shepherd, the soft notes of his pipe heralding the
approach of a Parliamentary millennium, when the National
lion should lie down with the Imperialistic lamb, and all envy
and bitterness be forgotten in a rosy dream of peace and
prosperity and harmony.
The promise of May was not destined to be fulfilled. The
Treasury returns for the half-year ended 31st December, 1888,
gave abundant material for congratulation, thanks to increased
Customs taxation. - The l'evenue of the colony was greater bv
£300,000 than the revenue for the corresponding period of 1887,
while the expenditure was actually less. The Griffith legacy of
debt was reduced by £327,292 during the half-year, and stood
at £274,718, while there was a steady increase in the earnings
of every administrative department. The revenue obtained
from taxation (on the revised tariff) showed the most marked
accession, being nearly £190,000 in advance of that for the last
half of 1887. But other sources of income also gave excellent
results. Territorial revenue exhibited an increase of £38,000 ;
railways, £17,000 ; postage, telegraphs, and harbour dues,
£4OOO each ; and miscellaneous receipts £16,000, over the
amounts for the corresponding period of 1887. Yet economy
kept down the expenses in every department, though thorough
efficiency was maintainecj.; and the result was that in spite of
the increased revenue, and the naturally increased cost of ad-
ministration, the expenditure was reduced.
Unfortunately, this progress could not be maintained.
The colony’s back had been broken by the previous Administra-
tion. and it was unable to bear the burden put upon it. In
1889 expenditure began to increase. Nevertheless, so large
was the additional income from taxation (£622,000) that the
financial year closed on June 30, 1889, with a surplus of revenue
over expenditure of £116,846, though the quarter ending the
same date showed a deficit of expenditure on revenue of
£318,464. Mr. Pattison divided the credit of the surplus
netween Sir Thomas Mcllwraith and himself, though the colony
was steadily going down hill.
Towards the end of the year Parliament grew lively.
There were dissensions in the Cabinet, and Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith, returned from Japan, resigned his seat, and by
October was in open enmity with the Morehead Ministry. The


course of opposition to legislation upon which the Griffith
party then entered was the culmination of the endeavours
which they had made ever since the general election to dis-
credit the Government in the eyes of the people. Perhaps no
previous Ministry had been the subject of such sedulous mis-
representation and vilification as that which, with Sir Thomas
McTlwraith as its head, endeavoured to stem the tide of disaster
admitted by the heedless blunders of its predecessor, and
threatening, when the leaders of the National Party accepted
office, to completely overwhelm the colony. The Ministry were
advancing cautiously —retrenching expenditure, encouraging
industries, conserving resources, endeavouring by prudent
management to reform the abuses and clear off the deficit which
were the only conspicuous legacies they had received. In
Parliament their opponents were compelled to acknowledge
the necessity and the excellence of their policy of rehabilitation,
sind to accord it a grumbling support; but out of Parliament
the Ministers were dubbed tyrants, and their most harmless and
necessary measures became instruments for grinding the people
to the dust.
Realising, perhaps, that there was a suspiciously imaginative
air about these incoherent charges, the Griffith Press bolstered
them with numerous circumstantial allegations against the
personal character of Ministers, until those who were most familiar
with the originals could not recognise a single trait of the
sinister villains who glowered upon them from the pseudo-Liberal
•canvas. Put the charges had not the desired effect, and the Griffith-
ites had almost reconciled themselves to a long and weary wait
in Opposition, when the accession of Sir Thomas M‘llwraith
revived their drooping spirits and emboldened them to hope that
the divided Ministerialists would form an easy prey. Disap-
pointed to find that the party still held closely to the Ministry,
they yet resolved to take advantage of every point, however
trivial, which would serve as a basis for attack. The division on
the coloured labour vote was their first opportunity ; but though
supported by the powerful influence of the lirixbane Courier they
failed to shake the Ministerial position. Their second chance
came with the Loan Estimates, containing the famous reserva-
tion of £1,000,000 for railways without plans or specifications;
-and the so-called Liberals turned Conservatives, developed an
abnormal reverence for constitutional principle, and commenced
■“ stonewalling.” Their tactics were successful; the Government
were forced to withdraw the Estimates, and a compromise
followed. The Ministry gained time and sufficient money to
work with.
The session closed on 11th November after a duration of
nearly seven months. The Government still presented a bold


front. On the whole they had fairly fulfilled their promises-.
The Mines Regulation, Civil Service, Crown Lands Amendment*
Payment of Members, and Companies Acts were the more im-
portant measures passed. Sir Samuel Griffith contributed the
Defamation Act. Further reconstruction followed in the Cabinet;
Mr. Pattison resigned the Treasury, which was taken by Mr..
Donaldson, while Mr. Powers became Minister for Education.
Immediately afterwards, Mr. Pattison, in a speech to his Rock-
hampton constituents, made a vigorous attack on Sir Thomas.
Mcllwraith, whom he accused of “a base betrayal” of the
Ministry. He added that the colony’s finances were in evil case,
and that there must be more taxation, throwing the blame on
the extravagant system of expenditure introduced by the
£10,000,000 loan, and the shortage of revenue due to the 1884
Land Act. Sir Thomas M‘llwraith warmly retorted, and the year
ended ominously.
Parliament reopened on 24th June, 1890. The principal
measures announced by the Ministry were a Bill to provide an
elective Legislative Council and a Workshops and Factories Bill.
Both were imputed to them as crimes. The Elective Council
Bill would have been excellent, the country was told in effect,
had Sir Samuel Griffith introduced it; because Mr. Morehead
introduced it, it must be looked on askance, and a sinister motive-
sought for what, under other circumstances, would have been a
wise and patriotic measure. The Factories Bill, which, from the
hand of Sir Samuel Griffith, would have been hailed as proof
positive of his desire to advance the interests of the working-man,
became, from Mr. Macrossan, a mere sop to catch that labour
vote for which Sir Samuel himself was so persistently
angling. The diamond drills, the travelling dairies, the agri-
cultural lectures; —these, had Sir Samuel Griffith established
them, were irresistible evidence of his forethought and consider-
ation for miners and farmers, because established by his
opponents they were deprecated as trumpery affairs of doubtful
utility. The Opposition was at least consistent, and Sir Samuel
Griffith was true to his best personal traditions. There is a
difference of style and demeanour between Sir Samuel Griffith as
Minister and as Opposition Leader; but scratch the paint off, and
we find the same old Samuel beneath. We miss in the one
none of the egotism, the pettiness, and the narrowness which we
see in the other. “France will always be France,” says the
Parisian song, “ and Frenchmen will always be Frenchmen.”
Just as long will Griffith be Griffith. The light of office or the
shadow of Opposition can no more alter his natural peculiarities
than the tropic sun can turn an Icelander black. Transport him
to the moon for fifty years, and he would return with the same
penchant to glorify himself, the same tendency to impute evil


motives to others, the same coll sneer for everything which
implies a good quility in a political opponent or a bad one in a
political friend.
Until July, 189 J, Sir Samuel Griffith and Mr. Glassey were
rivals for the leadership of the Labour Party. In that month
the former dropped out of the running. He made an ad
■captanium speech at South Brisbane, in which he grandiloquently
“ trusted that his ideas had become more progressive in their
tendency.” Doubtless encouraged by this, the Australian Labour
Federation asked him to make the eight-hour clause compulsory
in his labour-day regulation Bill, previously referred to. He
replied, with instances, that it was impossible, and was plainly
told that the Labour Party distrusted him, and could give him
no support. From that day Sir Samuel Griffith’s enthusiasm
for the cause of Labour began to wane, and his sense of the
unequal distribution of wealth grew noticeably duller. The pro-
gress of his ideas was suddenly checked, and Mr. Glassey’s
position as Labour champion has never since been questioned.
On 80th July Mr. Donaldson made his budget statement.
It was clear, concise, emphatic, and informed the country that
the loss on the year’s operations was £484,000, making the deficit
£969,000. He proposed to balance revenue and expenditure by
a property tax of Id. in the £ above £SOO, and to reduce the
deficit by a tax on beer and spirits. No better proposals could
have been devised. The burden was put on the shoulders of
those able to bear it ; though publicans and large property-
owners were naturally indignant. The Opposition were taken
aback They had always insisted that the Government was the
■embodiment of wealthy conservatism, and had threatened in
advance to crush Ministers who dared to issue Treasury Bills.
Yet here was the “ Mount Morgan Ministry ” taxing Mount
Morgan .£BO,OOO at one blow ; here were the representatives of
Capital taxing Capital and exempting Labour ! But the Oppo-
sition were fighting not for principle, but for place. They
voted the proposals unsatisfactory. On a division the Govern-
ment had a majority of two votes ; but they decided that this
was insufficient, and resigned office early in August.
The Morehead Ministry no longer existed. To the best of
its ability it was a good Ministry, an honest Ministry, a useful
Ministry. It had to face a strong and unscrupulous Opposition,
and to endure both obloquy and misrepresentation ; it had to
perform the impossible task of reducing a heavy deficit with a
falling revenue ; and it came to grief on that rock of new taxa-
tion on which so many Ministries split. The Coalition followed.
The coming together of Griffith and Mcllwraith is one of
the most memorable events in the political history of Queens-
land. A priori, no more unlikely thing could have happened.


The two had been opponents for so long ; they differed so widely
upon important points of policy ; their conflict had, on many
occasions, been so bitter ; they were both so impatient of
“ brothers near the throne,” that obviously only an extraordi-
nary concatenation of circumstances could have brought a
coalition about. In 1888, when Griffith and Mcllwraith stood
together as candidates for the North Brisbane electorate, he
would have been called lunatic who said that in three years
they would sit side by side in the Cabinet. In the few months
which preceded M'llwraith’s Japan trip the breach was no
nearer closing. Even after his return, in a less important
capacity, and after the smouldering jealousy between himself
and his colleagues had blazed out in open rupture—even then
the union of the knights seemed outside practical politics. Sir
Thomas stated, in announcing his retirement, that he still sup-
ported the Ministry. He was certainly very far then from
dreaming of helping the Leader of the Opposition to wreck it.
But many little things imperceptibly alienated him from his
former friends, and bit by bit his criticism grew so hostile that
he was a supporter of the Opposition in effect, if not by avowal.
Yet still, to those who looked at past events and existing pledges,
a coalition appeared improbable. In spite of probabilities it took
place ; and even then people could not convince themselves it
would be lasting.
II.—AFTER THE COALITION.
TITHE Coalition killed the Liberal Party. Like Julius Caesar’
X it was stricken by its friend ; and Et tu, Sammy, was just
as appropriate as Et tu, Brute. The rage of the Liberals
at the catastrophe was chiefly fed by the knowledge that to their
trusted leader the catastrophe was entirely due. Mr. Groom and
Mr. Barlow, two untrusted lieutenants, were like the widows of
Ashur, loud in their wail. Perhaps a request to join the
Cabinet might have altered their views; but it was not forth-
coming. Mr. Barlow permitted himself to be consoled; Mr.
Groom was inconsolable. Of the lesser Liberal lights, some
swallowed the Coalition with a perceptible gulp; others were dis-
contented, but never dared to be dangerous. The Labour Party
found its worst forebodings confirmed, and resolved for the future
to play a lone political hand.


The Morehead Ministry had been overthrown on the financial
question, and it was the financial question which the Coalition
had first to consider. Parliament was prorogued for a month,
and in September Sir Thomas M'llwraith produced his amended
Budget. Mr. Donaldson had estimated the deficit on the current
year at £147,800 ; Sir Thomas Mcllwraith manipulated the
figures and promised a surplus of £6,998. He proposed to enact
a dividend-tax and a spirit tax, to increase the stamp duties, and
to make a saving on the Estimates, chiefly by reducing the en-
dowment to local authorities. This was a policy of makeshift,
and very poor makeshift toQ ; and it was plain the results were
pure guesswork. Instead of laying the axe to the root of the
deficit, the Treasurer and his colleagues contented themselves
with lopping oft' the branches. They provided for meeting defi-
ciency on current revenue, but of the accumulated deficit of
£969,000 nothing was said. The Leader of the Opposition
characterised the boasted retrenchment as mere legerdemain—a
reduction of general estimates by the simple process of transfer-
ring some items to loan account and eliminating others which
would turn up in supplementary estimates.
The Opposition, however, made only a formal resistance, and
the Treasurer’s schemes passed with merely perfunctory discus-
sion. He had taken the only way open to him. Further
Customs taxation w r as inexpedient, as well as ineffective ; a land
tax (evidently by agreement) was unavailable ; a property tax had
just been rejected ; an income tax was worse ; there remained
only the dividend-tax—a tax unsatisfactory and unequal in its
operation, which fines limited companies and lets wealthy indi-
viduals escape. The Treasurer might have gained £45,000 from
a beer tax ; but it did not suit him to impose a beer tax, so to
recoup local authorities for the loss of endowment by permitting
them to raise a larger local revenue, the Valuation and Rating
Act was introduced. During its progress through the Assembly
it was completely re-cast; and as eventually passed it changed
the whole system of municipal rating by exempting improvements
except on goldfields and taxing unimproved value only.
In October, Mr. Macrossan’s motion for Northern Separation
was defeated by six votes, Mr. Cowley voting for it; and next
month the Premier introduced Provincial Partition proposals
which also came to nothing. Early in December Parliament
was prorogued. It did little of permanent value during its three
months’ session, which was chiefly characterised by indifference
amounting to recklessness. The Opposition adopted a policy of
masterly inactivity, and the political pendulum swung at once
from zeal into apathy. The tense eagerness of the time when the
division-list contained the name of every representative, and the
stonewalling record was broken by orators ready to do or die in


defence of legislative precedent, became a laxity whose easy
insouciance the violation of a score of legislative principles could
not shock. The revulsion was demoralising. Deprived of the
bracing influence of opposition, the Ministry grew careless and
petulant; while the criticism to which their antagonists restricted
themselves had not sufficient vigour to be useful. Mr. Donaldson
went through the form of discussing the Ministerial Bills as they
were presented, but it was merely talking for talk’s sake, and few
of his remarks had any practical value except as Aunt Sallys for
the Premier to shy at. All along the debates lacked pith and
energy, except where local prejudices toughened their fibre ; and
the gravest questions of public administration received only heed-
less or flippant comment. With Mr. Macrossan died the energy
and earnestness of the National Party.
Under such circumstances, the apparent success with which
the Ministry concluded the session could not be deemed a very brilli-
ant augury for the future. The merits of their crude financial policy
by no means justified the placid benediction which Parliament
bestowed upon it; and it did not seem likely that the process of
clipping and tacking by which revenue was made to fit expendi-
ture would stand the test of experience. Salvation theoretically
lay in an elaborate system of checks and counterpoises, taxes and
economies ; but the colony’s income showed no signs of improve-
ment.
What is known as the maritime strike had lasted from
August to October of 1890, causing great inconvenience and loss.
The new year, 1891, saw the still more disastrous shearers’ strike,
which for nearly five months kept Queensland in turmoil. The
shearers in the centre and west of the colony, dissatisfied with the
conditions imposed by the squatters, massed themselves in camps
containing hundreds of men, many of them armed. Grass was
fired, woolsheds burned, and other outrages committed, while
much threatening language was used. The Government sent the
police and Defence Force to disperse the camps. The strike
ended, as the previous one, in the defeat of the men, after great
public and private loss. The direct cost to the Government was
upwards of £50,000.
The strike was made the scapegoat for all the Government mis-
deeds. Its practical strength was due to the organisation of
labour into unions by the Australian Labour Federation. The
moral support which it received from the working classes was
largely due to the foundation laid by Sir Samuel Griffith, when
in Opposition he advocated for political ends the cause of commu-
nistic labour, and supported with tongue and pen tenets which
the mob orator all over the world delighteth to honour. But the
strikers found that all was changed when Sir Samuel’s own
shoulders bore the burden of responsibility. Sir Samuel in office,


roundly charging the labour leaders with contributing to ruin the
colony, is a very different person from Sir Samuel out of office,
writing amiable platitudes on the unequal distribution of wealth.
At June 30, 1891, the value of the Treasurer’s financial
promises was apparent. The deficit stood at £1,303,576, or an
increase of £334,432 for the year. He tried to float a loan and
failed. Of £2,500,000 asked for at per cent., with a piinimum
of 94, only £BOO,OOO was subscribed. When the session opened
in July, the development of the Government policy was watched
with grave anxiety by those who knew how' critical was the
position of the colony, and how essential was prudent adminis-
tration. Supported by the metropolitan daily newspapers, but
with the remainder of the Press strongly or silently adverse, the
Premier passed through Parliament the Naval Defence Bill, which
he was obliged to withdraw in 1887, and which the people un-
mis takeably condemned at the subsequent general election. So
obviously distasteful was this measure to the community, and so
persistent was the Premier in its advocacy, that it became evident
he was prepared to sacrifice both the credit of his Ministry and
the reputation of Parliament to the personal triumph implied by
the ratification of his pledge to the Imperial Conference. Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith executed a right-about-face to which colonial
politics can furnish few parallels. The founder of the Australian
National Party, and the champion of the Australian National
spirit, he endorsed and approved a scheme which places the de-
fence of Australia in the hands of an English fleet, manned by
English seamen, and controlled by an English Admiral, over
whose movements the colonies have no control whatever. He
did this in the teeth of his own denunciations of the Bill and of the
principle of the Bill in 1887, on the plea that the approach of
Australian Federation made it desirable that self-defence of the
colonies, which is a main object of Federation, should be handed
over to others. Even the Sydney Morning Herald , in full sym-
pathy with the Bill, could not forbear from commenting on this
perversion of reasoning, and congratulating Sir Thomas upon his
“adroit performance. The Opposition made no opposition.
Whether they ‘feared the dissolution of Parliament which the
Premier not indistinctly threatened, or whether they were in-
fluenced by the recantation of their whilom leader, their demoral-
isation was in the highest degree discreditable.
What is this naval defence for but to defend British property ?
i'he whole risk lies with the merchants and shippers in England, and yet the
colonists are asked to come forward and pay for the defence of that shipping
—Sin Thomas Mcllwbaith, April 11, 1888.
\\ hen Sir Samuel Griffith left England he assured the home authorities
that the Naval Defence Bill would be passed without the slightest trouble.
The Bill has not passed yet, and I can safely say that the public opinion of
Queensland is dead against the passage of the Bill.—Sta Thomas Mcllwkaith
April 12, 1888.


The debate on the Amending Electoral Bill was a further
example of Parliamentary weakness. The Coalition had turned
moral fibre into paste. The pseudo-defenders of the working
classes turned a deaf ear to the appeal to give the working-
classes a vote, and while professing the utmost anxiety to base
electoral representation on the most equitable principles ac-
quiesced in a principle which disfranchised a fourth of the adult
male population, and gave preponderant power to a single section
of the community. The interest of the session, however, centred
in the Treasurer’s budget, brought forward late in August.
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith asserted that “so far as our finances
are concerned, we were never in a better position than at the
present time;” though the year’s revenue was £425,000 less
than his estimate, the expenditure £84,000 more than his esti-
mate, and the deficit had increased to £1,500,000. He fled to the
last resource of timid or unprincipled colonial statesmen, and
proposed to sell land wholesale in order to raise revenue. He
could not further tax the working classes through the Customs,
for they were already unable to meet his demands. He
dared not directly tax the propertied classes, since their interests
were his interests, and he had been their lifelong representa-
tive ; to sell land was his only alternative. Parliament
acquiesced, in spite of pledges.
The English squadron arrived in September, and the
story of the cruelties inflicted on the Mildura stokers, as pub-
lished in the Boomerang, attracted general attention. Sir
Samuel Griffith denied that the stokers’ statements were true ;
but overwhelming evidence was brought to prove the denial base-
less. In October came the dispute with the Bank of England.
The Treasurer had thrown the blame of the loan failure upon
the Bank, accusing it of dishonesty; thinking his excuses
would pass unnoticed in England. At first he refused to apolo-
gise for his misstatements, but was finally compelled to do so,
after a correspondence ignominious and damaging to the
colony had taken place. In October also, Sir Samuel Griffith’s
Provincial Partition proposals were again brought forward, and
rejected by thirty-three votes to twenty-eight. ~
The session closed on November 18. Never once, during
its business term of four months and a-half, did the Assembly
settle down to honest work. There were occasional spasms of
feverish zeal. There were some debates of exceptional power.
There were frequent evidences of the ability of the Chamber, had
itso chosen, to deal aptly and wisely with the problems before it. But
energy was wasted by diffusion, and the tale of work completed
was comparatively barren and insignificant. The Bill to purchase
land for settlement purposes, which was set in the forefront of
the Governor’s speech, ingloriously lapsed ; together with the


Bill 1° amend the Electoral Act. The more notable measures
passed were the Water Authorities Act, useful, but of little pre-
sent value ; the Postal Act, a purely departmental measure ; Acts
tor the protection of women, for the extension of the goldfields home-
stead system, for the regulation of pearl fisheries ; and finally the
Special Sales of Land Act, giving the Treasurer power to pay off
the deficit by selling land, and the other Amending Land Act
providing for unconditional and co-operative selection. The two
last-mentioned were the most important of the session, since they
established a new precedent and inaugurated a new policy.
Throughout the session, the Opposition was impotent. Mr.
Donaldson, Mr. Nelson, and Mr. Morehead fought half-heartedly
end in \ain against an alliance which the force of talent and the force
of prescription combined to render irresistible. Their failure was
evil for the country. The sway of the Coalition became a tyranny,
crushing out the individuality of independent members, and
making the decisions of the Assembly representative not of the
Assembly, but of the Ministry, or the heads of the Ministry who
controlled it; though indeed the House, long out of touch with
the country, voiced neither the popular will nor the popular
aspirations.
The vacation was marked by the Premier’s black labour mani-
festo, which announced the reversal of his opinions and the in-
tention of the Government to extend the term of the Polynesian
Labour Act. Parliament re-opened on March 29, 1892. The
Premier had already taken the public into his confidence, by telling
them that meat export, coloured labour, and land-grant railways
were to be the main features of the Government programme. A
Provincial Partition Bill and a Federation Bill were also threat-
ened, together with a Bill to legalise mining on private property.
Economical administration was promised, and a restoration of
confidence hoped for.
The Government was persistent; the Opposition was par-
alysed ; and the programme was systematically executed, feder-
ation alone being left untouched. The session was the last
session of an expiring Parliament; the policy of the Ministry had
never been submitted to the country ; yet they used their power
to carry important measure after measui’e, which should un-
questionably have been submitted to the people. The Pacific
Labour Extension Act, the Land-grant Railways Act, the Amend-
ing Elections Act, the Constitution Bill, all involving vital changes
m administration, some opposed by the voters at the last election,
others on which they had never been asked to give an opinion,
were all hurried through in the teeth of reason and justice. So
fill' as the sense of responsibility to the country was concerned,
Parliament and Ministry were utterly corrupt.


The Constitution Bill was rejected by the Legislative Council*
after an extraordinary career in the Assembly. Starting as a Bill
to give local government to North, Central and South Queens-
land, the Central province was struck out when the Ministry
found it objectionable to their supporters; and the Bill was
altered to create a Northern and Southern province only. The
Elections Amendment Act introduced a second ballot on a pecu-
liarly awkward plan, the deficiencies of which have yet to be
realised. The measure was intended to curb the power of the
Labour Party, which had been successful in winning two by-
elections, those for the Barcoo and the Musgrave ; though it lost
that for Bulimba. New standing orders increased the penalty for
contumacy of the minority in Parliament; and the electoral
rolls were thoroughly weeded.
At 30th June, 1892, the deficit was £1,455,140, the loss on
the year’s operations being £151,564. By manipulating Treas-
ury Bills—that is, by transferring £279,055 from loan account to
revenue account, this was nominally reduced to £1,176,085. The
Treasurer was in desperate case. Land sales had failed to raise
the expected revenue. Again he refused to retrench the expendi-
ture on the Civil Service, or to tax land or property. The Cus-
toms duties were further raised, increasing the burden on the
working classes, and particularly on residents in the North. The
succession duties were also increased, and the long-deferred beer
tax was at last imposed. With the Harbour Trusts Act, the
Conciliation Act, and other minor measures, the session came to
a close.
Chief Justice Lillev had previously resigned his office, the
resignation taking effect from the middle of February, 1893. His
outspoken advocacy of the rights of Labour had given great
annoyance to a Ministry which was doing its best to crush
Labour ; and it was openly stated that had he not resigned,
Parliament would have been asked to oust him from his position.
Some curious proceedings followed. Sir-Samuel Griffith wished
to retire from politics; the Ministry passed an Act through
Parliament increasing the salary of the next Chief Justice by
£I,OOO a year ; and Sir Samuel Griffith signified his intention to
become Chief Justice at the increased salary. Nevertheless, he
continued to take an active part in politics, and even appeared
as leading counsel for the Government in the Robb arbitration
held to decide the claims for £262,000 for extras made by the
contractor for the second section of the Cairns Railway. The
extraordinarily high fees which he was reported to receive were
the subject of caustic comment.
With the New Year came the startling announcement that
Mr. Nelson, who became leader of the Opposition on Mr. Donald-
son’s retirement, had accepted a seat in the Cabinet. Mr. Nelson


was Minister for Railways in the previous Administration, and
had been all along in direct antagonism to the Coalition,, so his
a< tion in thus endorsing their policy cast grave doubts on his
political honesty. Sir Thomas Mcllwraith had journeyed to
India, Sir Samuel Griffith was tonring in New Guinea and Tas-
mania, and Mr. Nelson undertook their functions as Treasurer
and Premier.
Mr. Hume Rlack, Minister for Lands in the previous Ad-
ministration. had been one of the strongest opponents of the
Coalition. In the last days of the session, the Government stated
their intention io appoint him special agent in Great Britain for
three years, at a salary of £I.OOO a year and expenses. Mr. J.
G. Drake was another severe critic of the Ministry. He was given
a brief in the Robb arbitration case worth many hundreds of
pounds. Many people found unpleasant significance in the
favours thus showered upon three of the most dangerous mem-
bers of the Opposition.
In February came the great floods, doing extensive damage
to Brisbane, Ipswich, Gympie, Maryborough, and Bundaberg.
Early in March Sir Samuel Griffith assumed the office of Chief
Justice, and Mr. Nelson undertook to form a Ministry. He was
unable; and the task fell to Sir Thomas M'llwraith, who had
returned from India. The result was a re-construction of the
Cabinet, which is not completed at the date of writing. But we
are now abreast of events in recent memory, and it is unneces-
sary to carry the record further.
III.—COALITION FINANCE: ITS BASIS.
CONFRONTED in IH9O with a deficit approaching the million,
Mr. Donaldson rose to the occasion. His budget speech
was admirably clear. He traced the decrease in receipts
partly to the mischievous Land Act of 1884, and pointed out
that the land revenue of £2 19s. lid. per head, gained under the
1876 Act in 1881-2, had fallen to £1 9s. 3d. per head in 1889-90.
A still further decrease was due to the still more mischievous
ten million loan and the political railways which had been built
with the proceeds. Mr. Donaldson showed that though 972
miles of railway had been built since 1888-4, the nett income
from all railways was £106,000 less than in that year.
Notoriously the branch lines which caused the loss were built to


gratify the supporters of Sir Samuel Griffith ; but the nominal
plea for their construction was that they would serve as feeders
to the trunk lines. Mr. Donaldson pointed out that their action
had been j ust the reverse; instead of feeders they really proved
leeches or bloodsuckers, taking the vitality out of the main lines,
and rendering the whole system unremunerative. The gradu-
ally-increasing charge on the consolidated revenue was an
excellent index of the progress in the construction of the Griffith
lines. In 1884-5 it was £172,507, in 1885-6 it was £276,845,
in 1886-7 £899,360, in 1887-8 £364,757, in 1888-9 £396,484, and
in 1889-90 £493,204. That half-million sterling represented
part of the colony’s annual payment for the whistle of a Griffith
Ministry and a ten-million loan. When to these losses, said
Mr. Donaldson, was added a general depression in trade and
industries caused by the floods in the early part of 1890, a deficit
was the natural result.
Mr. Donaldson dared to propose a property tax on those
who were able to pay it. Property-owners were dismayed. The
Press was full of lamentations from injured pockets. All
manner of ludicrous reasons were devised for ousting the ignorant
usurper who declared that the community’s burdens should be
borne, not by Labour, but by Capital; and the representatives of
Labour actually assisted to swell the outcry against the Govern-
ment. Verily they have their reward. In the teeth of facts it
it was asserted that no new taxation was necessary ; in the teeth
of common sense it was asserted that it was better for the working-
man that he should be taxed directly on his food, and drink,
and clothing than that he should be taxed indirectly through his
employer, if at all ; in the teeth of economic maxims it was
asserted that a property tax would reduce wages—as if wages
were not constantly being forced to the subsistence minimum by
causes independent of taxation. To all such absurdities there is
a sufficient answer in New Zealand.*^
* I hold that the present condition of Queensland is such that the
possessors of realised wealth, whether in the form of land or invested money,
ought to make a larger contribution to tbe public income ; and whenever
additional revenue is found necessary, it is from these sources that I should
seek it. Such a proposal will naturally be obnoxious to the classes I have
already referred to, who would prefer the simple and thriftless alternative of
selling land—by mock auction as heretofore or otherwise —in such quantities
as might satisfy the necessities of the hour, not caring for, but rather
approving of, the difficulties that would be put in the way of future
settlement, and the creation of new and dangerous class interests —of the
existence of which wo have already, indeed, had some warnings. The
example of older countries, and notably Ireland and Scotland, should be
sufficient to deter us from any such fatal error.— Sir S. W. Griffith,
August 3, 1888.


What radical reform has done for New Zealand it -would
have done for Queensland, had Mr. Donaldson been permitted to
lay the burden on the shoulders of Capital, which can bear it,
instead of upon those of Labour, which cannot. But many of
his supporters were lukewarm ; there was strenuous opposition,
and he did not receive from the apathetic working classes the
support to which he was entitled. The consequence was that a
great chance passed, not to return for many a long day ; the
representatives of Property returned to power in other guise;
the taxation of Labour through the Customs re-commenced ; and
during two years of Coalition Government there has been great
private distress, while the financial position of the colony has
steadily grown worse.
Mr. Donaldson estimated the loss on the next year’s operations
at £147,800. He proposed to raise :
By a property tax of Id. in the £ above £SOO .. .. £250,000
By a tax on spirits .. .. .. .. .. .. 52,000
By a tax on beer .. .. .. .. .. .. 47,000
I ____________
£349,000
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith revised these Estimates, and
promised a surplus of £6998, obtained as follows :
Saved from Mr. Donaldson’s estimates .. .. .. £154,798
By a dividend tax .. .. .. .. .. .. 100,000
By a tax on spirits .. .. .. .. .. .. 52,000
By increased stamp duty 15,000
£.321,798
There can be no doubt that the property tax would have
achieved Mr. Donaldson’s object of balancing revenue and ex-
penditure, and the receipts from the beer and spirit taxes would
have gone to reduce the deficit.
What Sir Thomas Mcllwraith’s scheme of taxation achieved
we have already seen. The saving on estimates was largely
a transfer from revenue account to loan account; the receipts
from dividend tax and stamp duties fell a long way short of the
author’s promise, and instead of a surplus of £7,000 there was a
deficit of £834,000. Sir Thomas met it by wholesale land sales.
Nevertheless, next year there was a deficit of £151,000. Sir
Thomas met it by “revision of the tariff” and by issuing
Treasury Bills. He has never dared, he has never wished, to ask
wealth to bear its due proportion of the colony’s burden by direct
taxation. The property tax he scornfully rejected ;* a land and
income tax he scouts, though every other member of the Coalition
Ministry has spoken in favour of either a land tax or an income tax,
* I will support, if it is necessary, a general property tax. —Mr. T.
Unmack, April 30, 1888.


or both. Reduced to essentials, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith's finan-
cial platform has only three planks. His first resource is to tax
the working classes through the Customs. When they can pay
no more he alienates land. When he cannot sell land he borrows
to pay his debts. And this is the policy which is to make our
small state a great nation !
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith’s retrenchment is as delusive as his
taxation. He can retrench the wages of working men by re-
ducing the endowments to local authorities ; but he cannot
retrench the Civil Service —a banyan tree which every year
throws out fresh suckers to feed on the unfortunate people of
Queensland. During the debate on the budget of 1892 Sir
Thomas indeed showed that it is much harder to tax Civil
servants than appears at first sight. In the first place, there is
only £791,960 paid in Civil servants salaries, out of an income of
£8,473,000, or merely a fourth of the colony’s total revenue ; and
ten per cent, on this would only yield £79,196, while the new
duty on flour is to yield as much as £83,432. This shows at
once that it would be absurd to tax Civil servants’ salaries. But
there is another reason still stronger. If Mrs. Brown, whose
husband earns £250 a year, hires a general servant at 10s. a
week with the expectation of a rise, it stands to reason that when
her husband’s business falls off during the year, and he only
earns £2OO, Mrs. B. cannot go to the girl and say, “ Well,
Julia, I thought I would be able to give you a rise ; but Mr.
Brown’s business is not so good, and I cannot afford it at present,
though I shall be very glad to keep you at 9s. a week.”
Similarly, the Treasurer of Queensland cannot possibly say
to the Civil servants, “ Well, gentlemen, the colony’s in a bit of
a fix just now. Every man’s income is reduced but yours, andyou
are expecting a rise. It is true that you work shorter hours for your
money than any other mail with an equivalent income does in any
other business; but this, of course, is your right as Civil servants, and
should not be interfered with. However, since the general tax-
payers, who find the money for your salaries, are all earning less,
I must ask you to be content with a little less also. If you like
to accept a five per cent, reduction on all salaries of £l5O a year,
ten per cent, on all between £l5O and £3OO, and fifteen per cent,
over £3OO, I shall be very-glad to keep you all on. Otherwise, 1
am afraid I must make you work ordinary business hours, which
will enable me to dispense with about a seventh of you, and save
a seventh of the whole amount I pay you, or say £IOO,OOO.
It is obvious that it would be utterly ridiculous to expect the
Treasurer to address the Civil servants in this fashion ; so he
imposes instead taxes on flour, on boots, on tea, and so on,
which reduce the incomes of people with £IOO a year or less by


about seventeen per cent. This has been well shown by a cor-
respondent of the Rockhampton Bulletin , who has taken the
trouble to calculate the average cost of
Rations for One Man for Fifty-two Weeks as per Pastoralists’
Association Scale.
Retail
Cost.
Tariff
Amount of
Phice.
Rate.
i-UTY,
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
Flour, 4161b.
12s. per
2
10
0
20s. ton
4
3
100
Tea, 1941b.
2s.
1
19
0
6d. lb.
9
9
liice, 781b.
3d.
19
6
Id. lb.
6
6
Dried Apples, 261b.
6d.
13
0
3d. lb.
6
6
Spice, 13oz.
2s. lb.
1
7
3d. lb.
2
Raisins, 261b.
7d.
15
2
3d. lb.
6
(3
Currants, 391b. ..
6d.
19
6
3d. lb.
9
9
Hops, 3lb. 4oz. ..
Is. 4d.
4
4
8d. lb.
2
2
Vinegar, 3Jgals.
Pepper, 41b. 12oz.
3s.
9
9
Is. gal.
3
3
Is. 6d.
7
1
3d. lb.
1
2
Mustard, 31b. 4oz.
Is. lOd.
6
0
3d. lb.
10
Coffee, 131b.
Is. 6d.
19
6
6d. lb.
6
6
Curry, 41b. 14oz.
2s.
9
9
15 %
1
6
Carb. Soda, 131b.
3d.
3
3
Is. cwt.
n
Tart. Acid, 61b. 8oz.
2s. 2d.
14
1
25%
3
6
11
11
6
3
2
5*
Add—
2 Pairs Men’s Boots ..
10s. 6d.
1
1
0
2s. 9d.
5
6
1 Felt Hat
12
6
lOd.
10
Clothing, say ..
5
6
8
15%
16
0
18
11
8
4
4
94
“ This does not include luxuries—no jam, sauce, pickles,
tobacco, beer, or anything but bare necessaries. Suppose the
fortunate man to be blest with a wife and four children, and
count the whole as four adults. We multiply £4 4s. 94d. by
four, which gives £l6 19s. 2d. as the amount of toll levied by the
Government for bare necessaries. Now, if the breadwinner is in
constant work he may earn 455. a week, or £ll7 per annum.
That is his income. Here, then, will be his expenditure :
Rent, taxes, water, etc., at Bs. per week .. .. .. .. £2O 16 0
Cost of dutiable necessaries, as per table (four persons) .. 74 6 8
Free necessaries—sugar. 8321 b. at 2d., and meat, 2000 at 2d. .. 28 12 0
Total .. .. £llß 14 8
This leaves a deficit of £1 14s. Bd. to provide for life assu-
rances, school expenses, doctor’s and chemist’s bills, tobacco,
beer (the extravagant dog does sometimes like a glass, just as if


he were a gentleman), furniture, church collections, and
hundreds of small things which cannot be enumerated.”*
We can make this clearer by the graphic method. Suppos-
ing that £ll7 a year is the normal expenditure for necessaries in
every family, though many breadwinners have to make ends
meet on less, let us see how disproportionately the existing tariff
taxes the poor man and the rich, and what would be the possible
savings of each did both live on the same scale. Take the length
of a line across the printed column to represent the possible
savings of a family if there were no Customs duties. By filling
in with black we may show the proportion which the Customs
duties (£l7 in £117), abstract from the possible savings on
various incomes :
The whole possible savings are abstracted in the case of an income of .£ll7.
68 per cent, is abstracted in the case of an income of £125.
64 per cent, is abstracted in the case of an income of £150.
17 per cent, is abstracted in the case of an income of £200.
mhhbhb
per cent, is abstracted in the case of an income of £300.
4 j per cent, is abstracted in the case of an income of £500.
Ml
2 per cent, is abstracted in the case of an income of £1000.
■
per cent, is abstracted in the case of an income of £5000.
I
Conversely, if an income of £117 a year and an income of
£5000 a year were taxed uniformly the latter would pay
no less
—
* The above quotation has been slightly altered for convenience of
calculation.


S^ te ' Suppose even that » as in the case of
from . £l2 ° at P!' esent ’ 68 P er cen t- was taken uniformly
hom possible savings, the result would be as follows 7
INCOME - Saving?. t . x
- ** .. £l7
I'>u 1 ' >u • • 50 qi
300 " 100 •• 68
500 •• 200 *• 13 «
1000 " 400 •• 272
S •' 900 '• 612
SUC(V •• 4900 .. 3332
These illustrations make it very clear why the propertied
-classes prefer taxation through the Customs to any othfr tax,
Soon that 111 Qu ® e “ slan /« at the day, an income of
<mntAflw*i a ? n n m 1S taXed f ° r the necessaries of life (as per table
quoted) £l5 bs. per cent, less than an income of £lOO per
-annum. Compare now the results which would have followed
tw P r °P ert y t , ax by Mr - D °naldson as a substitute for the
twice-revised tariff of Sir Thomas Mcllwraith. In the first place
property up to the value of £5OO was exempted ; and as many of
the workmg elasses are supported wholly or chiefly by wages,
' ' < °, r !? t P oBses ® property to this amount, they would have
escapei ie tax. But for the sake of illustration, all income may
in aS re ?r S . ntmg rou^hl y 8 P e r cent, interest on capital;
follows — aSe the mCOmes previously instanced would be taxed as
Income. Capital Value. Taxation Value. Tax.
£ 125 " £ }£2 •• £962 •• 0 2
!rn 1502 - 1002 •• 43 6
•• 1875 •• 1375 .. 514 7
•’ " 2000 •• 868
500 ” SIS •• 3250 *• 13 10 10
100 " Limn " 5750 *• 23 19 2
500 " •• 12 ’ 000 ’• 50 0 0
5000 .. 62,500 .. 62,000 .. 258 6 8
~,nd th f, sake of contrast, we may unite two of fhese tables,
-and show the possible savings at each income (1) under the
presen Customs tariff and (2) under Mr. Donaldson’s property-
tax after bare necessaries have been provided as in the foregoing
■hcale (expenditure, less tax, taken at £100).
Income. Possible Earnings (1). Possible Savings (21.
£ }}J. •• Nil - .. £l2 19 10
Y* £8 -• 20 16 6
Jnn •• 33 •• 44 5 5
29 •• 83 .. 91 13 4
399 •• 1 83 •• 186 9 2
,25! 383 •• 376 0 10
i; •• 883 850 0 0
i>oo ° •• 4483 .. 4641 13 4


This comparison clearly shows the weight of taxation in
the alternative cases. As has been already pointed out, under a
property tax, with exemption to £5OO, most small incomes would
escape taxation, since their very smallness precludes the possessor
from accumulating property. But even granting that everyone
will be taxed, it is manifest that the poor man has a much
greater opportunity of bettering his position under a property tax
than under such a Customs tariff; while under the property tax
a rich man is compelled to contribute a fair, but not an excessive
proportion of his riches to the cost of government. *
The basis of the comparison is just, since after the neces-
saries of life are provided for any citizen, the State which protects
individual property may justly tax the surplus of individual property
in proportion to its amount. The taxation of surplus property in pro-
portion to its amountis expedient, as well as just, because tending to
equalise individual comfort, and to reduce extremes of poverty and
wealth, which are a fruitful source of danger and dissension in the
State. Yet the existing Customs tariff taxes chiefly the poor man’s
necessaries, which he cannot do without, and only secondarily
the luxuries with which the rich man may dispense if he chooses*
The communistic maxim is: “ From each according to his
capacity, to each according to his need.” The maxim which Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith has enforced as Treasurer of Queensland is:
“ From each according to his need, to each according to his
property.”
The successive “revisions” of the tariff have made it to
some extent protective. Without entering upon the general con-
troversy between free-traders and protectionists, it may be said at
once that as far as Queensland is concerned, protective imposts
have failed in their object of increasing prosperity, though they
have greatly increased the cost of living. While duties have
been raised, and the necessaries of life have become dearer, in-
dustry has been depressed, wages have been reduced, and em-
ployment has grown more scarce and 'less constant. So far as
North Queensland is concerned, it could easily be shown that
while there remains so much natural wealth to develop, a pro-
tective policy must be fallacious. In the case of South Queens-
land, the argument would be more lengthy, the conclusion the
same.
* At the present time the revenue comes entirely through the Customs,
but I do not think this is a fair way, as it is too much like a poll-tax, and
the amounts which each individual pays are much too nearly alike. People
who can afford to pay a good deal pay scarcely anything, and vice versa.
That is unfair. The proper basis upon which taxation should be settled is
that those who can afford to pay most should do so. Some people seem to
have an idea that the taxing of property is a terrible thing.— Sib Samuel
Gbiffith, April 5, 1888.


The theoretical merits of protection, however, need not now
be discussed. We judge it by its fruits. The facts and illustra-
tions which have been adduced make it sufficiently clear why
Hir Thomas Mcllwraith and other representatives of property
hold fast to protection. Professing to advance the interests of
the working classes they are really defending their own interests.
As long as by a high tariff they can indirectly raise revenue from
poor men’s pockets, the pockets of rich men are safe from direct
taxation. All the objections to a property tax, to a land tax, or
to an income tax, are traceable to this natural wish of the wealthy
to evade their due contribution to the expense of government.
And when, at rare intervals, we find a Ministry in office which is
willing to lower Customs duties and impose direct taxation, we
generally find, as we have found in Queensland, that many of
the working classes are only too eager to join in fastening the
burden of taxation on their own backs, and lifting it from the
backs of the propertied classes.
Enough has been written to show that, so far as its fianncial
policy is concerned, the aim of the Coalition Government has
been to tax Labour, while Capital escapes almost scot free.
The single apparent exception to this policy is the dividend tax,
and that, as we have seen, is so limited in its scope, and so un-
equal in its incidence, that it is practically no exception. Dis-
cussing the dealings of the Government in relation to other
branches of public administration, we shall find that the same
motive underlies them all; and that instead of being a Govern-
ment of the people, by the people, for the people, the Coalition
Government has been, as indeed we might expect from its compo-
sition, a Government of Property, by Property, for Property.
However, its members have every confidence that the working
men of Queensland will return them again to power at the general
election ; and no doubt their confidence will be justified.
IV.—COALITION FINANCE: ITS RESULTS.
1! THOUGHTFUL taxpayers have long ago made up their
J X U minds that, speaking generally, there is nothing in Trea-
surers. One heaven-born financier is very much like
another, and all are rather small potatoes when you pin them
down and examine them. If the colony has good seasons, and
there is a revenue surplus, the Treasurer invariably takes the
•credit, and Press and people revere his abnormal genius. If the


seasons are bad, and there is a revenue deficit, Providence
invariably gets the blame, and well-to-do persons who pay off
Adam’s debt by threepenny instalments wonder how he can be
so inconsidex - ate. When Sir Thomas Mcllwraith basted the Queens-
land roast in the early eighties he sold land to the tune of half-
a-million sterling for what it would fetch. Sometimes it didn’t
fetch; but he sold it just the same with cheerful complacency.
The result was tidy little surpluses in the Treasury, of the kind
which Sir Thomas once told the Clermont electors were his
speciality, and everybody said what a wonderfully clever financier
he was. In the early nineties he could only find purchasers for
£175,000 worth of land, and Providence sent the shearers’ strike,
the floods, and the Robb arbitration case, and added half-a-
million to the deficit. Everybody said it was very annoying of
Providence.
It was exceedingly annoying, when you come to consider.
For, to unthinking taxpayers who look only at the surface of
things, there seems to be a screw loose in Sir Thomas’s financial
armour. When Sir Samuel Griffith was Treasurer in 1887,
and Sir Thomas said the colony was “ on the brink of a
volcano,” Sir Samuel could see no path round the volcano but
that marked “ land tax.” He pointed out in his financial
statement on August 11, 1887, that “the Customs revenue fell
unevenly on the general community, and the land-owners con-
tributed nothing to the revenue in comparison to the poor man.
Taxation was most uneven and unfair, and it was quite time
they resorted to some direct form of it.” Many persons thought
there was sense in this ; but Sir Thomas Mcllwraith said it was
nonsense, and because he was a famous financier people believed
him. As the Brisbane Courier remarked in a leading article on
May 5, 1888, “ The electors will not be blinded by Sir S. W.
Griffith’s sophistries. They will intrust their cause to the man
of large views, enlightened statesmanship, financial ability, and
quick business aptitude, rather than- to the narrow, sus-
picious, legal leader, whose greatest measures have been failures,
and whose financial policy has ended in disaster.” And as,
besides being “a man of large views, enlightened statesmanship,
financial ability, and quick business aptitude,” Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith was a man who said that no new taxation was neces-
sary, the people believed him, and he was returned to Parliament
with a thumping majority, while the “ narrow, suspicious, legal
leader ” was hustled by a Brisbane mob.
Because no new taxation was necessary, and yet money had
to be obtained from somewhere, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith “ re-
vised the tariff,” which had the effect, as Mr. Unmack said in
the Legislative Assembly, of drawing another £250,000 a year
from the working classes through the Customs. Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith explained that this was much more just than making


unimproved land values pay Id. in the £, with an exemption up
to £SOO, as Sir Samuel Griffith proposed. The difference was
that you could not tax land without taxing somebody, while if
you revised the tariff, you just revised the tariff. This did not
seem quite clear ; but Sir Thomas Mcllwraith said it was all
right, and as he was such a famous financier people knew it must
be all right.
Thanks to the tariff and a splendid season the surplus on
1888-9, when Mr. Pattison was Treasurer, was £116,000, though
the deficit stood at £485,000. Next year, 1889-90, consumption
fell off, because (as Mr. Unmack said in the Assembly) the tariff
was so frightfully oppressive, and the revenue was £602,000 less
than in the previous year. Mr. Donaldson, in drawing attention
to the fact that the deficit was now £969,000, modestly regretted
that Providence had sent “devastating floods’’ to open such a
leak in the finances. But Sir Thomas Mcllwraith was now in
Opposition, and he tore the flimsy excuse to tatters. Mr.
Donaldson suggested a property tax, just as Sir Samuel Griffith
had suggested a land tax. Again Sir Thomas proved that such
a tax was iniquitous. So he became Treasurer, and inaugurated
a policy of “ sound retrenchment, coupled with judicious tax-
ation.” The “ sound retrenchment ” consisted in knocking off a
great part of the endowment to municipalities and divisional
boards, which stopped local improvements, and threw many men
out of employment. The “ judicious taxation ” consisted chiefly of
a dividend tax, which took a percentage of the profits, however
small, of seven men who agreed to trade as a company, and took
no percentage of the profits, however large, of men who traded
singly. Thus a struggling company of working miners is taxed,
and millionaire Tyson escapes.
Unfortunately Providence took a hand in the game, and
everything went wrong. The dividend-tax should have realised
£IOO,OOO, and it only yielded £32,000. Stamp duties should
have increased by £15,000, and they only increased by £4,000.
Providence scored every trick, with the result that the year’s
operations, which (with the property tax given in) Mr. Donaldson
thought would result in a loss of £147,000, and which (without
the property tax) Sir Thomas Mcllwraith thought would result in
a profit of £7,000, actually resulted in a loss of £334,000.
This was discouraging, but Sir Thomas Mcllwraith was not
discouraged. It was destiny; and who could fight against destiny ?
After calm consideration, he came to the conclusion that there is
a special Providence attached to land sales with whom the ordin-
ary workman has no connection ; and he proceeded to extinguish
his deficit by the simple process of selling land until ends met
again. There was a tussle between the two Providences, but the
specialist did not get fair play. Not many people were willing to
buy land wholesale, and they invariably wanted the pick of the


• country. There was no objection to giving them the pick of the
country ; but their wants were too soon satisfied. The amount
was £125,000, and that was not enough. So the loss on
iWJI-z was £151,000, and Providence nearly burst his sides with
laughing.
Heroic measures were necessary. Further efforts were made
to sell land, but land sales by themselves were evidently unequal
to the crisis. So the tariff was again “revised.” New duties
were imposed, and the old ones were increased. But in order to
make assurance doubly sure Treasury Bills were issued. The
.treasurer was calling his capital income and spending it; yet
even then Ins income was insufficient. So he simply borrowed
money to make up the difference. Readers of Dickens know how
the revered Wilkins Micawber was accustomed to pay his debts.
If he owed fifty pounds, he would give his 1.0. U. for the amount,
eave a sigh of relief, and thank goodness that was squared. Ob-
viously Mr. Micawber was a heaven-born financier. Sir Thomas
M ell wraith is another, and when Queensland has a deficit of a
million and a half or thereabouts, he gives the colony’s 1.0. U. for
the amount in the shape of Treasury Bills. “ Thank goodness
that s squared.”
The result of this is that an intelligent Press congratulates
?Qo°o n reduction of the (leficit to £196,000 at 31st December,
uU 'ii • n l )a P ei ’’ that is, for even with a heaven-born financier
these things happen only on paper. Here are the official figures
of revenue and expenditure since Sir Samuel Griffith laid the
nest-egg of the deficit in 1884. A surplus of £366,000 was left by
his predecessors; but this was soon dissipated, and the deficit
commenced to grow in earnest.
Revenue and Expenditure.
Year.
Revenue.
Expenditure.
Deficit.
Surplus.
1884-5
£
2,720,056
£
2,819,853
£
' 99,197
£
1885-0
2,808,294
3,090,159
221365
1880-7
2,807,098
3,203,584
455^885
1887-8
8,177,518 1
3,308,883
191,365
1888-9
3,614,652
3,497,805
110346
1889-90
3,211,795
3,695,774
483,979
1890-1
3,350,222
3,684,054
334,431
1891-2
3,473,710 . |
3,025,280
151,564 )
And here are the official figures showing the rise and fall of
the deficit:—
Accumulated Bevbnue Deficit.
£410,614
}!Hi 601,979
Kf WM44
PI ■■ :: :: :: KS
Dec. 31, 1892 .. .. .. 196,472


At first sight these tables seem contradictory. Plain people
cannot comprehend how, when the nett deficit for 1891-2 is
£151,564, the accumulated deficit should be decreased during
that year by £127,490. Nor is comment unnatural on the
sudden improvement in revenue which reduces the deficit by
£979,614 during the single half-year ended 31st December, 1892.
Critics who came to curse will surely remain to bless a Treasurer
who can wave his wand and show a profit at the rate of nearly
two millions per annum. And the world has learnt from Pytha-
goras that figures can’t lie.
Treasurers can, however, for all political intents and pur-
poses. For the official fall in the deficit is really a rise, and the
official games of hanky-panky with the public funds are what
“no honest Bank ” would resort to. The increased revenue is
obtained in the first place by a transfer of capital, and in the
second place by a transfer of loans ; and the alleged reduction of
deficit is purely and emphatically bogus. The colony’s land is
part of the colony’s capital, and the chief security for the colony’s
loans. When the Treasurer sells land in order to raise revenue
he is reducing his capital just as improperly as the merchant who
cannot get income to meet outgo, and holds a forced sale of stock
in order to make up the deficiency. Profit and loss are balanced,
but there is so much less stock. As for transferring money from
loan account to recoup revenue account, it is the same as Dick
borrowing from Tom to pay his debt to Jack. When the trans-
action is over, he can boast that he does not owe Jack a cent, but
he owes it all to Tom. Such a system of hocus-pocus financing
can deceive no one who takes the trouble to think. Put the
Treasurer’s balance-sheets are made up for the multitude of
people who do not take the trouble to think. These read
in the papers that “ The deficit is now reduced to £196,000.”
“ Why,” they say, “ that’s good. A little while ago it was over a
million. Mcllwraith’s the man for me.”
The official deficit is £196,000. Let us see what the true
deficit is; that is, the true loss to the Treasury from the
Coalition’s operations.
At 30th June, 1800, the deficit was .. .. .. £069,144
Add loss on 1890-1 .. • • • • • • 334,431
£1,303,575
(So far, we agree with the Treasurer. This was the result
of the first year of the Coalition, and he was trying to win by
fair means. When fair means failed, he had to try others).
Add admitted loss on 1891-2 .. .. .. ..£151,564
Add receipts from forced land sales .. .. .. 125,000
True deficit at June 30, 1892.. .. .. £1,580,139


(The official deficit was £1,170,080, or £404,050 less. This
was cheering, and it only remained to continue the process).
Add receipts from forced land sales .. .. .. £50,000
£1,630,139
Deduct surplus for half-year .. .. .. 219,614
True deficit at December 31, 1892 .. .. .. £1,400,525
Official deficit at December 81, 1892.. .. .. 196,472
Bogus reduction of deficit .. .. .. .. £1,204,053
Gained as under—
Transfer from capital account (land
sales) .. .. .. ..£175,000
Transfer from loan account (Treasury Bills) 1,029,053
£1,204,053.
This, it will be admitted, is first-class financing. The
Treasurer has merely taken £1,204,058 out of one pocket and put
it in the other, and the deficit becomes a trifle, the incubus is re-
moved, capital flows, trade expands, labour is in request, vines
and fig-trees blossom, and Queensland once more lifts her head
among the nations. It is a very simple process to achieve such
results, but we needed a Mcllwraith or a Micawber to show us
how it is done. After Columbus, everybody could make an egg
stand up.
The mischief all arises from the unaccountable disagreement
between promise and performance, theory and practice, estimate
and fact. This is a difficulty which besets all your heaven-born
financiers —your Gladstones, your Yogels, your Gillies, your
Parkes, your Mcllwraiths. Not one of them can escape the
avenging Nemesis. They will prove to you most conclusively,
and with an impressive parade of the best precedents, the most
distinguished authorities, that two and two make five, that they
must make five, that the whole scheme of the universe would fall
to the ground if they did not make five. And when the balance
is struck, and two and two persist in making four, nobody is more
astonished than your lieaven-born financier. He scratches his
head in utter perplexity, and calls on gods and men to witness
that it is the one single time in the history of the world when
two and two have made lour, and no financier can fight against
destiny. So when we look at the following figures, and realise
how consistently the great expectations ol Sir Thomas Mcllwraith
have been disappointed, we shall say “Kismet! It is fated!”
and bow in submission to the decrees of an inscrutable Will.
Estimated Revenue. Actual Revenue. Deficiency.
1890- .. £3,776,000 .. £3,350,222 .. £425,778
1891- .. 3,675,200 .. 3,473,716 .. 201,484
Estimated Expenditure. Actual Expenditure. Increase.
1890- .. £3,599,877 .. £3,684,654 .. £84,777
1891- .. 3,647,693 .. 3,635,580 .. 2^4l3^'


was tins 'S™« orin le . Treasurer’s estimates for two years
was thus £689,626, or a miscalculation of £345,000 per annum
all because two and two refuse to make five.
. J Jl o nett rcsult ? f Coalition finance to December 31st
bv £43l f qft7 S r Z e T' 8 com * erned ’ is the increase of the deficit
fZthl’ 887 ' We I hav ®, now to se e what the Coalition has done
or the loan account. The following are the figures :
Qukknsland Loans.
DATS. A«o„,Of«„ d . iXES. fsS% 0.,.5%
* BBB •• £2,500,000 .. £6,152,000 U°/ *O4 »qk o n
1890 .. 2.264,734 .. 6,221,000 V° " 97 " J ?
1891 .. 2,500,000 .. 311,500*.. ' 94 * tl }f J
1893 .. 1,1 82 ,400 ~ 3,449,000 .. ” V. %\\ gJJ ° 4
shown ll6 Tn ° f f h(3 n° l( n y ’ S Cl ' edit COuld not be moreclearl J
i V ! 1888, just after the general election, our loan was
every £1 Of) fj lce T over ’ and 2s. 9d. was paid for
ThZlf ?, St ° ck S ° ld - , In 1890 tbe subscription was nearly
thiee times the amount asked for, and the price was £2 13s 7
higher, or £97 15s. The Coalition took offic e P and Sr attempt
to borrow in the next year failed signally, though the minimum
Price £9 e iel^ by 3 per cent. This year’s loan was floated at a
p ice £9 less per cent, than was obtained in 1890. The whole
nuu» m l’,,iT”’ Underwritten afc a discoun t on the mini-
th h 6 6XaC re f 6lptS haVe yet t 0 be raade Public.f
rhough the nominal interest is 8} per .'cent, the real inte-
rest paid for the money, with loss on sales added, is over 4 per
~ 1 ]le P rice of stocks in the London market tells the same tale
of lowered credit. Here are the figures
Queensland Inscribed 4 %, 1945-24..
” 3 .. 97* :: 9l| !! 'Sof
Thus, during the Coalition’s tenure of office our 4 per cent
.stock has fallen 4*. and our 3* per cent, stock 6f. At date of
wnting (March 18) quotations are lower still, the 4 per cents
yeT'toS 10 t’ “ d , th f e 8 * «* m. the lowest point
8,0 inuc h for the improvement of credit which we
Salitio“4“ WoU ' d reBUlt fr ° m ‘ he °P erat ions « f ««
heyerthel&ss, Sir Thomas Mellwraith has done just as he
pleased in the Treasury. He has been hampered neither by con
Won n Holt- Cr "? nor by P ar ftamentary opposition. In addi-
-1 hoatmg loans amounting to more than three and a-half
less 2J per toW .loss SS"
I The loss on the sale is at least £150,000.


millions on terms (considering previous successes) most dis-
advantageous to the colony, he has issued Treasury Bills
amounting to £1,150,000, repayable in four years, and bearing
interest from four per cent, upwards. This is an expedient
which is condemned by the best authorities on finance as costly
and unsound ; and as it is very unlikely that the colony will be
able to meet the Bills from revenue at maturity, the result will
be the flotation of a new loan, and a further addition to the
funded debt.*
At 30th June, 1892, the cash to the credit of the Loan Fund
was £1,741,618 since then there has been sold £1,182,400
worth of stock; while the expenditure from 30th June to 31st
December was £197,921. The Treasurer has, therefore, only
about two and a-half millions to meet a liability on unexpended
loan votes of over three millions ; and the surplus of Government
liabilities over assets, which at the Auditor-General’s last report
was £650,000, will probably be increased at his next examina-
tion. The Treasurer has exhausted the Parliamentary authority
to borrow money, and has raised a sum of nearly four and a-half
millions, in addition to nearly three millions which he took over
in 1890. Of the seven and a-half millions thus at his disposal
two and three-quarter millions have been expended ; more than a
million went to retire the loan of 1866, and a million to make up
deficiency in revenue ; totalling in all nearly five millions, and
leaving a cash balance, as before stated, of about two and a-half
millions.
This amount is deposited with the various Banks, and nearly
four-fifths of it with the Queensland National Bank. The interest
paid is not authoritatively stated; but as a considerable portion
of the money is held at current account the average return can-
not be above 4 per cent., and is probably less. As the Govern-
ment now pays more than 4 per cent, for its money the transaction
must result in loss to the Treasury, while the Bank gains the
difference between 4 per cent, and their and overdraft
rates of 7to 9 per cent.—or at least 4 per cent, all round. The
system was practically founded by the Hon. J. R. Dickson in July,
1885. He offered to the Banks, on fixed deposit, £BOO,OOO from
the first proceeds of the £10,000,000 loan ; and the amount has
since been largely augmented. Apart from the direct loss to the
Treasury, the principle is most vicious in principle and results.
The Jlanks which accepted the Government deposits had to place
the money in circulation ; they could not easily find investment
* I think a liberal and manly Government, and one which has always
advocated taxation, should make an effort to maintain their own good name
by meeting the liabilities they have created, instead of putting them on the
shoulders of their successors, as the present Government did when it issued
its promissory-notes to be paid in three years. . . . It is a very unjust
thing to the colony. —Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, April 11, 1888.


for such large sums ; and they were glad to make advances to
anyoody with fair credit. The money was chiefly used in land
specu.ation ; and the consequence was a land boom which made
the fortunes of a few persons, and has since ruined thousands.
Inch of the land in Brisbane and elsewhere is still held at
ictitious prices, as the Banks have advanced more than the
security is worth. Were the Government deposits withdrawn,
forced sales must follow ; the market would collapse utterly and
iuec nS 'mV S ' epidemic of insolvency might surpass even that of
6 - rhe Position is therefore this: that the. Government of
the colony, having deliberately encouraged reckless speculation
and rotten financing, cannot now withdraw from its position
without causing national disaster.
. r^eso considerations enable us to understand how it is that,
with a population of four hundred thousand, a debt of thirty-one
millions, a heaven-born Treasurer, and an annual charge on a
.fee and a ' lia “ million revenue of one and a-quarter million
interest, wages are so high, work is so plentiful, and the country
is so confoundedly prosperous.
V.—LAND ALIENATION.
Wholesale alienation has been already referred to as the
cardinal feature of the Coalition land policy. The Ministerial
maxim has been “ Sell the land-for a good price, if possible ;
but anyhow sell it. On this point, as on others, the will of
bn 1 homas Mcllwraith dominated those of his colleagues. They
revenue Th^ T ° PPOSed b L c ™ vi f on to selling land to raise
taxation of prepe^^£’t
land sales the
In the light of what has been written, it is plain that this
tiZw 6 , , W J n !f f h u° ld , Wat ® r - As lon & r a s wealth remains compare
tively untaxed, the taxation of wealth should be the first means
employed to raise revenue. It has been clearly shown that
wbifrr ta - Xatlon &lls Wltb cr oshing force upon small incomes,
le large incomes escape almost scot free. It was open to the
of re nroDertt° hlComes ’ or to tax the accumulation
of property which they represent, or to tax the hundreds of
thousands of acres of unoccupied land on the Darling Downs, on
the Burdekm River, on the Peak Downs, on the Johnstone River


and in other districts of the colony, which lie barren, though
fertile, because barred against culture by capitalists waiting till
the unearned increment of value has quadrupled the original
price. But instead of making private wealth contribute to the
national weal, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith preferred to make national
wealth contribute to private weal; and the Cabinet swallowed its
principles and echoed his dicta. *
It is needless to discuss the question whether land alienation
is or is not expedient in the abstract. It is enough to declare
that the sale of land in large areas is at the present juncture
highly inexpedient. In the first place, as lias already been
argued, while other legitimate modes of raising income remain
untried, land sales, as a reduction of the common capital, are an
unsound and illegitimate mode. In the second place, owing to
the existing depression in trade and industry, the land sold does
not realise its true value. The sale is a forced sale, and there is
practically no competition, so the seller is at the buyer’s mercy.
The Government invites likely purchasers to point out what
blocks of land they wish to acquire, and at what price, and the
ostensible auction sale which follows merely gives legal effect to
prearranged bargains. Under such conditions it is hopeless to
expect that the price paid will represent the worth of the land to the
community. The market is limited, because most people have no
money to buy; it is still further limited, because the land is sold
to suit the predetermined buyer ; a,nd the public auction resolves
itself into a deal between the Treasurer and a single capitalist, in
which the latter, knowing the former has to sell, fixes the price
to suit himself. The sale is a sacrifice.
It is a sacrifice of the community to the monopolist. So
long ago as 1881 Mr. F. Kates, then a member of the Legislative
Assembly, showed that 800,000 acres of land, the pick of the
Darling Downs, and adjacent to the railway lines, were monopo-
lised by some dozen individuals, who contributed hardly anything
to the revenue in return for the conveniences which the taxpayers
afforded them. In spite of Mr. Macrossan’s diatribe on the
“ standing disgrace” of such a state of things, in spite of Mr.
Samuel Griffith’s opinion that “ if the land was not put to its
proper use the State could legitimately interfere,” the condition
of things is practically unchanged, or rather is changed for the
worse. Successive Ministries have sold nearly all the fertile land
abutting on our railways, or within easy distance of a market;
* Mr. Unmack has repeatedly spoken against wholesale land alienation.
Mr. Cowley, on September 19, 1888, declared that “ an income tax above
.£3OO was the fairest tax in the world,” Mr. Hodgkinson, on August?, 1890,
said he was in favour of both a land tax and an income tax. Mr. Tozer, on
July 31, 1890, maintained that taxation was absolutely necessary, but it
should be a tax on the unimproved value of the land, and should be accom-
panied by a differential income tax, so as to get at all persons in the colony.”


and the consequence is that for anything but an unprofitable
lodge in some vast wilderness the settler may sigh in vain, while
after thirty-three years of national life, with 428 million acres of
territory, we have only a quarter of a million acres under culti-
vation. If the mistakes of the past teach any lesson at all, they
teach that wholesale alienation of our land is a blunder now and
a crime against posterity. It does not raise revenue in any
appreciable degree when the temporary inflation of the Treasury
is over, and it throws large areas into the hands of capitalists,
who have subsequently to be bought out, as on the Darling
Downs, that the farmer and producer may get a living on the
soil. The Coalition Government, indeed, announced their inten-
tion to pass an Act authorising the purchase of big estates, to be
subdivided among settlers ; but the intention w r as never carried
out. The inconsistency was too glaring even for the Coalition.
For very shame, the Government spared the country the spectacle
of its administrators endeavouring to buy back retail, at a high
price, the land sold wholesale a few years before at a small one
w hile at the same time alienating in other districts vast tracts of
land which, by inevitable deduction, were destined to be similarly
re-purchased. *
Not only are land sales unjustified as an expedient to avert
financial disaster, but they fail in their object; they do not avert
disaster. Before the Special Sales of Land Act w r as passed, the
Treasurer was told by Mr. Stevenson and others well acquainted
with the facts that it would not produce revenue to anything
like the degree contemplated. The Government wished to sell
some three million acres of land at 10s. an acre, and raise about
£1,500,000. So far, they have only sold £175,000 worth, and
the best available land is gone, while the demand is already
satisfied. Yet there was no restriction on the location or quality
of the land to be sold—there was carte blanche to dispose of land
anywhere, all over the colony. So their trump card having failed,
the Government resort to Treasury Bills to wipe off the deficit.
To any unbiassed mind, these considerations are conclusive as
to the expediency of wholesale land alienation. There are honester
and juster ways of raising revenue ; forced sales of large areas do
not bring a tithe of the fair market value of the land, let alone
its value to the colony for the gradual establishment and extension
of industry; they sacrifice the most fertile portions of the country
* The Conservative party has ever tried to benefit the few to the disad-
vantage of the many, and has ever raised money by selling large blocks of
land. The result has been that though we have built railways through most
magnificent lands, there are thousands of acres alongside them lying idle,
and the country has to bear the expense of the lines. ... I will not
sanction land-grant railways, though I believe the idea might be a very
good one if the Government undertook the work themselves. —Mb. T. Unmack,
April 30, 1888.


to the monopolist, leaving the comparatively barren and unpro-
ductive districts to be tilled by the hard hands of the future
settler; and, finally,with all these disadvantages, they do not give
the return which is the sole excuse for their institution. Even
were the policy temporarily profitable, it is a policy which, as
Sir Samuel Griffith has pointed out time and again, no temporary
profit can justify ; since the permanent injury to the community
is immeasurably greater than any present gain can compensate.
It is said that the State is the people, and that consequently,
when all the land of the State is in private hands, the people are
just as rich as before. True, some of the people. But what of
those who own no land ? Look at England, Scotland, Ireland,
the continent of Europe, and see their fate. :;:
The advocates of land sales—those who benefit by them—
say, “ Why, 3,000,000 acres out of 417,000,000 —it is a mere
flea-bite ? ” Not if it includes “ the eyes of the colony ; ” not
if it is the first step which will cost us our heritage; not if it is
the well-intentioned precedent which paves the way to perdition.
“ Don’t tax the land now,” says Sir Thomas M‘llwraith, “alien-
ate the whole, and then tax it.” Has that been found a sage
policy elsewhere, or has it been found that those who own the
land, the source of national wealth, have made use of their power
to rivet the national burdens more firmly on the shoulders of the
people ? Why is not the land taxed in England, instead of food
and drink P For the reason that the landlords, because they are
landlords, can prevent it. Once put the land monopolist in the
saddle, and it is not so easy to shake him off. Let the miner, the
prospector, the selector, the farmer—all who know the obstacles
to their industries caused by the monopoly of trhe land already
alienated in Queensland—say whether it is wise to pursue still
further the policy which has created those obstacles, and lock up
* There is one man [Sir Thomas Mcllwraith] who objects to our land
policy ; who, without regard to settlement, would sell the lands of the colony
for the mere sake of putting money into the Treasury, and who maintains
that that is a great triumph of statesmanship. I fail to see it. It is the same
sort of statemanship as may be compared to the wisdom and prudence of the
young gentleman who coming into his estate thought to cut a great dash in
the world by at once selling it for the purpose of getting as much money as
he could to meet his extravagance. (Applause). Do we want in this country
such large estates as are found in the Old World, so that the farmers and
other men who desire land here will be compelled to go hat in hand to the
landlords to ask for land for occupation ? [A v®ice, “ No,” and applause.]
You all know that the people have been blind for many years ; but in the
other parts of the British dominions, notably in Ireland and Scotland, people
are beginning to see what a fatal mistake it is that enormous tracts of land
should be allowed to get into private hands, to the detriment of those who
may desire to occupy and use them. . . . Even in America, the same
danger is beginning to be felt; but we in Australia are not too old, and
ought to put a stop to such a state of things at once.—Sir Samuel Griffith,
April 5, 1888.


the remainder of the richest, most fertile, and most accessible
tracts of our territory in the hands of half-a-dozen wealthy indi-
viduals.'"
VI.—LAND-GRANT RAILWAYS.
TIFHE Land-Grant Railways Act is the Coalition measure of
most direct concern to miners, since it involves the possible
alienation of undeveloped mineral country without draw-
back or restriction, and for a consideration which may be far
below the value of the concession.
It is possible to argue that the plan of constructing railways
on the land-grant system is in essence a good one, as applied in
the present condition of Queensland. The chief objection to the
sale of land in large areas is that it tends to discourage settle-
ment. The chief reason for exchanging large areas of land for a
railway is that it tends to encourage settlement. Herein lies a
vital difference between mere land alienation and land alienation
for railway construction. In the one case the community gets
what should be an equivalent; in the other case it gets no equiva-
lent.
For a long time it has been evident that the end of Govern-
ment railway construction was approaching. The evils insepa-
rable from State control of any industry have appeared in our rail-
way system in an acute form. Lines have been built through
districts where neither the population nor the prospects justify a
hope that the cost will be directly or indirectly recouped within
a reasonable time ; they have been built because of influence, not
because they will pay interest; they have been built at a great
expense by costly methods, when cheaper methods would be
equally effective. The consequence is that from £17,000,000
expended on railways out of the public debt of £80,000,000, we
receive less than 2£ per cent, per annum, while we pay over 4
per cent, for the borrowed capital, and it cost the colony in 1891-2
£818,198, or nearly a tenth of its revenue, to make up the
annual railway loss. Yet with all this sacrifice of revenue, there
* What can jbe more lamentable than to see the policy of a country
subordinated to the money-making proclivities of a class ? . . . I
maintain that it is our duty to use every effort to prevent the creation in
this new land of such terrible inequalities of condition as are found in
Europe, and even in the United States of America.—Sib S. W. Griffith,
August 3, 1888.


is dissatisfaction with the railway management. Engineers tell
us that the Department has got into a groove, and that instead ol
adapting itself to the country’s needs, it fits varying needs to one
unifonn° and often unsuitable pattern. Producers tell us that
their industries are languishing because maximum freights are
combined with the minimum of conveniences for traffic. Critics tell
us that we are heavily taxed to maintain an army of Civil servants
who do half the work of the average worker at twice his wages.
Since the delegation of railway management to Commis-
sioners, these grievances have been to a great extent remedied,
so far as compatible with justice to the community. Working
under great disadvantages, the Commissioners have materially
reduced expenditure and increased income, thus lessening the
burden on the taxpayer. When Separation diminishes the dis-
tance difficulties preventing energetic administration, it is not
improbable that Commissioners in the separated colonies will
accomplish the task of making the railways pay. Either directly
or indirectly the railways should pay, and the profit should go to
the community. Divested of political control, therefore, it appears
well to retain for the State the ownership of all railway lines,
now or to be built. Faults of management there will still be,
doubtless; but private ownership has also its weak points.
There remains the question of construction. Here, again,
had the Government money to build, and were political influence
rigidly excluded, the State might undertake the work. But the
Government has no money ; the money must be borrowed ; and
the interest must be paid, even if the line does not return work-
ing expenses. And if the money is borrowed, it is very likely
that the line will not return working expenses. Political influ-
ence cannot be excluded 5 every district wants a railway , and the
railway goes not to the most deserving district, but to the district
which "has the greatest political influence to eke out its deserts.
Thus the Government construction of railways with borrowed
money almost certainly entails a direct loss. That has been the
experience of the past', and from the past we may learn the
future.
Yet railways are essential to progress. Geordie Stephenson’s
locomotive is the best of pioneers. Wherever it goes, it facilitates
commerce, expands industry, hastens prosperity. Queensland
has vast resources comparatively undeveloped because they are in
the interior of the colony, far from a port or a market. To put
every mineral field, every agricultural distiict, in the quickest
possible communication with the manufacturei and the consumer,
is to give employment at profitable rates to thousands of mineis
and farmers, and to penetrate the wilderness with the comforts of
civilisation. It is said that we have railways enough, that the
land which they have opened up is not yet settled, and that when


there is a large population on existing lines it will be time enough
to think of making others. The reply is that you cannot fetter
natural impulses. If there appears to be a richer return for
labour on the Walsh or the Etheridge than in the country
between Brisbane and Gympie, or between Gympie and Rock-
hampton, population will naturally gravitate to the Walsh and
the Etheridge. It is not the business of Government to feed the
people with a spoon, to tie trade to its apron-string, and to decide
in good grandmotherly fashion where and on what terms citizens
shall earn a living. The people want far less governing than
some legislators would have us suppose. It is their business less
to regulate industry than to take away the impediments which
prevent industry from regulating itself. Space, time, distance—
these are grand impediments, and a railway reduces their hind-
rance to a minimum. As long as railways aid settlement, no
matter in what part of the country, we can never have too many
railways. J
If, then, railways be necessary, yet the construction of rail-
ways by Government at present impracticable, approval of the
land-grant system must follow. The objections to purposeless
land alienation, or to alienation for the mere purpose of raisin"
revenue, as set forth in the preceding section, do not here apply!
the objections to land alienation under any circumstances do
apply. But if land alienation in itself is an evil, so is the alien-
ation of population, of the population who cannot make a living
on the land for want of transit facilities. You have to choose
between leaving your land in idleness or your people. It will
Pay 110 company building a railway to leave its land unused. If
the company is to profit the land must be profitably worked.
And land-grant railways add no more millions to debt; they add
not a penny to taxation. They decrease, indeed, the amount of
undeveloped wealth which we bequeath to our children. But
they increase the developed wealth of the fathers of our children ;
and, in the present condition of the colony, we have every right
to think of ourselves first, and let posterity follow in consideration
as they follow in fact.
It is plausibly objected that if the Government has to give
land to build a railway it might as well sell the land and build
tie railway itself. But the value of the land is different in the
two cases. A private company can build a line more cheaplv
than the Government, even when it uses the same quality of
labour. This seems strange ; but it is proven true in practice.
Consequently, the company needs less capital than the Govern
merit, and is able to do with a smaller gross profit. Further,
the value ol land to a company about to construct a railway line
itself through that land is greater than the value of the land to a
number of owners who buy on the speculation that the Govern


ment will build and run a railway to suit them—a speculation
which is not too likely to be realised, no matter how good the
anterior guarantee.
But if land-grant railways be right in principle, the Coali-
tion Government went deliberately wrong in its application of
the principle. The efforts of the Opposition were chieffy directed
to one object —the imposition of such restrictions as would make
Parliament, and not the Ministry, the arbiter of the fate of pro-
jected lines. Their efforts were fruitless. As things stand, the
Ministry of the day need not give the country any material in-
formation whatever. They will simply inform Parliament that
they have agreed with a syndicate to construct a railway, say,
from Charleville to Point Parker. They will not say how it is pro-
posed to get from Charleville to Point Parker—whether the line
will go as straight as an arrow, or whether it will contrive to
meander through all the property owned by Ministerial sup-
porters en route. They only say to Parliament —“ You know
where Charleville is ; you know where Point Parker is. We will
choose and approve the route for the line.” Is it not obvious
that Parliamentary sanction given in such ignorance is worth
nothing at all ?
So the Opposition fought persistently, but unavailingly, to
compel the Government to give more information. They pro-
posed a new clause providing that when any projected line was
submitted to Parliament for approval, the Railway Commis-
sioners should furnish an estimate of the cost of construction, of
the probable traffic, and of any other returns to be derived ;
while the Land Board reported on the value of land granted as
subsidy. This was not contentious; it was not exacting ; it
simply gave Parliament ah opportunity to gain facts on which to
base a proper decision. Since we have Railway Commissioners
and Land Commissioners, why not put them to service in their
proper capacity ? Under the existing system contracts are made
by the Commissioners. Are we to reverf to the old system of
Ministerial jobbery ? It was said that to fetter the bargain
would prevent business altogether. But there is ample room for
compromise in the power left to the Ministry to fix the value of
the land. If restrictions made it unprofitable to build a railway
in exchange for a million acres of land, the Ministry, were the
line worth it, could offer two millions. However, the Govern-
ment would not hear reason ; and though, for very shame’s sake,
many of their supporters could not be brought to a division, the
amending clause was rejected by a majority of three.
Fruitless, also, was the opposition to the scandalous clause
defining the price which syndicates are to get for building rail-
ways. The common view of the land-grant railway system is
that a company constructs a railway and gets paid for its expen


diture in land. The Coalition view is that the company gets
paid twice its expenditure. The Act provides two modes of pay-
ment, applied in three cases, as follows :
1. If the railway is to become the property of the Crown as soon as con
structed, the company receives land of a value equal to the cost of construe
tion. (This is right and reasonable.)
2. If the railway becomes the property of the Crown after being run by
tie company for a fixed period,the company may receive twice the cost of con-
struction. (This is absurd.)
3. If the railway remains the property of the company, subject to a right
of purchase by the Crown, the company receives the cost of construction, and
the Government pays over again for the railway when it wishes to buy it.
(This is monstrous.)
or it is plain that as every company would rather be paid
twice than once no railways at all will be built on the first condi-
tion. If there is a chance of the railway paying, the company
will pocket the cost in land, make their profit out of the line,
and then hand it over to the Government, and get
})<(id over enjoin. And this is political wisdom ! But the Coali-
tion majority was submissive, and the Coalition motive was—who
shall sav what ?
Either of these objections would condemn the Land-Grant
Railways Act; but there is a third more fatal still. The Act
alienates mineral lands unconditionally. Now, it is evident that
where a line passes through purely mineral country (and some of
the most useful land-grant lines would pass through purely
mineral country), the surface freehold alone will not repay the
oost of construction. Some concession must be made, if the line
is to be built at all. But to concede everything is probably to
pay far more than the line is worth. In the case of agricultural
or pastoral land, a fairly accurate idea of its value can be formed
beforehand, and both parties to the bargain are likely to be
satisfied. In tbe case of mineral land, valuable solely for its
minerals, no such estimate can be made. The cleverest expert
cannot say decisively, until a mine is opened up, whether it is
worth millions or nothing. The consequence is that either the
Crown or the company must lose in selling or buying mineral land
for the minerals. It will not be the company. The transaction is a
gambling transaction, and for its own security the company must
insist on a wide margin. As a result, we may pay a monopoly
millions for a railway which cost thousands, and shut out th '
working miner from the best land in the country.
Two remedies suggest themselves. The first is to permit
suitable agricultural or pastoral Crown lands in one district to be
reserved as a subsidy for a railway through mineral lands in
another district. This course is open to objections ; but the ob-
jections do not seem decisive. The Act provides that the land
given as a subsidy must be reserved “ adjacent to ” the proposed


line of railway, and the context implies that this means immedi-
ately adjacent ; but the Solicitor-General declared that this must
be. a matter of arrangement between the company and the
Government, and if there was no suitable land contiguous to the
line it must be obtained elsewhere. Or, by another and a better
way, mineral lands might be finally alienated, subject to strin-
gent labour conditions, and to the payment to the CroWn of a
royalty proportional to the profits, and increasing with the profits.
Or land and mines might revert to the Crown after a certain
stipulated limit of profits had been reached.
But the Coalition gave no heed to the miners’ plea. The
result is that the Land-Grant Railways Act, now law, provides
for the construction of lines which may gerrymander all over the
country at the will of the Ministry in office, while Parliament,
once it has approved the termini, is powerless to protest; lines
for which the country may be called upon to pay the value once
in land, and a second time in cash ; lines which, costing a few
hundred thousand to construct, may absolutely and un-
conditionally sacrifice to private monopolists the potential
millions of a Broken Hill or a Mount Morgan. Yet Parliamen-
tary assent was given apathetically, almost without protest! So
much for the corruption of Parliamentary morals by the Coalition
Government—in defiance of the so-called principles of one knight,
and the so-called pledges of the other."
* After the full discussion of the last three years I have become a strong
opponent of the system of land-grant railways, being convinced that if
adopted it will lead to the creation of vast freehold estates, in the hands
mostly of absentee proprietors, and to the introduction amongst a compara-
tively small people of powerful corporations exercising a preponderant
control over our internal affairs, and threatening us with the gravest social
and political dangers.—Mr. S. W. Griffith, July JO, 1883.
Regarding the other great scheme of land alienation for railway purposes
by syndicates, I hope the country will never be flooded by great syndicates of
this kind. But they are waiting their opportunity. . . . What I
propose is to alienate the land only as it can be utilised by settlement.
(Cheers.) —Sir S. W. Griffith, April 5, 1888.
I pledge myself not to bring forward the Transcontinental or any other
railway during the next Parliament. (Cheers.) I cannot change my prin-
ciples ; but I tell you what I will do, and I shall be scouted as a liar all over
the colony if I depart from my word in the slightest respect.— Sir Thomas
Mclt.wraith, May 1, 1888.
On the Transcontinental land-grant railway scheme Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith was explicit enough on Tuesday night. “As an honest man,”
he said, “ he would neither bring forward himself nor support anybody else
who might directly or indirectly bring forward during the next Parliament
the transcontinental railway or any other land-grant railway.” But Sir S.
W. Griffith is not content with these outspoken and manly assurances. He
hints obscurely that Sir Thomas Mcllwraith will work for the scheme all
next Parliament, so that there would be no alternative but to bring it forward
in the succeeding Parliament. Apart from the ungenerousness of this blow


VII.—COLOURED LABOUR.
The last word on the coloured labour question in Queensland
cannot yet be written. It is essentially an open question.
Critics thoroughly competent may conscientiously arrive at
directly opposite conclusions. The most that can be done is to
sum up the case as it stands and hold the verdict in suspense.
This indecision is due to a conflict between the temporary
and permanent interests of the community. There are some who
assert that Northern Australia must either be served or dominated
by inferior races ; but no Australian can regard such a prospect
without horror. The establishment of a servile class, or Lhe
tyranny of a barbarous nation, are alike hateful to those whose
motto is “ Australia for the Australians.” We will neither bow
the neck, nor lay our yoke upon the necks of others.
Australia is a democracy, and Australian sentiment is essen-
tially democratic. With the maintenance of a democracy any
inequality of class or status is incompatible. Our citizens must all
stand upon the same plane of opportunity. Individual differences of
capacity there will always be, but to all who perform the duties
of a citizen the fullest privileges of citizenship should be accorded.
Yet it is impossible that aboriginals, kanakas, coolies, or Chinese
should be received as equal citizens of the ideal State which it is
our ambition to form. Such a union would be degradation. The
mixed community of Australians has its faults and vices; but it
has grand possibilities. Brutal whites may fall as low as the
brutal kanakas, but the best white type soars infinitely above the
best kanaka. Whateverour failings, we are the heirs of European
civilisation ; and we cannot merge our nationality in a barbarism
to which European civilisation is incomprehensible.
Nor is there a reasonable basis for the assertion that the
North is for the coloured man. White races can and do live in
every climate. That they do not thrive is often their own fault,
since they persist in refusing to adapt themselves to their environ-
ment —eat unsuitable food, wear unsuitable clothing, work at
below the belt, and which may be left to the righteous condemnation of out-
raged publio opinion, it may be remarked that ... we are concerned
with the Parliament about to be chosen ; and during its life land-grant rail-
ways, so far as Sir Thomas Mcllwraith is concerned, will have no encourage-
ment or support. —Brisbane Courier, May 3, 1888.
* I have never changed my principles on this matter of the land-grant
railway, but I believe in the minority bowing to the will of the majority, and
will therefore neither bring this matter forward nor favour it in any way
during the forthcoming election. (Cheers.) And when I say this I ask the
electors of North Brisbane to believe me, and accept my pledge so distinctly
given. (Loud Cheers.) —Sir Thomas Mcllwhaith, May 4, 1888.


unsuitable hours, and generally conduct themselves in dogged
defiance of natural laws. Wherever in Northern Australia
there is profit for labour, white men are labouring and profiting.
Tt is not always pleasant labour ; but that is not the point. . The
point is the statement that white communities cannot exist in the
North. The refutation is the statement that white communities
are existing, and that when the first strain of grapple with the
tropical wilderness is past they exist comfortably. As time goes
on, and the adaptation of Northern modes of life, to Northern
conditions grows more complete, this comfort will increase, and
there is no reason to doubt that a society as stable, and a civilisa-
tion as prosperous, as that of the South, will eventually be built
up in the North.
At present, however, we have in the North only the rudiments
of society, the beginnings of civilisation. Granting, as
Australians must grant, that the permanent settlement of any
part of Australia by coloured or inferior races is at all risks to be
prevented, is the temporary employment of coloured labour in the
North permissible and justifiable ? That is the question, and a
difficult question it is. Let us briefly consider the arguments for
and against, in especial reference to Queensland.
With sufficient knowledge of the conditions under which
kanakas are now employed in Queensland, a little thought makes
it evident that the only valid ground of objection to their employ-
ment is the ground already glanced at —that the admission oi
inferior coloured races as competitive labourers is a menace to the
safety and prosperity of the white population. No other plea will
bear examination. Whatever may have been the abuses con-
nected with kanaka labour in the past, the arrangements for its
utilisation are now practically above reproach. The condition ot
a kanaka on the plantations is superior to that of many white
labourers, and his three years’ service makes him a more useful
and a more intelligent man. Nor does he take bread from the
white man’s mouth. On the contrary, many white men live by
the aid of his labour, and when he returns to his islands, the
profit of his industry remains behind him. These are conclusions
which will be reached by any capable and unbiassed observer of
the facts.
It may be taken as established that, in the present year 1893,
the employment of kanakas is pecuniarily profitable, not only to
the kanakas’ employers, but to the whole Queensland community.
Without the assistance of kanakas, or other cheap labourers,
agriculture in the North would be at a standstill. White men
can do the work, but at present they will not. Either it is too
severe in proportion to the remuneration, or there are other more
remunerative occupations. For it must be remembered that
pioneer Northern agriculture is carried on under special disad


vantages. The coastal country is frequently rugged and moun-
tainous ; the two or three short railways are of comparatively
little service ; the roads are in many places ipipassable for wheel
traffic, and there is no money to mend them; the tropical scrub
is often so dense that it is the task of a lifetime to bring forty
acres under cultivation ; fever is prevalent; the wet season is a
deluge ; the heat makes even light avocations laborious ; and
sugar is the only crop which yields a satisfactory return.
Northern agriculture is still in its swaddling-clothes.
Coloured labour is nursing it through the troubles of infancy.
When the ground has been cleared; when roads have been
formed ; when the heart-breaking tasks which Nature sets as
preliminaries to productive industry have been accomplished ;
then the white man may profitably undertake the work of agri-
cultural development, and the uses of coloured labour will be
ended. Is it safe to permit of its temporary employment ? The
query is self-answered. The danger lies in permanent settlement;
and if this is carefully guarded against we may benefit without
risk. But the temporary character of the labour must be insisted
upon ; and no time-expired kanaka should be permitted to remain
in the colony unless under a further agreement for a definite term.
Nor should the introduction of other than island races be per-
mitted. The Chinaman, the Javanese, and the Indian coolie
should be rigorously excluded. Their character and habits make
them dangerous ; and they come to stay.
Yet even when all these admissions are made in favour of
coloured labour, when all these conditions are made to prevent
the abuse of coloured labour, there remains justification for grave
doubts as to the expediency of permitting coloured labour, even
temporarily. For though there is no abuse now, the use of
kanakas tends always and naturally to abuse or misuse. The
regulations confine the kanaka to field labour ; he is frequently
employed in the mills in defiance of regulations. And there is a
constant pressure for the extension of his sphere of labour, as at
Mackay, where the co-operating farmers wish all restrictions to
be done away with, providing one white man is employed for every
four kanakas. Then why one to four ? Why not one to five, or
ten, or fifty ? You cannot draw a logical line. And if unre-
stricted kanaka labour be permitted to the agriculturist, why not
to the miner, the mechanic, the artisan ? There is no valid
reason opposing. If the kanaka drives carts, milks cows, and
watches machinery, cannot he dig silver, make machinery, sew
clothing, sail ships
* We have to deal with a real tangible evil—the presence of an alien
and degraded race, who are coming more and more into connection with us
every year, and crushing out the white population. . . . White
labour has deteriorated in the interior, although the rate of wages may still


Once admit the point of the wedge, and it needs only the
pressure of circumstances for the head to follow. And the
pressure of circumstances always tends to increase. The man
who sees his neighbour making a profit from kanakas wishes to
make one for himself. The man who makes a profit from one
kanaka soon wishes to get more. If cheap labour could be main-
tained within definite boundaries, something might conceivably
be said for it. But the curse of it is that it is always overflowing its
boundaries, and that eventually it swallows up dear labour, even
moderately-paid labour. The longer kanaka labour is permitted
the greater the hold it will obtain on the community, and the
more difficult it will be to expel it. We are creating vested
interests which grow stronger every day, and when the colony
eventually takes away their mainstay it may have to admit a
claim for compensation.!
These arguments will have more or less weight in propor-
tion as readers are more or less biassed by interest and experience.
It seems hard to a resident in Bundaberg, or Mackay, or Cairns
to acquiesce in a decree which, in abolishing coloured labour,
abolishes a great deal of white labour as well, Bundaberg, with
a dozen sugar plantations, is a thriving community ; Bundaberg,
with two or three, is an idle township. The stoppage of kanaka
labour would unquestionably be a great blow to the sugar industry
and to the community at first. But the industry is too profitable
to be ruined without a struggle, and it could, and would, eventu-
ally adapt itself to the new conditions. Several plantation
owners were commencing to sublet their land to white farmers,
themselves retaining the central mill, when Parliament last year
legalised the continuance of Polynesian labour. Then the sub-
letting in great part ceased, since by employing kanakas the
planters make a cultivation profit as well as a milling profit.
But so far as the experiment was tried, it promised success.
be the same ; and this, I contend, is owing to the fact that the best part of
the population has been thrust out in the face of the black labour. There-
fore, I maintain that it is the duty of the Government ... to
attack the evil at the foundation, and to adopt this night some steps by
which the House will commit itself to the abolition of the traffic —at all
events at some future time, if it cannot be done at once. . . . It is a
mistake to suppose that the sugar industry cannot be carried on without
black labour, and if many of the small farmers, who have been reduced
almost to starvation by growing maize, had been employed in sugar growing,
they would be in a better position than they are now.— Mr. Thomas
Mcllwraith, May 22, 1877.
f After a very full consideration of the matter, I am convinced that it
is impossible for an inferior servile class, and a free white labouring
population, to permanently exist side by side with one another.— Mr. S. W.
Griffith, July 30, 1883.
Experience has taught me that black labour is not good for the
country, and we can do without it. — Mr. T. Unmack, April 30, 1888.


\et. however the people may decide, the Coalition Govern-
ment had no right to settle the question without reference to the
people’s decision. Its leaders were solemnly pledged against the
re-introduction of coloured labour, and the pledges were delibe-
rately broken. Nothing can excuse such a betrayal of the popular
trust. Is the colony prepared to forgive a shameless breach of
faith on the questionable ground of expediencv ? Or will
Queenslanders reply to supporters of the Coalition seeking re-
election : “ No, we can neither forgive nor forget your treachery.
Your performances are corrupted ; your promises are moth-eaten.
You have proved yourselves thoroughly untrustworthy ; we will
choose new men to represent us. They may do better than you:
they cannot do worse. ”*
VIII.—ELECTORAL REFORM.
?HE basis of the representation of the people in the Queens-
land Parliament is professedly manhood suffrage. The
electoral law gives a vote to every male over 21 years of
age, a resident for six months in any electoral district. The
administration of the electoral law has disfranchised nearly a
fourth of these voters.
* One statement most widely spread ... is that during my
political career of fifteen years I have been a consistent supporter of coloured
labour. It is a preposterous falsehood ; ... on the contrary, 1
have always been a supporter of the theory of Australia for the white man.
—Sir S. W. Griffith, March 12, 1888.
To the Electors of North Brisbane.—Gentlemen, —With a view of
showing you the absurdity of the statements made by my opponents, I now
pledge myself to the following, if I am returned to power:— Not to allow the
introduction of coolie or other coloured labour ; not to allow the introduction
of Chinese ; not to pay the survey fees of the transcontinental railway syndi-
cate ; not to introduce or support a transcontinental railway Bill or scheme.
— I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant, Thomas Mcllwraith. —Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith’s election handbill, May, 1888.
I therefore now most unhesitatingly pledge myself, if elected, to oppose
the employment or introduction of kanakas or coolies into the colony to the
utmost of my power. —Mr. T. Unsiack, April 28, 1888.
Mr. Tozer and Mr. Hodgkinson were elected as supporters of Sir
Samuel Griffith, and endorsed his opposition to black labour and land-grant
railways, making many remarks about the tyranny of syndicates and the
necessity of reserving Queensland for the white man, which would now be
profitable reading. Unfortunately, the references are not available.


This is easily proven. At the census of 1891, there were in
the colony 107,675 males of 21 years of age and upwards,
exclusive of Chinese, Polynesian, and other Asiatic races, prisoners,
lunatics, and members of charitable institutions. The number
of names on the electoral rolls for 1892 was 98,065, or 91 per
cent, of the number of males 21 years old in 1891. The number
of names on the rolls for 1898 is 83,011, which is only 84 per
cent, of the number on the rolls for 1892, and only 77 per cent,
of the total number of males 21 years old at the census of 1891.
As nearly two years have elapsed since this census, there has
probably been an increase of the number of males 21 years old
and upwards proportioned to the general increase of population.
There has certainly been no decrease.* The Registrar-General
also states that at the 1891 census there was “ great loss to the
enumeration in the western and northern districts ” —that is, a
considerable number of the population were not counted, owing
to the floods and the shearers’ strike. One enumerator alone
felt sure that, in consequence of the difficulty of getting informa-
tion from the men in the camps, there were fully 300 or 400 in
his district who were not counted. Taking the number of this
probable increase and the number of men not counted to ap-
proximately represent the number of voters who have not com-
pleted six months’ residence in any electoral district, we reach
the conclusion that nearly a fourth of the qualified voters are
disfranchised.
This non-representation of adult manhood in the govern-
ment is of the most serious importance. The welfare of a State
depends upon the welfare of its citizens, and in a democratic
society it is the right and duty of every citizen to decide how that
welfare may be best attained, and to express his decision through
constitutional channels. Obviously, the broader the basis on
which democratic institutions are founded, the more truly repre-
sentative of democracy they become. Hence universal adult
suffrage is not only just, but expedient. -There is no conclusive
ground for the exclusion of women, though children and lunatics,
habitual drunkards and criminals, may be excluded on the ground
of mental incapacity. With these exceptions, all who are
expected to obey the laws are entitled to a voice in making the
laws. Government by representative institutions is neither safe
nor permanent if it denies to any capable elector the opportunity
* The total number of males in the colony at the census of 1891 was
228,779. —Census Report.
At December 31,-1891, the estimated male population was 232,558.
During 1892 there was an excess of male births over deaths of 4390, and an
excess of male arrivals over departures by sea and railway of 1216. — Pugh's
Almanac, 1893.
The male population at December 31, 1892, was therefore 14,391 more
than at the census of 1891.


of performing his electoral duty ; if it fails to stimulate his
better nature, to foster his self-respect, his patriotism, his sense
of responsibility. The nation which wrongly disfranchises a
class or an individual commits an injustice which sooner or
later recoils upon itself. To extend the franchise to its utmost
possible limit, so that the action of the State may represent the
will of the greatest possible number of citizens—that is the
course consonant both with equity and with prudence.
The Coalition Government has taken a course exactly op-
posite. Its efforts have been continuously directed to the
limitation of the electoral body, by excluding as many as possible
of the labouring classes. How well it has succeeded the quoted
figures demonstrate. Though the electoral qualification remains
unaltered, though the population has increased, the “ weeding of
the rolls ” by order of the Government at the close of 1892 has
reduced the number of voters by 15,054, and lowered the per-
centage of electors from 91 to 77 per cent, of the adult male
population of the colony, supposing that this "remains about the
same. Not only are 24,664 adult males, who are by law entitled
to the franchise, excluded from the franchise ; but an amend-
ment of the law has made it difficult for them to obtain their
right, by hedging electoral privileges with many new conditions.
These may easily be misunderstood ; they are often troublesome
and expensive to comply with ; yet a breach of any of them is
fatal to an electoral claim. No one who impartially considers
the electoral policy of the Coalition Government can doubt that
they strained every nerve to prevent the working classes, who
might reasonably be supposed to be hostile to their administra-
tion, from securing their due share of electoral representation.
Lest even the purgation of the rolls and the creation of
obstacles to voters’ registration should not be sufficient for this
object, the second ballot scheme was superadded. This is of
sufficient importance to be dealt with separately. Its effect, how-
ever, will be to greatly complicate electoral machinery, and thus
to increase the number of informal votes—miners and selectors
and shearers being as a rule more conversant with the use of axe
and spade than with the subtleties of pencraft. In addition, the
uncertainty of its operation is calculated to cause discontent;
while it does not uniformly nor necessarily secure its ostensible
object—the choice of candidates who are elected by an absolute
majority of votes.
Had the Coalition Government really wished to advance elec-
toral reform, there was ample opportunity. It was surely their first
duty to remove the difficulties in the way of full electoral re-
presentation, instead of adding to them. It is shown that a
fourth of the adult male population of the colony cannot exercise
the right to which every citizen is entitled. Is this democratic


representation ? Does anyone think it conducive to the stability
of the State that twenty-three in every hundred of its citizens
should have no voice in directing the state ? that in an adult
male population of 108,000 the wishes of only 83,000 should be
considered? But even these 83,000 are not fairly represented.
Most have only one vote ; but many have two, some three, some
half-a-dozen. Why ? Is the man who has three votes more
intelligent than the man who has only one ? Certainly not. Is
he a better husband, a better father, a better citizen, a better
man ? No one will say so. Then why should he have extraor-
dinary privileges, since he has only ordinary qualifications to use
them ? But, it is said, the man with two votes has “ a greater
stake in the country,” than the man who has only one. That
is to say that citizenship is not dependent on the right of every
man to justice in a society which exists to confer equal justice on
all its members ; it is not dependent on a man’s honesty of heart,
or his strength of intellect, or his patriotism, or any other vir-
tues he possesses ; it is dependent on the amount of property he
owns. The assumption is that a man and a house are entitled
to more votes than a man, because possession of the house im-
plies that the man is a better man, and more qualified to take a
share in the government of his country. -Consequently, a man
with two houses is better than a man with only one, and a man
with ten than a man with two. The ideal electorate would
therefore be composed of a single man and an infinite number of
houses, exercising an infinite number of votes. This conclusion
appears ridiculous, yet it is a legitimate inference from the doct-
rine which values a man not by his integrity, his ability, or his
manhood, but by the amount of property which he has been able
to accumulate.*
A little consideration makes it evident that the possession
of “ a stake in the country ” is no guarantee that a man is a
good citizen. We see men living hard, toiling all their days for
gain, subordinating every noble principle, every generous senti-
ment, to the lust for gold, and dying wealthy and (convention-
ally) respected. We see others spurning wealth, and devoting
their lives to the service of humanity. The first are good citizens,
and may have a dozen votes. The second are lucky if they get
one This is an exceptional case, like the favourite example
adduced on the other side of the shiftless, thriftless improvident,
who is actually, being a man, entitled to the same number of
votes as the well-to-do business person. Yet the more the ques-
tion is looked into, the more plainly will it appear that the
qualification of manhood is the only one on which we can finally
* I am in favour of not allowing an elector. more than one vote. —Sib
Samuel Griffith, April 5, 1888.


rest. Oppose the spendthrift at one end of the scale to the miser
at the other, and you will have to choose the man between.
If the richer a man is, the better citizen he becomes, and
the more power over the lives and rights of his fellow-citizens
should be given him, then the ideal citizen is not an Abraham
Lincoln, but a Jay Gould ; not the man of the people, the toiler
who bears the burden of the State, but the capitalist who exploits
the people, the millionaire whose fortune, to a large extent, has
been wrung from the surplus profits due to labour. That such a
doctrine should still be seriously contended, in the face of the
inequities caused by the undue monopolisation of wealth in
private hands, shows clearly how potent is self-interest to blunt
the force of logic. It is to the class who already have the greatest
share of this world’s goods that the opponents of electoral reform
would give the greatest power to keep what they have and to gain
more ; while the lack-lands and lack-alls, born in economical
poverty, are to live and die without political privileges. No ; a
man is a citizen in right of his manhood, not in right of the acres
of land which his father has left him, or of the brick and mortar
that superior shrewdness has enabled him to pile up. Granted
even that his acquisitions are the result of honest thrift, he is
not on that, account better qualified to decide how the country
shall be governed. The test of a man is not what he owns, but
what he is. Every class of the population seeks its own interest.
The rich make laws for the rich; the middle class make laws for
the middle class ; and the poor, in justice, must have the right
to make laws for the poor. Only by the consensus of citizens
can the will of the State be equitably ascertained. Wealth has
already and intrinsically preponderant influence ; plural voting
gives it more. Why should those who monopolise the wealth
monopolise also the voting power ? Depend upon it, where the
citizen has no rights, there will he feel no obligation to maintain
the rights of others ; and when its citizens are not knit together
by the sense of mutual responsibility, the safety of the State is in
danger.
These considerations show the injustice of plural voting as
between man and man, between class and class. But further
amendment of the law is necessary that electoral representation
may be even moderately fair. It is impossible to defend the
existing inequality of electorates; and equal electorates on a
population basis should at once replace them. In the electorate
of Muriiia there are 605 names on the voters’ roll; in the
electorate of Woolloongabba there are 1986. Yet there is only
one member for each electorate, so that William Stephens, who
represents 1881 more electors than Hugh Muir Nelson, has only
an equal ' nice with him in Parliament; and one Murilla elector
has three times as much influence in the Government of the


country as one Woolloongabba elector. Gregory, with 4»0
electors, returns one member ; Bulimba, with 2385, returns one
member, and Mackay, with 1528, returns two members. Ipswich,
with 2302 electors, has two members; Charters lowers, with
4201 has no nore. These are not isolated instances , the list
is made up of similar anomalies. At present 72 members repre-
sent 83,011 voters —that is, the average number of voters which
a member of Parliament represents is 1153. The following
table shows the excess or deficiency of voters per member in each
electorate as compared with this quota.
Electorate. Electors on Roll. Excess. Deficiency.
Albert • • 1326 .. 173 .. " •
Aubigny ..1196 .. 43
Balonne • • 521 .. • • 5. -
Barcoo .. 1191 • • 38
Bowen • • 708 .. •• 4
Brisbane North (2) 2928 .. 311
Brisbane South (2) 3028 .. 361 ..
Bulimba • • 2385 .. 1232 .. --
Bulloo •• 447 .. - •• 706
Bundamba . • 1357 • • 204
Bundaberg . • 1440 . • 287 .. _r
Burke •• 575 .. - •• 478
Burrum • • 1106
Burnett . • 1545 .. 392
Cairns .. H 77 •• 24 ..
Cambooya .. U 39 •• •• 1
Carpentaria . • 485 .. • • y
Carnarvon .. 753 .. - •• 400
Charters Towers (2) 4201 .. 947 . •
Clermont .. 819 .. - -.334
Cook .. 1025 .. - -.128
Croydon • • 1609 .. 456
Cunningham .. 1307 .. 154 ..
Dalby .. 896 .. - •• 257
Drayton and Too’ba 2374 .. 34 ..
Enoggera .. 1065 .. - •• 88
Fassifern .. 1093 .. . • 60
Fitzroy • • H 62 .. 9 ..
Flinders .. 953 - -.200
Fortitude Valley (2) 3161 .. 427 ..
Gregory . • 450 .. .. 703
Gympie (2) .. 2390 .. ..
Herbert .. 892 .. - .. 261
Ipswich (2) .. 2302 .. ..
Kennedy • • 852 .. • • 30
Leichhardt .. 538 .. • • 616
Lockyer .. 1487 .. 334 ..
Logan .. 847 .. •*
Mackay (2) .. 1528 .. - ..389
Maranoa • • 1063 .. • • 9
Maryborough (2) .. 2360 .. 27 • • ~~~
Mitchell .. 996 .. - -. 157
Moreton .. 1644 .. 491 ••
Murilla .. 605 .. .. 548
Musgrave . • 1177 • • 24


Electorate Electors on Roll. Excess Deeicienct
Normanby .. 650 .. __ 503
Nundah .. 1459 303 '' _
Oxley .. 1440 .. 287
Port Curtis .. 719 * *
Rockhampton (2) .. 2510 " 102 ’' _
Rockhampton North 1056 _ ’' q 7
Rosewood .. 962 ” _ " Iq {
Stanley .. i Ol3 _ _ ”
Toowong .. 2021 868 ’'
Toombul .. 2060 .. 907 ' * _
Townsville (2) .. 2387 40 "
Warrego .. 749 .. __ "
Warwick .. i 065 __
Wide Bay .. 999 .. _ " 2 47
Woolloongabba .. 1986 833 " _
Woothakata .. 1392 23 9 ' *
tent with ? Whi sine q ualityofrepresentationconsis.
should h,™ Vem T nt? 11 is saitl that the country
4 n ttLThi f,, f ea ,‘ er re P resent ation than the towns
to be sa"d aoaimt it 16 °n ar g m ? nt ’ thou 8 h there is something
to be said against‘t, why should the representation be unequal
as between one country district and another country Slot
uoLTvMB R r°‘ her toWn ' falls short ol the
excess '■ 1 S“ 00 I has “ excess of 88. Townsville has an
excess oi 4U; loombul has an nf 007 t t i I
equality IS impossible, surely there is possible a closed ap°
the Elections Act ?? th<3 C ° alition ’ in amendi^
I=i=3SS=SS
vo itr The Cold-t ;? ay ’ ‘° glVe tlle fullesl opportunity of
reforms to Set Govemment has refttsed to make these
hS in "t HP? p a 4-“,rs iS
speed tL demU“i pC g r POh ‘ 10al will


IX.—THE SECOND BALLOT.
1. The second ballot is applied in the case of contested
elections where at the first ballot candidates do not obtain an
absolute majority of votes. Its introduction to Queensland is
the principal feature of the Elections Act of 1892, already
referred to, which defines an absolute majority of votes as “ a
number of votes greater than one-half of all the electors who
vote. 1 hus when 1500 electors vote in a single election, polling
1000 votes, an absolute majority is 751. When 1500 electors
vote m a double election, polling 3000 votes, an absolute
majority is the same —751.
2. The second ballot is in vogue, with various modifications
in nearly every State on the European continent, and is designed
to secure a juster representation of the majority of voters than
is attained by the English or customary Australian plan. Eor
example, if one candidate is to be elected for a constituency in
which 1000 votes are polled in favour of three candidates, by
the method familiar to ns, C, who gets 334 votes, wins from A
and B, who have 333 apiece ; though either A or B singlv would
nd C ’ s election practically disfranchises 666 voters in
J 000. ihe representative of the minority and not of the majority
is thus elected. This is an extreme illustration, but similar cases
occur often; and the result is an obvious misrepresentation of
the people At the last election in New South Wales, according
to the 8. M. Herald — h
87,000 Ministerial votes elected 48 members.
68,000 Labour ~ „ 30
62,000 Opposition „ *, 56
13,000 Ministerial „ ~ 7 ”
Thus the Labour Party polled 6000 more votes than the
Opposition, yet is represented by sixteen -members less ; while
the Government, which polled 25,000 more votes, has eight
candidates less. 6
3 - But though the principle of the second ballot is sound,
the Coalition s application of the principle to reach their peculiar
ends is an extraordinary patchwork. As, however, the patch-
work is now law, and the coming elections are subject to this
law, it will be profitable to examine it in some detail. The
essence of the system is the utilisation of secondary or contingent
4 Take a case in which Brown, Jones, and Robinson are
candidates one to be elected. The voter receives his ballot-
paper and strikes out two names—say Brown and Jones. Then
against these names he may (but he need not unless he likes)


write the figures 2,3, or any subsequent number (if there are
more than three candidates). This means that in the event of
a second ballot being taken, if Robinson is in too great a
minority to be elected, the voter prefers the candidates in the
order of the figures. Say he writes 2 against Brown and 3
against Jones, he will be under-stood to reason thus : “ T wish
Robinson to be elected, if possible, and therefore I do not cross
his name out. But if Robinson cannot be elected, I wish Brown
to be elected rather than Jones, and I show my preference by
putting 2 against Brown’s name, as 2 comes before 3.” Similarly
with any number of candidates. The result of the first ballot
may be : —Brown, 600 votes ; Jones, 500; Robinson, 400. Had
Brown polled 751 or more votes, he would have an absolute
majority and be elected. As it is, he has to fight Jones on the
second ballot. In a single election, at the second ballot, all the
candidates but the two first on the list at the first ballot are
considered to be defeated, and have no further chance. In this
case Robinson is the defeated candidate. The ballot-papers of
all who have voted for Robinson are examined, and the contin-
gent votes counted. Suppose that 100 of Robinson’s voters
have indicated a preference for Brown, and 300 for Jones. Then
Jones is elected with 800 votes to Brown’s 700. If 200 prefer
Brown and 200 Jones, Brown maintains his lead and is returned
by 800 votes to 700. So far as the voter is concerned, when
two candidates are to be elected, the contingent vote is applied
in a similar manner, with the difference that the voter may, if
he chooses, leave two names standing on the ballot-paper.
5. Further illustration will make the procedure more
intelligible. Take first the case of single elections (whether in
a one-member or a two-member constituency). There are three
possible cases —
(«) When there are only two candidates, the candidate with
the greatest number of votes must have an absolute majority,
and is elected at once;
( b ) When there are more than two candidates, if one can-
didate has an absolute majority, he is elected at once ; and
(c) When there are more than two candidates, if no candi-
date receives an absolute majority, all the candidates but the
first two are defeated candidates, the contingent votes given to
the first two on defeated candidates’ ballot-papers are counted,
and the one of the two which then gets most votes in all is
elected. We need only consider case (c).
G. A t the last Bundaberg election, as everybody knows, Duffy
was the strong Coalition candidate, Curtis was the weak
Coalition candidate, and Hall was the Labour candidate. The
Coalition votes were split between Duffy and Curtis, and HalL


was elected. Bat suppose the new system in force, with the
voting as follows —
First Vote.
Hall 600
Duffy .. .. • • .. .. .. .. .. 500
Curtis .. .. .. .. .. 400
Total, 1500
According to the Act, Curtis is a defeated candidate. But
Duffy has another chance, as Hall has not obtained an absolute
majority of votes. Therefore, “ suppose ” all Curtis’s men had
given a contingent vote to Duffy, then Duffy would have 900
to Hall’s 600, and would be triumphantly elected to the tune of
“ Croppies, lie down !”
7. But “ suppose ” that the Labour party —they are capable
of any villainy —also take it into their head to run two candi-
dates ; and give their second candidate half Curtis’s votes.
Then the figures will be—
First Vote.
Hall 600
Duffy .. .. -. .. .. .. .. .. 500
Curtis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 200
Skyring .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 200
Total, 1500
Then Curtis and Skyring are defeated candidates. Grive
Curtis’s 200 contingent votes to Duffy, which makes him 700;
give Skyring’s 200 votes to Hall, which makes him 800 ; and—
Hall is elected. Nothing can be simpler.
8. Or suppose we go on “supposing.'’ “ Suppose ”we
put the names as every supporter of “ law and order” would
wish them to be, but with smaller majorities, and show —
Fir»t Vote.
Duffy .. .. .. .. .. .. . • . • 550
Hall 500
Curtis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 450
Total, 1500
Under the old Act, Hall would get left, and the A.L.F. would
sit lamenting in sackcloth and ashes. But under the new Act
the A.L.F. smiles, for it knows Hall has another chance, and it
relies upon the manipulators of the contingent vote falling into
the pit which themselves have digged. So let ns imagine that
the contingent votes of Curtis are divided, as they probably
would be when he is in antagonism to Duffy, and suppose
most of his supporters prefer prejudice to politics, as they are
quite likely to do. Hitherto we have supposed that every
elector exercises a contingent vote. But this is quite optional,
and in practice many persons, from doubt or dislike, will not
apply contingent votes. In this illustration suppose that only
three-fourths of possible contingent votes are applied. Grive


194 of Curtis’s votes to Hall, and 143 to Daffy.- Then wo
have—
Contingent Votes.
550+143 = 693
" au 500 + 194 = 694
HesuH : Hall beats Duffy by one vote and enters Parliament,
-although, on the first vote Duffy beats Hall by 50. This
is election by an absolute majority of votes. It is also not
election by an absolute majority of votes, as Hall has only 694,
win e the absolute majority as defined by the Act is 751. There
nre hundreds of similar combinations possible.
9. Let us now consider the case of double elections. Here
thoie are four legal alternatives instead of three—
(//) When there are not more than four candidates, the two
who get most votes are elected; and the contingent votes are not
counted.
( e ) When there are more than four candidates, and two of
them get severally an absolute majority, they are elected. When
thtee of the four get each an absolute majority, the first two are
presumably elected. (This is not clearly expressed, but may be
taken as implied. The Act thus beats Euclid, and proves that
the parts are greater than the whole).
(/ ) When there are more than four candidates, and only one
gets an absolute majority, he is elected. Then all but the two
next candidates are defeated candidates, their contingent votes
are counted to the second two, and the one of the two who gets
most votes in all is elected.
(//) When there are more tli4n four candidates, and no
candidate gets an absolute majority, all but the four with most
votes are considered defeated candidates, their contingent votes
are counted to the first four, and the two who then get most
votes in all are elected.
Let us illustrate (/) and (g). —
10. (/) Brown, Jones, Robinson, Smith, and Thompson
are candidates for a two-member electorate, where 1,500 electors
poll 2,800 votes (allowing 200 for “plumpers ”). The voting is:
First Vote>
Brown .... fi ti
jones •• ' •• ." :: " 5 ?o
Robinson .. d( . 9
Smith .. . ‘ ‘ * "In
Thompson .. .. " “ 456
Total .. .. .. 2,800
Then Brown has an absolute majority of votes, and is elected.


{Smith and Thompson are defeated candidates ; and their contin-
gent votes are counted to Jones and Robinson as under.
Contingent Votes.
Smith to Jones .. • • ' •• •• ••
„ Robinson .. • • • • • • 100
~ others (or not given) .. .. ..311
461
Thompson to Jones .. •• •• •• ®0
„ Robinson .. •• •• •• HO
„ others (or not given) .. .. .. 287
456
Ho that we have —
Final Count.
Jones 570+ 50+ 50 .. 670
Robinson .. .. •• 462 + 100+119 .. 68
Result: Robinson beats Jones by 11 votes and sits beside Brown
in Parliament, although on the first count Jones beats Robinson
by 108. This is election by an absolute majority of votes. It
is also not election by an absolute majority of votes, as Robinson
has only 681, while the absolute majority as defined by the Act
is 751.
11. (</) Brown, Jones, Robinson, Smith, Thompson, and
Johnson are candidates for a two-member electorate, where
1,500 electors poll 2,800 votes (allowing 200 for “plumpers”).
The voting is :
Fikst Vote.
Brown .. •. • • • • • •
Jones.. .. .. •• •• ••
Robinson .. .. • • • • • • “7
Smith .. .. • • • • *' 107
Thompson .. .. .. • • ”077
Johnson .. .. •• •• ..oil
Total ... - .. ..2,800
No candidate has an absolute majority, therefore Thompson and
Johnson are defeated candidates, and their votes are counted as
under —
Contingent Votes.
Thompson to Brown .. • • • • .. 20
~ Jones .. • • • • .. 25
~ Robinson .. .. • • • • HI
„ Smith .. .. • • • • H 8
„ Johnson (or not given) .. .. 130
407
Johnson to Brown .. . • • • .. 20
„ Jones .. • • • • 25
~ Robinson .. .. • • .. 98
„ Smith .. . • • • • • 164
„ Thompson (or not given) .. .. 130


So that we have —
Final Count.
Brown 591+ 20+ 20 = 631
Jones* 570+ 25+ 25 = 620
ltobinson 431 + 114+ 98 = 643
Smith 424 + 118 + 104 = . 646
Then Robinson and Smith are elected, though neither has an
absolute majority as defined by the Act.
12. To these illustrations may be added another (/i).
Brown, Jones, Robinson, Smith, Thompson, and Johnson are
candidates for a two-member electorate, where 1,500 electors poll
2.500 votes (allowing 200 for “plumpers ”). The voting is :
First Vote.
Brown .. .. • • • • • • • • 920
Jones .. •• •• •• •• •• 690
Robinson .. .. .. •. • • 510
Smith .. .. . • • • • • • • 980
Thompson .. .. .. .. • • 910
Johnson .. .. .. .. • • 190
Total .. 2,800
Then Brown and Jones together have a majority of the total
votes polled, and as the object of the Act is to secure election by
an absolute majority of votes, one would naturally suppose them
elected without further trouble. This is not so. however, and
the case is treated as an example of (/), paragraph 10. So that
Brown is elected, and the contingent votes of Smith, Thompson,
and Johnson are counted to Jones and Robinson as under —
Contingent Votes.
Smith to Jones 11
„ Robinson .. .. 80
„ others (or not given) .. 189
Thompson to Jones .. .. 13
„ Robinson .. .. 70
„ others (or not given) 127
- 210
Johnson to Jones .. .. .. 16
„ Robinson .. .. 80
~ others (or not given) .. 94
So that we have —
Final Count.
Jones .. 690 + 11 + 13 + 16 = 730
Robinson .. 510 +Bo+7o +BO = 740
Then Robinson is elected to sit beside Brown, although he has
not an absolute majority as defined by the Act.
18. From the preceding paragraph it is clear that what the
Act aims to secure is not, as it declares, an absolute majority of
votes, but an absolute majority of voters. For compare the case
last illustrated (paragraph 12) with the cases illustrated in para


graphs 10 and 11. In (f) the successful candidates receive
together on the final count 1,582 first and contingent votes, and
only one candidate has the absolute majority required bv the
Act. In (//) the successful candidates receive together 1,289 first
and contingent votes, and neither candidate has the absolute
majority required by the Act. But in (h) two candidates receive
together 1,610 first votes, or more than the added first and con-
tingent votes of the candidates in either (/) or (//), and yet one
of these candidates is unsuccessful, although on the final count
he receives 49 votes more than the second successful candidate
in (f), and from 87 to 90 votes more than either successful candi-
date in ((f). True, Jones in (h) does not get an absolute majority.
But neither does Robinson in (/); neither does Robinson or
Smith in (//) ; and Jones comes nearer an absolute majority on
the first count than any one of these does on the final count —the
total number of first votes polled being in all cases the same.
14. These illustrations are neither exceptional nor isolated
instances of the manner in which the Act may work. On the
contrary, they are typical examples, which may and will recur
in actual politics. It is thus shown, as in paragraphs 8, 10, and
11, that, taking the Act as it stands, it cannot in all cases secure
election by an absolute majority of voters, nor even (as in para-
graph 12) by an absolute majority of votes. In the one instance,
it is dependent upon the utilisation of contingent votes, which
may or may not be exercised ; in the other it is hampered by its
own restriction that every candidate must obtain an absolute
majority, which is inoperative in analogous cases.
15. It is not to the point to argue that the Act secures the
best possible majority in each case. For, in the first place, the
Act professes to secure an absolute majority, and after making a
number of arbitrary stipulations, it fails to do what it professes.
In tiie second place, the electoral law should not only deal justly
with the candidates in every electorate, but should deal equal
justice to the candidates in all electorates. Now, when in
electorates where the same number of voters poll the same
number of votes, two candidates in one electorate have a
greater number of votes both jointly and severally than two
candidates in another electorate, yet the latter are elected and
the former not, it is manifest that equal justice is not done.
16. It remains to show that the injustice pointed out may
be repeated indefinitely, that the Elections Act of 1892 does
not uniformly nor necessarily secure a true majority of votes
to any candidate, and that consequently its cumbersome machi-
nery has been created to no purpose save that of em-
barrassing electors and increasing the number disfran-
chised by informal votes. The Act reaches this rail actio
ad absurdutn by giving a preference sometimes to the primary


votes cast for one candidate and sometimes to the secondary votes
cast for another candidate. For such a course there is no justifi-
cation whatever. In the eye of the law, one candidate should be
as good as another candidate, one man’s vote as good as another
man’s vote. If only first votes are counted, then all the first
votes should be counted ; if first and contingent votes are counted,
then all the first and contingent votes should be counted. But
the Act deliberately refuses to count the contingent votes given
to certain candidates, and by calling them “ defeated candidates ,r
on the first vote excludes them from the chance of winning on
the contingent vote, which in justice they should share with the
other candidates. That this division of defeated and undefeated
candidates is purely arbitrary is shown by the line of exclusion
being drawn in one case at the second candidate, in another case
at the third candidate, and in another case at the fourth candi-
date. There is no reason why the fifth and sixth candidates
should not also count the contingent votes given to them, or the
seventh and eighth, or any number, and the Act actually declares
those candidates defeated, in a drnnt of first and contingent votes,
Avho have more first and contingent votes than any other
candidate.
17. This is easily illustrated. Take the case of a single
election, as before given (paragraph 8), with the figures—
First Vote.
' Duffy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 550
Hull 500
Curtis .. .. .. .. ; .. .. .. 450
Total .. .. .. .. 1500
Here the Act steps in and declares Curtis a defeated candidate.
Why ? If contingent votes are to be counted, why not count
the contingent votes given to Curtis as well as those given
to Hall ? Are they not of precisely the same value ? It is not
convenient. But is an Act which professes to increase the
measure of electoral justice to perpetrate a new injustice on the
ground that it is not convenient to do justice ? Is the conveni-
ence of the legislator to be made the measure of the justice of the
law ? For the whole of the contingent votes will possibly, even
probably, show as follows (supposing three-fourths are given)—
Duffy to Hall 50
~ „ Curtis .. .. .. .. .. .. 362
Hall to Duffy .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
„ „ Curtis .. .. .. .. .. .. 325
Curtis to Duffy .. .. .. .. .. .. 143
„ „ Hall 194


Thus we have, counting first and contingent votes together
First Vote. Contingent. Total.
Duffy 550 .. 50 + 143 = 193 .. 743
Hall .. 500 .. 50 + 194 = 244 .. 744
Curtis 450 .. 362 + 325 = 687 .. 1137
That is to say that, when Curtis has 1137 first and contin-
gent votes to Hall’s 744, Hall gets in. But most of the votes are
here counted twice over—once first and once contingent. So,
comparing Hall directly with Curtis, excludes from Hall’s total-
count Curtis’s votes, and from Curtis’s total-count Hall’s votes.
Then we have—
First Vote. Contingent. Total.
Hall 500 .. 50 .. 550
Curtis 450 .. 362 .. 812
That is to say that, in an electorate of 1500 voters, when
nl2 prefer Curtis to Hall, Hall is elected. So much for the
power of the Act to secure election by “ an absolute majority of
votes.”
18. The above illustration is likely to be practically exem-
plified in every single-member constituency where there are three
candidates —Government, Opposition, and Independent—if the
Independent is third on the poll. For the contingent votes of
both Government and Opposition supporters naturally go to the
Independent candidate, who will be defeated though more first
and contingent votes are cast for him than for either of the
others. Thus the electors choose him, and the Act vetoes the
choice.
19. It is just the same with double electorates. We have
already seen in case (//) that when on the first count Brown and
•Jones are preferred by an absolute majority of votes to any other
two candidates, Brown and Jones are not necessarily elected. A
similar result may easily follow in cases (/) or ((f), with the
difference that the defeated candidates have an absolute majority,
not of votes, but of voters. Take case (g). Here we have—
First Vote.
Brown .. .. .. .. .. '.. .. .. 591
Jones .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 570
Robinson .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 431
Smith .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 424
Thompson .. .. .. .. .. ..' .. .. 407
.Johnson .. .. . t .. .. .. .. .. 377
Total .. .. 2800
And here are all the
Contingent Votes.
Brown to Jones .. .. .. .. .. .. 30
~ ~ Robinson . i .. .. .. .. .. 10
~ ~ Smith .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
~ „ Thompson .. .. .. .. .. 250
„ ~ Johnson .. .. .. .. .. .. 226
(Not given) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 60
591


Jones to Brown .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
~ ~ Robinson .. .. .. .. .. .. 16
~ ~ Smith .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
~ ~ Thompson .. .. .. .. .. 220
„ „ Johnson .. .. .. .. .. .. 246
(Not given) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 55
570
Robinson to Brown .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
~ „ Jones .. .. .. .. .. .. ll
~ „ Smith .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
~ ~ Thompson .. •.. .. .. .. 175
„ ~ Johnson .. .. .. .. .. 160
{Not given) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 43
431
Smith to Brown .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
„ „ Jones .. .. .. .. .. .. 17
~ ~ Robinson . . .. .. .. .. .. 31
~ „ Thompson .. .. .. .. .. 155
~ „ Johnson .. .. .. .. .. 165
(Not given) . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 44
424
Thompson to Brown .. .. .. .. .. 70
• „ ~ Jones .. ..... .. .. .. 25
~ „ Robinson .. .. .. .. .. 141
„ „ Smith 118
~ ~ Johnson .. .. .. .. .. 40
(Not given) 40
407
Johnson to Brown .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
„ „ Jones 75
„ „ Smith 98
„ ~ Robinson .. .. .. .. .. .. 104
~ ~ Thompson .. .. .. .. .. 35
(Not given) .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
. 377
Total 2800
So that we have—
Final Count.
Brown .. .. 591+ 25+ 14+ 12+ 70+ 20= 732
Jones .. .. 570+ 30+ 11+ 17+ 25+ 75= 728
Robinson .. 431+ 10+ 16+ 31 + 114+ 98= 700
Smith .. .. 424+ 15+ 8+ 28 + 118 + 104 = 697
Thompson .. 407 + 250 + 220 + 175 + 155+ 35 = 1242
Johnson .. .. 377 + 226 + 246 + 160 + 165+ 40 = 1214
Thus, in a two-member electorate, when 5818 first and con-
tingent votes are polled, if Thompson and Johnson together get
2456, Brown and Jones together get 1460, and Robinson and
Smith together get 1397—then Robinson and Smith are elected.
But many of the votes are here counted twice over—once first
and once contingent. So, comparing Thompson and Johnson, the
defeated candidates, directly with Smith and Robinson, the success-
ful candidates, exclude from Thompson and Johnson’s total-count
their own interchanged contingent votes and Smith and Robin-
son’s contingent votes ; and exclude from Smith and Robinson’s


total-count their own interchanged votes and Thompson and
Johnson’s votes. Then we have—
First Votk. Contingent. Total.
Eobinson .. .. 431 .. 26 = 457
Smith .. .. 424 ... 23 = 447
Thompson .. .. 407 .. 470 = 877
Johnson .. .. 377 .. 472 = 849
That is to say that, in an electorate of 1500 voters, when
Thompson and Johnson together poll 1726 votes, which is an
absolute majority of first votes polled, each having an absolute
majority of Voters, and Smith and Robinson together poll 904
votes, which is not an absolute majority of first votes polled, neither
having an absolute majority of voters, Smith and Robinson are
elected. So much for the power of the Act to secure election by
“ an absolute majority of votes ” —or voters.
20. This, again, is a case which is very likely to be met in
any double electorate at the coming election, where there are two
Coalition candidates, two Labour candidates, and one or two
others. Whatever the place of the others on the poll they are
nearly sure to have a majority of first and contingent votes,
since they will get nearly all the contingent votes from the sup-
porters of four candidates, while Coalition and Labour candidates
will share contingent votes from the supporters of only one or two.
If the Independent candidates are fifth and sixth on the list they
are sure to be defeated; but if one or both are placed among
the first four they are nearly sure to win, unless the first man
gets an absolute majority.
21. We might go on indefinitely multiplying instances of
the erratic manner in which the Elections Act of 1892 will work
in defiance both of its own principles and of abstract justice.
Sufficient, however, has been said to show that the so-called
“ provisions for securing an absolute majority of votes ” are both
complicated and worthless ; and that the Act, as a whole, leaves
electoral grievances in worse case than it found them.
X.—BLUNDER AND PLUNDER.
Sir Samuel Griffith has been the prodigal child of Australian
politics. The nation’s substance is entrusted to him, and he
straightway goes and spends it in riotous legislation. After a
sufficient time devoted to the husks of repentance, he returns and
weeps upon the nation’s neck, exclaiming that he has sinned


before Heaven and in their sight, and—is worthy to be trusted
with some more substance. One by one his ill-omened chickens
have come home to roost—not, indeed, on his shoulders, their
proper place, but on the burthened back of the great big suffering
people. His ten million loan came home as the basis of false
values and reckless speculation which ruined thousands. His
advocacy of so-called “ rights of labour ” came home as a strike
which terrified capital, paralysed industry, and took an armed
force to quell it. The Naval Defence Act is one of the most
recent and portentous of the Mother Carey’s brood.
This Act was the result of a pledge, which Sir Samuel
Griffith had no authority to give, at the Imperial Conference, to
which he had no authority to go. The original Bill in 1887 met
with vigorous opposition from Parliament, Press, and the public ;
and the Government were forced to withdraw it. At the general
"election of 1888, it became a strong weapon in the hands of Sir
Samuel's opponents, and materially contributed to the downfall
■of his party. * A prion, then, the recommendation of the Naval
Defence Bill was this : that it was the discredited measure of the
discredited head of a discredited Ministry.
The Coalition Ministry re-introduced the Bill; and Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith, who owed his election in great part to
his denunciations of its principles, had the audacity to support
it, though the circumstances had not changed, and the arguments
which he and others had brought against the measure were and
are unanswerable. In the first place, England provides the fleet
quite as much in her own interest as in ours. She is protecting
the British bondholder just as deliberately as when she bombarded
Alexandria. Do our chivalrous Imperialists imagine for one
moment that it is pure motherly anxiety for our welfare which
prompts her interference ? Not a bit of it; it is anxiety for the
three hundred millions of British capital invested in the colonies,
for the colonial shipping companies more than three-fourths of
whose shares are held by British owners. And it is our connec-
tion with England which chiefly exposes us to attack. The
moment England is involved in a European quarrel, that moment
Australian danger begins. As appanages of the British empire,
we invite hostilities from nations which would never dream of
t Questions for the Electors to Answer. —Who is the coming leader
of the great National Party of Australia? Mcllwraitli. Who wants to stifle
the independence of Australia by the Imper alistic Naval Defence Bill ?
Griffith. Who left a surplus in the Treasury after finding a deficiency left by
a, Liberal Government, and who will do it again ? Mcllwraith. Who will
put it in the power of every working man to become the possessor of a piece
of freehold land of his own ? Mcllwraith. — Sir Thomas Mcllwraith’s elec-
tion handbill, May, 1888,


attacking independent colonies. Naturally, English statesmen
are only too glad when, besides accepting the risk of the English
connection, we show ourselves willing to pay for the risk as if it
were a privilege.
A more serious objection still is found in the fact that we
have no control whatever over the movements of the fleet we
subsidise. The admiral is responsible not to the colonies, who pav
his salary, but to the imperial authorities, who pay nothing at
all. This is not taxation without representation, for it is worse
—it is taxation for somebody else’s representation. Queensland
is a constitutional colony, working on constitutional methods;
and for every penny of the people’s money expended Parliament
is entitled to demand an exact account. But. for the money we
pay as subsidy to an English fleet, we get no account whatever.
We cannot ask how it goes, because the admiral has nothing to
do with us ; he takes his orders from England. Would we
dream for one moment of permitting the Commandant of a
Colonial Defence Force to refuse obedience to everyone but the
English War Office ? On what grounds then should the Admiral
of a Colonial Defence Force be permitted to refuse obedience to
everyone but the English Admiralty ? The pledge that the
fleet will remain in Australian waters is a very safe one as long
as those who make it can break it when they choose. But of
what value would it be were the Channel fleet defeated by an
enemy, and every available vessel needed to defend England’s
own shores ? Even supposing we should be glad to sacrifice
ourselves to England in such a crisis, why pay for the fleet in
the meantime ? •
The impotence of the colonies was strikingly shown in the
matter of the cruelties practised on the stokers of the Mildura,
one of the English squadron. On the first trial of this vessel one
stoker died from heat and exhaustion. Another broke a blood-
vessel. Several were violently sick. And this was in England,
where the temperature was comparatively cool. When the vessel
approached the tropics on her voyage to Australia, the state of
the men is more easily imagined than described. The remainder
of the squadron had passed through the Red Sea under moderate
steam, with the ventilating fans working in the stokeholes. The
machinery of the Mildura had several times broken down, and
she was a week behind. The captain gave orders to increase the
speed in order to make up for lost time. The chief engineer
hastened to obey. Instructions were issued to keep up the steam,
and woe betide the stokers who let the furnaces run down. Even
* To pass the Naval Defence Bill will not only bind us down for a term,
of years to pay tribute to Great Britain, but will also implicate us in the
risks of war which she runs with other nations. (Cheers.)— Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith, May 4, 1888.


in the Mediterranean the heat was blistering. When the Mildura
left Suez, and commenced the journey through the Red Sea, the
sufferings of the unhappy stokers baffle conception. The ventilating
fans broke down, and no cool air whatever could reach them. Ihe
stokeholes were nearly as hot as the furnaces themselves. The
boilers radiated so great a heat that it was impossible to stand
between them. Yet the stifling wretches had still to trim the
coal and feed their roaring furnaces. Speed must be maintained,
said' the captain ; and the chief engineer’s oaths followed every
fall in the pressure-gauge.
The men fainted, and dropped where they stood. Their
mates carried them to the upper deck for a breath oi air. The
captain placed sentries over every air-lock, and forced them to
stay below. The men came off watch as black all over as the ace
of spades, and lay senseless in the waterways. The doctor was
annealed to. He had his orders. The men must go on with
their work. A marine fell down on the upper deck in full air,
and died unconscious. Yet below deck the stokers wtie roasting.
Speed must be maintained, said the captain. The Black Hole of
Calcutta is the only possible simile for the stokeholes of
the Mildura on the voyage from Aden to Colombo, and Colombo
to Batavia. “ Hell itself was never hotter,” declared one of the
victims. “ The ship may well be called Mildew-ra,” ran the
bitter jest; “for God has put a blight upon it.” Mater threatened
to run short, and sentries were placed over the drinking-tanks. Ihe
food was unsuitable ; and the miserable creatures who were not
carried from the stokeholes to the sick-bay, foaming at the mouth,
ffrew as weak as children. They were tortured with prickly
h e at' their bodies were covered with boils. The ship met heavy
weather, which made even the captain sick. Yet the men were
harassed with hammock-cleaning and washing decks. They re-
belled at last. They had literally worked themselves out. Two
watches threw down their tools. The third watch was sent below,
and sentries were placed at the escapes to keep them below. But
the captain had to give in and ease the speed. It was time.
This account of the men’s sufferings was published when
the Mildura reached Queensland, with the result that the Ad-
miral held an informal enquiry at Sydney, when •* nearly the
whole of the stokers,” “ sixty or seventy men,” substantiated the
statements. What followed ? Nothing. The great men and
the great journals of Australia either held their peace or at-
tempted to excuse the officers of the Mildura. But if we had the
ri"ht to bring these officers before an Australian court of justice,
to confront them with sixty or seventy men who swore that the
stokeholes were a hell, that the stokers fainted from the heat and
work, that sentries were kept at the exits to prevent them from
getting fresh air, that the officers abused them like dogs, would


nothing follow ? But we have not the right. Australia must
see these things without being able to remedy them. She has
not the slightest control over the fleet for which she pays. She
is compelled, perforce, to witness without preventing tyrannies
committed in her name. That is the privilege which we draw
from the disgraceful bargain of the Naval Defence Act—the pri-
vilege of standing sponsor for all the cruelties on board a British
slaver.
Even granting that the squadron is worth sustaining, no
rhetoric can disguise the fact that if the colonies built, owned,
and controlled it themselves as a nursery of Australian seamen,
it would cost them £15,000 a year less than now, when they
neither man it, own it, nor exercise the slightest control over it.
Mr. Goschen, England’s versatile financier, borrowed £700,000
at per cent, to build the squadron, and charges us 5 per cent,
on the cost for the use of it, actually making 2£ per cent., or
£17,500 per annum, out of the bargain, and retaining at the end
of the agreement the vessels which our money has meanwhile
kept in a constant state of efficiency.
Efficiency! And what is the measure of their efficiency ?
We had a glimpse of it on the voyage from England, when the
engines broke down in nearly every vessel, when the boilers in
all gave constant trouble. We are gradually getting fuller and
fuller light. The English Press teems with condemnations of
the ships and all of their class. We are told that the boilers
are worthless ; their tubes leak ; they are constantly in need of
repairs, “In nearly every instance,” says the Pall Mall Gazette,
“ the condemned boilers will have to be taken out at a very
serious cost, the repairs to the Vulcan alone [which has similar
engines to those of the Mildura] costing £30,000. It is true that the
vessels can yet be fought, but it is impossible to depend upon
them for speed. And it is for her share of these unreliable
playthings that Queensland pays £12,000 a year, while the tele-
graph master runs about Georgetown because the Government
cannot afford a message-boy. A more useless object to waste
money upon could never have been found. Of what value would
five leaky-boilered vessels, stationed at Tasmania and New
Zealand, be to the Queensland coast if once (a swift Russian
cruiser got past Thursday Island. But the passage of the Act
was pleasant to Sir Samuel Griffith’s vanity, wounded by the
general election ; it seemed expedient for his interest, which,
clings to Imperialism as the policy most advantageous to a
colonial politician. So he exerted his eloquence and his influ-
ence successfully ; Parliament danced to his piping, and another
mark was added to the long score chalked against him by the
much-enduring people of Queensland.


When the Imperial Defence Act became law, Mr. Gosclien,
Lord Carnarvon, and others congratulated Great Britain on
having made a very good bargain ; “ for,” said they, “ the
colonies’ assent to such an Act is an admission of the principle
that they should l* taxed for the benefit of the empire.” That is
precisely the admission which Queenslanders, if they are loyal to
themselves and to their manifest destiny, will never make. It is
unnecessary to recapitulate the arguments against the dream
that all the British possessions, the numerous English-speaking
countries, will consent to merge their growing importance in
the decaying grandeur of England. For even if they would, they
cannot; since in opposition stands the national tendency to
separation of scion from stock which all growth brings. As the
ripe fruit falls from the tree, as the son on reaching maturity
(piits his father’s house, as the nebula thrown from the whirling
nucleus condenses and takes an orbit of its own, so these colonies,
as they gradually become populous, wealthy, and stable, will be
inevitably impelled to break the trammels of restraint which were
safeguards in their youth, and launch forth for themselves on a
career of independence. Meantime, England should know that,
in the words of Charles Pinckney, we have millions for defence,,
but not one cent, for tribute.
“ The colony has been a splendid hunting-ground for lawyers
lately,” dryly remarks Pugh’s Almanac for 1893. The reference
is, of course, to the famous Robb arbitration case—“ and none
will deny, in regard to the same, what that name might imply.”
This arbitration was held to decide a claim against the Govern-
ment for £202,311, made by Mr. John Robb, the contractor for
the second section of the Cairns railway. The amount of the
original tender for this piece of line was £290,984 ; and the
amount paid to the contractor to 30th June, 1892, was £880,406.
The whole responsibility for this monstrous extravagance falls
upon the Minister, the Hon. W. Miles, who let the contract, and
upon the Ministry, with Sir S. W. Griffith at its head, which
supported Mr. Miles. The work was of unusual difficulty,
and the Government engineers and surveyors recognised that
unusual care was needed in the preparation of plans and specifi-
cations. They protested in vain that they were not ready ; that
the necessary preliminary tests had not been undertaken; that no
trial shafts had been sunk along the course of the line to ascer-
tain the nature of the country. Political reasons were paramount
their protests were unheeded ; the plans were “ rushed through at
the rate of fifty miles an hour,” as one of those concerned graphic-
ally puts it; and the result was that tenders were called for a line
which could not possibly be constructed. It was suspended on
the verge of precipices, where there was not foothold for a fly; it


found a basis of solid rock where there was only treacherous
earth; at one point of its progress it was literally hung in mid-
air, like Mahomet’s coffin. The result was that instead of the
railway being constructed on the plans and specifications it was-
constructed piecemeal. The plans were given up altogether, and
at every mile the engineers went ahead and decided what direction
tie next mile should take. In fifteen miles of construction there
were sixteen miles of deviations ; and in place of 587,000 yards
of excavation there were 2,824,000 yards. The total cost will
probably be a million sterling ; and the line should have been
built for a quarter of that amount.
The Railway Commissioners were apparently powerless to'
avert the expenditure. Their hands were tied by the original
contract; and they could only sit still and watch the contractor
charging rock-cutcing prices for shifting cheesy earth, and put-
ting in blasts which tumbled into the abyss, at four-and-three-
pence per cubic yard, hundreds of tons of stone. Had the ground
proi ed hard, the contractor might have been ruined ; it turned
out to be soft, and he has nearly ruined the Government. The
Commissioners might have cancelled the contract. But the con-
tractor would have had a huge claim for damages, and the Com-
missioners would still have had the line to build. They might
ba\e allowed the contractor to build a line to carry goods only,
lea\ing the slopes as they stood in the original plans,
and doing most of the extra excavation themselves. This
seems, at first sight, a feasible way out of the diffi-
culty. But high authority affirms that it was not feasible;
that the line could not possibly have been built to the first
plans, even to carry an engine ; and that the contractor would
still have had a just claim for damages for the work taken out of
his hands. The only point where the Commissioners appear to
have been at fault was in attempting to fight an untenable
defence on the last certificates. A good deal of odium has been
cast on the contractor, who, after all, is only demanding his
bond. But the odium and the blame really belong to the
Ministry which hastily started the section, knowing that the
plans and specifications had been badly and ignorantly prepared.
it was only fitting that Sir Samuel Griffith, as Attorney-
General, should assist the Government to lessen the cost of
blunders for which he was largely responsible. It seemed most
uufitting that as Premier in esse and Chief Justice in posse, with
no money in the Treasury for the most necessary public works,
he should permit counsel’s fees to be fixed on a scale of unex-
ampled magnitude, and should himself accept the highest fees
of all. (This, at least, is generally believed ; lias been publicly
stated in the Press ; and was never contradicted.) The following


are said on good authority to be the chief fees paid—
Sir S W. Griffith, 500 gs. brief, daily refresher 35gs.
Hon T. .1. Byrnes, 400 gs. brief, daily refresher 30gs.
Mr. J. G. Drake, lOOgs. brief, daily refresher 18gs.
When it is remembered that Sir S. W.Griffith drew £I3OO a year as
Minister, and Mr. Byrnes £IOOO, and that the fees were practically
iixed by themselves, the significance of these figures will be
appreciated. The contractor’s counsel included Mr. \ irgil Power
and Mr EdwinLilley, whose briefs were marked 150 gs. andlOOgs.,
with refreshers of 15 and 12gs. daily. These fees are in strong
contrast to those paid by the Government. Ihe court sat over
80 days ; and though the full cost to the country cannot yet be
stated, it is at least £20,000. There was no justification what-
ever for this expenditure, which yielded no commensurate return.
The sole object of referring such disputes to arbitration is that,
they are disputes not about law, but about fact ; and the arbitra-
tors are experts qualified to decide the fact. Ihe lawyers aie
not experts, and are not qualified, and only obscure the issue
instead of illuminating it. There is ample room foi
comment; but as it would probably be considered libellous,
readers must make it for themselves. Three questions may be
nut in aid. If Griffith and Byrnes were not Attorney-General
and Solicitor-General, would they receive such high fees as
counsel? Certainly not. Or if other counsel were employed,
would Griffith as Attorney-General and Byrnes as koluator-
General allow them such high fees? Certainly not Does
follow, then, that Griffith and Byrnes abused their public trust
for the sake of public plunder ? Certainly not.
The last days of the Coalition were made memorable by
games of hanky-panky with great public offices, the like of
which had never before been seen in Queensland. Sir Samue
Griffith had cheated every political party in turn, and he sav
that his career as a political leader was ended. His name was
universally execrated; and though he might still have found
support, he could never again have inspired confidence. Sr
pressure was brought upon Sir Charles Lilley to resign the
office of Chief Justice, and an Act was passeu through
ment increasing the salary of the next Chief Justme by £IOOO a
vear Sir Samuel Griffith announced his intention to accept
th„ position. As he was Premier and Attorney-General, the
appointment rested with him ; and he practically appomted hnm
self There, for a time, the matter ended. A wise and decent
custom ordains that, to avoid the slightest suspicion of evil, om
judges shall avoid becoming political partisans ; but the Uner
Justice-elect continued as Premier to make political speeches,
while as Attorney-General he took fees as Government counsel.


The resignation of Chief Justice Lilley took effect in the middle
of February. The office remained vacant, waiting the Premier’s
convenience. The administration of justice was impeded ; but
that was a comparative trifle. Not until the middle of March,
did the Premier resign his position as Minister, and ascend the
Bench.*
The scandal was great ; and the public murmurs were not
loud, but deep. Did Sir Samuel Griffith, it was asked, exist for
the service of the country, or did the country exist for the ser-
vice of Sir Samuel Griffith ? Was the colony in a position to
afford the increased salary of the new Chief Justice? Was the
increase prudent or necessary, when it so greatly increased
the inequality between the salaries of the Chief Justice and the
puisne judges? What would follow the precedent set by the
Premier of Queensland, entrusted with the power of the people
of Queensland, in rewarding himself for his political services
with the most lucrative office in his gift, after the emoluments
of that office had been still further increased by a subservient
Parliament? There is no satisfactory answer to these questions, j
In the meantime, Mr. H. M. Nelson, leader of the Oppo-
sition to the Coalition Ministry, astonished the country by
becoming a member of the Cabinet. Only a few days before,
he had told his constituents at Callandoon that the Coalition Min-
istry had failed to accomplish its task of financial reform, and
drew the inference that it was untrustworthy. A few weeks
before, he had fought persistently against the Land-Grant Rail-
ways Act, and other leading measures of the Coalition policy. Yet
bis action in deserting his party, and endorsing the policy he
condemned, was extolled by Press apologists as a triumph of
patriotic rectitude ! Plain people might well pinch themselves
to make sure they were awake. We are told that patriots should
rise superior to party ; that there should be no parties; that
all should strive together for the common good. But what o t
* It is now my unpleasant duty to refer to the way great offices of State
are made a toy to be kicked about and played with to suit the political exi-
gencies of the party in power The office of the Postmaster-General is an
essential one according to the laws of the colony. He has functions to per-
form that can be performed by no other person. The rule according to the
constitution, is that as soon as the office is vacated—a high office of State—
it must be filled.—Sir S. W. Griffith, August 10, 1880.
I \V e shall not be surprised if Sir Samuel’s sense of dignity and pro-
priety have come to his aid, and if he should decline to take office under the
provisions of the Chief Justice’s Salary Act until a new Parliament has been
afforded an opportunity of reviewing it and of considering whether the
country can really afford the enormous increase of expense which would be
the consequence of its operation. In any case, we submit the vacancy
should not be filled until we have in power a Ministry constitutionally formed
with the sanction of Parliament and in touch with the people. —Brisbane
Courier.


principles: is the new-fangled patriot to rise superior to them
also ? is he to advocate one set of tenets one week,
and another set of tenets another week, and appeal
to his patriotism and his purity in proof that both sets
are equally true and equally reasonable ? Is the weathercock to
become the symbol of constancy ? are we to steer our course not
by the stars, which are fixed, or by the compass, which points
always to the pole; but by the wind which bloweth whither it
listeth, by the leaf which drifts on the surface of the wave ?
When every policy in turn is cast off like an old glove, must we
believe the versatile comedian who advocated it when he makes
equally moving, equally passionate appeals for a policy exactly
opposite ?
The celebrated Crockett tells a story of a farmer’s boy whose
master ordered him to plough across the field to the red cow.
Well, he began to plough and she be o an to walk ; and he ploughed
all morning after her. When the master came, he swore at him
for going so crooked. “ Why, sir,” said the boy, “ you told me
to plough to the red cow, and I kept after her, but she always
kept moving.” So with the people of Queensland. We have
tried to plough after Sam Griffith, and Tom Mcllwraith, and
Hugh Nelson ; but they always keep moving. As long as they went
straight, we went after them ; but when they go this way, and
that way, and every way, we won’t follow.
XI.—THE LABOUR PARTY.
TyTR. H. H. CHAMPION, a Radical writer and speaker of
10l ability who visited these colonies some years ago, summed
up the Australian Labour Party as lions led by asses.
Miss Shaw, the representative of the London Times, and a shrewd
observer, though with all a woman’s facility for jumping at con-
clusions, described the Queensland Party as consisting of inept
chatterers at the head and larrikins at the tail, with the great
body of sensible men silent in the middle.
In these judgments there is unfortunately-a great measure
of truth. Mr. Lane was the only really able man whom the
Queensland Labour Party has yet produced; and he has left it.
Mr. Glassey, Mr. Hinchcliffe, and others, are honest and zealous
-enough ; but provokingly lacking in brains, in tact, and in know-
ledge. Joined with them are visionary enthusiasts, eager to
•create a new heaven and a new earth by Act of Parliament, and


refusing to see the difficulties in the wav. Others again are un-
scrupulous demagogues, brass-mouthed and iron-lunged, gulling
the people for a living. There are two or three of fair capacity,
with some sense of proportion and possibilities, but these are
elbowed into the background by their more noisy colleagues.
Such men are enough to damn any party, and they have
done their best to damn the Labour Party in Queensland. Partly
in ignorance, partly by intention, they have succeeded in spread-
ing the belief that the interests of the manual labourers are
hostile to the interests of all other classes in the country ; that
reform means revolution ; that the rights of labour are incom-
patible with the security of property ; that the triumph of the
Labour Party means the triumph of mob rule, the destruction
of law and order, the establishment of socialism, or communism,
or anarchy. Nothing could be further from the fact. Yet the
average man has been brought by the acts and speeches of its
leaders to associate the Labour Party with riots, and outrage,
and dynamite ; and the consequence is that the unionists desiring
to better their condition, who are after all a small numbrr com-
pared with the mass of the population, find arrayed against thein
very many peaceful, law-abiding citizens, who do not quite under-
stand what the trouble is about, who would probably sympathise
if they did understand, but whom the labour leaders have done
their best to convince of the utter absurdity of labour schemes.
Naturally, this conviction is fostered by the organs of vested
interests in the Press. The labour leaders and their aims are
foolish enough in many ways, goodness knows ; but they are
blackened, and vilified, and misrepresented until the average
reader is incapable of understanding that the Labour Party as a
whole only wants justice, and is persuaded that if he does not
vote for Mcllwraith his home will be taken from him, and his
wife and children sold into captivity.
Take the case of the shearers’ strike. People acquainted
with the facts, and competent to form arr impartial judgment,
know that although there was no justification for that strike,
there was a great deal of excuse. The strike was indefensible
because its object was to limit private liberty in a manner
incompatible with public justice, and because it endeavoured to
obtain its object be violence when peaceful and constitutional
ways should have been sought. Yet the shearers had grievances,
and though the grievances appear a small matter at a distance, it
is yet easy to understand why the strike was commenced, and
why it was carried on in the face of the police and in
the face of the Government and the majority of the people, bor,
passing the question whether conventional morality is a sure
criterion of abstract right, descend a moment from the plat-
form of pure ethics, and consider the matter from a broad human.


standpoint. Look at the condition of the bush labourers at any
time since Queensland has been a colony. Far in the interior,
remote from every civilising influence ; divested of all that culture
and refinement can give to brighten life ; lacking the comforts of
home, the stimulus of feminine society, the resources of
education ; frequently serving tyrannical masters under revolting
conditions ; excluded from the rights of citizenship ; with the
church absent and the public-house their single solace, —what
wonder that ignorant men should become lawless, that suffering
men should become desperate, that men crushed beneath injustice
should retort injustice ?
But the average man who is not a shearer is quite unable
to put himself in the shearer’s place. He reads the tale of burnt
wooisheds, shot bullocks, assaulted blacklegs. “Would I,” he asks
himself, “ with my comfortable home, my wife and family, my
friends, books, schools, churches, theatres, clubs—would I do
these things?” And he virtuously answers “No!” and is
indignant that the bush drudges exhibit inferior self-restraint to
his. His attitude is wrong, we can see ; but does that justify
the strike and the outrages of the strike ? Not at all; yet the
labour leaders have praised and defended the shearers, and every
word spoken in praise or defence has alienated more and more
the sympathy which it should be their first object to win.
The strike was an example of the labour leaders’ power to
direct action. As to their power to conduct thought, take the
principle that a man has the right to demand work from the
State, as set forth in the current political platform. (It is a
hopeful sign that this platform has been much modified since the
impracticable aims of 1800 were formulated with the object of
securing “ straight-out socialism.”) This principle cannot be
accepted, and for these reasons. It is the duty of the State to
secure the welfare of all its citizens. A natural corollary to
this asserts that it is the duty of the State to secure the
welfare of every individual citizen and of every section
or class of citizens. Hence there is a moral incum-
bency on the administrators of the Government to provide
work for the unemployed class. But that incumbency exists only
in proportion to the power of the State to discharge it consistently
with its duty to other classes. Self-preservation is the first law
of the State’s nature, as of the individual’s ; and though the
unemployed, being a discontented class, are a menace to its
existence, yet it would involve a greater danger if the State were
to guarantee them employment.
In the first place, it is to the State’s interest that its
citizens should be provident, self-reliant men, not children
clinging to the Government apron-string. The sapping of the
sense of independence means the loss of liberty, the prevention


of progress, and the degradation of the l’ace. Great nations do
not grow by spoon-feeding. In the second place, it would not
be judicious for the State to compete with private enterprise
as a large employer of labour in special industries. Its
constitution does not fit it for the task. Knowing that they could
not be discharged, its employees would take things very easily;
their work would be unprofitable ; and the loss would fall on the
thrifty and industrious. The unemployed are unemployed
because their work did not pay their last employer. How, then,
could it pay the State ? The State has no powers greater than
those of the individuals who compose it: what it gains by
concentration it loses in freedom and activity. Are Government
departments now well administered ? Is not the Civil Service
regarded as the refuge of the idle and incompetent ? Is not the
“ Government stroke ” proverbial ? And is it well, seeing how
Government management fails at present, to further widen its
sphere ? Then, in the third place, we have J. S. Mill’s argument
that if the morrow were perfectly assured, if work were certain,
or failing work, subsistence, there would be no restraint
on population. “ Profitable work could not after a time be
found for all, and the tax for the support of the poor would
engross the whole produce of the country, payers and receivers
having at last reached equality in universal poverty. At this
point the natural check on population could no longer be post-
poned, civilisation, culture, and everything that places mankind
above a nest of ants or a colony of beavers having been sacri-
ficed in the interval.”*
These considerations seem conclusive. Yet, in spite of them,
there can be no doubt that the existence in Australia of a single
individual unemployed or destitute, unless directly by his own
fault, is a disgrace to our statesmen. With the enormous natural
wealth at our disposal, nothing short of reckless misgovernment
could bring us face to face with poverty so early in our career.
That the government has been bad and reckless admits of no
question. We defaced our first century with blots which have
sunk through to the second, and, unless reformation is speedy,
will flow over upon the third. Reform—social, financial, legal,
constitutional, radical—is urgently needed, that the vital forces
of the people may play easily and develop freely. No student of
the times can fail to note the abuses thriving in our midst—
some the relics of effete tradition, others the consequence of
unchecked tyranny, all perpetuating misery and injustice.
The existing social system is surely not the best of all pos-
sible systems. Its inequalities are patent to every observer.
While some individuals have accumulated wealth out of all pro-
portion to their need or desert, many are absolutely starving, and
* Graham’s “ Socialism.”


very many more spend joyless lives in toiling for wages which
barely permit them to subsist. In Europe the lower working
classes are in a state of simple slavery, from which their utmost
efforts cannot free them. They are bound to the wheel of capital,
and must crush out intelligence and aspiration in its dreary
round. The triumphs of civilisation are bought by the blood and
tears of innumerable victims. Nor, on the whole, is it certain
that the world grows better, whatever the visions of optimists.
The sacrifice does not ensure redemption. Modern philanthropy
is more than balanced by modern egoism ; and greed, fraud, and
oppression are as rampant now as at any previous period in human
history. Progress in the arts and sciences has had no corres-
ponding influence on the condition of the masses; and the in-
crease of wealth since the industrial revolution of the last century,
though more than proportionate to the increase of population,
has mainly tended to make the rich richer and the poor relatively
poorer. Side by side with a luxury of which the ancient world
had no idea, we find a constant misery to which it could rarely
furnish a parallel. Property has taken new privileges, while
discarding old duties ; and the sweets of life fall always to those
who sit in the sunshine at the top of the tree, while it= bitter lees
are the share of those who sweat in the shadow at the root.
Australians are travelling in the footsteps of their fathers.
Our social economy has been modelled on old-world lines, and
sooner or later old-world problems will confront us. Our wealth,
in so far as it is not borrowed, we owe to the small population
and the large resources of the virgin continent we are exploiting.
As population increases, as mines fail, as land is monopolised, and
commercial capital concentrated, our present state, in which
wealth is fairly diffused in comparison with other countries, and
there are neither immense fortunes nor extreme poverty, will give
place to a state in which the bulk of the people struggle for an
uncertain livelihood, with a class of princely capitalists above
them, on the topmost rung of the social ladder, and below them,
clutching its foot, a class of starving paupers. Given similar
conditions, and history must inevitably repeat itself. Already, at
labour crises, we see reproduced in miniature the forces which
have convulsed European states. Already stalks among us the
gaunt spectre of the unemployed, the honest man who cannot get
work, “ that figure more tragic than any Hamlet.” Soon his
clamour at our gates will become a menace which we cannot
disregard. Is it not prudent for the State to face the danger
early, and to try, at least, to deal even-handed justice to all its
citizens, in order that its prosperity may be no whited sepulchre,
but a structure sound from basement to pinnacle ?
It is impossible for any nlan with a heart in his bosom to
refuse sympathy to the Labour Party’s aims. It is hardly pos


sible for any man with a head on his shoulders to be in sym-
pathy with the Labour Party’s means. The Labour leaders
desire a new heaven ; but they have to work with an old earth.
When human nature learns self-control, the State will be able to
control it; while it remains as at present, the State is as impotent
as the individual to make a millennium at a blow. But this the
State can do. It can make just laws, and reform unjust ones.
It can open and keep open to all the avenues of industry. It can
protect the weak against the strong. It cannot make all equal,
but it can give to all equal opportunities. It can place the poor
man’s child and the rich man’s child on the same footing of
natural ability. It can tax the inheritances of the wealthy for the
benefit of the labourers by whose efforts they are chiefly amassed.
It can prevent by legislation the evils arising from the monopoly
of land, whether it be alienated or not. It can experimentally
aid co-operative production. But it cannot ensure human hap-
piness while human egoism remains a constant factor. Its
power has limitations; and in spite of the obscuring influences
of passion, of prejudice, or of selfishness, these must be recog-
nised. The world can only be bettered by better men. Always
struggling upward, humanity has evolved out of chaos and
savagedom a civilisation in which, despite its defects, there are
noble possibilities. Looking at the record of the past, hope beats
high for the future. But Nature’s own motto should never be
forgotten—Hasten slowly. The plant that blooms in a week
sprouts quickly to maturity ; the oak that defies the centuries
takes a century to grow. Going slowly, we will go securely ; re-
membering always that, if there is a golden age to come on earth,
evolution, not revolution, will bring it.
XII.—“UNDER WHICH KING, BEZONIAN?”
WE can now understand the basis on which the Coalition was
formed. Of the leaders, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith got
power; Sir Samuel Griffith got the name of power. The
one had the pleasure of showing his former colleagues, men
too independent to be coerced, that if they would not submit to
his autocracy there were others who would. The other had the
pleasure of showing the people who had reviled and discarded
him at the general election that his place in Parliament was in-
dependent of their votes. Sir Samuel Griffith bai’gained for the


nominal headship of the Government, which gratified his vanity ;
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith knew who would be really head, and did
not value the title of Premier. 1 " Sir Samuel Griffith insisted on
the passage of the Naval Defence Act. Sir Thomas agreed,
though this was a harder pill to swallow; and in return he was
conceded everything he wished. The policy of the Coalition was
throughout his policy ; he broke his pledges for the satisfaction
of seeing Sir Samuel Griffith eat his principles. • That was a
triumph indeed. The two knights had been at historical feud
for a dozen years and more, and the Coalition consummated the
victory of Sir Thomas Mcllwraith. Sir Samuel Griffith saw no
way of obtaining place and power but by sacrificing his convic-
tions ; the Chief Justiceship might be expected to fall vacant,
and were he in Opposition another would get the office ; he -be-
trayed himself and his trust, and was none the less a captive,
though his chains were garlanded. Sir Thomas Mcllwraith
sacrificed no convictions ; he merely sacrificed his word of
honour, and that was a trifle, f Election promises are mere pie-
crust, made to be broken. It was worth breaking a thousand
promises to receive coloured labour, land alienation, and land-
grant railways from the hands of the man who for a life-time had
argued, thundered, and implored against them.
Of the others, Mr. Tozer and Mr. liodgkinson got simply
office ; and suited their opinions to the circumstances of office.
Possibly, they would have preferred to oppose black labour and
land-grant railways ; but if these things were good enough for
the Premier they were good enough for them. Mr. Unmack got
office and something more ; he got what he hoped would be an
opportunity of putting cherished convictions into administrative
practice for the benefit of the country. He found too late that one
man’s energy can make little impression on vested interests ; that
honesty and independence are not prized in a Cabinet dominated by
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith ; and that no man should league with evil
that good may come, or support wrong that right may issue. Mr.
•Cowley got black labour. Mr. Byrnes got advancement in his pro-
fession, and did what he was told. That is what the Coalition got
from the Coalition. •
And what did the country get ? It got everything which it
had returned a majority to oppose at the general election. It
got black labour, and both Sir Samuel Griffith and Sir Thomas
* The Tie usurer [Sir T. Mcllwraith] has only to say what should be
done, and the Government and the House will do what he tells them.
It is a case of Hoc volo , sic jubco.— Mk. H. i\l. Nelson, in tariff debate, August,
1892. ‘
flf you return me—as I know you will—(enthusiastic cheering)—on
the good faith you hold in me, I will do all I promise.—Sik Thomas
Mcllwkaith, March 17, 1888.


Mellwraith declared against black labour. It got land-grant
railways, and both Sir Samuel Griffith and Sir Thomas Mcll-
wraith declared against land-grant railways. It got naval tribute,
though the National party swept the country on naval tribute.
It did not get legal reform, though this is the undertaking of all
others which Sir Samuel Griffith is best fitted to accomplish. It did
not get electoral reform, but it got a consolidation of electoral
abuses and a curtailment of the franchise which has left nearly
a fourth of the electors voteless. It did not get land legislation
in aid of settlement, but it got land legislation in aid of monopoly.
It did not get labour legislation, but it got relief doles which kept
the unemployed hanging about Brisbane. It did not get the big
loaf, but it got crushing taxation on the loaf and every other
article of food. It did not get retrenchment of the Civil Service,
hut it got retrenchment of the working man’s wages, and was
told he was lucky to get any wages at all.
The Coalition has done the things that it ought not to have
done, and left undone the things that it should have done. Few
men in Queensland are better off to-day than they were when
the Coalition took office. The majority are only too thankful
if they have kept their heads above water; if the profits of three
years’ labour have been sufficient to meet expense. The ex-
ceptions are the rich, who in the collapse of land booms and the
fall of stocks have had the opportunity to make themselves richer;
and the poor, who have been driven to the wall by loss of employ-
ment and reduction of wages, and are now destitute. Hundreds
are existing on charity, hundreds are out of work, thousands can
only get work intermittently. Never was private distress so
great in Queensland ; yet never was private wealth so great.
The Government can give no help, for the Treasury is said to be
empty, though the Banks are paying dividends out of the millions
of Government money which they hold on deposit. The Trea-
surer has exhausted every expedient for raising the wind ; he has
imposed taxation (on the poor) until the taxes no longer yield
revenue, he has sold hundreds of thousands of acres of land; he
has borrowed to the utmost limit o'f his authority, to the utmost
limit of the colony’s depreciated credit. The debt is increased ;
taxation is increased ; insolvencies multiply ; lawyers flourish :
and the depression in trade is unexampled.
Yet this is Queensland, “ the queen of the colonies,” which
exported in 1892 products valued at £8,447,012, £4,188,149
more than the value of the products it imported, or at the rate
of £2l per head for every man, woman, and child in the com-
munity. And with this surplus of income over outgo the
Treasurer cannot make ends meet, though taxation is higher in
Queensland than in any other colony of the Australian group
except West Australia, and money is borrowed at every oppor


tunity. Is there not evidence of misgovernment here ? The
foregoing pages have been written in vain if the reader does not
comprehend its nature. It is misgovernment which taxes
industry for the benefit of property, which fetters the poor man
and gives free play to the monopolist, which does its best to
obtain and retain for capital an inordinate share of the wealth
created by labour. Ample wealth is produced to maintain the
population, but it goes into too few hands ; and instead of en-
deavouring to equalise the distribution the Coalition Government
has done its best to make the inequality still greater.
Nevertheless, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, the incarnation of the
spirit and policy of the Coalition Government, again comes for-
ward in the guise of a saviour of the country, with his cohort of
journalistic sycophants in full cry behind him. At the election
of 1888, he gave the most solemn pledges that he would not sup-
port black labour or land-grant railways. These pledges he has
shamelessly and deliberately broken. At the election of 1888,
he was held up for public reverence as the broad-souled financier
who would speedily make the colony solvent and prosperous.
He has doubled taxation, trebled the deficit, and the colony is in
a worse state than ever it was. Yet he “ damns public opinion ”
as coolly as any Vanderbilt, and fronts the electors with an assur-
ance which no blunder, no apostacy, is able to impair. Is
habitual perfidy, then, to become the proof of statesmanship? Is
eternal failure to be the guarantee of success ? Are the evil fruits
of the evil tree to be shown as evidence of its ability to produce
good fruits ? From the past, may we not augur the future ?
We are told that this betrayal of principles, of parties, of
the people, is an admirable thing, and redounds to the everlasting
honour of the turncoat. This is an extraordinary statement.
Poets and moralists of all ages have been accustomed to compare
the strong man, the trustworthy man, to a rock ; he is fearless
and stable when a shattered world falls in fragments around him.
It appears that his likeness is rather to a quicksand, in which,
when you trust to find firm footing, you are suddenly engulfed.
We have been used to consider treachery a token of anything but
sincerity. But now it is: “ This man has deceived you times
without number; therefore trust him again.” Or we are told
that there is no one else to lead Parliament. Better no leader
than a bad leader, if that were true ; the people have pith and
mettle; let them learn to govern themselves.* But it is not
true. There is ample ability at the service of the country. The
* I have noticed for a long time there is a large majority of this House
who think if the present Government were to resign it would be, a dreadful
calamity for the colony. . . . Ido not care if the Government resign
ten times every week. I believe the colony would go on just as well whatever
happened.—Mr. H. M. Nelson, in tariff debate, August, 1892.


Premier is not mdispensible—no man is ;he is dangerous—many
men are not. Or we are told that there is a dread of the Labour
iarty. There is no reason to dread the Labour Party. The
Labour Party is formidable exactly as long as it has a legitimate
basis of grievances. Repress those grievances, as the Coalition
Government has done, and you excite men to rebellion ; sympa-
thise with them, right them, and the risk is gone. Those need
not be afraid of the Labour Party who profess the old principles
of Liberalism in other lands, and whose motto is “ Trust the
people.”
Persistent efforts are being made to show that the cause of
Labour is synonymous with anarchy, with communism, with
socialism, and other vaguely-understood terms, which are used
as if they were convertible. Unfortunately the sayings and
doings of the labour leaders in the past have given too much
colour for this calumny, for a calumny it is. The great majority
of men who are banded together in the unions, the great majority
o t ien sympathisers outside the unions, have as great a horror
of anarchy or of communism as the most respectable property-
owner. They have leanings to socialism, it is true ; as what
thinking man of the present day has not ? And why ? Because
they look round the world and see greed and injustice rampant
because they feel themselves the victims of greed and injustice.
The moment you reform the laws by the aid of which capitai
continually exploits labour, the moment you make the incidence
of taxation equal on the poor man and the rich and give to each
equal opportunities, the moment you admit that every man who
is asked to obey the laws has a right to a voice in the making of
the laws, that moment you take away the foundation of the exist-
mg discontent, and turn the labour agitators and their supporters
into peaceable, law-abiding citizens.
There is a plain alternative before the people of Queensland,
lhey can elect a Parliament to reform the electoral law, by giving
every man a vote and equalising representation; to reform the
finances, by taxing wealth and exempting poverty; to reform
legal procedure by making it possible for a poor man to get
justice for nothing ; or they can elect Sir Thomas Mcllwraith
to defend property, to reserve to property the right of making
laws for property, of raising revenue from any source but property
to widen the gulf between the poor and rich, and to build up
still higher in this colony the monopolies and class privileges
which are at the root of human wretchedness, and involve the
establishment of a standing army to keep the victims from revolt.
In the one case they make Queensland the home of freedom • in


the other they pave the way for tyranny, with its corollary of
slavery and rebellion.
It must be remembered that the same power which has dis-
franchised 25,000 voters can disfranchise 25,000 more. If Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith gets a majority in the Legislative Assembly,
he gets the whole power of the country for three years. If a
reforming Assembly should ever go too far there is the Legisla-
tive Council and the Imperial veto to stop its progress. But if
an Assembly elected to maintain the rights of property should go
loo.far in the opposite direction, who will check it ? Aon may
talk of public opinion—you may talk of resistance —but with
both branches of the Legislature against you, with what eftect
could you resist ? What did public opinion avail against the
proceedings of the last Parliament ? You might talk vehemently
—could you act successfully ?—when you were no longer sup-
ported by your representatives —when to act would be to rebel !
The law would be against you : how can you tell to what extent
it might be stretched ? Vainly then would you say, “In our
next Parliament we will be wiser ; ” in your next Parliament the
people might be no longer the electors! t
The people have now the option of confirming or rejecting
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith’s government. It is madness to hesitate
in the choice. We are asked to try the men ; have we not tried
them before ? Look around and see their work. We are asked
to trust the leader; have we not trusted him before ? What
return did he make for the trust ? The prime essential at the
coming election is to choose honest men, consistent men, reliable
men, men of energy and character. Ability is a small matter
comparatively. Sir Samuel Griffith was, in one sense, the most
able man of his day ; and look at his record! Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith is, in another sense, the most able man of the day ;
and look at his record! What is the use of ability without
stability ? But, it may be said, how are electors to know the
ideal candidate amid the multiplicity of canvassers for votes?
There is one test that may be used : ask him if he endorses Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith’s policy in the past, if he will support Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith in the future. If he says “ Yes,” or “ No,”
with reservations ; have nothing to do with him.
* The tide is just on the turn. We are going, during the next two or
three years to determine what is to be our future polity. Are we going in
for big monopolies, large syndicates, big land grants, and black labour, or fo-
of minding our own business and not asking any absentee
ists to enter into partnership with us?— Sir S. W, Griffith. August 10,
1883. '
| Adapted from Lytton.


(treat capital is being made out of the necessity for support-
ing “ law and order.” Nobody, not even the Labour Party, wishes
to support anything else ; despite the occasional foolish vapour-
ings of labour leaders. Reform is wanted ; not revolution. But
under the pretence of supporting “ law and order,” an attempt is
being made to ride roughshod over individual liberty. The “ law ”
is for property; the “ order ” for the people. The purging of
the electoral rolls, the difficulties thrown in the way of electoral
registration, the complications of the contingent vote, all point
one way. In attacking manhood suffrage, the Coalition Govern-
ment has endeavoured to undermine the foundation of our free
institutions. The effort might succeed in other countries, at a
darker day; in this country, and at this day, it never will. There
is young Australia to reckon with.
The old Frisians earned the distinctive epithet of “ free-
born Frisians, ” because they never bowed the neck to foreign or
domestic yoke. A similar love of independence is innate in
those born on Australian soil, irrespective of the influence of
parentage or the ties of kinship. Its causes are difficult to
exactly determine ; they evade definite analysis ; they are traceable
not to any one influence or condition, but to the whole environ-
ment in which the young Australian grows to manhood. Thought
here moves with a broader sweep; there is a carelessness of
tradition and conventionality that cramp the limits of action.
Pastors and masters tell us that young Australia is irreverent or
indifferent to things round which for her forbears, for her con-
temporaries of European race, clusters an accretion of pious and
respectable memories. The charge is true ; and ’tis not pity that
’tis true. The precept is good, “ Prove all things ; ” and it is that
which the young Australian follows, still resolving to hold fast to
that which is true. But he will not take his truth on trust. No
second-hand shams and spurious philanthropies will he swallow,
because stamped with the hall-mark of regal or theological appro-
bation. The imagination of the age of reason finds in him its
concrete embodiment. The age of superstition will decay as the
nation gathers strength, and flings off the trammels that would
devitalise its lusty vigour.
The genius of European civilisation is aristocratic; the
genius of Australia is essentially democratic. We Avish here to
be away from ancient feuds and enmities ; we Avish to breathe an
ampler ether, a diviner air than old-Avorld denizens, steeped in
hereditary prejudices. We wish to be able to adapt ourselves to
the constantly-changing conditions to which the natural expansion
of our commonAvealth will give rise ; and we refuse to be saddled
Avith the antiquated forms and institutions which elsewhere make
misery and retard progress. In Queensland, the Coalition bars


the onward way. Hence the importance of the coining elections.
Queenslanders are called upon to decide for themselves if they are
fit for freedom —not the freedom of the child that is tied to its
mother’s apron-string, but the freedom of manhood, kneeling at
no throne but the throne of Justice, acknowledging no “ majesty”
but the majesty of Truth.


REFORM; NOT REVOLUTION.
TVMlwloil r fore^ 01 “g P a S es were written, Sir Thomas
haS f ?? ned " eW Ministr y- It is an assemblage
of nonentities, with a notoriety atop. But his colleagues have
hlr „ T i 10mas Mcllwraith’s eyes—that every man-
ImonttSot.'"" d ° “ he " bM - Th ™ is
Mcllwraith means to be either Ctesar or nobody. He is not
going to repeat again the mistake of 1888, and make a Cabinet
oindependent men, who will dare to beard their tyrant. So he
offers the colony a puppet Ministry, with himself, supreme and
irresponsible, to sit in the centre and pull the strings. Why does
he not proclaim himself Dictator at once ?
, . Griffith on the shelf, Hume Black got rid of* his
friend Forrest installed in Garrick’s place, subservient colleagues,
and a Press which he despises, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith sees a
fairer held for the realisation of his policy than ever he saw
declare it A — 18 hIS P ° Hcy ? Let Sir Samuel Griffith
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith's policy is to make big contracts to create vast
estates, to encourage the creation of great monopolies, to gamble with the
resources of the colony to introduce into the colony two classes of people onlu
great capitalists and poor labourers, and generally to act as the \igh pri J t
of the great god Mammon. —Mr. S. VV
of North Brisbane, August 10, 1883. ™ " addreSS to the electors
, Gave we not found that true? For Sir Thomasjlcllwraith
as at least the merit denied to his former rival—the merit of
consistency ; and there is no mistake about his intentions. Hear
again Sir Samuel Griffith
* * Can d f scover ’ there is no change in the politics of the
McllwraUhA dm m ist ration, no change m the objects they W in view-
Mr b. W. Griffith, August 17,1888. 3 view.—
~ change is at election time, when Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith is so liberal with pledges which he never intends to
criticism ? the name ww^ m ? n ' SenS t Wh f d 0 1 care about Mr. Back’s
him if c/ a ‘ Wl’ at ( 1° I care about his opposition? I can get rid of
sXter.lm ,n> MCIS.Z™. in the ,„rif 2,°!


keep. But the (lay for pledges is over. And, pledges or no
pledges, the leopard cannot change his spots. As Sir Thomas
himself says :
You should not look at words, but deeds; and I can point to the deeds
I have done in the colony as the best test of what I and my followers will
do in the future.—Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, April 11, 1888.
Give Sir Thomas a majority at the elections, with a free
hand for deeds; and woe betide white Queensland !
If the choice lay between supporting Mcllwraith and support-
ing the Labour Party, many men might hesitate. But there is a
mean between —and a man. To Charles Lilley all eyes turn. He
may not be perfect: who is ? But his errors have been always
on the side of freedom. And he is at least honest; he has no
temptation to be otherwise. He is nearing the close of an
honourable and laborious life. He has every motive to seek ease
and retirement. Political strife is bitter; there are few roses
among its thorns. If Charles Lilley comes forward in defence
of the liberties of Queensland, it will be from a conscientious
conviction that it is his duty. And in him, if in any man, can
the people put their trust.
April 1, 1893.


Errata. —On page 22, in heading to table at bottom, for “ Possible
Earnings (1),” read, Possible Savings (1).
On page 31, third line from bottom, for “ the principle is most vicious,”
read “ the practice is most vicious.”


BRISBANE:
A. J. Ross and Co., Printers, 26 Queen Strebt.
1893.




