

Ij THE INSPIRATION OF THE |
|| SCRIPTURES. |
;| Review of the Inaugural Address of the Rev. George 1
Mac/nnes, M.A., 8.D., Moderator of the
N.S.W. General Assembly. i
\\ ' {
(< o
DELIVERED IN THE
REFORMED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH , GEELONG.
On July 11th, 1894,
BY THE
REV. A. M. MOORE, M.A
“ The Scripture cannot he broken." —John x, 85.
i nP\ pQ)CQ-~3 y'fln I
telomj i
E. J. Hall & Sons, Printers, Ryrie Street,
PRICE-THREEPENCE.




j£hc aiul
af the Jlmjjtmts.
IN this Lecture we propose to present a Eeview of the Discourse
delivered by the Rev. George Madnnes, M.A., 8.D., in
March last as Moderator of the N.S.W. Q-eneral Assembly, and
afterwards published in pamphlet form, under the title: —“The
Death of the Verbal Theory: and The Unveiling of Christ: or,
The Bible a ‘sufficient witness’ to the ‘Self-evidencing Christ.’”
When it is considered that the leading object of the discourse was
to overthrow the doctrine of the plenary inspiration of the
Scriptures, it was not to be wondered at that the opposition of
some of his brethren in the Assembly was stirred up, and that the
devout students of the Word of God throughout the country were
both surprised and grieved. The newspapers reported some
movements in his presbytery with the object of calling him to
account for his utterances. After some delay, it turns out that
one of his co-presbyters reports that he had a few hours’
conference with the offender, and found him sound in the faith,
and so it appears that the whole thing is hushed up, or passed
over without further proceedings, in a most unfaithful manner.
As the Moderator’s action was an open one, and his sentiments
published to the world, why was he not dealt with in public, that
all might be able to judge for themselves on this great and vital
subject. Having, then, waited to see the issue of this affair, we
felt that some one ought to step forth and examine this man’s
teaching, and put it to the test of Revealed Truth—we say the
test of Revealed Truth, for in this case we are not called to deal
with the sentiments of an avowed infidel or sceptic, but of one
who acknowledges the Bible to be the Word of God.
In this discourse those who maintain the plenary inspiration
of the Scriptures are described as so many “unbelieving Uzzahs
stretching out their hands to save the ark of God,” and as


“foolish men who would erect props to keep the sky from
falling.” His professed object is to overthrow what he calls the
11 verbal theory'' and to accomplish what has the appearance of a
laudable object —“ the unveiling of Christ.” He tells the Fathers
and Brethren that they are on the eve of a great and impending
change. In some grand words he pictures out the new and high
“vantage ground” to which apparently he himself expects to lift
up the Church, so that she may “inflict a crushing defeat on
infidelity,” and “win the world for Christ.” But whilst the
professed object of this discourse is the death of the “verbal
theory,” we shall find before the close that there are other purposes
behind that cannot he viewed with satisfaction.
Meanwhile, is there any good ground for calling the doctrine
of the plenary inspiration of Scripture a “verbal theory?” We
don’t admit of theory in the matter at all. It is a question of fact
and not of theory. It is perhaps a matter to be regretted that
the term verbal itself should ever have been introduced. This
term, however, has been forced upon the defenders of the Word
of God by Sceptic's and Rationalists, and nibblers at the Bible in
past ages of whom there are so many successors in the present
day. When cavillers arose to call in question the full inspiration
of the Bible, its friends were driven to declare that the words of
Scripture are inspired no less than the ideas or sentiments; and
that the latter unquestionably implied and necessitated the former.
But whilst this is so, the idea of a theory has no place whatever.
Of course we have nothing to do in this discussion with the
question as to how the sacred writers were inspired. Of that we
know nothing and can know nothing. The question which
concerns us here and now has regard to the result of inspiration;
in other words, to what or how far does this inspiration extend,
that is—to the ideas or words, or to both—to a part of Scripture,
or to the whole of it? Is the Bible altogether God’s Word, or is
it not? It is plain enough in the discourse before us how the
author would have us answer these questions; for it looks as if he
were no believer in the inspiration of the Scriptures in any true
or real sense of the term.
Let us then glance at some of the arguments which have
been set in array against what is designated the “verbal theory,”
but which I take to mean the full and plenary inspiration of
Scripture. And here let me express my conviction, in passing,
that it will not be difficult to produce arguments sufficient to


outweigh all that has been or can be advanced in support of the
thesis in question.—lt is admitted, indeed, by this writer that
the doctrine of verbal inspiration “has been held, almost
universally, from the last quarter of the 17th century down
to nearly our time.” And surely that should count for some-
thing! The great, the learned, the holy —Teachers, Professors,
Commentators, Ministers, and people —all satisfied that this was
a great and undoubted fact. But now it turns out that every
man of them was in hopeless error, and maintained a principle
utterly false: and it is only just now that light has broken upon
the world! Is it so that the past generations knew nothing of
all these objections now brought forward against this doctrine?
Mr Maclnnes must be aware that some of the ablest theologians
and students of God’s Word were frequently employed during
the last fifty years in repelling the very attacks which are now
revived in this pamphlet. Those writers and preachers, we
believe, were as conversant as himself with the arguments in
opposition to plenary inspiration which are now being paraded
before the world by the advanced critics of the present day. It
is asserted that Luther and Calvin did not hold this doctrine.
And the only proof furnished of this assertion is that Luther
(who, by the way, was apt to employ at times startling and
extravagant statements) once called the Epistle of James “an
epistle of straw.” Plainly such a sentiment has reference to the
Canon of Scriptures however, and not to the nature of inspiration.
It is argued that the verbal doctrine cannot be maintained
because of the doubts regarding the text of the Old Testament
But of what avail are all the reasonings against its validity built
on the variations of certain versions and the absence of vowel
points originally in the Hebrew language, in view of its acknow-
ledgment by Christ and His Apostles? If they acknowledged it,
surely we are safe in doing the same. Do we ever hear the
Master or His disciples, in quoting from the Old Testament,
hinting at any errors or mistakes in those Scriptures. They quote
constantly and freely from the accredited volume as a Book of
infallible and authoritative Truth. Take a few instances. When
Christ came upon the covetous, dishonest traders in the Temple
and scourged them out of the place, He made His appeal to
Scripture: “Is it not ioritten, My house shall be called of all
nations a house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves.”
When He went into the Synagogue of Nazareth on the Sabbath


day, and the Book o£ Isaiah was handed to Him, “He found the
place where it was written ,” that is, of Himself, in the 61st
chapter. On another occasion “He took unto Him the twelve
and said unto them, Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things
that are written hy the prophets concerning the Son of Man shall
be accomplished.” When the Arch-enemy made his fierce
onslaughts on Him in the wilderness He repelled these hy drawing
the Two-edged Sword, and making His appeal to what was written.
When His enemies took up stones to stone Him, He met their
malicious attacks by the same mighty weapon: “Is it not written
in the law , I said ye are Gods, &c.,” “and the Scripture cannot
he broken .”
In like manner we find the evangelists again and again in
relating Christ’s sayings and doings, and the conduct of the Jews
toward Him, employing the same formula, As it is written , or
Thus spoke the prophet. And so the Apostles in their sermons
and in their Epistles are constantly appealing to the written Word.
And what Word was this but that which is found in the Scriptures
of the Old Testament. In the New Testament we find no less
than 300 direct quotations from the Old Testament Books, and
407 allusions to passages in those Books. And these quotations,
be it observed, are not from a few of the Books, but drawn from
almost all of them. We have counted over thirty of these, and
possibly the number is greater.
Now surely in all this we have a satisfactory demonstration
that there was an acknowledged and an accredited Bible among
,the Jews in the days of Christ on earth, of a great variety and
number of Books, sometimes spoken of generally as “ The
Scriptures at other times as “ Moses, and the Prophets, and
the Psalms .” This Bible both in Hebrew and Greek was in
the hands of the Ancient Church, and the Canon of it was
undoubtedly admitted as the constant and unhesitating use
made of the various Books of which it consisted, by our Lord
and His Apostles, clearly and unmistakeably demonstrated.
Great stress is laid by our author as by some others of the
Bruce and Hods school on the fact that quotations in the New
Testament taken from the Old are sometimes made from the
Septuagint or Greek Bible instead of the Hebrew and that these
often differ from the Hebrew. But where is the difficulty here?
If Christ chose to take and adopt as His own what He found in
the Greek version, has He not by that circumstance made it His


own, and thereby put His imprimatur on it as Divine? Or if
He was pleased to take a passage from either the Hebrew or
Greek and alter it to suit His purpose in declaring anew His will
either with more fulness or with greater suitableness to new
circumstances, who can find fault with this? Or where is the
ground for concluding that the original text is unreliable? If we
allow a human author to quote from his own writings and allow
him to alter his expression or the form of his statement, while
the substance remains the same, is not the new statement as
much and as truly his own as the previous one ? And if we grant
this freedom to an uninspired writer, why deny it to Christ and
His inspired Apostles ? The verbal doctrine cannot therefore be
touched by an argument from this quarter.
The “ Higher Criticism ” is next appealed to as a witness
against the verbalists. But what value can be placed on its
testimony here ? It is true the critics of this school, who with
a defective modesty designate themselves as advanced thinkers,
have put their critical genius to work, and have found out that we
have a Hexateuch and not a Pentateuch; that Moses never wrote
the books which go by his name; that the Law was not given by
him, but written hundreds of years after his time probably by
Jeremiah; that there were two Isaiahs, or possibly half a dozen;
that there was personation in some of the Books, these being
written by one man in the name of another; that much of the
Scripture consists of a number of old traditionary stories
gathered and pieced together, by writers who stood in no need
of inspiration; and so on and so on. But what is all this but
the speculations of restless minds never contented unless they
can startle the world with some marvellous novelty and prove
themselves too clever and too far advanced to keep on the old
beaten track of the Church of God. It will be time enough to
ask us to accept of the testimony of the higher critics against the
verbal doctrine when they come to some agreement among them-
selves, and have settled something.
But it is thought that verbal inspiration is impossible in view
of certain discrepancies which are to be found in the Bible, and a
number of passages are adduced in illustration. Let us glance
at a few of those. An appeal is made to what is termed “the
two-fold narrative of the creation,” found in the Ist and 2nd
chapters of Genesis. But where is the contradiction here? Is
it any new or strange thing for an author to first give a general


view of events, and afterwards to resume his narrative and furnish
a fuller and more particular account of these? And this is just
what has taken place in the 2nd chapter of Gen. Then in the
passages in Gen. 6-9 and 8-19 quoted as containing a “ two-fold
narrative of the flood,” it is difficult to see anything to sustain the
objection to “verbal inspiration.” In the two accounts in Gen.
26 and 36, of Esau’s wives there is the appearance of discrepancy,
but nothing but what may be satisfactorily cleared up if we
consider that the same person may have more than one name, or
the name may become changed in the process of time. Besides
the same person is sometimes described as a son or daughter of
a certain man when it may turn out that that man is a grandfather
or an adopted father. And further how can we be sure that Esau
did not marry other wives besides the first mentioned, some of
these having the same name. But if it should be that a difficulty
remains in a case like this, that we are unable to solve, it by no
means follows that either account is incorrect. The whole thing
would no doubt be cleared up if all the circumstances were
revealed. Are we to be told for example, that Moses’ father-in-law
was a mythical person, or the narrative is false, because he is
spoken of under two different names.
; Another instance referred to is the case of the “deportation
of Joseph,” as it is called. And there does seem something like
confusion in the mixing up of the terms “Ishmaelites,” and
“Midianites ” But possibly both terms may have been employed
to describe the same people; as in the Book of Judges we find
that the same people are called Midianites in one place (ch. viii, 1)
and Ishmaelites in another (ch. 24-28). If this is not the
explanation and they were different people, then the Ishmaelites
may have purchased Joseph from his brethren, afterwards sold
him to the Midianites who on tbeir part sold him again to
Potiphar. The other point in the case of Joseph, namely that,
whilst it is related that he was “ sold” he himself states that he
“ was stolen out of the land of the Hebrews,” is surely of a most
trivial character and stands in no need of reconcilement at all.
Another powerful argument against the verbal accuracy of
Scriptures is termed “the varying laws regarding the Sanctuary.”
And what is the proof of the existence of these laws? Why one
passage is in Exod. 20, the other Duet. 12. The explanation is
plain and easy. In the former of these passages the Lord is
evidently instructing His people about building altars and


observing His worship while in the wilderness, and so in reference
to their movements and changing circumstances, He gives them
His gracious promise: “In all places where I record My name I
will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.” In the other passage
(Deut. 12) the reference is to their settled condition in Canaan
where the Tabernacle would be permanently fixed, and the temple
afterwards established. Then it would be their duty to wait on
God, in their ritual worship, at the one central Sanctuary.
Thither must “the tribes of God go up.”
Other instances are adduced for the same purpose in the
discourse in question, but it is unnecessary to pursue the matter
further; as they admit of as easy explanation as those already
noticed. Besides, there is scarcely anything new at the present
hour in all that is said or written on the subject. The same
attacks have been made in the past, and been successfully repelled
by men valiant for the truth.
It is well enough known that many of these difficulties which
disturbed expositors in past ages have since been cleared up, and
been removed, as for those that remain not one of them, nor all
of them together, can prove the weight of a feather against the
Divine assurance that, “ All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God” —or the declaration of Christ that, “The Scripture cannot
be broken.”
But our author takes a step in advance when he undertakes
to demolish the doctrine of verbal inspiration by making appeal
to the Canon itself.* It is, however, difficult to see where the
force of such an appeal is to be found. Bor if the Books which
form our Bible are admitted to be the true canon of Scripture,
the question of the extent of the inspiration must be regarded as
settled. Bor what constitutes their canonicity, but the fact of
their inspiration —yea, their full inspiration ! But if the canon
of Scripture is denied, then the whole thing is unsettled, and we
have no Bible; or we are not sure if we have one. What we
have hitherto called a Divine Revelation may be no revelation at
all. Some of the Books may be uninspired, or indeed all of them
together may be of this character; and may only be a collection of
humanly-composed pamphlets gathered and bound up as one Book
by men of old who were ignorant of the laws of the “ Higher
Criticism.” Is that what Mr. Maclnnes means? If so, then the
Blessed Book in which we have been trusting, and on which
God’s people have been resting their hopes for salvation is to be


torn from them and set aside as unworthy of credence. But if
we are to believe this critic this is the way by which a “crushing
defeat is to be inflicted on infidelity,” and “ the world to be won
for Christ!” Simple-minded people may possibly imagine that
the directly opposite of this will be the result; and that infidels
will be encouraged, emboldened and comforted in their opposition
to God’s Holy Word by these attacks, on it, of its professed
friends.
But people may want to know how Mr Maclnnes reconciles
the teaching in his published speech with the teaching of his
“-Confession of Faith,” on this great and all-important subject.
That Confession leaves us in no doubt as to the fact and the
extent of the Canon; all the Books of the Old and New Testa-
ments, 66 in number, being embraced under that designation —
“ All of which," it is added, “are given ly inspiration of God,
to be the rule of faith and life.” And when it sets aside
Apochryphal books, it does this on the ground that “ they are
not inspired ; ” and so “ are of no authority in the church of
God.” That, then, which constitutes the books of Scripture
Canonical is the fact of their being inspired of God. And it
is this inspiration which clothes them with authority in God’s
Church. Or in the words of the Confession ; “ The authority
of the Holy Scripture dependeth wholly upon God the Author
thereof.” But the Confession by a further statement explains
that “ The Old Testament in Hebrew, and the New Testament
in Greek, are immediately inspired by God; and by His singular
care and providence kept pure in all ages ; and are therefore
authentical.” Hear that, Mr Maclnnes —The Books embraced in
the Canon are the Books of the Old and New Testaments,
written the one in Hebrew, the other in Greek; all of them
immediately inspired by God; kept pure in all ages by His
singular care and providence ; and so demanding our faith and
obedience as being “ authentical.” If you are in any doubt as
to what constitutes the Canon, you will find a clear and full
account of the matter in chapter first of your own Confession of
Faith.
But this chapter of the Confession treating “of the Holy
Scripture” is such a grand one we cannot help dwelling on it a
little further. And here we find no uncertain sound on the
question —In what sense, and how far is the Bible an inspired
Book? That it not only contains God’s Word, but is God’s


Who does not know that God’s Word has been given “at sundry
times and in divers manners?” And of course the light has been
growing and increasing all along the ages from the first of the
sacred penmen till the shining light of the forerunner, and the
blessed beams of the Sun of Righteousness Himself, down to the
last of the Apostles whose writings close up and complete the
sacred volume. To ridicule the confidence that Christians have-
in every part of God’s Holy Word as if they displayed great)
weakness or ignorance, is surely unworthy of a minister of the-
Gospel of Christ, and more especially of a man elevated to the;
chair of a General Assembly.
We are aware that another meaning is attached to the
expression—“development of revelation” —by some of the newer
critics. Revelation, according to them, does not end with the
completion of the Canon of Scripture —but that God speaks
through men now; and bestows fuller light and fuller knowledge
in each successive age—that the “living faith of the Church”
should be accepted, even though it may contradict the Bible.
Whether Mr. Maclnnes means to adopt this view when he 1
speaks of the “development of revelation” we cannot say. But J
certainly the sentiment, whoever holds it, is contrary to the old
Protestant doctrine that the Bible, though containing a pro-
gressive revelation within its own limits, is a final and complete
and supreme authority in all matters of faith and duty, and that 1
to it nothing should be added, and from it nothing taken away.
Any teaching contrary to this is to be discarded by all lovers of
God’s Word as fraught with unspeakable danger.
But what are we to understand by a “ progression in morals?”
If by this it is meant that fuller and clearer light was shed upon
human obligation and duty as revelation proceeded, this can be
freely admitted. But if the meaning be that the moral law has
been altered, and become different in later days from what it
was in earlier ages this we stoutly deny. The illustrative
instances adduced, we take leave to say, are not to the point.
The change from the “Old Covenant” to the “New” —or, in
other words the change of dispensations, is one thing, and the
change of moral law is a totally different thing. The reference
to what is written in Hebrews, and in 2 Cor., 3 ch., and in Mat,
5 ch., and the use made of these passages strikes, not simply
against verbal inspiration, but sets aside the Divine authority
and binding obligation of large portions of the Word of God—


that Word of which the Psalmist says that “it is settled in
heaven,” and which is as unchangeable as G-od Himself.
At last we come to the question: “ What is the true nature
and function of the Bible?" This, we are told, must be learned
from the Lord Jesus Christ; and he might have added, also from
Apostles and Evangelists; for surely we are also indebted to
them for much that we hare learned of the character and contents
of the Scriptures. He finds, however, that the Scriptures were
written to make Christ known; and with that finding we can
cordially agree. The Scriptures do indeed “bear witness of
Him.” In that passage in John v, 39, on which the author of
this discourse dwells with such emphasis, our Lord declares of
the Scriptures: “They are they which testify of me;” reminding
us of His Words prophetically spoken in the 40th Psalm: “In
the volume of the Book it is written of Me.” But what does the
“Volume of the Book” and the term Scriptures refer to but
the Old Testament Scriptures; and it is admitted that “He
virtually said the same of the New Testament when He com-
missioned His Apostles saying; “And ye shall be My witnesses
unto the uttermost part of the earth.” Let it be observed that
Christ said—“ Scriptures,” not parts or portions of Scripture,
but Scripture as a whole , no book being excepted. And we take
it to embrace the statement of facts as well as the teaching of
morals and doctrines.
But this writer makes a statement which is an admission of
nearly all we could wish for, when he says: “The Apostles were
His witnesses at first by word of mouth, and the N.T. is just their
testimony written down”—mark, written down. But how could
it be written down, unless in words? It is therefore a verbal
testimony. As the Westminster Confession, which this writer
has no doubt subscribed, declares: “The Holy Scriptures em-
bracing all the Books of the Old and New Testaments are the
Word of Ood written ” —Not the word of man , mark, but the
Word of Ood, and the Word written-, so that God in these books
of Holy Writ has proceeded Author; and if written, expressed
in words.
To return, however. This writer once more defines the sole
object of the Bible to be a witness of Christ. He makes a show
of esteem, if not of admiration, of the Book. “It is invaluable and
indispensable” (but is that all?). “It reveals to men the flawless
character, the perfect life, the stainless soul, the gracious and
glorious personality of the Son of Man who is the Son of God.”


So it does. But lean scarcely credit my senses when the description
of our Blessed Lord stops here. Is this all that the Scripture
tells us of Christ? Alas, if this were the whole, whither could
poor lost bewildered sinners look for salvation? No mention
here of Christ’s mediation—not a word regarding His work and
sufferings and death in making atonement for sin! Can this be
a- mere omission? This is scarcely credible when we reflect that
the writer is a learned student of the Bible, an experienced
minister of the gospel, and a Moderator of a Great Church
Assembly. To magnify Christ’s character and extol His Glorious
Person as the God-man is both dutiful and praiseworthy, and is
demanded of all His followers. But surely it is inexcusable and
unpardonable on the part of any disciple to leave out of view His
Great Sacrifice He presented to God, the sufferings He endured,
the obedience He rendered, and the death He died, in rolling
away the curse that hung over guilty man. How unlike is this
to the holy Apostle when he exclaimed in impassioned language:
God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ.” And again, “Por I determined not to know
anything among you save Jesus Christ and Him crucified.” Be
assured that, infinitely great and infinitely good as Jesus is, He
would not be our Saviour if He had not interposed between us
and Divine wrath, and received the stroke of eternal justice in
our stead and poured out His heart’s blood for our deliverance.
If we were to escape the penalty of our sins it behoved Him to be
“wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities,
and that the chastisement of our peace should be laid on Him,”
for it is only “by His stripes that we are healed.”
Passing from this we reach the important point regarding
he relation of the Apostles to Christ and the written Word.
Here we are told, “ it is of no importance whatever whether the
Bible writers are inspired,” or not. All we need to know is that
they are what is called “ sufficient witnesses.” And “ the
triumphant proof that they are sufficient witnesses is the simple
fact that they actually have revealed and do reveal Christ, and
make Him known to men.” But how, I ask, are we to know
that they have not erred in revealing Christ, if they are not
inspired ? Can we really confide in any man as infallible, either
when he speaks or when he writes, unless he is under the inspira-
tion of the Spirit of God. If “ holy men of old spake as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost,” so must we believe in like


manner that holy men wrote of old under the same gracious and
powerful and unerring guidance. One of these holy men tells
us that “ all Scripture is given by inspiration of Grod,” or in
other words, is Ood-hreathed. But now, it appears, we must
discard the notion of inspired penmen and be satisfied with the
new invention of “Sufficient Witnesses.” Oh, no, Mr Maclnnes,
we don’t want the wine of this new gospel, because the old is
better—infinitely better.
G-reat stress is laid on what this writer calls the “ self-
evidencing Christ.” “He needs no man,” we are told, “ not
even an inspired man to vouch for Him.” All this has the
appearance of honouring the Redeemer - r and no doubt there is a
glory and a loveliness in Him which possesses inexpressible
attractions for a gracious renewed soul, and makes Him “ the
chief among ten thousand and altogether lovely.” But to my
mind there is something in this talk of a “ self-evidencing
Christ,” altogether unreasonable, if not bordering on the absurd.
Por I would like to know when or where was Christ ever
“ evidenced ” to mortal man where there was no Bible and no
gospel. Who ever heard of .Christ or believed in Him who was
a stranger to the Word of God ? It is true all God’s children
are taught of Grod ; but when taught by Him they are taught by
means of the great text-book, the Bible, and the Holy Spirit
accompanying it. There might be some show of reason if this
were applied in reference to those who saw and heard Christ in
the days of His flesh. But applied to the generations since, it
looks very like pious nonsense. “ Let Him only be seen ‘by
men and He vouches for Himself.” True: but how will you
let Him be seen of men ? That is the point. And this is
where the weakness of this teaching exhibits itself. How, I
ask, is Christ to be shown to men, unless by directing them to-
what is written in the Divine Word. This is how the apostles
and evangelists and early preachers showed Him. And this is
how Christ let Himself be seen to two favoured disciples on the
road to Emmaus : “ O fools and slow of heart to believe all that
the prophets have spoken ! Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things and to enter into His glory ? And beginning at
Moses, and all the prophets, He expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning Himself." I know not how we
can let Christ be seen, unless we follow Christ’s own example,,
and allow the inspired writers to show Him.


Our author makes the assertion that “if we put off believing
in Christ until we have conclusively proved the miracle of in-
spiration, we should never reach the stage of believing in Christ.”
To this we would reply that all cases do not demand exactly the
same mode of treatment. In most instances, perhaps, it will be
sufficient to assume the fact of inspiration, and to go on, showing
from the Word of God what is made known of Christ as to His
Person, character and work. But you can suppose a case like
this : Where a minister goes and preaches Christ to a heathen
or to a man totally ignorant of all religion, and asks the man to
accept of Him as his Saviour, the person addressed inquires who
Christ is. What answer can be given, but this, that He is the
same as is set forth in the Divine Record ? Then may arise
another question—On what ground is the Record to be credited?
Thus the teacher or preacher may be driven to state some of the
evidences for the Divinity of the Book, and so prove its reliability
and integrity as a Revelation from heaven. And it is an un T
doubted fact that in this way men have been led to a belief in
God’s Word, and from this to faith in Christ. By some road or
other, men to be saved, must be brought to a knowledge of
the Truth, and to the assurance that the Bible is God’s Book, and
that, as Paul says to Timothy, it is “ able to make men wise to
salvation.” “Ye shall know the Truth,” says Christ, “ and the
Truth shall make you free.” And James speaks of 11 the
ingrafted Word which is able to save the soul." Can we safely or
guiltlessly separate Christ and the Truth ? His testimony before
Pilate is an emphatic reply to this: “To this end was I born,
and for this cause came I into the world that I should bear’
witness to the Truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth
My voice.”
This writer talks in a lofty way of “unveiling Christ,” and
is in raptures about the wonderful exploits of “Historical Critic-
ism.” Christ, he declares, “ has been hidden from men during all
the ages, and is hidden still.” At the same time he goes on to-
say that among all the wonderful discoveries of the 19th century,
“the discovery of Christ, the real Christ, is the most wonderful.”
This discovery, made by himself and his friends of the Higher
Criticism, he describes as something “like a Second Advent of
Christ.” Really one can hardly help thinking that the man must
have lost his balance who can write in such extravagant language.
Does he really mean to say that the whole multitude of believers


wholived and died inthe hope of eternal life during all the centuries
were ignorant of Christ? Was Christ hidden from the whole
Christian world till these Higher Critics arose, and made the light
to shine? What if the light that is in these men should turn
out to be darkness! And if this pretended light be darkness,
must we not say, “how great is that darkness!” It may just be
another instance of what the apostle refers to when he declares
that, “the world by wisdom knew not God.”
Our author intimates that he has benefitted greatly by the
perusal of the works of such giants as Bruce and Pairbairn —that
Bruce who belongs to a school that maintains that there are
“errors, mistakes and immoralities in Scripture”—but not that
Pairbairn the late eminent principle of the Free Church College,
the author of the Typology of Scripture, and other valuable
works: but the lesser Pairbairn, the author of a big volume in
which will be found some of the erroneous sentiments which the
Sydney moderator has adopted. Thus the absurd and impossible
doctrine is propounded that the “Consciousness of Christ” is to
be the guide of the Church and Christians, and not the writings
of the inspired penmen. Evidently our friend has been caught
by this philosophical claptrap. It is surely a pertinent question
to ask, how are we to get at the consciousness of Christ, excepting
by the Word. How shall we find out Christ’s thoughts or
sentiments, or “consciousness,” or how shall we know His holy
will unless we give heed to the “Record which God has given us
of His Son ? ” Is there any other source of information regarding
the Redeemer open to us? The whole thing is a delusion which
our would-be High thinkers wish to palm upon a credulous world,
instead of the gospel of Jesus Christ.
Another feature of this modern theology is the device of
turning the entire attention to the four gospels, and either
altogether ignoring, or else depreciating all the rest of the New
Testament Scripture. Some of these gentlemen raise the cry —
“ Back from Paul to Christ! ” And Mr Maclnnes in his pamphlet
says: “The Bible is not a written certificate stating with in-
dependent authority the facts that Christ is the Son of God and
the Saviour of men.” And he avers that Christ is the only
Teacher whose teaching is authoritative. And this looks as if the
teaching of prophets and apostles was of little or no account. It
would seem to indicate that we are not bound to hearken to the
teaching of Paul, or Peter, or James, as if their writings were less


inspired and less Divine than those of the four gospels.
one writer says, he wishes to “exhibit the pure Christianity of
Christ without the artificial admixture of Pauline theology .” And
another writer says: “The gospel for which this age waits is the
gospel as presented by Christ rather than as presented by Paul or
Peter.” And a third says, we “must get behind the apostle to the
Lord.” Substantially the same teaching is set forth in Fairbairn’s
book. Need we say such teaching is as unscriptural as it is
dangerous. Did not the Redeemer direct His disciples to tarry
at Jerusalem until they should be endued with power from on
high? Did He not promise to send upon them the Spirit to teach
them all things, and bring all things to their remembrance what-
soever He had said unto them ? Did He not tell them that He
had many things to say unto them that they could not hear then?
But afterwards He would disclose these things by the “Spirit of
Truth,” who, when He came, “would guide them into all truth ,
for He shall not speak of Himself, but whatsoever He shall hear
that shall He speak.” And Christ goes on to say that the work
of the Spirit would be to “glorify Him;” and He would do this
by taking the things of Christ and showing them to the apostles.
“He shall receive of Mine and shall show it unto you.” And
they would receive these things for the great end of showing them
to the Church and the world. Hence the world is laid under the
most solemn obligation to hearken to their teaching. For did
He not say, “he that receiveth you receiveth Me, and he that
receiveth Me receiveth Him that sent Me.” Apostolic teaching
then is Christ’s teaching. Christ Himself spoke by the Spirit
who was “poured on Him without measure;” and His apostles,
if we will believe the Lord, spoke and wrote by the same Spirit.
The man then who would set the apostles in opposition to Christ
must be either very ignorant or very perverse. Indeed, this very
point, the apostle John in his epistle, makes a test of a man’s
soundness in the faith. Speaking in his own name, and in that
of the other apostles, he says: “He that knoweth God heareth us;
he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the
Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of error.” Of which words Mr.
Spurgeon cuttingly remarks, “This bears hard on modern critics
who, in a hypocritical manner, pretend to receive Christ, and then
reject His inspired apostles.”
Assuredly the writers of the Epistles had the same authority
for their Scriptures, as the writers of the gospels. If Matthew,


Mark, Luke and John wrote of Christ, so also did Paul and
Peter and Jude and James. The difference between the two
sets of writers is not a difference in regard to inspiration or
Divine authority. If the former gives us more information of
Christ’s personal teaching and personal character as well as the
signs which he wrought; in the latter we have a more fully
developed account of Christ’s work, and a more fully developed
system of Christian doctrine. The Acts of the Apostles and the
Epistles form the complement of the Gospels, and carry on and
carry out what was commenced in the Gospels.
Glowing representations are given by this writer of what
shall take place when his views are embraced and Christ is made
known to the heathen world. Then shall men, “ under the spell
and fascination that is in Christ,” turn from their idolatry and
“crowd to touch the hem of His garment and be made whole.”
All this reads very like a slander on the preachers of the gospel
at home and abroad. It is no less than marvellous to be told
that with all their preaching they have as yet utterly failed to set
forth Christ to men, and commend Him to their acceptance. We
had thought that missionaries to the heathen would be occupied
in proclaiming the renowned fame of the Saviour to their hearers,
and calling on them to believe in Him for the salvation of their
souls, whilst the result of their preaching depended on the
revelation of the Divine arm. But it seems that this notion turns
out to be a mistake and a delusion.
However, all is now to be put right by the propagation of a
“New Theology,” one leading feature of which is that “Christ’s
consciousness is the one authoritative source of the knowledge of
Divine things.” Another feature is the repudiation of its
“systematic” character. How any man in his proper senses can
stand up to condemn the systematizing of Divine Truth I cannot
understand. Will not the facts and doctrines of Scripture, like
the facts of natural history for example, demand such a treatment ?
Is it not both rational and profitable to reduce the teaching of the
Bible under so many appropriate heads ? Is there any reasonable
objection to such a procedure ? Nay, can we help observing what,
for instance, the Scripture says of Ood —what it says of Jfara—
what it says of the Redeemer and of salvation —what it says of the
Holy Spirit and Sis Work —what it says of Man's Destiny or the
Last things —and what it teaches of Christian Doctrine and Duty?
Does not the study of Divine Truth on these lines tend greatly


to furnish clear and distinct views of that Truth, and to exhibit
the undoubted and interesting fact that the Truths of the Bible
have a close, yea, an inseparable connection with one another?
To some extent therefore it appears to us that every Christian
should be a Theologian, or in other words, have a clear view of the
relation of the great principles and doctrines of Scripture to one
another.
Another point in this “New Theology ” is the doctrine of the
universal Fatherhood of God —a doctrine proclaimed by the
Principal Fairbairn referred to above and adopted by the writer
under review. It seems to us clear enough that, wherever we
find men maintaining this view, they have departed from the
Truth of the Bible, and their other opinions in religion are likely
to be tainted by this error. If all men are the children of God
what are we to understand by Christ’s words addressed to the
Pharisees, “Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye
■escape the damnation of hell?” Or again His retort upon un-
believing Jews when they asserted, “We be not born of forni-
cation: we have one Father, even God.” “Jesus said unto them
if God were your Father ye would love Me.” “Te are of your
father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do.” Now,
can men be both God’s children and the devil’s children at the
same time? If we follow Christ’s teaching we must know that
no man can become a child of God in the Scriptural spiritual
sense of the term until he is born from above. As the Apostle
says. —“For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are
the sons of God.” And again, “Te are all the children of God
by faith that is in Christ Jesus.”
The doctrine of the Divine Sovereignty is also distasteful,
as might be expected, to the advocates of the “ New Theology.”
And in order to render it the more obnoxious to his readers this
writer misrepresents, or we might say caricatures it. This
doctrine, we are told, “ was elaborated by Calvin, and fashioned
by Augustine.” It is true Calvin was a clear and able expounder
of the doctrine, resting all his arguments and statements on the
Scriptures, and it will require more might than this minister or a
thousand besides can ever wield to overturn the position of the
great Reformer. But what can be meant by the statement that
this great doctrine was “fashioned by Augustine?” It is true
this mighty man held and taught it. But if “fashioned’ means
that he invented it, or was the first to maintain it, all this we


utterly deny. We must go back to the Apostle Paul, and we
shall find this Truth declared and enforced by this inspired writer
in the most powerful and uncompromising manner. And did not
the Lord Jesus proclaim this doctrine once and again; as when
He addressed His Father and said, “I thank Thee, O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, because Thou hast hid these things
from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto babes.
Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in Thy sight.” To the
same purport are His words in the great intercessory prayer:
“As thou hast given Him (that is the Son) power over all flesh
that He should give eternal life to as many as Thou hast given
Him.” But it is said this doctrine represents God as an “Autocrat.”
Possibly something very unamiable and repulsive is intended by
this term. Well, at all events, God is a king, and an absolute
king, and as such, “He does according to His will in the army
of heaven and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none can
stay His hand or say to Him, what doest Thou.” If a God, He
must be a King, and if a King He must be a Sovereign, and
consequently, beyond the control or interference of any creature.
It is undoubtedly the teaching of the Calvinistic, or rather the
Pauline Theology, that the Divine Sovereignty is displayed in
Creation, Providence and Redemption. And the same thing, be
it remembered, is set forth in that Confession to which all
Presbyterian ministers have given their adherence. And what
after all is Divine Sovereignty but the right of God to do as He
pleases—a right which is very plainly declared in His address to
Moses; “I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I
will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.” “So
then,” adds an inspired Commentator, “it is not of him that
willeth, nor of him that runneth,but of God that showeth mercy.”
In support of objections to this doctrine, and as flowing from
the pleasing notion of a Universal Fatherhood, it is maintained
that suffering among the sons of men is not to be looked upon as
penal, but as “ chastisement inflicted for the reformation and
good of the sufferers.” It is indeed true that God’s own
children are often called to endure chastisement for gracious
ends. But it is impossible to admit that all suffering is of this
character. The Word of God and thousands of facts declare this
to be untrue. Was this the case when Sodom and Gomorrah
were destroyed by fire from heaven? Was this the case when
four hundred and fifty of the priests of Baal were slain on


Carmel? Was it for their reformation that Korah, Dathan and
company were swallowed up in the gaping earth? Was it for
their good that Ananias and Sapphira were struck down dead for
lying to God ? Is this the case when multitudes are swept out
of life by storms and earthquakes ? Was it for the reformation
of Pharoah’s hosts that they were drowned in the Bed Sea ?
Was Babylon swept out of existence for its reformation ? These
cases have only to be stated to explode for ever the false and
unscriptural theory in question.
It will be seen that we have had under discussion, in this
ecture, a variety of topics, besides the leading one of Inspiration.
We would have preferred to give the whole attention to this
vital subject, and so have entered into its discussion with greater
fulness. But it may not be without profit that we have followed
Mr Maclnnes throughout his address, and examined his teaching
on other topics of an important character. At the same time
enough has been said, we are disposed to think, to demonstrate
the Moderator’s sentiments as inconsistent with his avowed
principles ; and the futility of his attempts to overthrow the
doctrine of the plenary Inspiration of Scripture, or destroy the
confidence of God’s own children in that Word which is as stable
as the pillars of heaven.
Before closing, we may observe, that there are indications
abroad that among our leading theologians in our own colony, there
are some, whose views on the vital subject of inspiration are in
accord with those we have been considering. Some time after
the publication of the Moderator’s address, a learned Professor
from Victoria whilst on a visit to Sydney was interviewed by a
representative of one of the newspapers. And in the published
report we learn what his sentiments are on the subject on hand.
It is his opinion that “few intelligent Christians” now hold the
doctrine of the verbal accuracy of the Scripture. How often
do men of this school throw out the suggestion that those who
maintain the plenary inspiration of Scripture are wanting in
intelligence. It would seem as if these advocates of the New
Theology had monopolised all the intelligence of the world. “If
a man takes up this position,” we are told, “he must make him-
self a mere slave to the outer letter, the mere outer husk in
which the living kernel or living grain is contained.” Was the
psalmist then “ a slave ” when he exclaimed —“ The words of
the Lord are pure words ; as silver tried in a furnace of earth,


purified seven times!” Was Paul an unintelligent “slave”
when before Felix he declared that “ after the way which his
enemies called heresy he worshipped the God of his fathers,
believing all things which are written in the law and the
prophets.” No word here of husk or kernel. He simply
believed what was written —written, it is presumed, in words.
Was the apostle depending on the kernel merely when he founds
his interpretation of a great promise on a single letter ?—“ Now
to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not;
and to seeds , as of many, but as of one; and to thy seed, which
is Christ.”
Baxter is referred to, and spoken of as “ the greatest of the
Puritans.” I had thought that it was generally allowed that
Dr. Owen held a foremost place both as to learning, talent, and
soundness in the faith. However, Baxter, it appears, was one
of those very intelligent people who knew how to distinguish
“ between the inner substance of the Revelation from God and
the mere outer form in which it has been recorded.” “ The
letter of Scripture he likened to the body of man, and the sub-
stance of truth to the life and spirit in man.” But it is natural
to ask, are not the body and soul necessary to a living man ?It
is true the Spirit may live without the body. But can anyone
tell us what will become of the Spirit of Scripture when the body
of the writing is gone P In that case perhaps it may have flown
to heaven like the soul of Dr. Talmage’s organ ! “ I don’t see,”
says the late Dr. John Duncan, “ what Scripture is but writing,
and writing is words. No doubt the meaning of Scripture is
Scripture, but it is meaning contained in words. ‘lt is written,’
‘lt is written,’ says Christ. Now if it be so —if I am told
Scripture is inspired, but not the words, how am I to know the
thing but by the words ? How can I rest in vagueness and
speculation? You tell me it is the kernel not the shell; but
give me the sweet kernel and the shell both ; and you cannot get
at the kernel, but through the shell.”
This professor makes the assertion that “ the advocates of
verbal inspiration fail to see the distinction between the revelation
itself and the outward record of that revelation.” Now perhaps
they are not quite as much in the dark as he imagines on this
head. No doubt we can think of and speak of these two things
as distinct things; that is, the revelation given to man and the
record of it by man. But would he kindly inform us where or
how we could discover the revelation if the record of it was gone?


But there is one thing that the verbalists do fail to see, and that
is that the one is Divine and the other merely human. And this
is what he and his friends apparently are trying to palm on the
world as very enlightened views. He does indeed say that the
writers of Scriptures “were led to write by Divine illumination of
the Divine Spirit.” But was that all? If that was all, they occupied
no higher position than ordinary Christians; for, are not all
God’s people illuminated,” in one degree or other by the Holy
Spirit. Let it be remembered that illumination is not inspiration.
But here follows a more remarkable statement. Speaking of the
verbalist doctrine he says, —“God’s inspiration was of a nobler
kind, because each of them ( i.e . the sacred writers) was left
his free individuality; left to exercise his own judgment as to
the choice of materials!” Now what sort of inspiration could
that be which left the writers to themselves — left them to their
own judgment in the matter? The verbal doctrine is that the
sacred w r riters were under the gracious and mighty and con-
trolling influence of the Blessed God —that they wrote as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost —that as Christ said to the
twelve on their ordination day —“It is not ye that speak, but
the Spirit of your Bather which speaketh in you” —so the
advocates of plenary inspiration hold that it is not the sacred
penmen who speak in the Gospels or Epistles, but the Spirit of
God which speaketh in them and by them to men. Now tell
me, which of these is the “nobler inspiration?” If men were
left to themselves , their writings cannot be the Word of Qod.
We will be told there is a 11 human agency ” in this business.
But is this any news? Surely this is no modern discovery. The
benighted verbalists never imagined that the Books of Holy
Writ w r ere composed by angels or that the manuscripts fell
from heaven like so many snowflakes upon the world! But it
is said “the distinct individuality of the writer” must be kept
in view. Well, we don’t object to that; although at the same
time we consider it a secondary matter. As for what is termed
“the inner substance of the Truth,” how are we to get at that,
what ever it may be? Is there an inner and outer substance?
I understand the record itself to be the Truth. And it seems to
me that these distinctions about inner and outer substances have
been introduced to get rid of the great and God-glorifying
doctrine of the full and complete and absolute inspiration of the
Scriptures. In the Bible we are never asked to believe in the


Hall & Sons, Printers, Ryrib St., Geelong.
but in the Truth itsel£ : —in other
words, “in the record which Ood has given us of His Son.”
The Professor speaks of “an authoritative revelation.” Now,
the great question to be answered here is this —What is it that
constitutes a Revelation Authoritative ? His answer, according
to the newspaper report, is very different from what might he
expected from a Presbyterian Professor. Thus he says —“ The
authority of Scripture depends on its being an adequate record.”
And again, “all'[that is necessary is that it be a worthy
record.” But we are left to conjecture what may be the mean-
ing of these phrases —an adequate record—a worthy record, —
how much they embrace, or how little. But assuredly they do
not express the great truth taught in the Bible regarding the
inspiration of the writers. Por observe, when John speaks of
believing the Record, he affirms that it is the “Record which God
gave us of His Son.” It is a record given hy Ood.
But says the Professor, “The authority of the writings of
Holy Scripture does not certainly depend upon their author-
ship.” Now here is what the Confession says on the subject: —
“ The authority of Holy Scripture for which it ought to be
believed and obeyed dependeth not upon the testimony of any
man or church but wholly upon Ood (who is the Truth itself) the
Author thereof; and therefore it is to be received because it is
the Word of God.” We leave Professor Rentoul to reconcile his
teaching with his Confession.
It is plain we live in serious times. The very foundations
are being destroyed ; and the attacks are coming from within as
well as from without. Whither can Christians turn for comfort
and safety if it has come to pass that what was regarded as a
firm and immovable rock turns out to be the shifting sand ? Let
us beware of having our faith shaken in the blessed Word of
God. Let us study it more carefully, prayerfully, and con-
stantly. And when we peruse it, act the part of the Psalmist,
who, when he opened his Bible, lifted up his cry to heaven that
God would open his eyes to behold the wondrous things of His
Law. Let us drink in its Divine teaching, for our enlighten-
ment and refreshment, and carry out its heavenly counsels in
our daily walk, then shall we find ourselves proof against all the
unsettling voices now sounding in men’s ears throughout the
churches.




