

THE VAIN EFFORT,
.- y A JOURNAL PUBLISHED ON BOARD THE
GREAT BRITAIN STEAM SHIP,
DURING HER HOMEWARD VOYAGE FROM
MELBOURNE TO LIVERPOOL,
to May 7, 1860
From March
MELBOURNE :
JAMES CAPLE, 29, COLLINS STREET,
1860.
(svv® (sxxts; (sw?
C
s u/








THE YAIN EFFORT,
A JOURNAL PUBLISHED ON BOARD
THE GREAT BRITAIN STEAM SHIP,
DURING HER HOMEWARD VOYAGE FROM
MELBOURNE TO LIVERPOOL,
From March 8 to May 7, 1860.
'.<c
BRISTOL :
I. E. CHILLCOTT, CLARE STREET.
1860.


,-r jft'
A / . ,/ _
n r /— — r A
'Jhuffl 3'i\iz
r r~r y~ r r fSSSS'M


INTRODUCTION.
Published by subscription (so general as almost to merit the title “universal”) of
the saloon passengers of the Great Britain, its only value consisting in its fidelity as a
memento of a very pleasant and the swiftest voyage ever accomplished from Melbourne
to Liverpool, this work appears. "We are equally careless as to hlame or praise from
any other quarter than our own readers; they have already approved of it, and we are
satisfied. At the close of our labour of love, it becomes our duty to bear testimony to
the kindness of those who have assisted in the prosecution of this work; and firstly,
we thank Capt. Guay for his readiness at all times to afibrd every necessary information;
secondly, we thank Messrs. Dailey, Mabsoh, Mclntyre, McEeebow, Etheeidge,
Me Cloud, and each and every other Contributor. Lastly, we perform an act of simple
justice in placing the two names signed hereto, as entitled to equal credit for (amidst the
difficulties and annoyances inseparably connected with such an undertaking at sea)
carrying it onward to so successful a result.




THE VAIN EFFORT
GREAT BRITAIN
SCREW
STEAM SHIP.
N°. i._
•MARCH
9, 1860.
The Editor chooses to deem it advisable to
write that which, he trusts, will prove a record
of the voyage now commenced. He desires it
to be distinctly understood that each copy is,
and remains, his own property, and expects it
returned accordingly. Capt. Gray has kindly
promised to give us regular intelligence touch-
ing the progress of the ship; and we, on our
parts, desire to avoid three things—religious
discussions, personalities, and politics.
While we invite our fellow passengers to
forward to us (authenticated) statements of any
and every cause of complaint, Ave reserve to
ourselves the right of accepting or rejecting any
article.
Contributions are solicited.
It is intended to issue a number of “The
Vain Effort” daily, should sufficient “matter”
be forthcoming, and the weather permit.
A limited space will be reserved for adver-
tisements.
Re-echoing the wish (still sounding in our
ears) of a pleasant, safe, and prosperous voyage
to the Great Britain, we make our first ap-
pearance; and as our sole object is the enter-
tainment of our fellow passengers, we solicit
their assistance.
Lost, on the evening of the 7th March, a
Meerschaum pipe, with amber mouthpiece. The
finder will oblige by giving it to the saloon
Steward.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Among our passengers are a pair of birds,
familiarly known as laughing jackasses. We
are informed, that in the event of their arrival,
they will be the first birds of the kind intro-
duced into England. .Our friends at home
have from time immemorial associated the jack-
ass bipedal as vrell as quadrupedal wdth laugh-
ter ; but for the first time they will shortly haA - e
the opportunity of seeing an exemplification of
the wondrous economy and wisdom of nature at
the antipodes, where laughter and the jackass
are combined In one animal.
An enterprising steerage passenger proposes
to establish a Cremorne Gardens, with a zoolo-
gical exhibition, between the funnel and the
forecastle.
The band of the Great Britain will perform
an Ethiopian melange this afternoon, abaft the
main mast. It is not, perhaps, generally known,
that this talented company of musicians has
already Avon many orchestral triumphs in Vic-
toria and the adjoining colonies.
We have been requested to state that the
report, which was generally circulated as to the
arrival of the mail at Kangaroo Island, origi-
nated in a misapprehension of the nature of a
telegram received by one of the most respected
of our fellow passengers.
VIVE LA BAGATELLE.
Our first day at sea has been characterized
by the usual incidents. While in the smooth
water of Hobson’s Bay, the deck presented an
unusually gay and animated appearance. Cri-
noline and lace-bordered pocket handkerchiefs
Avere in the ascendant upon the quarter deck,
Avhile meerschaums, regalias, and other enjoy-
ments, supposed to be compatible with health
and masculine elegance on shore, were frequent.
As soon, however, as the heads Avere cleared, all
such evidences of a highly cultivated state of so-
ciety disappeared; and with them the fair pro-
prietresses of the crinoline and the owners of the
pipes. Towards the afternoon the only trace of
a love of smoking remaining among the saloon
passengers was a remarkable smoking cap worn
by a handsome young man, with Byronical
tendencies, upon the quarter deck. This ele-
gant turban requires, to do it justice, the culti-
vated criticism of one of the editors of “Xe
Follet.” If the gentlemen passengers are in
possession of anything like a reasonable Avard-
robe of articles so sumptuous, hoAv easily the
ennui of a sea voyage could be relieved by
private theatricals. The Aveather, up to the
time of our going to press, continued to be very
fine. At 10 p.m. we were somewhere between
King’s Island and Cape OtAvay.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
It is much to be regretted, that in conse-
quence of the strong head winds experienced
since leaving Port Philip Heads, our start has
not been as favourable as might have been
wished. But as so many of us have experienced
touching, and in some cases, convincing proofs
of the power of the breezes before named, it
may be satisfactory to knoAV, that our progress
has, (all things considered) been good; that,
up to twelve o’clock of the date of our first
issue, our ship has gone over, in 47 hours, 348
miles; and on “heaving the line” at that hour
she was proceeding at a rate exceeding eleven
knots per hour.
March Bth. Latitude 40.14. Long. 142.15.
„ 9th. „ 43.25. „ 142.51.


We left Hobson’s Bay on Wednesday, 7th
inst., at 7.30 a. m. and passed Port Philip Heads,
at 1.0 p.m.
We are glad to see so many recovering
from their temporary indispositions, and sin-
cerely trust, by Sunday next, all our fellow
passengers will be able, according to their re-
spective inclinations, to read under shelter of
the deck, or stroll up and down the same. In
to-morrow’s issue we purpose giving a few
hints which will, we believe, commend them-
selves to the good sense of each one interested
(and which of us is not?) in the health and
cleanliness of the passengers, and the safety of
the Great Britain.
No. 2.—MARCH 10, 1860.
It is a matter requiring no demonstration,
that whilst on board ship, it is no less the
interest than the duty of all passengers to
attend willingly to any advice tendered them
(by those competent to instruct) in all matters
pertaining to the safety of the ship, and their
own health and comfort.
We are indebted to Captain Gray for the
suggestions we now offer, and trust, that gentle-
man’s kindness will meet its fitting response.
It is advisable that matches, fusees, and
any other matter likely to ignite spontaneously,
or in consequence of friction, should be handed
over to the Purser.
No naked light should ever be used.
Smoking in berths or between decks is so
dangerous, that we believe it is only needful
to point it out to ensure its entire avoidance.
As there are a very large number of passen-
gers on board, it is necessary, for their own
health’s sake, that the instructions issued by
the Surgeon should be promptly attended to,
including as they do cleanliness in person, dress,
and berth.
The information contained in yesterday’s
issue, that in twenty-four hours we made over
three degrees of south latitude, wfill convince
us that it is not mere fancy on our parts that
the weather is getting cold, and as it will daily
get colder, it will be wise for us to avoid the
natural consequences of a speedy transition
from a climate so warm as that of Victoria, to
one so cold as we must pass through in round-
ing the Horn, by taking such precautions in
the way of clothing, &c. as prudence will
dictate to each of us.
Our ship being much crowded, the comfort of
all on board will be greatly enhanced by gene-
ral attention to the divisions of the deck,
specially appropriated to each class of passen-
gers. Should we be so unfortunate as to have
fire break out on board, it is imperative that
the alarm should be instantly communicated to
the officer in charge of the deck, and imme-
diate and implicit obedience given to any
orders issued by the Captain, as upon the
prompt execution of these will depend the
lives of all on board.
Divine service will be (D. V.) performed
in the saloon at half-past ten o’clock to-morrow
(Sunday) morning. The Rev. T. Williams
will be happy to conduct a second service in
any other part of the ship, and desires to com-
municate with any parties wishing the same.
We are since informed by the rev. gentleman
that the second service will take place at half-
past two o’clock mid-ship.
Some of the passengers find their luggage
has been wrongly stowed, and as they find
themselves much in want of it, we feel certain
Captain Gray will try to rectify the error.
“ Happy is the nation that requires not her
annals written, or that hath no annals to write.”
Such, or some very similar sentiment, is attri-
buted to a heathen philosopher, or somebody
else, and as we have not the pleasure of pos-
sessing a copy of Goldsmith’s works at the
moment, decline taking the trouble of looking
up either author or words. In truth, gentle
reader, the given quantity of matter must be
forthcoming, whether we “cudgel our brains”
to some purpose or to none. Hence this
chapter of nonsense. Forgive us, reader!
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
P.—The distinguished member of our commu-
nity, a bullock, whose throat was cut yesterday,
would no doubt have been better esteemed by
his fellow passengers, had he lived sufficiently
long to allow them to appreciate the beauties
of his voice. He would have been, as you
say, very useful as an accompaniment to the
band.
Sophia. —The lines on the “Purple Cap w r ith
Orange Tassel,” are respectfully declined, in
consequence of the Editor’s desire to avoid
personalities.
Contributions from any of the passengers
are respectfully solicited. They must be ad-
dressed to the Editor, No. 60, Saloon.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
After twelve o’clock yesterday our ship
made such steady progress under the influence
of a wind nearly fair, that at about half-past
six o’clock last evening preparations were
commenced for unshipping the screw’, an oper-
ation concluded shortly after seven. It cer-
tainly surprised us to see with how little
trouble this was performed, and any apprehen-
sion previously existing in our own mind, as
to the liability of this machinery to get out of
order, was completely dispelled. For some
hours, nevertheless, the Great Britain con-
tinued (apparently) under the impression that
it was her duty to roll about “ considerably,”
but we are happy to say, at the time we write,
she seems to have got rid of this idea, and


moves more easily, evidently to the great com-
posure of certain nerves that have been much
affected since passing through Port Philip
Heads. In fact, we are happy (not for our own
sakes) to announce that the band of performers
on (save the mark) musical or other instru-
ments, appear to have recovered also, and
occasionally work away as if their dinners
depended on the quantity of noise they were
able to make.
By the kindness of Mr. Beamish we are
enabled to give the following particulars:
UK VOLUTIONS.
Up to 12 o’clock, 7thinst. \ ~ / 5,041
„ 12 „ Bth .„ ) 23,971
” ” gjj l ) made (
„ 7 p.m. 9th ] \ 7,342
Total.. 61,826
And as the screw turns thrice to one revolution
of the engine, the screw has revolved 185,478
times.
Log. 12 o’clock.—Lat. S. 46.33. Long. E.
146.14. Distance run, 236 miles. Last casting
the reel, 10| knots.
Ho. 3.—MARCH 12, 1860.
“SHE WALKS IN BEAUTY LIKE THE
NIGHT.”
A PARODY.
He walks in sorrow, like the night
Of gasless streets and starless skies ;
And all that’s worst of dark and bright
Meet in his togs and in his ties ;
Thus darkened into such a sight,
That Pity fain would close her eyes.
One chain the more, one seal the less,
Had half impaired the jewell’d grace,
Which shines o’er all his out-door dress,
And beams resplendent in his face,
Where thoughts of golden charms express
How precious is their dwelling-place.
And on that cheek, and o’er that brow
So blue, so bitter, so intent,
The smiles that scare, the spots that glow,
And tell of days in “ fast life spent, ”
A mind at war with all below,
And heart by no means innocent. (o.
The above parody on one of Lord Byron’s
Hebrew Melodies was suggested by the appear-
ance of a friend of the Author’s, who from
having led a fast life became a prey to melan-
choly and loud dress.
In the small world in which we are now
moving, the reciprocity of kindly words and
interchange of kindly offices have a much
deeper significance than in either the society
which we have left, or that in which within a
few weeks we shall join. Let us always re-
member that at sea we are all comparatively
helpless, and that the weakest among us may
be in a position to do a kindness to the strong-
est. There is a degree of heroism in a young
man undertaking the duties of nurse for the
baby of a sick mother, which while the thought-
less may smile at its exercise, will command
the approval of the philosopher. The Great
Britain has a precious freight, which does not
appear upon her manifest. She carries a cargo
of love and innocence and helplessness suffi-
cient to freight with happiness a whole convoy.
We of course allude to the baby passengers,
fore and aft. We commend them to the care
and affection of everybody.
Divine service was performed yesterday morn-
ing and afternoon by the Rev. T. Williams.
Our Log.—Lat. 49.42. Long. 156.00. Dis-
tance run, 243 miles.
No. 4.—MARCH 13, 1860.
The fast young man who returned to his
home at a little after four o’clock this morning,
is requested to take notice, that if this exploit
is repeated, he had better be provided with
fresh lodgings,—First and final notice.
The ocean in its many beautiful phases, has
been so often described by abler pens than
ours, that it would be presumption on our part
to attempt to paint the scenery by which we
have been surrounded for the last twenty-four
hours. The materials of which these views
have been composed are so exceedingly simple,
that we are compelled, spite of ourselves, to
wonder at the unceasing changes presented to
us. All of us, however, have at one time or
other been able to see for ourselves “ Old
ocean in his gambols.” Well is it for us that
even he, seemingly “ resistless in his might,”
is obedient to Him who “ holdeth the waters
in the hollow of His hand.” A stun’sail or two
gave way yesterday, and this morning one of
the fore-top gallant sheets followed suit. These
incidents in some slight degree interfere with
and to some extent alleviate the monotony
almost inseparable from a long sea-voyage.
Last evening, a passenger in the intermedi-
ate carelessly set fire to his own coat, by thrust-
ing into his pocket, after lighting his pipe, the
material with which he had lit it. Surely we
cannot be too careful of that terrible enemy —
fire.
The Editor solicits contributions from any
and every one. The experiences of each one
may seem a trivial thing, but these added to-
gether would probably exceed in interest (and
certainly in truth,) the Arabian Night’s Enter-
tainments.


PARODY ON “ ALL IS VANITY, SAITH
THE PREACHER.”
FROM THE EXPERIENCES OF A. F. F. E.
Cash, jewels, love, and ease were mine,
And health and youth possessed me ;
The nice young man of every clime,
Where lovely forms caressed me;
I danced in Toorak’s regal halls,
And felt my soul grow tender,
Or in the Exhibition Balls
Moved amidst Melbourne’s splendour.
I strive to number o’er what nights
Remembrance can discover;
Which all that beauty loves, and lights,
Would lure me to live over.
There shone no moon, there roll’d no hour
Of happiness unalloyed:
All milk of human kindness sour;
My appetite was cloyed.
The snakes which o’er the Yarra dart,
The charmer wins from harm ;
But that which preys upon my heart,
What “ Underwood” can charm?
It will not list unto the “ Age,”
Nor can barrel organ lure it;
But there it stings, with constant rage,
And I must needs endure it. w.
The albatross still hovers round us. The
stormy petrel we saw for the first time yester-
day, about the time when the sun, shining glo-
riously in the midst of the rain, gave existence
to the bow, the reminder to man of his Maker’s
promise that He would no more destroy the
world by water.
“ WHERE SHALL I WRITE ?”
our editor’s trials.
Where shall I write r
The Editor cries;
In a precious plight
Each spot he tries
In the saloon:
Its rather too soon,
Children are squalling,
Bread and meat mauling;
Babies whining,
Mothers pining;
Billows battling,
Glasses rattling,
Vessel rumbling,
Stewards tumbling.
Up aloft
The weather “soft;”
Sailors hauling,
Showers falling
Right abaft, above the shaft;
Smokers sitting, spraying, spitting—
More than smokers —curious jokers,
Who laugh hoarsely, and very coarsely,
While I tire, poor penny a liner,
Looking left and looking right
For a spot whereon to write. m.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
13th March, 1860, Noon—Lat. 50.26, E.
Long. 163.58. Distance run, 314 miles, which
added to previous distance 1021 miles, makes
1335 miles in six days. Last casting of reel,
14 knots.
No. S.—MARCH 14, 1860.
We shall be obliged by the return of Nos. 1.
and 4.
Messrs. Hennessy and Co. present their
compliments to the twelve o’clock firm, and
respectfully request orders for stretchers, (if
those articles are required) may be sent in
before five in the evening.
ORIGINAL CORRESPONDENCE.
“ My dear Mister Heditur.
“ I may as well just tell yo it furst place
at o’im one o’th chaps they ca’ Barneby voaks,
and oive just bin thinking as you’ve begun a
noosepaper i’Greate Britain that you’ll be glad
to get a bit of ’riginal correspondents, now I
just tell you I don’t like ta name you’ve gin
your paper. Its toitle remoinds ma of a labring
mountain yo know ta rest. Oi think you capable
o’ much more than “ The Vain Effort, ” soa if
you’ll be advised by me, yo’ll name your paper
after some o’them great guns that are read,
quoted, and admired, thro’ the length and
breadth “ o this great globe.” There’s the
Melbourne Argus, which stands on the highest
point of noosepaper greatness, its among noose-
papers wdiat Paganini wor among fiddlers. It
has talented Editors and able bodied misrepor-
tsrs, yo’ might name your paper after that. I’ll
just tell you an anecdote about it. Eight years
ago, when I was in Melbourne, I recollect see-
ing some pack-horses loaded wdth Argus news-
papers, when they reached Russell Street, they
broke loose and galloped down to the Yarra.
Folks said they did so, because the reading
were dry. Now Mr. Editor, I don’t wish to in-
sinuate that your articles are dry, but I dare say
if one knew more about you, we should think
you a dry rogue.
Should I have said aught amiss, you can
point it out, and as I’ve got my clogs on look
out, so now, good night, old lad,
Yours, &c.
A Baknsby Chap.
The Editor has made the attempt in the first
portion of this letter to copy his correspondent’s
dialect, but perceiving his complete failure, has
fallen back into that more generally in use.
He will deem it a pleasure to reply to-morrow.
Considerable excitement prevailed in the
steerage yesterday afternoon, in consequence of
a difficulty between two of the male passengers,
resulting on the part of one of them in the loss


of a little blood, and the gain of a little ex-
perience. We have every reason to believe
that the report of a lady being in the case, is
entirely without foundation.
PARODY.
Moore. “ Rich, and rare were the gems she wore.”
Rich and rare were the togs he wore,
And a Cameo Pin on his breast he bore ;
And his plaids and checks and golden ring,
Were, in vulgar parlance, “ quite the thing,”
Model of Grace ! Hast thou no fear
To round the Horn at this time of year ?
Hast thou no fear of Icebergs vast
Storm, Frost, and Sleet all flying fast ?
“ Oh ! Seaman, I feel not the least alarm,
“ Nor Iceberg nor storm can do me harm,
“ For tho’ Ice may threaten and storm may lour,
“ Against pure malt Whiskey they have no power.
On went G. (with a laughing lip
And a twinkling eye) around the ship ;
And jolly for ever is he who thinks
Misfortune can best be put down by drinks. w.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
GENERAL INTELLIGENCE.
The quarter deck has lost its ordinary
interest for the past evening or two, in the ab-
sence of the brilliant and fashionable audience
which usually assembles in the afternoon to
hear the music of Mozart, Handel, Beethoven,
and Verdi, with the more light and gorgeous
harmonies of Jullien andD’Albert, rendered by
our admirable band. Let us hope that with
the reappearance of fine weather, we shall again
be gratified with those smiles which make up
for us the only sunshine w r e can hope to bask
in round the Horn.
Our Log. noon this day.—S. Lat. 50.16. E.
Long. 170.47. Distance run, 266 miles. Total
distance run in 7 days, 1601 miles. Last cast-
ing of the reel, 11 knots.
Captain Gray has very considerately placed
on the saloon table a chart showing our pro-
gress up to the present time. This will afford
a large amount of instruction combined with
amusement. We trust every one availing him-
self of this source of information, will be es-
pecially careful not to injure the map.
We again remind our fellow passengers of
the daily increasing coldness of the weather,
and trust each one will take the necessary pre-
caution in the way of clothing, &c., that our
worthy Surgeon’s skill may not be taxed in
order to restore them to their usual state of
health.
’TIS PUNISHMENT TO “ PUN.”
A pun’s a word that’s played upon
And has a double sense ;
But when I say a double sense
I don’t mean double cents.
As thus— a bat about a room
Not long ago I knew
To fly; he caught a fly, and then
Flew up the chimney flue.
But such a scene was never seen
(I feel quite sure of that)
As when with bats, all hands essayed
To hit the bat a bat.
To make a pair—two pairs it takes ;
If ciphered out with care ;
You’ll find each pair, though worth two cents,
Is but one cent a pair.
The captain gave the man a rope
To carry up aloft,
And though he took it up aloft
It was not up a loft.
If one were ridden o’er a lot,
He might his lot bewail;
If on a rail—most likely he
Would rail against the rail.
’Tis punishment for us to pun,
’Tis trifling void of worth ;
So let it pass away just like
The dew that’s due to earth. A.
No. 6.—MARCH 15, 1860.
Before this sheet is in the hands of our
readers, they will have known that the dastardly
attempt to crush this humble periodical has
been well nigh successful. It is, however, satis-
factory to know that the jury was not unani-
mous; and although the court in which this
action was brought has not the power of grant-
ing a new trial, it required all the persuasive
eloquence of the leader of the bar on this circuit
to obtain the verdict recorded in another column.
To allay the public anxiety, this paper will
continue to appear as heretofore, and we trust
with an undiminished circulation. The Editor
feels it necessary to ease his “overcharged heart,”
by thanking most heartily those friends who
rallied round him in his “hour of trial.”
Nos. 1 & 3 of “the Vain Effort” are missing.
We shall be much obliged by their return.
Wanted—A young person to nurse a baby
three hours each day.-—Apply to Mrs. Me Leod,
Saloon.
Sophonisba,—The so-called poetry of the
present day is not intended to be understood.
—Ask I).
THE STORMY PETREL.
“ Oh! stay, sweet warbling Woodlark, stay.” —Burns.
Oh! stay, sweet stormy Petrel, stay,
Nor dip thy wing in the silver spray;
A sea-sick man the live long day
Is watching thee in thy gambols.


Again, again thou fliest away,
A flirt with constancy at play,
Giddy with laughing Yea and Nay,
Through long sweet summer rambles.
Say, Petrel, does thy mother know
That thou art out where the winds do blow,
Now soaring high, now skimming low,
As if Ocean waves were “Mountain Dew?”
You seem as if you didn’t care
About your parents’ dark despair;
But I must go below, and there
I shall not think of you.
The Editor inserts the above out of the great
respect he entertains for the writer, but unless
that gentleman alters his style, and writes, at
least, grammatically, spelling at the same time
correctly, his future efforts will be refused.
Ed.—V. E.
The report of last night’s trial is unavoidably
postponed. The Compositor has struck work.
We hope to-morrow to present our readers with
full particulars.
We thank a “Barnsby chap” for his letter,
which appeared in yesterday’s issue; but after
mature reflection, must decline to follow his
advice, and retain “our ancient name.” “A
Barnsby chap ” must not forget—“ Our spurs are
yet to win.”
P. Y.—Even if it were so, we don’t think it a
crime. It is not inpossible that the Plaintiff
and Defendant in the late action were seen to-
gether drinking hot whiskey and water, with
sugar in it, after the trial was over.
2. The band has not been sent ashore by
the Captain’s orders. You might have heard
them playing this morning, but we do not be-
lieve either they or you could conscientiously
take an affidavit to the tune.
Missing—“ The Island World,” by Cheevers.
Any person who may find this stray book, will
oblige the owner by returning it to berth No.
57, Saloon.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our Log. Noon, 15th March, 1860. —Lat.
50.58, Long. 177.20. E.
Distance run, 250 miles. Total distance,
eight days, 1851 miles. Last casting of reel,
11 knots. During the night carried away heel
of fore-topmast, but at date of publication
repairs almost completed.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENT.
Steel Pen is thanked; his letter will appear
probably to-morrow.
The cold weather is now fairly coming on,
and we hope to receive hints from our friends
as to the best method of spending the long
evenings. Can we “get up” a portion of one
of Shakespere’s plays? Or will those who can
sing, kindly forward their names, so that we
may have a concert on board shortly?
No. 7.—MARCH 15, 1860.
(The following article has been contributed by
our Law Reporter.)
Nisi Prius sittings in Saloon of Great Britain ,
before His Honor Chief Justice Collin, 14th
March, 1860.
LIBEL.
GRACE V. BRANSCOMBE.
This action arose out of a Parody (published
in this paper) on some lines of Moore’s, “ Rich
and Rare,” &c., whereby the Plaintiff, R. W.
Grace, deemed himself aggrieved. For the
Plaintiff, Mr. Dailey. For the Defence, Messrs.
Leary and Etheridge, and the Defendant in
person. The Jury w r as composed of four beau-
tiful and accomplished ladies.
Mr. Dailey, addressing the Jury, opened the
case in a very able manner, commenting upon
the position held by Plaintiff in society; his
charming manners and his demeanour, both in
public and private life. He next adverted to
the Defendant and his berth, No. 60, which he
described as being the worst of cribs. It was
evident to the highly respectable audience
who crowded the Court, that the Learned
Counsel was drawing considerably on his vivid
imagination. He stated that berth No. 60 was
the receptacle for all the combustible matter of
the ship, and contained immense quantities of
“Old Tom,” cigars, and other objectionable
materials. The Captain was strongly recom-
mended by the Advocate to make strict search
in No. 60, and forward the delinquent Editor,
somewhere in the direction of the bowsprit.
He called upon Auguste Phillippi, who stated
that he had seen the Plaintiff partaking of
whiskey hot, with three lumps of sugar in it.
Mr. Dailey endeavoured to throw discredit
upon the evidence of this witness, but entirely
failed to do so. He could only obtain from
Mynheer Phillippi the admission that he was
in the habit of taking large doses of a certain
Hamburg medicine, called claret. Phillippi
stated that the Plaintiff used, after a smoke
upon deck, to cry out for a drink. The next
witness, a jolly, rakish-looking fellow, couldn’t
say whether the Plaintiff was with him on deck
on the former night at twelve o’clock, and was
by no means clear as to whether he was there
himself. This closed Plaintiff’s case.
The Defendant commenced his address to
the Court by ridiculing the idea of bringing
into a Great British Court of Justice a suit of
so trumpery a character as the cause now before
them. He then, with that energetic and bril-
liant style of oratory, for which the Editor is at
all times remarkable, descanted in the most
glowing terms upon the necessity of keeping
untrammelled that palladium of our liberties—
a free and unfettered press, a blessing possessed
only by the fortunate Anglo-Saxon race. He
scorned the idea of a technical defence, but


with confidence in the amiable Jury, he would
now leave the case in their hands.
Mr. John Kettle was then sworn. He gave
the Plaintiff a high character, and was of
opinion that his habits were of a temperate
character.
Now came the solemn part of the trial. His
Honour (attired in the most correct judicial
costume —his noble head surmounted by a
brilliant cap of varied hues, such a one as the
old druids were accustomed to wear in their
courts of justice) with that gravity of manner
which only such models of deportment as
British judges can assume, summed up the
evidence which had been adduced. It was
really delightful to all present to hear the law
expounded in such a masterly manner. The
lovely Jurors were directed by the Learned
Judge to disregard the evidence of the witness
Anderson, and to judge for themselves as to
the value of the testimony of the other witnesses.
He then dwelt most eloquently upon the good
results which would follow a due observance of
the law. He had no doubt his friends on the
Jury would give a proper verdict in accordance
with the evidence. The Learned Judge’s ex-
cellent speech was listened to with profound
attention. The Jury, after considerable hesita-
tion, stated that they could not agree. A
majority of the Jury then gave a verdict in
favour of the Plaintiff. Damages—one bottle
of “ Old Tom.”
Found—One Silk Pocket-Handkerchief and
Watch-key.-—Apply to the saloon steward.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —Seeing the trials you are exposed to,
and the penalties you have incurred in your
patriotic efforts for the happiness of the people
of “ Great Britain,” it becomes your friends to
rally round you, and to express their sympathy.
I think they might appropriately indemnify your
losses, and afterwards present yourself the very
amount of damages awarded in the late action,
at once testifying their total disagreement with
that extraordinary verdict, and cheering your
own harassed mind. But, sir, I know that
Patriotism, like Virtue, is its own reward. The
consciousness of the utility of your “ efforts,”
the signs of awakening intelligence in the
community, the eager demand for your publica-
tion, and the entertainment which it has
originated and afforded, may well sustain you.
You know that among our “undemonstrative”
population, a sentiment is often strong and
pervading, yet for a time finds little expression
in public. So it is with the admiration and
gratitude your public services have excited.
Persevere, sir, in your good work: its difficulties
will diminish—its success increase, and in
addition to the reward of conscious merit, you
will “ read your praises in your country’s eyes.”
I am, Sir, yours truly,
Steel Pen.
The Editor’s bashfulness would undoubtedly
have prevented his publishing anything so
eulogistic as the above, but he considers “ every
intelligently-expressed opinion ” entitled to in-
sertion, and will not refuse any letter “ merely
because its sentiments differ from his own.”
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —If Captain Gray had assented to the
proposal of two Sundays instead of two Thurs-
days, would both days have had equal religious
obligations ? If not, which would be binding,
and why ? Yours truly,
John Knox, Jun.
A SONG.—(?)
I sit me down to write some fun,
To please my charming Sally,
But I’ve no chance ’gainst such a gun
As that great poet D y.
My heart is full, I wish to speak,
Oh ! heaven, I love my Sally,
But I’m afraid she’ll say I squeak,
And ape the poet D y.
What shall I do, I’m in distress,
My thoughts run wild for Sally,
I have it now, my stars I bless,
I’ll say —I wrote for D y.
If by this trick I only win
The heart of lovely Sally,
To heaven I will confess the sin
Of having “ done brown ” D y.
I. X. L.
Happy is man when he surveys the glossy
unwrinkled surface of a new dress coat, but
what sorrowful emotions succeed his blissful
sensations, when he reflects that his tailor—
covetous wretch—expects to be paid for it.—
E. M. C.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our Log.—Lat. 5.100. S. Long. 175.26 W.
—By chronometer.
Distance run, 273 miles. Total distance, 2124
miles. Since our last issue, we have passed
from east to west longitude, and gained one
day in consequence of the difference of time.
We are now, therefore, eight days out, and
have averaged 265| miles per diem. We have
two Thursdays in the present w r eek. The repairs
are all completed. Stunsails were set yesterday
afternoon, and we are proceeding at a rate over
ten miles per hour.
No. B.—MARCH 16, 1860.
It is expressly requested that gentlemen
(who from their position should know better,)
will abstain from lighting either pipes or cigars
at the saloon stove fire.


To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —I really fear your Law Reporter is in
difficulties, and was unable to regain possession
of his linen, until he received (for his report,)
from you sufficient cash to discharge his laun-
dress’s account in full. Under no other hy-
pothesis can I reconcile the well-known fact of
that gentleman’s strict regard for truth, with
his report of the statement for the defence, un-
less he is ridiculing you, which I believe is the
case. As to that precious epistle signed Steel
Pen, we know you wrote that yourself—so my
worthy Mr. Editor, better give up your paper
and your humbug together.
Yours, &c.
Snappish.
We are happy to be able to announce the
intention (on the part of a few passengers,) to
promote the amusement of the whole by pro-
ducing “ The Trial Scene” in The Merchant of
Venice. The cast is complete. It will, we
believe, be followed by an Original Farce.
Several whales have been playing about
the ship, and have given an opportunity to one
gentleman to perpetrate a most atrocious pun
about New South Wales. If he will forward
it to the Editor, with an appropriate explana-
tion, we will insert it without charge.
We shall feel obliged by any one on board
who possesses Bulwer’s or Goldsmith’s Plays,
or a good one-act Farce, communicating with
the Editor.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Shortly after two o’clock yesterday after-
noon the wind died away, and at five o’clock
our speed had decreased to 4| knots per hour.
Steam was got up at 7.30 p. m. and stopped
this morning at 7.40 a. m. The number of
revolutions performed by the engine during
this time was 13,617 —by the screw, 40,851.
Our Log.—Lat. S. 51.26 Long. W. 169,24.
Distance run, 232 miles. Total distance run,
2356 miles in nine days. Last casting of reel,
13| knots.
A YARN ABOUT A “ SONG,”
BY ONE WHO HEARD IT.
’Twas eve, the sun sank down to rest,
Purpling with gorgeous tints the West,
And, from each neigh’bring hill and dale
Sang forth the tireless nightingale ;
When, the green forest trees among,
There arose a clearer, sweeter song.
She sang, whose eyes, with lustre bright,
Made envious stars to veil their light;
Whose brow, of snowy purity,
Would make the Parian marble sigh;
Whose lips, of ripe bewitching red,
Would make a cherry hang its head.
What numbers, in poetic flame,
From those sweet lips with rapture came !
Sang she of deeds of daring high ?
Or, of the lover’s bursting sigh ?
Oh! listen to the thrilling lay,
’Tis “ Nix, my dolly, pals, fake away!”
E. M. C.
The above is from our insane contributor.
He is hereby cautioned, that one dose of this
“ sort of stuff” is quite sufficient—and handcuffs
and bread and cold water will reward his next
attempt.
Ed.—V. E.
A concert of vocal and instrumental Music
took place last evening in the Ladies’ Soloon.
Some Scotch ballads were sung, with much
taste and feeling, by Dr. Eadie; and Mr. Ethe-
ridge rendered Mr. Sims Reeve’s favourite song
of Madeline very successfully. The entertain-
ment broke up about ten o’clock.
We have no doubt the concert was pleasant
enough; but we have it on undeniable authority
that some of the ladies were driven from their
own Saloon in consequence of it; and we know
the noise made by some of the gentlemen,
whilst proceeding to it, more resembled “ the
row” that might be expected on retiring from
Evans’s supper rooms, than the decorous beha-
viour looked for on entering a drawing room.
One lady was really frightened.
An alarm of fire was circulated last night in
the Saloon, and occasioned considerable con-
sternation. On enquiry, it transpired that the
smell proceeded from some paper carelessly
thrown under the stove.
We assure our readers that it did not pro-
ceed from a holocaust of unsold numbers of the
“ Vain Effort”—for whatever our enemies may
say to the contrary, we experience great diffi-
culty in completing our own files.
No. 9.—MARCH 17, 1860.
Divine service will be performed (D. V.)
on Sunday next (to-morrow) in the saloon and
intermediate, at half-past ten o’clock in the
morning, and in the second cabin and steerage
at three in the afternoon.
Advertisements should be forwarded not
later than ten o’clock in the morning.
All communications to be forwarded to the
Editor, berth No. 60, Saloon.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort .
Sir, —I think it would be a great improve-
ment if some place w r ere appointed in which
letters could be deposited, say, amidships, as
some of us cannot meet with you at all times.
Yours truly,
A Passenger Forward.
If any letter is given to either of the Stew-
ards, it will be sure to find its way safely; but


the exceedingly-limited number of contribu-
tions already forwarded have not rendered it
worth while to trouble about a Receiving Box.
Ed.—V. E.
There is a land where money goes,
In stubbing thistles set in rows ;
Land of the burnt-out farmer’s woes.
On hill and dale the want of rain
Has damped our sanguine hopes of gain,
And makes the gardeners swear again.
We regret to hear that unpleasantness exists
in the second cabin. Surely every passenger is
aware how much unhappiness it is in the power
of each individual to make or avoid, and we
can assure them that their conduct will, “like
ill-wishes, return to their own bosoms.”
Australia.
There is a land where agents shine,
In puffing shares of a wondrous mine.
Which turns out always “ very fine
Whose cash is scarce, bills overdue,
Shrinogels often visit you,
And whitewash bounds the pleasing view.
Australia.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Mr. Editor, —Last night I went to bed at
half-past ten o’clock, as every reasonable man
ought to do. Just as I was falling into a
profound slumber, a most frightful noise (such
as I imagine would be made by a legion of
monkeys) awoke me. After a few moments’
of dreadful suspense, I ascertained that the
noise proceeded from the direction of the
saloon, and shortly after I was annoyed still
further by the senseless freaks of a few whis-
keyfied, graceless young men. I had some
difficulty in finding my boots this morning.
No doubt the funny, jolly youths made use of
the unfortunate boots as missiles for their own
peculiar style of amusement.
There is a land where hovels peep
From narrow lanes, and many a heap
Of broken bottles make infants weep ;
Where the shrill yelp of half-starved dogs,
And the deep bass of bloated frogs,
Make concert rooms of pools and bogs.
Australia.
There is a land where rising high
Dust and rubbish and pebbles fly,
Warning you always to “ mind your eye
Where tenants bolt without paying the rent,
And debtors pay claims with five per cent.
And this is the land I’ve always meant.
Australia.
I hope your insertion of this letter will
prevent a repetition of such conduct. The
ladies especially on such occasions become
alarmed. lam certain that the young men I
refer to, had their lark thoughtlessly, and are
not at all devoid of good nature.
Yours, Tin Pot.
We are glad to see that our fellow passengers
amuse themselves on deck by playing quoits,
&c. All should take as much exercise as
possible. Nothing is so conducive to good
health as playing quoits and other games cheer-
fully. It is pleasant to witness a game played
in so good humoured a manner. We hope
that no disputes will arise. If anything of the
kind happens, we shall be glad to see other
parties act as peace-makers. Hitherto every
thing has gone smoothly. By bearing and
forbearing with each other all will go “ merry”
as a marriage bell.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
Bold Captain Gray, the people say,
Is a clever fellow, and ’tis true ;
Which if you’re at a loss to see,
I’ll very soon make plain to you.
His maxim’s this, (bear it in mind,
When folks won’t pay you what’s your due)
“ Whene’er you’re fixed to raise the wind,
Put on the screw ! ” M.
Wanted to borrow, a Sea Flute. Ed.—Y. E.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
We have great pleasure in announcing the
completion of the Farce named yesterday. It
is entitled “Lovers and Friends.” We have
been favoured with a sight of it, and predict
its success confidently.
For the last twenty-four hours we have made
splendid way. The wind has been favourable,
and we have ploughed the deep at a rate
exceeding knots per hour. Should these
breezes continue for a few days longer, we may
fairly reckon on arriving at our destination
under sixty days. Water temperature 48.
Our Log.—Lat. 57.26. S. Long. 160.49. W.
Distance run, 324 miles. Total distance run In
ten days, 2,680 miles. Last casting of reel,
13-J- knots. We should remind our readers
that we give the number of nautical miles.
THE SONG OF AUSTRALIA.
There’s a land that’s very hot,
And calls are made on pint or pot
By lucky swells who’ve money got;
Where ginger beer and lemon kale,
And Hobson’s stout and Bass’s ale,
Meet always with a ready sale.
We find it impossible to circulate two copies.
The amount of assistance rendered is far less
than the Editor expected. The passengers
generally are too well-behaved to afford a
Australia.


Journal of this nature much scope. This may
be, and no doubt is, very satisfactory to those
“ in authoritybut to us, whose very existence
depends on “ occurrences,” it is far from plea-
sant. Will no none throw himself overboard ?
Will “no one” lead some other “ one” to the
hymeneal “ halter,” and so give us a paragraph
about the “ lovely and accomplished bride?” &c.
We pause for a reply.
To day is St. Patrick’s Day. We trust all
our Hibernian friends here, at home, or in
Australia, will enjoy themselves.
No. 10.—MARCH 19, 1860.
The Rev. T. Williams peformed Divine ser-
vice yesterday morning, in the saloon; and in
the afternoon, in the second cabin. He selected
as his text Heb. xi. 4. The singing in the
saloon was remarkably good. We would sug-
gest, as our hymn books differ so much, that
the hymns selected for singing should be fixed
not later than Thursday evening. In this case
it would be easy, where necessary, to obtain a
copy.
It is necessary to draw attention to the water
tanks. They are very often empty.
AWFUL CAT-ASTROPHE.
When glass is broken under ordinary cir-
cumstances, the cat gets the benefit of the
doubt. To vary the yarn, sometimes it is the
Baby. But it certainly is the first time we
knew dumb-bells blamed for anything of the
sort. The authority on which we publish the
following is above question. During the roll-
ing of the ship last night, a dumb-bell tumbled
on a lot of brandy bottles in the Doctor’s berth,
and as a natural consequence smashed them;
and, alas! (“the sympathetic tear trembles in
our eye” as we write it) awoke the Doctor. It
may be satisfactory to those interested in “me-
dical comforts,” to know that the bottles were
empty.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Mr. Editor, —During the course of last night
my sufferings were of the most intense descrip-
tion. Although I am not the most nervous
individual in the world, still the rolling and
tossing and confused rumbling noises of falling
crockery, &c.; and probably, as it occurred to
my feverish imagination, the falling bodies of
fellow passengers, outraged my feelings. The
continual dread of falling headlong from my
(top) berth was sufficient to prevent me closing
my weary eyes. I am astonished that there is
not a net-work of some kind fixed in front of
the berths, to prevent the chance of a catastro-
phe such as I have suggested. I know, Mr.
Editor, that it is only necessary for you to call
attention to this matter; the powerful influence
of your widely-circulated paper will, I am sure,
cause the proper authorities to devise some
means for the prevention of awkward tumbles
while the stormy weather lasts. There is one
consolation, however, in our difficulties, our
good ship, I have been informed, Is progressing
very favourably, and will soon round “the
Horn.” Yours, &c. Trembler.
At a late hour last evening, a tumultuous
disturbance took place in the saloon, between a
number of gentlemen, who probably imagined
that the last hour or two of the Sabbath might
be properly employed in a general row. Our
informant, who occupies an after cabin, tells us,
that the parties to the outrage passed his berth
in a noisy procession to the cabin of one of the
saloon passengers, adjoining the intermediate
cabins; and returned in about an hour with
uproarious demonstrations, which furnished
pretty conclusive evidence of the way in which
they had been engaged.
We chronicle the occurrence, actuated by a
powerful sense of duty. We regret exceedingly
to have to write in this manner.
CUTTINGS FROM OUR ELDERS.
A Wonderful Baby. —A curious epistle
was picked up in Utica, a short time since,
about a baby, addressed to “Brother and Sister
Stebbins,” and commences by informing them,
“We have got a live baby at our house; none
of your common babies. She laughs (and
cries) so pretty, you can have no idea how
handsome she is. It is decided, by the best of
judges, (her mother and me) that she is the
handsomest child that ever lived. You can’t
think how I acted the day the stranger came
along. Mrs. Boardman and I were the attend-
ing physicians, and what she didn’t know I
didn’t either. Felt a little considerable scared,
looked for my hat two, three, several times,
and wondered how far it was to Texas. But
after the excitement was over, wasn’t I tickled
some. If it hadn’t been for that white hat of
mine I couldn’t have told which end my head
was on. I went up stairs a dozen times or less
after my hat; went and looked at the baby,
and forgot it every time. Sold a man some
goods on tick, and charged him, * To one baby,
sixpence per pound. But I am calmer now,
think I shall recover. Begin to think that baby
ain’t such a cunning affair after all. It’s quite a
night institution. It takes one half the bed, and
right in the middle, and I have to sleep all
round the edges. Can’t roll over and kick as I
used to, might wake the baby. And if I just
happen to roll on to the little thing at night,
then there’s a fuss, for my wife would make a
great ado if I should kill that baby. She sleeps
with one eye open. The next morning I have
to be careful using the towels, for ‘all is not
gold that glitters.’ But I must keep still and
stand it all, for the dear little baby, mother’s
little precious lamb.”


We regret to find it necessary, (but we shall
not shrink from our duty) to remind those
gentlemen who persist in sitting around the
stove, that there are ladies and children on
board. It would certainly be more comme il
faut for gentlemen to “give place” to the ladies.
It is proposed to get up a sweepstakes for
the day of arrival at Liverpool. Forty members,
at 10s. each. Capt. Gray has consented to hold
the money.
No. 3 of “the Vain Effort” is missing.
OUR SHIP —HER PROGRESS.
It afforded considerable amusement to a select
few, who braved the rain and wind for the pur-
pose, to watch the manoeuvres of a sailor at-
tempting to fish up a rope hanging from the
stunsail boom. We hope and believe he was
successful. If not, next best, he deserved to be.
Our ship rolls considerably, and the injury to
nerves and crockery, bonnets and crinoline, not
to mention baby linen and grog, must have
been considerable. The wind dropped off a
little last night, but came up again before mid-
night, when the sails were squared. We are
now fairly half way to the Horn. The rain has
continued, “ off and on,” all the morning, con-
fining the ladies to the saloon. Their example
has been followed by most of the gentlemen.
Indeed, the visits of the latter to “upper air”
have been, “like angels’ visits, few and far be-
tween,” and, we believe, ended in smoke.
No. 11.—MARCH 20, 1860.
COMMERCIAL NEWS.
The demand for Whiskey has somewhat
fallen off, in consequence of purchases made in
the previous week, which suffice for immediate
requirements. Stocks are however rapidly go-
ing into consumption, and we look for a con-
siderable enquiry for Thin’s brand shortly.
Tyrer’s is not in much favour. Other spirits as
before.
In slops we have heard of no transactions.
A desperate attempt to exchange a cabbage
tree hat for a velvet cap went off in conse-
quence of a “ difficulty” about the size; but we
think it likely it may yet come off, if one of the
parties “ spring” a trifle, say, one pound of
tobacco.
Since writing the above, the deal has
taken place. Settling scores for grog, we
hear, went off pretty easy. Some few com-
plaints were heard about discount on Sydney
sovereigns : but on explanation the holders
were satisfied. We heard of one case in which
Sydney sovereigns were deposited as security
for British under promise of redemption,
when the party can negotiate a loan.
Mining shares—No Transactions. Bendigo
Water Works and Long Gully in demand.
Without responsibility—Ed. V. E.
’TIS PUNISHMENT TO PUN.
Although we find some words to mean
The same by sound and sight;
Some mean according to their mien ;
So mind and write them right.
Thus planes are never planes, that’s plain,
No more than hares are hairs ;
Some mean according to their mien,
And fares are never fairs.
A sea-horse is a sea-horse,
When we see him in the sea ;
But when we see him in a bay,
A bay-horse then is he.
Of course, a race-course is not coarse,
A fine is far from fine ;
And, though a mine a mine must be,
It is not, therefore, mine.
Although a night is not a day,
And differs from it quite,
Yet still it happens, odd enough,
A Day’s sometimes a Knight.
And though in eccentricity,
We see some several C’s ;
We’ve none less in coefficiency,
But not one C in seas.
A. F. F. E.
Why do I gaze enraptured on thy brow ?
Look you so like my sweetest Juliet now ?
I eye you thus, my dear, it is most true,
Now look I like a Romeo to you ?
I. X. L.
Found —Draft on the Bank of New South
Wales. Owner must apply to the Captain for
it.
As it is proposed that a first public per-
formance of the original Farce to which we
drew attention in Saturday’s issue, shall take
place to-morrow evening, we beg to announce,
that a meeting of all those interested in the
fostering of Theatrical Entertainments will be
held in the saloon, at ten o’clock, for the pur-
pose of making arrangements for stage cos-
tume, &c.
As it has been suggested that the above-
named Farce might be appropriately introduced
by a Vocal and Instrumental Concert, we beg
to request that any friends willing to tender
their services on this occasion will communi-
cate with the Editor of this Journal.
LATEST INTELLIGENCE.
Hobson’s Bay. —Sunday, The Mail Steamer
Northam will most likely sail at twelve o’clock
to-morrow. We have therefore every chance of
landing our passengers before she can deliver
her Southampton mails.
Hannah Nicholson, from Calcutta, under date
6th Jan., has arrived. From the “ Lucknow
Herald” we take the following, with reference


to the death of Nana Sahib:—“We certainly
do think the Nepaulese might be called upon to
furnish the best possible proof in such a case.
The Nana was no common criminal, and our
account with him ought to be settled to the
satisfaction of the English nation. It is a sin-
gular fact, that reports of his illness were cir-
culated when our intention to hunt him out of
the Terrai was first hinted. It is equally strange
that at no one period between August and De-
cember, any general breaking up of the muti-
neers was reported, although it is evident such
a casualty as the Nana’s death must have so far
disconcerted their hopes as to have induced a
desire to surrender. * *
“ No European officer has yet visited the spot
where the Nana is reported to have died, and
we have every right to doubt native testimony
from a quarter where our greatest enemies have
long enjoyed repose. It is also reported that
Tantia Topee is still alive. From an extraor-
dinary of the Bombay Telegraph and Courier,
we gather that the Waghurs had been defeated
with heavy loss. Captain Anderson and Lieut.
Lewis on our side mortally wounded, and very
severe casualties.—Number ofkillednot known.”
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our L0g.—53.1. S. Lat. 138.6. W. Long.
Distance run, 292. Total distance run, 3528
miles. Last casting of reel, 11 knots.
No. 12.—MARCH 21, 1860.
This evening, by (their own) particular desire
the following gentlemen will appear in the
undermentioned characters and songs.
The performance will commence with :
Fifteeen minutes vvith ) Mr Mabson ,
Napoleon the hirst ~ j
Scotch Song Mr. Anderson.
Five minutes with Uncle ) £ o p- n
Tom j "
Song Mr. Knowles.
T ~ „ , T , . ) Messrs. Me Intyre
Lochiel s Warning j and Branscombe.
The whole to conclude with an Original Farce
from the pen of W. B. Dailey, Esq., entitled
LOVER’S AND FRIENDS.
Mr. Fast Mr. Etheridge.
Mr. Rapid Mr. Leary.
Mr. Dashwood Mr. Collin.
Mrs. Madeline Flyrtilla j Mr Dall
Dashwood. .. )
Servant, &c.
Performances to commence at Eight P. M.
The band of the Great Britain will form the
orchestra.
YIYAT REGINA.
We are informed that the stage for the even-
ing performances will be erected at the saloon
doors. The Captain has kindly placed his state
room (what will be used as a dressing room,)
at the disposal of the gentlemen engaged in the
entertainment.
Rehearsals of the Farce have taken place, the
last was intended to come off at half-past ten
this morning. All is said to be progressing
very satisfactorily.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Lost, a brown Poncho, supposed to he ex-
changed in mistake from the table behind the
staircase.
Anyperson having “Harper’s Magazines” will
much oblige by returning them to J. R.
Anderson.
If Captain Gray persists in “squeedging” his
friends, as he has been in the habit of doing, he
will be brought up for assault and battery.
J. R. Anderson.
alias Sandy.
During the gale last night the fore-top-mast
stunsail boom was carried away. Immediately
afterward the main-top-gallant stunsail followed
suit. Both sails were saved. The first men-
tioned spar was an exceedingly good one, a part
of it is now lying on deck, so that our readers
may see its thickness themselves.
A PORTRAIT.
Rich golden hair —all molten
Round a head, which
Might have cased the weighty brain
Of her, who,‘in the olden time, far journeyed
Unto Wisdom’s feet, through love of Lore :
A face as soft as the first breath
Of reviving spring, struggling into
Being from the cold of winter’s tomb. w.
We cannot permit this number to appear
without testifying our appreciation of the atten-
tive kindness of Captain Gray, who in spite of
the stormy weather, has assisted the theatrical
gentlemen in every way in his power.
Special Notice. —The Parliamentary De-
bating Club will meet as usual until further
notice.
Place of meeting.—Stove, Saloon
Time do. —Eleven o’clock p. m.
Business to-night, to elect a President.
All Advertisements intended for insertion in
this Journal must be sent in at latest by twelve
o’clock on the date of issue.
During the gale last night the following
accident occurred. As the fourth Mate and
Captain of the fore-top were endeavouring to
secure the fore-top-mast stunsail-boom, the end


dashed them with great violence against and
almost over the ship’s side. We are happy to
state that with the exception of temporary loss
of breath, and a few bruises, both parties escap-
ed from the horrible fate of being washed
overboard.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Since our last, we have had a strong wind,
accompanied by sudden squalls, which last
evening necessitated the taking in a considera-
ble quantity of sail. In fact some came in, or
rather “ wanted to go out, ” on its own account.
Opinions seem to vary considerably as to the
amount of rolling during the night. We rather
guess the amount of sleep obtained by each
party, gives the key to these differences of
opinion. To day the sun crosses the equinox.
The present wind will probably continue, and
if so, we may confidently reckon (barring acci-
dent) on passing Cape Horn before noon, 29th
inst. Lat. 53.2. Long. 129.56. Distance run, 296
miles. Total distance run, 14 days, 3824 miles.
No. 13.—MARCH 22, 1860.
Last evening an entertainment took place
in the saloon of the Great Britain. It con-
sisted of an Original Farce, Recitations, Songs,
&c. The arrangements reflected great credit
on the Stage Manager, Projectors, and all con-
cerned. We must not omit to make mention
of the kind manner in which Captain Gray
rendered all the assistance in his power by
granting the Joiner’s services, flags, &c. on the
occasion.
The Programme was well selected, and for
the most part efficiently performed, and met
with the most decided approbation from the
audience.
The band commenced proceedings with an
Overture, L’ltaliana in Algeri, by Rossini, and
in a few minutes the curtain rose and discovered
Mr. Mabson, who delivered a portion of Phil-
lips’ able and eloquent delineation of the Life
of Napoleon the First. Mr. Mabson appeared
to be.quite at home in the part, and rendered
full justice to it. On leaving the stage, this
gentleman received the well-deserved meed of
approbation he had won from his delighted
audience.
Mr. Collin next w r ent into Uncle Tom’s Cabin
for five minutes. He was ably followed by the
band. The only regret was that his part was
so soon over. Mr. Anderson followed in his
capital Comic Song of “ Old Tam Trews,” and
drew roars of laughter from his audience. His
song and comic action were excellent. Being
encored he gave the song of the “ Nice Young
Man,” which was equally well received. On
retiring for the second time, the performer
received any quantity of applause.
The song by Mr. Knowles, a Parody on “ I’m
Afloat,” was very well executed. “ Lochiel’s
Warning” followed, the parts being sustained
by Messrs. Me Intyre and Branscombe, and was
a creditable performance. Mr. Branscombe
went through the part of Lochiel with perfect
success, but we were unfortunately too far from
the stage to hear Mr. Me Intyre’s voice, those
near enough to do so appeared highly pleased.
Both gentlemen received much approbation.
The Entertainments concluded with the Farce
previously named, the characters being sus-
tained by Messrs. Dailey, Etheridge, Leary,
and Collin. Mr. Dailey played Mrs. Madeline
Flyrtilla Dashw r ood with excellent taste. His
“make up” reflected great credit on all con-
cerned in the wardrobe department.
Mr. Leary’s Rapid was played with great
esprit, and we award him our most unqualified
approbation. With a little practice, this gen-
tleman would shine greatly. Mr. Etheridge
commenced well, and in the first scene played
his part to perfection, but subsequently lost his
cue, and the song of “ Madeline” was lost in
consequence. Mr. Collin would do well to
speak louder. At the fall of the curtain, the
piece was heartily cheered, and the author loudly
called for, when Mrs. Flyrtilla Dashwood (Mr.
Dailey) appeared before the curtain, and received
the applause of the audence in a most graceful
and winning manner. He delivered himself
thus:—
“Ladies and Gentlemen, —I regret to say,
that owing to something incomprehensible, the
Farce has not gone off as it should. At three
o’clock this day, every gentleman was able to
go through his part, now you see they are not.
One gentlemen, Mr. Fast (Mr. Etheridge)
thought fit to introduce a lot of ‘ gag,’ and lost
not only his own cue, but ‘ sold’ every body
else.” —Bad taste (witten in pencil.)
The Editor handed the above to Mr. Ethe-
ridge, who, in his most gentlemanly manner,
“ smudged” it as above.
Wanted, a couple of One Act Farces.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our Log.—Lat. 53.7. S. Long. 122.16. W.
Distance run, 277 miles. Total distance, 4,101
miles. We have had repeated showers of rain
and sleet, which have rendered it almost im-
possible for passengers to remain on the quarter
deck. We have* however, one consolation in
this, that we are informed (by the weather) of
our being somewhat nearer the great turning
point of our voyage, Cape Horn.
Our own correspondent has kindly furnished
us with a report of last night’s proceedings.
This will not, however, prevent our giving-
utterance to our own thoughts on the matter.
The Farce produced last night, we have before
stated, is extremely Avell written, and deserved
success. While we endorse Mr. Dailey’s state


ment, that at three o’clock yesterday each per-
former was up to his part, a love of truth com-
pels us to state that the performance of the
Farce last night was an utter and complete
failure. We do not care at the moment to
indicate the causes which would have led (but
for the determined good, temper of the au-
dience) to the rejection of a piece, the intrinsic
merits of which, we state it advisedly, should
have insured its success.
We must not omit to mention Mr. Grace,
who was of very great assistance, although his
name does not appear in the bills, and we take
the present opportunity of thanking those
ladies who kindly lent dresses, &c.
No. 14.—MARCH 23, 1860.
We desire to intimate to the gentleman who
Wrote “ Bad Taste” in pencil, on yesterday’s
paper, that our columns are open to him, if he
has any inclination to vindicate his opinion.
We consider such a course would be more wor-
thy of any one who thinks fit to set himself up
as a judge in matters of taste.
We are desired to intimate that the Sweep-
stakes on the day of arrival will be drawn this
evening, at eight o’clock. Punctuality is very
desirable. It is, we believe, intended to collect
the money on the spot, hand it over to Captain
Gray, and immediately draw. We would ad-
vise a clear understanding between all parties,
as to the precise time, whether landing mails
or arrival at Liverpool.
Mr. Peterson had rather a narrow escape
yesterday, when a squall carried away the mizen
top-gallant sail, the block fell rather too near
to be pleasant, and was immediately followed
by the rope. Fortunately he escaped without
injury.
We are happy to inform our numerous rea-
ders that there is a great probability of a series
of instructive and amusing lectures being de-
livered shortly. One of our talented fellow-
passengers, we understand, intends to give us
his gastronomical and other experiences in
France and Italy—Napoleon will soon be him-
self again. We hope he will soon give us
another treat, similar to the one we had on
Wednesday evening. John Anderson my Joe
—always Jolly—promises at an early period to
give us a varied entertainment of a musical
character. With these and other amusements
to anticipate, we hope the otherwise dreary time
will pass off pleasantly.
By desire of the ladies we request those mid-
night gentlemen, who gather in a ring under
the lamp in the saloon, to debate in future in a
lower tone.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
I. X. L.—Your MS. is unfortunately mislaid;
we will endeavour to find it in time for to-mor-
row’s issue.
P.—The Great Britain traversed a distance
of 13405 nautical miles on her outward voyage.
Divide that number by 56, (bring nautical into
land miles) and you will find the statement of
275 miles per day correct. Her best day’s work
Avas 345 nautical miles.
John Knox, Jun. —After consulting all the
authorities at hand, we have come to the de-
liberate conclusion, that in the event of two
Sundays coming together, it would rest with
each individual to act as his conscience dictated.
Our esteemed fellow-passenger and co-editor
of this valuable broadsheet, in the exercise of
that politeness for which he is so remarkable,
met with a severe accident this morning. (Geo.
Leary, Esq. late of Sydney, is the gentleman
referred to.) Whilst trying to open a window
his foot slipped, and he struck his head violently
against the deck. We are glad to be able to
report that he has nearly recovered, and will
take his dinner as usual.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Since our last the old ship has rolled con-
siderably, but has again made satisfactory pro-
gress, as our Log (subjoined) will testify. We
have had snow and hail storms —these far from
driving “ all hands below,” have afforded con-
siderable amusement to “ sundry and divers,”
who have pelted each other (contrary to the
creed of the First Napoleon) in a style which
we can only describe as after the American Free
Fight, A flag of truce—held out—received a
terrible hailstorm; and to the eternal shame of
those concerned in the transaction, Yattel on
the Law of Nations remained unheeded. It
affords us considerable satisfaction to have had
such convincing proof of the popularity of the
Editor of this Journal, as that afforded by this
morning’s proceedings; for that unfortunate
individual had no sooner “ taken up his position”
on deck than he got a series of volleys—friend
and foe together peppering away at his devoted
head. At one time he feared the last number
of this Journal had appeared, but as “ what is
good for nothing never comes to any harm,” he
survived.
Our Log.—Lat. 53.27. S. Long. 114.23. W.
Distance, 279 miles. Total distance, 4380.
No. 15.—MARCH 24, 1860.
Divine service will be performed (D. V.) in
the saloon and intermediate, at half-past ten
; o’clock in the morning ; and in the second
i cabin and steerage, at three o’clock in the
afternoon of to-morrow (Sunday). We under-
stand the singing will consist of a portion of
the Psalms.


To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —I shall feel very much obliged to you
for inserting a few lines from one who glories
in belonging to the “gentler sex.” Through
the medium of your liberal and enlightened
paper, I wish to convey to our kind-hearted Cap-
tain the earnest thanks of all the ladies for the
kind things he has said and done for the comfort
of the whole of the passengers. The ladies praise
the Captain for the especial attentions he has
shown to themselves. With that shrewdness,
which is the characteristic quality of his coun-
trymen, he has long ago discovered, Mr. Editor,
that the bestowal of extraordinary attention
upon individuals of your sex -would be only
throwing pearls before swine. But the grati-
tude always felt and shown for kindly attentions
more than compensates for any trouble those of
my sex occasionally cause to those “rough
diamonds,” called men. Wasn’t it a very nice
thing, last evening, for us to sit in the saloon
at our work, and at the same time to listen to
the delightful strains of music from the band ?
The evening passed over most agreeably. The
band played very well. Their music was a real
treat to us in this cheerless weather. I am
sorry, Mr. Editor, that I have not that com-
mand of language possessed by yourself; if I
had, the most glowing panegyric would be
written upon the conduct of our worthy Com-
mander. Yours, &c.
Marina Horn.
Wanted—by the Editor —No. 3 of “the Vain
Effort.” The Editor is anxious to retain all
the copies of “ the Vain Effort.”
discussions, and inconvenience to our fellow-
passengers. The speaker usually takes the
chair at eleven o’clock, and the deliberations of
the body extend to the small hours of the
morning. Of the matters discussed, we might
say a word or two, but perhaps this is not our
business. We object to the place where, and
the time at which, the discussions take place.
We may be pardoned for suggesting a reform
in both particulars, by substituting the quarter
deck, and six o’clock, a. m., in lieu of present
arrangements.
MC INTYRE V. ANDERSON.
This important case will come off this even-
ing, at eight o’clock. W. B. Dailey, Esq. is
judge. ‘We understand the parties to the cause
will act for themselves, assisted by their attor-
nies. Full arrangements heve been made for
reporting this important matter. We refrain
from any comment.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Another hail-storm this morning afforded
opportunity of paying off “ scores ” run up
yesterday. Our Log is, 54.38. S. Lat. 107.17.
W. Long. Distance run, 260 miles. Total
distance run, 4,640 miles. Last casting of reel,
knots. We have now (17 days out) accom-
plished a full third of our distance.
No. 16.— MARCH 26, 1860.
ORIGINAL POETRY,
BY I. X. L.
Lot me round thy neck entwine,
Softly on thy breast recline,
Sip thy lip’s ambrosial wine,
Call thee, fondly, fondly mine.
Angel sweet! and child divine !
Joy within my heart would shine,
Could I seal my love with thine;
Say, oh ! say, wilt thou decline,
Heart so fond, so full as mine ?
Let those eyes that shine so bright,
Ever on me shed their light,
I behold them with delight.
Tell me, dear, (and do not fright,)
Heart that throbs for thee all night,
Wilt thou stretch thy hand outright,
Clasp with mine and love unite ?
Blessings then would on us light,
Bliss of heaven our souls excite.
Our attention has been directed to the nightly
sittings of a small parliament, which assembles
in the vicinity of the saloon stove. We are
not in any way disposed to question legitimate
authority, but we must remark that this parlia-
ment is a self-constituted body, and represents
nothing but late hours, noisy and profitless
Divine service was performed yesterday
morning in the saloon. Dr. Morrice read the
prayers prescribed by the Church of England.
The Rev. T. Williams reading as lessons 2nd
chapter of Ecclesiastes, and the first 22 verses
of St. John’s Gospel. In the course of the
morning the 100th, and portions of the 97th
and 99th Psalms were sung creditably. The
rev. gentleman then addressed his numerous
audience from the first two clauses of the 97th
Psalm, teaching the Sovereignty of God, and
the reasons why His people should rejoice
therein.
While on this subject, we may remark that
a very general feeling exists, that the morning
service should close not later than a quarter
before twelve o’clock. Such an arrangement
would materially promote the comfort of the
ship’s company. It would probably be as easy
to commence the service at a quarter past ten,
or some of our “ numerous” correspondents
may be able to suggest other methods by which
the difficulty may be obviated.
A meeting (of all interested in the Theatrical
Entertainments at present in preparation) is
called at half-ten o’clock to-morrow morning.


SUPREME COURT OF “GREAT BRITAIN,”
Before their Honours Chief Justice Dailey,
and Mr. Justice Etheridge.
MC INTYKE V. ANDERSON,
James Russel Anderson was indicted for
that he did on a certain day, to wit, the 23rd
March, falsely pretend that a certain purse or
portmonnaie contained a number of sovereigns
of lawful British money, whereas in truth and
in fact the contents of the said purse consisted
of spurious imitations of sovereigns and half
sovereigns. Damages moved for equivalent to
two bottles of whiskey.
The Plaintiff, in his address to the Court,
stated that the Defendant had sold to him the
contents of the purse, which were of no real
intrinsic value, for the large sum of £7 10s.
He commented in very severe terms, in the
course of his eloquent address, upon the fright-
ful propensity of Anderson for strong drinks,
and in particular for Hennessy’s brandy, a large
stock of which was kept in his cabin. We
can give but a faint idea of the looks of disgust
cast upon the Defendant by the temperate por-
tion of the spectators. But when the Plaintiff
mentioned that the Defendant was in the habit
of decoying unwary people into his subter-
ranean berth, by holding out to them, as a
bait, a wee drop of Hennessy—looks of horror
were darted at the unfortunate Anderson.
The Plaintiff then most insidiously remarked,
that the Defendant had left behind him in
Melbourne a very interesting lot of bairns,
and in order to keep himself on good terms
with the nurses, he was always playing with
children. Messrs. Coffin and Me Kerrow were
called to prove the allegations that had been
made. The Defendant then in a most humorous
speech tried to rebut the statements of the
Plaintiff. He designated them as vile slanders
against an innocent young man who was looking
out for a wife. He frankly acknowledged that
he had treated his friends to Hennessy’s, to
which an ungrateful affusion had been made.
Anderson then jocosely satirised the Plaintiff,
calling him a Canny Scotchman, which is
another term for duplicity. He knew the
Plaintiff was too canny to be easily taken in.
He would now leave the case in tlie hands of
the Jury, knowing that the love of Hennessy
stiff prevailed over minor considerations. Wit-
nesses for defence, Cameron and Knowles.
Chief Justice Dailey, in along speech summoned
up the evidence. He very facetiously referred
to the speeches and to the evidence, stating that
no evidence had been adduced to prove that
the contents of the portmonnaie were really
spurious. He directed the Jury (too strongly,
as we think) to find a verdict for the Defendant.
We regret that our space will not allow a fuff
report of this very interesting case. The Jury
gave their verdict in favour of the Defendant.
The Court then adjourned. Justice was then
done to the whiskey.
The character of a Judge is one that must
not be lightly called in question. With an
experience of human nature probably excelled
by few before him, it his duty to
“ Lift the golden balance, that show
The fates of men, and mortal things below.”
It is not often, in civil cases, that a Judge
takes upon himself the duty of Counsel, nor do
we recollect, in any instance, that this has
been the case, when prior to the elevation of
that Judge to the Bench he enjoyed the pro-
fessional confidence of the Defendant.
Our law report will show that full justice
was done to the whiskey. We wish it was in
our power to add that substantial justice (see
Pohlman every day) had been done these
parties.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENT.
G. Me K. to-morrow.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
The wind, on Saturday afternoon, gradually
died away. Squalls were, however, still fre-
quent, and advantage was taken of the sleet and
hail that accompanied them to make snow balls,
and therewith to pay off old scores, and run
up new ones. We are happy to be able to say
that although some very hard blows were given
and taken, all went off in the saloon depart-
ment with thorough good temper. We would
recommend our saloon friends to confine their
fun to themselves in future : it will be most
agreeable for all parties. Steam was got up
last evening, and the screw again taken off,
when a strong breeze sprung up. This con-
tinued from about half-past two this morning
to date of publication. Last heaving of log,
13| knots. During the night we carried away
a stunsail, and this morning, at half-past five,
the fore-top gallant sail went to pieces.
LAT. S. LONG. W. DISTANCE RUN,
March 25. 55.15. 102.7. 182 miles.
„ 26. 56. 2. 94.46. 255 „
Our total distance run then has been, in 19
days, 5,077 miles, and our distance from Cape
Horn, about 800 miles.
We are proud to announce to our readers,
that we are promised an Original Tale from
the pen of a talented friend. It is to com-
mence to-morrow.
No. 17.—MARCH 27, 1860.
Found— A Cigar Case —Apply to the Editor.
The Parliamentary Debating Club intend in
future to meet at eight o’clock instead of eleven.
It is intended to-night to elect officers, and to
settle nights of meeting, subjects for discus-
sion, &c.


Lost —a Penknife, the property of A. Phil
lippe, Esq.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
The wind is fair—the yards are square ;
See how the old ship dashes on ;
Twelve knots an hour, and we’ve the power
Of steaming ten when wind there’s none.
Thus from Australia’s prospr’ous shore
To our old homes we speed along;
Happy though we should roam no more,
To spend our days those scenes among.
We leave behind a fertile land,
Raised by Britannia’s sons to fame ;
By their hard toil and courage grand
In every climate still the same.
Beneath their stroke the forest yields ;
They force the gold from its rocky bed ;
Where dark woods frowned are smiling fields,
O’er barren rocks their towns are spread.
O’er the haunts of the plovef and wild curlew,
Where sheep lately grazed ’mong pastures green,
Down gullies late home of the kangaroo,
Now Englishmen’s tents in thousands are seen.
There now is a mart for every trade,
There steam-mills are crushing the golden ore ;
Eor the toiling diggers, with pick and spade,
Have peopled the waste so void before.
But in hunting for gold, that busy throng,
Stick by the law, and the good old rules ;
The might of the right —not the right of the strong
Is taught in their churches, their courts, and their
schools;
The world may bless the English flag,
And hail it on the sea ;
Wherever it shows, there justice goes,
And truth and liberty.
And when of gold those diggers bold,
Have gotten sufficient store, old,]
They remember their homes and their friends of
And must visit their friends once more.
For old England’s sons, though they push their
way,
O’er sea—ice—fields—and desert sand,
For religion, or science, or trade that will pay,
Never forget their native land.
They plant kingdoms new, on the old-home plan;
They’re Britons wherever they roam ;
They fill their pockets when they honestly can,
Then back to the old folks at home.
So let us sing—Long live the Queen,
Prince Albert, long live he;
And a prosp’rous trip to this good old ship
Whenever she goes to sea. G. ’
G. Me K
Lost—A copy of “ Thackeray’s Esmond,” the
property of R. W. Grace, Esq. The finder of
the book is requested to give it to the owner,
or to the Editor of this paper.
LOVE AT SEA.
BY w.
From time immemorial, ( we presume, almost
simultaneously with the discovery of Navigation
itself,) life on board ship has been singularly
characterised by love-making. People afloat
seem to have two great objects in view—first,
escaping from sea sickness; and second, falling
into love. Men who have braved the graces
in shady groves, and who would have presented
the hide of a rhinoceros to Cupid, though he had
borrowed the bow and arrows of the Swiss
patriot, expose themselves so, that the hearts
which landsmen could only reach with lances,
may, as Lear says, “be pierced with pigmy
straws.” At sea, widows even are safe from
the warnings of Mr. Weller. Sen. and may not
only be married, but loved. Rely upon it, the
Greeks knew something of this, when they wor-
shipped the Venus emerging from sea-foam.
We cannot explain why men of mature age
should only become lovers, when, according to
their sailor friends, they become lubbers. A
state of sea-sickness is far from an interesting
condition. A man can hardly be sure of keep-
ing the love of his mistress, when he is scarcely
assured of the certainty of keeping his break-
fast on his stomach; and it is difficult to make
a proposal on the quarter deck, with a rolling
sea; and a gentleman under the apprehension
that when the blissful “yes” is muttered, he
may have lost his sea-legs, and be either pros-
trated on the deck, or projected from the port
to the starboard side, with that absence of
ceremony which contributes very much to the
ludicrous. And, still, in spite of all discourage-
ments, every body knows that of all places in
the world for love making, and marriage pre-
liminaries, the saloon of any vessel on any
voyage, (more particularly a long one,) is the
sacred place.
The world in which people “ live, move, and
have their being,” is so small, that one would
think even on a favourable view of human na-
ture that there was scarcely room for heart ex-
pansion. After all, there must be a great
amount of good in the world, when passenger
ships become transformed into floating, though
very innocent Agapemones, and are as full of
love as a Swiss cottage or a gondola. The
poor boy fresh from school, and the caresses
of mamma, and sent across the seas to
countries as young and as innocent, aye, and,
as hopeful as himself, to push his fortunes
there, and grow into his own ripe rich man-
hood with theirs, meets the sweet, gentle girl
who goes out to a prosperous brother, and the
two, eager-hoping boy and the trusting lovely
girl, meet and look and love; feeling for the
first time, upon the bright sea (grand image of
love in its vastness and its limitlessness) the
change in mind and soul of the mastering pas-
sion of love. w-
(To be continued.)


OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Since noon yesterday, the sea has been very
rough, as completely proved by the heavy roll-
ing of the vessel. During the night we had
some heavy squalls, but as yet all her spars
look heavenward. May they so continue.
Our Log.—Lat. 56.20. S. Long. 86.22, W.
Distance run, 292 miles. Total distance run,
20 days. 5,369 miles.
No. 18.—MARCH 29, 1860.
LOVE AT SEA.
( Continued.)
Shakspere even borrows a technical sea
phrase and puts it into the mouth of Romeo,
in expressing the aspiration of his passion,
“Up to the high top gallant of my joy; ” by
which, perhaps, the immortal poet intended to
signify the uncertainty of the result of an
We desire to direct the attention of our
readers to an Advertisement emanating from a
Society rejoicing in the appellation of the
Parliamentary Debating Society. Of the object
of the gentlemen banded together under this
title, we confess ignorance; but to speak mildly,
we question the judgment and condemn the
policy which proposes, in so mixed a community
as ours, to commence its existence by discuss-
ing a subject, which from its very nature,
compels recourse to religious discussion.
Already the dreariest portion of our voyage is
past, and we are rapidly approaching weather
when our amusements must be on deck. What
do these gentlemen expect ? Do they fancy
the ladies, when the band sends forth its cheer-
ing strains, and invites them to trip it merrily
on deck, will remain below to be suffocated,
not alone by heat, but by the dry and used-up
arguments, on a most uninteresting theme on
which nothing new remains to be said? If they
do, they are mistaken. We trust reflection
will enable them to let the project fall through.
amour, inasmuch as the probability is, that if
every lover had to reach the top-gallant altitude
in order to secure his bride, the sailors would
enjoy an undesirable and injurious monopoly
of the ladies, and would not only find, as in the
language of a popular ballad they are said to,
wives in every port, but in every sea also.
Now why are people so prone to matrimony
under circumstances which deprive the whole
business of half its romance, where a de-
jeuner ala fourchette may find its w r ay rather
into the bosom than the mouths of the guests,
by the operation of what is called a cross sea ?
Why should a lady transform herself into a
bride, when she has as much chance of procur-
ing orange blossoms, as she has of being lulled
into slumber, by the amorous cooing of young
doves ? By the way we presume the ocean bird
of love is the sea-gull, appropriately named in
more senses than one. We ask why should
these things be? and are unable to give any
satisfactory answer to our own question. But
let us go on with our story. It was a clear cold
frosty day on the high seas, and in the latitude
of Antipodes Island, and the good ship Empire
was playfully throwing the silvery spray around
her bows, and furnishing numerous and economi-
cal shower baths to various aquatic fowl whose
passion for bathing in all forms seems to be
exhaustless. Freighted with Australian gold,
and infinitely more precious with those who
had won and were about to wear it, the gal-
lant ship sped on, leaving a glorious wake of
bubbling foam mingling with the purple sea.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our Log.—Lat. 56.47. S. Long. 70.24. W.
Distance run 250 miles.
The Parliamentary Debating Club will meet
Tuesday evening next. Question for discussion
—ls it wise to continue State Aid to Religion ?
No. 19.—MARCH 30, 1860.
LOVE AT SEA.
( Continued.)
The deck presented the appearance of any
one of the leading thoroughfares of an Austra-
lian capital, in all respects save one—that is,
the absence of horses, carts, and carriages. As
far as men and women were concerned, the
types of both sexes, in Bourke and Collins
Street, Melbourne, might be readily discovered,
fore and aft. The elegant young man pensively
standing near the wheel; the lady-like girl,
suggesting perpetual motion, by the rapidity
of her crotchet work; the boisterous middle-
aged gentleman, of plethoric habit, who moves
briskly about, and suddenly halts near the
capstan, with a commercial air, as if he thought
of striking a bargain with it on the spot. All
these people may be seen every day in any one
of our Australian cities. But it is time to fix
our attention on a group seated abaft the wheel,
consisting of two ladies and a gentleman. The
younger of the ladies was one “whom but to
see was to admire;” the gentleman was of that
general appearance which requires no descrip-
tion, whilst the elder lady will receive full
attention in our next.
(To be continued.)
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —I do think that in your leader of
yesterday, you unnecessarily and unwisely con-
demn what might become a useful society. It
does not follow because you are opposed to the
Parliamentary Debating Society, that it cannot
flourish. Rather, sir, than crush it, lend a
helping hand to those who desire to improve


their minds. And, sir, with reference to your
closing remarks, when we see the graceful figure
of the Editor tripping it gaily on the light
fantastic toe, the writer will, as willingly as
others, discard Locke and Bentham, and join
those hastening to the festive dance.
Yours respectfully,
One of the Club.
No. 20.—MARCH 30, 1860.
For the information of our readers we give
them the following description of the islands
sighted yesterday afternoon. The account is
copied from a “Sailing Directory,” kindly lent
to the Editor by Captain Gray. Diego Ramirez,
discovered in 1619, These are a cluster of
great barren rocks, 18 leagues south-westward
of Cape Horn, which extends north-west and
south-east four or five miles. The channel
between is entirely clear. The position of the
centre 56.24. Lat.—68.37. Long.
In consequence of a letter that appeared in
“the Vain Effort” yesterday, several gentlemen,
we are informed, met for the purpose of adopt-
ing the suggestion made by our correspondent.
Mr. Anderson, in compliance with the expressed
wish of several persons, has consented to act as
treasurer for the fund to be raised for theatrical
amusements, &c. We have been requested to
state that Mr. J. R. Anderson is now ready to
receive subscriptions.
Joseph Rodgeurs, of Royal Charter fame,
was slightly injured on Wednesday afternoon
last, by the fall of a block. He is, however,
again at work.
It is intended to have a first rehearsal of the
4th act of the “Merchant of Venice,” at half-
past ten o’clock to-morrow morning. It will
be a very great accommodation to the parties
engaged in it, if the ladies will give up their
saloon for about one hour. We understand
the performers are quite ready. It is also
intended to rehearse the farce, “Lovers and
Friends,” at the same time.
We understand the first number of the new
journal, “The Success,” is to appear to-morrow.
Nos. 3, 10, 11, 18, and 19, of “the Vain
Effort” are missing.
Lost, a Railway Rug.—Apply berth No. 20.
Immediately after dinner yesterday, a rush,
to see land, took place. At the same time a
sail was in sight, but unfortunately too far off
to speak.
We are requested to desire those gentlemen
who are inclined to sing at the entertainment,
to be held to-morrow evening, to meet in the
saloon at half-past ten to-morrow morning, for
the purpose of arranging programme, &c. &c.
The letter inserted yesterday, signed “ One
of the Club,” goes (in our humble opinion) to
prove all that the leader in this paper asserted,
with reference to the Parliamentary Debating
Society. In spite of the anxiety of “ One of the
Club” “to improve his mind,” he makes the
candid avowal, that at the first note of music—•
the first sight of a muslin dress fluttering in the
wind, Locke and Bentham shall be discarded,
the improvement of his mind forgotten, and he
will give himself up to dancing. Oh 1 tempora,
oh! mores.
LOVE AT SEA.
( Continued.)
Her form was of that species of beauty
usually characterised in a mathematical way,
and designated angular. A senior wrangler
could, by making her go through a series of
poses plastiques, get most of the propositions
of the first book of Euclid out of her carriage
and gestures ; and if ladies were admitted into
our great halls of learning, Miss Tabitha Jones
would have furnished flesh and blood figures
in substitution for chalk ones on a black board.
Now, as the developments of consumption have
been recently studied in our theatres, instead of
our hospitals, by the representation of that
fascinating piece of French morality, “ Camille,”
we cannot see any reasonable objection to
infusing a little fresh blood into mathematical
studies in a similar way. With what a sweet
devotion undergraduates would apply them-
selves to the solution of problems, when in
order to understand them, some Tabitha pro-
fessor would be under the necessity of acting
them. Miss/Tabitha was a lady of an eminently
practical cast of mind. If she had been taken
into the Florentine Gallery, or the Sistine
Chapel, she would assuredly have provided
herself with knitting-work. Indeed, we are
not quite certain (so strong was her apprecia-
tion of the British axiom that “time is money”)
that in the event of her being led to the hyme-
neal altar, she would not have whiled away the
period consumed by the matrimonial service
in hemming pocket-handkerchiefs. But Miss
Tabitha never had been exposed to temptation
in this form. No one up to this time sought
her as a bride; the probabilities being now
decidedly against such a consummation, Ta-
bitha was a lady who especially prided herself
in her deportment. With her the age of
manners in young ladies had passed, and all
traces of its graceful reign had been removed
by the new revolution under the dictatorship
of crinoline.
( To he continued.)
THE BEGINNING OF MAY, OR AUTUMN
IN AUSTRALIA.
WRITTEN IN 1859, BY X. X. L.
They say this is Autumn—l know it is May,
For showers have fall’n, but leaves don’t decay;


All nature looks fresh, and is clothed in green,
Sure spring-time has reached us, so bright and
serene.
The winds are not hush’d, but blow softly as free,
And dance ’mid the leaves that now hang on the
tree;
No rustling is heard as they sweep o’er the ground,
But trees they are full of a musical sound.
The sun rolls in splendour o’er heaven’s concave,
And paints as he travels the sky and the wave ;
And see with what grandeur he goes for the night,
Arrayed in his robes which are gorgeous and bright.
And then in the morn his effulgence behold,
As up from his bed, in cloud-trappings of gold,
He mounts the blue sky to exult in his beams,
Gild brightly the mountains, and woodlands, and
streams.
O ! summer is coming all lovely and gay,
They say this is Autumn—l know it is May.
OUE SHIP—HEE PEOGEESS.
The outer jib was blown to pieces this morning.
In spite of a very unfavourable wind, we have
made good progress, as our Log will testify.
We are going rather more southerly than we
could desire, but can hardly expect to have it
all our own way, Lat. (D. E.) 57.21. Long.
61.00. Distance run, 218 miles. Total distance
run, (22 days) 6,112 miles.
No. 21.—MAECH 31, 1860.
Divine service will (d. v.) commence to-
morrow morning, in the saloon, at a quarter past
ten o’clock. The evening and prayer
after tea.
Lost—a Glove. Apply to J. E. Anderson.
The fires were lit at 8.0 p. m. 26th inst. and
the engines stopped at 2.30 a. m. 27th inst. In
this time the engine made 5523 revolutions, and
the screw consequently 16,569.
It is intended to have an evening’s amusement
in the saloon to-night, to commence at eight
o’clock. We append the programme.
The Seven Ages
The Forty Thieves
A Chapter on Logic
Selections from English \
Authors,contrasted with I
a piece from Sakoontala, 1
an Indian Drama )
In the days when we went )
Gipsying ]
Mr. Dailey.
Mr. Murray.
Mr. Dodgson.
Mr. Mabson.
Dr. Eadie.
Part 2.
Simon the Cellarer Dr. Collin.
Annie, my own Love Mr. Browning.
Queen Mab Mr. Dailey.
Hurrah for the Highlands.. Mr. Knowles.
Home, Sweet Home Mr. Murray.
God save the Queen.
LOVE AT SEA.
( Continued.)
And what a wonderful revolution this same
crinoline has effected, transforming the world
into one vast masquerade, where nobody can
recognise the figure of his partner. Talleyrand
said that language was intended for the con-
cealment of thought; and we presume crinoline
was intended for the concealment of forms; at
all events, since its introduction marriage has
become a greater speculation than ever, inas-
much as a man can only, under present circum-
stances, make a reasonable guess as to the
proportions of his future wife. Miss Tabitha
had resolutely opposed herself to all such inno-
vations, and almost regarded the wearers of
crinoline as ladies endeavouring to obtain hus-
bands under false pretences. Her own simple
silk dress hung from her attenuated form, like
a banner from a flag pole in a dead calm. It is
almost needless to say, that her bonnet was on
her head, and not, according to the modern
fashion, suspended hood-like half way down her
back. It may be urged that the analysis of Miss
Tabitha’s costume has been unnecessarily mi-
nute; but apart from the interest any peculiarly
dressed lady invariably excites, we may say,
that this lady will occupy perhaps the most
prominent place in our story, though we must
by no means be supposed to commit ourselves
to the labour of elevating Tabitha into the
heroine of a love tale ; in fact, we have not yet
determined upon having a heroine at all. A
great humourist has written a novel without a
hero.
(To be continued.)
THE FALKLAND ISLANDS.
As we are now in the neighbourhood of the
group of the Falkland Islands, we submit the
following items of information respecting them.
They own the sway of Queen Victoria. Com-
modore Byron took jmssession of them January
23, 1765, and Capt. Macbride was sent out in
H. M. S. Jason, to begin their colonization in
January, 1766. The small British colony which
he established at Port Egremont was obliged to
surrender to a Spanish armament, by which it
was attacked in 1770. It was restored by the
Spanish government subsequently, but was
abandoned by its few inhabitants in 1774, the
signals of possession being however left flying.
The islands remained uninhabited until Novem-
ber, 1820, when the government of Buenos
Ayres thought fit to send their Commodore,
Jewett, who took formal possession in their
name. _ On what ground they rested their claim
it is difficult to see, for the islands were dis-
covered by John Davis, an Englishman, in 1592,
and the British crown had never abandoned
its claim which the Spanish government had
confirmed.


A very enterprising gentleman, Louis Yernet,
a German, obtained from Buenos Ayres a grant
of the sole right to the soil and fisheries of the
Islands, and established himself there in 1826.
The number of persons belonging to his esta-
blishment, and induced to settle on his land,
was about 100. But Mr. Vernet’s people com-
mitted the mistake of ill-using some North
American sealers, for which offence the United
States government demanded redress from
Buenos Ayres, at which juncture Great Britain
stepped in and enforced her indisputable claim,
took possession, and appointed a governor, Lieut.
Henry Smith, R. N. in 1834. In October, 1841,
Lieut. R. C. Moody succeeded to the governor-
ship, and at the date of our information was
busily engaged in developing the resources of
the colony. The group consists of two principal
Islands, East and West Falkland, with a consi-
derable number of smaller ones around them.
East Falkland is 95 miles long and 53 broad;
West Falkland 80 miles long and 40 broad;
and the situation of the group is between 510
and 53° South Latitude, and 57° and 62° West
Longitude.
The above information is extracted from the
Sailing Directory, 1845, lent by Capt. Gray. It
is probable that we shall pass these Islands in
the course of to-morrow. We understand the
general feeling of the betting community is that
the line will be crossed by noon, 15th April.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
The wind gradually died away after noon
yesterday, and at about nine o’clock, steam
being up, the screw was started, and our speed
thereby materially increased. The vessel sped
along throughout the night, literally “ pursuing
the even tenor of her way,” to the great delight
of those who were tired of her rolling. The
breeze getting stronger, steam is now turned
off, with every prospect of a better day’s work
than that of which we now give particulars.
At noon this day our Latitude was 56.7. S.
Long. 58.9. W. Distance 208 miles. Total
distance 6320 miles in 24 days. Should we
continue at this rate, we shall hail the shores of
Erin, “ the gem of the sea,” on the fifty-fourth
day out.
No. 22.— APRIL 2, 1860.
The usual services took place yesterday.
They were conducted by the Rev. T. Williams
and Mr. Thompson.
The Concert on Saturday evening went off'
in a most satisfactory manner, except one song,
which was certainly more fitted for a taproom
than the saloon of the Great Britain .
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our Log.—Lat. 51.28. S. Long. 45.16. W.
Distance run, 252 miles.
It is not our intention to ignore the fact,
that some dissatisfaction has been expressed
about a song at the last Concert. We do not
defend it, but the idea of relinquishing Con-
certs on that account Is absurd. The party
who sung was a saloon passenger, and the
Committee considered they could trust him to
select a song himself. It appears they were
wrong. Had they known his ideas, he never
should have sung. We refer with confidence
to the past, as affording proofs of our care in
these matters, and intimate for the benefit of
the dissatisfied, that the Concerts will be pro-
ceeded with as usual, whether they like it or
not.
No. 23.— APRIL 3, 1860,
LOVE AT SEA.
( Continued.)
Our readers have now before them the cha-
racters of the little tale which we had contem-
platedfinishing. It has, however, been suggested
that in order to relieve the minds of the sup-
porters of the “ Vain Effort” of any unpleasant
apprehensions as to the fate of the parties
concerned, it will be our better course to aban-
don our ideal friends to whatever fate the
reader may determine on. Whether Mr. Firm
will or ought to marry the elder or the younger
lady, whether any or all of them will be married
or loved, will form an amusing and no doubt
interesting subject of speculation.
The author cannot take his leave of his
friends without acknowledging the kind enco-
miums which have been bestowed upon his
humble effort. The highest proof of its popula-
rity is to be found in the circumstance that all
the numbers of this Journal in which it has
appeared have been stolen, so that whatever
difficulties might stand in the way of its pub-
lication, in the ordinary way it has at all events
obtained a thorough circulation. w.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —I wish to say a word with reference to
an article which appeared in your issue of
yesterday. If I had thought that my song
would have given offence, I should most cer-
tainly not have volunteered my services. I
may be pardoned, however, for differing with
you in opinion as to its suitableness to the
j saloon, when I have still ringing in my ears the
uproarious applause with which it was received.
Yours, &c. John W.
Partly in consequence of a rehearsal, but
mainly because a gentleman who has previously
favoured us with contributions thought proper
to forget himself so far as to tear up a portion
of the first sheet commenced, our paper this
day appears only half size.


We direct attention to the crowded state of
that part of the quarter deck allotted to saloon
passengers. The inconvenience this morning
was so great as to hinder some ladies from
walking at all. We presume the station se-
lected for the band was partly the cause of this.
A rehearsal of the Merchant of Venice is
to take place to-morrow, at one o’clock. We
trust the gentlemen will follow the good ex-
ample set them by the ladies, and come with
their lessons well learnt.
Wanted to borrow, a pair of Scales —small.
Apply to the Editor.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
The Great Britain most unquestionably can
roll. It must be satisfactory to each one of us
to know that this vessel, so “ splendid” in most
respects, is a match for anything afloat in this
particular. During the night we sprung the
heel of the main-top-gallant mast. The screw
got to work about three o’clock, and this
morning we were steaming with try-sails set.
The wind has since headed us, and all the
canvas was taken in. At noon we were steam-
ing 7| knots. Lat. 48,11. S. Long, 42.17. W.
Distance run, 225 miles. Total distance run,
7,092 miles.
No. 24.— APRIL 4, 1860.
NEW ZELAND.
CONTRIBUTED BY AN OLD COLONIST.
New Zealand was first colonized about twenty
years ago. For many years it was annexed to
New South Wales, It now has a very liberal
constitution. The governments of the various
provinces are responsible. The new constitution
was granted in 1853. The country is divided
into eight provinces, each of which has a separate
local government. The north island contains
four provinces—. Auckland (which is the seat of
the general government), Wellington, New
Plymouth, and Napier. The south island is
also divided into four, viz. Nelson, Canterbury,
Otago, and Marlborough. Stewart’s Island is
in the Otago province, and is of little use ex-
cepting to whalers. A great part of the northern
island is yet in the hands of the aborigines. The
land in the north is good, but more adapted
to agriculture than pasture. The south island
is more mountainous than the north, and is for
the most part covered with good natural pasture.
Nearly all the wool exported from New Zealand
is grown in the south island. New Zealand
has a population of about 60,000 Europeans
—Auckland, Wellington, New Plymouth, and
Napier contain about one half the population;
Auckland having 16,000, Wellington 9000,
New Plymouth 2000, and Napier 3000. The
remainder of the inhabitants are in the south
island, Nelson having 9000, Canterbury 10,000,
Otago 9000, and Marlborough 2000. In every
province of New Zealand land may be obtained
at 10s, per acre, excepting in Canterbury,
where it is at £2 per acre. But although the
price is almost universal, the manner of ob-
taining land is different in each province, owing
to each province having the power of making
laws for the disposal of their own lands. In
Otago, for instance, if you buy land at 10s.
you are bound to expend £2 per acre in mak-
ing improvements on it. In Wellington and
Napier you can buy land at the same price,
without any reservation. In Nelson, Auckland,
and New Plymouth the upset price of land is
10s. but it can only be bought at auction.
There has been a large immigration to Auck-
land the last two years, in consequence of
a grant of forty acres being given to every adult
on arrival. This law exists only in Auckland.
The native population are nearly all in the north
island, to the number of about 50,000; only
about 4000 are in south island. They have
large farms under their own management, and
in anything they undertake prove themselves
quite equal to an English settler. They are
good reapers, shepherds, and general servants.
In one way, however, they retard the progress
of the north island by their tenacity in keeping
the land. It is almost impossible now to pur-
chase land from them, which cripples the ope-
rations of the various governments in the North
very much. In the south island the titles of
the natives are totally extinguished.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —In your issue of yesterday you remarked
that a certain gentleman did so far forget him-
self as to tear a portion of your paper, but, Mr.
Fox, you omitted to mention that his forgetful-
ness was merely the effect of your own—you
were the primary cause. (1.) I hope you will be
more careful in the future, for that rash humour
which my mother gave me makes me forgetful,
(2.) I must mention, for the information of the
public, that when I tore the “ passion to tatters, to
very rags,” you looked aghast, and your hair
stood on end “ like quills upon the fretful por-
lf your readers were disappointed
because they received only half rations yester-
day, I am very sorry, very much ashamed, and
mean next winter to be quite reclaimed. You
can say ditto to this, it is really pleasant to have
a companion in one’s misfortunes. Sadi, a
Persian poet, (4.) says,
“There’s not a day but thou this truth may’st learn
—Two sticks together will more cheerful burn.”
For this reason I would recommend every ba-
chelor to take unto himself a wife,(s.) so that he
may have some one to share with him any and
every distressful stroke. By the bye the Chi-
nese have a proverb, that “ a man who runs a
single life is like a carriage that goes without
w'heels.” I hope, sir, you will not think, be-
cause of this digression, that I wish to make an


attack upon any female in the community(6.)—
“ I’d scorn the idea.” I shall never resort to the
press for such a purpose. My modus operand!
will be to besiege the waist, and threaten the
lips with storming—keep my word, and carry
her.
“ Oh woman’s eye and woman’s tongue
Some mischief in this world have done.” (7.)
I think I have not been severe with you, Mr,
Editor. It would only be pot calling kettle
grimy face for me to say anything harsh, how-
ever for the little I have written I hope you will
forgive me, and I trust you will forgive your-
self, if not I must.
I remain, sir, yours in affection,
I. X. L.
If we are to view I. X. L.’s communication in
the light of an apology, w r e should accept and
have done with it. But as it is evidently in-
tended to cast the blame on ourselves, it is
necessary that we should reply to this document
—which, as briefly as possible, we do, (1.)
I. X. L.’s state of forgetfulness seems to con-
tinue. The “ primary cause” was poetry. We
never write any. (2.) I. X. L. confesses to an
inheritance of “ rash humour.” (3.) We fear
if I. X. L. saw anything like “ quills,” they must
have been in connection with “Cobbler’s”, sherry
or otherwise. (4.) The quotation from Sadi is
the production of one of the Red American
Indians; to Natty Bumppo belongs the credit
of its good state of preservation. (5.) We
would recommend I. X. L. next time, following
up his own advice, to bring his wife with him.
(6.) We hope I. X. L. will not “make an attack
upon any female in this community” for his own
sake. We do not believe he would be guilty
of it ; still, we warn our fair friends to find out
the locality of the marlinspikes, should he again
forget himself, and fulfil his threat of “ modus
operandi.” (7.) I. X. L. snarls at woman—
“ some mischief in this world you’ve done.” In
introducing you, I. X. L. ? And now, in all
love and tenderness, I. X. L. you are forgiven.
The figures used are references to I. X. L.’s
letter. Ed,—V. E,
We understand the Stove will be removed
to-morrow, and are most thankful to hear it.
Smoking on the quarter deck is to be con-
fined to abaft the wheel.
Passengers are requested to confine them-
selves to the respective portions of the deck
appointed for their accommodation.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
The old ship, as if to prove she can move
steadily, has gone as if moving over a duck-
pond for the last twenty-four hours. We are
now fast overhauling a large ship ahead, and
shall probably overtake her about four o’clock.
Lat. 44.54. S. Long. 40.6. AY. Distance run,
217 miles. Total distance run, 7,309 miles.
A concert will take place in the saloon this
evening.
No. 25.— APRIL 5, 1860.
The following songs and recitations were
gone through last evening in the saloon.
They were for the most part exceedingly well
performed, but the only encore was received by
Mr. Murray, who responded to it by singing in
good style “ Lord Lovel.” The audience testi-
fied their satisfaction with each piece by loud
and long applause.
PART I.
Jeannette and Jeannot.... Mr. Knowles.
Essay on Ruins .Mr. Dodgson.
Parody on Yillikins and ) ~, r,., n
his Dinah | Mr. Sibley.
Richard 3rd (original.) . .Mr. Dailey.
Richard 3rd (impostor.) . .Mr. Murray.
The Battle of Waterloo . .Mr. Mabson.
PART II
Annie Laurie M. Knowles.
Macbeth Mr. Dailey.
Monody on death of Lord j M M b
Byron j
Darling old Stick Mr. Anderson.
Jolly old Farmer Mr. Collin.
The conclusion, of course, was God save the
Queen, sung in the usual way. John Bull
worshipping himself in the idol he hath set up
for himself, and feeling rather proud of it too.
The band must not be forgotten. They
played remarkably well, and followed, or rather
led, the various tunes in the medley in first rate
style. The Captain gave instructions to the
joiner to put up the neccessary “ fixing,” and we
believe we may unhesitatingly assert that it
was an evening very pleasantly spent by all
concerned.
Found—A white-handled Knife—Apply to
Dr. Williams.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Querist. The population of Victoria in
1836 was 222—186 males, 36 females. Of
course the aborigines are not included in this
census.
P. C.—Of course.
A. L.—Choose a fine night.
R. S.—We cannot understand your Epistle.
Pray repeat it.
U. P.—You may entertain your own opinion.
We think your Irish song was not sung better
than that unfortunate “Annie Laurie,” who
certainly fell last night 75 per cent, in our esti-
mation.
and Inquire —The Sovereign of the Seas ran 430
'ock. miles in one day. The Marco Polo, on the sth
run, January, 1854 ran 438 miles. The Lightning,
i. on the 19th March, 1857, ran 430 knots, or
nearly 500 miles. The latter, is perhaps, the
this greatest run ever accomplished.


Antonio
Bassanio
Gratiano
Shylock
Divine service will (d. v.) be performed to-
morrow (Good Friday) morning, at quarter-
past ten o’clock.
Rehearsals of the “Merchant of Venice,”
and “Lovers and Friends,” took place this day.
It is intended to produce both on Saturday
next, we solicit assistance as to costume, &c.
The folloioing lines are extracted from the “Marco
Polo Chronicle,” of 1853-54.
PATHETIC ADDRESS TO THE COOK,
BY NAME DANIEL.
After the style of the celebrated ballad, “Wood
man, spare that tree.”
Daniel, spare that cake,
Burn not its simple crust;
’Tis left with thee to bake,
Do not betray thy trust.
’Twas my good woman’s hand,
That made the precious lot;
And something short I’ll stand
If thou wilt scorch it not.
That dear delicious bread,
When nicely bak’d and brown—
If spoilt by thee instead,
Is scarce worth taking down.
Oft like a careless child,
To use no stronger word,
Thy sad neglect has spoil’d
The paste our hands have stirr’d.
My cake and tin went here,
And ne’er came back to hand;
I therefore ask in fear,
Pray don’t let this one stand.
My poor spoilt puddings cling
Close to thy pot, old swell;
And now I won’t unstring,
Unless thou bake this well.
Old chap, then, here’s the cake,
Be sure and find a spot
Where this may nicely bake,
And spoil or harm it not.
Yesterday we sighted the ship Harmony, 47
days out from Callao, bound to Cork. She
desired to be reported.
The following numbers of “the Vain Effort”
are missing. The Editor will feel it a personal
favor if those parties in whose possession they
are will return them to him.
Nos. 3, dated 12th March.
~ 11, ~ 30 th ~
„ 18, „ 28th „
„ 19, „ 29th
„ 22, j, 2nd April.
The engines started 30th March, at 6.10. p. m.,
and stopped at 6.30. a. m., 31st March, making
in the interval 12,804 revolutions. They again
started at 9.0. p.m. 31st ult., stopping at 1.30.
p.m., having made 17,348 revolutions. April
3rd, from 3.40. a. m. to noon they accomplished
8,136 revolutions, and thence to 4th April, 9.0.
p. m., 9,328.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Again we are able to lay a satisfactory state-
ment of our progress before our readers;
the distance accomplished being 224 miles.
Lat. (obs.) 41.19. S. Long, (chro.) 38.48. W.
This has been made principally under sail,
steam being got up only this morning. Some
unpleasantness occurred through the forward
passengers being instructed not to walk on that
portion of the deck allotted to saloon pas-
sengers ; but the latter having given up several
feet to the former, we believe the matter may
be regarded as settled.
Ho. 26.— APRIL 6, 1860.
It will not, probably, be a matter of astonish-
ment to those at all aware of the difficulties
under which this Journal has hitherto made its
appearance, to be informed that the present is
the concluding number of “ The Vain Effort.”
The amount of assistance received by the
Editor is totally insufficient to justify him in
sacrificing so large a portion of his time as is
requisite for the proper carrying out of the
design.
The idea has not been abandoned hastily.
It has been in existence nearly a month, and
the amount of support afforded does not war-
rant its continuance.
It is unnecessary to enter into further par-
ticulars. We thank our readers for the courtesy
extended tons, and our very few contributors for
their assistance. It would be unjust to close
without acknowledging Mr. Leary’s valuable
and continuous assistance, for which we most
cordially thank him.
Our thanks are also due to Captain Gray,
and we take this opportunity of tendering
them.
Ho. 27.— APRIL 7, 1860.
Programme of this evening’s performance
in the Saloon. The entertainment will com-
mence at half-past seven, p, m., with the 4th
act of the “ Merchant of Venice,” which will
be introduced by a prologue written for the
occasion by W. B. Dailey, Esq., spoken by Mr.
Mabson.
Duke of Venice Mr. Collins.


Portia
| Two Ladies.
Nerissa
To be followed by a Musical Melange.
Swallows Home- j Mr> Browning ,
The Forty Thieves..
Mr. Murray.
Duet by a
Lady and Mr. Etheridge.
To conclude
with the Farce of
LOVERS & FRIENDS.
Mr. Fast
Mr. Etheridge.
with Song of Madeline.
Mr. Rapid
Mr. Leary.
Capt. Dashwood....
Mr. Collins.
Mrs.FlyrtillaMadolineDash- ) j) a^ey
wood | 1 * ‘
God save the Queen.
Parties in full dress only admitted to the dress
Circle.
Admission for babies, two guineas each.
Original Poetry.
SPRING TIME IN ENGLAND.
Hail, joyous spring ! with, sun and showers,
With budding trees and opening flowers ;
Now hills and valleys may be seen,
Array’d in lovely brightest green;
Sweet perfumes float upon the breeze,
And birds are warbling in the trees ;
Clear streams are coursing on their way,
And sparkling in the sun’s bright ray ;
Huge forests cast a deep’ning shade,
A pleasing gloom by green boughs made ;
All nature smiles, and seems to say,
Hail, joyous spring ! hail, lovely May !
I. X, L
As it appears to be the wish of several of
the passengers that “the Vain Effort” should
not cease to exist, and that wish has been sup-
plemented by considerable offers of assistance,
it is intended to continue it to the end of the
voyage.
We were present at a full-dress rehearsal of
the two pieces announced for this evening’s
amusement, and believe every performer is
well prepared.
The prayers appointed by the Church of
England were read yesterday in the saloon,
after which the Rev. T. Williams delivered an
address.
The noisy mob made themselves conspicuous
again last evening, by engaging in a row “second
to none” of those in which they have previously
gloried. We trust theoffendersagainstpropriety
and decency will be discovered, and subjected to
condign punishment. The officers of justice
may apply to the sub-editor for information.
SKETCHES OF TRAVELS IN THE
STATES OF AMERICA
DURING THE INDIAN SUMMER.
I am now seated upon the stump of a tree,
on the edge of some high cliffs that overlook
! the vast Lake of Michigan. The eastern sky
on Avhich I now gaze is beautified with layers
of clouds, some of which stretch in a horizontal
direction nearly to the bosom of the waters,
whilst others are thrown together like so many
wool-packs upon them, with edges white and
shining as silver ; above is a clear and deep
blue sky, with here and there a few fleecy
clouds floating before the gentle land breeze.
The sun will soon have reached the meridian of
his glory, his rays, tempered by the westerly
winds, fall as softly as moonbeams upon me.
The lake, with its mighty breadth of waters
stretches before me far as the eye can ken,
looking like huge Atlantic, as seen from
“ Calpe’s olive shaded steep,” basking in the
sun, and discoursing most eloquent music as
its waters beat against the cliffs, it lays out-
stretched before me in sleepy grandeur, heaving,
sparkling, and scintilating in the summer’s
sun; scattered here and there are some dark
patches, shadows from the flying clouds, that
look like so many huge monsters floating away
upon the bosom of the deep, seemingly
motionless; far from the shore upon the vast
horizon, may be seen ships that proudly spread
their whited canvas to the breeze. Now,
northward bound, a steamer heaves in sight,
running more closely to the shore, and puffing
its volume of smoke, that is soon scattered and
cleared away by the passing breeze. Small
fishing smacks, with one sheet in the wind,
spread the shining lake. A splash of oars is
heard beneath, as a boat laden with human
freight on a trip of pleasure is rowed along.
• How beautiful and happy the little creatures
seem, as they float by with a merry laugh,
F That which I have now described as seen, is
[ taken in at a coup d’otil, or glance. “ The eye
■ takes in at once the landscape of the world at
, a small inlet, which a grain might close.” I
; can now realize the beauties of a stanza from
Byron.
“ There is a rapture on the lonely shore,
There is society where none intrudes,
By the deep sea, and music in its roar;
I love not man the less, but nature more.
From these our interviews in which I steal
From what I may be, or have been before,
To mingle with the universe, and feel
What I can ne’er express, yet cannot all conceal.”
I. X. L,
(To he Continued.)
COMMERCIAL INTELLIGENCE.
Champagne was in demand late last night.
Heavy sales for immediate consumption were
effected, but we remark a great tightness in
the money-market. This can hardly be attri-
buted to the banks, whose influence is not
much felt here. Some transactions have taken
place on the sweepstakes; but these have been
few and unimportant, and not worth quoting.
We hear of no insurance transactions. Mining


shares dull. Oats and maise in demand for
fowls and geese, and hay for sheep. Beef,
none; mutton, plentiful. Pork goes into con-
sumption as fast as it makes its appearance.
Bottled beer is more lively, probably on account
of the warm weather; and we look with confi-
dence to an improvement in bottled stout and
lemonade.
We are desired to advertise a Handkerchief,
marked J. M. Apply to the Editor.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
DIST. EUE.
April 6. Lat. 38.56. Long. 36.31. 175
7. „ 38.27. „ 34.28. 101
Against head winds and a cross sea, we have
done the above. It is hardly to be expected
this wind can continue, and we hope for an
immediate change. There is nothing to hinder
our beating the celebrated trip of the Lightning,
yet several of our fellow-passengers are again
sea-sick.
No. 28.— APRIL 9, 1860.
Divine service was performed by the Rev.
T. Williams yesterday morning. The text was
1 Peter ii. 10. At night the Evening Hymn
was sung, and prayer offered in the saloon.
Mr. Thompson preached three times on the
one subject—“ Praise,” and was very attentively
listened to each time.
An alteration was projected yesterday in the
saloon arrangements for meals, which occa-
sioned considerable misapprehension. It had
been suggested by some, and assented to by a
considerable number, (we believe a majority) of
the saloon passengers, that the hour for dining
should be fixed at 3 p.m. and the usual mid-
day lunch omitted. The arrangement was
about to be carried out yesterday, when one or
two gentlemen vehemently agitated the ques-
tion, and the result of course was, that the ori-
ginal arrangement was adhered to, and lunch
was served.
It is a matter of indifference to us what de-
termination may be arrived at upon the ques-
tion, but we cannot help expressing our opinion
that the reform would have been a desirable
one; and we regret that it was not carried out.
At the same time we beg to observe that, ac-
cording to our information, the head Steward
had made arrangements to place upon one of
the tables biscuits and cheese, for the conveni-
ence of those who felt themselves unable to fast
from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.
It is requested that gentlemen who are will-
ing to sing or recite on Wednedsay evening
next, will kindly intimate the same to the
Editor, on or before Tuesday night.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —I see in your issue of yesterday, that
champagne was in considerable demand late on
Friday night. I would presume, from the very
fact of the tap-room club which you accom-
panied so late on that night, or rather early on
Saturday morning, that not only was champagne
in demand, but Hennessy’s also. And, sir, I can
assure you, if such proceedings are carried on
much longer, the value of Hennessy’s will be
enormous, especially if your “fondly” club par-
takes of so much, that they may be not only
seen tumbling round the deck, but out of their
state-sooms, lounging in folded possum rugs.
Now, sir, I hope that in future, when they feel
disposed to call their club together for the pur-
pose of partaking of champagne, that they will
select a more respectable hour; and, for the
future, deal lightly with Hennessy’s, in order to
keep their right end up. Temperance,
M. Cl. M. c,
April 9th, 1860.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Steam was got up yesterday morning, and
we append our Log :
BIST, EtW.
April 8. Lat. 36.27. Long. 32.42. 142
9. „ 32. 2. „ 32.42. 265
The weather is now very close, and ventila-
tion very necessary.
We shall feel much obliged, if parties having
any of the old numbers of “the Vain Effort,”
will kindly return them to the office.
Last Monday’s and Friday’s papers are both
missing this week.
SKETCHES OF TRAVELS IN THE
STATES OF AMERICA
DURING THE INDIAN SUMMER.
( Continued.)
Turning to the south, a promontory may be
seen which forms the Bay of Milwawkee, and
reminds me of Flamborough Head, as seen
projecting from the Cliffs at Burlington, It
juts out about the same distance into the sea
or lake, but instead of a whited side it shews
one “ with verdure clad.” At a considerable
distance beyond it is another headland, pro-
jecting still further into the lake, being in dim
distance, it appears but as a line drawn to
separate the water from the sky.
The cliffs that are near me are of a rich,
warm colour, with trees overhanging their
sides in cool and delicious contrast. An inter-
vening hill hides the town of Milwawkee from
my sight. Standing but a short way off the
almost perpendicular cliffs is a large, unfinished
brick building, intended for an Asylum.
Now, looking to the north, before and close
by me is a deep creek, and on the other side a


wooden tenement, which has the appearance of
age, from its slate-coloured sides and dark pur-
ple roofing. It is almost surrounded by a
cluster of trees, which grow down to the water’s
edge, and shut out the northern view.
Facing the west, stumps of trees in endless I
numbers may be seen, as they were left by the
merciless wood-men; rolling hills surrounded
by and crowned with noble forest trees of every
hue and shade, complete the scene. But crack
and another crack is heard. The sportsmen |
with their guns are making sad havoc with the
wild-wood pigeons, that fly in countless numbers
round ; and now a loud booming of cannon
assails with awful tone the feeling ear, thun-
dering and rolling along the hills as if “ each
had found a tongue.” The democrats had named
a governor, and are sounding it to the world.
Those beautiful lines of the poet now occur to
me, though not descriptive of the scene here
portrayed, but as there are similar feelings
aivakened within me I will give them: —
“ O let me in the country range,
’Tis there we breathe, ’tis there we live;
The beauteous scene of aged mountains,
Smiling valleys, murmuring fountains,
Lambs in sportive pastures bleating,
Echo every sound repeating,
Bees with busy sounds delighting,
Groves to gentle sleep inviting,
Birds with cheerful notes expressing
Nature’s bounty and their blessing;
These afford a lasting pleasure,
Without guilt and without measure.”
The performances announced for Saturday
evening came off with tolerable punctuality.
Mr. Mabson delivered a prologue, written for
the occasion by W. B. Dailey, Esq. We pur-
pose publishing the words to-morrow. As
every thing this gentleman undertakes is well
done, it is almost needless to state, that the
audience gave evidence of their appreciation of
his elocution by prolonged plaudits. The final
scene of the “ Merchant of Venice” succeeded,
and we are at a loss what to find fault with
throughout the entire scene, nor do we know
to whom to award the greatest meed of praise.
The dresses w r ere elegant and appropriate, the
actors well up in their parts, and we venture
unhesitatingly to affirm our conviction that it
was, if not the best, one of the very best things
of the kind (unassisted by professional players)
ever performed on board ship. In the name of
the audience we thank the ladies who personated
the rich heiress and her waiting maid; their
costume was correct to a fault. Portia was
particularly distinct; the clearness of her voice
enabled her hearers to catch every syllable
uttered, and every speech was excellently de-
livered. The actors -were loudly cheered, and
in obedience to a call of the audience, appeared
before the curtain, and bowed their acknow-
ledgments. Mr. Browning, though suffering
from severe cold, gave very pleasingly, “Home,
sweet Home;” Mr. Murray followed with the
“ Forty Thieves,” a very amusing parody; “All’s
Well” was then sung by a lady, and Mr. Ether-
idge. Under the circumstances the union of
the voices had a very pleasing effect. “ Lovers
and Friends” followed. Mr. Etheridge sang
with great spirit “ Then you’ll Remember Me.”
The Farce was well performed, and the audi-
ence testified their approbation by calling all
the actors before the curtain, who gave most
loyally “ God save the Queen.” The enter-
tainments then concluded. We believe it is
acknowledged that there was never a more
agreeable evening spent upon ship-board. Every
person appeared satisfied and delighted. The
band played very well, and most agreeably
occupied the intervals between the pieces
by appropriate airs. Success to the next
performance.
No. 29.— APRIL 10, 1860.
The letter (signed “Temperance”) which
appeared in yesterday’s issue, -would not have
been inserted had its personal charges extended
beyond that made against the Editor.
Lamentable as is the fact, the ignorance of
the writer is only equalled by his presumption.
As “Temperance” looks for his broadsheet and
receives it regularly—does it ever occur to him
that the valuable information collected and
laid before him, from all parts of “ Great
Britain,” has to be sought for and enquired
into before it appears in these pages. Does it
ever occur to him that, while he “ wakes mid-
night” with his horrible snoring, hundreds of
his fellow creatures are busy collecting infor-
mation for his especial benefit—“one agent
at Constantinople obtaining particulars of the
designs of Russia; another in Covent Garden
enquiring the price of cabbages;” whilst the
third, in the exercise of his duty, accom-
panies w r hat “Temperance” is pleased to
call, in the amplitude of his ignorance, the
Tap-room Club?
We were not previously aware that one
hour differed from another in respectability.
Perhaps our correspondent will oblige by
stating which are the respectable, and which
the disreputable hours. The insinuation as
to “Hennessy’s Brandy” is peculiarly aggra-
vating to our feelings, inasmuch as we are
unable to obtain any, but as our correspondent
will no doubt humbly apologise for his letter,
we hereby offer him our forgiveness and three
pounds sterling for one dozen bottles of that
celebrated brand.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ALLUVIAL DIGGINGS, ETC.
No. 1.
The Bendigo gold-field is distant from Mel-
bourne one hundred and eight miles, and from


Castlemaine thirty miles. It was opened about
the month of November, 1851. A shepherd
and his wife were the discoverers. They were
the servants of Mr. Gibson, a squatter, on whose
run a large portion of the field exists. Their
hut was situate on the bank of the creek (then
called Bandicoot), at the rush corrupted into
Bendigo. They found several pieces of metal
when sweeping out the hut, and supposed it
to be brass, and threw it away as worthless,
until they heard that gold was found at Balla-
rat and Forest Creek, when they began care-
fully to collect it. Mr. Gibson’s overseer
visiting the hut on one occasion, found the
two worthies, instead of attending to their
master’s interest, busily employed washing gold
from the surface soil with their tin plates and j
pannikins. This was immediately reported to
head quarters, and the dismissal of the shepherd
and his wife was followed, as a matter of course,
by the rush of several hundreds, miners and
others, who soon increased to thousands. Se-
veral versions have been given of the mode of
discovery, but the above we believe to be the
correct one. In those days all persons engaged
in mining pursuits were termed Gold-diggers.
Now there are three classes, viz. the quartz miner
the puddler, and the digger, or tub and cradle
man. The early diggers confined themselves
entirely to alluvial mining, if we except their
Sunday operations, which were followed more
for pastime than for profit, and consisted of
breaking quartz that cropped out from the
surface of the hills, from which they often
procured very valuable specimens. It is re-
markable that the impression then prevailed,
that no gold would be found in the quartz
beneath the surface, and when it was reached
it was considered useless to search deeper.
( To be Continued.)
PROLOGUE,
BY <j).
Where’er in modern times our “English tongue’’
Renders the poetry “great Shakespear ” sung;
Unto all time and unto every race,
The stage is honor’d with a leading place.
The dark mysterious curtain hangs before
The temple, where all truth and blessed love
Are worshipp’d. And even here upon the vasty
sea,
Afar from all the great world’s pageantry,
On rolling waves, through every shifting clime,
We bow before the poet of all time.
In his great dramas of the human heart,
Not only actors find they play a part,
But all who listen to his gorgeous song
Find their own places in the mighty throng.
The vast procession which the poet brings
Before the mind which listens as he sings,
Hymning the virtues of the good and great,
And robing humbleness with regal state.
To-night our daring “ effort” is a “trial,”
Which, if resulting in a cold denial
Of justice on your part, we shall deplore
For our own sakes—but for our poet’s more ;
For bis whose every word is always greeted
With smiles or tears, and e’er shall be repeated
Either in sorrow’s softest, tenderest tones,
Or wailed with sweet Ophelia’s saddest moans ;
Or, as beneath the moon-beams watery sheen
Sweet Juliet’s whisperings were heard between
The night air sighing through Italian shades ;
Or, starting in the calm of peaceful glades;
All quiet thoughts with the air-shattering sound
Of war, the trumpet waking all around.
Holiest the genius which can thus portray
The glorious past unto the present day.
With conscious weakness ours the humble aim
To win your favor, if we win no fame.
It seems very desirable that the water-closets
in the saloon should be nailed up during the
hot weather. It is requisite that this step
should be taken immediately, as the health of
all the passengers (saloon) is concerned. We
believe the public are in favor of the measure,
and trust (as it must commend itself to com-
mon sense) no opposition will be offered.
Died, this day, 10th April, 1860, shortly
before noon, Henry Rowbotham, late of
Melbourne, and formerly of Hide, Cheshire,
aged 45 years. Cause of death, consump-
tion.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
For the last twenty-four hours we have
steamed constantly, and in spite of light and
at times head winds, have accomplished the
distance of 221 miles. We have now been out
34 days, and have run 8437 knots. At noon
this day we were distant from the line 1,712
miles, and the wind had become fairer. There
is therefore every probability of crossing the
equator in seven days,
Lat. 28.32. S. Long. 31.25. W.
_ It is with great regret the Editor states, that
his repeated notices of missing numbers, have
been unattended by one single return of “the
Vain Effort.”
No. 30.— APRIL 11, 1860.
The bodies of our fellow passengers who
expired yesterday, were last evening committed
to the great deep. The burial service of the
Church of England was read by the Rev. Mr.
Williams, who delivered on the occasion a brief
but impressive address. The scene was in
many respects one of a character not likely to
be soon effaced from the minds of those
witnessing it. The light airs of a calm even-
the fluttering of the flags thrown over the
bodies, and the purple sea lit with the last
gleams of the sinking sun. Everywhere around


a mass of human life, pervaded with the senti-
ment of reverential awe which the calm majesty
of death inspires. Standing, with heads un-
covered, the seamen, who, although perhaps the
witnesses of many such a spectacle, seemed deeply
conscious that their world of waters, like our
own of land, is a vast sepulchre. The tears on
many a rugged weather-beaten cheek, suggested
thoughts of mothers, wives, and homes, where
howling winds on stormy nights rang trembling
groups to prayers, with a mightier but more
religious music than peals of minster bells. A
little before 6 p.m. the bodies were launched
into the sea; and the crowd collected at the
gangway dispersed. Though no friends of
the departed were present to take a long last
view of the faces upturned to God, it may be
some sad consolation to them to learn that all
that human tenderness and respect could ac-
complish was manifested towards the dead, not
only by our noble Captain, but by all on board.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 2.
For the first two or three years the diggers
evinced no desire to economise labour. But
when the richest gullies were pretty well turned
over, and several of the would-be “ knowing
ones ” began to leave for other fields (as Ben-
digo was “done” according to them) an enterpris-
ing party erected the first puddling machine on
the flat at the foot of Golden Gully. This party,
instead of sinking holes, some ten, fifteen, or
twenty feet deep, as the diggers did, commenced
on the surface, and carted all the soil out, till
they reached the bottom, and washed it
through the machine. Undoubtedly, a large
portion of this soil would contain little, if any
gold; still the great quantity they were enabled
to pass through made their returns much more
satisfactory than when they worked with the
tub and cradle only. It will scarcely be credited
that great numbers of the diggers looked upon
this improvement with aversion, from a fear
that then impressed them that so soon as ma-
chinery was introduced, a master and servant
system was sure to follow, and even the possi-
bility of such a system was viewed with alarm.
They therefore condemned the machine, as un-
suited for the purpose, openly ridiculed it, and
with many sneers pronounced that it would
never do. Notwithstanding their sneers and
scepticism, in less than twelve months from the
erection of the first machine, there were upwards
of three hundred successfully at work over the
field, and now there are two thousand five
hundred registered. Out of this number about
fifteen hundred only can be reckoned as regu-
larly at work.
The average produce of each machine per
week is about two and a half ounces of gold.
( To he continued.)
SKETCHES OF TRAVELS IN THE
STATES OF AMERICA
DURING AN INDIAN SUMMER. — (continued.)
Having briefly sketched one of the many
views around Milwaukee, I will now enter the
town. Walking into one of the principal busi-
ness streets (East Water) I am struck with the
appearance of the stores on either side, most
of them being lofty, substantially-built, brick
buildings; and here I must say that the Mil-
waukee brick is the most beautiful of any that
I have seen in any part of the world. It is al-
most of a straw colour, and when viewed from
a distance has a charming and gay appearance,
and blends harmoniously with the glossy and
deep green foliage of the American oak and
other umbrageous trees. Passing along, I can
see that these stores are well stocked with
wares, and produce from every country and
from every clime,
“ From Araby and Persia’s shore,
And India’s rich domains,”
ribbons from “ la belle France,” articles in
steel from the “ city of soot,” as renowned for
temper, strength, and elasticity, as those of the
far-famed Damascus. The best recommendation
given them is, that they
“ Are Sheffield made,
Both heft and blade.”
Were it not for the new appearance of the
buildings, a person might think he was standing
in one of the busy thoroughfares of Liverpool
or London, excepting that now and then he
would be reminded of his whereabouts by seeing
loads of timber and of hay drawn along by
teams of bullocks, with their slow, steady, and
almost noiseless step. Turning to the right, I
come to a bridge that spans the Milwaukee
river. Upon the self-same bridge, a few days
ago, two red Indians with bows and arrows,
stood.
(To be continued.)
Wanted, to borrow, Bradshaw’s Guide.—
Apply to the Editor.
We believe it is intended that a concert
should be given to-night; but so far as we
have heard, there is considerable “backwardness
in coming forward,” We would desire to im-
press upon those gentlemen who are capable
of instructing or amusing their fellow-passen-
gers, that in some sort it becomes their duty
to make the attempt.
We regret, for the sake of the commonwealth,
that opposition to the closing of the water-closets
will prevent the carrying out of this much-
needed reform.
It has been mooted whether a shower-bath
is practicable on board. We shall be glad to
hear from any authority on the subject.


Died, of consumption, 10th April, 1860,
Henry Derwent Harrington, aged 30, Artist
late of Back-Creek Diggings, Victoria, for-
merly of 29, England Street, Carlisle.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Still on the bosom of the great deep, our
ship glides along, careless of the past, and like
ourselves, ignorant of the future. Lat. 25.12.
S. Long. 29.33. W. Distance run, 226 miles
—from the line 1512.
No. 31.— APRIL 12, 1860.
For a considerable time past a number of
our saloon passengers, mainly consisting of
the young, unmarried gentlemen on board,
have manifested a singular reluctance to con-
form to the rules of the ship, by retiring to
their respective cabins at half-past ten, p.m.
The celebrated “Stove Parliament” (now a
matter of history) having been dissolved, the
prominent members of the body have been
since occupying themselves in a variety of
ways. The excessive heat of the weather fur-
nishes them with very plausible pretexts for
meandering the main-deck until two or three
hours before dawn. One of our staff, who was
returning home by way of the “ after com-
panion,” encountered this morning, an hour or
two before we went to press, (five, a. m.) a
gentleman who occupied a very prominent
place in the late parliament. On being inter-
rogated by our reporter as to being out at so
unseemly an hour, the gentleman observed
that having partaken of some mulled port, he
felt extremely anxious to catch a glimpse of the
island of Trinidade. We have merely men-
tioned this circumstance by way of illustrating
the truth of the assertion with which this article
commences.
Last evening, about eleven o’clock, a noise
being heard in the region of the stern cabins,
on the lower deck, we instantly despatched a
reporter there. On his arrival, he found him-
self the spectator of a scene of intense excite-
ment. A number of gentlemen were assembled,
by no means in full dress, inasmuch as more
than one individual was merely arrayed in a
robe de chambre, immediately in the vicinity of
a portion of the lower cabins, appropriated to
the female domestics of the saloon families.
The cause of the excitement was soon apparent:
a lady's duel was about to come off. The
combatants were a short, well-made lady, with
a rich Glasgow brogue, and a more delicate
but taller person, with a distinct cockney ac-
cent. Bets were being freely offered on the
event; and amidst the shrill feline shrieks of
the pugilists, such remarks as these were
made: “two to one on the Scotchy,” to which
promising offer no response was made. A
critical young gentleman, whose only costume,
according to our reporter, was a pair of inex-
pressibles, here volunteered the double piece of
information that “ Scotchy didn’t look fine
enough, and that the Londoner’s condition was
good, if she had pluck.” While the ring was
being formed, an alarm of police was given;
the lights were suddenly extinguished, our
reporter tumbled over a barricade of boxes,
playfully put in his path, and escaping from
the scene of action, found himself precipitated
into a prize fight just going on round the corner.
W e regret that he arrived at home too late to
permit us, in our present issue, to furnish an
account of the latter event, a full report of
which we are reluctantly obliged to postpone
till to-morrow.
The Rev. T. Williams will deliver a lecture
on Fiji, to-morrow evening.
The usual concert was put off, last evening,
by request of some ladies, and dancing was
patronised to a limited extent.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 3.
Each machine—taking the average —gives
employment to three men, and requires at least
two horses—one to puddle, the other to draw
the soil from the claim. A claim is that por-
tion of auriferous land belonging to each party.
A puddler can take fifty feet by fifty feet for
every man he employs, up to four; but no
ground is allowed for any he may employ over
that number. However, the laws are always
altering, and at each alteration they are be-
coming more liberal. The day was when only
eight feet by eight feet was the portion of each
man ; and we believe the day is not far distant
when an acre will be allowed to each. As the
horse gives way to steam, so must the extent
of ground increase. It is true that a system of
leasing has lately been introduced, which
allows twenty acres to any person or party,
provided some five thousand pounds are ex-
pended on machinery, and four men employed
upon each acre—which absurd and ridiculous
requirements we are positive will never be en-
forced, for the simple reason, perhaps, that
they cannot be: once give possession of land,
under lease, and no matter what conditions
may be inserted therein—we have it on the
best legal authority—let these conditions be
ever so much infringed upon, it will be a most
difficult matter for the State to retake possession
of the land until the expiring of the lease, which
in no case exceeds ten years. But to return to
the puddling machines. For three or four
months out of the twelve nearly all are standing
still for want of water. When this is the case
the puddlers generally turn their attention to


alluvial mining, or searching for gold-bearing
quartz reefs. If they succeed in finding the
latter—and a few of them mostly always do—
they seldom return to work their machines,
which they can sell, if the locality is at all a
favourite one, at a very high price comparatively
with the original outlay. The market for them
is good, because of the difficulty there now is
to obtain advantageous sites to save a sufficiency
of water to carry on their operations, for of
this invaluable element a large supply is re-
quired ; and at present the puddlers are solely
dependent on the annual rains, which it is well
known are exceedingly variable.
(To he continued.)
SKETCHES OF TRAVELS IN THE
STATES OF AMERICA,
during AN INDIAN summer.— (continued.)
Upon the self same bridge, not many days
ago, two red Indians, with bows and arrows,
stood mute as mummies, looking with wild
astonishment at a dredging machine as it
dipped its iron bucket into the river, and
scooped from its bed sand and gravel, and
deposited it in a mud lighter close by. What
feelings thrilled through their savage souls, one
might better imagine than describe, as they saw
the unshapely iron man upheave his ponderous
load and cast it from him. Not many years
ago they here, upon their own native land,
hunted the deer and the wild fowl; but now
the white man claims the soil, and builds
his princely habitation on the spot the wig-
wam stood: thus the poor Indian disappears
from his native haunts at the approach of civi-
lisation, as the shadows of darkness fly before
the rising sun. Crowded cities, with their
gaiety and refinement, are as little welcome to
his untamed spirit as to the wild buffalo that
bounds the pathless meadows of the undulating
flowery prairie land. The river is all anima-
tion, —vessels taking in and discharging cargo,
steamers plying to and fro, boats passing and
repassing ; grasses which have broken loose
from the marshes are carried along by the
current, and look like so many emerald islands
floating along the crystal waters; warehousemen
are hauling in their merchandize; wagons, carts,
drays, and carriages, are rolling across the
bridge; there is a ringing of hammers, a splash-
ing of oars, a dipping of iron buckets, a
whistling of steamers, a grunting of locomotives,
a cracking of whips, and ajshouting of draymen;
all of which indicate the onward march of man.
Across the river are stores, warehouses, and
timber yards, full of the rich produce from the
north and far, far west. Returning across the
bridge, I now enter a street in which they have
erected an elegant building, named the “ State
Bank of Wisconsin,” and forgetting that winter
has to come, it lifts to eternal summer its mar-
ble Avails ; adjoining it is going up another
building of the same stone, smaller but much
more highly ornamented, with elaborately car-
ved brackets and heads, in has relief; and
beyond it rises in stately grandeur the “ New
Hall Hotel,” with a frontage 180 by 120 feet, it
is the most magnificient superstructure I have
met with west of New York, and may be seen
from most parts of the town towering above
the surrounding edifices with princely pride.
The man whose name it bears may be said to
have ventured on an enterprise of great pith
and moment, for which he will need no other
monument to swell his name and fame.
(To be continued.)
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our Log. Lat. 21.38. S. Long. 29.22. W.
Distance run, 215 miles. Weather very hot.
Wind, none at all. Sea, calm. At half-past
one o’clock Trinidade and two smaller islands
in sight, and just (apparently) entering the S. E.
trades.
No. 32.— APRIL 13, 1860.
Our readers will possibly consider we give
an undue importance to the subject, but it is
necessary that it should be understood. We
have repeatedly advertised for the missing
numbers of this Journal, but without effect.
There are now, out of thirty-one numbers,
eight missing; and we would ask those who
are in the habit of taking the paper with them
into their berths, to be kind enough to look for
and return any numbers, now in their posses-
sion, to the Editor. We may state that we are
unable to find yesterday’s number; and if, at
the close of our voyage, it should be deemed
advisable to print “the Vain Effort,” its value
must be materially lessened if incomplete. We
press this matter, because, although some of
our readers may deem it of no consequence, we
esteem it sufficiently important to justify us in
asking each one to search for the missing num-
bers, particulars of which we append.
Nos. 3, 11, 18, 19, 22, 24, 26, 30.
We trust these remarks will have the desired
effect.
Last evening, music and dancing were the
order of the night, but the latter was not much
patronized by the saloon passengers. We
notice with great pleasure the alteration in the
position occupied by the band. It is an im-
mense improvement.
SUNSET OFF TRINIDADE.
My soul is entranced with that lovely sky,
Rich mantled with clouds of a gorgeous dye ;
So vast are their folds, with such lustre they shine,
No words can portray a sight so divine.


How fleeting that scene ! the sun bids adieu,
And clouds, as by magic, are changed in hue ;
In glory enshrouded that orb goes down,
Kiss’d by a sea-wave with a golden crown !
X feel now he’s gone I must heave a sigh,
No lover e’er parted more tenderly;
Still back he’ll return and regild that skv.
I. X. L.
Yesterday afternoon we were all very much
cheered by the sight of Trinidade, and one of
“ the Martin Yas rocks.” There was a halo of
extreme beauty thrown over the surface of Trini-
dade’s barren rocks, by the rays of the setting
sun. Trinidade is about six miles in circum-
ference, the land very unequal, and, at best, no
more than a cluster of rocks, with some shrubs
in the valleys. The northernmost side is quite
barren; but to the southward, all the inter-
stices of the rocks are filled with evergreens
of several kinds. There is also a quantity of
sea fowl and rock-fish, and many wild hogs.
Generally the wood is very small, though there
are trees of eighteen inches diameter toward
the extreme heights. Trinidade is surrounded
by sharp, rugged, coral rocks, with almost con-
tinual surge breaking on every part, which
renders the landing often very precarious, and
watering frequently impracticable; nor is there
a probability of rendering either certain, for the
surf is often incredibly great, and has been seen
during a gale at S. W. to break over a bluff
which is 200 feet high. There is very, good
water on the island. On the west side of the
island there is a rock 850 feet high, called the
Monument, or Nine Pins; also an arch, per-
forated through a bluff rock, about 800 feet
high. The arch is 40 feet in breadth, 50 feet
in height, and 420 in length; the depth of
water above 3 fathoms. When the sea is
moderate, you may see through this arch into
the only bay in the island, and have a view of a
distant rock, covered with trees, which renders
the prospect extremely picturesque.
Bearings of the island, about sun-down,
E. N. E., and about twenty-three miles distant
from us.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
We sighted, yesterday, a large ship, ap-
parently bound to Australia with passengers,
but could not make out her name. We believe
she would be able to see our colours, as the
sun was favourably situated. In this case, we
shall be reported as safe so far, before news of
our arrival can be telegraphed from Cork. We
have continued steaming, and have again a
good run to report, spite of a head wind, though
not a very strong one, to our joy. We are now
likely to fall in with ships, but it is most un-
likely we shall stop to put letters on board any.
Lat. 18.11, S. Long. 30,50. W. Distance run,
223 miles. Distance from line, 1091 miles.
The Rev. T. Williams will, this evening, de-
liver a lecture in the saloon, at eight o’clock-
subject, “Fiji and the Fijians.”
We regret to hear that the once highly pro-
mising Mutual Improvement Association, _ and
Society for the Discussion of Useless Questions,
is about to dissolve, in consequence of “want of
tin.”
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 4.
About the same time (1854) as the first
puddling machine was erected, the quartz reefs
began to claim great attention, and caused
considerable excitement from the reports that
were current of large yields of gold being ob-
tained simply by crushing the quarts with
hammers, and extracting the gold from the
powdered particles, in the same manner as the
diggers washed the gold from the alluvial soil.
The majority of those then engaged at this
(now without doubt the principal) branch of
mining industry were Germans, to whom we
have no hesitation in stating, the credit is fairly
due of practically bringing it into operation at
that early date. They proved, beyond dispute,
(in opposition to the views previously enter-
tained) that the quartz reefs did contain large
quantities of the precious metal, and that at a
considerable depth beneath the surface. This
fact once thoroughly established, every hill
near the centre of the diggings, that held forth
the slightest indication of a quartz reef, was
taken possession of; but unless the hills showed
large bodies of quartz on the surface, the in-
ducement to sink in search of reefs did not
exist. We mention this particularly, as it will
be observed, as we proceed, that shafts are now
sunk to depths varying from 100 to 300 feet,
without the smallest appearance of a reef in the
form of quartz on the surface; the only thing
taken into consideration when commencing the
shaft, is whether the spot on which it is to be
sunk is near the line of any of the other rich
reefs at work.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENT.
X. —At noon, yesterday, we were 67 miles
N. of Trinidade.
No. 33.— APRIL 14, 1860,
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 5.
So soon as the reefs gave indications of per-
manency, a Bendigo gentleman (Mr. Ensor)
got one of Berdan’s patent crushing machines


erected at the foot of New Chum Gully. He
charged £8 per ton for crushing. This was
the first public crushing machine on Bendigo;
others, however, soon followed. In about six
months afterwards we had Clissold and Kelly’s
extensive stamping batteries, with shaking tables
for amalgamating, and Bruce’s metropolitan
quartz crushing works, which consisted of bat-
teries of stampers, Chilian wheels, and shaking
tables. Everything about these works (for
that time) was so evidently superior to the other
machines, that they became favourites with the
quartz miners. Immediately after their erection
the price of crushing was reduced to £5 per
ton, which, in itself, was a considerable induce-
ment to the miners to support the metropolitan
works, seeing that it was through them that
such a great reduction was so speedily made in
the cost of crushing. The reefs were being
developed rapidly, and sending forth their im-
mense treasures with so much regularity, that
in a short time there were several public ma-
chines erected all over the gold field, besides
numerous small ones belonging to parties of
miners, for their own use solely.
In 1857, the prices of crushing ranged from
£3 to £4 per ton. A Mr. Pollard (now editor,
we believe, of the “Mining Journal”) proposed
to form a company, for the purpose of crushing
quartz to the public at 30s. per ton, which he
asserted would leave a large margin of profit
to the shareholders, after paying all expences
in connection with the w r orks. This proposition
was met with laughter, and treated as an ab-
surdity. Nay, some went the length of saying,
that it was impossible to crush for less than
£3 per ton. Of course, these opinions were
carefully nurtured by the quartz crushers them-
selves, who, from their continual intercourse
with the miners, had considerable influence.
Those that laughed at Mr. Pollard’s proposition
then, now exceedingly regret that they did not
listen to his representations, as they find his
estimate correct. We have in support of this
merely to state that the present price of crush-
ing varies from 15s to 255, according to the
quantity of quartz supplied. If above twenty
tons, it will be done for 15s; if under 10 tons,
from 20s to 25s
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
We have been informed that a vessel passed
us during the night; but of course, owing to
the darkness, it could not he ascertained what
she was. This morning, two vessels passed—
one the Damietta, the other the Anna Maria.
Their port of destination could not be discovered
by signals. The sea still calm. We are sorry
to remark, the absence of the trade "winds usual
in these latitudes. However, the screw still
propels along our noble ship. The distance
run this day, 14th April, is 182 miles. The
Lat. is 15.9. S. The Long. 30.48. W.
Divine service will be performed by the
Dev. T. Williams, at a quarter-past ten o’clock
to-morrow morning.
SKETCHES OF TRAVELS IN THE
STATES OF AMERICA
DURING AN INDIAN SUMMER. — (continued.)
The next building which attracts my attention
is the Custom House, which has a very chaste
appearance, being built of white marble. I
am now upon the rising hills, and am taking a
survey, “ en passant,” of the mansions of princely
merchants. Many are highly ornamented and
handsome buildings ; some of them have a
commanding view of the lake, with gardens
and slopes, enriched with the fairest, sweetest
flowers that “ fill my thoughts with dreams,”
and are made still more beautiful with shrubs,
and creeping plants and trees. Light, fairy
carriages, with fair ones in them looking as
lovely as spring, or like “ the fair-born star
that gilds the morn,” are drawn through the
streets by spirited and prancing horses, such as
were driven in the chariots of old. They have
a better class of horses here than in any city in
the world ; scarcely an old hack can be met
with. The streets, running at right angles to
each other, are wide, and are sweetly adorned
on either side with trees of dense and varied
foliage, that overshadow the walks of the pe-
destrians, and form beautiful avenues through
which may be caught glimpses of the polished
lake. Numerous churches lift their spired
towers and spires high into the crystal vault of
heaven, and enhance the beauty of the scene.
Here is a town, with a clear and salubrious
atmosphere, adorned with churches and trees,
with a lake dashing and sparkling at its feet,
and a river flowing through and shining in its
midst. Who can help being charmed with
such a place P
We regret to say that our reporter did not
make his appearance this morning till long after
the milk, and when he did turn up, he was in
so excited a state that with great difficulty we
induced him to take the medicine prescribed
by the doctor, viz: brandy and soda water.
Shortly after swallowing this dose (which he
did in a most greedy and remarkable style,
draining it to the very last drop) saying, he
heard it fizz, we are glad to state that he
went to sleep, and at the present moment his
melodious snore “ breathes soft music ” in our
ears. We have endeavoured to extract a few
notes from his memorandum book, but it is
quite evident that at one period he must have
been in a most peculiar state. If, therefore,
any error is made, it must be attributed to
this.
From these notes, we gather that at the time
people usually go to bed, he, at the call of duty


perambulated the deck, where he held several
animated conversations with sundry gentlemen
of his acquaintance, with whom he appears
shortly afterwards to have parted. Then he
received a message, and shortly after there are
some hazy marks which hint at champagne.
An hour-and-a-half afterwards he attended a
lecture, but appears not to have availed himself
of his professional character to obtain admittance;
inasmuch as he remarks (as well as we can
make it out) that a vote of regret was past
unanimously by the assembled company, that
the editors of this journal were not present at
this brilliant affair, in consequence of which
the whole of the valuable information about
Honolulu is lost to a despairing world. We
trust this may not eventually be the case.
Surely some one who was present will favour
us with particulars. The remainder of his
notes are as follow :
[They consist of illegible marks.]
until he appears by a desperate effort to have
recovered his usual ability, and proceeds, under
the head of shipping intelligence, we fear sur-
reptitiously obtained from the ship’s log book,
Six a. m., spoke the British barque Damie-
killetta, from St. Paul’s to Trinidade, with a
cargo of bricks to build penal prisons, for the
accommodation of those individuals who “vam-
osed” from the Sandwich Isles “between two
lights.” Seven, a. m. signalled the Danish
ship Anna Maria from Elsinore to Jamaica.
Cargo, yams and one bunyip. Captain reports
Shakspeare’s version of Hamlet incorrect, and
that Ophelia had opened a boarding-house.
Terms, 25s per week, paid in advance.
REV. MR. WILLIAMS’S LECTURE.
Last evening a lecture was delivered, pursuant
to announcement, by the Rev. Mr. Williams,
on Fiji and the Fijians. At eight o’clock it
was moved and seconded that Mr. Dailey
should take the chair. The chairman having
introduced Mr. Williams to the meeting, the
reverend lecturer proceeded with his subject.
Having humorously alluded to the general
geographical ignorance manifested in the mo-
ther country with reference to Polynesia, Mr.
Williams briefly pointed out the situation, ex-
tent, and history of Fiji. He then spoke of
the climate, productions, and structure of the
islands, discussing the various theories with
regard to the formation of coral reefs. A
review of the customs, superstitions, obser-
vances, and tribunals of the natives, closed a
very entertaining and highly instructive address.
Mr. Williams resumed his seat amidst general
applause. Mr. Harker then moved a vote of
thanks to the lecturer, which having been
seconded by Mr. Leary, and put from the
chair, was carried by acclamation.
We feel under the painful obligation of again
calling attention to the proceedings of the
party whose entertainment of Wednesday even-
ing was chronicled in our issue of Thursday.
This morning, about half-an-hour after mid-
night, a respectable saloon passenger called at
our office with the information that the party
alluded to were then assembled in the saloon,
engaged in discussing what the night’s or
rather morning’s amusement should be. We
despatched one of the gentlemen engaged
on this journal to the saloon, and having waited
a considerable time for his return, we left our
office, not without suspicion of foul play. A
paragraph in another part of this journal will
explain what happened. On stepping from
our door we stumbled over the prostrate body
of our reporter. He had been drugged, and
in the delirium of his intoxication persisted in
stating “that he had been engaged in analysing
coral polypi;” and stretching his hands over
the deck, informed us “ that he was a vasu
tabooing his property.” The spectacle was a
sickening one. We may observe that this un-
fortunate young man had last evening attended
Mr. Williams’ lecture. We can assure the
wretched band of night prowlers, who have
thus desired to stifle the censure of the press,
that their puny efforts are quite unavailing.
They are watched : let them beware. This
very night they will be followed; and perhaps
in our Monday’s issue the public will be in-
formed of a system of villainous dissipation, of
which few among us have any idea.
No. 34.— APRIL 16, 1860.
lx was intended to give a concert in the
saloon, on the evening of Saturday last; and
the necessary arrangements were nearly com-
pleted, when it was intimated that the band
had been applied for by the passengers in the
second cabin. It thus became needful to modify
the original idea, and the following songs and
recitations enabled many amongst us to “waste
an hour pleasantly enough.”
Mr. Mabson commenced with the “ Slave of
the Dismal Swamp;” and in the course of the
entertainment, gave also a Translation from the
Persian, and Reflections suggested by a Visit
to the Tomb of that Napoleon, designated by
history, “the Great,” to distinguish him from
the individual of that name, called by Victor
Hugo, in a book of the same title, “the Little.”
Mr. Dailey repeated “ Queen Mab,” and “ Hodge
and the Vicar.” Mr. Branscombe followed with
a few lines from Byron’s Giaour; and, late in
the evening, with “Death of Murat.” Mr.
Anderson sang “Tam Fou’s Hat,” &c.; Mr.
Browning, “Mary Queen of my Soul.” The
pieces were all w 7 ell delivered, and the songs
well sung. Difficult, however, as it may be to
our friends to believe, it is nevertheless the
fact, that in “God save the Queen,” a break
down was successfully accomplished. By what


peculiar process of reasoning the idea has got
possession of the heads of some of our friends,
that Saturday’s amusement was in opposition
to a concert on deck, we confess ourselves
totally at a loss to imagine; but we emphatically
deny the truth of any such report.
DESCRIPTION OP THE
COUNTRY ABOUT “FRASER’S RIVER,”
RECENTLY STYLED “ BRITISH COLUMBIA.”
Some five years ago I spent much time in
the society of a gentleman who had resided
about three years in Vancouver’s Island and
the immediate neighbourhood. He spoke of
the country in most glowing terms, and much
regretted that it was so thinly populated by
Europeans, which to him was the only draw-
back to the place. He said that the rivers
teemed with fish of the most delicious kinds;
that the forests abounded in game; and that
the country was most beautifully diversified.
Mountains wild and romantic, stupendous and
majestic, rear their lofty summits to the skies,
and thrust their snow-capped heights deep into
heaven’s sapphire bed, inspiring the mind of
man, as he gazes upon their gigantic propor-
tions, with the most sublime awe, such as ani-
mated the soul of the Oriental poet when he
exclaimed, —
“ Stupendous prospect! Yonder lofty hills
Do suddenly uprear their tow’ring heads
Amid the plain; whilst from beneath their crests
The earth receding sinks. What, lo ! the earth
Seems upwards hurl’d by some gigantic power.”
In the wide valleys that lie between the cascade,
mountains, and the ocean, there is some of the
finest pasture land in the world, through which
numerous rivers & streamlets coui’se and sparkle
in the sun’s bright ray, as they wind along their
serpentine beds to the vast and mighty reservoir
—the great Pacific. Trees, with broad and
massive foliage, such as fill the forest with a
gloomy shade, are scattered in great profusion
on the hills, in the valleys, and up the moun-
tain’s steepy sides, from which timber, suited
for all the purposes of man, may be obtained.
The climate is the most healthy and salubrious
of any upon the American continent; the biting
winter winds which sweep across the eastern
states, and which require all the cunning of
man to protect him from their chilling blasts,
are arrested in their bowlings by that long and
lofty range—the rocky mountains. The sum-
mer months are exceedingly mild and pleasant;
the country about Fraser’s River, being situated
in Lat. 49<> N., is 550 miles further from the
equator than New York, so that the rays of the
sun fall less directly in the former than in the
latter place, and as a consequence, they have
not the excessively hot summers which are
experienced and have to be endured by the
people in the eastern states of “Uncle Sam’s”
territory; and then the rays of the summer’s
sun are so tempered by the northern gales, that
they fall softly as moonbeams upon the lovely
landscape that stretches its undulating and ver-
dant face beneath. I. X. L.
Thy form is graceful, and thy tread
Light as the down by thistles spread;
Thy cheeks are full of blushing bloom,
Thy breath like dewy flowers’ perfume ;
Thy lips are velvet, soft and bright,
They thrill the touch, and charm the sight;
The “ tout ensemble” of thy face
Is matchless in the realms of space;
Those spirits that glide by unseen
Have tried to catch thee up, I ween ;
But that which pleases mortal sight,
Earth, earth will claim, ’tis her birthright.
Thy fairy form, alas ! it must,
Like autumn leaves, return to dust;
’Twill fall as snow-flakes to the ground ;
But then thy spirit it will bound
To worlds unknown, to realms of light,
To fairer worlds, to realms more bright;
Then who would bid thy spirit stay,
To hold its tenement of clay ?
Still, lovely maid,
Until the shade
Of death shall o’er thee fall,
My throbbing heart
Would never part
From thee, its all in all.
I. X. L.
Divine service was performed yesterday by
the Rev. T. Williams, at quarter-past 10 a.m.
and 2,30 p. m.; and by Mr. Thompson, at
quarter-past 10 a.m. and 6.45 p.m. Each
service was well attended.
A concert took place on deck, on Saturday
night. We have not received any particulars
respecting it, and other engagements prevented
our presence. Judging from the applause be-
stowed by the audience, the concert must have
been eminently successful.
We are very much gratified by the proof
given, last night, of the tendency towards a
state of reformation in the conduct of our noisy
fellow Saloonites.
Before half-past twelve, our indefatigable
says that the large majority had retired to their
peaceful couches. And if a few remained on
deck beyond that time, no one, we are happy
to state, was in the slightest degree disturbed.
Since we published, a few days ago, with refer-
ence to the noisy and unseemly conduct of
certain parties, an article of the most thrilling
character —we have heard some of the ring-
leaders—(readers of Don Quixote and other vile
books j—most gravely exclaim that they had
turned over a new leaf of a yoocl hook. We
quiet folks may, for the future, hope to enjoy
refreshing slumbers during that period set apart
by nature for that necessary amusement.


OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Since our last issue, the sea has become | in th(
rougher than it has been for several days pre-! ings,
viously. The screw was taken up yesterday | shop,
morning; but as the wind, which had been |
freshening up during the morning, died away, i precii
it was again put down. We are now going on i Sible
very well, considering the want of favourable retur:
winds. The screw is doing its work well.— tion.
Number of miles on Sunday, 15th April, 211.1 his h
Lat. 11.38. S. Long. 30.31. W. The number large
of miles this day, 16th April, 217. Lat. 8.4. S. other
Long. 30.17. W. On Saturday, a French brig hopes
passed pretty close to us, probably bound for becor
New Caledonia. A great many other vessels hope
passed us since, but were out of sight.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 6.
The reefs run nearly north and south, taking
their rise generally from the south, and dipping
to the north. They, with few exceptions, un-
derlay to the west; when the underlay is to the
east, their continuance for any great depth (as
far as present experience goes) cannot be de-
pended upon, nor is the yield of the precious
metal, except in a very few instances, either so
large or so regular. Amongst the earliest reefs
discovered, are Specimen Hill (Eagle Hawk),
Victoria, New Chum, Diamond Hill, Glasgow,
Johnson’s, Long Gully, and Hustler’s. All of
these, except Hustler’s, are nearly in one direct
line, extending from Diamond Hill, on the
south, to Specimen Hill, on the north, a dis-
tance of eight miles: some portions of this line
remain as yet almost untouched; however, the
great number of shafts commenced on several
of these portions during the last six months are
likely, ere long, to make one continuous con-
nection of the whole. The Hustler’s Reef is
situated about a mile east of the above line,
and is surrounded by gullies (once) of astonish-
ing richness; it runs parallel with and close to
the Redan and Maiden Reefs, both of which
are well known for the great amount of gold
they have yielded and still continue to produce.
This reef was one of the very first opened, and
out of it many fortunes have been made; and,
without doubt, many more are yet still to be
made. The largest cake of amalgamated gold,
it may safely be asserted ever produced, or that
the world has ever seen, was taken from Mr.
Sibley’s claim on this famous reef. This mon-
ster piece of gold weighed 1270 oz., was sold
for £4970 sterling, and was purchased by the
Bank of New South Wales, Sandhurst. It was
the produce of the crushing of eighty tons of
quartz, which were mined from the claim, raised
and crushed all within three weeks, and was,
it will be admitted, a magnificent return for so
short a period of labour. This enormous mass
of metal created considerable sensation, even
on Bendigo, where cakes of gold are exhibited
in the gold-brokers’ windows on Saturday even-
ings, as plentifully as cakes in a pastry-cook’s
shop. This astonishing claim yielded, in about
nine weeks, upwards of £ll,OOO worth of the
precious metal. The fortunate owner, Mr.
Sibley, is one of our saloon passengers, and is
returning home with his family, with the inten-
tion, we think, of settling, to enjoy the fruits of
his industry. But as we believe he has left a
large interest in this valuable claim, as well as
other property, behind him, we have confident
hopes that he'will return amongst us again, and
become a permanent settler; if so, we sincerely
hope his good fortune may still adhere to him.
It is in contemplation to get the “ Merchant
of Venice” ready for Thursday next; and as it
is desirable that we should have a gala night,
we shall esteem it a favour if those friends who
are willing to assist would kindly communicate
their intentions as soon as possible.
Our appeal to our readers to search for miss-
ing numbers remains apparently unheeded, as
>ve have received none so far.
The following lines, no doubt, old acquaint-
ances of our readers, were suggested by Avhat
we presume to have been some performance of
the Psalms of David, similar to that of yester-
day. Complimentary as the fact may be, we
heard children, yesterday afternoon, singing on
the quarter deck; not croaking, as we call the
wretched failure of Sunday morning.
Our choir would scarcely be excused
Even as a band of raw beginners ;
All mercy sure must be refused
To such a set of croaking sinners.
If David, when his toils were ended,
Had heard these blockheads sing before him,
To us his psalms had ne’er descended,
In furious mood he would have tore ’em.
The luckless Israelites, when taken
By some inhuman tyrant’s order,
Were ask’d to sing, by joy forsaken, >
On Babylonian river’s border.
Oh ! had they sung in notes like these,
Inspired by stratagem or fear,
They might have set their hearts at ease,
The devil a soul had stay’d to hear.
From Byron’s “ Granta.”
No. 35.— APRIL 17, 1860.
The pleasures of journalism have been so
frequently descanted upon by abler pens than
ours, that we do not care to enumerate them
on the present occasion.
In a limited community like ours, it is some-
times necessary to reply to charges made
verbally, and to waive that etiquette, which
requires communications to be written and


forwarded to the office for publication. Such
a necessity has now arisen. The assertion has
been made that the contents of our leader
yesterday are untrue.
We have endeavoured to state the truth in
this journal on all occasions ; it but remains
for us to remark that our article of yesterday’s
date is no exception to this rule—lt is “in
spirit and in letter” true, as the writer (whose
name is hereto appended) reiterates.
William Branscombe.
We understand that Wednesdays and
Saturdays are to be devoted by the second
cabin and intermediate passengers to the
recreations of music and singing. We wish
them every success. We hear they have
amongst their numbers several very good
singers.
The rehearsal yesterday went off fairly, and
we are in great hopes that by the appointed
time (Thursday evening next) every body and
every thing will be ready.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 7.
Of all reefs yet opened in the colony the
Victoria Reef, Bendigo, from the immense
quantity of gold it has produced, as well as
from its regularity of bearing stands pre-emi-
nent. This world-famed reef is situated on a
rather steep hill, at the head of Iron Bark
Gully, the hill having a rapid decline towards
Long Gully, and along its base are the quartz
workings.
The credit of first discovering the great rich-
ness of this hill is generally accorded to Messrs.
Ballerstedt and Sons (Germans) and we believe
justly. Their claim is situated at the extreme
south, and highest point of the hill; it is 48
yards in length by a width of 80 yards, and has
yielded from its commencement up to six
months ago £208,000 sterling. Of this great
sum £98,000 was taken from what are termed
“ cross spurs ” alone, that is, leaders of quartz
lying often horizontally, and sometimes perpen-
dicularly or underlying, like the reef itself; but
mostly always joining the reef at some point.
These spurs were met with merely by accident
when working the claim. The remaining
£llO,OOO was obtained from the main reef.
Including Ballerstedt’s with the seventeen
claims immediately north, there has been taken
(up to six months since) the enormous sum of
£576,000 sterling. This, it will be understood,
is the result from eighteen claims, which be-
long to eighteen different parties, or companies
of miners, consisting of two, three, or four
persons in each party. But as a proof of the
extraordinary richness of the ground all these
claims together are only 474 yards in length,
and the deepest part of the workings is not
more than 250 feet from the surface. In Sep-
tember last the Iron Bark Quartz Mining Com-
pany went to considerable expense to obtain
correct statistics of the produce of this wonder-
ful reef, and from those statistics the above
figures are taken.
We have no hesitation in saying, from our
knowledge of the reef, and of the care with
which these particulars were collected, that they
are correct beyond dispute.
The Rev. T. Williams purposes delivering a
continuation of his lecture on Fiji and Fijians
on Friday evening next.
The entertainments in preparation for Thurs-
day evening next, consist of a scene from “ Love
and Pride, ” a few songs, and three scenes from
the Merchant of Venice.
Found—pair spring Spectacles.
Wanted—Longfellow’s “Miles Standish” re-
turned to the Editor.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Shortly before three p. m. yesterday, we
spoke the Hamburg barque Malvina Vidal, and
soon afterwards a brigantine. Late in the
evening a ship passed us, but too far off to
signal, and. at night a vessel, apparently large,
passed very near us on the larboard side. This
morning another small craft passed us. All
the forenoon was very sultry and close, but at
about two p. m. a squall passed over us, accom-
panied by slight rain, which will probably cool
the air a little. Lat. 3.59. S. Long. 29.31. W.
Distance run, 250 miles, 41 days out.
It is very desirable that the custom of giving
liquor to the crew to celebrate the “ the crossing
of the line,” should be more honoured in the
breach than the observance. The sailors are
supplied with grog by the ship.
No. 36.— APRIL 18, 1860.
Our attention has been directed to the fact,
that certain individuals are in the habit of
leaving the bath room in a state of semi-nudity,
and drying themselves below, much to the an-
noyance of the ladies whose berths are situated
there. We feel satisfied that reflection will
hinder a repetition of such behaviour.
We understand great attempts are already
made that to-morrow (Thursday) shall be “ the
great night.”
We were favoured with a view of the new
drop scene, and consider it a highly creditable
performance to all who have so kindly taken
so much trouble about it. The arrangements
for the stage “ fixings,” we are informed, will
be far superior to any hitherto made. The
rehearsals are very satisfactory, and we are
informed another will take place at half-past


one o’clock to-day. We are promised two
songs by a lady, and although not able to give
the programme to-day, are justified in stating
it will be A 1.
We solicit a little assistance for writing the
programmes. Donations of narrow ribbon,
accompanied by tenders for sewing the same
on, thankfully received.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS —ALLUVIAL DIGGINGS.
No. 8.
Among the Bendigo golden reefs, the next
in importance to the Victoria is without doubt
the Johnson’s. This highly auriferous reef has
been worked with immense results during the
last four or five years. But it is only from the
mining operations of the last eighteen months
that anything like valuable records have been
obtained of the yield of gold from the several
claims. This reef is situated at the head of
California gully, and commences in that gully
immediately at the foot of the celebrated
Windmill-Hill reef. It runs in a line nearly
north from this point for about 800 yards—
that is, an extent of about 800 yards was taken
up by some seventeen different parties along
this line, and to this length the name of the
Johnsons only applies, although there is not
the slightest doubt but that the Windmill-Hill
on the south, and the Anglo on the north, are
both the same reefs as the Johnson. The dif-
ference in the names of reefs on the same line,
so close to each other, may be a matter of sur-
prise to those who are not aware of the cause.
It is easily explained. When the reefs were
first searched for, as stated in a previous paper,
all the hills bearing any appearance of a reef
were taken possession of; and soon as a reef
was found on one hill, the discoverers gave it
a name, although at the very time there might
be prospectors within 300 yards from either
end of them, and when those prospectors
found a reef they named it also. But in a
short time they were to be one and the same.
The folly of this carelessness is now very appa-
rent, from the many cases of disputed bounda-
ries, encroachments, and bearings. It causes
considerable confusion and annoyance, and often
the loss of valuable ground to the original
holders.
GRAND REVIEW.
Major-General Me. I. reviewed his forces on
Monday last on the quarter deck of the Great
Britain. By the aid of sundry old newspapers
(formed into foolscaps) a most formidable
appearance was presented by the corps, which
marched around the deck, we believe, three
times. While going through the rest of their
exercises, an individual present proposed that
they should divide and fight. This proposition
was contemptuously rejected by the youthful
heroes, who immediately commenced an action
of assault and battery upon the proposer of the
atrocious thought, which would have let loose
the dogs of civil war amongst our hitherto united
society. Had a blow been struck, we know
not what the consequences would have been;
but discipline prevailed. In a voice unlike
thunder, the Major-General gave the word of
command, “ right about face,” followed by
“ quick march,” and the army baffled, but not
defeated, and still claiming the victory, left the
field.
The Editor -would feel obliged, by any missing
number of “the Vain Effort” being returned.
We are compelled to draw attention (once
more) to the water-closets in the saloon. It is
absolutely necessary that more care should be
used by parties frequenting them. There is
now constantly a good supply of water.
A concert is, we believe, intended to take
place to-night on deck. No particulars have
been sent us. We are therefore unable to
publish programme.
As the ship supplies the crew with grog, it
is especially requested that the passengers will
not, by giving spirits to the sailors, (on the
occasion of crossing the line) endanger the
safety of the vessel.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
During the night we passed two vessels, one
apparently very large, which -was very near us.
This morning two small sails have been visible,
but too far off for us to signal them. At noon
this day we were 32 miles from the Line, and
shall consequently cross it between three and
four o’clock, and thus take our dinner in the
northern hemisphere. Lat. 00.32. S. Long,
(chro.) 29.43. W. Distance, 208 miles.
Commercial Intelligence.—Babies, £5 offered
for one, and refused. Hats, ss. given for one,
and sold again instanter for 10s. Good cigars
very scarce and dear.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —Something in the shape of a baby’s
perambulator made its appearance on deck
yesterday. No doubt some of the nurses would
have found it very useful had it not been ob-
jected to by one or two of our delicate sa-
loonists, especially by one gentleman (if entitled
to the name) who came on deck this morning,
and in a very authoritative manner said that if
the Captain would not throw the baby carriage
overboard he would. It seems to me that if
that fastidious person had simply remarked to
the o-wner of the invention that it annoyed him
it would have been at once dispensed with, and
the gentleman’s character for courtesy would
not then have been forfeited.
Pater Familias.


No. 37.— APRIL 19, 1860.
Writing in the midst of effluvia exceeding
those which caused the plagues of Egypt, which
it would beggar the English language to des-
cribe, and bid defiance to the joint productions
of Rimmel and Jean Marie Farina, assisted as
they might be by that powerful aid, chloride of
lime, we still endeavour to produce (in a tro-
pical climate) our daily paper, and ive really
do implore, at the hands of the Captain and
Surgeon, that protection which may be neces-
sary to avoid a repetition of the nuisance which
drove ladies and gentlemen together from the
saloon this morning. Whether it was caused
by the water closets, or unwashed linen, or any
other removable cause, we know not; but if
the cause be beyond controul, we do earnestly
entreat to know by what we are to be poisoned,
to the end that we may die easy in our minds.
It is intended this evening that the perform-
ances in the saloon shall take place as follows ;
Song,. .Little Nell A Lady.
Recit... Love and Pride Mr. Mabson.
Song,.. Bonnie Dundee A Lady.
Song,.. The Englishman Mr. Etheridge.
Song,., Annie my own Love . Mr. Browning.
Song,.. Alonzo the Brave Mr. Murray.
The Merchant of Venice, with a new drop
Scene.
Song,. .The Great Britain .... Mr. Collin.
To conclude with
God save the Queen, by the entire Company.
A Concert took place last evening on the
deck. It attracted a numerous audience, who
testified their pleasure by their applause. We
have received programme nor report,
and are consequently unable to give full parti-
culars. Considerable amusement was afforded
by the appearance of a basket-man, with the
old cry of “ apples, oranges, nuts, and ginger
beer.” At the conclusion of the performance
“ Collingwood, ’S’Kilda,” &c. became the fa-
vourite cries, and reminded one forcibly of the
closing of the Theatre Royal, Melbourne.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 9.
The claims that have gained for the John-
son’s Reef its celebrity are those belonging to
Early & Co. Chappie & Co. Me Callum & Co.
Thorpe & Co. Abbot & Co. and Murdoch & Co.
Those very rich claims are all comprised in the
short length of some 200 yards, and the produce
of this small piece of ground, during the last
eighteen months, has exceeded 25,000 ounces
of gold. Two months ago the weekly yield
averaged 500 ounces, with every prospect of its
increasing. The other claims along this line
have given large profits on the outlay required
for working them, but the claim-holders have
been, in a manner of speaking, only scratching
upon the surface, although quartz has been
raised from their claims which have yielded 14
ounces to the ton. This was only found in
patches, whereas Thorpe’s Reef, as the under
reef is named, runs more regularly, and its
results are much larger, as much as 120 ounces
to the ton having been taken from It. The
usual crushings rate from 20 to 50 ounces to
the ton. The reason that the claim-owners
north of the above rich ground have not done
so well is, because the reef, from the spot where
it was struck, dips to the northward a foot and
a half in every three feet, thus requiring the
northern claims to sink to a much greater depth
to reach it; this they were unable to accom-
plish, in consequence of the great influx of
water met with at a depth of about 220 feet
from the surface.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
The afternoon yesterday was fine, and the
evening pleasant, and although the water did
not sparkle as on the previous night, many of
us remained on deck to a late hour. This
morning has been close and. sultry, in spite of
almost ceaseless rain. The sea, which this
morning was “ calm as a sky without a cloud,”
is now rising in long, although not heavy,
waves.
Latitude, 2.51. N. Long. 30.24. Distance
run, 208 miles.
No. 38.— APRIL 20, 1860.
According to arrangement, the first drill of
the “ Great Britain Peaceful and Useless Rifle
Corps” took place this morning at 10.30, a. m.
Under ordinary circumstances we should have
dismissed the affair to the oblivion it deserves,
merely remarking that it appeared to be got up
in imitation of the* children’s play of Monday
last, and was anything but an improvement on
that performance. As, however, some of the
gentlemen composing the corps, have thought
fit to endeavour to intimidate our peaceful and
quiet-loving Editor by a threat, that if we did not
give a favourable notice of the drill, they would
burn the office down, we give it more notice
than it would otherwise have received. At
about the time appointed, thirteen gentlemen
assembled, and after one failure, at the second
attempt, succeeded in counting thirteen cor-
rectly. A series of manoeuvres followed, and
were, so far as we could judge, well gone
through, except one beyond our comprehension,
viz: “raising the nipple,” but we presume, as
we heard no fault found by the commanding
officer, that this operation (whatever it may be)
was performed to the satisfaction of that gallant
gentleman. One of the corps had the good


sense to retire previously to the conclusion of the I scene
drill, and although branded with the letter D genth
in chalk, we consider it was intended to convey and s
not deserter but Deserver of thanks for courage. Jew, •
Should these meetings continue, we trust the had t
authorities will provide for the safety of the lende:
man at the wheel. besidi
Missing numbers of “the Vain Effort”—3,
18, 19, 22, 26, 30, and 31. It is particularly
requested that these numbers (if found) may
be returned to the Editor.
It is again our pleasing duty to record the
passing of as pleasant an evening as (under
the circumstances) we can expect.
The various songs and recitations were per-
formed satisfactorily, but we must make special
mention of “ Little Nell,” and compliment the
lady who favoured us with this truly beautiful
song on the taste with which she sung it. One
word, en passant, to the stage manager; we
should advise him in future to know when a
song is finished, and not keep a lady waiting
for the bell to ring, as he did last night—verbum
sap. We trust we shall not have occasion
again to speak of this.
The “ Merchant of Venice” merits something
more than a passing notice, not only from the
amount of time spent on its “ getting up,” but
because so many are engaged in it; and if one
performer misses his part, it casts a certain
amount of doubt over the others, as to who is
the next speaker, and frequently mars what
would otherwise have been a most effective
performance. We are thus particular, inasmuch
as the success of the first scene of this play was
last night jeopardised in consequence of loss of
memory; and as it is in contemplation to repeat
it, we trust each one engaged will perform the
common duty to themselves and to each other
of thoroughly mastering the words set down for
them before again appearing. We turn from
the unwelcome portion of our duty to the more
congenial one of praise, which we award un-
hesitatingly to every one engaged throughout
the two latter scenes. Portia was even more
distinct than on the previous occasion, and we
are satisfied was heard throughout the saloon.
Nerissa did the little falling to her lot well;
but to Shylock we are compelled to award the
palm of pre-eminence. In his reading of the
speech, beginning,
“ Signior Antonio, many a time and oft,”
he not only excelled anything he has previously
favoured us with, but we do not remember ever
seeing it on any stage more correctly delivered.
It was a perfect treat. Antonio dressed and
acted his part with his usual good taste: his
by-play (to which he pays far greater attention
than any other gentleman) was particularly
good, and his delivery of his (supposed) last
speech effective. Bassanio and Gratiano ac-
quitted themselves creditably; and in the trial
they -were quite at home. The latter
gentleman entered into the spirit of the revenge,
and served up the previously used words of the
Jew, with great gusto, when “the fair heiress”
had turned the tables on the Hebrew money
lender. Lorenzo had but little to do, and
besides that, was compelled (in consequence of
the smallness of the stage) to make way for
the more prominent characters, and stand very
far back; nevertheless, under these unfavour-
able circumstances, he did that little well, and
we should be much pleased, if opportunity offers,
to see him in a more showy part. The drop
scene was very good, and showed well, but did
not elicit the amount of admiration we consider
it was fairly entitled to. This may possibly be
attributed to the difficulty, nay, impossibility,
of obtaining a good light for it; but we do
thank the lady and gentlemen who painted it
for the trouble they have taken. It represents
Lorenzo and Jessica awaiting the return of
Portia, on that sweet moonlight night when the
two wives (after, of course, tormenting their
lords sufficiently) return the rings, and Portia
tells Antonio that three of his argosies had safe
returned.
We take this opportunity of thanking the
joiner for the extreme readiness he has at all
times shown, and for the many valuable sug-
gestions received from him, from time to time,
as to the fitting up of the stage, &c.
The band, as usual, acquitted themselves
well and wdllingly.
The occasion was taken advantage of to pro-
pose Captain Gray’s health. This our readers
will find reported in another column.
“ God save the Queen ” concluded the enter-
tainment.
We acknowledge the kindness of the ladies
who have lent dresses, &c., and trust everything
has been returned uninjured.
The Rev. T. Williams will deliver a lecture,
at eight o’clock this evening, on Fiji and the
Fijians. Subjects :—War, Cannibalism, and
Proverbs.
OU-R SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our Log.—Lat. (obs.) 5.49. N. Long. 30.33.
W. Distance run, 178 miles.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 10.
Sometime in 1855, the Government appointed
a gold fields commission, which consisted of Mr.
Panton, then resident Warden for the district
of Bendigo, Professor Me Coy, and Mr. Bracke,
of Melbourne.
This was the second gold fields commission,
the first (of which the Hon, John O’Shannassy,
and the Hon. J. P. Fawkner, were the head)


resulted in much good to the mining commu-
nity, but the second had quite an opposite
action. What the duties of this second com-
mission were intended to be, they themselves
(and perhaps the Government) only knew.
Suffice it to say, that what became publicly
known of their labours had a most prejudicial
effect upon the interests of the Bendigo gold
fields in particular, from the fact that quartz
mining operations were, in a manner of speak-
ing, paralysed for upwards of twelve months ;
and it is owing to the indefatigable exertions
of a few parties, that this important branch of
mining holds its present position. The theory
propounded by this sapient body was to the
effect, that gold would not be found in paying
quantities at any depth from the surface. They
gave utterance to this theory, and held forth
the opinion of the great Sir Roderick Mur-
chison, the Geologist, in support of it. They
also instanced several cases on Bendigo itself,
where gold had been found in large quantities
on the surface, and ran out entirely at a depth
of 50 or 60 feet.
( To be continued.)
Lost—a White Silk Pocket Handkerchief,
with a Pink Border. Also, a Red Silk ditto, un-
hemmed. Information communicated through
the Editor will oblige.
CAPTAIN GRAY.
The entertainment of last night (of which
a full report appears elsewhere) was brought
to a close in a very gratifying manner. Im-
mediately after the fall of the curtain, Mr.
Dailey rose and asked the gentlemen to charge
their glasses. He said, that having now passed
under the guardianship of our gallant Captain
from one hemisphere to another, he (Mr. D.)
had been requested by the saloon passengers
to propose to them the health of the Captain.
They were all doubtless aware of the interest
the Captain had taken, not only in their safety,
but in their amusements; how kindly he had
given all the assistance in his power towards
successfully carrying out the various modes of
entertainment which had been devised for
whiling away the tedious hours of a sea voyage.
Hitherto they had providentially only expe-
rience of Captain Gray as a courteous Com-
mander, bnt he (Mr, D.) felt sure, that if
circumstances had arisen, or should arise, to
call for that display of calm courage which
distinguished in moments of peril the British
sailor, they would all find our noble Com-
mander as courageous as he was courteous.
He would not detain them longer, but would
at once propose the health of Captain Gray.
The toast was drank with three times three,
and the song of “ He’s a jolly good fellow.”
Captain Gray, on rising, was received Avith
loud applause, and after thanking the company,
confessed that he was “ taken all aback,” and
“felt as if the screw was up and the wind
ahead.” He said that he was delighted to
have had the opportunity of rendering assis-
tance towards the general entertainment of
the passengers, and that he should at all
times find his own highest happiness in the
pleasure of all on board. Again thanking the
ladies and gentlemen for the manner in which
his health had been received, the Captain re-
sumed his seat amidst loud applause.
“GREAT BRITAIN’S” SALOON,
ADAPTED.
You’ve heard of the vessels that carry the brave,
From the new to the old world over the wave ;
TJp to this present time, no vessel afloat
Ever bore such a name as our noble steam boat:
Of her I will sing, she’s well known to you,
Our noble Great Britain, our captain and crew.
And those that sail in her will find out quite soon
The comfort we have in the Britain's saloon.
CHORUS,
Saloon, saloon, the Britain's saloon.
The comfort we have in the Britain’s saloon.
There’s nothing afloat can surpass our fine craft,
For comfort and peace reigns both forward and aft;
Inrough orvret weather there’s none can complain,
On board our fine vessel, of wind or of rain.
We’ve all sorts of amusements to pass away time,
There’s no one regrets or has cause to repine;
And those who sail in her will see very soon,
The fun that wo have in the Britain’s saloon.
Chorus.
Each day, after dinner, all try their exploits,
And one favourite game is throwing the quoits;
While some play backgammon and others play
chess,
No troubles or cares now our spirits depress.
And our Captain, good fellow, does all that he can
j To please every passenger, woman or man;
j As all bound to England will find out right soon
! If they’ll just take a trip in the Britain’s saloon.
Chorus.
Two evenings each week we’ve a concert at eight,
We’ve assizes on others, a play, or debate ;
Each night in the week for some fun’s set apart,
When every one joins with a good willing heart.
Our ladies, dear creatures, endeavour to please,
And make time pass short while we’re crossing
the seas;
So that all who sail in her must deem it a boon,
To partake of the fun of the Britain’s saloon.
Chorus.
There’s one thing quite certain, no rumour I quote,
We’re in one of the best merchant vessels afloat;
And if rumour that’s spoken shall ever be written,
A favourite ship has become the Great Britain,
For those spirits of fun can ne’er cease to live,
While we’ve love and we’ve laughter such fellows
to give;
By daylight, by dark, or by light of the moon,
Good fellowship reigns in the Britain’s saloon.
Chorus.


And now to conclude, may she carry the prize,
As from world to world on her errand she flies ;
And may each wind that blows beafav’ring breeze,
To waft this fine vessel across the rough seas.
And may other commanders ne’er have cause to say,
That they’ve taken the palm from our own Captain
Gray;
And as from his j oily face we must part very soon,
Let us sing to the praise of the Britain’s saloon.
Chorus.
The above song is not original, but “ adapted.”
Ed.—V. E.
ERROR
By some strange mistake our notice of the
Duke’s performance last evening has been
omitted. His dress was far more becoming
than on the previous occasion, and his role,
well learnt, was carefully and audibly delivered.
Mr. Collin also sung with great eclat the song
The “ Great Britain,” which, by desire, is this
day published.
No. 39.— APRIL 21, 1860.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 11.
The damper thus thrown upon our quartz
resources was fortunately removed by the
magnificent results derived from the claim of
Early, Cartwright, and Co., on the Johnson’s
reef. This party, with creditable energy,
though suffering under financial difficulties,
managed to continue sinking their shaft, in
face of the generally-accepted theory of Me
Coy and Co., and at a depth of 150 feet from
the surface. They -were rewarded for their
indomitable perseverance by striking a reef of
extraordinary richness. Two tons of the quartz
picked from the first kiln raised, yielded upwards
of 350 ounces of the precious metal, and the
remainder of the kiln gave 24 ounces to the
ton. The quartz afterwards was crushed as it
was taken from the claim, that is, it was sent to
the crushing machine without being packed,
and averaged about 35 ounces to the ton, to a
depth of 210 feet. At this point the reef
appeared to be what is termed running out.
Mr. Cartwright (another passenger with us) at
that time, sold his interest in the claim, which
was one fourth share of 26 yards (the length
of the claim) for £1,300, to a Mr. Dowding.
The reef, instead of resulting as was anticipated,
continued to turn out well, and Mr. Dowding
had the satisfaction of realizing his money out
of the produce of the claim in three months
from the date of purchase, with £5OO as profit
on his plucky speculation. He then sold for
£5OO more (thus clearing £1,000) to Mr.
Chappie, a miner on the reef, and the latter
has found it a very fortunate investment. The
claim is now some 250 feet in depth; and from
present appearances and past experience there
is every reason to believe that the yield of gold
will increase as the mine deepens, rather than
decrease. The absurd theory of the commission
being so effectually blown encouraged the mi-
ners to turn to “reefing” with renewed vigour,
and the result has established the fact beyond
doubt that the reefs are richer at a great
depth than near the surface.
Last evening, at eight o’clock, the second of
a series of lectures upon the manners and cus-
toms of the Fijians was delivered in the saloon
by the Rev. T. Williams. The lecturer com-
menced by remarking upon the taste for warlike
pursuits always evinced by savages, and gene-
rally even by civilized nations. He made a very
humorous allusion to the Great Britain band
of volunteers. After expatiating with great
eloquence upon the peculiar mode of carrying
on war as practised by the Fijians, he dwelt
forcibly upon their cannibalistic propensities.
The third portion of his lecture was devoted to
the proverbs of the Fijians. Many of their
proverbs are most beautiful. They seem to be
as fond as the ancient Spartans were, of the
laconic style of speaking. The great wonder
is that a people, so remarkably gifted as the
Fijians are intellectually, should abandon
themselves to the detestable practice of roasting
and eating one another. The chair was occupied
by our respected fellow-passenger Mr. Barker,
who introduced Mr. Williams to the audience.
A vote of thanks to the Rev. lecturer was pro-
posedbyMr. Mabson, and seconded by Mr. Leary.
Mr. Dailey then rose, and in a humorous address
proposed a vote of thanks to the Chairman,
who very facetiously reminded Mr. Dailey that
he had made a slight mistake, by putting the
cart before the horse—Mr. Williams not having
had time to respond to the audience, Mr. Me
Intyre, whose highland blood was up, attacked
his friend, Mr. Leary, in consequence of an
allusion he had made to the Great Britain
volunteers. Everything went off very well.
Mr. W. has promised the ladies a great treat,
next Friday.
TAIES OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE.
INTRODUCTION.
Mr. Robert Sinclair returned to Glasgow in
May, 1858, after an absence of six years, the
last four of which were well employed in gaining
a mercantile position in Melbourne. He
anticipated a stay of six months in his native
country, the first joyous week of which he had
just completed when our narrative commences,
in the society of his nearest relatives. He had
experienced no greater pleasure outside the
paternal domicile than in renewing his old
friendship with the family of Dr. Gillespie, a


physician in good practice, who resided in St.
Vincent Street.
Thither he bent his steps on one of those
bright May mornings, and on being ushered
into the Doctor’s dining-room, he found the
young gentleman he was specially in quest of,
Master David Gillespie. “ Davie ” had com-
pleted his fifteenth year, was an active, frank
youth, who, after having had the foundation of
a good education well and securely laid at a
public school, had advanced his knowledge of
Latin and Greek by an attendance at the uni-
versity of his native town, during the session
which was just concluded. He was therefore
unoccupied, and Mr. Sinclair’s object in calling
was to secure Davie’s lively company on an
excursion which he that day meditated down
the river to Greenock.
Davie was stretched on the sofa, reading
“ Old Mortality,” which he threw from him as
he sprang up to meet his friend. After an
exchange of ordinary salutations, and after
enquiries by Sinclair for the other members of
the Doctor’s family, he lifted the book which
the young idler had thrown aside.
“Ah I I see you are filling your head with
these fancy pictures of the old times—very
romantic and exciting, and very deceptive.”
“ I fancy,” said Davie “ that Scott knew
more of those old times than most men of his
day or of ours.”
“ Yes, as an antiquarian, and his zest in
depicting an old custom, is in proportion as it
is antique and singular, and being a romancist
as well, of course he portrays the actors on
those occasions of violence and of suffering
which have occurred in our national history, as
heroes and heroines, as the favourites or the
victims of fortune. But depend upon it,
though in his pictures those old times seem so
romantic, yet our grandfathers and grandmothers
a great many removes back, often found them
fruitful in injustice and misery, and would
have blessed their stars if there had succeeded
quiet and humdrum times like these.”
“ Truly romance is dead and buried, and
trade rules over all now-a-days,” was Davie’s
reply.
“ I could tell you tales of colonial life which
would make you confess that romance is not
dead, and that heroes and heroines still exist
in the flesh. There never was a time when
adventurous and brave spirits had ampler scope.”
“Well,” said the youth, “ when will you com-
mence ? I am all attention.”
Sinclair replied, that he had a commission
to a Mrs. Ferguson, in Greenock, from her son
in Victoria, which he proposed to execute that
day ; and that if Davie accompanied him he
would narrate the colonial career of his friend
in Victoria, which he thought would prove as
interesting as some romances, and had the
recommendation of being true.
Davie needed no further inducement, but
leaving word that both Mr. Sinclair and he
would be back in the evening, set off with his
friend.
(To be continued.)
We regret that our space does not permit
our insertion of detailed notices of the rifle-
corps gathering and other important matters,
which must lie over till Monday.
We trust no gentleman will (after the notice
issued this day) trespass on the space allotted
to ladies for their sole use, viz : the Ladies’
Saloon.
We draw attention to the programme here-
with, and trust a full attendance will encourage
the performers to outshine each other. It is
in contemplation to perform the “ Merchant of
Venice,” after a musical melange, on Monday
evening next, on deck, weather permitting.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Lat. (obs.) 8.35, N. Long. 32.48. W. Dis-
tance run, 214 miles. Total distance in 45
days, 10769 miles, or averaging 239£|- miles
per day, being her average distance on her
splendid outward voyage of 55 days 16 hours.
No. 40.— APRIL 23, 1860.
About six leagues from a fort of Niagara, in
Canada, is the greatest cataract in the world,
known by the name of the “Water Falls of
Niagara.” The river at this fall runs from
SSE. to NNW., and the rock of the fall forms
a figure resembling a semicircle or horse-shoe.
Above the falls, in the middle of the river, is
an island about eight hundred feet long, the
lower end of which is just at the perpendicular
edge of the fall.
Before the water comes to this island it runs
very slowly, compared with its rapidity when it
has passed towards the fall; its .swiftness there
is very remarkable. The water is perfectly
white, and in several places is thrown high in
the air. The flow of water on the west side is
more abundant, and whiter than on the oppo-
site, and seems almost to outfly an arrow in
swiftness. When a person is at the fall, and
looks up the river, he may fancy that the water
is extremely steep, almost like the side of a
hill; but in looking at the side of the fall it is
impossible to describe the astonishment it oc-
casions.
The height of this extraordinary fall has,
according to mathematical observations, been
ascertained to be 137 feet. It may be observed
the sound or roaring of this “gigantic” fall has
been heard at the enormous distance of 40 miles,
but seldom further, as the flow at various periods
is either gentle (comparatively speaking) or an
overwhelming torrent; this is regarded as an
Infallible prognostication of rain or other bad
weather.


From the place where the water falls, there
arises a prodigious vapour, as thick as smoke,
so much so, that when viewed at a distance, a
stranger would suppose the whole forest to he
on fire. These vapours rise high in the air when
calm, but are in time dispersed by the wind.
These vapours are so penetrating that if one
walks into them, it resembles in some degree
a shower bath. Birds in innumerable quan-
tities are often found dead at the bottom of the
fall—the condensed state of these vapours kill-
ing them —or they are so confounded by the
roar—or their wings become so saturated, that
they fall helpless.
( To he continued.)
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
April 22. Lat. 11.22. N. Long. 35.00. W.
Distance run, 218 miles.
April 23. Lat. 14.52. Long. 37.12. Dis-
tance run, 240 miles.
Total distance run, 11,227 miles in 47 days,
or an average of 238 miles per day.
We understand a concert, commencing at
half-past seven o’clock this evening, will be
followed by the “Merchant of Venice,” on deck.
We hear great works are going on to render
the attempt successful, and trust the weather
will be favourable. We have not yet received
the programme.
A TALE OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE.
When the steam boat, on which Mr. Sinclair
and young Gillespie had embarked for Greenock,
had got clear of the busy Broomielaw, the
former commenced his promised Australian
story, which we will repeat in our own fashion.
It was a simple narrative of a young Scotch-
man’s career in Victoria, and might be para-
lelled by a thousand examples in that colony.
Adam Ferguson was born and bred in
Greenock, was apprenticed at the age of twelve
to a baker in the next street, and served his
five years without the occurrence of any inci-
dent worth remarking.
But that apprenticeship system is capable of
improvement, unless it is designed that English-
men shall be the slaves of business though life,
in which case the sooner they are broken in the
better.
Young Adam, and forty-nine in fifty youths
in the same trade, had far harder work and
usage than the negro slaves of the same age in
Virginia. Your hard honest old British shop-
keeper may be safely backed to screw double
the work out of a fifteen-year-old lad, against
your swearing, smoking, Yankee Planter, and
at a less expense. Compare a fat, glossy, scamp
of a young nigger with the pale-faced appren-
tice of the English baker. They are both
treated as mere machines, of course. The
Yankee feeds his machine three times a day,
and has often the toil of thrashing him, and
eight or ten hours work a day on the average
is the outside result. The honest old Scotch
or English baker gives his machine two pairs
of boots in a year, sends him to his mother for
all his meals, and gets out of him fifteen or
sixteen hours a day of good steady labour. If,
during the fifth year, he gives him ss. a week,
that scarcely supplies food to keep him going;
and as to “casing,” or clothing, the Yankee
owner has to incur some trivial expense, from
which the more fortunate British owner is free.
It is clear, that for economy and efficiency there
is not to be found, even in the smartest nation,
a machine to compare with the British baker’s
apprentice.
( To he continued.)
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 12.
As proofs of the great riches of the Bendigo
quartz veins, we have selected small portions of
Hustler’s, Victoria, and Johnson’s Reefs; and
we have endeavoured to show that in our opi-
nion those very portions, when proper appliances
are brought to bear, are sure still to continue
producing the precious metal, and in all proba-
bility in much larger quantities than ever, the
views of many wise men , however, being to the
contrai’y. We have so many reefs, and they have
all proven more or less their value, that we
might proceed describing them in a similar
manner for months to come, and then we are
certain that the subject would be far from ex-
hausted, for as we would proceed, so would
their riches come forth. But as with all its
pleasures our voyage is drawing rapidly to a
termination, we must hurry through, as we
purpose taking a glance at the several com-
panies lately formed, stating the causes which
led to their formation, and giving, to the best
of our knowledge and belief, our opinion of
their prospects and chances of success. Many,
no doubt, will wonder why reefs, so long proved
to be highly auriferous, should ever fall into
the hands of companies, or that outside ca-
pital should require to be called in to aid in
their further development. This has been
brought about principally through the want
of proper legislation, but partly in conse-
quence of a repugnance existing amongst the
miners themselves to co-operate with each
other. All over the gold field, when a certain
depth is reached, (varying, according to the
elevation of the hill on which the shafts are
sunk) water is struck in such quantities as
render individual efforts quite unable to cope
with it. The claims held under the “Miner’s
Rights” are generally small; and those parties
that are fortunate in working the quartz before
the water level is reached, in many instances


4.40 a. m.
15
99 99
16
20,170
From noon,
16
99
17
25,256
99
17
18
24,777
99
18
>> J)
19
24,275
99
19
9* 99
20
24,341
99
20 to 10.19 p.m.
21
10,542
abandon their claims rather than erect the
machinery necessary for pumping them, because
there is no law to compel their neighbours,
who may be within a few yards of them, to pay
their share of the expences requisite for work-
ing the machinery, although those neighbours
may gain equal advantages with the parties
erecting the machinery.
The competition, on Saturday afternoon and
evening, (as to who should most amuse the
passengers on board the Great Britain ) was
very great.
A gentleman gave a most amusing and in-
structive Lecture on Tahiti, stating, in his
whole experience, that he had never met with
more pretty women, or handsomer men. In
fact, the wonder to those who heard him speak
of the former was, that he ever summoned up
courage to leave them. He also stated a fact
in natural history, which, for the information
of those who may require it, we snatch from
oblivion, and preserve it in the pages of “the
Vain Effort.”
It appears, if you drive a pig into a swamp,
(said pig weighing 301 b.) and leave him there
the right time, he will come out as fat as butter,
and weighing 112 lb. This can however only,
as we understood the lecturer, be accomplished
in these remarkably productive islands.
THE LOVERS’ RAMBLE,
BY I. X. L.
My dear, to say I love you is most true,
Indeed, this heart of mine beats but for you;
Swells as it beats with an intense desire,
Say,w ill you fan the flame of love’s bright fire—
Shed sunny smiles on him who hopes to see
His joyous days on earth all spent with thee ?
Amid dame nature’s paths he seeks to rove
With thee, the darling object of his love ;
To catch sweet perfume from delicious flowers,
And revel mid their fascinating powers ;
To hear sweet music dropping from above,
As skylark soars upon his wings of love ;
O list! he pours his soft melodious song,
While angel spirits wake and round him throng;
His buoyant soul now springs for other light,
And heaven’s blue curtain screens him from my
sight;
As now I hear his thrilling strain, I think
Of heaven and earth, his the connecting link ;
See back he comes, wide circling on the sky,
The guest of heaven falls singing from on high;—
O welcome, welcome to the earth again,
Thrice welcome to thy soul-bewitching strain !
Come, love, we’ll seek for a sequestered nook,
’Neath shady boughs, hard by a babbling brook ;
On mossy banks we’ll sit in soft repose,
And all the secrets of our hearts disclose.
(To be continued.)
Divine service was performed, as usual, on
deck yesterday. The Rev. T. Williams preached
morning and afternoon, and Mr. Thompson
morning and evening.
STEAM.
HE VOLUTIONS.
Our engines started at 9.15 a.m. sth
April, and made, from that hour till
noon, sth April 2,758
From noon, sth April, till noon, 6th.. 24,849
„ 6 „ 6.0 p.m. 7 .. 5,166
Started again—
-9.10 a.m. Bth April, & till noon .. 3,239
From noon, 8 „ till noon, 9th 26,561
„ 9 „ „ 10 26,005
„ 10 „ „ 11 25,843
„ 11 „ „ 12 26,533
~ 12 ~ ~ 13 25,534
~ 13 ~ ~ 14 25,153
„ 14 „ „ 15 25,648
We again request any of our readers who
may find any of the numbers of “the Vain
Effort,” to return them to the Editor.
No. 41.— APRIL 24, 1860.
FEOM OUR OWN REPORTER—BY ELECTRICAL
GALVANISM.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —You are aware that I was instructed to
make enquiries into the truth of Shakspere’s
statement respecting a loan contracted in Ve-
nice, under what you deemed suspicious cir-
cumstances, and I am happy to inform you that,
after hearing last night the current version of
that transaction, I fell in with a gentleman who
stated that the Papal Government had been
deprived by the Great Napoleon of the papers
referring to this affair, but he possessed copies
of them, and in consideration of “ two cigars”
I might make what use of them I chose. It is
with pride I inform you then, sir, that my task
is accomplished.
I am, Sir,
Your affectionate Reporter.
“Y E VERITABLE HISTORIE OF Y E
JEWE AND Y E MERCHANTE,
CHAPTER Y K FIRSTS.
“ Now y e respectable parients of y e younge
Bassanio died when he was sixteene, and this
younge gentleman dyd straightway imitate the
bad example of y e ‘ prodigal sonne,’ and * spent
alle his substance in riotous livinge.’ One fine
morning he awoke with a very bad headache,
and proceeded to follow y e advice of ye late
virtuous and much respected Lord Byron, then
medical attendant to the Duke of Venice, at


that time suffering severely from influenza. He
accordingly did ring for his valet, and bade him
bring some hock and soda water. Gratiano
replied, that all the liquids, even the bottled
stout, had been cleared out on the previous
night. After an ineffectual search in their
pockets for sufficient money to obtain a drink,
they were compelled to declare their effects
inadequate, consisting as they did of one cork-
screw, a knife, part of a stick of tobacco, one
very dirty and very short black pipe, and seven
lucifer matches wrapped up in Portia’s last
love-letter, tied not with red tape, but one of
that fair lady’s love-locks.
CHAPTER Y E SECONDS.
“ Now Antonio was a Jew, and kept an
oyster shop. ‘ Other ventures he’ had also,
‘squandered abroad’—some not very creditable
either. [Note —by our Reporter. Very inge-
nious of Shakspere, but not over honest. He
certainly states the fact, but as our old friend
Macbeth touchingly remarks—He keeps the
word of promise to our ear, and breaks it to
our hope.] He did a little in the discount line,
post obits, and that kind of thing, if it seemed
safe. He had been concerned in several bubble
companies, mining, and insurance, and was
supposed by some few (not very well posted up)
individuals, to be 4 good.’ The truth, however,
is vaguely hinted at by Shakspere. Tubal, a
‘ wealthy Hebrew of his tribe,’ and two other
gentlemen of the same persuasion, were always
‘ open’ to play billiards with Antonio, and gene-
rally managed to clean him out. The intimacy
between Bassanio and Antonio commenced
when the latter was tried for conspiracy against
the former Duke, by agreeing with others to
swamp the gondola in which he wedded the
Adriatic. On this occasion Bassanio proved
what Mr. Weller, senior, wanted so badly—
a alibi. As the Duke reigning at the time of
this trial was concerned in this attempt, it will
clearly account for his evident leaning to the
side of Antonio. Bassanio, when locked out
for the night, or out of funds, as was, alas! too
often the case, found a home at Antonio’s, and
as it was more convenient than the pastrycook’s
round the corner, by the special request of
Bassanio, Portia directed her ‘ fair speechless
messages’ (always prepaid) to his house.
CHAPTER Y E THIRDE.
“And Shylock was a bright and shining light
in the community of Primitive Methodists. In
early life he married Madeline Smith, but poi-
soned her, was tried, tipp’d heavily the Duke,
and obtained a verdict * not proven.’ He, at
this date, was chiefly remarkable for walking
early to Church on Sundays, and the Rialto
every other day ; for his very pretty daughter;
the mildness of his temper; the suavity of his
manners, and the peculiar twang (nasal) with
which he ejaculated ‘amen’ for the special
benefit of unbelievers.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 13.
The Bendigo Water Works Company, al-
though strictly speaking not a mining company
itself, was the first to give an impetus to mining
companies on the gold fields; this Company
was projected for the purpose of supplying the
inhabitants of the town of Sandhurst, and the
miners of the district with water; the Company
are in possession of a large area (13 miles) of
drainage ground, and intend constructing nine
reservoirs, on such portions within the area as
present the most natural advantages for the
purpose; one of these (the largest) is being
constructed at such an elevation as it is calcu-
lated, will enable the Company to supply the
miners in the back gullies north of Bendigo
Creek; should this calculation prove correct,
the great quantity of water required by the
puddlers will be an immense source of revenue
to the Company. The principal reservoir as we
take it to be, and the one which has claimed
for the Company so much attention, is situated
at the foot of Golden Gully, on the Bendigo
Flat, it is some twenty-two acres in extent, and
as it is In one of the richest spots of the flat,
contains a large amount of gold. The Company
being bound to excavate it, very prudently
erected powerful puddling machinery, with the
view of extracting the gold from the debris,
and the trial they have given it has proved
highly satisfactory; the directors in their report
of February last to the shareholders, estimate
being able, from the result of their puddling
operations, to put the shareholders in possession
of property worth £162,000, and the original
capital was only £60,000 ; they reckon besides
to be able to give handsome dividends on the
former amount. The Company were going on
very smoothly in their arrangements for about
a year after its formation, till about July last,
when all at once, and without to us who were
located upon the spot, the smallest apparent
reason, a great demand took place in Melbourne
for their shares, an article that a few days
before would scarcely sell at any price, became,
in a manner of speaking, invaluable; £2 shares
were selling in less than 14 days from the first
movement at as high as £2O, being £lB pre-
mium ; it was then rumoured on all sides that
they were sure to rise to £5O; but no, the bait
would hook no more. The Bendigo and Mel-
bourne papers wrote hard, cautioning the
unwary, but for a time with little effect; how-
ever, the turn did come, and in spite of all the
bolstei’ing with grand opening of the works,
quiet inuendos respecting the great result from
the first washing, &c. &c., down they went
again, and with their fall the ruin of not a few.
(To he continued.)


ENIGMA.
There is a word of plural number,
Foe to rest and peaceful slumber.
Now any other word you take,
By adding S you plural make ;
But if you add an S to this,
Strange is the metamorphosis;
Plural is plural now no more,
And sweet what bitter was before.
D. W.
ACCOUNT OF THE FALLS OF
NIAGARA.
( Continued.)
Prodigious quantities of dead fowl are found !
every morning, below the fallthey afford
ample subsistence to the garrison at the fort.
The bodies of dead bears and other animals are '
often picked up. Their end has been brought
about in consequence of their attempt to cross
the water at the upper part of the fort. Some
melancholy instances of loss of human life
might be recounted if our space allowed their
insertion. My uncles related to me one
case. An unfortunate Indian, in a state of
inebriety, was reposing in his canoe, which
was properly secured a few miles distance from
the edge of the falls. A sailor from one of the
vessels on the lake happened to arrive at the
spot. In order to revenge himself on the
Indian’s wife, with whoiti he had a quarrel,
the mariner cut the cord which secured the
canoe, and set it adrift. The little vessel glided
swiftly down the stream, and in a few moments
it was seen to enter the rapids. The Indian,
awakened by the violent motion of the water,
started up, and on perceiving perilous
situation, grasped his paddles. Finding it
absolutely impossible to stem the force of the
torrent of water, he calmly folded his blanket
round his body, and resumed his former posi-
tion at the bottom of the canoe. In a few
moments he was hurried down the precipice,
and was never afterwards seen. Several large
vessels have been swept down the precipice
since that time, but strange to relate they have
never been discovered.
There is an island in the centre of the falls,
which was formerly supposed to be inaccessible,
but an accident that occurred a few years ago
made it appear otherwise. Two went
out from Fort Niagara, to hunt upon an island
that is situate on the middle of the river above
the great fall. This island was then stocked
with abundance of deer. Having indulged too
freely in the use of brandy (no doubt Hen-
tiessy's) they fell asleep, and their canoe drove
back with the stream, until it approached the
before-named island. They were awoke by
the noise of the cataract. At first they thought
they were lost. But after some Vigorous exer-
tion they effected a landing upon the island,
and exulted in the idea of their escape, but
upon cool reflection, found themselves to be
very little better off than they would have been
if swept down to the bottom of the falls.
After a while necessity compelled them to
invent a means of escape. They made a ladder
of the bark of lime trees, in order to reach the
water below, one end of the ladder they
fastened to a large tree, that grew on the side
of a rock above the fall. They then let the
rope fall down to the water below. By means
of this contrivance, they descended to the water
in the middle of the fall, and then threw them-
selves out into the water, thinking to swim to
shore. Hardly had they begun to swim, before
they were thrown back with violence against
the rock from which they started. After
several fruitless attempts they were compelled
to return to the island. They soon after saw
some men on the opposite shore, who expressed
pity for them, but gave them no hope of assis-
tance. They informed the commandant of the
fort of the situation of the Indians.
(To be continued.)
“THE LOVERS’ RAMBLE.”
( Continued.)
Or shall we seek a cave upon the shore,
Where ocean waters tumble, foam, and roar;
And as we view the splashing, flushing spray,
Toss’d by the unseen winds in sportive play.
Think that the soul, though hidden from the sight,
Speaks through the eyes, in gleams of love and
light ?
Love’s language of the heart is ne’er outspun!
No hand can paint the brightness of the sun.
Come then, my sweet! let’s hie to yonder cave,
Our hearts they bound as high as ocean’s wave.
Now swear beneath this adamantine rock,
That’s braved, and bid defiance to the shock, —
The wars of elements, —the throes of time, —
In firmness strong, —endurance most sublime, —
That hearts like our’s shall staunch, and truly beat,
Till elements shall melt with fervent heat.
0 swear that whilst the soul can call the past,
Our hearts shall beat as one, our loves shall last;
1 swear to it. Come join your oath to mine.
Aye, that is love, —that’s noble, —that’s divine I
Our feelings, thoughts, and souls together run ;
Our blood’s commingled, we are but as one.
O darkness ! —chaos, —ye have fled away,
Joy’s sun within my breast has shed his ray,
( To be continued.)
Lost—a mauve Tie. Return it to Bassanio,
A Forage Cap. Apply to the gallant Com-
mander-in-Chief, on drill.
The performances last night were very satis-
factory. We congratulate our friends upon
their success.
It is contemplated to get up a concert on
Thursday evening next. If our friends are
generally in favour of it, they will oblige by
stating to the Editor the part they are willing
to take with regard to it.
Mr, Anderson is hereby authorised to make
a further collection of one shilling, on behalf
of theatrical expenses.
By order of the Committee,
W. B.


OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Again we have to place before our readers
the gratifying statement of a good run. Lat.
18,14. N. Long. 39.8. W. Distance run, 231
miles. Total distance run in 48 days, 11,458
miles. Weather delightful.
No. 42,—APRIL 25, 1860.
Y E VERITABLE HISTORIE OF Y E
MERCHANT OF VENICE.
CHAPTER Y e FOURTHS.
“Easier far were it ‘to gild refined gold, to
paint the lily, or throw a perfume on the violet,’
than to praise Portia, if the testimony borne
regarding her by Jessica (Shylock’s daughter,
who ran away with a scapegrace by the assist-
ance of ‘ the mob,’ described in our opening
chapter, and received shelter and assistance
from Portia) be true. For the reader’s benefit
we quote,
* If two gods should play some heavenly match,
And on the wager lay two earthly women,
And Portia one, there must be something else
Pawn’d with the other; for the poor rude world
Hath not her fellow.’
But as full and complete evidence of Jessica’s
insanity exists in the fact of one woman praising
another—(omitting Act V. of this play, which is
overpowering evidence on the point) for when
in the world’s history—either before or since—
did such an event occur P we feel justified in
rejecting, as incorrect, her supposition. We
rather fancy that if two gods did play some
heavenly match, it would be for stakes very
different from two earthly women, and humble
as our lot in life is, we should be very sorry to
exchange lots with the winner, for in a week,
we are very sure, he’d wish himself in heaven
again. Portia, in fact, was disposed of by
lottery—setting a fine example, certainly, to
begin with—and this peculiar exhibition is
hardly disposed of when she pretends to ‘have
toward heaven breathed a secret vow to live in
prayer and contemplation,’ and leaves her house
in her husband’s absence, stating that she will
abide at a monastery two miles off.”
( To be continued.)
THE FALLS OF NIAGARA.
( Concluded.)
The commandant of the fort projected the
means of their delivery in the following manner;
the water that runs on the west side of this
island is shallow, especially towards the eastern
shore. The commandant caused some poles to
be pointed with iron ; by the help of these, two
Indians offered to walk to the island to save
their unfortunate countrymen, or to perish in
the attempt. Each had two poles to set to the
bottom of the stream, in order to keep him
steady, and by this means they safely reached
the island, and brought away the poor crea-
tures, who were almost exhausted for want of
food. On the west side of this island are some
small rocks. In former times, a part of one of
the rocks, at the side of the fall, hung over in
such a manner that the water, which fell perpen-
dicularly from it, did not moisten the space
under the rock. People could easily walk
along the land under the overhanging rock
without wetting their feet. Some years ago
the protruding portion of the rock fell down
into the water. The sun shines upon the lower
parts of the falls only from ten, a. m. till two,
p. m. During this time, a person looking from
below the falls sees one rainbow, and sometimes
two —one within the other. The brightness or
clearness of this phenomenon depends on the
quantity of vapour that results from the spray
produced from the rush of the cataract, for when
the wind drives the vapour away, the rainbow
disappears ; as soon as the vapour again arises
the sky resumes its former appearance. The
rock of the falls consist of a grey limestone.
I once saw some horns that were picked up
below the falls. These horns are supposed to
have been those of the moose, which had been
swept down the falls. The horns (which are
now in the New York museum) measured in
length seven feet eleven inches, and in breadth,
from point to point, thirteen feet eight inches.
A. G. McC.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 14.
Sometime about January, 1859, Mr. Kennedy,
a master blacksmith in Sandhurst, patented a
machine for puddling the alluvial soil; this
machine was estimated by the patentee to wash
daily 600 cubic yards, or fully 1,200 common
horse loads of earth. A number of gentlemen,
of some considerable influence in Sandhurst,
considered that such inventions as these should
meet with every encouragement, and being
convinced that the introduction of steam ma-
chinery, for puddling purposes, would be pro-
ductive of great good to the townspeople as well
as to the mining community, they determined
to assist Mr. Kennedy to get a company formed
for testing the capabilities of his patent. After
carefully examining models and plans of the
patent, they were positive, if it would not
accomplish the amount of work stated, that it
would, at all events, be an improvement upon
the horse-puddling machines. They were satis-
fied that at least a fair profit would be obtained
on the amount of capital required to carry out
the undertaking; having arrived at these con-
clusions, a prospectus was issued, and placed
before the Melbourne as well as the Bendigo


who had last joined the group, (our acquaint-
ance Adam) and insisted on the new comer
joining himself and the company in a glass
from the portly jug of ale which at the inter-
vals which occured, in the soldier’s humorous
and exciting stories, passed from hand to hand.
This jug showed in front the figure of jolly
Bacchus, who in truth presided over the scene,
inspiring the ardour of the son of Mars, and
melting the hearts of his hearers to yield to
his persuasions, and enlist under his glorious
banner. But the arts of the sergeant did not
on that day in the case of our hero succeed,
further than to lead him seriously to debate
with himself the question of enlistment.
( To be continued.)
A public meeting will be held to-morrow
(Thursday) morning, at which the attendance
of all the saloon passengers (gentlemen) is
particularly requested. It will commence at
ten o’clock in the stern sheets.
FROM THE “ ANVAR-I-SUHELI,”
A TRANSLATION FROM THE PERSIAN, BY I. X. L.
A monkey saw a carpenter seated upon a
piece of timber, cutting it; he had two
wedges, he drove one into the fissure of the
wood, so that the way for the working of the
saw might be opened, and the work rendered
more easy ; when the fissure was opened to a
certain extent, he knocked in another and
drew out the wedge behind. In this manner
the work was done; the monkey was greatly
amused. Suddenly the carpenter was called
away upon some pressing business, when the
monkey saw the place vacant, he at once seated
himself upon the timber, and was sawing
away when his tail fell down through the
fissure, the monkey drew out one wedge before
he had driven in the other, when the wedge
was drawn out of the fissure the timber clapped
together, and the monkey’s tail was nipped
between it; the monkey turned sick with
pain, and exclaimed in his agony, as he sat
secured,
Each should the business of himself attend,
Who does not thus does badly in the end.
TO CAPITALISTS, COMPANIES, AND
OTHERS.
To be disposed of, that very excellent Chance
in the Sweepstakes, from six o’clock, p. m. to
midnight of 7th May. If not sold soon, it
will be raftled for. Apply to the Editor.
THE LOVERS’ RAMBLE.
( Continued.)
Now I behold a paradise of flowers,
Whose balmy fragrance fills the shady bowers ;
A river stream glides by, wide, deep, serene,
And mirrors heaven within its banks of green ;
Tall lofty trees uplift their tufted heads,
And there, the mighty banyan far outspreads
Its branching arms, which downward send their
shoots,
That cling to earth; with many fibrous roots;
The rounded hills now wave with golden corn,
And valleys smile as on creation’s mom;
The luscious fruits hang tempting on the trees,
And birds with glossy plumage chase the breeze;
The ice-crowned mountains stand in awe sublime,
The giant land-marks through the reach of time;
Look on their vast proportions ! Upwards hurl’d!
As though companions of another world ;
The glorious sun rolls on in grandeur bright,
And earth illumines with his matchless light.
’Tis thus, when love invades the human mind,
A thousand pleasing thoughts themselves unwind;
Then let us love, for ’tis to live intense,
It fills the heart with joy, its recompense.
Now I will beg you spare my erring muse,
There’s much in it that calls for an excuse;
Think of the love I’ll bear throughout all time,
And then you’ll pardon all my faults in rhyme.
I. X. L.
No. 43.— APRIL 26, 1860.
MR. KETTLE’S LECTURES.
We have much pleasure in drawing the at-
tention of our readers to the lectures delivered
on Tuesday and Wednesday evenings, by Mr.
Kettle. The place selected was the stern
sheets; and we may confidently assert that
more entertaining, free, and easy instructions
were scarcely ever listened to than the lectures
to which we have referred. The subject of
Tuesday’s discourse was the Island of Tahiti —
its geographical position, climate, productions,
history, and the habits and manners of the
natives. The materials of the lecture were in
fact compiled from a leaf torn out of Mr. Kettle’s
autobiography. On Wednesday evening, the
Islands of Tanna Erromango, New Caledonia,
and the Isle of Pines, were the subjects of
discourse, involving in their treatment an
explanation of the nature of the trades between
China and the South Pacific. The particulars
connected with the sandal wood and tortoise-
shell trade were made extremely interesting.
On both occasions the attendance was very
great, including all the gentlemen in the saloon,
with the exception of some two or three who
were prevented from attending by other en-
gagements, and who could scarcely be expected
to find intensely-interesting matter in the por-
traiture of the Mexican beauties of the Monte
Tables, the lily-crowned lovers of Porpeete, or
the sea-foam Venus of the coral reefs of Tanna.
We omitted to notice that on the evening of
the first lecture, a lucid account of the early
stages of the development of San Francisco
was given, with a description of its social and
commercial life. The vociferous and unanimous
acknowledgments of the meeting were on
both evenings tendered to the lecturer, and


the business of the night -was brought to a
close by an al fresco entertainment on the
quarter deck.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 15.
Of the numerous mining companies formed
during that period the Long-Gully Reef and
Back Creek Mining Company, Bendigo, was
among the very first. This Company was put
before the public with an influential provisional
directory, composed of gentlemen resident in
Melbourne and Sandhurst. The prospectus \
was issued on the Bth of August, 1859, with a j
notice that the share list would close on the i
10th, allowing only two days for application I
for shares. The list closed according to notice,
and when the directors met they found there
were applications for fully three times the
number of shares they had to allot. This will
show the mania that then existed for shares in
mining companies. Every person possessing
such shares appeared from their great delight
in them to have discovered the long-sought-for
philosopher’s stone. It is strange, though
quite true, that there was scarcely an applicant
who did not by some means or other press one
or more of the provisional directors to be sure
to get all the shares that he applied for allotted
to him, urging his claim to this consideration
on the grounds that he wanted them solely for
investment, and not with the slightest intention
to speculate, as he was thoroughly convinced
of the genuineness of the undertaking and
prospects of the Company, so he said; but after
events have shown how much dependence
could be placed on such statements; indeed,
next day (in many instances) if a premium
was offered the said bona fide investor was
minus all the shares that were allotted to him,
on the faith of his representation, because the
provisional directors of the above Company
being desirous of at once beginning legitimate
operations were exceedingly anxious to allot
shares to none but those, as far as they could
judge, who were likely to retain them for some
time at any rate.
The Long Gully Reef and Back Creek Mining
Company has a subscribed capital of £40,000,
in 20,000 shares of £2 each. £1 2s. 6J. has
already been paid up, but from the very advanced
state of the works and the balance in hand, |
there is no likelihood of any further call being |
made; besides, so soon as the puddling works
start, the Company will, without doubt, have
returns weekly. This Company is as it were
two companies in one, being both a Quartz
Mining and Alluvial Puddling Company. The j
Company hold two sites, under ten years’ leases j
from the crown, consisting of 440, by 80 yards |
of quartz veins on the Long Gully Reef, and!
by 48 acres of alluvial auriferous land at the
Back Creek. These sites are about two miles
and a half apart, and are respectively situated
in portions of the gold fields celebrated for the
great riches they have produced, and still are
producing. The Long Gully land is between
the famous Victoria and Johnson’s Beefs.
The southern boundary peg of this Company is
•within three hundred yards of the Victoria
Reef Company’s land, which land cost the
shareholders £50,000 and 5 per cent, tribute
or royalty secured on the produce of gold taken
from the land. In length, this land is the
same as the Long Gully Company’s, but the
breadth is much greater. We have little
doubt but that the Eastern Victoria Beef runs
through the Long Gully Company’s land,
although the Company was not formed to
work this reef, still if it is within their ground,
it will, with the Long Gully Reef itself, prove
an invaluable property. The Long Gully
land, about fifteen months before the formation
of the Company, was in the possession of several
parties of miners, and had been worked for
some three years before then. The reef was
discovered cropping out of the surface on the
south, and worked towards the north with very
good results, until the water was reached; but
as stated in a former paper, none of the parties
would erect the necessary machinery to pump
the mines, nor would they co-operate with
each other for that purpose; the consequences
were that after hanging to their respective
claims for some time, without any prospect of
arrangements being come to, several of them
abandoned the ground altogether. Stewart
and party took possession of, and erected a
small engine for pumping and crushing; how-
ever, before the mine was much deeper, the
engine proved totally inadequate to keep the
water under. Mr. Stewart was anxious to erect
a more powerful engine, but his partners and
he could not agree about some matters in
connection with it, and this time an offer was
made to them for their rights to the land by
the prospectors of the Long Gully and Back
Creek Company, which was accepted. Stewart
and Co. took upwards of £16,000 out of one
shaft, and as a proof of their belief in a conti-
nuance of similar results, they hold some 300
shares in the Company.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Lat. 25.34. N. Long. 40.56. \V. Distance
run, 224 miles.
We intend delivering passengers at Liverpool
Sunday evening se’nnight. Those who desire
to remain till Monday morning may, we believe,
receive permission.


No. 44.— APEIL 27, 1860.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC,
No. 16.
The Long Gully Reef and Back Creek
Mining Company’s land is situated at the Back
Creek, Bendigo, (immediately below Spring
Gully, a gully which has continued, since it was
first opened, to yield large amounts of gold).
Its extent, as already mentioned, is forty-eight
acres. It will be a matter of surprise to many
to make out how the Company became pos-
sessed of such an extensive tract of auriferous
land, and requires an explanation here; as the
Company, when first established, had only a
right to twenty acres. In March, 1859, the
Government issued a code of regulations under
which mining leases were to be granted for ten
years. These regulations were long and anxi-
ously waited for; but when they did come,
instead of being the boon that was anticipated,
they were to all appearance going to make
matters worse than ever, from the many ridi-
culous conditions attached to them; conditions
that were framed, no doubt, with a view to
protect those working under the miner’s right,
and to conciliate them to the proposed new
order of things; but they had quite an opposite
effect, and were consequently condemned by
all. Shortly afterwards they were withdrawn,
and a fresh lot took their place, which although
far from satisfactory, were a great improvement
on the first. However, the Government con-
tinued making alterations in them almost every
week, either adding new conditions, or striking
out some of the old; so that it is supposed
(with how much truth remains to be seen) that
bye and bye they will be completed, and meet
with the approval of all. These regulations
allowed leases of auriferous lands for ten years,
part of the conditions being the erection upon
the leased land of adequate machinery, and the
working of the land at least nine months or so
in every year during the continuance of the
lease. The maximum of alluvial land for each
lease was twenty acres, and the minimum two
acres. This maximum was considered at that
time to be quite ample, as it was next to im-
possible to secure such an area of unoccupied
(one of the special conditions) auriferous lands
on Bendigo. The projectors of the Long Gully
Company managed to obtain the first twenty
acres by purchasing out the rights of the then
occupants (consisting of puddlers and diggers).
This was a matter of no small difficulty; but
money succeeded, and the land became the
property of the Company. Another party of
Bendigo gentlemen, following the example of
the projectors of the Long Gully Company by
similar means, (though at much greater ex-
pense, as the occupants were then aware of the
intentions of the purchasers) secured twenty-
eight acres, in two leases, of land almost close
to the above twenty acres. They tried to form
a company to work this land, but by the time
they got "it before the public the mania had
ceased, and no exertion or influence could prevail;
their effort was, therefore, a failure. Seeing
this, they offered their right to the land to the
Directors of the Long Gully Company, who
made a most advantageous purchase of it; and
from its proximity to their machinery, they are
able to work the whole of it without erecting
more, which will be an immense saving to the
shareholders. All the Company’s alluvial land
has been previously worked by diggers, but
very little (compared with other portions of the
field) by puddlers; it was being rapidly rushed
by the latter when the projectors got it into
their hands. The whole of the washing stuff
will average about sixteen feet in depth. The
depth, covering forty-eight acres of ground, will
show that the Company have many years’ work
before them. The puddling machinery (which
consists of one engine, forty-five-horse power,
and three large puddling cylinders, somewhat
after Hart’s patent, with all the necessary at-
tachments) is admirably situated to command
a large supply of that element (absolutely ne-
cessary in great quantities to carry on puddling
successfully) water. The Company have two
of the largest reservoirs in the district, one of
which is estimated to hold twenty-two million
gallons. To fill these they have rights to some
miles of drainage ground, in addition to their
leases, and round this ground are cut drains,
which convey the rain water to the reservoirs.
(To be continued.)
Found—a Pocket Ivnife—apply to the Editor.
Y E VERITABLE HISTORIE OF Y*
MERCHANT OF VENICE.
( Continued.)
The important characters in this moving
history being now before our readers, we pro-
ceed to that part which was performed here on
Monday last.
CHAPTER Y e FYFTIIE.
“It will be evident to each reader, who is at
all acquainted with Australian life, or in the
habit of living by the arts of eating and drink-
ing, that it became a matter of absolute necessity
to Bassanio ‘to raise the wind.’ It was there-
fore decided in solemn council between Lorenzo,
Gratiano, and this gentleman, that a loan
should be negotiated. The question as to who
should try it on was next debated; and as
neither of the two former had either cash or
credit, it was arranged that Bassanio should
‘spin a yarn,’ or, as Shakspere has it, ‘wind
about Antonio’s love (of money) with circum-
stance,’ which he did in the following style.


CHAPTER Y s SYXTHE.
Y e Attempte to Negotiate y‘ Loane.
“The three swells started together, arrayed
in borrowed clothes; and having found Antonio,
Gratiano endeavoured to ‘chaff’ him into good-
temper —for he looked as if hehad just swallowed
a quart of salt water when they first met him; —
and having, to some small extent succeeded,
Lorenzo and his friend took their leave, when
Antonio and Bassanio commenced abusing
Gratiano, as people always do absent friends;
and finding the oyster-shop keeper in tolerable
fettle after this process had been gone through,
Bassanio stated to Antonio very plainly, that
his only chance of getting cash out of him Avas
to advance a little more. Now Antonio had
been so often sold, that he exercised rather
more caution than usual; and having ascer-
tained that Bassanio really had some chance of
obtaining the hand of the heiress, promised to
advance him sufficient to pay his railway and
omnibus fare to and from Belmont, if any good
Christian could be found Avho Avould melt his
I O U—for Antonio himself had little, if any,
more of ‘the ready’ at that time, than Bassanio
—the various and constant calls upon his min-
ing shares having, to use his oavu expressive
phrase, left him with neither ‘ money nor com-
modity, to raise a present sum.’
CHAPTER Y b SEVENTHS.
“ In this dilemma they had recourse to Shy-
lock, AA'ho Avas nearly mad at the time in conse-
quence of the elopement of his daughter, Noav
the old sinner was determined to have it out of
some one—he did not care much AA'ho; and
accordingly AVent to one Mabson, Avho imported
Sheffield goods, and bought a knife terrible to
behold. He always slept with this under his
pilloAv, aAvaiting the happy moment when he
might be able to use it. It was therefore Avith
peculiar pleasure he received from Bassanio the
intimation that Antonio (Avhora Shylock firmly
believed Avas implicated in the robbery perpe-
trated on him by his daughter) wanted money,
and his resolve Avas immediately taken to ac-
commodate him if he could get sufficient secu-
rity. This Avas accomplished by depositing
Bolinda, and other equally valuable shares, in
Shylock’s hands, accompanied by the promise
that if the cash Avas not repaid by a certain day,
one pound of Antonio’s flesh should be cut oft.”
AN AUSTRALIAN TALE.
( Continued.)
We left our young hero in the company of
the recruiting sergeant. It Avould be difficult
to imagine circumstances Avhich Avould more
poAverfully dispose a youth to listen to the in-
viting representations of that accomplished
functionary. Young Ferguson was dispirited
Avith years of drudgery and pining for a release
or a change, yet Avith no visible resource but
the alternative of either returning as a journey-
man baker to his former bondage, or adopting
the easy, healthy life which the soldier depicted.
But he pictured to himself his mother’s grief,
his uncle’s disapproval, and the temptations of
a soldier’s life; and, Avith a sad heart but a
satisfied conscience, resolved not to encounter
them. In that struggle the issues of his future
career Avere involved. In taking conscience
instead of inclination as his guide, Avhen diffi-
culties beset his path, he entered on the sure
road to prosperity and content.
He made an effort to obtain employment out
of his old trade, by commencing to Avork as a
labourer in a ship-building yard; but the op-
portunity presented itself through the influence
of his fellow lodger (Avho employed his earnest
persuasions to recommend it) to Ferguson of
an engagement in the same bakery, and at a
rate of Avages considerably above that Avhich
his accustomed efforts were obtaining.
In this situation he continued for some
months, carefully practising temperance and
economy, when a small bakery in Greenock
becoming vacant, he Avas encouraged by his
uncle to make an essay at business on his oavu
account. This friendly relative guaranteed him
to the miller to the extent of £2O, and the
opportunity Avas most industriously improved
by Adam Ferguson. At the end <f fourteen
months he had saved £6O. At this time the
exciting tidings of the extent, the richness, and
the promise of permanence in the Victorian
Gold Fields, not only attracted croAvds of fickle
adventurers, but excited hope in the breasts of
thousands of the self-reliant, persevering, hard-
Avorking children of toil in the British islands.
Young Ferguson felt that he was equal to most
men at any species of hard work, and Avas com-
plete master of a trade that must be prosecuted
in every populous community.
( To be continued.)
Yesterday evening a concert took place in
the saloon. The songs and recitations elicited
much applause. One gentleman seemed to
have taken a lesson from the celebrated Ameri-
can shipbuilder, Avho builds so many miles of
ships, and then cuts them off “to order.” He
started Avith what seemed, as he Avent on, to
“groAV Avith its groAvth, and lengthen with its
length,” but had the sense to perceive his
audience Avas tired, and accordingly “ shut up,”
folloAving the example set by the aforesaid
builder, cutting it off short, NotAvithstanding
this, a celebrated lecturer informed the Avriter
that he deserved tAVenty-five lashes for the
performance.
We solicit our friends, Avho have not paid the
amount of their subscriptions, to pay Mr. Harker
the sums before ten o’clock to-morrow —Saturday
morning.


The Rev. T. Williams will lecture to-night
on Fiji and Fijians, their Poetry and Marriage,
what they Marry, and how.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our Log.—Lat. 29.1. N. Long. 39.46. W.
Distance run, 216 miles.
No. 45.— APRIL 28, 1860.
The Rev. T. "Williams (according to the
announcement in this journal of yesterday)
delivered a lecture on Fiji and Fijians,—their
Amusements, Poetry, and Marriages; what they
Married, and how. Our limits will not permit
a detailed report, but Mr. Dodgson occupied
the chair, and acquitted himself with his usual
tact and ability. Mr. Kettle proposed, and
Mr. Collin seconded, a vote of thanks to the
lecturer. Mr. Dailey proposed, and Mr. Me
Kerrow seconded, the usual compliment to the
chairman. Both propositions were carried
unanimously. This will probably be the last
of the series, as we are now so rapidly approach-
ing our destination.
Divine Service will take place as usual to-
morrow.
BIRTH.
Last evening, Mrs. Martha Geary a son ; all
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 17.
On the Long Gully land, the company have
two engines, twenty-five-horse power each, one
for pumping and drawing the auriferous quartz
and debris from the mine, the other for crush-
ing only. The pumping engine started work
successfully early in February last. The pit
was then 170 feet deep. It is anticipated that
it will require to be 300 feet in depth, before
what is known as the main reef is struck. The
influx of water, when sinking, had been so great
that the miners (who were working by con-
tract) were compelled to delay work for about
two weeks, until the engine began to pump,
when the water was speedily brought to the
surface. The engine is sufficiently powerful,
and will do the work required with perfect
ease, so that the water will be no obstacle to
the proper working of the mine in future. The
pit or shaft is eight feet six inches, by four feet
in diameter, and is secured in a most substantial
manner, with strong split slabs and thick sawn
timber frames, from the surface right down.
While excavating for the Bell Crank, a large
body of quartz (seven feet thick) was struck
within fourteen feet from the surface, and from
the sample of gold-bearing stone raised, this
will, doubtless, as soon as the crushing machinery
is erected, be found another great addition of
wealth to the Company’s valuable property. We
believe that this will prove of very great value
to the Company, from the ascertained fact, that
quartz which will yield only eight pennyweights
of gold to the ton, where there is any thickness
of reef, will give handsome profits upon the
capital necessary for mining and crushing it;
and that the stone struck in the Bell Crank ex-
cavation will yield at least that amount we do
not, for a moment, entertain a doubt. The
Company is managed by a board of ten directors,
seven of whom are resident in Melbourne, and
three in Bendigo; they are all gentlemen whose
business habits and social positions command
confidence and respect. Those resident in Ben-
digo are denominated a local board, and the
Melbourne board very wisely allows them, in a
manner of speaking, uncontrollable manage-
ment. The thorough knowledge of mining
matters, which the local board have, renders the
discretionary power vested in them a matter of
congratulation to the shareholders, as we feel
confident, from the large quantity of valuable
machinery erected upon the ground, as well as
the great amount of other work done, that it is
only first class management, gained by experi-
ence, that could accomplish so much for such a
(comparatively with many other works of a
similar kind) small expenditure.
We are perfectly satisfied that almost all
the mining companies established on Bendigo
will, if the shareholders but show reason-
able patience, pay good interest upon the
money invested—and that with only middling
management. But we are quite positive that
the strictest economy in the outlay, and the
utmost carefulness in the general management,
are absolutely necessary to realise the great
results which are very fairly anticipated from
many of them. To obtain these, we recommend
all shareholders to have as many local directors
as possible to manage their affairs, provided
they can and have sufficient confidence in them.
We, for our own part, consider that having
boards of management sitting in Melbourne is
merely throwing away the capital of the Com-
pany. It might be desirable to have an agent
there to transfer shares, but that is all that is
necessary.
( To he continued.)
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Lat. 32.16. N. Long. 37.51. W. Distance
run, 219 miles. Distance hence to Cork, 1,760
miles. Going eleven knots, Stunsails set.
A novel game seems to occupy the attention
of a number of gentlemen; it is called specula-
tion. We remember hearing of it about twenty-
six years ago. Its mysteries may be personally


inspected by any anxious wife or sweetheart on
board, at any time between half-past ten and
three.
We have much pleasure in announcing that
all the subscriptions are paid ; and, we believe,
the amount will be handed over for security
to the Captain.
W. B. Dailey, Esq. has consented to deliver
a lecture on “Legal Experiences.”—To com-
mence, this evening, at eight o’clock.
A special meeting of the committee, appoint-
ed at the meeting of Thursday last, is hereby
called at half-past ten on Monday next.
No. 46.— APRIL 30, 1860.
Divine Service was performed in the saloon,
yesterday morning, at a quarter-past 10 o’clock,
by the Rev. T. Williams. A portion of the
morning service having been read, the reverend
gentleman preached. His text was taken from
Acts iv. 12. We were glad to observe a de-
cided improvement in the singing of the hymns.
The evening service commenced at Bp. m. It
was well attended. The beautiful Evening
Hymn was very effectively and nicely sung.
The Rev. T. Williams prayed, which concluded
the services of the day.
The Rev. Mr. Thompson performed religious
services (in the fore part of the ship) both
morning and evening.
We once more request our readers to search
among their clothes, papers, &c. for any copies
of “ the Vain Effort” that may possibly be in
their berths. It is intended that a certain
number of copies of the numbers of “ the Vain
Effort” shall be printed after our arrival in
Liverpool. If the Editor could obtain the stray
numbers, there would be a complete account of
all the incidents of the voyage worth recording.
COMMERCIAL INTELLIGENCE.
Lemonade went out early last week. Soda
water became remarkably scarce about Wed-
nesday last, but yesterday offers were vainly
made for that article. The market is entirely
cleared of whiskey, and Geneva cannot be pro-
cured for money. Brandy, however, continues
plentiful, and most descriptions of wines may
be obtained at previous quotations—still hock
being the exception. The best English cheese
is completely used up, and the kind now offered
is slowly going into consumption at a consider-
able discount from previous prices. Green
stuff—French beans bring brisk competition;
green peas (very good) go off well; even pump-
kins are well cleared off. Potatoes move slowly,
the samples now offering are anything but
good, and therefore do not receive that attention
which they otherwise would. Mutton chops
very tough. Beef—none in the market. Pork
goes off well, if not too fat. Hams, when
thoroughly dressed, are much sought after.
Rolls, hot every morning, are rapidly consumed,
and the supply well kept up. Milk—the con-
sumption in connection with ‘burgoo,’ increases,
but as yet no scarcity has occurred.
THERE IS AN ASYLUM SITUATED BY, AND WHICH
TAKES ITS NAME FROM, THE “ YARRA BEND.”
I stood on the cliff by the “Yarra Bend,”
And down-wards I look’d, but dar’d not descend ;
Its side was so steep, its depth so profound,
I felt as it were upon treach’rous ground ;
I put forth my arm, and grasped a tree,
And then my brain—reeled less giddily;
Thus safely I stood, and took a survey,
Where waters stole gently sparkling away,
Reflecting a bright, and clear autumn sky,
Bedappled with clouds of exquisite dye;
With heaven below, and sky o’er my head,
It seem’d as though earth from its bounds had
fled;
But leaving the course of the shining stream,
A landscape for beauty shone out supreme ;
Hills rose upon hills, with sharp broken lines,
With forest trees crowned, and encircled with
vines;
While mountains afar their heads rear’d on high,
And blended their peaks with the sapphire sky;
And then between mountains and hills was spread
A vale as expansive as ocean’s bed ;
O’erlooking that vale by the cliffs that tower’d,
There lay an asylum ’mid trees embower’d;
How silent was all! How mild and how blest!
A fitting abode for souls that need rest.
I. X. L.
AN AUSTRALIAN TALE.
( Continued.)
We left Adam Ferguson, the baker’s appren-
tice, just arrived in Hobson’s Bay, in October,
1853. While he and his shipmates are sailing
up the sluggish Yarra, in the steam-boat Samp-
son, and gazing with eager curiosity on its dull
margin, let us, who are familiar with the scene,
speculate on the probable career of some of
these new arrivals. We might venture on some
anticipations merely from their present demea-
nour, we might proceed with further confidence
if we had been in their company during the
voyage; but if we really knew the character of
each individual in this motley crowd, their
habits, their principles, or want of principles of
action, we could form a very reliable estimate
of their colonial prospects.
Life even in a gold colony is not a lottery.
Chance does not distribute the prizes there or
elsewhere. Cause and effect maintain their old
connection even through the romantic varieties
and contrasts of colonial life. That young
dandy, who has exhausted his reputation, his
means, even his wardrobe, on board ship,
betrays the weakness of his character in his


countenance, and in his timid apprehensive de-
meanour: he will make one or two ridiculous
efforts, and disgraceful failures, and will be
granted a passage back in the ship which
brought him, on the guarantee of the Captain,
who knows his friends at home.
This easy-minded young fellow, who always
acts on the opinions of others, will of course go
to the diggings, he will join every “ new rush”
and do no good, till harsh experience has at
length supplied him with the only tools the
digger can rely on, patience and perseverance.
That sharp-visaged gambler, with all his
acuteness, will utterly fail, and will sink hope-
lessly to the lowest grade.
But how is the young baker armed for the
struggle on which he is entering? He is stand-
ing with a companion of similar character,
quietly remarking the scene as it passes by.
He has no expectation of equalling the achieve-
ments of the loud talkers, who appear to know
exactly where to go and what to do, the mo-
ment they step on the wharf. He has made
up his mind to seek employment at his trade
as soon as he lands, to take the first opportu-
nity that offers, to work hard, and to avoid dis-
sipation of every kind. He feels timid, but he
is determined to do his best, and as his friendly
old uncle advised him, in parting, to trust in
Divine Providence for health and help. On
him we prophesy that “ fortune will smile,” if
not, that he will “ conquer fortune.”
(To be continued.)
The lecture advertised to be delivered by
W. B. Dailey, Esq. on Saturday last, ■was post-
poned to this (Monday) evening, when it will
be given.
It is probable we shall sight the “ Azores,”
or Western Isles, this afternoon.
It is important that as large an attendance
as possible of the saloon (male) passengers
should take place to-morrow morning, at half-
past ten o’clock, when the adjourned meeting
will be held in the stern sheets, if the weather
permit.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Sunday, April 29, Lat. 35.13. N. Long.
34,13. W. Distance run, 253 miles.
Monday, April 30, Lat. 38.26. Long. 31.27.
Distance run, 234 miles. Total number of days
out, 54. Total number of miles run, 12,836.
Average daily, 237 ff miles.
The question has been mooted, as to whether
it is advisable to print “the Vain Effort.” From
all the enquiries we are able to make on board,
we find the probable cost will be £2O. If,
therefore, 200 copies were subscribed for, we
have reason to believe that it would be printed.
It might be well to elicit an expression of pub-
lic opinion at the meeting to-morrow morning
on the subject.
BENDIGO.
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 18.
The Johnson’s Reef Gold Mines Company
next claims our notice. This Company was
launched in the market about the end of Au-
gust, 1859, just as the desire for mining invest-
ments was beginning to cool, and when mining
companies, no matter where situated or what
their prospects might be, were in a mild man-
ner termed swindles; how r ever, in spite of all
these difficulties, the well-known richness of
the reef, combined with good management,
prevailed, and all the shares were taken up in
the incredibly short time of four or five days.
The Bendigo people evinced the confidence they
had in this Company by the very large number
of shares they took in it, as compared with any
of the other companies. The capital of the
Company is £BO,OOO, in 20,000 shares of £4
each ; the amount of £2 on each share has al-
ready been paid. This large sum w r as rendered
necessary to pay the several original claim-hold-
ers the amount of purchase money, and to leave
a sufficient sum in hand for the erection of
machinery to carry on mining operations, &c.
The land belonging to the Company is imme-
diately north of Chappie & Co.’s claim, on the
Johnson’s reef, the richness of which we have
alluded to in a former paper. The extent of
the Company’s land is 173 yards in length, by
80 yards in breadth. This apparently-small
piece of land cost the Company £34,000; to
many this will appear an enormous price, but
when it is remembered that the land quite con-
tiguous to it on the south has yielded upwards
of £I2OO to every yard of ground worked, and
is yet to all appearance likely to yield ten times
as much, it will therefore be admitted that the
Company has made rather a cheap purchase
than otherwise, indeed we have no doubt our-
selves, from our intimate knowledge of the
ground, that twenty yards of it will more than
repay the purchase money.
It is needless for us to say more respecting
the wealth of this reef than we have already
said, but as the dastardly proceedings of a
number of reckless speculators made this Com-
pany suffer in the estimation of the public, it
may be as well to state why such a valuable
piece of land fell into the hands of a Company
at all, and we shall give this information in few
words. _ This portion of the reef had been for
nearly six months previous to the formation of
the Company but very feebly worked; this
circumstance was caused by the great influx of
water, and the want of laws to compel all the
claim-holders to pay into the Emeu engine (an
engine erected solely for pumping by some of
the claim-holders), several of the owners were
most anxious to pay the share of the working
expenses of the engine, others again had not
the means, or from some other cause would not,


and without unanimity nothing could be done.
Those on the south end of the reef, where the
engine was placed, kept the water down suffici-
ently to allow themselves to work, but as the
reef dipped rapidly to the north, that end of
the reef could not be worked at all. Week
after week those enabled to work were produc-
ing from their claims immense quantities of
gold, and still the others would not co-operate.
At last it was proposed to form that portion of
the line into a company; this was strenuously
opposed by many, and it was only managed after
great difficulty, indeed had they not been suffi-
ciently bound not one of them but would have
retaken possession of their claim, even after the
Company was formed, so great was their idea of
the value of the reef. The very smallness of
the land the Company has got proves its value,
for the claims north and south of this ground
were tried to be bought, but the owners would
not sell, except at extravagant prices, for in-
stance, Chappie & Co.'s claim (on one end of
which is the Company’s boundary peg) is only
eleven yards and a half in length, and the price
sought for it was £11,500, and no desire w r as
shown by the owners to sell, even at that price.
The Company is prosecuting its operations with
great vigour, under the direction of an excel-
lent engineer and an energetic and experienced
manager, two great desiderata necessary to
the success of all mining companies. As we
have a number of companies to say a few words
about, we must finish our remarks for to-day
by stating it as our confident belief, that the
results of the Johnson’s Reef Gold Mines
Company will be such as will surprise the most
sanguine, and effectually rid us of the scepticism
which prevails as to the ultimate success of our
Quartz Mining Companies.
(To be continued.)
Ro. 47.—MAY 1, 1860.
In accordance with the advertisement that
appeared in our issue of last Wednesday, a
meeting of the saloon passengers took place
on Thursday morning, at 10 o’clock, and we
believe every male passenger attended.
Mr. Dailey moved, and Mr. Collin seconded
the proposition, that Mr. Darker do take the
chair. At the request of the chairman Mr.
Etheridge consented to act as secretary.
Mr. Darker briefly introduced to the meet-
ing the object for which they had met, the
consideration of the propriety of presenting to
Captain Gray a testimonial, accompanied by a
purse of sovereigns. This announcement was
received with loud and continued applause,
after which Dr. Williams proposed, and Mr.
Dodgson seconded, the first resolution, as
follows;
“ That to express our appreciation of the
unremitting efforts made by Captain Gray for
our comfort and amusement, during the voyage
from Melbourne to Liverpool, (March, 1860)
it is deemed advisable to present that gentle-
man with a written address, accompanied by a
purse of sovereigns. The committee appointed
by this meeting to take into consideration the
best method of accomplishing this end.” This
motion was carried con amove.
Mr. Me Intyre next proposed, “ That a simi-
lar mark of respect be paid to Mr. Robert
Brown, chief officer of the Great Britain .”
This was seconded by Mr. , and adopted
without a dissentient voice.
Mr. Me Intyre then proposed, and Mr. •
seconded, the following resolution; “ That Dr.
Charles Lloyd Morrice be presented with a
written address, accompanied by a purse of
sovereigns, to testify the appreciation in which
the saloon passengers hold his professional skill
and attention during the voyage from Mel-
bourne to Liverpool, March, 1860.” This was
carried unanimously.
Mr. Branscombe then proposed, “That a
committee, consisting of the chairman and
Messrs. Dailey and Me Intyre, be appointed to
carry out the object of the meeting.”
Mr. Browning proposed, “ That Messrs.
Cole, Branscombe, and Dr. Williams be added
to the number named.” The chairman sug-
gested the addition of Mr. Etheridge’s name,
and the following gentlemen were (nem diss.)
appointed members of the committee : Messrs.
Darker, Dailey, Me Intyre, Cole, Dr. Williams,
and Messrs, Etheridge and Branscombe. A
desultory conversation ensued, after which Mr.
Collin proposed, and Dr. Williams seconded
the proposal, “ That a written address be
presented to the Rev. T. Williams, thanking
him for his uniform kindness throughout the
voyage.” This was again carried without a
dissentient voice.
Mr. Branscombe proposed, “ That the meet-
ing adjourn till Tuesday next, at 10 o’clock,
wffien it should reassemble to receive the report
of the committee.” Alas! that we have to say
it, no opposition was offered to this. A vote
of thanks to the chairman was passed by accla-
mation, and the meeting dispersed.
We have attended many meetings, public
and private, in our time, but w r e never met
with one so painfully unanimous. We can
only record it, and at the same time state, that
it was neither ready cut and dried, nor a hole
and corner meeting.
The adjourned meeting was held this morn-
ing (Ist May, 1860) when the chairman (Mr.
Darker) reported the result of the labours of
the committee, that they had collected about
£63 towards the Captain’s testimonial; nearly
£2O towards that intended for the chief officer;
and £3O for the one proposed for presentation
to the surgeon. The trifling amounts requisite
to make up these sums were instantly sub-
scribed. The addresses were then put to the
meeting, and carried unanimously.


The address to the Rev. T. Williams was
also brought up by Mr. Me Kerrow, secretary
to the committee appointed for that purpose,
and carried.
The committee were instructed to appoint
the time and manner of presentation, and after
the usual vote of thanks to the chairman, the
meeting separated.
It has been proposed (and we really deem
the idea well worthy of serious consideration)
that a friendly dance should take place in the
saloon on Thursday evening next. We would
solicit those amongst us who hold a prominent
position, to lend their “ countenance and aid”
to this most desirable (probably) last reunion.
The committee will meet at 10 o’clock to-
morrow morning.
W. B. Dailey, Esq. delivered a lecture last
evening in the saloon, on “ Legal Experiences.”
Our report is unavoidably crowded out, but we
hope to insert it in to-morrow’s paper.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our Log.—Lat. 41.13. N. Long. 27.47.
Distance run, 237 miles. This morning, 8.0 a.m.
spoke the British barque British Tar. Saw a
full-rigged ship sailing same direction as our-
selves, but could not signal her. Yesterday,
3.0 p. m. sighted two of the Azores —Flores
and Corvo.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 19.
Early in September, the Specimen Hill Eagle
Hawk Quartz Mining Company took its place
in the market, and has, in spite of the “ bear-
ing” and “ bulling” of the time maintained a
favourable position. The prospects of this
Company are very good indeed. The land was
about the first operated upon by the Quartz
Mining Prospectors, and their early efforts were
highly successful. As much as 101 ounces of
gold were crushed from one stone; five buckets
full of quartz produced the splendid amount
of 254 ounces, and the general crushings from
the reef have been exceedingly rich. In sub-
stantiation of this we may state, that large
quantities of the tailings (the debris after the
gold has been extracted) from the early crush-
ings, were re-crushed at the Metropolitan
Works, and yielded a handsome profit after
paying £4 a ton for crushing. Water, as in
almost all the other instances, was the sole
reason for this Company being formed. About
this period (September) the New Chum Com-
pany was established. The action of the pro-
jectors, in trying to withhold a large portion of
valuable ground from the Company, under the
pretext that it never was put forward as a
portion of the Company’s property in the pro-
spectus, caused great annoyance to those who
were not shareholders in the Company, as well
as to those who were. It annoyed the former
because it had a most prejudicial effect at the
time upon the other companies, as it created
doubts in the public mind whether or not
all of the companies might not be similarly
dealt with; however, this matter was got over
at last by a graceful concession on the part of
the projectors of the land in dispute to the
Company. This settled everything, and the
affairs of the Company, after suffering greatly,
assumed quite a gratifying appearance. Shares
went up in price, and all connected with it
gave evidence of their satisfaction, by taking
up as many shares as they could get at the
discount at which they were offering. They
acted well by so doing, as we believe the
ground acceded to them will be found of very
great value.
The land of this Company Is situated on the
south end of the famous New Chum Gully
Reef. This reef also was among the first
opened, and immense quantities of the precious
metal have been taken out of it. The well-
known quartz miners, Gibbs & Lazarus, took
from their claim alone upwards of £60,000.
Watson & Co., Clissold & Co., Thomson &
Co., and several others did proportionately
well.
We will be very much mistaken if the New
Chum Company (which is now going on pros-
perously) will not give magnificent returns
from its mine ere a year from its commence-
ment. This Company also is fortunate, in our
opinion, in possessing a talented engineer, and
an able and highly respected manager.
( To be continued.)
A NEW STYLE OF BLIND MAN’S BUFF.
A novel and to some parties interesting
game was inaugurated yesterday, before that
important and all-absorbing event of our every-
day life while on board—our dinner.
It consists of a group (the larger the better)
surrounding two of the players, who place
themselves in such a position that they cannot
see, at the same time putting their hands open
crossed over their backs. The other players
then strike as opportunity offers, and at each
blow the blinded person has the right of guess-
ing, and if he correctly guesses the name of
the party striking, that person takes his place.
As this game is usually played it is productive
of some amusement to the byestanders, but as
it was developed yesterday, the fun was abso-
lutely overpowering. A respected friend of
ours, a Kyneton man, with his wits all about
him, was successfully “ fogged” for at least forty
minutes. Resolving, however, that “ what is
sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander,”
this gentleman determined to assist at the


induction of another into the mysteries of the
play in which he had himself so rapidly be-
come proficient. The preliminaries were soon
arranged, and after dinner the process com-
menced. Captain Gray, in the fulness of his
heart, “ lending a hand” heartily, as truly our
friend Anderson can testify.
With very slight alteration the latter re-
mained in the blindfold position for very nearly
an hour, the Captain being mostly down with
him. Unfortunately Anderson, in the inno-
cence of his heart, never dreamt that his
companion in misfortune was the very one
who was warming his hands for him. Every
one else, heavy and light handed, young and
old, pleasant tempered or growling, who sur-
rounded this couple, was selected by the
namesake of John my Joe, and to no effect.
We certainly felt inclined, out of the love we
bear for sundry and divers from “that ilk”
(when this meets their eyes, if the Scotch is
incorrect, they can put it right) to post up our
friend, but the joke was really too good, and
we had not the heart.
What we ourselves could, not do, (for we are
constrained to state we saw it out, and hoped
for more fun on the morrow) was done by the
company of ladies on board, who informed
our confiding friend of “the sell,” viz: that the
blows he received were invariably given by his
partner in misfortune, whom, of course, he
never suspected.
Moral.—Look after your partners at whist,
as w r ell as at any other game.
AN AUSTRALIAN TALE.
( Continued.)
But here we are at the Queen’s Wharf, and
now shipmates and friends hurriedly part.
Years hence they shall occasionally meet one
with another in strange unexpected circum-
stances and places. The quiet intermediate
shall, half-a-dozen years after this, be the well-
to-do substantial J. P., who, stepping in to see
the play some evening, when in town, shall
recognise in the check-taker that pretentious
leader of the saloon.
But let us watch our humble friend, Adam
Ferguson. He is off with his companion and
their couple of chests to the “ Crown.” In the
evening they carefully inspect the advertise-
ments in the “ Argus,” and three addresses of
bakers in want of men are copied by Ferguson
for to-morrow’s guidance. He makes an early
start, and soon discovers the localities. Num-
ber one objects to him, because he has had no
colonial experience; number two, because a
foreman, to act over four other men, is required,
and the new arrival very justly declines a post
of so much distinction and responsibility. To
wait upon number three, he laboriously explores
his way to Prarhan, and there he obtains an
engagement at twenty-five shillings per week.
He remains there three months, under a
drunken master, often put to sad perplexity by
that circumstance; reduced by sickness, incident
to newly-arrived emigrants, and subject to the
discouragement that, though he is straining
every nerve for his master, all is in vain through
the folly of that confirmed toper. That un-
worthy citizen, who is got considerably in debt,
is one day found to have absconded, and the
principal creditor sells off the plant, stock there is
none, and the establishment is closed. Young
Ferguson, though defrauded of a month’s wages,
and his Imported funds diminished by exor-
bitant medical fees, has often felt inclined to go
to the diggings, where he justly reflects that he
cannot fare worse.
( To be continued.)
No. 48.—MAY 2, 1860.
BENDIGO,
ITS QUARTZ REEFS, ETC.
No. 20.
The multifarious matters that demand our
attention during the remaining few days of our
voyage, will necessitate our finishing this
subject with the present paper. We will there-
fore close with a few general remarks.
We formerly said that the great demand for
Bendigo Water Works shares, and the high
premium at which they were selling, was the
principal cause that led to the introduction and
establishment of so many mining companies.
We also said that the twenty-two acres of alluvial
auriferous land, from which the Company had
power to extract gold, had more to do with the
rise of the shares, than all the other property
and privileges of the Company put together.
Although, this has been stoutly repudiated by
those interested, on the grounds that the com-
pany’s mining operations are merely subordi-
nate to the main purpose of water supply to
the district; we are firmly convinced, had the
Company no auriferous land for mining pur-
poses, that they might have carried on the
Water Works business for ever, and the shares
would never have reached the price at which
they sold in July and August last. Now seeing
the view taken by hundreds of the value of the
comparatively small piece of auriferous land, we
cannot but deprecate in the most unqualified
manner the injustice inflicted upon the legiti-
mate holders of mining scrip, by the actions of
a few nefarious speculators. We allude to
those who (when the companies were in course
of foundation) had applications for shares, in
almost every one of them, without making the
slightest enquiry as to the genuineness of any;
rushing from one provisional director to another,
and then declaring on their honors (save the
mark !) that they only desired the shares for
investment, and praying that all they applied


for should be allotted them; but no sooner did
they get possession of them, than long before
the scrip could possibly be issued they were
sold. This loose mode of trafficking in shares
had itself a bad effect on the market, but it was
the “ bearing and bulling ” system that in
colonial parlance “cooked” it. The very best as
well as the worst of the companies suffered
from these swindling proceedings. Companies
whose position in the scale of wealth is un-
doubted by those residing on Bendigo, went
down in Melbourne some fifty per cent. Now
what we would claim from that part of the
Melbourne capitalists who unbuttoned their
breeches pockets during the late mania, with
intentions of legitimate investment, is to allow
the shares of the several companies to hold
their proper position in the market, by retain-
ing their own until a fair trial is made by the
companies getting to work. Should this not be
generally successful, let them then act as they
please. We ask in this no more than is accorded
to companies of every other description. If a
bank is being established, the shares (except in
some extraordinary cases, such as the “National”)
are always worth par, until business at least
commences. Now why should the same not
be the case with mining companies ? We
have once or twice previously said that if
shareholders in these companies only show
reasonable patience, they would be amply re-
paid for every farthing they have expended.
Those who are selling during the present de-
pression, must not forget there was a time
when “ Burra Burra ” shares (£5 paid up)
were offering for a mere song, and they have
since been sold for £2OO per share, and are
worth at present some £l6O. We have many
companies that will prove Burra Burras to the
fortunate shareholders.
We have now finished, and have merely
stated simple facts, from which if an idea of
the wealth and permanence of Bendigo is
gained, all we intended has been accomplished.
J. Me I.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Our Log.—Lat. 44.17. Long, 24.19. W.
Distance run, 241 miles.
Last casting of reel, 13 J knots. Going ahead
steering N. E. in three-quarters of a gale of
wind. If you take up a favourable position on
deck, you might get your teeth blown away.
LECTURE.
On Monday evening Mr. Dailey, pursuant to
announcement, delivered his lecture intituled
Legal Experiences ! After a brief introduction
the lecturer proceeded to state, that in two of
the cases by which he proposed to illustrate his
lecture, it would be necessary for his audience
to be made familiar with the nature of circum-
stantial evidence. He then explained the
nature of such evidence with exemplifications,
and referred to the treatise of Willes, Amos’s
Ruins of Time, and the romantic stories of
Edgar Allan Roe. The lecturer then stated the
circumstances of two cases of murder, in both
of which he had been engaged as counsel for
the prisoners, and in the proof of which no
positive evidence was adduced. The establish-
ment of the guilt of the accused was shewn,
by the piecing together a number of minute
circumstances,affording when collected, the most
conclusive evidence of the criminality of the
accused. It would be impossible within our
limits to give even an outline of the two cases.
The lecturer concluded by a humorous account
of the fraud perpetrated by Signor Miranda,
on the joint stock bank at Sydney, about eight
months since. The lecture occupied about two
hours in delivery, and was listened to through-
out with great attention. Mr. Dailey was
repeatedly interrupted whilst delivering it, and
at its close was greeted with a perfect hurri-
cane of applause. Mr. Me Intyre occupied the
chair. Mr. Harker proposed, and Dr. Williams
seconded, a vote of thanks to the lecturer, the
former gentleman alluding to the obligations
under which Mr. Dailey had placed the saloon
passengers throughout the voyage, by contri-
buting to their amusement by every means in
his power.
The chairman was thanked for his conduct
in the chair, and as all things sublunary come
to an end, the meeting separated.
AN AUSTRALIAN TALE.
Continued,
Having resolved to try for his fortune at the
diggings, he joined two young men of his
acquaintance and started for Ballaraat. With
what flattering visions of success he beguiled
the tedium of that long walk, it is needless to
tell. Arrived at the busy exciting scene the
three friends admitted a fourth person, known
to one of them, into their partnership. Their
first act was to purchase a claim from a party,
which was being dissolved ; this claim had not
been tested, yet more than half the labour had
been done; the speculation turned out tolerably
well, and three or four claims, which they
afterwards worked, yielded so satisfactorily that
in two months Ferguson was the happy poses-
sor of £BO.
Several fine nuggets of great value w r ere
discovered at that time, but at a considerable
depth, and deeper sinking became common.
Ferguson and one of his mates united with ten
others, in forming a new party, and sinking a
shaft on a spot most carefully selected.
They worked with extraordinary energy for
four months, and did not get the smallest speck
of gold, having entirely missed the tortuous
lead. Ferguson’s last pound was exhausted;
one of the party had alone borne the whole ex


penses for the last two weeks, with the expecta-
tion of subsequent recompense.
The party broke up, and our hero, after
working for two weeks for wages to defray his
expenses to Melbourne, arrived there with no
other wealth than nine months’ colonial expe-
rience; yet it may be safely said that that
simple acquisition was well worth the labour
and time which it had cost, and that this youth
had a vastly better prospect of success than
any young gentleman who, perchance, just
arrived, might attract observation by his elegant
exterior, as he emerged from one of the banks,
after placing to his credit his London draft for
£3OO or £4OO.
(To be continued.)
No. 49.—MAY 3, 1860.
This evening the addresses are to be presented
to the officers of this ship. It is, we believe,
contemplated to have tea rather earlier than
usual.
The proposed dance will not take place; but
we understand arrangements have been made
with the band, who will perform some of their
favourite airs.
We trust the committee will avoid the errors
so frequently occurring on similar occasions,
and have everything “ straight and right.”
Herewith we hand copies of the several
addresses, and may state they are all very
satisfactorily signed.
We would direct attention to the extraordi-
nary advance in the prices of cockatoos, &c.
Surely our friends are not aware they can
nearly always purchase these birds far cheaper
in England than here.
TO CAPTAIN GRAY,
OF THE S. S. S, “GREAT BRITAIN.”
Dear Sir, —We, the saloon passengers of the
Great Britain, on the approaching termination
of our voyage from Australia to England, express
our acknowledgments of your courtesy as
commander of this vessel.
We feel the pleasure which gratitude always
inspires in bearing our testimony to your
unwearied solicitude, by day and night, for the
furtherance of our happiness, as well as the
most vigilant care for our security. While an
unremitting attention to your responsible duties
as Captain of this noble vessel, in the discharge
of which duties you have been ably assisted by
your officers, has tended to secure for us, (under
Divine Providence) a rapid passage, your co-
operation with us in the various entertainments
which we with your aid have enjoyed, has
caused the time we have been together to pass
as pleasantly as possible.
And in thus expressing our thanks to you
for the past, we desire you to accept our best i
wishes for the future. That you may be long
spared, not only for your own sake, but for the
happiness of those who may sail with you, to
continue in the command of this ship, must be
the earnest hope of all who have had the
pleasure of knowing you as a commander.
In conclusion, we beg of you to accept the
accompanying testimonial of our confidence
and esteem, which we desire you to devote to
the procurement of some memento of a voyage,
which, while it increases the reputation of the
vessel you command, enlarges the number of
your friends.
Signed by
Saloon Passengers.
TO MR. BROWN,
FIRST OFFICER OF THE S.S.S. “GREAT BRITAIN.”
Dear Sir, —We, the saloon passengers of the
Great Britain, on the approaching termination
of our voyage from Australia to England, desire
to recognise your care and attention in the dis-
charge of your duties as first officer, and at the
same time to mark our sense of your uniform
courtesy. We beg of you to accept the ac-
companying testimonial, and our best wishes
for your advancement in your profession.
Signed by
Saloon Passengers.
TO CHARLES LLOYD MORRICE, ESQ.,
SURGEON, S. S. S. “GREAT BRITAIN.”
Dear Sir, —We, the saloon passengers of the
Great Britain, on the approaching termination
of our voyage from Australia to Great Britain,
desire to express our sense of your assiduity in
the discharge of your duties. Although provi-
dentially the greater number of us have had
the enjoyment of perfect health, we have been
sensible of the extreme care you have taken of
those who have been more immediately under
your charge during the voyage. As a more
substantial proof of our good wishes, we beg
your acceptance of the accompanying testimo-
nial.
Signed by
Saloon Passengers.
Screw steam ship, Great Britain,
TO THE REV. THOMAS WILLIAMS.
Rev. and Dear Sir, —We, the saloon passen-
gers on board the Great Britain, beg to tender
you our warmest thanks for the services you
have rendered us as a minister of the gospel,
during our voyage from Melbourne to Liverpool.
In bidding you farewell, we cherish the
earnest hope that your visit to England may
promote your health and happiness in the
highest degree, that you may have a safe return


£
S ,
d.
Captain Gray .
0
0
Mr. Branscombe
0
0
Mr. Mabson
0
0
Mr. Etheridge
0
0
Mr. Dodgson
0
0
Mr. Collin
0
10
0
Mr. Philippi
0
10
0
Mr. Grace
10
0
Mr. Me Intyre
10
0
Mr. Sibley
10
0
Dr. Williams
0
0
to your family and friends in the colony, and
that you may be favoured -with a long career
of usefulness and honour.
Signed by
Saloon Passengers.
THE TOBACCO STOPPER.
It is said that Sir Isaac Newton did once in
his life go a wooing, and as was to be expected,
had the greatest indulgence paid to those little
peculiarities which ever accompany a great
genius. Knowing that he was fond of smoking,
the lady assiduously provided him with a pipe,
and they were seated as if to open the busi-
ness of Cupid. Sir Isaac smoked a few whiffs,
seemed at a loss for something, whiffed again,
and at last drew his chair near to the lady. A
pause of some minutes ensued ? he seemed a
little uneasy; oh! the timidity of some !
thought the lady, when lo! Sir Isaac had got
hold of her hand. The lady cast her eyes
down to the floor, and the palpitations began ;
he will kiss it, thought she, no doubt, and
then the matter will be settled. Sir Isaac
whiffed with redoubled fury, and drew the
captive hand near his head; already the expected
salute vibrated from the hand to the heart—
when, pity the damsel, gentle reader! Sir Isaac
only raised the fair hand to make the fore-finger,
what he much wanted, a tobacco stopper.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Sir, —It affords me great pleasure to be able
to state to you that the gentlemen of the saloon
have turned over a new leaf of a better book
than they have been accustomed to. Only
about once a week do they annoy the ladies
by making noises at midnight. You know, of
course, that until lately we ladies were disturbed
every night by the most discordant noises. I
think you, Mr. Editor, must have spoken to
them on the subject. Perhaps the near approach
of our glorious ship to a civilized country has
a good effect upon the savage breasts of the
lords and masters of creation.
Yours, &c.
Mary Jane.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Lat. 46.52. Long. 21.5. Distance run, 206
miles.
Yesterday, at about three o’clock, the inner-
jib split, and from that time the gale increased
until it became a perfect hurricane, and every
yard of canvass (except the main-top sail) was
either taken in or “blowed away,” as one of
our friends termed it.
The fore-sheet went at about six o’clock, and
the block striking the top-sail, rent it from top
to bottom. The wind at this time had the
game all to itself, and the reddish tinge of the
fog that surrounded us—(said tinge being so
thick that if it had been possible to get at it,
one might have cut it with a knife) involuntarily
made the spectator hope that no ships were
near us. Por the rest, we felt as secure as if
at anchor off Kinsale, or in fact, rather more
so. At one time forty-three men were engaged
aloft, taking in the main-sail; at another, thirty-
five performing the same duty for the fore-sheet.
The most dangerous operation undoubtedly
was “ taking in ” the mizen-top, but even this
was accomplished without accident. This is,
perhaps, the fitting place to testify to the
willingness of the crew to perform their various
duties. About ten p. m., the gale abated, and
shortly after sail was again set, and under a
clear full moon we made the above splendid
run.
No. 50.—-MAT 4, 1860.
A very general desire has been expressed to
the Editor, from time to time, that “ the Vain
Effort” should be printed in England, shortly
after our arrival. In accordance with this wish
a list was made out. A sufficient number of
persons have consented to subscribe for, (in all)
two hundred copies. It is probable that the
whole of the copies of “the Vain Effort,” in the
possession of the Editor, will be printed in the
form of a pamphlet. Our fellow passengers
will by this means have complete information
of all the interesting incidents of the voyage in
a convenient form, and at a small cost. The
Editor undertakes the responsibility of arrang-
ing the papers for publication. All the sub-
scribers, by leaving their addresses with him,
will have their papers sent to them through the
post. A complete log, containing an account
of the distance run each flay, the latitude and
longitude, the state of the atmosphere as de-
noted by the barometer, and the changes of
temperature, as shown by the thermometer. All
information relative to revolutions of the en-
gine, the quantity of coal consumed, the number
of days we have been under steam, and the
number without steam. There will also be full
information relative to the islands sighted dur-
ing the voyage, the ships seen, &c.
LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS
To the Fund for the Printing of “the Vain Effort."


Mr. Monk
.. . o
10
0
Mr. Greaves
.... 0
10
0
Mr. Me Kerrow
.... o
15
0
Mr. Me Cleod
.... 1
0
0
Mr. Anderson
0
10
0
Mr. Paterson
0
10
0
Mr. Barker
.... 0
10
0
Mr. Faulkes
0
10
0
Mr. Prowse
0
10
0
Mr. Green
0
10
0
Mr. Leary
1
0
0
Mr. Brandt
0
10
0
Mr. Knowles
0
10
0
Mr. W. B. Dailey
0
10
0
Mr. Browning
0
10
0
Mr. Duff
0
10
0
Mr. Lazarus
0
15
0
£ s. d.
For sale a small Portmanteau. Apply
before to-morrow, No. 17, Saloon.
Died, on the 3rd instant, Harriet Emma
Melville, JEt. 4 months. Immediate cause
of death, convulsions.
Lost, on Wednesday last, a (colonial) Gold
King, with masonic emblems. The finder will
oblige by giving it to the Editor, No. 60, saloon,
Great Britain .
Wanted to purchase —a large Chest. For
full particulars apply at No. 12, saloon.
Mislaid or lent—the sth vol. of Macaulay’s
History of England (new edition). The finder
or present possessor would oblige by giving the
book to Mr, Attwood, saloon.
AN AUSTRALIAN TALE.
( Continued.)
There is seldom any romance, though there
is often much heroism, in a career of patient
industry. The former implies the occurrence
of startling incidents, the latter the possession
of that fortitude which will not yield to any
difficulty. It is none the less heroism, perhaps
it is in truth the more real, if displayed in a
humble sphere, and wanting the incitement of
public observation. There is scarcely a man
who has exerted himself, for say six or eight
years, in the colonies, and with moderate success,
who has not had to contend with many and
great discouragements.
Bunyan’s pilgrim saw the entrance to the
abode of perfect happiness guarded by armed
men, and only by forcing a passage through
that fierce band could admission be gained.
The allegory equally applies to the pursuit of
success in the common occupations of men.
But we will venture on another allegory, per-
haps more illustrative.
Midway between the base and the glittering
summit of the hill, which is the type of human
success, there is within the sight of the toiling
crowds below, a happy retreat called Compe-
tence, to which all aspire, but only the smaller
number attain. It is a common delusion among
them that a capricious goddess named Fortune
is the mistress of the track, and that to her
favour is due the good success of those who
reach it, and to her unaccountable resentment the
failure of those who remain below. In truth she
has no existence; but as we may observe cer-
tain spirits in disguise mingle with the busy
crowd, and offer their services as guides upthe
ascent. On the choice of his guide we plainly
perceive depends the success of each adventurer.
Of those who follow the leading of Temperance,
Patience, Industry, and Courage, not one in a
thousand misses the road, while during all the
time we have watched the scene, neither Indul-
gence, Fickleness, nor Timidity has brought a
single follower to the happy retreat.
(To he continued.)
TO NOAH BEAMISH, ESQ.
CHIEF ENGINEER OF THE S. S. S. “ GREAT
BRITAIN.”
Sir, —I am deputed by the saloon passengers
of this vessel to express their acknowledgments
on this occasion, of the skill and assiduity dis-
played in the discharge of your onerous duties,
by yourself and the officers under your com-
mand, during the present voyage. Although
from the nature of your duties, and from the
circumstance of the vessel having been so fre-
quently and for such long periods under steam,
we have not had opportunities of cultivating
your personal acquaintance, I am requested by
my fellow passengers to inform you, that we
are all fully sensible of our obligations to you in
the successful accomplishment of our voyage.
With the best wishes of those whom I repre-
sent for your advancement in your profession,
I am, dear Sir,
On behalf of the Saloon Passengers of the
S. S. S. Great Britain,
Your obedient Servant,
George Barker.
To this Mr Beamish replied as follows: —
Mr. Chairman, Ladies, and Gentlemen,
On behalf of my fellow engineers, I return
you hearty thanks. For the kind way you have
alluded to my services I also thank you.
PRESENTATION OF ADDRESSES.
Yesterday evening the saloon of the Great
Britain presented a most animated appearance,
and we feel satisfied if our friends in either
hemisphere had been permitted to look in upon
us, they would have pronounced that if we
were not happy we ought to have been, at
least, for the time being. Our space will not
permit a very full report, but we give, at least,
one that is complete. The present number
contains the replies of some of the gentlemen


to the addresses published yesterday ; we,
therefore, only state in present report where
the address was read and the reply made.
The band commenced by playing an overture.
Mr. Harker occupied the chair, and Mr. Dailey
the vice-chair.
The chairman opened the business of the
meeting, stating that it had been called together
for the purpose of presenting the testimonials
agreed on previously, and after paying a high
compliment to Captain Gray, called upon Dr.
Williams to read the address, after which he
presented it and a purse containing sixty-three
sovereigns to our gallant Captain, who replied
in the words found elsewhere.
The band played “Hearts of Oak” prior to
the Captain’s reply.
Mr. Dailey next spoke, testifying, in most
effective style, to the general appreciation of
the conduct of Mr. Brown (first officer) and
Dr. Morrice. The addresses were read and the
testimonials presented, the former accompanied
by twenty and the latter by thirty sovereigns.
The replies of these gentlemen, who have won
the respect of all with whom they have come
in contact, will be found in another column.
Mr. Me Kerrow next brought up the address
to the Rev. T. Williams, and by request of the
chairman presented it to that gentleman. His
reply will be found with the others.
Mr. Dailey, in a brilliant and dashing speech,
proposed that the omission of any recognition
of the services rendered by the engineers should
be immediately supplied by the presentation of
an address. Mr. Green seconded the motion.
It was carried unanimously, and signed by the
chairman on behalf of the meeting, and pre-
sented to Mr. Beamish, who was sent for from
his engine room to receive it. The address
and reply will be found with the others.
The chairman then called upon Mr. Browning
to sing a song. This gentleman, having cast
on one side that innate modesty, which he
possesses to a great degree, sang with excellent
taste the sweetly-beautiful song, entitled “When
the swallows homeward fly.” At the conclusion
of the song, Mr. Browning was loudly cheered.
Mr. Collin was then earnestly requested to
to sing his popular song called “The Great
Britain Saloon.” The nervous and bashful
soldier, as soon as he could obtain a sufficiently-
strong mastery over his nerves, gave in very
good style his heart-stirring song. All the
passengers joined in the chorus. At the ter-
mination of the song, Mr. Collin was loudly
applauded.
Mr. Leary then proposed that the thanks of
the saloon passengers should be given to the
members of the committee. This proposition
was received with loud applause. Mr, Leary
then called for three cheers for the committee.
The whole of the passengers, both ladies and
gentlemen, gave three lusty cheers.
Mr. Harker (the chairman) briefly returned
thanks on behalf of the committee.
During the evening two toasts were proposed
which had not a necessary connection with the
proceedings above reported. One of the toasts
referred to, was the health of Mrs. Captain Gray
and family, which was proposed by Dr. Williams,
and seconded by Mr. Dailey. This proposition
was vigorously cheered. Captain Gray, in feel-
ing terms, responded. Mr. Kettle then proposed
the health of Mr. Branscombe, the Editor, and
also the health of the contributors to “ the
Vain Effort.” Mr. Branscombe, in a very hu-
morous and eloquent speech, referred to the
origin and history of “ the \ain Effort” up to
the time he was speaking. He stated that the
consciousness of having given pleasure to
others, by means of his labours, was to him a
great reward. (At this portion of his speech,
Mr. Branscombe was greeted with loud cheers.)
The speaker then alluded to the assistance
given him by several of his fellow passengers,
to ail of -whom he gave his hearty thanks.
The evening passed over very pleasantly.
All the passengers seemed highly pleased with
themselves and everybody else.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS,
Our Log.—Lat. 48.57. Long. 16.41. Dis-
tance run, 233 miles.
Last night, much to the surprise of our
friends who have not visited England, a thick
fog came on rather suddenly, and obscured the
(previously) clear blue sky, at the same time
rendering the moon invisible. This fog con-
tinued, more or less intense, throughout the
night, and the fog signal was frequently used-
Happily, the night passed without accident,
although we are now in the direct track of ships
bound to or from the United Kingdom.
A three-masted schooner in sight at three
o’clock.
The subscription list for printing “ the Vain
Effort ” was filled in two hours.
The Raffle. —When, Mr. Editor, Is the
dozen of champagne to be had in P I land at
Cork. P. Q. x.
CAPTAIN’S REPLY TO SALOON
PASSENGERS.
Ladles and Gentlemen, —In accepting the
flattering address, which has just been read,
and the handsome testimonial by which it is
accompanied, I beg to express my sincere
acknowledgments of your kindness and gene-
rosity.
I am fully sensible how much you have over-
estimated my services in your behalf. I cannot
take credit to myself for having done any more
than my duty towards you. I have felt in the
course of this voyage, having under my care a


greater number of passengers than ever sailed
from Australia to England in any vessel, how
necessary it was that I should be more than
ordinarily vigilant, and that my best efforts
should be directed to the promotion of harmony
throughout. lam glad to hear from you that
in your opinion I have been successful.
In taking leave of you, I may be permitted
to say that I have scarcely ever before met a
body of passengers so disposed to assist me in
the maintenance of order on board; and that I
shall never forget, not merely the kind terms
in which you have just addressed me, and your
substantial present, but the pleasure of our
daily intercourse in the happy voyage now
drawing to a close.
I am, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Your faithful servant,
John Guay.
MR. BROWN,
FIRST OFFICER’S REPLY TO SALOON PASSENGERS.
Mr. Chairman, Ladies, and Gentlemen, I
beg to thank you for the very flattering and
substantial token of esteem which you have so
kindly presented me with, also for the kind
manner in which you have expressed yourselves,
as to my attention to my duties, and my
courtesy to all; and your kind expression of
feeling on the, to me, important subject of,
advancement in my profession. I have several
times before now received testimonials, some
of them flattering ones, but the mark of respect
now tendered is particularly gratifying to my
feelings, inasmuch as it shows you regard
my conduct worthy of notice. By your depart-
ing from the rule usually followed on occasions
of this description, its accompaniment is a proof
of the genuine character of your feelings to-
ward me. We are now drawing near home;
I trust you may all meet your friends on your
arrival as well as you wish ; and those who
have never been in “ Old England ” may find
their expectations thoroughly realized.
Now, Ladies and Gentlemen, you have
expressed yourselves pleased with me, in return
I can only say, I have never met a more agree-
able company than assembled here at present;
and should it be my good luck, some future
time, to carry any of you backwards or for-
wards, we will endeavour to renew the Old
“ Britain.” Again I thank you.
C. L. MORRICE, ESQ.’S
REPLY TO ADDRESS.
Mr. Chairman, Ladies, and Gentlemen, —
Being, under any circumstances, a poor hand
at speech making, you will, I am sure, excuse
my saying much. But allow me to thank
you all most sincerely for the very flattering,
kind, and unexpected manner in which it has
pleased you to express your satisfaction at
the manner in which I have performed the
duties of “ medical officer ” in this department
of the ship, and to think that I have in any
way merited your approval, affords me, I assure
you, an infinite amount of pleasure, and is of
itself a sufficient reward for anything.
Although, fortunately, few of you here have
required any professional attention from me, as
is evident from your healthy looks, I can truly
say that had it been otherwise, I should only
have been too happy to have done the utmost
in my power, and thus endeavoured to render
myself worthy of this undeserved mark of your
kindly feeling and respect. For much kindness,
courtesy, and consideration, received from all,
I have also to thank you; but as it is impossible
to expi’ess in words all I feel, you will, I am
sure, excuse me, and take the will for the deed;
therefore, let me again thank you most heartily
for this very flattering testimonial, and wish
you, each and all, every enjoyment and happi-
ness in the land we are going to.
THE REV. T. WILLIAMS’ REPLY.
Ladles and Gentlemen, —ln reply to the
address, which you have been pleased to pre-
sent to me, I have to thank you for such an
evidence of your appreciation of my ministerial
services.
The gentleman from whose hand I received
this testimonial suggested that the position I
occupy among you is similar, in some respects,
to that of a commander of a ship, having to
direct your course over the ocean of time, by
the chart of truth, to the haven of eternal re-
pose. There is an aptness in the simile; but I
must remind you that I have been endeavouring
to discharge this important duty, surrounded
by a company from among which it would be
difficult to select half-a-dozen who are agreed
upon the course by which they purpose gaining
that haven. I have felt the difficulty of such a
position, but have endeavoured to act, as in the
sight of God, without offensiveness to your-
selves.
Having been kept in the enjoyment of health,
you have not made particular demands on the
services of Mr. Morrice or of mine, further
than they have been publicly rendered; had it
been otherwise, I should have been prepared
to do my duty to you, as I endeavoured to do
it to those, who from another division of the
ship, were removed to rest until the sea shall
give up her dead.
It cannot be otherwise than a pleasing
thought to everyone concerned that so nume-
rous a company —‘Varying so widely in purpose,
creed, and habits—has made so pleasant a
passage.
My thanks are due to the Captain, for the
facilities he has afforded me at all times for
conducting public worship in every part of this
ship.


Gentlemen and ladies, as you have presented
this testimonial, so I receive it, and am pleased
with the mode you have chosen, because it
leaves me in the enjoyment of that position of
independence 1 have thus far held, and which
I wish to preserve in its integrity, I value this
expression of your good will, and shall place it
with similar documents, which it has been my
honour to receive.
In the proceedings of this evening I do most
sincerely concur.
I pray Almighty God, of His goodness, to
permit us to complete the voyage as happily as
we have thus far prosecuted it, and to bring us
to the haven we desire without accident.
Again I thank you cordially, and believe my
thanks will be cordially received.
I am,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Yours sincerely,
Thos. Williams.
No. 51.—MAY 5, 1860.
With this issue of our paper, “ the Vain
Effort” will cease to exist. It was originated
amidst considerable difficulties, has been main-
tained by some sacrifices on the part of its
contributors, and is abandoned only because
its writers and readers cease to exist as a com-
munity. It is the lot of few journalists to
contemplate the termination of their enterprise
in consequence of the breaking up of society.
It is, however, the inevitable fate of all those
who devote themselves to the establishment of
an Ocean Press. To such, however, a consola-
tion is found in the circumstance that the limit
assigned to their labours has been reached. We
rejoice, for our own part, that our work has been
brought to a close, and that we are this morn-
ing in a position to say a farewell word to
those who have so heartily sympathised with
us in our enterprise, and so generously ignored
our shortcomings. We have had the gratifica-
tion of passing rapidly from the New to the
Old World; and the rapidity of our passage
has been almost accelerated by the feeling of
thorough good-fellowship by which we have
all been actuated. Never before, perhaps, did
the saloon of this noble vessel echo merrier
laughter, sweeter melody of human voices,
and never before, perhaps, was it rendered so
pleasant, by such harmony of cultivated minds,
as during the voyage now about to close. We
have all been as happy as a party of pleasure
yachting on a sunny lake. In a few hours we
shall have said “good bye” to each other, and
in many, perhaps, in most cases, we shall say
farewell to meet no more. With this feeling
profoundly impressed upon our minds, and with
the most earnest wishes for the health and
happiness of all who have perused, praised, or
pardoned “ the Vain Effort,” we say to our
readers farewell. w.
We regret to have to record an accident to one
of our fellow passengers, the fracture of the neck
of the thigh bone. His name is Fitzpatrick,
AN AUSTRALIAN TALE.
( Conclusion.)
Adam Ferguson having, as before related,
returned to Melbourne an unsuccessful digger,
was resolved to embrace the first opportunity
of employment at his own trade. He accord-
ingly rose early the next morning, and was at
the “ Argus” office when it w r as opened. He
purchased the morning’s paper and inspected
the advertisements. One required a baker for
a small country trade. Though there were a
score of applicants, the modest, manly, open
countenance of the young Scotchman was a
certificate •which recommended him more power-
fully than the bits of paper with which several
were provided. Having unhesitatingly stated
his ability to perform the duties required, he
obtained the situation, and proceeded the next
day to his destination. It was a rising township
on the road to the gold fields. His employer
had not been long in business, and to his first
undertaking of a general store, had added tw r o
others, one a bakery, the other the manufacture
of lemonade and other cordials, with which he
supplied the increasing demand of the nume-
rous hotels already existing in the district.
Commencing on a humble scale with temporary
accommodations, energy and courage could
alone triumph over the innumerable difficulties
of such a position. But these were the quali-
ties which distinguished the new comer, and
were displayed, not only in the performance of
his special duties, but in his prompt and vigour-
ous assistance "wherever he could render it.
As his usefulness became more apparent his
remuneration was increased. By degrees each
branch of his employer’s trade became ex-
tended, so that he found it convenient to limit
his own superintendance to his store, and to
give to each of the persons who conducted the
two other departments an equal interest in
them with himself. Time w r ore on, and in
spite of its fluctuations trade prospered. The
cordial maker and the baker at length proposed
to pay a fair rent, each for his own establish-
ment, and to conduct it on his own account.
That offer was accepted, and young Ferguson
soon found himself established in a secure and
improving trade. Against those difficulties
which beset every situation, sometimes subsid-
ing and again rising into a threatening crisis,
he opposed a steady resolution.
His savings already far surpass the modest
expectations he entertained when he landed,
and in a few years he hopes to reach the
“ happy retreat” of competence.
Mr. Sinclair concluded his narrative by
exhibiting to young Gillespie two photographs
which had been intrusted to him by Ferguson,
whom he knew first as a purchaser of flour at


his warehouse in Melbourne. These, with a
few specimens of gold in quartz, and a £lO
bank order, he was now conveying to Ferguson’s
mother. One photograph was Adam’s own
portrait, the other that of his young wife, whom
through a tortuous “ course of true love,” he
had wooed and won. The presentation of these
articles to Mrs. Ferguson was an occasion so
affecting to the old lady, that she was almost
incapacitated from entertaining her visitors as
she desired. But they participated in her
happiness as well as in her hospitality, and in
the pleasant discourse with which they en-
livened their return to Glasgow, united in the
opinion that to the colony of Victoria is now
due more than ever before the title—Australia
Felix. G. McK.
A SONNET OF KEATS' ,
Happy is England! I could be content
To see no other verdure than its own ;
To feel no other breezes than are blown,
Through its tall woods with high romances blent;
Yet do I sometimes feel a languishment,
For skies Italian, and an inward groan
To sit upon an Alp as on a throne,
And half forget -what world or worldling meant.
Happy is England ! sweet her artless daughters ;
Enough their simple loveliness for me,
Enough their whitest arms in silence clinging :
Yet do I often warmly burn to see,
Beauties of deeper glance, and hear their singing,
And float with them about the sunny waters.
The receipts are now ready for the sub-
scribers to “the Vain Effort,” who are requested
as early as convenient to leave their addresses
with the Editor.
To the Editor of the Vain Effort.
Mr. Editor, —Having heard that this is to
be the last number of “the Vain Effort,” I, on
behalf of my fellow ladies, thank you for all
the trouble you have taken to please those of
the “ better sex.” Although you have not re-
ceived many communications from your friends
—the ladies—do not attribute that fact to a
want of interest on their part, or any absence
of a strong sympathetic feeling towards you.
We, ladies, have had so much to do in the
courting line, during nearly the whole of the
voyage, that we had no time to compose beau-
tiful poetry, or write jjlain prose for your paper.
I was rather surprised that “ the health of
the ladies” was not proposed by some bachelor
the other night. I thought that you, at least,
being a nice bachelor, would have risen to
speak in our behalf. After all, I suppose the
proposition of your own health so overcame
your judgment, that you forgot how to display
your usual gallantry.
Wishing you many happy days, I am, &c. &c.
Mary Jane.
OUR SHIP—HER PROGRESS.
Under steam since our last. We have made
232 miles. Lat. 51.13. N. Long. 11.47. W.
Signalled this morning the barque John Barber.
Spoke the Harvest Home from Iqueque, bound
to Cork—lo 2 days out —wished to be reported.
At noon, to-day, we were about 140 miles from
Cork.
3r Under circumstances very similar to those in
in which, by God’s providence, we are now placed,
a- the Royal Charter (in October last) drifted on
le the rocky coast of Moelfra Bay. She had made
w the most rapid passage on record. She had on
ia board those whose departure had been pre-
ceded by the tears of friends, and whose safe
- arrival in Great Britain would have been the
signal for thanksgivings to that throne of
grace which had so often been approached with
prayer in their behalf. In the memory o' \
many among us dwells still the petition of the
Rev. C. Hodge, written the night of her sailing,
t . and found on that iron-bound shore after he
’ who had penned it had passed into the presence
of his great Master, to give an account of the
deeds done in the days of his mortal life.
;. Ceremonies and compliments to the full, as
8 ! pleasant to them as were ours of the night
before last, had been exchanged between cap-
tain, officers, clergyman, and passengers. Her
living freight was, we believe, the heaviest
(without exception) that had ever left the
shores of Australia. Our passenger list exceeds
theirs by nearly 150 souls. Her reputation
b- was second to none. The vessel in which we
ed sail has made the swiftest passage yet
es plished from Liverpool to Melbourne —nearly,
if not quite, equal to the famous and still quoted
Simla’s trip from Southampton the latter
vessel being under full steam all the way.
Her commander, like our own, had “won
golden opinions from all sorts of people.” Her
passengers, like ourselves, were nearing their
destination, full of expectation fast maturing
°* into hope, destined never to be realized. We
trust that ours may be a more fortunate lot
as than befell those who, in the very spring-time
a of their rejoicing, perished in the waves on the
ce dark and gloomy night of the 26th October
last, and that we may make good use of the
time yet remaining to us.
“ e To each fellow voyager we have to say adieu.
u ' The time, once reckoned by months, is now
3r - counted by hours; and as our journey draws
°* still more swiftly to its close, the number of
or minutes will become the all-absorbing question.
st > It is pleasant, at the close of our existence, to
t 0 he able to state, that we are not aware of any
single unpleasant feeling called into being by
ne our publication; and if, as we believe, we have
ay at all ministered to the amusement of our
fellow-passengers, our “Efforts” have not been
“Vain.”


j» 27 „
99
28 24,924
>> 28
10 p.m. 29 11,953
Starting again—•
4.40 p. m. 1st May, till noon
2nd, 21,021
From noon, 2nd „
99
3rd, 22,383
„ 3rd „
4th, 24,015
„ 4th „
99
5 27,311
n ° >>
99
6 25,169
„ 6 „
99
7 26,095
advice to the Agents.
of very inferior quality,
the sherry worst of all.
Id also direct their attention to
their scale of
CLEARED OUT, March 6.
“GREAT BRITAIN,” AUXILIARY S. S. S., 1,734
TONS; JOHN GRAY, FOR LIVERPOOL.
Bright, Brothers, $ Co,, Agents.
Passengers : —Mr. and Mrs. George Harker;
Misses Mary and Anne, Masters Robert, John,
William, and Thomas Harker, and servant;
Dr. and Mrs. Eadie, children (3), and servant;
Mr. J. and Mrs. Mclntyre, children (3), and
servant; Mr. and Mrs. C. C. Cole, Miss Cole,
and servant; Mr. and Mrs. Wm. Faulkes,
children (2), and servant; Mrs. and Miss Ker-
ferd; Mr. Attwood, and servant; Dr., Mrs.,
and Miss Williams; Misses M. A. and M. L.
Rigby; Mr. J., Mrs., and Miss Milligan; Mrs.
Rodgers; Miss Beveridge ; Mrs. and Miss
Saunderson; Mrs., Miss Emma, and Masters
John and James Hockin; Mr. R. 8., Mrs., and
/Miss Sibley; Mr. C., Mrs., and Miss McLeod;
Mr. G. L. and Mrs. Woodworth; Mrs. Sanders;
Miss Reid, Miss Kate Reid; Mrs, and Master
Langtree; Mr. Donald; Mrs. and Misses A.
and C. Cameron; Rev. Thomas Williams; and
Messrs. G. P. McKerrow, Jas. Alderson, Kettle,
H. Meinertyhazen, Dailey, Branscombe, Ethe-
ridge, Geo. Duff, Phillippi, Dodgson, Lichten-
stein, Chas. Greaves, Monk, Z. Lazarus, Jas.
Harper, J. Brandt, M. Green, W. Prowse, Geo.
Leary, W. J. Murray, R. W, Grace, W. Barrett,
R. Paterson, Knowles, J. K, Anderson, Jos.
Collins, Browning, Schroeder, Mabson, in the
saloon; and with second and third cabins to-
gether 504 passengers.
592 bales wool, 31 bales skins, 2 bales leather,
1 case opossum rugs, 24 bales old bags, 1,408
bags S. A. copper ore, 3 packages merchandise,
1 trunk effects, 1 case spirit levels, 1 case spe-
cimens natural history. And 117 packages, con-
taining 47,472 oz. Bdwt. of gold, shipped in
the following parcels:—Bank of Australasia,
20,217 oz. 9dwt.; Union Bank, 10,3020 z. 6dwt.;
Oriental Bank Corporation, 10,0440 z.; Bank of
New South Wales, 6,1670 z. 3dwt.; small ship-
ments, 741 oz. lOdwt. Also 20 snakes, one of
which has the recommendation of having bitten
a man, and thereby caused his death.
SUPPLEMENT.
Th k Great Britain left Liverpool on the 11th
Deceiver, 1859, and passed the Rock Light at
1.30. pirn., crossed the Equator in Long. 20°
47', having accomplished an average speed of
223 miles. From 28th December to 16th
January (Lat. 42.54. Long. 16.59.), the average
speed was 266 miles. From the 16th January
to sth February, the average speed was 326
miles. The passage from the Rock Light to
Port Philip Heads was performed in 55 days
16 hours. She remained at anchor from sth
February to 7th March, I 860; sailing thence,
as per Log, and repassing the Rock Light at
10. a. m. was docked 7th May; thus going
round the world in 147 days, out of which 31
were spent in Port Philip Bay. The quantity
of coal consumed on her outward voyage, was
795 tons 13cwt.; number of days under steam
32.* The quantity burnt on her homeward
voyage was 1050 tons. 7 cwts.; number of days
under steam 42.* Total number of revolutions
of engine, 756079.
* The reader must understand that steam was used
on parts only of many of these days.
We must not conclude without one word of ad
The wines and spirits placed on board were ol
This should be remedied in future. We would
prices for wines, which might be
LIST OF LIVE STOCK
SHIPPED AT MELBOURNE ON BOARD STEAM
SHIP “GREAT BRITAIN.”
420 live fowls
300 „ ducks
133 live sheep
38 „ pigs
2 „ bullocks
1 „ milch cow
40 „ geese
13 ~ turkeys
fresh beef.
4097 lb.
REVOLUTIONS OF SCREW.
REVOLUTIONS.
The screw started again 24th April,
and made to noon 25th, .. 24,137
From noon, 25th April, till noon, 26th, 24,110
„ 26 „ „ 27 24,331
considerably lowered to their own great advantage


From March 8 to May 5, 1860.
Temperature
Air. Water.
Hours under—
No. of
Days.
REMARES.
Sail. Sail. Steam,
MarchS ( 40.14
142,15
Left Port Philip Heads, and dis-
charged Pilot at One o’Clock,
p. m. 7th Inst.
9 43.25 142.51 30.10 62 60 .... 4
10 46.33 146.14 30.25 65 54 18 ...
2 191
3 236
11 47.34 150.45 30.20 59 54 6 5
12 49.42 156.00 29.50 54 51 20£ ...
13 50.26 163.58 29.35 48 48 24 ...
14 50.16 170.47 29.48 51 48 24 ...
15 50.58 177.20 29.72 51 46 24 ...
4 194
5 243
6 314
7 266
8 250
Longitude changes from East to West
15 51.00 175.26 29.62 51 51 24 ... .
8 273
16 51,26 169.24 29.60 50 48 .... 11 13
9 232
17 51.26 160.49 29.80 49 48 24
18 51.45 153.12 29.85 48 50 24
19 52.20 146.00 29.25 50 49 24
20 53. 2 138. 6 29. 6 47 47 24
21 53. 2 129.56 29.20 40 46 24
22 53. 7 122.16 29.32 43 46 24
23 53.27 114.23 29.50 42 45 24
24 54.38 107.17 29.42 43 44 24
10 324
11 281
12 275
13 285
14 296
16 277
16 279
17 260
25 55.15 102. 7 28.78 38 42 24
18 182
26 56. 2 94.46 28.81 38 42 19£ 4£
27 56.20 86.22 29.2 39 42 24 ....
19 255
20 292
28 57.00 78.00 28.80 37 42 24
29 56.47 70.24 29.22 38 41 24
21 265
22 250
30 57.21 64.00 28.70 40 40 .... 12 12
23 218
Rounded Cape Horn; sighted one
ship, standing S.W., and Diego
Ramirez.
31 56. 7 68. 9 28.80 38 41 .... 9 15
24 208
25 295
April 1
53. 9 51.24 29.10 44 42 22 2
2 51.28 45.16 29. 0 45 41 24
26 252
3 48.11 42.17 29.83 50 49 16 .... 8
27 225
4 44.54 40. 6 29.91 53 53 15 4 5
28 217
One sail in sight ahead; signalled
Harmonia, from Callao to Cork,
47 days out.
5 41.19 38.42 30.25 54 64 21 3
6 38.56 36.31 30.15 64 63 24
29 224
30 175
7 38.27 34.28 29.98 69 65 .... 5 1 ,
8 36.27 32.42 30.10 67 66 21 3
31 101
32 142
9 32. 2 32.42 30. 5 70 70 .... 24
33 265
10 28.32 31.25 30. 2 73 76 .... 24
34 221
Two deaths.
11 25.12 29.33 30. 6 78 78 .... 24
35 226
12 21.38 29.22 30.12 80 81 .... 13 11
36 215
Sighted Trinidad and two,ships;
signalled B. barque Dainietta,
steering S. E., and Danish ship,
Anna Maria , steering S.
Saw a Hamburg ship steering S.
13 18.11 30.50 30. 9 86 82 .... 20 4
37 223
14 15. 9 30.48 30. 2 80 81 4 20
38 182
15 11.38 30.51 30. 2 81 82 .... 20 4
39 211
16 8.4 30.17 30. 0 82 82 4 .... 20
40 217
17 3.59 29.31 30. 2 82 82 24
41 250
42 208
18 0.32 29.43 29.98 82 81 .... 24
19 2.51 30.24 30. 0 78 80 .... 18 6
43 208
20 5.49 30.33 30. 0 83 80 .... 20 4
44 178
45 214
21 8.35 32.48 30. 0 86 76 13 11
22 11.29 35.00 30. 3 78 76 24
46 218
47 240
23 14.52 37.12 30.11 86 77 24
24 18.14 39. 8 30.20 78 75 20 4
48 231
Sighted large ship standing E,
25 21.51 40.34 30.20 75 74 24
49 232
26 25.34 40.56 30.30 74 73 .... 24
50 223
27 29. 1 39.46 30.35 72 70 .... 24
51 216
52 219
28 32.16 37.51 30.22 72 70 .... 24
29 35.13 34.13 29.90 67 64 13 11
53 253
30 38.26 31.27 29.90 67 63 24
54 234
41.13 27.47 29.80 64 58 4 20
55 237
Passed British barque British
Tar; also, two islands —Flores
and Corvo.
May 1
2 44.17 24.19 29.70 63 59 3 21
56 241
57 206
3 46.52 21, 5 29.80 63 56 24
4 4&57 16 A 1 29i90 58 54 \\ 22J
58 233
5 51.13 11.47 30. 4 58 52 .... 24
59 232
Sighted the Irish coast—ll.o p.m. the Fastnett Rock Light,
May 5. 6.30 p. m
Was boarded by Irish pilot off Kinsale; landed mails and 38 passengers
6. 3.30 a. m,
Started again; passed Hook Light, Waterford, 2.30 p.m.; and the Tuskar, at 7.0 p.m.
Passed South Stack Light; received pilot, at 5.0 a.m. between the Skerries and Point
Lynas; passed the Rock Light at 10,0 a.m.; and at noon docked ship in Huskisson
Dock. Thus completing the quickest passage on record from Australia to England.
5.30 a. m,
7. 2.30 a.m
I. E, CHILLCOTT, PRINTER, CLARE STREET, BRISTOL.


