

(aV
■e


« fWljyGH#
I) JJ — t\t7^
toil
\ <, I J / /
, v v V j "
/ i
w 4 -j^
J
"Examiner" Litho. Launceston




(r~r Cj QUJUU, Ckhi&-^JY'


«


THE TWILIGHT HOUR




The
Twilight
Hour .
Adeline J. Whitfeld.
Tasmania :
Printed at The Examiner Office,
Launceston.


To the Memory of my Parents and Brother
this Book is Affectionately Dedicated.


PREFACE.
little picture rises up before me, and this is
what I see—A long low room with greeny-
grey walls and muslin curtains at the windows. On
one side is a bed wide enough for three of the size
of the little figure among the bunched-up pillows.
There is a twinkle of mischief in the laughing brown
eyes, as their owner begs for one more story—“ just
one before you go.” In the little bed opposite, big
solemn-looking blue eyes are watching steadily, and
presently comes the mutual request; “Oh, Miss Whitfeld,
will you write those stories you’ve been telling us, so
that we may have them to keep ? The angel-faced
baby in the other room is already asleep.
Now that I have written the stories, that they and
others may have them to keep for their very own, I
dare to hope they will be the means of passing some
pleasant hours, both for the little people and those
that are not so little.
Many of the tales are taken from life, yet told simply
that they may be read aloud without need of explanation.
And so 1 launch my little boat upon the mighty sea.
Adeline J. Whitfeld,


*


+
PAGE
1
11
24
32
69
77
87
137
146
155
162
.COKTE^TS.
The Rabbit Family
Muffet
Mrs. Pig’s At Home
Patch and Toby
The Short-Nosed Lizard with a Stumpy Tail
Toddy -
Juju and Fifi
Prisoners in a Cave
Robin
Daisybell
Animal House
Mr. Binks
Old Nell -


*.


V


•
4
%
Wfe % ' &
- '' '« ? . $'
i v# i. i«’f..,
. •■ , / :k V
/
W‘ A ' w '' ‘
f v
\ I II if
\ ■%!¥</
i \ I
K / /'®
1 *#% - “ :%J
•; p
,/
•• '■ $ \ :
# ■■ |t
/ ' > l
T ’k
» y -~ yV -v
V-*>. .■’*• • ' v
9, k I 1 »
I ' ’ ' -' x '
* \
17 **
f
: 0.\g0gur
|
f
P
l]
i
: fywi
\
y4a
i\
j^ f
«** '
J£ Hi* Kv&kS
MSy
' ■ ,¥ .
it li
Jf 0^
. : D\
“ Dear ! Dear 1 ’
’ said i\ I a Rabbit to herself, “
What a bad temper Pa is In,
to be sure. ’


THE RABBIT FAMILY.
PAPA Rabbit sat on the ground close by the door-
way of the passage which led to his little home.
Indoors were Mama Rabbit and seven little boy and
girl rabbits just big enough to have larks when they
went out with papa and mama. They were all snuggled
together just now in a soft warm nest made of dried
grass and leaves, and felt comfortable. Mr. Rabbet
did not feel so comfortable; every now and then he put
up a thoughtful paw and stroked his nose, or rubbed his
forehead. He was thinking very hard, for a little while
before he had had a bad fright. It happened like
this. He had just given Mama Rabbit a good-bye kiss,
and told the boys and girls to be good, and not bice
and scratch one another as they had been doing sca eral
times, and then he stepped out for a bite or two off a
patch of green grass which grew near. It was sweet
and juicy with dew, and Papa Rabbit curled up his nose
and meant to have a real good breakfast, when there
came a great and dreadful noise very near. He sat
up and looked round in a great fright, and there he saw
two or three terrible looking creatures with their
mouths open, and their red tongues showing, coming


straight for him. Poor Mr. Rabbit, he made two or three
thing leaps towards his home, and was only just in
time. As he rushed through the doorway, he heard
a snap as two great jaws met, but without a piece of
him between them, thank goodness. “Bless my whis-
kers!" gasped Mr. Rabbit, “that was a touch and go;
another inch and my tail would have gone.” He sat
down and with a leaf rubbed the perspiration from his
face. He turned his head and looked at his tail;
} es, it was on all right. Then up came one of the little
rabbits whose name was Wig, and he said—
Hullo Pa, you look a bit upset! What’s up?”
You mmd your own business,” said Pa Rabbit,
giving Wig such a sad box on the ear that he fell right
over on his side.
“For shame, Pa!” said Ma Rabbit, rooting at
Wiggie with her nose until she got him on his legs
again.
Mr. Rabbit looked very cross, and scratched hard
until he had made quite a hole in the ground before
he would speak. When he did speak he looked so
savage that Wig and little Greyfoot, who were near
him, squeaked with fright and ran behind their Ma.
Mrs. Rabbit put out her right front paw and patted
them gently, then she said—
“What did you say, Pa, dear?”
I said,” said Mr. Rabbit, rubbing his cheek, “that
the sooner we get out of this place the better. Such an
awful thing happened just now,” and then he told
them all about it.


Ma Rabbit, and Greyfoot, and Wig, and all the rest
of them were in a great fright; but after a bit, when Pa
Rabbit had gone out again for another nibble, they
snuggled together and forgot all about it. You see
they hadn’t nearly had their tails snapped off like Mr.
Rabbit. When he got outside, again he "looked round
very carefully, but nothing was to be seen of the dread-
ful creatures with the open mouths and red tongues.
Only some of those big, woolly things that eat grass
the same as rabbit* do, and wouldn’t hurt a fly. T here
were some of them feeding quite close, and sometimes
they looked up and said “baa!” Mr. Rabbit did not
mind them; but he sat down and ‘thought a great
deal. week cousin Whitepaw got her foot
S
caught in a'terribfe iron thing, that Mrs. Longears
says is called a trap. Anyway, poor Whitepaw’s foot
was broken right off at the ankle, and it was the white
one, too, more’s the pity, and so she isn’t Whitepaw
any more, and now they call her Stump instead, which
makes the poor angry she doesn’t know what
to do. Then, again, Mr. Blacknose was running through
a hole in a fence on his way home to his wife and
family, when all at once a piece of long, greyish thin
stuff called string, went tight right round his neck,
and up he flew in the air, and that was the last they
saw of Mr. Blacknose. No mistake it was growing
a nasty, dangerous place to live in, and the sooner
they got out of it the better. While he was still think-
ing, up came an old grey rabbit, who was always called
“Bob the Careful.” He was thought to be a very wise


rabbit, and could remember a long way back, right to
when Pa R.abbit was born.
“Plow do?” said Bob the Careful.
Pa Rabbit twitched his nose.
“I feel in a bit of a fix,” said he, “being a family man,
and not a small family either.” Then he told Bob
all about it.
Bob sat up and rubbed his two front paws together
very fast.
“Well, what do you think?” asked Mr. Rabbit.
“Like you, that it is a bad place to live in, and you d
best cut and run. Why, look here, within the last
fortnight I’ve lost fifty relatives, and the question is,
where have they gone? My poor daughter, Mrs. fhin-
skin, and all her children are not to be found, and
besides them my beloved grandson, Silverfur, wife and
family have not been seen for days; and now I heai
old Mr. Rawbones is missing. I guess if they’ve put
him in a pot they found him tough.”
“In a pot?” asked Mr. Rabbit, in horror.
“Yes, don’t you know those tall animals that walk
on two feet, and have to wear a false covering, eat
flesh, not raw though, they cook it in a three-legged
not.”
Mr. Rabbit turned cold all over, and had a shivering
fit before he could answer. Then he said —
“By my two front paws, you don’t say so!”
“Only too true,” said Bob the Careful.
Mr. Rabbit put up his ears.


“I’m afraid it will break Mrs. Rabbit’s heart leaving
home like this, and the children not out of hand yet.
Scratch my back, if it isn’t hard.”
“You arc right,” said Bob, “and being a family man
makes it worse.”
“Parsley and onions, it does!” exclaimed Mr. Rabbit,
Pie did not often use that expression unless very much
excited, but when he did, he always thought it sounded
well.
“Where shall you go?” asked Bob the Careful.
“Pinch my ear if I know,” said Mr. Rabbit, “its no
easy matter travelling with a wife and family these days,
with all sorts of dreadful creatures about”
“There are some beautiful burrows down by the
river,” said Bob. “I believe those things called men
say it is a ‘bank’ where the burrows are; but anyway,
they only need a little more scratching and they would
make lovely nests. I’ve been in some of them myself.”
“Take me to them,” said Mr. Rabbit, “and let me
see for myself. As sure as my fur is of the very best,
I will start at once.”
Then away they went, sometimes jumping, but
generally running at a good pace, till they reached the
bank of the river. Yes, there were a great number ot
beautiful holes, so many that if a horse had tried to
trot on that bank he must have surely broken one of
his poor legs. As Mr. Rabbit and Bob ran up, about
a dozen heads popped out of the holes, and twenty-four
little cars peaked themselves, and the same number of
bright eyes peered forth to see who was coming.


‘‘By my top lip,'' said Mr. Rabbit, “the holes are full
of ladies and gentlemen already.”
“Plenty of room, sir,” said a stranger rabbit, coming
up. He put up a paw and touched his forehead out
of respect to Mr. Rabbit and Bob, who bowed and held
out their paws. When they had shaken paws, the
stranger told them that though there were quite a
hundred rabbits living there, yet a great many holes
were empty.
“Squeeze my foot,” said Mr, Rabbit, “if it does not
seem a little funny. Where have they all gone to?
Holes and homes do not make themselves; they must
have had folk living in them.”
The stranger, who said his name was Longtooth,
smiled sadly.
“There is no telling,” he said, “maybe they went
away for a change.”
Mr. Rabbit shook his head and pulled his whiskers.
Then he said —
“It seems rather funny. By my left ear and right
hind leg it does. Still, it cannot be worse than where
we are now, so tickle my ribs if I’m not off for Mis.
Rabbit and the children,” and away he scampered as
hard as he could go. Then Bob and Longtooth hopped
off to where a sweet tuft of clover grew, and began to
munch with all their might and main. Mr. Rabbit
mshed in to where Mrs. Rabbit and her family were
taking a quiet dinner of turnip leaves.


“Come along, one and all, great and small,” he said
in a loud voice, “we will make a new home in peace
and safety.”
“Lor’ Pa,” squeaked Mrs. Rabbit, “how you do
startle one rushing in like that.”
“Crush my toes, if you are not a silly,” returned Mr.
Rabbit, rather rudely. “There you are, always eating,
eating. No wonder you jump when your digestion’s
spoiled.”
“Oh, Pa,” said Wiggic and little Greyfoot both at
the same time.
Mr. Rabbit boxed their ears for speaking to him, and
then they all went out to where the green grass grew,
and where the little birds hopped about. They played
for a little while in the sunshine, and then off they set
for the new home. It seemed a long way to the little
ones, who very soon grew tired; but Mr, Rabbit said
they were lazy, so he bit off a long piece of rush, and
when they lagged behind the others he whipped them.
“Dear! dear!” said Ma Rabbit to herself, “what a
bad temper Pa is in to be sure.”
When they reached the bank where all the
burrows were, Pa Rabbit chose one of the
finest empty holes to be seen, and then Ma
and the boys and girls helped him scratch until
they had made it look like home. They gathered
some stray fur, some dried grass, and some dead leaves,
and made another soft, warm nest; and then they all
cuddled up. and went fast asleep, tired out with their
long trip. Now close by the bank was a large hollow
log, and in this log lived a big fierce cat and five kittens.


If Mr. Rabbit had onlv known this, he would not have
come to the bank, because cats love to kill and eat
young rabbits. Mrs. Cat was very, very fierce looking.
She had a big face, wild eyes, and a long bushy tail.
The kittens had really almost passed kitten-hood, and
were very fat, but almost as fierce as their mother.
They were named Tabby toes, Whitestreak, Darkie,
Eat’emup, and Birdcatcher. The two last were the
wildest and the cleverest, and brought more food home
than all the rest put together. They always got their
way, too, for Tabbytoes, Whitestreak, and Darkie were
afraid of Eat’emup and Birdcatcher, they scratched and
bit so when they were angry.
Pa and Ma Rabbit and their family had not been
in their new home long when a dreadful thing happened.
Wig had been in disgrace because he had turned up his
nose at the grass Pa had brought in for tea, which made
Mr. Rabbit so angry, he sent him out to get his own
tea. Wiggie had not been gone long, when they all
heard a dreadful squeal. Poor little rabbit! He was sit-
ting quietly on the ground, wondering where he should
hop to for his tea, when two great bright eyes glared
right into his, and then before he knew anything more he
was seized by the back and carried off squealing with the
full force of his little lungs. Ma Rabbit rushed to the
doorway of their little home, just in time to see Mrs.
Cat with Wig in her mouth. Ma Rabbit almost fainted
from fright.
“Oh, my poor darling, Wiggles!” she cried, “the best,
the very best of them all. My Wiggy-piggy.” Mrs.


Rabbit burst into tears, and then wiped them away on
little Greyfoot’s back. “Whatever is that dreadful
creature that ran off wdth Wiggie, Pa:' she asked.
Mr. Rabbit turned pale, and putting up a paw fanned
himself for some time before he answered
“Pull my whiskers!” Then he fanned himself again.
“Parsley and onions, I don’t know,” he said, I never
saw such an ugly creature before.’
“Oh, my poor darling son,” said Mrs. Rabbit, “what
will become of him?”
“Straighten my legs!” said Mr. Rabbit, I expect
” He did not say what he expected, and Mrs.
Rabbit shed some more tears. Presently she said, “I
cannot bear this any longer. I must go and look for my
Wigsy-pigsy.” Then Mrs. Rabbit popped out, and this
is what she saw. Close by the big hollow log in which
they lived were Mrs. Cat and her five children, all tear-
ing at something which lay on the ground, and this
something was poor little Wiggie. Already his head
was off and one leg, while at the rate he was going
there would soon be nothing left of him. Mrs. Rabbit
nearly choked with horror as she went back and told
them of what she had seen.
“Tear my fur!” said Mr. Rabbit. “What shall we
do?” and then Greyfoot and all the others squealed a
good deal because poor Wiggie was eaten up. But it
was all of no use, and very soon Mr. Rabbit grew
angry.


“Pinch my leg - !” said he, “what a noise. If you do
not all stop this instant minute, I’ll give you to the
savage creatures that ate poor Wiggie.”
After that a whole day passed and nothing particular
happened, and then came Brown Eyes, who was really
the prettiest rabbit of the lot, home with only three
legs. He said something sprang out of some soft earth
and bit his leg off; but Mr. Rabbit, who was growing
wise, said it must have been a trap. The other little
rabbits left off Brown Eyes’ real name and dubbed him
Three Legs, and Three Legs he was always called.
Mr, Rabbit had not been at the bank long before
he began to get fat and lazy, too fat and too lazy to
bring in grass or anything for tea. So Mrs. Rabbit
and the little ones had to “fossick” for themselves, it
chanced that sometimes when they were fossicking,
Mrs. Cat and her family went fossicking also, and,
sad to tell, one after another went after ooor Wisrsfie,
till only Three Legs was left. Then a dog with very long
legs caught Mr. Rabbit, who was too fat to run very
fast, and Mrs. Rabbit, quite broken-hearted, said to
Three Legs that they must go away to a new country.
This the} 7 ’ decided to do, and very early one fine morn-
ing away they went, after saying good-bye to the ladies
and gentlemen who lived in the bank. Whether they
ever reached their new home or not, no one ever heard,
so no more can be told.
THE END.


MUFFET
U TV /TORE pork! More pork! More pork!” cried an
■*" -*■ old brown bird, with a round head and yel-
lowish eyes. He looked this way and that, but couldn t
see anything nice to eat. “More pork! he said more
loudly, “More pork!”
“What a lot of pork he wants to-night,” said a little
grey mouse, sitting on the sloping trunk of a half-fallen
elderberry, he said half to himself and half to his
mother. Mama Mouse and her other children were
still indoors, that is in their soft little nest inside the
hollow trunk.
“What’s that you’re saying, Muffet?” said Mama
Mouse, sharply. “More pork, indeed, more mouse you
mean.”
“But, Mama, dear,” said Muffet, starting, “Mr. Mops
wouldn’t eat mice.”
“Wouldn’t he?” cried Mama Mouse, coming to the
crack in the trunk and looking out. “Where was it
your poor, dear Pa went to, tell me that, Muffet, my
b °y ? ” .. „
“Wasn’t he out after supper? You always said so,”
said Muffet, uneasily.


j- es, said Mama Mouse, blinking her bright little
eyes, “and he made one for that dreadful Mops. Well
I remember the night; I was not feeling at all well,
having got my feet wet the night before coming home
from a party, and when your poor, dear Pa came in
with a crust he’d found in the kitchen sink, I said it
would make me sick to touch it.”
“I didn’t know mice were ever sick,” said Muffet.
“You are only an ignorant little boy,” said Mama
Mouse, and there are many things for you to learn.”
“But were you sick?” asked Muffet.
Of course not, silly, I didn’t eat the crust,” said
Mama Mouse. “What absurd questions you ask.
Well, I was saying as I was too ill to eat, your poor,
dear Pa said he would go back to the kitchen, and
look in the broken glass dish, where they put bones
and bits for Rover,”
“And did he?” asked Muffet.
“Have patience and you will hear, I fancied I could
nibble a mutton bone, so I said so, and your poor, dear
Pa smiled and whispered that there was just a chance
of finding a few cheese parings. Dear me!” cried
Mama Mouse, “it makes my mouth water to mention
cheese. Well, with a good-bye kiss and a last fond
look at you children ”
“We were very young, I suppose, Mother,” said
Muffet, “for I can’t remember anything about it.”
“I should think you were young,” said Mama
Mouse. “Why, you hadn’t any fur, and your eyes
were not open; you were just squeaking, wriggling bits


of pink; but your poor, dear Pa was very proud of
you.”
“And how did he die?” asked Muffet, who wanted to
hear the story.
“What a lot of questions you ask, Muffet,’’ said
another little mouse coming’ out. He was a shade
darker than Muffet, and his name was Nobby.
“Don’t interrupt, Nobby,” said Muffet, trying to
speak like Mama Mouse.
“That is a lesson you should learn,” said Mama
Mouse. Muffet grinned.
“Did poor, dear Pa get the cheese?” he asked.
“Muffet,” said Mama Mouse, “I fear you are mocking
me. Your poor, dear Pa often said he hoped his boys
and girls would grow up worthy of the length of his
tail. Pie had a beautiful tail,” added Mama Mouse, with
a proud shake of her own, “and mice for miles round
used to come to see it.”
Muffet and Nobby tried to measure theirs, and Mama
Mouse went on with her story —
• “He had been gone a long time, long enough I
thought to bring me all the scraps from Rover’s dish,
and I was really beginning to feel hungry, when all at
once there was a great rushing and scuffling in the
long grass near. It was a bandicoot who had scratched
a hole and made his bed of dry leaves beneath our
tree. I was just going to speak to him, when a spotted
rat came up. ‘What, going to bed now? why, you’ve
been up no time,’ he said. ‘Oh, well,’ said the bandi-
coot, T feel tired, I think my liver is out of order, and


—and I saw a murder just now; I fancy that helped
to upset my liver.’ ‘A murder!’ said the spotted rat,
while I turned cold and shook all over. ‘Yes,’ said the
bandicoot; ‘you remember the mouse with the long
tail?’ ‘Do I not,’ said the spotted rat. ‘Well, he was
coming along with a bit of cheese rind, as much as he
could well carry, when down came old Mops from the
elm tree, and before you could look round, poor mousie
was gone, tail and all! I suppose I must have fainted
then,” said Mama Mouse, “for I cannot remember any
more; but, of course, I never saw your poor, dear Pa
again, or the cheese.”
“Would Mr. Mops eat us?” asked Nobby.
“If he got half a chance he would, and me, too,”
said Mama Mouse.
At that moment there came a loud and dreadful
noise quite close, and both Muffet and Nobby squeaked
with fright, which vexed Mama Mouse so much that
she tried to box their ears; but they were so quick they
were out of reach in a moment.
“Mew! Mew! Miouw!” and a tabby cat with a lame
leg sat on her tail and yawned. She was only a yard
or two away, and presently she began to talk to her-
self, while Mama Mouse, Muffet, and Nobby kept quite
still, with their little hearts beating very fast.
“Dear me!” exclaimed the tabby cat. “It seems an
age since I tasted a mouse. This lame leg does hamper
one talk about a velvet step, I think it is a velvet
hobble with me,” and she yawned again.
“Did you hear what she said,” whispered Muffet.


“Hold your tongue,” said Mama Mouse, in a very
low, but very fierce voice.
“Ah,” said the tabby cat, “what’s that? I heard
something; and now I come to think of it, there’s a
very strong smell of mouse in the air.” She rose to her
feet and looked warily round.
“What do I see on that old tree?” With one bound
she reached the trunk, in spite of her lame leg, but at
that moment three little tails shot into the crack.
“Well,” said the tabby cat, “if that’s not too bad,
and I knocked my sore leg, too. Botheration!” ihis
was one of the tabby cat’s strongest expressions, and
only used when she was very vexed indeed. “Ah, well,
I’ll wait awhile, and perhaps they will come out.” So
she made herself as comfortable as she could, and fixed
her eyes on the crack. It was weary work, and she
yawned a great many times, and each time forgot to
put her paw up.
Once in their little home Mama Mouse turned very
faint, and had to be rubbed, and fanned, and patted,
laid flat on her back, and fed with dainties before she
was well again. Nobby then went to peep at the crack.
“She’s still there,” he said, “and her big green eyes
are trying to see in; what ugly eyes she’s got.’
“Well,” said Muffet, “I’m not going to stay here all
night for all the cats in the country.” He put his head
in the air, and all his brothers and sisters gathered
round him.
“Don’t be a sillikin, Muffet,” said Mama Mouse,
sharply.


Muffet laughed rather rudely, and, running up the
hollow trunk, dropped through a small hole he knew
or, and so to the ground, where he lay quite still for
a moment, lest his enemy should be near. Presently
he got up, and, chancing to run over the bandicoot’s
den, a muffled voice said harshly, “Who are you? and
what are you doing on the roof of my house?”
“It’s only Muffet,” said the little mouse, in a fright-
ened squeak, “who wouldn’t hurt a fly.”
“Well, go off my roof," said the bandicoot, “or 111
find a way to make you." Why he was so cross was
really because he had been nearly caught by a little dog
while making a quiet meal of half-decayed apples near
the fruit store. There had been a hard run, and now
he was tired and hungry, and in a bad temper; yet too
frightened to go out again. Muffet made all haste to
get out of the bandicoot’s way, and set off running at
a great rate.
“I am now in the great world,” he said to himself,
“and by myself too. Wfflat a grand time I will have.
This is far better than going out with mother and the
family.” Just then something sprang right across his
path, and he started back with a little cry.
“Don’t be frightened. It’s only me,” said a queer
voicg. and a big green frog peeped ad him from behind
a tuft of grass.
“Who are you?” asked Muffet, trying to be brave.
“My name is Doodles,” said the frog; “by rights my
borne is in the swamp, where they are always saying
boom, boom, boom, I would just love to be there, but


it is so far away. They caught me and put me in a bait
tin, and now I spend much of my time among the ferns
in the summer-house.”
“What’s a bait tin?” asked Muffet.
“A tin with a hole in it, and a lid, for keeping worms
and grubs in when people go fishing,” said Doodles.
“What do people fish for?”
“Fish for ,” repeated Doodles, “why, for fish.”
“Fish for fish, and you call it fishing. Well, I never,”
said Muffet.
“Do you know the way to the house, Mr. Doodles?
I want to fish for a bit of supper,” and the little mouse
laughed.
“Never been inside ’cept once,” said Doodles, “when a
boy caught me; some of my slippery coat came off on
his hands, and somehow he chanced to rub his eyes.
Jupiter! Didn’t he cry? The whole house was in an
uproar, and he had to go to bed and have his eyes
bathed and bandaged. Since then he’s let me alone.”
And Doodles swelled at the thought of his own import-
ance.
“You show me the way to the house,” said Muffet.
So together they went, Muffet running, Doodles
jumping.
“More pork! More pork!” cried a voice above their
heads suddenly. Doodles gave a long leap, and Muffet,
full of fear, crept under a rose tree to hide.
“Do you know Mr. Mops?” asked Muffet, as pre-
sently they heard him fly away.
Doodles laughed.


‘Why, half my time I’m getting - out of his way,” he
said, “and the other half I’m getting into it. I don’t
say he will eat frogs, I’ve never seen him do it, but I
don’t want to set the fashion.”
‘‘Mr. Doodles seemed a merry old gentleman, and
when they reached a green painted door, half glass and
half wood, he stopped saying, with a funny roll of his
round eyes—
‘‘There is the kitchen, creep under the door, and I’ll
wait for you. Don’t hurry, but make all the haste
you can.” After which he hopped under the low
boughs of a flowering fuchsia which grew near.
Very softly Mnffet crept under the door into
the kitchen, and looked round. It was a large
room, large enough to be a world in itself,
he thought, and however was he to find
Rover’s dish. But after running hither and
thither his sharp little nose smelt something good on
the top of the dresser. Instead of it being scraps, there
was a dish piled high with lovely golden-brown cakes.
Ah, weren’t they good? Muffet tried first one and then
another, till his little white teeth had made many holes,
but just as he was thinking that he really must go back
10 Doodles, there was a cry quite close, and what seemed
to him a terribly loud voice, said —
“There’s a wretched little mouse at my cakes! Puss!
Puss! Puss!” Muffet had never had such a fright in his
life, he leaped to the floor, and ran this way and that,
while several very large creatures, with tremendous feet,
tried to catch him, stamp on him, or in some way end


his days. The noise was deafening, and Mnffet was
fast losing heart, when he saw a gleam of light like a
crack, and, rushing forward, passed under the door and
into the dewy garden.
“Well, you have had a feast,” said Doodles, who was
sitting on the step waiting, “but what was all the noise?”
“They tried to murder me,” said Muffet, gasping.
“Ah,” said Doodles nodding, “I thought it was quite
likely.”
“You take it coolly,” said Muffet.
“Well, my boy,” said Doodles,” when you are my age
you will have learned to take things as they come. Do
the best you can, but don't worry.”
If Muffet had not made such a very good supper, I
think he would have been rather cross with Doodles; as
it was he said—
“Show me your summer-house, Mr. Doodles.”
“With pleasure,” said Doodles. They went as be-
fore, Muffet running, Doodles leaping, till they came
to the summer-house.
“There’s a friend of mine here I should like you to
meet,” said Doodles, “Mr. Taut, which is short for
tarantula.”
At that moment a pair of small gleaming eyes, set
very close together, looked out of a dark corner.
“Is that you Doodle?” said a thin, cracked voice, and
Mr. Tant let himself down by a silver thread to where
a ray of moonlight fell.
“A friend of mine,” said Doodles, “Mr. Mr. ”
“Muffet, at your service sir,” said the little mouse,


“So pleased to meet yon, Mr. Muffet,” and the taran-
tula held out a hairy leg, which Muffet pretended not to
see. “Do you happen to change your skin, sir?”
“No,” said Muffet, very much surprised, “how could
I?”
“Ah, well,” said Mr. Tant, “you’re an animal, and I’m
an insect, that makes all the difference, I suppose you
couldn’t get a new skin if you wanted it. I shed mine
to-day, and the new one still feels tender; but it’s all in
a lifetime, isn’t it?”
“How did you take off your old skin?” asked Muffet.
“I didn’t take it at all, I just slipped out of it, and you
can see it hanging now near the roof,” said Mr. Tant, his
little, mean-looking eyes gleaming more than ever.
“Do all spiders shed their skins?” asked Muffet.
“Spiders?” exclaimed Mr. Tant, drawing himself up.
“Do you rank me with common spiders? Ah, if you
only knew my cousin, the tarantula of the desert in
foreign parts, whose bite, if not at once treated, means
certain death.”
“I don’t see that is anything to be proud of,” said
Muffet, who did not like Mr. Tant; “a snake’s bite may
mean death, but no one thinks better of the snake on
that account.”
Mr. Tant looked still more annoyed, but Doodles
laughed.
“My dear fellows,” he said, “don’t have a row about
it, ’tis only nature. We were born so, we can’t help it,
and there’s no use worrying. Just let us make the best
of everything; we can’t all be pretty and good, but it


isn’t worth while to fight about it; life is too short, and
I'm a frog of peace myself. I could wish I was back in
my beautiful swamp, but as I’m not, why I must put up
with it,” He ended with a smile, but Muffct fancied
he saw tears in Doodles’ big round eyes.
‘‘l’ve no fancy for swamps,” said Mr. Taut, shortly.
“Everyone 1o his taste,” said Doodles cheerfully;
“you sec, you have never known the delight of leaping
down a dark slippery hole, and creeping up to do the
same again: cr taking a dive to the bottom of some
clear pool, and of coming to the surface to catch flies,”
and the poor old frog drew a deep breath, but this time
Muffet was certain that there were tears in his eyes.
“Ah, well, there’s no use talking,” said Doodles.
“Good-by, Taut, old chap, leave a few flics for me,”
and he and Muffet left the summer-house.
“Well, what did you think of the place, Mr. Muffet?’
It was the first time the little mouse had been called
mister, and his heart filled with a new pride.
“I liked the place well enough,” he said, holding up
his head in an absurd manner, “but I don’t care for
your friend.”
“Never mind,” said Doodles, kindly, “we will have
our likes and dislikes, and there’s no making them to
order.”
With a sudden squeak Muffet buried himself in the
thick, soft grass.
“What’s the matter?” asked Doodles.
“Look,” cried Muffet, putting up a tiny nose, “look
at all those dreadful creatures.”


Doodles rolled from side to side with laughter.
“What are you laughing at?” asked Muffet, crossly.
“My dear innocent,” said the frog still shaking, “it is
only a clump of pansies with their old man faces,”
“Well, I don’t see where the fun comes in,” said
Muffet.
Doodles was just going to say something, when they
both heard a soft step behind them, and only just in
time, for as Muffet rushed and Doodles leaped among
the low boughs of a large laurel close by, there was a
spring of some animal many times their size, and the
dead leaves crackled under its tread.
“Beaten again,” said a tired voice, “it all comes of my
lame leg.
“Yow! Ow! Meeow-ow!”
“It’s the tabby cat,” whispered Muffet.
“Then we must wait, my boy,” said Doodles.
They waited a long time, but so did the tabby cat,
and now comes rather a sad part in my story, for as all
,was quiet, Doodles said it was quite safe to go out
again, and there was a great deal more he would like to
show Mr. Muffet.
“Better stay a while longer,” said Mr. Muffet, “she s
a wily old cat.”
The tabby cat was just going to yawn, but hearing
this, smiled instead.
Doodles shook his head, and sprang out of the bush,
and then Muffet heard a wild shriek, and after that shrill
cries, and he never saw Doodles again.


How he got back to the home in the elderberry tree
the little mouse could never tell, but he did get there at
last.
“Oh, my son! My son!” cried mama mouse. “1
thought you were lost."
‘“l’ve been to see the great world,” said Muffet, in
tears, “but I never want to go again, for Doodles is
dead; and, oh dear! oh dear!”
THE END.


MRS. PIG’S AT HOME.
T T was Mrs. Pig’s at home day, and she had made up
her mind to have afternoon tea in Farmer Snake-
by’s potato plot. It was not far off, just across a
couple of paddocks, with fences easy to manage; the
first with a slip panel, which, if you butted with your
head, and rubbed with your cheek, would fall down;
the next was a brush fence, and under some bushy
boughs was a lovely track quite big enough for most
pigs to get through; the last had slabs, and some of
them were loose.
Mrs. Pig’s owner had potato plots, but they were too
securely fenced for her.
She called up her children, and gave them notes of
invitation for all the high-born pigs who lived near.
The children grumbled rather at having to go.
“Oh, bother!” said Rolypoly, who had been so named
because he was fat. “Oh, bother going to Lady
Droplip, she is so cross, she’d bite off your tail as soon
as look at you. What is a pig without a tail?”
And he turned his head and looked fondly at his own
tail, which was a long and handsome one, with a curly
end.


“Oh, bother!” echoed little Snooks and Growlywowly
and all the other little pigs.
This annoyed Mrs. Pig so much that she gave the
one nearest to her a sharp bite.
It happened to be Growlywowly, which didn’t much
matter, because she was always grumbling and growl-
ing at something, so a bite never came amiss to her.
But Rolypoly and little Snooks said—
“Buh! Buh! Bull!” and ran off as hard as they could
go-
The afternoon turned out fine and warm, and just
when the clock struck half-past two, Mrs. Pig called all
her family together again to get ready.
“Snub,” she said, frowning very much, “where have
you been?”
Snub was a little white pig when he was clean, which
was not often. Just now he had been rolling in a mud-
hole in the cowyard, and looked very shocking.
Snub did not know what to say. He wrinkled up
his nose, and showed his little teeth, and grinned.
“Snub,” said his mother, in a very loud grunt, “dont
you give me impudence.”
“Haven’t got any,” said Snub. He thought it was
something to eat. Impudence was too long a word for
him.
“You disgraceful, disgusting cub of a pig,” said Mrs.
Pig, “go and wash this instant minute.”
When Mrs. Pig called any of her children a cub it
showed she was very angry indeed, and Snub began to
be really frightened.


“O-o-o-o-oh!” he squealed, “I didn’t mean it. It
wasn’t me. O-o-o-oh!”
Mrs. Pig turned round quickly, and Snub fled for his
life. Up the lane he went, through the gate, and into
the backyard full rush, and then saw a bucket of lovely
clear cold water.
“Ugh! Ugh! Ugh!” said Snub to himself, and he put
his dirty little nose into the bucket, and tipped it over,
which made a nice pool.
He was just having a grand wash, when out rushed a
girl with a bass broom.
“Oh, you horrid little pig!” she cried, and Snub got
several good hard knocks from the bass broom.
“O-o-o-h! E-e-e-eh! O-o-o-o-oh!” he squealed, and
ran down the yard only half clean after all. He was
quite out of breath when he got to the lane. His
mother was too busy to notice him, though he was only
half clean. Several lady and gentlemen pigs had ar-
rived, and were bowing and saying how do you do to
Mrs. Pig, and what a lovely afternoon it was for an out-
ing, and any other nice thing that came into their
heads.
Lady Droplip was there with Mrs. and Miss Flap-
jack, also Mrs. Cobbletoes and young- Fundylundy
with his baby brother. Besides these were some who
seemed to be friends of Lady Droplip’s, but Mrs. Pig was
not sure whether they had been introduced or not; she
was getting a little flustered and anxious to set off, lest
any of those men creatures and dog creatures should
come along. • . .


As they went, Mrs. Pig, whose proper name was Mrs.
Berk (short for Berkshire), walked with Lady Droplip.
“I’m glad,” said Lady Droplip, “to see that you didn’t
ask that common Miss Bacon, or that vulgar old Mr.
Porkington. There’s Mrs. Hamsey, too, she’s not at
all nice. I hear she’s taken to eating chickens, and they
do say she’s not above a weakly lamb.”
“Fancy!” said ‘Mrs. Berk, opening her eyes; “fancy
that!”
“Yes,” said Lady Droplip, “such bad form. Anyone
can see they’ve been born and reared in the gutter. No,
I never touch meat. In fact, I couldn’t look at it, if
you asked me. If it were a plain egg, now, or a hatch-
ing egg. You can hardly ask for anything more deli-
cate than a hatching egg warm in the nest.”
Mrs. Berk turned back her top lip.
“I never get the chance to try it,” she said, “it’s ridi-
culous the way gates are fastened, and doors are shut.
Anyone would think the place was full of thieves.”
“You don’t say so,” said Lady Droplip, “you should
come to stay with me. I was strolling round the yard
at my place the other day, when I came upon a nest
full of hatching eggs under a rosebush. One of these
climbing roses, you know, that had flopped down on the
ground. I suppose the old hen, or Mrs. Wyandotte,
as she calls herself, thought that I would never dream
of looking under there.”
“Hens are stupid things,” said Mrs. Berk, looking
back to see that they were not being followed by any
of those men creatures.


“ I just said, ‘what are you doing here?’” went on
Lady Droplip, “when off she comes, and you never
heard such a noise; you’d have thought the sky was
falling.”
“What next?” asked Mrs. Berk, with one eye on the
slip-panel, which young Mr, Tundylundy was butting
and rubbing without getting the rails down.
“I ate the eggs,” said Lady Droplip, smiling.
“And were they nice?” asked Mrs. Berk, sighing.
“Delicious,” said the lady, smacking her lips. Crash!
Bang! Down came the rails, one after another. The
first hit Mr. Fundylundy on the nose, which made him
squeal dreadfully. At that, several of those round
made a rush for the panel, and there was a great noise,
and Mr. Fundylundy’s baby brother had his ear tom,
and Snubb’s foreleg was jammed between the rails.
Mrs. Berk rushed up and lost her head, as most
mama pigs do when a little one is caught in the fence,
or any accident happens; and the first thing sue did was
to snap at poor Snub, and so bit him on the cheek. Poor
Snub set up a yell, and goodness knows what would
have happened, only just then his foot slipped out, and
he ran away on three legs, giving little squeals and sobs
to himself. After that they reached the brush fence
quite safely, but Lady Droplip, who had eaten so many
hatching eggs and other good things, that she was
getting fat, nearly stuck fast in the gap. It was only
the pushing she got from behind that made her go
through. Mrs. Cobbletoes and Mrs. Flapjack were


both stout matrons, and they pushed with all their might
and main till at last they managed it.
And now a short run, then, they just nosed down a
few of the loose slabs, and before them lay, one after
another, rows upon rows of shining green-topped po-
tatoes.
Mr. Fundylundy, who tried to be funny sometimes,
said it was “as easy as falling off a log.” He laughed
a great deal at his own wit, and some of the others
joined in; but a strange gentleman who before that
had been very quiet, made an ugly face. “When’s the
time to laugh?” he asked, shaking his left ear scornfully.
Mr. Fundylundy had just rooted up his first hill of
potatoes —they were pink eyes, and there they lay before
him, pink and white, with a touch of reddish brown,
clinging to the stem with their little white roots, and
ready to cry, if potatoes could cry, at being rooted up
so long before their proper potatoe time. But when
Mr. Fundylundy heard the strange gentleman’s remark,
he left that heap of pink and white, and opening his
mouth in a very rude manner, rushed at the stranger,
who opened his, showing two dreadful looking tusks.
What happened then no one knew very well, but
Lady Droplip said afterwards she had never before been
mixed up in such a disgraceful paddock row. Only
Snub, Snooks, Rolypoly, Growlywowly, and Mr. Fun-
dylundy’s baby brother went on eating potatoes; all the
others were biting, grunting, squealing, and yelling in
a terrible manner. When it was over you would hardly
have known Mr. Fundylundy, he was so bitten, bruised,


and bleeding—one eye was nearly closed by a blow
from the strangers front foot, and besides that he was
covered with dirt from being rolled over and over in
the damp earth, which Lady Droplip, Mrs. Berk, and
several other ladies had rooted up.
It quite spoiled the afternoon tea, or potato feast,
for the row was scarcely over; well, Mr. Fundylundy
had only just shaken feet with his enemy, whose name
was Mr. Gobbleup, and said the proper thing that they
were as good friends as ever, and had “buried the
hatchet,” like the men creatures, when there was a great
shouting on the side of the paddock near the house.
They all put their noses in the air, and opened their
little piggy eyes, and what do you think they saw?
Farmer Snakeby, with a dreadful-looking whip in his
hand, that people call a stockwhip a short handle,
with an end like a little hoop, and a long, long whip,
with a tiny tail, that kept on cracking as the farmer
swung it round.
Such a skirmish then you never saw! Away they
went hither and thither, helter skelter, rush and tumble,
through the slab-hole, and away for the brush fence.
Lady Droplip had been nearest the slab-hole, and now
she was the first to reach the brush fence, and alas!
stuck fast in the gap. Neither Mrs. Cobbletoes, Mrs.
Flabjack, nor any of the other ladies could think to
push her through; and so she was fast, and up came
Farmer Snakeby with his terrible whip. Poor Lady
Droplip, she had never had such a thrashing as she got
then, and as for the others they were all prisoners m


the paddock, because the only gap was filled up by
Lady Droplip’s fat body. The farmer called his
two sons, and with their help, and his black dog Bounce,
they got Lady Droplip out; and then they took all the
pigs to a place called the pound, where they were shut
up, with very little to eat and drink, till their masters
came and paid some money to get them out. If the
masters hadn’t come, all the pigs would have been sold
at a public sale, which is called auction. And that was
the sad end of Mrs. Pig’s At Home.
THE END.


PATCH AND TOBY.
r T''OBY was sitting on his tail with his two front feet
planted firmly in front of him. He was a black
and white fox terrier, with pretty ears, and a sore eye.
It was not really sore, he was always saying, only a
kind of wart, or something growing on the lid.
“It looks sore,” said Patch waking up. He shut
one eye, and stared hard with the other at Toby’s wart.
“You are not the first person to think so,” said Toby,
with a grin. “When I was coming to this place to
catch rabbits with my little master, an ass of a man tied
me in a buggy so that I had room to jump out; and, of
course, I jumped.”
“Then you were the biggest ass of the two,” said
Patch, politely.
Toby moved one ear in an injured manner, but took
no further notice.
“I jumped, and I hung by the chain. Two girls were
driving, and of course they didn’t see me; girls don’t
see much at any time,” said Toby, knocking a fly off his
nose; “but the boys in the street set up a shout, a man
dashed out of a shop, and there was great excitement.”
Toby sat up and swelled out his chest.


| 4 ' ’ ' >**■ ' I
. - • U,
“Grandmother’s eyes!” exclaimed Patch, “What are you doing- there?
Why don't you fly away ? ”




“Is that all?" asked Patch beginning to snuffle.
“No, the girls pulled up, they looked over the side of
the buggy, and when they saw my pink wart, they
thought my eye was coming out;" and Toby sniggered
to himself.
Patch laughed, then coming closer he said—“lt’s
an ugly wart."
“Warts are not often thought a beauty," said Toby,
parting his lips so that his teeth showed.
“Why don’t you have it burnt?" asked Patch with an
air of wisdom.
“Burnt! How? What with?" asked Toby in a
startled manner.
“Electricity," said Patch, who had been lying on the
front door mat, and had heard the ladies talking. “It’s
the fashion now to have your warts or moles burnt
awav.”
“How do you know?" asked Toby so interested that
he forgot to be offended.
“Oh, I know a great many things,” said Patch, who
was ashamed to own that he had been listening.
“I dare say," said Toby, in a huff now; “a good deal
more than is good for you."
Patch lifted one foot, and bent his right ear forward.
“I beg your pardon," he said with much politeness.
“Oh, you go and hull strawberries," said Toby, “or
‘teach your grandmother to suck eggs with a straw.’ ’’
“Come," said Patch, “not much more of that, because
a dog of my size won’t stand it."


Toby rose to his feet, and looked Patch well over,
then he parted his lips again, and this time he gave then
a backward curl.
“You think Pm not game, do you?” asked Patch,
coming closer. “Well, take that,” and he gave Toby a
sharp nip. In two minutes they were rolling over and
over in the dust, biting, snuffling, and snarling, which
set the big dogs on the chain barking at a great rate —
they wanted to be in the fun, and they were tied up, so
they made as much noise as they could, and that was a
good deal.
“I'll show you what’s what,” panted Patch; “I'll let
you see I won’t take sauce from a puppy of your make
with a wart in its eye.”
“An’ I’ll ‘give you what for,”’ gasped Toby. “I’ll
have you know my wart’s not to be insulted.”
And at it again they went, rolling over and over, till
you would hardly have known them, such dirty little
dogs as they were. The big dogs were making a dread-
ful noise, when down the yard rushed a pale-faced fair-
haired boy. This was Toby’s little master, but most of
the people called him Grandfather; he was so quiet,
and little-old-manish in the house.
“Go out of that! Lie down! Toby! Toby!” he
shouted.
“Catch me going now,” said Toby to himself; “you 11
have to wait, little master, till I've settled Patch.”
“Then you’ll have to wait a good while,” said Patch,
giving Toby’s hind leg another nip, which Toby re-
turned with a sharper one.


How long they would have gone on it’s hard to say,
if the little master had not picked up a switch with
which he began to give them what he called a dressing.
A few cuts only of the switch had fallen, when Patch
got on his feet. “That’s enough of that for me,” he
yelped to himself, “Toby can take the rest;” and he
ran a little way off and sat down. But directly Patch
moved off the little master dropped the switch. “Toby!”
he cried, looking anxiously at his grimy pet. “Toby,
poor little fellow. Did he bite you, the bully? Poor
old chap, never mind. Come on Toby, poor Toby.
Go out of that Patch,” and a stick whistled past Patch’s
head.
“Pooh,” said Patch, “I don’t care, I’ve beaten him;
he had to get his master to help him. Ha, ha.”
Toby walked with a limp, and part of the time he
swung one leg, and walked on three.
“You got the worst of it,” shouted Patch, as Toby
hobbled away with his little master.
Toby tried to get a look of scorn into his eye with
the wart, but it only looked more sore than ever.
“I’m going to catch rabbits,” he said, wagging his
little tail and trying to walk in a sprightly manner.
“You look more fit for the hospital,” said Patch, by
»
way of a parting shot; after which he followed one of
the men to where the fattening cattle were tied up in
a shed. Such big broad backs they had, such wide
branching horns, such funny patches on their sides
where the hair went all ways, from the licking it so often
got from those great rough tongues. Patch looked


on with interest while they were fed, and wondered how
they came to like cut turnips so much; but soon the man
went away to mow rye-grass, and Patch strolling after
him, remembered to have seen a girl burying some liver
the day before, and decided to go and scratch it up.
He was on his way when he met Toby. "How do?”
said Patch, in a jaunty way. "Plow do you find your-
self?"
"No better for seeing you,” growled Toby, trying not
to limp.
"Pm going to have a scratch up of some liver,” said
Patch, meaning to be friendly.
“You’ll get something for your pains if you are
caught,” said Toby, whose sore leg still smarted.
"I wasn’t made to be caught,” said Patch, with a gay
little bark to himself as he ran off. But he didn't
scratch up the liver after all, for passing by a plot of
land with a mulberry tree and a paling fence round it,
he saw the best part of a rabbit just inside.
“Good enough,” said Patch, who gave way to slang
sometimes, "this will be better than high liver.”
"Take it and welcome,” said a sad voice from the
other side; and a hawk who was crouching on the
ground lifted her head.
"Grandmother’s eyes!’ exclaimed Patch. What
are you doing there? Why don’t you fly away?
"Can’t,” said the hawk slowly, "my wing is cut.”
"Well, why don’t you run about and keep warm;
what are you doubled up like that for?


“I’m gone in the legs,” said the hawk, her big eyes
filling.
“What’s the matter with them?”
“Rheumatics, I s’pose,” said the hawk; “this is a cold,
damp spot, and the frosts lately have been terribly sharp
of a night.”
“What’s your name?” asked Patch, curiously taking
a large mouthful of rabbit as he dragged it between the
palings.
“Jenny, my late mistress called me,” said the hawk,
turning her head that Patch might not see a tear fall.
“Is she dead?” he asked, crunching a bone as he
spoke.
“No, she has gone away, and I fear I shall never live
to see her again. The rheumatics get worse every day,
and my appetite, that was always so good, is gone;”
and the hawk shook her head dolefully.
“Try a bit of rabbit,” said Patch, pausing in his meal
for a moment.
“I’ve tried it many times,” said the hawk, “but it’s of
no use. You see I always hold my food in my claws
and tear it; and now I’m gone in the legs I can’t do that,
and so, somehow, I’ve no appetite."
“I’m afraid in a bad way,” said Patch.
“I’m afraid I am,” said the hawk; and she moved her
poor cramped legs uneasily.
“Who looks after you?” asked Patch presently, lick-
ing his lips as though well satisfied.
“Some of the girls,” said the hawk; “but it’s little care
I get, though it doesn't matter, for they can t help me.


Two of them came this morning—one brought that
rabbit you've just eaten. ‘Well, Jenny, old girl,’ said
one, ‘how many more of these frosts will you stand?
‘Look here/ said the other, ‘when she dies let’s write
some verses and send them to Janet. You see tney
know I cannot live with such frosts, and the rheumatics
so bad in my legs/ 7 and the hawk turned away her head
again.
Patch stared at her for a moment and blinked his
eyes. “Why don’t you go into that little house they’ve
built for you?” he asked, pointing his right front paw
at a shelter spot with a piece of tin for a roof, and bags
hung round.
“I don’t like it,” said the hawk, “ and never have; it
looks like a trap. I like the open air.”
“More fool you,” said Patch; “bow, wow, wow”—for
at that moment he saw a little grey rabbit dart into a
huge burrow, which led under the floor of a fruit store
near. “He’s gone,” said the hawk. “Oh, dear, how
my poor legs ache. I wonder if they will write any
verses about me. I’d like to hear them. 1 o think of
what an appetite I had, and now I’ve none. To think
of the mice I’ve eaten whole, and the rabbits. Oh,
dear! dear! I believe it’s going to be another
to-night, and there seems to be a fog creeping up from
the river. My poor legs! My poor legs! ’
Patch did not get the rabbit, and after sniffing round
for a while he came back again on his way to the stable-
yard. “Hullo, Jenny!” he said in his perky way, “you


look very dozy. If you take my advice you II creep into
your little house.”
Jenny shook her head.
“Well, good-bye, old party,” said the rude little dog,
“don’t get downhearted; I'll see to-morrow if I can get
you a bottle of a famous liniment, made by my great-
grandmother ;it acts like magic on the rheumatics, la,
ta,” and away he went, this time after a bandicoot which
was nibbling at a fallen apple under the cherry hedge.
It was days before Patch thought to see how Jenny
was getting - on, and when he came Jenny was gone. He
peered between the palings, he called to her, he even
pretended he had got his great grandmother’s famous
liniment; but it was all of no use, Jenny was gone.
Afterwards he heard from the tabby cat with the lame
lee that the frosts had proved too much for her, and the
o *■
girls had come and carried her off.
“And now,” said the tabby, pausing in the midst of
washing her face, “I believe they’re going to write some
verses about poor Jenny.”
“Why didn’t they put her somewhere else where
she’d been warmer?” asked Patch presently of the tabby
cat.
“They hadn’t got anywhere,” said the cat curling her
tail round and sitting on it. “You see if they’d put her
in the aviary she’d have eaten the canaries, and if they’d
let her out of here she’d have run away like the other
one.”
“What other one?”


“She had a mate once, whose name was Bob; they
were both loose in the garden, I used to see them when
I was round the peastack watching for mice. Well, one
day Bob was missing, and he never turned up again,
and the cat curled her tail round on the opposite side
and sat on it again.
“Ah, well, it’s a bad job for Jenny,” said Patch.
“Poor Jenny,” and he scratched his side thoughtfully.
The tabby cat looked at him calmly for a moment.
“Little dog,” she said presently, beginning to wash her
face again, “was it you who took part in that disgrace-
ful yard fight the other day?”
“Madam!” said Patch, holding up his head, “I fight?
The question is an insult.” And he tried to look as
indignant as a little dog well could.
The tabby cat yawned.
“You’ve no idea, Madam,” said Patch in his most
gentlemanly manner, “how large your mouth looks
when you yawn. You might at least put up a paw, it
would cover part of it at any rate.
“A p-entleman would have taken no notice, ’ said the
tabby cat, reaching for a blade of gra?s.
“And a lady would not have done it," said Patch with
1 ! ' 0
a low hDW. 1 •;
Their politeness and their good temper wou c no
have lasted much longer, but just then Toby came up,
and his pink eye turned upon them in an enquiring
manner, though he did not speak.
“Well, Toby, old boy,” said Patch, “how arc the ra J-
bits getting on?”


“We got eight this morning, the little master and 1.
Why didn’t you come, too, lazybones?”
Patch pretended to think.
“I had to —h’m! I had to get up the killing sheep,”
he said, coughing violently.
“You!” said Toby. “You’d look pretty getting the
sheep, besides the master always kills in the evening—
so there’s one for you.”
“Well,” said Patch, “if it wasn’t that, it was some-
thing else.” He coughed again, and the tabby cat
yawned. Toby set his pink eye with a severe look.
“Say, Toby,” said Patch, putting his head on one side,
“did you ever try ointment for your wart? It happens
that a first cousin, one remove, of mine, has had some
wonderful ointment that cures warts, corns, pimples,
or any h’m trouble of that kind.”
The tabby cat ate some more grass, washed her face,
and yawned a bigger yawn than ever.
“And, madam,” said saucy Patch with a sly snuffle,
“I believe it is also very good for wounds of any kind,
or —or sore legs.”
“Really,” said the cat, settling herself more comfort-
ably on her tail.
“Plonour bright, madam,” said Patch.
•‘You might be civil enough to get me a bit,” said
the cat with a side look at Toby.
“Certainly, certainly,” said Patch, with a great air of
good nature, “I will get yours and Toby’s at the same
time, my dear madam.”


“I hope I will lie comfortable till it comes,” said
Toby.
“And while I think of it,” said the cat, smoothing her
fur, “you could get me a drop of that famous liniment
you promised poor Jenny, made by your great grand-
mother, I believe. A friend of mine—a very respectable
old lady hen of the Brahma tribe —is a great sufferer
from rheumatism, and she, too, has lost the use of her
legs.”
Toby gave a quiet chuckle, and Patch knew that they
were both laughing at him. What he would have said
I don’t know, but at that moment a young black rabbit
darted past, and away dashed Patch after him as fast
as he could go. It was not likely that Toby was going
to sit quiet and let Patch have all tne fun. The next
few minutes were taken up with a great deal of barking
at the mouth of the burrow, but no work to speak of.
“My!” said the little black rabbit to himself, “that
was a near go. This is the wrong burrow, but it’s as
safe as the right one. Jiminy! What a noise they’re
making.”
“Bother! Bother! Bother!” barked Toby. ‘‘We’ve
lost it!”
“Oh, it doesn’t matter,” said Patch, cooling down.
“I wasn’t very anxious to get it; we had a run, and now
we’re warm. I think it’s going to be another of Jenny’s
frosts to-night,” he added looking round.
“Bother the frost, and you, too,” said Toby; “I want
that rabbit.”


“I daresay you do,” said the little black rabbit laying
back his ears; “but ‘want must be your master.’ ”
“He’s in there,” said Toby, all excitement. “I heard
him move.”
“Let him move,” returned Patch, walking off.
“You should have ‘put a little salt on his tail’ as they
say,” remarked the tabby cat, who had moved across to
a laurel bush, and was now peering into it.
“What are you doing?” asked Patch, pricking up his
ears.
“Oh, nothing particular,” said the cat; “but there are
birds in there —sparrows, I think; they’re going to
roost.”
“Ah,” said Patch, “you’d better get a handful of
that salt you’re talking about.”
The tabby cat turned round with an air of dignity.
“Young dog,” she said gravely, “it ill becomes you to
make fun of your betters. My grey fur should meet
with respect.”
“Old cat,” returned Patch just as gravely, “you should
know that you lower your dignity when you jest with
those —h’m —beneath you.”
“A gentleman would have taken no notice,” said Ihe
o
tabby cat, putting out a paw to stop a feather which was
blowing past.
“A lady would not have done it,” said Patch.
Just then Toby came up.
“I couldn’t get it,” he said, with a disappointed snort.
“Of course not, you’re far too fat to get into burrows/
said Patch, looking at Toby’s round little body.


“You’re fat enough for anything,” snapped loby.
“You might try eating rats,” said Patch with a curling
lip; “they say they make cats thin,” and he barked soitly
to himself.
The tabby cat took no notice. She had been watch-
ing carefully, and as Patch said this a little brown biid,
with a sleepy chirp, came hopping along almost close to
the ground. With a bound Puss was into the bush,
and there was a pitiful cry, and then a great fluttei in
the leaves overhead, and much squeaking and chirping
from all the little sparrows who were going to sleep up
there.
“Look at them,” said Patch, .raising his head as they
flew out on all sides.
Presently the tabby cat came out of the bush. She
was licking her lips, and seemed in a very good humour.
“Was it good?” asked Patch.
“What?” said the cat.
“The bird you’ve just eaten,” said Toby.
“You’re a wise couple,” said the cat, blushing hei
whiskers.
“What’s that sticking in the corner of your mouth?”
asked Patch. “It’s very, very like a feather,” he added,
with a twinkle in his eye.
The tabby cat put up a paw and brushed away the
tell-tale feather, and, making her fur stand up, she said
slowly —“You’re two rude little dogs, not fit to speak
to a lady cat.” After which she walked off looking
very much offended.
“Sly old puss,” said Patch, “she wouldn’t own up.’


“She might have spared us a leg or a wing,” said
Toby.
This made them quite friendly, and they went away
ear by ear to the stable-yard.
Two or three days after this Babs from the house
came running into the yard with a little empty bottle
with a cork in it. She held it up that the sun might
shine on it, and cooed softly with delight.
“Nice bottle,” said Babs, “dood bottle —make
med’sin.”
There was a saw-table near for cutting wood, and un-
derneath a big heap of sawdust. It was dry and soft,
and nice to play with, and bury your hands in; and
Babs did this for so long, to say nothing of a pie or two
which she made with a chip crust, that she almost for-
got her bottle.
“What are you doing, Babs, dear?” and a cheerful
motherly face showed at the kitchen door.
“Med’sin,” said Babs, “doin’ to make med’sin.”
“Don’t make yourself dirty, pet,” and the face disap-
peared.
“Med’sin,” repeated Babs, trotting off to a water tank,
and half-filling her bottle. She left the tap running at
a trickle, but that didn’t matter to Babs, and back she
pattered to the sawdust, and squeezed and pressed some
into the bottle. “Med’sin,” she said over and over to
herself, and she put in some red dust from a crumbling
brick, which coloured it nicely. It was shaken till it
frothed and frothed, and a little oozed out by the cork.


“Babs,” and the loving mother’s face was at the door
again.
“Yes,” said Babs, dropping her bottle, so busy was she
in rooting a bit of coloured glass out of the ground.
“Come to dinner, my little one; nicey soup, toast, cus-
tard, so nice, for Babs.”
“All wight,” said Babs, trying to talk like the big
brother. She got her coloured glass and took it to the
trickling tank to wash it clean, but the med’sin lay for-
gotten.
When Babs had gone, Patch, who had been lying in
the shade under the tank stand, got up and stretched
himself lazily, after which he walked over to where
Babs’s bottle of medicine lay. Turning his head on one
side to see that nobody was looking, he stooped quickly
and picked the bottle up in his mouth, and then away
he ran through a hole in the paling fence into the gar-
den. Under a big spreading cypress he scratched a
hole in the ground, put his treasure carefully in, and
covered it up. Trotting quietly down the grass-covered
drive, which swept round the house, he met the tabby
cat with the lame leg.
“What mischief have you been up to?” asked the cat.
“Nothing, madam, nothing,” said Patch, with his best
bow; “just taking the air for the benefit of my health ”
The cat sniffed, but as by that time they had reached
the shade of a creeper-covered arch, she sat on her tail,
and seemed ready for a chat.
“Rabbits have gone off a great deal lately,” she began
in a civil tone.


“I wonder what the old girl is up to,” thought rude
little Patch. “Yes, ma’am,” he said aloud, twitching one
ear.
“And it’s ridiculous (to use a long word) to see how
frightened the birds are. I 1 very often go hungry.
Ido really. I wonder, now, if you —a strong little dog
like you, could catch me a rabbit, or even a rat, or a
bandicoot would do very well,” and she paused and
coughed once or twice.
“Of course,” said the naughty little dog “it’s harder for
you, with your —lame leg.”
The tabby cat was just starting to yawn, but remem-
bering- that Paten didn’t like to see her mouth v/ide open,
o
she put up a paw.
“Ah, that’s better,” said Patch; “I quite trembled for
my life, made sure I was going down.”
There was a patter of feet behind them, and Toby, who
had been taking a stroll round the orchard in the dinner
hour, came up.
“Too much sauce, Patchy, my boy,” he said, winking
the eye with the wart, “too much, too much.”
“Ah,” said Patch, with a little start, “seeing your warr,
Toby, reminds me of my great-grandmother’s famous
liniment. Sorry I couldn’t get the ointment made by
my first cousin one remove, but perhaps the liniment will
do instead.”
Toby glanced at the tabby cat and grinned, and the
cat grinned back, and then tried to cover it with her paw.


“Anyway it might do your leg good, madam,” said
Patch, “or those of your friend, the respectable old lady
hen.”
Pie bounded away to the cypress tree, and very soon
was back with Babs’s bottle of medicine in his mouth,
which he laid at the feet of the tabby cat.
“Eyes and limbs!” cried the cat, quite startled. “You
don’t expect me to take any, do you? I never take any-
thing but a little green grass when I feel out of sorts,”
and she put down her head, and bit off a blade as she
spoke.
“Madame,” said Patch, “you do not take liniment,
you rub it in, Madam, rub it in.”
“Poor Jenny,” said the cat softly, “if only she’d had
some.”
“Ah,” said Patch, “if only she had, she might be alive
now.”
“They’ve written those verses about her,” said the
“Have they?” said Patch and Toby at the same time,
for they both had a weakness for verses.
“I was lying on the window-sill, and heard them mak-
ing them up,” said the cat.
“Could you get us a copy?” asked the little dogs.
“Oh, I daresay,” said the cat, “but I must see my rab-
bit first.”
The next day a nice fat young rabbit was caught, and
carried into the summer-house for the tabby cat, and
there she met them with a sheet of paper, which she said
was a rough copy of the lines upon poor Jenny: —


Take back the rabbit
From the little square yard;
Brown Jenny’s departed,
The frosts were too hard.
Long sick her legs were
In mulberry land,
Queer to the knees, they
Unable to stand.
No one to speak to,
For Hubby had fled:
Gaining his liberty,
Bnt losing his head.
She’d lost all her appetite.
Who, once, without fail
Could gobble a mouse
From the tip to the tail.
So she lay down to rest,
And the dews of the night
Now hastened to bring her
A mantle of white.
The early-rising magpie
Shook his knowing head:
Why, bless my honest little feet.
There’s poor old Jenny dead!
Now, who can blame me if I take —
We will not call it steal —
A rabbit’s leg, or say a rib.
To make my morning meal?
lie ate till he could eat no more,
Then scraped his hard old beak;
I wonder what you’d say to me
If yon could only speak?
No more you’ll flutter wide your wings,
Or sound your war-cry shrill.
Which in the ear of other birds
Was e'er a bitter pill.
What say the little paroquets?
Beside the plum and pear;
Now both your Vnemies hare gone—
How will the apples fare?
The paroquets winked both their eyes
And held their heads on high;
The secrets of the future, friend,
Are not for you or 1.


“Good enough,” said Patch, “I couldn't have done
better myself.”
The tabby cat, who was gnawing at her rabbit with
a haste that was not ladylike, did not answer.
“Can you write poetry?” asked doby, setting his pink
eye.
“Oh, well,” said Patch, softly, “I don’t call myself a
poet exactly.”
The tabby cat gurgled over her rabbit, but Patch
caught a few whispered words.
“My!” she said to herself, “Can’t he talk? Num, num,
num. Isn’t this rabbit good? Haven’t had such a feast
since my leg was hurt. Num, num, num.”
“Madam,” said Patch, “have you used that liniment?”
“I!” the Tabby cat looked up. “I might have, my
leg is better.”
“I don’t believe it,” said Patch, curling his lip, “I shall
go and see.”
He dashed off, and for want of something better to do,
Toby followed.
The bottle lay on the side of the walk under the arch,
but the cork was out, and most of Babs’ mixture had
run aw r ay.
THE END


THE SHORT-NOSED LIZARD WITH A
STUMPY TAIL.
A SHORT-NOSED lizard with a stumpy tail was
lazily basking in the sunshine, when a fat old toad
with goggle eyes hopped up.
“Heyday!” said the toad, opening his mouth in a very
ugly way, “the laziness of some people surprises me.”
The short-nosed lizard with the stumpy tail, whose
name was Joe —Joe for week-days and Joseph for Sun-
days—opened his sleepy eyes.
“It does not surprise me,” he said, “as much as some
other things do.”
There was a wee smile creeping round the lizard’s
mouth which vexed the fat old toad, for he thought he
was being made fun of.
“What things?” he asked, coming nearer. “Oh, I beg
your pardon, my dear sir, did I tread on your tail?
As poor Joe Lizard had lost his tail this was a cruel
hit, for well did the old toad know the subject was a very
sore one, and it was only just lately that Joe had held
his head up again.
“Don’t mention it, your portliness,” he said, bowing
politely, “it is a hard matter, I know, for you to tread
anywhere without treading on somebody or something.”


“What?” cried the toad, swelling with rage, “do you
mean that I have large feet, sir?”
“I don’t mean anything,” said Joe, winking at a bull-
dog ant who was passing just then, “I just mention facts,
and, I say, Mr. Toaddleskins, they tell me there’s some-
thing new in corsets for marking the waist line, and if
you’ll excuse me, sir, I’m afraid your waist will soon be
a memory only.”
Now the toad, who came of a good old family of the
name of Speckleton, who had had a crest and coat of
arms for the last hundred years in toadland; was far too
fat to show the least sign of a waist, and had been for
as long as he could remember. He swelled so much
with rage that his skin grew quite tight, and his face
turned purple, while one foot gave little jumps, and then
Joe Lizard burst out laughing.
“I’ve paid you off, Mr. Toaddleskins,” he said,running
gaily off as a big buzz fly buzzed past, “and for my tea
I’ll have ye,” he went on making a vicious snap at the
buzz fly, who was sitting thoughtfully on a bone left
by the little dog from the house.
“Not this time,” said the buzz fly, and away he went
humming cheerfully as he flew.
“Smash the fly!” cried Joe, rather crossly, wide awake
by this time. “If he doesn’t like to be caught, he
needn’t.”
“Ha, ha, ha,” came a burst of loud gruff laughter
just behind him, and there was the old toad again, or
Sir Toadly Speckleton, as he liked to be called.


“What now?” asked Joe, pretending not to know why
Sir Toadly was laughing.
“Who saw him go? Why, tailless Joe. Never say
die, though you want but a fly,” croaked Sir Toadly.
Joe’s eyes were flashing by this time, and his poor
little stump of a tail bobbed up and down. ,
“I wasn’t feeling very hungry,” he said, in rather a
grand tone; “I told the fly he needn’t be caught if he
didn't like.”
Sir Toadly was a very revengeful old fellow, and
just then he thought of something, so he choked back
his laughter, spluttering and gurgling so much that Joe
was quite tickled.
“You look in the wrong place for flies, Joe,” said the
wily old toad presently, “no reasonable person would
expect to catch one on the hop like that."
“Oh, indeed!” cried Joe, putting his tongue out of his
mouth rather rudely, it must be said.
Sir Toadly Speckleton sat down, crossed his legs
tailor fashion, and putting his head on one side said,
in as pleasant a tone as he could call up,
“I happen to know of the very thing to suit you, a
place where flies are in the habit of holding meetings,
giving sugar parties, or jam fights, or a sit-down lunch
of cake and cream, and no able-bodied fellow need go
short there.”
Joe Lizard scratched his head, and eyed the old toad
very closely before he spoke. Just then a grey and white
moth came sailing by, and seeing that she lighted on


the golden head of a dandelion, Sir Toadly Speckleton
came softly up.
“Sweet, maiden fair,” he began in a low soft voice,
“fair as the flower which now supports thy slender
form.”
The grey-white moth turned her head but
slightly. “Keep thy honeyed words,” she began, “I
am but ”
Joe Lizard heard the faintest of cries, and for a mo-
ment saw the flutter of grey-white wings in Sir Toadly’s
great gaping mouth.
“Call yourself a gentleman, old Toaddleskins,’ he said
with great scorn, “to get the better of a mere child, just
because she showed fight. Idbe a man or nothing at
all.”
Sir Toadly licked his lips.
“’Twas a dainty morsel,” he said, “sweet as the
honeyed dew upon which she supped.”
“Whatever are you talking to that old toad for, Joe?”
said a small voice near.
A slender, bright-eyed lizard, with a long graceful tail,
was close by, and he had not heard her come. It was
Fizwiz, his first cousin, one remove; she and Joe were
'•’Teat friends, indeed everyone in the lizard country
thought they were engaged to be married, for he had
been known to catch her flies, and pay her many other
attentions for some time.
“It’s all right, dear,” said Joe in the lowest of tones,
lest the toad should hear, “he has promised to show me
one of the best places for sport I’ve ever seen.”


Fizwiz moved one leg nervously.
“Don’t go with him, Joe,” she said, “I smell mischief
in the air; he is not to be trusted. Oh, Joe, I feel that
something is going to happen.”
Fizwiz blinked her bright eyes to keep back the
tears, for they were just creeping out, which made Joe
rather cross, because he said tears were silly and weak,
and only gave you swelled eyes and a red nose.
“Are you going to let Sir Toadly see you cry?” he
asked her, putting his nose in the air.
Poor little Fizwiz, she blinked harder than ever,
and then, as the bright drops were really falling, she
ran under some dry leaves to hide.
“Who’s this? Who’s this? Who comes here? Turn
her out! Bite her tail! Poke her eye out!”
There were angry voices on all sides, and, looking
round, Fizwiz saw that she had run right on to a nest
of blackjacks, which you know, dears, is a kind of large
ant, not so large as a blue-bottle, but quite able to give
a very nasty and painful sting.
“Oh, I didn’t know, I never meant to,” she cried
piteously; and away she went as fast as possible, where
she knew not.
“Take care, you careless stupid,” cried a cross voice;
and looking up the frightened little lizard saw that she
had bumped against a hoary old caterpillar sitting on
a stick.
“Oh, I beg your pardon, sir,” said Fizwiz, humbly.
“It’s all very well to get begging my pardon.” said
the old caterpillar, “why can’t you mind where you go?”


56 THE SHORT-NOSED LIZARD WITH A STUMPY TAIL.
“I didn’t see you,” said Fizwiz, almost ready to
cry again.
“Then, why didn’t you look?” asked the caterpillar,
arching his back angrily.
“Don’t you give yourself airs, old boy, ’ said a new
voice close by, and the bulldog ant that Joe winked at
walked up. He was carrying a dead grub, but he set
the grub down and looked readv for battle, as bulldog
ants, or inchmen, as they like to call themselves, gener-
ally are.
“Airs!” screamed the old caterpillar. “Dont you
talk of airs to me, because I won t take it, and so I tell
you, little bully.”
The bulldog ant came closer.
“Come down off the stick my ragged foe,” he sneered.
It was only too true, the caterpillar’s coat was wear-
ing, but this was a point he was very sore on. He
grasped the stick still more tightly, and looked down at
his enemy.
“You low-born ant,” he said with great scorn, “how
dare you speak to me? Everyone knows what you
are
“Are you coming down?” asked the bulldog ant,
edging close to the stick, “because if you are not, I’m
coming up.”
“Go away,” cried the caterpillar, growing nervous,
“the stick won’t bear your weight, too.”
“Ha! ha! ha!” laughed the bulldog ant, beginning
to crawl up.


“Go away! Go away!” screamed the caterpillar.
“O-o-oh! O-o-o-oh!”
“What’s this? What’s this?” cried the buzz fly,
coming up in that fussy manner that buzz flies will.
“Take him away! Take him away!” shouted the
caterpillar. “The thief, the murderer, the —the —the —
lowborn ”
That was the last word he ever said, for at that mo-
ment the bulldog ant seized him in his cruel grip, and
in another second the old caterpillar rolled over, and
together they fell to the ground below.
“All over,” said the buzz fly, and he went buzzing
away.
The bulldog ant went to look for his grub, but some-
one else had “made hay while the sun shone,” and
walked off with it.
“Well, I never,” said he in a tone of disgust, “to think
I’ve lost a tasty morsel like that. I wish that old cater-
pillar further.”
He looked so vexed at the loss of his dead grub that
Fizwiz ran away again. This time she bumped up
against something big and soft lying on the ground,
and though she thought she had given it quite a hard
blow, it never stirred.
“What can it be?” she said aloud, with wide open eyes.
“My!” said a voice at her side. “What a funny fel-
low!”
It really was the baby from the house, whom every-
one called Kiddie, and it had fallen asleep in the shade
of a drooping elm.


58 THE SHORT-NOSED LIZARD WITH A STUMPY TAIL.
Kiddie was so sound she never heard the lizard’s
little squeak, nor did she see them gathering round her.
There were two or three more lizards, cousins of Fizwiz,
an old black spider who had his home in the trunk of
the elm, a butterfly, and a brown moth with a body so
fat she went by the name of Clumsy Meg.
“Well, I never,” piped Clumsy Meg.
“Did you ever?” whispered the butterfly.
“See forty whales without their tails,” said a rude
voice close by.
Clumsy Meg shrieked and fell over on one side, while
the butterfly gave a faint cry, and fluttered her pretty
wings.
“Fools!” said the old black spider, glaring, “it’s
only ”
“Only me,” said the rude voice; “none of that I beg.
They all turned round to look, and saw a fine, a very
fine grasshopper, with bright green wings and a lame
Ipp*
Fizwiz bowed.
“Can you tell us, sir,” she asked politely, “what this
wonderful creature is?”
The grasshopper put on a wise look.
“Let us see,” he said with his head on one side, “has
it legs?”
“Well, no,” said Clumsy Meg, “not what you could
call legs—there are two long pieces with turned ends;
call them legs if you like, but they make very funny
legs, I think.”
“Eyes?” asked the grasshopper.


THE SHORT-NOSED LIZARD WITH A STUMPY TAIL. 59
“There are two slits—there might be eyes inside,”
said Clumsy Meg.
“Is it alive?” asked the grasshopper.
“It must be,” said one of the cousins. I was crawl
ing over it, and it went bobbing up and down.
“Breathing,” said the spider.
“Will it bite?”
“It has no mouth.”
“It has.”
“It hasn’t.”
“I tell you it has; it was open just now, and there were
little sharp-looking bits of bone stuck inside.”
“Teeth,” said the spider, who was old, and thought
he knew a great deal.
“I don’t care what you call ’em, said Clumsy Meg,
who had lost her temper.
“I know what it is,” said the grasshopper; “it’s called
a biped. They’re queer things, they wear many cover-
ings, which they call clothes; they walk on their turned
ends, and they call me a hoppykicky, instead of a grass-
hopper. Did you ever hear of anything so silly as a
hoppykicky? This biped is not what you would call a big
one. I’ve often seen them bigger, and when they
chirp they make a dreadful noise, and when they walk,”
went on the grasshopper, turning up his eyes, “they
shake the ground.”
“What,” cried Clumsy Meg, “what if they were to
tread on —on one?”
“Certain death,” groaned the grasshopper.
“O-o-o-oh!” said Clumsy Meg.


6o THE SHORT-NOSED LIZARD WITH A STUMPY TAIL.
“O-o-o-oh!” said Fizwiz in her little pipe.
“O-o-o-oh!” they all groaned together.
Kiddie roused for a moment, and opened her eyes
that were sweetly blue.
“Mum,” she half whispered, then fell asleep again.
“It would be pretty if it was only little,” said Fizwiz,
sighing.
“Here goes for some fun,” said the grasshopper,
jumping on to one of Kiddie’s shoulders, and beginning
to crawl towards her dimpled cheek.
“Oh, please,” said Fizwiz, all in a tremble. “Oh,
please, what are you going to do, Mr. Grasshopper;
don’t hurt it, it’s—it’s pretty.”
“What?” cried the old black spider in a voice of thun-
der, at least it sounded like thunder to poor Fizwiz.
“You call it pretty, that, our common enemy, you little,
silly ignorant speck.”
The grasshopper laughed wickedly.
“I’m going to give it a nip for calling me a hoppy-
kicky,” he said.
“Oh, no! don’t, don’t!” cried Fizwiz.
“You see,” said the grasshopper with a roguish shake
of one of his feelers; and he crawled closer and closer
to the little dimpled cheek.
Kiddie’s little red lips parted in a happy smile; she
was dreaming of mum and sugar plums, when all at
once the sugar plums vanished, and instead came a sud-
den pain.
“Ow!” squealed Kiddie. “Oooh! Ah! Oooh!”


THE SHORT-NOSED LIZARD WITH A STUMPY TAIL. 6l
She sat up howling with all her might, at least that
is what the big brother said when he ran to pick her up.
“Why, Kiddie,” he said, “don’t cry, old girl; it’s all
right, I’m here. Come now, I’ll give you a ride on my
shoulder. Up she goes.”
“Boo!” cried Kiddie. “Boo —ooh! Boo —ooh! —
ooh!”
“Poor little beggar, she’s frightened,” said the big
brother. “Never mind, don’t cry, and I’ll take you to
mother.”
“Ooh! —ooh! —ooh!” said Kiddie in broken sobs.
As for Fizwiz and the grasshopper, and the rest of
them, they had a great fright. Clumsy Meg and the
butterfly flew high up among the branches of the droop-
ing elm, where they whispered together, while the old
black spider was safe home in about “two shakes of a
dead lamb’s tail” (that’s a quotation). The grasshopper
gave a flying leap, and was gone in a moment; and
Fizwiz and her cousins ran this way and that, so great
was their fear.
When all was quiet again, and both big brother and
Kiddie were gone, one of the cousins put her head out
cautiously.
“Fizwiz,” she said softly.
There was a slight rustle near, and Fizwiz poked her
little nose from under a laurel leaf.
“What is it?” she asked in the same low tone.
“Uncle Wiggles has just come and he wants you.”
Fizwiz came out quickly.


62 THE SHORT-NOSED LIZARD WITH A STUMPY TAIL.
“Have you news for me, Uncle?” she asked, turning
pink.
Uncle Wiggles was an old and deep brown lizard,
with a thoughtful expression. He put up a front foot
and rubbed his chin before answering.
“I have, my dear,” he then said sadly, “very bad news,
I fear.”
“O, my heart!” cried Fizwiz, clasping her little beat-
ing heart. “What is it; what can it be?”
Uncle Wiggles shook his head.
“When did you last see Joe, Fiz dear?”
“Oh, a long, long time since,” cried Fizwiz; “he is
dead —he is dead, I read it in your eye, Uncle Wiggles.
My Joe, my darling, my only love.”
Uncle Wiggles put a comforting foot on hers.
“Don’t you fret so, Fizwizzie,” he said, “it may not be
so bad as that; but he has fallen into bad company.”
“Bad company!” cried Fizwiz, turning pinker.
“He was seen,” said Uncle Wiggles solemnly, “he
was seen with Sir Toadly Speckleton.”
“Oh, yes, I know. Oh, dear! Oh, dear!” cried Fiz-
wiz, wringing her feet.
Uncle Wiggles picked up a dead beetle, and ate it all
but the wings, before he went on.
“He was seen with Sir Toadly, a toad of very bad
character; they were going in search of sport.”
“Yes! Yes! Do be quick, Uncle Wiggles, dear,’
cried Fizwiz.


“He who runs fast, never runs long,” said prosy old
Uncle Wiggles. “I learnt that saying once when i
paid a visit to the parlour of the bipeds.”
“Yes; but Uncle, what else? What else?”
“Nothing else,” said Uncle Wiggles rather offended.
Fizwiz began to cry.
“You won’t tell me,” she sobbed; and Joe may be
dying, or dead. O-o-o-oh! E-e-e-e! O-o-o-h!”
“There! There!” cried Uncle Wiggles, “If you must
know, you must. They were seen going into a very
large place, which, I believe, the bipeds call a tank.
Now, a tank holds water ”
Fizwiz cried aloud.
“Oh, me! Oh, my, Joe! My Joe!”
“A tank holds water,” went on Uncle Wiggles again;
“and so a tank is a very dangerous place, and several
nephews of mine tell me that they were sunning them-
selves near, when they heard the most awful cries, and
chokes, and splutters; and they think it must have been
Joe. They said they warned him, but he shook his
stump in scorn and ran off. When they heard all the
noise they looked up, and there was Sir Toadly sitting
on the tank looking in, and grinning with delight.”
“Oh!” cried Fizwiz, “is there no hope? Was there
no way for him to get out?”
Uncle Wiggles rubbed his chin again.
“I believe,” he said slowly, “that it was a ringed
tank ”
“What is a ringed tank?” cried Fizwiz. “Is it dead
like a ringed tree?”


There was a shout of hoarse laughter from the trunk
of the old elm, and looking round Fizwiz and Uncle
'Wiggles saw the black spider spinning his web and
rolling about with amusement.
“Oh, you speck, you little ignorant speck,” laughed
the spider.
“Sir,” said Uncle Wiggles, “yon forget yourself.”
“Ha Ha! Ha!” said the spider. “Fancy a dead
tank?”
“Come, my dear,” said Uncle Wiggles with dignity,
offering Fizwiz a foot; and as they went along he ex-
plained that tanks were made by the bipeds, shaped like
rings, one upon another, and that it was just possible
Joe might be able to get out of the water and rest upon
one of these ledges.
But as they went they heard the old black spider
still roaring with laughter, and, looking up, there he was
on his back with his legs in the air spinning away, and
when he saw them he shrieked out—
“Mind you come back and tell me about the dead
tank.”
“Mr. Binks is very rude, I think,” said poor little
Fizwiz.
“Ah! my dear,” said Uncle Wiggles, “but did you
never hear that when he went to school at Spider Hail,
m Cobwebshire, his people were too poor to pay the
extra twopence for his manners, and so he was never
taught them.”


“O-00-h!” said Fizwiz, “no wonder he is so rude.”
“Look where you are going,’’ cried Uncle Wiggles
suddenly.
Fizwiz looked up. There was a great shining round
«
wall with bulging rings.
“The tank!” she cried, all in a tremble.
“The tank!” cried Uncle Wiggles gravely.
“Joe!” cried Fizwiz. “Jo-o-oe! Jo-o-oe!”
There was no answer.
“Oh, he is dead!” she screamed. “My Joe, my darl-
ing!”
•‘Ha! Ha! Ha! He! Fie! He!” came from the
top of the tank.
At first they thought it must be the spider; but no,
there was Sir Toadly Speckleton’s great gaping mouth
grinning from side to side.
“It’s all up with Joey, my dear,” he said with a leer.
“Where is he? Oh, where is he?” cried Fizwiz.
“He’s drunk, my love,” said Sir Toadly. “He took
so much water that he is quite drunk, and lying like a
log at the bottom.”
“But he'll be drowned!” screamed Fizwiz.
“Oh, no, he won’t, my sweet, he can’t be, because he’s
drowned already,” said the wicked old toad, laughing
again.
“I must see him,” said Fizwiz almost frantic, begin-
ning to run round the tank.


66 THE SHORT-NOSED LIZARD WITH A STUMPY TAIL.
Sir Toadly laughed till he coughed, and then as he
,saw they really meant to come up he sprang into the
waterspout, where he lay chuckling.
The tank was three parts full of water, and floating
on the top were several dead moths, a grasshopper or
two, and a very long-legged fly; but there were no liz-
ards to be seen.
“Oh, where can he be?” said Fizwiz, peering first on
one side, then on the other.
“Who’s that?” cried a faint voice from the shady side
where the sun couldn’t reach.
“That’s Joe!” cried Fizwiz, nearly tumbling off the
tank in her excitement.
Yes, there was Joe more dead than a,live, sitting or
lying on the ledge next to the water, half supported
by a thin and rather sad-looking toad.
What was to be done? He was too ill to crawl, and
too heavy for the thin toad to carry. The thin toad they
heard later was the cruel Sir Toadly’s daughter, who,
when young and foolish, had run away with one of her
father’s servants, and as a punishment had been ordered
to live for ever in the tank. She had lost her husband
a day or two after their toadal marriage. The bride-
groom’s name was Sniff, and he was killed by a passing
boot with a foot in it, and ever since then poor Mrs.
Sniff had lived in the tank. When it was cleaned she
hopped out, but the cruel Sir Toadly always found out
and drove her back again.


THE SHORT-NOSED LIZARD WITH A STUMPY TAIL. f>7
‘‘What shall we do?” cried Fizwiz.
“This beats all,” cried Uncle Wiggles.
“Good gracious!” exclaimed Fizwiz.
“Worms and ashes!” cried Uncle Wiggles, using the
strongest expression he knew of.
No wonder they exclaimed.
There was an enormous biped covered from head to
foot with garments that flew out on all sides, and carry-
ing in her hand a long stick with a broad end hollowed
out.
“They call that a spoon,” whispered Uncle Wiggles.
Then another big biped came up. A biped with a
short, dark body and long white legs. Looking closely
they saw the last one was covered also, only his
ments didn’t fly in the wind.
“What are you going to do?” asked the last in what
sounded a dreadfully loud voice to Uncle Wiggles and
Fizwiz.
“I’m going to fish out the dead lizards and things
from this tank,” said the other. “Well, I never, here’s
one half dead;” and she lifted Joe in her spoon and put
him on the tank-stand, where the sun shone brightly.
When the fishing was done the biped swept the leaves
from the spout, and out leaped Sir Toadly almost into
the very jaws of tabby Tom, who was sitting on his
tail watching his mistress. Tabby Tom made short
work of most small things that came in his way, and
so Sir Toadly went after the others; and Mrs. Sniff was
free now to leave the tank when she pleased.


“Are you better now, dear Joe:'” asked Fizwiz ten-
derly.
“Oh, Fizwiz,” cried Joe, “can you ever forgive me
and love me again.”
“Again,” cried Fizwiz, “Fve never stopped.”
And so ends the story of the short-nosed lizard with
the stumpy tail, but Fve often seen him since sitting on
the sugar bag in the pantry catching flies.
THE END


TODDY.
SHE was a little bit of a blue-eyed mite with fair hair
and dimpled cheeks, just learning that wonderful
thing which people call talking; and oh, how hard she
found it. Over and over again she said the pretty things
muv taught her, but just when they seemed quite plain
they slipped away, and Toddy could only round her
blue eyes and stare, when muv asked her to repeat what
she had learned. On the other hand words that muv
did not wish her to remember, words that had been sam
before her by one or another of her uncles, who wete
livelv gentlemen, stuck fast in doddys wee head, or
slipped from her little lisping tongue. Muv was dis-
tressed. “Oh, Toddy! Toddy!” she said one day,
“those are not your father’s words.” ioddy looked at
muv and shook her head.
“Deni’s not farder’s weards,” she said.
“No,” said muv, “farder would be so sorry to hear his
little girl say them.”
Toddy shook her head again.
“Bern’s not farder’s weards,” she repeated. Then she
trotted off to the last place found for her dolly-dirl.
The last place was on one of the pedestals of the dining-
room table. There was a sweet little hollow in part of


its carving which made a lovely seat for dolly-cUrl.
Dolly-dirl was broken-nosed and knock-kneed, and
was rather shaky about the neck, but for all that she
was a dear dolly, and very, very dear to ioddy. ihe
wee woman crawled under the table and seized doll}-
dirl by one leg. She sat on a cushion and placed
dolly-dirl on her lap.
“Sit up,” said Toddy; but dolly-dirl rolled over on
her side. “Dolly,” said the mite severely, “I tell oo sit
up, oo not sit up, oo want me to swear at oo.” She sat
dolly-dirl up again. “Dem’s not farder's weards, dolly-
dirl; me no say deni anny more.”
Then there came the sound of a heavy step in the
room, and a man’s voice called out in a loud fresh way:
“Hi, Toddy, where are you:' ’
“Unler de taby,” said Toddy in her little pipe.
“Come out and have a ride on my knee.”
Out crawled Toddy at full speed, leaving dolly-dirl
with her head where her feet should have been.
“Now tell me what I say when the nails won’t drive,”
said the man when he had lifted Toddy on to his knee.
Toddy shook her head.
“What, forgotten?”
“No,” said Toddy.
“No uncle,” said the man, who was one of Toddy s
uncles.
“No uncoo,” said Toddy sweetly.
“Well, then, tell me what I say.”


Toddy lifted her little face and looked at her uncle
out of her big blue eyes.
“Dem’s not farder’s weards,” she said slowly.
“No, they are my words; say away.
Toddy shook her head again.
“Come, you little imp,” said her uncle coaxmgly. He
rubbed his cheek against her little one, so soft and
dimpled; but Toddy said nothing.
“Say them chicky-biddy,” urged her uncle. ‘ Lncle
wants to hear you.”
“Deni’s not farder’s weards,” repeated Toddy with a
tremble of her little button mouth.
“I know that,” said her uncle, “they arc my words,
and I want to hear you say them.”
Toddy slipped off his knee.
“Now, then, you little eel, where are you off to. J
“Unler dc taby,” said Toddy, crawling under at a
great rate.
“Come and have the ride on my knee.
“No.”
“No, uncle.”
“Go ‘way,” said Toddy, poking a tiny finger into
one of dolly-dirl’s little black eyes.
“Come out from under the table.”
“S’ant.”
“Come out, I say.”
“S’ant, oo go dead like one bullick.” 1 his was the
very worst thing Toddy could ever think of that she
could wish to happen to anyone, to go dead like one


bullock, which same bullock had died in a swamp on
her father's farm.
Her uncle laughed, but just then a young man came
into the room, and Toddy poked her head out to see
who it was. Then she crawled out.
“Farder, dear,” she said, and she clasped one of his
legs with all the force of her little arms.
“What is it, my tiny one?” he asked, and he lifted her
shoulder high. Toddy patted and smoothed his hair,
uttering funny little gurgling sounds of delight.
“What do I say when the nails won’t drive?” asked
her uncle.
Toddy looked down from her perch with a little
frown, but said not a word. Then “farder dear” found
a seat and put Toddy on his knee, while the uncle teas-
ingly pulled off one of her shoes.
“Say what I asked you, and I'll give you back your
shoe,” he said when Toddy stretched out an eager
little hand; but the mite said nothing, only nestled
against “farder dear.”
“Look here, old man,” said Toddy’s father, “you
must not teach the child to say such words.”
“Why not?” and the uncle laughed. “Farder dear”
looked at him for a moment without speaking, and the
other man stopped laughing.
“Now that I am a father,” began “farder dear”
slowly, “I have made up my mind to forego all strong
language.”
“Ha, ha, ha,” laughed the uncle, “that’s pretty good,
that is.”


I -
n I P
\% ■ i| i
r I •-
frrr-^ aM=! = : - — - —4 ■ • I -S’
I
| ■
| i "O
'''
j




“Farder dear’s’' bright blue eyes flashed a little; but
he went on speaking very quietly.
“For the future I do not mean to make use of any
words that would pain me to hear from my children. I
think all parents should think out this matter. If we
say things that we should not, how can we expect our
little ones not to do the same.”
“You are beginning early,” said the uncle; “here is
Toddy a little over two only.”
“Oo be chiet,” interrupted Toddy indignantly, “me’ll
soon be droan up; muv sez, me’s her ickle woon’em.”
Then she slipped on to her feet and trotted out to find
muv.
“Annie,” said she to muv, who was busy at the oven,
looking to see how her pudding was baking.
“Not Annie, Toddy,” said muv gently, “you must not
call me Annie.”
Toddy opened her eyes.
“Farder dear calls oo Annie,” she said, in a tone
which meant, “so why shouldn’t I?”
“Yes, but you must say mother or moth,” said muv,
as she lifted a delicious-looking little pudding out of
the oven. Toddy shook her head.
“Me wants take,” she said with a little stamp of one
tiny foot.
“What will you say if I give you one?” asked muv,
going to a little cupboard “farder dear ” had fixed up


for her the day before. Toddy pulled up a chair and
tried to mount it that she might see how many cakes
were in the cupboard.
“What will you say?” repeated muv.
“Tar muv,” said the mite meekly.
Muv put a ginger-nut into her hand; it was round
and dark, and it shone, and looked good.
Toddy gurgled with satisfaction, and stuck her little
white teeth into it without delay.
“Well, Toddy, what do you say?" asked muv.
“Sank 00, Annie,” said naughty Toddy. Then she
pattered along the passage to look for “farder dear,
but not finding him scrambled under the table again
and offered dolly-dirl a crumb of the ginger-nut.
“Eat it dolly-dirl,it nice,” she said over and over again,
but dolly-dirl kept her mouth shut tight. Toddy
shook poor dolly-dirl till her head rolled from side to
side, but still she wouldn’t eat the crumb. “Bad did,”
said Toddy, severely, “dat is farder’s weard. Me no
say de uzzers, dem's not farder’s weards. Go dead,
dolly-dirl, go dead, like one bullick." Then after
thumping dolly-dirl till she had made her dood, she
crawled out from under the table. After that she made
up her mind to crawl right out to muv and see what she
would say. When muv came back from the dairy,
which was down the back-yard, she found Toddy sitting-
on the kitchen floor smoothing her grimy pinafore.


“Oh, Toddy, Toddy!” said muv, “jump up; that is
just like a baby to sit on the Hoor, and, look at your
pinny!”
Toddy smoothed it again.
“All darety,” she said.
“Who made it dirty?”
“Muv, no, Annie,” said Toddy, roguishly.
Then “farder dear ” came in and bore off his wee
daughter on his shoulder again. Toddy was a twin,
perhaps that was why she was such a mite. Grandma took
the other one when she was ever so little, just a little pink
morsel in long clothes, for poor muv could never have
put up with both of them. But when she was about
six months’ old Toddy's twin sister went away on what
seemed a long journey for such a tiny atom to
take. She went to a better and brighter land, where
she is still waiting for Toddy. And Toddy? She
stayed on with “farder dear ” and muv, stayed till she
was quite grown up, but she was never known to say
acrain the words which were not “farder s weards.
C 5
Toddy has big girls of her own now, but even the little
ones never say naughty words to one another. Then,
too, Toddy had brothers and sisters, many of whom are
still here. Some day I may tell you of their doings,
and of their funny sayings, when they were bits of
things like Toddy. Perhaps you would like to know
for certain that “farder dear” kept to his word and used
only words that his babes might use. I can tell you


that he did this, and that he and muv set their little
ones an example in most things, which has been, and
is now their earnest wish to follow. For though they
are big people, and big people ought never to do
naughty things, still there are always times when it
seems nicer and easier to do the wrong, instead of the
light. And when you dear babes come to be grown
up, you will find it so, but you must always fight for
the right. Fight hard.
THE END.


JUJU AND FI FI.
T N the warmest, softest, cosiest home yon could think
A of, nestled Mr, and Mrs. Opossum. They chose the
spot themselves, which was a leafy bower in the heart of
an old acacia. The poor tree was only the wreck of
its old self, but still a very pretty wreck, being covered
with ivy, trunk and all. So thickly grew the bright
green leaves, so closely had the ivy twined itself on all
sides, that you had to go quite close and peer into the
shadows before you could get the tiniest glimpse of
their big round nest. Many birds found a shelter here
when the sun was hot, and some came to eat the ivy
berries, or to catch odd spiders here and there.
f ‘Fifi/ > said Mr. Opossum very drowsily one warm
afternoon (for opossums always sleep in the daytime),
“what do you think some of those little birds are
doing?”
Now Mrs. Opossum had curled herself into a soft-
looking ball, and was sound asleep, so she didn’t an-
swer.
“Fifi, do wake up a minute,” said Mr. Opossum,
rousing himself. Fifi opened one eye and moved her
reddish little nose.


“Well, Juju, what’s the matter?" she half-whispered,
and fell asleep again.
“Really,” said Juju to himself, “this is enough to try
any opossum’s patience.” So seeing the white tip of
Fill’s curly tail quite close he gave it a sharp nip.
“Dear me!” exclaimed Fifi, waking up direct!}. Ive
been having bad dreams. I thought my tail was caught
in a trap, and the pain of it woke me.
Juju chuckled wickedly.
“What do you think some of those birds arc doing.
he repeated, pricking his little round ears.
“What, Juju?”
“Building nests in our castle,” said Juju, blinking his
eyes angrily. “Isn’t it enough that we feed them with
insects and berries, without ” Juju stopped and put
up a paw to smother a hiccough.
“Well, dear,” said Fifi, beginning to curl up again,
“there’s plenty of room.”
At this Juju was so indignant that he nearly gave
that little white tip another bite.
“Q-o-o-i-p!” said Mrs. Crisp from her nest at the foot
of the tree. “Can’t you let a hen have a quiet sit in peace,
instead of keeping up a chatter, and such a rustling and
scratching of leaves just above her?
“My dear madam,” said a grey and black fantail with
a little white about the head, who had just been tumb-
ling in the air in her usual crazy fashion catching dies,
“I was making no noise beyond my usual little note.”
“Who was speaking to you?” said Mrs. Crisp crossly;
“you mind your own business.”


“I’m very sorry,” said the poor little fantail, leaving
off tumbling to pick up a feather for her nest in the
ivy.
“Don’t take any notice of her, my clear,” said a gay
voice from the summer-house, and Patch came out lick-
ing his lips. “She’s a regular old mother grumps. The
only thing that worries one is the fear of her bringing
out a family of little grumps.”
“Fifi,” said Juju, in a frightened voice, at the same
time giving her a little poke to wake her up, there s
a dog down there.”
“Well, Ju,” said Fifi, “dogs can’t fly.”
“I wish they could,” scolded Mrs. Crisp, ‘ and then i
might have a little peace. What with possums and
fantails, and goodness knows what, I get into such a
nervous state I won’t be able to hatch an egg.
“ Tt’s an ill wind that blows no one any good,’ ” said
Patch, and Fifi and Juju crept further into their nest
and laughed softly to themselves. “I was thinking
one grump was enough for this world.”
“And one dog of the name of Patch is one too many.”
said Mrs. Crisp very sharply, giving a vicious pick to
an egg that had rolled a little way out of the nest.
“Gently, dear lady,” said Patch, with one of his best
bows, “if you treat them like that, there will be holes
in the shells long before the chickens peck them.”
“O-o-o-i-p!” said Mrs. Crisp loudly. “You leave me
and my eggs alone.”
“Heydey!” said a voice near. “What a hubbub!” and
the tabby cat with a lame leg settled herself comfortably


on her tail, and glanced at Mrs. Crisp with a slight
smile.
“Your servant, ma’am,” said Patch, “and how may
you be? I fear the poor leg is still a little stiff, and it
seems to me to have a funny twist about it,” which was
rather cruel of naughty Patch, because the tabby cat’s
leg had set itself, or rather had joined of its own ac-
cord in a way that was crooked.
“And you,” said the tabby cat, with a sly twinkle in
her bright green eyes, “you are not feeling any the
worse for your spin over the garden fence, I hope.’
“Bless your heart, no,” said Patch, “in fact I rather
liked it. It reminded me of the switchoack railway.
Perhaps you've never been on a switchback railway?
“I can't say that I have,” said the tabby cat, “but I’ve
been in a good many places, Master Patch, that would
make your hair stand on end. What would you say to
taking an airing on the ridgepole of the oarn?
“Not half bad, if I knew the way to get up,” said
Patch; “but what would you say to a swim across the
Meander, my gracious lady"”
The tabby cat washed her face thoughtfully.
“Ah, little dog,” she said slowly, “you have me there.
You know quite well that the dislike of wetting one’s
feet is born in every cat.”
“Yes, ma’am,” said Patch meekly; “many’s the time
I’ve seen you and other ladies walk round a pool of
water, instead of bounding through it as we would.”
“There’s a cat down there, too, Fifi,” said Juju very
softly. ! .: j


JUJU AND FIFI.
“We do not fear cats, my dear,” said Fifi cheerfully,
“you arc growing nervous like old Mrs. Crisp.
“None of your impertinence,” said Mrs. Crisp, shrill.,
“Old indeed. Fd like to know what next.
“What now?” asked Patch, and the tabby cat, too,
turned her head to listen.
“Oh, do be quiet,” said Mrs. Crisp, “don't you know
that sitting' hens should have perfect rest?
“But who were you talking to?” went on inquisitive
Patch.
“To those silly opossums, of course.”
“’Possums!” cried Patch, dancing round in great ex-
citement. . ,
“O-o-o-h!” squeaked Juju, trying to burrow into
nest. .. , „
“It’s all right,” said Fifi, “he can't climb up.”
“I wish they’d come out," barked Patch. H°w
like Toby to be here with his pink eye, and tie i e
master Jth a pocket full of stones. We’d give them a
‘how d’ye do?’ ”
“Oh, dear! dear!” cried Juju. “Oh, my legs an
arms! Oh, my curly tail! Pm all on the shake.
“Don’t take any notice,” said Fifi, “think of to-night,
when the bright moon comes out, and we are off on an
apple hunt.”
“Ah!” screamed Mrs. Crisp, “and nicely you 11 get
caught one of these nights at your games. If you only
heard what I did the other day.
Fifi rose up in the nest, and looked over the edge.
“And did you hear, ma’am, who had been scratching up


the flower seeds, and fluffing big round holes in the
dry dust. I heard some remarks made, I assure you.”
“Do you know what a gun is?” asked Mrs. Crisp, in
a very ill-natured voice.
“My!” exclaimed Patch, still on the dance. Don’t
they know? Don't they just?”
“My very bones are beginning to shake,” muttered
poor Juju.
Fifi leaned forward, and patted Juju on the back.
“Cheer up,” she said, kindly, “I would never have it
said that you were frightened of a little dog, and an
old hen.” She put out her paw and gathered a few
acacia leaves. Here, eat these, and you will feel better.
It’s being awake in the daytime that has upset you so.’
“Are they ivy leaves?” asked Juju, turning his nose
“Of course not, you stupid old dear,” said Fifi; “fancy
eating ivy leaves. I think they taste dreadful.”
Juju ate the little green leaves and was just curling
round to go to sleep again when he heard Patch say —
“Mrs. Crisp, are they up there still?”
Mrs. Crisp did not answer.
“Mrs. Crisp, old girl, are you getting deaf from old
age?”
“O-o-o-i-p!” cried Mrs. Crisp. “I wish someone
would poison you, Patch, and then I might get a mo-
ment’s peace. There’s some poison for rabbits in that
tin bucket hanging up, and I’ve heard of dogs being
poisoned before to-day.”
Patch gave a little snuffle.


“I heard of something being poisoned, too, he said,
“but it wasn’t a dog. It had feathers and a rose comb,
and only two legs, and, strange to say, was very n e
you, Mrs. Crisp/’ .
At this Mrs. Crisp rose up with fluttering wings, c
leaving her nest, rushed at Patch with open beak,
looked so very sharp, and Patch was so taken sur-
prise, that he ran away and crept under the aviary
shelter.
“If I could only have given him a good hare P
it would have made him more civil,” clucked Mrs. _nsp.
as she went back to her eggs.
The tabby cat was sitting on the garden seat under
the ivy watching the fantails tumbling in the air, and
Juju and Fifi were really asleep at last. The sun sank
lower and lower, and a little shower of rain fell, but they
slept on cosy and snug in their warm soft nest, and never
heard Mrs. Crisp go off for a last scratch and a peck
round. The little birds in the lilac bushes were singing
their good-night songs, and the silver eyes had flown
home to their nests in the apple trees, when the sun
popped out of sight, and even then Juju and Fifi did
not stir.
"Hooooy!” cried an old brown owl, who all this time
had been quietly seated in a little nook in the ivy, and
no one had known. "Hooooy!” he cried again, and
rustle, rustle went the leaves as he lifted his big wings.
With a whirr and a rush he was gone, and Juju, now
wide awake, sat up. "What a dreadful noise Mr. Blowy
does make to be sure, he said.


“But when he is quiet, he is,” said Fifi, “he must have
oeen there all day and yet no one had any idea. And
now, my love, let us be moving. See, the moon is shin-
ing, and ’tis a lovely night.’’ So saying, she sprang up
and ran nimbly along the boughs, now stopping to eat
a leaf, and again to swing by her curly tail. At last
they reached one of the lower branches, and sat on it
side by side.
“Ah!” said a voice from the ground just beneath
them, “what about a gun now? Why a pea rifle would
do quite well.”
In a great hurry they swung off their branch, and
dropped into a Kentish cherry growing near, and then
they saw that it was only the tabby cat with the lame
leg, who was sitting on her tail looking at the moon.
“Don’t let me alarm you,” she said politely, “I am
only looking for mice.” But as she was very near
the lilac bushes where the little birds slept, I fear the
tabby cat was telling a naughty story.
“Now, which way shall we go?” asked Juju, as they
paused for breath on the post and rail fence which
separated the orchard from the garden.
“Why, to the sweetest apples, of course,” said Fifi
gaily.
“Well, then, we’ll choose snowflakes,” said Juju; “you
know them, pink and green outside, and white as snow
under the skin.”


“Oh yes, I know, and so soft to eat,’’ said Fifi, “that s
why the paroquets like them so much.”
“Those paroquets are a plague,” grumbled Juju; “I
can’t think where they all come from.”
“Why they say the smoke and heat from all those
dreadful bush fires drove them down from the moun-
tains,” said Fifi, “at least, so I heard the tabby cat tell-
ing Patch one day.”
“Who is Patch?” asked Juju, stopping to taste an un-
ripe damson plum, which he threw down at once, mak-
ing a dreadful face.
“What?” asked Fifi. “Really, Juju, darling, I think
you sleep both night and day. Patch is the little dog
who was under our place to-day.”
The snowflake tree they had decided to visit stood
very near the yards where the calves were fed, and it
chanced that night that one of the calves, not feeling
well, had refused its tea. The master, hearing of this,
said it must have a drink of new milk and a raw egg,
and went out himself to see that it was taken. While
standing under the tree in which Juju and Fifi were hav-
ing a grand feast he heard a rustling overhead, and a
low chuckling sound.
“Ah,” said the master, “those ’possums are at the
apples again.” He went swiftly away, making as little
noise as possible, and presently returned with something
long and dark in his hand.


Bang. There was again a rustling of the leaves
and a bough bent slightly as Fifi leaped from it to the
damson tree, and directly afterwards was lost among
the shadows.
Juju was found hanging by his curly tail, but nevei
more would he steal apples or taste unripe damsons.
Since then another pair have found a home m the
ivy tree, for I saw them myself swinging on the boughs
and eating acacia leaves.
THE END.


PRISONERS IN A CAVE.
CHAPTER I.
nn HE waves were idly washing the grey rocks and
boulders, and flipping-flopping now here, now there,
bits of reddish-brown seaweed and foamy spray.
This was the West Bay, known for its angry waters
and rough, rocky coast. Away on the other side of a
stretch of forest, a mile or two in width, there was
another bay with a smooth sandy beach, where the
children from the village near were bathing, running
races, digging, building houses, and having games the
livelong day. By the West Bay it was different; only
a few daring boys scrambled and climbed and fought
their way down to the water’s edge, and they didn t do
it often, such a scramble as it meant. Coming through
the rough grass and tangle of bush and creeper weie
two boys, big strong fellows for their age, which could
hardly have been more than fourteen 01 nfteen, and pc.
haps not that. They were going to try if they could
reach a spot called Accident Hollow, so named be-
cause some years before a man was said to have fallen
from the rocks above into this strange basin-like place,


and then disappeared. Perhaps being dazed by the
fall, he rolled or tumbled into the deep, dark pool,
which lay at one side of the basin, or maybe a big wave
took him in its arms; anyway he was gone, and now al-
most forgotten.
“Jim,” said one of the boys to the other, “what the
dickens is that thing bobbing about down there."”
Jim caught hold of a bush and leaned so far over
the side that he found himself pulled back suddenly.
“What’s the matter?” he growled in a good-natured,
though bearish tone.
“If you feed the fishes, what's the use of my setting
lines?”
“Your bump of caution is a bad as a corn, ana
want’s the knife,” said Jim.
“Look at the sun, if we are to be on top again before
dark we’d best look slippery, said the other, whose
name was Fred.
He straightened out some lines he carried and started
off, and Jim followed; slipping, jumping, tumbling,
climbing up here and down there, tearing their clothes
and scratching their hands till they bled, they went
quickly enough; and then came a narrow path, on one
side the usual rocky wall, on the other a kind of gulf,
half full of rocks, with tufty grass and prickly bushes
growing between.
“Make jelly of a fellow to go down there,” said Jim.
“Where was it that the old chap fell from, you've heard
more of it than I."”


■


- \ i
; -:v -- .~ \
' l *^'b,£iO'Nt*\*\t-rr
’
lk*K —^
i
-
A woman came into
the firelight and took a fryingpan irom the carthern
floor.


“He wasn’t old/’ said Fred; “he was young, they say,
and just a trilie off.”
“Off his head?”
“No fear, not a straight-goer. Just before the acci-
dent he got mixed up in something shady, and they
say the bobbies were after him.”
Jim began to whistle. He was Fred’s visitor, and
this was the first time he had tried to go down to the
West Bay. So he whistled “We won’t go home till
morning;” and as it happened they did not go before,
or even then, though he little thought it.
It was a tiresome, tiring task they had set themselves,
and from laughing and joking at the first they gradu-
ally calmed down, till they scrambled and pushed their
way with scarcely a word.
“By Jove!” said Jim at last, “this is tough work.”
“Pretty swift,” said his friend. “How do you feel?”
“All right,” said Jim stoutly.
Instead, he was tired, bruised, scratched, and sore
enough to wish almost that he had not come.
“Steady on the blue,” said Fred, as Jim took a long
slide. “You’ll land in the basin if you’re not careful.”
Jim laughed, but the laugh ended suddenly. He/
was still slipping along regardless of bruises, pricks,
and torn clothes, when just two yards away, and right
in front of him, lay a black snake —a black snake with
raised head, gleaming eyes, and a tongue that darted
in and out. It hissed, and raised its head higher, and
again and again that dreadful forked tongue shot in
and out. Jim said afterwards that he seemed to live


a lifetime in those few moments. A queer, dizzy feel-
ing came over him, and an odd sound between a sigh
and a groan made Fred look to see what was the mat-
ter. Something must be done, and that quickly; but
there was not a stick near, only prickly bushes, cutting
grass, and stones so large that it was impossible to
move, much less lift them. It seemed as though Jim
must die, for instead of trying to scramble out of the
way he sat quite still staring at the snake, with wide
frightened eyes. It was an awful time, almost as awful
for Fred as for Jim —every moment they expected it
to dart forward, and then Jim’s leg was so near!
Fred seemed to see the terrible fang, to see it pierce,
when a sudden thought came to him. In a second hesr
had dragged off one of his thick heavy boots, and had
thrown it down, down, crash, bang, and the snake was
gone. Jim began to sob like a child^
“Hi! Dry up!” exclaimed Fred, in as rough a
tone as he could get up. “Don’t be an ass!
Jim left off being an ass, and Fred began to whistle.
“We’ll go back if you like," he said presently.
“No, we won’t,” said Jim manfully, v “we are not com-
ing down here for nothing."
“Good for you," said Fred.
They went scrambling on just as though nothing
had happened, but the colour did not come back to
Jim's cheeks for a while.
“We’re nearly there,” said Fred, stopping to pull a
thorn from his thumb.
“ ‘Bout time,” said Jim breathlessly.


A few steps more, a jump or two, a turn round a
rock, and the basin, or Accident Hollow, lay at their
feet; and just outside, bobbing up and down in the
water, was the mysterious something they had seen, no
more nor less than a cask —an ugly, brown, ordinary-
looking cask.
But Fred was surprised.
“Here's a rummy go,” he said; “I wonder what’s m-
side.>
Jim broke into a loud laugh.
“Only a cask,” he said. “Ha! Ha! Ha! If you
want to know what’s inside, we’ll soon find out.
“Wait a bit, old chap, this line has got to be set. We
can go for the cask afterwards.”
They undid the line, and Fred tooK a small bait-tin
out of his pocket, and then a funny thing happened.
Jim chanced to look up, and when he did so he saw,
or thought he saw, a man standing on the top of the
rocks on the opposite side of the small neck of water
which ended in the basin, or Accident Hollow. The
man seemed to be watching them intent!), but when
Jim raised his head he popped out of sight.
“Who ever can that be?” asked Jim.
“Can who be, my lad. J
Jim told him what he had seen, and pointed out the
place where the man had popped down.
Fred gave a long whistle.
“That,” he said, “is a queer place to see a man. It’s
nothing but rocks upon rocks —not enough grass to
keep a bandicoot, and awful climbing.”


“Why would he want to hide when he saw me?
“Goodness knows,” said Fred, “perhaps he was up
to something.”
In the deep, dark pool at one side of Accident Hol-
low there were a good many fish, both little and big,
and Fred’s line had been in no time before there was a
bite; and up came a lovely rock cod.
“Flere’s a beauty,” cried Fred. “Hooray! Hooray!”
“Wish I’d brought a line,” said Jim.
“You can take mine while I fish that old cask out.”
But instead of that they fixed Fred’s line and left it
set, while they both went for the cask, taking off their
boots and socks and rolling up their trousers. Such
work they had with that slippery cask; one moment it
seemed to be safe in their hands, and the next as far
A
off as ever. Their feet slipped on the greasy wave-worn
stones, and two or three times they just saved them-
selves from a bath in a way that they called a touch
and go.”
At last they hauled out their prize; they called it
hauling, though they had no rope, and pushed, rolled,
and tumbled it up to the very edge of Accident Hollow.
“And now to see what’s inside,” cried Jim excitedly.
“The line first,” said Fred.
Fie pulled it up.
“Mullet! Two, by Jove!”
They were not very big, but two at once was “good
enough,” F'red said. So busy were they with the cask
and the fish that they never noticed how late it was
growing. Long slanting rays of dying sunlight slid


over the rocks and into the sea, and under the
rays dark shadows formed. Accident Hollow was quite
dusky before they noticed it.
The cask had a bung- tightly driven into its head,
but the boys worried at it with their knives and various
stones they picked up, till it was quite loose and fell in,
and then
Fred started up.
“Pooh!” he cried, partly in surprise, and partly in
disgust. A strong smell of spirits, or alcohol, had risen
and caught his breath.
“What is it?” cried Jim, trying to look in.
The fumes caught his breath, and made him cough
violently, while Fred roared with laughter.
“Too much for you, me lad,” he said.
“Why, it’s whisky or gin,” said Jim; “how the
dickens ”
Neither of them noticed the figure of a man stealing
upon them out of the darkness at the other end of Acci-
dent Hollow.
“That’s it,” answered Fred. “How the dickens came
it here?”
“Washed overboard,” suggested Jim.
“No fear; there’s been no wreck lately.”
“But it might have been washed off the deck of a
steamer.”
“ ‘Pigs might fly, and so might I,’” quoted Fred, not
very politely.
The dark figure drew nearer and nearer, but they
neither saw nor heard it. The wind and waves made


so much noise they could hear nothing else; but the
dim light of evening startled them both. They were
just springing up when a deep voice out of the dar -
ness said quite close to them
“Not so fast, young gentlemen.”
Thev stood still; they said nothing. They were no
cowards, but it had an ugly sound, that deep voice
coming from they knew not where.
Fred at last found his.
* “Who are you?” he asked, trying to speak without
a trace of fean,
“You'll find that out quick enough, said the voic .
“You’ve got to come along o’ me.
“No jolly fear,” said Fred, with both fear and temper
in his voice now.
The man put a whistle to his lips, and two more
figures came out of the gloom.
“You are my prisoners.” said the first, coming nearer.
He seemed a short, thickset fellow, and he carried a
stick with a heavy-looking head.
“But, why— why—why are we?” stammered <re( ■
“We’ve caught you damaging our property an
stealing our fish,” said the man, while the others kep
quiet.
(( y ours!”
“This place belongs to us. Come along, I can the
wasting words with the like of you. I leads and do
you Tom and Bob follow the young gents, and see all s
fair and square.”


He disappeared in the gloom, but Fred and Jim did
not move.
“Come, young fellers,” said one of the men not un-
kindly.
“What's it all about?” asked Jim, speaking for the
first time.
“That’s no business o’ mine,” answered the man in
a surly tone; “but you’d best move on.”
There were two strong men behind them, there was
another in front. What could they do? Jim touched
Fred lightly on the arm.
“It’s no use, old chap,” he said, “we’d best march,
and perhaps these gentlemen will be good enough to
tell us what they’re up to.”
The men grunted, but said nothing.
It was so dark they could not see where to tread; but
there seemed to be a sort of path, and so they went
slowly on, with the wind and the sea roaring together
on every side, while a few drops of rain began to patter
down. They stumbled sometimes, and almost fell; and
the sea hissed and splashed at their very feet they
thought; but it was too dark to tell. Then came a
faint glimmer of light —a faint glimmer from a regular
wall of black darkness. They were brave lads, but
their hearts sank as they drew nearer and saw the
mouth of a cave, and a figure moving in the fitful flick-
ering firelight. A cave! No one knew of a cave any-
where near the West Bay. There were some three or
four miles up the coast; but here a cave was unknown.
Quick as lightning these thoughts shot through Fred’s


mind. A cave; it looked a big cave, too, and there was
a fire with a three-legged pot, and he thought he caught
a glimpse of a woman’s figure shrinking in the shadow.
But they said nothing, only stood there, two sorry-
looking figures, tired, hungry, and scarcely knowing
whether to be most angry or frightened.
“Come on, Fan,” said the voice of the leader, and
don’t be a fool.’ .
A woman came into the firelight and took a frying-
pan from the earthen floor. There were fish in it, and
directly she put it on the glowing coals they began o
sputter and fizzle in a way that sounded good to the
bovs who had eaten nothing since dinner.
'Aw. young fellers, sit ye down,” said the leader,
‘•and make yerselves at home-as the old woman sate
<r am X wish you were.
They wished themselves at home with all their hearts.
but it was not much good doing that.
The other two men drew up to the fire an t
out their hands before the blaze.
‘‘Coin’ ter be a rough night,” one muttered to the
other.
“Is tea ’bout ready, Fan,’’ asked the leader impa
tiently.
“Oh, yes, it’s ready,” said the woman sullenly.
“Time, too,” growled the man.
“Hoogh!” said she, lifting her head and showing a
face that was still young. “That’s good, when you come
home at all hours, father.”
“Shut up,” was all her father would say.


“Oh, yes, I can do that; and, what’s more, make
others do the same,” she answered crossly as she drag-
ged nearer the fire a rough four-legged table, made out
of palings split from some neighbouring tree. Over
this she spread a length of coarse damask, brown and
yellow with age, full of darns, and not over clean.
“Coin’ to have the cloth to-night, eh, ban, said her
father with a grin; “an’ the silver spoons, I spose, an
the mats."
It was but poor wit, and the girl Fan took no notice.
She set the table for six, and to the surprise of Fred
and Jim put on both jam and butter, and bread that
they said afterwards was not “half bad. Last of all
she lifted up the steaming dish of fried fish, true, the
dish was but a tin plate, and the fish were almost swim-
ming in fat; but by this time the boys had plenty of
real sauce (which is hunger, you know) to eat with
their tea, and they doubted if they had ever tasted any-
thing half so good.
Fan and her father did their best to make them have
a good meal, but the boys felt that they were watched
all the time. Not a look or a word that passed between
them seemed to escape one or another of the men.


CHAPTER 11.
When tea was over Fan’s father whispered something
to her, and then all three men began to pull on oilskins
and muffle their throats. It was raining, and the roar
of the wind and sea sounded like a dull booming in-
side the cave. When they opened the door a rush of
spray and bitter cold came in—the tallow dip was put
out, and the dying fire gave but a dull light.
“Now’s our time!” cried Fred in an excited whisper.
They rushed to the door, but as it swung back on its
hinges, a huge dark figure blocked the way, and some-
thing cold and hard and steel-like touched Fred’s hand.
“Stand back,” cried a hoarse voice. “One step fur-
ther and you are lost.”
There was a bang of the heavy door, and the boys
stood staring dumbly in the dim light.
Fan was lighting the tallow dip, and blowing up the
fire. She did not look at the boys, but went on with
her work just as though they were not there.
Fred was the first to speak.
‘■What is the meaning of this? What have we done
that we should be shut up here?" he asked Fan in a loud
angry tone.
“S’sh!” said Fan. "There’s no use making a
about it.”
Fred looked at her
“Let us out at once,” he said, “at once! Don't you
know that you'll get into trouble about this?”


“Yes,” said the girl with a ghost of a smile, “if we let
you out there would be trouble enough.
The boys’ faces grew very long. Fred decided on a
new plan.
“But suppose we go our way and say nothing,’ he
said, speaking pleasantly now.
Fan gave a scornful little laugh.
“Ah, no, you don’t ketch me like a weasel asleep
“But we will give you our word of honour,” cried
Jim, starting forward. “Our word of honour to say
nothing about it, if you will let us out.
“Not a word,” echoed Fred, “about you. or your
father, or this cave, or anything —not a word to a soul/’
“You don't ketch me,” repeated the girl stubbornly.
“But you see,” went on Fred, “we will be missed;
there will be a regular hue and cry —a search party
out, and no end of a row, and you’re bound to be found
out —you and your secret, whatever it is.”
“Our secret!” said Fan. “As if you didn’t know.
“I don’t care,” cried Fred, “it’s nothing to me. Now,
look here, you let us out and mum’s the word; but keep
us here and we’ll get out one way or another, and then
and then ‘the band ’ll begin to play.’ ’
“Very well,” said the girl, getting sullen again, “get
out now; I shan’t do nothing to stop you.”
She finished washing the tea things, filled the kettle,
made up the fire, and then took from a shelf an old,
torn, and dirty-looking book, and, sitting down, pre-


tended to read, while the boys banged and pulled,
kicked and beat at the heavy iron-framed door in vain.
“Hang it all!” cried Fred, angrily; “it might as well
be all iron, we can do nothing with it."
“Let’s take a look round,” whispered Jim; “we might
find a manhole somewhere.”
“And might not," said Fred, with a wry lace; were
in a pretty mess I’m thinking, and a nice stew they 11
be in at home."
“It can’t be for long,” said Jim, hopefully; “they
couldn’t keep two strong fellows like us.
“Couldn’t they?” said Fred. “When you fall into the
hands of three cut-throat looking fellows like those,
you don’t know what’ll happen.”
Jim nudged him, and glanced at the girl Fan. who
was still pretending to read.
“Oh, she’s not taking any notice," said Fred.
Fan did not look round, but slowly, slowly, a httle
smile crept up and stole all over her dull face.
“Come on,” said Jim, “let’s have a good look round.”
“In this fool of a light, and we’ve no matches, said
Fred, crossly.
But together they began to search the walls and
roof of the cave. It was a long narrow place, so far
as they could tell, with one opening, that with the iron-
framed door; but the light was so bad, it was hard to
make out anything. They went right to the other
end, where all was dark. Looking back Fan seemed
to be much further off than she really was.
“It’s for all the world like a tunnel,” said Fred.


“We’ll go back to the fire," whispered Jim. “Look
here, old chap, there must be some sort of a hole for
the smoke to get out; perhaps we could get out that
way. Then, again, there must be ventilation some-
where. or we would all die like rats in a hole, and i
could have laid ten to one that I felt fresh air blowing
in my face a while back.”
Fred began to cheer up.
“It is all too silly for anything,' he said, as if two
fellows could be shut up for nothing, without people
finding it out.’’
They sat on the floor by the side of the fire, and the
warmth made them so drowsy, that one thing after
another slipped away till there was nothing left to think
of.
A great noise at the door awoke them with a start,
and it took a few moments to collect their thoughts.
They were here in this lonely spot, prisoners. They
struggled to their feet, stiff from their cramped position.
The men were coming back; the boys heard their
voices, and caught the gleam of the lantern they were
carrying. They tramped in, and shook the water from
their oilskins, throwing down a string of fish, and
swearing at the weather and the night.
The kettle was boiling, and Fan mixed them huge
mugs of something hot and strong. When it was gone
they left off swearing, and stretched themselves before
the lire. In a little while there were sounds between
the grunt of a pig and the croak of a frog, and the boys
looked at one another, and signed that they were asleep.


Presently Fan got up, and without a word disap-
peared somewhere towards the other end of the cave.
They listened intently, and heard a pushing, grating
noise, and bits of dirt falling down; but that was all, and
presently the warmth and the silence overcame them
again, and they too slept heavily.
In a small cave of her own, just big enough for one,
the girl Fan was sitting with her head on her hand.
She was sitting on the side of her rough, wooden bunk,
staring at the opposite wall. On the floor was a pannf-
can half full of fat, with a tiny burner floating in the
middle, which gave but a poor light, and yet enough
for an old brown frog sitting on a stone high up near
one of the cracks where the air crept in, to see Fan give
a vicious kick or two in the air. The frog was old and
fat, and had such big round eyes, and seemed so
friendly, that the lonely girl had named him Goggles.
Sometimes she talked to Goggles, but to-night there
was no talking, only now and then she muttered some-
thing to herself.
“It’s beyond bearing," she said, pulling her hair
down; “he'll find me missing one of these days.’
Goggles eved her inquisitively, and put out a icady
tongue to snap a little grey spider running down the
stone, after which he lifted a leg to his nose and rubbed
it thoughtfully.
“Oh,” said the girl, ‘T wish I was dead, I do. Oh,
mother! Mother!”
Round her were only the grey-brown walls, with
Goggles sitting on his stone; she jumped up and


pressed, pushed and pulled, at the bits of rock near
the absurd hole she called a window. Some of these
she loosened slightly, and Goggles, growing alarmed,
hopped into a crevice and hid. Wild thoughts filled
her breast; she stamped her feet on the earthern floor.
“Why should I be in this hole of a place?" she asked
angrily, and then her mood changed.
“Oh, mother! Mother! If only you ”
“It was somewhere along here," she heard a voice
say on the other side of the wall. “There was a cry of
some kind. Do you think it was the girl?”
She went crying to bed, crying softly now.
The air in the cave was close, and the few straggling
rays of light so weak that it was long after morning
broke when the boys stirred, rubbing sleepy eyes, and
staring vacantly at the fire one of the men was kindling.
But when the door opened, and the sunlight and fresh
sea breeze rushed gleefully in, they jumped and
would have been out, as they afterwaids said, in two
shakes of a dead lamb’s tail," had not a burly figure
stopped the way again.
“Now then! Now then!" said the man. “Steady
boys, you’ve dropped anchor here for a bit, an’ you
might as w 7 ell take it aisy. ’
They looked at him, and seeing a twinkle m Ihe
corner of his left eye, Fred ventured to say—
“Look here, old chap, give us a hand to clear out of
this, and we’ll make it well worth your while.”


“Couldn’t do it, my lad,” said the man; “its more
than my life is worth; but don’t you take on, it won’t
be for long.”
For breakfast they had more fried fish, bread, and
strong tea boiled in a billy. Fan came out in what her
father called a fit of the sulks, and wouldn't speak a
word to anyone; and after the meal was over dcclaicd
she wasn’t going to be shut in there like a mole in a
hole.
“You’ll do as you're bid,’’ her father cried angiily.
Fan did not answer. She went to the thick iron-
framed door and let herself out —out m the sunshine,
with the sea washing at her feet, and the silvery spray
leaping high.
She turned up her skirt, and taking off her boots an
stockings, paddled in the shallows.
•‘You fool!" shouted her father. “You fool to show
yourself out there in the daytime. Come back, you
hussy!" _ ,
But Fan gave a mocking laugh, and paddle ICL '
lessly on.
The man had thick grizzly hair, which fell heavily on
his forehead, almost touching the no less bushy eye-
brows. He put it back now, and his fierce eyes gleamed
wildly.
“Come back!” lie shouted, “or I’ll ” He picked
up a stone, and he brought the hand holding it above
his shoulder.
Just at that moment the girl looked up.


“Don't throw, father! Don’t throw!” But the cruel
stone had sped on its way.
A bitter, helpless, hopeless cry, a dull thud, a loud
splash, and the little, tricky, playful waves were wash-
in <r over her as she lay.
o
The grizzly-haired scoundrel who had raised his
hand against his own child, stood as though looted to
the spot, and in the meantime Fan bade fair to breathe
her last. Her long* dark hair had come out of ns loose
coil, and was floating on the surface of the water. With
a swish and a flip-flop the breakers came up again,
when two figures rushed wildly past the stupefied star-
ing man, and down, down to where the prostrate figure
ofthe girl lay. By the time they had half pulled, half
dragged her beyond the water's edge, her father and
another man were there. Between them the) got her
back to the cave, where she lay on the flooi whh a
rolled up coat for a pillow. Then they stood off, and
stared stupidly at her white face, and the big purplish
patch on her forehead.
“Will she come round?” asked her father m a some-
what awed tone.
“Blessed if I know,” said the other man, with the
awkwardness of a dull sympathy.
“Got any brandy?” asked Jim suddenly.
“Look out if you go putting brandy down a person's
throat when they ain’t sensible,” cried Fred, too excited
to think what to do himself.
In the meantime the remaining man, the youngest of
the three, who had been away down at Accident Hollow,


and had known nothing of what had occurred, came in
to see where his mates were.
“On the spell! Just as I thought ”he began,
and stopped suddenly as his eyes fell upon Fan.
“What the dickens! What's happened?”
He plunged forward, and dropped down on his
knees.
“Fan!” he cried. “Fan, old girl, what's up?”
But Fan neither moved nor spoke.
He lifted her hand, and it fell limp and helpless by
her side.
“Oh, God!” he cried, “she’s dead! She’s dead!”
Then for the first time he noticed the purplish patch
on her forehead, and springing to his feet turned furi-
ously on her father.
“Who did that?” he asked, pointing at the bruise.
“It’s that what killed her! It would ha' killed a strong
man.
He doubled his fist, but his mate put a hand on his
arm.
“Steady, Tom, old lad, bad blood between you and
the captain here won’t mend matters; an’ it’s not so clear
to me that she’s really gone.”
A sound like a choking sob bubbled up in Tom's
throat, and down he went on his knees again.
“Fan, my girl, if you are alive, don’t try to speak;
just a wink o’ your eye will be ’nough,” said he in rough,
broken tones.
But the poor girl lay with dull, wide-open eyes, and
not an eyelid moved.


“She’s dead!” cried Tom. "Oh, dear! Oh, dear!
He felt her hands, they were cold and clammy; and a
big- warm tear or two, which dropped on them, lay like
c* *
little drops of dew.
“I'm goin’ for a drop o’ sperrit to put down her throat,
anyhow,” said Tom s mate, moving oh.
He did not go out of the iron-framed door at the
mouth of the cave, and the boys looked up curiously
as a queer, grating sound came from the other end
where all was dark.
CHAPTER 111.
Tom’s mate, whose name was Bob, had only been
crone a few minutes when there was the same grating
sound again, and he was back with perhaps a quarter
of a pint of raw gin.
“Not like that, Bob,” said Tom, “you'd scald the
throat off her.”
Bob mixed several spoonfuls in a little water, and put
a few drops at a time between the parted lips, while the
rest stood round and watched eagerly.
At first it seemed to make no difference, and Tom's
eyes grew heavy again, and the lids fell over them in a
shamefaced kind of way. A few minutes went b} , and
Bob put a little more of the spirit into her mouth, when
there came a slight gasp.


“There, what did I tell yer?” said Bob.
Another gasp or two, and her lips moved.
“Cold. Cold,” she muttered. “So cold, so cold.”
“No wonder with all these confounded wet things on
her,” cried Tom, trying to tug some of them off.
Some more of Bob’s mixture, and she sat up and
looked dazedly round.
“What’s up?” she asked at last
“Oh, Fan—Fan, we thought you were done for,”
blundered Tom.
“More fool you,” said Fan, politely.
“Oh, I say Fan, you're hard on a feller,” said Tom,
drawing off a little.
“Clear out,” said Fan, “the lot o’ you. Do yer think
I want a dozen taggin’ and fussin’ after me.”
But she staggered as she got on to her feet, and would
have fallen but for Tom.
“Flang on to me, Fanny; I’ll take care on yer, my
poor girl,” he half whispered.
P'anny gave a queer laugh.
“You put your boots on,” she said; “who wants you
takin’ care on ’em.”
She pulled herself away, and stumbled down the pas-
sage-like place till she came to the queerest little door-
way you ever saw in your life, so narrow and so low,
with a heavy board on a pulley above, which would
slide down —an iron pin slipped into the wooden frame
was the fastening.


Fan crawled through the opening, let the board down,
and put the pin in. Her teeth were chattering, her
eyes wild.
“Oh, I do feel bad!” she cried, as she took off her wet
clothes. “Oh, me! Oh, my head! My head!”
She undressed and went to bed, where she lay shiver-
ing and shaking for perhaps an hour; after that she fell
into a heavy sleep—a sleep that was more of the nature
of a stupor, and lasted a long time.
In the meantime, the man the others called captain
brought out a piece of salt junk, which he bade Fred
and Jim boil for dinner, together with about a dozen
potatoes in their skins; and after remarking that if din-
ner was not ready about one o’clock, it would be the
worse for them, he went away and the others after him,
locking the door as they had done before.
Jim made up the fire quite meekly, but Fred stood
scowling with a very ugly look on his face; and Jim had
the meat in the pot and on the fire before he stirred.
“Flow can that salt stuff be done by dinner, when it’s
past ten now?” he asked, with an angry scorn.
“Well, there are some fish left,” returned Jim, cheer-
fully.
“Confound the fish!” cried Fred. “Confound those
men; confound everything.”
Having relieved his feelings in this manner, he felt
better.
“I wonder how that poor girl is getting on, Jim ven-
tured presently.


“Well, confound her, too,” said Fred; but his voice
was less severe now.
“I think one of us ought to speak to her before long,
and see if she wants anything,” said Jim, mildly.
“All right, you can turn nurse if you like; for my part
she can turn up, so far as I care,” said Fred in a strongly
don’t-care tone.
He thought that Fan, wherever she was, would be
likely to overhear him.
‘‘She might die,” said Jim, fearfully; “that was a bad
blow on the head.”
“She might let us out of this rat's hole if she liked,”
said Fred savagely; “the one escape that I can see would
be the chimney; but it's too confoundedly small to
get up.” ;
“We’ve got broad shoulders,” said Jim, looking out
of the corners of his eyes at his own. ‘‘Stop raging,
Freddy, and let us light the tallow dip and have a look
round.”
“You’ve got something more than mere book learning
in that old noddle of yours after all,” returned Fred,
brightening up.
They were so eager to begin that they forgot both the
potatoes and the fish to be got ready for dinner. Tip-
toeing in their heavy boots, lest Fan should hear them,
they went the whole length of the cave without discover-
ing anything of much importance. At the very end,
however, was a round hole, about big enough for a man
to get through; but when they stooped to examine it.


such a strong breeze met them that the light was blown
out.
“Dash it!" cried Fred aloud.
“Ah!" exclaimed Jim, who was down on his hands
and knees, “that explains."
“Explains what?" snapped Fred
“Where the air comes from."
“Bother the air! What air?"
“That we breathe in here. I couldn’t see before
how the place was ventilated."
“Well, and are you much wiser now?”
Jim did not answer. He was leaning forward with
his head through the hole, listening intently.
“Well," said Fred again.
Jim drew in his head.
“The sea is below," he said, breathlessly. “I hear the
waves coming in. It is quite dark, but the water is
washing against the rocks. It must be a wet cave; no
wonder they thought it safe to leave us if this is the way
to escape."
“What do you mean?" asked Fred, dropping on his
knees also.
Air, damp with the salt of the sea, blew in his face;
he, too, heard the wish-wash of the waves on the rocks
far, far below. It was dark, cold, gruesome. He
gripped Jim by the arm.
“Speak. Speak,” he said, in a queer rough voice.
“What’s the matter?" asked Jim. “It’s my turn now
to tell you not to be an ass."


“Oh, it’s all right, old chap; let’s go back and light
up.”
They went back, and their eyes fell on the fish not
cleaned, the potatoes red with the earth that grew them.
With one voice they cried, “By Jove!” and set to work
in good earnest —for what if the men came back, and
there was no dinner ready. The fire had burned low,
and the salt junk was off the boil.
“I wish we could cut the old thing,” said Fred,
gdoomilv.
“But, as we can’t, would you mind washing the spuds
while I clean the fish,” said Jim mildly.
“What a fellow you are, Jim, said Fred admiiingly.
“You’ve got plenty of real grit in you.”
Jim smiled.
“For all I'm so quiet,” lie said, “I’m making plans
all the time.”
What his plans were he had no time to explain, for
there was a rattle of a key in the lock just at the vei>
moment when the fish were fried and the potatoes we.e
cracking. As for the salt junk, the men said it was
“as tough as old boots;” so it was left in the pot to grow
tender.
“What about Fan?” Tom asked presently, as the fish,
bread, and potatoes began to disappear at lightning
speed.
tier father scowled at the question, and it passed un-
answered; but after dinner, when the others went out,
Tom remained, and presently the boys heard him call-
ing.


“Fan,” he said at first gently, and then in a louder
and louder key, till it had reached a shout
“Fan, can't vou hear me? Are you ill, han, and want-
in’ a drink? Fra out here, an’ I’ll get you anythin’ you
want.”
But all was silent within, and presently he began to
thump upon the board which did duty as a door, and
to swear to himself because he could get no answer.
“You Fan,” he said, and the words came through
clenched teeth. “You Fan, can’t yer speak when yer’s
spoken to? eh?”
A little ripple of scornful laughter came then.
“Ha! Ha! Go away sillybilly Tom- j om.
Tom swore then, swore at Fan, at the closed door,
at Fred and Jim for laughing, and at himself for being
a fool. After that he, too, went away.
“Now’s your time,” said Jim, in a low hurried voice,
“thev are out of the way.”
“What’ll we do?” asked Fred, all eagerness.
Jim did not answer. He w r ent to a corner behind the
door, and from under an old bag and a torn oilskin
coat he dragged forth a coil of rope.
“Flow did you find that, and what are you going to
do?” asked Fred.
It was a funny thing, but the boys seemed somehow
to have changed places; instead of Fred leading and Jim
following, Jim seemed to lead and Fred follow.
“Help me undo it, and I’ll show you,” said Jim.


They uncoiled it, and Jim fastened one end securely
round his waist, and the other to the heaviest log of
wood he could find.
“Now,” be said, “I’m going through that hole.”
“I guessed as much,” said Fred; “but you 11 be food
for the fishes if you go down there.
“We’ll see,” returned Jim; “you hold on to the rope,
and let me have it slowly and steadily.”
He went through feet foremost, feeling his way with
the utmost caution. Down below he heard the splash-
ing and dashing of water, and could just see a faint
gleam of the daylight creeping in. He had had a wild
idea of their being able to reach the water and swim out
of the cave; but now as he looked down, he gave it up.
So far away was the water, and so dark and treacherous-
looking, it would be almost certain death to drop down
there, he thought; and he stood for a few moments on
a ledge of broken rock, and peered here and there to sec
if there might possibly be another outlet. What was
that away to the left—what, but a shaft of light piercing
the darkness?
Fred felt the rope suddenly tighten as Jim moved on.
“What are you up to?” he called out suddenly.
“Don’t be an ass, Jim, and risk your life.
But there was no answer, and the rope went slack
just as suddenly as it tightened.
An awful fear that Jim had fallen seized Fred. What
else would prevent him answering?
“Oh. Jim, Jim!” he cried in a panic. “Do answer;
do speak.”


But only the wash of the water came up from below,
and the roar of the waves outside.
He threw himself down by the hole, and poked his
head into the darkness and listened, listened with strain-
ing ears, and fading colour.
Stopping up the hole, as he was with his body, it was
impossible to see the least little bit. All w r as black dark-
ness, and the hum and roar of the sea, the dashing ot
the waves on the rocks, the strong, damp, saltish smell
seemed to deepen his fears.
“Oh, I say, Jim, old chappie!” he began; but above
the noise of the sea he all at once heard “Ssh! in so
warning a style that he was silent in a moment.
“What could be the matter? What was Jim doing?”
he asked himself again and again, but he was obliged
to draw back his head for his neck ached, as he termed
it —“fit to drop off.”
It seemed a long, long time that he waited before the
rope began to move —a longer strain ere Jim's head
once more appeared at the hole. His face was white
and drawn looking, and his hands were bleeding where
the rocks had cut them.
Fred almost dragged him through the hole, and even
then clutched at his arm as though afraid of losing him.
“What were you doing, Jim?” he asked.
Jim took his handkerchief out and rubbed it over
his face.
“When I got through,” he began in a queer voice,
Fred thought, “I found a sort of foothold, but damp
and slippery enough for anything; I hung on to the


rope, and felt my way along the side. I thought we
might go down on the rope to the water and swim out,
but it wouldn’t do.
“But whatever were you doing all the time?” asked
Fred. “Look alive, man, how did you put the time m?”
“I'll tell you directly,” said Jim; “but let’s have
breathing space, old chap. I saw a faint light on the
water away down below, and it looked miles off, so I
gave that up as a way out. Then I saw a light on the
left, not much, but enough to make me go to see what
it was.”
“What was it? What was it?” asked Fred.
“It came from another cave,” said Jim slowly, “and
in that cave were the men we have seen, and a couple
of strangers.”
“Oh, I say!”
“It’s a big roomy place, but it’s got a lot of casks
like that one we saw in the water. When I looked in
they were rolling in two or three empty casks, and then
started to roll out a couple of full ones, I know by tne
way they went.”
“Great Christopher!” exclaimed Fred, his eyes open-
ing wide.
o
“I saw some other things,” went on Jim, “what looked
like a heap of wheat, and some big, dark-looking ves-
sels, or something; I couldn’t quite make out what, the
men got in the way; but I know now what this place is."
“But what were the men doing?” asked Fred, open-
mouthed now,


“J told you,” said Jim, a trifle shortly, “they were
rolling casks. I suppose there’s a boat waiting out-
side ”
“Oh, but there couldn’t be,” interrupted Fred; “they’re
too mighty frightened of being seen.”
“Pooh!” said Jim, “it must be getting dusky by now;
they were using a lantern.”
“Is it a dark cave?”
“How could I tell that?”
CHAPTER IV.
Fred whistled softly to himself.
“It's mighty lucky it’s dark where we are, for if any
of the men came in they’d think we were up to some-
thing,” he said, drumming with his heels on the floor
of the cave.
“Oh, I say, Jim!” he cried suddenly, what a rummy
hollow sound; I believe there’s another cave under-
neath.”
“Shouldn’t wonder,” said Jim, who seemed to be
thinking of something else.
“Could you hear the fellows talking? What were
they saying? What did you mean by saying you know
now what this place is?” asked Fred, rushing one eager
question after another.


“It's a place for making grog on the sly, and selling
it on the sly; and there must be a regular gang of them
mixed up in it, said Jim slowly.
“My word!” exclaimed Fred; “I say, dont those soit
of chaps get a bit fierce if you come in the way of their
plans?”
“Yes,” said Jim, in the same queer, slow way. \ou
know what they always say, ‘dead men tell no tales.
Didn’t you tell me once that more than one person had
seen a ghost away out there on the rocks ?”
“Yes,” said Fred, “but ”
“But what?”
“I don't see what the ghost had to do with it.”
“I s'posc they played ghost to keep people away.
“You heard them saying something,” said bred, sud-
denly; “something about us.”
Jim coughed.
“Come away from here, old fellow,’ he said kindly;
“we won’t do any good sticking by this hole; it’s for
all the world like the mouth of a trap.
Fred’s heart sank.
“Oh, I say,” he caught at Jim’s arm. “I say tell me
what you heard.”
“Come away,” said Jim, roughly shaking him off.
“Drop that, Jim; it’s only bluff. Come, out with it.”
They were groping their way through the darkness,
but just then Jim stopped.
“They did say something —at least one of ’em, a cut
throat-looking fellow —he did—but the others were
down on him like a hundredweight of bricks.”


“One of the fellows who comes in here?”
“No; one of the others. He said ” Jim coughed
again.
“What did he say?”
“He said —‘Hang it, what do you let them stand in
the way for? There’s the basin; what more likely than
a slip scrambling over the rocks? Accident Hollow,
you know;’ and the brute laughed.”
“What —what did the others say?”
“Two or three growled out something or other, and
the captain said, ‘No yer don't;’ and that one called
Tom, the one that's a bit soft on Fan, called out from
the other end of the place, where he was trying to hoist
up one of the casks, ‘None o’ yer dirty work here, for
I ain't on'; so you see nothing’s likely to come of it.
“And anyway,” said Fred, with set lips; “we can only
die once; and, if it comes to that, we'll die like men;
they shan't say we showed the white feather. ’
“No, they shan’t say that; but I don't think we’ll die
just yet; I don’t feel that way inclined myself.”
They made their way to where the fire should have
been; and, to their dismay, it had gone black out, and
they had no matches. By this time it was quite dark,
for the chinks of light which stole through cracks in the
rocks overhead, and an odd hole or two near the door,
were gone, and there was nothing left to do but to sit
down and wait for the men.
“Oh, dear!” said Fred, in a woebegone tone. “What
fools we were to let the fire go out, we can’t see to do
anything.”


“What are you thinking of?”
“You know when Tom, or was it Bob, got that gin
or whisky stuff for the girl; well, he was gone no time;
1 want to know where he went.”
“You are thinking of the hollow sound just now,
said Jim; “I see, a cave underneath, trap-door, that
scroop, scroop, we heard after he'd left us. it
might be that.’’
They sat silent for a while, and only the dull roar of
the rising sea crept in through the cracks, and the man-
hole at the other end.
“Fred,” said Jim, sleepily, “how’d you like to be a
blackfellow, and live in caves always?”
But Fred was already asleep.
Jim must have dropped off, too, then; for it seemed
a long while after that he woke to find the cave flooded
with the light of a newly-lit fire, and the men grumbling
to themselves and at each other, as they made their rude
preparations for tea.
“Well,” said the captain, lumbering up to them, “what
do you think of yourselves for a pair o’ young cubs, to
let the fire out and sleep like pigs.”
The boys jumped up.
“We never noticed it,” said Jim, fearlessly, “till it had
gone out.”
“Must ha’ bin doin’ summat mighty interesting,” said
the man, suspiciously; his fierce grey eyes gleaming
under his shaggy eyebrows.
The boys’ faces fell, and they shuffled their feet, and
twiddled their thumbs nervously.


The fierce grey eyes looked them up and down, and
then with a sudden exclamation he strode down the cave
and banged at Fan's door.
But all was silent as before, and after scolding with
much noise and many threats, her father tried coaxing;
but still there was no answer.
“She can’t be dead,” the captain said at last in a voice
that sounded strange to himself, “she’s trying to frighten
me, that’s what's she’s doin’.”
But his face had paled somewhat as he stood look-
ing about uncertain what to do next.
“Can’t you make her hear, cap’en?” asked Tom, com-
ing up.
“It’s a trick,” said the captain, sullenly. He turned
and battered at the door again with renewed and savage
threats, but all to no purpose.
“I’ll break the door down,” he muttered, going to seek
a handy weapon.
“Fan,” said Tom, in a tone sharp from very fear,
“he’s going to break the door down. Speak! Quick,
before it’s too late.”
The boys had crept up in the shadow, and now they
listened fearfully for Fan’s answer; but only the sound
of the men's voices broke the silence. Presently the
captain returned with a heavy bar of iron, and, draw-
ing near the door, prepared to strike.
“You won’t hurt her, cap’en ?” pleaded Tom.
“You mind out of the w r ay,” said the captain, gruffly.
A heavy blow, two, three fell, and amid the cracking
and crashing of the splintering timber, the other man


sauntered up and looked on without a word. At last
there was a hole big enough for the captain to put his
arm through and withdraw the iron pin, which acted as
a fastening. He did this, pushed up the battered and
broken door, and stepped in. The wooden bunk was
empty, but it was so dark he could see nothing, and,
savagely, he bade them bring a light. lom caught up
a tallow dip and hurried with it to the narrow doorway.
The cave, a forbidding, cell-like looking little place,
was almost wholly bare, save for an old mattress and
an odd blanket or two which were huddled up together.
An empty box stood on end, and above this was a hole
large enough for an ordinary-sized person to get
through. They could see the stars glittering and
twinkling in the dim evening light, and for a moment
the captain stood staring at them.
“She’s gone,” he cried, at last; “she always told me
she'd clear out some day. But maybe we’ll catch her
yet! After her boys, and a pound note for the one that
brings her back.”
They were hurrying out, when the captain stopped—
“We can’t all go,” he said, looking at the boys; “and
to take them would make matters worse. ’
“You stay, cap’en,” said Tom, and without waiting
for an answer, he followed his mate.
Fred and Jim stood still waiting in some anxiety for
what should come next.
Presently the captain spoke, in what was quite a
gentle way for him.


“Well, boys,” he said, “it's a bad job, but what's done
can’t be undone, so we’ll hope for the best. Lend a
hand now, and we ll mend that door I’ve been smash-
99
mg-.
It was very late when the two men returned from a
fruitless search, tired, hungry, and not in the best of
tempers.
“You couldn't find her?” said the captain.
“Who could?” asked Bob, as he threw down his oil-
skin.
Tom drew up to the table without speaking, and as
he sat he leaned his head on his hand like a man who is
out of spirits.
“We will find her in the morning,” said the captain,
“she can’t have gone far.”
“Aye, we’ll find her.” muttered Tom; “dead or alive.'’
At daybreak the following morning they set out again
in search of the missing girl, leaving the boys fast
asleep, and securely locking the iron-bound door. Ihe
sun was shining through the chinks and holes into the
cave when Fred and Jim awoke.
“I say,” said one, nudging the other; “the men have
all gone. Come, wake up, and let's see what we can
do.”
With a faint hope that the door might have been left
unlocked, they ran to it, but after pulling and pushing
for a few minutes, they gave it up, and turned their
thoughts to the possible chance of there being an
underground cave. With unceasing care and patience
they strode up and down, sounding with their heels,


poking with sticks, and every now and then knocking
their heads against the low roof or projecting stones.
“It’s no go,” said Fred, at last, leaning against the
wall in a hopeless kind of way.
“Never say die,” returned Jim, who was down on his
knees scraping away the fine dry earth which lay lather
thickly just at that spot.
“I’ll go and light the fire,” said Fred.
While he was doing this Jim went on with his scraping.
Now, he gathered up the dust in his two hands, formed
liked a basin, then stopped to scrape more into a heap.
He breathed hard, and his face was flushed with exer-
cise and excitement. There was something under it
all; something hard, board-like. His breath came still
more quickly. Was it the trap-door?
‘‘They’re coming,” warned bred, who was bending
over the fire.
With a few frantic movements of his hands Jim spread
his heaps of sand and dirt, but only just in time, for as
he sprang to his feet, there was a noise at the door, and
the next moment the men came in, but without ban.
CHAPTER V.
It was late in the afternoon of that day, and a cold,
drizzling rain was falling, when a woman carrying a
small bundle, came slowly through the heavy sand on
the south road, and entered the seaside village of Card-
ruth. Not the one that lay on the other side of the


strip of forest, that was a long distance from Cardruth.
The woman’s clothes were torn and dirty, her sunbonnet
had been blown or pushed backward, and the rain fell
on her defenceless head —on her head, and trickled
softly over a terrible bruise on her temple, and down
her poor weather-beaten face.
At the door of one of the outlying cottages two or
three women were gathered, watching the rain, and
gossiping with each other.
“Look at that poor creature,” said one.
“Poor enough, and ill too, by the looks of her.”
“Here, my good woman,” said another to whom the
cottage belonged, “maybe you’d like to come in out of
the rain and rest a bit.”
The woman put her hand to her head in a dazed kind
of way.
“No, no;” she said; “I mustn’t stop, I’m going to find
the police.”
“Come in for a while first,” said the housewife, coax-
ingly; “and go for the police afterwards. See, now, I’ll
warm you a drop of cawfee. ’
“But there won’t be time,” cried the other wildly.
“Oh, yes, there will, plenty of time,” said the house-
wife. “She’s half beside herself,” she added in a lowered
tone.
“What’s your name, my dear?”
“Fan.”
“Fan what?”
“Only Fan.”


The housewife looked at her friends, and tapped her
forehead.
“I doubt she’s quite right in her ’ead,” she half
whispered.
“Come in Fan, and welcome;” she said aloud, and
she hurried to warm the coffee and butter the scone for
her guest.
“I can’t be stoppin’, though,” said Fan, as she sank
wearily down on a stool by the fire; “I mus’ be gettin'
on.”
But she ate with a ravenous hunger all that was
placed before her, and afterwards grew drowsy in the
warmth of the fire; the women drawing aside and talk-
ing among themselves. Presently the good housewiie
laid her hand on Fan’s shoulder.
“Feeling better now, my dear?”
With a startled cry the girl staggered to her feet.
“What now?” asked the woman.
“The police!” exclaimed Fan wildly; “Police two
boys in a cave —men —casks cave.
She threw her hands above her head.
“Let me go —go —go. ’
Half frightened, half curious, the women gathered
round her.
“Here’s your bundle,” said one, picking it up.
Fan hugged it to her, and muttering fragments of
sentences, passed out into the falling rain, making her
toilsome way through the wet and now heavier sand.
Late that night a policeman found her wandering
aimlessly up and down the jetty, still talking to herself


and hugging her bundle. It had ceased to rain, but
her clothes were wet and clung miserably to her, and
her bonnet had fallen back.
“What are you doing here?' asked the man, not un-
kindly.
“Looking,” began Fan, vaguely, “the police—two
boys in a cave —casks —men tell them.
“You’ve been drinking,” said the constable; come
away from here,” and he laid his hand on her arm.
“You show me where they are,” said Fan, more sen-
sibly than she had yet spoken.
who are? ’
“Police —make whisky—make gin—two boys m a
cave shut up.
The man considered. It had been reported the day
before that two boys were missing from the village of
Forbes; what if there should be some foundation for
this woman’s half-crazy chatter.
The moon struggled out of the clouds, which still
blackened the sky, and as it did so the pale light fell
on the woman’s face.
“What’s happened your head?” asked the constable.
“Stone,” said Fan, “fell on it. Go and let the boys
out.”
“Presently, presently,” said the man; “I’ll take you
to the police, and then you can tell us all about it.
*** * *
Not till the next morning did Jim have the oppor-
tunity of seeing what his find was under the sand and


dirt. The men had gone out, and a few preparations
were made for dinner when he suggested that they
should have another search for the hidden cave, hred
began sounding with his heels as before, but Jim
brought a board from a box the men were using for
firewood, and quickly scraped till he had a fairly clear
space of about two feet square. His breath came hur-
riedly now as that of one on the eve of a discovery, and
he failed to answer when Fred spoke to him.
“What is it?” asked Fred, peering over Jim’s shoul-
der. “What are you feeling for? I’ve brought a light,
such as it is.”
Jim was running his open hand all over his two feet
square.
“Ah!” cried he excitedly, as he lighted on a knob
or piece of iron which jutted out.
Fred dropped on his knees by Jim, and oh, how they
tugged and pulled, pushed, thumped, and jerked, yet
vainly. They were red in the face, and out of breath
before they left off for a moment’s rest.
“There must be some catch or hitch about it,” said
Fred; and he proved to be right, for by pulling the
iron back, and then giving it a sudden jerk or twist,
it slipped out of place, and they lifted a heavy wooden
trapdoor, and—What lay beneath? The boys stared
for a moment, when Jim broke the silence with a sudden
burst of laughter.
“To think,” he said, “after all our work, after all the
castles we’ve built in the air, we should find a couple oi
jolly casks.”


And so it was, and here it must have been that Hob
got the spirits with which to revive I 1 an.
Fred and Jim looked at one another blankly, and
in a very sober fashion they let down the trapdoor,
put the iron catch in place, and spread the sand and
dirt.
“Well, that’s a pretty go,” said Fred, in a tone of dis-
gust. “I don’t see anything to laugh at.”
Jim, who was chuckling loudly, pulled himself up
short.
“And there isn’t either, old chappie, only I couldn t
help seeing the funny side of it. To think how we
fought and wrestled with that trapdoor to find what
we did.”
“H’st,” said Fred.
It was midday, and the men were at the door. So
quickly had the time passed during their search that
they had forgotten to take note of it, and only narrowly
escaped being caught in the act.
After dinner the men lingered somewhat smoking
and talking. No mention was made of Fan, but the
brows of her father were bent in a sullen frown as he
moodily knocked the ashes out of his pipe, or grunted
in answer to some question of his mates.
“I thought they were never going,” said Fred, when
at last the door was banged to, and they tramped off.
“They seem to think we are their servants,” said Jim,
with a rueful smile as he cleared the rough table.
“I’d like to pay them off for keeping us in this
wretched hole,” said Fred.


“Never fear,” returned Jim cheerily, “we’ll get out
sooner or later.”
It proved to be sooner than they either guessed or
thought.
“Let’s have another go for your hidden cave Freddy,
old boy,” he said presently with one of his pleasant
smiles.
“I know you’re laughing,” said Fred, “but all the
same I believe there’s one underneath, if we could
only find the way to it.”
As he spoke he began grinding with his heels on the
floor where he stood, which was close to the wall on the
darkest side.
“Oh, I say!” he exclaimed presently, “it feels funny
here; just as though it’s giving way.”
As, indeed/it was, for as he jumped aside the earth
on the spot seemed to crack, and they heard it fall down
below with a dull thud.
“In the nick of time,” said Fred, as soon as he could
find his voice.
But Jim was lighting a second tallow dip with a
hand that shook.
“We must see what this place is,” he said, “before
there is a chance of the men catching us.”
They fell on their knees, and peered fearfully into
the darkness below.
“There must have been a trapdoor,” said Jim, “be-
cause I can feel the framework that it fastened into.
You must have loosened it somehow when you were
stamping.”


He leaned forward, and thrusting his arm into the
space felt round as far as he could reach.
“Ha!” he exclaimed; “I thought as much.”
“What?” cried Fred eagerly.
’“There is something like the top of a rough ladder.
I can’t hear any voices or anything; I'm going down.”
“No,” said Fred, “111 go.”
Jim said nothing, but he sat on the edge of the hole
and moved his feet till they touched the top of the
ladder.
“You must have a light,” said Fred, snatching up
one of the tallow dips. “You might tread on a snake
or something.”
“Wait a minute,” said Jim, in a low voice; “I don’t
know whether it’s safe to take a light.”
He went down the ladder slowly and noiselessly, till
his feet touched the ground. It was perfectly dark,
and the air was heavy and somewhat musty. Pre-
sently he reappeared again at the hole.
“Give me one of the lights,” he said, “and I’ll have a
look round.”
Fred handed it to him, and then followed himself,
not without a few qualms, for now a narrow, dark, close-
smelling passage or tunnel showed, with a low roof and
rugged broken walls, and at the foot of the ladder there
was a heap of something. It proved to be nothing
worse than the trapdoor and its earthy covering. Jim
waited for him, holding the light. They went a little
way, and were stopped by a massive-looking door
made out of roughly hewn timber.


“This must be the end of the tunnel,” said Fred, ”1
can hear the roll and wash of the waves outside.”
“Let’s try the other way,” said Jim, softly. “Jove!
this air is nasty to breathe—nearly enough to stifle a
fellow.”
They went slowly and silently, shielding their light
with one of their hats, when they came to a sudden
turn in the narrow passage, and seemed to be
going down hill; and the ground underfoot was rough
and stony. Suddenly the passage came to an end,
and a blank, dark-forbidding-looking wall faced them.
“All for nothing,” said Fred, in a low, hopeless tone.
But Jim was taking a careful look round. Holding
his light close to the walls he peered into all the dark
crevices; stooping down he set the tallow dip on the
ground, and sounded the floor with his heels. All to
no purpose; there seemed to be no way of getting out,
save to return by the same as they came.
“Let’s go back,” said Fred.
But Jim, with his lips set, shook his head and went
on with his search. Presently he caught hold of Fred s
arm in an eager excited way, and pointed upward.
What was there to see? The ceiling took a rise here,
but it only looked the darker for being higher; and
Fred could see nothing but greasy-looking, blackened
rocks, and blacker shadow's between them.
“What do you mean? What are you pointing at?”
he asked in rather a grumpy manner.


“A manhole!” cried Jim, in a whisper. “See. fol-
low the line of the wall; there's a hole at the top, and
look here.”
“What?” asked Fred staring.
they had forgotten to take note of it, and only narrowly
not ithout a ftw qualms, for no a narrow, dark, close-
“Let’s have another go for your hidden cave, Freddy
“What?” cried Fred eagerly.
“Why, these are footholds,” he said. And as he spoke
he stuck his foot into one and pulled himself up with the
help of a projecting “ock. Before Fred could prevent
him, he had climbed the hole and disappeared in the
darkness, and while the former was making his own
way, by no means an easy task, for the^ niches were few
and far between and the rocks slippery, Jim's feet and
legs appeared again and felt about for something to
stand on.
“Well,” said Fred, when they had both got down
safely.
“I had to creep on my hands and knees,’ said Jim;
“there was so little room I couldn't kneel upright, and 1
went several yards when I saw a light.”
“A light?”
“Yes; I had to be careful then, and as quiet as a
mouse; but I got nearer to the light and had a look in.
It was the same cave, or one just like it, that I saw into
before, and the men are there, and they’ve got a fire. I
s'pose they are at their distilling business; anyway,
there's no get out for us, and the sooner we re back in
the old shop the better.”


They hurried back to the foot of the ladder, and after
shaking the trapdoor as free of earth as was possible,
managed, by dint of some time and trouble, to fix it in
its old place. This was scarcely done, and a few hand-
fuls of sand strewn over it, when they were greatly
startled and surprised to hear a shot fired, and then an-
other, and another.
They ran to the door and listened, but only the mur-
mur of the sea and the wash of the waves came in there.
Both cried at once, “The holer and rushed to it, but
though they strained their ears to hear, but a droning,
muffled sound, as of men’s voices in the distance, reached
them.
“What can it be?” said Fred. “Let us go back to the
door; we must not be found here.”
They did this, but were filled with fresh fears by a
noise below, as of heavy, rushing footsteps, followed by
the banging of a heavy door, and then all was quiet.
The bovs stood with clenched fists and white faces ready
for whatever might happen next, and they had not long
to wait before a key grated in the lock and the door of
their prison opened.
They started forward, but stopped suddenly at seeing
Tom, with a bleeding face, no hat, and a general air of
something being very much amiss with him.
“Cut and run, young masters,” he said huskily; “the
game’s over. The sergeant and his men would ha’
caught us like rats in a trap on y for the passage down
below.”


“But you, Tom,” said the boys, in a generous impulse
to save the man who had risked his liberty to set them
free.
‘Til be right,” said Tom; “I’ve got a hiding-place that
even the cap’en don’t know of.
“Did he get off, too?” asked Fred.
“Yes, but they winged him. You see the cap’en when
they called on us to surrender let fly at ’em, and then
they let fly at him, an’ if his arm’s not broke it’s pretty
bad.”
“But won’t they come round here and nab you?” said
Fred.
“Well, I won’t give them the chance,” said Tom, going
to the safe and hastily thrusting some bread and meat
into a small bag. “And now, young masters,” he said,
dabbing at a cut in his cheek with his shirt sleeve, in
course you’ll be questioned. If yer don t want to give
no evidence agen me, don’t stand by the door and watch
the way I go.
“No, no, we won’t,” they cried; “run, Tom; by all’s
that good, don’t lose any more time.”
They waited till they thought he must be in safety, and
then, as it was growing dusky, set out for home without
seeking the sergeant and his men. But they had only
gone a little way, and were in the midst of some pretty
rough climbing, when a voice cried —
“Who goes there? Stop, or I fire.”
It was one of the sergeant’s men, from whom they
learned many things. How that each day a large party
had been out in search of them, how they had scoured


the country for miles, and were beginning to lose all
hope, fearing that they had been drowned while bathing
or fishing, when the news came that a half-crazed woman
had given information of two boys being shut up in a
cave.
“And so,” said the man, “since early morning we’ve
been at it, and I’ve done some of the stiffest climbing I
ever did.”
But, though they secured the plant for distilling, to-
gether with various casks of rum, and lay in wait at the
caves for the captain and his mates, they did not return,
nor were they ever heard of again.
THE END


ROBIN.
T T E was not a wee red-breasted birdie at all, like you
see hopping about the garden; instead of that, he
was a chicken —a white-feathered, pale-faced chicken
an orphan, for his mother was dead and his father re-
fused to own him.
“See, Mum/'' said a little girl, opening her pinafore.
Mum looked in for a rosy apple, but instead there was
a little white chicken with sad eyes and one toe shorter
than the others.
“What are you doing? Let the chicken go, Laurie, ’
said Mum.
“Oh, Mum!” cried Laurie, opening her sweet grey
eyes. “Do let me keep him. He’s such a little love, and
—and he’s all alone in the world. His mother’s dead, and
I don't know where his father is. ’
“How do you know his mother's dead?” asked Mum,
twisting her mouth on one side to stop from laughing.
“She was flying over the fence and slipped, and her
head stuck between the palings, and she died.” said
Laurie. “If you come down to the gate, Mum, and
stand on tip-toe and stretch your neck you can see
her.”


“Tell Joe to pick her and save the feathers, and he can
roast her for his dog,” said Mum, a trifle crossly. Now r
what do you want with the chicken? You can call it
yours if you like.”
“I want to keep it, Mum. Do let me, do, do; and
I’ll call it Robin, and it’ll be my pet, and foller me
about.”
“I haven’t a hen that would take it,” said Mum, think-
ing.
“Then I can keep it,” said Laurie, with a happy laugh.
“Come on, Robin, pet, and we’ll have some —some
lunch.”
After that Robin became the special pet of Laurie, and
the special plague of everyone else. He turned up in
all sorts of unexpected places, and, though Mum always
said that if Robin was not kept in his own particular
basket at night he must go out of the house, it seemed
he was more often out of the basket than in it. Pap
(which is another name for father) used to take a nap
over the sitting-room fire in the evening, and when he
awoke once there was Robin in his pocket. It was
pretty warm there, and Robin fairly gasped when Pap
took him out.
“Laura,” said Pap severely, “take this chicken away;
I can’t have him in my pocket.”
“Well, father,” said Laurie, “I never asked you to put
him there.”
Pap was fairly caught, for everyone knew how fond
of pets he was, and mother smiled over the stocking she
was darning, but I think it was a wee bit rude.


One morning there seemed to be a little stir among
the girls. Laurie was smiling one moment and frown-
ing the next, and a bigger sister was talking a great deal
and looking rather fierce.
“What is the matter?” asked their aunt, a pleasant-
faced lady who was paying Mum a little visit.
“It’s that horrid chicken, Aunt Janet,” said Annie, who
was talking much and looking fierce. ‘‘There was I
sound asleep, and something came creeping, creeping
over my bed. I couldn’t think what it was, and it came
creep, creep on to my hair, and creep, creep right on to
my face, and then I woke up, and there it was; iorn
little oig •” , ,
“Chicken,” said Laurie, and this time she smiled and
smoothed Robin’s feathers.
“I’d like to chicken it,” said Annie. “I’d wring its neck
and break every bone in its body, and fricassee it. No,
I think I’d curry it, and have boiled rice and mashed
potatoes.”
“I’d wring vour neck, and break your bones, and
curry you, and—and mash you with boiled rice,” said
Laurie, her face on fire. “Td —I d kill you if you
touched a feather of his head. Little Robin, little pet,
poor darling,” she cooed to the chicken; “come away
from cross old Annie.”
“Mother, you’ll have to have that chicken killed,
began Annie again; but Laurie had fled with Robin out
of sight and hearing.
Mum, who w'as bending over the kitchen fire, stirred
the porridge so vigorously —that is, round and lound,


giving the side of the saucepan little scrapes —that of
course she couldn't hear, so Annie turned to her aunt.
“Isn’t it a shame, Aunt Janet, to think that one can't
have a quiet night’s rest without being pulled out of bed
by that disgusting chicken?”
“It must be a strong chicken,” said Aunt Janet quietly,
but there was a twinkle in her eve.
“Oh, well, you know, I had to tumble out to catch it.
Oughtn’t it to be kept out of the house?”
“Yes, Nan, it ought,” said her aunt, decidedly; “it
would do very well in the aviary with the pigeons and
doves. I’ve put it in myself several times.”
“Old Aunt Janet,” said a low voice outside; “I don’t
like you; I’m glad you’re not my mother. I’d pity your
little girls and your poor little chickens. Ugh!” And a
sweet little face with big grey eyes puckered itself up
into an ugly frown till all the sweetness had gone.
But Aunt Janec did not hear. She was settm° r the
breakfast-table, and presently, when she met Laurie, the
cloud had gone. The cloud had gone, but not so
Robin; he was taking a stroll through the house, pick-
ing up stray crumbs and chirping happily to himself.
Presently he reached the breakfast-room, and looked
round. There was a large table, and some books on a
box, and a mangle, and several other things not inter-
esting to a chicken; so he pattered away to where stood
another table with a lot of chairs round it. A few nice
crumbs, cakey in taste, were lying underneath, but these
were soon eaten up, and then Robin put his head on one
side, and one little bright eye tried to see what was up


top. “There are things up there good to eat,” he
thought. “Look what a store I found on the kitchen
table one day. Bread fresh from the oven, a lovely
brownish-yellowy cake with a lot of nice-tasting black
spots, and a sweet soft pudding with a skin on top, but
when you pecked that off you could eat a lot in a few
minutes."
He hopped to the bar of a chair, then jumped off,
stood away, spread his little wings, upsy daisy, and he
lighted on a form. A few minutes later Aunt Janet
came in with some butter. Aunt Janet said “Oh! ’in a
quick, sharp way; then she made a rush. So did Robin,
and in his hurry he ran over the cut bread, and one foot
got into a jam dish. It was rather thin jam; that is
why several footprints were left on the cloth. Robin
was quicker than Aunt Janet, who was not quite so
young as she once was, and he got to the door first.
“What’s the matter, Auntie?” asked one of the girls.
“You may well ask,” said her aunt vexedly. “Look
at that table, and goodness only knows what he has been
pecking at."
“Never mind,” said niece Bessie, soothingly. “It’s
horrid, but it’s not the first time, and I think he’s a
healthy chicken.”
“A healthy chicken!” Aunt Janet smiled in spite of
herself.
In the meantime Robin was airing himself in the back
yard, and when they were all seated at breakfast he
strutted in again and began picking up a few stray bits
which lay around.


Presently something went wobble, wobble on the
floor. One or two of the girls looked down, but made
no remark. Wobble, wobble, wobble it went again,
till Pap looked down and tried to stir it with his foot.
“Whatever has the chicken got?” said Pap, giving a
little kick.
Then he looked sternly at Joe.
“Joe, you’ve been throwing bones under the table
again.”
Joe looked under the table to see if he had.
“Pick up that bone, Joe, and throw it outside.”
Joe rose, pushed back his chair with much noise, and
did as he was bid.
Breakfast went on quietly till someone chanced to look
at Baby. She didn’t seem to be eating anything, and
both little brown hands were hidden under her pinafore.
“What are you doing, Baby? What have you got in
your lap?”
Baby opened her eyes in what seemed like wonder.
“It’s moving!” cried one of the girls excitedly.
“It’s Robin!” cried another.
“Baby,” said Mum, looking cross; “put that chicken
down and go on with your breakfast.
Baby made a show of doing this, but presently Robin
was found hidden in the loose folds at her back.
“Baby,” said Mum severely, “I told you to put that
chicken down.”
“He wouldn’t go, Mum,” said Baby in her deep voice.
Mum went on with her toast and tea.


‘‘Mother.” One of the girls nudged her mother.
“He’s still there.”
Baby heard more quickly than mother, though she
was a long way down the table. .She pushed back her
high chair, and something was lowered gently to the
floor, after which it pattered away, chirping as it went.
Joe and Baby made a small effort to help clear away
when breakfast was over, but left off to chase one an-
other because Joe pulled Baby’s hair, and Baby wanted
to pull his. So they reached the kitchen first, and then
there was a shout. “Robin’s on the kitchen ta-a-ble!
Robin’s eating old Kilby’s bread, and he’s been at the
meat, and the butter’s all dirty,” shouted Joe in not a
very sorry tone; but perhaps he remembered his bone
under the table.
“Old Kilby will be cross. He said yesterday Robin
was a noosance,” chimed in Baby, raising her deep
voice.
“I’ll go and tell him,” said Joe, starting off.
Baby raced after him to help with the telling.
Kilby leaned on his spade and looked at them.
“It wants its neck wringing if it can’t be kept off a
decent man’s table,” he said, after which he went on dig-
ging.
And so the time passed. Robin was here, there,
and everywhere, and Mum said at least several times a
day that Laura must keep that chicken out of the house,
and she wouldn’t have it. She was not going to be
worried out of her life by that bonny chicken on the table
and into every mischief.


Aunt Janet came quietly to the rescue.
“Why don’t you insist upon it?” she asked. “Come,
Robin.”
But it was some time, and Aunt had to creep under
the kitchen table before Robin was captured and popped
into the aviary.
“Where’s my darling Robin? Rob-i-i-n! called
Laurie, opening the pantry door and peering in. Ko-
b-i-i-i-n-n!”
Mum was basting the roast beef for dinner; it would
be ready soon, and Laurie was to lay the cloth; she aas
just out of school, and there would be no time for a run
outside if she spent it in looking for Robin.
“He's in the aviary, Laura,” she said.
“Now that’s Aunt Janet,” said Laurie, all the sweet-
ness going out of her face again.
Mum went on basting the beef.
Laurie opened the aviary door. There were beauti-
ful pigeons there, and the prettiest of doves billing and
cooing: but she did not even glance at them.
“Come on, Robin, pet; did a cross old aunt shut you
up? Never mind, we wouldn’t have her for a mother,
Robin, would we —not for anything? ‘Cross patch,
draw the latch, sit by the fire and spin. Take a cup,
and drink it up, and call your neighbours in.’ That
would do for her.”
It was a few days after this that Aunt Janet said she
must run away home again, and though they were all
sorry, still, Laurie thought, Robin won’t be shut up
now, poor little feller.


Aunt Janet had only been home a short time when
the news came that Robin had met with a terrible
accident.
“Don’t tell her,” Laurie had said; “she’ll only be glad
poor Robin’s dead.”
“Poor Laurie,” said Aunt Janet, when she read the
letter. “Oh, but, lam so glad; he was such a plague.
Let us make some verses, Lucy.”
Robin was a lively chick,
As you will plainly see;
Of all the flock he was the pick,
When perched on Laurie’s knee.
With watchful eye and dainty tread,
He hopped on sleeping Annie’s bed;
He pecked her head, and then her chin,
Till she awoke and went for him.
He sprang upon the table clean,
And waltzed around the soup tureen;
He tried the bread, and then the cake,
But found it made his toofy ache.
He flew on to the window sill,
And chanced upon a crumb;
While not a single thought of ill
Warned him of what would come.
Without a sound, without a check,
Down came that window on his neck;
His nervous system got a shock,
Which finished him —let no one mock.
Least said, soonest mended,
Kindness is best;
And as he’s departed,
We’ll now let him rest.
“I knew she’d be glad,” said Laurie.
THE END.


DAISYBELL.
WC) nice fat-looking cows with shining coats —
that is their hair had been licked into order, all
smooth and glossy—stood nose to nose by a stout post-
and-rail fence. One, the prettiest, was a Jersey; she had
lovely horns with very fine tips, and of a graceful shape,
just a little black on her nose, and a white brush to her
tail, while all the rest was fawn coloured, and then her
eyes were soft and clear and trustful-looking. Still, she
was not always so gentle as she looked. Those graceful
little horns had given that big Mansfield cattle-dog of
Neigbour Dumley’s a hard dig in the ribs more than
once. The Jersey’s name was Daisybell, and her friend,
with whom she was having a quiet chat, was called Old
Kit. The name annoyed Kit; it made her seem old
before her time, she said. Many things annoyed her,
for, being a Hereford, she was of an excitable dis-
position. She was red, with a white face, and had sDme
curls about her forehead. She had wide upstanding
horns, only the end of one was broken. It happened
this way: A little fox-terrier, white, with a black mar!:
on his right hind leg, named Patch, was poking
his nose into a rabbit hole one day, and making


a good deal of noise about it —he had seen
the rabbit go in and yet, scratch and dig
as he would, he couldn’t squeeze his little fat
body into the hole. Just then Old Kit, or Mrs. Kit, as
she called herself, came up, and looked at Patch with
scorn.
“What a fuss!’’ she said, sniffing. “What’s it all
about?”
Patch was getting quite red in the nose, he was
working so hard. He stopped a moment to take breath—
“There’s a rabbit in here,” he panted. “I saw him go
in. If it wasn't under a fence I’d make this hole hold
me.”
“Pooh!” said Mrs. Kit, with a toss of her head. “Let
the rabbit go; there's plenty of room in the world for it
and you, little puppy dog.
“Go and curl your hair,” cried Patch, who was not to
be put down easily.
“What is that you sayr asked Mrs. Kit, tossing her
head angrily now.
Patch did not answer, it took him all his time
scratching and squeezing to get into his hole.
“Come out of that, you rat!” cried Mrs. Kit, stamping
her left front foot.
Patch heard that. He hadn't much of a tail to boast
of, but what there was waggled fiercely. So he backed
out of the rabbit burrow, and peered between the rails
at Mrs. Kit.


“Say that again, old sour face,” he said, with his head
on one side, “and by my grandmother’s teeth I'll get
you by the nose, see if I don’t.”
Mrs. Kit went back a few steps, and kicked with both
hind legs in a most ungraceful manner; then she put
her head down and rushed at Patch Crack! hang.
Her head struck the fence, and one of her wide branch-
ing horns, of which she was so proud, was broken, and
at that moment her owner came up with a stockwhip,
with which he gave Mrs. Kit a hard blow, or cut he
called it. # „
“Take that, you ill-conditioned, cross-grained brute,
he said, for he had been looking on, and saw how it all
-happened, and Mrs. Kit went slowly away with her
head hanging, angry and ashamed.
Of course, everyone wanted to know how her horn
was broken, and in a very short time the whole herd
knew, and a good many of the neighbours’ cows as well.
Patch must have told them, because when they asked
Mrs. Kit, she told them to mind their own business. But
they all seemed to find out, even the very calves, and
this vexed Mrs. Kit more than anything. She was
passing by a clump of wattles, pretending to eat grass
as she went, but really she was looking at and listening
to a pair of yearling calves, who were having a game in
the shade, of “bump heads.” Perhaps, dears, you don’t
know the game. Strictly played, you stand apart several
feet, and then, putting your heads down, you rush
together and bang them one against the other. Sheep
play it very strictly, and in such an earnest manner that


very often, if they are not separated, they go on till one
falls and dies, but calves go in for more fun and less
pain, and they generally stand pretty close and mix in
a good deal of playful horning. That is what these two
were doing. Their names were Star and Stripe, and the
first was red and white, and the second white and red.
“Mind your eye, Stripe,” said Star, giving Stripe a
poke.
“Mind my horn, you mean,” said Stripe, with a
laugh, looking over his ear at Mrs. Kit.
Such an apology for a horn as it was, too!
Mrs. Kit walked away half choked with rage. Of
course she knew they meant her to hear. Impudent,
rough-haired, raw-boned yearlings as they were.
The two ladies by the fence had been chatting for
some time, wdien Mrs. Kit said seveiely
“I think that new comer, Mrs. Devon, must be a low-
born sort of person.”
“Do you?” asked Daisybell in surprise. “I thought
she seemed rather nice.”
“Ah! you never know, I was rather taken in by hci
manners myself. Of course, I always look foi the good
in people, when there’s any to find,” said Mrs. Kit.
“But what has Mrs. Devon done?” asked Daisybell.
“Well,” said Mrs. Kit, lowering her voice, “it seems
she has a daughter two, no, three, if not four days old,
and what does she do, instead of taking it into the pas-
ture and introducing it to her friends, she stays away
down in the swamp and hides it. I know it for a fact,
because Black Polly told me.


“I’m afraid Black Polly is rather a mischief-maker,
said Daisybell, giving a low bellow to herself.
“I don't know about that,” said Mrs. Kit, with a slight
flap of one ear, “but it’s quite true, and they say the
master is in a rage about it. He’s sent the men to look,
and he’s been himself. T hey can see the calf in the dis-
tance, but when they go down not a hair of it is to be
found.”
“Is it a pretty calf. - '” asked Daisybell, tears rising to
her big soft eyes, for she still sometimes thought of her
own little calf, a pretty fawn-coloured little creature with
a blackish nose and one white foot, and, though it must
have been more than a month since it was taken, she
could never hear a bellow in the distance without
looking for Pearl.
“Pretty enough in it’s mother’s eyes, I have no doubt,”
said Mrs. Kit, lifting her top lip. “Polly says its a
strawberry.”
“Look over there,” said Daisybell excitedly, begin-
ning to run.
Mrs. Kit looked. There was quite a gathering of the
herd, some standing with heads upraised in a startled
manner, while others were bellowing, and a few begin-
ning to paw the ground. Mrs. Kit with one great moo
leaped a ditch near with a bound, passed Daisybell at
a flying pace, and was with the most excited of the ladies
in less time than it takes to tell it. And now from out of
the tall rushes and reeds came a young red cow with
hanging head and anxious eyes, and by her side the
sweetest and prettiest of strawberry calves, and behind


them a man on horseback with a long cruel-looking
whip, which, when he swung it round, went crack, bang,
crack, all at once. Once or twice the lash fell across poor
Mrs. Devon’s back, and then she tried to hurry, but they
could not go very fast, because Poppy, the calf, was
rather weak in its hind legs, and not too strong in its
front. They asked her afterwards why she had called her
daughter Poppy, and she smiled sadly and said it was
after a distant aunt, who had been famous as a good
milker. Presently the man’s whip began to swing round
at a great rate without seeming to care where it fell, and
the ladies drew back a little; even Mrs. Kit left off
stamping her feet. Just at that moment a great noise
came from the other side of the field, cries of pain, roars
of anger and fear.
“A cow in the ditch!” cried the man, and he left Mrs.
Devon to fondle Poppy, while off he went at a canter,
and Mrs. Kit, Daisybell, and all the rest tore after him.
Yes; there was a cow in the ditch, on her back in the
mud, but worse than that, she was being horned in a
most spiteful manner by her mates.
“800-00-oo! Moo-ooo!” cried she, struggling hard to
get out.
Who should it be but Black Polly, who had been set
upon for a mischief-maker and a tell-tale. Being a poley
cow, she couldn’t horn back again, so here she was in a
sad plight.
‘Take that,” said one, “for telling stories about me.”
“And that,” said another, “for saying my mother
had to be roped each time she was milked.”


“And lie there till you die,” said a third, “for giving
out that I’ve kicked the bucket over more times than
any cow in the yard.”
“I didn’t! I never! Let me get up! Brutes that
you are,” cried Polly, struggling blindly.
“You can kick,” cried a bad-tempered looking young
Ayrshire. “Who was it said my grandmother took two
men to milk her?”
“Ah, and who has been whispering round that Lady
Tinkle’s first calf had only three legs, and so was killed
and burned in a rubbish heap.”
“I heard,” said a black cow with a smudgy face, “that
it was sent to a museum for people to look at, or if it
wasn’t that it was given to the dogs.”
This was spite on the part of this cow, because Polly
had said her name ought to be changed from Gnat to
Smudge or Smut, and since then the yearlings had often
called after her, “Hullo, Smut!” or “Go it, Smudge, old
girl!” which made Gnat very angry.
“And whose been saying all that, Pd like to know?”
and Lady Tinkle herself, a fine-looking roan cow came
up and put her head low.
“It wasn’t me,” bellowed poor Polly, half dead with
pain and fright, “I never knew your calf only had three
legs.”
“It hadn’t,” said Lady Tinkle, shaking her head
angrily; it had four good straight legs, so there.”


“Well, I didn’t ” began Polly. “Oh, there’s the
master! Master! Master save me! They are
killing me ! I'm all sore, and bruised, and dirty.”
But all the master heard was a cow bellowing with
pain, with the others making all sorts of noises round
her, and what he saw was a poor brute in a ditch being
horned by her mates. So the big whip went round and
round with a crack, bang, crack, till the way was cleared
and not a cow was within hornable distance of Polly.
The master got off his horse then, and tried to get the
ill-used cow on to her legs, but she only groaned and
bumped her head on the side of the ditch.
“I see I’ll never manage her alone,” he said to himself,
while all the ladies looked on, ready for more horning
when he should be gone. He jumped on his horse,
whose name was Poppet, and then to the disgust of the
herd, he drove them all into another paddock; so I oily
was left in peace while the master went for help.
“Well,” said Mrs. Kit, drawing a long breath, “she s
got her deserts.”
“I thought you were her friend,” said Daisybell.
“Urn, yes. Well, I s’pose I was, because I always look
for the good in people if there’s any to find, said Mis.
Kit, with a grumbling sound in her throat.
“Well, I was sorry, even if she did make mischief, ’
said Daisybell, who had a kind heart under her coat of
velvet. “It was cowardly to set on her like that.”
“Ah!” said Mrs. Kit, with a vulgar wink of her left
eye, “but you see she didn’t talk about you, or say any-
thing against Pearl.”


“There is nothing to say against her,” said Daisybell,
fiercely. “You couldn’t wish to find a prettier Jersey
calf,'* and a big sob rose in the young mother’s throat.
Airs. Kit grinned.
“What a soft heart you have, Daisy. Wait till you see
your little ones led away with a rope round their necks,
it will begin to harden then; wait till you hear them
crying, and you know that the cruel knife But
Daisybell had fled.
She was standing by a fallen tree, pretending to rub
her head, but really trying to hide the big drops in hei
eyes, when a young white cow with a kind face came
up-
“l heard what Old Kit was saying to you, she said in
a gentle moo. “Don’t take any notice of her. I saw
Pearl the other day; she was with a lot of other calves
in a lovely playground, all green grass underfoot, and
green trees overhead.”
“Did she look well?” asked Daisybell, anxiously.
“As well as could be, and fat,” said her friend.
“But she has forgotten Daisybell,” said the young
mother.
THE END.


ANIMAL HOUSE.
T T must not be thought that four-footed creatures
A lived wholly in Animal House; instead of that
there were father, mother, a host of daughters, and one
son : but the name came about in this way. They were
all fond of animals, from father down to Tessie, who
was baby, and so when the pets took it upon themselves
to pop indoors, no one drove them out. Mother said
sometimes they really must be kept out; but it ended
there. Then came Aunt Helen to stay for a while,
and one of the first things she did was to cut a few
handy switches, which she stood in a corner of the
kitchen ready for use. Aunt Helen was neither old
nor sour, but she said, and rightly too, that animals
had their place, and that place was not in the house.
Very soon she had plenty of work for her switches.
Coming into the kitchen once she stopped and counted
four cats on the table cleaning the plates and dishes
in the way cats love best. Sitting on the floor were
two dogs waiting for stray bits, while pecking up
crumbs was a handsome bronze turkey. Just inside
stood a huge pet lamb, as big as many a sheep, and
when Aunt Helen saw him she said, “Well, of all the


houses for suffering nuisances, I think this is the woist.
One of the girls smiled.
“Do you remember, Aunt Helen, you said long ago
it should be called Animal House?”
“And a very good name, too,” said Aunt Helen, seiz-
ing a switch. Presently those four cats flew out at
various doors, and after them went the dogs, and not
far behind came the bronze turkey. Just then in rushed
another of the girls.
“Don’t touch my darling Robert, Aunt Helen,” said
she, throwing her arms round the pet lamb’s neck.
“Robert has no business here,” said her aunt severely.
“Oh, but he is such a darling,” said the girl, whose
name was Mary. “ Alary had a little lamb, you know.
Aunt Helen could not help smiling, but she was
hard-hearted enough to drive Robert into the back
yard, where he and Mary frolicked together. Of all
the children perhaps Mary loved animals most. Some
time before she had had a pet pig, which she called
Sallv. Mary had a brush and a currycomb she had
coaxed from father, and with these she groomed Sally
till she looked as clean as a pig well could. Sally was
fond of Mary, almost as fond in her piggy-way as Mary
was of her; and when Mary said, “Lie down, Sally,”
down went Sally on her side, while Mary rubbed her
with a stick, and she grunted. The worst of it was,
the time came for Sally to be killed, and poor Mary
ran away somewhere and cried. When Sally-pork
came on the table Mary would not touch a bit, but all
the others did; they ate her share, and their own too.


And once she had a hen —a pretty hen —which was
named Topknot, but it happened that when Mary was over
at grandma’s Topknot was killed and eaten. Mother
was afraid Mary would fret, so when she came home
the children were told not to tell Mary that poor lop-
knot was dead. Tessie said she wouldn’t, but she was
a very little girl; so first she went to Rover, one of the
dogs:
“Rover,” she said softly, “Topknot’s dead.” Rover
wagged one ear, but said nothing. Then Tessie went
to Mary.
“Topknot’s dead, Mary,” she said.
“She isn’t,” said Mary starting.
“She is,” said Tessie. “Father killed her, and we ate
her.’
“He didn’t, Tessie,” said Mary. “Did he, mother?”
“I never saw him,” said mother.
“But I did,” said Tessie; “I saw him kill her.”
Poor Mary looked at her mother, and saw that it
was only too true; and then the tears came. She cried
a long while, and then she got better, at least that is
what one of her sisters said.
When Eileen spilled some hot water on the governess’
feet, which she was warming in the oven, the governess
was very cross, and said Eileen was a clumsy animal.
Eileen was a pretty big girl, and did not like being called
an animal; but she said nothing. Mary was there, so
she said things were put into the oven to be cooked;
and then all the children laughed a great deal, and the
governess was crosser than ever. It was rather naughty


of them to laugh so, don’t you think? Talking of
naughty things, I must tell you of one a mite of three
years did, but she did not live at Animal House, though
it comes in this story. It was in the early morning,
and baby Mildred, who was really always called Babs,
was wide awake. She wanted to get up, to ioll out
bed, and stamp round; but her side of the bed was nearest
the wall, and she would have to crawl over her big
sister. The big sister had her eyes quite shut, and
though “Babs” pummelled her and poked her till she
was tired, there was no getting that big sister to wake
up. “ Babs” sat up and looked round, and then rappee
the big sister’s nose with one of her tiny fingers.
“Det up, Dane,” she said; but Jane only snored.
“Dane, det up.” Then she pulled Jane s hair. Pre-
sently she spied a glass of milk on a chair near the bed.
“Babs” chuckled.
“I’ll make 100 det up, Dane.”
She scrambled over Jane, and stretched out a wee
hand for the milk, and then she emptied it into poor
jane’s face, and away it ran down her neck and on to
the pillow; and oh! poor Jane, her hair was all wet and
sticky too. Up she sprang, and was out of bed in a
jiffy. It was a good thing for “Babs” that Jane had a
kind, patient heart. All she said was—
“Oh, ‘Babs,’ that was a naughty thing to do.” As
for “Babs” her eyes sparkled, and her face was all
smiles.


“I made 100 det up, Dane. I made 100 det up,” she
chuckled. Loo won t div me a velly good vipping,
will 100, Dane? She did not get a very good whip-
ping, or even a little one; but the milk is always put
a safe distance from the bed now.
During Aunt Helen’s stay at Animal House all her
cat sticks, and her dog sticks, and the stick for Robert,
Mary’s pet lamb, and the one for the bronze turkey—
they one and all disappeared. Aunt Helen came into
the kitchen and found a cheerful gathering of the pets.
The cats were on the table, the dogs were picking up
stray bits, the turkey was perched on a chair pecking
the end of a loaf, while Robert was enjoying a cup or
so of new milk, which was all the cow had given.
Robert had his head in the billy, and did not see Aunt
Helen, but the others did. There was a general rush,
while Aunt Helen scolded, and looked for her sticks.
Then the children came in.
“Who has taken my sticks?” asked Aunt Helen,
looking very fierce.
No one said anything, but most eyes were turned to
Joe. He looked at his aunt, and then at the floor, and
then he hardly knew where he looked.
‘ Joe,” said Aunt Helen.
“Yes,” said Joe, tugging at a knot in his handker-
chief.
“W 7 here are my sticks?”


Joe put his handkerchief in his pocket
“Where are your sticks?” he asked slowly.
“Yes,” said Aunt Helen. “I think you’ve taken them.”
A little smile curled the corners of Joe’s mouth.
“What have you done with them?”
“Burnt ’em,” said Joe. “You hit my cats.”
Then Aunt Helen recited, or, at least, that is what 1
was told. 1 suppose Joe got the scolding he deserved ;
anyway some new sticks were cut from the quick hedge,
and the cats and dogs flew out quicker than ever. it
was while Aunt Helen was there, too, that father’s pet
greyhound, or kangaroo dog, I forget which, was
staked; that is he was running very, very fast after a
kangaroo, and struck against a sharp piece of wood.
The wood ran right into his chest, and he just crawled
home to die. Joe found him, and when Aunt Helen
ran down she saw that he could not live. Father was
away in town for the day, and mother had gone to
grandma’s for a little while. Aunt Helen thought for
a bit, and then she said, “There is nothing we can do
for him, poor fellow. Come away, Joe, there is no use
watching him. And, Joe, don’t tell your father when
he comes home; I want him to have his tea first.”
“Father will be in a way,” said Joe; “he thinks such
a lot of Dawn.”
“Yes,” said Aunt Flelen, “he must have his tea first.”




(
| S m V*
■ * : - ; *
■*•! M 1


But when father came home, and Joe ran to meet
him, he said—
“Father, what do yon think has happened? Oh, 1
forgot, Aunt Helen said I wasn’t to tell you.”
“What do you mean, Joe?” asked his father; and then
Joe told him all about it. Poor father, he was sorry;
it almost took his appetite away. Aunt Helen felt in-
clined to recite again when she heard, but Joe said if
he had not told someone else would.
That is all about Animal House this time.
THE END.


MR. SINKS.
TV/J R. BINKS was thinking very hard. Anyone
who has read “The Short-nosed Lizard with a
Stumpy Tail” knows who Mr. Binks is. Well, he sat
in his pretty home all lined with silver-grey, with its
large open-work screen in front, and thought hard.
Presently he ticked for one of his servants (I daresay
you’ve often heard a spider tick, I have), and a wee
fellow in a red coat came in.
“Jumpkins,” said Mr. Binks in quite a grand tone;
“call the rest together.”
Jumpkins was only a little chap, but he could tick
well, and so in a few moments he ticked the other ser-
vants in.
“Are you all here?” asked Mr. Binks.
“All here, sir, your majesty,” cried Jumpkins.
“T shall give you your wages,” said Mr. Binks, open-
ing the door of the larder. “As you know I pay in
food, it is always useful, because you can eat it; other
things you can’t eat, and if you don’t eat you will die.”
“But but ” faltered a little grey spider of all
work; “why are we to be sent away? Haven’t we done
our duty?” and her little bosom rose and fell.


“What’s that?” cried Mr. Binks fiercely, shutting the
’arder door with a bang.
“Haven't we kept the house clean?” asked a stout
and matronly-looking spider with a speckled back.
“Haven’t we kept the box with the finest cobweb lace
free from silver fish? Haven’t we set traps enough?
Haven't we taken good care of you, Mr. Binks; sir,
tell me that?’’
“Your majesty, or his honour,’ said Jumpkins in a
low tone.
“I’ll majesty and your honor him,” said the stout
housekeeper angrily; “a common grub would have
more manners.”
“Jumpkins, Redlegs, and Nibsy, turn her out, turn
her out,” shouted Mr. Binks.
Jumpkins, Redlegs, and Nibsy went to the lady.
“Please go,” said Jumpkins.
“Let yourself down,” cried Redlegs.
“Cut and run," said Nibsy.
“No, yer don’t,” screamed the housekeeper. “I’ll
have my wages or I'll tear the whole place to pieces.
You can’t get over me.”
“Turn her out,” repeated Mr. Binks in a very loud
voice. “If she won't go quietly, pull a leg off.”
“Not an inch,” said the angry lady. “Do you think
I’fn going without a slice of fly ham, or a pickled
lizard's foot, and one of those bottles of codlin moth
sauce belongs to me.”
“Pull two legs off,” shouted Mr. Binks.


“I’ll have some fly ham and a pickled foot, if I let
the sauce go,” screamed the matron.
“Pull three legs off, two front and one hind,” they
heard Mr. Binks yell.
The housekeeper struggled madly in the grasp of
Jumpkins, Redlegs, and Nibsy, and in the skirmish one
of her legs was broken.
“I’ll go,” she cried aloud, “if you'll only give me a
dice of fly ham.”
“Wring her neck! Twist her head off! Break all
her legs!” yelled Mr. Binks, who was quite beside him-
self with rage.
“No, no, no! only let me go,” sobbed the house-
keeper.
“Oh, please, let her go,” said the little grey spider of
all work.
So they did, and she let herself down by her own
thread, and crawled away sobbing and dragging her
broken leg on the ground.
When she was gone, Mr. Binks looked round
“Order!” he shouted.
They all stood in a row, bowing low.
Mr. Binks opened the larder door again.
There were shelves and shelves of good things. Fly
hams piled one upon the other. Jars and jars of potted
head and pickled lizards’ feet, and quite a row of bottles
of the codlin moth sauce. Then there were salt junks
of grub, and several dishes of beetle preserve, to say
nothing of a large loaf of ants’ eggs bread, which is a
delicacy not many get the chance of tasting. Mr.


Binks gave his servants not only their own share, but
also divided the poor housekeeper’s, and then he shut
the larder door, and put the key on his right hind leg.
“Now off you go,” he said in his loud voice. “I
want no one but Jumpkins. Anyone else who stays
behind will have his legs broken and his neck twisted.”
“Oh, Mr. Binks, his honor, his majesty,” said the
poor little spider of all work, who was getting mixed.
“Well,” said Mr. Binks glaring.
“Who will keep yer ’ouse tidy, and keep away them
silver fish from that there lovely lace?” asked the little
grey spider tremblingly.
“I hear,” said Mr. Binks with great dignity, “that
there is to be a new school opened in Cobweb Lane
by the Misses Blackpoints; very highly educated young
ladies, and I advise you to go to it.”
The poor little spider of all work hung her head and
crawled sorrowfully away with a fly ham, which, though
not a large one, was as much as she could carry. It
was hard work getting down with the ham, and she
was almost tired out when at last she reached the
ground.
“Oh, I wonder where Mrs. Killfly is,” she said to
herself.
Mrs. Killfly was the housekeeper.
“Mrs. Killf-l-y,” she called; “I want you.”
A half-smothered groan sounded close by, and there
under a curled leaf lay Mrs. Killfly.
J J
“Oil, Mrs. Killfly, dear, don't cry,” said the little
spider of all work; “see, I have brought you a lovely


fly ham, and I will go back for some codlin moth
sauce.”
“To think,” sobbed the housekeeper, “I should come
to this; why I made that blessed sauce myself, I cured
most of the fly hams, I made the ants’ eggs bread, and
now and now ” she broke down and cried so
much that the little spider of all work hastily brought
a grass handkerchief and wiped her eyes.
“Eat a little ham, dear Mrs. Killfly,” said the little
spider, “you’ll feel better then.”
“It’ll take more than ham to make me feel better,
said Mrs. Killfly; but she sat up, and, being hungry,
ate the whole of the ham, and used more than half the
bottle of codlin moth sauce, which the little spider
dragged down.
“And now,” said Mrs. Killfly, “I must find another
place. There’s old Mr. Tarantula, I might try him;
but he’s got such wicked-looking eyes, and they tell me
he gets into fearful rages when people call him a trian-
telope. And they say he went blue with anger 'cause
a little girl said he was a trancherlater.”
Mrs. Killfly was selfish enough to forget that the little
spider of all work had had nothing to eat.
“Or there’s Mr. Wasp, Mr. Mason Wasp. Ah! a
bright idea has crept into my head. How now, Mr.
Binks, your honor, your majesty, will you be strong;
will you fight? Will you have your legs broken, or
pulled off; your neck twisted? Or will you go with
Mr. Mason Wasp with wings of silver, and sting
of ?”


‘‘Who speaks my name?’’ said a sharp voice near.
Mrs. Killfly almost screamed with fright. A large
mason wasp had lighted on a stick close by, and was
looking at her in a very enquiring and hungry manner.
“I beg pardon; no offence meant, sir,” said Mrs.
Killfly,
The mason wasp hummed to himself for a few
minutes, then he said —
“And what have you to say for yourself, Madam
Spider. Fat and fair you seem to me, I have but
two cells filled in, I have three to fill. Seems to me
both fat and fair you are.”
Now, Mrs. Killfly knew all about the mason wasp's
work; knew that he formed cells of a pasty cement,
which lie made out of plain sand and earth, and fixed
them high up, where the walls and ceilings meet in the
homes of the bipeds; knew that he caught luckless
spiders and fastened them into the cells while yet alive,
and then cemented them one after another, leaving the
end one for his own egg, which, in time, would hatch
into a little grub; knew that the little grub would eat
its way through the cement, and then would eat the luck-
less spiders waiting there; so, no wonder she was
frightened. But she put on a bold face.
“I may be fat,'’ she said, “I may be fair, Mr, Mason
Wasp ”
“The Right Honorable Malicious Mason Wasp,
broke in the wasp proudly.


“Right Honorable Malicious Mason Wasp, said
Mrs. Killfly humbly, “I know of someone more worthy
of your honoured attention.”
“Ah!” said the wasp. “Who is that?”
“An enemy of mine, and one —oh, so fat, so big/ said
Mrs. Killfly bitterly.
“Where does he spin?” asked the wasp.
“You see that hole in ” but the words died on her
lips. There was a murderous look in the wasp’s eyes,
and so scared was Mrs. Killfly that she burrowed among
the grasses and leaves, and fled for her life.
“Hum!” said the wasp, scratching at a little patch of
earth near to make some more cement, “Knew of some-
one fatter, did she? If she crosses my path again!
Hum! Hum-m-m!”
Mr. Binks had opened his larder door again, and
with a slice of fly ham in one hand and a bottle of codlin
moth sauce in the other, was just taking a light lunch,
when the little spider of all work dragged herself
wearily in.
“What’s this?” cried Mr. Binks, rushing forward and
seizing her fiercely by the neck.
“Oh, sir, honour, majesty,” cried the little spider.
“Let me go; you are choking what little life is left.”
“How dare you come back here?” asked Mr. Binks
angrily.
“I’ve come for my other fly hams,and 1 couldn’t carry
the jar of beetle preserve; it was so very heavy," fal-
tered the poor little spider.


“Well, take your hams and things, and be off with
you,” shouted Mr. Binks; “and I say Greysie ”
The little spider of all work could hardly believe her
ears. Mr. Binks so seldom called her by her pretty
name Greysie, she had almost forgotten she had it.
“Sir, your honor, your majesty,” she put down the
load of hams and preserve which she was trying to tug
cut of Mr, Binks’ sight, and waited.
“If you see that fat old Mrs. Killfly, you tell her from
me to mind I don’t set eyes on her any more. There’s a
friend of mine, with a nest in yonder tree, who has a
great weakness for fat spiders with speckled backs;”
and Mr. Binks roared with laughter.
In a nest in the tree, Mr. Binks was nodding and
winking at, sat Mrs. Silver Eye, and under her, all soft
and warm, were three of the sweetest, downiest birdies
you ever saw; but it was a naughty story of Mr. Binks’
to say that she was a friend of his. It was only, I think,
that he was too large and too fierce for her to attack
that made him safe.
“I’ll tell her, sir,” cried Greysie, trying to hurry.
“Mind you do,” called Mr. Binks, going to the larder
for a slice of ants’ eggs bread, which he spread with
beetle preserve.
“She was a good housekeeper, was old Killfly,” he
said to himslf as he munched away; “but she was too
saucy, and I don’t take sauce; it’s not my way.”
Then he ticked loudly for Jumpkins.


“Lock everything up, Jumpkins, and close the front
door,” he said in a lordly manner; “and then follow
me.”
“Where to, your majesty?” asked Jumpkins.
“To the homes of the bipeds,” said Mr. Links. I
hear that they have a number of homes, which they call
by different names —a parlour is one name, and a school-
room is another. I’m going to the school-room, be-
cause I’m told that a gentleman, an old friend of mine
at least we were boys together —lives there.
Mr. Links was too lazy to let himself down by his
own thread, so he crawled to the very edge of his pretty
home, and then jumped. It was a bigger jump than he
thought, and for a few moments he lay gasping for
breath. As he gasped he heard a burst of shrill laughter
under the grass.
“That’s old Killfly,” said Mr. Binks in a rage, in a
moment. He sprang up and peered into the grass —
now here, now there, but could see nothing; yet as he
crawled away he heard a sly chuckle or two —there was
someone there, and that someone was laughing at him.
“I’ll go for you!” he cried, making a mad rush forward.
“I’ll tear your eyes out! I’ll break your legs! But
all was still, and Mr. Binks was obliged to go on his way
without tearing anyone’s eyes out, or breaking any-
one’s legs.
Under the grass, not five inches from where Mr.
Binks had been lying, was the ill-used housekeeper, not
daring to move, but yet chuckling to herself over Mr.
Binks’ fall.


lii the school-room, practising at the piano was going
on, a five-finger exercise, and it was a hot day—hot days
and five-finger exercises do not go well together. Above
the. piano hung a big coloured picture of a cottage, a tea-
party under huge trees, and a load of wood drawn by a
horse with a man at its head. Behind that picture, in a
crack in the wall where the paper was broken, lived Mr.
Stripes, so named because his body was striped, while
his legs were blackish grey.
Mr. Stripes was old, and there was a weary look in
his eyes which puzzled Mr. Binks. The little girl on
the piano stool left off the exercise, and began strum-
ming little tunes to herself. In the meantime Mr. Binks,
with the faithful Jumpkins toiling behind with a fly
ham under each arm, mounted the piano, ran up a piece
of string which hung from the picture, and sitting on
top looked down at Mr. Stripes for a moment without
speaking. Mr. Stripes was slowly wiping a drop of
perspiration from his forehead, with a cobweb hand-
kerchief of his own making.
“Hullo!” said Mr. Binks, in a loud voice.
Mr. Stripes finished wiping his face before he spoke.
“Who may you be?” he asked.
“What! Forgotten your old schoolmate?” said Mr.
Binks cheerfully.
“Ah! Is it you, Binks? Come down. My memory
is not so good as it was. Have a fly? Those nearest
to you are fresh, the others are not so fresh, and these
are smoked and salted for winter use.”


Mr. Binks was not hungry, but he took one of the
freshest flies, and ate it while he talked.
“You are not looking well Stripes, and yet I must say
your flies are very good; this one now is the juiciest fl>
I’ve tasted for many a long day.”
“Oh, yes,” said Stripes in a dreary voice; “that’s all
very well, the flies are good enough. It's not that."
Mr. Binks looked round.
“These seem very comfortable quarters of yours,
Stripes; I don’t see what’s wrong.” •
“I daresay not,” returned Stripes gloomily; “it’s fresh
to you.”
“What is?”
“I’ve lived here all my life,” said Stripes, taking no
notice of the question; “and I’m a spider of habit. I’ve
spun my web, I’ve killed and eaten my flies, I’ve set my
traps here since I was a mere boy, and I can't make up
my mind to go away."
“But why, why should you?” asked Mr. Binks.
“Why?” repeated Stripes sadly. “Just you listen a
moment.”
The little girl on the piano stool was still picking out
tunes.
“Nellie Bly shuts her eye, when she goes to sleep,”
sang the little girl, “and in the morning when she wakes
her eyes begin to peep.”
“Well,” said Mr. Binks, to whom Nelly Bly was new,
“that seems a very nice little song.”
“Nice!” exclaimed Stripes, in what would have been a
terrible voice, only it was so very sad.


“What s the matter with it?’’ asked Mr. Binks, a trifle
crossly.
Look here Stripes, it strikes me there’s something
wrong with your liver. I know that when a fellow’s
liver gets out of order, everything else seems to get one
of order too. Let me tell you of a very good remedy—”
“Oh, bother,” interrupted Stripes rather rudely.
Lo bother at all, said Mr. Binks; “it’s only a chew
of a camomile leaf, nothing more. You trv it Stripes;
one chew and your liver will ”
“Stop that about my liver,” shouted Stripes. “It’s
not that at all; it s that dreadful planner (Stripes was so
used to hearing the little servant who swept the room
talk of ‘those children leaving that ere planner open’
that he always called it a planner); it’s wearing me out.”
“Eggs and fishes!” exclaimed Mr. Binks. “How can
that be?”
“\ou think it nice,” said Stripes, mimicking Mr.
Binks’ voice; “but you’ve not sat up here for years ana
listened to it from morning till night—from morning
till night. Five-finger exercises, c flat, f sharp, some-
thing or other major. ‘Nellie Ely,’ ‘Long, Long Ago,’
then more scales, more exercises; stop for dinner, or
lunch, or tea, and then at it again— at it again. ‘Rous-
seau’s dream,’ ‘The Blue Bells of Scotland,’ more scales
and scales; and ‘Oh, Dear, What can the Matter Be?’
I could tell them quick enough what the matter is?
They’re wearing me out, making me old and grey, and
bent before my time.”


“I can’t make you out. I think it’s very good, said
Mr. Binks.
“You may,” said Stripes; “as I said before you’re
fresh. All my friends tell me I look like an old fogey
now, when there's Grandfather Ilairyback alive and
well (and he can remember quite well when I was born)
says he has a bit of the christening cake put away some-
where, and it’s still quite eatable.”
Mr. Binks laughed wickedly, and winked at Jumpkins
behind Stripes’ back, and Stripes only just missed seeing
it, for he saw Jumpkins wink back.
“I don’t think much of your choice of a servant,” he
said, glaring at Jumpkins and touching a tiny bell which
he had hanging by the door of his house.
Directly the bell rang a neat-looking brown spider,
with a white apron fastened to her throat and a pretty
blue cap on her head, came quickly up.
“Go and find Lady Prettyfeet, and tell her to come
to me,” ordered Stripes.
When she was gone Stripes told Mr. Binks that he was
going to be married very shortly, and Lady Prettyfeet
would be his bride.
Mr. Binks was much interested, and offered some of
the good things from his larder towards the wedding
feast. “And will you still live here?” he asked, thinking
to himself that if Stripes left he would have the home
himself.
“Oh, yes,” said Stripes; “it is trying, but still home is
home, and I wouldn’t be happy anywhere else/'


“And yon don't look very happy here,’’ said Mr.
Binks to himself.
When the brown spider came back with Lady Pretty-
feet, Stripes introduced her.
“My love,” he said, “this is my old friend and school-
fellow, Mr. Binks.”
Lady Prettyfeet had not only pretty feet, but also a
lovely body of pale green and white with pink dots,
and Mr. Binks couldn’t take his eyes off her, which
made Stripes rather jealous.
“Delighted to make your acquaintance, Lady Pretty-
feet,” said Mr. Binks with a very low bow.
Lady Prettyfeet bowed, but she thought Mr. Binks
looked grim and bad tempered; so she didn’t say she
was pleased to meet him.
“Has he come to stay, Stripey?” she whispered pre-
sently.
“Yes, my dear, for a little while perhaps,” whispered
back Stripes.
“Will he be at our wedding?”
“Yes.”
“Oh, bother!” said Lady Prettyfeet.
“He’s going to bring fly hams, and all sorts of good
things,” whispered Stripes rather nervously.
“Bother his fly hams and things,” said Lady Pretty-
feet, quite loud enough for Mr, Binks to hear.
Two days later they made ready for the wedding. It
was to take place in the garden, because Lady Pretty-
feet loved the fresh air, the green leaves and sunshine,


and said she would have quite enough of the dusty old
school-room after she was married.
It was a pretty wedding, for Lady Prettyfeet had a
great number of friends and relations, which was a
good thing, as poor old Stripes hardly knew a soul to
ask, save Mr. Sinks and a grey old gentleman who lived
away up the pole of the summer-house.
They chose the asparagus bed, all green and gold,
with autumn tints, as a nice place for the wedding; and
the pretty red berries did for decorations, they said; but
as all the friends had come the day before, and each had
spun a lovely pattern of silver lace, there was no lack
of beautiful decorations. As Prettyfeet climbed up
Jeg in leg with Stripes, all the ladies and gentlemen said
how pretty she was, and what a noble-looking spider
old Stripes was, which wasn’t the least little bit true,
for as we all know Stripes had lost his youth, and was
bent and weary-looking too. The wedding ceremony
was very simple. The oldest and greyest, and most
hairy gentleman spider in spider land, came forward
with two legs of some rather rare beetle they were
bright blue, and had a sweet scent. Stripes took one
and Lady Prettyfeet the other, and put them to theii
lips. “Change,” said the old grey and most hairy
spider. Stripes and Lady Prettyfeet exchanged their
beetle legs, kissed them again, bowed to each other, and
to all the other ladies and gentlemen.
“Mr. and Lady Prettyfeet Stripes,” said the very old
spider, “I wish you all the joys in life that spiders can
ever hope to find. Accept my blessing.”


They all crowded round, and Lady Prettyfeet quite
blushed at the compliments they paid her. Then came
the feast, and such a feast you never saw or tasted.
Everyone had brought a present of something to eat,
and on a lovely table of red and yellow apple leaves
these were all spread out. Jumpkins and Greysie, the
brown spider with the cap and apron, and many others,
waited on the company, and when the latter had finished
they had their turn at the good things. Of course the
nicest were all gone, such as grub trifle, scalloped March
flies and curried cricket, still there was a dish of beetle
preserve, a bowl of worm soup, a whole ant pie, and
several bottles of moth sauce; so they did very well.
Then came a wee surprise.
What did they see, but Jumpkins leading up Greysie
to the oldest and greyest spider, who bowed gavely,
and gave them two enormous beetle legs with which they
were married. The blue legs of the rare beetle were
kept for high-born spiders like Lady Prettyfeet.
Mr. Binks grew quite envious.
“Let us go too,” he whispered to the neat brown
spider in the cap and apron.
She shook her head, and a tall speckled spider, who
had heard the whisper, came up and hit Mr. Binks in the
face. In a dreadful rage Mr. Binks hit out right and
left, and there was a terrible scene, when swish came
a pair of greenish grey wings and two gleaming eyes,
with white rings round them, and a gaping beak came
close; there was a sound like a clap of thunder to all


the company, and when they looked, 10, Mr. Binks had
gone.
Up in the tree where Mrs. Silver Eye’s nest swung on
its branch, the softest, downiest little birdies chirped to
one another that they had the best dinner they could
ever remember.
So Jumpkins and Greysie went to live in the trunk
of the old elm, and Mrs. Killfly came back to keep
house again.
THE END.


OLD NELL.
O HE was a white pony, with big mild eyes, a long
flowing tail, and pretty pointed ears, and was
always called old, even when she was quite young. The
children learned to ride on her, and when they fell off,
which was very often, she never ran away, but always
waited close by till they got up again. They took it
in turns to ride, and in the holidays when the cousins
were paying a visit, poor Nell did not have much free
time. Sometimes if they were not too heavy, two rode
at the same time, and they have her photograph now,
with three little boys on her back.
“I say,” said Jacko, the master’s sheepdog, coming
up one day, “why don’t you throw those brats off your
back? I’ve been watching you go up and down the
lane, up and down, up and down, till I wonder you don’t
take a fit.”
“They’re so little,” said old Nell, looking round at
the two chubby-faced children; “they don’t know much
—they are just learning to ride.”
“All the easier to get them off,” said Jacko, tossing
his head. He gave himself airs very often now, because
it had come to his ears, that the master being asked


what he was like, said he was “of a lively disposition,
with a feathery tail,” which Jacko thought very high
praise indeed.
“But they trust me,” said Nell
“Who do?”
“The master and the missis. I’ve heard them say
so often.”
“Well, I’d sooner be without their trust,” said Jacko,
“if I could get rid of the children.
“Ah, no you wouldn’t,” said Nell, her mild eyes
shining. “Who is it that brings up the sheep directly
the master sharpens his knife, or is off to the paddock
when he sees the butcher’s cart coming down the lane?
Jacko smiled and was pleased, for he was a vain dog,
and it was quite true what Nell had said.
“Oh well,” he said, rubbing his nose, “that’s different;
if I didn’t do these things, who would?” A pretty fix
the master would be in. He’d have to get the sheep
himself, shake his silk handkerchief, and say ‘Ho! Ho!
Ho!”’ and Jacko laughed to himself and wagged his
feathery tail, of which he was very proud.
“And is there anyone else who would let the little
ones have a ride?” asked Nell, gently. “They clutch
at my mane and never seem to think it hurts, and they
drum on my sides with their little heels, but I love
them, and would not harm them for the world,” and
again she looked round at the children on her back.
“Gee up,” said the younger, a boy, holding to the
pommel and reaching down to smack poor Nell.


“There,” said she, looking at Jacko, “what would
Poppet do if they did that to her?”
“Get up,” said the other child, shaking the reins,
“Nell, you lazy old thing, get up.”
“Ha!” said Jacko, “they call you names, do they?
If you had any spirit they wouldn’t do it a second time.
Just then the two children lost their balance and
lurched over to one side. They looked very funny, but
felt very uncomfortable, and set up a lusty cry for help.
“Well, well,” said the master as he ran up, “what
a noise! I thought you must be half killed.” He set
them straight, his blue eyes twinkling, patted Nell, and
went back to the barn.
“You see how he trusts me,” said Nell, softly.
“Pooh!” said Jacko. “Just because he patted you.
What a softie you are, Nell.”
Nell did not answer, she knew in her heart that Jacko
loved his master, and was cross and jealous now be-
cause he had patted Nell, but had not noticed his dog.
“Get up, Nell,” said the little girl; “wish I had a stick.
Get up, you old nuisance.”
She drummed with her heels, but Nell took no notice.
“Why don't you give them a trot?” asked Jacko.
“If I went out of a walk they’d tumble off,” said Nell.
“You are a pattern of goodness,” sneered Jacko.
“Ah, Jacko,” said Nell, sadly, “you are cross, and
when people are cross they are often very unjust. You
need not mind them trusting me. Why, I heard the
master say you were the best dog he’d ever had, that
when he was away for a night you seemed to know,


for you always lay under the bedroom window to take
care of the mistress and the little ones. Now, if I did
that, what would be the use? No one would take any
notice of a pony. You see, I couldn’t bark, and I’m
not sure if I could bite, I’ve never tried, it seems so
cruel.”
“You are a good creature, Nell,” said Jacko, “and
you must excuse me. I suffer from my nerves, and you
can't expect a dog to be good-tempered when his nerves
are out of order, but I flatter myself I do know how to
take care of the missis and the children,” and he put
his head in the air and wagged his feathery tail.
A few days after this there was a great outcry. One
of the little girls had just ridden to the kitchen door
and called aloud—
“Don’t make me any tupper this morning, please,
Ma, and don't give anyone else my mug,” and was
riding away again when she saw Poppet rush wildly into
the stable-yard with a saddle and bridle, but no rider.
Poppet was a pretty mouse-coloured pony, very
nimble, but rather shy, and belonged to Fred, the eldest
boy, who always rode her.
The little girl who didn’t want any tupper (bread and
milk) gave the alarm, and then set off to find her
brother. She rode about from one paddock to another,
but no Fred could she find, and she saw Father, Mother,
and several others running hither and thither in vain.
“Oh where can he be?” she cried (her name was
Flilda), “Oh, I must find him, I must.”


She strained her eyes sweeping the ground on every
side, and presently saw a dark object lying in a hollow
a good way off. It might be a log and it might be a
figure.
“Quick, Nell,” she said, and Nell, who knew quite
well that something was wrong, started off at a brisk
trot, and in a few minutes they were there. Yes, it was
Fred. Lying on his back with his eyes closed and such
a white, white face. Hilda was a brave child, and a
sensible one. She jumped off Nell, and running up to
her brother, undid his collar that he might breathe more
easily. When she did this she saw an ugly reddish
black bruise just over one eye. He took no notice of
her touch, and when she spoke there was no answer,
but he was not dead, for he drew a long breath with a
little moan, and when he did this Hilda caught hers
with a sob. How she got on old Nell and hurried to
carry the sad news she hardly knew, but very soon they
were all there, and Father had taken the senseless lad in
his arms, and carried him gently, tenderly, while
Mother, whose face was nearly as white as Fred’s, fol-
lowed with the rest.
Jacko, who was with the master, went into the house,
too, and looked on while they placed Fred on the sofa,
bathed and bandaged his brow, and held smelling salts
to his nose; but poor Nell, who was feeling rather
anxious, had to wait outside. s\s Jacko said, horses
couldn’t go into the house, you must draw the line at
something.
“Well,” said Nell, as Jacko went out, “how is he?”


“As well as can be expected,” said Jacko, who had
heard that that was the proper thing to say.
“He won’t die, will he?” asked Nell. “Oh, Jacko,
fancy if it had been one of my children, and I had shied
him off as Poppet did, it would almost break my heart.”
“Who says Poppet shied him off?” asked Jacko.
“I asked her how it happened, and at first she was
so upset she couldn’t tell me, but afterwards she said
they were having a fast trot when she saw something,
she didn’t know what, out of the corner of her eye, and
it startled her so she jumped to one side, and the next
moment she saw the young master on the ground. That
was all she could tell me, and then she got a trembling
fit, and a man came to rub her down, so I came away.”
“P’raps she saw a snake,” said Jacko. “I have a
horror of snakes myself.”
“So ’ve I,” said Nell, “and I wouldn’t go near one
for anything; yet the children kill them, and so do the
cats. I saw Billy, the stable cat, with quite a large one
the other day.”
Just then one of the little girls came out of the house,
a wee bit of a thing that was sometimes found guilty of
hiding her toast crusts in her pinafore —such a store
as she had under the horehound in the backyard. She
ran to Nell and put up her little arms to throw them
round her neck.
“Oh, Nelsie, Nelsie,” she said softly, “you wouldn’t
have thrown him off, dear, would you?”
Nell lowered her head and rubbed her nose gently
on the little one’s shoulder.


— —I. . rni 111—THiifini —ini HIM i mMmrmmnrTrriM 1 m -mrg tiBrintj . aa ’.jr*
Itor l
fr P •
* " ■' * M > \
- ■ ‘ ' v #« |'
I, f
m 1 . '$ \
s t ft s - \ s
I— v f M r |
I sf - -•'-*• ' V. w
I J — p
• . *«* - - ■ - _*J


.


“Are you saying no, Nelsie, and I can’t hear you,
’cos I’ve never learned pony talk?” She pressed her soft
red lips to Nell’s neck, patting it gently.
“Nettie,” said someone from the doorway of the
house, “come and get your breakfast.”
“What was the kid kissing you for?” asked Jacko,
who was standing close by.
Only for love,” said Nell, turning away and pre-
tending to eat grass.
Why, I do believe the old silly has tears in her eyes,”
said Jacko to himself. “Well, I never.”
The days came and went, and a hot, dry summer set
in, when all the lovely green grass turned yellow and
brown, and the ponds looked like mudholes. For hours
now in the hottest part of the day Nell was free, but
it was too hot to eat much, and so she lay in the
shade, or nibbled at the green leaves of the hawthorn
hedge. Jacko found her doing this one day, and, having
just had a nice doze himself under the old barn cask,
a nice cool spot for a body to rest in,” but he was
afraid Nell could never squeeze under —he felt inclined
for a chat.
“You have a good bit of time to yourself now,” he
began. “By the way, Madam Nell, did you see Master
bred the day after his tumble?”
“No,” said Nell in a gentle whinny; “but old Peg, the
cattle dog, told me his face was swollen.”
Swollen! said Jacko. “You never saw such a sight
as he was. One eye was shut and the other half way,
with a black patch on his forehead, and a bulge all


round. I couldn’t help laughing, but he thought I was
growling at the cat."
“How could you laugh?" asked Nell, opening her
eyes.
“Ah," said Jacko, “he kicked me one day because i
wouldn't mind him, so I howled my loudest, and he
laughed. It was my turn to laugh when I saw him such
a picture, and I took the chance while I had it."
Nell did not answer, but helped herself to some more
leaves.
“You seem out of spirits to-day," said Jacko, turning
his head to admire his feathery tail.
“Yes,” said Nell, drawing a deep breath; “a dreadful
thing has happened."
“What do you mean?”
“You know the white mare, Jess, a very old and very
dear friend of mine," and a big tear rolled down Nell s
nose and dropped on the ground.
“Oh, yes, I know, she got bogged going down to the
river for a drink. I was there when the master found
her dead, and her foal was running after Lady Don,
because she’s white,” said Jacko; “but I never saw such
geese as you horses if you get down. You fret and
fume, and bang your heads on the ground, and groan
till you lose all heart, and then no wonder you die.
Why can’t you take it quietly; you're sure to be found
sooner or later? I can’t make you out."
“Ah," said Nell, with a faint smile, “but then you’re
a dog, and until you’re a horse you'll never know how
they feel."


“If I have to wait till then, I’ll have to wait a long
time,” said Jacko, gruffly, and he walked off with his
nose in the air.
But, alas, poor Jacko. About a week later he had
been out with the master gathering sheep in the top run,
and when he came home seemed very sleepy and tired.
“I’m afraid something’s amiss with Jacko,” said the
master, “he’s not himself at all.”
“Try him with this mutton-bone,” said the mistress.
But Jacko had crawled under the old barn cask,
where he lay panting with his tongue out of his mouth,
and such weary looking eyes.
“He won’t eat or drink,” said the master. “Here,
Jacko! Poor old fellow, come here. Jacko! Jacko!
At the sound of the loved voice the poor dog made
a mighty effort to get up. He struggled forward, and,
staggering to his master’s feet, stood swaying there,
and then the quivering shaking legs gave way, his dim
eyes closed, and he fell over on his side —dead.
“Don’t touch him, children,” said the master, turning
away.
“What killed him, Father? What killed him?”
But the master did not speak for a few moments.
Poor Jacko. Never more would he lie under the
mistress’s window when the master was away; never
again go for the killing sheep at the sharpening of the
knife, or the sight of the butcher’s cart. And Nell, in
the shade of the hawthorn hedge, stood with drooping
head and heavy heart.


“Jacko’s dead, Nell,” said one of the little boys, run-
ning up.
“Yes, yes, another friend gone,” said Nell, but he did
not hear her.
• Presently she went over to where poor Jacko was,
but she hardly knew him. His legs were doubled up,
his brown eyes closed, and the beautiful feathery tail,
of which he had been so proud, lay limp and dusty on
the ground. Poor Jacko.
“What killed him, Father? What killed him?” the
children cried again and again.
“A snake must have bitten him in the top run this
morning. He was in some scrub after sheep when I
heard a howl, and though I rode in at once, could see
nothing. Doubtless he was bitten then. Ah, well; Pve
lost a faithful friend,” and the master seemed all at once
to have found a thorn in his finger, for he was looking
at it and squeezing it for quite two minutes before he
said, “You boys can dig me a good deep hole in the
shrubbery to bury him in, I’ll show you where.”
The chosen spot was at the foot of a tall white gum,
and they put a board up with JACKO painted in white
letters; and the little girls planted some flowers, which
soon died under the hot summer’s sun. But the evening
breezes whispered to each other round the old dog's
grave, and the silvery gum leaves fluttered softly down
from the lofty branches overhead, resting lightly on the
little mound, and when the sun sank, and the breezes
whispered more than ever, the little birds sang their
evening hymn over Jacko’s quiet bed.


Old Nell lived for many years after her friend, and
when the family moved to another farm some thirty
miles away, she went, too, and taught more little boys
and girls to ride, and waited patiently when they fell
off till they felt ready to get on again. They twisted
and plaited her mane and forelock, they drummed on
her sides with their sturdy heels, they whipped her for
greater speed, and, when they stopped riding, turned
round and slipped down over her tail for fun, and yet
she never kicked or bit, or trod on their toes that she
might have some fun.
I wish I might tell you that her end was a peaceful
and happy one, but, alas, for the cruelty of fate. She
was feeding on the bank of a creek, and somehow slipped
down to the water’s edge, her legs becoming fast under
a fallen tree, and when she was found those mild loving
eyes were closed for ever, and another faithful heart was
still.
In Nettie’s desk at home there is a little plait of
coarse, gre) r hair, tied with cotton. It was taken from
the mane of the good old pony Nell.
THE END.




TASMANIA :
PRINTED AT THE EXAMINER OFFICE,
LAUNCESTON.






NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


3 1508 01593885 0


* •
*
♦
N
