

THE CONVENTION BILL
1898.
ADDRESS
DELIVERED BY
Mr. H. B. H IGGINS, M.L.A.
(MEMBER OF THE FEDERAL CONVENTION).
TO HIS CONSTITUENTS IN GEELONG,
ft OlfCf)
APRIL iBth, 1898.
flftelbourne:
The Atlas Press (W. H. Newlands), Block Place.




The Convention Bill of 1898.
IHAVE called this meeting for the purpose of laying before
you, my constituents in Geelong, some thoughts on the
Federal Bill, which, by your good-will, I have assisted in
framing. I have not forgotten—l shall never forget—the very
handsome way in which the electors of Geelong indicated their
confidence in me on the day of the election for the Convention.
Nearly 45,000 electors of Victoria marked me as one of the
Victorian ten ; and of these votes I had nearly 2,000 in Geelong
alone. You then put me in a position of great privilege, but of
greater responsibility. As a man comparatively new to politics,
it was a great privilege to mix with so many oi the most dis-
tinguished politicians in Australia—men who had the invaluable
experience of the working of Constitutional Government in five
colonies, and who have—many of them—acted as responsible
Ministers of the Crown. I should have been most stupid if I
did not learn much that is useful from them, and most ungrate-
ful if I did not acknowledge it, Taken as a whole, the Con-
vention contained as strong men as you could find in Australia.
But I find that for this reason alone many are inclined to vote
for this Bill without fully considering it. They say that a
Constitution which the ablest statesmen in Australia have, with
so much labour, assisted in devising must be the best Constitu-
tion that can be obtained, and ought to be accepted as of course.
That is a mistake. The stronger the men, the harder is the
tussle ; and the harder the tussle, the less is each strong man
able to impress his personality on the result. When the
Geelong football team meets foemen worthy of its steel, the
goals are usually fewer, or more evenly balanced in number.
One strong man wins on this point, and another on that; and
the result may quite possibly be an inconsistent, incoherent,
and ill-digested Constitutional scheme.
Perhaps some of you may think that I ought to have spoken
sooner. I deliberately abstained from doing so, in order that I
might not take any course rashly, fresh from the heat and ex-
citement of the debate. If I had given my views directly after
the convention, I should have said unhesitatingly, but with deep
pain, “ This bill will never do.” But I was urged—and I think
rightly—to re-consider the bill in quiet, after some interval, and
to see whether, after all, notwithstanding vhat seemed to me to
bs its serious blemishes, I could not recommend that it be adop-
ted. The cost of the convention to Victoria, in money alone,
vill be, I '--ypnsp £IO,OOO or £12,000 ; and I should so
nucli like to be *e to recommend the bill—to see some direct
fiuit of our labours. It is now a month since the bill was com-
peted ; and I tell you that during that month my responsibility
las been pressing on me like a nightmare. The people of Vic-
toria have last week had the opportunity of reading in the papers
vhat their premier, Sir George Turner, has to say about the bill;
aid his utterances, his advice, naturally and properly, command
nore attention and interest than anything that I can say. Well, I
fiid that after a careful examination of the clauses, he feels him-
sdf justified in recommending the bill. But let me warn you
tiat you must take the recommendations of any of the delegates
vith much caution, with much of the salt of qualification. For
ve are under a strong temptation to favor the acceptance of a
till on which we have bestowed so much labor. Every work-


man likes to see some direct result from his work. I never saw
such hopeless and vacuous workmen as soldiers undergoing
punishment in a barrack yard, who had to carry cannon balls
and pile them up in one heap, and then carry them and pile them
up in another, and so on from heap to heap. For they laboured
and they achieved nothing. Even the mere sense of loyalty,
and respect for one’s colleagues is a strong incentive to recom-
mend this bill. Then is also the desire, the legitimate am-
bition, to have one’s name go down in our annals as one of the
framers of the Federal Constitution for Australia. So it is
not by any means remarkable that you find most of the delegates
concur in favor of the acceptance of this bill. It was so in
connection with the bill of 1891 : it will always be so in every
such undertaking. But you—the electors—must judge for
yourselves—must not forego the duty which you are under, as
trustees for posterity, to consider the bill on its own merits.
Trustees for posterity—trustees for posterity ! We are making
for posterity a contract from which they are not to get out.
You have never had so momentous a political question to face
before. It is proposed that you shall bind, under an “ indis-
soluble constitution,” your children and your children’s children
for all generations. If you once come under this bill, you and
your descendants must stay under it. Marriage is a big, a grave
undertaking; but it can at least be dissolved by the death of
one of the parties. This Constitution cannot be dissolved by the
death of any person, or of any number of persons. This is not
like an ordinary Act of Parliament which Parliament can change
if it do not work well. If the Factories’ Act of Victoria be found
defective, Parliament can change it. Even the Constitution Act
of Victoria; the act under which we make Victorian Laws, can be
changed, in any clause at the will of the Victorian Parliament.
I want to impress this point upon you, because I find some
unthinking people saying: “Oh, let us federate; and if the
arrangements do not work, we can put them right.” That is a
mistake. You cannot rectify an error in the federal constitution
as you can rectify an error in the Factories’ Act, or in any other
Victorian Act, Let me start with this proposition, in order to
clear our ideas.
Not a section, not a phrase, not a word in this constitution can he
changed by the Federal Parliament, no matter how urgently the change
may he required, and even though every member in each House of
the Parliament may vote for the change.
There—you may rely on that and my other propositions as
absolutely true. There are some in this audience who do not
agree with me in my general politics ; but I feel sure that even
they will take my word to-night. Indeed, whatever faults I
have, I have never been accused of a want of candour. Let the
fact sink deep in your minds. Our Victorian Parliament has
power, under an Act of the Imperial Parliament, to change any
part of our Victorian Constitution. Some parts may be changed
by an ordinary majority in both houses : other parts cannot be
changed except by an absolute majority in both houses ; but any
part can be changed. Now, we know by experience how hard
it is to get a change of our Constitution even with these facilities.
But the difficulty will be far greater in getting a change in the
Federal Constitution. So that it is no wonder if some of us do


not throw up our hats in the air at once, and shout for this Bill,
as the crowd shouts for a goal at a football match. It is no
wonder that some of us do not come before you with oratorical
effusions about the glories of union among Australians, and the
narrowness and pettiness of those who venture to criticise this
Bill. Oratory is an excellent thing in a good cause ; but we
must steel ourselves against its seductive power in a matter which
needs so much deliberation in the interests of our cnmmon
country. Here is my next proposition :
To make a change in a single word in this constitution, there must
not only be an absolute majority of both houses of the Federal
Parliament; hut the change has to be submitted to the electors in the
several colonies; and unless there he a majority of the people, and
also a majority of the States in favour of the change, the change
cannot be made. Even if four out of every five Australians voting
vote for the change, the change is not necessarily carried.
Take these figures, which are quite possible : Suppose a
change in the constitution proposed, as to which the great bulk
of the large populations of New South Wales and Victoria are
agreed, but as to which opinion is nearly equally divided in the
other three colonies. Of course, lam taking the differences in
population as they stand at present; but the differences in popu-
lation will probably be greater hereafter. Assume that you have
overcome the difficulty of getting an absolute majority of the two
Houses in favour of the change. Then suppose that in New
South Wales 100,000 vote for the change and 10,000 against;
suppose that in Victoria 90,000 vote for the change and 10,000
against; suppose that in South Australia 14,000 vote for the
change and 15,000 against; suppose that in Tasmania 6000 vote
for the change and 7000 against; suppose that in West Australia
6000 vote for the change and 7000 against. Then you have
216,000 electors voting for the change, and 49,000 voting against
it. That is to say, you have more than 4to lin favour of the
change. Yet that change cannot be made. Public opinion is
thwarted. After the prolonged discussion which must have
taken place before such a stage could be reached, the will of the
great mass of the Australian people cannot be carried into effect.
And the Australian people have no remedy, for they have, in the
words of the preamble, “ agreed to unite in one indissoluble federal
commonwealth . . . under the constitution hereby established.'”
The constitution binds them as by a contract, and the British
Parliament will have to let the Australian people lie in the bed
which they have made for themselves.
But I have not yet told you the worst. There are some pro-
visions of this Bill which cannot be altered at all, even though
all these conditions, the difficult conditions to which I have re-
ferred, should be fulfilled. When you get a copy of the Bill,
look at the last clause of the last section, and weigh it well.
Any layman can understand as well as any lawyer the point to
which I am going to refer. An alteration diminishing the
proportionate representation of any State in either House of the
Parliament is not to become law unless the majority of the
electors voting in that State approve the proposed law. This
clause is difficult and obscure in its application to the House of
Representatives, but it is clear as to the Senate. To take a
possible case: If New South Wales should hereafter have


20,000,000 people, and Tasmania 200,000, Tasmania must
continue to have the same number of members in the Senate as
New South Wales, unless Tasmania consent to have the number
reduced. Under this Bill we are to start with six senators for
each colony, no matter what the population. You may, in
other words, have 100 people in New South Wales for every one
in Tasmania; and yet Tasmania is to have the same influence in
one of the Houses as New South Wales; one person in Tas-
mania is to have as much influence on that House as 100
persons in New South Wales. We cannot alter this precious
arrangement unless Tasmania consent You might as well
say we cannot alter it at all. If the sky fall we shall catch larks;
and if Tasmania consent you may reduce her power in the
Senate.
Now, I should personally be willing to accept a worse consti-
tution than this is in other matters, if there were reserved for
the future people of Australia reasonable facilities, after full
deliberation, to change the constitution where it proves to be de-
fective or unsuitable. Sir George Turner has, the other day, put
before the public a number of points on which he regards the
Bill as defective and injurious. Well, even if, as he estimates, the
Victorian Treasurer may have to find some £500,000 a year
more, for some years to come, to compensate him for the loss of
sugar duties and other intercolonial duties, and to meet Victoria’s
share of the extra expenditure of the Commonwealth, that
would not be too high a price to pay for a good system of
Federation. The inconveniences felt during some years of
transition will be as nothing compared with the advantages of
Australian union. So strongly do I feel impressed with the
value of a federal union that I should not dream of voting
against this Bill for the reasons which operate on Sir George
Turner —if we only trusted the free people of Australia to do justly
hereafter, to make such changes as they may find to be necessary,
to be, in fact, as wise and as fair as ourselves. But no —that
will not suit our wiseacres. We know better what will suit the
people of the after-time than they can know themselves. I say
nothing—nothing —nothingshould be made so rigid, so absolutely
unchangeable. You must have the ultimate sovereignty some-
where. I may put out of account the British Parliament, which
will not, cannot constitutionally, interfere with our internal
Australian arrangements, especially when they are the
result of a solemn agreement and compact. I say that
subject to the theoretical sovereignty of the British Parliament,
the practical sovereignty in our Australian affairs ought to rest
with the Australian people. As this Bill stands, we are
depositing the sovereignty in a parchment document, which
cannot be moved by prayers, or swayed by reason, or impelled
by force. I ask you are the Australian people (in the words
of Shakespeare) to be thus
“ bound in with shame,
With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds ? ”
You will notice that Sir George Turner has not touched this
point, and with good reason. For he, and the other ministers
have made a mistake with regard to it. Not only did they
vote for equal representation of all colonies in the senate —voted


that Tasmania with its 170,000 people, should have the same
voting power as New South Wales with its 1,320,000 —but they
voted that this provision should be unchangeable, no matter how
much Tasmania may dwindle and New South Wales increase.
As our Victorian ministers cannot complain of this feature, the
rigidity of the constitution, there is all the more need that I
should call your attention to it.
“ Well,” it may be said, “ what is this bill which is to be like
the law of the Medes and Persians that altereth not.” Now, Ido
not intend to go in full detail into all the provisions of this bill.
I propose to fix your attention on certain of the main features
which, to my mind, ought to affect your votes. You would not
endure my speaking for more than an hour or two ; but I shall be
happy to answer any questions afterwards. I frankly tell you that in
my opinion many of the provisions are a great improvement on
the Bill of 1891.' Federation is a grand ideal towards which we
are making rapid strides. We are one people—we have one
destiny. We are adjoining communities of the British type,
under the British flag, occupying a great continent far removed
from the other centres of civilization. We have the same origin, the
same habits, the same ideals. Our families are scattered widely
over the continent, and the scattered ones find themselves at
home among fellow-countrymen, in West Australia as well as in
Victoria. We are labouring to express that unity in political
terms ; and we shall do it before we are done. Federation must
come, and soon. We all want it. I could wish that at the
poll to be taken on the 3rd of June, the Government could make
arrangements to have another question submitted at the same
time. In addition to the question, “ Are you in favour of this
Bill ? ” we should ask, “ Are you in favour of Federation ? ” and
the answer “Yes” would be so overwhelmingly preponderant as to
give a great impetus to the Federal movement. Personally, I
have only found one man in Geelong who is against Federation.
He supported me in the election of 1894; but hetoldmelast October
that he was voting and working against me, because I was one of
the federal delegates, and helping Federation ; and Federation
would be the ruin of Victoria. So I lost his vote; but I did not lose
my seat. Every new discussion brings us nearer to this great
goal. I have rejoiced to watch, in the course of our discussions,
the steady growth in the convention of what I regard, as the true
federal idea; but still, but still, the narrow provincial spirit is
too much for us. My objection to this Bill is, not that it is
federal, but that it is provincial. I have come to the conclusion
that it ought to be called “ a bill of perpetuate provincialism.”
It is provincial, in that it refuses to allow the great intercolonial
rivers of Australia —such as the huge Murray system, which
extends from Queensland through New South Wales, Victoria
and South Australia—it refuses to allow this river system to be
treated as an Australian subject in Australian interests by the
Australian Parliament. It is provincial, this Bill, in that it
refuses to allow the railway systems of the colonies to be worked
for the benefit of Australia as a whole, without regard to state
boundaries. It is provincial, in that it leaves to the provinces,
the states, large control even over those subjects which are
called and recognised as federal —in that it creates a States-
House, the Senate, by means of which the selfish provincial spirit


—provincialism with its clumsy, greedy fingers—is to retain its
power over Australian subjects. This states-house theory is out-
and-out provincialism, under a softer name. I say that Australian
subjects should be dealt with by the Australian people as a whole,
and not by the states, which have their own state subjects to
attend to. Yes, provincialism is as yet too strong for us. It is very
hard for anybody to give up a power which he has once enjoyed;
and it is still harder for an organised state to make a voluntary
surrender.
In framing a Federal Constitution, there are two main pro-
blems : One is to settle what are to be the federal subjects, the
business to be entrusted to the Federal Parliament and Executive;
the other is to provide that the opinions of the people within the
federation shall, after due deliberation, be carried into effect in
regard to those subjects. As for the subjects, I regret, as I have
said, the provincialism which has kept the railways and the
rivers out of federal control. But I should be willing to trust to
the progress of public opinion for the federalizing of these
subjects, if we found that fair play, free play, were given to public
opinion. But fair play is not given to public opinion. I think
that the subjects handed over may be divided, roughly, into three
classes; commercial subjects, social subjects, administrative
subjects. Under the commercial subjects I should put the
regulation of foreign and intercolonial trade and commerce,
banking, insurance, bills of exchange, insolvency, patents.
Under the social subjects, I should put marriage and divorce, old
age pensions, conciliation and arbitration in labour disputes.
Under the administrative subjects, I should put the postal and
telegraphic services, defences, light houses, quarantine, sea
fisheries. To give expression to public opinion on these subjects,
there are to be two Houses of the Federal Parliament—a Senate
and a House of Representatives. The House of Representatives
is, in a certain limited sense, to be based on population—one
member for every 58,000 people at the start. But no colony is to
have less than five members, and therefore Tasmania and West
Australia, although they have populations under 200,000, are to
have five members each. This will give a House of 64 members,
probably. As for the Senate there are to be six Senators for
each state, no matter how few or how many the people. That
makes 30 senators for the five colonies; and, as it is provided
that the number of members of the House is to be, as nearly as
possible, only double the number of the members of the Senate,
there could be only 60 members in the House, but for the special
advantage given in the House to the least populous states, Tas-
mania and West Australia. I want you to observe that an
increase in the population of Australia, no matter how great, does not
involve any increase in the number of members in the House. Unless
the number of States be increased, or unless the number of
Senators be increased equally for every State —say from 6 to 10—
there can be no increase of members in the House when Austra-
lia’s population has increased to 50 or 100 millions. 1 do not
know how it appears to you, but to me it appears ludicrous,
even childish, to make the number of members of the National
House—the House which represents population—depend in any
way on the number of States. What on earth has the number of
States to do with it ? Under this precious scheme, the total


number of members in the House of Representatives will in no
sense depend on population; but the distribution of the members
will. The 1891 Bill and the United States Constitution were
more liberal m this respect; for they allowed one member for
every 30,000 of population at the first. You are aware how
difficult it is for men of moderate means to contest large districts,
and how large districts are very apt to fall into the hands of the
money-power. Here in Geelong, you have two members for
24j000 people. In the House of Representatives there will be
one member for 58,000; and it is quite on the cards that there
may be one member for every million.
So much for the House of Representatives. As for the Senate,
there are to be an equal number of members for each original
state; and this can never be changed. The Senate is to be a
state’s house as distinguished from the people’s house. I have
consistently objected to this system, and the more that I have
thought and read upon the subject the more am I convinced
that the theorists who are imposing the system upon us are
fundamentally wrong. I object to having a state’s house in
addition to a people’s house—a house in which the state, as
states, are to be a check on the people. Some say that this is a
democratic constitution. I deny it, absolutely ; and I say that
no one can clearly appreciate democratic principles who does not
see that this provision is inconsistent with democracy, or with
peace, order, and good government. It violates the principle
of the rule of the majority. This rule is not a fetish—it is not
an unreasoned theory. It is simply based on fundamental
physical laws. The majority of the people arc stronger than the
minority, and in place of fighting it is better to yield to numbers.
It is better to count heads than to break them. To judge from
some recent speeches we shall have to go back to first principles
again. We liberals uphold the rule of the majority in order to
attain peace—to make particular interests, special interests, sub-
ordinate to the general interest ; to make the laws of a nation a
true reflection of current opinions and current culture. I came
across a passage in John Locke the other day —the great John
Locke, who, in his “ civil government ” 208 years ago, explained
the conditions of this rule. He says, speaking of any political
community, as “it being one body must move one way, it is
necessary the body should move that way whither the greater force
carries it, which is the consent of the majority.’’ In Victorian
subjects the majority of Victorians should rule ; in New South
Wales subjects the majority of the people of New South Wales
should rule ; in Australian subjects the majority of the people
of Australia should rule. Mark my words, there are more ways
of interfering with the will of the people than by property houses
We must not suppose that by getting rid of property houses we*
are securing that effect shall be given to the will of the people.
You can block the people just as well by the device of states
houses, or by the device of an unalterable constitution. What
you have to aim at, in any house of parliament, is to get public
opinion properly reflected and voiced, and you cannot get public
opinion properly reflected and voiced in a house in which one-
tenth of the people paying one-tenth of the taxes, may have
nine-tenths of the power. Even at the start, one-fifth of the Aus-
tralian people paying about one-fifth of the taxes will have three-


fifths of the power of the Senate ; and the differences of popula-
tion will increase as the years roll by. Under the constitution
of the State of Connecticut the three original townships returned
the same number of members. The same provision remains to
this day, although one of the towns has over 100,000 people, and
another is a mere village with a public-house and a rouseabout;
and, as a consequence, the name of Connecticut has become a by-
word in the United States for its backward politics. Recollect
that thinly peopled states are the least progressive, have the
lowest political intelligence. In large populations there is the
friction of mind with mind, and a keen discussion of social and
political problems. Small, scattered populations are the strong-
hold of the obstructives ; they become the pocket-boroughs of the
wealthy. What is the reason that England has remained so long
free from revolution while all the states of Europe suffered from it?
It is because the constitution in substance recognises the right of
the majority to rule. As Dicey points out, revolutionists know that
they cannot succeed unless they have the majority of the people
with them ; and they know in England that when they have the
majority of the people with them they can, without endangering
lives, change the character of the House of Commons and
accomplish their purposes. The House of Commons is truly
Sovereign, for it can change the constitution as it likes. It is
urged, by way of excuse for equal representation in the Senate,
that even if a man in West Australia is to have eight times the
voting power of a man in Victoria, those'men who think with us
in West Australia will have eight times the power as well as
those who think against us. What an excuse! How would that
be accepted in Manchester at the time of the Reform Bill of
1882 ? When the great population of Manchester found that
the rotten boroughs of Gatton and old Sarum had equal represen-
tation with Manchester, would they have been satisfied with the
statement, “Oh, our friends in Gatton and Old Sarum will be
over represented as well as our enemies.” It is remarkable that
the theory of a states’ house had almost an exact parallel in the
Tory theory of 1882. The Tories argued gravely that the House
of Commons was not meant to represent the people or popula-
tion, but such communities or interests as the King chose to
invite to consult with him, and on this principle they justified a
system under which, as Lord John Russell said, “ a ruined
mound ” sent up two members, “ three niches in a stone wall ”
sent other two members, and “ a park where no houses were to be
seen ” sent other two. I tell you, it is possible to obstruct the
play of public opinion by other means than property houses.
You can obstruct it by a house representing states, or communi-
ties, or interests.
In the United states they had a good excuse for adopting the
system of a states house. The people had but a few years be-
fore been engaged in their war of independence. There was
utter disorganization, anarchy in the states; even treaties
could not be enforced ; and certain of the less populous states—
which had been already used to equal representation, as there
had been no census —threatened openly to make terms with
England, to re-admit the English troops, and thereby give a
foothold from which the independence, so dearly purchased,
could be destroyed. They threatened this unless equal repre-


sentation were conceded, because, as Washington aud Hamilton
said, “ the peculiarity of their political situation rendered it in-
dispensable.” It was conceded, and probably wisely. But
although the evils of the system could not be so pronounced where
the states are numerous as where there are only 5 or 6, think-
ing men have traced to this system the unjust war with Mexico,
the growth of the slave power, and the great civil war. Now
you find the Senate the stronghold in America of rings and
trusts and corruption, which threaten the very existence of the
great republic. But for the less populous states, the noble pro-
posal lately made from England for arbitration before war, and
instead of war, would have been easily carried. As the New
York World says:—“ The 26 Senators who defeated the treaty,
represent in whole or in part 17 states (naming them). These
include the seven rottenborough and sage-brush states of
Montana, Kansas, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nevada, Utah,
and Idaho, whose total population by the last census was only
2,408,338 out of a total for the country of 62,622,260. . . .
. . . This vote does not represent the will of the people.
This treaty has been warmly favoured by two administrations, the
one democratic, the other republican. The moral and
patriotic sentiment of the country has expressed its approval
through the World’s great petition and otherwise with an unan-
imity and an enthusiasm never manifested in behalf of any cause
since the war of the rebellion ended.” The same comment has
been made by the editor of the New England magazine, in the
last June number. He says “ Ten of the 26 Senators, from
the five states of Idaho, Montana, Nevada, and North and
South Dakota, represent a combined population smaller than
that of either of the cities of New York, Chicago, Philadelphia,
or Brooklyn. Nevada, with the same power in the Senate as
the largest state in the union, has a population (60.000) less
than that of Worcester, or Lowell, or Fallriver, or Cambridge
in Massachusetts. These were the states which blocked civiliza-
tion, and covered the republic with shame before the world.
. Only the constitution of the Senate, which makes it a
grossly and grotesquely unrepresentative body, makes possible
even such a minority vote as that which defeated the arbitration
treaty, and that the overwhelming majority of the American
people, and almost all of the country’s intellect and conscience are
on the side of peace and reason, and the proposed advance.”
This is the pernicious system—this is the ridiculous states’
house theory—which is imposed upon us by this bill; and—let
me remind you once more —this system can never he changed.
They will tell you that without conceding this system there
never could be federation. That is all nonsense—the experi-
ment has never been tried. The doctrine was laid down as if
it were essential to a federation as a fact, not as a concession.
What could the representatives of the less populous states do but
accept a concession which was offered to them as if it were a matter
of course ! And if the concession be pleasing to the smaller
states, it is, of all other objections to this bill, the strongest ob-
jection in New South Wales, t and without New South Wales
there will be no federation. In the N.S.W. Assembly 59 mem-
bers voted against equal representation and only 4 voted for it.
If that is not a significant vote Ido not know what is; and such


a newspaper as the Spectator , in England, has backed the New
South Wales members up in their attitude.
A great deal of capital is being made out of the fact that
this bill provides for one man one vote. It is a mistake : it does
not. In each state each elector is to have one vote; but all men
are not electors. There is a property qualification and an in-
come qualification in Tasmania ; in West Australia there are
certain stringent residential and other qualifications; and in
Victoria, as is known full well, many men are deprived of a
vote by certain machinery in the Purification of Rolls Act.
There are ways of making the franchise restricted in practice,
although liberal in theory. Besides, it cannot be “ one man one
vote,” so long as a Tasmanian has, in effect, 8 votes for a Vic-
torian’s one vote for the Senate ; or so long as a miner at Cool-
gardie has nine votes for the one vote given to a miner at
Broken Hill.
You will be told that we are to have the time-honoured system
of responsible government resting on the supremacy of the House
of Representatives. For my part, Ido not believe it. Of course,
though the words “ responsible government ” are nowhere men-
tioned in the Bill, you may be able to achieve the result by
putting in the House of Representatives supremacy in the money
power. The Assembly in Victoria can turn Ministers out and
put Ministers in, because it has a decided advantage over the
Council in money Bills. The Council cannot amend any money
Bills, and the Assembly can refuse Ministers money supplies if
the Ministers have lost the confidence of the Assembly. In this
Bill (s. 58) you will find words to the effect that the Senate may
not amend the principal money Bills—Bills imposing taxation
and Bills appropriating revenue for the “ ordinary annual services
of the Government.” But if you look a little further on, you
will find that the Senate can “ request ” amendments, and can
keep on “ requesting ”as often as it likes. The Senate can send
down “ requests ”at any stage. I say there is no material
difference between the Senate proposing amendments to the
House, and requesting amendments to the House. Calling it a
different name does not alter the true nature of the thing.
The Senate will be able to escape the odium of rejecting the
measures absolutely which are necessary to keep the Government
going ; and it can keep Ministers on tenterhooks, can worry
Ministers until they accept, in whole or in part, the suggestions
of the Senate. Money Bills won’t wait; the Queen’s Govern-
ment must be carried on, and Ministers must generally yield.
The power of veto —of saying, “No is often fully as valuable
as the power of originating. You saw not long ago how a
Ministry can be coerced by a secondary House in the matter of
a money Bill. The Turner Ministry got the Assembly to pass a
Bill imposing a land valuation and an income tax. The Council
rejected it, with a clear intimation that it would pass an income
tax if sent up. The Treasurer was in dire straits : he was in
sore need of money ; he was faced with another huge deficit,
and he meekly submitted, brought in a Bill for income tax, and
it was passed at once.
But we are told that the Senate cannot originate money Bills—
that taxation Bills and ordinary appropriation Bills must first be
put before the House of Representatives. That will not secure


supremacy to the national House. It does not secure
supremacy to the national House in the United States. By the
constitution of the United States all taxation Bills must origi-
nate in that house, and by long usage all appropriation Bills do
originate in that House. And yet the Senate has become the
stronger House —more frequently carries its way in money and
other matters. Constitutional writers, such as Senator Hoar,
and the Frenchman, Boutmy, have pointed out how this power
of originating money Bills has become, in the United States,
“ incredible as it may appear, a cause of inferiority and of
diminished influence in financial matters.” For some time after
the constitution was established it was thought that the House
of Representatives was going to become another House of
Commons in strength and prestige. But the Senate gradually
felt its power and used it, and the House is generally compelled,
at the end of the session, to accept the Senate’s proposals. The
House having the originating power is under a responsibility to
the country of devising means for carrying on the administration,
and it is driven to choose some course which will satisfy the
Senate. You must remember, also, that in this Bill the Senate
is to be elected by the whole colony, not by districts. That is a
noble provision—a provision which secures that one House at
least shall be free from petty local influences, although it will be
necessary and possible to make some provision, by Hare’s
system or some other method, whereby the country districts shall
get their fair share of representation. But this provision for
election by the whole colony, combined with the longer term of
office, and retirement by rotation, as distinguished from retire-
ment by ordinary dissolution, will all tend to make the Senate
the stronger and weightier House. It will justify the triumphant
boast of Sir Richard Baker, which he uttered after the Bill had
been passed, that he looked on the Senate as “ the pivot on
which the whole Federal Constitution will revolve.” And yet how
absurd it is that that House, the Senate, which represents the
minority of the taxpayers, should have more power over the
money of the taxpayers than that House which represents the
majority of the taxpayers. As Mr. Reid well put it, we ought
to give superior money powers to the people’s House, because
taxes are raised from the people and not from the States. If
the States paid equal taxation, that would be a ground for con-
tending that the States’ House shall have an equal voice as to
the raising and application of the money. But the States do
not pay equally. Even at the start, one-fifth of the people of
Australia will have three-fifths of the power of the Senate; and
it is a nice arrangement to give this one-fifth of the people
control of taxes of which they pay only about one-fifth, and the
others four-fifths.
But as if we had not enough difficulties already to face, this
oill throws an apple of perpetual discord between the two
Houses. This precious distinction between “ requests ”
and “ amendments ” will lead to continual friction between the
two Houses in appropriation bills. For you must call it a
“ request ” when you are dealing with a bill which appropriates
revenue “ for the ordinary annual services of the government,”
and you must call it an “ amendment ” when you are not. At
present, in all the colonies, we put all kinds of appropriations


into any appropriation bill. The distinction is quite novel; no
one ventures to define what the “ ordinary annual services ” are ;
the treasurers are in despair about them; and the definition will
have to be considered and re-considered as often as the increasing
complexity of our modern social organization raises the need for
new kinds of payments. I should like to know whether we are
to treat as an extraordinary appropriation and to put into a
separate extraordinary appropriation bill, an allowance of £SO to
the widow of a deceased warder, or an extra shilling a week to the
pay of a messenger.
“ But,” it is said, “ there is provision made for meeting dead-
locks between the two Houses, There is to be a simultaneous
dissolution of the two Houses, if there be a serious disagreement;
and if after the dissolution they still cannot agree there is to be a
joint sitting in which a majority of three-fifths can carry its way.”
This provision for a double dissolution is, I conceive, only right,
and will exercise a healthy influence on ordinary legislation. I
cannot complain of it, for it was I who suggested it, though not
as a substitute for the referendum. I moved it in Adelaide,
when I was beaten by 24 to 7. It was carried in Sydney; and this
change of part is a good illustration of how repeated discussions
are leading us towards a workable federal constitution. If, as
happens under our Victorian Constitution, only one House is
sent to the country in the event of a critical disagreement, the
position is grossly unfair. The members of one House are sent
to face the worry and anxiety, and expense of a general election ;
while the members of the other House can roll back on their
velvet cushions and laugh. There can be no reason why, when
both houses are elective, both houses should not be liable to face
the electors. But the provision for simultaneous dissolution
cannot be regarded as a remedy for deadlocks, A deadlock
proper is a dispute during which money cannot be got to carry on
the administration of the country. This double dissolution is a
weapon of last resort, and can rarely be applied to money bills ;
for money bills cannot wait as other bills can. The Ministry
will generally find it necessary, as our ministers found it in 1895,
to back down, to yield. Besides, it still allows the minority of
people to rule, as the smaller states may back up their senators ;
and the voting is not necessarily on the merits of the measure
proposed. The machinery is too cumbrous, too risky, too incon-
venient to be often brought into play. Then, at the final joint
sitting, to require a majority of three-fifths is unfair. Say that
the two Houses have 94 members : to get three-fifths of the joint
sitting in favour of a measure, you would have to get 57 votes.
If you had 56 one way, and 38 the other, the 88 would win.
Why? I moved that an ordinary majority should be sufficient;
but I was defeated.
In speaking of this double dissolution, it may not be amiss
for me to say that though from the first I feared that we should
not get a workable constitution, that we had started wrong,
accepting false theories, I worked with all my might to get what
I could. In the words of the Ingoldsby legend, I
“Wisely fell back upon poor Eichard’s plan,
“ When you can’t what you would, you must do what you can.”
I have even succeeded in carrying on my own motions, clauses


wbioli I am amused to find Mr. Barton now referring to as induce-
ments to accept the constitution. But he spoke against them, and
he voted against them. I refer, for instance, to the power given
to the federal parliament to legislate for conciliation and
arbitration in labour disputes extending beyond the limit of any
one State. I was beaten in Adelaide, but I succeeded in
Melbourne, in the face of Mr. Barton's opposition ; and now I
find Mr. Barton referring to the clause as a valuable and
attractive provision. I may refer also to the clause which
prohibits the Federal Parliament from imposing religious
observances, or interfering with religious liberty. Mr. Barton
did all that he could against it, and he could do a great deal as
leader of the convention. Your Victorian ministers also did
their best to emasculate it. And now I find Mr. Barton boasting
of the clause as if it were the great charter of religious liberty.
Before I pass from this machinery for settling disputes between
the two Houses, I should like to refer to the refusal of the con-
vention to allow the referendum. You know the idea is that where
two Houses differ fixedly as to an important measure—when
session after session, the measure is sent up and refused—the
electors should be asked at the ballot-box to say Yes or No to
the measure. A dissolution and general election does not
satisfactorily ascertain the will of the people, or which House
in the opinion of the majority of the people is right. For an
elector, in voting for a member, is influenced by a number
of considerations which have nothing to do with the measure on
which the Houses are dissolved. An elector may vote for Jones
because he likes Jones personally, or because he dislikes Smith
the other candidate, or because Jones is on most subjects a good
man. But on a referendum there is a neat issue put before the
people —Do you wish for this meastire or not? Nothing, in my
opinion, would conduce more effectually to a healthy and
intelligent interest in politics ; nothing would—with proper safe-
guards—have such a beneficial influence on our political life.
But I am not disposed to push my views on this subject to an
extreme. I should be willing to trust the future people of
Australia, that they would adopt the referendum when the time
if fully ripe—provided you make il reasonably possible for them
to do so. I should trust fearlessly to the spirit of progress. I
should not refuse a federal constitution for the mere reason that
the referendum is not provided for. But, unfortunately, so tar
as I can see, if the referendum be not adopted in this constitution,
it can never be adopted. For the referendum, whereby the
final decision would be left to the majority of voters in Australia
is a distinct violation of the theory of a State-House —a House
which is to speak the voice of the organised state and not of the
people as a whole. If the people's House differ from the States-
House, and if their differences can be settled by the majority of
Australian voting, it is at once urged “What is the good of a
States’ House to check the peoples’ House? Why, this would
destroy the effect of equal representation in the Senate !” It
was on this ground that our ministers, Sir George Turner, and
Mr. Isaacs and Mr. Peacock voted against the referendum in
Sydney. In Sydney, there was a chance of carrying it- Mr.
McMillan, a New South Wales conservative, said he was pre-
pared to vote for it. Mr. Holder, a South Australian minister,


and a staunch advocate of the views of the less popular states,
said that he would be prepared to concede the referendum. The
moment was critical. Then, and only then, was there a chance
of getting a solution which might have reconciled liberals to the
evils of equal representation in the' Senate. But Sir George
Turner and Mr. Isaacs intervened, and shattered all our hopes.
They spoke and voted against the referendum on the ground that it
was inconsistent with equal representation. Of course it was in-
consistent; it was inconsistent with a false principle. But the
attitude might well have been taken that it, for the protection of
the less popular states, there was to be a States House, a House
which could stay the hand of a majority of the people doing an
injustice on impulse, yet that, in the end, in the final resort, the
majority should rule—the body politic should move, as Locke
says, “that way whither the greater force carries it.” But the
opportunity was lost; and for ever, so far as regards this Bill. If,
under this Bill, a proposal be made for a referendum, the Senate
is almost forced to throw it out, and even if, by any good fortune,
it passed the ordeal of the Senate and got an absolute majority,
then the electors of the less popular states would be hardly
likely to consent to a curtailment of their influence. I think,
therefore, I am within the mark when I say
The Bill prohibits any change in the system of equal representation
for ever.
The Bill makes it practically impossible ever to adopt a referendum ,
as it would interfere with that system.
In other words, under this Bill we should have to give up, for
ever, the simple, peace-giving, wholesome principle, that the
majority must rule; and we must give up for ever all hope of
the referendum.
I desire now to direct your attention to the provisions as to
finance. The Federal Parliament may put on any taxes that it
likes—customs or excise, or direct taxation ; and it may borrow
any money. No customs or excise duties are to be imposed by
any state. With regard to the vexed question of protection, I think
that I should be wanting in my duty if I did not tell you that,
in my opinion, a protective tariff is by no means necessary under
this bill. That a large sum must be raised by customs and ex-
cise duties, at all events at the start, I admit; but that it may
not be raised by revenue duties, as distinguished from protec-
tive duties Ido not admit. lam convinced by the reasoning of
Mr Pulsford, of Sydney, who has shown that a revenue of more
than £6,000,000 —the revenue estimated by many as necessary at
the start—can be raised by duties on narcotics and stimulants, with
a revenue duty on drapery, tea, coffee, and other goods. But I
heartily concur with the policy of leaving this question abso-
lutely open. lam always willing to trust the Federal Parlia-
ment for the solution of all political and social problems within
its scope—provided always that you trust the people who are
behind the Federal Parliament, —provided that you make that
parliament a fairly accurate exponent of public opinion through-
out Australia.
Now, the several states are to be left to direct taxation, and
a share of the surplus revenue raised by the Commonwealth, if
there is any surplus. By Sir Edward Braddon’s amendment,
not more than one-fourth of the customs and excise can be spent


by the federal parliament: the three-fourths must be returned to
the states. You will ask at once, in what shares ? Well, for
the first five years after uniform customs and excise duties have
been imposed, each state is to get back, substantially, its own
receipts under the Commonwealth taxes, less its proportion of
the federal expenditure, based on its population ; and then after
the five years, parliament has to settle how the surplus is to be
divided. The customs houses and inspection at the border must
be kept up until uniform duties are imposed, and for 5 years
afterwards. And then ? How the surplus is to be divided after
the five years will, in all human probability, involve long and
bitter struggles, renewed from time to time, I observe that
Sir George Turner expects a general scramble, and log-rolling,
and possibly a combination among the smaller states, to get
better terms out of the larger. He seems to fear a combination
of the smaller states against the larger, when the question of
money is at issue. I concur with Sir George Turner in regret-
ting that the convention did not see its way to provide that
the surplus be divided in proportion to population. This would
be the broad, brotherly, Australian method of disposing of the
difficulty ; but it could not be adopted because of the timidity of
the delegates from New South Wales. You have little idea
how confident some people are in New South Wales that their
colony must be richer, and must contribute far more per head
of population to the revenue than any other colony, and this idea,
even if fallacious, must be reckoned with. If, as I apprehend,
the wealth and social condition of the people of the various
colonies are approximately equal in proportion to population,
when you take one decade of years with another, and when you
allow for the disturbing effects of loan moneys, we may have
some hope that the Federal Parliament will be persuaded
to distribute the surplus in proportion to population. Mean-
time, the narrow provincial solution holds the field. Bear in
mind that the Federal Parliament is under no obligation to pro-
vide any surplus—to raise any money by taxation which is not
required for federal purposes ; and that unless a handsome sur-
plus be provided, the various states will be unable to pay the
interest on their debts. The necessities of the State Govern-
ments in this respect will make them interfere in the elections
for the Federal Parliament, and will introduce into the State
politics the disturbing influences of the federal politics, and into
federal politics the disturbing influences of state politics. Mem-
bers will go into the Federal Parliament pledged to support the
principles of some state party, and into the state parliament
pledged to support some federal party.
With regard to rivers, I was one of those who fought hard to
have the great Murray system treated on Australian lines, as an
Australian question. In New South Wales, they have great
hopes of utilising the waters of the Darling, the Edwards, and the
Murrumbidgee, tributaries of the Murray, for conservation and
irrigation, for the development of the lands of New South Wales.
Mr. Reid spoke repeatedly of the waters of these tributaries as New
South Wales waters, although the Darling is very largely fed from
Queensland ; and but for the water which comes from Victoria
the Edwards and the Murray would not be of much good. The
South Australians who hold the lower part and mouth of the


Murray, wished to secure that the Darling waters should not
be absolutely at the mercy of New South Wales, and that the
Darling should be kept open for navigation so far as nature
has made it navigable. If South Australia and New South
Wales were ordinary owners of land along the course of the
river, South Australia could in the law courts have New South
Wales stopped from making any material diminution in the
volume of water which comes to South Australia. Now, in a
country so dry as Australia, the question of the use of the
rivers takes an exceptional importance ; and we have hardly any
true analogy to guide us. Sir George Turner backed up New
South Wales in Adelaide; then backed up South Australia in
Melbourne ; and then backed up New South Wales again when
he realised that conservation and irrigation were probably at
present of more importance to Victoria than navigation. There-
fore, he proposed that for all time the purposes of conservation and
irrigation should be made paramount to the purpose of irriga-
tion. I wanted to leave the whole matter to the Federal Par-
liament, to adjust the respective claims of the various states in
the general interests of Australia as a whole. We cannot tell
what the future will bring forth, and what may be the most
beneficial mode of treating these rivers. We have no right to
say now, in 1898, what use shall be paramount for all time.
The South Australians were willing to accept my proposal;
but we did not succeed; and as the power to regulate trade
and commerce has been held in the United States to involve a
power to keep navigable all inter-state rivers, a clause was
eventually carried to the effect that the Commonwealth shall
not by any regulation of trade and commerce, abridge the right
of a state, or of the residents therein, to the “ reasonable ” use
of the waters of the rivers for conservation and irrigation. The
phrase sounds well; but I am afraid that it leaves us open to
long and bitter disputes in the Federal Parliament, and in the
Inter-state Commission, and in the law courts. To speak
candidly, every one remains in a thick fog about the rivers.
All depends upon the word “reasonable.” No one knows what
can be done, and what cannot be done, until the matter
is brought to a test by actual facts, by actual proposals to put
these waters to some definite use. I may say that I was much
struck with the liberal tone of the New South Wales news-
papers, during this discussion. They scouted the narrow and pro-
vincial views taken by Mr. Keid and his colleagues. The people
are more federal in spirit than their representatives. It often
happens that agents are more exacting, less generous, than their
principals. I feel sure that if this Bill be rejected we shall
approach the subject next time in a more federal spirit, and
recognise that the Murray system must be regulated by the
Federal Parliament, for the best advantage of Australia as a
whole. In this discussion, as well as in the discussion as to
railways and other important matters, I found that at the root of
the provincial objections of the New South Wales delegates was
the great blunder of the States House, with its equal represen-
tation. If the New South Wales members felt that the weight
of the great population of New South Wales would be duly felt
in both houses of the Federal Parliament, they would, I am
convinced, have much more readily submitted to leaving the
whole question to the Federal Parliament.


But if disputes and litigation may arise from the provisions as
to the rivers, absolute confusion and dismay may be expected
from the provisions as to railways. I was one of those who
advocated the taking over of the railways—the great arteries of
the Australian body—by the Federal Parliament. The idea of
federalizing the railways is rapidly gaining ground. Now one
member, and then another, came over to it. But opinion had
not sufficiently ripened by the time that the convention ended.
I am happy to say that power has been taken for the common-
wealth to acquire the railways, or any part of the railways, ot
any state by agreement of purchase. But until the railways are
purchased, what is to happen ? No one knows, I understand
that Mr. Matheson, reading the clauses as a layman, gave a
report as to their effect on the Victorian Railways and Victorian
trade to the Government; and that the Victorian Government
sent him back the report, on the ground that he misunderstood the
clauses, and got from him another report Sir Geo. Turner has
referred briefly to the later report. I should much like to see
Mr. Matheson’s original report, and the legal construction put on
the clauses for Mr. Matheson’s guidance, and his revised report.
They have not been published, so far as I know. You all know
that there has been for years waged a war of railway rates
between the eastern colonies. For instance, by means of pre-
ferential rates, charging more for Victorian goods from and to
Echuca, than for Riverina goods over the Victorian railways,
our Victorian railways and our Victorian ports have been able to
retain a large share of the Riverina trade. These are called
“preferential ” rates, because they “prefer ” New South Wales
producers and New South Wales produce to Victorian pro-
ducers, and Victorian produce, and Victorian storekeepers, by
allowing goods to and from New South Wales to be carried
much more cheaply. On the other hand, the New South Wales
railways carefully keep away from the Victorian border (except
on the mam trunk line), and tap the Riverina, and charge exces-
sively low rates from the Riverina to Sydney. It is about twice
as far from Hay to Sydney as it is from Hay to Melbourne ; but
to induce the Hay people to send their wool to Sydney, and to
get their stores from Sydney, the New South Wales railways
charge very low rates for the long distance. Cootamundra is
about half way between Hay and Sydney ; but it costs about as
much to carry a bale of wool from Cootamundra to Sydney as
from Hay to Sydney. These low rates for long distances are
called “ differential ” rates. Now, you must allow some
differential rates, you must have low rates, tapering rates, so as
not absolutely to ruin the producers in the far back country.
No one denies that. But there is a point at which the differen-
tial rates become improper, from a broad Australian point of
view ; and that point is, I think, when the rate is made very low
for the mere purpose of attracting trade from ports of one state
to ports of another. Victoria cannot make low tapering rates, so
as to get the Riverina trade ; for she has not the Riverina railways.
Her only weapon in this war is the preferential rate, under which
a man in New South Wales has his goods carried at a much lower
rate say from Echuca than a man in Victoria. We Victorians
were willing to lay down our weapon if New South Wales laid
down hers also. We wanted this unfraternal struggle, this


ruinous cut-throat struggle, to cease. The Convention, as a
whole, was with us in the justice of our claim ; and it was, I must
say. owing to the want of tact (I shall use no stronger
word) on the part of the Victorian Ministers that we did
not succeed. New South Wales insisted that she was en-
titled to charge as low rates as she chose within New South
Wales territory, but that all preferential rates should cease. At
last I carried a clause forbidding all rates which were framed
merely with the view of attracting trade from ports of one state
to ports of another. This, admittedly, would have covered the
unjust differential rates of New South Wales, and with some
slight qualification it would have prevented cut-throat rates of
both kinds, while leaving the railway authorities full discretion
in their general regulations. I carried this clause in the teeth of
our Victorian Ministers by 18 to 15. Had the Victorian
Ministers voted with me, I should have carried it by 21 to 12.
But the Ministers would have none of it. The South Australians
who had been helping us nobly, and who voted with me, thought
that, there was no use giving to Victoria a clause which she
did not want, and Sir George Turner was asked to frame a
clause in his own words. Mr. Kingston wanted to get the Vic-
torian ministers’ three votes on our side, as we had won by
only a narrow majority, and might not hold the majority in
a full Convention. Then Sir George Turner and Mr. Isaacs
brought down their clause. It provided that the Parliament may
forbid as to railways any preference or discrimination, if such
preference or discrimination is undue and unreasonable or un-
just to any state. You need not be lawyers to see that the whole
provision turns on the words “ preference or discrimination.”
The clause was carried, and mine was struck out ; but it was
absolutely useless for our Victorian purposes. It enables the
Parliament to prohibit unfair preferences or discriminations, but
it does not enable Parliament to prohibit the unjust differential
rates of New South Wales. In the New South Wales differential
rates they charge the saroe to all persons for the same class of
goods from or to any station. There is no preference or dis-
crimination as to goods or as to persons. Sir George Turner
in his speech admits that he thinks our preferential rates can be
stopped, and that the New South Wales differential rates cannot;
but he puts the blame on a clause carried by Mr. Grant allowing
rates which are necessary for development. That is not fair. If
Mr. Grant’s clause were not in the Bill at all, still there would
be nothing to enable Parliament or the Inter-State Commission
to interfere with the unjust New South Wales rates. Some
people say, “ Oh, you may trust the Inter-State Commission for
what is fair and just.” Probably, if you do not tie its hands.
But its hands are tied. It is to have merely powers of adjudication
and administration for the execution and maintenance of the
provisions relating to trade and commerce. But there is no pro-
vision relating to trade or commerce which forbids any differential
rates. I agree with Mr. Reid's view of these clauses, when he
told the electors of New South Wales that the Commonwealth
cannot interfere with the special charges made by New South
Wales on the Riverina railways, and I agree with Mr. Wise, who
says in the “ Review of Reviews ” that these clauses “do not
abolish low rates for long hauls, nor do they deprive the State of


the control and management of its own lines.” I under-
stand that Mr. Barton has expressed his opinion to the same
effect.
With regard to this Inter-State Commission I must say that I
don’t think that the provisions relating thereto have been
sufficiently considered. They will lead to much difficulty, heart-
burning, and litigation. The Commission is to have such powers
of adjudication and administration as Parliament deems
necessary for the execution and maintenance of the provisions
of this constitution relating to trade and commerce. This is to
apply to the navigation of rivers, to shipping, to railways. The
Commission cannot prohibit anything which the constitution
does not prohibit. It is to say what preferences and discrimina-
tions in railway rates are to be forbidden as unjust and unfair.
There is to be an appeal from the Commission to the High Court
on questions of law. The Commissioners are to have a seven
years’ tenure of office, and during that seven years cannot be
removed except as an address from both Houses. Ido not like
entrusting so much to an irresponsible body. Who are to be
appointed ? If the Railway Commissioners of the several colonies
are appointed they each will work for their own States as against
the interests of Australia as a whole. Speaking to you as a lawyer,
I think that the provisions leave much in uncertainty ; and I
forsee much scope for quarrelling, not only in working out the
problems committed to the Commission, but as to the relative
powers of the Parliament, of the High Court, and of this
Commission.
I observe that Sir George Turner still persists in his view that
all the debts of the various States ought to have been taken over
by the Commonwealth. lam surprised at this persistency. As
Mr. Holder clearly pointed out, it would mean making a most
valuable present to the bondholders without getting any equiva-
lent from them. If the bondholders of South Australia, for
instance, learn that the whole of the colonies have taken over
the responsibility of South Australian loans, the bonds will at
once rise in the market, and the bondholders will get the whole
benefit of the rise, for nothing. If, on the other hand, as the
Bill now stands, the Federal Parliament has merely the power
to take over the debts, it is possible for some able Federal
Treasurer to formulate a great conversion scheme, whereby, in
return for the Commonwealth assuming the responsibility, the
bondholders may consent to exchange their bonds for the bonds
of the Commonwealth before their bonds expire, and to take a
lower rate of interest for the Commonwealth bonds.
I want to call attention to the provision for the admission of
new States. To my mind, the provision for the equal repre-
sentation of the States in the Senate will seriously interfere with
the proper and necessary subdivision of the larger colonies. It
is true that only the original States —the States which at the
beginning of the Commonwealth adopt the Constitution—are to
be necessarily entitled to six Senators. In admitting a new
State, the Federal Parliament may make such stipulations as it
pleases with regard to the number of Senators. But the
practical difficulties are still great. You know that in Queens-
land there is an agitation for a division into three separate
colonies—North Queensland, Central Queensland, and South


Queensland. Now, suppose that all Queensland comes in as one
original State, and then attempts to subdivide; or suppose that
subdivision takes place first, and each part asks for leave to come
into the Federation. Central Queensland has 56,000 people.
I assume North Queensland has about the same number. That
leaves about 368,000 in South Queensland. Is each of the
divisions to have six Senators ? That will give Queensland
eighteen Senators as against six for New South Wales, which
has three times as many people ; and New South Wales is not
unlikely to object, and Victoria, and, indeed, all the other
colonies. Are the three divisions to have six Senators between
them ? Then South Queensland is likely to object to having
fewer Senators than West Australia, which has not half her
population. Even if some intermediate course be adopted, and
South Queensland is to have six Senators, and each of the others
two or three, Queensland will then have ten or twelve as against six
in New South Wales. If by subdivision you increase the total
number of Senators for the colony subdivided, you will have the
other colonies opposing. If by subdivision you do not increase
the total number of Senators for the colony subdivided, you will
have the colony which is to be subdivided opposing. It would
be a curious thing to find this great fundamental flaw in the
Constitution, this great crack running through the whole
structure from basement to roof, and widening as the years
increase, having the indirect effect of checking the necessary
subdivision of those huge areas which we call colonies. No such
difficulty arose in the United States, for there the new States
were created from new territory, not by subdivision, as in Aus-
tralia. Is it ever fully realised that the area of Australia is about
nine times as great as the area of all the thirteen original united
States, and that the Avhole area of Australia is nominally within
the boundaries of the existing colonies ? The only colonies, by
the way, which have little or nothing to hope from subdivision
are Tasmania and our own colony of Victoria. It has to be
remembered, also, that whatever proportion of Senators a State
begins with it must keep, for if the proportion were increased
for every State when the population increases, it would mean a
reduction of the proportionate representation of the other States,
and that is forbidden by the last clause of the last section of the
Bill. For instance, Central Queensland might come in with two
Senators, might increase to 5,000,000, while Tasmania remains
at 200,000. Still Tasmania must remain with her proportion
of six to two as against Central Queensland.
As to bounties. The Federal Parliament may grant bounties.
But inasmuch as many bounties might effect the same object as
protection between the colonies, might interfere with intercolonial
free-trade, the several states were, at the first, absolutely
deprived of the power to give bounties from the State funds.
As this objection would not apply to bounties or aids to mining
for gold, silver, and other metals, the Convention resolved, on
my motion at Adelaide, to allow the states to give such
bounties. But even this did not cover all the ground. You
must be aware of the excellent effects of the butter bonus, in
which Victoria set the example to the other colonies. If we
had had to ask the Federal Parliament to grant such a bonus,
in the first instance, before the experiment was tried, the


Federal Parliament would probably have said No—That would
be benefitting Victoria at tbe expense of the general Australian
revenue. So with beet root, oil plants, and scent plants, and
other special industries; and bonuses for export to other
countries would not generally interfere with freedom of trade
between the colonies. Victoria, as Mr. McLean has pointed out,
is pre-eminently the colony suitable for special industries and
novel experiments—owing to the nature of its soil and its
comparatively dense population. Therefore Sir George Turner
very naturally wanted to give to the states a freer hand as to
bounties. I managed to get a clause carried allowing any state
to give any bounty, with the consent of the Governor-General-
in-Oouncil (that is of the Ministry of the day), provided that it
did not interfere with freedom of trade between the colonies.
But Sir George Turner would not have this. He was offered
as the only alternative, a clause allowing bounties to be given
by any state with the consent of both Houses of the Federal Par-
liament ; and he took this latter alternative, although it involves
the delay and trouble of getting the consent of both Houses.
Not to embarrass our Premier, who from his official position
should know better than I did what Victoria wanted, I consented
to the withdrawal of my clause. lam not at all sure that I
was right.
There is a curious phase of this federal campaign which
people ought to grasp clearly. The real contest will be in New
South Wales. There will be no federation without New
South Wales. Three colonies at the least must accept the Bill,
or the Bill cannot be transmitted to the Imperial Parliament;
and neither West Australia nor South Australia will accept the
Bill unless New South Wales accept it. It is so provided
expressly in the West Australian Act; and there they are taking
care to vote after the other colonies. Ido not think that it is
so provided in the South Australian Act, but I find that the
South Australian Government has fixed their day of polling for
the day after the polling in New South Wales and Victoria.
They will not, in South Australia, come into the Federation
unless New South Wales come in; for Victoria would have too
much predominance; and, as one South Australian said to me,
“ Federation with Victoria is of no use to us. You can supply
yourselves with everything that we could supply you with.
What we want is the market of New South Wales.” So that
New South Wales holds the key of the position; and she knows
it. If every elector in Victoria voted for Federation, that would
not secure it. The very eagerness of our Victorians for
Federation, and their willingness to abandon sound constitu-
tional principles for its sake, have produced a false impression.
One delegate said, in effect, “ Victoria must federate, or she will
go insolvent.” Another said, “You in Victoria are bound to
take whatever we choose to give you.” They mistake the
warmth of our national, Australian sentiment, for an indication
that we in Victoria dare not, cannot stand alone. Dr. Cockburn
is reported to have said to a newspaper man at an interview,
that the Bill would be accepted by Victoria “with eagerness,”
and in his colony by a substantial majority. I confess that I
should like to show our detractors (I do not include Hr.
Cockburn, of course), that Victoria is able to take an in-


dependent stand as any of the colonies. I should like to teach
them that Victoria will accept Federation with eagerness, that
she will make substantial sacrifices for Federation, provided that
the people of Australia are allowed to control their own
destiny, provided that the Bill is constitutionally sound. People
talk of the need for “ give and take ” in a federal compact. Of
course there must be “give and take.” But it must be “give
and take” in financial arrangements: I do not believe in
bartering fundamental democratic principles. Give up as
much money as you like; but do not give up our liberties —and
the liberties and political privileges of the future people of
Australia.
Why is it that the reactionary, the obstructive forces in Vic-
toria are so eager for the acceptance of this Bill ? Ido not
suppose that Conservatives would formulate their reasons as I
shall express them ; but I will say that their instinct is leading
them correctly. Ido not entertain any unkind thought of our
conservative opponents, many of whom are my personal friends.
But, taking the class as a whole, they find that public opinion is
gathering in strength against their views ; that if the majority of
the people in Australia are allowed to sway in the legislation of
Australia, they will be hopelessly beaten. Their Mrs. Partington
brooms of property houses, and so forth, will not long succeed in
keeping back the rising tide. So they fasten their hopes on a
States’ House, to be a check on the people’s house, and on _ a
fixed, rigid constitution, enforced by a Federal Court, which will
serve as an invincible sea-wall against the encroachments of the
waters. In England, the Tories groan because they have not a
hard and fast constitution like that of the United States, which
does not permit of changes such as are possible under the English
constitution. For my part, I shall recognize no right on the
part of any house or body of men to interfere with carrying into
effect of the deliberate will of the majority of the people, to
obstruct the peaceful operation of public opinion on our policy.
A written constitution, which cannot be modified, is not amenable
to moral pressure, to public opinion. It is a dead, lifeless thing
which no arts of persuasion can reach. It is not susceptible of
growth. In the quick change and movement of the world’s
development, it is—
“ Like a dead, leafless log in the summer’s bright ray
The beams of the warm sun play round it in vain ;
It may smile in his light, but it blooms not again.”
What we want, above all things, is a constitution which may
grow with the growth, develope with the development of the
people ; a constitution which shall be flexible, capable of adjust-
ment to the needs of the people. We want a tree which has life
and the promise of growth ; we do not want an Agamemnon’s
sceptre, which will not have leaves or shoots, or ever bloom
afresh since it left its parent stock in the mountains.
You will find that I shall be plentifully abused for this speech.
I fully expect to be sneered at, called names, ridiculed; probably
what I say distorted and misrepresented. I am speaking to a
few hundred ; the newspaper reports will speak to thousands and
tens of thousands, “ and none of them nodding.” It would be


much easier for me to shout with what is at present the bigger
crowd in Victoria. But I won’t do it—
“ I will not do it,
Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth,
And by my body’s action teach my mind
A most inherent baseness.’ ’
For I have a strong conviction that with patience we should
get a much better constitution, one which will not leave a
legacy of miserable provincialism for ages to posterity. They
will tell you that if we do not get federation now, under this
bill, we in these colonies will drift further asunder, federation
will become more difficult, and we shall not see the movement
revived within our time. I have considered this statement,
and Ido not believe a word of it. They told us the same in
1891 ; and they were wrong. Mr. Deakin warned his hearers
in the Assembly that
“ There is a tide in the affairs of men
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune ;
On such a full sea are we now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures/ ’
He warned his hearers of the aggression of the European
Powers in the Pacific. He spoke of the temporary lull in their
movements because they saw they were driving the Australian
colonies to federate. He said that we should see his reading of
the situation was correct if that federal movement failed. He
spoke of the dreaded influx of the Chinamen. He said—“ The hour
may strike too soon that tells us our united action has come too
late; a series of sundered colonies may be seen drifting helplessly
together when they might have stood together against a common
foe. We have at this moment a magnificent opportunity lying
within our reach, lying at our hands.” What more impressive
warnings could be given to-day ? Mr. Munro, the Premier of
the day, said (for he had been one of the Victorian delegates to
the Convention of 1891)—“ I say now that I feel perfectly satis-
fied, that if we accept the Bill as it stands we will get the very
best form of federation which we could ever get.” Another
member, supporting the Bill, said “we are getting good terms
offered to us, and if we do not accept them now we are
not wise, for we may never get the same terms again.”
How absolutely wrong they were! We all see now how
ridiculous was the scheme of 1891. We have in the bill of
1897-8 several important improvements. If the Bill of
1891 had been accepted, we should have been tied up in the
meshes of a constitution which would have been unbearable, a
constitution which would have involved the ruin of some of the
colonies, including Victoria. To-day you have new bogeys raised
to frighten you. It is said that New South Wales may place
tolls upon the Darling, may cut down further her Riverina rates,
may put an export duty on wool coming into Victoria. If she
should do so, her own-people would suffer the most, and would
cry out more loudly for federation. The truth is that what we
have gained in the direction of liberal principfes in this Bill is
gained for ever. Liberal principles, whenever grasped, abide.


We are rapidly moving towards the grandest scheme of federa-
tion that the world has ever seen. Shall we arrest that progress
by accepting this Bill ? Shall we pluck the fruit before it it
ripe ? I think of this glorious ideal of federation as of a noble
and perfect fruit, rounding to ripeness, but as yet green and
crude and acrid. Under the influence of a few more genial suns
it will fall into our hands, mellow and warm-hued and luscious.
This movement for federation will go on. It is the outcome of
our pressing needs, the result of the overwhelming pressure of
our public exigencies. I do not know any more disparaging
reflection on the people of the Australian colonies than that
argument that they will throw up the federal idea in despair if
they cannot succeed on the first or second attempt. We must
have patience. Our rebuffs are—
“Naught else
But the protractive trials of great Jove,
To find persistive constancy in men.”
Many of the delegates came to that convention bound by
election pledges, by platform declarations, which they would be
glad to modify if this scheme fails. We have started wrong in
several matters. Discussion and criticism have shown us our
mistakes. We have it in our power now to choose two courses;
we are at the parting of the ways. One course, is the course of
passion, of impatience, of hysterical impulse ; the other course,
is the course befitting a great people—a people looking forward
to a great future—deliberation, and a jealous watchfulness to
preserve intact the fundamental principles which conduce to
peace, order and good government. Which path will you take ?
Will you trust the destinies of Australia to the future people of
Australia? Will you trust posterity to deal with the needs
of the future times as they arise; or will you tie the hands of
the generations which follow us ? Will you not give the future
people of Australia at least as much power as we claim our-
selves —a power to vary the constitution, as you claim the power
to make it? If you vote for this Bill, I believe that you vote
against a true and beneficial federation which will come as
surely as the day follows the night; if you vote against this
Bill, you vote for the better Bill which must soon follow. Time
and thought are on our side. I know we may be beaten in
Victoria. That should not effect our conscientious votes:
“ The fewer men, the greater share of honour.”
If this Bill became law we shall have at the least the conscious-
ness of having done our duty; and we shall find ourselves
absolved from responsibility for the evils which must arise. I
have seen the other day, a tree which, when a sapling, had an iron
band put round it; the sapling grew, and the iron band stayed,
unmoved, biting into the vitals of the tree ; and the tree was
deformed, distorted, stunted. The sapling is Australia; the
iron band is this Bill. Will you put the iron band around the
sapling? If this Bill does not become law, you will, in all
probability, have an opportunity to vote for a greater bill, freed
from the selfish elements of provincialism. But, in any case,
remember that —
“ Not failure, but low aim, is crime.




