



DAIROYING INDUSTRY.
i mvsm md m,*
*n]ELßoniy]E.«
/IDclbournc:
DUFFUS BROS., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS, 197 FLINDERS LANE.
1889.




CONTENTS.
PAGES.
Introduction .... .... .... .... .... 1 - 2
Dairying Industry .... .... .... .... .... B - 8
Foreign Markets .... .... . .... .... .... 9 - 15
Factory System .... .... .... .... .... 10 - 18
Cream Separators .... ... .... .... ' .... 19-20
Competition of Separators .... .... .... .... 27
Practical Opinions .... .... .... .... .... 28 - 42
Dairy Requisites .... .... .... .... .... 4B - 55
Barnekow’s Preparations .... .... .... .... 50-59
Calf Raising .... .... .... .... .... .... 00 - OB
Notes—Cooling Dairies .... .... .... .... 04 - 00
Milk .... .... .... 00
How to Milk .... .... .... ■••• 07 - 08
Overchurning .... .... •••• •••■ 08
Bad Butter .... .... .... •••• 08
Cooling Cream .... .... .... .... •••• 08
General Agency .... .... .... .... .... 09
Produce Business .... .... .... •••• •••• 09
Index to Dairy Requisites .... .... .... ...
a a


INTRODUCTION.
In the following pages there is information, which we believe will prove both
interesting and profitable to all who are identified with dairying pursuits.
THE DAIRYING INDUSTRY AND
FOREIGN MARKETS.
THE FACTORY SYSTEM.
DE LAVAL’S CREAM SEPARATORS
AND OTHER DAIRY INVENTIONS.
PRACTICAL OPINIONS
CALF FEEDING.
Although dealt with under separate headings, these
subjects are closely related, and should be considered as
one. The expansion of the Dairying Industry is impossible
without a profitable foreign market. Our terms for
conducting foreign shipments will be found at the close.
Anything from the pen of T. K. Dow, Esq., will amply
repay careful perusal. His ability is generally recognised,
and it is well known that he has devoted special attention
to the developments of Modern Dairying during his recent
visits to America and New South Wales.
We simply refer you to the printed matter and
illustrations.
Are letters from those using Separators, in nearly every
case well known Victorian colonists, whose opinions are
of value. They can be referred to by anyone desiring
further information.
We have others from all parts of the world,
together with awards and medals, that are always open
for inspection at our offices.
This article, although written for the benefit of other
countries, with different climates, can be read with
interest here, and some of the information turned to
profitable account.


DAIRY REQUISITES
Embraces the supply of everything required in a Dairy or
Factory. The more important utensils arc represented by
Wood Cuts, to which wo have also added short descriptions.
We direct special attention to our Butter Printer
and Weigher. It is so simple that a child can, with its
aid, print as quickly as two pair of lads can pack the butter
into boxes.
We have confidence in saying they are the best" and
cheapest manufactured. Mr. David Wilson attributes in
a large measure to their use his phenomenal success in
prize taking.
Certain matters of interest to dairying. “ How to Cool
Dairies ” is worth special attention.
Deals with miscellaneous business undertaken by us.
Defers to the business we have been engaged in for the
last twenty years.
BARNEKOW'S DAIRY PREPARA-
TIONS.
NOTES.
GENERAL AGENCY
PRODUCE BUSINESS


THE DAIRYING INDUSTRY.
The nineteenth century is distinguished by the prodigious increase in wealth
producing power.
The utilisation of steam and electricity, the introduction of improved processes,
and labor saving machinery, the greater subdivision and grander scale of production,
and the wonderful facilitation of exchange, have multiplied enormously the effectiveness
of labor.
The steamship taking the place of the sailing vessel, the railroad train of the
waggon, the reaping machine of the scythe, and the threshing machine of the flail, all
work to this end. The forest tree is now transformed into doors and sashes, blinds, boxes,
or barrels with hardly a touch of the human hand, and boots and shoes are now turned
out by the case, with less labor than the old-fashioned cobbler could have put on a new
sole. Under the eye of a single girl, cotton becomes a fabric, faster than hundreds of
stalwart weavers could have turned it out with their hand looms. Steam hammers,
shaping mammoth shafts and mighty anchors, delicate machinery making tiny watches,
diamond drills cutting through the heart of the rocks, and coal oil taking the place of
sperm, sheep killed in Australia eaten fresh in England, and an order given by a London
banker executed in Victoria the same day—these and the thousand other improvements,
which those mentioned only suggest, tend to show that there is no industry or field of
labor which science cannot touch with its transforming power.
There can be little doubt but that an era is fast approaching when, as steadily and
surely as the steamship has superseded the sailing vessel, Centrifugal Force—CEE AM
SEPARATORS—as applied to the Dairy, will displace the old dish-setting system.
It is singular that progress in this line should have been so slow. With other industries
the keen competition existing has long ago compelled the adoption of any machinery
possessing only a small proportion of the advantages which time and use have established
for the De Laval Cream Separator. But farmers are eminently conservative, and it is
only after repeated proofs of genuine advantages that they will receive and apply new
processes.
Tt is a matter for wonder how long the dairymen of Victoria will be content with
the costly and laborious old system. How long will it take to convince them that the
Cream Separator offers them a large addition to their yearly income, besides a substantial
saving of labor and time, without increasing the number of their dairy herd.
To put it emphatically, it offers two harvests from the one sowing.


Our Government has market! the progress in this industry made by other
countries, by the aid of the Cream Separators ; and, with a view of securing to our colony
like results, they have, at considerable expense, placed before our farmers examples of
the new system.
A complete travelling Dairy, in charge of Mr. Alex. Crawford, one of the most
competent dairy experts obtainable, has been visiting all the chief dairying districts of
Victoria, while at the same time the Factory System has been shown in operation at
the Centennial International Exhibition, under the charge of Mr. David Wilson, whose
fitness for the post is indisputable.
Dairy Schools.
Below is an extract from the report of one of the dairying inspectors of the south
of Ireland.
“ A marked improvement lias taken place in the quality of the butter received at tlie Cork
Butter Market. The training of the pupils at the Munster Dairy School has largely contributed to
this result, and a fact not to be overlooked has been the influence exercised by the dairy pupils in
their own localities.”
Published by the New Zealand Government.
The great success of the dairy industry in Denmark is attributed by all the best authorities here to the
excellence of the technical education given in that country, and to the way it is carried to the
farmers’ doors, every pupil being taught on the same lines. Consul Inglis, in a report just
published (May 1888), says that the increased export of Danish butter (which five years ago only
amounted to between 80,000 and 90,000 barrels, and has nearly doubled) has been due to the
co-operative system of dairying ; and the export of cheese has trebled, having grown from 20,000
pounds to 60,000 pounds. Nearly fill this is due to the spread of technical teaching. Denmark
is permeated with agricultural and dairy farming schools, and its superiority as the model state in
dairy farming has been achieved by the constant co-operation of science and practice. The butter
manufacture in Denmark is chiefly done on the “ Creameries” system, large Creameries having
been established, to which farmers sell all their cream. In Sweden there are many travelling
Government teachers. If a dairymaid wants to improve herself, the travelling teacher goes to the
farm and tells her what to do, and shows the farmer how to produce the richest milk. Instruction
in Swedish dairy colleges includes the methods of farming, varieties of pasture, dairy management,
and characteristics of good butter and cheese. Practical work is done in weighing and cooling
milk, setting cream, separating milk, and testing ; and the Government pays a number of girls for
learning how to turn out their pmduce in the best way. The result has been that Swedish trade
in butter has grown from a large excess of import over export into an excess of export over import
of more than 8,000,000 kilos (17,624,710 lb.) In cheese, however, there is still an excess of
import over export of nearly 500,000 kilos (10,000 lb.). In Germany there are a dozen
Agricultural Colleges, with large grants of from £BOOO to £5OOO a year from the State ; sixteen
schools, with grants up to £l2OO a year, and 82 farm schools with small grants. In France there
are four colleges, and more than fifty other schools, the cost of the principal institution being
£lO,OOO a year. In Belgium the chief State Agricultural School costs £4600 a year. In Italy
technical instruction in dairying is most carefully given, each season being utilised for different
kinds of cheese. In nearly all these countries, wherever dairying is at all possible, it forms part of
the technical instruction provided.


Conclusions arrived at, and laid before the Imperial Parliament by the Departmental
Commission of Agricultural and Dairy Schools.
(1.) There is n eleit v proof of threat loss to this country through a want of knowledge of the best systems
of dairy practice.
(2.) No efficient system for supplying this want, and for assisting dairy farmers to compete with foreign
producers, who possess the advantage of State-aided technical instruction, can be set on foot
without large State aid.
(8.) A central normal school should be created, and State aid given to local effort; seven district dairy
schools established, with an endowment of £SOO a year, and a general grant-in-aid of £15,000
made annually.
Technical instruction, combining practice with science, was daily becoming more necessary. So great
was the want of it, that when an endeavour was made in Scotland to get a skilled teacher in butter
making, they had to send to Sweden for one ; while for really skilled teachers in cheese making,
they had to go to the United States and Canada.
That a country like Ireland, in its celebrated district for butter-making (Cork)
finds benefits arising from the establishment of Dairy Schools is a clear proof that the
action of the Government in their endeavor to educate dairymen up to the best modern
standard is a move in the right direction.
If anyone had suggested a few years ago that “ Double Rose Cork Butter” could be
improved upon, and that its makers would he better for a few lessons in dairying, he would
have been described as a fit and early subject for the nearest lunatic asylum.
The fact that, concurrently with the success of many labour saving inventions
during the last few years, there have been others for which great advantages have been
enthusiastically claimed, and which on trial proved failures, makes the farmer shy of
belief. Knowing that only a small percentage of inventions endure the test of practical
work, and knowing also the value of hard earned cash, we honor the feeling that makes
him cautious in disbursing it. The memory of past unprofitable, and it may be expensive
experiments no doubt lives in his mind, and at the same time there is a point where
caution ceases to be a virtue, and we are absolutely sure the further delay in the use of
Cream Separators is a serious loss to each individual farmer. What this loss amounts to
in the aggregate may be calculated approximately from the following figures. When it is
admitted that of the annual butter production in Victoria only about one-third is of
prime quality, it will be seen that by the expenditure of a few pounds, a gain of tens of
thousands per annum awaits the dairymen of the colony.
Three years ago, when we accepted the agency for the now renowned De Laval
Cream Separator, it was only by the very strongest personal influence, backed by a
guarantee to, if desired, take the machine back after a month’s trial, that we succeeded in
inducing anyone to try it. Mr. Longmire, of Werona, with the enterprise which has


marked his career, was the first to undertake to make the trial To show the domestic
prejudice to the new machine, we may mention that his good lady declined to even eat
the butter made from the separated cream. We are glad to say, however, that within a
few months the same lady was one of the most energetic advocates of the Separator. The
favourable opinion formed after a month’s trial has in no way abated, but only been
strengthened by the three years’ constant use to which the same Separator has been put.
These are Mr. Longmire’s own words, after a month’s use. “I am happy to say
the Separator is working well, and has given me every satisfaction up to the present. You
will see from the papers that we got first prize for Powdered Butter at the Kyneton Show.”
And now Three Years after he Says:
“ My previous opinion is confirmed, all that I can say in addition is, that if I had
“ to give up the Separator, I should give up dairying altogether, as I am afraid my family
“ would not work at the old system. Every advantage claimed for it I have proved it to
“ possess.”
That Mr. Longmire is only a type of all those farmers using De Lavals Cream
Separators will be evident from a perusal of the “ Practical Opinions.” Pages 28 to 42.
Prior to this time we might say that Mr. David Wilson, of Mount Egerton, had one
in use for some years (which he had imported from England himself at a heavy cost), and
he dates his successful career as a Dairyman from the time he found out bow to use his
Separator. We have no hesitation in saying that any man who has enterprise enough to
venture on a large expenditure, taking the risk of damage in transit, and having to find
out how to use a machine which may turn out to be very complicated, deserves success,
and what is more, commands it. Men of enquiring mind and enterprising spirit
who are the first to take up and carry out to a practical issue new inventions are
giants and benefactors among their fellows, and whatever their rank of life or occupation,
they will succeed,
The New System.
The new system is the simplest possible—every buyer is more than satisfied, and
with each sale we have added a new friend.
Our long experience in the Butter Trade of Victoria is a guarantee that we know
our subject, and the position our firm takes in the trade is a further guarantee that our
word would not be pledged in favour of any machine, or system, which would not bear
the test of practical use.
A mistake such as this would shake to the foundations a large business that has
been built up by a quarter of a century’s hard work—yet knowing this, we are content to


risk our position on the statement that the De Laval Cream Separator is superior to the
Dish-setting System in the following points :
It skims the milk fresh from the cow, and thus avoids all losses consequent on
hot or thundery weather.
It enables the production of good butter, in all climates and at all seasons.
It gives an increased yield of fully twenty per cent, of cream.
It enables the production of a more uniform and finer quality butter which
consequently commands a higher market value.
It produces sweet cream, and that which is invaluable for the rearing of calves,
sweet skim milk.
It saves fully fifty per cent, of labour, time, space and utensils.
Three years ago reliable evidence of the value of the Cream Separator was difficult
to obtain, and consequently our position was simply that of belief in the glowing reports
received from the old world, now it is one of absolute proof. We have up to date sold 200
of De Laval’s Separators, and in every case the purchasers say that the machine does more
than is claimed for it. The fact that during the last six months no less than 2300 of
these machines have been sold should speak more strongly in favour of its merits than
pages of books, especially as it is by no means a new invention, having been manufactured
and placed on the market for the last twelve years.
We do not give you many foreign opinions, preferring those of our own colonists,
who can readily be referred to.
We have not the space to publish all the letters or abstracts of letters received from
those using Cream Separators in Victoria, but we have tiles of them that can be seen at our
office.
IMPROVED CARE DURING TRANSIT.
Cool storage at the railway stations, refrigerating trucks for carriage, and a cool
depot in Melbourne are urgently required during the summer months. The railway
department are recognising the necessity of this accommodation, and are erecting
receiving chambers at some of the larger stations, but the dairymen in every district
should use their influence to secure accommodation of some sort at every station.
The country party are very strong just now, and united action will certainly produce some
tangible result. The action, however, must come from the country ; we in Melbourne can
only assist.
EMPTIES.
Another matter, apparently trivial, but really of considerable moment, is the
better management of the return empties. It is only those intimately connected with the
trade that have any idea of the inconvenience arising from the present carelessness.


Until some uniform and more substantial package or packages are adopted, and
responsibility undertaken by the railways during transit, as well as storage room provided
at the country railway stations, this branch of the trade cannot be satisfactorily managed.
We would draw your attention to our special transit butter box, which we find lands
the butter in market in best condition. These boxes last ten times as long as the
ordinary gin box, and when returned are better looked after.


FOREIGN MARKETS.
As far as one factor of our food supply is concerned, Dr. Malthus’ assertion that population
increases faster than the means of subsistence is reversed. Butter increases faster in this
country than the population can consume it. When the production of an article has
reached this stage it becomes necessary, for the continuance of the industry on a sound
basis, to establish an outside market at a profitable price.
The appended table of exports for the last few years establishes beyond contradic-
tion the fact that Victoria has now arrived at this point.
A close acquaintance with the industry shows that the adjacent colonies, who have
hitherto absorbed our surplus, are now, to a great extent, producing their own supplies.
Were this not so, our production is increasing so rapidly that even now they could not
absorb anything like the whole of our surplus. Again, our outlet during the Spring must
be regular, not occasional, as is the case with the intercolonial trade.
The neighboring colonies are only accidental or occasional customers, on account
of their seasons, and as the number of their producers is increasing every year, it is only
a question of a short time before they will be exporters instead of importers.
In view of this our attention must necessarily be directed to the larger centres of
population, the first and most natural of which is England. While importing Butter
annually to the extent of some millions of money, the demand is always increasing, or, in
other words, “ the population is fast outstripping the means of subsistence,”
BUTTER FOR EXPORTATION.
There are of course initial difficulties to be overcome in the establishment of a new
market. Sufficient information has, however, been acquired, and enough has been done
in the way of practical experiment, to make the road practically safe for future travellers,
if they will only heed the following finger-posts :
Shipments must be composed of first-class qualities only.
They must be put up in clean, neat, and attractive packages.
They must be shipped in the cool chambers of regular steamers, in the months of
October, November, December, January, and February.
No greater or more expensive mistake can be made than to suppose that medium
and inferior qualities—that are difficult to sell here, and are at all times a clog on the sale
of better qualities—will meet a payable market at home. Many different shippers, we
ourselves among the number, have tried it, and the result has always been the same—


financial failure. We have carefully distributed it in fair-sized packages, and in different
seasons have placed it on the London, Liverpool and Manchester markets, but the same
result has always followed. The advice received from the sellers has always been to the
following effect:—“lt is no use sending-anything to this market, except really prime
quality, in clean packages.” The cause of this, after close and careful enquiry, we have
arrived at, Butterine is now in England an established substitute for Butter, and good
Butterine is a much more taking article of diet than inferior and bad qualities of Butter.
We are absolutely sure that a profitable English market can be established for good
Victorian Butter—not an all-the-year-round market, but one quite sufficient to absorb the
whole of our Spring surplus doubled, or even quadrupled.
OUR SPECIAL ADVANTAGES.
This would open the way for the extension of the industry for which we are so
favorably situated, both as regards climate and season. By season we mean that our
surplus is made just in time to catch the English winter market and the consequent
highest rates of the year. Now it so happens that the countries from which this supply
at present comes are handicapped in this direction. They cannot produce, at this season
of the year, without stall-feeding and housing the cattle. With us everything favors a
large and economical production at the very time when it is the most wanted, and when
the prices obtainable are most remunerative.
The yearly Butter production of Victoria is even now of more money value than
that of Gold or Wheat. It is difficult to forecast the future of this great industry, but that
it will attain enormous proportions, when once a certain outlet at a profitable price can be
found for the Spring make, cannot be contradicted.
A HIGHER AVERAGE PRICE.
The great drawback to the natural increase of the production has been the glut (and
consequent low prices) which has invariably occurred during the months of September,
October and November. There is scarcely a dairy farmer in Victoria but would double
his herd were he sure that he would be able to quit his Spring Butter at anything like 9d.
per lb. He knows that there is sufficient demand, at a paying figure, for all he can
produce during the remainder of the year, if only the Spring surplus is taken out of the
colony Except in extraordinary seasons the big stocks representing this Spring surplus
become a drug and a drag on the market. By entering into competition with the Winter
make they bring the price of fresh down below a paying figure. A clearance of this
Spring surplus would undoubtedly insure a good local market for the rest of the year.
This clearance can without doubt be effected, for a practically unlimited market is
available, if only the dairy farmers will pay a little attention to its requirements. Moderate


care must be paid to manufacturing, and all but what is required for the local consumption
should be shipped at once: the sooner it leaves the churn the better. These shipments
should be made in October, November, December, January, and February, in clean,
attractive packages, by swift steamers, with refrigerating chambers.
Profitable returns are absolutely sure if only this course is followed; but loss is
bound to result from the shipment of medium or inferior qualities.
Opinions of English Traders, Our Correspondents, and Others Generally.
SUITABLE PACKAGES.
In shipping Butter I do not think you can improve on the ordinary cask of 70 lbs.
to 100 lbs. In shipping to a distance the larger the bulk or body of the Butter the better
it keeps.
I have known instances when the large parcels of Butter have been shipped from
America to England and have fetched good prices, while the Melbourne ones were mostly
all rank on the outside. Have the casks or cases made of good sound material —something
that will not affect the Butter, but never expect to see them back again. After the Butter
is landed in London, it is eight miles from there to the warehouses, and it is there sold
to men who take it 150 miles into the country, and sometimes it may go 600 miles, to'
Glasgow ; hence the impossibility of collecting empties.
The Butter should have a good, natural, primrose color.
'The packages from each factory should ever be of a uniform size, as, if I want to
take an average of a quantity, I should require ten times the labor if the packages are of
a variety of sizes.
If your colony is to develop you must simply land your Butter fresh and in
good condition.
An attractive, neat, and clean Butter package, that will be decently ornamental to
a provision shop, will increase the value of Butter. Such salt should be used as may be
tasted, but not felt by the touch of tongue or finger in the Butter. Pure brine should be
frequently poured on the Butter while in store. A tallowy taste, for an inch on the top,
is induced by neglect of that. All Butter for export shipment should be stored in suitably
cold store rooms, from the time of making. The best churning temperatures are between
57deg. and 60deg. during the summer, and between 60deg. and 64deg, during the winter.
The lower the temperature of the room in which the Butter is kept, if that be above
freezing point, the better will the Butter keep while there. And the better will it keep
when brought into the warmer temperature of English warehouses. The same conclusion
is applicable to its treatment during transit. Therefore, every creamery should have, as
part of its buildings, sufficient and suitable cold storage for its make of Butter.


UNIFORMITY OF QUALITY.
The fashionable color in the London market now is primrose, and the Butter of
other shades, whether lighter or darker, is not saleable. Going away from London the
taste differs. Hence it must be quite fresh; but as one goes North it has to be salter and
salter, until what is in demand there could hardly be sold in London at all.
In the London market the one golden rule is to have uniformity of color, taste and
texture. In that way top price can be had, and in no other way.
The consumer will not give up a brand of uniform quality, sent over in large
quantities, for the variable and uncertain supply of country districts, in which it is vain
to look for the watchfulness and minute attention to detail which distinguish, for instance,
the dairymaids of Normandy.
If it were not for the continental Butter during the winter months in England the
public would have to take almost entirely to Butterine; and if the Australian dairy farmer
wants to compete with the foreigner in the London market he must do as the foreigner
has done —cast away the old dairying traditions, and simply set himself to make the
Butter that pleases the public taste. But above all things he must, in order to succeed
at all, do what is done in Scandinavia —bring science to his door, since the farmer will
not come to science, by having specialists to teach him in his own dairy.
Again, the foreigner excels in his form of package. Dutch casks, for instance, can
always be depended upon for regularity in the 16 lb. tare.
The extent to which the trade in Dairy Produce has grown in this country is
something enormous.
IMPORTS INTO THE UNITED KINGDOM.
The Imports into the United Kingdom \ Butter, 12,424,000 cwt. (621,200 tons)
during the last five years, Ist January, [Cheese, 9,124,000 cwt. (456,200 tons) of the
1883, to 81st December, 1887, were ...J aggregate value of <£80,000,000.
The Imports into the United Kingdom [ £11,887,000.
during the year 1887 were ....[Cheese, 1,834,000 cwt, (91,700 tons), value
J £4,500,000.
\ Butter, 124,000 tons
The Imports into the United Kingdom Cheese, 91,000 tons
yearly, for the five years, was on the[
average rather more than .... 215,000 tons of the aggregate average
value of £16,230,000 per annum.


For the , last three years, 1885, 1886,\
1887, the greater part of the imported 903,000 cwt. came from Denmark and France
Butter has come from Denmark and 1 3*21,000 ~ ~ ~ Germany and Holland
France. In 1887, out of a total import 32,000 ~ ~ ~ Canada,
of 1,515,000 cwt., .... ....)
Of Butterine, by far the largest quantity) 1,170,000 cwt. out of 1,273,000 coming in
comes from Holland .... ...j 1887.
] United States, 760,000 cwt.
The largest imports of Cheese are from.... Canada, 631,000 cwt.
J Holland, 362,000 cwt.
. n ... Produces. Consumes.
The production and consumption of Europe, 651,000 tons 681,000
Butter in Europe, as compared with -United States
America, is .... .... ....] and Canada, 404,000 tons 374,000
The production of Butter in the United )
Kingdom is 115,000 tons less than thelUnited Kingdom 90,000 tons 205,000
consumption .... ... ....j
In 1860 only 840,000 cwt. of Butter was imported and 583,000 cwt. of Cheese, less
than a third of what was imported in 1887. England is now by far the largest consumer of
Butter in Europe, and for all practical purposes, so far as the supply from Australia is
concerned, the market is unlimited.
Consul Sadler, in a report just published (June, 1883), gives instances of the
magnitude of the dairy industry in the prairie states of America. In the seven prairie
states of lowa, Illinois, Missouri, Kansas, Wisconsin, Minnesota and Nebraska, there are
nearly 5,000,000 milch cows. lowa alone produced last year 86,000,000 lbs. of Butter,
and Minnesota 40,000,0001b5. Chicago alone received in 1887 128,000,000 lbs. of Butter
and 46,000,000 lbs. of Cheese. But the supply of Butter will soon be unequal to the
demand within the United States, and so far as New Zealand Butter is concerned the
competition of neither the States nor of Canada need be feared, only about 52,000 cwt.
having come thence to the English market during 1887. In Cheese, on the other hand,
766,000 cwt. came in last year from the States and 63,000 cwt. from Canada, so that here
the competition is formidable.
BUTTER IN KEGS.
We received a consignment of Butter when the cool chambers in the steamers were
first fitted on board, but the shipment arrived out of condition, and our friends were
rather discouraged from making another trial, as they stated that Butter of a quality fit
for shipment was difficult to obtain. As, however, a very large quantity found its way to
the market in good condition last season, we conclude that dairy farmers on the other
side have mastered some of the difficulties of Butter-making, and are able to turn out a
much better article. The patent case is no great advantage, as Butter comes twice as
B


well in kegs if properly packed. The weight should be from 60 lbs. to 100 lbs. net (the
60 lbs. net preferred), and the kegs should not be filled, but half an inch be left all round
between the Butter and the keg. The cask should then be headed up, and a hole made
through which pickle (strong brine) should be poured in until full, when a bung (wood)
should be inserted to prevent the liquor running out. The Butter should be made as
little salt as possible, consistent with its keeping sound. Unless Butter is perfectly
sweet and good to eat it should not be sent Home, for if it has gone off at all, or is in the
least tainted, it brings a miserable price, as it is used for cooking purposes, and our
market is flooded with such kinds. Directly the Butter is made it should be packed and
sent off to the refrigerator, and it would then, in all probability, arrive here in good
saleable order. Shipments from New Zealand begin to arrive in November, and continue
up to say early in April, for we do not get any parcels during the summer months. The
trade is growing very fast, and we hope to make £6 per hundredweight next season for
really good quality. The kegs should have galvanised iron hoops, as they do not rust.
PACKING BUTTER FOR SHIPMENT.
Butter should not arrive before the middle of October, and not later than the end
of March, because, when exposed to the milder temperature after being in the
refrigerator, or cool chamber, it speedily goes rank; this being one of the greatest
objections, and a defect which the producers should try to overcome. We would impress
most emphatically upon the packers not to pack anything but the very best quality, and
nothing unless in refrigerator or cool chamber, the extra cost of freight being more than
repaid by the prices realised here. The tendency of New Zealand butter is to cut
mottled, or two coloured—that is, with streaks of white. This is a serious defect, and
depreciates the value to the extent of 10s. or 15s. per hundredweight. The packages
most in favour here are the small kegs made of white wood, and having four galvanised
iron hoops on them (plain hoops get rusty, and spoil the appearance of the package), and
square enamelled boxes, holding about 401bs. nett, with lids screwed on. In each case
uniform tares are very desirable. The kegs should be perfectly air-tight, and filled up
with brine, as the butter in them keeps longer after being in the refrigerator.
There is a preparation far superior to the enamel now used sometimes, which,
being worked over the insides of the casks, will make them absolutely impervious to
brine, and prevent the butter sticking, thereby the cask becomes clean, and the tare
remains practically unaltered, and the butter just as it is shipped ; quantity needed is
exceedingly trifling, and the price is £1 per cwt. As with cheese, uniformity of quality
under one brand is a most essential feature in the shipment of butter, S as now, when
buyers come to inspect the butters they are obliged oftentimes to waste a lot of
time in examining so many packages, which otherwise would not be necessary if the
quality were one ; and they frequently reject the parcel on account of its irregularity. If
care be taken to fulfil all these requirements we look for a large increase in business.
The prices during this season have ranged from £1 10s. to £5 IBs. per cwt. for butter.


SHIPMENTS TO FOREIGN MARKETS.
Our Home Agents are the best and most reliable to be had. They distribute
directly to the retail trade, and so do away with the numerous charges of those merchants
who have to employ brokers. Having had long and intimate experience in this line, all
goods entrusted to their care are placed on the market to the very best advantage.
Our charges when sending Home are the same as if sold in Melbourne, and we
advance if required up to three quarters of the market value here at time of shipment.
We need scarcely say that intending shippers can rely on getting the highest ruling
market price at Home. , The charges amount to as nearly as possible 2d. per lb., and
this includes frieght in the refrigerating chambers, by steamer. We reserve the right of
inspection, and a discretion as to whether the quality is good enough, having proved by
experience that it is useless to ship anything but fine quality.
At the risk of repeating ourselves, we strongly urge the dairy farmers, as a body,
to ship in the spring, as the benefit to the industry—if a profitable outlet can be
obtained —cannot be over estimated. We have a guide in the result of the trial
shipment made by the Government Dairy through our firm in December, 1888, and
which obtained the satisfactory return of 120/- per cwt. Our agents advise that the
demand for this quality is unlimited.
ri


THE FACTORY SYSTEM.
By T. K. Dow.
The factory system of making butter has now been adopted by all the
great dairying countries of the world, and it can safely be asserted that no
coijntry can succeed in carrying on an export trade by adhering to the old
methods. The single dairy system served well enough when the object was
simply, to supply the neighbouring town with butter, but the colony of Victoria
has for a long time been past that stage of development, and the dairying
interest can no longer afford to ignore the new conditions. Last year the
surplus of butter was larger than usual, and the result was a mass of totally
unsaleable produce with a quite unremunerative price even for the best brands.
Such periods of over-production must occur with increasing frequency, and it is
only by the factory system that the consequent low prices can be prevented.
When the factory system is adopted the surplus can be profitably exported, and
the local market be thus kept from falling below a remunerative level.
Theory and Practice.
Theoretically the factory system is calculated to place the dairying industry
on a sound basis, and it comes out right in practice. The difficulties of
improving the butter production of a whole community by inducing the individual
to make a better article are so great that the task is impracticable. Those who
make bad Gutter are precisely the persons who will not be instructed. The
better class of dairymen and dairywomen are capable of improvement, but who
can expect to first convince the worst butter makers that they need improvement,
and ’ then teach them better methods ? All things are, no doubt, possible, but
such an undertaking would be so tedious as to be practically out of the question.


Under the factory system it is not necessary to improve the general body
of butter makers. There are always some good butter makers in every district,
and all that is wanted is one first-class expert for each factory. With one good
butter maker the product of an entire district is turned out in excellent condition,
and it is not only good, but being a large parcel, it is better calculated to meet
with a favourable market than a large number of small and varying parcels. No
matter how skilful the butter maker in the private dairy may be, he or she has
other things to attend to besides looking after the dairy, and consequently the
butter cannot always be good. There are the household duties to look after,
and the result is that the butter varies even in the best dairies.
In the factory, however, the manager has nothing to do but to attend to
the butter, and there is no excuse for faults in the product: the butter can be
relied upon, and this certainty gives the product of the factory a special value
in the market. The conditions in regard to ventilation, cleanliness, temperature,
and other things cannot as a rule be perfect in the private dairy, for many farmers
must make shift to some extent, and few have the means to provide extensive
cool storage accomodation in their dairies, such being often too costly on a small
scale. The factory can be economically provided with the necessary cool chambers
and all the essential conditions can be secured, so that there is every opportunity
of producing at all times an article of the best quality.
This is how the case of the factory system stands theoretically. How
does it come out in practice ?
In practice the factory system is found to be so advantageous that all
dairying countries which produce an exportable surplus have been forced to adopt
it. The case of America, and the European dairying countries, is a proof of
the necessity of the modern factory system, but an Australian example is more
forcibly illustrative. With the fact of Victoria’s failure last season (1887) to deal
even moderately well with a surplus, the success of New South Wales in grappling
with a similar state of things is a complete victory for the factory system. A
surplus is something rare in the Sydney market, and consequently a failure would
have been excusable, but dealing with new conditions the factory system was able
to save the New South Wales industry from the disastrous condition into which
the single dairy system allowed the . Victorian butter business to fall. Those
interested in the Sydney dairying industry ? foreseeing that a glut was threatening
on account of the favourable season, began in the month of October to export
to London, and continued to send away shipments till March, when the supply
came down to the requirements of the local market. The factory made butter
fetched a shilling a pound, and very little private dairy was sent at all. The
best private dairy butter forwarded was sold at from a penny to twopence per
pound less than the factory made, and v. ithout the factories there would not have


been a sufficient quantity of good butter to send away to have relieved the local
market. One firm sent away one hundred and seventy tons, and a large quantity
was exported with equal success by another firm. These shipments were highly
spoken of by the London agents, and the Sydney shippers were informed that
any quantity of such butter could be readily sold in the London market. Thus
the factory system completely mastered the situation of an unusual surplus on a first
trial, and at the same time established the fame of the Sydney butter in the London
market. But this was not all; the relief of the local market was the great point. It has
been pointed out by the Sydney butter merchants that if the surplus had not
been got away the very best butter must have come down to threepence per
pound, and it was this disaster they were seeking to avoid. They did prevent
it, and got a good price for the surplus, at the same time keeping the local
up to sevenpence per pound. At the same period the private dairy system left
Victoria in the position of having a glutted local market and a large unsaleable
surplus. In this way have practical results backed up the theory of the butter
factory system. New Zealand is establishing butter factories, having found the
old system out of date, and the sooner Victoria does the same the sooner will
her dairying industry be placed on a satisfactory basis.
We are now prepared to Supply and Erect Modern Butter and Cheese Factory
Plants , complete with Latest Appliances, and will guarantee same in good working order .
Working Plans and •Estimates of Cost on Application .
The plans are taken from the best examples in America and other countries , where
Dairying has been reduced to a Science , Altered and Improved to meet the Special
Requirements of this Climate. The services of a first-class experienced Engineer are
available. He will proceed to the locality for consultation and advice if desired.


DE LAVAL’S CREAM
SEPARATORS.
DE LAVAL’S CENTRIFUGAL CREAM SEPARATOR, of which we are the
SOLE AGENTS, is without doubt the greatest dairying improvement ever invented.
Though only patented ten years ago, there are now over ten thousand in
daily use (more than three times the number of all the other cream separators put
together). The Separators are made of all sizes. They are suitable for dairies of from
one to one hundred and fifty cows; over that number two machines are necessary. Their
simplicity is such that any person after half-a-day’s practice can work them easily. They
effect a saving of fully fifty per cent, in labor, space, and time, while the quality of the
butter produced is improved, and its yield largely increased.
QUALITY OF BUTTER.
We find that the butter made with the Separator is more uniform in quality and
color, finer in texture, and of better keeping quality. The cream, of course, requires to
mature after separation. If it is churned immediately on coming from the Separator, a
soft, sweet butter will be the product. If, however, the cream is allowed to ripen (24 to
36 hours) the butter produced from it is of the very primest and best keeping quality.
EXTRA YIELD.
After numerous and exhaustive experiments it has been proved beyond question
that the average yield of cream from the Separator is fully twenty per cent, above that of
the dish-setting system. This alone makes the Separator worth ten times its cost, a?
shown by the following facts ;


A daily supply of 45 gallons of milk (15 cows) will give lOOlbs. of butter weekly by
the old method. With ■'the Separator the same quantity will give T2olbs.
Now, estimating the average value of the butter at 1/- per lb., it will be seen
that XI per week, or X 52 per year, is gained by the use of the Separator.
This result is from the extra yield alone ; we have not taken into account the
increased value of the butter produced, which, as you will see by the
testimonials, ranges from Id. to 4d. per lb. The labor and time saved to be
devoted to other branches of farm labor, are fully worth another 2d. per lb.
The separated milk, too, is much more valuable for raising calves and pigs
than the ordinary skim-milk.
SIMPLICITY.
Several in Victoria are worked by the farmer’s wife or daughter, without any help
whatever. There are only three main parts, viz., stand, bowl, and tin covers. Cleaning
after separation can be effected in five minutes.
SAFETY.
The bowl is pressed out of one piece of Swedish steel, and Can Never Burst.
Should the driving power suddenly cease, the bowl continues to revolve till it stops of
itself. Each bowl before leaving the factory is tested up to 14,000 revolutions per
minute—twice its usual speed.
With the 10,000 machines in use not a Single Life has been Lost or
a Single Serious Accident occurred.
At the late Hygienic Exhibition, held at Berlin, De Laval’s Separators were
declared to be the only safe Centrifugal Separators manufactured.
DURABILITY.
With ordinary care a Separator will last a lifetime. A farmer should be at no
expense whatever, excepting oil, for the first two years, and then a yearly expenditure of
10/- will cover all necessary repairs. A Victorian farmer who has had an A 1 Separator
for seven and a half years tells us that all it has cost him during that time has been 15/-
—not half-a-crown per year. The few small wearing parts are exposed to view and easily
taken out. They are supplied in duplicate with the machine, and can be replaced
entirely for a few shillings.


AWARDS.
No fewer than one hundred and fifty first prizes in public competitions have been
awarded the De Laval Separator, including no less than sixty-eight gold medals. Among
them are the following :
1881. General Agricultural Exhibition, Malmo, Sweden —Honorable Diploma,
Gold Medal, and King Oscar ll.’s. Gold Cup.
1882/8. For six consecutive years, the First Prize in England, and the Royal
Agricultural Society’s Gold Medal.
1886. Sixteenth General Agricultural Show at Stockholm —Prize of Honor,
large Gold Medal.
1884/8. Sixteen First Prizes in United States and Canada.
TESTIMONIALS.
We do not go to foreign lands for our testimonials. We have sold to date (20th
February, 1889) two hundred and sixty-three Separators, and we can safely say we could,
for the trouble of asking, get two hundred and sixty-three testimonials.
A 1 CREAM SEPARATOR, WITH INTERMEDIATE
For Single Horse, Steam, or Water-power.
Skims 00 gallons milk per hour. Suitable
for from 20 to 100 cows.
PRICE-WITH INTERMEDIATE. BELT TIGHTENER,
FEED REGULATOR. SPEED INDICATOR. MILK
VAT, AND A COMPLETE SPARE SET OF ALL
THE WEARABLE PARTS, £
A 2 CREAM SEPARATOR, WITH INTERMEDIATE
For Steam or Double Horse-power. Skims
150 Gallons Milk per hour. For Factory
use.
PRICE-WITH INTERMEDIATE. BELT TIGHTENER.
FEED REGULATOR, SPEED INDICATOR, MILK
VAT, AND A COMPLETE SPARE SET OF ALL
THE WEARABLE PARTS, £


El TURBINE CREAM SEPARATOR,
To be driven by a steam pipe direct from
a boiler, thus saving the cost of engine.
Steam pressure required, 601bs. Skims 90
gallons milk per hour.
PRICE—WITH FEED REGULATOR, SPEED INDI-
CATOR, MILK VAT, AND A COMPLETE SPARE
SET OF ALL THE WEARABLE PARTS, £
E 2 TURBINE SEPARATOR.
Steam Pressure required, 601bs. Skims
150 gallons milk per hour.
PRICE-WITH FEED REGULATOR, SPEED INDI-
CATOR, MILK VAT, AND A COMPLETE SPARE
SET OF ALL THE WEARABLE PARTS, £
HORIZONTAL HAND-POWER SEPARATOR.
Can be worked by a woman for an hour at a time easily. Skims 35 gallons per hour.
Suitable for dairies of up to 20 cows.
PRICE—WITH MILK VAT, AND COMPLETE SET SPARE PARTS, £


VERTICAL HAND-POWER SEPARATOR.
Skims 25 gallons per hour. Suitable for dairies of up to 15 cows.
PRICE—WITH MILK VAT, &c M ALL COMPLETE. £
BABY CREAM SEPARATOR.
Skims 12 gallons per hour. Suitable for private use or dairies of up to 10 cows. Can be
worked by a boy easily.
PRICE-COMPLETE, £


DE LAVAL’S LACTOCRITE (in Separator Frame).
A simple, handy, and sure apparatus for testing the amount of butter fat contained
in milk or cream. Wherever factories or creameries are established, some sure method
of testing the proportionate value of the various supplies should be available. A farmer
whose cows give one pound of butter to two and a half gallons of milk, should be given
more per gallon than one whose cows give only a pound to three gallons.
The samples of milk to be tested are diluted with an acid supplied with the
machine, and the mixtures boiled for a few minutes, to dissolve the caseine in the milk.
Samples of the mixtures are then put into graduated tubes that are placed in circular
holes radiating from the centre of a specially constructed bowl. This bowl is made to
revolve for five minutes, and the centrifugal motion separates the butter fat from the
other elements of the milk. The result is then read off on the graduated glass of the
tube. We have experimented most satisfactorily with this machine on milk coming from
three different farms to the Centennial International Exhibition ; the first, giving 13 % of
cream, gave 4 % of butter fat; the second, giving 10 % of cream, gave 3J %of butter
fat; and the third gave only 3%t09 % of cream. Now the difference between these
samples of milk would mean that a factory buying ]V[ilk equal to the first would
make lOOlbs. of Butter from the same quantity of milk as would take the factory
using the third quality to make 751bs. Unless a difference in price was
arranged, the one factory • would be paying good dividends and the other approaching
insolvency.
PRICE-LACTOCRITE M. (BOWL ONLY), FOR A 1 OR El FRAME, WITH CASE, 12 TEST BOXES,
BOILING GLASSES, WATER BATH, AND ACID, £
PRICE-LACTOCRITE P., COMPLETE WITH FRAME, TO BE DRIVEN BY HAND-POWER, 6 TEST
BOXES;' GLASSES, BATHS, ACID, &c., £


DE LAVAL'S EMULSOR (In Separator Frame).
For enriching the separated milk with nutritive fats; for improving the calves’ feed, or
producing a second quality cheese.
PRICE—(TO RUN IN A 1 OR El FRAME), WITH SPECIAL COVER AND HEATING VAT, £
DE LAVAL'S PATENT MILK WARMER.
For Quickly and Easily Warming the Milk in cold weather before separating. No. 1
heats 90 gallons per hour to the required temperature.
PRICE £
No. 2 heats 180 gallons per hour.
PRICE £


DE LAVAL CENTRIFUGAL MILK PUMP.
The Milk Pump is to be fixed to De Laval’s Separator Frame, to raise the skim-
milk from the Separator to the cheese vats, or to a higher level, where required. It
raises 190 gallons per hour to a height of 16 feet.
PRICE £


Report of the Judges of Dairy Utensils at the
Recent Show of the British Dairy Farmers
Association, London, 1885.
COMPETITION OF CREAM SEPARATORS.
Council did not require them to enter into a full scientific test, so much as the more practical
one of saying which machine they considered best adapted for use by farmers for the production of cream
of good quality ; and to this end the judges drew up a list of points, which they considered the most important
to test the machines, and, moreover, they took the somewhat unusual course of giving a copy of the
requirements to each exhibitor, so that they might be able to work their machines to the best advantage
in exhibiting these points. The points were as follows:
1. —Construction (embracing simplicity of design, facility of cleaning, emptying and oiling).
2. —Analysis of skim-milk.
3. —Analysis of cream.
4. —Quality of cream.
5. —Temperature at which the milk was separated.
6. —The time taken in separating a given quantity.
7. —The quantity of milk required to work the separator.
8. —The cost of the separator including the intermediate motion.
9. —The cost of fixing.
10. —The revolutions.
11. —The safety.
12. —The convenience of delivery of the skim-milk and cream to a higher or lower level.
18. —The adaptability for horse-power.
14. —The intermediate motion, embracing simplicity of construction, readiness of throwing in and out
of gear, and any arrangement for neutralising the effect on the speed by the stoppage of the
horse,
15. —The power required to work each machine.
In summing up the results of these remarks it will be noticed that though the Laval and the
Danish machines are on an equality as regards some of the minor points, in regard to the essential points
of comtruction, separation, temperature, and quality of cream, and analysis of cream, the Laval was far ahead
of its opponents, and quite deserved the gold medal given by the Council. The power of raising the skim-milk
after separation to a higher level seemed to entitle the large a Danish to a second prize, but the failure
to separate the milk satisfactorily debarred the other Danish machine from any further recognition.
The above are only extracts; the fall report can be obtained on application to J. BARTRAM
and SON, 8 Queen Street.


PRACTICAL OPINIONS.
Messrs, Bartram & Son. Exhibition, September 20th, 1888.
Dear Sirs, —In answer to yours of the 18th hist., it gives me great pleasure to state that the De Laval
Cream Separators you fitted up for our dairy here are doing grand work, although they are very often in charge
of the male and female students the Government are sending here every week, who have many of them never
seen a Separator before. To-day at the Grand Centennial Exhibition of Dairy Produce we have been awarded
two first prizes for the butter made from them, thus adding more laurels to our long list of victories with these
indispensable machines for the dairy.
Yours truly,
D. WILSON,
Superintendent Govt. Model Dairy.
Euroa, Sept. 27th, 1888.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son, Melbourne.
Dear Sir, —The Separators you supplied for the Travelling Dairy have been in constant use ever since,
and we have not had one minute’s trouble with them since we started. The A 1 we work with horse power or
steam as is most convenient. We have been using only one horse, as many thought it was too much lor one,
and we wished to disabuse their minds of that idea. We can come into a new place, and having unpacked the
separator and intermediate, have it set up in working order inside one hour ; after once seeing it set up, anyone
at all ought to be able to do all that is required. It seems to take all impurities out of the milk, even blood ; and
numerous farmers, incredulous of its separating power, have taken home the separated milk and set it. In
every case they have acknowledged that no cream rose. The quality ol the butter from the separated cream is
much more uniform, and superior to that from the old system, and the quantity increased at least fifteen per
cent. I would not attempt dairying without one.
Yours truly,
ALEX. CRAWFORD,
Manager Government Travelling Dairy.
Springbark, Mount Egerton, Egerton, 20th April, 1885.
Dear Sir,—On request, it gives me much pleasure to send you my opinion and experience of your De Laval
Cream Separator. I have had it at work for nearly twelve months, driven by a three horse-power engine that I have
on the place for cheese-making and other purposes, but I think it would be no trouble to work it with the usual
chaff cutting horse-works to be found on most farms in this country, as I do not think it takes more than one


horse-power to drive 6000 revolutions a minute, which, I think, is about the right speed. Regarding the merits
of the Machine, I may say, after thirty years' experience of dairying in Victoria, under all methods, in making a
good and profitable butter during the hot months of the year, and although successful in obtaining numerous
and valuable prizes in this and other countries, that with the aid of your Separator I can surpass all my previous
efforts, for the following reasons :—Compared with the old system of dishing up milk to obtain the cream,
your machine saves fifty per cent, of room and labour ; it gives a uniform good cream in all seasons, and through this
I obtained, on an average, twenty per cent, higher pnce last season for my butter. It gives from ten to fifteen per
cent, more butter out of any given quantity of milk, and the skim milk being always sweet and good, I am able to
make a good marketable cheese out of it. I sincerely hope you will make the value of this indispensable
machine known to the Farmers and Dairymen of Victoria through our Agricultural Societies’ Shows, and in
other ways during the short time you are to be in the colony.
Yours truly,
D. WILSON.
To Mr. A. Wahlin,
Of the De Laval Cream Separator Co.,
Stockholm, Sweden.
Fair View Farm, Werona, P. 0., 80th Nov., 1885.
Dear Sirs, —
Yours of the 27th inst. to hand. Please to find enclosed cheque for £6O for Separator, which lam
happy to say is working well and has given me every satisfaction up to the present. We have attached Churn
to the horse-works, and we work the Churn and the Separator at the same time; they both work well together.
You will see from the papers that we got First Prize for Powdered and Third for Fresh Butter made from the
Separator, at Kyneton Show,
Yours faithfully,
T. LONGMIRE.
To Messrs. Bartram & Son.
Welton Dale, Glenvale, nth January, 1886.
Dear Sirs, —
I hope before long to have the Separator going all day, and make my place a larger butter factory. In
reference to the working of the Separator, lam very well pleased with it. It certainly is all that it is represented.
We have no trouble with it, and it does its work beautifully, and has increased my butter one pound per cow per
week, and the butter is pronounced here to be the best ever produced in the district.
Yours sincerely,
W. W. SPOONER.
To Messrs. Bartram & Son, Queen-street, Melbourne.
u


Pernside, Ellenbank, 26th July, 1886.
Dear Sirs, —
lam perfectly satisfied with the Separator I got from you. I tested it against the dish system, and
obtained about 20 per cent, more butter from the Separator cream, and through the hottest part of last summer
I never saw any floaters or white specks in the butter, which I think shows that the butter is of much better
quality than that obtained in the old way. I have worked the Separator by horse-power, but lam going to
try steam, as I think it will keep up a more regular speed.
Yours, &c,,
A. W. HARVIE.
To Messrs. Bartram & Son.
Nulla Nulla, Brd August, 1886.
Dear Sirs, —
1 have very great pleasure in replying to your inquiry re De Laval Cream Separator, at use in my dairy
the past season, I have no hesitation in saying, without fear of contradiction, that it is the best and most profitable
implement a dairy farmer ever purchased ; in a word, it thoroughly separates the cream from the milk, gives a much
larger per centage of butter than the usual way of setting the milk, and, as far as my experience goes, the
prices I obtained for the butter exceeded my most sanguine expectations. I have worked the Separator with
horse-power without any difficulty. It remains only to be known to be appreciated; in fact, the benefits and
advantages derived from it are manifold, and I, having a slight knowledge of these, would not be without a De
Laval Cream Separator for any consideration. A dairy with twenty cows and upwards will in a very short time
repay the cost of the machine.
Yours truly.
C. LEHANE.
To J. Bartram & Son.
Walnut Park, Morwell, Gippsland, Brd August, 1886.
Gentlemen, —
With a personal and uninterrupted experience for over seven months with the use of the De Laval
Cream Separator, driven by One-horse Works, I find that every representation you have made to me in regard to
it has come true, I have read a number of your printed Press Opinions, as well as letters from a number of
dairymen who have it in use, and would like to verify that their praise is fully justified. I find it a very
profitable and necessary adjunct to my place, and I feel certain I could not now do without it.
I remain, Gentlemen,
Yours respectfully,
LEON WUTTRICH.
To Messrs. Bartram & Son, 8 Queen-street, Melbourne.


Whittlesea, 6th August, 1886.
Dear Sirs,
I have much pleasure in saying that the Separator which I purchased from you about six months ago
has given me great satisfaction. I was told by several farmers that it would not do with horse-works, but
must be driven by steam, but that is all nonsense ; they can be worked with horse-works quite as well if not
better than with steam.
I am, yours truly,
JAMES COULTHARD.
To J. Bartram & Son.
Lyndhurst, April nth, 1887.
Messrs. Bartram & Son.
Dear Sirs, —Regarding the “ De Laval” Cream Separator, we have had one in use now for a year, and we
find the advantages of it very many. First we get all the cream there is in the milk—there is positively none
left—and no system can do more than that; and then in the summer we can get all the cream independent of
the weather, no matter how hot it is. Again, we lose no cream by blowflies, as the cream is put away safe.
We have been milking 46 cows all the summer, and the skimming and washing up is all done* within one hour;
in fact, we start the Machine when the milking is about half done, and the skimming is done very soon after the
milking. One man can drive the horse and attend to the machine. As regards repairs, we have not required
any ; there is no part worn and not likely to be, except the rope-belt, which gets too long. We have used two
of these, but the cost is very little.
The greatest advantage of all is the superior quality of the butter. For the last ten months we have been
getting 2d. (two pence) per pound more for all the butter we can make, and there is no difficulty in selling it at
that.
I have no hesitation in recommending the Separator to any person who has a dairy sufficiently large.
Yours truly,
N. McSWAIN.
St. John’s Wood, Lyndhurst, April 2ist, 1887.
To Messrs. Bartram & Son,
Gentlemen, —In reply to your letter asking our opinion of the Cream Separator, I can say that after eight
months trial we are very well satisfied with the result. We milk on the average about 30 cows, and get fully
half a pound more batter each per week than formerly, and for the last six months have been getting 2d. per
lb. more than top market price for the butter, those extra pence alone amounting to £3O up to this date.
We would not care to be without one now, and I am sure that ours will have paid itself and all accom-
panying expenses, including homeworks and building, at the end of a year.
I am, yours truly
J. McFARLANE.
C 2


To the Editor of “ Seymour Express.”
Kobyboyn, May 9th, 1887.
Dear Sir, —Would you kindly publish the following report for the benefit of the dairy farmers of this
district. I lately bought a Cream Separator, and have had it in use for the last six weeks, during which time I
have made 20 per cent, more butter from the same quantity of milk. I get 2d. to Bd. per lb. more for my butter
and the calves do a great deal better off the new skim milk than they did before I used the Separator. I
consider the Cream Separator to be a great benefit to any dairy. Any further information I shall be happy to
give.
Yours truly,
SAMUEL FERRIS.
To Me. Bartram it Son. Kobyboyn, Oct. 18, 1888.
Gentlemen, —In answer to your enquiries concerning the Separator, it has worked splendidly ever since
I had it. It saves a deal of labour, and we get about 2d. per lb. extra for our butter, and average 15 per cent, more
cream, and the sweet skim milk I consider 25 per cent, better for calves. Wo milk 40 cows per day on an
average all the year round. The De Laval Separator I consider one of the best inventions for dairy farmers.
Yours truly.
SAMUEL FERRIS.
Lower Crawford, Lyons, Heywood, May 18th, 1888.
Messrs. Bartram & Son.
Dear Sirs,—The “Baby Cream Separator” is working splendidly. A boy fourteen years old works
mine for three hours without distress, and I get about 20 per cent, more and better butter.
Yours faithfully,
JOHN PETTIT.
Mt. Mitchell, Ballarat, Ist June, 1888.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son, 8 Queen-street, Melbourne.
Dear Sirs, —It is now oyer two months since I bought a “ Baby Separator ” from you, and in that time
you may depend I have given it a thorough trial. I have much pleasure in saying it has given great satisfaction.
We get more butter than we did in the old way ; the butter is of a better quality, and we have no trouble. I
am satisfied that any one milking six or eight cows, as we do, cannot go wrong in getting a “ Baby Cream
Separator.”
Yours very truly,
JAMES G. ROBERTSON.
Mr. Bartram. Gnarwarre, June llth, 1888.
Dear Sir, —I have been using the “ Baby Cream Separator ” twenty minutes twice a day for the last two
months, but I should think it could be kept going easily for any length of time, as once it is set going the
velocity is kept up. It is a much cleaner method of gathering the Cream than the old way of setting the milk,
and I consider it well worth the money.
Yours truly,
EMILY McFADDZEAN.


_ _ Willsmere Park, Private Model Dairy, Kew, 16th June, 1888.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son.
Gentlemen, —I have much pleasure in giving you my opinion of the “ Baby Cream Separator.” In the
first place we find it completely performs all that is professed for it, that is, it separates Cream from Milk,
quickly, cleanly, and perfectly, and is very easy to work. As regards its usefulness, the value of any machine
which does the above is self-evident, and one cannot imagine any person dealing with milk, even in the smallest
quantities, being without one.
Faithfully yours,
ARTHUR WILLS.
Polkemmett, Horsham, 2ist June, 1888.
Messrs. Bartram & Son.
Dear Sirs, —In reply to yours of the Bth inst., I can say that I find the “ Baby Cream Separator ”
satisfactory. lam sure that the quantity of Cream yielded is greater than with the old way, and it is very easy
for a man to turn; in fact, I often turn it for a considerable time myself. I would certainly advise anyone with
a small dairy to get one.
Yours faithfully,
MISS L. CALLER.
Willowbank, Moe, 6th July, 1888.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son.
Dear Sirs, —The “ Baby Separator”! purchased from you a little over three months back, works
grand. It takes all the Cream out of the milk, saves room and labor, and is extremely easy to turn. My boy,
not 10 years old yet, has repeatedly turned it for 25 to 80 minutes at a stretch without fatigue. Leaving out all
other items, such as labor saved, etc., and only counting the increased yield of Butter, I reckon that the “ Baby,”
at present, is worth to me about 7s. 6d. per week. Of course, some of my cows are indifferent milkers,
otherwise the gain would be greater than it is. Altogether lam well pleased with it, as I consider it the best
bargain I ever struck, and I would not like to be without one again now, after having worked it for this short
time.
Yours truly,
E. W. FECHNER.
To the Editor of the “ Tungamah Express.**
Belfast Farm, Tungamah, Tungamah, 22nd July, 1888.
Sir, —Knowing your valuable journal is ever ready to promote and advance the welfare of the farming
industry of this important district, 1 would crave a small space to bring under the notice of the farmers and
graziers the following information:—lt is a well known fact that a few gentlemen interested in the welfare of
our town and district are endeavouring to start a butter factory, and as I have been asked to furnish all
information in my power and to set forth all the benefits which I consider would be derived from the establishment
of such an industry, I have great pleasure in doing so to the best of my ability. In the first place I notice by
all the leading papers that wherever a butter factory has been established in the colony that land has risen in


value from £1 to £1 10s. per acre; this in itself is a great matter and worthy of the consideration of the farmers
and others interested. I may state that I have been dairying for over twenty years, and in that time have had
many experiences; I may further state that I have always had the reputation of making a first-class article,
which commanded the top price going both in the cold climate where I formerly lived and in this hot one, but
so little profit fell to my lot after all my hard and laborious work that last year I determined to sell every cow I
possessed, but was still in the dark as to how I would better my condition in any other way. At this time the
De Laval cream separator came under my notice, and I at once procured one, and then made up my mind to
rise or fall by the dairying industry. The result of the experiment was most wonderful, as I was able to get
double the quantity of butter, pure and sweet in the hottest day in summer, besides getting Is. per lb. for some
when my neighbours were only getting 4d. per lb. This I consider one of the plainest proofs of the success that
would be attained if the factory system was properly carried out. I will now show you what lam doing with
my own dairy under the factory system. lam milking 20 cows at present, which give jme an average of
6 lbs. butter each per week ; my butter is worth in the Melbourne market Is. 9d. per lb., and allowing for
expenses 2d. per lb. the net value is Is. 7d. per lb., leaving me a profit of £9 9s. 2d. per week. Now take the
worst six months of the year, say 20 cows with an average of 3 lbs. butter to each cow, price 9£d. per lb., the
profits would be £4 14s. 7d. per week ; added to this bear in mind that the milk is all saved for the calves, and
20 calves at the end of the season are worth 30s. each or £3O for the lot. The total profits for the year would
therefore be £398115. 6d., not at all bad for the purchase and keep of 20 cows. In the proposed factory this
would represent two shares with 10 cows to each share. The cost of buildings, machinery, and other appliances
would be about £7OO, and the cost of working would be about £8 per week, £4OO per year, and as there are to
be twenty shareholders in the company the cost to each shareholder would be £2O. Trusting that my remarks
will enable the Directors to at once complete the share list. Yours obediently,
W. FOSTER.
Lancefield, 12th August, 1888.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son.
Dear Sirs, —Yours of 10th inst. duly reached me, calling my attention to some disparaging remarks re
Cream Separator. I can positively deny having said or made use of any such remarks. I have only to add
from my experience for over two years of the Separator that it gave me thorough satisfaction, and I consider
any dairy is not complete without one. It saves labour and expense, for I consider in a dairy of forty cows it
will pay for itself in a season. The foregoing is my candid opinion, given without fear or favour.
Yours faithfully,
C. LEHANE.
Tooborac, 18th August, 1888.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son.
Gentlemen, —In reply to yours of the 10th inst., I beg to inform you that I started the Separator to
\*ork on the 17th November, 1886, and have used it every day since, and intend to continue to do so while I
have a cow to milk; in fact, Mrs. M'Master would sooner do without anything about the place than part with
the Separator. And we consider it is worthy of all praise.
Most respectfully yours,
D. M'MASTER.


Yannathan, let Sept., 1888.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son.
Dear Sirs, —I consider I made a very profitable bargain when I bought the Cream Separator three years
ago. Sixteen per cent, .increase in the yield of butter from my dairy of 60 cow’s is a big item, without
calculating the improvement in the quality. The time the Separator saves is very considerable, and I have
been put to no expense at all ever since I had it.
Yours faithfully,
J. T. SMITHURST.
Murchison, Sept. 6, 1888.
J. Bartram & Son.
Gentlemen, —Tie your enquiries of the De Laval Cream Separators, I may say that I have had one in use
for the last nine months, and it is doing excellent work. The number of cows I milk are 30 on the average. The
saving in the Separator and the old setting fashion is quite 10 per cent, more butter. The butter brings
twopence extra in the market. In the summer time the calves get the benefit of the milk from the Separator,
it not being allowed to get thicker sour. With regard to expense of Separator, I have been put to none ;in
fact, quite as good as the day I started her. I consider I have made a profitable investment by purchasing the
Separator, and would advise any farmer that only milks ten cows to secure one* for it is simple and easy to
work. I have got an old horse (26 years) that works it with ease. I may state that I have been milking cows
for the last 30 years.
Yours truly,
JOHN HUTCHINSON.
Lethbridge, Sept. 6,1888.
Messrs. Bartram & Son.
I have much pleasure in recommending the Separator. We have been working it for about three
months, and it has cost no expense except oil, and it is equally as good now as when we started, if not better.
We milk on an average from 45 to 60 cows. I consider we get fully 20 per cent, more butter from the
Separator.
I am, yours faithfully,
W. JENKINS.
Messrs. Bartram & Son. Dunach., 6th Sept., 1888.
Gentlemen, —I have deferred writing you re the De Laval Separator I purchased from you last February,
until I could speak with certainty from experience as to its capabilities. It has now been in daily use for six
months, skimming the milk of 20 cows, the increased yield ol butter as compared with the dish-setting system
being at least 20 per cent; quality far superior, consequently of higher value. Athough taking every atom ot
cream from the milk, calves thrive well upon it. Of wear and tear I cannot find a trace, the only expense to
keep it in order being a bottle of oil per month ; indeed myself and wife find now that we made a great mistake
in not obtaining one when they first came out.
Yours faithfully,
GEO. HULL.


Mr. Bartram. Baddagiimie, Sept. Bth, 1888.
Dear Sir, —It gives me great pleasure to add my testimonial to the value and benefit of the De Laval
Cream Separator. I consider no dairyman with twenty cows should be without one. We have had the
Separator nearly two years, and are milking 50 cows at present, but have thirty more cows to come in. The,
increase in the yield of butter is 10 per cent, in very cold, and 40 per cent, in the very hottest weather. We
get from Id. to 3d. per lb. more for our butter than our neighbours, and the quality is always good and
uniform. The calves we find do not do so well for the first month on the skim milk, but after that they thrive
well on it. 12s. 6d. is all the expense we have been put to since we have had it, and it is worth quite what I
paid for it; in fact, the longer I work it the better I like it. Ido all my washing up in fifteen minutes, and I
consider the Separator has paid for itself long ago. Yours truly,
STEPHEN MACK.
Dear Sir, Femside } Warragul, 10/9/88.
In reply to yours of the Ist inst., asking for my opinion of the De Laval Separator, I may say that I
think very highly of the machine. I have had it in constant use for the last two years ;it has cost me
nothing in repairs except a new cotton belt (8/6). I milk about twenty cows on an average, and I think the
time saved, together with the increased quantity of butter obtained over the dish-setting system, to have fully
repaid me the cost of the Separator, which I consider is as good as ever it was. I have never seen any cream
rise on the separated skim milk. 1 am, yours,
A. W. HARVIE.
To J. Bartram & Son. Tinamba, Sept. 11th, 1888.
Dear Sir, —In reply to your letter, asking my opinion of be Laval Cream Separator, I have been working
it about six months, and it has given every satisfaction. We get all the cream from the milk ; also make better
butter, and get top market price. I consider the butter made from the Separator keeps sweet longer than
ordinary dairy made, as all the filthy matter is abstracted from the cream. It has cost nothing for repairs,
and I consider it as good as new. I think it a great labor saving investment, and have no hesitation in
recommending it to any person who has a dairy of twenty cows and upwards.
Yours truly,
C. ROUT.
Gentlemen, Authoringa, Mirboo, 12th Sept.. 1888.
We have now used the Separator for fifteen months, and the longer we have it the more we esteem it.
We have never tested the increased yield of butter, but we are quite satisfied that it will repay us well for the
outlay. We made as good butter before we got the Separator as we have done since, but not so uniform in
quality. Our calves have done quite as well on the separated milk as they did on skim milk. The Separator
has not cost us one penny for repairs yet, and I don’t see that the machine has worn in any of the parts. We
have never found any cream on the separated skim milk by setting. The Separator saves time and a great
deal of labour in skimming and handling milk dishes. We could not have put up a building suitable for
carrying on dairying under the old style for the cost of the Separator and engine.
I remain, Gentlemen, yours respectfully,
To Messrs. Bartram and Son.
WILLIAM SMITH.


Clifton Farm, Avenel, 12/9/88.
Dear Sir. —I am well pleased with the Cream Separator I bought from you. I have separated the milk
from an average of 25 cows for the last seven months, and the machine appears to be as good now as when I
bought it. It has not needed any repair as yet. I can make about a fourth part more butter with the
Separator than I can with the dishes. Where I can make 60 pounds off the dishes, I can make 80 pounds
with the Separator. I find that the Separator butter is worth threepence per pound more in the summer time
than butter made from dish cream. I think I can make as good butter off the dishes in the winter as I can
with the Separator, as I have tried both ways this winter, and got as good a price for one as the other. But
the Separator is far less trouble. With the Separator you have sweet skim milk for the calves, but it is very
poor, as you can set it as long as you like, and there will not be any cream on it. In conclusion I must say
that the Separator is a great improvement on the old system of setting the milfc in dishes. 1 would not be
without it now on any account.
Yours truly,
JOHN HOLLAWAY,
Clifton Farm, Avenel.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son. 8 Queen-street, Melbourne. Inverbroom, Sale, 15th Sept., 1888.
Dear Sirs.—I have pleasure in again testifying to the merits of the De Laval Cream Separator, which
has given me complete satisfaction during the three seasons I have used it. It has cost me nothing for repairs
save a few wooden plugs and rubber rings. With the De Laval Separator I have always been able to
command top prices for my butter, and it is an advantage to have sweet skim milk for calves. I consider that
my Separator has suffered no deterioration in value in consequence of wear, and is as good as a new one.
Having some experience of machinery generally, I can safely say I know of no other that will run for months,
or I might say years, without requiring a considerable outlay for repairs, the only essential points (and they
are essential in the highest sense of the term) being that the frame of the machine is kept perfectly level, and
proper attention be given to oiling with the finest procurable lubricating oil. I am satisfied that for anyone
dairying on a fairly large scale, the purchase of a Separator is a profitable investment. I milk from 50 to 80
cows according to the season.
Yours faithfully,
FRED. J. LITTLE.
Morwell Park, Sept. 15,1888.
To J. Bartram & Son.
Dear Sirs, —I have now had the Cream Separator supplied by you for eight months, and it is giving me
great satisfaction. I milk on an average forty-five cows, and I believe I get an increase of from 15 to 20 per cent,
of butter. The quality of the butter is much better, and the skim milk—though there is absolutely no cream in
it—is invaluable for the calves. I made a most profitable investment when I bought the Cream Separator; in
fact I cannot find words to praise it enough.
Yours truly,
R. PORTER.


Messrs. J. Bartram & Son, Stratford, Sept. 17th, 1888,
Dear Sirs, —In reply to yours of the Ist, asking my opinion of the De Laval Cream Separator which I
purchased of you some months ago ; all I can say is that it is simply perfection, and undoubtedly I think I have
made a profitable investment. In the first place, I reckon I get fully 15 per cent, more butter as compared with
the old dish-setting system ; and then again the quality of the butter is very much superior to the hand-made
article. I have set the skim milk, but there was not a particle of cream to be seen on it after standing all
night. The calves thrive very well indeed on the skim milk; in fact they do quite as well as if they were
running with their mothers during the day, and shut in the pen at night, as they are where people milk only
once a day. I have had my machine working for the last four months, and so far it has not cost me anything for
repairs, nor is it likely to for some years to come as far as I can judge, as there is no appearance of its wearing
in any part. There is one thing I would strongly advise anyone getting one of these machines, and that is to
work it by steam, the advantage of having steam for heating purposes, and the saving in time and trouble
looking after a horse would very soon pay for the extra expense of a small engine.
Yours faithfully,
JOSEPH V. DANIEL.
Messrs. Bartram & Son. Yarrawonga, Sept. 17th, 1888.
It gives me great pleasure in informing you that the De Laval Cream Separator that you sent me has
done all that you said about it. As to taking off the cream, it saves more labor than I can explain. We have
given it a good trial as to quantity of cream, which is a deal more than the old system of setting in dishes, and
we can get from twopence to threepence per lb. more for it in the local market. We had no trouble in working
the Separator ; one of my boys works it. We would not be without one of them, now we have got used to it,
on any account. We are working it with a very light horse. The Separator is as good as it was the day we
got it; no wear whatever.
Yours truly,
J. INCHBOLD.
Belmont Farm, Shepparton, nth Sept., 1888.
Messrs. Bartram, Queen-street, Melbourne.
Gentlemen, —I have to state that I have now worked De Laval’s Cream Separator for two years, and it
has given me every-satisfaction. The machine is now as good as when I got it. I have run it on the same
foot-bearing points that were in when it came, and, with the same care, I see nothing to prevent it lasting
another ten years ; in short, there is no appreciable wear anywhere excepting in the collar bearing, which has
slightly more play. The expenses of working the thing is but a mere trifle. It saves a lot of labour compared
with the dish system, gives a better return —in my opinion of from fifteen to twenty per cent., and makes cleaner
and better butter in every way. There is an average of seventy cows milked on my place, and without the
Separator now, we would feel completely lost. The machine is to the dairyman all it is represented to be,
namely, the best of all dairy appliances.
Yours truly,
JOHN McPHERSON.


Messrs. J. Bartram. Yinnar, Sept. 17th, 1888.
Gentlemen, —1 have only had your Separator in use four months, and as the cows were going out when
I got it, and are now only coming in, we have hardly had a good trial of it, but so far it has done very well.
We milk 80 cows, and find the Separator gives us an increased yield of fully 20 per cent. The quality is more
uniform, and the sweet skim milk better for the calves. We have been put to no expense as yet, and we save
about two hours per day by using the Separator.
Yours,
JOHN SILLCOCK.
“Lochend,” Baimsdale, 19/9/88,
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son.
Dear Sirs,—l have had the Separator in work nine months, milking on an average 35 to 40 cows. I
get an increase of 25 per cent, more butter, and from 3d. to 4d. per lb. better price for it. The sweet skim milk
is much better for both calves and pigs, and I reckon the machine saves from 60 to 60 per cent, of labour. I
consider it one of the best investments I ever made, and by far the best any dairy farmer can make.
Yours truly,
J. M. KIRKPATRICK.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son. Benalla,. 21/9/88.
Gentlemen, —Be enquiries whether I am satisfied with the Cream Separator I purchased from you about
16 months ago. I must say lam perfectly satisfied with it; in fact I would not run a dairy with 25 or more
cows without one. They are very easy to clean. Mine has only cost me the price of a new set of endless belts
yet. 1 work mine with a steam engme.
I have, &c.,
JNO. STANDISH,
J. Bartram & Son. Grantville, 24th Sept., 1888.
Dear Sir, —I have been working the Separator for two years, and all I can say is lam very well satisfied
with it. I milk 20 cows, and I get 25 per cent, more butter than I used to. It has cost me nothing for
repairs at all, and is just as good as new. lam very well pleased with it.
Yours truly,
D. MIDDLEBROOK.
May Park, Mooroopna, Sep. 26,1888.
Messrs. Bartram & Son.
Dear Sirs, —In reply to your inquiry how the Separator is working, I must say first-class. I have no
machine on the farm that has paid me so well. I have it in use now eighteen months, and it goes as well now
as the first day I had it. lam perfectly satisfied that I get all the cream, no matter how wind or weather goes.
I am milking 38 cows, and make an average of 260 pounds of butter per week, although dry as the weather has
been. One grocer takes it all, and gives top market price. I never had a complaint against the butter. To
my brother dairyman I must say that after my experience with the De Laval Separator, I would not think of
carrying on a dairy again without one.
Yours truly,
T. M'CORMACK.


Heathfield, Shepparton, 27/9/88.
Messrs. Bartram & Son, Melbourne.
Dear Sirs, —I have much pleasure in stating that I have used the Separator I bought from you for about
six months, and that lam satisfied with it in every respect. It works as well as when I first got it, and it
has cost nothing for repairs. One horse does the work easily. Having had long experience of the old method
of butter making, I find the new much less laborious and more profitable.
Yours faithfully,
R. C. ANDERSON.
River View, Tallarook, October 25,1888.
To Messrs. Bartram & Son, Melbourne.
Sirs, —1 have now had about twelve months’ experience with the De Laval Cream Separator, and lam
pleased to state that it is beyond my expectations. The average number of cows we milk throughout the year
is about 88, and lam sure the increased yield is fully 20 % when compared with the dish-setting system. The
quality of the butter is by far superior, and realises about a penny per pound more. The sweet skim milk is
highly valuable for calves, and I consider any person milking about twenty cows, that really knew the advantages
of this machine, would not be without one at the price.
Yours faithfully,
M. D. RYAN.
Priory, Poowong, October 80, 1888.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son, Melbourne.
Dear Sirs, —We have much pleasure in giving you our opinion on the De Laval Separator. In the
first place we consider it so great an improvement on the dish system—it is almost idle to institute any
comparison between the two. It does away with a vast amount of labor and slopping about that is
inseparable from dairying under the old system, at the same time it enables one to preserve much more
easily that cleanliness and sweetness so necessary in a dairy. It is much more easy to keep the butter at
an even quality with it than with the dishes. What that quality is may be judged from the fact
that our butter always realises the highest market price in Melbourne. We have set the milk after coming
from the Separator but found there was no cream rose on it. Calves do well on the milk and we consider it
is better for them than the stale milk out of the dishes. We milk from 180 to 200 head in the summer
and would consider ourselves heavily handicapped if we had to work the dairy now without a Separator.
We have had our machine eight months and during that time our expenses for repairs have been almost nil,
in fact we consider it is just as good as the day we bought. As a labor-saving appliance we think the
Separator may be considered to stand in the same relation to the dairying industry as the reaping machine
doe? to the farming.
JAMES SCOTT & SON.


Mr. J. L. Thompson’s Opinion of the De Laval Cream Separator. Extract from his letter to C. J. Coates, Esq.,
Secretary Royal Agricultural Society of South Australia.
Dear Sir,
Before the Separator was purchased we had almost given up
making Butter of any kind. What we did produce was of that white, pasty description, which most people
prefer going without, rather than eat it.
But now, with the Cream Separator, the result is very different. To commence with, lam quite sure
with the use of the Separator we get from 25 to 30 per cent, more Cream. The working of this
machine is exceedingly simple. A Small Horse can work it with ease, and all our dairy work is finished
early in the morning. The Butter always comes in less than 15 minutes’ churning, and is rich in colour, fine
in grain, and firm.
You will remember the trial we had at Messrs. Harrold Bros. (Agents in Adelaide) of the Cream
Separator, under the auspices of the Society. From recollection, I must say that trial was unsatisfactory.
Many people took away small samples of the milk and set it, for the purpose of seeing if any cream would rise.
In every case, I was informed cream did rise, and this fact prejudiced me, and I presume others also, against
the machine. The working of the Separator was evidently defective, for I have always set a small quantity of
the separated milk, and I have never seen the least appearance of cream on the top. Indeed, it is impossible
any could be left, considering the extra quantity of Butter made.
If I were commencing operations on my own account, and had only Ten COWS, the first investment
I would make would be a Cream Separator No one need apprehend any fear
of trouble through the working of the machine, and it is certainly all and more than has been said of it.
Yours, &c.,
J. L. THOMPSON,
Manager Dookie Experimental Farm, Cashel, Victoria.
The Hon. J. L. Dow, Minister of Lands and Agriculture, in the (official) Hand-Book of Victoria, says :
“The Separators have given entire satisfaction, and it may be expected that they will be extensively
sold. As this Machine separates the cream from the milk by centrifugal force in a few seconds, it saves a
large amount of labor. All the labor of setting, milk-skimming, and washing milk-dishes is done away with,
and there is also a great saving of dairy room. A very small dairy is sufficient to keep cream in, while a large
space is needed for setting milk. Not only is there a saving of dairy room, but a saving of milk and cream,
for there is no danger of losing cream by the souring of the milk. The whole of the cream is obtained, and
both the cream and skim-milk are perfectly sweet, so that the farmer obtains the best article in the best
condition.”


Cheese and Butter Factory, Woodstock-on-Loddon, Feb. 13th, 1889.
J. Bartram & Son.
Dear Sirs, —In reply to your query, re Separators, I have much pleasure in informing you that I am
more than pleased with their success. In a dairy of say thirty cows, the A 1 Separator will more than pay for
itself in the first year. It will take all the cream off the milk, in all seasons—cold or hot weather. In fact,
on a day this season that the thermometer stood at 110 deg. in the shade, the Cream Separator produced a
pound of butter to each 2 gallons 8 pints of milk. In the ordinary setting fashion I should have got very
little cream, if any. To sum up, my opinion is that it is impossible to carry on dairying with profit without
using a Cream Separator.
Faithfully yours,
MICHAEL BURKE.
Cave Hill, Lily dale, November 8, 1888.
Messrs. J. Bartram & Son.
Gentlemen, —I have used for some time your Turbine Cream Separator, and it gives me the greatest
satisfaction to certify to its completeness. 1 would recommend it to all who require Cream Separators.
Yours truly,
DAVID MITCHELL.
THE VALUE OF CREAM SEPARATORS.
To the Editor of “The Leader.”
Sir, —I beg you will insert this in reply to a paragraph recently in The Leader, which says that I had
stated “ that the dairy farmers in Ontario, Canada, had given up the Cream Separators and gone back to the old
system,” Ido not remember ever having made such a statement anywhere ; indeed it could not be made by
anyone, because Ontario has just begun to try the Separator, and has had no time for proof. Quebec province
has used Separators much longer, and is well pleased with them. It is possible I have mentioned to some one
that the State of New York, in some districts, gave up the use of the Separator five years ago, thinking it
spoiled the general appearance and quality of the butter, but even there the evidence was not conclusive. I
desire most clearly to assert my strong approval of Separators, especially for Australia, as to which the public
will hear more ere long.
Yours, &c.,
WILLIAM BROWN,
Late of Canada.


DAIRY REQUISITES.
We take this opportunity of informing you that we have established a new branch
to our business —that of Supplying all Dairy Requisites. In doing so we are meeting a
long felt want. In the past any farmer deciding on fitting up a Dairy or Factory, has
been at a loss how and where to get his plant. He has been obliged to specially import
some of the articles, and to search the length and breadth of Melbourne for the others.
Unless experienced, he has run the risk of having old-fashioned and expensive articles
pushed upon him, and has necessarily wasted a considerable amount of time.
We ourselves have felt, when our country customers ordered a few dairy requisites,
the difficulty of getting them, and hence determined to establish a Dairy Supply
Department in connection with our present business, where a farmer could get a
complete dairy outfit without any trouble.
The subject has received our careful attention during the last three years. We
have posted ourselves up in the most successful systems in vogue in other countries. We
have only to add that the branch is administered by a thoroughly competent manager.
BUTTER FACTORY OUTFIT.
(TO TREAT THE MILK OF 200 COWS (600 GALLONS) DAILY).
1 4-h.p. Horizontal Engine
1 6-h.p. Colonial Tubular Boiler
2 A2 Cream Separators (each 150 gallons per hour)
2 Milk Storage Yats (each 300 gallons)
1 weighing Tank (70 gallons)
1 Weighbridge (£ ton)
1 Square Concussion Churn (150 lbs.), pullies extra
1 Butter Worker (75 lbs.)


1 Eureka Butter Printer and Weigher
8 Cream Cooling Cans (each 5 gallons)
1 Set Milk Testing Instruments
1 Set Butter Scales and weights
1 dozen Cream Test Tubes
2 Sieves, \ dozen Pats Price complete X
A cheaper Milk storage vat can be supplied. The above are the patent steam heating cheese vats that can be utilized for
cheese making without further expense.
These vats, and also the weighing can, and weighbridge, can be dispensed with when milk is not to be purchased.
This would reduce the cost of outfit by about £3O.
The above price is for the specified apparatus only, and does not include erection, shafting, pullies, belting, washups and
necessary piping.
We give special estimates of the larger plants.
CHEESE MAKING OUTFIT.
(TO TREAT THE MILK OF 200 COWS (600 GALLONS) DAILY).
1 Self-acting Return Heater
2 Vats (each 300 gallons)
1 Curd Strainer
1 Colonial Cheese Press (12 screws)
20 Cheese Moulds
1 Syphon and Strainer
1 Curd Bucket
1 Scoop
1 Horizontal Curd Knife
1 Vertical Curd Knife
2 Mould Knives
3 Annatto Measuring Glasses
1 Weighing Can (70 gallons)
1 Weighbridge (£ ton) I only required if buying milk
1 Conductor Head j
1 Set testing instruments
1 dozen Cream Test Tubes
1 Set Stencil Plates and Figures Price complete X
Where a butter plant also is provided the heater will not be required, as the engine boiler heats the vats.
For each additional 100 cows add, another vat, 4 screws and half u dozen moulds.


PRIVATE DAIRY OUTFIT FOR BUTTER MAKING.
(20 TO 100 COWS, OR 300 GALLONS PER DAY).
1 Set Horseworks
1 A 1 Cream Separator (90 gallons per hour)
1 Square Concussion Churn (100 lbs.) pullies extra
1 Butter Worker (50 lbs.)
1 Eureka Butter Printer and Weigher
1 Set Butter Scales and Weights
1 Thermometer, 2 Sieves, 2 Pair Pats
40 feet Leather Belting (3 in.) Price complete £
This includes everything except erection, for which we charge ma t's time an I travelling expen :s.
PRIVATE DAIRY OUTFIT FOR CHEESE MAKING.
(40 TO 100 COWS, OR 300 GALLONS MILK.)
1 Heater
1 Yat (800 gallons)
1 Curd Strainer
1 Colonial Press (4 screws)
8 Moulds
1 Syphon and Strainer
1 Curd Bucket
1 Scoop
2 Curd Knives
1 Mould Knife
1 Measuring Glass
1 Thermometer
6 Test Tubes
1 Set Stencil Figures
Price complete £
We manufacture and supply a cheaper plant for dairies of less than forty cows.
I)


EUREKA BUTTER PRINTER AND WEIGHER.
For years past it has been felt that some more speedy method of printing butter
was required. We have at last produced a machine that supplies the want. It is self-
weighing and clothing, and turns out either pound or half-pound rolls. One operator can
easily print two hundredweight of butter in an hour, and it is so simple that a child can
work it. For durability and simplicity it is unequalled. During the closing month of the
Exhibition it was in daily use at the Government Dairy, and created quite a sensation by
its simplicity and effectiveness.
SQUARE CONCUSSION CHURN.
Nothin" in relation to butter-making has received so much attention as the churn,
and the sizes, shapes, and patterns manufactured are numberless. After very exhaustive


experiments it has been proved beyond contradiction, that the churns without beaters
produce the finest quality butter. It is now a recognised fact that concussion is the
essential element in churning, as it ensures the granulation being simultaneous and certain.
It avoids the overchurning of one portion of the cream and the underchurning of the
other, and hence the perfect sample of butter it produces. The butter is more easily
taken from the churn, the churn itself more quickly cleaned, and the extra power
required as the butter is forming done away with.
However, if people once get used to a certain style they don’t like changing, so we
keep samples of all the leading styles in stock, which we supply at makers’ prices.
BUTTER WORKER.
This article is now recognised as indispensable in a modern dairy, whether the dry
or the washing process is in use. It abstracts all the butter milk, and carefully cleans the
butter without breaking the grain. Wherever good and cold water is scarce the dry
process is of incalculable value. If there are any doubts as to its success we would
simply refer to the fact that it was used exclusively by the Government Dairy at the
C.1.E.M., 1888-9. The quality of the butter turned out was unquestionable, taking the
first prizes at the special shows, and giving the greatest satisfaction daily to hundreds of
consumers.
D 2


HEATER AND VAT.
This is a very simple and economical invention. The action is automatic and
the one supply of water in the heater will last for a long time, which is a great con-
sideration where water is scarce. The hot water or steam passes between the inner
and outer jacket of the vat and returns again to the heater. This is the best, simplest
and most useful system where a steam boiler is not required for other purposes. The
vat is so made that it can be used with a boiler equally well, and is supplied with
or without the heater. Can also be used for steaming chaff for cattle food. When
not used in cheese making, it can be utilised as a milk storage vat in dairy or factory.
CURD BUCKET AND SCOOP.
Ensure the rapid and satisfactory handling of the curd.


CURD STRAINER.
All makers know how important it is that the curd should he readily and
easily handled, This strainer is of the latest and best style and of the very best
workmanship.
COLONIAL
CHEESE PRESS.
lever CHEESE PRESS.
These cuts represent the styles now most used. We recommend the “Colonial,’
as it is the cheapest, most easily and quickly worked, and possesses all the points of a
perfect press. It can be supplied ready for use or built in the factory by a local
carpenter. Screws of several styles,—handles above or below, or cogs and ratchets
supplied for it.


SYPHON AND STRAINER.
For drawing off the whey from the curd.
CHEESE MOULDS.
Made of best quality tinned iron. They are solid, substantial, well-made, and
perfectly smooth on the inside. Fit of the followers guaranteed.
CURD KNIVES.
Altogether indispensable to good cheese-making, doing away with the curd-
breaking mills and ensuring the proper cutting of the curd. It will be readily seen
that these knives are of very superior make. Best quality steel and double tinned.


ANNATTO MEASURING GLASS.
CREAM TEST GLASS.
No one should rely on guesswork as to the quantity of annatto and rennett used.
A lot of trouble is saved and accuracy guaranteed by the use of this little.glass.
The Cream, or per cent, test glass, is very handy for testing the richness of the
different cows’ milks. Where milk is purchased it is indispensable, and on the farm it
is useful in weeding out the light creamers among the herd.
MILK COOLER.
Whenever milk has to be carried any distance or kept any length of time the
animal heat must be abstracted immediately it comes from the cow. The milk cooler is
the best and quickest method of effecting this desideratum. It is easily fitted up and
only requires a plentiful supply of cold water. It is indispensable where milk comes any
distance to the factory, and more especially so where it is sent to town.


PRINTS AND PATS.
We always keep in stock a good selection of box and other Prints, of all
patterns, grooved and plain butter pats, and butter hands.
DAIRY BOOKS.
Books, with columns ruled for the quantity of milk received, butter or cheese
produced, price and amount realised, &c., save a great deal of clerical work, and ensure a
useful and business-like record being kept.
HORSEWORKS.
These horse works are specially constructed for driving the Be Laval Cream
Separator. We also supply Separator Horse Gears, manufactured by Messrs. Nicholson
& Co. and Messrs. Buncle & Co. The intermediate motion of the Separator requires
to be driven GOO revolutions per minute. Ordinary gears are constructed to drive
up to ‘250 revolutions only, so the necessity of a special gear will be readily understood.
Each gear is fitted with a patent stop clutch.
The selection of Horseworks is so much a matter of fancy that we only say that
each of the above kinds does its work thoroughly and well. Any of the above, or others
ordered through us, will be supplied at makers’ prices, and will be fitted with correct
pullies for driving the Cream Separator. They can be used for Chaffcutting, &c., &c.,
as well, if required.


ENGINE AND BOILER.
TANGYE’S SOHO STEAM ENGINE, WITH COLONIAL TUBULA.R BOILER.
We have found this Engine and Boiler to be the most suitable for factory or dairy
requirements, besides being the cheapest and most durable.
The speed of the engine can be increased or reduced by simply tightening or
releasing the cap which forms the top of the governor. The fly-wheel can be put on
either end of fly-wheel shaft. The boiler, which is small in diameter, hence very strong,
has large heating surface, and the fire-grate space can be altered in length for burning any
kind of rough fuel. It is fired on the outside of the large tube, the flame passing along
and returning through the tubes to the smoke box, the heat thus being almost entirely
absorbed. There is no dangerous furnace crown liable to be overheated through
shortness of water. All parts exposed to the action of the fire are under water. The
boiler flue and tubes are thoroughly accessible for cleaning. Each boiler is tested by
hydraulic pressure to 1201bs. per square inch before leaving the works.
BUTTER PAPER.
This is a patent parchment paper, impermeable to moisture. It answers all the
purposes of butter cloth, and is cheaper and more easily handled. At a slight extra cost
we can supply it cut to any size required for wrapping prints or rolls,


MILK BARROW,
For conveying the milk quickly and easily from the milking-yard to the dairy. Saves a
great deal of labour. Can be used for retailing, on small milk rounds.
BUTTER BOXES.
We supply the ordinary gin cases, fitted with trays to hold pound or half-pound
prints. Also a “ Special Transit Butter Box,” substantially made and specially adapted
for use during hot weather —provided with straps, painted, and ventilated ; holds 120
half-pound prints. We are the Victorian agents for Pond’s enamelled lined boxes, which
have been used with such success for exporting to Foreign Markets. Those holding 561 b.
are the general size used, and we supply them in crates of half a dozen each.
BUTTER KEGS.
We are agents for a steam cooperage, and can supply all descriptions at lowest
market rates, consistent with good workmanship. Stocks of Kauri, Wattle and Oak Kegs
always on hand.
CREAM CANS.
These are manufactured with patent lids to permit ventilation, and during hot
weather can be used as coolers, according to instructions given to purchasers.
CHEESE BANDAGE,
Both soit and stiff kinds, of finest quality, in lengths to suit purchasers.


THERMOMETERS.
Glass Dairy Thermometers, in wooden or metal cases, by best makers.
DAIRY SALT.
Best brand of flour-ground Salt, specially prepared for dairy purposes.
PRESERVATIVE.
We supply a Preservative for keeping milk in hot weather, more specially during
transit to factory or town. We used this with advantage when supplying the milk to the
Exhibition Government Model Dairy.
MISCELLANEOUS.
BELTING (LEATHER) LAURENCE COOLER. SETTING PANS.
BUTTER SCALES. MILK CANS. SKIMMERS.
BUTTER TRYERS. MILK PAILS. STENCILS.
BUTTER BOARDS.
MOULD KNIVES. STRAINING CLOTH.
BUTTER SIEVES (HAIR)
OIL FOR SEPARATORS TRYERS (BUTTER).
CONDUCTOR HEADS.
CURD MILLS. OIL FEEDERS * (CHEESE).
COTTON WASTE. PRESS RINGS. WEIGHBRIDGES (FOR
LACTOMETERS. SALT SIEVES (WIRE). FACTORY USE).


BARNEKOW’S
DAIRY PREPARATIONS
Are now very largely used throughout Australia and New Zealand. Used exclusively
at the Government Model Dairy at the Centennial International Exhibition, Melbourne,
1889, and also by the Government Travelling Dairy. The Rennet is free from
smell or after-taste in the cheese, while the Annatto gives that beautiful golden color so
much esteemed and so difficult to obtain.
The usual form in which we supply is quart bottles, but we have pints and
gallon jars, while the Rennet is done up in powder and tablets, and also in small
bottles, down to a third of a pint, for private use.
We can safely assert that the above is the best and cheapest brand yet
manufactured. During the whole time that we have acted as Mr. Barnekow’s
agents it has, without a solitary exception, given great satisfaction. A single trial
always ensures its being used in preference to all other brands.
Mr. Barnekow has carried off numbers of gold medals and first prizes in all
parts of the world. We, however, prefer, as with the Cream Separator, to confine
ourselves to those local testimonials that are easy of reference. See next page.
The preparations are manufactured in Sweden, where the raw material is
produced, and where the rate of wages is so low as to defy competition.
PRICES.
RENNET.
Bulk (80 gallon tanks) ... ... £ per gallon.
Gallon Jars ... ... ... £ „ dozen.
Half-Gallon Jars ... ... ... £ ~ ~
Quart Bottles ... ... ... £ ~ ~
Pint Bottles ... ... ... £ ~ ~
Half-Pint Bottles ... ... ... £ ~ ,»
One-Third Pint Bottles ... ... £ ~ ~
Powder ... ... ... ... £ ~ tin containing
Pastils ... ... ... ... £ .. »


ANNATTO (CHEESE COLOR).
Bulk (80 gallon tanks) ... ... £ per gallon.
Gallon Jars ... ... ... £ per dozen.
Half-Gallon Jars ... ... ... £ ~
Quart Bottles ... ... ... £ ~ ~
Pint Bottles ... ... ... £ ~ ~
BUTTER COLOR.
Bulk (80 gallon Tanks) ... ... £ per gallon.
Gallon Jars ... ... ... £ per dozen.
Half-Gallon Jars ... ... ... £ ~ ~
Quart Bottles ... ... ... £ ~ ~
Pint Bottles ... ... ... £
TESTIMONIALS.
Warmambool, IBth June, 1887.
Dear Sirs, —
The Swedish Annatto purchased from you has given me great satisfaction, I would recommend all
dairymen to try it, and am sure they will approve of it.
JAMES LEE, St. Mary’s.
The Swedish Annatto (Barnekow’s) I used in my dairy during last season, has given me
unqualified satisfaction ; the quality is superior to any I have ever used, and I intend to use it again
during next season.
16th June, 1887.
CHARLES KAVENAGH, Grasmere.
"We have been using Barnekow’s Swedish Annatto. The quality is first-class, as it gives the
cheese such a rich color. We recommend its use to all dairymen.
16th June, 1887.
B. KAVENAGH, Purnim.
I beg to say that the Swedish Annatto I had from you is the best I have ever used, and I can
conscientiously recommend it to all the cheesemakers in our district.
16th June, 1887.
JOHN HENDERSON, Grasmere.


Mymiong Cheese Factory, 24th Sept., 1888.
Messrs. J. Babtram & Son.
Dear Sirs, —I have been using your Barnekow’s Swedish Rennet for some time now, and have much
pleasure in testifying to the uniform strength and superior coagulative quality of same. I find from experience that
it turns out a first-class cheese, rich and nutty in flavour, with a nice texture. The cheese also is free from the
“puffing” tendency given when a more crude Rennet is used. Altogether I am thoroughly satisfied with the
way in which the Rennet acts, and shall recommend it to all my friends. The Cheese Color, too, is very good,
and is much stronger than any other I have used—taking less to the given quantity of milk—and it appears to
mix very evenly through the curd, giving a uniform appearance to the cheese.
I am, dear Sirs, yours truly,
BARON JONES.
Exhibition, 20th September, 1888.
Mr. Bartram.
Dear Sir, —It gives me very much pleasure to state that Barnekow’s Annatto and Rennet that I have
been using now for years is the best and cheapest I have come across yet. It gives the cheese a fine color and
flavor, and I think this has materially assisted me in carrying off 95 per cent, of the prizes I entered for
last year.
Yours faithfully,
D. WILSON,
Government Model Dairy, Centennial International Exhibition.
Akaroa, N.Z., 19th December, 1887.
Messrs, J. Babtram & Son.
Dear Sirs,—I find Barnekow’s Rennet equal to any other, and the Annatto much superior to any I
have ever used. I have used Hansen’s, Vissier’s, and several others.
Yours faithfully, TOM CHECKLEY.
Tooram, Allansford, 9th April, 1887.
Dear Sirs, —
The Annatto I obtained from you is of first-class quality; a small quantity will give a proper color to
cheese. I can with confidence recommend it to dairymen and others.
Yours faithfully, T.
McLEOD PALMER.
September 27th, 1888.
Messrs. Babtram & Bon, Queen-street, Melbourne.
Dear Sirs, —I use Messrs. Barnekow’s dairy preparations for all my dairy work, and like them very
much. The Rennet I find very regular and reliable.
I am, yours truly,
ALEX. CRAWFORD,
Manager Government Travelling Dairy.


Warrnambool, 13th June, 1887.
Dear Sirs,
Be Swedish Annatto purchased from you last season, I have much pleasure in recommending same to
dairymen as being most suitable for cheese. I have not used it for butter, but think it would also suit that
requirement.
PATRICK HEARNEY, Keilambile.
Warrnambool, 13/6/87.
Messrs. Geilhofer & Helpman.
Dear Sirs, —Throughout the past season I have used the Swedish Annatto purchased from you, and
have great pleasure in recommending it to dairymen. It produces a very rich color, and requires a less amount
than any Annatto I have previously used.
MICHAEL McCaRTHY, Hopkins Falls.
Warrnambool, isth June, 1887.
Dear Sirs,
Having used the Swedish Annatto purchased from you all last season, I beg to say that it is the best I
ever used, and would advise dairymen to give it a trial next season.
JOHN LEE, Wangoorn.
Warrnambool, isth June, 1887.
Messrs. Geilhofer & Helpman, Warrnambool.
Dear Sirs, —I beg to bear testimony to the excellent qualities of the Swedish Annatto which I
purchased from you last season. It imparts a beautiful color to the cheese, and a less quantity is required than
any brand before used.
P. MoNAMARA, Winslow.
To J. Bartram & Son, 8 Queen Street, Melbourne.
Dear Sirs, —I have great pleasure in being able to recommend S. Barnekow’s Fluid Annatto. It is the
best and cheapest I have used during my experience of 15 years, having made upwards of 300 tons of cheese,
and used all the leading brands of cheese color. It is of a reliable strength and free from any smell.
I remain, yours truly,
M. EDWARD O’KEEFE,
Sale Cheese Factory, Gippsland,
June 11th, 1887.-


CALF FEEDING AND STOCK
RAISING.
Herewith we furnish a translation of a report by Professor Nathorst, of
the Royal Agricultural College of Sweden, giving most valuable experiments made
by him in the direction ;
Which is the best way of using skim-milk ?
This question is one of the most discussed to-day, and many different
ways have been tried. One is to make skim-milk cheese with or without fat,
another is to give the skim-milk to the cows or pigs, and after you have tried
all this you give it to the calves, for whom it was produced. If the skim-milk
cheese could be sold, as it used to be in some parts of the country, that would
be a good way, but the fact that there is an overproduction in so many places
has caused experiments in new directions. No doubt the simplest and most
natural way is to give the skim-milk to the calves, and we do not only mean
the breeding calves, but all classes. The skim-milk is not to be used alone by
these young calves, but the fat taken out by the Separator is to be replaced by
some other fat, and a very good one is Oil Meal, and very fitted to adjoin the
skim-milk for the calves. If you mix one pound linseed to one gallon
skim-milk you get a mash that will in the best way correspond with sweet milk,
and if you only remember that the skim-milk should be given fresh from the
cow after passing through the Separator and warmed to about 100 degrees, which
can easily be done by placing the milk can in hot water. For young calves the
linseed should be crushed and boiled in water to a heavy soup, which you put with
the skimmed milk, or you can put the crushed linseed in a tinned vessel, pour hot


Calf 190 days old.
Weight 4601bs.
Sold
for m
17
6
9 9
248
9 9
99
' 540,,
99
7
1
8
99
256
>>
99
500 „
99
6
11
8
5 9
300
9 >
99
740 „
99
9
12
4
99
310
5 >
9 9
800 „
99
10
8
4
99
340
> 9
99
800 „
99
10
8
4
9 J
355
99
9 9
840 „
99
10
7
6
5 9
368
9 9
99
t-
co
99
9
1
3
n
370
99
99
—1
00
o
9 9
8
9
6
418
9 9
99
1100 „
99
16
13
4
water over it and let it stand some hours, and then use it blood warm with the
skim-milk. You can make a rule of always giving the milk warmed and boiled. If
,you can use steam it is better than boiling over a fire. Butter milk also can be
used in the same way if the calves are not too young. Should the milk purge the
calves you can prevent this by boiling the milk before using it. The most important
point'of all is that the troughs should be kept well clean and the mixture given
warm. Experience shows that the calves increase Itb. living weight to XOlbs. of
sweet milk.
In Sweden, as well as in Denmark, this kind of fattening has been used
with the best results. In Denmark they now begin to keep the calves- to about one
year, then of course replacing the mixture with other foods. Linseed cakes, oats,
or corn could not be used with the same results as linseed meal, but are
recommended to be given with the skim-milk when the calf begins to take other
foods, such as hay, turnips, &c. Mr. Fenk, in Mariebund, Sweden, got the
following results by feeding with 401bs. of skim-milk, with gravy fodder instead :
The amounts of gravy fodder not mentioned. Many of the calves had the
grass on the pasture besides the fixed quantity of the milk. As no linseed was given
the calves did not fatten before they were half a year old. In Alnarp (Swedish
College of Agriculture) we raise calves on a large scale with skim-milk.
E


Age in days.
Pounds weight.
Increased weight per day.
221
610
2-40 fts.
220
600
197 „
198
458
1-88 „
196
496
2*10 „
194
424
1-79 „
110
416
1*77 „
110
460
2
187
420
1*81 „
180
480
2*23 „
178
490
2-30 „
177
422
1*94 „
172
492
2-20 „
6667 medium increase 2*05
As we do not like them fat they get no linseed. They only get whole milk
the first eight days, and after that time the sweet milk is gradually changed to
warm separated skim-milk. The most we give them is three gallons a day for the
first six months. To show the increase of weight obtained by this not forced, or
for fattening nor designed feeding, we will give the first weighing (April 20th, 1885)
as one result of feeding with skim-milk. Beside the skim-milk the calves get
hay, one pound of linseed cake, and one pound of oats every day.
The birth weight, 80 lbs. each, taken off. To fix the value of the calves
in regard to living weight, one of them was sent to England. The weight was
420 lbs., the age 140 days, and the calf was sold for T 4 18s. Each calf
mentioned above had received 17*65 gallons sweet milk, or a total of 212*80 gallons in
all. Then they had got 3882 gallons of skim-milk, 18001bs. of linseed cakes, ISOOlbs. of
oats and 36001b5. of hay. The account is as follows:


12 calves at 8s. 9d
.... £5
5
0 #
212’80 gallons sweet milk
4
18
4
1800 lbs. linseed cakes
5
18
8
1800 lbs. oats
4
8
9
3600 lbs. hay
3
19
0
3882 gallons skim-milk at 2£d.
.... 36
7
10
60
17
7
6569 lbs. of meat sold for
65
18
9
Gives a Surplus of £5
1
2
If we now say that this £5 Is. 2d. and the manure paid for the straw
and care, the skim-milk was paid for at 2jd. per gallon, which is a good return.
It may be observed that these calves were not fattened, and no linseed was given.
If linseed had been used a much better result would have ensued. Another thing
to be observed and followed is, if there is not a good market to be obtained for
one year old calves, they can be put on the pasture to be fattened and sold at two
years. From all this it seems to me to be a good thing to use the skim-milk for
fattening calves. It is the most natural way, and gives better results than any
other way of using skim-milk. Another year will add much experience to these
simple facts I have given you here. I have told you our first results and now
transfer the matter to the farmers to try—every one on his own place.


NOTES.
COOLING DAIRIES.
Mr. A. N. Pearson, Government Agricultural Chemist, having been requested
by a dairywoman in the country to acquaint her with the means of cooling a
dairy 12 feet square and 8 feet in height, replied as follows; —
It is not likely that such a room could be economically cooled by means either of
ice or of a cooling mixture. From the description furnished, the room seems unfavourably
constructed and situated for cooling by any means whatever. The suggestions
regarding a cooling chamber for dairies made by me some time ago had reference
to a small chamber, in which cream could be allowed to stand undisturbed for about
12 hours at a temperature of about 56 deg, Fah,, in order that it might “mature.”
I propose shortly compiling in pamphlet form a statement of those methods of
constructing cool chambers which would be suitable for agricultural purposes.
When that statement is published your correspondents will have no difficulty in
understanding what should be done in their own particular case. In the meantime,
I would recommend them, as a temporary arrangement, to have a small chamber,
about 4 or 6 feet square and about 6J feet deep, excavated in the ground inside
the dairy room. At the bottom of this chamber (aaa of the following sketch) should
be the pans containing the freezing mixture. Immediately above these pans should
be a trellis work tray (h of the sketch). On this tray the cream pans (c cc) and,
if desired, milk pans also should be placed. The whole should be covered up with
sliding or lifting up lid ( d ) made of double boards, with a space between stuffed with
felt or sawdust. It would be advisable that this chamber should not be opened more
than twice a day if practicable.
As regards the freezing mixture, I advise that at first a little of it only should
i
be used for experimenting with, until the proper use of it be understood. The most
convenient vessels for experimenting with would be kerosene tins cut in half lengthwise,
with a handle attached, (See fig, 2),


FIG. I.
In one of these should be placed two and a half pounds amnionic nitrate,
one and a quarter pounds ammonic chloride, and half a gallon of water. After
pouring the water on the mixture of salts, and stirring a little, the temperature
will rapidly fall below freezing point. After the cooling solution has been used
the crystals may be re-obtained out of the solution by placing the pans on a slow
fire (an ordinary brushwood fire with three stones for a fireplace will be found as
good as anything) and allowing to simmer and evaporate down. The solution
should not be allowed to boil, otherwise there may be loss of salts by splashing.
After the solution has evaporated down so far that on dipping a stick into it the
drop at the end of the stick thus obtained rapidly solidifies on cooling, the vessel
should be taken off the fire and allowed to cool, when the solution will solidify
into one mass. After solidifying it should be broken up with a knife or other
handy utensil, and spread out to dry in the sun or a warm place. The completely
dried mass will be readily friable, and when crushed into a coarse powder will
be again ready for use. For a chamber of the above size about three-quarters
of a hundredweight of ammonic nitrate and three-eighths of a hundredweight of
ammonic chloride would probably be found enough. Ammonic nitrate is T 9 16s.
per cwt., and ammonic chloride is T 3 10s. per cwt., so that the above quantities
would cost £8 13s. 3d. The material should be divided into three lots, one lot
being in operation in the chamber, while one lot was being evaporated down and
the other lot was being dried. By having a block and tackle above the excavated
chamber, the trays and cans may be let down and hoisted up with very little
difficulty. About 24 half kerosene tins would be required for a chamber of the
dimensions above suggested.


The Kansas system of cooling dairies in summer months has been adopted
this season by Mr. E. Carter, of the Richmond River, N.S.W., and the experiment,
according to the Town and Country Journal , has proved very successful. The principle
is that a trench 13 feet deep be dug for a distance of 300 feet; at the bottom of this,
drain-pipes, at least 6 inches in diameter, are laid; the earth is then returned and
well rammed. One end, or outlet, of this air shaft turns upwards under the dairy floor;
the other end, or inlet, is generally arranged at the side of a bank or declivity of the
ground. The dairy floor, being higher than the drain, a current of air enters at the inlet
by the bank, rushes up the pipe, and discharges a constant stream of chilled air into the
dairy. Kansas experimenters assert that if any attempt is made to scamp the job by not
placing the pipe so deep as 13 feet, then the whole plan will be a failure. This, if
effective in our tropical North, would certainly be the cheapest and most satisfactory plan
possible for cooling the dairy-room, for, once done, there is not any after expense or
trouble whatever. At Mr. Carter’s dairy the air shaft is formed by hollow logs split in
two. Care has to be taken that there are no hollow places where water can lodge, the
shaft having a gradual incline from the dairy. The dairy building of Mr. E. Carter is 30
feet by 20 feet, with concrete floor, and has double walls and double roof. It is, in fact,
one building inside of another, with a verandah 10 feet wide all round. Openings are
provided in the roof for the escape of hot air, which is forced out by the strong current
of cold air which is being continually conveyed through the air shaft. In the hottest
summer weather the temperature never rises above 70 deg. Fahr., so that butter-making
is an easy matter.
MILK.
J. W. Robertson, Professor of Chemistry, gives the following advise:—Let every
dairyman weed out his poor, unprofitable milkers by fattening for the butcher, and not by
selling into another herd. The utmost cleanliness in milking, in vessels, in utensils, and
in all surroundings, must be observed to preserve the flavour and body of milk, cream,
butter and cheese, from contamination. For many years it has been recognised by
observant and thoughtful dairymen, that when milking cows were denied access to salt,
the quantity and quality of the milk yield was affected. The following are results from
observation and record :—The average immediate loss (taking a period of two days after
each change) was 17£ per cent, in the weight of the milk yield when salt was withheld.
An abundant supply of water, and pure water only, should be where milking cows may
drink freely twice or three times a day. Milk is so much the product of nervous
operation, that any undue excitement, no matter how induced, lessens the supply and
injures the quality, The kind and gentle treatment of his cows by the sensible dairyman
is the source of his profit. During the month of August I visited the farms of a large
number of the patrons, and by measurement and calculation learned that on the average
33 lbs. of milk were taken to yield enough cream to make 1 lb. of Butter.
With a Cream Separator, 25lbs. of milk will make a pound of butter. —J. B. & Sons.


HOW TO MILK.
Milking should be done regularly. Have certain hours for the work, and do it at
the usual time. The internal milk producing and supplying organs of the cow learn when
the udder should be relieved, and will kick (and perhaps the cow will do the same) if you
don’t squeeze at the proper time. Likewise milk clean—Blessed is the man or woman
that strips for three minutes after the udder is empty. It should be remembered that
four-fifths of the milk production of the cow has been developed by thus mutely asking for
more by tugging away at a teat. In a state of nature a cow gives enough milk to support
Her calf until it can make its own living. The milking propensity has been developed by
squeezing. Always rub the udder and teats clean before beginning to milk. To make
absolutely clean Butter is an impossibility. There are too many chances for dirt to get
into it. But the nearer you get to absolute cleanliness, the nearer you will get to the
highest excellence. Comparative cleanliness is essential to good Butter. There is always
more or less dirt clinging to the udder, and falling into the milk pail, unless removed
before milking is begun. Keep a cloth about the cow stable with which to rub the udder
and teats clean. In the name of all that’s half-way decent we beseech you never to dip
your hands in the pail while milking, as your filthy neighbor does. The practice is so very
filthy that we simply hold it up to your disgusted gaze, on the end of our pen, and then
drop it. Cleanliness in the dairy is an absolute necessity. Practically excessive cleanli-
ness is the first, and second, and third important thing in butter-making ; ordinary clean-
liness won’t do, it must be extraordinary. Without extreme cleanliness all else is useless.
It should go so far that no speck of dust or dirt should be allowed in the dairy, nor a drop
of spilt milk. No one with dirty shoes should enter it, this is a stringent rule in
Holland. Smoking in the dairy must be strictly prohibited. Sour milk must not
remain in it an hour, nor meat, nor anything else be put there that it is wished to keep
cool, as is often done. The pans and cloths that have been used should at once be
removed outside. This mcety of cleanliness should extend to everyone that has to do
with the milk and butter. It need hardly be said there should be no possibility of smoke
getting in where milk stands. Smoke is sure to leave its taste, even if the water used for
scalding vessels is smoked in boiling the water it will taste the milk. There must be no
sourness in the dairy, and no bad smells either inside or outside, or anywhere near it.
Milk and cream have the power of absorbing the foulness of any sort of bad smell, and are
thereby put more or less in a condition of corruptness. They will even absorb good
smells, as apples or oranges, which, however, are not good in Butter, whatever they may
be alone. It is indispensable, too, that the place where the dairy work is done, the scour-
ing and scalding, &c., should not be the same in which the milk is kept; there should be
an outside room for the purpose. It is only by care of this extreme sort, as some may
think it, that the very best Butter can be made. Though all else may be well done, if
this careful cleanliness is neglected in ever so slight a degree the very best Butter will not
be made.
Let it be once for all clearly understood that it is only for the very best Butter that


a high price can be had. The very best Butter will sell for a price that will repay all the
trouble in cleanliness that anyone can possibly give it.
OVER-CHURNING.
Mr. Geo. Barham, Managing Director Dairy Supply Company, Limited, England,
writes on this subject:—Over-churning is the cause, to a very large extent, of Butter not
keeping. Although ceasing to churn as soon as the Butter has appeared in a
granular form, has been advocated for years by our best authorities, yet I venture to say
that three-fourths at least of the Butter made in England is churned into a lump, and
buttermilk thoroughly incorporated with it before the churning process is stayed. Butter
that is properly churned needs very little working. By overworking the Butter you spoil
the texture and make it of a greasy, pomatum-like substance. Finally, there are three
faults in butter-making to be specially guarded against:—l. Over-ripening the cream; 2.
over-churning; 3. over-working.
During the same period, by the ordinary twelve and twenty-four hours’ setting in
ice-water, 28 lbs. of milk yielded sufficient cream to make 1 lb. of Butter. Had the same
milk been used with the centrifugal separator 25 lbs. of milk would have given as much
cream as would produce 1 lb. of Butter. From these facts it will be seen that the increased
yield of Butter from a given quantity of milk, set in ice-water, is 17-8 per cent, on the
quantity realised by ordinary practice. The increase by the use of the centrifugal separator over
ordinary practice would he 27 per cent.
BAD BUTTER.
The cheesy taste of butter is due to the imperfect cleansing of the butter
from the buttermilk. The “ fishy ” (commonly called) taste of the butter is
caused by the cream boing churned at too high a temperature.
COOLING THE CREAM.
To produce good butter it is absolutely essential that the cream should be
not above 58 degrees when churned. Where a Separator is used the cream should
be cooled down immediately it comes from the Separator, and kept at that
temperature till mature for churning. Where a farmer churns with his cream at
70 degrees and more, he cannot expect to turn out anything other than a poor butter.
A dairy thermometer can be had for a trifle, and no dairy should be without one.
NOTES.


GENERAL AGENCY.
Under this head we undertake to conduct any miscellaneous business our country
friends may require doing. Our arrangements for buying are such that our customers
secure the benefit of the full trade discount that our position commands. It is only
reasonable to expect that the major part of the business that brings a farmer to town
three or four times a year, can be done quite as effectively and much more cheaply by a
firm that gives this class of trade their special attention. At the cost of a small
commission the farmer saves the expense of a trip to Melbourne, and also the time
involved.
We give careful attention to Sales of Land, and to both Fire and Life Insurances.
We secure Mortgages at Lowest Rates, having clients always ready to lend at fair
rates, on good security. All business at the Public Offices that can be conducted by
an agent will, in our hands, receive prompt attention.
PRODUCE BUSINESS.
Regarding our other business, we simply quote from the Australasian Track
Review : —“Messrs. Bartram and Son, beside being the largest exporters of butter in the
colony, are also the largest exporters of cheese.”
We are, and have been for the last twenty years, cash buyers of all Dairy Produce,
at highest market rates. We receive consignments, for which we send prompt
returns, with cheque. We place our cool cellarage at the service of our clients who may
wish to store their butter for an increase in value.


INDEX TO DAIRY REQUISITES.
PAGE.
ANNATTO .. .. .. .. 57
„ MEASURING GLASS .. 51
APPARATUS—BUTTER FACTORY .. .. 4H
CHEESE .. .. 44
FARM DAIRY (Buttek) .. 45
FARM DAIRY (Cheese) .. 45
BABY CREAM SEPARATOR .. .. 28
BANDAGE, CHEESE .. .. 54
BARROW, MILK .. .. .. 54
BELTING, LEATHER .. .. .. 55
BOILERS AND ENGINES .. .. .. 53
BUTTER BOARDS .. .. 55
. BOXES .. .. .. 54
„ COLOR .. .. .. 57
KEGS .. .. .. .. 54
PAPER .. .. .. 53
PATS .. .. .. 52
PRINTS .. .. .. 52
PRINTERS .. .. .. 40
SCALES .. .. .. 55
SIEVES .. .. .. .. 55
TRYERS .. .. 55
WORKER .. .. .. 47
CANS, CREAM .. .. .. 54
„ MILK .. .. .. .. 55
CENTRIFUGAL SEPARATORS .. .. 21-23
CHEESE BANDAGE .. .. .. 64
COLOR .. .. .. 57
MOULDS .. .. .. 50
TRYERS .. .. .. 55
CHURNS .. .. .. 40
COLONIAL CHEESE PRESS .. .. 49
CONCUSSION CHURN .. .. .. 46
CONDUCTOR HEAD .. .. .. 55
COOLERS, CREAM .. .. .. 54
„ MILK .. .. .. 51
COTTON WASTE .. .. .. 55
CREAM TEST GLASS .. .. .. 51
CURD BUCKETS .. .. .. .. 48
„ KNIVES 50
„ - MILLS .. ' .. .. 55
„ SCOOP .. .. .. 48
„ STRAINER .. .. .. .. 49
DAIRY SALT , .. .. .. 55
ENGINES AND BOILERS .. .. .. 53
EMULSOR .. .. .. .. 25
EUREKA BUTTER PRINTER .. .. 40
FACTORY CHURN .. .. .. 40
GLASSES, MEASURING .. .. .. 51
„ TEST .. .. .. 51
„ PER CENT. .. .. .. 51
HEATER .. .. .. .. 48
PAGE.
HORIZONTAL SEPARATOR .. 22
HORSEWORKS .. .. .. .. - 52
KEGS .. ...... .. 54
KNIVES, CHEESE .. .. .. 55
„ CURD .. .. 50-
LACTOMETER .. .. 55
LACTOCRITE .. .. .. 24
LAURENCE COOLER .. .. .. 51 &55
LEVER CHEESE PRESS .. .. .. 40
MEASURING GLASS .. 51
MILK BARROW .. .. .. .. 54
„ CANS .. .. .. .. 55
„ COOLER .. 51
~ PAIL .. .. .. 55
„ PRESERVATIVE .. .. 55
„ PUMP .. .. 20
„ WARMER .. .. .. 25
MOULDS, CHEESE .. .. 50
MOULD KNIVES .. .. .. .. 55
OIL, SEPARATOR .. 55
OIL FEEDERS .. .. .. 55
PATS, BUTTER 52
PRESERVATIVE .. .. .. 55
PRESSES, CHEESE .. .. .. 49
PRESS RINGS .. .. .. 55
M SCREWS .. .. 55
PRINTS .. .. .. .. 52
PRINTER AND WEIGHER .. 40
REFRIGERATOR .. ■ .. 51
RENNET .. .. ~ 50
SALT, DAIRY .. .. .. 55
SCALES, BUTTER .. .. 55
SELF-ACTING HEATER .. .. .. 48
SEPARATORS .. .. .. .. 21-25
SETTING PANS .. .. 55
SIEVES .. .. .. 55
SINKS, CURD .. .. .. .. 49
SKIMMERS .. .. .. 55
SQUARE CONCUSSION CHURNS .. .. 40
STRAINERS .. .. .. .. 49
STRAINING CLOTH .. .. .. 55
STENCILS .. .. .. .. 55
SYPHON & STRAINER .. .. .. 50
TEST TUBES .. .. .. .. 51
THERMOMETERS .. .. .. 55
TRANSIT BUTTER BOX .. .. 54
TRYER, BUTTER .. .. .. .. 55
„ CHEESE .. .. .. 55
TURBINE CREAM SEPARATOR .. 22
VATS, CHEESE .. .. .. 48
VERTICAL CREAM SEPARATOR .. .. 25
WEIGHING MACHINE- (for factory use) .. 55
