

THE
INAUGURATION
OF
GREATER
BRISBANE




THE INAUGURATION
OF
GREATER BRISBANE
By
Alderman W. A. JOLLY, C.M.G.
First Mayor of Greater Brisbane
BRISBANE:
WATSON, FERGUSON & CO. LTD.
1928


ALDERMAN W. A. JOLLY, C.M.G.,
First Mayor of Greater Brisbane.


FOREWORD
THE object of this booklet is to place on record a
brief resume of the inauguration of the Greater
Brisbane scheme.
The problem of organising some more effective system
of civic control for large cities is one which has been
engaging the attention of municipal bodies throughout
the world for some time past. It is recognised that a
multiplicity of authorities dealing with matters in
which the community as a whole is interested does not
tend to assure the most efficient civic service.
Brisbane is one of the first cities to attempt to
unify its civic affairs by placing the whole of its local
government bodies, consisting of 19 different Councils
and a number of Joint Boards, as well as several big
public utilities under one administration. When
fully established, it will be one of the most compre'
hensive systems of civic government in the world. In
addition to the ordinary functions of local government,
it will have under its charge tramways, electric light,
water supply and sewerage, abattoirs, fire brigades,
traffic control, cemeteries and ferries.
The area of the new city is not only a large one,
covering, as it does, 385 square miles, but embraces
many and varied interests —commercial, manufacture
ing, industrial, shipping, residential, seaside, rural,
educational, social and religious—all of which go to
make up one complete community.
I would like to place on record my appreciation
of the loyal support of my brother Aldermen, as well
as the faithful and able service rendered by the Town
Clerk, Executive Officers, and Staff, in launching this
new and somewhat unique system of civic government.
The task has not been an easy one. Contentions
and difficulties have had to be faced all along the line.


There is still a number of big problems to be solved
which will demand not only wise guidance and sane
administration on the part of the Aldermen and
Officers of the Council, but the full and sympathetic
co-operation of the citizens as a whole.
Brisbane is a city in the making, and the new order
will undoubtedly place the civic authorities in a much
better position to plan and mould its future develop-
ment to the best advantage. This is indeed an oppor-
tunity to make our vision of a greater and nobler city
a reality. Let us build wisely, let us build surely, let
us build not for the moment but for the years to come,
seeking to establish a city which for all time will
assure the peace, comfort and happiness of its citizens.
WM. A. JOLLY,
Mayor of Brisbane.
31st December, 1927.


Inauguration of Greater Brisbane
THE BEGINNING OF THINGS
AT the outset it is interesting to recall the fact that
Local Government was established in Brisbane in 1859,
when the first Brisbane City Council was elected, the
following gentlemen being elected as Aldermen: —
JOHN PETRIE (Mayor)
PATRICK MAYNE
THOS. BLACKETT STEPHENS
JOSHUA JEAYS
ALBERT JOHN HOOKINGS
GEORGE EDMONSTONE
ROBT. CRIBB
GEORGE WARREN
WM. S. SUTTON
The population of the town and suburbs at that time was
5,000. Since then steady and marked progress has been
made, until to-day it has nearly reached the 300,000 mark.
One cannot write of the early days of our city without
a feeling of reverence and admiration for the pioneers who
laid its foundation. What a story of pluck, determination
and achievement their lives reveal ! They had come to
conquer a strange and unknown land; and one can easily
imagine not only the feeling of loneliness, but the trials,
privations and disappointments which they had to meet by the
way as they literally biased the track.
It seems almost incredible that in a little over 100 years
what was a wilderness has been transformed into a great and
beautiful city. This is an achievement of which any race
might well be proud.
We are apt, at times, to find fault with the want of
vision on the part of the early settlers; but it must not be
forgotten that they laboured with some grave doubts as to
what the future would bring forth. We citizens of to-day,
on the other hand, have entered upon a goodly heritage—for
what has been accomplished in the past justifies every faith
and confidence in the future.
As the city expanded, other Local Authorities were
established until there were 20 Local Government bodies
within a ten-mile radius. In 1903, the old Booroodabin




Council was amalgamated with the Brisbane City Council,
this being really the first step towards a Greater Brisbane.
AGITATION FOR A GREATER BRISBANE
For some years prior to the passing of the Greater
Brisbane Act, it was apparent that the time had arrived when
it was necessary to make some change in the existing system
of Local Government for Brisbane and suburbs. This was
evident from conflict between contiguous Local Authorities
from time to time on a number of civic improvements essential
to the proper development of the city as a whole.
Further, it was necessary to create a number of joint
Boards to handle matters in which more than one Local
Authority was interested.
Naturally, on a big question of this kind, there was
bound to be a good deal of controversy, it being held in some
quarters that a Greater Brisbane should be built up gradually,
a start being made by the amalgamation of Brisbane and South
Brisbane Councils. Others contended that the start should
be made with a radius; but the officials of the Home
Department, who had given this matter much thought,
strongly recommended the ten'-mile radius, which was ulth
mately adopted.
Whilst this meant a much more difficult task at the
inauguration, it must be admitted that the great advantage
of the larger area is that it places the civic government in a
much better position to handle a number of big problems
which affect the whole of the citizens within the wider area.
Parliament, apparently, found it difficult to make up its
mind upon this problem, as no fewer than three different
Bills were submitted to the House before it was finalised by the
passing of The Greater Brisbane Act on the 30th October,
1924, the first bill having been presented on the 3rd
December, 1917.
UNIQUE SCHEME.
The “Greater Brisbane” scheme is unique in several
respects. In the first place, the area controlled by the
Council is, if not the largest, one of the largest under muni"
cipal control within the Empire. “The City of Brisbane
Act of 1924” abolished nineteen Councils and their respective


areas, and created in their place the Brisbane City Council,
controlling an area of nearly 400 square miles.
The most distinctive feature of the scheme, however,
is the extremely wide charter which Parliament conferred
upon the Council. Except so far as the Act itself alters
them, or the Council by ordinance alters them, the powers
and duties of a Queensland Local Authority attach to the
Council. In addition to these well-defined and familiar
powers, section 36 of the Act conferred remarkably
extensive powers both administrative and legislative. The
opening words of the section are to the effect that the Council
is charged with the government of the City and is to have the
control of the working and business of such government. It
is difficult to conceive wider language to express the authority
of any body subordinate to the State. Subject to State
Government, one might say, colloquially, that the section
means “Home Rule” for Brisbane.
The draughtsman then proceeded to amplify his mean-
ing, and he gives various particular powers which are included
in the “government” of the city. The charter is so unique
that no apology is needed for quoting the more important
parts of section 36: —
“(2) The Council shall have full power and duty to
make ordinances for promoting and maintaining the peace,
comfort, education, health, morals, welfare, safety, conveni-
ence, food supply, housing, trade, commerce and manufactures
of the City and its inhabitants, and for the planning, develop-
ment, and embellishment of the City, and for the general good
government of the City and its inhabitants, and for the
direction, administration, and control of the working and
business of the government of the City, and shall cause all
ordinances to be duly carried into effect.
“And generally all such ordinances may be made and
carried into effect by the Council as may be determined by
it to be necessary for the proper performance of the powers
and duties of the Council, whether the subject matter be
within the express powers conferred by this Act upon the
Council or not.
“(3) Without limiting the generality of its powers, the
Council shall have and possess express powers in relation to
the following matters; —The provision, construction, main-
tenance, management, control and regulation of the use of
roads, bridges, tunnels, ferries, subways, viaducts, culverts and
other means of public communication; public parks, aviation
grounds, recreation grounds and other public places; reserves


and lands vested in it or placed under its control either per'
manently or temporarily; markets; baths and bathing places;
tramways, motor omnibuses, omnibuses and other means of
public transportation; traffic; public health, sanitation, cleans'
ing and scavenging, prevention and suppression of infectious
and other diseases, sewerage, drainage, removal, suppression
and abatement of nuisances, noxious and offensive trades,
public conveniences; abattoirs; milk supply, supply of water,
light, and power; disposal of the dead; subdivision of land
and use and occupation of land; buildings and use and
occupation of buildings; protection from fire; boundaries and
fences; opening, closing, aligning, widening, altering, and
grading of roads; eradication and destruction of noxious
weeds and pests; pounds and impounding; the accounts and
audit of accounts of the City; and generally all works, matters
and things in its opinion necessary or conducive to the good
government of the City and the welbbeing of its inhabitants.
“(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other Act,
the Council may provide, acquire, construct, maintain, manage,
control, and carry on any work, service, or undertaking with
all associated or ancillary works or services.
“(5) The Council may do any acts not otherwise unlaw'
ful which may be necessary to the proper exercise and per'
formance of its powers and duties under this Act or under
any other Act conferring powers or imposing duties on the
Council.”
Again, in respect of its ordinances the Council is placed
in a much stronger position than any other subordinate Legis'
lature in Queensland. The proceedure for the making of
ordinances us simple, and, after approval by the Governorum
Council and the Legislative Assembly, their validity would
be extremely difficult to challenge.
The Council enjoys the benefit of a special Act enabling
it to resume lands or interest in lands other than Crown lands.
The procedure under that Act is simple, and the approval of
the Government is not required.
The State Government retains control of the Council’s
activities in several ways. For instance, its approval is neces'
sary for the making of ordinances; it can repeal ordinances;
and its approval is requisite before the Council can borrow
money otherwise than by overdraft.
The whole scheme is an unprecedented delegation to
a subordinate body of some of the powers of government.
The Council has already exercised a number of those powers,
and is preparing plans for the exercise of others.


GENERAL SIR THOS. BRISBANE,
After whom the City was Named.


WILL THE IDEALS OF THE NEW SYSTEM
BE REALISED?
Whether the ideals of the Greater Brisbane scheme are
going to be fully realised cannot be fairly judged from the
result of the first few years’ operations. In the first place, it
is not to be expected that in the making af such a drastic
change, the organisation could be made perfect in so short
a time. It will, in the light of experience, be necessary to
make adjustments from time to time.
Without doubt the new order of things does enable the
Council to take the broadest view as to what is best in the
interests of the community as a whole. This has already been
fully demonstrated by a number of big problems dealt with.
Take, for instance, the question of the construction of good
arterial roads radiating from the heart of the city to the
various suburbs, a work which has been carried out by the
new Council. * Under the old regime, it would have been
practically impossible to carry out a programme of this kind,
as several of these main roads ran through areas controlled by
five or six different Local Authorities.
The construction of another bridge across the river is
a long-delayed civic improvement upon which it would have
been difficult to get the old Councils to agree upon the vexed
question as to who should pay.
Further, the new Council has carried out a number of
very urgent works, such as drainage schemes, and construction
of bridges on main highways, which had been held up for
many years because of differences of opinion between the con-
tiguous Local Authorities.
The acquiring of the beautiful range of hills which sur-
round the city will be admitted by all who have given the
matter serious consideration as a wise policy; but it was not to
be expected, under the old order, that the Local Authorities
in whose areas these ranges were situated should pay for what,
after all, is a benefit to the whole city.
The preparation of a Civic Survey—on which the City
Planner is now engaged—so as to provide a plan for the future
development of the city as a whole upon the most economic
and scientific basis, is another vital matter which could not
have been effectively dealt with under the old conditions.
It would have been impossible for the individual Local
Authorities to have dealt with big matters such as the question


BRISBANE BUILDINGS IN COURSE OF CONSTRUCTION
(1) Craigston Flats; (2) “Canberra” Temperance Hotel; (3) Messrs. Blocksidge &
Ferguson's New Premises; (4) New Building for Robert Harper & Co. Ltd.;
(5) Roman Catholic Cathedral; (6) Automatic Telephone Exchange; (7) Trans-
continental Hotel; (8) Bank of Australasia; (9) Town Hall; (10) Commercial
Travellers’ Club; (11) National Bank of Australasia; (12) Bank of New South Wales;
(13) National Mutual Life Assn, of Australia Ltd.; (14) Commonwealth Bank;
(15) Heindorff House; (16) Freeleagus Bros.’ Building; (17) Capitol Theatre.


of a pure Milk Supply for the city and the Establishment of
Abattoirs.
Under the new conditions, the Council is justified in
securing the most up-to-date machinery and plant, as it can
be utilised to its utmost capacity. The working of quarries to
provide road material can also be better handled for the whole
area than by individual Councils.
The experience of the first few years indicates that, when
fully and effectively established, the new system will stand
not only for economy but greater efficiency.
MARKED GROWTH OF THE CITY.
During the past three years, Brisbane has made remark-
able growth. This is indicated not only by an increase in the
population of nearly 30,000, but also by the number of new
buildings erected during this period, the total value of which
is over <£10,000,000.
At the present time, there are several very imposing
buildings in the course of construction. The following are
some of the more important:—
Roman Catholic Cathedral £500,000
Commonwealth Bank, Queen Street . . <£200,000
Commonwealth Offices, Adelaide Street <£170,000
Bank of Australasia, corner Queen
and Wharf Streets £116,000
Bank of New South Wales, corner
Qjueen and George Streets .. £llO,OOO
National Mutual Life Association of
Australia, Queen Street .. , . £BO,OOO
Telephone Exchange, Elizabeth Street £lOO,OOO
Residential Hotel, Ann and Edward
Streets £120,000
Theatre and Shops, Queen and
Elisabeth Streets £lOO,OOO
Warehouse, Heindorffs Building,
Queen Street £50,000
Warehouse, W. D. 6? H. O. Wills,
Ann Street £56,000
Alliance Insurance and Royal Ex-
change, Eagle Street £66,000
National Bank of Australasia Ltd. .. £lOO,OOO
as well as several other commercial buildings each costing
anything up to £50,000.


The completion of these buildings, with the new City
Hall, now in the course of erection and estimated to cost
£BOO,OOO, will considerably improve the architectural features
of the city.
During the three years about 10,000 new residences have
been erected. In this connection, it is pleasing to note that
over 80 per cent, of the people in Brisbane own their own
homes; this is the best assurance of stability any city can have.
The opening of the Kyogle line, which will make
Brisbane the natural port of the Northern Rivers district —
one of the richest parts of the Commonwealth—will urn
doubtedly hasten the progress of Brisbane. This railway,
which it is anticipated will be finished in about two years’
time, will connect Brisbane with the Southern States by a
uniform railway gauge, and reduce the time of travelling be-
tween Brisbane and Sydney by seven hours. The Railway
Department has made some extensive resumptions in South
Brisbane so as to make provision for a big railway centre there.
CONSTITUTION OF COUNCIL.
The Greater Brisbane Act provides that the Council shall
consist of the Mayor and twenty Aldermen, one for each
ward of the same area as the Parliamentary electorates. Under
the old regime, there were 205 Aldermen and Councillors in
the Greater Brisbane area.
The Mayor and Aldermen are elected on the adult fran-
chise, the Mayor being elected by the whole of the electors
voting as in one ward. The Council is elected for three years.
The Mayor has a primary vote as well as casting vote.
FIRST ELECTION.
The first election was held on the 21st February, 1925,
when the following Aldermen were elected: —
Mayor:
Alderman W. A. JOLLY
Aldermen:
A. HARRISON (Bulimba)
J. SODEN (Logan)
W. F. SCHULZ (Sandgate)
R. W. H. LONG (South Brisbane)
A. ELLIOTT (Maree)
T. PRENTICE (Windsor)
W. L. DART (Wynnum)
J. A. FIHELLY (Paddington)


H. M. RUSSELL (Toombul)
J. P. KEOGH (Fortitude Valley)
J. TAIT (Kelvin Grove)
F. A. STIMPSON (Oxley)
E. LANHAM (Enoggera)
A. LAURIE (Buranda)
E. BARSTOW (Kunlpa)
A. WATSON (Toowong)
W. R. WARMINGTON (Ithaca)
F. W. BRADBURY (Nundah)
J. P. TEEFEY (Brisbane)
J. T. McMINN (Merthyr)
Following on the death of late Alderman J. T. McMinn,
a by-election for Merthyr Ward took place on the 27th June,
1925, when Alderman A. M. Oxlade was elected.
Alderman H. M. Russell resigned from the Council on
being elected a Member of Parliament, and at a by-election,
held on the 31st July, 1926, Alderman C. W. Campbell was
elected for the Toombul Ward.
The Greater Brisbane Act provides for the remuneration
of the Mayor and Aldermen, the Mayor at <£l,ooo a year and
the Aldermen at £4OO a year, this being a new departure so
far as local government in Queensland is concerned.
Immediately after the election, steps were taken to
arrange for the first meeting, Mr. S. E. Travill, who was then
Deputy Town Clerk at South Brisbane, being appointed sec-
retary pro tern, to assist in the preliminary work.
FIRST MEETING.
The first meeting of the new Council was held on the
18th March, 1925, in the Central Technical College, George
Street, in the presence of a large and representative gathering
of citizens. The Hon. James Stopford, Home Secretary, pre-
sided; and after Mr. C. E. Chuter, Returning Officer, had
announced the result of the poll, Mr. Stopford installed the
Mayor and delivered an address, congratulating the Mayor
and Aldermen on their election and wishing the Council every
success in its big task.
At that meeting Alderman H. M. Russell was elected
Vice Mayor, and on his retirement in June, 1926, Alderman
A. Watson, was elected to that position.
VICE MAYOR
The position of Vice Mayor is an important one, as, in
the event of a vacancy in the Mayoral position, the Vice


Mayor automatically becomes Mayor. On the retirement of
Alderman Russell, a peculiar position arose, as the Act pro-
place until af t ° f a a™ VlCe May ° r could not take
fill AM f n r th^ Extraordina ry Election had been held to
mo er^T.U USSdIS poslt r lon ‘ Durin g the in terim of about a
th, had the position of Mayor become vacant, it would
have been impossible for the Council to elect a new Mayor.
vidently such a contingency had not been foreseen when the
Act was framed.
ioa<r Alth j° Ug u th f Council was elected on the 21st February
Local’ t v Act 2t i dl u d not take ° ver actual control of the
ivocal Authorities until the Ist October, 1925.
In the meantime, the Council gave its attention to the
ordinances"' the ° f the
A.,^ on ,- the lst ,°, ct ° ber > the of the then existing Local
An honttes included in the Greater Brisbane area were
olished, and the new Council took over full control The
following cities, towns, and shires, were absorbed:—
Cities of Brisbane and South Brisbane
Towns of Hamilton, Ithaca, Toowong, Windsor,
oandgate, and Wynnum
Shires of Balmoral, Belmont, Coorparoo, Enoggera
Kedron, Moggill, Sherwood, Stephens, Taringa
and Toombul, 6
and parts of the Shires of Tingalpa and Yeerongpilly,
as well as other Boards, such as:
The Victoria Bridge Board
Metropolitan Electricity Board (controlling supply
of electricity in the absorbed Local Authority
areas °f Balmoral, Coorparoo, Wynnum, Toom-
,-r, *L, c , te ’ En °gg era > Kedron and Ithaca.)
Three-Mile Scrub Road Bridge Board
Wattlebrae Hospital Board.
THE CHANGE-OVER.
The Ist October, 1925, was a momentous day in the his-
tory of civic government of Brisbane. On that day the
change-over from the old order to the new took plaj and
passed off very smoothly, practically without a hitch The
whole of the arrangements had been carefully planned by the
Heads of the various Departments. y


It had been suggested that it would be necessary to keep
a number of the offices of the old Local Authorities open,
particularly for the purpose of receiving rates; but, after much
thought, it was decided to close the whole of the outside
offices and centralise the administration in the old Town Hall,
Queen Street, and this arrangement has worked satisfactorily.
One of the greatest difficulties was in the housing of the
staff, as the old Town Hall building was inadequate. It was
felt, however, in view of the early completion of the new
City Hall, the Council would not be justified in going to any
considerable expense for the short period that would elapse
before a part of the new building would be ready.
WORKS DEPARTMENT.
The Works Department of the Council in itself is a huge
organisation. Mr. E. F. Gilchrist, M.C.E., M.I.E. (Aust.),
who had previously held the position of Engineer of the old
Brisbane City Council, was appointed Chief Engineer to take
charge of this Department.
In the organising of the Works Department it was de'
cided to create seven separate districts each in charge of a
qualified engineer, under the Chief Engineer, with a Works
Depot in each district. In the past, a number of the smaller
Authorities did not employ a qualified engineer; but
under the new conditions it was found possible, without im
creasing the number of the staff, to so arrange matters that
the whole of the works throughout the area are supervised
by competent engineers.
Associated with the Works Department are the City
Architect and Mechanical Engineer.
In addition to inspecting and approving all plans of new
buildings to be erected in the city, Mr. A. H. Foster, the City
Architect, has under his charge the numerous buildings, as
well as wharves and markets owned by the Council.
The Mechanical Engineer (Mr. H. Hicks) has under his
charge the ferries, as well as the whole of the Council’s plant
and machinery.
COMMITTEES.
The business of the Council is carried on by Committees,
the Council as a whole meeting weekly, when the reports of


BRISBANE —SHOWING QUEEN AND EAGLE STREETS,


the Committees are submitted for adoption by the whole
Council, special meetings being arranged as required:
The personnel of the various Committees is as follows:
Finance, Tenders and Stores; Aldermen E. Barstow
(Chairman), C. W. Campbell, J. A. Fihelly,-A.
Watson, and J. P. Teefey.
Works, Buildings, Alignments and Street Lighting: Alder-
men R. W. H. Long (Chairman), A. M. Oxlade,
F. A. Stimpson, E. Lanham, J. P. Keogh, W. R.
Warmington, W. L. Dart, F. W. Bradbury, and
W. F. Schulz.
Health, Sanitation and Burial; Aldermen F. A. Stimpson
(Chairman), F. W. Bradbury, J. Tait, A. Elliott, A.
Laurie, J. Soden, and E. Lanham.
Parks and Recreation; Aldermen A. Watson (Chair-
man), T. Prentice, J. Soden, J. Tait, W. R. Warm-
ington, W. L. Dart, and R. W. H. Long.
Cross-River, Bridges, Ferries, Baths and Wharves: Aider-
men T. Prentice (Chairman), E. Barstow, A. Har-
rison, A. Elliott, A. M. Oxlade, W. L. Dart, J. P.
Keogh.
Electric Light and Power; Aldermen A. Harrison
(Chairman), C. W. Campbell, J. A. Fihelly, F. A.
Stimpson, T. Prentice, J. P. Teefey and R. W. H.
Long.
Resumptions: The Mayor (Alderman W. A. Jolly,
C.M.G., Chairman), Aldermen R. W, H. Long, A.
Watson, and J. P. Teefey,
Licensing, Markets and Miscellaneous : Aldermen J.
Soden (Chairman), A. Watson, F. W. Bradbury,
W. R. Warmington, J. P. Keogh, A, Harrison and
W. F. Schulz.
Transit: Aldermen A. Watson (Chairman), A. Harrison,
C. W. Campbell, A. M. Oxlade, T. Prentice, E.
Lanham, and R. W. H. Long.
Abattoirs ; Aldermen E. Barstow (Chairman), F. A.
Stimpson, E. Lanham, J. P, Teefey, J. Tait, J. A.
Fihelly, and A. Harrison.
General Purposes: The Mayor and all the Aldermen.
The Mayor (Alderman W, A. Jolly, C.M.G.), is ex
officio a member of all Committees.


STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE BUILDING
WITH WIRELESS STATION


ADMINISTRATION.
The work of organising and co-ordinating the 19 Local
Authorities and the other Boards into one administration was
no easy task. The selection of the Heads of the various De-
partments and appointment of various officers was a matter
that necessitated very careful consideration. With the excep-
tion of the position of Town Clerk, practically the whole of
the executive officers were drawn from the ranks of the old
Local Authorities.
The following executive officers were finally appointed
to the respective positions: —
Colonel F. W. G. Annand, D. 5.0., V.D., F.C.I.S.
F.A.1.5., Town Clerk.
Mr. S. E. Travill (Cert.), Deputy Town Clerk
Mr. E. F. Gilchrist, M.C.E., M.I.E. (Aust.), City En-
gineer.
Mr. N. F. Hetherington, F.1.C.A., A.F.1.A., City
Treasurer.
Mr. G. L. Byth, 8.A., Barrister-at-Law, City Solicitor.
Mr. J. H. Hindman, Manager, Electricity Department.
Mr. G. R. Steer, M.V.0., M. Inst. T., General Manager,
Tramways Department.
Mr. W. M. Ludwig, City Valuer.
Mr. A. H. Foster, F.R.1.8.A., City Architect.
Mr. W. J. Earle, M.C., City Planner,
Dr. H. W. Tilling, M.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P. (Lend.),
Medical Officer of Health.
Mr. R. A. Fraser, Chief Health Inspector and Secretary.
Mr. H. Hicks, A.M.I.E. (Aust.), Mechanical Engineer.
Mr. H. S. Moore, Parks Superintendent.
Mr. E. Bick, Curator, Botanic Gardens.
Mr. J. Geddes, Industrial Officer.
TOWN CLERK.
The position of Town Clerk is the most important office
of the Council, as he is the permanent head of the whole sen
vice.
Applications for this position were called throughout the
Commonwealth, and, after carefully considering the numerous
replies received, it was decided to appoint Colonel F. W. G.
Annand, D. 5.0., V.D., A.D.C., to this position.


GOVERNMENT HOUSE


Colonel Annand has had some considerable commercial
training, as well as a distinguished military career. At the
time of his appointment, he was Manager of one of the bank'
ing institutions in the city. In addition, he had some experi'
ence with Local Government matters, having acted in the
capacity of Auditor to Local Authorities as well as being an
Alderman and Mayor of the Hamilton Town Council.
There is no doubt that in every way he is well qualified
to carry out the responsible duties of Town Clerk of Greater
Brisbane.
CITY SOLICITOR
As the new Council was to take the place of nineteen
former Local Authorities, and was clothed with not only the
powers enjoyed by Queensland Local Authorities but also
many wider powers, it was apparent that its activities would
involve a great volume of legal work —which might be
further increased by the merging in the Council of the Bris'
bane Tramway Trust, the Metropolitan Water Supply and
Sewerage Board, and other bodies, as provided in “The City
of Brisbane Act of 1924.” The Council therefore decided,
in the first few months of its existence, to establish its own
Legal Department. The office of City Solicitor was created,
with a fixed salary and no right of private practice. For this
office the Council obtained the services of Mr. G. L. Byth,
8.A., Barrister-at'Law. Mr. Byth had had a distinguished
academic career at Brisbane Grammar School, Sydney Uni'
versity, and Oxford Uniiversity. He had spent nine years in
the Crown Law Office, Queensland, holding among other
positions those of Legal Assistant and Assistant Crown Prose'
cutor.
While it is common in England to appoint a legal man
to the dual position of Town Clerk and City Solicitor, it is
believed that this Council's appointment of a fulbtime salaried
City Solicitor is unique, at any rate, in Australia.
The City Solicitor’s Office has justified its creation,
handling satisfactorily a large amount of legal work.
The drafting of the Council’s Ordinances is in itself a
considerable task.
In carrying out its policy the Council is continually
obliged to resume land. The effecting of the resumptions, the
settlement of claims which have been determined by agree'
ment, and the litigation in connection with those where agree'


ment cannot be reached, all mean considerable work for the
Solicitor s Office. In addition to this, there is general com
veyancing, the preparation of opinions (which are constantly
required as the Council is working under a new and unique
statute), prosecutions, and a considerable amount of litigation
in various Courts.
ORDINANCES.
The framing of Ordinances was another very heavy and
difficult task. It was essential to have a new set of uniform
regulations covering the whole area. This necessitated much
thought and reviewing of ordinances and bydaws of other
Local Government bodies throughout the world. The magni-
tude of this task is indicated by the fact that already some 30
differ ent sets of Ordinances have been passed, comprising
1,100 separate regulations.
A BIG TASK,
In addition to the task of organising the new administra-
tion, as well as carrying on the ordinary work, the Council
was compelled, almost immediately, to tackle a number of big
problems which had been held in abeyance for many years
awaiting the advent of the Greater Brisbane scheme. This
had resulted in the civic development, which would have
taken place in the ordinary course of events, being consider-
ably retarded. It was evident that, if the leeway were to be
made up, it would be necessary to immediately enter upon a
bold policy of civic improvement. With this object in view,
it was decided to secure a loan of <£2,000,000 for the purpose
of carrying out a number of permanent works such as con-
struction of good roads, drainage, building of bridges on main
highways, and acquisition of further breathing spaces.
ARTERIAL ROADS.
the most urgent of these was the putting in order of the
arterial roads. When the Council took over, with the excep-
tion of the city, the main highways were in a state hardly
creditable to a community of the siz;e and importance of Bris-
bane. A schedule was accordingly prepared providing for the
construction of good roads with bituminous surface, radiating
from the heart of the city to the various suburbs. Many of
these new roads have already been constructed, and it is ex-
pected that the whole programme will be completed in a






few months. Undoubtedly, the construction of these good
roads will considerably improve the status of Brisbane as
a city.
This programme, the carrying out of which will cost
<£500,000, comprises the following arterial roads: —
Lutwyche Road (from Bowen Bridge to Kedron Park)
Annerley Road (from Cornwall Street to Junction Hotel)
Beaudesert Road (from Ipswich Road Junction to Salis"
bury,
Ipswich Road (from Cornwall Street to Moorooka).
Logan Road (from O’Keefe Street to Chatsworth Road
and from Chatsworth Road to link up with Main
Road).
Main Gympie Road (Leichhardt Street to Kedron
Bridge)
Moggill Road (from North Quay to former Moggill
Shire Office)
Old Cleveland Road (Stone’s Corner to tram terminus)
Paddington Road (from Petrie Terrace and Roma Street
to tram terminus).
Samford Road (from Normanby to Mitchelton).
Sandgate Road (from junction Brookes and Leichhardt
Streets to Sandgate).
Waterworks and Ashgrove Roads (from Normanby
Bridge to Ashgrove School).
Wynnum Road (from Wellington Road to Wynnum).
Pinkenba Road (Racecourse Road to Pinkenba).
The Council has also constructed many more miles of
road with a bitumen surface, which will not only reduce the
maintenance cost, but will help to keep down the dust
nuisance.
DRAINAGE.
There were also a number of big drainage works which
had been held up for some years, and it was decided to pro'
vide a sum of £250,000 out of loan money to enable the more
urgent of these to be proceeded with at once. The following
are some of the more important of these works: —
Serpentine (Kedron Brook).
Birdwood Terrace through Torwood
Russell Street to Ascot Racecourse (with branches).
Dunnellan Estate and City View Estate


TREASURY BUILDING


Ekibin Creek to Cracknell Road
Ipswich Road Storm-water Drainage.
Kingfisher Creek, straightening.
Pembroke Road, Coorparoo.
Yeronga (3 schemes).
Riding Road, Balmoral.
Andrew Street to Memorial Park, Wynnum,
Graceville (two schemes).
Norman Park (two schemes)
BRIDGES.
The Council was also faced with the task of replacing a
number of bridges on main highways which had reached
a state of collapse, and it was necessary to provide nearly
£lOO,OOO for this work, in most instances the existing wood
structures being replaced by-concrete. The more important
of these bridges were: —
Albion Fiveways £34,000
Burnett Swamp £12,000
Nundah Overbridge .. .. £ll,OOO
Three Mile Scrub Road . . £12,000
Kedron Bridge £28,000
NEW HIGHWAY THROUGH MAYNE.
The question of the Bridge at Fiveways, Albion, was one
which had been under consideration by the contiguous Local
Authorities for many years. This work has now been under-
taken, and it is expected that the bridge will be completed
early next year. This will be of great benefit to the com-
munity as a whole, as it will open up a new and shorter
thoroughfare giving a direct route from Albion, Clayfield,
and districts beyond, through Mayne, to the city.
OTHER BIG WORKS.
In addition to carrying out this programme, the Council
had to complete a number of big works which the old Brisbane
and South Brisbane Councils had on hand, the more important
of these being:—
The opening up of Barry Parade, a new roadway running
from Leichhardt Street to Wickham Street;
The widening and concreting of Adelaide Street from
Creek Street to Albert Street;


PARLIAMENT HOUSE


The widening and concreting of Ann Street from Queen
Street to Duncan Street;
The concreting of Ann Street from Brunswick Street to
Wickham Street;
The concreting of Wickham Street from Brunswick
Street to Breakfast Creek Bridge;
The concreting of Brunswick Street from Valley Corner
to Gregory Terrace;
The widening and concreting of Melbourne Street be'
tween Victoria Place and Boundary Street;
The widening and concreting of Grey Street between
Melbourne and Ernest Streets;
The concreting of Roma Street between Railway Gates
and Countess Street.
The new Council has decided to continue the widening
of Adelaide Street from Creek Street to Petrie’s Bight; the
affected properties have been resumed, and it is proposed to
shift the buildings back and complete this work in 1928. This
will entail the underpinning of St. John’s Cathedral.
WIDENING OF STANLEY STREET AT CLARENCE
CORNER.
The widening of Stanley Street at Clarence Corner is
another long talked'of improvement which has been finalised,
the necessary resumptions made, and the buildings concerned
are now being shifted back to the new alignment.
OPENING UP OF ADELAIDE STREET THROUGH TO
NORTH QUAY.
The opening up of Adelaide Street through to North
Quay is one of the most urgent of proposed civic improve'
ments. The Government, who owns the buildings in the way,
has been approached on this matter several times, and it is
hoped that, before long, they will be able to make the land
available.
The Council has also carried out numerous other street
improvements, such as the rounding'off of corners and the
opening up of blind streets.
CROSS-RIVER FACILITIES.
Brisbane is blessed with a magnificent river, which is a
great asset not only for shipping, but provides a very healthy
lung as well as adding charm to the city from the aesthetic


NEW BRIDGE GREY STREET TO NORTH QUAY.


point of view. It creates, however, the problem of providing
facilities for crossing it, and the question of building another
bridge has been under consideration for many years past.
The Council appointed a Bridge Commission, consisting
of Professor R. W. H. Hawken, 8.A., M.E., M. Inst. C.E.,
M.I.E. (Aust.), Chairman; Messrs W. M. Nelson, M.1.E.E.,
M.I.E. (Aust.), A.M.1.C.E., and R. Martin Wilson, M.E.,
A.M.1.E., to consider the whole question of cross-river facili-
ties. This Commission, in their report (which has been pub-
lished) recommended a number of bridges to be built as the
city developed, the principal one to be somewhere near
Petrie’s Bight, with a canal cut on Kangaroo Point, but also
suggested, as such a scheme would take a number of years to
complete, that a start be made immediately with a bridge
across the river from Grey Street to North Quay. The Coun-
cil, after consideration, decided to proceed with the construc-
tion of a bridge from Grey Street to North Quay, and tenders
have now been called for the work, which it is anticipated
will be completed in about three years’ time, and will give
much-needed relief to Victoria Bridge.
This bridge, which has been designed by Mr. A. E.
Harding Frew, 8.E., M.I.E. (Aust.), Consulting Engineer,
will be constructed of concrete and will be an imposing struc-
ture estimated to cost, with necessary resumptions for widen-
ing of Grey Street and approaches to North Quay, £700,000.
BREATHING SPACES.
It has been recognised for some time past that Brisbane
was somewhat lacking in provision for breathing spaces; and
early in the life of the new Council, it was decided to acquire
a number of areas in the various suburbs for this purpose.
In all about 1600 acres have been resumed. Many of these
areas require considerable improvement, but this can be done
from time to time in the future when funds are available. It
was felt that the Erst essential was to acquire these open spaces
before all the available land was built upon or otherwise
utilised.
ACQUIRING OF RANGE OF HILLS AROUND
THE CITY.
One of the most important acquisitions was the securing
of practically the whole of the beautiful ranges which sur-
round the city. We citizens of to-day are deeply indebted


SCENE AT MT. COOT-THA


to the foresight of the men who in 1880 reserved 1500 acres
at Mount Coot-tha for the people.
Australia is rich in beautiful scenery, and Mount
Coot-tha is certainly one of the choicest. A panorama of
imposing grandeur, the beauty of which it is impossible to
adequately describe, unfolds itself to a visitor on a clear day.
The hills themselves are draped with trees and foliage of
varying shades and colours; and, standing on the crest, one
looks down upon green fields, stretching out to blue mountains
in the far distance. The beautiful river, like a silver thread,
can be seen winding its way through the city out to the sea,
which is visible, glistening in the distance. The imposing
buildings in the city, surrounded by the various suburbs, give
some conception of the sise of Brisbane. At night, when
thousands of lights can be seen twinkling in the city below,
the scene is an enchanting one.
The Greater Brisbane Council has added to the area by
securing the rest of this range, and the total area of the park
is now 2,560 acres. It is important that we should retain
these tree-clad hills for all time in their sylvan state, not only
for the pleasure which it affords to those who visit them,
but because if these hills were sub-divided and the trees cut
down, it would destroy the beautiful background with which
nature has endowed the city.
Undoubtedly, Mt. Coot-tha Park is a great asset to-day;
but it will be of untold value to the future generations to have
a glorious park of native trees and foliage practically in the
heart of the city.
Arrangements have also been made with the Defence De-
partment, which owns the adjoining range at Enoggera, that
the trees are not to be destroyed, and in the event of the
Department not requiring it in the future for defence pur-
poses the Council to have the first opportunity of acquiring it.
WHITE’S HILL, consisting of 43 acres, situated be-
yond Coorparoo, has been acquired; and MT. GRAYATT,
consisting of 298 acres, situated nearby, has been taken over
from the Trustees. Both these spots are beautiful tree-clad
hills, and provide excellent points of vantage.
EILDON HILL, Windsor, and BARTLEY’S HILL,
Hamilton, have been acquired by the Metropolitan Water
Supply and Sewerage Board for reservoir purposes, and ar-
rangements have been made so that they can be used by the
public as view points.


NEWSTEAD PARK


GARDENS AND PARKS.
The Greater Brisbane Act provided for the handing over
by the Government to the City of Brisbane of the Botanic
Gardens, and they are now under the control of the City.
The cost of maintaining these Gardens, viz;., £6,000 per
annum, had previously been borne by the Government.
During the past two years, considerable additions and
improvements have been made to a number or the parks.
NEWSTEAD PARK, at the junction of Breakfast Creek
with the River, has been considerably added to and laid out.
The laying-out of CENTENARY PARK, between Wickham
and Ann Streets, has been completed and will greatly improve
this part of the city.
In addition to the Botanic Gardens, consisting of 58
acres, the Council has several very fine parks and gardens, the
principal being: —
Bowen Park Yeronga Park
Newstead Park Victoria Park
New Farm Park Hardgrave Park
Centenary Park Raymond Park
Albert Park Dutton Park
Musgrave Park Davies Park
Mowbray Park Orleigh Park
Wickham Park Ascot Park
Perry Park
as well as a number of smaller public gardens in the suburbs.
In a number of the parks, sports grounds have been laid
out for cricket and football, as well as numerous tennis courts.
The total area of park reserves controlled by the Council is
5,762 acres.
CHILDREN’S PLAYGROUNDS.
There are a number of Children Playgrounds in the city
situated in the following localities: —
Paddington Kangaroo Point
Water St., Spring Hill Windsor Park
Domain Balmoral
Valley
Most of these playgrounds are controlled by the Child-
ren’s Playground Association of Queensland, under an arrange-


BOTANIC GARDENS


ment with the Council. Experience teaches that it is prac'
tically useless to equip such playgrounds unless they are under
the control of a competent supervisor.
MUSIC IN PARKS.
The Council gave consideration to the whole question
of music in parks, and with a view of encouraging bands to
play in the public parks, grants a subsidy for each perform'
ance. Under this arrangement concerts are rendered in the
following parks:—
Albert Park Musgrave Wynnum
New Farm Windsor Cook’s Hill
Bowen Sandgate Botanic Gardens
With a view of keeping the performances up to standard,
Mr. E. Jackson, Bandmaster of the Brisbane Municipal Con'
cert Band, has been appointed Supervisor to control the band
music.
WADING POOL FOR CHILDREN.
It was considered that in a warm climate like ours, it
would be an acquisition to our parks to have wading pools
for small children, and one has just been constructed in the
Botanic Gardens near the George Street entrance. The pool
is only filled to a depth of 8 inches, and is so designed that
it will be quite safe for the smallest children to enjoy wading
in it.
It is intended to extend this innovation to other parks
in thickly'populated areas, if it proves satisfactory.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
In the past the Health Department of Local Government
has not received the consideration its importance demands,
and under the new order it was felt that the health of the
city should be regarded by the Council as one of its chief
concerns. With that object in view, it was decided in the
organising of the Health administration, that a full'time
Medical Officer should be appointed whose duty it would
be to protect and promote the health of the citizens. This
new position was filled by Dr. H. W, Tilling, M.R.C.S.
(Eng.) L.C.R.P. (Lond,) with Mr. R. A. Fraser as Chief
Health Inspector and Secretary.


EXHIBITION SHOW GROUNDS


LADY HEALTH INSPECTORS.
An innovation was the appointment of three Lady Health
Inspectors who were qualified Nurses. It was thought that
as these Inspectors had to visit the homes of the people, it
would be far more satisfactory to have women appointed for
this purpose who, being qualified nurses, would be able to
give householders much useful advice. These nurses also
take swabs of contacts in diphtheria cases.
CAMPAIGN AGAINST MOSQUITOES
It has been felt for many years past that some more defim
ite campaign should be initiated against the mosquito pest,
but little was done with the exception of certain action to
the extent of spraying the gully traps with kerosene, by
some of the component Councils before the inception of
Greater Brisbane, upon somewhat haphazard lines. The
Greater Brisbane Council at an early stage resolved to system'
atise the operations on the basis of a permanent campaign,
and for this purpose authorised the creation of an Entomolo'
gical Section in the Council’s Department of Health. A
Laboratory was fitted up, a trained scientist placed in charge,
and a staff of inspectors and labourers engaged. Shortly
afterwards the Mosquito Ordinances were gazetted, and at
a later stage additional staff was provided.
A commencement was made from the centre of the city,
and the operations progressively extended outwards over a
widening area roughly circular in form; by this plan the cam'
paign applied first to the areas of densest population, leaving
the less densely settled areas for later attention, until at length
the outer fringe of rural or semfirural areas should be reached.
At all times the Section has responded to complaints of mos'
quito infestation from areas beyond the zone of systematic
control, and certain intensely infested localities which acted
as feeders for surrounding areas have also been brought
under control.
To ensure effective results operations have been con'
ducted upon the following general line : (a) Laboratory in'
vestigations of the species of local mosquitoes, their habits and
breeding places; (b) The cultivation of larvae'eating fish for
stocking permanent waters; (c) A survey by trained field
inspectors to obtain and classify accurate information enabling
suitable methods of control to be applied to the varying


STATE GOVERNMENT EXECUTIVE BUILDINGS


sources of infestation; (d) Compulsory enforcement of mos-
quito reduction methods by householders and others; (e) The
systematic treatment by oil emulsions or other larvaecides of
waters not capable of control by other methods.
During the 18 months the Section has been in existence
almost the whole area has been surveyed and attention has
been given to the worst breeding places, these places being
dealt with according to the intensity of the breeding.
Gully traps to the extent of about 9,000 are under com
stant treatment by the new “swab” method.
Very many areas of swamp land (more especially that
caused by tidal influx) have been drained by “ditching.”
The house to house inspections have now been instituted
12 months, and during that time every premises and land
within about a mile and a-half radius from the G.P.O. have
been inspected and notices have been given to the owners
of those places not in accordance with the Ordinance. These
notices have been followed up by re-inspections until the con-
dition has been remedied.
All dumps and open sewers are under regular inspection
and receive treatment.
TOWN PLANNING DEPARTMENT.
The Greater Brisbane Council was the first civic
authority in Australia to establish a Town Planning Depart-
ment. Mr. W. J. Earle, who had considerable experience in
town planning, was appointed City Planner.
Special attention has been paid to the sub-division of
estates, particularly with a view of co-ordinating and con-
trolling the development of the city on the most economic
lines. This supervision is very important as, owing to faulty
subdivision in the past, the Council to-day is put to great
expense in rounding-off dangerous corners, opening up blind
streets, and widening narrow roadways,.
The City Planner has now under consideration the ques-
tion of a civic survey, with the object of laying-out a definite
plan for the future development of the city upon the most
scientific lines. It will be readily realised, however, that the
preparation of such a survey will take years to complete,
especially as no steps along these lines had been taken by com-
ponent Local Authorities, nor was any data available at the
inauguration.


The carrying out of this work is an essential in muni'
cipal government, but in order that the city should not con'
tinue to grow in any haphazard manner, pending its com'
pletion, steps have been taken by the preparation of Ordin'
ances under which the Council can, by resolution, set aside
and declare any portions of the city to be—
(a) Residential Areas
(b) First'dass Building Sections
(c) Industrial Areas
(d) Noxious Trades Areas
(e) Hazardous Trades Areas
There is a mistaken idea in the minds of many people
that town planning stands only for city beautification. This
is not so. One of its chief objectives is to organise and
arrange the various services and interests of the community
to the best advantage of all concerned. Many large cities
are suffering huge economic losses owing to the want of some
proper supervision and co'ordination in their natural growth
and development.
For instance, it is not good business for a city to be
expanding ten or twelve miles in one direction, whilst there
is a number of suitable localities within a distance of a few
miles of the heart of the city not being fully utilised owing to
the want of proper transit and other facilities. This not only
means increased cost to the Civic Authorities in having to
maintain a larger mileage of streets, but also means a heavy
expenditure in providing the necessary services such as water,
gas, electric light, and transit; in addition, there is the loss to
the community in the extra time of travelling and increased
transit charges.
It is also essential that the authorities give serious con'
sideration to the providing of the most direct thoroughfares
from one important centre to another.
These are only a few of the matters which suggest the
advisability of giving due regard to the development of a city
from the broad economic standpoint.
FERRIES.
Under the policy of the old Brisbane City Council, the
ferries within its area had been free, and it was decided to


extend this policy to the ferries serving main highways. The
following are free ferries: —
Vehicular : Bulimba (free except Sundays)
Charlotte Street
Indooroopilly (free except Sundays)
Passenger : Bulimba
Hawthorne
Norman Park
Custom House
Edward Street
St. Lucia (free up to 7 p.m.)
All vehicular ferries also carry foot passengers free.
NEW VEHICULAR FERRY
Consideration was given to the need of
vehicular ferries, and tenders are now being called for a new
vehicular ferry boat. It will be necessary to secure further
similar boats as the city develops.
SWIMMING BATHS.
The old Brisbane City Council had made a start with
the building of an up'tO'date swimming bath in Wickham
Street, Valley. This has been completed, and gives the city
one of the most modern baths in the Commonwealth. The
dimensions are as follow: —
Length—so metres
Breadth —20 yards
Depth—3ft 6in. to 9ft. (9ft. 6in. below
diving tower)
while a system of filtration and aeration of the water, so as
to assure its purity has been installed.
A new bath has been erected at Manly, on the foreshore.
This is specially constructed to hold back the tidal water, and
thus enables residents and visitors to have a swim when the
tide is out.
A similar bath has just been completed at Sandgate, and
it is intended to extend this convenience to other seaside
resorts as soon as funds will permit.
A new bath has also been constructed at Balmoral on
the bank of the river.


TIDAL SWIMMING BATH AT MANLY


The Council has under its control the following swim'
ming baths:—
Davies Park (open'air pool)
Metropolitan Baths (open'air pool, near Victoria
Bridge).
Spring Hill (covered pool)
Caxton Street, Paddington (open'air pool)
Toowong, near Railway Station, (open'air pool)
Mowbray Park (open'air pool)
Dutton Park (tidal river baths)
Sherwood (open'air pool)
Balmoral (open'air tidal baths)
Wickham Street (covered)
Manly (open'air, seaside)
Sandgate (open'air, seaside)
Wynnum (seaside)
ANZAC SQUARE
The question of an Ansae Square in the heart of the
city is another matter which had been under discussion for
many years past. After some considerable controversy, a
satisfactory settlement was arrived at by the State Govern'
ment donating a piece of land 178 ft. bins, and the Federal
Government another piece of 46ft. bins.
It is the intention of the Federal Government to erect
on the Creek Street side an imposing building of seven storeys
to house certain of the Federal Services in Brisbane, and
ultimately the State Government proposes to erect a building
on the other side to harmonise in architecture with that of
the Commonwealth buildings. The Square, which in all will
be 260 ft. x 225 ft., is to be laid out by the City Council; and
the National Ansae Memorial Committee have decided to
erect an Ansae Memorial herein. Arrangements are now
being made with Sir Bertram Mackennal, R.A., an Australian,
and one of the world’s leading sculptors, to carry out this
work. When the whole scheme is completed, it will not only
be a fitting monument to the men who responded to the call
of the Empire in its hour of need, but will considerably im'
prove this part of the city.
RATES AND VALUATIONS.
The Greater Brisbane Act makes it compulsory upon the
Council to levy a uniform rate for the whole area, with the


single exception of rural lands which, in the opinion of the
Council, are being reasonably used for the purpose of primary
production and which must be at a lesser rate in the pound
than the rate made on other land, the rate being struck upon
the unimproved value of the land.
DEFINITION OF UNIMPROVED LAND.
According to the relative Ordinance —
“the term 'unimproved value 1 means the capital sum
which the fee-simple of the land might be expected
to realise if offered for sale on such reasonable terms
and conditions as a bona fide seller would require,
assuming that the improvements (if any) thereon or
appertaining thereto and made or acquired by the
owner or his predecessor in title had not been made.
The value of improvements means the added value
which the improvements give to the land at the date
of valuation, irrespective of the cost of the improve-
ments.”
The question of valuations has been one of the most con-
tentious with which the new Council has had to deal. It was
apparent, on the establishment of Greater Brisbane, that some
steps would have to be taken with a view to secure a more
uniform valuation for the whole area.
In the past some of the Local Authorities had adopted
the policy of a low valuation and high rates, whilst others
had a high valuation and low rates. This is borne out by the
fact that the rates levied by the various Local Authorities
ranged from 6d. to 1/4 in the pound.
It was obvious that as, under the Act, the Council had to
strike one uniform rate for the whole area, to continue the
existing valuations would have meant that those areas which
previously had the higher valuations would have had to bear
an unfair burden of the taxation. In the first year under the
new regime, the rate levied was 9d.; but, had the old valua-
tions been maintained, it would have been necessary to levy a
rate of 1/1 to secure the same revenue. It was necessary,
therefore, to review the whole of the valuations, and as there
were something like 100,000 separate valuations to be made,
it was not to be expected that this could be effectively done
in one or two years.


RATING OF RURAL LAND.
As already mentioned, the Act makes it compulsory for
the Council to levy a lesser rate for rural lands. It was de"
cided, in accordance with this provision, to make the levy on
rural land 3d. in the £ less than on other lands. The total
value of lands classed as rural in the Greater Brisbane area
is <£564,388.
ONE RATE ONLY.
It was the practice in the past for Local Authorities to
levy a General Rate and then special and separate rates for
specific purposes such as Loan, Street Lighting, and for bene"
fited areas; but under The Greater Brisbane Act, provision
is made for the striking of one general rate to meet all com"
mitments, with the exception of a special charge to cover the
sanitary and cleansing services,
TOTAL VALUATION OF CITY.
The total unimproved value of the land in the city is
£22,000,000 whilst it is estimated that the improved value,
that is, land and buildings, is well over £100,000,000.
The Council has given serious consideration to the
present system of making valuations, and representations have
been made to the Government for the establishment of a Valu"
ation Board whose duty it will be to make one valuation for
the purpose of all taxation on land, such as Land Tax, Muri"
cipal and Water and Sewerage Rates, as well as for Succession
Duty purposes. This suggestion, which is now receiving the
consideration of the Government, if adopted, will not only
assure the making of valuations by an independent body, but
will stand for uniformity and economy.
FINANCIAL
It is not proposed here to give detailed statements of the
finances of the Council, as these are fully set out in the City
Treasurer’s Annual Report.
The total revenue for the Council on the General
Account for the year ended 31st December,
1926, was £1,046,359
Added to the revenue from the Trading
Departments: —
Tramways £767,707
Electricity £174,170
941,877
makes a grand total of £2,028,236


WINDSOR STATE SCHOOL
Eildon Hill in background.


The figures for the current year are, of course, not yet
available, but it is anticipated that the revenue from all sources
for this year will be well over £2,300,000. When the Water
and Sewerage Board is taken over the total annual revenue
of the Council will exceed £3,000,000.
In the last year under the old order, the total receipts,
apart from the trading departments, from all the Local Author-
ities included in the Greater Brisbane area, were £849,465, but
the expenditure was £1,126,966. The expenditure for the
year 1926 under the new conditions was £1,145,848.
INCREASED COST OF CIVIC GOVERNMENT.
Some comment has been made on the fact that the new
Council has levied more in rates than the old Local Author-
ities. Whilst this is so, the above statement discloses the fact
that there was very little difference between the expenditure
of the last year under the old conditions and the first year
under the new. It must not be forgotten that, had the old
order continued, the various Local Authorities would have
had to carry out many of the improvements undertaken by
the new Council. Indeed, if it had not been for the coming
into being of the Greater Brisbane scheme, many of these big
works would have been carried out years ago. Further, the
city has made marked progress during the last three years,
indicated by the fact that the population has increased by
30,000, (this in itself representing a fair-sized community),
which means added cost to civic government. It should also
be remembered that as the city becomes greater, it calls for
more and better facilities.
The marked increase in the number of motor vehicles of
recent years has considerably increased the cost of street main-
tenance. Not only does it mean more traffic over the roads,
but the wear and tear caused by the suction from fast traffic
is estimated to be eighteen times as great as that of horse-
drawn vehicles. To meet these new conditions, the Council
is compelled to put down a better, and incidentally, a more
expensive type of road. The economic saving from these good
roads is reflected in cheaper cost of goods delivered by a re-
duction of maintenance in the running cost and longer life of
vehicles, as well as the considerable reduction of the dust
nuisance which not only damages goods and property, but
affects the health of the citizens, not to say anything of the
comfort of those who travel over the roads.


Further, the cost of civic government in Brisbane is
affected by the fact that the city is spread out over a much
larger area than most cities, each home having a
plot of land around it. This certainly makes for ideal living
conditions, but adds considerably to the cost not only in the
maintenance of many miles of streets, but in the supplying of
the various services such as water, sewerage, electric light
and transit facilities.
INCREASED RESPONSIBILITIES OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT.
It would not be out of place here to refer to the in-
creased responsibilities which have been placed upon Local
Governments of recent years. In days gone by it was the
practice of the Government to grant a subsidy to the Local
Authorities, but this was withdrawn many years ago, and
since then the Councils have been called upon to carry many
other burdens such as the contributions to hospitals, fire
brigades, cost of treating infectious diseases, as well as the
eradicating of pests such as flying foxes, sparrows, etc. These
services are essential to the welfare of the community as a
whole, but all add to the cost of civic government.
LOAN INDEBTEDNESS.
The total loan indebtedness of the city on the 30th June
last, apart from the trading concerns, was £4,866,186. This
money has been expended on permanent improvements such
as the construction of concrete roads, widening of streets,
building of wharves, sewers, acquisition of park lands, and
the construction of the new City Flail.
The loan indebtedness at this date in connection with
the trading departments was £2,386,385, of which £2,000,000
was represented by the Tramways and £386,385 by the
electric light undertaking.
SINKING FUND.
In connection with all loans floated by the Council, pro-
vision is made for a Sinking Fund to provide for the liquid-
ation of the debt.
LOANS.
Under the Greater Brisbane Act, it is not necessary for
the Council to submit proposals to borrow to the electors. It


is necessary, however, to obtain the approval of the Governor
in-Council to any loan proposals.
MUNICIPAL LOAN FLOTATION
The question of municipal borrowing is one that has
received the serious consideration of the Mayor, and the fol-
lowing letter was written to the Premier of Queensland on
this matter sets out fully the need for some improvement in
the present system: —
“With further reference to the question of municipal
borrowing, I have given this matter some consideration and am
satisfied that a considerable saving could be effected throughout
Australia if it were possible in some way to co-ordinate muni-
cipal borrowing with the Commonwealth Loan Council.
“I would point out that the amount borrowed in Australia
for municipal purposes is a very large one. Take, for instance,
Queensland alone; during the past twelve months the Brisbane
City Council and the Water Supply and Sewerage Board have
borrowed nearly £2,000,000, not to say anything of the numerous
other municipal bodies throughout the State.
“I am not in a postion to quote the loan figures of the other
States; but from information received of the big works on hand
by the larger public bodies, I am sure it must run into many
millions for the whole of Australia.
“Under present conditions, it is possible for more than
one of the big local government bodies to be on the market for
a loan at the one time. This competition not only results in
an increase of the interest rate to the bodies concerned, but also
more than probably adversely affects the Commonwealth Loan
Council’s flotation.
“Further, loan flotation is a very delicate matter, and to
assure the best results, it is essential that it should be handled
by men who make it their business to keep in close touch with
the world’s financial position.
“I feel sure that, owing to want of proper co-ordination and
supervision in the past, we are to-day in Australia paying an
enormous sum for interest which might have been saved. To
emphasise this, it is only necessary to mention that on a loan of
£1,000,000 for a period of 30 years, an increase in the rate of
only 1/- per cent, means an extra amount to be paid by way
of interest, over the period, of £15,000, and, by undue com-
petition, very easily might result in an increase in the rate of
interest by at least 5/- per cent.
“There is no doubt that public borrowing in the Common-
wealth will never be effectively controlled until municipal bor-
rowing comes under the supervision of the Commonwealth Loan
Council. It is possible for one State to slacken its loan expendi-
ture so far as State activities are concerned, but at the same time
to speed up its loan expenditure on municipal works.


“I am strongly of the opinion that it will be in the best
interests of all concerned to have municipal borrowing co-
ordinated with the Commonwealth Loan Council’s activities.
There are, no doubt, some difficulties in the way; but the saving
to be made through the organising of a more scientific method
of loan flotation justifies serious consideration of this question.
“It has been suggested that I should get the other large
municipal bodies in the Commonwealth to confer on this
matter; but, as the borrowing by municipal bodies is under the
control of the various State Governments, I thought it would be
better if you could see your way clear to bring this matter before
the Commonwealth Loan Council.”
W. A. JOLLY,
Mayor.
The Premier has advised the Mayor that this matter
has been discussed by the Commonwealth Loan Council and
will receive further consideration at a future meeting of that
body.
This is a question which demands serious consideration,
for, quite apart from the huge saving of interest to be effected
by co-ordination, the ever-increasing loan indebtedness of the
Commonwealth suggests that the time has arrived when
there should, from a national point of view, be some super-
vision over further loan flotations. Moreover, any unsatis-
factory loan arrangements made by one part of Australia will,
to a certain extent, react unfavourably on the whole of the
Commonwealth.
SEASIDE RESORTS.
When the Greater Brisbane Act was being framed, there
was some doubt as to the wisdom of including the seaside
resorts in the city’s area. In the light of the experience of
the first few years, it must be admitted that their inclusion was
fully justified. These seaside resorts are the pleasure places
of the people of the city, and it is not fair to expect local
residents to provide all the facilities for the convenience and
pleasure of the visitors.
The Council has connected up Sandgate, Wynnum, and
Manly by good roads, and has constructed up-to-date swim-
ming baths, one at Manly and one at Sandgate. These baths
are somewhat unique as they retain the tidal waters and are
a great acquisition to seaside places where the tide goes out
a long way. It means that visitors are assured of a swim
whatever may be the state of the tide.


The City Planner has prepared a plan to provide for the
future development of these seaside resorts. In the future,
when the population justifies the expense, it will be possible
to reclaim a considerable area of the foreshore which will add
to their charm as pleasure resorts.
Consideration is being given to the construction of a
good road to connect up Nudgee and Cribb Island, two other
popular seaside resorts.
ST. HELENA.
For many years past, there has been an agitation with the
object of having St. Helena —one of the beautiful islands in
Moreton Bay—made a pleasure resort. The Home Secretary
(Hon. ]as. Stopford) has now advised the Council that it is
the intention of the Government to remove the prison settle'
ment from St. Helena and hand the island over to the
Council. It will certainly be a great acquisition to the city,
for as the population increases, it will be necessary to take
every advantage of seaside resorts such as this. The work of
demolishing the building on the Island is now proceeding,
and as soon as this is completed, the Council will take over
control, and this delightful spot will be made available to the
public.
MACHINERY AND PLANT.
The amalgamation of the works for the whole area under
one administration justifies securing the most
plant and machinery, as it can be utilised to its fullest capacity.
It was found on taking over from the old Local Authorities
that, with the exception of a few of the larger bodies, the
plant was very primitive, and in most cases in a state of dis-
repair. It was therefore necessary to take immediate steps
to improve the plant and equipment to enable the works to be
carried out as efficiently and economically as possible. On
the recommendation of the City Engineer, a sum of £45,000
has been expended in this direction.
QUARRIES.
The Council is very much interested in the production
of road material. Many of the old Local Authorities were
working quarries and gravel pits, but on investigation being
made, it was found that a number of these had just about been
worked out and it was decided to close them. In other cases,


NEW TRAM CAR


where the supply of metal justified it, the plant was enlarged
so as to assure greater output.
New quarries and gravel pits have been opened up in
various localities in order to reduce as far as possible the cost
of haulage.
TRAMWAYS.
On the Ist January, 1926, the Council took over the
electric tramways from the Brisbane Tramway Trust. This
Trust had been established towards the end of 1922, when
the Local Authorities took over the concern from the Brisbane
Tramways Company. Since then considerable extension has
been made in the Tramway Service. Fourteen new extensions,
in all eleven miles, have been constructed, and 76 new trams
of the most modern type have been purchased, in addition to
duplicating 7J miles of single track and relaying 26 miles of
old track.
The total mileage of tramways now controlled by tne
Council is 91.92 (track), 53.02 (route), and the total number
of cars now running is 254.
The total number of passengers carried for the year
ended 31st December, 1926, was 81,802,945.
In addition to this, the Tramways Department has
erected tram sheds at Ipswich Road at a cost of
£83,500, and also a new workshop at North Quay at a cost
of £95,633. Several new substations have also been installed
at various points.
REVISION OF FARES
Practically no revision of the tram fares had ever taken
place in Brisbane, notwithstanding the marked increase in
the operating cost of recent years. The whole question was
carefully considered, and it was decided to make certain in
creases in the fares, the most marked being the raising of the
minimum fare from Id. to 2d.
The Tramways have shown a loss for the past few years,
but it is anticipated that as a result of the revision of lares,
they will show a profit in the future.
MOTOR ’BUSES.
The Council has the power of granting licenses for motor
buses within its area.
The Tramway Trust purchased a fleet of motor buses
but these proved very unsatisfactory, and in view of the heavy
loss entailed, it was decided to dispose of the whole fleet.


NEW CITY POWER HOUSE (now in course of construction)


ELECTRICITY.
When the Greater Brisbane Council was established, it
took over from a number of Local Authorities an extensive
electric light business. A number of the old Councils had
reticulated their areas and had entered into agreements with
the City Electric Light Company for the supply of current in
bulk for a period of ten years.
Early in the life of the new Council, it was necessary to
give consideration to the question of the establishment of a
power-house, not only for the purpose of being in a position
to supply these areas when the agreements expired, but also
to replace the three obsolete power-houses now being used
for tramway purposes.
Consideration was given to the question of acquiring the
whole of the City Electric Light Company’s undertaking, the
Company having Orders-in-Council for the areas covered by
the old Brisbane and South Brisbane Councils. Considerable
negotiations were carried on with the Company, who were
prepared to sell their undertaking for the sum of £2,5 00,000.
The Council had the whole question reported on by experts,
and after giving full consideration to these reports, it was felt
that the Council would not be justified in paying the price
asked by the Company. It was ultimately decided that the
Council should immediately establish its own power-house to
supply tramway purposes and to take over the bulk agreements
as they expired. The power-house is just about complete. It
will have an immediate capacity of 7,500 kw., with an over-
load of 25 per cent, and a third unit of 15,000 kw. with an
overload of 25 per cent, is to be added. Provision has been
made so that additions can be made to meet the demand.
The growth of the Council s electric light business has
been phenomenal. When the Council took over on the
Ist October, 1925, the total number of consumers was 18,061,
and the number of consumers at the end of August, 1927, had
increased to 27,974. For the first complete 12 months ended
31st December, 1926, the Council s Electric Light Department
showed very satisfactory results. After writing off ample
depreciation and making provision for necessary reserves,
a nett profit of £21,849 was made.
Notwithstanding the fact that certain concessions by way
of extra discount and reduction in domestic tariff to the
amount of £12,000 were made to the consumers this year, it


is anticipated that the good results of last year will be main'
tained.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES.
The following statement of the number of employees of
the Council will give some conception of the magniture of its
activities; —
Engineer’s Department 1,787
Ferries 47
Botanic Gardens 21
Parks 55
Health Department 117
Cleaners 35
Electricity Department 167
General Administration 286
Tramway Department 1,809
Baths Caretakers 8
Total .. . , 4,332
In addition to the employees who come directly under the
control of the Council, there are about 800 men employed by
contractors doing work on contract.
As already pointed out, it was not to be expected that
the new administration could be made perfect at once. Afte?
the new Council had been in operation for some 18 months
the Town Clerk was instructed to make a thorough invests
gation into the whole service, with a view of tightening up
the administration wherever possible. He has submitted a
comprehensive report on the whole organisation, and as a
result of his investigations, it will be possible to make certain
adjustments which will not only stand for economy but for
greater efficiency.
INDUSTRIAL OFFICER.
It was felt that in view of the large number of employees
it would be advisable to appoint an officer whose special duty
it would be to attend to all industrial matters, not only in
representing the Council at the Arbitration Courts, but to
see that the provisions of the various Awards are complied
with.
There are no less than 22 different Awards covering the
various activities of the Council. To this office Mr. J. Geddes,


who had previously been employed by the Water and Sewer
age Board in a similar capacity, was appointed.
NEW CITY HALL.
This magnificent building was in course of construction
when the new Council took over. Since then, considerable
progress has been made, and it is anticipated that the Adelaide
Street frontage will be available so that the administrative
staff, at present housed in the old Town Hall, will be able to
remove at the end of this year. The Council Chamber is
about complete and it is intended that the present Council
shall meet there before its term expires in February next.
Already a number of functions have been held in the
building, the first being a social afternoon arranged by the
Mayoress (Mrs. W. A. Jolly) to the wives of the Aldermen
and Executive Officers. This was held in the Mayoress’s
Room, which is a large room beautifully decorated in Adam’s
Period style.
The first Civic Reception in this room was tendered by
the Mayor (Alderman W. A. Jolly, C.M.G.), to the Right
Hon. the Prime Minister (Mr. Bruce) on the 29th July,
1927, and on the 22nd August, 1927, a Civic Reception was
tendered in the Council Chamber to the Hon. W.
McCormack, Premier of Queensland, on his return from a
trip abroad.
This building, when complete, will undoubtedly be one
of the outstanding structures of the Commonwealth, with a
frontage to Albert Square, bounded by Adelaide and Ann
Streets on either side and with a new street to be opened up
at the rear. It will be the civic centre at which the whole
civic administration will be housed. It covers two acres of
land, and the tower (in which is to be installed a clock with
Westminster chimes) is 302 feet high. In the building will
be provision for a large concert hall to accommodate 3,500
people.
The organ which had been previously housed in the
Exhibition Concert Hall, has been dismantled with the object
of having certain improvements and additions made to it,
and will be installed in the Concert Hall.
Messrs. T. R. Hall and G. G. Prentice are the architects,
and Mr. D. D. Garrick, the builder, respectively. The
foundations were put down by Messrs. A. Midson & Son.


LAKE MANCHESTER


REST ROOM FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
It is intended in the new City Hall to set aside a large
room on the ground floor at the corner of Albert and Adelaide
Streets as a rest room for women and children.
There is no doubt that our city is lacking in some pro-
vision where the tired mothers and little children can rest
awhile from the rush and bustle of our busy streets.
ABATTOIRS.
The Council gave consideration to the question of the
establishment of Abattoirs, and had the whole subject
thoroughly investigated by three experts. Their report indi-
cated that it would cost approximately <£750,000 to acquire
the necessary land and erect suitable buildings with adequate
plant. The Council also had an offer of several of the exist-
ing meatworks, but the experts could not recommend the
purchase of these for the purpose of carrying on abattoirs for
the city.
In view of the heavy commitments in many other direc-
tions, the Council was reluctantly compelled to relinquish the
idea of proceeding with the establishment of abattoirs at the
present time.
There is no doubt that as soon as funds can be made
available, steps should be taken to inaugurate a more up-to-
date and scientific method of slaughtering and handling meat
for the city.
WATER AND SEWERAGE
The Greater Brisbane Act makes provision for the
absorbing of the Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage
Board by the Council.
In view of the very heavy strain in other directions, it
was not thought advisable to take over this utility during the
first three years.
After conferring with the Government on the matter, it
has now been decided to definitely take over this body on the
Ist April, 1928.
The providing of an ample and pure supply of water and
an efficient sewerage system for a city of the size of Brisbane is
in itself no mean undertaking.


IMPOUNDING
Several of the old Local Authorities had maintained
pounds within their area. Under the new conditions, it was
found possible to reduce the number of pounds by having
them so located as to best serve the requirements of the area
as a whole.
WHARVES
The Council took over from the old Local Authority a
number of very valuable wharves, vis., in North Brisbane,
the Circular Quay Wharves, Norman Wharf and Queen’s
Road Wharf; and in South Brisbane, Musgrave Wharf and
Stanley Wharf.
These wharves are leased to various shipping companies
and produce a revenue of <£20,000 per annum. As the city
develops, they will become a still more valuable asset.
MARKETS.
The Council controls the Roma Street Markets, with
an area of 2 acres 1 rood 30 perches. The markets are split
up into sections and leased to various tenants, bringing in an
annual revenue of £IO,OOO.
CITY’S MILK SUPPLY.
Serious consideration has been given to this important
matter with a view of assuring a supply of pure milk for
the city.
After going into the whole question, it was felt that the
Council should limit its activity to the supervision and in-
spection of the distribution of milk.
At present, the Government’s Agricultural and Health
Departments carry out certain phases of this work. A further
difficulty presents itself in the fact that about 50 per cent,
of the milk supplied in the city comes from outside the
Greater Brisbane area, the Council having no control over
these dairies. The Council is now conferring with the Gov-
ernment with the view of coming to some arrangement by
which the Council will be able to co-ordinate the work of
inspection not only of the milk supply but the supervision of
the dairies from which the milk is produced.
CEMETERIES.
The Greater Brisbane Act provides that the Council can,
with the approval of the Governor-in-Council, take over the


existing cemeteries in the Greater Brisbane area. No steps
have yet been taken in this direction; but it is apparent that
at some early date, consideration will have to be given to the
whole question of cemeteries for the city. Several of the
existing ones have about reached the limit of their capacity,
and the main cemetery at Toowong, being in a thickly popu-
lated area, cannot be continued for an unlimited time.
The Council has under its control one cemetery at
Bulimba, which had been previously controlled by the old
Balmoral Shire Council, the other cemeteries being controlled
and managed by trustees.
CREMATION.
An application from a private company was received for
the establishment of a crematorium in Brisbane. The Council
approved of the application and the necessary arrangements as
to the site and terms are now being finalised.
FIRE BRIGADES.
Provision is made in the Greater Brisbane Act for the
taking over of the whole of the Fire Brigades within the area
on a date to be fixed by the Governor-in-Council. It was felt
that it would be unwise to undertake this responsibility in
the early years of the new Council. At present the Brigades
in the Metropolitan area are controlled by Boards constituted
of three representatives from the Insurance Companies, two
from the Government, and two from the Brisbane City
Council, the contribution to their upkeep being three-sevenths
by the companies, two-sevenths by the Government, and two-
sevenths by the Council.
CONTROL OF TRAFFIC.
The Council may also under the Act, on a date to be
fixed by the Governor-in-Council, take over the control
of the traffic within its area. Traffic is now controlled by the
Police, and it is not deemed advisable to make any change for
the present. The Council from time to time confers with
the Police Authorities on traffic problems.
PUBLIC HOSPITALS.
Under the Hospitals Act the Council is interested in the
management of public hospitals, which is now controlled by a
Board constituted by four representatives from the Govern-


NEW SITE FOR UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND, AT ST. LUCIA
Donated by Dr. and Miss Mayne


ment, one from the subscribers, and four from the Local
Authorities (two of whom are appointees of the City
Council),
This Board controls, within the city area, the Brisbane
General Hospital, Sick Children’s Hospital, Lady Bowen Hos-
pital and Lady Lamington Hospital. Under the Act the Gov-
ernment contributes 60 per cent, of the deficiency and the
Local Authorities 40 per cent. This is a considerable item,
and last year the City Council quota amounted to <£24,000.
In addition to this the Council has also to pay for the
Infectious Diseases patients from within its area at “Wattle-
brae,” which last year amounted to £12,500.
EFFECT OF SALT WATER ON STREETS
When the Greater Brisbane Council took over control,
it was the practice to water the city streets with salt water.
Motorists and others drew attention to the serious effect that
salt water had on vehicles as well as other property. The
matter was investigated, and it was found that whilst the
saving to the Council by using salt instead of fresh
water was £I,OOO per annum, it was estimated that the
damage to the Tramway Department’s rolling stock was be-
tween £2,000 and £3,000 a year, and the damage to motors
and other vehicles was, at a conservative estimate, computed
to be well over £40,000 annually.
In view of these facts, it was decided to discontinue the
use of salt water. This instances the necessity of viewing
matters of this kind from the broad economic standpoint.
BELMONT RAILWAY.
The Council took over from the old Belmont Shire
Council a branch railway from Norman Park to Belmont.
The Council owned the line, and the Railway Depart-
ment provided the rolling stock and necessary service.
This line, which was constructed many years ago, has
proved a very unsatisfactory proposition. On being investi-
gated, it was found that, apart from the interest on the in-
debtedness to the Government, it showed a loss on the work-
ing of £6,000 per annum.
In view of the fact that it only catered for about 100
passengers daily, it was felt that the Council was not justified
in continuing such heavy losses. The line was therefore
closed, and arrangements made to serve the area by motor ’bus.


CIVIC RECEPTION TO THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES DUKE AND DUCHESS OF YORK, 6th APRIL, 1927


GENEROUS GIFT OF DR. J. O’N. AND MISS MAYNE
OF 220 ACRES AT ST. LUCIA FOR
UNIVERSITY SITE.
In September, 1926, Dr. ]. O’N. Mayne, of River Road,
Toowong, intimated to the Mayor that he and his sister, Miss
Mayne, were prepared to donate the magnificent sum of
.£55,000 for the purpose of acquiring 220 acres at St. Lucia
as a site for a new home for the University of Queensland.
This is a beautiful spot, embracing the whole of one of
the most delightful of the many bends in the Brisbane River,
and for the purpose it would be difficult to find a more suitable
site. The land was offered to the Senate of the University,
and it has been accepted for the permanent home of the
University.
It is indeed encouraging to know that we have in our
midst such generous'hearted citizens as Dr. and Miss Mayne.
Their one wish is to give joy and happinesss to the young
men and women who will attend the University.
In addition to providing an ideal site for the University,
the generous gift of Dr. and Miss Mayne will be a big benefit
to the city as the part of Victoria Park, consisting of 108
acres, which many years ago had been granted to the Senate
of the University will revert to the Council.
Victoria Park, with a total area of over 200 acres, is a
splendid open space to have practically in the heart of the
city; but, up to the present, it has not been used to the best
advantage. There has been a suggestion that a part of it
should be utilised for a golf links, and there is no doubt that
it is admirably suited for the purpose. Judging by the ex'
perience of other cities, if laid out as a Municipal Golf Links,
it would soon become revenue^producing.
SOCIAL WORK.
The social duties demand a good deal of the time of the
Mayor and Mayoress. It was suggested that the Mayor and
Mayoress, under the new order, should confine their social
activities to the big functions in the heart of the city. How-
ever, it was essential in the early stages, so as to inculcate
the true spirit of a Greater Brisbane in the minds of the
citizens, that the Mayor and Mayoress should, as far as
possible, take an interest in the social affairs of the whole area.


During the past few years, a number of very big social
functions have been held, the most important being the visit
of Their Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of York, in
which the City Council was very much interested, the
arrangements being well carried out. It was acknowledged
that the Reception to Their Royal Highnesses in Brisbane
was equal to anything in the Commonwealth. The splendid
evening Garden Party arranged at New Farm Park was ad-
mitted by those who were in a position to judge to be one
of the best functions of the whole tour.
A Civic Reception was also tendered to Their Excel-
lencies the Governor-General and Lady Stonehaven on their
first visit to Queensland in July, 1926, and to His Excellency
the Governor (Sir John Goodwin) and Lady Goodwin on
their arrival on the 14th June, 1927.
Other receptions were tendered to notable visitors to the
city, including the Imperial Parliamentarians, (when a Civic
Reception was held at Newstead Park); the Prime Minister
of Australia, the Bishop of London, as well as many other
representative visitors from other States and overseas
The Mayor (Alderman W. A. Jolly, C.M.G.),'repre-
sented the citizens of Brisbane on the historic occasion of the
opening of Canberra, the new Federal Capital, by Their Royal
Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of York on the Bth May,
It is also the duty of the Mayor and Mayoress to take an
interest in and encourage in every way possible the good work
and wealth of service rendered by the numerous philanthropic
religious, social, and charitable institutions in the city.
MUNICIPAL YEAR BOOK.
No attempt has been made in this record to give details
of the working of the various activities of the Council or
the Ordinances and Regulations. This information is fully
set out in the Brisbane Municipal Year Book published
annually by Messrs. F. J. Brewer and R. Dunn.




