





THE MRSTERY OF
THE FORECASTLE
OR A RESTLESS HEART,
by
R.V. MACPHERSON
Price
One-Shilling
SEE MESSRS. MYERS’ ADVERTISEMENT ON NEXT PAGE.


■(#j
Mi
rjm
%iur'
ifeH
xi
&V
5D


Mystery of the Forecastle
OR
A RESTLESS HEART.
A Colonial Tale of Fact and Fiction.
BY
R. V. MACPHERSON
Jhntcdin:
N 2. Tablet Printing and Publishing Co,, Octagon,
1889.




CONTENTS.
PAGE
Chap. I. —a restless heart ... ... ' 5
Chap. ll.—a broken spirit ... ... 9
Chap. lll.—a steerage ticket ... ... 14
Chap. IV.—a mysterious ouarrel ... ... 19
Chap. V.—the doctor’s holiday ... ... 28
Chap. VI. —a voyage in prospective ... 31
Chap. Vll.—a glimpse at the steerage ... 34
Chap. Vlll.—from for’ard aft ... ... 39
Chap, IX.—a dawning mystery ... .., 44
Chap, X.—an unsigned letter ... ... 50
Chap, Xl.—on the trail ... ... ... 57
Chap. Xll.—a broken engagement ... ... 65
Chap. XIII.—a bed of pansies ... ... 79
Chap. XlV.—in the Chinese temple ... 87
Chap. XV.—a birthday party ... ... 102
Chap. XVI. —under the acacias ... ... 109
Chap. XVII. —on board the “alert” ... 118
Ch ap. XVIII.—at the “zoo” ... ... 130
Chap. XlX.—an awful tragedy ... ... 140
Chap. XX.—“till the day breaks” ... 147
Chap. XXl.—the detained passenger ... 152
Chap. XXll.—“blessed is the peacemaker” 158
Chap. XXIII.— 1 “ WHO IS HARRY HAZELDINE ? ” ... 162


PREFACE.
*HOSE who are acquainted with my life story have fre-
quently asked why I have never published it. But
hitherto my only answer has been a question—who would
believe but that I drew upon a too lively imagination were I to
relate the many ups and downs of my most fickle fortunes?
Nay, my life has been too full of stirring incident, of thrilling
adventure, of rapturous delight, of bitter woe, to be committed
to print as fiction, and who would receive so weirdly varied a
tale as truth ?
From out a kaleidoscopic experience, therefore, I have selected
two or three incidents, worked them into sequence, and now
launch them upon the waters of Colonial literature with a part-
ing “ God Speed.” If they can but earn for the writer a kindly
thought, they shall not have been written in vain.
RACHAEL V. MACPHERSON.
Qamaru, N.Z., June 25, 1889,


THE
MYSTERY OF THE FORECASTLE;
OR, A RESTLESS HEART.
CHAPTER I.
A RESTLESS HEART.
¥^¥ A ITARAMOA is a pretty seaside town in the
4|| Middle Island of New Zealand, boasting a capital
harbour, b roa d handsome streets, and very fine
i I pablic buildings. A stranger would be struck by
J the greyness of the stone of which most of the
houses are built, as well as by the handsome pillars freely
dispersed about the large edifices. He would soon learn that
the stone was quarried in the immediate neighbourhood of
Waitaramoa ; that the inhabitants of the little sea-port town
were extremely proud of what they termed “ the Grey Stone
City,” that their pride was justifiable in that it would be
difficult to point out a finer colonial street than that which lay
like a wide ribbon all along the centre of the town, or finer,
more productive lands, than the fertile plains surrounding it.
If he were sufficiently curious to inquire, he would further
learn that many of the better class of houses were to be had for
a mere old song, owing to the local depreciation of property
within the last few years. Many and various were the causes
assigned for such depreciation. People had drawn too freely
on th building societies; the town was so heavily burdened


with taxes; the injury of two or three years’standing, to the
breakwater had swallowed up so much money ; business was
dull, money did not circulate. If he still pursued the subject,
he would learn that the large two-storied bow-windowed house
on the hill known as “ Belvidere ” had been built during the
“good times” by a successful tradesman. At first it was
merely a cottage, but the tradesman’s family increasing, other
rooms were added; then a verandah was built out in front,
next a wooden lean-to was tacked on to the back of the house.
But still the tradesman’s wife was unsatisfied, for between her
and the wife of her husband’s partner there subsisted a bitter
rivalry. Mrs. Ames appeared at church in a new bonnet; Mrs.
Rennie’s chapeau was no longer a source of delight. When
Mrs. Rennie trailed her silken skirts down the hill-path, Mrs.
Ames watched her with ill-concealed envy.
Mr. Ames added to his dwelling a couple of rooms, which
popular gossip said were dining and drawing-rooms, and an
order for handsome furniture was given to a local upholsterer.
Mrs. Rennie enjoyed neither peace of mind by day nor rest
by night till her husband stood pledged to out-rival the Ames
in their new rooms. Four large apartments were consequently
added to the house on the hill; i.e., a dining-room, drawing-
room, and two bedrooms, besides a fine entrance hall.
For a few months Mrs. Rennie gloated over her rival’s
discomfiture, and then resulted, what all Waitaramoa had
foretold; a grand crash, a total collapse of the Rennie and
Ames firm. The Rennies were sold out of house and home;
they departed almost penniless from Waitaramoa to learn from
that ruthless teacher, Experience, the bitter lessons of economy
and common-sense.
Belvidere passed through several hands until, about a year
before this story opens, it was purchased in open market by a
gentleman named Jura, who, with a middle-aged housekeeper,
had taken up his abode in his newly-acquired property. Mr.
Jura was about sixty years of age, with fresh, healthy-coloured
face, and a look of great personal cleanliness. A man of sterling
integrity, he was also possessed of much financial ability; no
man in Waitaramoa commanded more general respect for
uprightness of character and geniality of manner. His library


contained many quaint and valuable old books, for he was an
ardent reader and profound scholar ; greatly given to minding
his own business and leaving other people undisturbed in the
management of theirs.
When it was known in Waitaramoa that Mr. Jura had
bought Belvidere and meant to reside in it, many officious
persons told him the place was much too large for him, and
suggested the possibility of losing himself in his big castle. But
he dryly answered he would have a few finger posts erected
throughout the house, and anticipated no difficulty in finding
occupants for the rooms when he desired company.
So he and Mrs. Lancaster, the housekeeper, took up their
abode on the hill, and the large room ; grew artistic and home-
like under the magic of a woman’s skilful fingers. For Ruth
Lancaster had refined ideas, with sufficient technical skill to
embody them. Her paintings adorned the walls of Belvidere,
or, in the attractive form of flowers, greeted the visitor from
many a bracket, occasional table, or satin cushion. Delicate
lace, intricate fret-work, testified to her industry; a mellow-
toned piano, a Canterbury filled with vocal and instrumental
pieces, answered for her musical acquirements. Beethoven’s
sonatas, Mendelssohn’s Leider, Gounod’s Masses, selections from
Haydn, Handel, Mozart, Zingarelli, Cherubini, and Palestrina,
were amongst her favourites and occupied places on the
Canterbury. The woman’s story was a strange one !
She was the eldest daughter of a respectable and successful
Scotch tradesman, and nad been educated to fill a totally
different sphere in life from that of dependant. While she was
still quite a young girl her good father yielded to her entreaty
that she might receive a thorough education.
“ You have received as much schooling, Ruth, as either of
your brothers, and if 1 permit you to remain at school the extra
cost must be deducted from your share of my estate after my
death.”
Mr. Field was strictly honest and just in all his dealings.
“ Very well, father,” the girl answered ; “that is only fair,
but I want to learn so very many things yet that I wouldn’t like
to leave school so soon.”


Ruth Field remained at school, and learned very quickly
whatever she took in hand. She was of a careless, happy-go-
lucky disposition, one of those who picked up knowledge by the
wayside rather than by real application to study. From one
boarding-school to another, she went whither-so-ever the dawn-
ing restlessness in her nature impelled : now she studied music
and languages in a ladies’ school in fair Edinburgh ; then took
wing to Westmoreland, where, by the borders of blue Ulles-
water, and on the green slopes of Helvellyn, she drank in beauty
and learning in one dr aft. For the greater part of a year,
Ruth Field cruised about amongst the wild stormy Hebrides,
teaching a family of bare-footed, bare-headed, rosy-cheeked,
sturdy Islanders in return for board, lodging and a small
salary. Ruth, in spite of her carelessness, had a bold, daring,
defiant nature, and until the fire had burnt itself out of her hot
blood, was sure-footed as a young goat, and adventurous as a
Red Indian.
As she stands, a middle-aged woman, at the commencement
of this story, looking out of the window over the Waitaramoa
harbour, gazing with a far- away look in her eyes at the vessels
riding at anchor in the open roadstead; her youth gone, her
ardour subdued, her hands roughened with toil, she gives no
sign of the smouldering volcanoes which once blazed so fiercely
in her young untamed soul. Her eyes reveal nothing of all
the remarkable scenes they have witnessed, her lips utter no
word ot all they could tell, no one would guess her feet had
carried her thousands of miles in a mad distracted race from
an unhappy home, a relentless fate, and from that one master-
ful emotion which had brought ruin into her life, changed the
current of her ways, and left her what she was.


CHAPTER II.
A BROKEN SPIRIT.
LANCASTER stepped out of a railway
M yj\[ carriage on to the Waitaramoa platform one chill
mm evening in April, 188 —. The ride from Dunedin
J v had been long and wearisome, and she was a
stranger in the country. She had left Melbourne
the previous year, had spent the intervening months in
Tasmania, wandering listlessly across that lovely island from
Launceston to Hobart. But the fine scenery had no charm for
Mrs. Lancaster then, ardent lover of nature and the beautiful
though she was. For a great trouble had settled down upon
her like a pall, filling her days and nights with gloom, and it
was questionable whether her naturally delicate constitution,
further reduced by hardship and privation, and recently pros-
trated by severe illness, could bear up against the terrible cloud
which enwrapped her. She had been a gay, careless, heedless
girl, filled with eager restlessness ; but that most fatal dower
that can be given to woman, the lavishing of her whole heart’s
devotion upon one created object, was the portion of Ruth
Field.
From the day she met young Harold Lancaster, Ruth Field
had been a changed girl. Others might have read selfishness
and indolence in the lines of his handsome face; to Ruth it was
as the face of a demigod. The flowers bloomed more freshly,
the sun shone brighter, when he was near; one careless word
from his lips set foolish Ruth’s pulses bounding madly.
What need to review the old, old story? It has been the
same from Adam and Eve in the garden of Paradise down to the
latest love-tale told in this every-d ay world. But Ruth did not
think so. Never was love as sweet as hers; surely there could be


but one love-tale in the great wide world: the one she heard
with thankful blushes from the lips of Harold Lancaster. What
a prospect opened out before her dazzled eyes ! Was ever any
one so happy? was ever fa!e so alluring? She was to be his
wife. Dear Heaven, what had she done to be so blest ?
Ah, poor Ruth ! her dream of happiness was never realised.
Ah, foolish Ruth ! Harold Lancaster cared too much for his
own handsome self to have any thought to spare for a wife. He
was attracted at first by Ruth’s bright cleverness (beauty she
had none), but bred of his bargain when the novelty wore off.
Then began a slow martyrdom for the unfortunate girl. She
loved her husband with all fervour; his lightest word of endear-
ment caused the sun to shine for her, his neglect made the
world a howling wilderness to her. Oh, the capacity of such
souls for suffering ! Year by year, month by month, the slow
torture of finding out the true nature of the man to whom she
had bound herself went on; year by year, month by month,
the brightness faded out of her face, the joy out of her life; the
faith, the hope, the very truth out of her character.
Little children, prematurely born, came to the wretched
wife; she thankfully laid them away in the quiet green church-
yard.
And then came the crisis.
Harold Lancaster held the post of cashier in a bank, and
one never-to-be-forgotten day the unloved wife learned
from his lips that disgrace stared them in the face. He con-
fessed to having applied to his own use certain monies held in
trust. He did not know in what fashion or for what purpose he
had spent them. He was unable to replace them: a visit from
the inspector was imminent and he could not hope to escape
detection. The wife who, in spite of coldness and neglect, still
loved him, drew his head upon her breast and tenderly, as if
he were a child, assisted at the unburdening of his conscience.
But what could she do to help him out of so serious a
scrape ?
At all events, she bore the brunt of the trouble by inter-
viewing the inspector, who, yielding to her entreaties, moved
by admiration for her courage, and pity for her lot, forbore to
prosecute, then she paid a round of visits to the tradespeople,


explained the state of her husband’s affairs and gained their
consent to his leaving the town unmolested. With only five
pounds, but never a word of reproach for the humbled man at
her side, the dauntless girl went out from a home of comfort
and luxury into the great wide world, to realise by slow painful
degrees the bitter meaning of the words, poverty, hunger, care,
cold—aye, and, God help her, cruelty. For Harold’s puny love
had gone from his wife, and, no matter though she toiled from
early morning to late at night, no matter though she stinted
herself of the very necessaries of life that he might not know
the gnawing pangs of hunger, she could not re-kindle the cold
ashes of his heart.
Still she toiled on, and at length managed to obtain good
and well-paid employment, which was to open and temporarily
conduct the technical schools then being established throughout
the kingdom. Mrs. Lancaster was a born teacher, eminently
fitted for such an undertaking. Moreover, the persons with
whom she now came in contact were no longer canaille, but
ladies of refinement and scholarly attainments, to whom she had
no hesitation in confiding the outlines of her social history.
God tempers the wind to the shorn lamb, and Ruth Lancaster
found much consolation for trouble in hard work. She threw
her whole heart into her business with such success that she was
soon regarded as the premier teacher in Great Britain. Appli-
cations for her services poured in from all quarters to the hands
of her employers, a self-constituted committee of wealthy
benevolent ladies. Ruth was untiring in her efforts, and, on
the other hand, they were gratified by the ardour and ability
with which she grasped their ideas, arranged their schemes, and
brought them to fruition. With unassumed reluctance, there-
fore, they accepted her resignation at the end of four years.
“ It is owing to my health,” she declared, when closely
questioned concerning her motives for leaving. “ I am not
strong, and before good fortune led me across your path, suffered
severely from privation and cold.”
“ But, dear Mrs. Lancaster,” urged one of the ladies, “you
work too hard. If you consent to remain we shall allow you
two months’ complete rest, which you shall spend at the new


Peebles Hydrophathic ; we shall be more than willing- to bear
the expense.”
“ You are all too good to me,” she said gratcfull}-, “ but I
must go.”
“Think it over, my dear,” replied her employer, “and if we
can supply anything to strengthen you, you need only name it.
We would all be so grieved to part with you.”
“ If I remain here,” answered Ruth Lancaster, in a voice of
despairing conviction, “ I shall die.”
She did not tell them that her life had lately become insup-
portable. Harold had resumed his old habits of gambling,
drinking, and excess of all kinds, so that, obliged to keep up
appearances, the poor woman was often at her wits’ end to find
even money for rent. Her hard earnings had to be handed
over to her husband with as good grace as possible, otherwise
he took them ; many a black, unsightly bruise had to be ex-
plained away by an invention of her active brain.
Her strength was dwindling pitifully—she knew she would
soon be unable to earn money, and then !
turned from the prospect. Hard mental and physical work all
day, sleepless disturbed nights were fast wearing her out; she
recognised, with a thrill of despair that her once-loved husband
was drifting, drifting, drifting out towards the great black ocean
of crime.
“ I shall leave him,” she cried desperately; “no words of
mine can arrest his career. God knows if love could have held
him back, I would have given my heart’s blood for him. Why
should I remain to sink with him into lower slums than poverty?
I shall leave him. When he finds me g-one to the other side of
the world, he may rouse himself from this awful lethargy, and
then, who knows, we may be happy yet.” Hope dies linger*
ingly in a loving woman’s heart.
With an affectionate adieu to her late employers, a
heart-broken farewell to her own people, the Fields, she
took her forlorn way, all alone, to Melbourne. Arrived
there, she met with abnormal success; for eighteen
months her career was peaceful and brilliant. Her wanderings
over the colonies enabled her to make many friends, while


every possible success attended her. A sudden termination
to all this prosperity came in the form of Harold Lancaster,,
who, having heard and read of his wife’s ascent in the social
scale, determined she should not enjoy it alone. Borrowing
the necessary money, he came out to Melbourne, claimed his
wife, and recommenced his former system of terrorism. Soon
again the unfortunate Ruth showed signs of breaking down
under her load of suffering. Her brother, Charles Field, who
was then established in Melbourne, urged her to leave her
worthless husband once more.
“ You can do nothing for him, Ruth. Leave him, and if he
has a grain of manhood left he will wo kto support himself; he
has lived on your earnings and ill-treated you long enough.
Take a trip through Tasmania and New Zealand; establish your
technical schools as you go. Thrown on his own resources, your
husband will be forced to work.”
Ruth’s spirit was broken, her health enfeebled, her pocket
wondrously light considering the amount of money she had
earned in the colonies. Her brother’s advice was good, she
took it, and it brought her on that bleak chill April day to the
Waitaramoa railway platform.
Mr. Jura had heard her sad story from a Victorian acquain-
tance, and pitied her from the depths of his kindly heart. He called
on her, saw she was a woman of refined habits, good education,
steady and industrious ; he judged that, for a time at least, she
would prefer a quiet home to a nomadic life, and offered her a
post under his roof. She accepted and had been his house-
keeper eight years. Her efforts to please, to make his home
comfortable, merited his approbation, and Ruth Lancaster,
having suffered so severely from her husband’s want of principle,
admired and respected the quiet strength of Mr. Jura’s
character and simplicity of his tastes. She who had been tossed
as a waif and stray on the wide tide of adversity, had drifted'
into a haven of rest and peace.


CHAPTER III.
A STEERAGE TICKET.
IW/HE “snuggery ” was one of the homeliest rooms in the
Jgfjj house. It contained a roomy old-fashioned sofa on
\k which one could enjoy a ccmfcrtable nap, a colossa
''' sL arm-chair with soft cushions, a bow window with
ottoman seat, a case containing favourite books, and
many other comforts. Visitors were rarely shown into the
“ snuggery,” which was Mr. Jura’s favourite morning and
general sitting-room w hen alone. Dark crimson roses climbed
up the sides of the bow-window and peered into the room, sweet
mignonette flooded it with fragrance, the lily of the valley and
purple pansies found their places in the beds just outside.
Mrs. Lancaster stood at the window of the room in the early days
of August; stood gazingou t with unseeing eyes over the tossing,
tumbling waters outside the harbour bar; stood there, engrossed
in thought, for fully twenty minutes by the loud-ticking alarm
clock on the mantelpiece. A large steamer from the north
gradually approached the entrance to the harbour, passed the
bar, and was nearly alongside the pier, but still Mrs. Lancaster,
who usually took a lively interest in the shipping of the port,
remained unconscious of its advent. For her mind had gone a-
roving into regions of the past, where once again she clasped
her brother’s hand on the Melbourne wharf; once again gazed
with tear-dimmed eyes into his beloved face, once again sailed
away down the muddy unsavoury Yarra with as sore a heart
in her bosom as ever woman had ; once again heard her
brother s parting words ringing in her cars like some refrain
“ Kuth dear, keep up your heart, the longest lane has a turning
last, and w r ho knows but this may be the turning point for
you. She could see Charlie now, (he sea-breeze stirring his


soft, silky, brown hair, a brighter flush than usual on his thin
delicate face. Ah ! that was eight years ago. Time had
wrought many changes since then, for time wags on, no matter
though it line our faces with wrinkles, or scatter silver threads
amongst our gold.
It had wrought changes for Ruth Lancaster too. During
that period she had dug a deep grave and buried the love of
her life out of sight; a lonely grave, over which no one wept ;
a hidden grave, with never a stone to mark its whereabouts;
a secret grave, visited only at night; yet it was the grave of a
strong love and many bright hopes.
As she turned from the window at last with a resolute look
on her face, one could see she was about thirty-seven years of
age, of middle height, fair complexion, blue-grey eyes, and the
rather pointed features which betoken an eager adventurous
nature. Her light brown hair, soft and silky like her brother’s,
was worn short and brushed off the forehead. She was quietiy
attired in brown velveteen and homespun, a close-fitting em-
broidered jersey of the same colour outlined her slight figure.
The restlessness which characterised her as a girl was not
wholly dissipated ; a good deal of it lingered in her quick
impulsive movements, in the nervous play of her fingers as she
arranged the table for dinner. She placed upon it tiny vases
of flowers, grouping in careless grace dark glowing crimson
with pale cloth-of-gold roses, light sprays of maiden-hair fern
and clusters of drooping grasses. These were just completed
when Mr. Juraentered the “snuggery,” and carelessly threw his
overcoat on a chair. Mrs. Lancaster knew he did not like to
be detained; therefore quickly placed before him a nicely cooked
appetising meal, and as he ate she waited on him.
“ I hear Johnson and Black are going to contest the
Mayoralty this year,” he said communicatively.
“Are they, indeed ? ” answered Ruth, “I shouldn’t have
thought either a very suitable candidate for the post.”
“No more do I,” he laughed, “ but they evidently think
otherwise. There is a ticket for the flower show, Ruth, if you
like to use it.”
“Thank you, Mr. Jura, I shall like very much to see the
flowers. Have you noticed the exquisite rose blooms in the


conservatory? I think your gardener is very clever as a rose
grower. 5 '
“ Yes, he seems quite up to his business. Oh, by-the-bye,
Town ley is going to the Melbourne Exhibition soon. I met
him down town to-da}', and he tells me quite a tribe of people
are going from Waitaram oa, for the steamer company have
begun to carry passengers at excursion fares, return tickets
being available for three months. Now is your chance, Ruth,
if you want a holiday. 5 ’
I have been longing so much, Mr Jura, to see my brother
Charles and his young wife. Strange that not an hour ago I
determined to ask a holiday! If you can dispense with my
services for a time, I should like to go very much indeed.’ 5
“To tell the truth. I half anticipated some such request,
Ruth, and have already decided to let you go, for it is only
natural you would like to see your brother. But shall you
return, Mrs. Lancaster ? When you reach Melbourne, meet old
friends, and mix again in gay society, I fear you will forget the
quiet home in Waitaramoa. 1 rather imagine I shall lose my
housekeeper. 55
“ No > no > Mr - Jura, how can you think so ? You befriended
me years ago, when I sorely needed a friend, and do you think
I am the sort of person to forget a kindness? Indeed, I could
not act shabbily to you who have been so true a friend to me. 5 ’
Mi. Jura and his housekeeper conversed for some time on
the subject of her proposed holiday, for many arrangements
were necessary before she could leave Belvidere, but, at last,
everything being settled to her employer’s satisfaction, Mrs.
Lancaster remarked sh e had better set about making prepara-
tions for the journey.
“ Our neighbours, the Bertrams of Sea View, are going,
and I might travel in their company. I shall see Mrs. Bertram
this afternoon and get matters settled at once. You know lam
much too energetic to allow the business to drag, now that my
mind is made up and your consent obtained.”
“ 1 know, I know, Ruth,” replied Mr. Jura. “ You will
swoop down upon the Bertrams like a whirlwind, convince


Mrs. Bertram that without a visit to the Melbourne Exhibition
life would be an utter failure. There will be two or three rapid
descents upon the Waitaramoa shops ; an incessant whirr,
whirring of your sewing machine for a couple of days ; then
hey! presto ! off you go in the steamer, and in the touching
words of the poet, ‘ I am left lamenting.,’ ”
Ruth was thin and keenly susceptible of cold, so she
wrapped a warm fur-lined cloak about her, placed a becoming
little ruby-coloured bonnet on her brown hair, before calling on
Mrs. Bertram. That Ixdy was one of Mrs. Lancaster’s prime
favourites; a pleasant, kind-hearted, happy-tempered woman,
never heard to make unkind remarks nor stinging speeches, but
who contrived to live at peace with all men, and (much rarer
virtue) all women as well. She and Mrs. Lancaster were about
the same age, but where lines on the face of the latter betokened
a stern battle with the world, a look of placid contentment
reigned on the countenance of the former.
Mr. Bertram had long filled a public position in Waitara-
moa, and gained much esteem and respect for his sterling worth
and sound common sense. Husband and wife had been made
joint recipients of a handsome testimonial on the occasion of
Mr. Bertram’s retirement from public life, so that whilst a
massive gold locket dangled from Mr. Bertram’s watch-chain,
a costly silver service adorned Mrs. Bertram’s sideboard.
The two ladies were soon conversing about the proposed trip,
over which Mrs. Bertram’s little nephew, Chester Waters, was
in great glee, and readily promised, with the confidence of
youth, to be the very best boy in the colony if his uncle would
only take him to Melbourne.
When the indispensable chat about their wardrobes was in
full swing between the ladies, Mr. Bertram slipped quietly out
•of the room. By-and-bye he returned, and handed a purse to
his wife.
“ There is the passage money, Mary. Mrs. Lancaster and
you had belter secure passages at once. Two and a half for us
you know, my dear; for Chester shall go with us.”
“ Hip, hip> hurrah !” cried Chester, throwing his cap into
the air, and turning a somersault on the floor in the exu


berance of his delight. “ Now, Auntie, get on your bonnet and
go straight off for the tickets. Uncle’s a brick, hurrah ! Yes,.
Uncle, your are ! Just a brick ! Hurrah, hurrah !”
“ Now, who can withstand all that?” asked Mrs. Lancaster,
laughing. “ You must either do what you are told, Mrs. Ber-
tram, or yield up your peace of mind for the present.”
So the two ladies went down the hill-path together into the
pretty town of Waitaramoa, and secured return tickets for the
trip. Mrs. Bertram took two tickets and a half for the saloon,
but, to her astonishment. Ruth Lancaster requested one for the
steerage, for, notwithstanding her name, she was a Scotchwoman
and possessed, amongst other national traits, that of economy.
She had carefully calculated how much she could afford to
spend on this pleasure trip, and had concluded that by travel-
ling in the steerage or second cabin she would effect a consider-
able saving and leave herself a little in hand for purchases in
the Victorian bazaars.
“ You see, my dear,” she remarked to Mrs. Bertram, “I
have only my salary as housekeeper to work upon, and cannot
afford to travel like you, but we shall be in the same ship and,
no doubt, can see each other occasionally.”
She deposited her money on the counter and was rather
surprised at the urgency with which the clerk advised a saloon
passage.
“ It cannot be very pleasant in the steerage, Mrs. Lancaster,,
and a lady is not so used to rough travelling as a man.”
Mrs. Lancaster gave a peculiar short laugh of derision.
She thought of the many rough, lonely paths her wandering
feet had trodden; of the ups and downs of her strange life-
history ; of the slight need, in her case, of luxurious surroundings.
“ But,” continued the clerk, “ there will be a number of
horses on board, and they are certain to be placed near the
steerage.”
Mrs. Lancaster looked into his face with the utmost
solemnity.
“ Young man,” she said gravely, “if there is any animal
upon which I positively dote, it is the horse."


CHAPTER IV.
A MYSTERIOUS QUARREL.
GLOVER was a little brown old lady of sixty,
M f/j'mimml w ‘th wrinkled face, and meek brown eyes. She
/uTjOV/n |t looked like a sedate well-to-do mouse as she sat in
J R her roomy arm-chair in front of a good fire in her
little drawing-room, her feet planted snugly on the
polished bar of the fender, her withered old fingers busily
engaged knitting a dark blue wrap for her daughter. She wore
a soft black dress, abroad old-fashioned collar of point lace, her
sleeves beingadorned by cuffs of the same costly, delicatefabric; a
cap of cream coloured lace rested on her white hair.
She had been a widow a very long time, nearly thirty years,
and the portrait of her dead husband hung on the wall just
above her chair. He was a good-looking man in the prime of
life, with frank open countenance, curly hair, and a pleasant
smile. Ah, she had been a happy woman while he lived, but
when he died, the light of her life died with him.
He was contractor for a new railway line and went out one
morning to the tunnel which he was boring through a hill, for
he was anxious about the security of the supports. He left home
with a gay whistle on his lips, kissed his hand back to the wife
who, with her child in her arms, stood in the open doorway to
watch him out of sight.
“ Kiss handle to papa, darling,” she said to the little one,
raising the pink chubby hand to the smiling rosy lips. “ Good-
bye, papa ! come back soon to pettie.”
Then he passed out of sight, and she never saw him alive
again. Some hours afterwards, a crushed body was brought
to the house by grave, silent men, who thought, each in his own


mind, how narrowly he had escaped being borne home to his
wife and family like the dead man he carried. Before the stricken
woman realised her loss, the husband she loved so well was laid
away, for all time, in his qui et grave.
Time softened the blow to her, as it does to everyone, but
Mrs. Glover was never the same woman again.
She was left in easy circumstances, and her daughter
Gertrude grew up an affectionate, intelligent companion. She
was a pretty girl, of quick, impulsive disposition, hot-tempered,
generous, forgiving. Her dark brown eyes reflected the
thoughts of her mind, they could melt with pity for distress, or
flash with indignation at oppression or wrong. When about
twenty she was considered a most attractive girl; well educated
and accomplished, she had no lack of suitors. She showed
herself in no hurry to wed however, and had attained her twenty-
fourth year before she yielded her affections to one who seemed
in every way worthy of her heart and hand. Her mother’s
pleased consent being obtained, Gertrude and Mr. Warwick pre-
pared for the event which was to unite them for ever. They
were a well-matched couple: he so staid, refined, dignified ; she
so affectionate, ardent, energetic.
They had been in Melbourne one day choosing furniture for
the home they hoped to occupy together, and returned in high
spirits. Some friends met at Mrs. Glover’s house the same even-
ing in an informal way ; after conversation and music, the young
folks proposed a dance. Gertrude, as hostess, took her seat at
the piano and played for the dancers; all was mirth and
innocent gaiety. Mrs. Glover sat on a couch at the end of the
drawing-room opposite a small conservatory, chatting pleasantly
to the mother of one of her young guests.
Suddenly her attention was arrested by the unusual
appearance of her daughter, who had stopped playing a short
time before, and now hastily rushed past her towards the door
of the apartment. The girl’s face was livid; a tortured soul
looked out of the brown eyes; she appeared to be dazed with
horror and was white to the very lips. Her mother pronounced her
name in astonished accents, but, putting out her two hands before
her with a strange gesture, as if to shield herself from a blow,
the girl hurried past. Mrs. Glover rose in alarm and hastened


after her, but she had gained the privacy of her own room, and
could not be induced to open the door.
“ Are you ill, Gertrude ? What is the matter ? Open the
door, love,” said her mother, tapping lightly.
“ Let me alone,” answered a strange rough voice, with all
the happy musical ring gone out of it.
“ Will you not admit your mother, Gertrude ?”
“ Mother, leave me to myself. I shall see you to-morrow.”
“ But what shall I say to Mark Warwick, dear? He will want
to bid you good night.”
“Tell Mr. Warwick I am indisposed, and have retired for
the night.”
Nor could Mrs. Glover elicit any further word from her
child.
Next day Miss Glover opened her door to admit her mother,
who cried out with horror at the wan face of her daughter. Dark
circles surrounded her eyes, which were full of unshed tears; the
face was deathly in its pallor. The dainty bed, with its tasteful
adornments, had clearly never been occupied ; indeed, the girl
still wore the pretty white dress of the previous evening.
“ Mother,” she said in a quick, hard tone, “do not ask me
any questions, for I cannot tell what is the matter, but I no
longer consider myself engaged to Mr. Warwick. I decline to
see him, now or later. Mother, can we not leave Victoria for a
while, and go to another colony ? No, no,” she said hurriedly, as
her mother was about to speak, “ for God’s sake do not mention
his name to me unless you wish to drive me mad.”
Mrs. Glover was struck dumb with dismay at this sudden
change of affairs.
“ Have you quarrelled with him, Gertrude ?” she asked when
she had partly recovered the first shock of surprise.
“ No, mother, I have not.”
“ Take time then, love, to consider what you do before
annulling your engagement. Do not act rashly, or you may
regret it all your life.”
c


Her words were thrown away ; she might as well have
spoken to a stone wall. “My darling child, I beg you not to
act hastily. Reflect a day or two on the matter, and then act as
you please, but do not throw away the happiness of a lifetime
in a moment of angry impulse. Tell me, Gertrude, what has
occurred. Surely you may trust your mother !”
“I can tell no one,” cried the girl distractedly, putting her
two hands to her head. “Let me bear my misery alone ;it
need not affect others.”
“ May I not share your trouble?” persisted her mother.
“No, mother; but you may save me much pain by seeing that
man and telling him I distinctly refuse to fulfil my engagement.
Make it clear to him, mother, that I desire my freedom, and
decline to see or speak to him again. Do you understand?”
she asked emphatically.
“ Gertrude, Gertrude,” remonstrated Mrs. Glover, “ surely
you will not deal so unkindly, so unjustly with Mark ?He went
away in great distress last night, saying something must have
upset you strangely.”
“ Something did upset me strangely,” said Gertrude with
a sarcastic laugh, “ but I have recovered now. Believe me,
mother, I shall soon be myself. Do not ask again ! I cannot
tell what has occurr ed. Mark’s own conscience will inform him ;
he need not pretend ignorance.”
“ But, Gertrude, is it fair to Mark to break off 3'our engage-
ment without giving him an opportunity of excusing himself or
explaining away whatever it is that has offended you?”
“ I want no explanation, mother, and he merits no kindness
at my hands.”
“ But see him for five minutes, love,” urged the distressed
woman. “ Perhaps everything may be set right yet.”
“ No, no ! that is impossible.”
“ Gertrude, my darling child, take care you are not mis-
taken ! I warn you not to throw away an honest man’s love.”
“Urge me no more; I cannot bear it,” said the girl
passionately, and her trembling limbs bore witness to the truth


of her words. “ All is ended between us, and I shall return
his ring. Oh, mother, if you love me ! if you love and wish to
help me in my trouble, make arrangements to leave Melbourne
for a time. Do, darling mother ! Let us turn our backs upon
this miserable place and go away together, you and I, where no
one shall come between us again. I shall never leave you now,
mother,” sobbed the unhappy girl, breaking down suddenly,
and throwing herself on the bed.
Now that her forced composure had given way, the torrent
of her grief was pitiful to witness. She wept as if her heart
would break ; wept, a nd would not be comforted; wept, till the
very fountain of her tears ran dry, when she lay, like a broken
flower, in utter abandonment of grief. But through all her wild
sorrow she still held to what she had said at first—her engage-
ment must be annulled, and she must get away from Melbourne ;
nor would she consent to see Mark Warwick.
At last she fell asleep through sheer exhaustion. Then
darkening the window, her mother stole softly from the room-
She went to the drawing-room, and, sitting there alone, carefully
reviewed all the incidents of the previous evening. What could
have befallen her daughter? Could the young people have
quarrelled ? No, for Mark showed no undue signs of agitation
up till the moment of Gertrude’s refusal to bid him good-night.
They had been happy enough earlier in the evening; had sung
duets together, and she had asked them to sing her favourite,
“ The wind and the harp.” She had seen Mark standing be-
side the piano while Gertrude played for the dancers, his head
bent in low conversation with her. Then she (Mrs. Glover) had
gone over to the couch to chat with Mrs. Miller, and nothing
further had occurred, as far as her memory went, till Gertrude
flew past the sofa with distraught manner, and an awful look
on her face. She knew literally nothing more than that, and
was powerless to clear up the mystery.
By-and-bye, a loud peal at the bell announced Mark
Warwick. He entered the drawing-room hastily with an
anxious look in his blue-grey eyes. “ How is Gertrude? ” were
his first words.
Mrs. Glover shook her head sadly.


“ I do not understand it, Mark,’' she said slowly, “ have
you done or said anything to annoy or offend Gertrude?”
“I ?” queried the astonished young man; “ not to my
knowledge. What makes you ask such a question ?”
“ She is evidently deeply offended at something, but posi-
tively declines to explain, and insists on annulling her engage-
ment.”
“ Mrs. Glover,” he cried, turning deadly pale, “ what do
you mean ? You cannot mean that Gertrude intends to give
me up because of some fancied grievance V
“ Alas ! Mark, I am as much in the dark as yourself. I
cannot prevail on her to tell me what has caused this sudden
change. I wish I could.”
“ But Mrs. Glover ! Mother! she surely cannot be so unjust
as to condemn me without a hearing ! Why, I know no more
than Adam what can have caused her anger. She must, she
shall hear me. She must explain this outrageous conduct. I
would give,” cried the unfortunate man, “my heart’s blood for
Gertrude, yet she coolly disposes of me and my feelings by a
careless message. Go to her, mother dear ; beg her to see me.
In common justice she is bound to see me.”
“ She certainly is,” admitted her mother.
“Tell her,” he eagerly pursued, “ 1 have not in thought,
word, or deed, been otherwise than loyal to her, and totally
refuse to accept my conge from her hands. She is my
promised wife, wearing on her finger the pledge of her
engagement. We were so happy together yesterday, choos-
ing our furniture, and I have been no place since. During
the evening we conversed freely enough, and I had
not the faintest suspicion of anything wrong until the
message was brought to say she had retired, i hat struck me
at once as curious and unusual, but I thought she was over-
tired and ill ; I have wearied for the hour when I would be free
to see her again. I came straight here from the office, and have
not been home at all. Oh ! she is dreaming, Mrs. Glover, or
playing a trick on me. Ah ! that is it. She wants to frighten
me. She wishes to test her power over me. Ha, ha, ha ! Well,


tell her/’ partly recovering himself, “she has succeeded in
thoroughly alarming me, and may expect me to take my revenge
when I see her. Oh ! the gipsy ! how she will laugh ! But let
her; what do I care so long as she is mine ?”
“ But, Mark, I fear this is no matter for laughter,” urged
the distressed mother.
“What else can it be?” retorted the lover, “give her my
message, and she will come to me soon enough, never fear.
Stay, I shall write her a note.”
Seating himself at a secretaire he rapidly penned these few
words ;
“My darling, what has come between us? I am not
conscious oi causing you any offence, and conclude you are
playing a practical joke on me. Let me see you, sweetheart,
and the cloud shall soon melt away. I await you in the drawing-
room. Come quickly to my impatient arms.
“ Ever yours,
“ Mark.”
“Go now, mother dear, give her this and tell her I am
impatient to see my darling.”
The widow rose, took the letter, and mournfully shaking her
head left the room. The young man stood still on the hearth-
rug, his eyes fixed on the door.
“The little rogue, to give me such a fright. She must make
up to me for this,” he said to himself. “ What an idea to enter
the girl’s head, but girls are queer creatures after all. She
would like to test her power over me. Ah ! Gertrude, my love,
you could not fathom it, that little white hand of yours has
power to play havoc with my very heart-strings. Dear Heaven !
what a shock I have had ! Lose Gertrude ! lose my love ! never ;
you will be my dear honoured wife, whose sweet life will be
spent at my side. But I have had a turn, and no mistake,” he
soliloquised. “ I almost fancied her mother believed the girl in
sober earnest.” He strode up and down the room in great
agitation. “ How long she stays away !” Another turn. “Ah !
here she is at last!” as he heard a step outside the door.
“ I cannot make it out,” was Mrs. Glover’s comment as she
entered the room with a note between her fingers, which she held
out to Mr. Warwick.


His face betrayed deep disappointment, but, steadying his
voice with a great effort, he asked, “ May I hope to see her
soon ?”
“ Mark, Mark,” wailed the sorrowful woman, “ there is no
further use trying. She refuses to see you/’
Mr. Warwick’s face was ashen as he tore open the letter and
read:—
“ Nothing can be gained by an interview which cannot but
be painful to us both. I wish you every possible happiness,
but refuse to be your wife.”
“ Is your daughter insane, madam?” asked the outraged
lover when he found voice. “ This is not the action, nor are
these the words of a sane woman.”
“ She has never been in bed all night,” sobbed the mother.
“ She looks ill enough for anything.”
“ Do I understand she positively refuses to fulfil her engage-
ment to me ?”
“ I fear so. The ring you gave her is in the letter. She
returns it.”
Pale, and cold as a statue, Mark Warwick took from the
envelope the costly circlet of diamonds and opals he had placed,
under such different auspices, on the blushing Gertrude’s finger.
“ I thank her,” he said, icily.
“ Mark, dear lad, my heart is sore for you,” wept Mrs.
Glover.
“ Nay, spare me }mur pity,” he retorted. “ Congratulate
me, rather, on this escape from the toils of a heartless coquette.
Were your daughter possessed of the smallest particle of honour
she would act in a very different manner.”
“ Mark, Mark, you are sorely tried, but do not be cruel ; do
not speak so bitterly.”
“ I have little need ; I have sustained no loss ; a man’s anger
at being duped is natural under the circumstances, but common
sense will come to my aid. Pray, tell your daughter I accept
the ring she has restored to me, and shall keep it till the day I
place it oh the hand of a true woman. Tell her I give her back


her frail vows, her faithless pledges. Were I to hear of her
marriage to-morrow, the news would create no other feeling in
my breast than that of scorn and contempt. Adieu, Mrs. Glover.
If my words are strong, remember how my most sacred feelings
have been outraged, and pardon me.”
With stately dignity he bowed to the weeping woman, and
soon a loud slamming of the street door announced his depar-
ture from the house.
A day or two later Mrs. Glover saw his name in the
passenger list of the ship “ Victoria,” bound for New York.
She marked the paper and silently handed it to Gertrude, who,
white and feeble, reclined on the sofa. No word was spoken
between the two women for a long time. At length Gertrude
said in a low voice: “ What is there to detain us here,
mother ?”
“ Nothing at all, my love,” answered her mother, pressing
a kiss on the pale forehead. "If you like, we shall go to New
Zealand next Thursday by the • Manuka.’ ”


CHAPTER V.
THE DOCTOR’S HOLIDAY.
„I|Bsf|| EOPLE said Mr. and Mrs. Marchmont were an uncom-
monly happy couple ; he, so courteous and differential
lloi? *° w^e ’ s^e ’ 30 an d proud ol him. They had
Z-kj/,* no family to disturb the even tenor of their lives, or
upset the order which reigned throughout their beautiful
home. “The Hermitage,” as they named their property,
was situated about three miles from Dunedin, and could be
approached either by way of Roslyn or the Reservoir. A long
avenue of beech trees, flanked on either side by green pasture
land, on which grazed sleek, mild-eyed cows, or satin-coated
horses, led from the road to the house. At the upper end of
the avenue another gate opened upon a flower garden, encircled
by a broad gravel carriage-drive. A wide verandah, framed in
glass, and bright with rare and brilliant flowers, ran round two
sides of the house, which had originally been built for a sana-
torium. But the expectation of the builder had not been realised,
and he had been glad enough to sell the property to Mr. March-
mont at considerable reduction. The rooms were large and
airy; every convenience was in the house itself; the dairy was
a charming sight with its great shallow pans of cream-covered
milk. The ground below the garden sloped down to a lovely
musk-scented creek, where a crystal streamlet rippled and purled
over great grey stones, or sidled under over-hanging green
boughs, or formed dark shady pools where tiny fishes darted
about in security. Mrs. Marchmont loved the “ Hermitage.”
Every acre of its grounds she prized, but perhaps no portion
more highly than this romantic creek. She had noted the natu-
ral advantages of its situation, the exceeding beauty of the
rural retreat, and had caused a rustic seat to be placed under
over-hanging branches by the side of the stream. The lady of


the “ Hermitage ” spent many a sunny afternoon there with her
work, or a pleasant book. “The very ideal spot for a declara-
tion of love,” she declared laughingly to her niece, Laura Blan-
chard, who coloured vividly at the recollection of certain burning
words spoken to her a week ago in that very spot by Glenois
Sanmaurez.
Laura was a very beautiful girl of twenty-two, with deep,
dark-blue eyes, dark eyebrows, long, beautifully-curled eye-
lashes, and abundant nut-brown hair, which she wore coiled high
upon her well-shaped head, and of which numerous tiny curls
strayed lovingly over her broad white forehead, and round her
little shell-like ears. Her complexion was that of the dainty
wild rose ; the expression of her delicately-curved lips was at
once arch and charming. She was of medium height, slight
and elegant of figure, of graceful and distingue manners.
A recognised belle of Melbourne society, she had given
away her heart a couple of years before to Dr. Glenois San-
maurez, who, though he loved the fair girl, did not con-
sider himself in a position to marry at that time. He was
too strictly honourable to bind any girl to an engagement of
indefinite length, and sailed for New Zealand with his secret
safely locked in his own breast. He purchased a good practice
in Dunedin, where by skill and attention he now secured a capi-
tal income. A fine, gallant young fellow was Glenois San-
maurez, worthy in every respect to be the object of a girl’s love.
He was of mixed parentage, his father French, his mother
Scotch; a handsome young fellow with a clever face, frank,
honest brown eyes, and a quantity of fair hair, which he wore
pushed carelessly back from his wide forehead. An immense
favourite amongst the poor for his kindly smile, gentle touch,
and ready sympathy, he was equally sought after by the wealthy
on account of his skill. When he could spare time he was
accustomed to ride or drive out to the “ Hermitage ” to spend
an hour with Mrs. Marchmont, to whom Laura’s father. Dr.
Blanchard, had furnished him with an introduction.
His delight was very great when Laura came to New Zea-
land on a visit to her aunt, who merrily insisted she had come
to be re-invigorated for the approaching gay Melbourne season.
Mrs. Marchmont was warmly attached to the bright girl, and soon


■saw how matters stood between her and the young doctor. Not
by word or sign did she interfere, for she highly approved of
the match, and considered that in such matters young people
were best left to themselves.
Mrs. Marchmont had been a beauty once ; she was still a very
handsome, distinguished-looking woman of forty-five. Her
abundant hair was rapidly turning grey, and accorded well with
her fine dark eyes and clear, almost colourless complexion.
Her husband was a Member of the Legislative Assembly ;
a busy man, whose committee meetings, public meetings, private
conferences, and multifarious duties left him very little time to
call his own. He was greatly pleased when Dr. Sanmaurez
proposed for Laura’s hand, and readily consented to his wife
accompanying that young lady back to Melbourne. He con-
sented all the more readily for knowing his wife pined for a sight
®f her only sister, Amy Blanchard, Laura’s mother; the sisters
had not met often of late years. He it was who suggested that
Dr. Sanmaurez should obtain a temporary assistant, and escort
the ladies to Melbourne, telling him he would plead his cause
with Dr. Blanchard better by word of mouth than letter. “ I
don't think you’ll need to plead very hard, my boy,” said he,
cheerfully, “ it is a very good match on both sides, but if you
are a little diplomatic you may manage to bring your wife back
with you.”
Glenois took his advice ; a young surgeon was put in charge
of the practice during his absence; Dr. Sanmaurez visited his
patients, introducing Dr. Hunter, and everything was satisfac-
torily arranged.
“We shall now call on Mrs. Glover,” remarked Dr. San-
maurez to his companion as he drove along Princes street, hav-
ing finished his rounds. “This will not be a professional call,
but a friendly visit,” he explained. “ The dear old lady
does not require doctor’s physic as much as a friendly
chat; I frequently run in to see her of an afternoon and beg a
cup of tea, so come along and make her acquaintance.”
He drew up his spirited horses in front of a house in Ran-
dolph Crescent, sprang lightly to the ground, and, throwing the
reins to his groom, sent an imperative appeal sounding through
the house.


CHAPTER VI,
A VOYAGE IN PROSPECTIVE.
J■HEN Dr. Sanmaurez heard that Mrs. Glover and
her daughter had arranged to go to Melbourne,
he offered his services as their escort also. “We
shall be quite a strong party on the 1 Waratera,’
- J k u (- more merrier,” he said in his cheerful
lighthearted way. Miss Glover told him how she and her
mother had been seized with intense longing to see Melbourne
again after nearly fifteen years’ absence. “It is quite an attack
of mal du pays," she explained. At all events they had decided
to go, and would be charmed to join his friends. Mrs.
Marchmontwas an acquaintance of many years’ standing, and
the doctor a prime favourite with both the old lady and her
daughter. When the matter was finally settled, the passages
taken, and he had received their congratulations on his matri-
monial prospects, the young man took friendly leave of them
and rode out to the “ Hermitage ” to pay a visit to his lady-love.
He was received in the verandah by Mrs. Marchmont, who,
arrayed in broad gardening hat and gloves, was snipping off
straggling shoots from her rose-plants. “ Laura is busy pack-
ing up her treasures,” she said in answer to his inquiry, “ but
come into the drawing-room, and I shall ring for her.”
She led the way into the pleasant rose-scented room and
laid her hand lightly on the bell. Laura entered shortly after-
wards, a rosy blush on her fair face. She greeted Dr.
Sanmaurez with pretty maidenly shyness, while her aunt
chatted about the impending journey. Before long Mrs.
Marchmont left the room, ostensibly to overlook the preparation
of tea, and when she had gone Glenois turned to Laura, a
whole world of love in his brown eyes, and drew her to him.


“ My love,” he said, as she nestled contentedly at his side
taking her hand in his he began to talk in a low voice. “ I can
scarcely realise you are my promised wife,” he whispered; “ I
feel almost afraid of the depth of my happiness. My darling,
how could I bear to lose you now ?” drawing her closer and
encircling her with his arm, “ yet sometimes a dread that we
shall be parted steals over me.”
“ Do not think of such a possibility, dearest Glen,” answered
Laura, looking up lovingly into his face, “ surely we have
nothing to dread. Papa is too good to be unkind ; he never is
unkind. And you are so good he could not possibly find any
fault with you. As for me,” she spoke lower, blushing crimson,
“ I could never, never marry anyone else, for my heart is yours,
and can never change. But, indeed, I do not think there is
anything to fear. I know of no shadow hanging over us/*'
laughing softly, “and we needn’t imagine trouble. Let us
enjoy our happiness, Glen.”
“ You are right, sweetheart, trouble will come soon enough
without our meeting it half way, and when it does come, please
Goi ,we shall meet it hand in hand. By-the-bye, darling, Mrs.
and Miss Glover are to be our shipmates to Melbourne next
week. I called on them to-day on my road here and found
they had secured passages on the ‘ Waratera/”
“ How very nice,” said Laura pleasantly. “ Miss Glover
and I are sure to become great friends on board ship. There
is something very sad about her, and yet she attracts me
wonderfully. Is it not astonishing she should be unmarried
when she is so highly accomplishd, and lovable of disposition?
To me she seems a very sweet creature.”
“I have heard she met with some disappointment in her
youth, but that may not be true. If it is, she appeals to our
sympathy, Laura, for think how it would be with us, dear, if
anything came between us now ?”
“ I shall try to secure her friendship, Glen, so that if—if—
when—if,” she stammered, colouring furiously, “if I return to
Dunedin she and I may be on terms of intimacy.”
“ My sweet little love, when you return as my wife you shall
not lack friends in Dunedin. No one could help loving my


Laura,” said Glenois proudly, as he fondly kissed her smiling
lips.
A warning sound at the door recalled the young people to
their senses, and, on the entrance of Mrs. Marchmont, conver-
sation became general.
The doctor spent the evening with his betrothed ; between
music, singing, and conversation the pleasant hours flew past,
bringing them nearer the day on which they were to embark.
When Dr. Sanmaurez had bidden the ladies “good-night,”
he rode briskly along the road, and through the silent streets
towards his own house. A thin, ragged, hungry-looking
woman stepped up to him as he dismounted at his door; with
broken accents she begged him, for the love of God, to give her
the means of procuring supper.
The kind-hearted fellow placed a coin in the gaunt creature’s
hand, saying, “Take that, poor woman, and get home off the
streets as soon as possible.”
As she hurried away, he lingered on the doorstep, looked
up into the dark sky thickly studded with stars, and reverently
uncovering his head, repeated in a low heartfelt voice : “ For
the love of God, who has given me my great happiness.”


CHAPTER VII.
A GLIMPSE AT THE STEERAGE.
RS■ LANCASTER hunted about for the forecabin
wmtnMlSrml s f ewarc^ess > whom she at last discovered seated on
A[/Q\y//C\\l a biscuit barrel in the pantry, drinking a cup of
J V; tea as nonchalantly as if she were in the boudoir
of some bijou residence. In the corridor women
clamoured loudly for the “ stewardess,” yet that majestic crea-
ture drank her tea as blandly, as coolly, as though she were a
marble sphynx, and the clamorous women a swarm of buzzing
gnats. Finding her reiterated calls of no avail, Mrs. Lancaster
boldly stepped into the pantry and laid a pretty firm hand upon
the “ sphynx’s ’’ shoulder. The worthy woman carefully de-
posited her empty cup on the table, replied to the badinage of
the steward, then, facing round, eyed the intruder with extreme
disfavour, saying, rather roughly, “ Now then, what do you
want ? ”
“ Madam, can I be accommodated with a bunk ? ”
“ You can not,” she answered, snappily; “ why, there’s been
any amount of you pestering me for bunks, as if I could stretch
out the sides of the ship at my pleasure. I feel like stretching
some folks’ necks, I do,” she added, grimly.
“ In my case, nature saved you the trouble by giving me a
good long one to begin with,” answered Ruth, coolly. “ Where
am Ito be placed ? Can I have a berth ? ”
“No, you cannot,” reiterated the “Sphynx,” “every one is
occupied. You’ll just have to go ashore and wait for the next
boat.”
“ Oh, nonsense, stewardess; I mean to go in this boat; my
passage is taken.”


“Taken, or not taken, you can’t go in the ‘ Waratera.’ I
tell you we’re perfectly full.”
“ Now, stewardess, I mean to go in this boat, so don’t say
another word.”
“ But how are you meaning to go ? ”
“Anyhow; I am not very particular as to manner, but I
positively shall form a unit in the ‘ Waratera’s’ passenger list,,
even if I stand all the way from here to Melbourne.”
“ You'll only grumble and complain of the accommodation,”
said the “ Sphynx,’ beginning to yield to Ruth Lancaster’s
determined words. “ Goodness me, there’s far too many pas-
sengers on board, and I can’t possibly do for you all, so if you
come you must look after yourself.”
“ Agreed,” responded Ruth, cheerfully. “ I shall pack my-
self into my pocket and emerge only when I can be of some
service to you.”
“ You are sure to be frightfully sick,” prophesied the
“ Sphynx,” pleasantly, “ but don’t expect me to attend to you,
for I could’nt undertake to do it.”
“ I scorn the insinuation,” persisted Mrs. Lancaster with a
gay laugh. “I am never sea-sick, and am, perhaps, an older
tar than yourself. Don’t imagine I shall grumble at the accom-
modation ; it must be very bad indeed before I would do that.”
“Well,” said the relenting “Sphynx” with an admiring
look, “you are an uncommon sort of passenger. I’ll take you
at your word. What’s your name ? ”
“ Mrs. Lancaster.”
“Oh, indeed!’’ with brisk change of manner; “why on
earth did’nt you say so before. Captain Baker, of the ‘ Ocean-
foam,’ told me to make room for you, and, as he is an old friend
of mine, I promised you should have a bunk.”
She walked out into the passage, threw open the door
of a small cabin containing three cribs, pointed to the topmost
of these, saying, “ there’s your place ; after a while I may con-
trive to get you a mattress, but, in the meantime, spread a rug
on the spars, and do the best you can.”
She prepared to go, but turned at the door to say, “ If you
want anything to eat you must look out for yourself; it’s quite


impossible for me to attend to you. Now, Mrs. Lancaster,”
seeing that lady about to speak, “you needn’t say a word. Take
it or leave it; it’s the best I can do for you, and you needn't
worry me with questions.”
“All right, stewardess, but I want ”
“ I can’t do any more for you,” she interrupted.
“Very well, but I want to know ”
“ Then find out for yourself, can’t you ? ”
“ Yes, yes. I only want to know ”
“ Ask somebody else than me,” she retorted in an exasperated
voice.
“ Bless my soul ! it’s your name I want to know, for you
must be sick of the word stewardess,” laughed Mrs. Lan-
caster.
“ Oh, my name ! ” in a modified tone ; “ my name is Ander-
son ; Mrs. Anderson. How could I guess you wanted to ask
my name ? I thought you wanted me to fetch you tea, or wine,
or something of that sort, and I really havn’t time.”
The two women joined in a hearty laugh that at once estab-
lished them on a friendly footing.
Then Mrs. Anderson spoke up in a heartier voice than she
had used hitherto: “I can see well enough you are not one
of the helpless women who want to be waited on hand and
foot; you make the best of things, and, after all, that’s the
best plan. When I have time to spare, I’ll come and chat
with you, if you like.”
So saying, she departed out of the cabin. Mrs. Lancaster
saw her struggling through the crowd in the corridor, elbowing
her way towards the door of the large cabin, into which she
presently disappeared.
“Here is a good opportunity of showing grit,” soliloquised
Mrs. Lancaster; “for, according to Mark Tapley, there is no
credit in being jolly when all one's surroundings are com-
fortable. After all, what am I but a Bohemian, pure and
simple? A little roughing ought not to come amiss to me;
besides, the comic side of things ought to console me for a few


bumps. Ah, there you are, my friend,” looking up at the
white life-belt above her berth; “just see how handy you are
to me should I require you. In the meantime, I shall make you
useful as well as ornamental by arranging a few necessaries
upon you.” With the dexterity born of long practice, she
arranged her toilet requisites close at hand.
The hour for the “ Waratera’s” departure having arrived,
Ruth Lancaster went on deck to see the last of Dunedin. As
the steamer cast off, a sudden mist gathered before her eyes,
and her heart throbbed painfully.
“ Alone! always alone! ” she murmured. “ Everyone appears
to have a friend—or, at least, an acquaintance—to bid her bon
voyage except myself, and I must live alone till death, since
Harold is not by my side. But surely lam growing sentimen-
tal,” she added indignantly.
As if. to counteract incipient sentimentality, two or three
suppressed snorts just then arrested her attention from behind,
and she turned round just in time to assist at the collapse of a
stout, good-natured-locking, elderly female, who had, as the
snorts testified, done her utmost to retain self-control.
Mrs. Molett now gave way entirely and let the big tears run
openly down her cheeks, as she grasped Ruth’s shoulder in no
gentle style.
“ I’m leaving my boy behind me,” she gasped in explana-
tion; “he’s just breaking his heart at letting his mammy go
away.”
“Poor boy,” said sympathetic Ruth, looking shorewards;
“ which is he? ”
“There, there,” the sobbing mother replied; “that’s my
Jamie with the straw hat and bonnie curly hair,”
Mrs. Lancaster looked at a group of children waving hand-
kerchiefs to those on board. Some small boys were amongst
them, but no one answered the description.
“ I don’t see him,” she said.
“ Don’t you see him standing there with the girl in dark
blue?” cried the mother impatiently, kissing her hand passion-
ately towards him. “Good-bye, Jamie, lad! Good-bye, my
boy ! God bless ye! ”
Following Mrs. Molett’s gaze, Ruth saw a tall, stalwart.


sunburnt young fellow, clasping a pretty, weeping girl to his
heart, evidently quite unconscious that tears were chasing each
other down his cheeks.
“Poor Jamie,” wept the woman; “it has gone sore against
the grain with him to let his mother leave the Colony; but
may be we wont be long parted.”
“'Who is the pretty girl in blue?”
“That’s my Jamie’s young wife,” said Mrs. Molett, proudly.
“ My Jamie has fallen on his feet for a wife, for Jessie is a clever
lassie and a thrifty; but Jess is in luck too, for though I say it
that shouldn’t, it’s no’ every day a lad like my Jamie goes
a-begging.”
“ Great satisfaction all round! ’ was Ruth s mental comment.
Her attention was soon occupied by the lovely scenery amongst
which the vessel steamed briskly down the bay; on one hand
the beautiful Peninsula with its handsome homesteads, on the
other panoramic views of Ravensbourne, St. Leonard s. Port
Chalmers. But she was not left long undisturbed to enjoy the
beauties of nature, for a young girl with florid taste in dress
(who evidently regarded herself as much more attractive than
any mere combination of sea and shore), sat down beside her
in the bows asking if she expected to be sea-sick. On being
answered in the negative she sagely shook her head, and
assured Mrs. Lancaster she would find herself mistaken, as she
(Miss Maud Caroline Downey) had been told by an authority
this was the roughest trip in the whole world. Mrs. Lancaster
gave one of her curious smiles; visions rose before her of certain
wild angry Hebridean seas, on whose billows she had tossed in
a mere fishing craft; of giant waves rushing furiously up the
smooth sides of Skerryvore lighthouse; of wrathful breakers
rolling, with majestic force, into huge water-worn caverns on
the storm-beaten coast of Tyree; of a certain anxious cruise
round the bleak, rough Mull of Cantire. She soon discovered
the florid young lady possessed a combative turn of mind ; was
desirous of airing personal grievances ; an egotistical talker.
Miss Maud Caroline did not long waste her sweetness on Ruth
Lancaster; her brilliant dress was soon in close proximity to a
pair of trousers. Maud Caroline had evidently found an
audience more to her liking than plain prosaic Mrs. Lancaster.


CHAPTER VIII.
FROM FOR'ARD AFT.
F7 H E welcome sound of the dinner bell aroused Ruth
Afejj Ipt from the reverie into which she had fallen ; mindful of
Yfn Mrs. Anderson’s warning, she descended to the cabin,
JI ll Z but found the tables surrounded by men. The crowded
state of the ladies’ cabin prohibited any chance of
obtaining a meal there, and yet there seemed little possibility of
gaining a seat in the steerage saloon. Ruth, therefore, awaited
a second service, but received a second disappointment, for once
more the tables were rushed by strong, hungry men, upon whom
the sea breezes were already taking effect,
“ Wait where you are, and whenever any one rises pop into
his place,” advised one of the busy stewards. A man rose
before long, when she secured the vacant place. “ Wipe that
spoon on this,” said the perspiring steward, handing her a wet
cloth. Ruth did so, and surreptitiously dried and polished it on
the tablecloth.
“ Soup ma’am ?’*
“ Please.”
“ What have you got there 7” asked a woman who had
wriggled herself into a place at Ruth’s side.
“ Gravy soup. Will you have some !”
“ Yes, give us some ; and you there,” addressing some men
further down the table, “ hand us up them petaties.” “I like a
petatie broke into my soup,” she said confidentially to Mrs.
Lancaster.
“ Anything else you’d like, mem,” said the men, handing
along the dish. An interruption occurred through the clamour-
ing of an impatient passenger ; he seized the handles of his


knife and fork, drummed loudly on the table with them, keeping
up an incessant demand for “soup, soup, soup/’ till, for very
peace’s sake, he was supplied, but by that time all the
“ petaties ” had been forked out of the dish.
“ Never mind, mem ; there’s more cornin’ “ said a consoling
neighbour.
The woman looked down the table again and demanded
“ them sass bottles.”
The cruet was placed before her. “ Now,” quoth she,
“who’s to know which is which ?” She answered the problem
herself in a sufficiently matter-of-fact way by inverting each
bottle upon her tongue.
Soup disposed of, a large assiette containing sliced roast beef
and mutton was placed on the table, from which each passenger
helped him or herself so eagerly that most of its contents had
disappeared before the distasteful-looking fare reached Mrs.
Lancaster. A man, seated about the centre of the table, had
watched her, noting how silently she awaited her turn, and now
he stood up in his place, remonstrated with those in possession
of the meat ; declared “ the women should get a show,” but,
finding his motion unseconded, looked at Ruth. “ Hev a
petatie, mem?” “If you please,” answered she, politely.
“ Cetch, then,” and a potato came trundling merrily up the
centre of the table towards her ; she caught it, laughed heartily,
and despatched it.
Despite early associations, Mrs. Lancaster was a thorough
Bohemian; her adaptability had been very serviceable during
her chequered career. In brighter days she had gracefully
fufilled the duties of hostess in her own handsome home; had
not infrequently been an honoured guest at the tables of
England’s nobility; but she had also snatched a hasty bite on
horseback when heading in a mob of cattle in the Australian
bush, made many a hearty dinner of potatoes and herrings in
the huts of Scottish fishermen, had even, on more than one
occasion, been altogether without any prospect of a meal; so
she was by no means overcome by the uniqueness of her present
banquet. It was simply a new experience.
Later on, her large opossum rug over her arm, she ascended
to the forecastle deck; a comfortable scat was soon arranged


in the bows, where, after freezing the ardour of a vapid young
man whose body appeared to have grown at the expense of his
brains, and who weakly endeavoured to engage her in silly,
small talk, she drew forth a favourite book. But her mind was
unsettled by her journey; “ Romola ” had no power to charm
to-night. Soon darkness settled over the ship, stragglers betook
themselves to the lighted cabin and she was left alone on deck.
Fragments of rollicking songs ascended from below; she sat on,
listening to the weird sound of rushing water, the heavy, mono-
tonous bump, bump, of the engines.
“ How shall I find Charlie and Alice?”she thought. “How
shall I like her? Oh, that is a needless question! lam sure
to like her. When we were young Charlie and I always liked
the same people; always, except one. There was one whom he
disliked, whom I loved! He ruined my life! He broke my
heart! Oh God, is he alive or dead? if I only knew !” with a
pitiful sob. “If people could live their lives over again, how
differently many of us would act, but we work in the dark. We
stretch out longing arms for that which seems desirable in our
earth-blinded eyes, and too often find only a shadow in our
grasp ; we have allowed the substance to escape.”
“Mrs. Lancaster! Mrs. Lancaster! where are you?” cried
the shrill young voice of Chester Waters, breaking in suddenly
upon her reverie.
“lam here, Chester,” said she, rising from her low seat;
“ what do you want? ”
“Auntie sent me to ask you to go to her immediately. She
is in the saloon and has something important to tell you. Shall
you come ? ”
“ Certainly, Chester, I shall go straight up with you now.
Give me your hand, dear.” The boy stretched out his hand
and clasped hers in the darkness; the rug dropped from her
figure and lay unheeded on the deck; they made their way
down the steep ladder-like steps to the main deck.
Their road lay along the narrow, dark passage by the
engines, on nearing which Ruth was surprised to see the slight
figure of a woman slipping aside quickly into an open doorway.
Her attention was attracted by a certain stealthiness in its


movements, a something which savoured of mystery. She
wondered whom it could be; wondered all the more because
she knew that doorway belonged to the third mate’s cabin.
But as she glanced back over her shoulder she saw the figure
emerge instantly and glide away in the direction of the steerage.
“ Probably one of the salcon stewardesses going forward on
an errand,” she surmised uneasily; “yet why should she hide
within a doorway? ”
She forgot all about it when she reached the saloon, and
descended to the ladies’ cabin, where Mrs. Bertram awaited her.
“ Mrs. Lancaster,” began that lady, rising in welcome and
warmly shaking hands with her, “ I sent Chester for you because
I happened to hear that an extra stewardess would be required
owing to the crowd of passengers on board. Were you to
apply for, and obtain it, we would be together again; it would
be so much nicer for us all.”
“ What a splendid idea,” cried Ruth eagerly. “I wonder
if I could obtain the post.”
“ Mr. Bertram says you should look after it at once; there
is no time to be lost.”
“Will you vouch for my respectability? Will you say all the
nice things you can about me? I shall apply instantly.”
Mrs. Lancaster found Mr. Roy, the chief steward, in his
cabin, seated on a high stool in front of a desk, a large book
like a ledger open before him, a pen in his firm white fingers.
After one keen, comprehensive glance, she decided to approach
her subject without circumlocution. A worried look was in
his fine eyes as he raised them from the ledger, a flush of
annoyance on his lace. ■ Seeing a lad}', he rose politely from
his seat, saying, “ What can I do for you, madam?”
“ Employ me as assistant saloon stewardess,” spoke Ruth
boldly; “saloon accommodation will amply repay my services.”
Mr. Roy looked surprised, but said quietly, “ What about
sea-sickness? ”
“I am an old traveller, Mr. Roy; there is no fear of my
being sick.”
“Are you accustomed to work? Can you make beds?”


“I have earned my living for many years; I do not dread
work.”
“ But can you keep your footing when the vessel rocks? All
new hands are comparatively useless for a time through that
inability.”
“ I have often kept my footing on rougher seas than we are
likely to experience between here and Melbourne.”
“What is your name?”
“Mrs. Lancaster.”
“Very good, Mrs. Lancaster; consider yourself engaged
for the trip. Now send Mrs. O’Neil to me that I may instruct
her concerning you.”
He dismissed her with a bow and pleasant smile.
Five minutes later Ruth curtsied with mock ceremony to
Mrs. Bertram —“ Permit me to introduce to you Mrs. Lancaster,
assistant stewardess.”
“lam so pleased,” said that kindly creature. “ Mr. Bertram
will be delighted also.”
“ How jolly ! you’ll be able to tell me lots of stories,” said
Chester.
“To be sure I shall,” answered Ruth; “any amount of
them. I keep a whole stock of them stowed away, so that I
can get at them whenever I want. Where do you think I keep
them ? ”
“ I know! I know!” cried Chester with great excitement.
“ Where, then? Tell me where.”
“At the back of your tongue,” replied the boy, triumphantly.


CHAPTER IX.
A DAWNING MYSTERY.
“lIP THOUGHT you were lost, Laura; I have been looking
||| for you. Where have you been?” asked Mrs. March-
I\ I mont, as her niece entered the ladies’ cabin on the first
J night of the journey.
Miss Blanchard looked rather pale and startled, as
though chilled by the night air—as though dazzled by coming
suddenly into the lighted apartment.
“Along the main deck, looking at the engines,” she replied,
untying her long dark cloak, and removing at the same time a
coquettish little sealskin hat. “Those terrible engines,” with
an expressive little shudder, “ that are working away down in
the depths of the ship. I had no idea a ship was so large till
I saw them in that great engine-room. They reminded me of
a story I used to read when I was a child of a wicked giant
chained for his sins, condemned to pump water out of a deep
pit all his life.”
Chester sat up with a look of eager interest.
“Was he down in the pit?” demanded he; “or did he stop
outside and draw it up? ”
“Oh, he was chained down in the pit; he couldn’t get out,”
laughed the young lady.
“But it would be dark down there, wouldn’t it?”
“ Quite dark. To be in the dark was part of his punish-
ment.”
“ But he wouldn’t see what he was doing; he might spill
all the water back again into the pit,” reflected the boy. “ Did
they give him a light, Miss Blanchard ?”


“ Tradition doesn’t say, Chester/' answered Laura merrily.
She had recovered both colour and good spirits, and drawing a
piece of lace-work from her pocket with nimble white fingers
began to work.
“ It is rather late to commence work to-night, Laura, dar-
ling,’’ said her aunt. “ I shall put mine away presently too.
Where did you leave the doctor.”
“ He has not been with me for some time,” she answered,
blushing, but with an anxious expression in her face, a startled
look in her eyes.
“ Was he not with you at the engine-room ?” questioned
her aunt, lifting surprised eyes to the girl’s face.
“No,” confessed the girl somewhat reluctantly; “I hap-
pened to be alone on the main deck when the thought occurred
to me to go and look at the engines; I put the idea into
practice.”
Mrs. Lancaster, who had been bending over a piece of work,
quickly glanced at Miss Blanchard’s face, for there came un-
bidden to her mind the remembrance of a certain shadowy
figure flitting down the corridor, past the engines, towards the
steerage. “ Nonsense, nonsense,” she thought reprovingly,
“ What an imagination I have ! What would take Miss Blan-
chard down there?”
“ My dear Laura,” spoke Mrs. Marchmont, in displeased
accents, " you really must not wander about the ship alone,
especially after dark. What could possess you to go along to
the engines at night,alone? Really, I am surprised at you.”
Her aunt stooped over her embroidery with an air of offence.
“Dear Aunt Julia,” cried Laura penitently, “I had no
thought of displeasing you ; you cannot imagine I would
wilfully displease you ? I have acted thoughtlessly, no doubt,
but promise to be more careful another time.”
“Take care to be so, Laura. Take care to have an escort
when you desire to go on an investigating expedition. Either
Dr. Sanmaurez or myself would accompany you with pleasure.
Of course, I am satisfied you had no intention of offending, but
some of you Victorians are a little too independent in your
ways to suit our quiet steady-going New Zealand notions.”


“I am really sorry for vexing you, Aunt Julia,” the girl
said, crossing over to her aunt with an earnest, affectionate
look ; “ I promise to be very careful in future."
“ Very well, love, we shall say no more about it. But no
one ever knows what characters may be on board, and how
would I meet Amy if her girl came to any harm while under my
chaperonage ?”
She glanced fondly at the lovely glowing face of her niece as,
folding up her work, she turned to the other occupants of the
cabin with a smiling suggestion that they should all retire for
the night to their own rooms, and thus leave Mrs. Lancaster
free to prepare her sleeping place.
They took the h int, saying good-naturedly everyone wished
the new stewardess to be fresh for her work in the morning.
“ Good night, Mrs. Lancaster,” they all said, leaving the
cabin ; Miss Blanchard laughingly added, “ a sound sleep and
pleasant dreams to you.”
“That is a sweet girl,” thought Ruth Lancaster, as she pre-
pared her bed ; “ her face tells its own tale of truth, love, honour.
If she is engaged to that doctor of whom her aunt speaks, he
ought to be considered a lucky fellow. She’s a very nice girl,
indeed. How curiously Miss Glover watched her to-night! I
wonder what attracted the lady’s attention ; she never took her
eyes off Miss Blanchard’s face. There can’t be any rivalry
between them regarding this doctor, surely. Miss Glover must
be a great many years older than Miss Blanchard ; nor did I
notice any unfriendliness between them ; only that keen, sus-
picious look in Miss Glover’s eyes. I wonder what it meant.
How comfortable I shall be here to-night in comparison with
the steerage," she ruminated ; “such a splendid airy cabin all to
myself; why, no one in the ship can be better lodged. Now
my nest is ready. Where’s my rug ?”
She looked about for the opossum rug, but did not see it.
“ I must have left it on the for’ard deck when I came aft
with Chester. Let me see. It’s only ten o’clock, and the
electric light does not go out till eleven. My rug might blow
overboard before morning. I’ll run along for it; I couldn’t
sleep without it.”


Throwing her fur-lined cloak over her shoulders, she hastened
along to the now silent, deserted bows. The rug lay where it
had dropped ; as she stooped to pick it up a paper rustled out
of its folds upon the deck.
“ My bill from Miss Spores,” thought Ruth, execrating her
carelessness as she lifted it. “ What a stupid I am to let my
bills blow about like that.”
Retaining the bill in her hand, she gathered up the rug,
threw it lightly across her arm, over which it fell in great soft
masses of grey fur, and began to retrace her steps towards the
saloon.
She had gone but a few yards when the thought occurred to
her that Mrs. Anderson, the “ Sphynx,” would be alarmed at
her non-appearance in the steerage next morning. Turning
back at once, she descended the stairs to the steerage cabin. As
she did so, Mrs. Anderson, looking out of the open door of the
ladies’ cabin, remarked, “ So you’ve come down at last, Mrs.
Lancaster ; I thought you meant to stop up there all night.”
“ Up where, Mrs. Anderson ?” asked Ruth, rather resenting
the familiarity of the “Sphynx’s” tone.
“ On the fo’castle, to bo sure,” answered the other, knowingly.
“ You surely don’t imagine I have been there all this time,
Mrs. Anderson ?”
“ I know you have; I saw you. I went up to have a chat
with you over an hour ago, when I had a few minutes to spare,
but soon saw I wasn’t wanted. Two’s company, three’s none;
so down I came again straight. I’m a bit disappointed in you,
Mrs. Lancaster; you seemed a capable, sensible, nice-like
person ; I never thought you’d have taken up so soon with one
of the hands on board. Passengers aint very much thought of
when they take up with the sailors,” she concluded, slightingly.
Ruth’s head was instantly and proudly erected, as she an-
swered this insulting remark with considerable heat.
“ You are utterly mistaken, Mrs. Anderson, for I have not
even spoken to a sailor on this ship.”
“ Come, come, now, Mrs. Lancaster, don’t blaze up at me
in that fashion ! My good woman, I saw you with my own two


eyes as plainly as Ido at this moment. There were you and
the sailor standing in the bows cracking away quite confiden-
tially, so much so that you never even saw me, though I ”
“ My dear Mrs. Anderson, I can prove your mistake/’ Ruth
said, calmly, “ for a lady friend of mine, who is a saloon pas-
senger, sent her little boy down for me before eight o’clock. I
accompanied him to the saloon, where I have remained ever
since with Mrs. O’Neil and Miss Tracy, for Mr. Roy has been
good enough to engage me as assistant stewardess for the trip,
and you ought to know my hands have been fully occupied.
So,” said Ruth, recovering her temper, “I plead not guilt)', and
can prove an alibi.”
“But I certainly saw you,” persisted Mrs. Anderson. “Your
long cloak and small hat were quite recognisable, and then
there was your big rug lying all of a heap at your feet.”
“Now, really, Mrs. Anderson,” remonstrated the indignant
Ruth, “you have no right to persist in so offensive a statement;
I deny it in toto. Besides, what could a decent woman of my
age mean by clandestinely meeting a common sailor in the
ship’s bows? Do I look like the sort of person for a low intrigue?
No, no, Mrs. Anderson; you are utterly mistaken.”
“Well, it didn’t seem a very respectable thing to do, and I
own I was surprised at you,” she admitted reluctantly, not very
well pleased to have her opinion called in question. “ But since
you so positively deny being there, your word must be taken.
All the other female passengers have been in bed this long-
while except yourself,” she grumbled, “and I really don’t see
who could have been there with a cloak just like yours.”
“ Might it not have been a saloon passenger? ” queried Ruth.
As she spoke, there again flashed into her mind the mysterious
figure of the engine corridor.
“ No saloon passenger would have been standing there alone
talking to a sailor,’’ answered Mrs. Anderson in a very decided
tone of voice. “More especially after dark,” she added.
“That’s not to be thought of for a moment. Since you insist
it wasn’t you, I don’t know who it could have been; but I could
have sworn it was you.”


“It certainly wasn’t I,” insisted Mrs. Lancaster; “it must
have been my double. You may be overworked, Mrs. Ander-
son, and unable to see clearly, but you wont be anything the
worse of cracking this little nut for supper, ‘Honi soit qui
maly pense.' ’’
With this parting shot, she withdrew to her new quarters.
“ Dear me,” she mused irritably while preparing for bed,
“what would Lavater make of this? Here am I, with noble
nose, honest eyes, a determined mouth, and a large organ of
conscientiousness, suspected of intriguing with a common sailor,
a veritable able-bodied, whom I never either saw or spoke to in
my life. Where’s the use of good features if they don’t inform
the general public of one’s interior uprightness? My nose
might as well be a snub,” she meditated, fondly stroking the
member in question; “or, instead of looking people honestly
in the face, 1 might as well have a cast in my eye. How ridicu-
lously positive that stupid Mrs. Anderson was; indeed, I
scarcely know if she believes me after all. How absurd! she
might as well accuse that pretty Miss Blanchard of an intrigue
as my mature self—the one would be quite as likely as the
other. Pooh! it’s not worth fussing about. Where have I
put that bill, now? How stupid of me to let it blow about the
ship. A little extra caution regarding rolling stock would not
be amiss, Ruth Lancaster, my dear; there’s no need to let the
whole ship know the price of the frilling round the neck of your
dress. But what has become of it? It was in my hand five
minutes ago! Very likely I put it in my pocket. How very
strange! it’s not there either. Why, that makes the second
time it has been lost to-day. After all, what a blessing it’s only
a bill; had I been a young girl, it might have been a love-letter.”
With this consoling reflection, Mrs. Lancaster said her
prayers and got into bed.


CHAPTER X.
AN UNSIGNED LETTER.
■UNFORTUNATELY, Mrs. Lancaster was not the only
person who had noticed Miss Blanchard’s confusion
that evening; hers was not the only mind in which
I; had arisen a suspicion (however slight) of Miss Blan-
chard’s straightforwardness.
When she first entered the cabin, the pallor of her cheek
had been observed by Miss Glover; her embarassment in re-
plying to Mrs. Marchmont’s questions had subsequently aroused
that impulsive lady’s attention.
Since the days of her early disappointment, Gertrude Glover
occasionally showed signs of possessing a hypercritical spirit;
she displayed a quick suspicious cavilling at apparently simple
words and actions; a tendency to misconstrue the words of those
about her. This spirit had been awakened by Laura Blanchard’s
confusion, by the absence of her usual lovely colour.
“ I wonder what ailed Laura Blanchard to-night ? She looked
as though she had been up to some trick,’’ thought Gertrude,
with ready suspicion. “ Why else should she flush and pale so
rapidly? why look so anxious? If she really cares for Dr.
Sanmaurez, how does she happen to be roaming about alone on
the main deck ? All night, too !" she added. “ There must be
a screw loose somewhere. Surely they cannot be desperately
in love with each other when he sits in the smoking-room with
a lot of men, while she wanders about the ship after dark alone.
There is something queer about it, but I hope, oh, I do hope,
they are both honest and honourable ! In the name of justice,”
she cried wildly, under her breath, “let us have no more
treachery.”


She drew an embroidered housewife from her pocket,
selected from it a fine needle, which she threaded with
black silk, slipped a silver thimble on her finger, and com-
menced to mend a small hole in the finger of her glove.
When that was completed to her satisfaction, she bethought
herself of the address of a certain livery-stable keeper to whom
she had been recommended. “ When you want a nice pony
carriage, with a quiet, steady-going pair of dapples, just call
at Mr. Selwyn’s,” her Dunedin friend had said.
“It would be advisable to make a note of the address in
case I forget it,” she remarked to herself. “ What was it again ?
John Selwyn, cab and carriage proprietor, 103 Little Lonsdale
street. The back of an envelope will answer nicely. Oh, how
tiresome; I emptied my pocket of all letters and papers just
before leaving home, and now I have nothing on which to write.
Ah, there’s Mrs. Lancaster in the large cabin only a few yards
away; she can’t be undressed yet, so I’ll step along and ask
her for a scrap of paper.”
She walked out into the passage with this intention, when, as
luck, or fate, would have it, she noticed a white paper lying on
the floor. To stoop for it, pick it up, and return in triumph to
the cabin was the work of a couple of minutes.
“Here’s luck!” said she, smoothing It out on her hand;
“ this will do nicely.’'
She drew a pencil from her pocket, and prepared to note
down the address. “ What writing is this ?” she queried, as
some characters arrested her attention. “A bill, doubtless.
How careless of anyone to allow bills to blow about the ship ;
who is the purchaser, I wonder ?
She drew nearer the electric light, holding the paper so that
the light fell on it; as she read, the half-comical smile faded
from her face, leaving behind it a strange, greyish whiteness.
These were the words on the paper :
“ Dearest, —I am an A.B. on this ship, and saw you
come on board. It is an age since I heard of my darling. Try
to slip along to the forecastle to-night about eight o’clock, when
I shall be off duty and expecting you. Should you be remarked,
say vou went forward to look at the engines. Do not fail your
unhappy ”


M iss Glover tottered to the side of her bunk and sat down
abruptly. For a moment the room appeared to whirl round,
but soon her ideas grew clear again.
“ I knew it,” she said emphatically. “ I had an intuition
that girl Laura was not acting fairly by her betrothed ; she must
be playing fast and loose with Dr. Sanmaurez, who, poor fond
idiot, thinks her a very angel out of heaven, as I used to think
Mark Warwick in days gone bye. More fool I/’ was the
bitter comment. “ This must have been at the bottom of her
confusion to-night. This chased the colour from her cheek. No
doubt she feared detection, but her excuse about the engines
was ready enough, only she had not counted on her Aunt Julia’s
displeaure. Two hours ago I could have sworn by that
girl’s truth and honour, yet now Oh Laura, Laura !” wailed
Gertrude Glover, sorrowfully, “are you also false ? Is there no
truth on this earth ? Poor Glenois Sanmaurez , poor fellow ! I
know what he will suffer when his dream of happiness is shat-
tered ; I know, for I too have suffered, oh, how deeply ! Mark,
Mark, how could you betray me so! You, whom I loved more
dearly than life itself. The bitter pain recurs whenever I think
of you; shall it be thus always, or shall I obtain peace some
day ?”
The large tears welled slowly over her eyelids ; they rolled
unheeded down her cheeks. She pressed both hands tightly
over her heart to still the bitter pain these thoughts had engen-
dered ; by-and-bye she grew calm and began to prepare for
rest, thinking all the time about Laura Blanchard and Dr.
Sanmaurez.
She drew off her stockings ; she sat contemplating her bare,
white feet. “Who can the sailor be? He calls her his darling
—there must be a disgraceful element in the affair to occasion
all this caution ; he doesn’t sign any name, nor does he address
anyone. Yet I feel convinced Laura, and no other, was the
recipient of this note. How frightfully careless she must be to
drop it in the passage ! His darling, indeed ! perhaps he
doesn’t know about Glenois Sanmaurez ; now that’s a pity,”
she laughed ironically, “ some one ought to tell him.”
She removed her dress, brushed out her long abundant hair,
still pondering on the mysterious letter; donned her night


attire, climbed into her bunk, but before she fell asleep her re-
solve was taken to watch Laura closely for the week they
would be together on the vessel. If her suspicions were
verified she would simply put the young doctor on his guard ;
nothing further than that; but she would certainly put him on
his guard, and, if his eyes were opened in time, he would thank
her for acting so friendly a part.
Next morning Mrs. Lancaster, bearing in her hands early
cups of tea for the ladies, entered the three-berth cabin occupied
by Mrs. Bertram, Mrs, Marchmont, and Miss Blanchard.
“You take to your new profession like a duck to the water,
Mrs. Lancaster,” said Mrs. Bertram, sitting up in her bunk and
stretching out her hand for the tea.”
“You see the advantage of being born a Scot,” retorted that
lady, jocularly. “ Here am I enjoying all the comforts, all the
luxuries of saloon fare at steerage price. Wont Mr. Jura be
amused, Mrs. Bertram, when he hears of my good fortune?
Well, I often say it’s better to be born lucky than rich. How
are you all this morning ? ” she added, collectively.
“ To tell the truth, I feel rather squeamish,” Mrs. Marchmont
answered ; “so do you, Mrs. Bertram ; do you not ?”
“ I do, indeed,” she replied, “but shall try to get on deck
by-and-bye, for I daresay the fresh air will do me good.”
“ Oh, yes, you will feel better in the fresh air,” declared
Mrs. Lancaster; “ perhaps I could assist you to rise after break-
fast. And how are you, Miss Blanchard ? Are you sick, also ?’’
Now, Laura’s bunk was uppermost of the three, con-
sequently she was out of view of the other ladies; but Mrs.
Lancaster was surprised to see her lift a wan, haggard face from
her pillow. Her eyes were red and swollen, as if she had wept
through the night, yet, in reply to Ruth’s question, she answered
bravely, “ Oh, no, not at all sick, though I confess to a restless
night; many persons do not sleep well in a strange bed. Thank
you, I should like some tea.”
Ruth silently handed her a cup; she felt instinctively the
girl did not wish to have her appearance commented upon, and
Laura thanked her by a grateful glance from her blue eyes.


“ Don't be in a hurry to get up, dear," said Ruth, gently.
« I shall bring your breakfast to you by-and-bye; it is very
early yet, only seven o’clock."
“ Indeed, Mrs. Lancaster,” spoke the girl, “ I believe I could
sleep now, only, perhaps—perhaps —Dr. ” she stammered,
the red colour rushing over face and neck,
“ Oh, don’t fret about him, Laura,’’ said Mrs, Marchmont,
with a smile, “ I daresay Mrs. Lancaster will be kind enough
to help you out of your difficulty. This little girl, she explained,
in a tender voice, “ is afraid our escort, Dr. Sanmaurez, may be
alarmed by her non-appearance on deck this morning; she
would feel relieved by your kindness in delivering a message to
him.”
“ I shall have pleasure in doing so,” Ruth said, gracefully,
looking, with kindly interest, at the lovely girl. “ I shall way-
lay him immediately after breakfast.”
“Thank you, Mrs. Lancaster. Will you please tell him I
am quite well, but a little tired from over-excitement. I shall
rest an hour or two, but hope to come on deck some time before
luncheon. Thank you, very much indeed,” she concluded, lying
back again upon her pillow.
A sweet, happy smile now played about her lips ; Ruth
glanced at the delicate, white hand on the counterpane; yes,
there was a handsome diamond ring on the “ engaged ” finger
of the left hand. “ How happy these young people are with
their love story,” reflected Ruth, “ as Tom Moore says, ‘there s
nothing half so sweet in life as love’s young dream.' God bless
them and their love. God grant it may be more than a dream
to them. Who is this Dr. Sanmaurez, I wonder ? Sanmaurez
is not a common name by any means ; how singular if he turned
out to be my old friend, Glenois.”
Ruth carried tea to the Glovers, saying, pleasantly, as she
entered their room, “ I hope you have had a good night, Miss
Glover ? ”
“I have slept very well,” answered that lady, “ but mamma
complains of having spent a wakeful night.”
“The noise of the engines disturbed me, Gertrude,” chirped
the little old lady from her bunk, in which she reminded Ruth


of a brown sparrow in its nest. “ I’m not as young as I once
was, Mrs. Lancaster, and much more easily upset by anything
unusual.”
“ You are in very good health, mamma,” said Gertrude,
gravely; “ for my part, I don’t know of anything to keep one
awake except an evil conscience.”
“ But I havn’t that, Gertrude,” said her mother, plaintively,
“ Mother, darling, I wasn’t referring to you; of course you
havn’t. I simply meant persons in general.”
But she knew that in her own heart she had referred to Laura
Blanchard.
“ Well,” volunteered Mrs. Lancaster, “ I oughtn’t to have
slept last night, by rights ; but I did, and soundly too.”
“ Why, what should have prevented your slumbers ?” asked
Gertrude.
“ A very odd thing happened to me last night,” answered
Mrs. Lancaster, with a peculiar intonation. “After my bed
was made up, I discovered my rug was a-missing. Now, lam a
very chilly creature, and cannot sleep at night without my rug;
the best conscience in the world would not be sufficient substi-
tute. As it was not to be seen in the cabin, I concluded I had
left it on the forecastle where Chester found me sitting. It was
only ten o’clock, so I decided to run along for it; it was there,
but, having secured it, the thought occurred to me to tell the
steerage stewardess of my employment here in case she should
be alarmed in the morning at my absence. Would you believe
it. Miss Glover, she declared she had seen me talking to one of
the sailors in the ship's bows ? She knew my dark cloak and
cap, she insisted, when I told her she laboured under a mis-
apprehension, and who else could it be as all the other steerage
passengers were in bed ? She quite scouted the idea of it’s
being a saloon passenger. ‘No saloon passenger,’ she said
grimly, ‘would be talking to a sailor in the bows at night.’ ”
Miss Glover looked eagerly into Mrs. Lancaster’s face.
“ At what time did she say she had seen you, or the person
she mistook for you ?” she corrected.


“ Between eight and nine o’clock. I was seriously annoyed.
Miss Glover, and indeed, question whether the woman believes
my word.”
“ You have plenty witnesses to prove the truth of that. If
I were you, Mrs. Lancaster, I would hold my tongue about the
affair. A story of that kind would quickly circulate in the ship,
being greatly magnified in the telling. Evil-minded persons
would not consider the truth ; it might get about that you
actually did meet some one under suspicious circumstances.
Take my advice ; let the matter drop.”
“You are right,” answered Ruth, ‘least said, etc.,’she
added airily, “ Well, good morning, ladies ; I am off to my
work.”
She took from their hands the empty tea-cups and left the
cabin,
“ Laura Blanchard met that man and was mistaken for Mrs.
Lancaster,” Gertrude decided. “ Already the plot thickens ;
what will be the end 1”
She turned her face to the wall for another sleep.


CHAPTER XI.
ON THE TRAIL.
RS. LANCASTER was not mistaken. Dr. San-
maurez P r °ved to be none other than the young
jllrviwt sur g eon s^e had known so well some ten years
J sprls back.
A He had come out to Melbourne as doctor on the
ship “ Hypatia,” in which Mrs. Lancaster had taken passage
Although she was some years older than the young man, a warm
friendship had sprung up between them—a friendship dissolved
only by the lady’s sudden disappearance from Melbourne eight
years ago. They were mutually pleased at this unexpected
rencontre , and Ruth was soon in possession of the young man’s
confidence. When her work in the cabin was over for a time,
the two friends promenaded the poop-deck, while he poured
into her sympathetic ear the story of his love and hope, just as
formerly he used to confide to her his vexations and difficulties.
“ It is like old times to have you to talk to,” he said affec-
tionately. “ You can’t think how pleased I am to meet you
again. I have so often wondered what had become of you. Of
course, when I knew your husband had arrived in Melbourne, I
dreaded there was trouble in store for you. Do I pain you by
alluding to him, Mrs. Lancaster?” he added with almost
womanly delicacy, as Ruth shrank away from his side.
“ Let us avoid talking of him, Glen,” she replied, with
gentle gravity. “It is very pleasant to me to meet you again ;
more pleasant still to find you frank, kind, and above petty
pride. But do you know my position in the ship?’’she in-
quired, with an unconscious touch of hauteur in her voice. “ You
may not understand I am a steerage passenger, but, in con-
sequence of the crowded state of the ship, have been appointed
assistant saloon stewardess.”


“ I know you are always a lady, always my old friend, ’
he answered, warmly. “If you were cleaning the passengers’
boots it would make no difference to me, except that I would
insist on helping you. And so you like my Laura, ’he said,
proudly, “ but you could not help yourself, she is such a
dear girl.”
“ I liked your Laura as soon as I saw her, Glen; she is un-
commonly lovely, but, like Mary of Argyle, ‘ it was not her
beauty afone that won me ’; her face only reveals the nature
within. You are to be congratulated on your choice of a wife,
Glen, for if ever a pure soul looked out of human eyes, one
looks out of your beloved’s blue orbs.”
“ Thank you, Mrs. Lancaster, for your kind words regarding
my future wife,” he responded, pressing her hand warmly. “ I
feel assured we have your good wishes for our happiness.”
“You have, indeed; but see, here comes the fair fiancee
herself.”
Laura came on deck at that moment —a vision of youthful
beauty, in her white serge dress, with blue ribbon round her
sailor hat. Fresh and fair, she looked, as a summer morning ;
no trace of her early langour lingered about her. Lifting his
hat courteously, the young doctor advanced to meet her, love
and pride beaming in his face. He brought her to where Mrs.
Lancaster had seated herself, explaining the long-standing
acquaintance between that lady and himself, and touching
laughingly on her present position in the ship.
“ She is a regular ‘ Jack-of-all-trades,’ Laura, for within my
own experience she has filled a variety of posts —organist,
surgeon’s assistant, ship’s cook, etc., etc. Do you remember
the shark you cooked so admirably?” he cried, with a joyous
laugh.
“ I should think I did,” replied Ruth, with an amused smile
at the recollection.
“Did you cook a shark, Mrs. Lancaster?” asked Laura,
innocently.
“ Yes, I really did, Miss Blanchard. It was once ”
“ Stop, stop,” interrupted the doctor ; “ let me tell the story.
This is how it came about, Laura : A good deal of excitement


had been displayed on board the “ Hypatia ” over the capture
of a large shark which, for three days, had followed the vessel.
The passengers, glad of a break in the monotony of a long
voyage, had procured a strong line and hook, baited with pork.
After many false attempts, my gentleman swallowed the bait,
hook and all, was drawn up on deck, quickly dispatched, and
carried forward by the sailors piece-meal. Our friend here,”
indicating Mrs. Lancaster by a turn of the head, “ begged a
piece, ‘to try experiments on, 5 she said. Well, she managed
to get those clever little hands of hers on a bit of his sharkship,
which she bore away to her den in mysterious silence. Next
morning she was early astir in the galley, for she had got round
the soft side of old Jack, the cook —that surly old worthy let
her do just whatever she pleased. ‘ Would your passengers
like fresh fish this morning? 5 queried she of Joe, the second-
cabin steward. ‘ I guess they would,’ Joe grinned knowingly.
‘ Then you may take them this dish, 5 said she, indicating one.
Joe took it away. 1 Halloa! fresh fish ! when were they caught? 5
asked one of Joe’s passengers. ‘ Some time yesterday,’ he re-
plied. ‘ I didn’t notice anybody fishing yesterday,’ remarked
another passenger. ‘ Perhaps you weren’t at the same end of
the ship at the time,’ suggested Joe. ‘ No, that’s true, 5 returned
the other; ‘ I was up helping to catch the shark. 5 Joe grinned,
but wisely remained silent. ‘lt is capital; give me another
piece,’ said the first speaker. ‘ I saw Mrs. Lancaster in the
galley,’ spoke up one, ‘so it 5 s sure to be nice.’ When the dish
was emptied, and breakfast almost over, this good lady entered
the cabin. ‘ Good morning, gentlemen,’ said she, cheerfully,
seating - herself; ‘ how did you enjoy the shark ?’ ‘ What shark ?’
cried they, aghast. ‘ That which I cooked for breakfast,’ she
replied. ‘Had we shark for breakfast this morning?’ tfeey
asked, with blanching faces. ‘You had,’ she answered; ‘did
you like it ?’ ‘ Oh, Mrs. Lancaster ! 5 —There was a sudden exodus,
a wild, frantic rush, and then ”
“ I found myself in sole possession of the deck-house cabin,”
put in Ruth, demurely; “the others had gone to pay tribute to
Neptune.”
An uproarious burst of merriment followed the doctor’s nar-
ration, for many of the passengers had gathered round our little
group, and joined in the general hilarity.


Ruth, mindful that she was an official on board, feared to
overstep her position ; she, therefore, seized an early opportunity
of inquiring if the children would like to listen to a story.
“ Bluebeard, tell us Bluebeard ! ” cried Chester, excitedly,
collecting all the children round her in great haste.
“ Who's Bluebeard V asked a fair, fragile little girl, with
long cuds of pale gold, who nestled close up to Ruth.
“ He was a horrid, ugly, old man, who had lots of wives,
and he knocked their heads off and sent them spinning round
the room,” answered Chester, who had a vivid appreciation of
the subject.
“ But he couldn’t have lots of wives,” argued the little girl;
“ could he, Mrs. Lancaster? Can’t people have only one wife ?”
“ I know a man that had two,” remarked one little boy,
triumphantly ; “ but people can’t have any more.”
“ Oh, but he had, though ; dozens and dozens of them ; and
he knocked their heads off just whenever he liked,” insisted
Chester, anxious that the autocrat should receive due acknow-
ledgment.
Fair little Nina looked quite horrified at this awful slaughter,
so Ruth thought it time to commence the story, to which the
children listened with breathless attention.
“Another, another, please Mrs. Lancaster,” they chorused,
when Bluebeard had met a just retribution.
“Puss in Boots,” shouted Chester; “tell us how the cat
went to the ogre’s castle, and how he turned into a lion and
frightened her up the clock, and how he turned into a mouse
and she ate him up.”
“ Chester ! Chester ! ” remonstrated Mrs, Lancaster ; “your
personalities are getting mixed.”
“ Who frightened who up the clock, and who ate who ? ”
queried little Nina, anxiously.
The day wore on pleasantly enough ; the passengers who
escaped sea-sickness amused themselves in various ways; the
less fortunate, amongst whom were Mrs. Marchmont and Mrs.
Bertram, desired nothing, poor souls, but to be left alone.


Mrs. Glover, too, suffered from mal-de-mer to a degree which
incapacitated her for conversation ; therefore, as she could in no
way allay her mother’s discomfort, Gertrude brought her knit-
ting on deck and sat on the saloon skylight seat. Quietly though
she sat there, not a movement of Laura Blanchard escaped her
watchful eyes ; but she could find nothing exceptional in the
young girl's behaviour to her lover, who, on his part, was most
devoted to her, and utterly unconscious of any treachery on
the part of his lady-love.
Nevertheless, Gertrude thought she might as well keep the
young lady under surveillance during the evening; she might
also try to discover the writer of that note. In her heart she
felt convinced the note was meant for none other than Laura
Blanchard, against whom her suspicious nature was up in arms.
She had no intention of bearing false witness against her neigh-
bour, but she knew of Miss Blanchard’s absence from the cabin,
had seen her agitation, and was well aware the girl’s figure, in
cloak and cap, might easily enough be mistaken in the darkness
for the spare form of Ruth Lancaster. Some one from the
saloon had evidently met a sailor in the bows; the weight of
evidence, circumstantial though it was, pointed strongly to Miss
Blanchard.
Darkness came on in due time. Miss Glover had seen
nothing; she wearied of sitting up there, and began to think
she might as well go below to the lighted cabin.
She pulled out her jewelled watch and looked at the time,
holding the watch over the skylight that she might distinguish
the figures on its dial. It was a few minutes after eight. Re-
membering that the sailor who wrote the note had been off duty
last night at that hour, she concluded this would be the most
likely time to mount guard over the unsuspicious girl ; so she
remained on deck.
Glenois and Laura sat on as if they never meant to move,
talking earnestly to each other in low voices. Meanwhile most
of the other passengers flocked to the social hall, from whence
ascended strains of martial music played by a skilled hand.
Miss Glover heard the round of applause which followed the
musician’s brilliant performance; then she heard a girl’s sweet,
high soprano trilling and carolling “The Rising of the Lark.”


Still she did not move, for her mind was made up to retain
her post of observation as long as the lovers remained on deck.
“ Are you cold, Laura darling?” she overheard the doctor
say at last. The loud “ encores ” from below drowned the
young girl’s answer, but Miss Glover saw Dr, Sanmaurez run
downstairs hastily, reappearing in a few minutes with Laura’s
fur-lined cloak and seal-skin hat. She stood up while he ten-
derly enveloped her slight form in the warm mantle.
“ I would do it myself, said the clerk. Amen, amen ” came
rollicking up through the open skylight with singular inaptitude.
They sat there, the watched and the watcher, till close upon
ten o’clock; then the young people rose and prepared to go below.
“ Are you sitting there all alone in the darkness, Miss
Glover ? ” asked Laura, catching sight of the silent figure on the
skylight.
“ Yes,” answered the other concisely.
“ I hope you have had pleasant thoughts to bear you com-
pany,” said the doctor, cheerfully.
“ I have been meditating over an anxious subject, doctor,
but have arrived at a conclusion.”
“ A favourable one, I hope, Miss Glover?”
“ Simply this,” she replied with peculiar, pointed emphasis,
“you will not catch a weasel asleep.”
“What a singular subject for meditation,” said Laura;
“rather eerie, is it not?”
“ If you are ready to go downstairs. Miss Glover, may I be
permitted to assist you ?” asked the doctor.
“Not yet,” she answered. “I shall come soon; do not
wait for me.”
So they left her alone upon the deck.
After a few moments she arose, drew near the top of the
stairs, from whence she commanded a view of the entrance to
the saloon, and stood there cautiously reconnoitring the lower
deck, “ They have evidently gone below for the night,” she
murmured in a pleased manner; “ I shall feel delighted if it
turns out there is nothing to detect.”
At that moment the clanging of the ship’s bell announced
changeof watch; she heard the steady tramp, tramp of men along


the lower decks, some going on, others going off duty. Like a
flash, it occurred to Gertrude Glover, standing there in the
darkness, herself invisible, because of the deep shadow in which
she stood, that the dog-watches took place between the hours of
eight and twelve —that, therefore, the man who was off duty at
eight last night would only be free at ten to-night.
The thought made her pause in her descent of the stairs ;
she drew back only just in time to avoid being seen by a woman
who emerged from the saloon doorway. Faint strains of music
were still audible from the social hall ; the musicians were
enjoying themselves too well to retire so early. But Gertrude
heard no sound save the loud beating of her heart, as, creeping
softly down the remaining steps, she glided away in the direction
taken by the cloaked figure, whom she easily identified as
Laura Blanchard.
Laura, all unconscious of being followed, hastened past the
engine-room down towards the steerage, climbed the steep ladder
steps to the forecastle, and walked straight up to the bows.
Gertrude followed as far as the steps, upon which she
lingered, fearing discovery if she approached nearer. From
her position she could distinctly see two figures, those of a man
and woman, standing together in the bows. No one else was
on the forecastle at that hour. They stood five or six minutes
in close, low, earnest conversation, of which the listener could
not distinguish a syllable, but when they moved towards the
steps whereon she stood, Gertrude turned and fled along to the
saloon.
She went straight into the cabin where her mother, having
wondered sorely why Gertrude had deserted her all the evening,
now lay in the profound sleep of exhaustion.
“ Poor mamma will think me strangely neglectful,” she
murmured, stooping to kiss the worn old face on the pillow ;
“but my mind is in such a turmoil, I really couldn’t attend to
her to-night. So lam right after all; more’s the pity ! That
girl is only fooling the young fellow, while anyone can see he
entirely believes in her. What ought I to do? It would be
shameful to stand by and see him deceived; yet I would earn
no thanks for interfering. I think I shall wait and see what
happens, for we still have six days on sea—so much may occur


in six days ; if he discovered her conduct for himself, without
any interference from me, it would be infinitely more satisfac-
tory. I cannot see how her conduct can be explained away—
secrecy stamps the transaction with guilt of some kind ; besides
he called her his darling in the note, and surely that is conclu-
sive evidence of a double game. Anyone who saw the doctor
and her together would say they were lovers ; she certainly
seems very fond of him, yet meets another man who calls her
his ‘ dearest,’ c his darling.’ Could it be possible for her to
have formed a school-girl attachment?—to have written foolish,
gushing letters to the object of her liking? If that be the case,
and the man a worthless fellow, he may hold control over her
by means of those very letters. He may threaten to show them
to Dr. Sanmaurez unless Laura meets him, when, perhaps, he
may extort money from her. I have read of such cases in
novels. But an able-bodied sailor! Where could Laura have
become on such intimate terms with a man of that class ?
Mercy ! who would think of such an intrigue in connection with
a simple, innocent-looking girl like Laura Blanchard?”
Meanwhile the unsuspecting Laura had gained her cabin,
where, with trembling fingers, she undid the fastenings of her
cloak and hung it on a peg. As Mrs. Bertram and her Aunt
Julia were both fast asleep, she undressed as noiselessly as
possible, to avoid waking them. By this time they were
accustomed to the clang-clang of the engines, which had, con-
sequently, ceased to disturb them.
“ How fortunate I was to-night,” thought l.aura. Glen left
me just when I wanted to get away —I knew he was safely dis-
posed of for half an hour, at least, in the smoking-room. What
a frightful strain on my nerves this journey is likely to prove !
What gave me power to control myself when Harry slipped
that note into my hand yesterday? A shriek rose to my lips
when I recognised him, in spite of the sailor’s garb and great
sou’-wester—how was I able to stifle it ? What a position for
the poor, dear fellow! If I could but persuade him to a bold
course of action, how happy I would be. I was always very
fond of Harry,” she meditated; then, as she climbed to her
bunk, she continued, “ But why put it in the past tense? lam
very fond of him still. Yes, indeed, Harry, lam very fond of
you still.”


CHAPTER XII.
A BROKEN ENGAGEMENT.
« r p 711 K “Waratera’s” passage had proved exceptionally
J fine—wind, weather, and sea favourable, —and she
was now within twenty-four hours of Melbourne.
*' She would pass Williamstown about eight next
morning, and the passengers counted upon landing
at the Flinder's street wharf by ten.
Most of them had fraternised amicably enough on the trip,
some pleasant musical evenings being the result. Some few of
the upper crust declined to associate with their neighbours, and
these were severely left alone with their dignity, but on the
whole, the “ Waratera’s” passengers had enjoyed each other’s
society. In no case had sea-sickness been very severe; most
of the ladies had been on deck for the last two or three days,
at least.
Mrs. Bertram and her friend were enjoying a smart prome-
nade on the poop-deck, followed closely by Mr. Bertram and
Chester. The pleasant nature of their animated conversation
was amply attested by the ringing laughter of the boy and
more subdued mirth of the elder persons.
Mrs. Marchmont sat apart in confidential talk with Mrs.
Glover, and the old lady’s face wore a comfortable, complacent
smile as she related to her younger companion all the hair-
breadth escapes she had experienced at different crises of her
existence. She had, according to her account, been providen-
tially plucked from the very jaws of death on various occasions,
and, as she evidently took pleasure in retailing these ex-
periences, kind-hearted Mrs. Marchmont listened patiently
to her account of the peculiar circumstances which had attended
the birth of Gertrude Glover.


That lady sat on a coil of rope right in the stern of the boat;
her knitting dropped in her lap, her idle hands resting aimlessly
upon it; her eyes fixed, unseeingly, on the track of white foam
which followed in the vessel's wake. A few gulls pursued the
ship on swift wings, or shot ahead with sudden alacrity, as if to
show the infinite superiority of the untaught skill of God when
compared with the genius of man, even after centuries of
civilisation and culture ; then, circling round on strong white
wings, they dropped into the seething waters for the scraps
from the cook’s galley, which their bright eyes discovered from
afar. Their weird, shrill cries mingled strangely with the hum
of human voices, peals of human laughter, sonorous clangingof
bells, and engines, and subdued tones of the organ ; strange,
that so great medley of sounds should emanate from one frail
craft, alone, far as the eye could reach, on the endless waste of
waters.
To none of these sounds, however, did Gertrude Glover
spare a thought; her mind was utterly engrossed with the
thought of Laura Blanchard’s worthlessness and treachery,
with the havoc her conduct was sure to play in the life of the
man who loved her.
“She will ruin his life,” Gertrude thought, sadly; “ he may
bid adieu to happiness the day he marries Laura. I wonder if
I ought to tell him anything? My mind is growing confused
on the subject—l scarcely know what to do. Upon one course I
am determined, that is, to do nothing anonymously. If I act
at all it shall be done in my own proper person, that the young
man may know whose finger points his way.”
It was close upon six o’clock ; the dinner bell would soon
ring ; but Gertrude’s plan of action was still undecided.
They all flocked down to their cabins when the dressing-bell
rang, and the company which assembled round the dinner-table
that last evening was a gay, laughing, merry one. Pweryone
was pleased with the voyage; Captain Clareson received
sufficient congratulations to last, as he laughingly protested, for
a month of Sundays. A concert was arranged to be held in
the social hall at eight o’clock, at which everyone was expected
to be present, and a very pleasant evening was anticipated.
Meanwhile, the ladies, after dinner, cloaked and wrapped.


ascended to the poop-deck, promenading with their cavaliers
until the bell should sound for the commencement of the con-
cert. The evening, though dark, was fine and mild ; the wit
and repartee of the marching couples drew forth bursts of
silvery merriment.
Dr. Sanmaurez was in high spirits—he, with Laura’s hand
drawn through his arm and tightly clasped in his, was the life
and soul of the merry-makers.
“ What a charming couple they make,” was the general
whispered comment.
In the very midst of their mirth the bell sounded sonorously,
causing them to flock merrily downstairs to the social hail,
where the enthusiastic organist was already playing Boildieu’s
overture, “ Belisario.”
“I must run down to my cabin for the song I promised to
sing, Glen,” Laura said, tripping away and leaving him alone.
As he looked fondly after her he little knew what bitter pain
was in store for him before he could hold Laura’s white hand
in his again.
He approached the taffrail and leaned upon it with folded
arms, thinking how smoothly the course of his love was run-
ning—thinking of his beautiful sweetheart; how by that hour
to-morrow he would have spoken to Dr. Blanchard—would
have laid his heart and possessions openly at Laura’s feet.
His heart was filled with a great love for her; he whispered to
himself passionately, “My darling, my darling ! I would serve
seven years for you as Jacob did for Rachael.” How innocent,
how transparent the nature of his fair young love ! so truthful, so
candid the clear gaze of her blue eyes ! so modest, so maidenly
her coy sly behaviour ! so lady-like her perfect, elegant bearing!
This was a wife for a man to be proud of—a woman to cherish
in his heart of hearts—a gentle, refined companion to sit at his
hearth. Like all good men, the young doctor felt he was about
to assume a great responsibility. This dear girl would leave
parents, home —all for him. She would place her whole future
in his hands with trustful love ; never, oh, so help him God,
would he give her cause to regret the day she linked her fate
with his. They would grow old and grey-headed together.


How tenderly he would guard this fair flower—how lovingly
deal with her—how gently
A hand was laid on his arm, and, turning quickly round, he
faced Gertrude Glover, The light from the skylight fell dimly
on her face, showing it white and agitated.
“ Dr. Sanmaurez,” she gasped, “mine is a thankless office;
but I cannot stand by any longer and see you deceived. I once,”
chokingly, “ had a lover —he deceived—me. Listen, if Laura
Blanchard leaves the social hall to-night, follow her unperceived.”
“ What do you mean. Miss Glover ? ” asked the young man,
in a stern voice.
“She is almost certain to slip away when she sees you
occupied ; watch, and if she does, follow her ; but do not let her
see you.”
“Are you mad, Miss Glover?” demanded the doctor,
hoarsely, his handsome face paling with anger.
“ I am not mad,” she hurriedly replied; “ do as I advise —
for your own sake,” she urged.
“ What would you insinuate ? Do you forget Miss Blanchard
is to be my wife, and any doubt of the propriety of her conduct
is an insult which it becomes my business to avenge? ” spoke
Dr. Sanmaurez, haughtily.
“ Then ask her,” retorted Miss Glover, trembling with excite-
ment, “ who is the man she meets at night on the forecastle, and
how comes he to call her his darling ? ”
“ It is a lie,” shouted Glenois, furiously ; “a malicious lie !
Were you not a woman I would make you remember the night
you uttered it.” He clenched his hands in impotent wrath.
“ I shall listen to no slanderous statements ; how dare you
make them to me?”
“ Can you read that ? ” she answered, defiantly, holding out
a piece of crumpled-looking paper.
With quick, scornful gesture he took it, and appeared about
to throw it overboard, but suddenly, changing his mind, put it
in his pocket, saying, “ I shall see to what length malice has
carried you.”
“ I am not malicious. Dr. Sanmaurez,” she replied; “ I
speak for your good. The very first night we sailed, Miss


Blanchard was missed from the cabin, but her aunt believed her
to be with you. When she appeared, white and anxious-look-
ing, she explained, in answer to Mrs. Marchmont’s question,
that she had gone forward alone to see the engines.” Gertrude
paused a moment to press her hand upon her wildly-beating
heart, and then resumed: “ When, later on, I accidentally picked
up that note in the passage, my suspicions were roused, and I
watched her. In putting you on your guard, I have no malicious
intention whatever; I simply do what appears to be my duty;
act now just as you choose.”
Before Glenois could stretch out a hand to detain her, she
hurried away and disappeared from his sight.
Dr. Saumaurez stood where she left him, transfixed with
anger and dismay. That his darling Laura should for a single
instant be the subject of unkind suspicion or remark filled him
with a longing to shelter her in his arms from every possible
danger. Not for a moment did he believe Miss Glover’s story.
“So very unlikely, too,” he muttered, wrathfully; “as if
Laura could be capable of low coquetry or intrigue! One need
only look into her pure eyes (God bless her !) to see her heart
is mine. His darling, too ! Confound that woman ! What on
earth does she mean ? What did she say ? If Laura left the
social hall to-night, I was to sneak after her? Bah! I would
insult my dear love by spying upon her actions. If she has gone
down to the forecastle at any time it must have been to relieve
the need of some poor wretch with sweet, unassuming charity.
But she ought not to have gone alone, for one cannot tell what
roughs may be on board, and according to jMrs, Lancaster’s
report, things are pretty rough down in the forecabin. I must
tell Laura not to go there alone; I shall gladly escort her when-
ever and whenever she wishes to go. Now, what is this con-
founded paper that Glover woman gave me ? ” said the poor
fellow, finding some slight relief in the use of these strong, and,
it must be confessed, somewhat rough expressions.
He drew from his pocket a box of wax vestas, struck one,
and, by its light, deciphered the contents of the note. As he
read, an anxious, puzzled look settled on his features ; his brown
eyes grew stern, his very lips white, but, making a great effort,
he pulled himself together.


“ There is not one word to implicate Laura except the fact
that she had been seeing the engines ; that, of course, is merely
a coincidence. Miss Glover declared she found this paper in
the passage ; it may belong to anyone in the ship. In short,”
drawing his breath with a deep inhalation, as if a mighty load
had been lifted from him, twisting up the scrap of paper and
putting it back into his pocket, “ in short, all this frightful busi-
ness turns out to be mere moonshine. Anyone glancing into
my darling’s pure face could tell she was no underhanded,
scheming coquette to play off one man against another. The
mere suspicion seems to me like sacrilege.
He began to recover from the shock he had received, but,
while determining to have a proper explanation with Miss
Glover before she left the ship next morning, decided to say
nothing about so unpleasant a matter to Laura in the meantime.
“ It would entirely spoil her trip, poor child,” he said to himself,
adding, with a laugh, “but when we are old married people I
shall tell her how she was suspected of flirting with an able-
bodied sailor on board the ‘ Waratera.’ She must have entered
the social hall,” he continued; “I hear her playing the prelude
to her song, and would know her charming touch amongst a
hundred players.”
Dr. Saumaurez left the poop-deck and entered the social hall
at the very moment his betrothed commenced in her clear, pure,
sweet soprano, “ I love my love, because I know my love loves
me.”
Her voice, which had been carefully cultivated, possessed a
thrilling sweetness, which found Its way to the hearts of the
listeners.
Lively, dashing sea-songs were given by other passengers,
young men with good baritone voices ; the audience took up the
choruses with great enthusiasm. A quiet-looking Scotch girl
astonished everybody by her passionate rendering of “ Annie
Laurie,” and, in response to an imperative encore, sang, in a
voice “ with a tear in it,” that most plaintive song, “The Land
o’ the Leal.”
Glenois Saumaurez, an ardent lover of music, sat entranced,
forgetful of all save the touching sweetness and pathos of these


homely songs, and responding to them with every fibre of his
being—
“ She’s a’ the world to me ;
And for bonnie Annie Laurie,
I’d lay me doon an’ dee.”
The refrain was in his ears ; it kept repeating itself in his
mind as he sat perfectly still, hardly daring to breathe lest the
spell should be broken.
But after a minute or two he roused himself and looked
around for Laura, meaning to escort her to a chair beside his
own. She was not there. She had left the room. Where had
she gone'l He glanced across at Miss Glover, who sat on the
opposite side of the social hall, her eyes fixed on him with a
meaning look.
He staggered blindly to his feet, for the room seemed to
turn round with him, erected his head in proud defiance, and
strode to the door.
“ Pshaw !” he muttered, angrily, “ that woman has surely
never tainted my mind. Laura has run downstairs on some
errand for her aunt, who sits over there near the door with Mrs.
Bertram. I shall bring her back immediately to show Miss
Glover how unworthy were her suspicions. When we are
married,” he thought, with some vexation, “ Laura must drop
Miss Glover’s acquaintance. How different we expected every-
thing to be ; my little love hoped to have had a friend in her,’'
he added, as the door of the social hall swung behind him.
He went straight downstairs to the ladies’ cabin, where
Mrs. O’Neil, Miss Tracy, and Mrs. Lancaster were chatting
merrily over their work.
Removing his hat, he asked if Miss Blanchard had
come down. They replied they had not seen her. “ But,”
suggested Mrs. O’Neil, “ she may be in her own cabin ; shall
I see if she is there ? ”
“ Do, please,” he answered, “and kindly tell her I am wait-
ing to take her to Mrs. Marchmont.”
Mrs. O’Neil obligingly left the cabin to execute her com-
mission, returning almost immediately to say Miss Blanchard’s
cabin was empty.


“ I think she must have gone on deck,” she surmised, “ for
her cloak is gone from its peg.”
With a courteous word of thanks Dr. Saumaurez turned
away ; he ascended to the poop, only to find it deserted. Grow-
ing anxious, he traversed the main deck, past the engines—past
the officers’ quarters—but still no sign of Laura. “ Where can
she be ?” he wondered uneasily, making his way to the bridge,
where Captain Clareson was keeping his watch. On the lower
bridge he encountered the first mate, released from duty, going
aft to join the singers in the social hall.
“ All deserted to-night, Mr. Thompson,’’ he said, with forced
pleasantry, pointing to the usually crowded decks.
“ Not entirely,” answered the mate with a comical laugh,
“ for I saw a woman climb to the forecastle a short time ago.
If rumour speaks truly,” he added, laughing, “ this isn’t the
first time she and her sailor boy has exchanged vows in that
romantic spot. Were it not for the concert to-night I wouldn’t
mind waylaying her for the fun of the thing. Are you coming
along, doctor?’’ he asked, moving towards the saloon.
“ Presently,” answered the young doctor. “ I have just
come out to have a breath of air and a look at the night.”
They parted—the mate went aft to join the merry party in
the concert-hall; the doctor forward to the bitter fate awaiting
him.
Unhesitatingly he climbed the ladder steps to the forecastle
—it was deserted—all was silence and darkness. The wind
had veered round—it was now dead against the ship’s
course —the water beat sobbingly against the bows. But, hush !
was not that a voice? —he paused to listen.
“ Only once more then, Laura ; you will promise to meet
me once more. I think I can promise all will be well.”
“ Hush, dear! do not mention my name.”
“Why! how cautious you are! Who is there to hear
it? I have no fear of anyone except your young doctor, and
you say he is safe in the concert-room. But you may be missed
if I detain you. You will be true to me, will you not ? ”


“ Indeed, I will. I shall meet you as arranged, but do not
attempt to see me in the morning for fear of attracting notice.
How we have met night after night on board this crowded ship
without exciting suspicion is little short of marvellous.”
“ Well, good-bye, dear ; give me one kiss, and I am off.”
The bewildered young doctor saw the man fold Laura’s
unresisting form in his arms—press a kiss on her unresisting
lips.
Then he released her, traversed the opposite side of the fore-
castle deck from that on which the doctor stood, and ran lightly
down the ladder steps to the main deck.
Laura stood where he had left her; the now infuriated
young fellow could see her press her white handkerchief to her
eyes. The sighing night winds stirred the long folds of her
dark cloak as she gathered it closely round her before turning
to leave. As she did so, a strong grasp was laid on her arm ;
she looked up with a cry of affright into the set, white face of her
lover.
“ Not so fast, Miss Blanchard, if you please,” he said, with
thick utterance, “ you and I have some accounts to square
before we leave this spot. lel 1 me,” he sard in authoritative
tones, “ who and what is this man who clasps my promised
wife in his arms ?—who receives her kisses ? Good God, what
does it all mean ?”
6he had shrunk from him with a low cry; had buried her
face in her hands ; she stood before him motionless, silent,
except for the low moan which broke from her stiff lips.
“ What does it mean, I repeat? Do you not consider an
explanation due to me?” he reiterated.
She raised her head suddenly as she asked, “ How long has
Dr. Saumaurez played the part of detective ? "
“ You shall not taunt me,” he hissed through his clenched
teeth. “ Half an hour ago I would have staked my life on
your guilelessness, but now—now what am I to think? I ask
again who is this man ?”
She looked steadily into his face. “ I cannot tell you,” she
answered sorrowfully, with despair in her voice ; “but, Glenois,


can you not trust me to do nothing wrong? I would trust you,
dear, through any and everything.”
“Trust me, then,” he cried eagerly, “ trust me, Laura, you
know right well I shall not he harsh with you. Thank God, you
can explain—you can set matters straight. Tell me who the
man is—how you come to meet him in this fashion. Your trust
shall not be betrayed, Laura.”
“You misunderstand me,” she said gently ; “ I cannot
explain what you saw, what you heard. Were I able to do so
there would be no need to ask your trust. I know I ask a
great deal, Glenois; yet I ask you to trust me without explana-
tion. Can you do that ? You know my love is yours —all
yours —no one else holds even the tiniest portion of my heart.”
“ So I thought,” said the unfortunate young man, “ but you
steal away at night to meet a man on the forecastle, I miss
you, and, fearing for your safety, search for and find you, but
how ? Great heavens, clasped in another man’s arms! —
returning his kisses ! And you ask me to trust you ! Laura,
what are you concealing?” he cried wildly; “if there be no
guilt why need there be concealment ? I heard you promise to
meet that man again—to be true to him ; how can you be true
to both of us? Yet I have your promise as well as he. What
does it all mean ?”
For a few moments they stood in silence, the doctor eagerly
awaiting an explanation of the mystery —Laura, sick with dread;
the shadow of coming trouble already upon her.
Then, finding she made no reply, Dr. Saumaurez drew him-
self up proudly to his full height. When he spoke again, his
voice was full of haughty scorn.
“ Since your promise was given to me only three weeks ago,
it follows that this man has a prior claim ; in common justice,
therefore, I surrender my claim to your hand. But, Miss Blan-
chard, why were you not satisfied with one man's love, one
man’s homage ? Why need you have destroyed my peace of
mind? why shaken my belief in woman’s goodness ? Was it to
gratify your vanity—your love of conquest? It may be wise
not to search too closely into your motives. But now, at least.


you are free to meet your lover openly ; I entirely withdraw all
pretensions to your hand.’’
Laura drew close to him and looked in his face with passionate
entreaty —through the gathering gloom he could see her deathly
pallor, the agonised appeal in her blue eyes. But he hardened
his heart against the coquette who had sacrificed his manhood
to her insatiable love of conquest.
The girl laid her hand appealingly on his arm —the hoarse
sound of her voice astonished herself—she was conscious of a
vague feeling of pity for herself, of commiseration for her un-
happy position.
“Glenois, let me call you by that name at least this once;
dearest Glenois, can you listen in patience ? Can you believe, when
I swear I am guiltless of wrong, to }'ou or to myself? Hitherto,
my protestations have been few ; the reserve of womanhood has
hindered m3' words, but now I tell you my heart will break if
you cast me off. Trust me, my love,’’ sobbed the girl, brokenly;
“trust me to clear up every doubt in time—in a few weeks at
most. My conduct wears a suspicious appearance ; mystery
surrounds my actions —but trust me through all, Glenois; be-
lieve that my heart is yours--all }'Ours. If I might but tell you
all,” she added, “ but he fears ”
Dr. Sanmaurez interrupted with a bitter laugh—“ No doubt
he does ! He fears the wrath of your dupe and his ! He is wise
to keep out of my reach.”
“ Glenois, have patience, have pity,” she ejaculated ; “ can
you not see how unwilling I am to keep the secret from you?
Can you not understand my abhorrence of the mystery which
comes between us? ”
“ Dispel it, then,” he answered, short!}'.
“Would that I could. But I have pledged my word to
maintain silence until released from my promise.”
“ Come here, Laura,” placing her in front of him in an
authoritative manner, “ look into my face and tell the honest
truth. Is your love really mine ? Can you swear that the words
you uttered three weeks ago, when, by the musk-scented creek
of the ‘ Hermitage,’ I revealed to you the innermost hopes of


my heart and asked you to be my wife, are as true to-day as
then ? Look into my eyes, Laura, and answer honestly.”
“ Glenois ! in fearless honesty I repeat them. I love you,
I love you with all my heart. Will you trust me, and, before
long - , these clouds shall have passed away.”
“ Yes, Laura, I believe you speak the truth. I will trust you
on condition that you will not meet that man again. Promise
you will not, and I shall wait trustfully and patiently for an
explanation of the mystery.”
“ I dare not promise that. I must meet him once again.”
“ Why need you ? ’ he said, hotly ; “ surely he has caused
us sufficient trouble already? Let me meet him, Laura. Nay, do
not start I shall treat him calmly, courteously; deliver any
message with which you entrust me, simply saying you decline
to meet him again.”
Oh, no, no ! cried the terrified girl, “ you must not say
that. That would never do; I must meet him myself.”
“You will, at least, permit me to accompany you?” said
Glenois, stiffly.
“ I cannot,” gasped Laura, in much agitation ; “ I must
go alone.”
“ Alone ! to meet this fellow whose endearments you permit !■
Do you deem me a fool, Miss Blanchard ? ” demanded the young
doctor, in rising anger.
“ You have promised to trust me, Glenois, and surely you will
trust me in everything?—you will trust me all in all?” she
asked, tremblingly.
I cannot do it, he answered, doggedly. “ You must choose
between this man and me. Wait a moment, though ?” he said,
as an idea entered his mind; “is this affair connected, even
remotely, with your school days? Is it a silly, girlish
ment of which you dread my knowledge ? If that be the case,
dismiss all fear from your mind, for I have nothing to do with
your early days; my claim on you dates back only three weeks.
Tell me, Laura, if it is anything of that sort. Have I gmessed:
rightly ? ”


“ No, Glen,” she answered, slowly, “ nothing at all like
that.”
“Then what, in Heaven’s name, is it? This is enough to
drive a man mad, and I cannot endure it any longer. To re-
turn to the question, do you persist in meeting this man again,
and unaccompanied? If so, you and I part here to-night.”
A dead silence ensued. The two stood with wildly-beating
hearts waiting for the words that were to unite or sever them.
The girl could not speak, though she made one or two efforts,,
but at last the doctor broke the oppressive silence.
“ What do you intend to do?” he questioned, with greater
coldness than he imagined.
“ I have promised,” answered Laura, in a very low voice.
“ Promised what ?” asked Glenois, shortly.
“To meet him once again. I must keep my word.”
“Very well, Miss Blanchard,” said Dr. Saumaurez, speaking
through his teeth, “you are the best judge of your own wishes.
I might upbraid you —expose your unworthy conduct—but I
shall leave you to your own reflections, which must sufficiently
condemn you. You can give whatever excuse you choose to
your parents and Mrs. Marchmont. I pray I may not meet
you again till I have learned to bear my trouble like a man.
We are both free, you and I, to order our future as we think
best.”
The young girl turned her face slowly round to him, as,
without one word, she slipped the costly diamond ring off her
finger, and held it out to him.
“Thanks,” he said, lightly, dropping it into his breast
pocket, and, with cool politeness, he asked leave to escort her
to the saloon end of the ship. The young man was profoundly
amazed at his own self-control, but the time was coming when
he would realise how bleak, bare, and unlovely his life was with-
out her who had made all things bright, all things fair by reason
of her love.
“Do not wait for me,” she said, in choking accents; “I
shall come by-and-bye.”
“ I do not like to leave you here, Miss Blanchard,” he hesi-
tated ; “ people will talk if you are seen here alone.”


“ What does it matter ?” she asked wearily ; “ I prefer to
remain/’
The truth was her limbs trembled under her so that she
could scarcely stand, and womanly delicacy forbade her to
cause a scene by fainting - on the way. While he urged her she
leaned heavily against the taffrail, shaking her head negatively,
and Dr. Saumaurez saw she wanted him to go.
I sha 1 send Mrs. Lancaster to you,’’he said as he quickly
descended the steps to the main deck,
Laura watched him disappear amongst the shadows, and
the great black tide of misery drew nearer and nearer till it
overwhelmed her heart with a sense of her unhappy position.
She staggered feebly towards a seat, but her strength was
exhausted by. the painful ordeal through which she had just
passed,
Glenois, my love ! Glenois, my love !” broke from her
white lips in low smothered tones of anguish ; then a blackness
that was not night came over sea and sky as the unhappy girl
fell forward on the deck unconscious.


CHAPTER XIII.
A BED OF PANSIES.
ARK WARWICK, was quite a puzzle to the
timmi fashionable ladies of Melbourne. He was tall,
J Inv/li Til re fi ,ie d. and sensitive; artistic in tempera-
J ment, yet of wiry constitution. He was a solicitor
owning an excellent business in town, and was
known to have "made his pile,” and had invested the money
safely as well as advantageously ; he owned a fine house at
Windsor, rode a thoroughbred horse, and drove a well-
appointed buggy.
Yet, in spite of all these advantages, he had reached the age
of forty-five, and was still a bachelor —the ladies could not
account for it.
The smoking-room, built out a couple of years ago in his
extensive garden, had been regarded as a sure sign that “ the
handsome residence of ‘Carr,’*' as auctioneers would have
advertised it, was about to receive a mistress who would natur-
ally object to the odour of smoke in her handsome rooms. But,
though slippers, smoking caps, and embroidered pouches amply
testified to the admiration of the fair sex for Mr. Warwick, no
mistress as yet reigned at “ Carr.”
Mrs. Meldon, the housekeeper, a decent, worthy widow
woman who had been ten years in his service, knew his tastes,
and could cook his cutlet to a turn, or devil the leg of a turkey
exactly to his liking —she and Maria, the housemaid, kept
“"Carr” in a state of high polish indoors; Jim Wilson, the
gardener, and Tom White, the groom, attended to the work out
of doors.


“ Carr ” amply sustained its claim to be considered one of
the choicest residences in Windsor. Long French windows
opened upon balconies upstairs, and upon cool-shaded, curtained
verandahs below. Ample evidence of wealth and cultured taste
could be seen within the rooms. Pictures (each one a gem) by
the best artists hung upon the walls; nor had Mr. Warwick
overlooked Colonial talent while making his selection. There
was an exquisite piece of native bush scenery, in which the dense
undergrowth, drooping creepers, and delicate ferns were repro-
duced with masterly skill. And there, where the light fell softly
upon it, was a wild New Zealand coast scene; the grim “ Law-
yer’s Head ” standing bold and dark against an ethereal sky,
the green waves curling round it and sending white foam in fly-
ing clouds up its rugged sides. The Parian statuettes, showing
whitely against rich dark curtains, the mirrors and inlaid cabi-
nets, the costly marquetry and rare Bohemian glassware, the
gleaming silver and sheeny satin—all plainly announced the
wealth and culture of the bachelor master of “ Carr.”
A fountain threw up Its glittering spray just outside the
verandah, and a number of goldfish disported in the white
marble basin which - received the fallen waters.”
From this fountain, a broad, well-kept lawn stretched down
to a belt of pine trees, thickly interplanted with laurel and other
shrubs, so as completely to conceal the wall which enclosed the
property.
A handsome iron gate opened upon a circuitous carriage-
drive leading to the front entrance of the house, where, just
within the verandah, the owner of “ Carr,” Mr. Warwick, was
comfortably stretched upon an Indian lounge. Although his
fingers kept the place in the periodical he had been reading, his
thoughts had wandered.
He had keen, clever, blue-grey eyes, and a remarkably
mobile, sensitive mouth. His hair, of peculiarly silken texture,
brushed off from an intellectual forehead, was of iron-grey
colour, as was the fine moustache shading his upper lip. Bushy,
dark eyebrows, gathered in a slight habitual frown, intensified
the keenness of his glance, whilst giving force and determina-
tion to his whole face. Certainly, Mark Warwick’s was a face
to attract attention, for it was the face of a man with other aims.


other thoughts in life than merely how to live well or enjoy him-
self—a good face, with great capacity for suffering—a good face,
giving indications of a generous, forgiving spirit.
Mark Warwick looked up from his periodical, and his eyes
rested on an object which had already attracted them two or
three times. Very simple and harmless the object; nothing
more nor less than a heart-shaped flower-plot near the steps
from the verandah, yet that innocent flower-plot drove from
the man’s mind every word he had read about the latest scien-
tific invention. Several different plots bordered and outlined
the trim, well-rolled lawn—some were diamond, some round,
some oval in shape—some contained verbenas, some roses,
others calcoclarias, and so on. This one alone interested Mark
Warwick—this heart-shaped plot filled with great dark purple
pansies.
“ How curious that Jim should fill that plot with pansies,”
he mused; “itis a singular coincidence. How Gertrude used
to love those great velvety ones. ‘ They look like faces, Mark,’
she used to say, ‘ in which I trace resemblances to the persons
I like.’ She watered them with a little green pan which I
filled and carried to and fro for her. In those happy youthful
days, when we were choosing a house, she insisted on having
one with a nice garden. ‘ I love flowers, Mark, and I shall have
a nice plot cut out in heart-shape, and filled with my favourites,
the pansies.’ I teased her by saying the rose was a finer flower,
but Gertrude retorted the rose had too pronounced a charm,
whereas the pansy fascinated by its subtle sweetness and modest
beauty. Ah, Gertrude ; how happy we were then ! lam an old
fellow now, but your place in my heart has never been filled up.
1 am here to-night in my lonely home, and for fifteen years your
vacant chair has stood beside my hearth. Where are you, Ger-
trude ? where are you, my dear ? Rumour said some years ago
you had gone to Scotland, and if that be so we are scarcely
likely to meet again. Who would have believed our lives
would turn out like this? And how suddenly everything
changed; one day we were betrothed lovers, busily planning
for our married life, the very next we had parted. Each inci-
dent of that sore time rises before my memory afresh—if I had
courage to rehearse them once more I might hit upon the missing
link. The trouble began on that day when Gertrude and I


returned to her home at Balaclava after choosing a suite of
furniture, in Melbourne, for the drawing-room in our house^
* Such a lovely suite; such a bargain ! ’ she cried delightedly to
her mother, when we arrived at Mrs. Glover’s home. l lt was
ordered from London expressly for Sir Isaac Telford, but he
did not think it sufficiently showy for his magnificent rooms,
when he saw it, and chose another. We have secured it,
mother, at a very reasonable figure, and deem ourselves fortu-
nate.’ And in a joyous, light-hearted way she waltzed from
the room to remove her walking attire. I sat with Mrs. Glover
till Gertrude returned, and we went over our list of estimates,
greatly pleased to find we were some pounds in hand above our
expectations. A few friendly neighbours gathered in after
dinner to chat, see the wedding presents, and enjoy a little
music. Caroline Maxey, who was to be Gertrude’s bridesmaid,
came out by train from Carlton. Carrie was engaged to young
George Panton in our office, but Panton’s father set his face
against their marriage, for he wanted his son to marry the
daughter of Milne, the rich successful digger. But George
was not to be coerced into a distasteful marriage; he and
Caroline, however, agreed to keep their own counsel until
they could see some way out of the difficulty. He had
hopes of a capital situation as managing clerk in a large
firm, but believed his stubborn father would turn him out of
Panton and Co.’s if he got a hint of the engagement between
him and Miss Maxey. He dreaded losing his present situation,
whilst the other was only prospective. Anyhow, when I left the
office that day to accompany Gertrude to the furnishing ware-
houses, Panton whispered to me he would not be able to go out to
Mrs. Glover’s, at Balaclava, that evening, for his father had asked
his assistance in making up the books at home. ‘ Tell Carrie I’m
awfully disappointed, but it can’t be helped,’ he said, dolefully.
* You’ll see her to the train, Mark, wont you, when she leaves?
Give her this note and little parcel from me, which contains a gold
locket I wish her to wear. Will you deliverthem, Mark, old fellow?
I am kept jolly close at home these times, and may not have a
chance of seeing Carrie for an age.’ I accepted the commission
readily enough, for I knew and liked both Carrie and George ;
if ever two human beings were adapted to each other they were
these two, whose subsequent happy marriage always fulfils my


idea of a perfect union. But to go on with my reminiscences
—During the evening we had music ; Gertrude sang a favourite
duet with me, ‘ The Wind and the Harp’; then the tables were
pushed aside, the floor cleared for dancing. My darling looked
sweet and lovely in her white dress, a bunch of her favourite
pansies clustering at her throat. I claimed a waltz with my
betrothed, but she laughingly refused, saying she was hostess,
and must play for the others. ‘ Get Carrie to dance with you/
she said ; ‘ she is not like herself to-night—she looks so sad.”
So I asked Miss Maxey for the dance, and, after a few whirls,
drew her outside into a tiny conservatory, in which a single chair
was concealed by a tall palm and numerous large ferns. Be-
lieving ourselves alone, I drew from my breast pocket George’s
letter and parcel. ‘ This is for you, Carrie/ said I, in a low
voice, ‘you can read the letter at your leisure.’ She coloured
brightly as she thanked me. ‘ But that is not all,’ I continued,
‘here is a packet containing a locket which you are desired to
wear.’ Carrie’s face glowed with delight as she took the locket
from its case, opened it, and saw George’s miniature framed
within. ‘ Oh, thank you, thank you,’ she whispered, raising my
hand to her lips with a pretty, caressing gesture. ‘ How good
a friend you are to us, Mark. I shall wear the locket to-night
that you may tell him to-morrow I did so.’ ‘ Allow me,’ I
offered, seeing her place its slender chain round her neck.
Fastening the clasp for her, I raised the happy, blushing face
by placing my hand under her chin. ‘ We shall be like brothers
and sisters, Carrie, George and you, Gertrude and I; in her
dear name and my own, I wish you every joy and blessing life
can hold,’ Stooping, I laid a brotherly kiss on her fair fore-
head ; then, satisfied at having faithfully fulfilled my friend’s
commission, offered my arm to lead her back into the draw-
ing-room. As she rose from her chair, the folds of her long,
pale, blue dress overturned one of the flower pots, and, knowing
how Gertrude loved and prized her plants, I stooped and replaced
it with the utmost care. Nothing my darling cared for could
be lightly treated by me. On re-entering the drawing-room we
found Gertrude absent, the company dispersing. Carrie got
her wraps, and we waited a short time, expecting Gertrude or
her mother to appear, but as train time drew near and they
seemed to be still detained, I undertook to deliver Carrie’s


‘Good-night,’ and saw her to the Balaclava station. When the
train moved off, I walked briskly back to Mrs. Glover’s, hoping
to have a pleasant half-hour with my betrothed, but Mrs. Glover
told me Gertrude was not well, and had retired. The dear,
little mother was considerably agitated, giving her message
rather incoherently, alarming me into thinking my love was
seriously and suddenly seized with illness. Re-assured on
that point, yet somewhat damped by the curtness of the
announcement, I retired to my lodgings, but next day
called to enquire for Gertrude. My betrothed was still
indisposed, but, learning she was not confined to bed, I
asked to see her. Then, to my amazement, her mother
spoke out and told me Gertrude had taken offence at some-
thing in my conduct, and positively declined to have anything
further to say to me. At first I thought she was playing a
practical joke on me, but too soon found she was in downright
sober earnest. Conscious of rectitude, of devoted attachment
to Gertrude Glover, I insisted on an interview, an explana-
tion. It was useless ; she was determined not to see me, to give
me a chance of exculpating myself. Wondering greatly what
had wrought this sudden change in the girl whose love for me
had shone .through her brown eyes only the previous day, whose
heart was mine beyond the shadow of a doubt, I wrote a note
asking an explanation or an interview. Her answer simply
broke off our engagement without assigning any cause what-
ever ; the engagement ring I had placed on the finger of my
betrothed wife was enclosed in the envelope. My hot pride was
roused by this unjust treatment, and in bitter anger I left the
house, threw up my situation in Panton and Co’s., and sailed
for America within the week. But my love for Gertrude
Glover was too deep-rooted to be crushed out in such arbitrary
fashion ; so after my first wild wrath had cooled I wrote her a
quiet, calm letter, professing unchanged regard for her—urging
her to tell me the cause of her displeasure—to be candid with
m e —imploring her not to wreck her own happiness and mine.
I his despatched, I awaited her answer. No answer came ; but
my own letter was returned with these ominous words in red
scribbled across it ; ‘ Left the place; address not known.’ She
was gone; vanished completely, leaving no trace behind. My
enquiries have been to no purpose; she passed out of my life


and I have neither seen nor heard of her from that day to this.
Things have prospered with me since then, though I have taken
but little pleasure in my growing prosperity. No other woman
has ever taken Gertrude’s place in my heart, and I don’t suppose
anyone ever will now. She was the one woman I ever loved. My
God, how I loved that girl who ruined my life, and I know no more
than Adam for why ! I wonder where she is ; if she is married ;
if she has got a good husband! Oh ! hang it ! even at this
time of day I don’t like to think of her as married.”
Mr. Warwick rose rather hastily out of his comfortable
Indian chair, and a few hasty strides took him down to the
heart-shaped plot.
Stooping over the pansies, he carefully selected a very dark
purple blossom, which he placed in the button-hole of his coat.
A tender, dreamy smile played about his mouth as he lingered
amongst the flowers, culling one here, another there.
But his mood suddenly changed ; the dreamy smile gave
place to one of angry impatience. Crushing the flowers in his
strong white hand he flung them down, saying bitterly : “ What
■is it to me if she be married or single ? Our parting was her
deliberate work, and I ought to be more of a man than whine
after her; but when all’s said and done, there’s no fool like an
old fool.”
With a heavy frown on his face he strode into the house.
A number of letters, bills, and papers, which had come by
post, lay on a morocco-covered secretary awaiting his attention.
He tore open the letters carelessly. “Umph! A meeting of the
shareholders of the Building Society, etc.” He flung that aside
contemptuously and lifted another.
“ The undersigned who has recently been reduced to great
poverty in consequence of severe paralytic shocks in his
arms, etc.”
“ Now, does the man think me a fool quoth Mark War-
wick ; “ how did he manage to write that begging letter with
two paralyzed arms ? ”
He tossed it and several others of the same class to one side,
and selected from those remaining a square, white envelope of
thick ribbed paper, addressed in a woman’s hand.


“ Mr. and Mrs. Bowring request the pleasure of Mr. War-
wick’s company at their soiree dansante on Wednesday, the
2ist Sept., at eight o’clock p.m. N.B.—ln honour of Miss
Bowring’s twentieth birthday.”
“ So pretty Eve Bowring is twenty on Wednesday week,”
murmured Mark. “ Why, how the time flies. When Gertrude
and I were engaged she was only a pretty wee tot of about five,
and now she’s quite a marriagable young lady. I suppose I
must accept this invitation, however little I desire society, for
Tom Bowring is a downright good fellow and a staunch friend.
If I absent myself he and Mrs. Bowring might consider I was
slighting their little girl. So I’ll go. And I might as well take
Eve a birthday gift. What shall it be? A nice locket would
please her. Ah, no !” he added quickly, “that would remind
me too vividly of Carry Maxey’s locket, and that last happy
evening with Gertrude. Oh Gertrude, my lost love ! ’ he cried
yearningly, “ what came between us ? After fifteen years of
separation, dear, I long for the touch of your little soft hand,
the sound of your dear voice.”
Mr. Warwick sat awhile in silence, his face covered by his
hands, but at last rose, and, pushing back his chair, decided :
“A handsome gold watch will delight Eve’s little heart, gratify
her parents, and bring no untimely memories to me. God bless
Tom’s little daughter, and grant the girl her heart’s desire.”
The sound of clattering feet upon the gravel announced the
appearance of his thoroughbred horse. His heart must have
been strangely stirred by sad memories, for, as he rode off
Melbourne-wards, the horse’s feet seemed to keep time to certain,
rhythmic words in his brain—
“ Oh I for the touch of a vanished hand.
And the sound of a voice that is still,”


CHAPTER XIV.
IN THE CHINESE TEMPLE.
the ship “Waratera” was being moored
alon g s >de the Flinders street wharf, her chief
X|yfiy|| steward, Mr. Roy, approached Mrs. Lancaster
jJ- flip kj as she stood in the ladies’ cabin, packing some
I* J c hina cups and saucers very carefully into a locker.
“ We have had a splendid trip, Mrs. Lancaster; but I dare-
say you’re not sorry to be at the wharf.”
“I am both glad and sorry, Mr, Roy. Mv love for my
brother wars against my love of the sea, so I am torn between
conflicting emotions,” laughed Ruth.
“ I suppose there are not many breakages amongst these
articles ? Some trips play old Harry with the dishes, but we
can’t have lost much this time.”
“ Not a single cup nor saucer. I have had entire charge of
the china, so am in a position to guarantee the fact.”
“ That’s right, Mrs. Lancaster. By-the-bye, have you no
idea of turning to the sea for a living?”
“I ? Oh, no, Mr. Roy ! lam very comfortable on shore.
Besides, I understand women find great difficulty in obtaining
stewardesses’ situations.”
“ That difficulty would not stand in your way,’’ he replied
quickly, “for we have seen what you can do, and, let me tell
you, not one in a hundred could have acted like you. Generally
speaking, new hands are more trouble than worth for a trip or
two, but no one could tell you were not an old hand at the
business. None of us ever had to tell you anything ; you kept
your eyes open, and did whatever presented itself.”


“Ah, but I am an old voyager, you know, Mr. Roy; that
makes a great difference—travelling is second nature to me,”
“Come now, Mrs. Lancaster, say you will take to the sea,
and I’ll get you a billet at once. Be persuaded, now ; it’s really
a shame for the like of you to stop on shore.”
“ I am grateful for your kindness, and some da} 7 may be
glad to accept it, for no one knows what the future holds, and
it is well to be able to earn a living whether on sea or shore,
but in the meantime, I must keep to my post.”
“Wtll, if I am still around when you change your mind,
you may refer to me, for you are thoroughly cut out for a sea-
faring life. Now that your cups are packed, Mrs. Lancaster,
your labours are over; but really, I consider you are entitled to
a salary.”
“ Oh, nonsense, Mr. Roy, sure I’ve been spoilt with kind-
ness. I have enjoyed myself immensely, and have been twenty
times happier flying round at my work than idling away my
time.”
“ You'll return with us by-and-bye, wont you?”
“Of course I will. I intend to wait for the * Waratera,’ on
which I have found such comfortable quarters and good friends.
But if free now, I would like to go on deck and look out for my
brother. So good-bye, Mr. Roy. Thank you again for your
kindness.”
“ Good-bye. I wish you a pleasant holiday, and hope to
have you back with us at the end of it.”
He shook hands with Ruth warmly, and left the cabin. The
woman’s eyes filled with grateful tears as she looked after him.
“ There has been a conspiracy to treat me well; everyone
has been good to me,” she murmured, thinking what a pleasant
experience had been hers since, a total stranger to every official,
she had stepped on board the “ Waratera” at Dunedin.
“ My holiday commences from to-day,” she added brightly;
“ so, for a time, I bid adieu to Mrs. Lancaster, the Waitaramoa
housekeeper, and re-introduce to the Melbourne world the long-
lost Ruth Lancaster, whose brilliant career ten years back must
still be remembered.”


Attiring herself in accordance with the social position she
expected to occupy in Melbourne, she ascended to the deck, from
which vantage ground she quickly distinguished the slight form
of her beloved brother amidst the crowd on the wharf.
When they met —this brother and sister who had been
parted eight long years—who so fondly loved one another—•
upon whom, in the interval, Time had set his grim mark—they
had not a word to say. Their Scottish reticence forbade out-
ward demonstration, but they clasped each other’s hands in the
silence of deep emotion, their humid eyes told what their
tongues were too proudly distant to utter. “Charlie !” “ Ruth!’’
Nothing more for some moments. Poor Ruth tried hard to
gulp down a certain big ball which kept rising in uncomfortable
fashion in her throat. Then Charlie asked some commonplace
questions concerning the “ Waratera’s ” passage, and the
meeting, so long desired by both brother and sister, was an
accomplished fact.
Alice Field warmly welcomed her new sister to her pretty
home at Windsor, and Ruth was delighted with her brother’s
charming little dark-eyed wife, whom she soon found to be a
dainty, affectionate little lad}'.
With Bohemian adaptability, Ruth very soon fell into the
routine of Mr. and Mrs. Field’s every-day life, finding a com-
plete and grateful change in being cared for and waited upon
—she, whose lonely life in Waitaramoa was spent in waiting
upon Mr. Jura and his friends, with only piano or palette ta
vary her occupation, but from morning to night ceaselessly
occupied.
“ Do rest, Ruth,” pled Mr. Jura, at times; “you will wear
yourself out with work. Take things easily ; the world will not
go done before you.”
“ I cannot,” she would answer, wearily ; “ a very demon of
unrest possesses me : the remains, no doubt, of my old wander-
ing life.”
“ But you are happy here, Ruth, are you not ?”
“ As happy as it is in my nature to be—yet a whiff of salt-
laden seabreeze fills my veins with a fever of longing. The sight
of rosy children clinging round their mothers’ necks arouses all


my old desire to fly from the face of my trouble from country
to country, or wear out my strength by multiplied duties—by
sheer hard work.”
“ Poor Ruth,” the kindly old man would answer, consolingly;
“ yours has been a hard lot.”
Mr. and Mrs. Field were sociable people, and had a large
circle of acquaintances, by whom Ruth was warmly received, and
many of her own former friends extended a cordial welcome to
the lonely woman whose mournful history had oozed oat some*
how during the long years of her absence. Thus she was re-
ceived with kindly hospitality and friendly warmth by many
of the most exclusive leaders of Melbourne fashionable society.
What a change for the quondam housekeeper ?
Mrs. Lancaster utterly refused to sail under false colours.
“ I have given up public life, and for the last eight years have
earned my livelihood as housekeeper to an elderly gentleman.
I worked my saloon passage on the c \Varatera, as the passage
money was too much for me to pay. ’ Then would follow a
humorous account of life in the steerage, and, somehow, Ruth
found she was no loser in the long run through honestly acknow-
ledging her social position. For, after all, colonists who have
not come out “to better themselves ” are few and far between,
and, in these new lands, every man and woman knows what is
meant by a hard struggle. Successful colonists are, for the most
part, they who have fought a hand-to-hand fight with hardship
and poverty ; they who, failing in one line, tried another ; they
who roughed it and swagged it in the early days ; who drank
their tea out of a “ billy,” and sweetened it with honest toil;
they who, in fact, by sheer indomitable courage, energy, and
shrewdness climbed, one by one, the toilsome rungs of the
ladder Success. Some, it is true, began life in a most humble
fashion ; many, women especially, as domestic servants, who,
having attained wealth and position, spoil everything by aping
society airs, and endeavouring to root out of people s minas the
very thing which is their chief recommendation, viz., that their
present position is entirely owing to the prudence, diligence, and
ability with which they filled humbler spheres.
Ruth Lancaster avoided this mistake, and had no cause to
complain of her reception either by her own or her brother s


friends. She was soon in a perfect whirl of amusements.
Parties, balls, theatres, concerts, outings of all kinds followed
each other in quick succession.
Her New Zealand friends and fellow-passengers had dis-
persed to different quarters of the feverishly gay city.
The Bertrams occupied apartments in a Carlton hotel, from
whence they visited old acquaintances or roamed about in
untrammelled freedom.
Mrs. and Miss Glover boarded with a clergyman’s widow in
Victoria Parade.
Mrs. Blanchard had met her sister and daughter at the
wharf and taken them straight home to her handsome house at
Hotham.
Dr. Saumaurez had not been seen by any of his fellow-
passengers since he left the ship ; —he had disappeared in some
mysterious fashion and no one was in a position to say when or
whither he had departed.
With that single exception, the little group of travellers who
had become so intimately acquainted on board the “ Waratera”
were more closely associated than ever in the Melbourne social
world.
Mrs. Blanchard and Mrs. Lancaster were not long together
without making a most singular discovery. From a chance
word heedlessly dropped it was found both were well acquainted
with dear “ Auld Reekie.” Further researches proved that both
had been partly educated in Edinburgh ; still more astonishing,
both had boarded at the same seminary for young ladies in
Hillside Crescent; presently they recollected each other’s faces,
each other’s maiden names.
“Ruth Field!” “Amy Weir!”
They stood on the Flinder’s street wharf, hand clasping hand.
For the moment, no longer women with worn faces, who had
found the world a rough abiding place, who bore on their
features scars received in the stern battle of life. No ; they
were, for the moment, happy, rosy-faced girls, full of fun and
frolic, looking forward with eager curiosity to the big world
outside their school walls; longing to take places in the great
life race ; fretting, with youthful impetuosity, for the hour which


would free them for ever from the trammels of school. How
quickly the minds of these two women travelled back over the
years that had intervened between then and now.
With a deep sigh, Ruth came back to reality, to her painful
position as an unloved wife, living respectably, no doubt, but apart
from her husband; and, at the same instant, her old school-
fellow and friend, Amy, turned anxiously to the fair, sorrow-
stricken, young girl, who twined soft arms round her mother’s
neck, and sobbed bitter tears upon her mother’s breast.
The two ladies parted with kindly expressions and mutual
hopes that they might be enabled to see a good deal of one
another during Ruth’s stay in Victoria.
“ I had not the least idea,” declared Mrs. Blanchard, “that
the famous Mrs. Lancaster, who sent Melbourne crazy ten
years ago, was my old friend, Ruth Field, with whom, in true
girl fashion, I used to quarrel bitterly one day, only to swear
eternal friendship the next.”
Harold Lancaster's name was not tabooed in the Field
household. Ruth held many a conversation with Charles and
Alice about her unhappy husband.
“ If I knew he was living soberly and honestly, I would
gladly return to him, and if he only earned sixpence a day I
would earn another sixpence,’' she would say, tearfully. “I am
so lonely, Charlie ; for though dear old Mr. Jura has my sincere
esteem and gratitude, he cannot fill my woman’s heart. There
are times when I lie awake sobbing the whole livelong night
over my ruined life—when no word comes to my fevered lips
but the one incessant cry, ‘ Harold, Harold ! ’ ”
Charlie could not comfort his sister otherwise than by ad-
vising her to settle in Melbourne with Alice and him. But
Ruth shook her head, declaring it would be unfair to Alice to
have another person sharing the home with them; young couples
being best alone.
“ Besides, Charlie, though Alice and you are all that is
kind, my heart craves for Harold, and refuses to be satisfied
by any other."
“ Why, Ruth, do you care for the fellow still ? ”
“I do not know; I think I do,” she answered hesitatingly.


The pretty home at Windsor, and Mr. and Mrs. Field’s
innocent pride in it, filled her heart with delight. The husband
and wife escorted her from room to room, telling how they had
planned this, contrived that; how this was a wedding present,
that an idea of their own. Her hearty admiration greatly
pleased them, and Alice went into raptures over the gifts her
sister-in-law had brought with her from New Zealand, and
which were mostly artistic efforts in oils and water-colours.
These were duly arranged by the little wife with exquisite effect,
and she retired a few steps to criticise. The few steps took her
close up to her husband, whose arm (as naughty Ruth slyly
observed) stole round her waist in unobtrusive fashion.
“What a lucky girl I am,” she sighed contentedly.
“You are, indeed, Alice,” said Charlie sympathisingly.
“ First you get a fine, handsome husband, and then all these
pretty ”
But somehow the sentence was never completed.
One day at dinner Ruth rallied her brother upon his
marriage. “ How did you bring yourself up to the mark,
Charlie? I didn’t think you had courage enough to ask a girl
to marry you ? ” she joked.
“ Oh, I hadn’t much to do with it,” he replied with a pawky
look at Alice. “ She took me down to the lagoon one day, where
I sat on a seat like a martyr, while the mosquitoes fattened and
flourished, and when I got back she told me it was all settled.”
“ Oh, you rascal,” cried Alice, “ I wish you were round at
this side of the table. Don’t believe him, Ruth; he was dying
to get me.”
“ Alice got a terrible fright,” he continued in a serio-comic
tone, with a tell-tale twinkle in his eye, but very grave expres-
sion of countenance. “ The fact is,” he whispered in what is
generally known as a stage whisper, “ she took me out one
evening to bespeak a parson for the ceremony. The first she
took me to was engaged; at the next house the parson was
absent on a holiday; the next had another wedding on the very
day she had fixed; but at last she took me to the Rev. Dr.
Power, and he agreed to tie us up. I met him in Bourke street
the other day,” continued Charlie, meditatively, “and he didn’t


recognise me, but I wasn’t astonished, for no doubt he was
ashamed to look me in the face alter the mean trick he served
me. Oh,” he said very gravely, “ I assure you Alice got a
terrible fright ; she thought she wouldn’t get me after all.”
“ Ruth,” laughed Alice, “make Charlie go outside. He
really isn’t fit to sit at the table.”
“ You have take n the burden upon yourself,” rejoined Ruth,
“so I hand him over to you, but if he belonged to me I should
box his ears for his impertinence.”
“What do you mean?” inquired the delinquent in an
aggrieved tone of voice. “If she hadn’t taken the matter in
hand she mightn’t have got me, and then where would she have
been ? ”
“He is incorrigible,” laughed his sister. “ Alice,you made
a poor bargain.”
“ I know,” retorted she brightly, “ but I took him out of
pure pity, for nobody else would have him.”
And the married couple looked across the table at each
other with a peculiar look of entire content —of complete under-
standing.
That they were happy, no one could doubt. Ruth’s keen,
experienced eye noted the various signs of mutual affection;
the floral remembrance Charlie brought home from the city to
his wife; the comfortable slippers awaiting him; the prettily laid
dinner-table; the tiny blossom from yesterday’s bouquet nest-
ling amongst the lace at Alice’s throat. A hundred daily tokens
comforted her anxious mind concerning her darling brother’s
happiness, and she thanked Heaven that his matrimonial lines
had fallen in pleasant places.
Meanwhile she was enjoying herself in Melbourne. There
was so much to see, so many old acquaintances to look up, so
many new arts and objects to study, that the time sped past
all too quickly.
One eventful evening they arranged to go to the Exhibition ;
so, having dined at six, they went into town by rail, and rode in
the cable tram-cars to the Exhibition gates.


They lingered but a short time in the art galleries,
proposing to return during the daytime to study the pictures
leisurely.
The two ladies were greatly delighted with the displays of
Bohemian and other rare glass ware. Mr. Field sought out
the publishers' cases before looking with critical interest at the
machinery.
The little party had made arrangements to meet Mr. and
Mrs. Bertram in the Victorian Ladies’ court at eight o’clock,
so, as the large Exhibition clock indicated ten minutes to that
hour, they wended their way towards the place de rendezvous.
The Bertrams being true to their appointment, the aug-
mented party presently strolled through the various courts
branching off the “ Avenue of Nations.”
The two gentlemen, with the boy, went on in front, conversing
-about the erudic doctrine of Freetrade, its pros, and cons., while
the three ladies lingered in front of a stand of exquisite lace,
which occupied a rather unfavourable position through being
placed in one of the most retired courts, quite away from the main
avenue. They bent over it with critical admiration, observing
the delicacy of texture, intricacy of design, and, just then, when
they were entirely engrossed with the merits of the lace, they
were joined by Chester Waters, who had already made several
excursions between them and the gentlemen, allying himself,
for the nonce, with whichever party best pleased him. He had
found Freetrade rather uninteresting, so returned to the feminine
party, hoping their conversation might be more on a level with
his young intellect.
Lace, however, proved quite as unattractive to him as Free-
trade, so his sharp young eyes went roving down the courts and
avenues in quest of something more appropriate to his years
than either of the afore-mentioned subjects.
And he certainly saw something which interested him, for
his hand relaxed his hold of his aunt’s gown, and he stood apart
gazing down one of the side avenues with a strange look of
wonder in his clear, hazel eyes.
“ What are you gazing at, Chester ? ’ asked his aunt, turning
at last from the stand of lace, and observing the boy shade his
-eyes with his hand and look fixedly down the minor avenue.


“I am watching Miss Blanchard,” answered he. “ I wonder
what she is doing there.”
“ Miss Blanchard ! ” echoed Mrs. Lancaster, turning her
surprised head towards the boy. “ Where is she ?”
“She’s along there—in that little wooden house,” replied
Chester, pointing with his finger to a small, square court fitted
up as a Chinese Temple, and hung with brilliant, many-coloured
draperies.
“ Who is with her ? ” asked Mrs. Field.
“ Nobody,” said Chester, laconically.
“You must have mistaken someone else for her,” declared
his aunt.
“No, I didn’t, aunt,” he persisted. “Fm sure it was Miss
Blanchard.”
“ But how can you be sure, dear? ” reasoned Mrs. Bertram.
“ I’m quite sure, auntie,” he insisted, “for she wore the
little hat and long cloak she used to wear on the ship at nights.
There she is ! ” he rejoined, eagerly, catching his aunt’s sleeve
in an excited way; “ there she is ! ”
“ I don’t see anyone,” declared Mrs. Bertram.
“ Quick, quick ! ” he cried, “ or she will go away again.”
At the same moment a dark figure appeared in the doorway
of the Chinese Temple.
“You have capital eyesight; you are quite right, Chester,”'
Mrs. Field said to the boy.
Mrs. Bertram looked attentively at the cloaked figure, but
said nothing.
“She appears to be quite alone,” said Ruth Lancaster;
“ surely she must have wandered from her party.”
The figure once more re-entered the Temple.
“She appears undecided about something,” Ruth declared.
“ Perhaps she doesn't know which way to take, or what to do.
I think I had better go along for her and invite her to join us.
until her own friends turn up. What do you think ? ” she ap-
pealed to the other ladies.


“The best thing to do,” Mrs. Bertram assented.
“ She may be awkwardly placed in losing her companions,”
said kind little Mrs. Field.
“ Very well, I 11 go to her at once, and you can follow,”
Ruth decided, starting off in Laura’s direction, there and then.
“ Run after your uncle and Mr. Field, Chester, and ask them
to turn back, or we shall presently find ourselves in the same
predicament in this enormous place, exclaimed Mrs. Bertram,
and, nothing loath, the boy ran off after the gentleman.
“Have you met Miss Blanchard, Mrs. Field?” inquired
Mrs. Bertram of her companion as the two ladies slowly sauntered
after Mrs. Lancaster.
“ Oh, yes,” she responded, “ Laura and her mother called
on Mrs, Lancaster at my house very shortly after my sister’s
arrival in Melbourne. Mrs. Blanchard turns out to be an old
schoolfellow of Ruth’s. Did you ever know so strange a coin-
cidence ? ”
“ My dear, one hears of so many strange coincidences in life
that one doubts if the world is really so big after all. You should
hear Mr. Bertram talk of his experiences in India and the
Malay Peninsula.”
“ How I should like to travel,” exclaimed Mrs. Field en-
thusiastically. “ Nothing can be more delightful than to travel
about from place to place, as Ruth has done. How she can
settle down in an out-of-the-way place likeWaitaramoa is beyond
my comprehension ; nor do I understand how a woman of her
talents and accomplishments can content herself in the position
of a mere housekeeper.”
“ Ah, Mrs. Field, you may depend upon it there is more in
her case than meets the eye. 1 remember well when she first
came to Waitaramoa, the sensation she caused in the district,
and the general dismay when her health suddenly broke down
in the very midst of her work. I do not know much of her
personal history, beyond the fact of her unfortunate marriage,
but she is our nearest neighbour in Waitaramoa, and both Mr.
Bertram and myself have a deep respect and admiration for
Mr. Jura. I know he highly values Mrs. Lancaster’s services,
and possibly she may find greater happiness in a quiet home


than in roaming about the world like Noah’s raven, without a
spot whereon to rest.
“ Perhaps so, Mrs. Bertram ; yet her brother and I cannot
help wishing she would emerge from obscurity and occupy her
rightful position in society. But whenever we hint such a
thing, Ruth gives such a peculiarly sad look at us that we
hastily quit the subject.”
“ Depend upon it, my dear, she knows what she is about.
Who knows but what she may deem it safer to remain quiet in
Waitaramoa than, by travelling about, risk again meeting Mr.
Lancaster? You may be quite sure she has some plan of her
own, or she would not remain Mr. Jura’s housekeeper, when she
could so easily take a position in society.”
By this time, Mrs. Lancaster had reached the Chinese
Temple, and was about to pass through its curtained doorway,
when, suddenly swerving, as if struck by a blow, she hastily
turned aside into another court.
“See, see !” cried Alice Field quickly; “ Ruth has turned
away! That cannot be Miss Blanchard after all. We had
better hurry on, and reach my sister. I wonder she didn’t turn
back to meet us when she discovered her mistake.”
They accordingly quickened their pace. In passing the
Chinese Temple, both ladies glanced in through the doorway,
wondering innocently whose was the figure so greatly resem-
bling Laura Blanchard as to deceive both Mrs. Lancaster and
Chester.
The curtains over the doorway were partially disarranged,
as if by some hasty hand; but, looking into the room, the two
ladies were much amazed to see Laura herself talking so
earnestly to a man—from whose hand she received a letter—as
to be totally unaware of their proximity.
Her face was very thin and pale; dark circles surrounded
her eyes ; her mouth showed lines of care and pain; she looked
the mere shadow of the bright, beautiful girl who had sailed
from Dunedin a happy prospective bride.
Mrs. Bertram and Mrs. Field both knew Laura was in
trouble of some kind, and that her marriage was broken off.


but nothing further, for the girl had kept her own counsel*
confiding in no one, only saying at home Dr. Saumaurez and
she had disagreed on board ship to a serious extent, and
marriage was no longer desired by either of them.
With true womanly instinct Mrs. Blanchard guessed all was
not well with her girl; but, with rare delicacy, forbore to force
the confidence which was not freely tendered.
So Laura’s frequent meetings with a man on board ship
were kept secret still from all save the two whom fate had in-
volved in the affair—viz., Dr. Saumaurez and Miss Glover.
Mrs. Bertram and her friend, knowing nothing of Laura’s
conduct at sea, were thunderstruck at seeing her keep what
was evidently an appointment with a man in the garb of a
labourer.
Shocked and horrified, they hurried past, without one word
of comment, towards the place into which Mrs. Lancaster had
turned aside; it proved to be a furnishing department con-
taining handsome specimens of the upholsterer’s art which at
any other time would have called forth expressions of admira-
tion.
But they had no time to admire the exquisite work, the
elegant couches, the graceful fanteuils; for a hasty glance
revealed the form of Mrs. Lancaster on a low, cushioned seat,
her head fallen back, her hands helplessly dropped by her side,
her whole appearance lifeless, inert.
With a sharp anguished cry, Alice ran to her sister-in-law’s
side, unfastened the neck of her dress, chafed her cold hands
between her own warm palms, and kissed the pale, clay-cold
lips, while Mrs. Bertram ran to hasten the approach of the two
gentlemen.
A little brandy was forced between her pale lips by her
startled brother, and Mrs. Bertram’s smelling-salts brought into
requisition. By-and-bye the heavy lids opened, and Ruth sat
up looking around her with agonised inquiry.
“ Where is he ? ” she asked excitedly.
“Who? dear Ruth,” Charlie Field said soothingly.


“ Harold, my Harold,” was the unexpected reply.
The little group glanced at each other in dismay.
“ Delirious ” they whispered.
“Where is Harold?” she repeated, impatiently; “I want
him. Bring him here.”
“ Ruth, darling, come home,” whispered Alice, drawing the
flushed face upon her breast. “ Come home first, and we shall
talk it over. Get a cab, Charlie,” she cried to her husband, as
Ruth's face paled again, and an expression of disappointment
and despair passed over it. But with an effort she rallied and
sat up, declaring herself better.
“Were you over-tired, dear?” questioned kindly Mrs.
Bertram.
“ I think so,” answered Ruth wearily.
“ Perhaps you were overcome by the heat,” suggested Mr.
Bertram.
“ Yes ; perhaps so,” she assented.
“ Were you alarmed by anything, Ruth ? ” asked her brother,
with gentle persistence. “ Did you see anything to startle you? ”
“ What could I see here to startle me, Charlie ?”
“ True,” he replied, thoughtfully ; yet you were attacked so
•suddenly that I cannot account for it.”
Mr. Bertram and her brother each gave Mrs. Lancaster an
arm towards the Exhibition exit. Their way lay past the
Chinese Temple, through the doorway of which Ruth sent a
terrified glance, tightening her hold of her companions’ arms at
the same instant. But it was empty. Ruth breathed freely
again, and some colour stole back to her face.
But long after Mr. and Mrs. Field had retired to rest that
night, believing her quite recovered, Ruth tossed and turned on
her comfortable bed, moaning, and groaning out her secret
trouble to the still night around her.
For, in the man who had met Laura Blanchard in the
Chinese Temple, and from whose hand the young girl had
received a letter; the man to whom she had talked so earnestly
as to be unaware of the approach of her friends; in spite of the


labourer’s coarse dress, the eight years of absence, of hardship
and rough living, Ruth had recognised, with a curious thrill,
the identical man to whom she had given heart and hand in the
far-away days of youth—her husband, Harold Lancaster.
Who shall say love is not deathless ?
Who shall say the marriage bond may be snapped at will ?
This man had wrung his wife’s heart till, in sheer despera-
tion, she fled from him ; this man had squandered her hard-won
earnings in drinking saloons and at gambling tables ; he had
followed her from the Old World to the New, and she alone
could tell what she had suffered at his hands ; but, in spite of
all, she knew by the bitter pang which darted through her heart
at the sight of him that she loved him still, and would love him
until death.


CHAPTER XV.
A BIRTHDAY PARTY.
fN the death of their parents, Rose and Alice Duke
found a comfortable happy home with their elder
sister, Mona, who, with her good husband, Tom
Bowring, had filled the places of father and mother,
as well as those of sister and brother to the young
orphaned girls. From Mr, and Mrs. Bowring’s house Charles
Field had married his wife, who began her new life with their
good wishes and counsels to cheer her, their handsome gifts to
beautify her home. Warm friendship, close intercourse, was
kept up between the two households; Rose Duke spent her
time pretty equally between her two married sisters, Mona
Bowring and Alice Field, from both of whom her lovable
nature ensured a welcome.
Mona Bowring was one of the most popular leaders of
Melbourne society; people were eager to secure invitations to
her hospitable table, or receive cards for her evening parties at
“ Edina,” as her beautiful villa at Windsor was called.
She issued invitations for a soiree dansante on the twentieth
birthday of her fair young daughter. Eve, who, on that occasion,
stood by her mother’s side in the large drawing-room receiving
the guests.
Eve Bowring was of the Mary Anderson type of beauty,
and looked her very best in a dress of white silk, covered with
soft rich lace, looped up with bunches of blue forget-me-nots
(the colour of her eyes). A cluster of the same modest flowers
nestled in her corsage.
Her mother looked stately in rich brocade; diamonds flashed
in her hair and glittered upon her fingers.


Mrs. Field’s pale pink mervielleaux enhanced the dark
splendour of her eyes ; the dead gold ornaments she wore were
wedding gifts.
Mrs. Lancaster was quietly attired in black lace; Miss Duke
looked regal in black and amber, with flashing rubies.
Miss Glover wore violet silk, softened and enriched by old lace
of great value ; two or three dark purple pansies were artisti-
cally grouped upon her dress and in her hair.
All the Melbourne fashionable world was present. Mr. and
Mrs. Carlisle, of Rutledge House; Mr. and Mrs. Hartington, of
Langdon, were there; each with a fair young daughter ; while
Mr. Sanderson, the great brass-founder, was present with his
wife and stalwart sons. It was a brilliant gathering.
A band, engaged to supply music, was hidden behind a
perfect bower of greenery, amongst which many-coloured fairy
lamps were interspersed with delicious effect. Already the
witching strains of the “ Blue Danube” floated softly through
the room.
Eve Bowring’s little satin-slippered foot impatiently tapped
time to the waltz; with pleading eyes she looked into her
mother's face for permission to join the dancers.
Mrs. Blanchard and her daughter were also present, and
none of the guests seemed able to decide which was belle of the
evening—the pretty Eve with her blue forget-me-nots, or the
pale, pensive beauty with the far-away look in her eyes.
“ Miss Blanchard doesn’t seem to be aware of one’s presence,”
remarked a dapper little gentleman at the conclusion of a dance,
in which Laura had been his partner. “By Jove, you know,
she gives me the idea of having her thoughts fixed on something
else than dancing.”
Nevertheless, the young lady in silvery gauze, with sprays
of white narcissus and maiden hair, was in great request among
the gentlemen.
“You look very pale, my love,” said Mrs. Blanchard when
Laura had been brought to her side at the close of a quadrille;
“ are you enjoying yourself? ”
“ Oh, yes, mamma,” she answered, listlessly, toying with the
feathers of her pretty white fan ; “it is a very pleasant party.
Do you not think so? ”


“ I do, my dear. Mrs. Bowring's soirees are always delight-
ful, and all the world seems here to-night.”
Laura only sighed in reply, as the words of an old ballad
rose in her mind,
“ What made the ball so fine ?
Robin Adair.
What made th’ assembly shine ?
Robin was there.”
Mrs. Blanchard heard the girl’s heavy sigh, and looked
keenly at her daughter.
“Do not over-fatigue yourself, Laura. Somehow you appear
to have left your strength in New Zealand, for you have never
been quite well since your return.”
“ I am perfectly well, mamma,” she hastily declared, a flush
mounting into her face, then as quickly receding, to be followed
by extreme pallor. “Do not talk of fatigue at the very com-
mencement of the evening, especially as I am engaged for every
dance. Indeed, I mean to enjoy myself.”
In another minute she was claimed by her partner, and took
her place in a set of Lancers composed of Eve Bowring, Mrs.
Field, and Miss Glover with their respective partners.
Mrs. Blanchard sighed deeply at Laura’s evident attempt
at gaiety.
“ Poor Laura tries very hard to conceal her grief, but its
traces are visible on her face. How thin and white she grows,
poor child ! Her father is quite anxious about her, and talks
of tonics. But I know very well she is fretting after Glenois
Saumaurez. I wonder what caused the rupture ? It is a
mysterious business. They were so well suited to each other,
too, and had known each other so well that I cannot imagine
what came between them. It is not as if Laura were a flirt, or
in any degree capable of flighty or unwomanly conduct. In
that event I could understand a denouement taking place be-
tween them, but Laura and Glenois have always been wrapped
up in one another, and her father and I both saw he would
have asked for her when formerly in Melbourne had he been
established in a good practice at that time. Julia has evidently
no idea what went wrong, for no woman ever looked more
thunderstruck than she when told of his disappearance imme


diately the ‘ Waratera ’ arrived. Poor Julia has never quite
recovered her self-possession ; she fancies I must blame her in
some degree for Laura’s unhappiness. But I don’t. For Julia
Marchmont loves my daughter very dearly, and, if possible,
would prevent the wind from blowing too roughly on her cheek.
I don’t see how any of us can help Laura in this matter. She
is a woman and must ‘ dree her weird.’ By-the-bye,” she
added with a sudden thought, “ I wonder whether it could be
Harry Hazeldine who parted them ? Surely ”
“ Mrs. Marchmont is not here to-night, Mrs. Blanchard,”
remarked Mrs. Glover, unconsciously interrupting Mrs. Blan-
chard’s train of thought.
Mindful of social duties, Mrs. Blanchard stifled maternal
anxiety and turned genially towards Mrs. Glover, who was
seated beside her, watching the flitting forms of the dancers.
“ No, Mrs. Glover,” she replied ; “Julia sent apologies and
remained at home with my husband, who is also unable to be
present to-night. Doctors can never be depended upon for
entertainments, you know; some ‘case’ is sure to crop up at
the very time they are about to start. And, unfortunately, my
sister is not in very good spirits for an entertainment like this.”
“ Fretting for her good husband, perhaps,” suggested the
little, old lady.
“ Oh, I don’t know if it is that,” laughed Mrs. Blanchard >
“ surely she may contrive to exist a short time without him.
But she certainly is not in the mood for gaiety."
“Isn’t that a pretty scene?” continued Mrs. Glover, indi-
cating the ball-ioom by a slight nod.
“Very, very pretty,” was the reply.
But the scene upon which the two ladies gazed admiringly
was more than pretty: it was brilliant. The beauty of fair
women; their glittering jewels ; the melodious strains of music,
glowing loveliness of flowers, and soft waxen lights—all tended
to enhance the charm of the hour.
Just then Mrs. Bowring, released from the duty of welcoming
her guests, availed herself of a pause in the dancing to cross
vthe room to where the two ladies sat.


“ I am the bearer of a request to you, Mrs. Blanchard,” she
announced, smilingly.
“ Indeed, what is it ? ”
“A gentleman, who is a particular friend of Tom’s, desires
the honour of an introduction. May I present him ?”
“ Certainly, Mrs. Bowring. I shall be pleased to make the
acquaintance of a friend of Mr. Bowring’s.”
“ May I present him to you also, Mrs. Glover V
“ By all means,” assented the old lady.
“ I know you will like this gentleman ; he is an immense
favourite in our family, but rarely goes into society. Tom and
I are positive he came here to-night just out of compliment to
Eve, and he has brought her such a handsome birthday gift
that the child is beside herself with delight.”
Away she went and presently returned with an aristocratic-
looking man of about forty-five.
“ Rather too old a suitor for Eve,” thought Mrs. Blanchard
to herself. But she need not have disturbed herself, for a very
different romance was beginning to fill the girl’s innocent
heart, whereas the man who approached with Mrs. Bowring had
lived his life, loved and lost, many years before.
“Allow me to present Mr. Mark Warwick, Mrs. Blanchard ;
Mr. Mark Warwick, Mrs. Glover,” said Mrs. Bowring with
stately courtesy. “I shall leave these ladies in your charge,
Mr. Warwick, trusting you to obtain refreshments for them, and
to entertain them to the utmost of your ability.”
With smile and bow she moved away.
Mr. Warwick stood in front of the ladies in an awkward,
helpless sort of fashion, a curiously bewildered expression and
strange pallor on his face.
He stammered out a few confused words to Mrs. Blanchard,
who looked at him somewhat enquiringly, for his evident
embarrassment surprised her ; then, turning suddenly to Mrs.
Glover, he stretched out both hands to her.
“ Can you be the Mrs. Glover, of Balaclava, whom I knew
in years gone by ? ” he asked in a low voice of agitation.


" Mark Warwick! ” exclaimed the old lady, sitting down
abruptly, as if overpowered by an unexpected blow. “Is it
really my dear boy, Mark, who stands before me ?”
“I have startled you, I fear. Indeed, I was startled myself
at meeting you so unexpectedly. I could not believe my eyes.”
“ Where have you been all these long years, Mark ? I often
wondered what had become of you.”
“Nay, Mrs. Glover, rather what had become of you? I
have sought for you without ceasing, but never dreamt of finding
you here to-night. And Miss Glover—Gertrude?” he ques-
tioned anxiously.
“ She is here, too, Mark; she will come to my side when
the dance is over.”
“ Is she much changed ?” he asked with suppressed eager-
ness.
“ Greatly changed ; remember the number of years which
have elapsed since you last saw her.”
“ Is she—is—is she still ?”
But the well-bred old lady had recollected herself, and
turned to Mrs. Blanchard with an apology for monopolising
Mr. Warwick's attention and conversation. She explained he
had been a dear friend many years ago ; their meeting was a
great surprise to both ; she had not even hoped to hear of Mr.
Warwick in Victoria, believing him to have left the colonies
many years previously.
“ Pray do not apologise,” Mrs. Blanchard cordially in-
sisted ; “do not mind me at all. I know how charming it is to
meet an old friend unexpectedly, and how much has to be asked
and told on both sides. But I fear you wont have much peace
to talk for some time,” she added, laughingly, “for here come
the dancers.”
Laura came to her mother, sank listlessly into a seat at her
side, unfurled her white fan of ostrich feathers, and used it with
graceful abandon.
“ You are tired, my love. Sit out the next dance beside me.’
Laura agreed; her heart was not in the place, nor amongst
the people—hospitable, gracious, though they were. A certain


pair of brown eyes, a certain head of curly fair hair seen across
the crowd would have changed the evening’s enjoyment for her.
But the brown eyes were not there ; the fair curls were no longer
her lawful property, and the girl’s heart was sick and sore with
the sense of loss.
“ Even if he were here,” she thought dejectedly, “ he would
not dance with me, nor talk as he used to talk to me, nor linger
by my side. How changed the world is to me since Glenois
passed out of my life ! How bitter the thought that now, when
I am free to tell him all, he will never approach to hear my
story ! Had he only trusted me, we might be so happy now,
instead of being parted. Still he was sufficiently justified,” she
continued, trying, womanlike, to excuse her lover even to her-
self ; “ perhaps, had our positions been reversed, I would have
acted in the same way. No, no, I would not; I could not doubt
Glenois ! When I gave him my heart, I gave him all—both
love and trust; perfect trust, for was I not willing to leave my
beloved parents, my happy home, and trust him with the control
of my whole life? I suppose a man is different. A woman’s
fate is very hard though. I cannot seek Glenois to explain,
and he is sure to avoid me, so very likely we shall never meet
again. Oh, the pain at my heart! Ah, Harry, what a price I
have had to pay for you ! ”
On the plea of fatigue, she excused herself to the partner
who came to claim her for the next dance; he, acting on his
privilege, sat down beside the fair girl, engaging her and her
mother in animated conversation.
Miss Glover had been refreshing herself with a cup of tea.
Her escort now brought her to her mother’s side, and withdrew
to claim another partner.
Mrs. Glover’s face was turned from her, for she was con-
versing with a gentleman who stood at her other hand—in
fact, between Mrs. Blanchard and herself. However, as Ger-
trude quietly sat down, her mother turned round, and, before
Miss Glover realised her position, she was gazing, with strained
white face and startled eyes, into the keen blue-grey orbs of
Mark Warwick.


CHAPTER XVI.
UNDER THE ACACIAS.
fOR a moment the atmosphere seemed dense enough to
stifle her; the room whirled and the dancers floated about
in a black mist; but Gertrude Glover retained sufficient
self-control to keep from fainting, and recovered to
hear the voice she had once loved so well utter regret
for having startled her. She became aware her hand was held
in Mr. Warwick’s —that his eyes were upon her, noticing her
confusion. Her pride was roused. What need had she to
tremble before him ? None whatever, she assured herself; and
yet there she was behaving like a guilty person. But he must
not flatter himself her agitation was due to his sudden re-
appearance.
So, recovering composure, she spoke to him courteously, but
coldly ; with calm dignity withdrew her hand from his clasp.
He looked at her hungrily, his whole heart in his eyes.
“ I have not danced for many years, Miss Glover,” he began,
with a strange tremor in his voice, “ but to-night—this waltz—
for old acquaintance sake ? ”
“ Excuse ” she stopped, abruptly, for she caught her
mother’s eye furtively watching her, and not even her mother
should guess her agitation. She rose calmly and accepted his
arm. After this dance she could plead fatigue and go home,
but in the meantime she must convince him of her utter in-
difference to his presence or absence. She must put it beyond
his power to laugh over her emotion with his wife. Perhaps his
wife was also present. Well, she would see them dancing
together, and would understand they were merely old acquain-
tances.


They joined the dancers, but Gertrude soon found she had
over rated her strength, for her breath came thick and fast, and
the unpleasant stifled feeling returned ; so much so that, after
two or three turns, she was forced to pause. She was incapable of
continuing the dance,yetwas at theoppositesideof the room from
where her mother sat. How should she reach her? What should
she do ? A tightening in her chest; a curious din in her ears; a
deathly coldness stealing over her frame. What did these sen-
sations forbode? Was she about to exhibit herself as a forlorn,
love-sick creature before this man and his wife ? What a fund of
amusement she would afford them ! Oh, the shame ! the agony !
With a low groan she clutched at her throat, gasping out
hoarsely, “ I—am—choking—give—me—air ! ”
Quick as thought Mr. Warwick grasped the situation, and
whirled her out of the room into the small conservatory which
opened upon it.
The man’s face flushed hotly. Here, at last, was his long-
sought opportunity ! Now he would learn why this woman had
ruined his life. But if he placed his half-conscious burden in
the conservatory they would certainly be disturbed, and he had
waited so long—so very long.
Still encircling her waist with his strong arm, he bore her
out into the cool garden, placed her on a rustic seat at one side of
the lawn, over which the acacias flung their sheltering branches,
and rushed back into the house for a wrap and glass of water,
which he brought to her before she realised where she was or
what had happened.
Tenderly placing the wrap about her shoulders, he sat down
beside her, awaiting in silence the moment when she should
regain composure.
His heart beat loudly; each deep-drawn breath betokened
the disturbance of the man’s nature.
There she was, at his side, the woman he loved ; he knew,
after all these long years of trial and separation, this was the
one woman in the whole world for him. Would she listen to
him? Would she explain what had come between them in the
old far-off days when they were plighted lovers ?


He glanced at her. The night was calm and clear; there was
sufficient light to show him how fair she was still; no longer,
certainly, the beautiful girl who had captured his heart, but a
sweet-faced, gentle woman, marvellously fair in his eyes.
But hush ! she is recovering! the next few moments would
be eventful for him, for he would learn his fate during them—
he would know if he might remain by her side, at least as an
old friend, or if she would send him away again with cruel, cold
words.
Yet when Miss Glover at last broke the silence her words
were strangely commonplace.
“ I think the heat of the room rather overpowered me; the
climate here is so much warmer than that to which we are
accustomed in New Zealand.”
He guessed she did not wish to acknowledge the sight of him
had in any way upset her equanimity, and, respecting her
womanly delicacy, accepted the suggestion thrown out.
“ The Victorian is very much warmer than the New Zealand
climate,” he assented. “ Have you been in that colony long.
Miss Glover ?”
“ Ever since 1 mean for some years. Mamma and I are
only paying a flying visit to Melbourne to see the Exhibition.”
“Then I am indeed fortunate in meeting you here to-night.
In accepting Mrs. Bowring’s invitation I little thought what
was in store for me. I have often wondered whether we should
ever meet again, and how. How well Mrs. Glover looks; the
years have not dealt heavily with her.”
“Nor with you, though your hair is getting grey; so is
mine,” she said with a little, constrained laugh.
“You are not so changed but that I would know you
wherever I met you,” he answered gently.
They sat a few moments in silence, while Gertrude nerved
herself to put a question she knew he would expect, and which
she determined to put at any cost to herself.
“ How is your wife ?” was her abrupt question.
She was unprepared for her companion’s violent start.


“ My what?” he asked brusquely, in a strange, hard voice.
“ Mrs. Warwick—your wife,” repeated Gertrude, confusedly.
“ Is she—is she well ? ”
“ I am not married,” he answered, shortly.
An awkward silence intervened—Gertrude flushed scarlet in
the darkness, as she endured a perfect agony of shame and
annoyance.
“What shall I do,” she thought, in dire distress ; “what
possessed me to ask such a question without previously assuring
myself of his marriage? But I never doubted the fact. Now I
am in a pretty pickle; I neither know what to say nor do.”
So, in the silence of desperation, she awaited a return of
composure before requesting Mr. Warwick to escort her to the
house.
But he soon broke the oppressive silence with these words,
spoken slowly and deliberately :
“ I have no wife. The only woman I ever loved, the only
woman I ever coveted for a wife fled from me without rhyme or
reason, and for fifteen years I have sought her in vain. And
now—do women know of what men’s hearts are made ?—now
she sits by my side coolly asking after my wife’s health.”
“ I thought—l understood —I believed you were married.”
“ May I ask to whom I was supposed to have tendered a
hand without a heart ?”
“I thought,” she answered brokenly, “you had married
Carrie Maxey.”
“ Carrie Maxey,” he repeated in bewilderment; “what put
her into your head ? She married George Panton fourteen
years ago, and is the mother of eight children, to whom her
devotion is proverbial. Carrie Maxey ! What a curious idea.”
Again came a short spell of silence, during which Gertrude’s
heart grew sick with dread, and felt like lead in her bosom.
Could it be possible she had wrongfully judged Mark
Warwick? And these long, loveless, fifteen years ? What if
she had herself only to blame for them ? What if she had
thrown away her life’s happiness on a mere chimera? But no;


that was impossible. For she had listened to no tales, no un-
kind words against Mark. She had acted on what she saw—
what could never be explained away except by proving her
eyesight false.
But Mr. Warwick’s voice broke in upon her meditations.
“ How came you to think I had married Carrie? I cannot
imagine why you have associated her name with mine, though
Mr. and Mrs. Panton are my very dearest friends—the only
ones to whom I ever talk of the past. Many a time when the
young Panton’s were in bed, Carrie, her husband George, and
I have sat far into the night talking about you, Gertrude, and
wondering how we had so offended you as to cause you to
disappear from amongst us without word or sign. For many
years they expected a letter from you, but at last became con-
vinced they must have caused you some dire offence. To them,
as to me, your conduct in that past time has always been
mysterious, most mysterious.”
“It need not have been mysterious to you, Mr. Warwick.
Surely your own conscience tells you why I went away.”
“ My conscience tells me nothing, Gertrude; but,” said Mr.
Warwick, earnestly, leaning towards her and taking her cold
hand in his, “ tell me candidly what caused you to throw me
over. You were to have been my wife, dear, and if ever man
loved woman I loved you with my whole heart. Why did you
act so cruelly? What had I done to offend you? Why did
you send me adrift ? ”
“I thought,” she answered in a low whisper; “I thought
you loved Carrie Maxey."
“ Carrie Maxey again ! ” he reiterated. “ How could you
suppose such a thing? You, not Carrie, were my betrothed
wife.”
“ If Carrie were nothing to you, Mr. Warwick, how can you
explain your behaviour to her?”
“ What do you mean, Gertrude ? I never treated Carrie
Maxey otherwise than with the deepest respect.”
“ Were you obliged to kiss her to prove your great respect?”


“ I have no recollection of ever kissing her,” he asserted,
with an odd laugh.
“ I saw you, Mark Warwick,” cried Gertrude, excitedly,
and at the same time you secretly gave her a letter and a locket
containing your photograph. I saw you place the latter round
her neck, and then raise her face to yours and kiss her. Had
anyone told me of your treachery I would not have believed,
but my own eyes saw all that before I fled in wild despair to my
room. Why need you have deceived me ? You surely knew I
would not hold you in unwilling bonds.”
“ Why did you refuse to see me, Gertrude?”
“ Because I had seen the man I was about to marry without
his mask, and I knew all the explanations in the world could
not undo what I had seen ; could not wipe out my recollections
of your faithlessness.”
Mark Warwick rose from his seat in strong excitement.
“ Gertrude Glover, he said, solemnly, “ you have done me
a bitter, foul wrong. Before Heaven, I swear I have never,
even in thought, committed any underhand or unmanly action,
I now remember all that passed that evening between Caroline
Maxey and myself. Nay, sit still, Miss Glover; you must
listen to me. At the time when you supposed she honoured
me with her affection, Caroline was engaged to George Panton,
who is now her husband. Old Mr. Panton had set his face
strongly against the match, and, until his opposition could be
overcome, the young people kept their engagement secret.
You may remember he was unable to be at your mother’s house
that night, sending an excuse by me. His disappointment was
very great, for few opportunities of seeing Carrie presented
themselves about that time, and on that evening he had pro-
mised himself the pleasure of placing round her neck a locket
containing his portrait. Ah ! you start at that ! wait a moment.
Unable to be present, he confided the whole circumstances to
me, his chum, and asked me to deliver his letter and parcel into
Carrie’s hands. She, poor girl, was so disappointed and de-
pressed by George’s non-appearance, that you remarked her
dull, spiritlessness, and insisted I should ask her to dance. I
did so, and presently led her into the conservatory, where, be


lieving we were alone, I executed my trust, fastened the locket
round her neck, and gave her a brotherly kiss of congratulation,
promising you and I would be as brother and sister to her and
George. These are the complete facts. Miss Glover, and contain
not one item of reasonable offence to you. But how little I
guessed my betrothed wife was there watching me from be-
hind the plants, twisting and distorting my innocent actions
into wickedness and black treachery ! ”
He strode up and down the lawn in great agitation, while
Gertrude sat still and white as a statue, unable to grasp the
full extent of the outrage she had offered this man—her whilom
lover.
“In vain,” he went on, bringing himself to a standstill in
front of her; “in vain I implored, entreated you to see me; at
last you sent a cold, formal note, enclosing in it the engagement
ring I had given you. Then my pride took fire; I threw up
my post in Panton’s office and went to America. But I loved
you too well, Gertrude, to continue angry, and I knew you
were labouring under some mistaken notion, for I had done
nothing to deserve dismissal; my conscience was entirely free
from reproacV- So I wrote asking an explanation from you,
but the letter was returned —you had left the place. That you
witnessed my interview with George Panton’s betrothed and so
frightfully distorted my actions, never, I swear to you, never
even entered my mind. Yet your unworthy suspicions have
caused me to lead a lonely life for fifteen years—my arms and
heart empty, my fireside desolate. Oh Gertrude ! Gertrude ! ”
he groaned, “ behold your work ; behold my ruined life ! ”
The strong man sank down on his seat, his frame shaking
with the force of his long pent-up emotion—deep sobs bursting
from his over-charged heart.
Gertrude could not bear it; she knelt at his feet in tears.
“Mark, dear Mark, I was wrong; I was cruel; I was
wicked. Oh, how could I have used you so? What can I say
for myself ? I shall say nothing, dear, for nothing can excuse
my rash judgment, my most foolish conduct. I shall only
plead that you have not suffered alone. I, too, have suffered,
and for the sake of the old love have remained Gertrude Glover


to this day. The long years have not blunted the anguish
caused by belief of your faithlessness. Oh, Mark, may I plead
for pardon ? Your grief breaks my heart. Forgive me, my
old love; forgive me ! Speak one word to say you forgive.”
“ Rise, Gertrude ; do not kneel to me. If it will make you
happier, I do forgive. What good can come of further retro-
spect ? The matter is cleared up now between us. I know why
you broke your engagement to me ; you know your suspicions
were without foundation —there let it rest/’
“ You are very good to forgive so readily, but nothing can
blot out the suffering of these years. Please God you will have
many, many happy years to teach you to forget them.”
“ I hope so, Gertrude, I think happiness is within my grasp
at last.”
“You deserve it, Mark, if ever man did. You have my
best wishes, and I shall never cease to pray for your happiness..
I shall presently pass out of your life again, but with the joy of
knowing myself forgiven. Will you promise to think kindly of
me sometimes ? Say you will do so before I return to my mother,
who will be anxious about my prolonged absence from the ball-
room.”
“ I shall always think kindly, fondly, lovingly of you, Ger-
trude. But you will never again, I trust, pass out of my life.
Do you think, my love, I have found you only to let you go?
We have done with the unhappy past, but surely the future holds
joy for us yet ? ”
“ Ah, Mark ! what joy can the future hold for me ? ”
“ My darling, you will let me claim you now, will you not ?
You will brighten up my lonely home and fill my empty life?
You will be my wife, dear ? ”
“Your wife ! I ! Why, lam not fit to be your wife now.
My youth is gone, my poor face faded, my hair turning grey.
There are many young, fair women who would gladly mate with
you, Mark ; you ask me only out of pity.”
“ Do not misunderstand me again, love,” he reproved,gently;
“younger, fairer women are all as shadows to me —I have eyes


for you alone —I want only you. You are now, as you always
have been, the fairest woman in the whole world to me—the one
woman I could ever love—the only one I would ever marry.
Say you will be my wile, Gertrude,” he whispered, drawing her
to his breast; “ remember you owe me reparation for the heart-
sickness of fifteen years; give ‘ Carr' a mistress, and me a
wife. Say yes, love ? ”
And Gertrude, laying her head on her faithful lover’s shoul-
der, felt that a great light had shone into her quiet, grey life ;
her heart throbbed with a new happiness, reminding her of the
day long ago when Mark Warwick, for the first time, preferred
the same request.
All unworthy though she acknowledged herself, she was
satisfied she held this man’s happiness in her own white hands.
With the light of a great love shining in her brown eyes, she
placed her hand in his, saying simply, “ Since you desire it, I
will be your wife.”


CHAPTER XVII.
ON BOARD THE "ALRT.”
J HE news of the engagement between Miss Glover
SI A and Mr. Warwick, the wealthy solicitor, caused quite
a sensation in Melbourne social circles.
Ladies who had tried vainly to catch the good-
looking, well-to-do bachelor were curious to know
“ who she was.” Mrs. Bowring, whose husband was known to
be an intimate friend of Mr. Warwick’s, was fairly beseiged
with afternoon callers, all intent on fishing out particulars con-
cerning the bride-elect.
But curiosity is a general failing of the sex, whether married
or single, and one afternoon Mrs. Bowring’s drawing-room
contained a goodly number of fair matronly gossips, sipping
tea and nibbling biscuits, the while conversation ebbed and
flowed around the engaged couple.
“Now who is she ?” questioned Mrs. Hartington; “'does
anybody know her?”
“ I have heard that her father was a contractor, who was
killed a long while ago. She and her mother seem well enough
off,” declared Mrs. Carlisle.
“ But how did you come to know her, Mrs. Bowring ? Was
it through Mr. Warwick you invited her to Eve's birthday
party?” persisted the first speaker.
“Oh no, indeed,” Mrs. Bowring replied; “Tom and 1
didn't know they were acquainted, and I am convinced Mr.
Warwick didn’t expect to meet her at my house.”
“ It was through my sister-in-law, Mrs. Lancaster,” said
Mrs. Field.


“That is true,” smiled Mrs. Lancaster; " they came over
with me in the * Waratera,’ and I liked them very much.
People get rapidly acquainted on ship-board, you know. Laura
Blanchard and her aunt were passengers also, and Mrs.
Marchmont had known the Glovers for years. Mona met
them at my brother’s house, and when I found so many mutual
friends were invited, I suggested she should send cards for her
soiree to the Glovers also. That’s how they came to be present.
“ Yes,” continued Mrs. Bowring, “ and Mr. Warwick has
long admired and desired an introduction to Dr. Blanchard.
The doctor was unable to be present, but I asked if he would
like to be presented to Mrs. Blanchard. He assented, and I
introduced him to her, and to the lady who sat beside her, who
turned out to be none other than Mrs. Glover.”
“ But surely, mother, they could not —I mean he and Miss
Glover could not have met that evening for the first time?” in-
terrogated Eve, anxious, girl-like, to know how love affairs
progressed generally, and wondering after what manner she
would be wooed and won in her turn.
“Of course not, child,” Mrs. Carlisle interposed. “He
must have been previously acquainted with her. People don’t
rush into matrimony like that.”
“ There can be no question as to their social position,”
declared Mrs. Bowring, “ for the simple fact of their intimacy
with the Blanchards and Mrs. Marchmont would open any
house in Melbourne to them. As to Mr. Warwick’s former
intimacy with Miss Glover, 1 can say nothing. I only know
that when he made his adieux to me on the night of Eve’s
birthday party, his face wore a look of radiant happiness. He
drew me aside, whispering : ‘ Tom and you have often wondered
why I remained unmarried, but I shall not be long so now, for
to-right, under your roof, I have found the lady for whom I
have sought fifteen long years; wish me joy.’ Before I re-
covered from my amazement he had wrung my hand and was
gone.”
“How lovely! how romantic!” sighed Eve, “to be loved
and sought for all that time by a man who could have married
at any time he chose, for everybody knows how well off Mr.
Warwick is.”


“And he is a thorough gentleman,” added Mrs. Field;
“my husband has a great respect for him. Miss Glover will
have a charming home at ‘ Carr.’ I hope they will be happy,
Such constancy deserves reward.”
“ Alice speaks feelingly,” laughed Mrs. Lancaster, and Mrs.
Field’s own pretty story being known, a smile went round the
company.
All Melbourne gossips, however, were not as good-natured
as these. Many false, malicious reports were circulated anent
Mr. Warwick and his bride.
Some said she had a very large private fortune which had
tempted Mr. Warwick ; others declared she had rejected him
many years previously because he was then poor ; others, again,
insisted she was a scheming old maid who had laid herself out
to entrap him; while some few evil-minded persons hinted at
darker stories still.
Alas ! for poor human nature, so prone to fish out, with
infinite pains, a possible flaw in the diamond, a tiny rift in the
lute.
And, alas ! for the clumsy fingers which, probing, determine
the flaw into irreparable danger, widen the tiny rift into a gap
which can never be closed on this side of the grave.
Happily for them the engaged couple were too overjoyed at
their re-union, too wrapped up in each other to bestow much
attention to rumours of such conversations as floated to their
ears.
Nevertheless, it was in consequence of overhearing some ill-
natured remarks that Gertrude Glover confided her whole
history to Ruth Lancaster one day when the two ladies sat on
the deck of the little steamer “ Alert,” on their way to Geelong.
Since their first meeting on board the “ Waratera " these
two had become great friends. They were about the same age;
both had suffered, and through suffering, peace and restfulness
had come to both. Ruth Lancaster's keen eyes discerned the
subdued nature of her companion as compared with her own
restless, untamed spirit; and Miss Glover was fascinated by
the strong self-reliance of Mrs. Lancaster’s character.
They were desirous of forming an excursion party to Geelong,
but many difficulties appeared in the way of the project.


The Blanchards and Mrs. Marchmont were too dispirited
to care for any form of amusement, for Laura was causing her
friends great anxiety by her langour, loss of appetite, and in-
creasing pallor. For the girl’s heart was heavy and her young
life had lost its interest. She pined for her lover, and her days
were wearisome because they brought her no nearer to him to
whom she had given her young affections.
Mrs, Glover did not care much about Geelong, being better
pleased to extend her visit to an old friend with whom she
could talk over by-gone times to her heart’s content; the Ber-
tram’s were gone to Ballarat, and Mrs. Field was too recently
married to care about leaving her husband to the tender mercies
of her cook.
“ If we mean to see Geelong we must go our two selves,”
decided Mrs. Lancaster in her conclusive way—so the matter
was arranged.
The appointed day was warm and pleasant; the ladies sat
on deck with pieces of fancy-work, which engrossed their atten-
tion alternately with points of interest on shore—viz., the new
Cut, Footscray, Williamstown, Port Allerton, etc.
While the little “ Alert ” did credit to her name, fussing
and snorting her way through the seething waters, Miss Glover
told her story without softening any of its details or sparing
herself in the narration.
“ It is an uncommon story,” said Ruth, dreamily, when her
companion concluded.
“My great fault as a girl,” continued Gertrude, “ was im-
pulsiveness ; I could not be persuaded to stop and weigh matters
calmly. On this occasion my mother begged, implored me with
tears to take time, to consider; but my mind was made up. I
would not listen, but stood to my plan. What years of un-
happiness might have been spared to Mark and myself had I
only been less impetuous, more reasonable. I have been more
fortunate than most women, Mrs. Lancaster, in having the very
happiness offered now which I flung from me fifteen years ago.”
With a pretty flush Gertrude twisted the engagement ring on
her finger, the very circlet, diamonds and opals, she had formerly
returned to her outraged lover, and which he had kept in his


possession ever since, until, as he said long ago in his anger,
he could place it on the hand of a true woman—the woman of
his choice, softened and subdued in nature, her love purified
and strengthened by affliction—the love of his life.
“ Mr. Warwick is one of a thousand,” replied Ruth, thought-
fully ; “ he must possess great stability of character, otherwise
he would not remain unmarried all this time because he had
lost his first love. My brother, Mr. Field, has a nature like
that. It is quite fifteen years since he first met his wife, who
was then Miss Alice Duke. Though they were only boy and
girl, a warm attachment sprung up between them, but Charlie
had to go to other colonies to push his fortune, so for a
time Alice lost sight of him. But you know the old saying,
“ Marriages are made in Heaven.” After a number of years
Charles and Alice met again, and the spark of love, kindled so
long before, which had smouldered in the breast of each, burst
into a living flame.”
“Ah, but Alice had nothing wherewith to reproach herself j
she did not throw away happiness as I did, nor did she twist
and distort her lover’s words and actions as I did mine. It fills
me with shame, Mrs. Lancaster, when I consider how sus-
picious I must always have been ; how ready to put an evil,
or, at least, unkind construction upon simple, honest words and
deeds.”
“Oh, no, Miss Glover, I cannot allow that; you are too
hard on yourself. Remember you happened to oversee your
plighted lover and Miss Maxey under sufficiently peculiar
circumstances to justify your behaviour.”
“ There was no need for me to accept the worst possible
view of the case, and nothing could justify mein refusing Mark
an opportunity of explaining, nor the silly, hot-headed pride
which made me refuse to state my grievance. And, dear Mrs.
Lancaster, I sadly fear that is not the only instance of hasty,
ill-judged impulse I have to regret.”
Gertrude lowered her voice, and bent towards her com-
panion with very grave, earnest face.
“ I want to tell you about something I did on the “ Wara-
tera ” —of a bold step to which impulse impelled me. I candidly


confess my mind is uneasy in consequence. Sometimes I think
I acted kindly, but at other moments am filled with the dread
of having worked mischief and ruined a girl's hopes. But I
shall relate the circumstances, in the hope of gaining your
honest, unbiassed opinion of my conduct. Mrs. Lancaster, you
must have noticed that since we arrived in Melbourne a great
change has come over Laura Blanchard.' 5
Mrs. Lancaster started violently at this abrupt mention of
Miss Blanchard’s name. Her mind dwelt continually on the
clandestine meeting in the Exhibition, of which she had been
the unhappy witness, and on the possible relations to each
other of the girl Laura and her husband, Harold. Yet, until
she discovered more, she kept silence regarding them, and, as
none of the others had recognised Harold Lancaster in Laura’s
companion in the Chinese Temple, Ruth s fainting fit had been
attributed to heat and over-fatigue. Only Chester's quick
eyes had caught the look of terror on her face, and he, being
without a clue to the cause of her fright, speedily forgot it.
“ Everyone knows there is a misunderstanding between her
and Dr. Saumaurez,” continued Gertrude, “but no one except
the doctor (not even Laura herself), is aware that my hand set
the machinery going which ended in their parting.
“ Miss Glover ! your hand? You were the cause of their
parting?" cried Mrs. Lancaster, in horrified amaze. 5 ’ Impos-
sible ! what had you ? ”
“ Yes, I,” replied the other hardily. “ Let me tell you all
about it. The fact is, I had reason to suspect Laura of playing
a double game —of secretly meeting a man in the ship’s bows
night after night, and . What is the matter, Mrs. Lan-
caster ? ” she cried, for poor Ruth had grown deathly pale, and
a low groan of anguish broke from her lips.
“ My husband! ” thought the unfortunate woman despair-
ingly ; “ could Harold have been on the ship without my
knowledge? Oh, my husband; so near and yet so far! And
Laura ! What good can come of clandestine meetings with a
married man ? What am I about to learn ?
“ You are ill, my dear,’ 5 said Miss Glover kindly; “ can I
do anything for you ? Perhaps you would rather hear m} story
some other time? 5 '


“ I am well enough, thank you,” Ruth asserted, steadying
her voice as well as she could ; “ but you shocked me by your
statement concerning Miss Blanchard. You must be mistaken;
so young and innocent a girl could not surely act with such
treachery. How did such a suspicion occur to you?”
“ Well, in this way. Do you remember, on that first evening
when you came up to the saloon as stewardess, Mrs. March-
mont was enquiring for her niece, who shortly afterwards entered
the saloon attired in a long cloak and sealskin hat, with a
singularly anxious expression of face?”
“ I remember. Her extreme pallor arrested my attention,”
returned Ruth, endeavouring to still the throbbing of her heart.
“ Her excuse to her aunt, ‘she had been seeing the engines,’
struck me as odd, when I learned she had been unaccompanied,
for she and Dr. Saumaurez were but newly engaged, and one
would naturally consider her society more charming for him
than that of the men in the smoking room. So I gave her a
quick, questioning glance, before which her eyes fell and a
vivid burning blush overspread her whole face. At that
moment I suspected her of want of veracity, and it gave me
pain to consider her untruthful.”
“ But the man ? ” urged Mrs. Lancaster; “ what of him ? ”
“ I shall come to him by-and-bye. Before undressing that
night, I required a scrap of paper upon which to note down
Selwyn’s address, and was on my way to the ladies’ cabin to ask
you for a sheet of note-paper, when I noticed a crumpled piece
lying in the passage, and concluded it was a useless scrap which
would answer my purpose. It looked like a bill, but, when
smoothed out, proved to be an unsigned letter from one of the
sailors to a passenger. No names were mentioned, but the
writer informed ‘ his darling ’ he was an able-bodied sailor on
the ship, and besought her to meet him on the forecastle that
night about eight o’clock, advising her, if missed, to say she
had gone forward to look at the engines.”
“ While coming up from the steerage with Chester, I noticed
a woman flitting down by the engines in a rather mysterious
way. Turning to look after her, I observed her go towards the
steerage.”


" Depend upon it, that was Laura Blanchard stealing away
to her appointment with the sailor,” declared Gertrude ener-
getically.
“ But why should you think it was Laura, Miss Glover?
You say no name was mentioned in the note; it might not have
been to her.”
“It might not, I grant; but subsequent events showed it
was. Remember the excuse she gave her aunt.”
“ That was not sufficient to condemn the girl; that might
have been a coincidence.”
“ I grant all that, but now comes another link in the chain
of evidence. Next morning you brought tea to my cabin, and,
whilst I drank it, related an encounter you had had with the fore-
cabin stewardess the night before. She declared she had seen
you talking to a man in the bows, and, in consequence of your
indignation at the mistake, insisted she had recognised your figure
cloak, and hat ; and. moreover, all the other female passengers
were in bed; consequently, the woman who stood in the bows
could not have been a steerage passenger. Now, which of the
lady passengers in the saloon would be most easily mistaken
for you ? ”
Mrs. La ncaster pondered seriously—there were Mrs. Heriot,
Mrs. Sherwin, Miss Dagmar, Miss Roberts, Miss Glover, Miss
Blanchard. Was there any other lady of slight figure like
herself? No, all the others were too short or too stout to be
mistaken for her. And of those enumerated, Laura Blanchard,
with her tall, slight figure, cloak, and sealskin cap, bore the
most striking resemblance, in the dark, to Ruth.
“Well, whom do you think?” questioned Gertrude.
“ Miss Blanchard,” replied Ruth, in a low voice of pain.
“ So I thought while listening to your account of the
stewardess’ charge. Putting this and that together I concluded
Laura Blanchard was the person who dropped that note in the
passage.”
“ I rather think I dropped the note there, Miss Glover.”
“ You?”
“ Yes, I; for, if you remember, the stewardess said the couple
stood close beside my fur rug. Now, a paper dropped from the


rug when I lifted it off the deck. Thinking it was a bill of my
own, I brought it away in my hand, but, being somewhat
agitated by my passage-at-arms with Mrs. Anderson, must
have permitted it to drop from my grasp, for I noticed I had
lost it again.”
“ No doubt that explains the presence of the note,” said
Gertrude.
“ Have you got that note, Miss Glover? ” asked Mrs. Lan-
caster.
A sudden thought occurred to the distracted wife that she
might recognise the handwriting if it were her husband whom
Laura met in so suspicious a manner.
“ Have you the note?” she repeated, hastily.
“ No,” answered Gertrude ; “ Dr. Saumaurez has it.”
“ Dr. Saumaurez ? How did it come into his hands ? ”
“ With my usual impetuosity, I placed it there.”
“ Oh, no, no ; I cannot believe it. What had Laura done to
you that you should act in such a manner? Miss Glover, it is
not—cannot be true ? ”
“It is true/’ she answered regretfully; “but let me con-
tinue.”
“ But what about the man ?” cried Ruth, impatiently.
“ I’ll come to him soon enough. Once convinced ol Laura’s
treachery, my heart bled for her lover, for I knew —who better ?
—the agony of finding a beloved one false; so, for Dr.
Saumaurez's sake, I watched the girl. Mrs. Lancaster, my
suspicions were more than justified.”
“ Did she meet the man ? Were they ?
“ Never mind the man just now —let me tell the story in my
own way. One night, the second of the trip, Dr. Saumaurez
and his fiancee and I remained on deck till ten o’clock—they,
engrossed with each other; I, doing duty as detective. Just
before the change of watch at ten, they rose and went below.
e Now,’ thought I, gladly, ‘ they are safe for the night,’ and I,
too, prepared to leave the poop ; but, just as I reached the
bottom of the companion stairs, Laura emerged from the saloon


doorway and hurried swiftly along the silent, deserted main
deck. Quick as thought, I followed her. Straight on she went
past the engines, up the forecastle ladder-steps. I feared to
follow her on to the forecastle deck, but remained far enough
up the ladder to see her and a man standing together in the
bows, and when they moved towards the steps I fled.”
“ Did you see the man, Miss Glover ? ”
“ Oh, I took no notice of him ; 1 was too busy watching
Laura.”
“ Did he—did he—kiss her ? ”
“ I don’t know ; very likely he did, as he called her ‘ his
darling ’in the note ; but I wasn’t interested in him—it was her I
cared about.”
“ Of course, of course,” murmured the poor woman.
“ My heart ached for the poor young fellow who loved that
worthless girl—who hoped to find her all he pictured her in his
mind.”
“Oh, my dear! my dear!” burst out Mrs. Lancaster;
“ what a dreadful thing. How did it all end?”
“ I watched the girl all the voyage, till her treachery became
sickening. Day after day she smiled into her lover’s face tilt
you could have sworn the love-light shone in her eyes; yet night
after night she stole down to the forecastle to hold a clandestine
meeting with the able-bodied sailor,”
“ Who would have thought it of pretty Laura Blanchard?”
wailed Mrs. Lancaster; “but did the doctor come to know of
it?”
“ Ah ! ” said Gertrude, apprehensively, “ that is the part I
dread telling.’’
“ Why ? ” asked the other, quickly ; “ did Harl , the man
receive any injury ? ”
“ Oh, bother the man ! It would have served him right if
the doctor had thrown him into the sea. It is your condemna-
tion of my own doings I dread.”
“ Why need you dread ? So far, you were not actuated by
malice ; you did what you thought right. What followed, my
dear? ”


“ I noticed the girl never failed to get away between the hours
of the dog-watch—to-night about eight, to-morrow night about
ten. You may remember a concert was arranged to commence
at eight on the last night of the trip. Convinced Laura would
make an excuse to leave the social hall before long, I was torn
between two desires ; one, to save the young man from the misery
of a loveless marriage; the other, to leave him in his fool’s
Paradise. When the bell rang, Laura left him on deck while
she ran downstairs for a song. * Now is your chance,’ said
something in my brain. Acting on the impulse, I stepped up
to Dr. Saumaurez and urged him to follow Laura, unperceived,
should she quit the social hall that evening. I intended him to
act upon the warning and discover for himself anything he
ought to know. He indignantly repudiated the insinuation
contained in my words.”
“No wonder. If he loved the girl he would naturally resent
any doubt or suspicion of her honour or truth.’’
“ I did not resent his words, but urged him to attend to mine.
He would not listen to a syllable. Then, getting angry at the
position in which I found myself, I again acted on an impulse,
and held out the fatal note. He took it with a scornful gesture,
putting it in his pocket without even glancing at it, and so I left
him.”
“ Well, go on —what happened ? ”
“ As I suspected, Miss Blanchard contrived to slip unseen
out of the social hall, and was not missed for a few minutes.
When he noticed her absence he threw me a look of defiance
and strode from the room.”
“ Why don’t you go on ? What occurred next ? ”
“ I do not know what occurred between them; where nor how
he found her, only this—he met me in the corridor later on when
the concert was ended, grasped my hand as in an iron vice,
wrung it wildly, and was gone in a moment.”
“He came to me with a face like death,’’ said Ruth, “ and
told me to go instantly to Miss Blanchard, who was along on
the forecastle deck. When I got there she was stretched on the
floor in a dead faint. I guessed at once there was some mis-
understanding between the young couple, for otherwise Dr.


Saumaurez would have been at her side, but had no idea it was
anything so serious. But what became of the man?”
“I don’t know anything about the man, Mrs. Lancaster;
how your mind runs upon him. Depend upon it he was after
no good in inveigling the girl down there at night; but how
she could ever have become acquainted with a man of that
class is in itself a mystery. Now, do you blame me for my
part in the drama? Give me a fair, unbiassed opinion."
“ I cannot, Miss Glover. lam not in a position to offer an
unbiassed opinion.”
“Dear me, how is that? I am disappointed, for I quite
expected to hear a calm judgment pronounced on my actions.
Why cannot you, Mrs. Lancaster? you are in no way con-
cerned either with the affair or the parlies.”
“ My dear Miss Glover, though I cannot enter into expla-
nations, I am by no means as unconcerned as you think. In
this case I am the last person in the world to give an unbiassed
opinion. But here we are at Geelong, and there are Mr. and
Mrs. Affray waiting for us on the pier.”


CHAPTER XVIII.
AT THE “ZOO.”
“ MflNl HALL we decide on Wednesday then, Ruth?” asked
Mrs. Blanchard, who had been trying to arrange a
drive with her old school friend.
“Yes; Wednesday will suit me nicely. It will be
a treat to have a quiet chat about old times, Amy. Is
it not remarkable that we, who were schoolmates so long ago,
should meet at the other side of the globe? Dear me, how
small the world is after all! ”
“ One hears of many such curious meetings in the colonies.
You were an old friend of Dr. Saumaurez too, were you not ?”
Mrs. Blanchard’s voice unconsciously betrayed a touch of
hauteur in mentioning the young man ; she could not readily
forgive an injury to her daughter.
“ Yes, Amy, he came out with me in the ‘ Hypatia.’ What
has become of him ? ”
“I do not know. When I met my sister, Mrs. Marchmont,
and my daughter at the wharf on the day of the ‘ Waratera’s’
arrival, it was in the expectation of receiving him as a guest,
for from Julia’s letters, we understood he was coming over t®
ask her father for Laura’s hand in marriage. Ido not mind
telling you, Ruth, how great was my surprise when the young
man, who had formerly been on such friendly terms with us
and to whom we were quite prepared to trust our darling girl,
coldly raised his hat with formal politeness, and crossing the
gangway, disappeared amongst the crowd.”
“ Of course I know something went wrong between them,
for the evening before we landed he came to me in great


agitation and begged me to go along to the forecastle where I
should find Miss Blanchard.”
“ The forecastle! ” cried her mother. “ What was she doing
on the forecastle ?”
“ She was doing nothing, poor dear; she was lying in a
faint on the deck. Has she not told you what occurred ?”
“She has not, nor do I like to force her confidence. Any
allusion to the subject causes her such extreme distress that
her father and I have agreed to avoid it in her presence.”
“ Does she blame Dr. Saumaurez?’’
“No ; that is the strangest part of all. One day her father
uttered a few hasty words, calling in question Glenois’ conduct
at the wharf. He referred to it as ‘ unmanly behaviour.’ But
Laura fired up instantly, declaring Dr. Saumaurez was every
inch a gentleman, had acted in a perfectly honourable manner,
and no one should blame him to her. Have you any suspicion
what caused their disagreement, Ruth ? ”
Mrs. Lancaster’s face coloured hotly at this straightforward
question, and she looked greatly embarrassed.
“ I see you have. You will not refuse to confide in me, for
both Dr. Blanchard and myself would be greatly relieved could
we but guess at the cause of our daughter’s trouble.”
“ Excuse me, Amy, I—l ”
“You will never refuse her mother, Ruth?”
“ You must not ask me. I certainly have a suspicion, but
it is most vague—so vague that I would not put it into words
for the world.”
“ Not even to me?”
“ Not even to you.”
“ But I am her mother; may I not know what affects my
child ?”
“I am his w . No, Amy ; believe me, if I actually
knew what occurred I would tell you openly, but I do not.”
“ But your suspicion : may I not know what you suspect ?”
“ Where would be the good ? Suspicions go for nothing,
and the girl shall come to no harm, for my eye is upon her, and


at the first indication of anything you ought to know I shall not
fail to communicate with her father and you. Do not press me
further, Amy; that is all I can say.’'
“ Very well, Ruth,” answered Mrs. Blanchard mournfully \
“ but that is poor consolation for a mother's heart. Then we
decide on Wednesday for the drive ? I shall call for you at
two o’clock. Good-bye, Ruth. For the sake of old times, I
hope I may trust my darling girl’s interests in your hands.
“ You may safely do so,” asserted Ruth, giving Mrs. Blan-
chard’s hand a friendly clasp; “and listen to me. Comfort
yourself by thinking ‘no news is good news ; if \ou hear
nothing further from me, consider my suspicion dead from want
of verification. Good-bye for the present. I shall expect you
on Wednesday.”
Wednesday came, bright and warm, but did not bring Mrs.
Blanchard. Laura drove up to the door of Mrs. Field s hou e
in a pretty pony-carriage, with a pair of spirited brown ponies
that tossed their heads impatiently at the stoppage. Giving the
reins to her young groom, she entered the house, and was shown
in'o the shady drawing-room, where Mrs. F ield sat embroidering
a smoking-cap for her husband.
“ Mrs. Lancaster will be here presently,” announced Mrs.
Field, after exchanging courtesies with her young visitor; “she
is changing her dress for the drive.”
“She will be disappointed,” said the girl; “ for mamma has
one of her severe headaches to-day, and is consequently obliged
to lie down and keep perfectly still. She sent me in her place
to explain her absence and ask you, Mrs. Field, to join Mrs.
Lancaster and myself in our drive. You will come, will you
not?”
“ I shall be delighted, dear, but am very sorry for your
mamma. My sister, Mrs. Lancaster, will be greatly disap-
pointed, as she has looked forward with much pleasure to a
quiet, confidential talk with her old friend. But no one can
resist sickness. Here she comes.”
Mrs. Lancaster entered the room attired for the drive, and
with deep regret learned the change of plans consequent on
Mrs. Blanchard’s sickness.


Ruth expressed her sympathy with the sufferer, and concur-
rence with the proposed change, and Mrs. Field rose to prepare
for the drive, but before she had crossed the roo.m the maid
announced “ Miss Bowring.’'
Eve came in, and was warmly greeted by the three ladies,
with whom the fair, amiable girl was a favourite ; her youthful
grace and pleasant manners always won for her a kindly recep-
tion amongst her acquaintances.
“ Mamma is not at all well. Aunt Alice/’ she announced to
Mrs. Field.
“What is the matter with her, Eve?” questioned Mrs.
Field anxiously.
“ She is flushed and feverish, has parched lips, and hot, dry
hands.”
“ Is Rose with her ? ” again her aunt asked.
“ Yes, Aunt Rose is with her, but sent me to enquire if you
could come to her assistance, as she is very anxious about
mamma.”
“Certainly, I shall,” decided Mrs. Field. “ You will excuse
me. Miss Blanchard, and you, Ruth ? If Mona needs me my
place ought to be at her side, for she has been like a mother to
me. You will excuse me ? ”
“Certainly, Mrs. Field.”
“ Certainly, Alice,” answered the two ladies in one breath.
After a few more words, Mrs. Field and Eve Bowring left
the drawing-room together. Then with a smile Mrs. Lancaster
turned to Miss Blanchard, saying, “ You and I must amuse
each other, Laura; we are fated to have no other companion
to-day.”
“ Where would you like to go for a drive, Mrs. Lancaster? ”
asked Laura.
“ Let us go to the Royal Park,” replied Ruth, “ and while
we stroll through the Zoological Gardens your groom can keep
the ponies outside the gates.”
Mrs. Lancaster spoke as if by inspiration ; hitherto she had
not given a thought to the direction of the drive.


Is there an implacable fate which governs our words and
actions? Had she chosen any other place in all the wide coun-
try around Melbourne this story would never have been written;
her life-story would have been entirely different. On such tiny
threads hang great issues—the weal or woe of an immortal
human being!
Of course Laura agreed to the proposal.
Ruth there and then determined that while strolling through
the gardens she would find out from the girl’s own lips, by some
method or other, on what footing she (Laura), stood with
Harold Lancaster.
On the other hand, the girl had no doubt but that Mrs.
Lancaster would try to elicit the truth concerning her ruptured
engagement with Glenois Saumaurez.
“ And I will so gladly tell her all,” she thought.” I have
not liked to tell papa or mamma for fear of causing them greater
pain and shame, but, thank Heaven, I need not keep the secret
from Mrs. Lancaster, for it can in no way affect her, and she will
seethe advisability of maintaining silence towards my parents.
And what a relief to unburden my heart to a kind and sym-
pathising friend! How have I borne my trouble so long in
silence? Mrs. Lancaster is a great friend of Glen's; who knows
but what ? ”
In spite of her heart trouble, Laura looked very lovely that
afternoon as she took her seat in the pony-carriage, gathered
the reins into her little gauntleted hands, and arranged a rug
over the skirt of her white dress.
Mrs. Lancaster sat at her side with an anxious, drawn look
on her face: a look which had frequently been visible there since
her memorable evening visit to the Exhibition ; and ever and
anon she glanced askance at her fair, youthful companion.
“ What wonder if Harold’s heart has turned to this beautiful
girl,” she thought, anxiously. “ I have been so long away ; he,
too, was always a handsome fellow, and had winning ways when
he liked. But no ! I could swear Laura loved Glenois. Did
I not see the two together? And do I not recognise love when
I see it ? I ought to. God knows, in my young days I saw it
in the eyes of others for myself, but for none, save Harold, did


it ever shine in my own. And I was conscious of it—l knew I
could not look at him as at others, and that very knowledge
caused my eye-lids to droop that the love-light might not be too
apparent. No; whatever may be the mysterious bond between
Laura and my Harold, it is not love, at all events on her side.
They started on their drive, all unconscious that, before they
returned, the whole aspect of nature would have changed for
one of them.
Away they drove into the warm, bright sunshine ; away,
leaving Windsor behind them, by South Yarra and Richmond,
into town ; away through the busy thoroughfares of Melbourne;
away into the Royal Park, where, in front of the entrance gates
of the Zoological Gardens, Laura drew up her spirited ponies.
Giving the little carriage into the groom’s care, they paid for
admission and passed into the grounds.
The place looked deliciously cool and inviting.
Here, then, was the place and opportunity for which both
ladies had longed ; what hindered them from opening at once
the subject nearest their hearts ?
Both longed intensely for a confidential talk, but (it was un-
accountable) both felt overcome by a strange, nervous shyness,
which fettered their tongues.
So they wandered from one point of interest to another.
They stood for some time watching the camels with their
curiously-curved noses, protruding under-jaws, humped backs,
and cold, calculating eyes.
They lingered near the Native encampment, beside the
badgers’ pond, before the glass houses of slimy, sinister snakes,
hurried past the unwcildy bear, to dawdle beside the lithe,
graceful leopard and panther; but Ruth came to a standstill in
front of the lion’s den.
“ What a kingly animal! Look at his paws, Laura; are they
not models of massive strength ? ”
“He is splendid. How I wish he would stand up that we
might see his form. Most likely, though, he will lie like that
until his dinner-time.”


“ I think the animals are fed at four, Laura ; but he opened
his eyes just now. There, there, do you see ? I believe he will
get up presently.”
“ Oh, what ails him? ” cried Laura, in alarm.
For the huge creature had begun to manifest symptoms of
uneasiness ; opened his eyes with fierce glare, while his whiskers
curled spirally like those of an angry cat. His tail also gave
evidence of coming wrath, for it lifted and fell with ominous
thud ; short snarls, growing momentarily louder and louder,
broke from the savage creature ; and at length he sprang to his
feet with a roar which shook the very ground.
Everybody drew back from the immediate vicinity of the
cage except one tall, slender, dark-complexioned man, who
leant both arms upon the strong rail surrounding the cage,
at about two yards distance from its bars ; a man who eyed the
raging brute with his own darkly lurid orbs ; a man who held a
cigarette between his gleaming, white teeth, and carelessly
removed it that he might spit at his ease. After replacing his
cigarette, this man, with the cruel smile on his thin, downward
curved lips, remained motionless, returning the angry glances
of the lion with those of cool defiance.
The creature, roaring furiously, went from end to end of his
cage in strong excitement, while white foam gathered upon his
lips, or fell with dull splash upon the floor.
Then a keeper hurriedly appeared upon the scene, to be met
by the terrified people with eager questions.
He paid no attention to them, but hastened to the dark,
silent man, upon whose shoulder he laid an authoritative hand.
“What are you doing to the lion?” he asked, in severe
tones.
“ Nothing,” replied the stranger, concisely ; again removing
his cigarette and spitting.
“ You have been teasing him ?”
“ I have been doing nothing of the kind, my man.”
“ You have been annoying him in some way,” insisted the
keeper.
“ In what way have I annoyed him?”


“You must have been teasing him, sir. Such excitement
is utterly unknown in the Gardens, and, let me tell you, you are
playing a highly dangerous game.”
“ Now, now, that will do. Ask these people,” with a wave
of the hand towards the onlookers, “ whether I have done any-
thing to the lion except merely look at him, and it was for that
I paid at the gate.”
“ Well, well,” said the keeper, more anxious to subdue the
infuriated brute than clinch an argument, “ you’ve seen him
now, and therefore may as well move on.”
“ Certainly,” answered the dark man, “as you say I have
seen him now.”
Shooting an evil glance at the brute, but without another
word he moved away from the neighbourhood of the den, coolly
smoking and spitting as he went.
The lion’s gaze followed him as long as he remained within
view, the roars gradually softening into growls, which also soon
modified, and then entirely ceased as the noble brute stretched
again in lazy ease.
“ What do you think caused the lion’s excitement?” asked
Mrs. Lancaster, with Bohemian freedom, as she and Laura
found themselves in close proximity to the keeper in one of
the many shady paths.
“ I do not know, ma’am,” he answered respectfully, “ unless
that chap was teasing him. It's a very foolish thing to annoy
these wild creatures. They see the bars and believe themselves
caged, but I, for one, wouldn’t like to risk myself near the den
if the lion took it in his head to try and break out. He’s a
mighty powerful beast, and could make short work of the bars
if put to it.”
“ But I didn’t see the man do anything to annoy him. Did
you, Laura?”
“ No, I didn't notice anything offensive in his behaviour to
the animal.”
“Then I’ll tell you what it is, ma’am,” said the man gravely
and impressively, “ if he did nothing to the lion depend upon it
he has a bad heart, that chap. The beasts have a sure instinct,


and the lion knew a black-hearted villain stood before him,
eyeing him, and plotting something. If that beast were out-
side his cage, the fellow might write “ finis ” to his life account.”
Touching his hat the man walked away, leaving the two
ladies to wander up and down the paths.
The curious incident had, up till now, entirely banished other
thoughts from their minds, but now, as they passed down green
lanes under leafy branches, the subject of interest once more
came uppermost.
“ I shall presently ask her to sit down on one of the seats,”
thought Ruth ; “but how am I to open the conversation ? I feel
placed in a most awkward position in having to question this
young girl about my husband.”
“ I wonder when she means to begin,” thought Laura; “ I
am dying to tell her everything and receive her sympathy and
advice.”
“ Do you feel inclined to rest ? ” began Mrs. Lancaster; “ if
so, we had better find a seat.”
They were walking down a path bordered by grassy plots,
whereon sat or lay numerous human figures. One of these
stretched himself wearily under sheltering branches, his hat
tilted over his eyes; but, at the sound of Mrs. Lancaster’s
voice, raised himself into a sitting posture. The astonished
look with which he at first regarded her, changed presently to
one of intense yearning; and, as he gazed wistfully at her,
great sighs burst from his breast.
Actuated by the mysterious instinct which makes one person
aware of the fixed gaze of another, Mrs. Lancaster turned and
looked at the man. With a strange bound of the heart she
recognised her husband.
This was the second time she had seen him during her short
holiday, and on both occasions Laura Blanchard had come be-
tween husband and wife.
“ Let us sit down,” she said thickly.
“You are very pale, Mrs. Lancaster. The lion episode
must have startled you,” declared Laura, drawing the trembling


woman down upon a seat close by. “ Rest a few minutes ; you
will soon recover. Were you much startled? ”
The agitated woman could see her husband through the
intervening branches ;he could see her on the iron seat; both
felt assured that some denouement would take place. Ah, how
little they dreamt what the next half-hour held for them !
“ Laura,” said Ruth, bending forward so as to look into the
young lady’s face, and speaking in a low, grave voice, “ Laura,
I was startled at seeing my husband, from whom I have been
parted over eight years, lying there on the grass at the side
of the path.”
“ Oh, my dear Mrs. Lancaster,” cried Laura, with quick,
ready sympathy, “no wonder you got a shock ! Did you wish
to see him ? Did he see you ? ”
“He saw and recognised me, as I did him. I wish to speak
to him, but before doing so, I ask you, Laura Blanchard, in
God’s name, what is the bond between Harold Lancaster, my
lawful husband, and you? ”


CHAPTER XIX.
AN AWFUL TRAGEDY.
“ M 0 husband?” repeated Laura in a voice of pure
.Mla/jpg amazement. “ What do you mean ? Ido not know-
him at all. Oh, Mrs. Lancaster, what induces you
nJJLv to question me about him?”
“ Tell me the truth, Laura, I beseech you. You
do know him, child, for I witnessed a clandestine meeting
between you and him.”
“ Are you mad, Mrs. Lancaster? I never met your husband
in my life.”
“Do not trifle with me. I have not known a moment’s
peace of mind since I saw that meeting. Oh, Laura, be honest
with me; you are on dangerous ground.”
“ Indeed, you are mistaken. Ido not know your husband.
You must have mistaken some other girl for me.”
“Unfortunately there is no mistake, as I saw you both quite
plainly.”
“Oh, Mrs. Lancaster ! ” cried the girl in deep distress, “for
what do you take me? Do you consider me a wicked girl
who intrigues with other women’s husbands ? ”
“No, love,” answered the elder woman. “ I do not think
that for a moment. I believe you to be a pure, good girl; but
perhaps Mr. Lancaster passes under an assumed name. I have
been .too abrupt, dear, but the sight of my once dear husband
stirred my heart so powerfully as to make me forget prudence.”
“No wonder, indeed. But about Mr. Lancaster? How
can I convince you I do not know him ? ”


“ I think the only way by which we can arrive at a solution
of the mystery is by your telling me quite openly all the cir-
cumstances of your rupture with Dr. Saumaurez. I am your
friend as well as his, therefore you need not hesitate, and I shall
be able to decide what part my husband has played in this sad
quarrel.”
“ I shall gladly tell you everything, Mrs. Lancaster. Indeed
when I found we were to have no companion in our drive, the
hope that I might speak unreservedly to you was uppermost in
my heart. I long for a confidante. I cannot bear my trouble
much longer alone. But Mr. Lancaster plays no part whatever
in my story.”
“ Not to your knowledge, perhaps, but when I call to mind
your secret meetings on board the ‘ Waratera,’ I can scarcely
understand his neutrality. For I presume you will not deny
having repeatedly met a man on the ship’s forecastle? ”
“ No,” answered the girl in a low voice. “ I did meet
someone on the ship. Dr. Saumaurez discovered the fact and
demanded an explanation, which I refused to give, and, in
consequence, we parted. That is the whole story.”
“Laura, what was the name of the man you met? The
name by which you knew him?”
“ Harry Hazeldine,” was the unhesitating reply.
“My poor girl, Harry Hazeldine must have been Harold
Lancaster.”
“Impossible!” was the girl’s unexpected answer in very
decided tones. “ I know who Harry Hazeldine is, and all about
him. Are you joking, Mrs. Lancaster, or do you seriously mean
to assert Harry is identical with your husband?”
“Could I joke on so painful a subject?”
“Then dismiss the idea, for Harry is ”
“ Was that Harry Hazeldine you met in the Chinese
Temple in the Exhibition, Laura?”
The girl coloured vividly, but looked honestly into her com-
panion’s eyes as she answered :
“ No, Mrs. Lancaster. That was a labouring man who
undertook to give me a letter Irom Harry.’’


“ He certainly wore a labourer’s garb, my dear, but was a
man of education for all that,” said Mrs. Lancaster, with a
touch of pride.
“ Do you know him ?” asked Laura curiously.
“ I do,” answered Ruth ; “ he is my husband.”
“Oh !”
After a short interval of silence, Laura turned to Mrs.
Lancaster with an intelligent look.
“I begin to understand. You were in the Exhibition that
night, and observed me, though I did not perceive you. You
naturally imagined the man I met that night must be the same
I had met previously on board ship ; and your mental distur-
bance arose from the recognition of your husband. But I did
not even know the name of the person who handed me a most
important letter, nor had I expected to meet a stranger. Harry
Hazeldine was to have met me in the Chinese Temple, but,
being unable to come, sent a message by a friend. When I
saw a stranger in the Temple, I hesitated to enter, and flitted
about the Avenue for some time before gaining courage to
<io so.”
Mrs. Lancaster suddenly remembered the erratic move-
ments which had attracted Chester’s eyes.
“Then you swear to me you never spoke to Mr. Lancaster
except on that one occasion ? ” Ruth questioned, with a curious
tremor in her voice.
“ Certainly/’answered Laura; “and, moreover, my mind
was so engrossed with other matters that I scarcely noticed his
appearance, and would not recognise him again/’
“Thank God!” uttered Mrs. Lancaster fervently. “You
have lifted a load off my mind, for I feared you were somehow
becoming entangled with my husband, being ignorant of the
fact that he was a married man, and I could foresee nothing but
misery for all concerned. lam very, very thankful to find my
fears groundless.”
“ Let me tell you about Harry,” pled Laura. “My lips
were sealed by a solemn promise when Dr. Saumaurez asked
an explanation, but now I am quite free to speak.”


“ You shall tell me all about him, Laura," replied Mrs.
Lancaster, bending over the girl and kissing her affectionately,
“ I shall have much pleasure and interest in listening to your
story after I have spoken to my husband, who is still there on
the grass. If 1 do not go to him, he will think Ido not wish
to recognise him. Nay, do not hinder me, child, for we have
been parted over eight years, and we are husband and wife.
Wait here for me.”
Passing hastily through amongst the branches, she joined her
husband. Laura sat still on the iron seat watching them, and
even listening to the murmur of their voices, for they were but
a stone’s throw from where she sat.
The husband and wife so long parted, so strangely met,
spoke earnestly to each other.
Laura saw a handsome, dissipated-looking man of about
forty-five, thin, poorly-clad, and with an air of weariness and
lassitude.
He held Mrs. Lancaster’s well-gloved hand in his own
rough brown one, and appeared to be pleading earnestly; but
there was a something in Mrs. Lancaster’s homely face which
riveted Laura’s attention, for, in spite of all that had come and
gone between them, the woman looked again on the face of the
man she loved, and in her eyes shone that wondrous light that
never lay on sea and land.
“They are quite middle aged,” mused Laura, “yet they
must have loved once, and love is said to be deathless. Who
would ever have imagined that Mrs. Lancaster, so quiet, calm,
passionless, could look like that ? I wonder if I could keep true
for years and years as she has done. Oh yes, I could during
years of absence, or poverty —but not surely through years of
neglect and unkindness, such as Mrs. Lancaster had to endure.
I have heard mamma and aunt Julia talk about her, and say
she had even to endure blows. He must be an ignoble man to
lift his hand to a woman ! I could not love such a man. I
could only love a man of noble, upright nature, of steady
principles to regulate his life. Such a man was Glenois Sau-
maurez, but I lost him through no fault of my own. I cannot
seek him, but surely there is nothing unwomanly in desiring


to tell all the unfortunate tale to Mrs. Lancaster, who may meet
him in New Zealand and repeat the story to him. He may be
married before he hears it, but I cannot lose the only chance of
clearing myself in his eyes. He is a good man, and no matter
whom he marries, I would like him to know I was not the
heartless coquette, the base intriguante he thought me. Even
if his love for me has died out, I would like him to know the
truth, and how sorely I was tempted to break my pledged word
for the sake of his love. If he had only trusted me, all would
have been well; but, after all, I could not expect that when
appearances were so strongly against me. Dear me, how that
lion is roaring! I wonder if they are tormenting him again.
Perhaps it is near his feeding time. There he goes ”as a
terrific roar rang through the Gardens, causing the very ground
to vibrate.
Laura looked at Mrs. Lancaster, who had withdrawn her
hand and was covering her eyes with it, while her husband,
bending his tall head, appeared to urge some measure upon
her.
“ Perhaps they will be reconciled. Mr. Lancaster may not
always have been unkind to his wife, and, since she left him,
the rough life he seems to have led may have steadied and
reformed him. It is to be hoped so for dear Mrs. Lancaster’s
sake, for anyone can see she loves him. I wonder if my face
used to light up so for Glenois ? Why, Mrs. Lancaster always
seemed such a calm, elderly, passionless sort of woman, that
that look is a very revelation to me. Oh dear, what is the
matter with that lion?” for another deep-toned roar "came
thundering over the Gardens. “ The man would never be
foolish enough to torment him a second time ; it must be time
for his dinner. How I wish Mrs. Lancaster would come ; yet
that is selfish of me when she has not seen her husband for so
long, and when so much may depend on this interview. But
the truth is lam getting nervous. No sign of moving yet,” she
sighed, looking at the two figures through the branches.
It was true; Mr. and Mrs. Lancaster were still engrossed
in each other,
“ No doubt in the delight of meeting they have forgotten
all about poor me ; yet I am becoming decidedly uncomfortable*


What a blood-curdling roar. I hope nothing will happen, yet
something seems to forbode Oh, my God ! ”
What happened during the next few minutes Laura
Blanchard never could remember. She appeared to have
bounded across the intervening space and thrown herself
frantically between the startled husband and wife, while, with
outstretched arm, she pointed to an awful object careering
madly down the very path beside which they stood.
It was the lion.
Tormented by the vicinity of a nature more brutish than his
own; maddened by his inability to escape from the baneful
glance of evil human eyes ; fierce from hunger, and excited by
expectation of food: with one bound the kingly brute broke
his bars and threw himself upon the object of his hate.
Struck down by the creature’s giant paw, the man who, in
his rash folly, had been the primary cause of the disturbance,
lay dead in front of the cage,- —the cruel heart stilled for ever,
the wicked eyes fixed in a glassy stare.
Had the massive brute been suddenly surrounded by men,
while still in his native wilds, he would doubtless have been
cowed by their presence, and, true to his traditions, would have
bowed his untutored spirit before his human masters. But, in
the Gardens, he had grown accustomed to their presence, and
had instinctively learned to associate them with every annoyance
and humiliation. It was, therefore, with no desire of abating
hunger, but with a savage breast full of hate towards his tor-
mentors, and the exhiliration of a captive suddenly set free, that
he bounded amongst the people, striking them down right and
left as they came in his way. Nor did the lordly animal stoop
to rend them, though, as the sense of liberty grew upon him, the
number of his victims multiplied. His eyes blazed with lurid
fire ; his tail now lashed the ground, now curled triumphantly
over his back ; roars of satisfaction broke from his massive
throat; his paws were soaked in blood.
As he approached, Mrs. Lancaster and Laura threw them-
selves into each other’s arms in mad terror, calling frantically
on Heaven to save them from the horrible death which seemed
inevitable.


Quick as thought, Harold Lancaster caught his wife to his
heart, pressed one kiss upon her lips, and, with the muttered
words, " Fly ! Save yourselves ! God bless you, Ruth, my
darling; do not forget me," turned and boldly threw himself
between the advancing lion and the two helpless women.
For a moment the brute paused in his headlong career as if
arrested by the splendid generosity of the man’s action, but the
shouts of his pursuers sounded close behind ; in another instant
Harold Lancaster lay, bleeding and defenceless, under the lion’s
blood-drenched paws.
Then a shot rang through the Gardens, and, with a stifled
roar, the brute sank dead upon the body of his victim.


CHAPTER XX.
“TILL THE DAY BREAKS."
SLL Melbourne rang with the awful tragedy. For long
weeks it engrossed public sympathy; but at first people
were appalled by the magnitude of the disaster.
Seventeen victims fell under the direct stroke of the
lion’s paw; many others were severely injured ; many
trampled under foot in the frantic rush for exit. Fearful tales
were told of how men lost presence of mind and scrambled to
safety over the backs of shrieking females; of how the tender
frames of little children were injured in the crush at the gates.
The huge heart of Melbourne was mightily stirred by the
pathos of Harold Lancaster's fate. The Argus told the whole
sad story of his wild, careless youth ; the neglect with which he
had treated the wife, whose brilliant, honourable career was well
remembered in the city ; of the parting between them over eight
years ago; of the wife’s steady, quiet life in New Zealand,and
the husband’s hand-to-mouth existence; of the strange interview
between them—the husband’s penitence and appeal to his wife—
the wife’s consent to share his humble lot, and of his tragic end at
the very moment happiness was once more within his grasp.
Women wept while they read, and the voices of strong men
grew husky over this sad story of a mis-spent life, but everyone
agreed his death was undoubtedly noble.
His remains were removed to Mr. Field’s house; those
doors which had been closed to him in life, were opened to admit
his body.
He had not suffered apparent mutilation, though a frightful
wound had been inflicted on the back of the head, where the
brute’s cruel strength had opened the skull and caused instan-
taneous death.


White as chiselled marble he lay in his coffin, his stormy
heart at rest, his quiet hands crossed upon his breast.
Ruth said very little to anyone, passively accepting the
kind attentions of her brother and his wife.
“ Let her alone,” advised Dr. Blanchard. “ Nature will
come to her aid by-and-bye; she has sustained a severe mental
shock.”
“ I am not unhappy about him,” she had said with a wan
smile when Charles and Alice endeavoured to comfort her with
the grand truths of religion. While we talked in the Gardens
he told me how his lonely rough life had softened his heart and
turned his thoughts to better things. c With God’s pardon for
the past and help for the future, I shall be a better man,’ he
said to me; and he told me how he had opened his heart and
bared his soul before God’s appointed tribunal. Therefore,
though it was cruel to see him struck down before my eyes, I
am not unhappy about him.”
So she went in and out of the room where Harold lay in the
quiet majesty of death. Sometimes she gazed long at his face
trying to trace the course of years upon it; sometimes she knelt
at his side, her face buried in her hands, but always silent,
always dry-eyed. She had placed a crucifix in his hands,
another small one on his breast, a few flowers upon the bed.
Before the coffin \\4ns screwed down she went alone into the
chamber of death.
“ Good-bye, Harold,” she said, kissing the cold lips for the
last time; “ good-bye, my husband, my one love. Life went
wrong with us somehow, dear, and only God knows who is to
blame most for it. Perhaps had I been gentler, more patient;
had I given you one more chance, you might have been different,
but I acted in good faith for the best. lam not your judge,
Harold. And oh, my love, just when we planned to take up
the dropped threads of our lives again with mutual forbearance,
God has interfered and snapped your thread short. Take my
kiss with you to your cold, dark grave, my Harold. I shall
keep my heart for you until we meet again in the land where
we shall never grow old. Good-bye, my darling, may God
have mercy on us both.”


Bending over him she laid a last long lingering kiss on his
cold lips, whispering softly: "Till the day breaks and the
shadows flee away.”
Ruth would have liked a quiet funeral for her husband, but
public sympathy was aroused. An immense crowd of mourners
followed the hearse to the cemetery.
They laid Harold Lancaster to rest while the wistaria hung
its purple clusters over garden walls ; while the gladness of
early summer was over the land. The ancient ritual of his
Church was read over the grave e’er they turned away and left
him alone with his God.
The time came when Ruth s unnatural calmness gave way;
when she wept blessed tears of relief on her brother's breast,*
while Alice and he strove to administer comfort to the sorely-
wounded heart.
“Is it not good to know he died a manly death ? ” asked
Charles, gently,
“ And that he had repented of his wild ways, and asked
your forgiveness ? ” added Alice.
“ Yes,” answered Ruth ; I have much to be thankful for.
Had he died on some up-country station, I might never have
heard of his death ; or he might have been snatched away in
debauchery of some kind. And, after all, a dead sorrow is not
so hard to bear as a living one. Indeed, Ido not repine, only
the pain is fresh and poor human nature cries out.”
"You will remain here with us now, Ruth, I hope?” said
Charles, whose heart ached for his sister. You will be happier
with us than among strangers in New Zealand, and here you
can take your proper position in society.”
“ You would not wish me to desert Mr. Jura in his old days,
Charlie? she asked, looking into his face with sorrowful eyes,
" He gave me a home wjjpn I was broken down in health and
alone in a strange country, and now that he is growing old I
could not desert him. Besides, in spite of my poignant grief,
I shall refurn to Waitaramoa happier than when I left it. For
I have often trembled almost at my own shadow, fearing
Harold ; have dreaded to scan a newspaper, for fear of seeing


his name associated with crime; for weary days and years have
shrunk from the thought of his re-appearance in my life. And
now my mind is at rest. Nay, dear Alice/’ she cried, turning
to her brother’s wife, whose soft arm had stolen round her neck,
“do not try to detain me. I must go back to Waitaramoa and
be good to the dear old man who was so kind to me in the
days when my heart was full of wild trouble.”
“Do not fret, Ruth,” said gentle Alice. “ You shall do
what you think best, and there shall always be a welcome for
you under our roof.”
So it was settled she was to return to New Zealand.
Many visitors called on Ruth Lancaster after her husband’s
funeral, and amongst them came Dr., Mrs., and Miss Blanchard.
Laura had sustained a severe fright, but youth soon enabled
her to throw off the effects, though the horror of the event
would never entirely fade from her memory.
The girl looked' pale and spiritless, for her kind heart was
afflicted in sympathy with her friend, and she was also suffering
acute disappointment through being unable to unburden her
mind, at the present juncture, to Mrs. Lancaster. So she
grieved, and grieved in silence, while the lovely colour faded
from her cheek, and the light from her blue eyes.
Mr. and Mrs. Bertram were quite overcome at the sight of
Ruth in her long black dress and widow’s cap, looking taller
and paler even than usual in the sweeping black robes. Mr.
Bertram wrung her hand in heartfelt sympathy, while his kind-
hearted wife wept openly.
“ I shall return to Waitaramoa with you when you are pre-
pared to go,” Ruth informed them by-and-bye. “Ah, Mrs.
Bertram, it has been an eventful trip.”
“ It has been full of trouble,” sighed Mrs. Bertram ; “ first
for Dr. Saumaurez and Miss Blanchard, and next this awful
blow to you. Who could call it a pleasure trip ? ”
“ It has contained both pleasure and pain, Mary,” declared
her husband; “ for Mrs. Lancaster has had the pleasure of
meeting her brother and his wife, and Miss Glover has met her
old sweetheart.”


“Yes; and I have also had the happiness of meeting and
forgiving my poor husband and receiving his last words.”
“ And perhaps Miss Blanchard and the doctor may become
reconciled yet,” added Mr. Bertram ; “young people often fall
out and soon fall in again.”
“ By-the-bye,” Ruth spoke meditatively, “ Laura was just
about to open her mkid to me that day in the Zoological Gar-
dens, when I requested her to wait till I had spoken to my
husband. The dreadful catastrophe that followed drove Laura’s
concerns out of my mind, but now I recollect she spoke quite
confidently of her ability to clear up every charge against her;
she said that though her lips had been sealed when Dr.
Saumaurez called her to account, there was no reason now why
she should not explain matters.”
“Of what did he accuse her?” Mrs. Bertram asked with
feminine curiosity, but her husband interrupted.
“Then, perhaps, if a meeting could be brought about be-
tween them things might be explained, and the young people
would be happy again.”
“Quite true, Mr. Bertram, but no one knows what has be-
come of the doctor. He has not been seen in Melbourne, and
may have returned to Dunedin by way of Sydney. Had he
been in Melbourne, he would surely have offered his sympathy
under my late trial. But, Mr. Bertram, you are a man of
observation; you do not keep your eyes shut. Now, if you
drop across him anywhere, be sure and bring him to me, for
my own trouble makes me pitiful to those young people, and I
would fain set matters right between them.”
“ If I come across him, I shall bring him to you by hook or
by crook,” answered Mr. Bertram.


CHAPTER XXI.
THE DETAINED PASSENGER.
*' New Zealand boat goes to-day, Mary,” said Mr.
Mu | KM Bertram to his wife on the Thursday morning
y&j after their visit to Mrs. Lancaster. “ I’ve been
thinking a good deal about that nice young fellow
Saumaurez, and I don’t believe he has gone back
to Dunedin yet.”
“ Don’t you, William ? ” asked his wife, looking up from
her knitting in surprise; “ if he hasn’t gone back, where can he
be ? Nobody has seen him here, and surely he would have
visited the Exhibition or other places of interest, and we must
have met or heard of him somewhere.”
“ I don’t think he has gone back yet, for you see the
Dunedin people all knew he was coming over here in the hope
of getting Miss Blanchard for his wife, and I scarcely fancy a
high-spirited young fellow like him would go straight back with
his finger in his mouth, as you might say, to let everybody
know he was disappointed. What I think is this ; as he had
got an assistant for three months, there could be nothing to hurry
him back, so he made up his mind to remain away that length
of time, and, on his return, inform people the wedding was put
off for a while, gradually letting out that it was not to take place
at all.”
“But where can he be, William? That is the question,”
said Mrs. Bertram, dropping her knitting into her lap, and
looking steadfastly into her husband’s face. “You can’t think
how troubled lam about that young couple. Poor Laura looks
heart-broken ; no one would take her for the same bonnie girl
who came on board at Dunedin. Do you remember, William,


how happy she and the doctor looked ; how entirely engrossed
in each other. I wish he could be found. And you are so
clever,” she continued, with an admiring glance at her husband,
who sat by the table, his hand supporting his head, his bushy
eyebrows knit in thought; “ you are so clever, that if you fail to
find Dr. Saumaurez, he can’t be in Victoria.”
“ My opinion is that the young fellow has taken his dis-
appointment sorely to heart, and, while the wound was fresh,
would dread the risk of meeting any of us by remaining in
Melbourne ; so I expect he just slipped quietly away to Geelong,
Ballarat, or may be Queenscliff or Sorrento, and there remains
eating his heart out till the time comes round for his return to
New Zealand.”
“ We did’nt see him in Ballarat,” remarked Mrs. Bertram.
“ We didn’t look for him,” her husband replied.
“ Mrs. Lancaster and Miss Glover didn’t see him in Gee-
long,” she insisted.
“ What of that? He might easily have been in Geelong
although they didn’t see him.”
“ Well, I hope we’ll come across him somewhere if he is still
in Victoria.”
Mr. Bertram sat silently, staring into the empty fireplace.
Now and then his wife glanced furtively at him, but did not
interrupt his cogitations, for during her married life she had
learned not to disturb him when he wore that look of meditation.
So she knitted industriously while he pondered, until the silence
was broken by the noisy entrance of Chester Waters.
“ Uncle,” said the boy, “are you going to take me to Cole’s
Book Arcade to buy ‘Grimm’s Goblins’? ”
“Hush, Chester,” said his aunt, lifting a warning finger;
“ your uncle is busy just now.’’
“ But is he going to take me, aunt?”
“ Your auntie will take you, my boy,” said Mr. Bertram,
suddenly rising up with an alert look on his face. “ You and
the boy can go to Cole’s, Mary, and buy the book; then you
can trot along Collins street and look at the shop windows to
your heart’s content.”


“ But aren’t you coming-, uncle ?”
“ No,” answered he, drawing out his watch and glancing at
the time ; I must go down to the wharf ; the steamer is to sail
at twelve.”
“ We might accompany you, William ; we can buy the book
another time,” suggested his wife.
“No, Mary; I have something to do down at the wharf
and had better be alone,”
“ Very well, William,” said his wife, placidly.
He walked briskly down to the wharf and made his way on
board the steamer, inquiring of the chief steward if Dr. Sau-
maurez was on board.
“ Not yet, sir,” was the reply ; “ though so many persons
have Exhibition return tickets that we can scarcely tell our
passengers til! we get under way.”
Thanking him, Mr. Bertram hastened ashore, where he took
up his post at the end of the gangway.
“Now,” thought he, “I shall see everyone who embarks ;
no one can possibly escape my eye.”
Mr. Bertram’s former profession (that of police inspector)
had trained him to weigh and analyse; he was a man who
deeply studied cause and effect. Turning matters over in his
mind that morning, he decided the young doctor was not one
to rush back impulsively to Dunedin “with his finger in his
mouth,” as he had aptly phrased it, but much more likely to
steal away in wounded pride and fight out his battle alone.
“ But,” he deliberated, “ the three months are nearly up
and he will not linger in Melbourne, nor, for that matter, in
Victoria ; so putting everything together, he is not unlikely to
take passage by this boat or the next.”
So he leaned upon the gangway and scanned each person
who crossed it.
“ There goes the first whistle,” he muttered, as the awful
unearthly shriek (like the death-cry of a maddened animal),
which is the special auxialiary of New Zealand boats, rang out
upon the startled air. The decks were crowded with intending


passengers and the friends who had come down to the steamer
to see them off, and there was continual rushing backwards and
forwards across the gangway. But in spite of the crush Mr.
Bertram kept to his post, and by-and-bye had the satisfaction
of touching Dr. Saumaurez’s shoulder to arrest his attention.
The young fellow started, and flushed painfully, but held out
his hand with manly frankness to Mr. Bertram.
“ How do you do ? ” he said, “ Are you also returning by
this boat ? ”
“ No, doctor; not for another fortnight, at least."
“ How are Mrs. Bertram and the little fellow ? Are they
enjoying their visit to Melbourne ? ” continued Dr. Saumaurez,
turning back off the gangway and facing his companion on the
wharf.
“ They are both well, and enjoying themselves."
The young man's face was thin and haggard; drawn lines
round his mouth told of mental suffering; but still he looked a
handsome, stalwart, manly fellow, and Mr. Bertram felt greatly
attracted by him.
“ How shall I contrive to get him along to Mrs. Lancaster’s?’’
he wondered ; “yet I must make the effort; nay, I must posi-
him there.”
The two men talked of the weather, the number of strangers
in Melbourne, and other non-committal topics.
“ Does Mrs. Lancaster return with you and your wife ? ”
asked the doctor, at last.
“Yes; she goes back with us, poor woman. What a sad
holiday it has been for her.”
“ How is that? Has she not enjoyed herself ? ” asked the
young man, with a look of interest.
“ Dear me, Dr. Saumaurez ! Have you not heard about her
husband ? ”
“ Her husband ! You don't mean to say he has turned up
again ? I tell you what it is—she will never have a moment's
peace with that man if she is foolish enough to go back to him.
She ought to get a protection order.”


“ Doctor,” interrupted Mr, Bertram, in shocked tones, “she
will need no protection order now, poor thing; he will trouble
her no more; he is dead.”
“ Dead ! is he really dead? I heard nothing about it. How
and where did he die ? ”
Just then the sounding of the second whistle reminded Dr..
Saumaurez he ought to go on board, but how could he do so at
such a juncture ? He felt great sympathy for his old friend in
her distress.
“ I ca- n still spare a few minutes,” he determined, looking at
the gangway; “even if that were removed, I could still spring
on board before the steamer moves off.”
“ How and where did Mr. Lancaster die? ” he repeated,,
hurriedly.
“Where have you been, Dr. Saumaurez ? ” retorted Mr.
Bertram, curiously, “that you are unaware of his fate ? Why,
Melbourne has spoken of nothing else for days, and the poor
fellow was followed to the grave by thousands of people.”
“You do astonish me! ” replied Glenois, permitting the first
part of Mr. Bertram’s speech to pass unnoticed. “ What hap-
pened to him ? did he meet with an accident ? The fact is, I
haven't been reading the papers lately.”
“ Look here, Saumaurez, I don’t know where on earth you’ve
been that you heard nothing of Harold Lancaster’s fate, unless
you’ve been camping in the bush. But you are an old friend
of the widow’s, and now that you learn of her sad trouble, the
magnitude of which has roused the sympathy of all Melbourne,
and, God knows, has been great enough to almost shake the
poor woman's reason, do you mean to tell me you will sail in
that steamer there in two or three minutes’ time? If you do, I
have mistaken my man, that’s all. If I know anything of your
character you will wait for next week’s boat, and come straight
away out to Windsor with me and visit your old friend in her
distress, I can tell you, Saumaurez, it will be a sore task for
me to go to that lonely woman and let her know that, though
you heard of her sad trial, you cleared out without going near
her. A terrible tragedy has taken place in Melbourne within
the last fortnight. If you accompany me to Windsor I shall
give you the particulars as we go. What are you going to do? ”


“ Mr. Bertram,'’ said the young- doctor, raising a pair of
honest brown eyes to that gentleman’s face, “ I shall not deny
my anxiety to leave Melbourne, nor to avoid the possibility of
meeting certain persons, but if Mrs. Lancaster, for whom I have
the deepest respect, is in any trouble which sympathy can allay,
it would ill become me to consider my personal feelings before
her need. No, I shall not sail to-day,” he said, turning to the
men who were urging him to go aboard before they removed
the gangway. “Mr. Matthews, I am not going with you*
could you put my traps ashore?” he shouted to the second
mate, who was on the main deck issuing orders to the men.
“ Aren’t you coming, doctor?” answered the busy mate.
“ No, something has occurred to detain me; get those traps
put ashore like a good fellow.”
“Here! some of you fellows lend a hand with Dr. Sau-
maurez’s luggage,” yelled the mate, for all strangers were
ashore, and the third and last whistle had gone. “ Put back
that gangway, you men,” for the gangway had been withdrawn,
and already the huge steamer was vibrating with the first
throbs of its powerful engines. Willing hands instantly re-
placed the gangway, and the mate himself rushed across it with
the doctor's portmanteau, followed by a sailor bearing the rest
of his effects. Slinging them down on the wharf, the two men
re-crossed only just in time, fora breach was rapidly widening
between steamer and shore. The engines worked furiously ;
undreamt-of substances floated up from the bottom of the now
inky Yarra. Faugh ! what slime ! what oil ! what filth ! Who,
looking at the Yarra at such a moment, would ever court a
grave beneath its unsavoury waters, be the burden of life ever
so hard to bear ?
“ God bless you! you’re a fine fellow and no mistake. I
foretell you will not regret the kindheartedness which caused
you to delay your departure. And now, we had better stow
your traps somewhere first, and then ride out t® Windsor.”


CHAPTER XXII.
“ BLESSED IS THE PEACEMAKER.”
RS • LANCASTER was deeply touched on learning
Jmbwsmowl Lorn Mr. Bertram of the young doctor’s kindly
ac b desire to help the lovers increased.
J Glenois’ ignorance of the tragedy at the Zoological
Gardens seemed unaccountable to her.
“ I have not looked at a newspaper since I landed in Vic-
toria. The truth is, Mrs. Lancaster,” he explained, falling back
unconsciously into his old habit of confiding in her; “ the truth
is, I went down to Geelong the very day the * Waratera ’ got
in. When in Victoria previously I had the privilege of board-
ing in Geelong with a very charming lady. During the first
hours of the day following my rupture with Miss Blanchard,”
his face colouring at the name, “ my mind reverted to ‘ Fernery
Cottage’ and kind Mrs. Hill. ‘ The very place and person to assist
me in bearing the blow manfully,’ I thought, remembering the
graceful delicacy of the refined little lady’s manner—the staunch
courage and smiling face with which she had fought her own
hard battle. So I lost no time in presenting myself at ‘ Fernery
Cottage,’where Mrs. Hill’s quick, bright, dark eyes discovered
my dispirited condition in a moment. ‘ I have come for perfect
retirement and study,’ was the only explanation I gave. ‘ I
wish to see no one, and would like you to keep newspapers out
of my room.’ She could see I was in trouble, and only once
infringed my request. One day, when I returned from a long
tramp by the banks of the ‘ Barwon,’ she brought a cup of tea
to my sitting-room, saying, * There is a frightful account in the
newspapers to-day of ’ ”
Do not tell me about it, Mrs. Hill,’ I objected wearily,
and she said no more—she saw I was too entirely engrossed in


my own affairs to care to hear of the outside world, but had
she known of my acquaintance with you, she would most
assuredly have broken through my wall of reserve. She has
been as kind as a mother to me. Ah ! Mrs. Lancaster, good,
true-hearted women like her save men from becoming misan-
thropes oftener than one thinks.”
“ I think I understand, Glen. You dreaded hearing of the
Blanchards or seeing mention of Laura’s social triumphs. I
see you wince at the name, but I hope you are manly enough,
brave enough, to endure what I have to say. I believe we have
both been labouring under a mistaken idea regarding Laura
Blanchard. I went one evening to the Exhibition in company
with my brother and his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Bertram and
Chester. While strolling round the courts, Chester’s bright eyes
detected Miss Blanchard within the doorway of the Chinese
Temple. He pointed her out to us, and, as she appeared to be
alone, I hastened forward to greet her. But, Glen, she was not
alone, for a man in the garb of a common labourer was with
her.”
“ Stop, stop, Mrs. Lancaster ! ” cried Dr. Saumaurez, rising
hastily, with a burning flush on his face; “don’t tell me any-
thing of that kind. The lady is at perfect liberty to meet
whomsoever she chooses.”
“ Have patience, Glen ; 1 do not tell this to harass you,
urged his friend. “Think what a shock it was to me to dis-
cover that the man who was with her was my husband, Harold.”
“ What?” cried the doctor, facing round suddenly, with a
look of consternation.
“ Was my husband,” she deliberately repeated. “Seeing
him hand the girl a letter, I sank senseless into the nearest
chair, and when I recovered they had left the place.”
“ The infernal scoundrel ! What did he want with Laura? ”
cried the angry man.
“ You are speaking of my dead husband,” reproved the
widow with grave dignity.
“I beg your pardon, Mrs, Lancaster; my feelings carried
me away for the moment.”


“ I was greatly perplexed how to act, Glen,” resumed Mrs*
Lancaster ; “but one day on our way to Geelong, Miss Glover
asked my opinion concerning the warning she gave you on
board the ‘ Waratera.’ ”
Ruth put out her hand to tranquilise the young man, upon
whose face that painful, burning flush again appeared.
“ Gertrude explained to me how severely she had suffered
in her youth through acting upon rash judgment. She has met
her old lover after fifteen years of separation, and he has proved
to her the injustice and folly of her early action. And now
that she is about to marry the man of her choice, her own
happiness has made her very pitiful towards Laura, and ex-
tremely anxious to be assured her interference in your affairs
was justifiable. So she told me the whole story of Laura’s
clandestine meetings with a sailor on the forecastle. Every
word was a dagger in my heart, Glenois, for, after what I saw
in the Exhibition, what could I believe except that the ‘ able-
bodied’ sailor was my poor husband striving to earn a living
at any rough job he could get.”
“ Your sufferings must have equalled mine, Mrs. Lancaster.”
“ I waited a chance of talking alone with Laura,” she re-
sumed. “It came that day at the ‘ Zoo,’ for, when walking
down the shady paths, I observed my husband lying on the
grass under the trees. We recognised each other, but, stagger-
ing past, I sank down on a seat a little way off. Then and
there, in the most abrupt fashion (for my reticent Scotch nature
was stirred to its depths), I faced Laura, and demanded an
explanation of the terms on which she and my husband appeared
to stand. Glenois Saumaurez! the girl spoke up honestly,,
without a shadow of hesitation. She indignantly denied having
any acquaintance with Mr. Lancaster, and openly told me the
man she had met on the £ Waratera ’ was ‘ Harry Hazeldine,’
from whom Harold had undertaken to deliver a letter into her
hands. Her own words to me were; * Though my lips were
sealed by a promise when Dr. Saumaurez demanded an expla-
nation, lam at perfect liberty to speak now.’ I thought while
she spoke she hoped the story might reach you through me t
each time your name was mentioned her voice trembled, her
colour came and went —proving conclusively to my experienced


eye you were the man who held her young affections. But
when I found Harold was in no way implicated with the girl, I
was too eager to speak to him to listen to her story just then,
and before we separated the tragedy had taken place. Promise
me, dear lad, to see Laura once more, and give her a chance
of explaining the mystery. Do promise me,” she pled.
“ How can it be explained, Mrs, Lancaster? Though your
husband was not the man she met, by her own confession it was
this 1 Harry Hazeldine.’ The fact remains—the persons only
differ,”
“ Listen to me, Glenois. lam convinced Laura is as guile-
less as a child. Had I been like you, I might even now have
been suspecting her and my dead husband wrongfully ; but I
asked and received an honest explanation, which my conversa-
tion with Harold entirely bore out. The girl has confided in
no one as yet, but has frattedand pined ever since she lost you;
nor would she permit a shadow of blame to rest upon your
name. If that was not love which shone in her eyes for you,
Glen, I do not know what love is. Now, be generous ; give
her an opportunity of explaining. You know best how dear
she is to you. Shall you lose her because of empty pride, which
will never fill the void in your heart?”
“She is dearer to me than all the world,” cried the young
man ; “ but what can Ido ? I cannot go to Dr. Blanchard’s
house after all that has passed, and where else can I see her?”
“ Face the position boldly—faint heart never won fair lady,”
counselled Ruth.
“ I will do it,” said he, drawing himself up manfully.
“ My dear boy, I shall accompany you ; my presence will
cover your embarrassment,” cried overjoyed Ruth.
So, to the unbounded astonishment of Charles and Alice
Field, Mrs. Lancaster drove off in a hansom with Dr. Sau-
maurez. It was the first time the widow had been out-of-doors
since the funeral.


CHAPTER XXIII.
“WHO IS HARRY HAZELDINE?”
ip 11E hansom drew up in front of Dr. Blanchard’s hand-
Mj/i ILIE. some house in Hotham just as Laura’s father himself
\YI\ jw came hurriedly out at the door. Dr. Saumaurez
coloured hotly, and even Mrs. Lancaster was for the
moment slightly taken aback, but to the surprise of
both. Dr. Blanchard received them with great cordiality.
“ My wife and Mrs. Marchmont are away from home. I’m
off to a sudden sick call, but I suppose you’ve come to make
friends with my little girl, Saumaurez ; you’ll find her in the
drawing-room. Our business won’t wait, you know, Glen, so
Mrs. Lancaster and you must excuse me. Glad to see you out,
ma’am ; nothing like making an effort.”
And he steamed out at the garden gate, leaving his two
visitors to look at each other in astonishment.
“ Come, now, that’s a good beginning,” declared Mrs.
Lancaster.
“ He couldn’t be thinking of what he said ; his mind must
have been on his work,” Glenois decided.
“ Perhaps it was, but I never saw him look so pleased, con-
tented, and light-hearted before,” responded Ruth. “ You
will go to the drawing-room, Glen, and have a talk with Laura.
Come, I shall usher you in.”
Sympathising with the young fellow’s evident agitation, the
kind-hearted woman softly opened the drawing-room door.
A most unexpected sight met their gaze ! There, on the
sofa, sat Laura Blanchard, robed in white, a happy flush mant


ling her cheek, a happy light beaming in her blue eyes. Be*
side her stood a tall, well-dressed, good-looking man of about
thirty, whose hand rested upon her shoulder, against whom she
caressingly leant her pretty head. They were enjoying the
most intimate confidential conversation, and Laura’s silvery
laugh rang out as merrily as it was wont to sound on the
“ Waratera.”
The two intruders on this unexpected scene stood thunder-
struck for a couple of minutes before their presence was dis-
covered. The young doctor’s face had become ashen white
even Mrs. Lancaster looked horror-stricken.
Laura was the first to notice them, and she rose to her feet
at once, her face alternately flushing and paling. But who
could mistake that look in the girl’s eyes ? Who could mis-
construe the innocent ease with which she bid them welcome?
Not even the veriest tyro.
With graceful dignity, she presented to Mrs. Lancaster
“my brother-in-law, Mr. Harry Hazeldine,’’ and then intro-
duced the gentlemen to each other.
After a few awkward remarks apropos of nothing in par-
ticular, poor Mrs. Lancaiter, who had scarcely recovered from
her great shock, lost her head completely.
Forgetting she was in another person’s house, she made a
few indistinct remarks anent the negligence of servants and
necessity of afternoon tea, ending by an ignominious flight
from the room, followed closely by Harry Hazeldine, who was
understood to say something about “ carrying the tray.
At the door of Mrs. Blanchard’s morning-room, Mrs.
Lancaster paused to say : “ Will you come in here, Mr, Hazel-
dine ? I would like a few words with you.”
“Certainly,” answered that gentleman, also recovering
presence of mind, and following Mrs, Lancaster into the room.
“ Who are you ?” questioned plain-spoken Ruth.
“I am Dr. Blanchard’s son-in-law," Mr. Hazeldine an-
swered.
“ His son-in-law?" repeated Ruth, in great bewilderment.
How can you be that ? ”


“By the simple fact of having married his elder daughter,
Florence,” he replied, with dawning amusement.
“ I thought Laura was his only child,” declared Ruth.
“My wife, Florence, is five years older than Laura ; but I
see you are mystified, Mrs. Lancaster. Poor, dear, little Laura
has got into sad trouble through loyalty to me, so it is but fair I
should help to set things straight for her again. The truth is, I
have been under a cloud for some time, and for that reason
Florence’s name and mine have not been alluded to lately by
her parents —not in public, at all events,” he said, looking frankly
into Mrs. Lancaster’s face.
“ Were you the man she met on the ‘ Waratera ’? ”
“Yes,” he answered, with rising colour, “and but for my
obstinate timidity, poor Laura need not have suffered.”
“ When you found she was suspected of intrigue, why did
you not exculpate her?” demanded the fair catechiser, hotly.
“ I knew nothing about it till to-day,” he retorted ; “ I only
arrived from ’Frisco last night, and seem to be rendering
account of myself pretty smartly,” with a quizzical smile.
The story he told ran something as follows ;
He was accountant of a bank in Brisbane five years before,
when he married Florence Blanchard and took her to his
Queensland home. Four happy years sped past, but early in
the fifth a terrible misfortune overtook them. Mr. Hazeldine
had been promoted to the post of manager, and fortune appeared
to smile on him, when a mysterious robbery took place in the
bank, and circumstantial evidence pointed strongly to Mr.
Hazeldine as the perpetrator.
Brought suddenly face to face with some very ugly facts, he
lost presence of mind, and irretrievably damaged his cause by
flight. When cool judgment returned, he found large rewards
offered for his apprehension—the newspapers dwelt on the fact
of his flight as proof positive of guilt. There seemed little hope
of escaping conviction by surrendering at that crisis, so he
made his way to Sydney, where he hid about in disguise, living
a wretched, hand-to-mouth existence.
In sailor’s suit and sou’wester, he contrived to elude the
vigilance of the police, but did not dare communicate with his


unhappy wife. Noticing Laura’s name in the passenger list
of a ship from Melbourne to New Zealand, he determined to
make his way to the latter place, and, through his little sister-
in-law, send a message to his darling wife, Florence.
A New Zealand boat was in the act of leaving the Circular
Quay when a sailor fell from aloft, being killed instantaneously.
Offering himself for the vacant post, he obtained it (thanks to
the sea-port town in which he was born, and the sailors whom
the bright lad delighted to help), and worked on the ship as an
able-bodied seaman.
Pfis intention was to leave the ship at Dunedin, and make
his way out to the “ Hermitage,” where he expected to find
Laura, but, to his amazement, she, with her aunt and Dr.
Saumaurez, came on board as passengers to Melbourne.
Mr, Hazeldine told Mrs. Lancaster what passed on board
—how he contrived to slip a note into her hand, asking her to
meet him on the forecastle, the only available place for him—
how she urged him each night to throw off disguise, surrender
himself, and, conscious of innocence, stand a trial—how, finding
entreaties unavailing, she had promised to meet him in the
Exhibition and provide him with means of escape to San P'ran-
cisco—how, finding an opportunity of working a passage, he
embraced it, entrusting to a labouring man, his humble fellow-
lodger, a letter of explanation to Laura.
“ I so dreaded being captured that 1 made Laura promise
solemnly to keep my secret till I had escaped, when I would
send and release her from it. She pledged her word not to
betray me, even to my wife Florence, till I had reached a place
of safet}'. But before I was above a week in ’Frisco, I saw in a
Queensland paper that the true criminal had been traced,
had confessed the crime, and was imprisoned. Then I cast off
disguise and returned without loss of time, arriving here only
last night. Laura behaved nobly, but I had no notion the poor
girl would lose her lover through keeping my miserable secret.
She told her father the whole business this morning, and I assure
you my father-in-law is very proud of his daughter’s rectitude.
And he allows Saumaurez was quite justified in suspecting
Laura under the circumstances; indeed, he goes as far as to
declare that had he not been a well-t»ained gentleman, he would


have kicked up a deuce of a row and chucked me overboard.
Do you think we may venture to disturb the turtle-doves yet ? ”
he concluded, with a humorous twinkle in his eyes.
“ I really don’t know,” replied Mrs. Lancaster with a
comical look, “ but, perhaps, if we coughed loudly outside the
door they might take the hint.”
When at last the young couple appeared, Harry Hazeldine
stepped forward to Dr. Saumaurez with outstretched hand.
“ I hope you bear me no grudge, Saumaurez ? ”
“ None whatever; I have buried the war-hatchet.”
“ Then let us smoke the peace-pipe together, while the ladies
have their chat.”
"So you have forgiven him, Laura ? My dear, you are by no
means a heroine. Young ladies in novels never forgive offend-
ing sweethearts,” laughed Ruth.
She was right—Laura was no high-flown heroine posing for
trffect; but a loving, simple-hearted Colonial girl, who had given
her true heart to this man, and who found it an utter impossibility
to take back the gift.
On Mis. Blanchard’s return home with her sister, Mrs.
Marchmont, a few days later, she was agreeably surprised to
find a change for the better in her family affairs. Mr. Hazeldine
had written to his wife from ’Frisco, and Florence had hastened
to join him at her father’s; her husband’s innocence in the
matter of the robbery was now being proclaimed far and wide
by the Colonial Press. Laura was quite her old self, bright
and joyous; and, above all, Dr. Saumaurez was back on his
old footing as her betrothed husband. Nor was he call.d
upon to occupy that position long, for so ably did he plead his
cause with Laura’s parents, that they consented to an almost
immediate marriage.
Money can do wonders; in ten days time Laura was in
possession of as handsome a trousseau as any Colonial girl could
desire.
They were married one bright sunny morning at St. Patrick’s
Cathedral, and departed to Geelong for a short honeymoon be-
fore sailing for New Zealand.


A week later, the “ Waratera ” bore from the Flinders street
wharf a party of homeward-bound holiday-makers.
Mrs. Lancaster, in hter widow’s garb, the romance of her life
hidden from sight, her restless heart in peace at last, was leaving
her beloved brother and sister, and wending her way back to
the kind old man who had been so true a friend in her desperate
need.
Mr. and Mrs. Warwick, of “ Carr,” with Mrs. Glover, were
on board also. They intended to dispose of their Dunedin pro-
perty, and then return to their beautiful home at Windsor.
Dr, and Mrs. Saumaurez were about to commence their
married life in Dunedin ; their young hearts beat high with
love and hope. Mrs. Marchmont returned with them to her
much-loved home, “The Hermitage,” thinking she had seen
no place so fair since she left it.
Of those left behind there is little more to say.
Mr. and Mrs. Field were contented and happy with each
other; admired by friends and acquaintances; beloved by
their sister.
The Bowrings continued to enjoy health and prosperity,
and pretty Eve was soon engrossed in a romance of her own.
For a time Dr. and Mrs. Blanchard felt lonely without their
daughter Laura, but Florence Hazeldine and her husband
lingered with them for a few weeks.
Mr. and Mrs. Bert ram are back in their own home, living their
simple, honest, kindly lives ; at peace with themselves and their
neighbours. When shadows fall, and the day’s duties are over,
Ruth and they talk of their eventful trip, and of the strange way
in which the lonely woman’s life story had become connected
with The Mystery of the Forecastle.
FINIS.


Tablet Printing Co. Octagon, Dunedin, N.Z.




