





LAST SERMON,
WITH
HIS LETTER TO THE CHURCH, AND THEIR
ANSWER, WITH HIS REPLY,
ROBERT ROSS, M.D.,
CONGREGATIONAL MINISTER.*
hij tjjp Cljnrrlj.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK, •
13, BRIDGE STREET.
. 1854.




MB3JS9 FiSO l^
\v^rv^"n
SERMON-
“I GO TO PREPARE A PLACE FOR YOU.”— John xnr. 2.
(Preached by the Rev. Dr. Ross, March 12, 1854,)
Christ was about to leave his disciples at a much
earlier period than they expected he would have
done, and in circumstances which they had not at
all anticipated. He had established no temporal
kingdom, had erected no earthly throne, had made
no territorial conquest. Instead of doing so, he
had intimated in plain terms that he should be
seized and put to death ; and that with all the
responsibility of maintaining a cause which was
founded in blood, and could only be carried on
through indefatigable exertion and the patient
endurance of suffering, his followers were to be
left alone in the world. Their hearts were filled
with sorrow ; he speaks to them the words of
consolation. I go, but it is not to be an eternal
separation—l go, whither ere long you will follow
me—l go, in order to prepare a place for your
reception in that happy land where we shall meet
together again, and where we shall never more be


separated—for where I am it is my will and inten-
tion that ye shall be also. Their hearts were
comforted, and in some measure prepared for the
trying scenes which they were soon called to
encounter. But this declaration of Scripture was
not intended merely for the encouragement of the
Apostles—for our benefit also was it spoken, and
for the benefit of all the disciples of Christ in all
ages. He has gone to prepare a place in the
heavenly world for them, for us ; and ere long he
will come again, and receive us unto himself, that
we may behold his glory and rejoice in his love.
There are several very interesting points of view
from which this declaration may be contemplated.
Place the emphasis upon the first w T ord in the sen-
tence, “ —allow your minds to dwell upon it,
and there w ill open up to you a most interesting
field of meditation. “Igo to prepare a place for
you.” He speaks of heaven as if it were a place
with which he was perfectly familiar, and yet as a
man he had never been in it. His language im-
plies that he could go to it and return from it just
when he chose, and as he chose—that he possessed
authority there, supreme authority—could make
arrangements in it for the reception of his fol-
lowers—had at his command all its means of se-
curity and happiness ; while among the loftiest of
its inhabitants there was not one who would dispute
his will or oppose his authority, but, on the con-


trary, all would giving effect to the least
of his wishes. Oh, what a combination of dignity
and of humility is thus presented to our notice in
the person of Jesus Christ! At the very time he
uttered these words, he was in the upper room of
a retired dwelling in one of the obscure streets of
Jerusalem. His enemies are plotting against him
to take his life—in a very few hours he will be a
prisoner, bound, insulted, condemned—and yet he
rises to all the dignity of a God, and employs
language which none could lawfully use but the
Lord of heaven. My brethren, if Christ could
ascend by his own power to the regions of Para-
dise—if he could command the golden gates to be
opened for his admission —if he could enter into
the eternal mansions, and issue his orders, and
make them a suitable residence for those spirits
whom he has been pleased to redeem and convey
thither —then surely we must look to him as Lord
of all, adore him as the King eternal, and trust in
him as an Almighty and all-sufficient Saviour.
And if this be his character, if through the guise
of his afflicted humanity we perceive such mani-
festations of the Godhead, oh, how can we ever
sufficiently admire his condescension in thus per-
forming for us the office of a servant. We might
have supposed it sufficient for him to send his
attendants to prepare a place for us—for in the
heavenly world, thousands of thousands minister


unto him, and love to do his will, hearkening to the
voice of his commands; he might have spoken,
and they would instantly have obeyed—but no, he
takes the matter into his own hands : He can trust
it to no other—he will trust it to no other—and
although it is a mighty stoop for him to behold the
things that are done in heaven or in earth, he
lowers himself still more when he would prepare
a place for his people, and goes himself to accom-
plish it.
“Igo to prepare a place for you.” Place your
emphasis upon the second word in this sentence—
“ I go." He was on the move. He had clothed
himself, as it were, for the journey. He was just
about to start; a few minutes, and he would be
off; but oh, what difficulties lay before him—what
obstacles to be removed by him—what enemies to
be overcome ! He knew it all, nothing was con-
cealed from his inspection, and yet he did not
shrink ; he was to be betrayed by a false friend—
he was to be deserted by his real friends—all the
powers of darkness were to be let loose upon him
—his soul, which had never sunk within him
before, was to be exceeding sorrowful even to
death—his Father was to forsake him —all that
the malignity and cunning of cruel men could
devise, was to be inflicted upon him—he was to
he treated as a worm and no man—he was to be
stricken, and wounded, and killed, to be brought


down to the darkness of death. All this lay be-
fore him—all this was to be encountered by him —
and yet he says, “ I go" willingly —he says it to
cheer them—no one could have constrained him
to move one step on this road—“ I lay down my
life of myself.” It is as if he had said, “True,
my sufferings are great, greater than any created
being could endure, but great as they are, I con-
sider them nothing when compared with the object
in view —to prepare a place for you. If I can but
succeed in this, I shall willingly endure the cross,
despising the shame.” “ I go." Oh, my brethren,
what a path for the Son of God to tread! H e
who knew no sin, and in whose mouth no guile
was’ever found, who was holy, harmless, and
undefiled, who w r as the image of the invisible God,
trode the path of suffering and of death. Do you
not admire his love, his pure, self-denying, disin-
terested love ? Can you find in the history of the
universe a parallel ? Can you make any return
at all suitable to it? Oh, “the depth and the
heighth, the length and the breadth, of the love of
Christ,” it passeth all knowledge.
“Igo to prepare a place for you.” Place your
emphasis on the middle clause of this sentence,
“to prepare a place." He has left his Holy Spirit
to prepare a place for his people upon earth, to
form their character, to arrange their circumstances,
to guide their feet, to mark out for them the direc-


tion in which to move, and to assist them in the
duties they have to perform. This divine Being
is the grand agent whom he employs to manage
all the affairs of his followers while they remain
in this world ; but he has gone himself to prepare
a place for them in heaven. Formerly there was
no place there ready for them—there was a heaven,
and in that heaven there were many mansions—
mansions prepared for angels, but none prepared
for sinners—and therefore, unless he had made
suitable preparations, man would have been for
ever excluded. It is true that the kingdom of
glory is represented as having been prepared from
before the foundation of the world, but this does
not refer to the actual preparation, but to the pur-
pose of God regarding it. If it be asked, what
Christ has done in heaven in order to prepare a
place for his people, and what the kind of pre-
paration he has made for their reception ? We
answer that we cannot clearly and distinctly tell;
but that from various intimations and figurative
passages of Scripture, we may state : that Christ
in heaven appears in the presence of God for us—
that he there presents the virtue of his blood on
our behalf—that there he bears our nature—and
as an advocate and intercessor pleads our cause.
Christ’s presence in heaven is necessary for these
purposes, and they are necessary, in order that
we may be enabled and fitted to dwell in heaven.


Heb. ix. 23, 24, intimating that as the temple was
polluted by the presence of sinners, and required
purifying, so did the heavenly temple. Heb. x.
20; ix. 11—14. By these means he makes the
preparation. And as to the preparation itself.
He has so prepared it as that his people shall be
admitted into it, and shall all dwell together—not
scattered from one another over the immensity of
space—but probably form the one happy dwelling
of those who dwelt together on earth. He has so
prepared it as that they shall dwell in great mag-
nificence, and dignity, and glory—sit on thrones,
wear crowns, and eternally reflect his own bright
perfections. He has so prepared it as that they
shall be peaceful and happy, active and useful,
having every power employed, and every capacity
for enjoyment filled ; a permanent abode, which
they shall never again leave—excluding all foes,
all temptations, all sin—beyond the possibility of
ever being withdrawn from its sacred delights.
“ I go to prepare a place for you.” Place the
emphasis upon the last words of the sentence—
“for you." Oh, with what a thrill of rapture
ought this declaration to be listened to by the
disciples of Jesus ; “ I go to prepare a place for
you." What, for me ? Why, this is the most
wonderful part of the whole ! It is indeed aston-
ishing that Jesus should condescend to make this
preparation—it is more astonishing that he should


make it at the expense of so much suffering —but
it is more astonishing still that he should make it
for me. Is it possible ? I was a rebel once, my
heart was full of enmity against him, my life
had been polluted by many sins ; and although I
am not what I once was, yet I still feel so much
of the old man in me, my heart is still so deceitful,
my imperfections are still so numerous, that I am
utterly unworthy of his notice ; and yet has he
prepared a place for me. I cannot realize it—my
fears forbid me to draw any comfort from it.
Humble Christian —penitent Christian —believing
Christian —it is true. For you he trode the wine
press alone; for you he endured the cross ; for
you he entered into the Holy of Holies, and ap-
pears in the presence of God for you. Rejoice
ever more—rejoice in the Lord always—again, I
say, rejoice. Yes, this place is prepared, not for
the righteous, but for sinners ; not for hypocrites,
but for the sincere ; not for nominal, but for real
Christians ; not for the proud, but for the humble ;
for all who, renouncing the world and sin, rest in
his blood, believe in his name, and live to his
g ]or y-
This passage is full of consolation and encou-
ragement to Christians.
1. There is something very delightful in the
thought that we have in heaven a friend, an Al-
mighty friend, who is thus preparing a place for


us, who is preparing it for us now ; and which we
are sure will be quite ready for our reception, as
soon as he thinks it right to call us hence by
death ; and we know that he will not remove one
of his people until it is ready for him. The
Christian may be poor, but Christ is now heaping
together for him imperishable riches, which in
another world he shall enjoy, and enjoy for ever.
The Christian may dwell in a hovel at present,
but his Master is preparing for him a splendid
mansion, adorned with every beauty, and furnished
with every delight, in which he shall for ever
dwell. The Christian may be disappointed and
in difficulties —surrounded with temptations, and
exposed to danger —his heart may be frequently
sinking within him—but Christ is now making
ready for him a home from which all disap-
pointment will be excluded, where the voice of the
enemy will never be heard, and whence sorrow and
sighing shall for ever flee away. The Christian
may be the subject of pain and disease and afflic-
tion—all around may appear dark and gloomy, all
within agitated and distressing —but Christ is pre-
paring for the eternal repose of the weary soul a
spot where groans will be turned into praise, and
the tear will be wiped from the eye, and where,
under the bright sky of an unclouded day, they
shall rejoice with an unspeakable joy.
My Christian brethren, realize in your own


minds, by the exercise of faith, these delightful
truths. At present, now, while 1 speak, you have
a friend in heaven who is working for you, plead-
ing for you, arranging its mansions for you ; and
when all things are ready, he will come to you,
one by one, and take you to himself. Oh, should
we not envy those to whom he comes first, and be
willing to exclaim : “ Come, Lord Jesus, for me ;
come quickly .” How do such contemplations drive
away the darkness of the tomb—how do they give
the soul assurance, and confidence, and firm foot-
ing, when standing on the brink of eternity ! Oh,
who need fear to enter, if they be assured that there
the Redeemer lives and reigns, and lives and reigns
to bless them !
2. While we know that Christ is preparing a
place in heaven for his people, we also know that
on earth he is preparing his people for that place.
You are acquainted with the old but pithy saying,
“ Heaven is a prepared place for a prepared peo-
ple and, therefore, it is not merely necessary
that heaven should be made ready for men, but
that men should be made ready for heaven. Ac-
cordingly it is one important part of the Saviour’s
work to make us meet, by the agency of his Spirit,
for the inheritance of the saints in light. The
means of preparation employed by him are various.
The principal are faith, repentance, and new obedi-
ence. But these are not all: in order to carry on


joy to heaviness.” Humble yourselves in the sight
of the Lord. Yet is there space for repentance;
yet is there an opportunity of securing your safety.
Turn to Jesus and live.


THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH OF CHRIST,
ASSEMBLING IN PITT STREET, SIDNEY.
My Beloved Flock,
You are all aware of the serious affliction with
which God, on the 16th of March, was pleased
to visit me, and by which in a moment He de-
prived me of the power of ministering to you
in holy things as I was wont to do; and which He
has seen fit to continue in a degree unto this day.
I bow to His mighty hand, and desire to see wis-
dom and mercy manifested in this dispensation,
as I have seen it in the gracious alleviations with
which He has been pleased to support me when
under the pressure of affliction. His strokes have
been far less than my desert. He might in jus-
tice have consumed me with the breath of his
mouth, and have cut me down at once as an un-
profitable servant. May all the dealings of his
hand be sanctified for my spiritual improvement
and growth in grace —and may you, my beloved
people, participate largely in the blessings which
arise from a trial so sanctified.


I have rejoiced, and sincerely thank God, for
the faith which by this dispensation He has called
forth in you, and for the humble submission you
have displayed to His divine will. Allow me to
thank you for the frequent and fervent prayers
you have offered up on my behalf. May they
be richly answered in blessings on yourselves-
May the presence and grace of the Triune Jehovah
be vouchsafed to you in every hour of need; and
whilst you journey onwards to the grave, and
when about to encounter the King of Terrors,
may the everlasting arms of love be underneath
and around you.
I have been lately informed by my medical
attendants that it is doubtful whether I shall be
able to preach or exhort publicly again, or at least
for some time; the period of my doing so is
therefore deferred indefinitely. I must, on this ac-
count, invite you to make the necessary arrange-
ments for supplying me with a colleague, and
yourselves with one who can do the duty for which
lam at present incompetent. I shall be happy,
as my health ackuits, and as it may be agreed on
with such colleague when so appointed, to preside
at the Church Meetings, to converse with appli-
cants for admission, to visit the sick and other
members of the congregation, and to do any busi-
ness that may be connected generally with your
welfare. I hope that by these ministrations I


may still be permitted to exercise a beneficial
influence, although not so much so, as when I
enjoyed the happiness of performing all the duties
of a Pastor.
I must again offer to the Deacons and Mem-
bers of the Church individually, my sincere and
hearty thanks for all the kindness they have shewn
me during the months of my protracted afflic-
tion, as well as during the years of our happy
union as Minister and People. May you ever
enjoy the highest consolation which a Pastor’s
blessing can procure for you.
Should God in his providence again return to
me health, and the power of speech, I shall most
gladly use them on your behalf, and break to you
from time to time, as he gives me opportunity }
the “ Bread of Life.” In the meantime let us
leave ourselves at His disposal, and wait His
will with unmurmuring submission.
I remain,
My beloved Brethren and Sisters,
Your faithful and affectionate Pastor,
ROB?. ROSS.
P.S. —I leave with the Deacons and the Church,
all other considerations which the above changes
may involve.


The Congregational Church,
Pitt-st., Sydney,
Friday Evening, Sept. 15, 1854.
To the Rev. Dr. Ross,
Our beloved and honored Pastor.
Your letter of the 4th ultimo, has been duly laid
before the Church. We desire to humble ourselves
under the afflicting hand of the Great Head of the
Church. Dark and mysterious to us indeed is the
dispensation by which we are deprived of your
earnest, faithful, Scriptural teaching.
We have, some of us, had the privilege of your
affectionate Pastoral care from the commencement
of your ministry in this Colony. Many of our
beloved children have received in your arms the
baptismal tokens of the Saviour’s love. Others of
our number you have united in the dearest of
earthly ties. And you have, with deep and kindly
sympathy, committed to the grave the objects of
our tenderest affection. You have, dear Sir, in
seasons of joy rejoiced with us, —whilst in the hours
of trial and bereavement your sorrow has mingled


with ours. The instructor and biblical guide of
our youth, and in many happy cases the instrument
of their conversion, you have given to them the
right hand of fellowship, and with a loving heart
have welcomed the lambs of the flock into the fold
of Jesus. As our Pastor, we have ever found you
a father, a brother, a-friend, a counsellor. Nor
can we be unmindful of the happy influence which
the exercise of your matured wisdom and sound
judgment has had in promoting and establishing
amongst us that large measure of peace and pros-
perity, which has been graciously given to the
Church ; —or in the extension of those sound prin-
ciples of Church polity, upon which our religious
institutions are based.
Remembering these things—looking back upon
the past fourteen years of our happy fellowship
and communion under your Ministry—we cannot
but most unfeignedly regret, that, in its more public
and official character, it is to be exercised amongst
us no longer. But very earnestly do we hope and
pray that your life may be spared for years to
come ; that, looking to you still as our father and
friend, your influence and counsel may be highly
promotive of this, and our sister churches ; and
that, retaining your high position in our Denomi-
national Societies, you may long continue their
venerable President.
Be pleased to accept our best and sincerest


thanks for the expressions of kindness yonr letter
contains towards each member of the Church ; and
allow us to tender our grateful acknowledgments
for your unvarying anxiety for the happiness and
spiritual growth in grace of each one of us.
The delicate and generous manner in which you
have kindly made known your willingness to
withdraw the desire for a coadjutor, if by so doing
it will promote and facilitate the choice of a suc-
cessor, and which has this night been communicated
to us by the Deacons, demands from us the renewed
expression of our warmest thanks. That which
was felt to be a difficulty, you —guided by the
highest and purest motive—have, in the genuine
spirit of your Divine Master, rendered easy.
May we be permitted to congratulate you, dear
Sir, upon the honor which God has been pleased
to put upon your Ministry. Extending over a
period of forty years, it was exercised first amongst
the followers of the False Prophet—then in our
beloved Fatherland ; and subsequently in this new
part of the world. You have had “ souls for
your hire, and seals to your ministry.” To pro-
mote the cause of Christ, you willingly sacrificed
much present comfort, and risked the future, when
at the call of Providence you left England for
Australia. But God has accepted your sacrifice.
By His blessing you have formed and brought to
a high state of maturity and enlightenment the


model Church of the Colony. Its first Pastor,
your name will stand in honorable association with
all its future and progressive efforts. But what to
you, dear Sir, is a higher and richer reward, is
this, that when you shall be called away from the
sufferings of humanity, and shall take possession
of that place which Christ has gone to prepare
for you, your welcome reception will be : “ Well
done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord.”
In your days of activity and devotedness to our
interests, you were ever kind and generous. It is
now no less our duty than our privilege to mention
our purpose of asking your acceptance of a retiring
stipend of £3OO per annum, for the remainder of
your life.
In conclusion, and at this particular juncture in
the history of this Church, we bespeak your earnest
prayers. We are taught in the Holy Scriptures,
“ that the prayers of a righteous man avail much.”
Intercede, dear Sir, at the throne of the heavenly
grace, in the name and mediation of the Divine
Redeemer, that in the duty of selecting your suc-
cessor we may be guided and influenced by no
inferior motive, —but that the glory and honor of
Christ, and the advancement of His kingdom, may
be the only objects which we seek to accomplish.
Finally, let us assure you, that in our public
supplications, whether in the Church or out of it,


in the social meetings for prayer, when we gather
around our hearths in domestic worship--you
will be always remembered. The advantages
and privileges enjoyed under your ministry for so
long a period, will stimulate us in seeking for you
those spiritual blessings which, in your more re-
tired moments, will refresh and comfort you ; and
the good seed of instruction and truth which you
have sown, will from time to time spring up and
present fruit to the praise and glory of your gracious
Master—thus giving you and the Church additional
cause for gratitude and joy.
You will not be angry with us, if in a very few
words we express our obligations to our excellent
sister and your beloved partner, Mrs. Ross. Al-
ways kind, gentle, loving, she has been to you, in
health, in sickness, the faithful and tender wife —
the watchful and anxious nurse. To us, the virtues
of her fine womanly and Christian character have
stood forth, not more to be admired and loved,
than to be cherished and imitated. We feel that
as in the past so in the future, her amiable
manners and sweetness of disposition will exert an
influence which must be beneficial to our whole
communion.
In a few brief years others will take our places.
Our names may be retained in the Church Book,
but the grave will have received our mortal re-
mains. Yet in the Church above, through the


precious blood of the Lamb, Pastor and People
shall be re-united. The strife of earth will have
ceased—the joys of heaven will have begun.
JOSEPH THOMPSON,')
DAVID JONES, I „
AMBROSE FOSS, I eac ° ns ‘
JOHN FAIRFAX, j
[Here follow signatures of the members of the Church,]


To the Deacons and Members of the Congre-
gational Church assembling in Pitt-streef,
Sydney .
Sydney, Hyde Park,
20th Sept., 1854.
My Beloved Flock,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your affec-
tionate letter, dated 15th inst.
It is with a bleeding heart that I thus dissolve
all connection with you, officially , as your Pastor.
Yet it is right that it shoidd be so—the prosperity
and peace of the Church demand it. I bow with
humble submission to the Almighty hand that has
rendered this step necessary. May the God of
love and of union ever preside over your counsels
and guide your conduct.
I thank you very sincerely for the kind senti-
ments and feelings expressed towards me in your
letter. Assuredly they will not be forgotten by
me. For all the good I have been enabled to
perform among you, the praise and the glory are
alone due to that gracious Being whom I have
endeavoured to serve in the gospel of his Son.
For all the defects and imperfections that have
marked my conduct, and they are many, I am


alone responsible. May He accept of what is
His, and pardon whatever He has seen to he wrong
in me.
Most earnestly do I entreat of you—and to
secure this chiefly I gave in my resignation as
Pastor —most earnestly' do I entreat of you, that
you will unite as one man in choosing a Pastor
who shall go out and in among you as God’s
servant, and who shall break to you, faithfully, the
bread of life. Let not each individual seek to
gratify himself, but let all combine in advancing
the prosperity of the Church of Christ in Pitt-street.
I do not indeed expect that you will all agree in
fixing upon the same individual, but it is of high
importance that the few should give place to the
many. It will grieve me greatly if the world, or
the Church, whether residing in Great Britain, or
the Colonies, or Sydney, should be furnished with
occasion to point at you, and say, “ See how these
Congregationalists bite and devour each other.’
But, beloved, I think better things of you, and
things that accompany salvation. Ido hope that
you will let all mankind see that you are able to
live and love as brethren, and to act unitedly in
choosing for your Pastor, a man whom the Lord
Jesus Christ will own as His, on that day when
he maketh up his jewels.
I cannot sufficiently thank you for the very
handsome provision of three hundred pounds per


annum, which you have made for me during my
life. May that life, such as it is, be spent for the
glory of God and for your benefit. It is not
worthy of preservation, so for as men can see,
except for such purposes as these. It will always
affords me the highest pleasure to do any thing by
which your best interests may be advanced.
With regard to Mrs. Ross, I sincerely thank
you for the very kind notice you have been pleased
to take of her in your letter to me. If the Church
has prospered, it is very much to her prudence and
piety, and counsels, that it is indebted—she has
been indeed a mother in your Israel, She will be
happy to give her advice and her sympathy to any
who may wish for her aid, and to assist in any
measures that may be adopted, so far as she is
able, for the advancement of the best interests of
the Church. We both of us unitedly join in praying
that the richest blessings of the Great Head of the
Church may descend upon and abide with you.
I remain,
My beloved brethren and sisters in Christ Jesus,
Your attached, and formerly, devoted Pastor,
ROBt. ROSS.
Printed by Reading and Wellbank, Bridge-street, Sydney.






