

HELP AUST[?]
KANGAROO
KOOKERY
BOOK
TO HELP YOU


AUSTRALIAN
CHEESE
Australian cheese is
of the Cheddar type
and richly-flavoured.
Australian cheese and
butter gained the
highest awards at the
great Islington Dairy
Show, London, in
October 1932,
AUSTRALIAN
BUTTER
Healthy cows grazing
on sunbathed pastures
and perfect methods of
production and trans-
portation result in
Australian choice
“ Kangaroo ” Grade
butter being notable
for its life-giving vita-
mins, delightful flavour
and good keeping
qualities.
AUSTRALIAN
EGGS
Australian eggs for
boiling, frying or
poaching. Freshly-
gathered, tested,
graded and packed,
conveyed in cool
chambers on fast
steamers, they arrive
here from September
to February virtually
as fresh as when laid.


THE KANGAROO KOOK BOOK
A Book containing simple, inexpensive recipes,
and produced to assist Australia's countless
friends amongst the housewives of Great
Britain, in the still more satisfying
use of Australia's food products
PLEASE LOOK CAREFULLY THROUGH
THE FOLLOWING NOTES, THEY WILL
HELP YOU IN VERY MANY WAYS
CONVENIENT MEANS OF MEASURING
QUANTITIES
1 cup is an average teacup.
1J cups equal £ pint.
2£ cups equal 1 pint.
4 gills equal 1 pint.
9 or 10 eggs equal 1 lb.
2{ cups butter equal 1 lb.
I heaped tablespoon butter
equals 1 oz.
I heaped tablespoon castor
sugar equals 1 oz.
1 cup currants equals 6 oz.
1 cup raisins equals 6 oz.
1 cup sultanas equals 6 oz.
4 cups flour equal I lb.
2 heaped tablespoons flour
equal 1 oz.
2\ cups castor sugar equal
1 lb.
HOW TO MEASURE IN CUPS AND SPOONS
(1) Use when possible standard measuring spoons and cups.
(2) If a level cupful or spoonful of a dry ingredient is required
fill cup or spoon and level off top with the blade of a
straight knife, without pressing.
(3) If a level cupful or spoonful of butter is required, pack
well down before levelling off, and measuring.
1


HELPFUL NOTES AND HINTS
IN THE PREPARATION, AND, IN SOME
CASES, SERVICE OF SANDWICHES,
SALADS, PUDDINGS, PASTRIES, CAKES
SANDWICHES.
(See section commencing page 5.)
(1) Any bread used should not be more than 48 hours old.
(2) Butter should be beaten to a cream, but not melted,
before spreading on bread.
(3) Make sandwiches of brown and white bread, toast,
bread toasted on one side, and the filling put on the untoasted
side, toasted split bridge rolls and unsweetened split biscuits.
(4) Serve sandwiches on a dish, line with a nice ice paper
d’oyley, garnish with a little mustard and cress, or if that is
not available use any delicate salad green.
SALADS.
(1) If making a salad of cooked vegetables, fish, game,
poultry or meat, or a combination of any two or more, soak
prepared ingredients in a little French dressing or in equal
quantities of oil and vinegar, and seasoning to taste, from one
to two hours. Drain well before moistening with mayonnaise.
(2) All salad greens used should be crisp and ice cold.
(3) Serve any mayonnaise either in a large salad bowl or
on individual glass plates, lined with crisp endive or lettuce
leaves, washed and gently dried.
(4) Any mayonnaise can be served in shells of boiled beet-
root, scooped out tomatoes, or half a grapefruit shell.
(5) When making a mayonnaise, allow I cup mayonnaise
to every 2 cups ingredients.
HOT PUDDINGS
(See section commencing page 12.)
(1) Stand all custard puddings in a baking tin containing
warm water about £ inch deep to bake.
(2) Brush pudding basins or moulds with a pastry brush
dipped in Australian butter.
(3) Never fill pudding basins up to the limit. Leave room
for puddings to swell.
(4) Place all puddings to be steamed in a saucepan con-
taining boiling water coming fully half way up the sides.
2


If the pudding requires a long time to cook, keep a boiling
kettle handy so that you can replenish water in the saucepan
when necessary.
(5) Stand all steamed puddings for 1 minute after remov-
ing from pan, before turning on to a hot dish.
(6) Drain fritters well, and sprinkle with powdered or
castor sugar, before serving on a hot dish, lined with a lace
paper d’oyley.
(7) Place a paper collar round baked puddings before
lifting pie dish on to the serving dish.
(8) Serve steamed and baked puddings with cream or
custard.
COLD PUDDINGS
{See section commencing page 17.)
(1) Do not add fruit to a jelly or cream until the mixture
is stiff enough to hold it.
(2) The addition of a beaten Australian egg to blancmange
makes the latter more delicate.
(3) If you want to lighten any blancmange, fold in the
stiffly frothed white of an Australian egg when cold, and
just before it sets.
(4) It’s easy to turn out a jelly or cream without breaking
it if you first dip it into hot water for a moment or two. Place
the dish on which the shape is to be served on top of it, then,
holding the dish tightly against the top of mould with your
left hand, quickly but gently turn the mould over with your
right hand.
PASTRY
[See section commencing page 19.)
(1) Prick the bottom of a pastry case with a fork before
baking.
(2) All the ingredients and utensils used for making pastry
should be thoroughly chilled before starting.
(3) To keep the juice from streaming out of fruit tarts bind
the edges with an inch wide strip of cotton soaked in milk.
(4) If you want a pie to look flaky on top, divide half a
tablespoon of butter into tiny pieces and dot it over. If
you want a pie to look brown, brush with milk before baking.
(5) If you want pastry to look glazed, brush with sweet-
ened milk either before baking or when nearly baked.
(6) Roll pastry for cases | inch thick.
(7) To keep raw pastry, roll to \ inch thickness, dust
lightly with flour, then roll and wrap in waxed paper, and
store in a cool larder.
3


BREAKFAST AND TEA BREAD
{See section commencing page 23.)
(1) Liquid used in making bread should be from 98 to
105 deg. F. If you haven’t a thermometer, mix 1 part
boiling to 2 parts cold, which will give you the correct tem-
perature.
(2) Substitute milk for water when you want bread with a
soft crust.
(3) If you don't bake with self raising flour, allow 1 tea-
spoon baking powder to each cup of flour when making girdle
cakes. One and a half teaspoons of baking powder to the
same quantity of flour when making muffins, and 2 teaspoons
of baking powder to the same quantity of flour when making
oven scones.
(4) Oven scones or muffins can be brushed with melted
Australian butter, or milk, or equal quantity of milk and
Australian egg yolks, or with a beaten Australian egg before
baking or before browning.
CAKES
{See section commencing page 25‘.)
(1) Prepare all cake tins before mixing ingredients.
(2) Before baking rich fruit cakes, hollow the mixture
down a little in the middle with the back of a wooden spoon.
(3) Test cakes with a fine skewer or knitting needle when
you think they are ready. If the skewer or needle comes
away clean, remove tin from oven and stand for a few minutes
before turning on to a rack. If the skewer is moist, bake a
little longer.
(4) If cakes brown too quickly, reduce the heat and cover
with a sheet of buttered paper.
(5) Remove all paper from cake while hot. ,
(6) Bake all rich cakes, such as Birthday or Christmas, in
tins on a deep layer of kitchen salt to prevent them burning
on the bottom.
(7) Baking temperatures (Fahrenheit) for cakes, etc.:—
deg. deg.
Slow oven ... 325-350 Fruit cakes and gin-
Moderate oven ... 350 ger bread ... 325-350
Moderately hot oven 350-375 Layer cakes and bis-
Hot or quick oven 375 cuits 375-400
Very hot oven ... 375-450 Oven scones ... 400-450
Pastry 475-500
4


SANDWICHES— See Notes on page 2
SCOTCH CRAB SANDWICHES
2 oz. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
2 oz. Australian cheese.
\ teaspoon mustard.
2 teaspoons vinegar.
1 teaspoon anchovy sauce.
Salt and cayenne to taste.
METHOD. — Use a strongly flavoured Australian cheese.
Rub all the ingredients well together in a basin, and press
down well in a pot. Use as a filling for any kind of toast
sandwiches, and garnish with mustard and cress.
CAMBRIDGE SANDWICHES
2 oz. Australian Kangaroo 2 oz. grated Australian cheese.
grade butter. Salt, pepper and cayenne to
1 tablespoon minced walnuts. taste.
1 teaspoon cream.
METHOD. — Mash your Australian butter and cheese till
creamy. Stir in cream, walnuts, and seasoning to taste.
Use with biscuits, and celery or watercress.
EGG SANDWICHES
(1) Scramble 1 beaten Australian egg with 2 tablespoons
minced cooked bacon, and seasoning to taste. Use between
bread and butter.
(2) Mince 3 hard-boiled Australian eggs. Stir in 1 table-
spoon minced pimento, and moisten with mayonnaise.
(3) Fill bridge rolls with sliced hard-boiled Australian egg,
seasoned to taste with pepper, salt and paprika, and a little
mustard and cress, or thinly sliced tomato.
SIMPLE AUSTRALIAN EGG DISHES
Boiled Australian Eggs.
(1) Serve with cold ham or tongue.
(2) Serve with dish of tomatoes.
(3) Hard-boiled, sliced, and masked with hot curry sauce,
and accompanied by boiled rice.
(4) Hard-boiled, sliced as a garnish to fresh or smoked fish
kedgeree.
5


Poached or Steamed Australian Eggs.
(1) Serve with grilled or fried rashers of bacon.
(2) Serve on rounds of fried bread with fried mushrooms.
(3) Serve on rounds of toast with fried tomatoes and
bacon fat poured over.
(4) Serve each on a flat fried sausage cake.
Scrambled Australian Eggs.
(1) Add 1 finely minced pimento to ingredients when
scrambling 6 eggs.
(2) Serve plain, surrounding kidneys and bacon.
(3) Cut 4 rashers of bacon into dice, and stir in 6 scrambled
eggs before they begin to thicken.
(4) Stir 3 tablespoons minced tongue or flaked cooked
smoked haddock into 6 scrambled eggs just before
thickening.
SAVOURY EGG CUSTARD
6 Australian eggs.
£ teaspoon salt.
1 £ cups milk.
Pepper and paprika to taste.
METHOD.— Beat your Australian eggs, paprika, pepper
and salt together in a basin till well mixed. Stir in milk, then
strain into oiled or buttered custard cups, or one large fire-
proof dish. Place in a baking tin containing just enough
6


warm water to cover tin. Cover with a buttered paper.
Bake in a moderate oven, about 375 deg. F. till set. The
small custards should take about \ hour, and the large one
about 1 hour.
To serve. —lf made in individual dishes, cool slightly,
then turn out and serve masked with diced fried bacon, poured
over with a little of the fat, or with tomato sauce flavoured
with bacon. If made in a large mould, arrange rashers of
bacon with rind removed, side by side on top, and grill.
Enough for 4 or 6 persons.
AUSTRALIAN CHEESE OMELET
2 Australian eggs.
1 gill milk.
| oz. cornflour.
1 oz. Australian cheese.
1 oz Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
Pepper and salt to taste.
METHOD. — Mix cornflour until smooth in a basin with a
little milk. Bring remainder of milk to the boil, then stir
into cornflour paste. Turn mixture into a saucepan, and boil
for 2 minutes stirring constantly. Remove pan from fire and
when mixture is cool stir in 1 Australian egg yolk at a time.
Beat well, season to taste, and fold in stiffly whipped egg whites.
Melt half the Australian butter in an omelet pan. When
smoking hot, carefully but quickly pour in the omelet mixture,
and cook till lightly browned below, then place in the top shelf
of a moderate oven, or under the grill, till brown on top.
While browning, melt remainder of butter and cheese in a
saucepan very slowly. Stir in 1 tablespoon of cream or milk.
Season to taste and stir till creamy. Turn omelet on to a hot
dish. Pour the cheese mixture on top. Fold in two. Serve
sprinkled with grated Australian cheese. Enough for 2
persons.
AUSTRALIAN EGG AND SALMON SALAD
6 Australian eggs.
2 tablespoons flaked boiled
salmon.
1 tablespoon minced celery or
cucumber.
Seasoning to taste.
METHOD.— BoiI your Australian eggs till hard, then shell,
and halve either crosswise or lengthwise. Carefully turn the
yolks into a basin, and season them to taste with salt, pepper,
celery salt, a little French mustard, and paprika. Stir in
flaked salmon. Mix well, then pile into the egg cups. Serve
in a salad bowl lined with lettuce leaves or mustard and cress.
Plant a tiny sprig of parsley in each, and pass round a bowl of
mayonnaise with the salad. Enough for 6 persons.
7


DEVILLED AUSTRALIAN EGGS
6 hardboiled Australian eggs.
| teaspoon salt.
3 tablespoons cream.
I tablespoon Worcester sauce
£ tablespoon Australian Kan-
garoo grade butter.
I teaspoon dry mustard.
I teaspoon minced parsley.
METHOD. —Cut your Australian eggs in half longways.
Carefully remove yolks and mash finely. Stir in salt, pepper,
butter, cream, mustard, and Worcester sauce.' Mix well, then
pile into egg cups—the whites of the eggs. Sprinkle each with
minced parsley or chopped chives. Serve in a dish lined with
lettuce or curly endive leaves. If wanted for a picnic, press
the halves together, and wrap in paraffin paper. Serve with
lettuce, mustard and cress, or watercress sandwiches. Enough
for 6 persons.
Note. —If the eggs won’t sit evenly in a salad bowl, cut a
thin slice from the bottom of each.
MAYONNAISE
2 yolks Australian eggs.
2 teaspoons Tarragon vinegar.
2 teaspoons white vinegar.
About 1 gill salad oil.
£ teaspoon made mustard.
Pinch salt, sugar and pepper.
METHOD.— AII the ingredients and utensils used in
making mayonnaise should be cold. Place your Australian
8


eggs in a basin with mustard, pepper, salt and sugar. Mix
well, then add oil drop by drop, stirring constantly all the
time. When the sauce is thick and smooth, mix in the
vinegars. Lemon juice can be used instead of vinegar. Use
with cooked meat, fish, vegetables, or with a mixture of all
three.
WHITE SAUCE
1 oz Australian Kangaroo grade
butter,
1 oz. flour.
| pint milk.
Salt and white pepper to
taste.
METHOD. — Melt your Australian butter in a saucepan.
Stir in flour. Cook for a moment or two, stirring constantly,
then draw pan to the side of the fire. Pour in milk, return
pan to fire, and stir till smooth and boiling. Season and
simmer for 5 minutes. Remove pan from fixe, then stir in
an extra piece of butter about the size of a large marble.
Serve at once.
Egg Sauce. —Add 2 chopped hardboiled Australian eggs
to | pint sauce made as above.
Cheese Sauce. —Stir 2 tablespoons grated Australian
cheese, and a little made mustard, into | pint sauce made as
above, then add the pat of butter.
SAUCE MORNAY
2 oz. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
I small onion.
1 oz. flour.
1 heaped tablespoon grated
Australian cheese.
| pint milk.
1 Australian egg yolk.
1 tablespoon cream.
Pepper and salt to taste.
METHOD. — Melt 1 oz. Australian butter in a saucepan. Stir
in flour, and cook for a moment or two, still stirring, then
gradually add the milk. When the mixture is well blended,
add peeled onion, and bring slowly to the boil, stirring con-
stantly. Season to taste. Cook for 10 minutes, still stirring,
then add the cream. Place the beaten yolk of your Australian
egg in the top of a double boiler, over boiling water. Stir
slowly, then stir in a little of the prepared sauce at a time.
Keep adding sauce till all is used up, then add cheese, the
remainder of butter, and more pepper and salt to taste.
Serve with boiled or steamed fish, poached eggs, or any boiled
white vegetable.
9


SWAN RIVER SALAD
£ pint sliced Australian apples.
1 gill chopped walnuts
1 tablespoon lemon juice.
£ pint shredded celery.
| teaspoon salt.
\ pint mayonnaise.
METHOD.— Mix your Australian apples, celery and walnuts
lightly together in a basin. Sprinkle with salt, lemon juice
and paprika to taste. Lightly stir in mayonnaise. Serve in
a salad bowl lined with lettuce leaves, in company with cold
roast pork or veal. Sprinkle with minced parsley. Enough
for 3 or 4 persons.
BLACK AND WHITE BUTTER SAUCE
White.
METHOD. —Mix a small minced peeled onion with 2
dessertspoons vinegar in a saucepan. Cook slowly until most
of the vinegar has evaporated. Stir in 2 oz. Australian
Kangaroo grade butter, a pat at a time. Serve at once, with
fried, boiled or grilled fish.
Black.
METHOD. —MeIt 2 oz. Australian Kangaroo grade butter
in a frying pan, letting it cook till it is dark brown, then cool.
Boil 2 tablespoons vinegar with pepper and salt to taste, until
it is reduced to half its quantity. Stir into the butter. Re-
heat, and serve with fried, grilled, boiled or steamed fish.
10


APPLE SAUCE
I lb tart Australian apples. oz. castor sugar.
1 oz. Australian Kangaroo 2 tablespoons water or shert-y.
grade butter.
METHOD.— PeeI, core and slice your Australian apples.
Put in a saucepan with the butter, sugar, water or sherry. If
wanted more savoury, add 2 or 3 tablespoons minced onion.
Cook till tender. Serve as it is, or sieved before serving.
Good with roast pork, duck, and goose.
HOUN RIVER APPLE JELLY
7 ibs. Australian apples.
7 pints water.
4 lbs. sugar,
juice of 3 lemons.
METHOD.— Core, peel and weigh your Australian apples.
Place in a preserving pan with the water. Boil till soft, but
not into a thick pulp. Turn into a hair sieve, and let the
liquor drain through into a basin, then strain through a jelly
bag. Weigh, boil quickly for 20 minutes, draw pan to the
side of the fire, add sugar, stir till melted, and return pan to
fire. Boil quickly for about 10 minutes, or until it jells when
tested, then add strained lemon juice, and pot and seal at once.
MAITRE D’HOTEL BUTTER
\ cup Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
1 teaspoon salt.
1 tablespoon minced parsley.
1 tablespoon lemon juice.
METHOD, — Beat your Australian butter to a cream.
Stir in salt, pepper, and parsley. Gradually work in the
lemon juice with a wooden spoon. Serve with grilled fish or
meat.
DERWENT RIVER CHUTNEY
2 lbs. Australian apples.
2 lbs. onions.
10 oz. brown sugar.
£ oz. mustard seed.
| teaspoon cayenne.
f lb. Australian sultanas.
1 pint brown vinegar.
| oz, ground ginger.
2 oz. salt.
METHOD. — Peel and quarter your Australian apples.
Place in an earthenware crock with the chopped peeled onions
and vinegar. Stew in oven to a pulp, then stir well and pass
through a sieve. Wash and dry crock. Place picked and
chopped Australian sultanas in the bottom, add all other
ingredients. Pour in hot mixture. Stir well. Cover, and
stir again each day for a week. Pot and cover like jam.
11


PIONEER LEMON CHEESE
£ lb. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
| lb. castor sugar.
3 lemons.
3 Australian egg whites.
4 Australian egg yolks.
METHOD. — Wash and dry .lemons, then grate rind into
the top of a double boiler. Stir in beaten Australian eggs,
strained lemon juice, sugar, and Australian butter, and stir
constantly over boiling water till the consistency of honey.
Pot and seal. Use as a filling for-layer cakes, and for cooked
pastry cases.
HOT PUDDINGS —see Notes, page 2
APPLE CUSTARD PUDDING
f pint bread crumbs.
1 £ pints hot milk-.
1 Australian egg.
J pint minced Australian apples.
1 tablespoon Australian butter
1J gills castor sugar.
\ teaspoon vanilla essence.
METHOD. —Pour the milk into a saucepan. Stir in
crumbs. Bring to boiling point, then add butter. Beat your
Australian egg and sugar together in a basin till light. Stir in
crumbs and milk. Add vanilla essence and apple. Pack into
a buttered pie dish. Stand in a baking tin containing hot
water to the depth of an inch. Bake in a moderate oven for
about 45 minutes until the custard is set. Enough for 6 persons.
12


BAKED STUFFED APPLES
6 large Australian apples.
i pint stoned, chopped Austra-
lian raisins.
\ gill chopped walnuts.
1 gill water.
1 gill castor sugar.
METHOD.— Wash and core your Australian apples.
Place in a baking dish. Rub dish with Australian butter.
Mix Australian raisins and walnuts together, and pack into
the centre of each apple. Measure water into a saucepan.
Add sugar, and when dissolved, bring syrup to the boil, and
boil 2 minutes. Pour over the apples. Cover, and bake for
20 minutes, until apples are beginning to soften, then remove
cover, and continue baking, basting occasionally until apples
are tender. Serve with cream or custard sauce. Enough for
6 persons.
HOBART SEVEN CUP PUDDING
1 cup breadcrumbs.
1 cup Australian raisins.
1 cup Australian currants.
1 cup castor sugar.
1 cup milk.
1 Australian apple.
1 cup flour.
1 cup minced suet.
£ teaspoon baking soda.
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon.
METHOD.— Sift flour, cinnamon and soda into a basin.
Stir in breadcrumbs and sugar, then all the other dry ingredi-
ents, the Australian apple, peeled, cored and finally chopped.
Mix well, then stir in the milk. Pack into a buttered pudding
basin or mould. Cover with buttered paper. Tie in a pudding
cloth. Steam for 2\ hours.
STEAMED FRUIT ROLL
DOUGH.
2 cups flour.
2 \ tablespoons Australian
Kangaroo grade butter.
1 tablespoon castor sugar.
1 \ gills milk.
4 teaspoons baking powder.
1 Australian egg yolk.
| teaspoon salt.
FILLING.
2 tablespoons Australian
Kangaroo grade butter.
J cup Australian raisins.
£ cup castor sugar.
2 tablespoons Australian
currants.
Sift the flour, baking powder, sugar, and salt into a basin.
Rub in your Australian butter, then moisten with the milk
and egg yolk. Roll into an oblong \ inch thick. Spread with
creamed Kangaroo grade butter. Sprinkle with chopped
Australian raisins, mixed with cleaned currants, and sugar
for filling. Roll up like a Swiss roll. Place in a buttered
steamer. Steam for 1 hour. Serve with cream or custard
sauce. Enough for 6 persons.
13


SYDNEY SULTANA SPONGE PUDDING
6 oz. flour.
1 Australian egg.
\ gill milk.
2 oz. castor sugar,
2 oz. Australian sultanas.
3 oz. Australian butter.
£ teaspoon baking powder
Grated rind half lemon.
METHOD. —Beat your Australian butter and sugar to a
cream. Stir in flour sifted with baking powder, and beaten
Australian egg, diluted with milk alternately, then add
grated lemon rind. Pour into a buttered pudding basin,
decorated with the Australian sultanas. Do this carefully
so as not to move the sultanas. Cover with buttered paper.
Steam for 1 hour in a saucepan with boiling water coming
half-way up the sides. Turn out. carefully. Serve with
custard sauce. Enough for 3or 4 persons.
APPLE MERINGUE
2 quarts stewed Australian
apples.
1 tablespoon lemon juice.
4 Australian eggs.
Castor sugar to taste.
METHOD. —Strain your Australian apples after stewing
and sweeten to taste. Cool. Stir in lemon juice and well
beaten Australian egg yolks. Turn into a buttered fireproof
dish, and bake for 30 minutes in a hot oven. Cool, then beat
the whites of the eggs until stiffly frothed, and mix with 4
tablespoons powdered sugar, and 1 teaspoon lemon juice.
Dust with sugar, and return to the oven until the meringue
is set and delicately browned. Enough for 6 persons.
14


BLACK CAP PUDDING
£ lb. flour.
1 Australian egg.
Pinch salt.
1 oz. castor sugar.
£ pint milk.
1 oz. cleaned Australian cur-
rants.
METHOD. — Sift flour and salt into a basin. Make a well
in the centre. Break in your Australian egg, add milk by
degrees, then gradually work in the flour from the sides.
When about half the milk has been used, beat batter well,
then add the remainder of milk, sugar and cleaned Australian
currants. Stand 1 hour. Turn into a well-buttered pudding
basin or mould. Cover with a buttered paper, and steam for
1| hours. Serve moistened with hot melted butter. Enough
for 4 persons.
BRISBANE RICE AND RAISIN PUDDING
1 cup rice.
I Australian egg.
II tablespoons Australian
Kangaroo grade butter.
Pinch salt.
\ cup castor sugar.
2 cups milk.
cup Australian raisins
Grated rind £ lemon.
METHOD. —PIace rice in the top of a double boiler. Add
\\ pints boiling water. Cover and steam until rice is tender,
then drain well, and add the salt, sugar, Kangaroo grade
butter, chopped raisins, lemon rind, and well-beaten egg
diluted with the milk. Mix well, then pack evenly into a
buttered fireproof dish, lined thickly with breadcrumbs.
Bake for 20 minutes in a moderate oven. If wanted richer,
or more nourishing, stir in 2 beaten Australian eggs. Enough
for 4 persons.
GOULBURN VALLEY PEACH FRITTERS
t lb. flour.
I pint tepid milk.
| teaspoon castor sugar.
1 tin Australian peaches.
oz. melted Australian Kan-
garoo grade butter.
\ teaspoon salt.
\ oz, yeast.
METHOD. —Sift flour and salt into a basin. Beat yeast
and sugar to a cream, add half the milk, and pour with the
melted butter into the flour and salt. Mix and then beat
well. Stand in a warm place for 1 hour. Drain and dry your
Australian peaches. Dip in prepared batter and fry in a
saucepan of deep smoking hot fat till golden. Arrange in a
hot dish lined with a lace paper d’oyley, and sprinkle with a
little castor sugar, and a little ground mace or nutmeg. Serve
garnished with fingers of lemon.
15


SOUTHERN CROSS PLUM PUDDING
1 lb. flour.
6 oz. breadcrumbs.
1 £ lbs. shredded beef suet.
I lb. Australian sultanas.
1J lbs. Australian raisins.
I I lbs. Australian currants.
1 lb. Australian apples.
| lb. mixed peel.
2 medium carrots.
2 oz. almonds.
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon.
Juice of 1 lemon.
3 tablespoons baking powder.
Teaspoon salt.
1 lb. Barbadoes sugar.
6 Australian eggs.
£ teaspoon ground mace.
| lb. black treacle.
\ teaspoon grated nutmeg.
\ pint Australian red wine.
Grated rinds of an orange and
lemon.
(Enough for 3 puddings.)
METHOD.— Wash, dry and prepare any fruit, mincing
the peel and stoning the Australian raisins. Blanch and chop
the almonds. Wash, scrape and grate the carrot. Grate
orange and lemon rind. Mix suet, flour, sifted with salt
and spices, and breadcrumbs together in a basin. Stir in
carrot, fruit rinds, almonds, chopped peeled apples and when
well mixed, the beaten Australian eggs mixed with the
treacle. Mix well, then add the wine and lemon juice. If
wanted richer, add \ lb. chopped glace cherries. Beat well.
The mixture should be moist. Pack into well buttered pud-
ding basins. Cover with buttered paper, then with floured
pudding cloth. Steam in saucepans, standing each on an
enamel plate, with boiling water coming half way up the basins
16


for 6 or 7 hours. When required, place pudding in boiling
water and steam from 3to 4 hours. Spike with almonds after
turned out, before soaking in brandy and setting on fire.
You can plant a sprig of holly on the top if you choose.
Serve with rum custard.
COLD PUDDINGS AND SWEETS—see page 3
SUNNY AUSTRALIAN FRUIT SALAD
1 tin Australian peaches.
1 tin Australian pears.
2 tablespoons maraschino
cherries.
2 Australian apples.
1 lemon.
Sugar to taste.
Bananas if desired.
METHOD.— Turn the contents of two tins into a bowl,
and quarter the fruit. Add strained lemon juice. Sprinkle
with castor sugar to taste. Stand in refrigerator or cool
larder until the sugar is dissolved and fruit well chilled. Add
pared, cored, quartered and sliced apples, cherries, and a little
of the syrup. You can also slice in two or three bananas if
you want. Serve with, cream or custard sauce. Enough for
6 to 8 persons.
VELVET SOUFFLE
3 Australian eggs.
£ cup castor sugar.
| pint whipped cream.
1£ pints milk.
11 tablespoons gelatine.
METHOD.— Pour 1 gill of the milk into a basin. Add
gelatine, and leave till soft, then scald remainder of jnilk.
Beat your Australian egg yolks and sugar together until frothy.
Stir in milk, then pour into the top of a double boiler with
water boiling below, and stir till thick. Add the softened
gelatine with the milk. Stir till dissolved, then remove to
a basin. Cool. Beat in the whipped cream and flavouring
to taste, then fold in the stiffly frothed egg whites. Turn
into a wet border mould, and leave till set. Unmould on to
a dainty dish. Fill the centre with whipped cream, or with
equal quantity of whipped cream and sieved Australian pears.
Decorate round the base with fingers of the pear, and
Australian apricots alternately. Enough for 6 persons.
BUTTER ICING
£ lb. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
Rum or vanilla to taste,
£ lb. sifted icing sugar.
METHOD. —Mix ingredients together with a wooden
spoon. Use as a filling for a sponge sandwich.
17


APRICOT FOOL
1 tin Australian apricots.
gills milk.
1 Australian egg.
1 tablespoon castor sugar.
2 or 3 tablespoons cream.
METHOD. —Drain your Australian apricots in a colander,
and reserve the syrup, for it makes a delicious addition
to lemon or orangeade. Heat milk in the top of a double
boiler, together with sugar. When sugar is dissolved, bring to
boiling point, and stir into beaten Australian egg, diluted with
1 tablespoon of apricot juice. Return to saucepan, and keep
stirring over the boiling water till custard thickens, when
remove from pan, and cool. Meanwhile rub the apricots
through a sieve, stir in custard, and then the cream stiffly
whipped, sweetened, and flavoured with vanilla to taste.
Serve ice-cold in custard glasses. Sprinkle each with a little
crushed meringue and serve at once accompanied by dainty
fingers of Victoria sandwich. Enough for 4 persons.
MELBA PEACH MELANGE
1 quart tin Australian peaches.
1 gill cream.
2 Australian egg whites.
2 tablespoons cornflour.
METHOD. —Mix cornflour to a smooth paste with 2 table-
spoons cold water. Drain syrup from peaches into a sauce-
pan. Stir in cornflour paste. Cook until smooth and trans-
parent, then stir in the peaches finely sieved, and chill. Beat
18


egg whites to a stiff froth. Fold in, then add stiffly frothed
cream, as lightly as possible. Pour into a crystal bowl.
Chill. Decorate with slices of banana, and halved cherries.
Enough for 4 to 6 persons.
RENMARK RAISIN WHIP
1 cup chopped Australian
raisins.
2 tablespoons lemon juice.
J cup castor sugar.
1 teaspoon grated lemon rind.
2 tablespoons granulated gela-
tine.
METHOD. —Soak gelatine in 2 or 3 tablespoons cold water
till soft, then dissolve it in 2 cups boiling water. Stir in
sugar and lemon and leave till beginning to set. Beat till
light and frothy and starting to hold its shape. Stir in your
Australian raisins. Pour into wet individual moulds. Serve
turned out on a dainty dish, garnished with fresh berries and
cream or sliced Australian peaches. Enough for 2or 3
persons.
PASTRY —see page 3
AUSTRALIAN SHORT CRUST
\ lb. flour.
1 small teaspoon baking powder
1 Australian egg yolk.
i lb. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
2 oz. castor sugar.
METHOD.— Sift flour, baking powder and salt into a basin.
Rub in your Australian butter and add the sugar. If wanted
spiced add \ teaspoon ground cinnamon. Beat egg yolk,
diluted with 1 tablespoon water, and stir into the dry ingre-
dients. Mix to a soft but thick paste, using as little water
as possible. The less water and more fat the shorter the crust.
Roll out and use as required.
AUSTRALIAN FLAKY PASTRY
£ lb. flour. Pinch salt.
3 oz. lard.
lb. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
METHOD. —Sift flour and salt into a basin. Rub in
your Australian butter, then mix to a stiff paste with ice
cold water. Place the lard on a well-floured pastry board.
Roll it out into thin pieces with a well-floured rolling pin,
then roll pastry to a thin square. Turn it upside down on
board. Cover with leaves of lard, then fold sides to centre
both ways, then over in half. Roll out and use as required.
19


GOLDEN WATTLE SHORTCAKE
1 cup flour. i cup milk.
I Australian egg.
£ teaspoon salt.
Tinned Australian fruit.
£ cup Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
£ cup castor sugar.
2 teaspoons baking powder.
METHOD.— Beat your Australian butter to a cream, then
add sugar by degrees, and beaten Australian egg. Stir flour,
sifted with baking powder and salt, alternately with the milk
into the mixture. Beat thoroughly. Bake in a buttered
round sandwich tin. Cool, split, and spread thickly with
well-drained halved Australian apricots or diced peaches or
pears, then with whipped sweetened cream flavoured with
vanilla. Pile cream on top, decorate with pieces of the fruit
as used in the filling, and with mimosa balls. Serve at once,
cut into wedges. Enough for 4or 6 persons.
BUSH TARTLETS
2 Australian eggs. 1 tablespoon Australian Kan-
-1 £ cups Australian currants. garoo grade butter.
1 teaspoon vanilla essence. | cup castor sugar.
J lb. Australian short crust {seepage 19).
METHOD.— Line small patty pans with shortcrust.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream in a basin. Add your
Australian eggs and beat thoroughly. Stir in cleaned
Australian currants and vanilla. Divide mixture between
the lined pans. Bake in a hot oven for about 15 minutes.
20


MILDURA MINCEMEAT
1 lb. Australian sultanas.
1 i lbs. Australian currants.
1 lb. Demerara sugar.
2 oz. each citron, lemon and
orange peel.
1 teaspoon ground ginger.
£ teaspoon ground mace.
1 saltspoon salt.
2 lemons.
1 lb. Australian raisins.
1 lb. Australian apples.
1 lb. beef suet.
\ teaspoon grated nutmeg.
| teaspoon ground cloves.
| gill rum.
| gill brandy.
METHOD. — Wash and dry your Australian currants and
sultanas and stone and chop your raisins. Mince peel, then
pare, core and mince the apples. Mix all the ingredients
together with the finely chopped suet, sugar, grated lemon
rind, brandy and rum. Mix well, stir in strained lemon
juice, pack into jars, press down well, and pot and seal like
jam. 2 oz. chopped blanched almonds or glace cherries can
be added as well if liked.
To Make Mince Pies. —Roll flaky pastry out on a lightly
floured board to J inch thickness. Line patty pans with
thin rounds of pastry. Fill with Australian mincemeat.
Brush edges of the pastry rounds with cold water, then cover
with thick rounds. Press edges well together and make a
cross on the top of each. Stand on a baking tin and bake in
a quick oven for 20 minutes. Just before removing from
oven, brush each over the top with beaten Australian egg
white. Sprinkle thickly with castor sugar and cook in the
oven for a moment or two before turning out.
AUSTRALIAN ECCLES CRAKES
£ lb. flaky pastry.
oz. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
3 oz. Australian currants.
2 oz. minced mixed peel.
METHOD.— RoII pastry out on a lightly-floured board to
I inch thickness. Cut into rounds with a cutter the size
of a breakfast cup, then turn the best side of rounds down
next to the board. Brush edges with cold water. Place
a heaped tablespoon of mixture in the centre of each. To
make mixture melt your Australian butter in a saucepan,
stir in sugar, and when dissolved add prepared Australian
currants, peel, and a dash of grated nutmeg. Gather the
edges of each round into the centre and squeeze together.
Turn upside down, roll each round out until currants just
show through. With a sharp knife make three slits side by
side in the centre of each cake. Brush with a pastry brush
dipped in cold water. Bake in a buttered baking tin for
about 20 minutes in a quick oven.
21


ADELAIDE PIE
4 large Australian apples,
f cup castor sugar.
| teaspoon ground cinnamon.
1 lemon.
J cup Australian raisins.
| lb. blanched and chopped
almonds.
6 oz. shortcrust.
METHOD. — Peel, core and chop your Australian apples
into a saucepan. Add sugar, almonds, chopped Australian
raisins, cinnamon and grated rind and strained juice of the
lemon. Cover and cook for 5 minutes, then remove from
fire and allow to cool. Place in a fireproof plate lined with
shortcrust. Bake in a moderate oven for about \ hour.
Decorate with whipped cream, sweetened and flavoured with
rum or vanilla. Sprinkle lightly with 1 oz. split almonds
fried in butter. Enough for 6 persons.
PERTH SHORTBREAD
J lb. Australian butter.
I oz. rice flour.
2 oz. castor sugar.
7 oz. flour.
METHOD.— PIace your Australian butter and sugar on a
pastry board. Gradually knead the butter into the sugar,
then by degrees, work in first the rice flour then the flour.
Keep on kneading till mixture is soft and free from cracks.
Shape into two flat rounds. Prick with a fork. Decorate
22


round edge by pressing with forefingers and thumbs; bake
in a steady oven for about \ hour. If preferred, the cake
can be moulded in a wooden shortbread mould, brushed well
with melted butter, then dusted with rice flour and shaken.
Sprinkle shortbread with castor sugar.
BREAD —see -page 4
AUSTRALIAN SULTANA TEA RING
| lb. flour.
2 oz. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
5 tablespoons syrup.
I Australian egg.
2 oz. castor sugar.
£ lb. Australian sultanas.
1 gill milk.
2 oz. walnuts.
1 small teaspoon salt.
METHOD.— Sieve flour, salt, and baking powder into a
basin. Stir in your Australian sultanas. Melt your Austra-
lian butter and syrup together in a saucepan, but take care
that they do not heat beyond lukewarm. Stir in milk and
half the beaten egg. Add to the flour, and stir into a soft
dough that does not stick to the spoon. Turn on to a floured
board. Roll out into an oblong \ inch thick. Cut into two
strips. Twist strips together, then shape into a ring. Lightly
pinch the ends together. It is best to do this in a greased tin
in which ring is to be baked. Brush with beaten egg.
Sprinkle with chopped walnuts and sugar. Stand in a warm
place to rise for 10 minutes, then bake in a hot oven for about
25 minutes. Serve hot or cold with butter.
AUSTRALIAN CLAPPTERONES
1 cup flour. 1£ cups milk.
11 cups sifted breadcrumbs.
2 tablespoons melted Austra-
lian Kangaroo grade butter.
i cup Australian currants.
3 teaspoons baking powder.
£ teaspoon salt,
METHOD. —Sift flour with baking powder, salt and bread-
crumbs into a basin. Stir in milk, then stand till the crumbs
have soaked up all the moisture. Add your washed Aus-
tralian currants, plumped in the oven in a tin. Stir in
Australian butter. Bake in spoonsful on a hot girdle rubbed
with a piece of Australian butter. When brown below, turn
and brown on the other side. Serve piled on top of each other
on a hot dish lined with a lace paper d’oyley, accompanied
by Australian butter or honey.
23


MURRAY RIVER RAISIN BREAD
1 lb. flour.
1 cup milk.
2 saltspoons mace.
4 teaspoons baking powder.
2 Australian eggs.
1 cup brown sugar.
1 cup chopped Australian
raisins.
1 teaspoon salt.
METHOD .—Beat egg well, then add sugar, and beat again.
Sift baking powder, flour, mace and salt into a basin. Stir in
chopped raisins. Chop nuts roughly, and add alternately with
the flour mixture to the sugar and eggs. Pack into a loaf tin,
well greased with Australian butter. Stand to rise for 20
minutes in a warm place. When almost double its size, bake
in a moderate oven for 11 hours. Serve for breakfast or tea,
thinly cut and spread with Australian butter.
MURRUMBIDGEE TEA LOAF
\ lb. Australian sultanas.
1 lb. flout - .
1 pint milk.
1 teaspoon baking soda.
6 oz. Australian butter.
| lb. castor sugar.
1 teaspoon salt.
2 teaspoons cream of tartar.
METHOD. — Sift the dry ingredients into a basin. Rub in
your'Australian butter. Add your Australian sultanas, then
stir in milk. Turn lightly on to a floured board, and knead
slightly. Place in a buttered loaf tin. Bake in a moderate
oven for 1 hour.
24


COMMONWEALTH TEA SCONES
1 lb. flour.
| teaspoon salt.
| lb. Australian currants.
1 saltspoon grated nutmeg.
2 teaspoons baking powder.
£ lb. Australian butter.
2 oz. castor sugar.
| gill milk.
METHOD.— Sift flour, baking powder, and salt into a basin.
Rub in butter with, the tips of the fingers. Add floured
currants shaken in a colander to remove any superfluous
flour, castor sugar, and nutmeg, then mix to a soft but loose
dough with either fresh cream or milk. Roll out on a lightly
floured board. Shake into a round. Mark with the back of
a knife into four. Bake in a hot oven for about 15 minutes.
Split into four. Serve hot or cold.
CAKES —see page 4
BIRDWOOD RAISIN COFFEE CAKE
2\ cups flour.
£ cup Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
1 gill cold coffee.
3 Australian eggs.
\ teaspoon ground cinnamon.
1 cup Demerara sugar.
1 gill syrup.
1 cup Australian raisins.
1 teaspoon ground cloves.
£ teaspoon baking soda.
METHOD. — Line a small greased cake tin with 2 layers of
paper, greased with Australian butter. Chop your Australian
raisins. Beat your Australian butter and sugar to a cream
in a basin. Sift flour with cloves, cinnamon, and a pinch of
salt. Stir flour and well beaten Australian eggs alternately
into the butter and sugar, then stir in syrup, or half treacle
and half syrup, raisins, and the coffee in which you have
dissolved the soda. Bake in a moderate oven for about
\ hour until firm.
SPICED AUSTRALIAN SULTANA SLAB CAKE
3 Australian eggs.
£ cup Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
I cup sour cream.
21 cups flour.
J cup chopped walnuts or mixed
candied peel if liked.
6 oz. Australian sultanas.
2 cups brown sugar.
3 teaspoons baking powder.
i teaspoon ground ginger.
| teaspoon ground cinnamon.
\ teaspoon ground cloves.
METHOD.— Beat your Australian butter and sugar to a
cream in a basin, then beat in 1 Australian egg at a time.
Add flour and the cream alternately, then stir in Australian
sultanas and walnuts or peel, rolled in flour and shaken in
colander. Bake in a well buttered, shallow baking tin in a
moderate oven for about 45 minutes.
25


Commonwealth Tea Scones, page 25
AUSTRALIAN DUNDEE CAKE
12 oz. flour.
6 Australian eggs.
3 oz. Australian currants.
1 oz. candied peel.
| lemon.
1 teaspoon baking powder.
8 oz. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
8 oz. castor sugar.
7 oz. Australian sultanas.
| lb. almonds.
\ teaspoon mixed spice.
METHOD. — Grease and line a cake tin with 2 layers
buttered paper. Beat your Australian butter and sugar to a
cream in a basin. Beat in 1 Australian egg at a time. Sift
flour with baking powder and spice. Mince peel, and add
flour and prepared fruit alternately, then grated rind of the
lemon. Mix well. Place in prepared baking tin, sprinkled
with blanched and skinned almonds, and bake from 2 to
hours in a moderate oven. Test with a skewer to see if
ready, and when ready turn out of tin, remove to a cake rack,
and leave till cold before storing in a tightly closed tin.
SIMPLE AUSTRALIAN DOUGH CAKE
1 lb. bread dough.
2 oz. castor sugar.
1 oz. candied orange peel.
2 oz. Australian sultanas.
2 oz. Australian butter.
2 Australian eggs.
] lb. Australian currants.
METHOD. —Melt your Australian butter in a saucepan.
Add chopped peel, sugar, prepared Australian sultanas and
26


currants, then turn into a basin. Beat in 2 Australian eggs,
then knead mixture into the dough. Mix well. Divide into
two parts. Grease two loaf tins, and put one portion in each.
Cover with a kitchen cloth and set to rise in a warm place till
double the size. Then bake in a hot oven for about 40 minutes.
When ready, remove from tins and stand on sides till cold.
If wanted spiced, add £ teaspoon grated nutmeg or mixed spice
to the fruit mixture before stirring into the dough.
RAISIN AND WALNUT CUP CAKES
2 cups Australian raisins.
1 \ cups castor sugar.
1 cup chopped walnuts.
3 cups sifted flour.
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon.
J teaspoon ground cloves.
| pint water.
2 tablespoons Australian butter
i teaspoon baking powder.
| teaspoon grated nutmeg.
1 level teaspoon baking soda.
METHOD.— Chop your Australian raisins. Sift flour with
baking powder, baking soda, cloves, cinnamon and nutmeg.
Place raisins, water, sugar, and Australian butter in a sauce-
pan. Bring to the boil. Simmer 5 minutes, then turn into a
basin and leave till cold. When quite cold, stir in lightly,
flour, spices, etc., then the chopped walnuts. Three-quarter
fill small buttered gem tins. Bake in a hot oven for about
15 minutes. Remove from oven. Stand for a minute or two,
then turn on to a cake rack and leave till cold.
SULTANA BUNS
£ lb. flour.
1 teaspoon baking soda.
2 oz. castor sugar.
1 Australian egg.
1 teaspoon cream of tartar.
2 oz. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
2 oz. picked Australian sul-
tanas.
METHOD. — Sift flour with a pinch of salt into a basin,
then rub in butter with the tips of the fingers. Add remainder
of the dry ingredients, and beaten Australian egg. Rinse egg
basin out with a tablespoon or two of milk into the mixture,
and mix to a moist dough that holds its shape. Fork into
rough heaps at equal distances apart on a greased baking
sheet. Brush with a little beaten yolk of egg, diluted with a
tablespoon of milk. Bake in a hot oven for 20 to 25 minutes.
Turn on to a cake rack, and sprinkle with castor sugar.
27


CANBERRA BIRTHDAY CAKE
1 lb. flour.
J lb. Australian Kangaroo
graded butter.
J lb. brown sugar.
2 teaspoons black treacle.
£ teaspoon vanilla essence.
| teaspoon ground mace.
1 lb. Australian currants.
3 oz. mixed peel.
2 teaspoons baking powder.
6 Australian eggs.
2 teaspoons rose water.
J gill sherry.
1 level teaspoon mixed spice.
1 lb. Australian sultanas.
METHOD.— Sift flour, salt, baking powder, mace, and
spice into a basin. Soften butter and sugar in a saucepan,
but do not allow the butter to melt. Beat butter and sugar
to a cream. Beat your Australian eggs well in another basin,
then add eggs and flour alternately to the creamed butter
and sugar, till the eggs are used up, and the flour nearly so.
Now add remainder of flour, and sherry, divided in two
portions, alternately, till all flour and sherry is mixed in.
Beat well after every addition. Lastly, stir in prepared fruit,
the peel finely minced, the rose water, and vanilla. Pour into
a greased cake tin, lined with two folds of buttered paper.
Make a slight hollow in the centre with the back of a wooden
spoon and bake in a moderate oven for about 2\ hours. Test
with a skewer to see if cake is ready. Cool, ice, and decorate
to taste.
28


ALMOND PASTE TO COVER CAKE
10 oz. icing sugar.
10 oz. ground almonds.
Juice of 1 lemon,
i teaspoon raspberry essence.
1 teaspoon vanilla essence.
10 oz. castor sugar.
2 Australian eggs.
1 teaspoon rose water.
1 teaspoon lemon essence.
METHOD.— Sift icing sugar into a basin. Stir in ground
almonds, castor sugar, and lemon juice. Add essences.
Break eggs, one at a time, into a cup, and stir in. Mix to a
dough, then turn on to a pastry board lightly sifted with icing
sugar, and knead to a paste. Knead till quite smooth, then
cover cake.
SUNNY SOUTH SULTANA GINGERBREAD
10 oz. flour.
f cup castor sugar.
2 Australian eggs.
| cup picked Australian sultanas
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon.
1 teaspoon ground ginger.
I cup Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
1 cup boiling water.
1 level teaspoon bicarbonate
of soda.
1 teaspoon ground cloves.
1 cup treacle.
METHOD. — Warm treacle and Australian butter in a
saucepan. Sift flour, spices and castor sugar into a basin.
Stir in butter and treacle, then add soda dissolved in boiling
water. Beat thoroughly. Stir in beaten Australian eggs and
picked sultanas. Bake in a buttered baking tin in a moderate
oven from 30 to 35 minutes. Half a cup of chopped walnuts
or chopped glace ginger can also be added if liked.
BARRIER REEF CAKE
4 Australian eggs.
2\ cups flour.
1 cup milk.
1 teaspoon lemon essence.
2 tablespoons grated choco-
late.
i cup Australian sultanas.
1 cup Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
2£ cups castor sugar.
2 large teaspoons baking
powder.
1 teaspoon vanilla essence.
\ cup Australian currants.
| teaspoon mixed spice.
METHOD.— Beat your Australian butter and sugar to a
cream in a basin. Stir in beaten Australian eggs and flour
sifted with baking powder alternately. Then mix in milk.
Divide into three. Add lemon essence to 1 portion, grated
chocolate and vanilla to another, and prepared fruit and spice
to the third. Bake each portion in a buttered layer cake tin.
Put together when cold with apricot marmalade, and spread
top layer with water icing flavoured with rum. Decorate
with halved walnuts, and wattle mimosa balls.
29


MELBOURNE SULTANA CAKE
J lb. flour.
\ lb. castor sugar.
2 teaspoons baking powder.
J lb. peel (mixed candied).
6 Australian eggs.
\ lb, Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
1 lb. Australian sultanas,
grated rind \ lemon.
Pinch salt.
METHOD. — Grease and line a cake tin with well-buttered
paper. Pick over and flour your Australian sultanas, and
mince peel, after removing any sugar. Sift flour and salt into
a basin. Beat butter and sugar to a cream in another basin,
then stir in one Australian egg and a little flour alternately,
and beat well after every addition. When all the eggs are
added, stir in remainder of ingredients. Turn into prepared
tin. Bake in a moderate oven for about hours.
CAPTAIN COOK CHRISTMAS CAKE
£ lb. Australian butter.
10 oz. sifted flour.
10 oz. Australian sultanas.
\ lb. minced glace cherries.
1 teaspoon mixed spice.
| teaspoon vanilla essence.
\ gill Australian tawny wine.
£ lb. brown sugar.
4 Australian eggs.
10 oz. Australian currants.
2 oz. minced mixed peel.
1 pinch salt.
2 teaspoons rose water.
2 teaspoons baking powder.
METHOD. — Cream your Australian butter and sugar in
a basin with a wooden spoon. Sift flour with salt and spice.
30


Add sifted flour and Australian egg alternately to butter and
sugar till all are used up, then lightly stir in prepared sultanas,
currants, chopped cherries and peel, vanilla essence, rose water,
wine, and baking powder. Give a last sharp beat. Pour into
a greased cake tin lined with 2 sheets of buttered paper.
Bake for 2| hours in a moderate oven. Cool on a cake rack.
Brush all over with a pastry brush.
Almond Paste. —Mix together 1 lb. sifted icing sugar
with 10 oz. ground almonds. Stir to a stiff paste with slightly
beaten whites of two or three Australian eggs, then add a
few drops of lemon juice and 3 drops of almond essence,
i teaspoon vanilla essence, and one or two drops of rose water
and orange flower water. If a yellow icing is preferred, use
Australian egg yolks instead of white, and if you don’t care
for a very soft icing use equal quantity of castor sugar and
icing sugar instead of all icing. Knead paste till smooth,
then roll out into a strip for round the sides, and a round for
the top. If you want a deep layer of almond paste on top,
make half as much paste again. Brush sides of cake with
melted apple jelly. Place on a strip at one end, and roll
over strip until the ends meet, when knead smoothly together.
Cover with round of paste, knitting edges smoothly together,
and rolling with the hand until the whole coat of paste is
perfectly smooth. Stand for 24 hours in a dry place.
To make Royal Icing.
2 lbs. icing sugar. 1 \ tablespoons strained lemon juice.
4 or 5 whites Australian eggs.
Sift icing sugar into a basin. Stir in lemon juice, then
enough stiffly frothed Australian egg whites to make a stiff
paste. Beat till smooth. Spread evenly over the top of the
cake with a palette knife dipped in hot water. When the
top is fairly smooth, ice the sides in the same way, taking care
to make the top edges meet. Cover basin with a damp cloth,
and leave cake till next morning before decorating. Beat up
icing again before using with a forcing pipe to decorate cake
with trails or ribbon work and roses. If a more natural
effect is wanted, place all the icing on the cake at once, then
dab it all over with the palm of the hand to give a snow-scape
effect. Decorate with Eskimos, polar bears, or other Christ-
mas ornaments.
Note. —lt is always wise to place the cake on a cake hoard
or a revolving cake stand before beginning to decorate.
31


ANZAC TEACAKE
8 oz. flour.
1 oz. candied peel.'
1 oz. Australian currants.
| gill milk.
1 teaspoon baking powder.
J lb. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
3 oz. Australian sultanas.
2 oz. castor sugar.
\ teaspoon mixed spice.
METHOD.— Sift flour and baking powder into a basin.
Rub in your Australian butter. Add fruit, spice, sugar, and
enough milk to make into a soft dough. Roll out thickly.
Cut into rounds with a floured cutter. Brush each with
beaten Australian egg, and bake from 10 to 15 minutes in a
hot oven. Serve split open, and buttered hot, arranged in a
hot muffin dish.
FRUIT COBURG BUNS
8 oz, flour.
£ teaspoon ground ginger.
1 £ teaspoons baking powder.
3 oz. Australian sultanas.
| teaspoon ground cinnamon.
\ lb. Australian Kangaroo
grade butter.
£ teaspoon ground cloves.
6 oz. castor sugar.
£ teaspoon mixed spice.
2 Australian eggs.
METHOD. — Beat your Australian butter and sugar to a
cream in a basin. Then add flour sifted with the baking pow-
der and spices alternately with the beaten Australian eggs.
Mix well. Three-quarter fill buttered bun tins after placing
half a blanched almond in each; Bake in a quick oven for
15 minutes.
32


AUSTRALIAN
APPLES
Apples for health !
Australian apples are
on sale from April to
September, just when
you need them to keep
fit in the spring and
summer. And they
are British to the core.
AUSTRALIAN
DRIED FRUIT
Australian sultanas,
currants and raisins
are sundried grapes,
full of rich flavours,
abounding in nourish-
ment and free from
injurious chemicals.
Use more of them. A
cheap healthful food,
always good every day
for everyone.
AUSTRALIAN
CANNED FRUIT
Australian canned
peaches, pears and
apricots are delicious.
The fruit is picked at
just the right stage of
ripeness and prepared
by the most modern
methods. Always
ready for your use.


INDEX
GENERAL INFORMATION
Page
Convenient means of measuring
quantities ... ... ... 1
Hints on making Sandwiches ... 2
Salads... ... 2
Hot Puddings 2
Cold Puddings 3
Pastry... ... 3
Breakfast and
Tea Bread... 4
Cakes ... ... 4
SANDWICHES
Scotch Crab Sandwiches... ... 5
Cambridge Sandwiches ... ... 5
Egg Sandwiches ... ... ... 5
SIMPLE AUSTRALIAN EGG
DISHES
Boiled Australian Eggs ... ... 5
Poached or Steamed Australian
Eggs G
Scrambled Australian Eggs ... (i
Savoury Egg Custard ... ... (i
Australian Cheese Omelet ... 7
Australian Egg and Salmon Salad 7
Devilled Australian'Eggs ... 8
DRESSINGS AND SAUCES
Mayonnaise , ... ... ... 8
White Sauce ... ... ... 9
Sauce Mornay ... ... ... 9
Swan River Salad ... ... 10
Black and White Butter Sauce... 10
Apple Sauce ... ... ... 11
Muon River Apple Jelly ... IJ
Maitre d’Hotel Butter ... ... 11
Derwent River Chutney... ... 11
Pioneer Lemon Cheese ... ... 12
HOT PUDDINGS
Apple Custard Pudding ... ... 12
Baked Stuffed Apples ... ... 13
Hobart Seven Cup Pudding ... 13
Steamed Fruit Roll ... ... 13
Sydney Sultana Sponge Pudding 14
Apple Meringue ... ... ... 14
Black Cap Pudding ... ... 15
HOT PUDDINGS —continued
Page
Brisbane Rice and Raisin
Pudding ... ... ... ... 15
Goulburn Valley Peach Fritters... 15
Southern Cross Plum Pudding... 1G
GOLD PUDDINGS AND SWEETS
Sunny Australian Fruit Salad ... 17
Velvet Souffle ... ... ... 17
Butter Icing ... ... ... 17
Apricot Fool ... ... ... 18
Melba Peach Melange ... ... 18
Renmark Raisin Whip ... ... 19
PASTRY
Australian Short Crust ... ... 19
Australian Flaky Pastry... ... 19
Golden Wattle Shortcake ... 20
Bush Tartlets ... ... ... 20
Mildura Mincemeat ... ... 21
Mince Pies... ... ... ... 21
Australian Eccles Cakes... ... 21
Adelaide Pie ... ... ... 22
Perth Shortbread ... ... .. 22
BREAD
Australian Sultana Tea Ring ... 23
Australian Clappterones ... ... 23
Murray River Raisin Bread ... 24
Murrumbidgee Tea Loaf... ... 24
Commonwealth Tea Scones ... 25
CAKES
Birdwood Raisin Coffee Cake ... 25
Spiced Australian Sultana Slab
Cake ... ... ... ... 25
Australian Dundee Cake... ... 26
Simple Australian Dough Cake... 26
Raisin and Walnut Cup Cakes... 27
Sultana Buns ... ... ••• 27
Canberra Birthday Cake... ... 28
Almond Paste ... ... ... 29
Sunny South Sultana Gingerbread 29
Barrier Reef Cake ... ... 29
Melbourne Sultana Cake... ... 30
Captain Cook Christmas Cake 30-31
Anzac Teacake ... ... ... 32
Fruit Coburg Buns ... 32
Hint on Making Orangeade or Lemonade ... 18
30-Nov-’32
C.8.41/420
Issued by the Director of Australian Trade Publicity
Australia House Strand, London. W.C.?
