

THE AIR AGE
George—a Taylor




THE AIR AGE
Being Lectures given before the Unite'd Service
Institutes of Australia,
July. 1910
July. 1911
July. 1918
BY GEORGE A. TAYLOR
1918
Building Limited,
20 Loftus Street, Sydney,
Australia


HIGHWAYS OLD AND NEW
The Sailing Ship of Columbus, the first Steamboat (Fulton’s), and Modern Dreadnoughts, with an Aeroplane overhead.


G.A.T.
Until to-day —for man’s inventive brain
Has ope’d a road that everyone can share.
To-day the world looks up! The aeroplane
Makes free for all the highway of the air!
So may it, when all War is crushed for good,
Bring brotherhood.
Highways Old and New
Until to-day the only road between
The Nations was the “highway of the sea.”
On it Columbus sailed; and ships of steam
Began their hundred years of history,
And Super-Dreadnoughts watched that oceanway
Until to-day!


Printed by
BUILDING LIMITED, 20 LOFTUS STREET, SYDNEY


PREFACE
In 1884, the world first saw an inanimate thing fly
with' its own power. It was flown in Australia by its
inventor, Lawrence Hargrave; but—Australia did not
bother.
Thirty-five years later, in other countries, men began
to fly in machines based upon the Hargrave invention.
The writer, therefore, to rouse interest in Australian
aviation, and noting the possibilities of the flying machine
for Australia’s best defence, inaugurated the Aerial League
of Australia in 1909, and, with the aid of such great
workers as Lawrence Hargrave, Lieutenant-Colonel W
Holmes (who was killed in the Great War), Commander
F. H. C. Brownlow, Norman Selfe, Charles L. Garland,
Thos. R. Roydhouse, Colonel J. T. Wilson, Major (now
General) Charles Rosenthal, Colonel W. L. Vernon, Major
F. E. Stowe, Captain Thomas Macleod (a well-known
barrister who helped to form the Queensland Section),
and E. L. Holmes (of Melbourne, \vho helped to form the
Victorian Section), much good work was done in calling
public notice to the possibilities of the aeroplane, and
particularly the attention of the military authorities to its
utility for Australian Defence. The writer was appointed
to an honorary post in the Military Service to report upon
aviation developments, and in the “Australian Military
Journal,” outlined a scheme for the establishment of Aus-
tralia’s first Military Aviation School.
The Great War of Central Europe developed the
aeroplane from an interesting feature for exhibition pur-
poses into a machine that could carry forty-one passengers
a thousand miles without stopping; hence the possibilities
for its widest use in Australia for commercial, sporting,
social, as well as for defence purposes, must receive
earnest consideration.
The three lectures published herewith give the story
of the development of the aeroplane.


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.


THE AIR AGE
Its Military Significance
LECTURE NO. 1.
Delivered at the United Service Institutions of New South
Wales, Victoria and Queensland in July, 1910.
Australia waking up to the fact that she was the richest
country on earth, and seeing envious glances cast at her great
possibilities, was seriously considering her adequate defence.
This activity in national defence marked a new era in our
national progress, inasmuch as preparing for war is but that
spirit of ambition, that inspiration to fight against difficulties
that is the basis of all progress, human and national.
There were, however, some of those smug individuals who
usually settled the fate of Europe over the morning poached
egg, who field the fallacy that active preparation for de-
fence meant filling our manhood with bloodthirsty desire; they
could not understand that a man brought up to render loyal
obedience to proper discipline was less liable than any other to
run counter to constituted authority. They could not see
that a soldier trained to control his mind and body had
achieved that spirit of self-control that after all is the basis
of all religious and moral doctrines. They could not see that
a soldier’s pride in his own army gave him a love of the man-
hood of his own nation; that, if needs be, he would give his
life for its protection.
Efficient national defence always means individual as well
as national improvement. A nation that rots in a deadly peace
becomes effete, and, like ancient Rome, passes out. It is the
same with an individual. Once he retires from the fighting
line of life with never a thought of rallying, he loses his self-
respect ; he becomes a back number.
Individual and national progress is therefore linked, with
the determination to be prepared for attack. Self-preservation
is the first law of nature —every creature being provided with
means of self-defence; and standing on the threshold of this,
the Air Age, and looking back through the ages of the human
race, we find the first natural thought given to every new dis-
covery is to what defensive purpose can it be put?
When primitive man learned how to shape a stone, his hairy
fist gripped a new implement of defence, and through the Stone
Age he ruled sway by the use of his superior weapon.
Time brought into being that age when man learned the
method of winning metal from the earth, and the Bronze Age
stepped into history with its improvements in fighting tools.
The history of warfare gives clear evidence that those who
lb


hold superior weapons invariably have held the advantage, the
man who fought with a club being victorious over the man
who fought with his fists, hence the tribes with the bronze
axes without doubt won out till their rivals rushed the adop-
tion of the new weapon. Then war became a matter of
strength of arm, until it was learned that victory more often
depended upon the efficiency of a weapon that could strike
from a distance, so the English archer with his cross-bow
gun was the victor at Crecy, asi lie could strike from afar,
whilst the striking distance of the French armored horseman
was only the length of the swing of his battle-axe. For the
same reason, in the battle of Falkirk, the English bowman
won over the Scottish spearman, hence the development of
a distance-striking weapon became the ideal of the military
inventor. It saw the birth of the cannon and the rifle, which
in the hands of the more advanced nations wiped out hordes
of less effectively armed fighting men.
The “Age of Iron,” with its improvement of the rifle and
the cannon, ushered into history this mighty Age of Steel, with
our oceans weighed with colossal floating fortresses, with the
nations of the earth spending £-150,000,000 per year, feverishly
turning out enormous floating Gibraltars, forcing to the limit
man’s use of mundane elements; when, behold, there flits
across the sky a puny, perky thing of canvas and stick—the
aeroplane—that threatens to change the history of warfare—
that may in a few years render obsolete the mighty fighting
THE DAWN OF THE AIR AGE


machines of to-day, and that calls in an imperative demand
for the transference to the air of the warfare of the future.
For to-day the aeroplane ushers in the Air Age—the age of
flying—the culmination of human desire since the beginning of
time.
The desire for speed that marks this age of haste that has
produced the ocean liner, the express train, and that triumph—
the automobile—attracted man’s restless spirit to the air—a
sphere where friction is reduced to a minimum—so the aero-
plane came into being.
The aeroplane started from the fact that air has mass and
offers resistance to moving bodies. This property is utilised
by broad, curved surfaces moved by power, and inclined at an
angle to the direction of motion, having the forward edge higher
than the rear. The air resists the motion, and by pressing on
the underside of the wing surfaces supports them in the same
way that a flat stone is supported when skipped over water.
The stone, however, will sink if not moving rapidly; so the
aeroplane, if not swiftly moving forward, will drop to the
ground. It must, however, be remembered that in still air
at a height of 1000 feet an aeroplane can be glided down at
almost any angle to any landing place within a radius of one
half mile, though in wind it takes similar manoeuvring that
is used to land a roAV boat in a swiftly moving stream.
It is interesting to note how the aeroplane developed.
The first self-propelled vehicle—the locomotive—was-bound
to a track, no steering was necessary; the driver had only to
start and stop.
I he locomotive, freed from the rail, became the automobile,
in which the driver could start, stop, and steer in one plane
to right or left. The automobile lightened, fitted with planes,
left the road, and became the aeroplane, which the driver can
start and.stop, and can steer in many planes, right and left,
and up and down, so that he enters a new arena in the face of
forces hitherto believed unconquerable—gravitation and un-
lettered winds—hence under the new conditions it is sur-
prising that progress is paid for by so few martyrs.
There are few great triumphs of human invention that have
not been paid for by human lives.
I he perfection of the X-ray has meant martyrs to its effects.
The discovery of radium meant the death of its exploiter, and the
aeroplane has been shaped principally by the defects) discovered
iq the deaths of its experimenters. Delegrange put a 50
horse-power engine on a Bleriot monoplane. The machine
met a heavier wind pressure when the under stays snapped
and Delegrange was killed. Ferber removed the little front
wheel from his A oisin; it glided to earth, where there was
no small wheel to take the motion, and the aeroplane stopped


“No. 13”
The aeroplane upon which Rolls experimented,
and lost his life
suddenly, when the 2501 b. of metal behind him shot ahead like
a cannon ball and smashed him.
Rolls placed on elevating plane behind his W right machine;
a sudden descent and it snapped, the machine turned turtle and
killed him. So each accident teaches new lessons and inspires
fresh efforts to correct imperfections, till to-day we have aero-
planes racing over the 165 miles between London and Man-
chester in a short time, and rising to a height of over 15.000
feet.
Yet but a few years ago the mention of aerial navigation
brought forth derision. In its first three years air craft ac-
complished what it took thirty years for the steamboat,
twenty years for the steam engine, and ten for the automobile.
When Bleriot.crossed the English Channel at one swoop
he broke down file barrier of sea that for ages has been Eng-
land’s main line of defence, and the cables throbbed for
weeks about it. Every day the Channel is flown, and it is
not considered worth cabling. Not long ago it was considered
a wonderful thing to carry two passengers on an aeroplane,
yet an aeroplane to-day has carried fifteen passengers without
any hysterical chronicling. *
The air has indeed been conquered, and we must look aloft
<it the new element to see what utility it presents for national
-defence.
The discovery that Montgolfier achieved by filling a great
Unen bag with hot air, won for the balloon some military re-
cognition ; but the hot air balloon has never, nor can ever, come
into any serious consideration as a military accessory, as it so
rapidly cools, staying up but a few minutes, has no control, and
js always an element ( of uncertainty.
The gas balloon is ; an improvement, inasmuch as it has


greater lifting power, can stay up for longer periods, has means
of descent, but with the element of uncertainty. Much use has
been made of the captive balloons for reconnaissance, but their
irregularity and utter dependence on weather caprices, as well
as the difficulty of transportation of accessories, have mitigated
against their general use.
In the Franco-German War of 1870 the French Balloon
Corps of thirty years’ existence was found unprepared, though
balloons were found useful in sending despatches from Paris
during the seige war. Balloons were used in England in 1879.
and in 1882 were sent to Egypt, but too late for any use.
The first military use of balloons was by the French at the
Battle of Fleury, 1794. During the American Civil War cap-
tive balloons were used by the Federal army, no less than three
being utilised at the Battle of Chancellorsville (1863), where
they were rendered ineffective by river mists blocking any
observations.
Excellent service was done by the British army balloon sec-
tion in South Africa in directing fire in the attack on Cronje.
and no doubt if the captive balloon was more utilised in the
South African war it would have been found most efficient for
reconnaissance, as it would have greatly eliminated the dif-
ficulty of sizing up a force that lay on the defensive and fought
with smokeless ammunition and magazine rifles; but one must
remember that the difficulties of transport of paraphernalia in
the rapid movements of that campaign were against wider
use of the unwieldy captive balloon.
Germany started her military balloon corps with two Eng-
lish balloons in 1810. but for long kept to the Parseval kite
balloon. The United States used balloons during the Spanish-
American war and did good work with them in finding posi-
tions: whilst their effective use by the Japanese in the attack
on Port Arthur is a matter of history.
The advent of the automobile engine, however, gave the gas
balloon the means of locomotion, and was cigar shaped to get
least air resistence, and so became the dirigible. Of dirigible
balloons there are two kinds, the rigid with internal framing,
such as the Zeppelin, and the non-rigid, without internal fram-
ing, such as most of the French balloons.
The feverish contest between France and Germany in
their anxiety to achieve superiority in the air is of interest.
France, smarting under the sting of 1870, when her balloon
corps was caught napping, looked to the air as her new arena,
and following Renard and Dumont, developed the dirigible till
we find the Republique, La Patrie, and the Ville de Paris, huge
fighting machines, rising in the air without, however, much
success, the La Patrie being lost in a gale, and the Republique
wrecked by a flying propeller blade.
During this time an old retired German military officer


was frittering away a fortune with his new-fangled ideas of fly-
ing-, and the name of Zeppelin evinced sundry winks and tap-
pings of the forehead. I lowever. a great machine was built and
rose into the air, a second followed, and success
now' seemed certain, hut the tempestuous air, as if
angry at the prospect of its realm being conquered,
gripped the great ship and dashed it to the ground,
where, catching fire, it was reduced to a ruin. Ger-
many then saw a broken-hearted old man staring through his
tears at the gaunt skeleton of his last hopes. Derision turned
to pity, and Germany woke. She looked across the border at
the French military activity; she thought of 1870, and looked
back at the broken-hearted, white-headed old fellow, and saw'
in him the chance of getting level with her old enemy, and
money poured into his lap like water, and Zeppelin after Zep-
pelin rose into the sky till we saw Germany aspiring to be
“mistress of the air.”
A ZEPPELIN BALLOON
A Rigid Dirigible Type


THE “REPUBLIC”
A French military non-rigid type, which, during a trial flight, was
wrecked by a propeller blade loosening and cutting the balloon skin.
France, however, found that dirigibles and their housing
were expensive problems, and that a hundred aeroplanes
could be purchased at the cost of a dirigible and its kennel,
the aeroplane also appearing to present greater possibilities


for defence. France therefore began to encourage private
aeroplane builders by purchasing one of each promising
machine, until she secured a great aerial fleet. >
From the military point of view the conquest of the air
has great significance.
The principal use of airships being:—
1. Gaining information by reconnaissance and photo-
graphic work, no military map giving such a detailed aspect
as an aerial photograph.
2. Despatch work.
3. Directing fire or drawing that of the enemy.
4. Attacking an enemy’s base line and stores.
5. Destroying railway and other lines of communication.
6. Locating submarines and destroying mines, as an air-
ship gives great facility for observing sea depths, owing to
observations being at right angles to the surface with freedom
from reflection.
7. Following up a victory and completing a rout.
8. Signalling and wireless stations.
9. Scouting work in time of war; providing the ideal
method, in these days of long-range weapons, of keeping a
General in touch with the enemy’s strength and dispositions.
It, however, may be pointed out that the dirigible and
aeroplane are not efficient in many circumstances, it being a
defect in an arm that can only be used under certain conditions,
the axiom of efficiency being that a force should be ready under
all circumstances in which the enemy can operate; but the
rapid development of aerial machines is whittling away present
disadvantages; for instance, one great defect of present aero-
planes being that if an engine fails, the machine comes down,
perhaps in an enemy’s country. This defect will be overcome
l3y carrying increased power.
It is also claimed that with the development of the long-
range artillery, chances of successful operation of aerial ma-
chines would be considerably lessened; but it must be remem-
bered that long-range artillery directed at targets, stationary
or slowly moving on one plane, is a different proposition to
shooting at an object moving swiftly in any plane, necessitat-
ing high-angle fire and constant change of vertical and hori-
zontal direction.
It must be also remembered that the swing of airship de-
stroying guns will be apt to do more damage to one’s own
country, particularly as a dummy airship might be sent to
draw artillery fire for that purpose. Aerial navigation presents
new problems for artillery fire. For instance, if an airship is
attacking a coast defended by a fleet and fort guns, the fort
guns must be wary of firing on the approaching airship on
account of the fleet in the distance, whilst the fleet, once the


visitor has passed over, must be wary of firing at it in the
direction of the shore.
The accuracy of dropping bombs had been questioned,
yet, after all, it is purely a mathematical proposition; given
the height by aneroid and the speed by anemometer, a refer-
ence to computed tables will show the distance that an explo-
sive must travel to hit its objective.
We therefore must not be blind to the fact that the airship
will undoubtedly revolutionise warfare, since it will well-nigh
destroy strategy and surprise movements, which have de-
veloped to such a science in modern tactics. Practically no
move can escape aerial scouts, hence the whole war game must
be re-modelled.
To Australian defence the aeroplane will be as a gift from
heaven. Lord Kitchener pointed out that Australia’s railway
lias been apparently constructed for the enemy, but aerial navi-
gation will eliminate that objection, for the airship needs no
culverts, bridges, nor prepared tracks; for it all roads are open.
The Australian aerial fleet has its track provided for it.
We cannot be blind to the great aerial fleets that the prin-
cipal powers have accumulated, and must note with no small
interest that our neighbor Japan, notwithstanding her recent
brilliant entry as a maritime power, has not only got a staff of
military officials studying aeronautical development, but has
hlso floating airships—constructing and repair stations.
'Till to-day Australia has held a certain security, inasmuch
as the approach of a hostile fleet would be heralded from afar,
and so give definite time for preparation for attack; but the
aeroplane has rapidly developed into a terrible vehicle of
destruction that can be transported in parts and rapidly fitted
together, presenting the possibility of a cruiser letting loose
from her decks a flock of aeroplanes like falcons upon our
aerial defencelessness.
Consider the possibility of defending against such an aerial
invasion, and the wrecking of the “moral” of an army by the
knowledge of its helplessness in the lack of protection against
an aggressive thing that could hide above a cloud and drop
its thunderbolts unseen ; and after all. the moral of an army is
a factor of far more importance than mere numerical strength.
An aerial fleet is therefore necessary for our adequate
defence.
The Commonwealth authorities are not blind to the neces-
sity of possessing this great arm of defence, but we must not
lose sight of the fact that the aeroplane is not everything. We
need a trained force of expert aviators and mechanics, and
these cannot be trained as quickly as an aeroplane can be built.
In the “Air Age” men will be more important than ma-
chines, for higher demands will be made on human brains,
nerves, and skill.


It is time (1910) that Australia considered the formation
of an army of aerial engineers for to our hands had come a
new wonderful ally—wireless telegraphy. With wireless will
perfection be at last brought to that military ideal sought
through the ages—the power to strike from a distance.
With wireless man has completed the conquest of the air.
He has harnessed it to throw his messages across many miles
of space at a speed of 156.000 miles per second. It gives us a
system of signalling that cannot be cut in stress of war, that
can be set in action at any time from portable appliances, and
tliat can produce such astounding results that should revolu-
tionise modern war tactics.
Early in 1909 the writer publicly mentioned that it was
regrettable that acquaintance with this marvellous military
factor was not wider spread. He accounted for this* by the
fact that the text books and lecturers as a rule dealt with the
historical side of the subject, and assumed that the reader or
hearer had a fair knowledge of electrical engineering, hence
in his public lectures he simplified the description, and used
explanations that seemed absurdly simple, as follows:
Wireless is the common phrase applied to an electric force
travelling in waves from a centre of electrical disturbance.
A stone is cast into a placid lake, and the expanding rings
of ripples present waves or swells moving to the shore from
which they are reflected; a cork on the surface simply oscil-
lating in a vertical plane without horizontal movement.
Such is an example of water waves, but there are also
sound waves, light waves, and electric waves.
When a sound is made a disturbance is created in the air,
and the impulse is transmitted to our ears in widening circles
of waves like the ripples on the lake, but in more than one
plane; these sound ripples can also be reflected as in the case
of an echo. There are, however, spunds we cannot hear, for
instance, air vibrations of over forty thousand per second are
inaudible, yet such sounds may be mechanically detected by
means of a sensitive flame.
Let a striking clock be suspended in the bell receiver of an
air-pump. By means of the sound waves you can hear it, by
means of the light waves you can see it; but when the air is
extracted it will be noted that the striking sound will not be
heard, sound waves needing air for their transmission, but as
the clock can still be seen, the waves of light by which we see
the clock proves that light waves do not need air, and there-
fore travel in a different medium to sound, a medium known
as Ether.
This Ether permeates everything. It reaches beyond the
furthest star and passes easily through all substances, all mole


cities being surrounded with it. and it is through this medium
that electric waves are transmitted.
Sir William Crookes proved by means of a vacuum tube
that a torrent of small particles is projected from the negative
terminal when an electric current is passed through the tube.
These particles are called corpuscles, or electrons, and are con-
stituents of chemical atoms. When an electron is removed
from an atom the atom becomes negatively electrified or
hungry. These electrons move freely in the ether of solids
running between molecules like little dogs among the legs of a
crowd. If freely running, the material is a good conductor,
if restricted it is a non-conductor.
AUSTRALIAN WIRELESS
Dr. Graham Bell (inventor of the telephone) inspecting the writer’s
wireless apparatus in 1910
A. coherer and tapper; B, small induction coil (note spark gap knobs
at top); C. polarised relay; D, tuning inductance; E, coherer; F,
Leyden jar condensers; G. cannon fired by wireless during lecture;
H. Leyden jar used for demonstrating tuning; I, mercury break;
J. coherer; K. motor for working mercury break; L. Hertz circle, by
which Hertz discovered electric waves, being the birth of wireless;
M and N, batteries and cells.


I ake an induction coil, which may be styled an electric
pump. It is sucking, as it were, electrons from one ball,
which becomes negatively electrified, and pumping them into
the other, which is positively electrified, so that the latter is
gaining in electric pressure.
I he excess of electrons in one ball is continually trying
to escape, and on turning on the current an intense strain
will be produced on the electrons in the surrounding air.
The air in the gap or “spark gap” will be subjected to
intense electrical strain, and when reaching a certain intensity
some of the electrons will be torn away from their atoms,
and the air in the gap becoming a conductor, a “one way”
or continuous current will be produced.
1 he first rush carries over too many electrons to equli-
ibriate the electron pressure, hence there is a back rush. If
the conductor be close enough to catch the return rush we
have a two-way or oscillating current —a current of electrical
oscillations.
Just as a “one-way” movement of the hand in water does
not produce encircling waves, so the “one-way” current is not
reckoned a wave producer; but like a hand repeatedly striking
the water surface and producing water waves, or a tuning fork
vibrating and sending out waves of sound, the oscillating spark
is continually striking the ether, sending out circles of electric
waves.
These electric waves were discovered in 1888 by Hertz,
and so are often called Hertzian waves. He noticed when giv-
ing a lecture that the discharge of an induction coil resulted
in the setting up of an induced current in the detector—the
detector for the purpose being a coil of iron with a gap in it.
The vibrations generated by the oscillating spark were
found capable of creating disturbances of a like nature in the
coil, causing sparks iin the spark gap.
1 have explained there are sounds we cannot hear, and
which must be detected mechanically, so electric waves from a
distance must be detected by an electric ear, the most common
being known as a coherer. It consists of a glass tube contain-
ing two blocks of silver, between which are filings, of nickel
and silver. When a current is passed through these filings they
cohere forming a conductor until separated by a tapper.
The current started by the coherer is not strong enough
to \v ork the tapper, so this weak current is used for working a
relay, which closes and opens the circuit of a stronger battery,
and this current being much stronger works the tapper quite
easily.
This coherer interprets waves impinged on the aerials of
masts of each station, and repeats them, providing the instru-
ments are tuned to the wave lengths of the sending apparatus.
This wave tuning, which is the secret of receiving, and


which is at present being energetically developed to win more
perfection may be thus explained.
A tuning fork in vibrations sends out waves; these will
effect another fork that is tuned to it, or that will give out
similar wave lengths of sound, thus if vibrations are set up in
one fork, you will note that the other fork repeats them.
(The lecturer struck a tuning fork, and then stifled its
vibrations, which had been taken up by another fork.)
In wireless the tuning may be achieved by discharging-
condensers. A condenser or Leyden jar can be charged, but
its comrade will not repeat an effect until it is tuned to the
other. (The lecturer by means of two condensers exhibited
this method of tuning. One condenser was connected with
the induction coil and another by means of a sliding wire slip
was brought into tune with it.) Wireless stations are tuned
up in similar fashion, and much comment has been made that
messages can be easily tapped by outsiders “tuning up” to re-
ceive them. This danger can be overcome by military stations
using a cipher code and changing the wave to predetermined
lengths at certain times.
The difficulty of tuning to receive proper wave lengths
was demonstrated at the time of the establishment of Aus-
tralia's first military wireless station by the writer at Heath-
cote, New South Wales, in April, 1910.
At that time a great liner, the “Aramic,” was out on the
ocean, drifting with a broken propellor shaft, the plaything
of the winds and tides, and was being carried by the great
southern current into the region of the Antarctic.
Drifting, drifting, ever nearer the frozen south, her lines
festooned with icicles. She may have seemed untenanted,
though ever and anon a few ghastly, emaciated wretches might
crawl to the rails, and their vacant eyes stare out for that
succour which was then hopeless.
To think a tale like this could be told in these days of
modern methods seemed absurd. Yet many a great liner had
gone out into the great unknown, the only link between her
and destruction being her shaft.
With wireless telegraphy, however, such sad stories of
the sea could be ancient history, for with its apparatus and the
man behind the spark, communication could be established
with almost any quarter of the globe.
Australia at that time was but awakening to the possibil-
ities of wireless; but a few of the ocean-going steamers had
the apparatus in use.
Wireless telegraphy was then to many a matter of con-
siderable mystery, and the writer conceived the possibility of
its use for military purposes.
An artillery camp was about to commence at Heathcote


under Lieutenant-C olonel \\ ells, who readily gave permission
to the writer for experimenting with wireless thereat. We
pictured the enemy landing some twenty-five miles to the
spilth of Heathcote, and advancing by the great South Coast
road, and that the artillery was ordered to defend the southern
entry.
In the hurried preparation for defending the southern ap-
proaches. the question of wireless communication being main-
tained between the far attacking parts and headquarters was
considered to have come into consideration.
The military were not provided with any wireless appara-
tus, and just as in the frenzied rush of war preparations, so
on the day the troops went forth, a collection of sundry-
apparatus, and the services of three experts were rapidly re-
quisitioned, bungled into a train going southwards, and
reached the camp at Heathcote on the day the troops arrived.
It was a sorry looking collection that ! had dumped on to
Heathcote platform. Two great railway baskets loaded with
glass jars, insulators, wires, coils, and other paraphernalia—
some new, mostly old.
“Looks like a raid on a second-hand shop,” an officer
facetiously remarked.
“So you’re going to try and get wireless messages through
those toys,” said another, with a sly wink. “Ah, well, keep it
going till my little girl comes up; she’ll be amused”—a sally
which provoked a roar at the mess table.
I he movement was not taken very seriously, the chances
of success were not many. Not only were the instruments oi
one operator unknown to the others, but the operators them-
sel\ es met foi the first time, and, though they were optimistic,
yet they thought there was only just a chance.
They were good fellows, they buckled into the work, al-
though one was a sick man, only coming out at my most
earnest solicitation.
The conglomeration of apparatus was sorted out, and it
was determined to establish two stations.
I he enemy was assumed to be in occupation seven miles
to the south, so the heterogeneous collection of apparatus was
sorted out and divided into two parcels. It was resolved to
establish one station at the furthest outpost to communicate
the movements of the enemy to Station A at the headquarters
camp. Station A was a military tent, and early next morning
(Saturday) three saplings were cut from a neighboring gully,
were lashed together, run into position, forming an aerial 54
feet high, with an enthusiastic friend, Air. Kirkby, in charge.
The second station was a rough cave on the side of a hill
about two miles south from Station A. At this distant station
the operators were two brother enthusiasts, Messrs. Wilkinson
and Hannam.


AUSTRALIA’S FIRST MILITARY WIRELESS
STATION
The cave at Heathcote (April, 1910), showing the
aerial built of three saplings


THE WIRELESS STATION AT HEATHCOTE
The makeshift table is a delapidated door picked up by the wayside
and propped up with boulders
Consider, then, onr operators installed in two stations with
what now reads like school boy apparatus met with for the
first time, and, as they found to their regret, with coils and
batteries of different strengths. The apparatus at Station A
consisted of 3in. coil with motor break for making the oscil-
latory intermittent current, two coherers, with tappers, one
Leyden jar condenser, one tuning inductance, a telephone re-
ceiver, a transmitting key and condenser, a polarised relay
(post office pattern), and a battery of four volts, the earth wire
being affixed to a metal fork embedded in the ground. The
apparatus at Station B consisted of a sin. coil, three Leyden
jar condensers, mercury break, with a separate battery for
working same, a receiving inductance tuning coil, condenser,
and transmitting key, with a battery of eight volts, the earth
wire being attached to the newly-cut bark of a sapling. An
extraordinary mixture indeed to try and tune together over
the most difficult country possible for wireless operators to
experiment.
All day Saturday willing hands cut saplings, lashed them
together and lifted them into the air; where Saturday night
saw two great aerials piercing the sky with their four rows
of wires like banjo strings waiting for a giant to twang them.
Two great masts losing their tops in the darkness were


like great fishing rods angling in the sky for aerial messages.
Saturday night found the patient operators radiating
waves from each station without being able to receive any
indication. Far into the night the great sparks cracked through
the spark gaps, lighting up the cave and tent with miniature
lightning flashes.
The signal letter “V” would be transmitted from one station,
and by means of signal lamps the question would be flashed if
it were received at the other. Saturday night found the air
criss-crossed with ether waves, but being differently tuned,
they passed each station by and reverberated into space.
“Hope springs eternal in the human breast,” a poet once
wrote. He must have been a wireless operator for the first
time.
After a consultation on Sunday morning it was decided to
secure more efficient earthing, the soil at each station being a
dry sandy loam. Sheets of galvanised iron were therefore
sunk vertically into the ground at each station, and signalling
again commenced.
“You haven’t got through yet?” was the stereotyped
query during Sunday in camp. It was also with a smile
which plainly said, “I told you so.”
Sunday noon saw “Failure” about to be written across the
experiment in big letters, and the fact that Mr. Kirby breaking
down on Sunday afternoon, and returning to Sydney, began
to shape the letter “F.” The circumstances, however, whetted
the enthusiasm of the workers, and further changes were
decided on.
It was found that the Marconi coherer was rendered in-
sensitive to receiving the waves by the sluggish action of the
polarised relay, which, being constructed for continuous cur-
rents for postal purposes, was ineffective with the oscillating
current we were using.
An electrolytic detector made by Mr. Wilkinson was
hurriedly despatched on Sunday afternoon from Station B
to A. “Hurriedly despatched”—it nearly had a double mean-
ing—for I was the courier. The electrolytic detector was
carefully wrapped in wadding and secured in my breast pocket,
but the handbag of rattling tools started my horse, and it
bolted for its life through the thick scrub, making a bee-line
for where I knew were hidden cliffs some hundreds of feet
deep.
Through the scrub the animal careered, and, suddenly
swerving from a tree, flung me into a clump of bushes and
dashed off. I had a narrow escape, but a feel at my breast
pocket told me the detector was safe.
Suddenly the sound of the horse’s hoof-beats ceased, and
I listened for the thud. “It’s having a long fall,” I thought.
A quiet glance through the scrub, however, showed me the
1c


animal shivering with iright on the edge of the precipice. He
was subdued. The shock was too much for him. I climbed
into the saddle, and—delivered the goods.
Station B then concentrated all its power to transmit
signals to Station A. but still “success” was the “will of the
wisp.” „ . .
It was Sunday night—9 o’clock. Station A was in charge
of Mr. Hannam. He had with him Officers Wilkins, Smith,
and Ross, of the University Scouts.
At Station B Mr. Wilkinson and I were trying the last
hope. . . , ,
“Station A reports that all conditions are complete, ana
something should happen,” said a signaller.
Nothing happened beyond the monotonous c-c-c-ra-a-k at
the spark. “She’s charged as full as she can be,” said Wilkin-
son, and great voilet-blne-red and gold lines of fire ciept round
the Leyden jars, like tenacles of some strange infernal reptile.
A glance behind a jar told a story. The cave walls were
damping the waves!
The instruments were taken from the cave, placed on the
bare rock beneath the aerial, and were no sooner in position
than the signaller excitedly dashed over, Station A icports
signal received.”
The signal was changed and it was again acknowledged.
The tuning was complete. A string of signals was about to
be transmitted when rain beginning to fall, the instruments
becoming wet, short-circuited, hence had to be dismantled.
No time was lost wiping them dry and placing them again
in position. The tuning space already understood was again
fixed, and once more the cracking spark was busy.
Through the scrub a dripping signaller rushed across.
“Station A is again receiving signals,” he reported.
We had succeeded!
Far into the night signals were repeated and verified.
The small hours of Monday still found us successfully operat-
ing.
Our eyes, dulled by the stress of a long vigil, flashed with
the fire of the spark, what now transmitted whatever sweet
fancy in a moment of joy dictated.
So we drank deep of the sweets of victory.
We had succeeded in establishing the first military wire-
less stations in Australasia, and the first officially recorded
stations on the continent to receive intelligible wireless sig-
nals, and for that success every credit must be given (1) to
the ardent enthusiasm of those who so generously assisted me.
Messrs. Kirkbv. Wilkinson and Hannam . (2) to the help of
Captain Cox-Taylor, a a well as (3) to the kindness of Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Wells, Captain Christian. Major Rosenthal,
and the officers of the University Scouts.


The experiments solved many problems of value to mil-
itary science.
They proved in a marked degree the ease with which wire-
less communication could be established between stations once
the definite spacing of the spark gap and tuning was at that
time understood. It also demonstrated the difficulty that an
outsider would experience in endeavoring to tap wireless
messages.
With “wireless” distant signals can be worked; in fact,
it will prove the ideal communication method for exercising
commanding control over the movements of widely dispersed
arms.
Wireless can operate even beneath the earth. This was
demonstrated by means of an interesting experiment at
Broomhtll Colliery in England. An equilateral triangle of
wire three-quarters of a mile each side, 360 feet below ground,
induced action in a similar triangle at the surface above. It
suggests that the day may not be far distant when wireless
will link the Empire through the earth.
We shall see expeditions leaving for the Poles armed with
wireless to annihilate the distance between it and civilisation,
deleting much of the anxiety and incidentally the romance
associated with these plucky plunges into the unknown.
FIRING A GUN BY WIRELESS WAVE
The Author at Liverpool Camp in May 1911


A PORTRAIT OF SIR FREDERICK DARLEY
Drawn by Frank Wilkinson, and transmitted by wireless by
Reginald Wilkinson
To-day we can send pictures and portraits by wireless.
I have a pen and ink portrait of Sir Frederick Darley, late
Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales, that was trans-
mitted for me by wireless by Reginald Wilkinson, of Sydney.
The day will come when reconnoitring officers, with their
wireless apparatus, will be able to transmit plans and detail
sketches during reconaissance.
A new element in military tactical operations will be
introduced in the possibility of exploding mines from a dis-
tance by means of wireless. (A small cannon was fired by
the lecturer by means of a wireless wave.)


To-morrow an army’s protective cavalry may, after
attacking the enemy’s advanced troops, feign a retreat, at the
same time sow their track with explosives that would be
operated with wireless when the enemy had reached the fated
area.
Though wireless apparatus to-day is readily affected by
outside interference; to-morrow, with the improvement in
transmitting and receiving apparatus, independence of action
may be looked for.
To-morrow the commander of a small body of troops in
the presence of a larger attacking force, may, by means of
wireless explosives, bring about the'ideal condition of having
the enemy’s forces dispersed, so that each part may be
attacked in turn. For instance, a bridge or other connection
between the arms could be destroyed by wireless when only
part of the enemy’s force had crossed.
To-day we are noting the development of the aerial
torpedo. Small dirigible balloons, fitted with motors and re-
ceiving apparatus, can be operated by electric waves, shoot-
ing the machine in any direction at the will of the operator —
a remarkable culmination of the military ideal of a distance-
striking weapon.
With aeronautics and wireless we are winning factors
which will revolutionise modern military strategy —factors
which are of more value to Australia with her lack of facilities
of intercommunication than to any other nation.
“What a city to loot!” Blucher said when looking at
London; but look at Australia and its tempting richness to
a prospective invader, and what are we doing about it?
Australia leads the world in the value of gold and
bullion possessed per head of population, having value as
follows:—Australia. £7/13/6 per head; United States,
£3/19/9 per head; Germany £3/6/3 per head; Great Britain
£2/12/5 per head; Canada, £l/18/7 per head; Russia, £l/5/-
per head; Japan, 7/10 per head. And yet Australia, though
the richest per head, had the lowest expenditure per head for
defence.
Therefore, on the basis of national comparison, further
expenditure in Australian national defence could not have
been fairly questioned, and the increasing responsibility
thrown upon us to protect our rapidly-developing continent,
coupled with the grim portent of future aerial warfare, calls
for every encouragement in Australia of a Corps of Aerial
Engineers armed with those mighty defensive factors —aero-
nautics and wireless.


SYDNEY FROM AN AEROPLANE OVER CIRCULAR QUAY


THE HIGHWAY OF THE AIR
And Military Engineering
LECTURE NO. 2.
Delivered at the United Service Institutions of New South
Wales, Victoria and Queensland in July, 1911.
To-day man is flying. He has achieved a distinction
sought since the dawn of time. One can picture primitive
man envying the freedom of the birds of the air and racking
his embryo brain as to the reason why he, the only thinking
creature, should be so tied to earth. .Yet it was this utter
helplessness, and then the dogged battle against natural ditii-
culties, that ultimately made him the /conqueror of the earth,
sea —and sky.
One can picture the first dawn of reason when the eailiest
individual began to think, and making things the unthinking
tribes did not possess, had to defend his new-born creations.
The first stone wall was the wonder of its time, but its build-
ing had to be followed by the devising of a stone axe to
defend it, and that primitive wall with its proud defiant war-
rior behind it, as it shielded his woman, her young, and all he
possessed, was the first cover for the worlds civilisation.
That wall was the, bulwark of the sciences, religions, and
liberties of to-day; and on that wall military engineering
took its foundation.
We have seen in the past how the military engineer has
gone forth and battled against natural conditions. I hrough
the forest he cut his roads; across the streams he flung his
bridges: he linked the miles together with his telegraph wire;
he built the cover to shield his armies; prepared the fortifica-
tions and drew maps of the country over which great Gen-
erals moved their armies in the mighty game of war; but till
to-day the engineer has delved upon the earth —a thing of
earth —for ages past he has built to suit earthly conditions.
To-day new conditions have arisen—a new element has been
conquered—the flying machine imperiously calls for the war
of the future to come into the sky.
To the military engineer dealing' with fortifications
(earthworks and obstacles) ; communications (roads and
bridges): and with mines and demolitions; the flying ma-
chine particularly beckons, as the change of conditions will
mean to him a reconsideration of present methods and ideas.
The New Material
The flying machines of the present day are either gas-
supported (dirigibles) or heavier than air (aeroplanes). The


A ZEPPELIN COMPARED TO A BATTLESHIP
former are either “rigid” (having internal solid skeleton), like
the Zeppelin; or “non-rigid,” like the Parseval, Gross, and
other military balloons.
The rigid balloon is unreliable, and the fact of so
many being storm-destroyed proves it must be protected by
a kennel; and, furthermore, the difficulty of its emerging or
entering its house during wind, necessitates that the kennel
be turnable, either mechanically or by placing same on water,
hence it must always act from a base. The “non-rigid,” how-
ever, can be deflated; it is thus more transportable where
railways are available. Its gas plant can be brought near the
arena of operations.
But the value of a military weapon depends on its being
utilised under all conditions in which an enemy can operate,
and in this respect the aeroplane comes nearer the military
ideal. It can travel horizontally twice as fast and rise three
times as quickly as the dirigible; a vital factor in aerial tac-
tics; and certain types can be flown in winds up to forty
miles an hour.
In this respect Johnson, flying at Belmont Park (U.S.A.).
was blown backwards out to sea, hence the wind was stronger
than the power behind his machine. This incident suggests
the possibility of being able to hover with present type aero-
planes when air currents are better understood.
The aeroplane can be flown in rain and almost under any
sort of weather conditions, whereas rain to a dirigible may
mean increase of weight sufficient to compel descent.
Therefore the future of the aeroplane appears to present
best possibilities, and looking through the various types we
note the track along which the military engineer must watch
for best development for military purposes.


Where Present Types are Defective
Every aeroplane has three essentials—surface, guidance,
and power.
The Voisin, the first type flown in Australia, had two
great horizontal planes, four vertical planes, and boxed in
tail. This surface spread made it a fine weather flier, and a
conspicuous object in the sky. Its guidance was front (ver-
tical) and back (horizontal). Its power was behind the main
planes; its single propellor making it difficult to turn except
in one direction for the reason that the propellor, having a
high rotation, sometimes at a speed of thirty times a second,
THE VOISIN TYPE OF BIPLANE
Practically Hargrave Box Kites with Propeller and gear


THE VOISIN BIPLANE IN AUSTRALIA
Being the first power-equipped man-carrier to fly in Australia
Flown by H. Houdini at Digger’s Rest, Victoria, 1910. This machine
was not, however, the first biplane man-carrier in Australia, as G. A.
Taylor rose in the air on a biplane, without power, at Narrabeen, near
Sydney, in November, 1909 (vide "Sydney Morning Herald").
set up a gyroscopic action. When turning it tended to uplift
the machine, and at the anxious moment of turn the machine
so banked itself that the extra torque the propellor gave
tended to oyerbank the planes. It may, of course, he con-
sidered that the torque was inconsequential as the propellor
shaft was practically frictionless, but there was always the
chance of the bearings being overheated, and in military
aeronautics one cannot afford to take any chances.
The Wright aeroplane was an improvement in “surface,”"
THE WRIGHT MACHINE
The first power-equipped man-carrier to fly


inasmuch as it was less conspicuous by having the side planes
removed, supplanting them for stability by flecking the ends
of the horizontal planes.
It improved the guidance by placing it so that the ob-
server can also work it in the event of the operator being
overcome —one of the most important points in aeroplane
construction, yet one which has been practically ignored in
many machines; and it improved the power by placing two
propellers instead of one, so that the Wright machine would
be turned in any direction without danger of being upset;
it also improved the observer’s position by placing him in
front of the main planes in such a position that no matter
what his weight the machine was always balanced.
The Bristol aeroplane had the disadvantage of the ob-
server being placed away from control, so that he was abso-
lutely at the mercy of the mechanic.
The observer in this type was also in a position of ex-
treme danger, inasmuch as he had the heavy engine immedi-
ately behind him, hence in the event of a sudden jolt there
was the chance that the great mass of metal would shoot
ahead and smash him. The descents in Australia have to date
been graceful and gradual, but in time of hostilities, with
flashes of speed and excitement, when a rapid descent any-
where with valuable information would save a crisis or be the
crux of a campaign, the quiet landing surface may not always
be forthcoming.
THE CODY BIPLANE
The first aeroplane to be purchased as a military accessory by the
British Government


THE BRISTOL AEROPLANE
Flying from Randwick Racecourse to Liverpool Camp with Captain
Neisigh as Observer, April, 1911
In this type the observer had to sit over the lower plane,
which thus shielded an area of dead vision included in an
angle of about 120 degrees, which increased as the machine
rose, so that at a height of 2,500 feet it hid an area of four
square miles. This could in a slight way have improved by
moving part of the lower plane, but even then the observer's
range of vision was too much obscured.
THE BADDECK BIPLANE
The first Military Aeroplane made for the Canadian Government
It had many novel features, for instance, the bow-shaped planes to
save breakages in the case of sudden descent


THE SANTOS DUMONT MONOPLANE
The first to fly in Europe


THE NEW AND THE OLD
A Bleriot biplane flying over a French farm
The monoplane type, as its name implies, is a single-
plane machine, and though the full-sized apparatus rose into
the air after the biplane type, yet actually the monoplane pre-
ceded the biplane, as Lawrence Hargrave the Australian, first
Hew a small monoplane model, with propeller in front, as far
back as August, 1884.
Most monoplane types have one advantage of having the
engine in front, so that on a sudden descent it will poke its
nose into the ground and to an extent save the occupants,
which explains why Bleriot had nineteen smashes of his mono-
planes before he flew the Channel. But having the engine
in front gives the disadvantage of an oil bath, unless the
machine is well cased in. 'The front propeller in monoplanes
gives the disadvantage of uncertainty of frontal observation,
inasmuch as the forward view is through a revolving propeller,
which means serious eye strain, though an observer can ob-
tain vertical observation by looking over the side.
The military engineer will therefore look for the ideal
military machine to give every facility' for frontal and ver-
tical observation, particularly as the aeroplane will be used
for bomb-dropping. His machine will be more stable than
present types, and will be capable of being quickly fitted to-
gether and rising from any surface.


How the New Material is Developing
That the ideal is rapidly coming we have only to look
at its rapid development.
By the end of 1910 the distance flown was twelve times
greater than in 1909, and nine times the number of aviators
flew, yet the mortality was only seven times greater, although
longer distances were traversed, greater altitudes attained,
more daring aerial movements made, starts and landings more
hazardous, and more amateurs threw themselves into the new
clement. It must also be understood that flying entered the
showman stage with fancy sensational aerial tricks.
At the beginning of 1910 tbe world’s record height for
heavier than air apparatus was by Paulhan, 1,558 feet. Before
the end of that year it was raised to 10.500 feet, and Tabiteau
had covered a distance of 365 miles in 7 hours and 18 min-
utes, an average of 44 miles per hour.
That year also saw an aeroplane flown from a ship’s deck
by Ely on a Curtis machine. He flew to the Pennsylvania—
from shore to ship and back again, smashing at one swoop
that “coveted distance” Australian defence had been cherish-
ing.
We had been nursing the fallacy that our distance from
unobserved invasion would give us time to prepare a hasty,
adequate defence, but military distance is a question of time
and facility of transport. Britain found the few hundred miles
between Capetown and Pretoria 157 times longer than a f v ew
thousand between Southampton and Capetown.
The ship-fitted aeroplane brought a limit of “understood
invasion” from anywhere from a few thousand miles to within
a few miles of Australia’s cities, and reduced the time from
weeks to minutes!
How Aerial Tactics will Affect Military Engineering
The military engineer, in considering aerial tactics, will
find for reconnaissance purposes the aeroplane provides a new
field of observation. It has advantage over mounted patrols,
inasmuch as it covers country at a greater speed, but it has
the disadvantage of breaking the great commandment of true
reconnaissance: that is, “See without being seen.”
The aeroplane I noted during the first flight at Liver-
pool Military Camp could be observed five miles off, though
the camp must have been visible to it from a further distance.
From a height of 1000 ft. a distance can be seen of thirty-three
miles, for accurate reconnaissance—and as no other is worth
considering; closer approach must be made. Hence recon-
naissance informal! tion from an aeroplane, to be of any value,
must be instantly transmitted. ;


If the aeroplane has to return and manoeuvre to safely
land and deliver the message, the enemy would have time to-
change its formation, and in that respect new problems in
strategy will engage military engineers, and Stonewall Jack-
son’s advice to “always mystify and mislead the enemy” will
take a wider meaning.
Trap formations will be made on even grander scales
than Napoleon’s formation trap at Austerlitz. It is well
known, yet its repetition is worth while.
He took up a position behind cover with his left flank
touching the northern of two ranges, and a great gap between
his right and the southern range. Through this gap it would
seem easy to penetrate and so turn his right flank and block
his communications. His enemies fell into the trap. Napoleon
attacked their right wing to let the left get well away on its
great outflanking movement; he then threw 30,000 men at
their weakened centre, seized their strong tactical point, cut
the army in two, and smashed nearly half of it.
The military engineer will have to be prepared for many
such schemes of deception and surprise.
In the first battle of wits in aeroplane military tactics
the ground engineer won out over his aerial brother. By
painted tree trunks and dummy earthworks the reconnoitring
aeroplanes in German peace manoeuvres were hoodwinked,
returned to their base with misleading information, their army
falling into the trap.
The saving of time in transmitting accurate information
will, therefore, be of extreme importance for best efficiency
in aeroplane reconnaissance, hence aeroplanes will have to
be fitted with wireless, and even then instant action must be
taken to be of any use.
By the most mobile of the forces will the information be
turned to best account, so to the advanced mounted troops
will the reconnoitring aeroplanes be allotted. The aeroplanes,
however, cannot give the best indication of tactical strength.
An aeroplane observer, for instance, cannot say if a house is
occupied, hence negative information from the air is unreliable.
A forest may screen an army, yet a body of light horse could
go through that forest like a rake.
The aeroplane will precede the advanced patrols, giving
the most advanced strategical information, yet it must be re-
membered that aerial observation from a height is at times
misleading. As one rises from the ground, the horizon rises
also, the ground below sinking, the country forming, as it
were, a cup; hills appear levelled and are almost unobserved
except in sunlight, being then distinguished by their shadows.
Aerial reconnaissance from a height practically only gives
horizontal plan; vertical elevation must be obtained by low
flying or by mounted troops.


ART AND NATURE
A Bristol aeroplane flying over some swans at Ascot, near Sydney,
in 1911.
The aerial engineer for reconnaissance purposes will have
to fly low and take risks.
In naval tactics the aeroplane will precede the destroyers,
locating the enemy’s submarines, and acting as advanced
aerial patrols.
Aerial Attack
In attack from the air the military engineer will have to
consider possibilities of aerial bombardment. Both dirigibles
Id


and aeroplanes can be utilised for aerial attack—bombardment
from dirigibles being the more accurate and having greater
effect; for, being stationary, there is best chance of accuracy,
and heavier bombs may be carried; but with the aeroplane,
given the height by aneroid, speed by anemometer, and hori-
zontal distance, accuracy of hits is a simple matter of the
parallelogram of forces, and a target will be quickly picked
up by the running fire from a bomb dropper.
Aeroplanes will start out with large fuel supply for ad-
vanced reconnaissance, and when, having ascertained the
position of enemy’s artillery, some can return and take loads
of bombs to destroy it, the others in the meantime keeping
“in touch.”
The value of sudden aerial attack is very great. Sur-
prise has been the greatest factor in all the grand strategical
combinations of military history. The first and last thought
of every great General is to strike where he is least expected,
and it is through such possible surprises that the engineer
in the past, with his field defences, has nursed the fighting
spirit of the soldier and kept at a distance that spirit of de-
moralisation that stalks every army, that spirit that watches
every opportunity to wreck the moral force of the fighter, for
more armies have been routed by moral effect than by shot
and steel.
It was the moral effect of Jackson’s counter stroke that
won the battle of Bull Run.
“Reserve your fire till they come within fifty yards,” he
ordered, “then fire and give them the bayonet, and when you
charge yell like demons” —and that yell rang in the ears of
12,000 Federals and chased them to Washington.
It was the moral effect of Napoleon’s tactics that won
the Battle of Ulm, when 23,000 surrendered without firing a
shot, when Napoleon said, “My army can fight with its legs.”
Consider the moral effect of screaming aeroplanes shoot-
ing into the scattered ranks of an army, marking its track
with explosives. Consider the effect the possession of swiftly
moving airships will have upon an army not so armed, who
would watch with fear each hovering cloud to see if it screened
an aerial terror that could smash them with smokeless, noise-
less guns.
It will be to counteract in some degree the moral effect
of aerial attack that the engineer will find some problems to
solve.
Aerial Defence
Aerial defence may be summed up. in having excess of
speed horizontal and vertical; and making the best use of


smoke clouds, fog, or mist cover. Organisation must be per-
fect, and aerial engineeers, pilots, observers, and mechanics
must be well trained in the use and possibilities of all arms.
Ground Attack
The attack from the ground will take the form of high
angle fire, and in this respect the engineer will consider the
best means of assisting field guns to rapidly allow for swift
aerial movements by Revising special elevating carriages.
It will be found that there are comparatively few effective
zones in attacking airships from the ground, as with high-
angle trajectories the zone of effect diminishes as the line of
departure approaches the vertical, and the nearer it approaches
the vertical the greater the danger of the return of expended
projectiles, expended rifle bullets returning to the ground with
a striking velocity of ninety yards per second.
High explosive shells will have a very marked effect
exploding in the locality of an aeroplane. The air concus-
sion of gun fire is sufficient, as is known, to break windows
in the vicinity, the concussion effect of the shell will therefore
be much greater in the air, as there is no ground friction ;
and it will be in the study of the concussion effects of certain
explosives that the engineer will have some problems to
consider.
In this respect an interesting accident happened during
manoeuvres on the Mexican frontier. An aviator named
Simon went out to locate three batteries of artillery. He dis-
covered two and flew over the third without locating it. As
the artillery had orders to fire blank cartridges at any machine
within range, they let go at Simon, who was flying at a height
of 800 feet. The air concussion almost upset him. Here was
an instance of an ordinary field battery blank fire having an
effective range of 1,600 feet diameter!
It has been said that tactical air waves may be made
with propellers or eschelon waves by other aeroplanes, but
the disturbance created by the propeller is very local—not
more than 60 feet away, as I carefully noted during the Voisin
and Bristol flights in Sydney. It must be remembered that
such disturbances are made at the botton of a great atmos-
pheric pressure of 14.71 b. per square inch, so are as local as
the water disturbance of a fish at the bottom of the sea.
In attack from the ground much ammunition will be
wasted, hence the engineer will facilitate mechanical arrange-
ments for speedy supply.
In recent wars it has been estimated that 1,000 to 3,400
cartridges and 80 to 100 shrapnel shells have been expended
for every man put out of action. The aerial attacker calls for


still greater expenditure. It has therefore been allowed that
8,000 cartridges are justified for an aeroplane with one ob-
server. Therefore if one company can fire 2,000 rounds per
minute, success is ground attack of aeroplanes will depend
on the expenditure of much ammunition, and with several
companies maintaining requisite rate of fire; sights of rifles
and machine guns being altered to allow of aerial elevation
and deflection.
Automobile guns are now in use, but having to keep to
the roads are under a disadvantage in following aerial move-
ments, particularly as aerial attackers may seek cover of
clouds, and under the best conditions remain but a short
while in range, and then suddenly change its direction on
apprehending danger. And it is in this superiority of direc-
tion over roads and such present lines of communication that
the aeroplane has the advantage.
A Road in War
Take a road in the stress of war. It is the life-line of the
army. It holds it to its supplies, and along its well-tramped
length rush the reserves to replace losses—the food transports.
THE ROAD IN WAR
A road snapped from an aeroplane
This snapshot gives a fair idea of the clear field of fire a road gives
for aeroplane attack.


the ammunition carts, hospital supplies, all rush ahead in a
cheering, wildly excited line; but coming back there crawls
another line of wounded soldiers, dejected prisoners, and
empty waggons—two opposite moving lines struggle along,
hedged by the sides of that road; each has to make its way
unimpeded or the army suffers. The protection of that road
has been the main concern of the campaign; cut it ahead and
the army is checked; cut it at the rear and the result may be
more disastrous. The fate of a nation may depend on the
break of such a line of communication. Napoleon made good
roads his first necessity. In fact, till to-day “the road” has
been the fulcrum upon which the fates of armies have been
balanced. Yes, till to-day, for the aeroplane knows no road,
and so will be difficult to follow up in ground attack.
It, however, must alight to replendish its store of petrol
and oil, and when down it will be like a tortoise on its back.
The alighting base, therefore, will give its position away,
and it will be rushed by the mounted troops, and petrol stores
located. The military engineer will therefore devise over-
head and horizontal cover for stores, and see that they are
not concentrated, but well scattered —before they are scat-
tered by an aerial visitor.
Ground Defence
It is in defence from aerial attack that the military en-
gineer will find some of his greatest problems.
The first principle is that field defences be so constructed
as to conform with the tactical plan of operations, and as the
tactical plan of operations of aerial attack means sudden
surprises; quick arrangements for ovehhead screen and cover
must be considered.
Hitherto the weapons reckoned with in devising works
of defence have been rifles, machine and quick-firing guns,
heavy artillery, and howitzers.
Looking through development of modern weapons, we
find field defences have been gradually getting more unsafe.
Of rifle bullets the slope of descent is lin at 2800 yards.
The greatest slope of shrapnel is 1 in 4 at 4500 yards. The
greatest slope of howitzer shells is 1 in 1, until with aerial
bombardment we reach the vertical.
I have heard military officers say that the dropping of
explosives from aerial machines can be prohibited by a Peace
Conference, but The Hague Conference, 1907, refused to
continue such prohibition, as it was felt that as aerial vessels
would be used for reconnaissance it would be unfair to de-
prive them of means of retaliation if attacked. Even if future


rules of war prohibited dropping bombs, they could be fired
down from guns of small carrying power.
Bombardment, however, is a wasteful method of getting
results. The bombardment of Paris, though it practically
used up all the German ammunition, only killed 96 people,
and in an aeroplane ammunition is particularly limited, but
the speed of the latter can enable it to quickly replenish.
The military engineer will therefore seize every oppor-
tunity to devise overhead screenings and defensive cover, and
not better screen will come to his hand than that devised by
Nature since the beginning of things—trees.
It is an awful traversity on humanity that to-day the earth
is confronted with a timber famine. The world stands aghast
at the reckless destruction of its forests. It will repent its
recklessness when it has found that it has destroyed the best
protection from aerial attack.
The advantage of trees as natural overhead screen was
shown at Liverpool where a Bristol machine flew over
the bush unknown to the Light Horse squadrons manoeuvr-
ing beneath.
Active steps will be taken to screen our roads with wide-
spreading shade trees, and the military engineer in times of
peace will be engaged in planting avenues of great and beau-
tiful roadside shade trees, and be blessed by those who come
after for bringing the “lungs” back to the earth again.
It will be remembered that during the Japanese war
Kuroki, under cover of night, transplanted a fir forest along
the side of the road to Wiju, so that his army passed unob-
served to the Russians on the hills beyond, an excellent ex-
ample of tree-screening from horizontal vision, but the roads
of the future will be screened also from vertical observation.
From the aerial attacker new cover will be devised, and
the Japanese painted screens of the late war may yet be
widely imitated. s
Infantry will study shadow throwing. In bright sun-
light the shadow of a pole will screen a few, and the shaded
side of a gutter will screen many.
Lying down shadows will be studied, lying in the direction
of light giving least shadow, and so less chance of observation
from the air.
Open country will, as far as possible, be avoided by
mounted troops, except in the widest of extended order.
Speed and movement, like modern life, will quicken up
warfare.
The Lessons of the Air Age
Time will more than ever be everything. It will be an-
nihilated with wireless telegraphy. Aeroplanes and advanced
patrols will carry portable sets for quick transmission of
messages and sketches. We shall see the last of those man


oeuvres with the flanks out of touch with their centre
because visual signals had failed. Wireless will operate either
in flat or bushy country where visual signalling is almost im-
possible. and during cloud, fog, or storm, when the helio is out
of action.
Portable Wireless
I have been experimenting in the devising of a man-
portable wireless apparatus, and have reached what is perhaps
at present the smallest wireless station made. It has been
utilised for equipping a wireless foghorn and for communicat-
ing between railway trains.
The advantage of a wireless foghorn is, that as a steamer
enters a fog that may be at the entrance to a harbor or where
much steamer traffic exists, its foghorn could be operated
from a wireless station covering the area, thus eliminating in
THE WIRELESS FOGHORN
Invented by the writer, and installed on the s.s. “Kanowna” (1911)


a degree the human element and consequently reducing the
risk of mishaps at sea.
My portable wireless was first installed on a railway
train, when it was used for communicating between the guard’s
van and the locomotive on the Sydney-Melbourne Express
(vide Melbourne Herald, 14th November, 1910). I also used
it for communicating between moving trains in February,
1911, at Toowoomba, Queensland.
Initiative
The coming age will be the age of the initiative.
Field defences will not be so important. Battles will be
continual ebb and flow. The army that will wait will lose.
Forces will march till tired, and the first to tire will be de-
feated.
The history of warfare has shown how initiative has ex-
tended through the forces. Time was when armies marched
to war, each man a trustful unit doing only what he is told to
do, and unable to do anything he had not been told—into war
he has gone a pitiful fighting animal trusting the initiative of
his commander, like the two mules of Frederick of Germany.
“See those two mules,” he said. “They have been through
twenty campaigns, and —they’re still mules.”
Moltke, in 1870, spread this initiative through German
subordinate leaders, and it is said to their intelligent though
sometimes reckless initiative, French officers had nothing to
offer but dumb initiative; they were “waiting for orders.”
Henderson points out that the initiative of German sub-
ordinate officers was the real cause of the swift destruction
of the French army and the secret of German strength.
In the war of the future this initiative will still further
spread; in fact, every soldier will carry his entrenching tool.
I have watched blue bottle crabs marching on our harbor
beaches, and at a stamp they entrenched themselves in the
mud with overhead screen. It suggested to one the terror
of an aerial attack in the days to be.
Air Currents
The military engineer will study air currents. He will
find the curlew can travel four miles per hour by utilising air
currents. He will understant why an albatross weighing 501 b.
can glide along at 40 miles per hour without a wing move-
ment; and he will find in the study of gliding one of the most
fascinating, and it may be pointed out. one of the most inex-
pensive phases of aviation.
He will find that gliding is not only the aviator’s
safety valve in the event of the engine stopping, but is the
basis of all aerial navigation. A close study of air currents
will enable the engineer to simplify present machine types.


In this respect some experiments in gliding I carried
out at Narrabeen, near Sydney, during November, 1909, will
be of military interest.
The aeroplane consisted of two planes with a box kite bal-
ancing tail. It was 33 feet long, 44 feet wide, of light timber,
covered with oiled calico. The planes were slightly curved,
and when inclined against the wind, the latter’s action on the
front of the top of the curved plane created a vacuum over
the rear, causing the end to tilt up and shoot forward in a
curved swoop.
This faculty may be noted by holding a small piece of
paper between the forefingers and thumbs, curving the paper
and gently blowing upon it. when the air waves will be de-
flected by the curve, passing upward and creating a vacuum
over the tail of the paper, causing it to rise.
The operator by lying in the centre of the glider can by
practice automatically keep the head of the planes up to the
wind, so that the glider can shoot ahead at a fair speed. A
skilful operator can automatically rise, swoop, and manoeuvre
in the wind without any danger; in fact, on the gliders used
during my experiments flights of over 250 yards were made.
Through such practical study of air currents many vital
improvements will be made in present type aeroplane con-
struction.
Making the first man-lifting aeroplane in Australia
(Photo, from the Sydney “Daily Telegraph,” October 14, 1909)


EXPERIMENTS IN GLIDING.—I.
The aeroplane straining in the wind as it is being let into the air like
a kite by means of slip ropes at each end of the main planes
EXPERIMENTS IN GLIDING.—II.
The planes tilted to catch the wind, causing the aeroplane to rise. It
is held taut by the slip ropes, so that it can get well off the ground


EXPERIMENTS IN GLIDING.—III.
The aeroplane in the air, the slip ropes being let go
EXPERIMENTS IN GLIDING.—IV.
The aeroplane leaving the last of the holders’ hands, and starting to
glide. The operator is throwing himself forward so as to bring down
the front edge of the planes in order to meet the wind at the proper
angle


EXPERIMENTS IN GLIDING.—V.
The writer rising on an air current
EXPERIMENTS IN GLIDING—VI.
The start of a long glide, covering 258 yards, December 5, 1909


During one of our glider flights at Narrabeen, a
20-mil‘e breeze was blowing from the north. My glider rose
upon it and shot ahead for 200 yards, when it suddenly began
to sink. We found by anemometer that a 90ft. hill 150 yards
ahead had deflected the lower strata of the wind, curving them
upwards, and causing a lull for a considerable distance south
of the hill. By the operator rising on his hands, and throwing
his weight backward to that it would tilt the tail down and
give a wider expanse of planes to the diminished breeze, he
could rise into the full breeze and son continue onwards.
In the case of a swiftly flitting engine-fitted aeroplane
it is difficult to give much study to air currents because of
the small proportion they bear to the air stream passing the
aeroplane.
Is it too much to conjecture the reconnoitring officer of
the future with his knowledge of gliding and air currents fit-
ting himself with quick-fixed planes with which he will, like
a great albatross, rise on a current of air and take observa-
tions.
Will the future see a troop spread their portable planes,
rise from a hill like a flock of hawks, soar across a valley to
a neighboring hill, and take up a position?
Who can deny to the future the most wonderful of pos-
sibilities? With aeronautics and wireless to his hand, the
military engineer will be the wizard of the new age.
War will Become the world’s greatest science, and vic-
tory will remain with the nation best trained.
The fighters of the future will not come from our foot-
ball or cricket fields. The future Wellington will tell a dif-
ferent story than that of Eton cricket fields.
The battles of the future will be fought in our Univer-
sities and engineering colleges, and the nation best educated
in that respect will win out in war as well as in peace.
To-day the soldier in almost every nation is the plaything
of politics. His necessities are regulated by political exi-
gencies. Defence estimates are butchered to build financial
statements.
The average layman is ever ready to pit his opinion
against the military expert.
The world denies to the highly trained military officer
that specialism it readily recognises in doctors and other
scientific men, but in the coming age the public in its utter
helplessness against the aerial terror, will grimly recognise
the importance of the military expert —and honor him accord-
ingly.


"THE MAN BEHIND THE GUN”
An aviator and his machine gun


The Man and the Machine
The Lesson of the Great War
LECTURE NO. 3.
Delivered at the United Service Institutions of New South
Wales and Queensland in July, 1918.
This is the age of the Machine!
In less than one century, the cart-horse, that for ages
trudged slowly along the old highway, is supplemented with
a steam or electrically-propelled train that dashes on rails at
the rate of a mile per minute!
In less than one generation, the old method of sending a
message round the earth that took six months, is supplemented
with wireless telegraphy with a speed of 156,000 miles per
second!
In less than ten years, that dream man has had since the
beginning of time, that of having the freedom of the air that
the birds is realised, and man flies!
And the Great War is speeding up machine development,
so that almost daily is some new contrivance in action on the
field of battle. The great guns and high explosives, the
caterpillar waggon, the mighty tanks, the improvements in
aeroplanes, and the hundred other machines, help to make the
last ten years an age of marvel.
Yet it was at the beginning of that decade that Kipling
wrote: —
“We’re creepin’ on, wi’ each new rig less weight and greater power;
There’ll be the loco, boiler next, and thirty knots an hour;
Thirty an’ more. What I ha’ seen since ocean steam began
Leaves me no doot for the Machine: but what about the Man?
So we have the great question of the age—Man in his
relation to the Machine. It is a subject crammed with interest,
especially to Australians.
The great development in modern machinery has, how-
ever, created in a man a general tendancy to place more
reliance upon it than upon himself.
We note it in those arts and sciences in which
personal skill has been supplemented or superseded by me-
chanical means. In mathematics, machinery can now solve
problems formerly requiring expert skill in calculating. This
has its disadvantages in suggesting to the lazily inclined that
there is no further necessity for study. We see this tendency
to rely more upon the machine than upon self in military
science.


In the artillery, for instance, the improvement in machin-
ery has made gunners somewhat too dependent on instruments
and less upon themselves. In other words, there is too much
instrument and not enough head; too much Machine, and not
enough Man.
Major A. E. C. Myers, of the Royal Garrison Artillery,
complained of this in the “Journal of the Royal Artillery,”
October, 1917. He noted:—
“We have devices for ranging by aeroplanes; devices
for plotting the observation of two observers; devices or
charts for finding the wind correction; tables for concen-
tration; tables of angles or nomographs for finding fac-
tors; slide rules of various sorts, and other devices of
various natures in use or suggested. Some of these are
clever, some are cumbersome . . . and there is not much
harm in using them, as long as the user can do without
them if necessary.”
And he proves that in an emergency no instrument of any
sort is absolutely necessary, provided the gunner has a range-
table at the particular moment.
The danger of solely relying upon an instrument will be
apparent when one realises that it may not always be possible
for a soldier to have the required instrument handy ; hence, if
the man is solely dependent on an instrument, and if it happens
to be missing, there is the grave possibility of himself and the
whole of the equipment being useless.
The average man to-day, who continually uses instru-
ments to solve problems, does not use his brain so much.
There is consequently a tendency to get “rusty” and slow,
and the soldier may even forget altogether.
This aspect of the tendency of some men to solely rely
on the machine is not ony to be found with the artillery,
but also in other arms; even in the Army Medical Corps. An
officer commanding the Australian Army Medical CCorps at
Gallipoli, and later in France, informed me that with the
development of what may be termed Medical Machinery,
there is not to-day that keenness in diagnosing that is neces-
sary for the best success.
We see the same diminishing of skill in our civic life.
The development of machinery is killing, in the modern
worker, that skill that made the old-time craftsman famous,
and his work long-lived. The individual to-day has not that
skill that his class once had in working in timber, stone or
metal; that, however, may not matter so much in civic life:
but in the military, the skill of the individual in the craft ot
the soldier must ever be at its best, irrespective of any machine
development.


THE WATCH-DOG OF THE NAVY
An aeroplane protecting an armed merchantman
READY FOR A RAID
A British biplane in France
1<:


I have found that it takes a good deal to convince the
average soldier that modern mechanical aids to military
efficiency, such as the aeroplane, the tank, the motor car and
motor cycle will not lessen the need for that high sense of
personal efficiency needed in the past. ,
The Great War has proved the utility of the aeroplane in
many respects, such as bomb-dropping, aerial photography,
and when armed with machine guns, in attacking troops m
the open; but it cannot relieve members of other arms of their
responsibility and value as “feelers” for their army.
An aeroplane can pass over a hidden foe without winning
any information; in fact, the first aeroplane journey of any
military significance in Australia passed over Liverpool in
1910, but the aviators failed to note the 7th Light Horse
Regiment manoeuvring in the bush south of the Liverpool
Camp.
An aeroplane cannot draw the fire of an enemy so well
as can mounted troops, and it is a military axiom that by
getting in direct touch with an enemy and drawing his fire,
his strength can be usually ascertained.
With regard to the “lank,” it has indeed been a great
factor in fighting on fairly level ground, such as in France and
Belgium, but in mountainous districts, it will not be as
übiquitous as mounted troops or infantry.
With regard to the motor car and cycle, the Great War
has proved their usefulness for speedy transport, and for
message-carrying; but they cannot jump fences nor cross
country like mounted troops, nor work into good cover and
capture positions like infantry. , i
Of course, there are extremes in motor construction, such
as armored cars, which can draw fire, but such can hardly come
into general use for many a day in Australia, with its wide;
area for attack, and its great lack of efficient roadways.
A direct proof of the value of the horse in an emergency-
over arty other terrestrial transport, such as the motor car,i
was given me during,a recent camp period at Menangle, New,
South Wales. One day it rained very heavily, and the clayj}
surfaced roads were so boggy and slippery that it took a
car nearly an hour to reach Campbelltown, a matter of five,
and a-half miles; yet it only took a half-hour’s easy riding by-
horse to return. '■ ’
The Machine is, therefore, not always dependable, but
Man must be. ...
There is a peculiar trait in the individual who likes the
machine. He is always inclined to give it more power than it
deserves. If he happened to be the inventor, his admiration
for his idea and the possibilities he anticipates for are usually
extraordinary. I have not yet met an inventor who has not
claimed for his affair almost every virtue on earth, and won


derecl why millionaires do not rush him with their bank
balances to float a company to surprise the Universe. Yet the
average individual has, in a sense, this admiration of the’
Machine, as it suggests the conquest of the inanimate by
Man; hence the Machine-possibilities are exaggerated.
For instance, when the aeroplane began to come into
notice in March, 1909, “The Sydney Star” (now “The Sun”)
said:—
“One inevitable effect of the adoption of the aero-
plane for military purposes will be the displacement of
millions of men from the armies of the world. Battles in
the air, if ever they do take place, will be largely battles of
machinery operated by a handful of men on either side,
and there will be no use for the big land battalions now
maintained. What will follow the glutting of the labor (
market by the billetless fighting men?”
I can, with no small pride, claim to be one of those who
foretold great changes in military science consequent on the
conquest of the air; but I ever hesitated to say it would in
any way supplant the individual.
I cannot forget how, after a demonstration I arranged in
the Sydney Lyceum Theatre, in 1912, when a Mr. Roberts
guided a small balloon about the theatre by means of wireless
waves from the stage, the press predicted that the next great
war would be carried cut by aeroplanes unmanned, but guided
and controlled in the upper heavens by wireless waves. These
machines would bang and ram till the battle was ended with-
out,a single life being lest. It was to be the triumph of the
Machine!
They little thought that within three years, that “Next
Great War” would eventuate, and notwithstanding that period,
would see the greatest machine development in the history of
the earth, men would have to delve, scramble and fight in the
mud of Flanders in the same way and, in fact, in the same place
as the Roman soldiers did two thousand years before; and that
text-books of Military Science would be set back to the early
days of the hand grenade, and the still more ancient times of
the Chinese stink-pot!
It must not be forgotten that wars are made between men,
and not between the machinery they fight with, and in these
days of rapid exchange of ideas and associations, when each
nation has its Consul in every principal city of the earth, there
really can be very little difference between the various kinds oT
armaments of the nations.
Even in these daws of war, when Consuls of'
enemy countries are berred, changes are fairly swift.
Britain and France first had the military aeroplane,
and Germany soon followed. Germany had the big guns and
high explosives, and the Allies lost no time in that direction.
Germany had the poison gas; the Allies went one better. The


THE STATE AVIATION SCHOOL, RICHMOND, N.S.W.
The first to be formed outside of the Defence Department
Allies played a trump card with the Tanks. Germany fol-
lowed with a similar armament, and even if one armament is
superior to another, the calibre of the man and lps tactical
placing will ultimately decide victory.
That master of naval strategy, Mahan, in his “Influence
of Sea Power upon History,” points out: —
“That whilst many of the conditions of war vary from
age to age with the progress of weapons, certain teach-
ings of history remain constant and become general
principles.
“Thus, notwithstanding the marvellous changes in
naval weapons, the general principles of maritime war-
fare that decided the fate of Carthage still hold good.”
It is indeed a great change from the ancient slave gallev
with its triple rows of oarsmen to the super-dreadnought of
to-day; yet in this change in the Machine, the head has got
to be used in the same way as in earliest days, and where the
head be subordinated to the Machine is there failure fore-
doomed. I
At the start of things, Germany made a bid for the com-
mand of the sea, but her fleets were followed up. and her
main effort at Jutland Bank resulted in failure. Since then
she has not ventured to renew the challenge on the high seas,
and her only naval work consisted of apparently thoughtless


raids by cruisers and destroyers of a “tip and run” nature,
whßh were of little value.
Tor her second objective she chose commerce-destroying
by raiders, which met with little better success, the most suc-
cessful being the “Wolf” and the “Emden,” the latter, how-
ever, being brought to book by the “Sydney.”
Her first and second objectives having failed, Germany,
in her dilemma, took to the submarine. To larger U-boats her
scheme developed, till notice of unrestricted warfare was
notified to begin on February 4th, 1917.
“Within three months,” said Germany, “Great Britain
will be beaten to her knees.”
Many months have passed, and, although losses must
be acknowledged, Great Britain is further from collapse.
If Germany had used her head, she would have remem-
bered that in every sea war since the days of the fall of Car-
.thage and Rome, unrestricted commerce-destruction, if not
backed up by a fleet, is doomed to failure. Her blind reliance
on the undersea machine brought against her the most power-
ful of all the neutrals, as the silly sinking of the “Lusitania”
and other American trading vessels sounded the battle call
for the greatest hitherto neutral oversea trading nation to
range herself against Germany.
The improvement of the machine should not mean any
relaxation of any of the duties of the soldier, for just as there
is progress in means of defence, there is just as much develop-
ment in means of attack. The one balances the other. There
is no standing still, and the soldier who considers the study
of detail is not now so essential, or who gets slack by thinking
certain points he had to study were now hardly necessary, is
making a mistake, in proof of which stands the whole history
of the science of war.
The invention of machines does not mean the invention of
faculties in man, but it should mean the development of the
faculties, and those faculties can be best developed by atten-
tion to details..
Military progress, like progress in everything else, is
made up of little advances, each advance perhaps a trifle, but
aggregating 1 what may constitute a conquest or a revolution.
It has been truly said that trifles make perfection, and per-
fection is no trifle. To illustrate this with a familiar object,
we may mention the early bicycle that had solid rubber tyres.
Then came a trifling advantage, the hollow cushion tyre. It
was a simple idea of blow out that hollow tyre till we had
the air-inflated tyre, giving comfortable travelling, and making
possible the extraordinary developments in motor transport
that have revolutionised road travelling and put extra speed
into military action. It is the little things that count.
It is the attention to details that makes the soldier.


ONE OF THE EVES OF AN ARMY
An aviator photographing an enemy position
It is the attention to details that is the basis of invention,
for invention is merely adding to details already known. It is
founded on information, and is based on detail, and most of
the triumphs of war have been due to some new invention,
some surprise either in mechanical or strategical skill.
Napoleon’s sudden flashes of inspiration gave him the
run of Europe. The unexpected high explosives on the Bel-
gian forts made the German dash through Belgium so easy.
The initiative of General Joffre at the Marne checked the Ger


man rush on Paris, and the success of the Battle Tanks was
the element of surprise. It is interesting to note how this
element of surprise was arranged.
Colonel E. D. Swinton, of the British Army, conceived
the “Tank” idea, and in the beginning of 1916, its extensive
manufacture was quietly begun in one section of England.
The advent of this new engine of war was kept quiet, even
the name “Tank” being inappropriately given it for the sake
of that secrecy and surprise that had much to do with the
success. It was a sort of literary camouflage to bluff enemy
curiosity ; hence the unexpected launching of the new weapon
found the enemy quite unprepared to meet it with an adequate
defensive weapon.
This proves that there is no difference in the fundamental
principles of ancient and modern wars, as the law of defence
is elemental'. Defence always finds a check to offence. The
invention of swords, spears and arrows as weapons of offence
called for shields and armour. As men massed together in
larger units for offence, fortified positions came into use. With
increased range and efficiency of modern weapons came con-
cealment and wider intervals between the fighting man.
This is expressed in a few lines that appeared in the
writer’s “Songs for Soldiers”: —
The snake with poisoned fang defends
(And does it really very well).
The cuttle-fish an ink-cloud sends;
The tortoise has its fort of shell;
The tiger has its teeth and claws;
The rhino, has its horns and hide;
The shark has rows of saw-set jaws;
But there Man stands, the whole world wide,
Unarmed and naked! But ’tis plain—
• For him to fight, God gave a brain !
So back in this world’s early mists,
When man began to use his head.
He stopped from fighting with his fists
And gripped a wooden club instead. . . .
The bow and arrow came and won,
For Death came winged from far away.
Then came the cannon and the gun,
And brought us where we are to-day.
And now we see the shield of yore
A floating mass of armour plate.
I 1 With crew a thousand men or more,
And guns a hundred tons in weight.
Beneath the seas dart submarines,
Around tlie.wo.rld.and-back-again. ;


But every marvel only means
Some greater triumph of the brain.
For while the thund’ring hammers ring,
And super-dreadnoughts swarm the sea,
There flits above, a bird-like thing
That claims aerial sovereignty!
A thing of canvas, stick and wheel—
“ The two-man fighting aeroplane.”
It screams above those hulks of steel:
“Oh ! human brain, begin again !”
THE OLD AND THE NEW The Pyramids photographed from an aeroplane


It was this conquest of the air that brought a weapon into
warfare that called on man to use his brain with particular
energy, as he had no defence at hand against aerial attack, and
where defence is not immediately available to counteract
offence, international law is called to bear.
The balloon was first used in the American Civil War.
Aerial offence possibilities were then foreseen by military
experts; hence in the Convention of St. Petersburg that
followed, the dropping of explosives from aircraft was pro-
hibited, though the Hague Convention of 1907 left the
matter open. The Great War, however, saw the smashing
of all international jurisprudence, so that hasty defence
had to be improvised in the shape of camouflage, and
as reprisals were expected by the enemy, German camouflage
was practised early in the conflict. Before German aero-
dromes were placed underground, the great Zeppelin shed
roofs were painted to represent the surrounding country, being
either pictures of tree-tops or house roofs. And this art of
camouflage is extending, making more necessary the develop-
ment in the Man of that careful observation and initiative that
form the basis of all strategy and tactics.
These points must be developed to even a greater degree
in the Aerial Scout. Unlike the Ground Scout, who works in
one dimension only—the horizontal plane—the Aerial Scout
must exercise initiative in two dimensions—the horizontal
and the vertical. He must also exert swift initiative in the
control of an apparatus of extreme delicacy.
An interesting instance well illustrates this point. An
Australian aviator, Captain Brian Dowling, in the Royal Fly-
ing Corps, was piloting a machine over the German lines, and,
with an observer, flew into the range of anti-aircraft guns,
which shot away his steering gear and one of the wings. The
machine lop-sided, side-slipped, and was crashing earthwards,
when the quick-witted pilot gave the observer a tip to climb
up on the almost perpendicular left wing. He climbed to the
end, and his weight somewhat counter-balanced the loss of
the other wing, so that the pilot managed to get the aeroplane
back into safety.
Though the aeroplane is a remarkable development of
the Machine, it thus calls for a still greater development in
the Man.
The Aerial Scout is without that great factor favorable to
the Ground Scout of easy cover in order to “see without being
seen.” He, moreover, has to have the initiative of taking
advantage of cloud cover; in fact, he is really in a new en-
vironment. and has to judge everything from an entirely new
point of view.
Though he has the advantage over the Ground Scout of


ROME FROM THE SKY
A photograph of the vicinity of St. Peter’s


covering' a great area, he cannot, from his height, determine
the depth of streams or their currents, the location of fords,
or ascertain if wired entanglements are sunk therlein, or
whether adjoining thickets are defended by troops.
The Aerial Scout has also to remember that, as defence
follows offence, high-angle guns must improve and make fly
still higher, so that he must develop a keener sense of observa-
tion.
An interesting instance, however, of the human element
in aerial observation and its superiority over terrestrial, was
recently given on the Western Front.
During a heavy mist, an aerial scout flew over a German
trench. Looking down, he noted it packed with soldiers, who,
evidently fancying themselves under cover of the fog, were
preparing to launch a heavy attack. They had forgotten that
a mist is thickest and practically uniform in thickness at the
ground level, but thins upwards. The aerial observer hastened
back to report. Within a few minutes of his return, that
plosely packed trench was soon smashed under a heavy fire.
One can easily understand how keen has to be the sense
of observation on the part of the aerial scout, when one con-
siders the many disadvantages under which he has to labor,
particularly as regards weather conditions. In clear weather
there is best opportunity for that never-failing “observation-
ieye”—the photo-camera; an eye that never weakens, an eye
that takes in every detail; an eye that preserves the quick
impression for the ever-ready reference.
Yet, notwithstanding this triumph of the mechanical, the
need for the keenest of human observation is in no sense
diminished. If it be in any way weak, one would probably see a
repetition of the affair of the Ma me, where lack of aerial observ-
ation on the part of the enemy was a big factor in the turning
of the enemy’s right flank. The Germans were on their
triumphant southern march. There was a road from Paris to
the Marne; it was tree covered in parts. Along that road
General Joffre rushed his divisions; rushed them packed in
(motor cars, motor lorries, in fact, in every speedy contrivance
he could obtain; rushed them so swiftly that they dodged
German aerial reconnaissance; surprised and forced the Ger-
mans to retire eastward, when they got upon their turned
flank the full force of the British, and were driven towards
the Aisne.
Therefore reconnaissance of a projected field of battle
cannot be confined to aerial observation. Reconnaissance _ is
not merely to view, but to become acquainted with, and notwith-
standing military machine development, the greatest ally or
opponent to the fighting man is the ground. Its forms and
contours help him to win or lose; and forms and contours


LOOKING DOWN ON LONDON
An aerial snapshot of the vicinity of St. Paul’s


viewed from an aeroplane vary with the change in direction
of light; in fact, aerial reconnaissance of the area to be fought
over presents so many aspects, the study of which has not
previously entered into military training, that it is developing
a special sort of soldier, and still further proves the develop-
ment of the Man must keep ahead of the Machine.
That the eye of an aerial observer must be superior to
any mechapical contrivance as a camera, will be understood
when one remembers that the play of light on a shell hole
or a mound has a considerable effect upon the aerial aspect
of such objects. Viewed from one aspect, the play of light
reveals a shell hole or mound, as the case may be, but when
the aeroplane turns, and these contrasting objects are reviewed
with the light from the opposite direction, the appearance of
the objects are changed, and the shell hole appears to be the
mound, and vice versa.
The light proposition, therefore, proves that the head
must be used with keenest attention.
There is also the problem of changing lights and their
effect on camouflage, which may, with the sunlight in the one
direction, show nothing, yet with the light another way, may
reveal a mound or gun emplacement, which is why a number
of photographs are taken of enemy country under various
lights, and deductions made therefrom.
The whole system of aerial reconnaissance is practically
based upon “saveefor instance, an aerial photograph was
taken of a railway embankment. A vertical view showed a
dilapidated embankment with communication trenches leading
up to the German front lines. There appeared to be a much
used roadway suggesting rather heavy traffic up to a certain
point. It was considered that infantry could not make such
a wide track, hence there must be a battery there. A photo-
graph of the front of the embankment proved that deduction
to be correct.
The careful deductions necessary will be understood when
one studies the photo (on page 74) showing German trenches.
The top line of trenches, from the amount of earth (shown
white), are deep, and no doubt are well supplied with dugouts
Overhead cover can be noted in parts where the line of
trenches appear to be broken.
Saps can be noted working towards the Allies'
trenches (at the lower right of photograph), from which
saps may also be seen creeping towards the enemy lines,
the country generally, being well trenched. The white on
photograph at right is a cloud, the aeroplane shown being one
of the Allies’. The white lines at left of German trenches are
tracks, and the appearance of these tracks enables the aerial
observer to make deductions as to whether they lead to dumps


AMIENS FROM AN AEROPLANE
Showing the Cathedral


behind the shelter of the more forward line of trenches,, or
whether to an important position, as for instance, the tracks
leading to the white pile that may be noted almost beneath
the left wing-end of the aeroplane in the illustration.
The deductions to be made from tracks will be still
better understood when it is mentioned that a photograph
was taken 8,500 feet above a village, in which many Germans
were billeted. A careful study of the tracks revealed much
information ; for instance, a wide track was correctly guessed
as the main road. A rail-line was noted linking up with the
main-line, but as the ground seemed much worn, denoting
much foot traffic thereabouts, a careful study found a battery
hidden from direct observation behind a house. Considerable
traffic indications were noted at another point, and careful
study discovered a heavy gun concealed under the ruins of
another house. The heavy traffic disclosed between certain
houses and not shown between the other houses, revealed the
valuable information that a field gun battery was hidden
amongst the former.
Considerable use must thus be made of the head in skilful
deduction regarding how to tell the difference between railway
lines and trench rail lines. The railway lines are wide .and
distinct, but trench rail lines are “savvied” by the narrowness
of the track, with a white line between the rails owing
to the natural inclination of men to walk between the rails.
,■ Communication wires also give away positions, and where
cables are buried, a thin white line is observed, the converging
of Such lines to a point suggesting the location of head-
quarters.
The Germans quickly guessing that their tracks were
giving away positions, began to fake or “camouflage tracks;
for instance, a track was made to what seemed to be a bat-
tery. The Intelligence Officers studied the shape of this track
and its relation to the alleged battery. They considered that
if that was a battery, it would be unnatural to have a track
.shaped the way it was shown, so they rightly concluded-that
it was a dummy track, and the battery evidently was also a
dummy. They considered that there must be some reason
for all that bluff, so they searched and found a “camouflaged”
battery with a tram track from it to the rear, the tram track,
gs explained, being known by its thin white line. _ •
\Aerial photographs prove how extreme keenness of ob-
servation and deduction in the individual must keep up with the
improvement in the machine, for the Germans try all the arts
of camouflage, particularly in the concealment of emplace :
ments.
Take an emplacement under construction. Any attempts
at concealment may be rendered abortive owing to the fact


OVER AN AERODROME AT VERDUN
The several aeroplanes may be noted “at grass”
that the work of building the emplacements may have been
photographed several times; for instance, a series of photo-
graphs were taken that proved a clever attempt at camouflage.
The first photo was taken showing the first trench dug, and a
dugout being made under a road. The second photo showed
three pits covered and one uncovered, with dugout further
advanced, as proved by the quantity of earth thrown out.
The third photo showed pits covered over and the dugout
camouflaged. The fourth photo showed the road continued
over and through emplacement to prevent signs of use up to
and not beyond it.


“THE CITY FAR BELOW”
Taken Taken by telescopic camera from an aeroplane when out of sight
It must also be remembered that photographs can be
taken by telescopic camera with the aeroplane out of sight,
and at the finish, although the work below may be camoin
flaged, a shell can be dropped into it.
It is by such continual snaps that the enemy country is
closely studied, this aerial reconnaissance being well followed
by ground observation.
The aerial observer links up with this ground work by
taking many snaps of the enemy ground to be fought over, and
the forms, contours and features are carefully noted and a minia-
ture model of the area is built up to be studied by the troops.
Having helped to have built a model of the country over
which the men have to fight, the aerial observers follow up the
attack by photographing it at its various stages. For instance,
a photograph will be taken showing the area to be attacked.
The quantity of earth thrown out will prove where extensive
dugouts have been constructed Extending tracks converging
on to points will disclose observation posts. In the meantime,
prior to action, the “eyes of the enemy” must be closed, so
attention is directed to keep off observers whether in
aeroplanes or in observation-balloons. Sometimes these “dogs
of war” may be in their kennels, so certain deductions are
made.


OVER “ENEMY” COUNTRY. — A British aeroplane flying over enemy trenches, shown by white markings
(Note (Note the enemy smoke cloud at top of right hand corner.)


A communication wire may be noted to be dipped be-
neath a roadway. If stopping at that spot, there is possibly
a communication post there. If, however, it is continued on
the other side of the road in order to leave the road clear,
that road is evidently used for captive balloons, in order to
allow its connecting cable to be free from entanglement. A
glance along the road may reveal a captive balloon, and its
tractor, the shadow of the balloon often giving it away. An
anti-aircraft gun may also be noticed, and a gun emplacement
protecting a large shed, which, from its size and the tracks
around it. would suggest the hangar; then some carefully
dropped shells would settle the point.
Besides accounting for the chained “watch dog,” such as
is the observation balloon, there are the “little terriers”—the
aeroplanes to be accounted for.
A careful survey of an area may reveal a series of sheds,
and as the tracks to which would be confined to the area be-
tween the sheds, and not radiate all over the country, as do
tracks from other important centres, it would rightly be guess-
ed as an “aerial” camp. These sheds would not be large
enough for balloons, but large enough for aeroplanes; so a
search for aeroplanes; is made. High elevation is kept, for it
usually is a case of “top dog” having best chance in a fight.
Some “birds” may be located, and a lively time would probably
AFTER AERIAL OBSERVATION
BuildiBuilding a model of the ground to be fought over


“WINGI"WINGING” ANOTHER HUMAN BIRD
A RoyaA Ryal Flying Corps aerial machine gun in action
follow. It may result in a D.S.O. for our observers, or it
may be the cold, callous, official message—“one of our aero-
planes is missing.”
Having thus accounted for observation balloons and aero-
planes the aviator would be used in the scheme of attack
against enemy aeroplanes with his special gun, or he may
be utilised in attacking ground troops with his machine gun,
the rate of lire from which can be regulated to pass between
his rapidly revolving propeller without striking it.
So the struggle goes on, both over land and over sea. for
the aeroplanes are now necessary adjuncts to every fleet flying
to and from the mother ship, like birds around a pigeon house.
Yet, notwithstanding all such wonderful mechanical aids to
modern warfare, it will be seen that the decisive fighting is
done bv human individuality.


WAR IN THE AIR
BristiA British machine (a "Nieuport") pulls a German "off the tail" of a comrade (on a "Quirk"
aeroplane)


It will also be understood that the intelligence of the man
must keep in step with any machine development, for every
improvement calls for the keenest cultivation on the part of
the observer of that primitive instinct we see so well developed
in the Australian aboriginal black-tracker.
This mention of Australia brings me up against the deep
lesson underlying these notes, and that is, that this universal
danger of letting the Machine excuse neglect in the Man is
very patent in this fair land.
Nature has been good to us.
To most Australians, our country is a land of “take it
easy,” and though Australia is the richest nation on earth per
inhabitant, our best inventors have to go abroad for recogni-
tion.
They say a prophet is without honor in his country, but
in Australia there is no “profit in being a prophet.”
The flying machine with all its wonderful possibilities,
was invented in Australia. It was in Sydney, as far back as
August. 188-1, that Hargrave first gave the world the theory
of flight, and opened the way to the conquest of the air. In
1881 he first exhibited the model that he had made fly 384
feet. It was the first inanamate thing to fly with its own power
in the history of the world; but Australia did not bother.
“The people of Sydney who can speak of my work without
a smile are very rare,” he wrote thirty years ago.
Yet public ridicule he could understand and place to
ignorance, but it was the callousness of professional men that
cut into his heart. His contributions to the Royal Society,
though solving the long probed mystery of human flight, were
never even discussed. But he fought on. His models were of
exquisite beauty of workmanship and most delicately fash-
ioned. For one of his boilers he required 190 feet of copper
tubing. The pipe on sale in Australia was too thick and too
heavy for the extreme lightness he desired for his flying
model. He could not send abroad for the required tubing,
so he purchased 190 feet of copper wire, shaved it to the thin-
ness he desired, and bored a hole through its length, invent-
ing a special lathe to do it.
It was this dogged perseverence that carried him on in
spite of ridicule, and in his beloved models were preserved
much patient and laborious work of thirty years. In 1909 I
begged of Hargrave to present these models to Australia.
For a while he hesitated. He no doubt remembered with a
pang the ridicule of the previous quarter century, but I pleaded
that the Wright Brothers in America were beginning to fly. as
the result of the principles first demonstrated by his models;


hence the possesion of the latter would, in the coming Hying
age, make their museum a world’s centre of attraction. After
much persuasion I convinced him, and he permitted me to
offer his beloved models to the Premier of New South Wales
free of all charges. I did so, and was cooly informed “they
were not required.”
That was in 1909.
On March 12th of that year I wrote in the press: “Fortun-
ate the city that will possess these. One can understand the
future pilgrimage of world tourists to view the wonder works
that solved the problem of human flight. They may be eager-
ly snapped up by Germany.”
But Australia didn’t bother.
Hargrave afterwards told me that Germany was after
his models, and so he let her have them for the Munich
Museum; and as Germans are such fine copyists, it is some-
what galling to think that in the losses of our fighting men
during the period of German air supremacy in the early days
of the war. we may have been punished for our neglect in
the past.
We have got to get rid of this “don’t care” spirit that
is developing in our national character, and is being mani-
fested in so many directions.
This “don’t care” spirit is dangerous. One result of it is
that the average Australian does not use his head enough.
He places too much reliance on the machine. Even in his
politics, he lets a political party-machine think and work
for him. and sometimes he wonders why there is not more
efficiency in the Government of his country.
The present strenuous age calls for efficiency in all things,
and as it is an age of war, greatest efficiency is called for in
our military training. That efficiency is won in the best
development of our fighting men, and we must develop them
so as to make best use of any professional skill and ability
they may possess.
We have made many mistakes in this Great War. one be-
ing that there has not been that keen sense of selection accord-
ing to ability. Men who have had professional qualifications
have been kept at tasks that could have been as well per-
formed by the less skilled ; but mistakes are sign-posts of the
future, and the future will be the brightest for us, if we
develop our soldiers as men, and not as machines.


The German soldier has been the scorn of the world,
because he has been trained as a machine; so trained that the
liner feelings have been forced from his soul. His vile out-
rages that have shocked the feelings of humanity are proof.
There is a lesson in that for us; not to forget that in the
training of men, the character must be trained as well as the
body. We must always remember that the soldier is a human
being, for when the grim curtain of war will drop, and 300,000
war-strong fighting men will come back to us; on the
way their characters have been developed will depend the
future of this great land we love—Australia.
