



[?]
The
Jubilee of
Mackay.
August,
1 9 12


1862-1912 FIFTY YEARS.
The Jubilee of Mackay
MACKAY,
August, 1912.
VIEW OF MACKAY, SHOWING CUSTOM HOUSE AND BRIDGE.
FOREWORD.
“ Our pioneers ! Our pioneers ! who
paved the nation’s way,
Look back along the shore of time,
and answer, ‘ Where are they ?’
A. few remain to yet relate the record
of past daj-s,
The rest, who nobly played their
parts, dispersed in many ways—
Some, tired of life’s rude shocks, to
other lands are gone.
Perchance to fill unhonoured graves,
their merits little known.
Let’s treasure those who still remain,
located with us here ;
The man most worthy of respect
should be the pioneer.”
In 1854, Gayndah was the prin-
cipal outpost of the northern part
of this country before it became
a separate province, and it was
from this centre that the squat-
ters advanced with their flocks
and herds still further north. The
Archer Brothers were among the
first to advance ; they pushed on
from the Upper Burnett until
they discovered and explored the
large river named by them the
Fitzroy, after Sir Charles Fitzroy.
Being perfectly satisfied with the
nature of the country, they
blocked it out, as was the custom,
and returned home. Two years
later they brought up stock and
+ ook legal possession of what they
named Gracemere run. The
spread of the pastoral occupation
and pastoral run hunting to the
north of Rockhampton then
spread rapidly, and very soon
different parties were exploring
over a wide area for sheep and
cattle country. At this time John
Mackay was gold digging at
Armidale, in New South Wales,
and in the following chapter he
relates, in his own language, how
he was persuaded to lead a party
into Queensland, and after
months of exploration, and ter-
-ible hardships, due to that pros-
rating malady, fever and ague,
well as want of provisions, they
ally discovered a river and
aced it to the coast. This river
hey called Mackay, after its dis-
overer, but subsequently the
■'me was changed to Pioneer,
upon the recommendation of
Commodore Burnett, of H.M.S.
Pioneer, who had previously
named a stream flowing into
Rockingham Bay, the Mackay.
Not wishing to detract from the
merit of the discovery, the
Queensland Government named
the town which quickly sprang
up on the banks of the Pioneer,
Mackay. This appears to have
been the only reward that was
offered in return for adding a
large district to the new colony.
Although, the discovery was made
in iB6O, it was not until 1862 that
Mackay arrived with cattle and
horses, and occupied Green-
mount, a short distance from the
present town. Mackay’s connec-
tion with the district was brief,
for he disposed of his pastoral in-
terests after a short while, and
returned south.
Supplies for the stations noith
of Rockhampton, now being
formed in rapid succession, were
overlanded from the Fitzroy. The
roads were lined with flocks and
herds of those entering on pion-
eering work in the north of
Queensland ; and business men
were following in the wake of the
early stock settlers to commence
a trade wherever opportunity
offered. As early as 1863, Nebo
Creek was made a recruiting
centre ; stores could then be ob-
tained via Mackay. The main
stock route northward followed
the Bowen River settlements.
Mackay landed his stores at
Mackay by a sailing vessel, and
chartered it for some time to Lake
soundings, bearings, etc. He
made a rough chart of the river
and adjacent coast line, which
enabled the Crown Lands Office
in Brisbane to declare Mackav
River a port of entry. Hencefor-
ward, all supplies were for-
warded by water, and landed at
Mackay, for the new settlement,
and for many of the stations
over the range.
Leichhardt had been over por-
tion of the northern coast, and
other well-known explorers to
follow him were Mitchell, Lands-
borough, George Elphinstone
Dalrymple, whose marks Mackay
had picked up on his travels, and
Hodgkinson. Port Denison ,vas
discovered by Captain Sinclair on
October 17, 1859, who left Rock-
hampton in the schooner “ Santa
Barbara,” to discover a good har-
bour north of Port Curtis, for
which the New South Wales
Government offered a handsome
reward. The party;- accompanying
Sinclair included li. Thomas (a
seaman) and Messrs. James Gor-
don, and Benjamin Poole, pas-
sengers. Bowen was settled by
Mr. George Elphinstone Dalrym-
ple, Police Magistrate and Com-
missioner of Crown Lands, and
several squatters, and the first
sale of Bowen town land took
place in the next two or three
years, and the high prices rea-
lised indicate that the speculators
had great expectations that it
would become the future capital
of the north.
The year Mackay stocked
Greenmount, the Hollow was
formed by Starr, and Spencer
formed the Retreat. Balnagowan,
Hamilton, and St. Helen’s were
taken up in 1863, and Bromlv
Park in 1865. Fitzgerald sur-
veyed the road over the range in
1864, and the cutting to make the
road trafficable was done the same
year, Holmes, of Pleystowe, and
Yates and Irwin (overseer) being
engaged on this work. The pre-
vious year James Ready an i
“ Billy ” Spencer (aborigine) had
crossed the range and come into
Mackay for loading from the
“ Presto,” the first vessel to enter
the new port.
The first arrivals at Mackay
were Andrew Henderson, E.
Cridland, Anderson, Burkitt, Tom
Matthews, Dominick, Hegrette,
and J. Bolger and wife, and late
in 1862 J. Muggleton came down
Stockyard Creek and through
Hamilton into Mackay. R. Flem-
ing, G. Voysey, Dick and Wil-
liam Jeffries, and others arrived
in January, 1863, and . a further
batch, including A. Shiels C,
Keely, Mrs. Keely, and others ar-
rived the following month. Other
early visitors were W. Christison,
Ben Reynolds, Curley Rice, Jack
Willis, Ben Allen, and Henry
Page. The first bank to open was
the A.J.S., with H. S. Seaborn,
manager, and T. O. S. Green ac-
countant.
It soon became evident to
the new arrivals that the country
was suitable for something bet-
ter than grazing purposes. Maize
was tried as a first crop ; cotton
and coffee were also grown, then
it appears to have occuned to
John Spiller, who had some
knowledge of sugarcane cultiva-
tion, that where long, succulent
native grass abounded, sugar-
cane should grew to perfection.
Accordingly, he imported a quan-
tity of plants and planted them
on the north side of the river.
The plants thrived with fine
luxuriance, and Fitzgerald, who
had come up as Government
Surveyor to the district, intro-
duced a further consignment of
plants from Hope’s plantation,
near Brisbane. These experi-
ments laid the foundation of the
great sugar industry upon which
Mackay depends, and the coastal
districts of the north also
depend for an existence.
To chronicle in detail the
progress of settlement in
Mackay from this time on-
ward would be mere recapi-
tulation, seeing that in the
following pages we have secured
from some oi the remaining ad-
vance guard of settlers who'have
weathered the interval of nearly
fifty years, almost every detail
that is properly associated with
the early years of this district.
Mackay grew and flourished as a
sugar producing centre, mills for
crushing the cane were soon
dotted all over the place, some
being very primitive contrivances,
while others were more up-to-
date and successful in extracting
the juice from the cane. To
Alexandra belongs the honour of
being the first mill to commence
crushing, and to Lady Macartney
the honour of passing the first
sticks under the rollers ; but
Spiller’s mill, the Pioneer, was in
operation almost at the same
time. It very soon became evident
that white labour was not suited
to the conditions of the planta-
tions, and, taking advantage of
the example of Robert Towns, a
well-known Sydney capitalist and
trader with the South Sea Islands,
who had brought a number of
Kanakas in one of his vessels to
work in his sugar fields on the
Logan River, Kanaka importa-
tions commenced to Mackay,
about 1866 or 1867, and were
continued for many years, until
the scandalous methods em-
ployed to secure a sufficient sup-
ply of the boys created such an
outcry that the traffic was re-
stricted to such a degree that it
almost became unprofitable. The
introduction of state aided central
sugar mills was the first effective
attempt to abolish black labour,
and when Federation eventuated
in 1900 one of the first legislative-
acts was to make employment of
Published by “The Daily Mercury.”


black labour illegal, and to bring
about the return of the Kanaka
to his island home.
The growth of Mackay pro-
ceeded with the numerous vicis-
situdes peculiar to an agricultural
community, times of adversity
occurring now and again, but all
the time there was a steady for-
ward movement. Perhaps the
most serious check to the pro-
gress of the district occurred in
the early seventies, when rust
attacked the sugarcane and prac-
tically wiped out the whole of
the crop. Ruinous as this was to
many growers, it proved a bless-
ing in disguise, for it taught the
planters that if they wished to
make a success of the industry a
study of cane varieties was of
paramount importance. This is
a lesson, by the way, that has not
properly been yet learnt by sugar
farmers. Another serious set-
back was given ten or a dozen
years later when the Griffith Go-
vernment decreed the abolition of
the Kanaka traffic, which decree,
however, was not enforced.
Throughout the fifty years of
its existence the district has con-
tinued to expand. The handful
of settlers of 1862 have grown to
15,000 in 1912, and the value of
the sugar export alone now ap-
proaches three-quarters of a mil-
lion pounds sterling annually.
The town of Mackay ranks among
the foremost provincial towns of
Queensland, and contains all that
is necessary to the comfort of a
thriving white population.
In the succeeding pages of this
Jubilee Number much will be
found to interest the reader. The
hardy pioneers who blazed the
track and made possible the con-
ditions we enjoy to-day relate in
philosophic and uncomplaining
terms the hardships and early
struggles that had to be encoun-
tered when communication by
sea or land was only possible with
grave dangers , when wild blacks
contested every movement that
was made ; others of later time
describe the conditions of life
as changes occurred ; and run-
ning through every page some-
thing will be found to contrast the
past with the present. We have
not attempted to give a con-
nected history of Mackay during
the fifty years of existence, but
in a disjointed style all that is of
moment in the first fifty years
of our existence will be found
contained in one section or an-
other of this issue.
Captain JOHN MACK AY, The Discoverer of Mackay
CAPTAIN JOHN MACKAY.
In 1859, John Mackay, when trying his
luck as a digger at Rocky Creek goldfield,
in New South Wales, made the acquaint-
ance of several young men whose relatives
had pastoral interests in the vicinity. Mac-
kay’s camp was a rendezvous for the little
party, and Queensland was then attracting
a large share of attention as a country
that offered cheap and suitable land for de-
pasturing stock. At this time many of
the young squatters were pushing their way
northward, and in the end Mackay re-
ceived a pressing invitation to act as leader
of a party that was to consist of the young
fellows in question, whose alluring descrip-
tions of the immense and certain fortunes
to be acquired by those who engaged in
squatting pursuits ultimately caused him
to acquiesce. He says, however, that it was
the love of adventure which really proved
the determining factor. A party was made
up consisting of John Macrossan, Hamil-
ton, Robinson, Andrew Murray, John Bar-
ber, Mackay, and Duke, an aboriginal.
They left Armidale 16th January, iB6O,
with twenty-eight horses and the necessary
impedimenta, and travelled straight on to
Rockhampton, which, at the time, was the
starting-place of numerous land-hunting
and exploratory expeditions. We have
secured Captain Mackay’s diary, giving the
history of his travels, from the time he left
Rockhampton until he discovered the
Pioneer River, also his return to New South
Wales, and his second visit to Mackay with
the stock to establish Greenmount. The
following extracts are from his diary. It
might here be stated that Captain Mackay
is entitled to full credit of being the dis-
coverer and original settler in the large
district now known as Mackay:—
“We left Rockhampton early on March
16th, iB6O, proceeding along the Fitzroy
River towards Yaamba. The horses be-
coming restive, a stampede eventually re-
sulted, both packs and contents being con-
siderably damaged. The most irreparable
loss was the sextant, which was damaged
beyond repair. Each member of the party
was supplied with 5 lbs. powder, 100
bullets, 8 lbs. shot, 4 boxes caps, a double-
barrelled fowling piece, and a navy size
Colt’s revolver. We crossed the Fitzroy at
Yaamba the following day, and joined a
party of Victorians bound west in search of
pastoral country. Arriving at Marlborough
on 19th idem, we were notified by Mr.
Henning, who was forming a station, that
the country to the westward was such as
to render travelling impossible. After a
few days’ spell, we proceeded in a westerly
direction towards the range dividing the
waters of the Fitzroy and Isaacs Rivers.
At sundown we camped on a creek running
to the south-west, and were surprised,
while preparing supper, by the appearance
on the opposite bank of a crowd of natives,
well armed, but apparently not on mischief
bent. Fearing others might be hovering in
the vicinity, Robinson fired over their heads,
and they fled down the creek. Next day
we ascended a spur of the range; to the
north-east the waters of Broadsound and
Shoal Water Bay were dimlv visible. Con-
tinuing our course in a west-north-west
direction, with a Hew of striking the river,
patches of dense scrub were encountered,
and we had to deviate widely from our
course. About noon we met more natives,
one of whom hurled a spear at Duke,
which fell short of the intended mark. We
fired over their heads, and they took fright
and disappeared in the scrub. We camped
on the Isaac River, a good, deep stream,
with immense silver-bark tee-trees lining
the bank. During the following week we
travelled along the valley of the river in a
north-easterly direction, cutting our way
through belts of dense scrub and swimming
creeks to avoid obstructions. We met
parties of natives returning from fishing
excursions, but they offered no menace or
obstruction. On the Ist of April we came
to the junction with the river of a large
sandy creek coming from the north-east,
and by careful traverse of the courses and
distances since leaving Marlborough, I
made its latitude by D.R. 22deg. iomin.,
and although differing from the position
assigned to it by Leichhardt on his chart,
I supposed it nevertheless to be the eastern
and principal tributary of the Isaacs River,
and identical with what is now known as
Denison Creek. Travelling in a north-
north-easterly direction, we came to the
junction of another creek from the north-
ward, which we believed to be the main
stream of the Isaacs, although Leichhardt
chose the western branch as the main
stream. On the night of April 3 we ob-
served for the first time the constellation
of the Great Bear, bright and clear, about
deg. above the horizon. Travelled in a
north-north-westerly direction, and passed
over excellent sheep country. Reaching
the eastward of the Suttor River, we ob-
served the letter “D” over broad arrow,
cut deep in several blood-wood trees, which
we concluded was done by Dalrymple and
party, who left Rockhampton two months
before our arrival at that place. Some
days later we came to the junction of a
large river running from the southward,
and which we knew to be the Burdekin.
We were disappointed with its general
appearance, size, and scanty supply of
water. The latitude was D.R. 20 deg.
47 min. S. Crossing to the eastern bank,
it was now apparent by the marked trees
that Dalrymple’s party had taken up the
best of the country, and our supplies being
reduced, \v<? decided to retrace our way
south on the general chart of the Australian
continent. There appeared to be an im-
mense expanse of “terra incognita” be-
tween the watersheds of the Isaacs and
Burdekin Rivers, extending eastward to
the sea coast, which Leichhardt had noted
as “heads of a large river supposed to flow
into the sea near Repulse Bay,” and we
accordingly proceeded in that direction.
“Reaching a small creek, we halted for
some days, patching and repairing pack-
saddles. During the next three weeks we
travelled in a south-easterly direction, with
a view of striking the river we had fol-
lowed coming north, which is now known
as the Bowen River, but the wet weather
prevented rapid travelling. On May 13 we
came to where a party of white men had
recently camped, indicating that another
party had gone north, which we missed
meeting by not following the river. The
country was now becoming broken and
stoney, this indicating our approach to the
coast range. Three days later we reached
the summit of the main coast range, and
next morning travelled east-south-east
towards a pass in the range. Descending
on the eastern side, we came to a large
stoney creek running to the eastward. Pro-
ceeding east by north along the creek,
still flowing to the eastward, we felt
assured that we were now in a tributary
of a considerable-sized river not shown on
the chart. We named this Bell’s Creek,
in honour of Mr. John Bell, of Port Curtis,
as a small recognition of his kindness ro
us. (Mr. Bell is still alive.—Ed.) .
DISCOVERY OF MACKAY RIVER.
At sundown we came to its junction with
another large creek, from the southward,
from which it flowed in a northerly direc-
a bold, deep river, with well-defined
banks, the landscape on boil: *k J 's being
rendered picturesque by clumps of palms
which, with their tall, erect stems and
feathery crowns, appeared like sentinel
giants keeping watch over the surrounding
expanse of rich tropical jungle and vege-
tation, and which, embellished with the rich
and variegated foliage of the tropics, pre-
sented to us, on the whole, a scene and
landscape unlike anything we had hitherto
seen on our travels. Having confirmed our
belief of its being a new discovery,
McCrossen suggested it should be called the
Mackay River, to which the others agr e-
ably assented. For the first time we ob-
served alligators disporting themselves in
the quiet pools. Next day (May 19) we
travelled north by east along the river, and
in the afternoon passed the mouth of a
creek joining the river from the westward,
from which junction the latter now trended
to the eastward. The weather was now
very cold and showery.
Continuing east by north, we passed over
rich black soil flats, timbered with iron-
bark, blood-wood, and Moreton Bay ash,
with clumps of immense tee-tree. Travel-
ling on, the country presented a series of
holes and mounds (‘devil-devil’ country)
We shot a few kangaroos, which enabled
us to conserve our reduced supply of meat.
I made a careful traverse of the courses
and distances since crossing the coast
range, with the following result —by D.R.
or latitude 21 deg. S., longitude D.R.
149 deg. E., which brought us within
thirty miles of the coast, and nearly due
west from a headland named on the chart
Slade Point. Reaching the river banks,
we found them clothed with mangroves and
other indications of our proximity to the
sea. Robinson and Duke were suffering
from a severe headache, and could not par-
take of any food. Several blacks’ fires
were observed on the north side of the
river, although as yet we saw none of the
Mackay River tribes. The sick men’s
condition showing no improvement, quinine
was administered. McCrossen and I started
to make an examination of the mouth of
the river, but finding no trees suitable for
marking we returned along the river bank,
and reaching a clump of thick scrub, I cut
the letter “M” on three conspicuous trees.
Robinson grew worse, but Duke was
slightly improved, while Murray was com-
plaining of feeling unwell. With
McCrossen and Barber 1 discovered another
creek six miles south of the river, and run-
ning parallel with it. The side showing no
improvement next day, we packed and
started west along the river, McCrossen
and I marking trees on both banks, alter-
nately crossing as opportunity offered
Murray and Robinson became so ill that we
were obliged to camp. Continuing next
day, we marked more conspicuous trees,
and were suddenly confronted by five sable
warriors, armed witn heavy clubs and the
longest spears we had ever seen. They
were apparently bent on mischief, and a
shot from my gun in the most fleshy , and
least vulnerable part of the body of one
of the tribe caused them to disperse.
McCrossen was now on the sick list, while
our scanty supply of provisions was causing
some concern. There being no chance of
proceeding, owing to sickness, we camped
for eight days, subsisting chiefly on fish.
Murray suggested killing one of his horses,
but having no salt and the weather being
too cool for preservation, we dissuaded him
from the proposal. Continuing our search
along the river to the southward, we shot
a kangaroo and scrub turkey, and gathered
a quantity of cherry-like fruit.
Proceeding, we arrived at the junction
of Bell’s Creek, and continued our journey
over steep and broken ridges. After mid-
night Duke fell from his horse, and we
found he had gone to the happy hunting-
ground from whence no warrior returns.
In the grey dawn McCrossen and I dug a
grave in the loose sandy 5°U, and wrapping
poor Duke in his Market and great coat,
we returned him to Mother Earth. We
spelled for a week to nurse our sick com-
rades, after which we travelled in a south-
south-westerly direction along the creek.
Some of our* horses having strayed in the
night, Robiniv.n rode in search of the miss-
ing ones. He had not returned at night-
fall, and sleep, under the circumstances,
wa r . impossible. At noon the following day
we found Robinson’s horse down the creek,
hobbled with a stirrup leather, his saddle
being suspended in a tree hard by. Tracks
of bare feet were observed leading from the
tree towards the creek. Further searches
proving futile, we decided to journey on,
leaving poor Robinson to histfate. How-
ever, while sitting against dozing,
I heard moans down the creek. Investi-
gation revealed the presence of Robinson,
who was in a wretched plight, in the
sandy bed of the creek; but he could
never relate his experiences. Th e sick men
greatly improved as the result of a week’s
spell, and on June 30, while travelling in a
south-south-easterly direction along the
broad Sandy Creek (which I now believed
to be the most important tributary of the
Isaacs River), we were surprised to meet a
party of three men, comprising Mr. Andrew
ScotTj of Hornet Bank, Dawson River;
Mr. A. Ross, and Mr. William Fraser,
whose family were the victims.of the awful
Hornet Bank tragedy of some previous
years. They had left Rockhampton two
months previously in search of some country
purchased on the Isaacs River. Being
now, like ourselves, homeward bound, we
agreed to travel in company. Towards
sundown I was seized with the first symp-
toms of fever and ague. I had a burning
thirst during the night, and our water
being exhausted I crawled from the tent
during the night and sucked the dew-laden
grass. Travelling south by east over
alternate small plains and belts of brigalow
scrub, we reached at midnight the junction
of a broad sandy creek, and camped on its
bank, where the last of our damaged flour
and sugar were used. Having breakfasted
on opossums and ‘jerked’ beef, we crossed
the creek to the eastward and travelled
south-easterly over open forest country, and
at sundown were greatly surprised to ob-
serve in a well-watered creek dray tracks
and the trail of cattle. The tracks were
followed till midnight, when we arrived
at the camp of Mr. Daniel Connor, who
was then forming Collaroy Station.
Having purchased some meat and other
commodities, a start was made across the
much-dreaded Broadsound Range, over
broken country of a barren, sandy nature,
covered with stunted ironbark and grass
tree. At intervals the aspect would
change, the ridges becoming less abrupt
and more uniform, well-grassed, and tim-
bered with ironbark and bloodwood. At
length we gained the summit of the table-
land, whence the low-lying expanse of the-
Broadsound country lay, panoramic-like,
spread out before us, walled in on the
western side by the irregular and semi-
circular portion of the coast range, while
to the eastward it was bounded by the
waters of Thirsty Sound and the numerous
mangrove-lined estuaries of the sea.
Descent was difficult, and daybreak
found us at the camp of Mr. John Alling-
ham, from New England, who was travel-
ling stock in search of suitable country.
Proceeding on our journey, we passed the
camp of Macartney and Co., then form-
ing Waverley Station. We then followed
a beaten track to Marlborough, where we
arrived at midnight, after an absence.of
four months. Next day we continued our
journey to Rockhampton, where we arrived
on July 10.
Here we remained for some days, dis-
posing of our horses and equipment, and
in accordance with the Crown lands regu-
lations we tendered for the respective blocks
of country taken up; then sailed for Bris-
bane in .the s.s. Tamior, commanded by
Captain Cottier.
Returning to Armidale, we were notified
that our tenders for the country on the
Mackay River had been accepted, and was
included in what, hereafter, would be de-
signated the Kennedy district, and that
from date of acceptance of tenders nine
months were allowed- for stocking the
same, failing which any person with suf-
ficient stock to enable him to comply with
the regulations could take possession of
the country and legally hold it.


On the recommendation of Sir A/thur
Palmer, I entered into partnership with Mr.
James Starr, a well known pastoralist of
Mihe Creek, on the condition that while,
on his part, he would undertake to supply
1,000 head of mixed cattle and horses, with
drays and equipments, I would secure four
blocks of country whereon to depasture the
stock. It was further agreed that I should
take charge for twelve months from date of
departure, lead them to the Mackay River,
and superintend the forming of the station.
In pursuance of such agreement, I left
Armidale on the 26th July, 1861, with 1,200
head of mixed cattle, 50 horses, two (earns
of bullocks ,drays, etc.
The party comprised four stockmen, two
bullock drivers, a cook, carpenter, two
aboriginals, and myself. We travelled via
Tenterfield, Warwick, Drayton, Dalby,
thence on to the Burnett River, which we
followed to its head, crossing the range on
to the watershed of the Dawson River.
Passing Camboon, then owned and man-
aged by Mr. James Reid, we proceeded
via Banana and Westwood, arriving at
Rockhampton on 27111 October. We left
Rockhampton on prh November, and,
crossing the Eiuroy River, at Yaamba,
camped for two days awaiting the arrival
of Mr. McC’rossen and Mr. Henry Robin-
son, who was desirous of inspecting the
block taken up lor his brother, who had
previously accompanied me. The party
then travelled via Princhestcr and Marl-
borough, passing through the Broadsound
country, where stations were then form-
ing. We arrived at the foot of the Coast
Range (not Connor’s Range) on the 17th
November. A week later we reached the
summit, and then proceeded to Collarov
and the Isaacs River along a beaten track,
which Mr. Nat. Buchanan, a prince of
bushmen, had previously driven a mob of
cattle en route for Fort Cooper Station.
On the 2nd December we reached Denison
Creek, the most important branch of the
Isaacs River. Eight days subsequently we
camped near the spot where poor Duke
had been buried twelve months previously.
The natural stillness hitherto pervading the
forest was unbroken, save by the coo-ee
of the sable nomads of the soil, but now
re-echoed the lowing of cattle, the report
of the rifle, the crack of the stockman’s
whip, significant of the onward march of
civilisation.
We camped for some days on a lagoon
near a dividing range (the* latitude being
2ideg. 34mm. south), before attempting to
Cross the range to the head waters of the
Mackay, and discover, if possible, a better
track than that by which we left the valley
of the river on our previous homeward
journey. With this object, McCrossen, one
of the aboriginals, and myself started on
December 21, and soon reached the sum-
mit of tly? highest spur of the range over-
looking the head waters of Mackay, and,
looking westward, we could observe the
locality of the pass by which we had
entered the valley of the river eighteen
months before. Descending to a small
stoney creek, we retired for the night, and
crossed the stream next morning. Failing
to find anything approaching a practicable
route for dravs, we returned to camp, and
commenced to cross the range on to the
Mackay River. Progress was slow, and
■it was the 4th January, 1862, when we
succeeded in getting the teams on to the
banks of the Mackay. Leaving the river,
we travelled in an easterly direction towards
the coast, over richy-grassed forest coun-
try, timbered with ironbark and blood-
wood, progress being retarded by devil-
devil. Oil 7th January we arrived with
the cattle at the locality selected at the
time of the discovery as an admirable site
for a head station. This was on a cres-
cent-shaped lagoon about a mile south from
the river, where the expanse of open plain
was bounded by a chain of low, grassy
hills extending to the south-east. The
western and nearest one to the lagoon being
the site chosen for the station, 1 named it
“Green Mount.” The margin of the
lagoon was lined with a miniature forest of
strong reeds, and several of the cattle were
bogged. Leaving the camp to make an
examination of the mouth of the river,
and after cutting our way through dense
clumps of scrub, 1 placed the mouth in
latitude 21 deg. 11 min. south, being some
ten miles south of Slade Point, where, at
the time of discovery, I supposed it flowed
into the sea. The inshore islet appeared to
lie north—north-east and south-south-wesr
about a mile and a half from shore, and
which I believed at low water could be
reached on horse-back, the water appearing
to be quite shallow from the north bank
of the river to a reef extending some dis-
tance from the islet. The outer island ap-
peared to be covered with short scrub,
while the inner island was covered with
long, waving grass. These two islets were
not marked on the chart, while to seaward
several islands were observed from north-
north-east to south-east. The blacks ap-
peared on the edge of the • scrub ana
attacked us, one of the spears penetrating
my valise. A few shots soon dispersed
them. By the end of the month the men
had settled down to their various duties.
The cattle were daily tended and yards and
huts erected. Towards the end of February
the primitive hut was completed, and the
middle of March witnessed the completion
of the yards. Towards the end of that
month our supplies had diminished con-
siderably, but we were depending on sup-
plies coming by steamer from Rockhamp-
ton. Green calabashes and the cabbage-
like fruit of a beautiful palm found in the
scrub made a delicious vegetable. We
planted sweet potatoes, pumpkins, and
melons, which thrived luxuriantly. The
middle of April having arrived and no
vessel in sight, we occasionally had a look-
out to seaward from the lop of Scrubby
Hill, on the north side of the river. On
Ist May we abandoned the look-out, and
the end of that month found us without
tobacco, salt, or sugar. We had contem-
plated making a trip across the range to
Fort Cooper for rations, when we espied
a cavalcade of horsemen advancing in the
direction of the camp. We started afoot,
and met them as they crossed the river,
when, for the first time, I had the pleasure
of making the acquaintance of Mr. George
Elphinstone Dalrymple, at that time Crown
Lands Commissioner for the Kennedy dis-
trict, who was then on his way from Port
Denison to Rockhampton. At noon the
following day I accompanied him to the
riiouth of the river, where he observed the
latitude, which differed nearly 2 mins, from
that taken by me. Returning ini the
afternoon, he named the two peculiar,
rbund-topped hills on the north side Mount
Blackwood and Mount Jukes, in honour of
Captain Blackwood, of H.M.S. Rattlesnake,
and the gifted naturalist who accompanied
him. He left us on the 6th June, the party
accompanying him to the base of Mount
Funnel. I never met him afterwards, but
the few days’ companionship with this
brave countryman is the only pleasant re-
miniscence that remains with me of my
sequestered sojourn at Mackay. No vessel
, having arrived, I started for Fort Cooper,
when I met a party of three horsemen,
comprising Messrs. Pringle, Barr, and
Sadlier, who confirmed my fears respecting
the vessel with stores. It appeared she
came north at the appointed time, but
passed the mouth of the river and anchored
near Slade Point, where, in a skirmish
with the natives, one of her crew and a
passenger named Roberts were killed on the
beach. The vessel thereupon returned to
Rockhampton. Our visitors had come
from Broadsound with the intention of ob-
taining stores from this-vessel also. We
all returned to Green Mount, and after a
few days’ fruitless lookout they proceeded
south, and nearly perished on (he way.
Another week passed, and one of (he
aboriginals and 1 again started for Fort
Cooper. On the third day out, when we
had reached the top of the. range over-
looking the head of Denison Creek, tents
were observed pitched on a lagoon, with
cattle and horses browsing in the forest.
Making our way to the camp, we received
a genuine welcome from Mr. Richard
Spencer, more familiar to the old pioneers
as “Honest Dick” Spencer. He saluted
me with “Halloa, stranger, where have you
come from ; 1 thought I was the furthest
out in this direction, but 1 am glad to
find 1 have got a neighbour.” He had
been camped there over a month, and had
completed a capacious stock-yard. My host
had served as a midshipman with Captain
Stokes, of H.M.S. Acheron, and I enjoyed
his company immensely. He informed me
that the vessel chartered for me was carry-
ing stores for him also, and was due on
the second trip. On the 17th June we
started back to Green Mount, Spencer
taking a black-boy and pack-horse, in hopes
of finding a more practicable road nearer
the coast. Proceeding to the north, side
look-out, we watched for days without suc-
cess, and, returning to Green Mount, it
was decided to proceed along the coast to
Broadsound, to searqh for the vessel. We
proceeded in a south-south-easterly direc-
tion towards the base-of Cape Palmerston,
boggy creeks and .jivikk blacks retarding
our progress. . ,
ARRIVAL OF FIRST CRAFT IN THE
RIVER.
The journey was devoid of interest for
days, when quite unexpected!}' we espied the
white painted masthead of a cutter at
anchor in a small bay about half a mile
from the shore. Forcing our way through
the scrub, we ascertained it was the long-
expected boat containing our stores. The
boys were sent back to Green Mount, and
we joined the party in the cutter, and
entered the river at noon on June 29. We
moored the cutter alongside the south bank,
about two miles west from where the town
of Mackay now stands. My charter having
expired, I engaged the vessel for two days
at £8 per day, to enable me to take sound-
ings and make a rough survey of the
river. Sailing out with the land breeze,
we anchored off the south-west point of
the western islet close inshore, from where
I observed the hearings of several objects
on shore, both north and south of the mouth
of the river. As far as this the channel
was protected by the north bank, but out-
side of this there was too much sea for
anything like accuracy to be obtained. The
channel, which at low water was well de-
fined, was both narrow and tortuous. 1
made the latitude to be 21 deg. 10 min.
42 sec. south, which nearly corresponded
with the position of the islet, neither of
which was shown on the chart. The cutter
returned fo Rockhampton on the Bth July,
and by it 1 despatched to the Crown £ands
Office a correct sketch of (he entrance to
the Mackay River. It was published in
Buxton’s Map of Queensland in that year,
and on which information and report
Mackay was declared a port of entry.
Early in August 1 visited Fort Cooper,
and hearing news unfavourable to my in-
terests at Green Mount, I decided to return
to Rockhampton. Before doing so I re-
turned to Green Mount, accompanied by
Messrs. Cornish, Henderson, Ridland, and
Bovey, and engaged a Mr. Vince to take
charge of Green Mount. Before leaving
I disposed of the block of country situated
between Green Mount and the coast, known
as the Cape Palmerston run, to Mr. Cor-
nish, who shortly afterwards stocked it from
Fort Cooper.
EARLY SETTLERS.
When I left Green Mount, Messrs. Rid-
land and Henderson were awaiting the
arrival of building material and stones,
wherewith to commence business. Mr.
James Ready and family, who came out
with Spencer, followed shortly afterwards ;
so that I have no hesitation in rightfully
designating these gentlemen the “fathers
of the hamlet.” Mrs. Ready was as-
suredly the first white woman in the dis-
• trict, and many of the early pioneers'now
scattered far and wide must retain a grate-
ful remembrance of the kindness and atten-
tion she so unsparingly dispensed to the
fever-stricken bushmen.
Leaving for Rockhampton early in Sep-
tember, I met, on Denison Creek, ‘Messrs.
Ross and Muggleton with a mob ofllcattle,
the property of Mr, John Cook, of Tam-
worth, New South Wales. They were in
search of a block of country purchased
from a Mr. John Allingham somewhere on
the coast. I sold them the leasehold of the
run opposite Green Mount, on the north
side of the. Mackay River. This is the
run which ever since has been in the pos-
session of Mr. John Cook, known as Balna-
gowan. Some time afterwards Commo-
dore Burnett visited the Queensland coast
in H.M.S. Pioneer, and, observing that , a
river named Mackay flowed into Rocking-
ham Bay, suggested that, to avoid geo-
graphical mistakes, our discovery should
be named “Pioneer River,” in honour of
that ship’s visit to Queensland. Kind
friends pointed out the injustice of such a
proposal, and were informed the Queens-
land Government intended naming the town
then being surveyed on its bank “Mackay.”
Here ends my connection with Mackay,
which I did not again see until 1883, when,
landing from the steamer, I found myself
a stranger in the land. Gazing round, I
saw on a plot, familiar to me in days of
yore as an area fringed with mangrove
swamp, an embryo city with, well-formed
streets and stately buildings, while the back-
ground- was studded with handsome villas
overlooking well-tilled fields of sugar-cane
as far as -.the eye could see.
Old Commercial Identities.
C. Lambert.
C. Webster.
William Marsh.
H. Paxton.
CAPTAIN JOHN MACKAY.—Continued.


OLD IDENTITIES.
H. Bell and C. Rawson.
Dr. McBurney.
Albert Brown.
R. Martin.
M. J. Burrowes.
Harry Murray.
A. H. Lloyd.
Sir John Macartney.
E. B. Kennedy.
H. F. Morgan.
A. R. McGregor.
Capt. Goodall, P.M.
Wm. Macartney & Robt. Walker.
C. Brandon.
Thos. Fitzgerald.
Graham Turnor.
John Cook.
Jim. Martin.
Stuart.
Wm. D. Cooke


Abrahams.
H. Wallace.
C. W. Tousaint.
J. G. O’Connell.
E S. D Hay.
J. C. Binney.
Capt. Edwards (Yaralla).
Pain.
N. Rawson, D. O’Connor, R. Martin.
Geo. Smith.
E. M. Long.
C. Walker.
G. H. M. King.
Hume Black.
H. B. Black.
J. Ewen Davidson.
M. J. Fay.
R. Fleming.
J. H. Mills.
McCluskey.
OLD IDENTITIES —Continued.


ORMOND PRIVATE
R. HAMILTON,
Ideal Store,
MAC KAY.
Iromongery,
Glassware,
Tinware,
Hardware.
♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦
Plumbing and Tinsmithing
Work a Specialty.
*
b d d Li
mm
mm
r Bit? ‘i R KVWION P
>•**> notAi stoat*
!TTO
—v.- ax-.. ,
a ■ ::, i
u
rsrs
nja&msf
re**
m*
wmmmm
mmsmm
VESTERGAARD’S
HOREHOLJND BEER
Has been on the Market since 1887, and has always been
recognised as the best manufacture both North and South.
HOSPITAL, MACKAY.
, ,** a
*Li~i 1
1 *?r£
5:
' :■ *. ■, 1
■>■ jl>A
K ' •: -i
t,V$
.«■ «
\ •
R. J. THOMPSON,
Fruiterer and Confectioner,
Sydney Street, MACR.AY.
W. H. ANDREW,
High=Class Watchmaker, Jeweller, and Engraver,
High-Class Jewellery
Manufacturer.
Repairs of All Descrip-
tion executed neatly
and with despatch.
Reasonable Prices
prevail.
Watch Repairs
a Specialty—Second
to None in Australia.
A
&
hM
SPECIAL
22/6
LEVER
is Unequalled in
PRICE and QUALITY
anywhere in Australia.
Fully Guaranteed.
JZ: VICTORIA ST„ MACKAY (Next Lambert’s).
Dr. Williams’ Residence.
Section of Main Ward.
Lounge for Convalescents.
Ormond Private Hospital.
Operating Theatre.
Matron Barlow and Staff.
Centrally situated, convenient to the Railway Station, and in a quiet locality practi-
: cally in Che heart of Che town. Special provision has been made for Maternity Cases
JI Staff of competent Trained Nurses is in attendance, while the Surgeon’s
residence is just opposite the Hospital and within easy call.


Early Settlement of Pastoral Country.
The Fort Cooper and Oxford Dowr
country was first taken up by the late
William Landsborough, commonly known
as Landsborough the explorer, in the year
1857. Canoona and Glen Prairie were then
outside stations, and it was from one of
those places that he usually set out on his
expeditions. Going out again the follow-
ing year, he had in his party Mr. Andrew
Diehm, now resident in Mackay; Mr.
Stuart, father of Mr. A. G. Stuart; and
Mr. Glen Walker, of How, Walker, and
Co., of Sydney. It was from the ranges
on the east side of Nebo Creek that the
•explorer first saw the Fort Cooper plains
which, being his land of promise, he called
the Pisgah Ranges, and the spot on which
he stood Mount Nebo. It does not appear
to be known which is the actual Mount
Nebo, but the creek was afterwards called
Nebo Creek, and although the well known
township on the left bank is officially the
town of Fort Cooper, it is only known to
us as Nebo. We have the old local saying,
“See Nebo and die.”
Landsborough sold the Oxford Downs
country, and it was first occupied in 1861,
or. the beginning ot 1862, by Mr. Stuart
above mentioned. The Fort Cooper coun-
try, north and south, was purchased by
How, Walker, and Co., of Sydney, and
stocked by them with cattle in the year
Mr. J. C. L. Rankin was in charge
of the stock and was the first manager.
The writer arrived on the station on
17th July, 1862, in charge of the first of
two lots of sheep that had travelled from
New South Wales, some of them from as
far as the vicinity of the Snowy River.
The place had at that date been purchased
by Messrs. Cornish and W'aikcr. The
former was a well known New South
Wales pastoralist, and met his death in
1866 from Gulf fever ; he was a director
of the Scottish Australian Investment Com-
pany, who first slocked the Bowen Downs
and Mount Cornish properties. The latter
in later years resided for a time at Horne-
bush, and Walkerston was named after
him. The first manager of Fort Cooper as
a sheep property was the late Mr. Arthur
Kemmis, afterwards of Oakenden and the
Chase. Supplies had until towards the end
of 1862 been carried by station teams from
St. Lawrence; there were no carriers in
those days, but about September in that
year Mr. John Mackay, now Captain
Mackay, and Mr. R. Spencer, who had
brought cattle from Fassifern, near Ips-
wich, and Mount Spencer, came one day
lo Tonguarry, near Nebo, which was then
the headquarters, and said, “You fellows
won’t have to send to St. Lawrence any
more ; we have a place much nearer where
you can land your supplies.”
Someone else may tell the story of the
first craft that entered the river, a ke.ch
that anchored under the green hill at the
mouth of Sandy Greek channel until
piloted into the Pioneer by Captain Mackay.
She was unloaded near Lansdowne, where
the late Mr. D. Connor lived for many
years, and the supplies carted by bullock
team to Greenmount Hill, where Captain
Mackay had made his camp and started
the first building on the coast side of the
range; and to Mount Spencer, then known
as Retreat, where Mr. Spencer had made
his settlement. Some time before the end
of the year the surveying ship Pioneer came
into the river, and it was, 1 believe, from
her that the river took its name. Sorneom>
else may be able to give fuller information.
There was a fall of rain in June, 1862, as
there has been in the present year of grace
fifty years later ; but the following months
were so dry that by November it was
found necessary to move the sheep to fresh
pastures.
Captain Mackay having sold a portion of
the country he had taken up to Mr. Cor-
nish, one of the owners of Fort Cooper, the
writer was sent in charge of some twelve or
fifteen thousand sheep to the coast. The
country from the range to the present site
of Mackay had been burned clean off, and
as there had lately been a few showers on
that area there was a spring of young
grass just suitable for sheep, and on
arrival they were located near what is now
known as the “Rocks,” on the present
Palms Estate. One day in the first week
in December, 1862, the writer visited 1.
new port, as it was then called, in com-
pany with Mr. Vince, who was in
of Greenmount, Captain Mackay having
left for the south a short time previously.
There were a few tents and temporary iron
humpies, a long, low, temporary iron erec-
tion with an earth floor, owned by the
late Mr. Andrew Henderson, where a
visitor could purchase a shirt and pair of
trousers, be provided with a meal, and
even liquid refreshment —as to a license,
such a thing was not obtainable, and not
required for some time afterwards. There
was also a slab and shingle structure in
course of erection by Mr 1 . Cridland, who
had been sent by the proprietor of Fort
Cooper to receive their stores and ship
their wool. This building was for many
years after standing at the back of one of
the business places on the east side of
Sydney street, and used as a bulk store, but
has now disappeared. The town site was
then a gentle green slope, with patches of
tropical scrub and glimpses of the river—
not then as shallow as it is now —shining
in the sun between.
Mr. James Ready, with us not long ago,
but now gone over to the majority, and his
wife came to Mount Spencer with the party
that took up and occupied that country.
He was afterwards for a time at Green-
mount, and towards the end of 1864 built
the Range Hotel, where he resided with
his young family for many years. During
the years 1863 and 1864 a great many ot
the names that are now well known in
Mackay were added to the population;
many we now see only in the person Oi
their descendants, but we often have Wil-
liam Bagley, who is as active as he was
in those days of long ago, and William
Landells, who was ne tiis, to supply the
inhabitants and shipping of the new port
with meat, is a res.dent of the new shire
of vSarina. There was no half-holiday for
butchers or anyone else in those days.
Michael Fay is well represented by his
sons and the genial Hostesses of the Metro-
politan, and in looking back to the faded
picture of those ancient days, one can
recall the faces of many who helped to
establish this new settlement before sugar-
cane had been planted by Fitzgerald and
Spiller, and when the sheep and cattle men
of the back country, as well as the people
of Nebo, looked on the new settlement
merely as a convenience for getting
supplies and-shipping their produce.
In this connection the first teamsters and
carriers on the roads to the back of the
country were an important factor. It is,
perhaps, not generally known that from
September, 1862, when the cattle with
which the Bowen Downs and Mount Cor-
nish country was first stocked started from
Fort Cooper—Mr. J. C. Binney being one
of the pioneer drovers —all the supplies for
those properties were landed at Mackay and
taken out on bullock teams. The names
of the Glasson Bros, were associated with
this work. After the date mentioned the
teams were turned to the Bowen road, until
the Central Railway took the business of
that part of the back country to Rock-
hampton. For some years afterwards a
considerable oart of the Leak Downs traffic
came to Mackay ; the late Mr. D. Connor
had teams on the road, and the names of
Charlie Flrebrace, Robert Graham, Sam
Lowther (now of Eton), Jack Harris 'rf
Homebush), and many others were well
known. The old hands were not so par-
ticular about having handies to their names
as some of the new ones are now. The
year 1864 was celebrated by the big flood
and cyclone. On the 3rd and 4th of Feb-
ruary the building, afterwards Wills’
Hotel, which was altered and added to, and
finally replaced by the structure we see
now, then half finished, was blown out of
shape, but put straight again with screw-
jacks. The roof of Mr. D. Connor’s house
at Landsdowne, just finished, was de-
posited on the island near by in the river;
at Fort Cooper and McMaster’s camp, on
Oxford Downs, flocks of sneep were washed
away and bush tracks made impassable for
some time. Rockhampton, or a consider-
able part of it, was under water the month
following; for the extent of area affected,
the flood of 1864 has never since been
exceeded. However, the new settlement
had got a fair start, and the year 1866
was an important one in its history and
development. In that year the “Mercury”
was established by the late W. O. Hodg-
kinson ; the first bank (the A.J.S.) was
opened by Mr. Larnach, as inspector for
the north and manager at Rockhampton,
with Messrs. Geddes and Green as local
manager and accountant; telegraph com-
munication was established; the first
chemist shop was opened by Mr. D. H,
Dalrymple; and last, but not least, the
first sugar-cane was planted, either at the
end of 1865 or the beginning of 1866. In
July of the latter year theie was a fine
show of Bourbon cane, for some time the
only variety known here, growing in a half-
acre allotment near the Post Office, or near
where Mr. George Woods’ home now
stands. This half-acre had been ploughed
and planted by Mr. H. Fitzgerald, one of
the fathers of the sugar industry in North
Queensland. He had then just finished sur-
veying the town and surrounding country.
With him, as assistants, were associated
Mr, Holmes, who later on took up Pley-
stowe, and lim Desmond and Sutherland.
As houses were not numerous, the bank
was located in a small cottage among the
cane aforesaid. Here in July it was one
morning stuck up by two armed men ; the
manager and accountant were stood up
against the wall, and kindly provided with
an apple each to eat to keep their hands
employed, while the second man secured
the plunder. This consisted of some
in notes and a little silver. They were
eventually captured near the New South
Wales border, and the notes recovered, with
the exception of a hundred or two.
Two years later was another epoch in
the history of Mackay, when the Alex-
andra Mill was opened in August, 1868.
It had been erected by the late John Dow,
engineer for Mr. J. E. Davidson, under
an arrangement with Mr. Fitzgerald, who
had taken up all the land now known as
the Palms and Alexandra, The writer
can remember the first pound of sugar
that came through the ’fugals. Dow said,
“Do you think that is sugar?” The
answer was, “It looks something like it.”
A dance was given in the sugar-room to
celebrate the evenjt, which was quite a
success, but ladies, especially single ones,
were not nearly as numerous as they are
now. The number available on the
occasion referred to did not exceed fourteen
or fifteen ; as the male sex were probably
double that number, the ladies did not com-
plain, as some do now, that they had to
sit out half their time.
V\ e read of epochs in history. Thfl[ open-
ing of the first sugar mill may be con-
sidered the commencement of modern his-
tory for Mackay. On the settlement,
started in the first instance as a landing-
place for supplies for the squatter of the
back country, opened the prospective idea
of possibilities for the future which have
eventuated into co-operative contract mills
and a large and increasing settlement of
white population on the land. This is
the proper and necessary development, but
it should be remembered and fully realised
by the hundreds and thousands who havc-
and will make homes here, especially the
rising generation, that it is through the
work and capital of such men as J. E.
Davidson, the Long brothers, Francis Nis-
son Amherst, Hewitt and Romilly, and a
little later W. H. Hyne, M. H. Black,
the McDonald brothers (of Inverness),
Paget brothers (of Nindaroo), and Henry
Brandon that present conditions were made
possible, and that, if it had not been for
these and other organisers of the sugar
industry, who brought capital and brains
to a new industry in a new country,
seconded by the labour of men, both white
and black, who diu the heavy work, the
plains of the Pioneer from town to Mirani
might have remained a cattle run; there
would have been no Technical College or
Town Hall, or prospect of railway ami
harbour works.
G. F. BRIDGMAN.
Some Early Pastoralists.
G. F. BRIDGMAN.
Fifty years ago, when the first settlers
camped on the site of the new port, now
known as Mackay, the country over the
range had been taken up and more or less
stocked for two or three years; supplies*
then often called rations, were obtained
from St. Lawrence. Mr. John Macartney
had been settled at Waverley, near that
place, some time ; his father, the Dean of
Melbourne, who died not so long ago, not
far short of 100 years of age, visited him
in July, 1862, and rode inland as far as
Collaroy, where the late Mr. Dan Connor
then was. The range at the back of St.
Lawrence is still called Connor’s Range.
■There were some sheep at Cardowan, ad-
joining, then owned by Mr. Wilmott.
Andrew Henderson, who put up one of
the first, if not the first, temporary iron
building on the present town site, was with
him there. They visited the port together
in July the same year. Henderson re-
mained in Mackay, and was associated
with the early history of the place. They
buiit the first Wills’ Hotel, and the
Beaconsfieid Mill, long since removed. The
Nirawoomba country was then claimed as
a i)'T of Cardov\an; Oxfoid IX.wns was
stocked with sheep by Mr. Stuart (father
of A. G. Stuart, solicitor) in 1861, or early
in 1862. He, however, soon sold out to
Mr. Robert Lawson, and the property was
for some time managed by his brother-
in-law, Trimmer, who was a relative of
Mr. Richard Spencer, who first stocked
Mount Spencer with cattle. They, a little
later, took up Saltbush Park ; the firm was
known as Spencer and Trimmer. The
Fort Cooper country was taken up origin-
ally by Landsborough, the explorer, who
sold to How, Walker, and Co., of Sydney.
J. C. L. Rankin arrived with the first
mob of cattle in 1859, and built the first hut
and yard under Mount Landsborough ; the
lagoon there, however, went dry in a few
months, and the buildings were removed
to the place now known as Tongwarry,
on Cattle Creek, seven miles from Nebo.
During the removal, while the only shelter
for men and goods was a tarpaulin, a
heavy rain-storm came on one night, and
the next morning the creeks had overflown
their banks, and the outlook was a sea
studded with trees. The property later on
was sold to Cornish and Walker, and 28,000
sheep arrived in July, 1862. Mr. Arthur
Kemmis was then manager. The cattle
were sold to Heffling and Petersen, of
Havilah, Bowen River, who took up and
stocked the Valley of Lagoons, at the head
of the Burdekin, with them. In the same
year Aleva der Ewen occupied Lake Elphin-
storie with sheep ; he built where James
Grey, his brother-in-law, afterwards kept
a “pub.,” and he put up a hut for the
shepherds nearer the Take. When the
water receded, and the distance made
water-carrying too much like work, the hut-
dwellers wanted their water carted for
them. Fifty years later there would have
been a strike, but workers were not edu-
cated in those days. However, a week or
two later the 1864 flood eventuated. When
the hut men made for headquarters in the
middle of the night, with the information -
that the water was to their bunks, they
were cheered by the information that “You
will no hae so far to carry your water the
noo. ” Roderick Mc.Lennon was at Burton
Downs with sheep ; he afterwards sold to .
Raymond and Featherstonhaugh, who were
succeeded by Stewart Ryrie, but the place
was eventually absorbed into the Lenton
Downs and Eaglefield property, managed
by the late Mr. Hume Black, for several
years member for Mackay. Eaglefield, in-
cluding what is now known as Dabin,
was taken up by Dr. Wilkin. A regulation
was issued that all country, although
applied for and taken up, must be stocked
by April Ist, 1863 ; in other words, everyone
was required on or before that date to
make a sworn declaration that their coun-
try was stocked. In this regard there was
said to have been some tall swearing in
those days. If the declaration was not
made, anyone could put stock on, declare,
and jump the country. It rained all the
first part of 1863, and most of the rest of
the year. Dr. Wilkin’s sheep were about
Yaamba, near Rockhampton, in January,
and a kind neighbour, thinking they could
not be up to time to secure his country,
put sheep on the place and was ready to
declare; but James Martin, afterwards of
Hamilton, who was in charge of the sheep,
drove the strongest of the flock by forced
marches from Yaamba, swam them over
flooded creeks, and put them on the country
the night before the regulation time was up,
a feat of droving not often excelled. As
before mentioned, 1863 was a very wet
year. There were no rain gauges in those
days, but it rained on and off all the year.
Most of the station teams —there were no-
carriers then—were stuck up on Green-
mount Hill. In February and March the
country was in such a stale of bog—there
were no made roads—that when the writer
asked a traveller who had just come down
country where so-and-so was with a load
of wool, the answer was, “When 1 saw
him last he was prodding with a pole for
his top bales.” The continuous rains ol
1863 finished up with the floods of 1864, in
February and March, which were long
remembered as. a record, and have never
been exceeded since.
To return to the stations, Suttor Creek
was occupied with sheep, first by Kirk and
Sutherland, who sold the following year
to Mr. Robert Smith, who, though now
residing at Brisbane, is well known to most
Mackay residents. It was his and his
family’s home for many years. Grosvenor
Downs had been stocked with sheep by the
Scotts, of Hornet Bank, and was managed
by William Fraser, orte of a family the
greater part of whom had been murdered
by the blacks at Hornet Bank a few years
before. For some years, and until the
Central Railway was extended to Comet,
a considerable share of the Peak Downs
traffic, both wool and copper, came to
Mackay. The extension of the Central and
Northern lines have long since confined it
to an area not much more extended than
that of the pastoral holdings before men-
tioned. Whether a railway over the range
by one of the rival routes we have lately
heard of in the local Press will ever cause
lucerne to be grown and butter and cheese
factories to be established on the Fort
Cooper plains, as they are on the Darling
Downs, will have to be told in the history
of the next fifty years of Mackay and its
hinterland. Apparently there is no reason
why the same successful settlement should
not take place.
G. F. BRIDGMAN.


The Pastoral Industry.
The occupation of Crown lands for
, o
grazing purposes has undergone many
changes since the separation of Queens
land from New South Wales, and now
the whole of the State legislation is in
favour of restricted areas, and short leases
within the coast and scenic coast country
When the pioneers came to Mackay dis
irict, they had almost unlimited areas of
country, and few stock. The many
changes in the Land Acts have all been
in favour of the 160 acres small blocks.
The Governments fostered agriculture, and
not grazing, for the coast areas, knowing
that the small area was quite sufficient
for anyone to properly cultivate. Had
the early pioneers in the South Kennedy
District been told that, within 50 years,
thousands of people would be growing
sugar crops, and that hundreds of thousands
would be spent in mills and machinery
for the manufacture of sugar, with white
labour, they would have said, “That man
is dreaming. ” Even when sugar-growing
was first started, few believed it was going
to supplant the pastoral industry. And yet
agriculture has only pushed grazing out
to fresh fields.' On many of the runs
to-day there is more stock in paddocks than
when the squatter held twice the area of
country. The grazing and fattening of
stock on the coast is an industry which,
aided by ring-barking and fencing, has
become a profitable business, and in the
large area round Mackay there are many
miles of grazing land which, when im-
proved, will yet be a source of wealth
to the occupier. The early pioneers
brought sheep to the coast, and adjoining
tableland; but the grass seed, low prices
for wool, long cartage, drought, and other
causes, swept them all away. Then ethers
came with cattle and re-stocked the coun-
try, and in spite of the losses by drought,
by floods, ticks, redwater, and other
diseases, the herds have increased. It is
really the survival of the fittest. The nice
soft skins, long-hair roans of the Durhams
have given place to the big’bally-face Here-
ford, and in the near future every grazier
who can grow feed to fatten, say, 100 herd
a year, will do well to do so. The large
runs of 100,000 acres to 400,000 acres will,
when the leases expire, be all cut up into
small areas of 2,500 to 10,000 acres; and
to make money on the small area, the
occupier must make two blades of grass
grow where only one grows. With the
railway system connecting our rich table-
land to Mackay, the small grazier will be
able to obtain a maximum return from
his herd, his cream can go to the factory,
his fat calves and fat pigs to the markets,
and his horses will be sent to the great
centres for sale, so that where there
is only a lonely cattle station now, there
will be thriving homesteads connected by
telephone-—perhaps wireless —so that they
can talk in their spare hours to those who
live in town, and isolation will not have
its terrors to the wife and fond mother,
who now resides in these distant home-
steads, helping to build up a great nation,
helping to subdue and prepare the country
for closer settlement. The pioneers of
Australia have won for themselves everlast-
ing fame by pushing out, and making
roads, building homesteads, and showing to
the world the best wealth which exists in
the Australian soil. To show the natural
trading area of Mackay, given a railway
to Nebo, one has only to look at the map,
and see Wando, Mount Spencer, Hazle-
wood, Bolingbroke, Tierawoomba, Colla-
roy, Saltbush Park, Cockenzie, Rookwood,
Bombandie, Grosvenor Downs, Oliver
Downs, Beresford, Winchester, Oxford
Downs; Mount Flora, Annandale, and all
the settlers round Nebo ; then west we
have The Lake, Mount Hillalohg, Dabern,
Blenheim, Cerito, Byerwin, Suttor Creek,
Eaglesfield, Burrenbring. These pro-
perties represent about 70,000 head of
cattle and 4,000 head of horses, and about
10,000 sheep, and Mackay is their port.
T. S. BEATTY.
A New Chum’s Experiences
A. McCLANACHAN.
As this is my jubilee year in North
Queensland, I will try and give a brief
sketch of 50 years’ experience. I landed
in Rockhampton on the nth of November,
1862, and engaged on the 14th to go to
Collaroy Station,, then owned by Walker
and McLaren. Mr. D. Connor, who was
well and favourably known in this district, •
only leaving it a few : months before \
arrived—l should say before we arrived,-
for I had a mate with me from the old
country, Tom Dickie. We left Rock-
hampton for Broadsound in a craft called
the “Ben-Bolt,” and only arrived there In
time to have our Christmas dinner; and
every soul, male and female, in that town-
ship, had their Christmas dinner in 1862
a: the one table and at the one sitting.
My mate and 1 made a start over Connor’s
Range, camping the first night right on
top of the range; that was New Year’s
Eve, or what we Scotchmen would call
Hogmanay. We resumed our journey on
New Year’s morning, 1863, after our first
night’s camp in the bush. The blacks at
that time were not to be trusted, but luckily
we did not know about it. In the after-
noon we came across a shepherd, whose
hut was 12 miles from the head station;
he was kind to us, and bade us stay for
the night; we also w some information
from him regarding making a damper,
cooking salt junk, and so forth. He
showed us next morning the nearest road
to the head station, where we arrived in
the afternoon, hungry and foot-sore. Col-
laroy had a fine house on the top of a
round knob, built by the late Mr. Connor;
I believe the house is still there. However,
we asked for Mr. McLaren, who came out
and looked at our agreements. Our time
started on the 14th November, 1862, and
now it was 2nd January, 1863. “That
fool of an agent,” he said, “made a mis-
take ; your time ought not to have started
until your arrival. But it can’t be helped
now ; so, boys, you must do the best you
can to make up for the agent’s mistake.’*
But Tom and I thought the ‘-‘mistake,*’;as
Mr. McLaren called it, was all right. 1 “I
suppose you boys are hungry (at the same
time calling Mr. Brown); give those boys
some rations.” Mr. Brown, who was
sheep overseer, took us down to the store
and gave us some flour, tea, and sugar,
and a few pounds of salt beef, and showed
us an empty hut to go to. Now for a
start at cooking. I got a piece of bark
which we could see had been used for a
bake-board, got some flour on to it, and
with a pint of water soon had our first
damper mixed up. Tom had a raging fire
going by this time, and soon the damper
was in the hot ironbark ashes. It turned
out a complete sod. However, being young
and not bothered with indigestion, we had
a good feed, and were none the worse
for it.
They say use is second nature. We soon
got colonised, and remained there for
nearly four years. At the end of two years,
our cheques getting rather too big, we
had to go down to Rockhampton to reduce
them, and at the end of four weeks we
had succeeded in the “reducing” fairly
well. So we went back to the station,
and remained there until they shifted the
sheep, as the grass seed was so bad.
Sheep did not do well on that country,
and by this time the blacks had got very
bad; they killed two shepherds the week
before we left.
My next experience was a trip overland
to the Murrumbidgee with 13,000 wethers.
We left Collaroy in November, 1866, and
got as far as Roma in April, 1867. There
1 left Collaroy, as the boss and I had p
bit of a row, and also parted with my
mate. I soon started off to look for work,
my only companion being my black and
tan collie, a true and faithful friend. The
first place I asked for a job was Bindango
Station, then owned by Mr. McLean, father
of Mr. J. McLean, of the Pinnacle, who
is well known in Mackay district, I should
think then a boy about 9 or 10 years of
age. Mr. McLean was just sending a
mob of sheep away to New South Wales,
and he wanted one more to make up his
number of men; and he said, when I
asked for a job, “You are just the very
man I want.” “Will ye hae a wee taste
o’ whiskie?” he said in broad Scotch.
“Weel, sir,” says I, “1 will na throw it
owre my shoulder.” We soon got a start
made with a fine mob of wethers, and
crossed the Maranoa, down to the Baloo 1,
. thence to Bourks, crossed the Darling,
thence up the Bogan, and across the Lach-
lan, from there over to the Murrumbidgee,
went down the river nearly to Hay, when
Mr. Scott, who was in charge of the sheep,
got word to come up the river to Wagga
Wagga, as the sheep-were sold, and had
to.be delivered there; so we had to about
ship and come back 150 or 200 miles which
we had just travelled over. However, we
got to Wagga in January, 1868, with the
sheep in fine condition. Our trip was over,
which had lasted nearly 14 months. We
had a parting glass at Wagga, and each
wishing each other God-speed.
Then each took off his several way,
Resolved to meet some other day.
Gympie being all the rage at that time,
1 started back for Queensland by way of
Sydney. I had a long journey, as the rail-
way had not got so far as Goulburn at
that time. However, I got to Sydney,
and had a look round for a week or two,
and left on the Ist of March, 1868, in the
s.s. Alexandra for Maryborough, 300 pas-
sengers aboard, mostly New Zealanders;
then 60 more miles to “hump bluey” before
reaching Gympie. When arriving at Gym-
pie, 1 found things not too bright, as the
rush of alluvial was pretty well over, and
the reefs were just hanging fire, waiting
for machinery to test them. I stayed there
until my exchequer got pretty low; then
1 started off again to look for work, only-
having three “bob” in my pocket. I
reached Banaro Station, 60 miles from
Gympie, and my rations being done, I
went to the station store and bought 6lb.
of flour at sixpence per pound. I was
then penniless. I kindled a fire, ai.d made
some jonny-cakes, boiled the billy, and had
dinner. Two main roads meeting there
for Gympie, while I was eating my frugal
meal I am certain there must have been
50 men passed, going and coming from
the diggings. After dinner I rolled up
my swag for a start, as I thought it was
no use asking there for a job where so
many were passing daily. I picked up my
swag, and suddenly threw it down, saying,
“1 will ask for a job; I can only ,be re-
fused.” So I went I >ck and found the
overseer. “Any chance of a job, sir?” He
eyed me from head to foot, then said, "Do
you know anything about lambing?” Of
course I said “Yes." “Where?” he said.
1 said, “Up north, on Collaroy Station.”
“All right,” he said; “I will give you a
job. Have you had any dinner?” “Yes,
thank you.” I stayed on Bonaro till
March, 1869. I could see by Hie papers
that sugar-growing had started in Mackay,
and, tired of the sheep business, thought
the plough would suit me better, being
used to it in my boyhood days. I startea
for Maryborough, another journey of 90
miles, got the s.s. Clarence for Rock-
hampton, then overlanded for Mackay by
way of Collaroy. By the time I rer died
there I had covered 160 miles more on foot.
When five miles from the station I met
the late H. Chidgee, who had been stock-
man there for five yer:* at that time. I
got a warm reception from him. He
turned back with me and made me ride
his horse, saying I had had enough travel-
ling lately. After having something to eat
with my old friend, I went up to the
house and saw Mr. McLaren. I told him
I was off to Mackay. He wanted me
to stay a week or two, as he had some
shepherds’ huts he wanted brought to the
station. I brought them in, and while 1
was doing so Mr. Fitzsimons came over
from Lotus Creek Station on business, and
stayed a night there. In the evening he
came to me and said, “Mr. McLaren was
telling me you were going to Mackay.”
“Yes; I will be starting in a day or
two.” He said, “I will be going down
there at once to start a plantation ;. come
with me, and I will give you the highest
wages going down there, whatever that
may be.” Two days later I started for
Lotus Creek by way of Cardown Station.
I had not gone half a mile when a gentle-
man pulled me up and asked, “Is your
name McClanachan ?” “Yes, of course,”
was the reply. “McGregor,” he said, “is
my name. I am manager of Cardown
Station. Mrs. McLaren told me you were
going to Mackay with Mr. Fitzsimons;
it is too far to travel to Lotus Creek;
give me your swag, and 1 will take it
to Cardown, and you stay there to-night.
I thanked him for his kindness, and he
cantered off. That turned out to be the
late Mr. McGregor, of Jollymount, who
was well known in Mackay district. I
reached Cardown that afternoon,, stayed
for the night, and got to Lotus Creek
next day. In the morning we started to
load up two bullock drays with sundry
things, and the following morning yoked
up two teams of bullocks and started off
for Port Mackay.
On the way down we camped a night
at the Range Hotel, then owned by the
late Mr. J. Ready, who was well known
in this district. We crossed the river at
the old Bowen crossing, and camped where
Nebia Mill was built later on. Alexandra
was the only mill in the district that
had crushed at that time. Pleystowe then
was in course of erection. There are three
well known men in Mackay still, who
were working there then. These are Mr.
R. Neill; Mr. Davis, Nebo road; amr Mr.
J. McLellan, Victoria street ; the late Mr.
McCready manager. Mr. Fitzsimons get-
ting permission to get our plough irons
fixed up, I soon became acquainted with
Dick Neill, as he was the blacksmith
there when crushing started, Messrs.
Donaldson, of Cassada, had a mill erected
by that time, wooden rollers, standing per-
pendicular, and drawn by two horses. Mr
Neill told me he would like to see it, so
he and I arranged to go over the first Sun-
day, whwh we did. We found Mr. Donald-
son lying having a rest after his week’s
toil, on a bunk in a slab hut. Dick told
him what we had come for, and he kindly
showed us his sugar factory. I noticed in
the “Mercury” the other day that a
farmer at P.R.F. meeting said we were
one thousand years behind the times. 1
cannot go so far back as the stone perio l,
but I know we are a long way ahead of
what the Cassada Mill was 43 years ago.
I stayed with Mr. Fitzsimons till April,
187 b ; then went to Mr. Walker, 01 Dumble-
ton; stayed there until November —I would
have stayed longer, but I wanted another


try at the diggings. After staying a week
in town with Mr. J. McLean, who was
the first townsman I became acquainted
with (Aid. A. McLean was then a bov
about 2 years of age). Meadowlands had
just started its first crushing.
I visited Ravenswood diggings, and only
stayed for six months. Money could be
made there in those days, but I could stand
it no longer, so got back to Mackay.
The fever was very bad. In June, 1871,
1 could hide myself behind a fishing rod,
and was as yellow as a Chinaman. How-
ever, Mrs. McLean looked after me well,
so 1 soon got strong and all right. I
thought of her past kindness the other day
when we followed her remains to that
bourne from which no traveller returns.
I got a job from Mr. Spiller; he was
erecting a mill at Pioneer, and stayed with
him something like twelve months. Then
1 got a job from Mr. Dow, the engineer
at Foulden ; he was putting up the mill
there. By the time it was finished I was
about three-eighths an engineer. There
were a good few mills put up that year.
Foulden was a fine place to work; Bob
Walker was manager ; plenty of good food
three times a day. The men in those days
said it was only old women who wanted
tea five times a day. The only brother-
employee I can recollect working with me
is Harry Wardrop, at the present day m
the Racecourse Mill, as strong and robust
as ever. 1 was 30 years of age by this
time, and I thought I had run about loose
long enough, so 1 got married by the
Rev. Mr. McClafferty, in the English
Church, on the 26th October, 1872, now 40
years ago. The English Church was a
stone building, built with stones out of
the river by the late Mr. Wheeler, who
was well known here in the early days.
That building afterwards collapsed. 1
went to Pleystowe, and worked for the
late Mr. McCready, who was still manager,
but I also got a cottage to live in. Mr.
McCready left in May, 1873, Mr. Hewitt
then taking the management. A very
hot-handed gentleman he was, although
we got on fairly well together. We only
had one dispute. He kept some money out
of my cheque for wet days, and 1 told
him it was not right. He got very angry,
and started rolling up his shirt sleeves. 1
thought he meant business, so 1 walked
up close to him and said, “Look
here, Mr. Hewitt, it takes two to
play at that sort of game.” He quickly
calmed down, and it was all over. I left
Pleystowe in February, 1874, and shifted
into town for a short time. Mr. Joshling
had started farming on Mr. Gogay’s land
near the Horse and Jockey Hotel. I went
to him and worked twelve months. A
friend lent me some money, 1 bought a
plough team, rented 20 acres of land from
Mr. Hardie, and shifted over to it in April,
1875, and there I have been ever since.
1575 was the year of the rust, which
ruined a good many. Mr. Fitzgerald
owned Meadowlands and Te Kowai; at
the latter place he erected a mill and dis-
tillery in 1874, an d through the rust in
1875 lost the lot. The A.J.S. Bank closed
on Meadowlands and Sloan and Co. on
Te Kowai. Mr. McCready got the manage-
ment of Te Kowai, and as all the cane
stools had to be ploughed out for new
varieties of cane, there was plenty of con-
tract ploughing to be got. I had almost
constant employment at Te Kowai with my
horses for three years. 1 then started in
1878 and planted 12 acres of cane; had a
fine crop for 1879 crushing. Mr. Walker,
of Foulden, bought it at 10s. per 100
gallons of juice, cutting and carting in-
cluded in those days. My crop realised
per acre. I bought the block then
which 1 had rented from Mr. Hardie. By
this time there had been no less than 26
mills erected, 14 on the North side and 12
on the South. Some of the smaller mills
were closed up by this time. The crushing
engine that Robinson Bros, erected at
Lome was then driving the chaflcutter
at Te Kowai. From 1879 until 18S3 I did
better farming than I have ever since; 1
paid £SOO for land, and had a trip to
Ayrshire, my native land, in 1884.
Just a word about the annual races in
those days. In 1873 Mr. Gogay won the
big money with a horse called Hermit,
belonging to the late Mr. McClusky; his
son Harry, who is well known, was then
only a boy. The following year the big
money was won by Mr. H. L. Black, who
is still here. Times got dull for a year
or two, then brightened up again. In
1883 Mr. Black sold the gates for £196
and the booths for £152 ; those were “the
good old days." 1 can’t describe the
ladies’ dresses, but the men’s were: Bosses,
moleskin trousers and a blue Oxford shirt;
working men wore moles and a Crimean
shirt. The only gentlemen with coats and
hard-hitters were the card-sharpers who
came from the south by the dozen.
Times were not too bright from that
time up to 1890, when two central mills
were erected by that time, at Racecourse
and Eton. The two gentlemen who de-
serve credit for their erection are Messrs.
T. Pearce and W. G. Hodges, the latter
gentleman still esteemed and respected by
all in Mackay. A few years later two or
three more mills were erected under the
Government guarantee, that scheme being
wrought up by H. B. Black and P.
McKenney, who both deserve much credit.
The latter gentleman is still with us, a
hale, hearty, grand old man ; H. B. Black
has now left Mackay, but he did a great
deal of good for this district during the
many years he resided here.
Now for Federation : the majority voted
for it and got it, and gained nothing but
a lot of red tape, from what I can see.
The man on the land is worse off now
than ever. I thought Federation meant
unity, but it is quite the reverse. Some-
times an aged swagman comes along, and
would be glad to do what he is able. A
farmer cannot employ him unless he gives
him full wages, which he cannot afford
to do, otherwise he would lose his bounty.
‘‘Man’s inhumanity to man
Makes countless thousands mourn.”
1 got "full up” of farming after the
strike last year, and sold out for £1,200 ,
and 12 years to pay it in—that is
a year to live on. My family are all
married and away. 1 retained half an
acre, and built a humpy on it; that is all
the land I possess. My live stock con-
sists of a collie dog and a pony. The
Government can’t raise much taxation out
of that lot. With all the unions and as-
sociations that we have nowadays, the
working man is no better off. It is the
agitator and politician who collar the
plunder. We have the A.S.P.A., the
P.R.F. and G.A., the A.W.A., and the
rest; it seems to me that all the
letters in the alphabet are at enmity
with one another. Now I like to see my
countrymen get to the top of the
tree, although I could never reach the
bottom branch —I suppose the want of
brains 1 Sir Thomas Mcllwraith and Sir
Hugh Nelson were both countrymen of
mine, and legislated for the good of the
community. The Hon. Andrew Fisher is
a namesake, and also a countryman of
mine, but a bit more Scotch than the above
Tom and Hugh. He legislates for him
self and colleagues, at the expense of
the country; but, faith, he might turn
the corner yet.
But to conclude, sir, ye man ken,
I’d like ye’d tak’ a thought an men,
Ye ablins might—-I dinna ken—
Still hae a stake — \
In wai to think upon yon den |[
E’v’n for your sake.
- ANDREW McCLANACHAN.
Mossgiel, Mackay.
From a Wilderness to a Garden.
Reflecting on the wonderful deve-
lopment that has taken place in the
District of Mackay during the last
half-century, one must certainly ac-
knowledge the great qualities for or-
ganisation and government that have
characterised the pioneers who first
undertook to open the country and
establish those industries and insti-
tutions that would convert a wilder-
ness into a civilised community.
Anyone that might have happened
to land on the banks of the Pioneer
River with Captain Mackay and the
first adventurers accompanying him,
and settling down then until now,
could have seen the miracle. In the
first ten years an inroad was made-
on the virgin forest through which
the shallow waters of the river
lazily meandered. That proclaimed
loudly to the colonist of Queensland
that a cradle had been found for an
industry that was to remain second
to none in importance under the
vigorous impulse of that indomitable
•spirit that lived in the brave intelli-
gent indomitable creators of the new
world. The Australian aborigine had
lorded it over ail for centuries, had
chased the ’possum and the kanga-
roo and hurled the boomerang and
nulla nulla ; he had corroborees, ac-
companied by the sound of the native
drums, it disturbed on great occasions
the otherwise peaceful rest of the
denizens of the forest perhaps for
thousands of years. The mighty
pioneer from the white man’s country
has stamped his foot in the loamy
soil, and said, “ Thou art mine,” and
looking through the gloomy view of
the giants of the forest, added, “ Let
there be Light.”
One day a sail appears on the hori-
zon, a boat clears the waters of the
Pioneer and approaches its banks ;
its crew land a multitude of cunning
tools. What are they ? The mighty
tools with which the stranger is going
to accomplish incommensurable con-
quest th ,t will begin by extorting a
tribute '■oin the land. A conquest
that will seal the doom of a wild,
savage, barbarous people, and by a
glorious transformation introduce
that civilisation that has been en-
gendered by the western nations as
the beacon light of the accumulated
knowledge of thousands of years
dispensed for the great work to be
done by the mighty intellects of the
twentieth century. The pioneers of
the great industry that has been
created in Mackay, and thence to all
parts of Australia, were men of the
highest distinction, who would have
been fit for every post or office in
the British Empire. The aristocracy,
the Bench, the law, the army, the
navy, the Court of Queen Victoria,
all that was hers in the British Em-
pire was here represented amongst
them.
The forest disappeared, the plough
tore open the bosom of the earth,
hundreds and soon thousands of
workers prepared the soil, deposited
in it the succulenr. gigantic grass, and,
after a season, the beautiful plant,
like a smile on an infant’s lips, ap-
peared like an oasis in the wilderness
of unaided nature. In a year you
could promenade under the arches of
the 18 feet plant and defy the heat
of Christmastide. In a few years
thousands of acies had been planted.
The factories arose by magic, hun-
dreds of thousands of pounds were
expended in machinery and improve-
ments of every kind. Then arose
the beautiful houses, mostly situated
under the shelter of the giant Euca-
lyptus growing on the banks of the
Pioneer. Each garden would present
to the eye rare plants and exotics
from every part of the world.
Almost all the first planters were
men of great literary and scientific
acquirements. Astronomers of gieat
distinction came to observe the stars
at the Davidson Observatory on the
banks of the Pioneer. After a sea-
son came the wife and children. A
social intercourse took place that
brought engagement and happiness
on the land. When a new mill was
started, invitations were issued broad-
cast, hundreds of guests would come
on the day of the opening, when hy
banquets and balls, and splendid
music, the new victory of civilisation
over nature would be celebrated
under the joyful applause of the
very captains and generals that had
planned and achieved the conquest.
Ten years of prosperity for the
sugar industry made it one of the
great assets of the country. The pas-
toral industry remained the leading
economic factor, with the mining fol-
lowing it closely. Sugar occupied the
third place. That it had remained so
for the welfare of the community and
of the planters Ihemselves is a wish
•that arose in the heart of every loyal
colonist. Unfavourable seasons arose
among the varieties of cane grown,
some years failed, then prices went
down, owing to the competition from
other countries.
The cry cf “White Australia”
arose, then a demand on the part of
the white workmen for higher wages;
the rise of trade unions; their growth
in England and in other countries,
the thrifty labourer who had saved
money and who also became ac-
quainted with ihe process of sugar
making, took land and became a
planter by the tide of the big land-
lord. The prices obti.ined for the
cane did not satisfy the small farmer.
The Central Mill, worked on the co-
operative principle, had sprung into
existence ; the spirit of democracy
brought it forth ; and it was then
that the planter of the old school
.realised for the first time that he
and his ideas had become ancient
history, that a now era had risen, and
Hercules like, icfused lo recognise
any peer or competitor. The old
planter was dead, the millions of
money lost to themselves had estab-
lished probably the best industry a
country could possess. No statesman
or economist ji any calibre has not
granted the first place to the farmer
in the formation of the manhood of
the country. The pioneers of the
sugar industry m Mackay deserve a
generous recognition at the hands of
all men, for the white man, the co-
operative principle, the central mill,
and the small farmer.
The last twenty-five years have
brought that system about. The pro-
gress that will delight the heart of
the true statesman is that which is
exemplified in the person of the
labourer, who, by his intelligence,
his hard labour, has succeeded in
rising in the social scale, and taken
his place among the owners of the
soil. Fifteen hundred men with their
homes and families have made an
Eden of what v. as a waste in the
country, a run for the kangaroo and
his mortal enemy, the black. Go up
the Pioneer and see on both sides of
the river the beautiful homesteads.
Hundreds of acres of cane on almost
every farm, fields covered with
splendid teams of plough horses
tearing the bosom of the earth, and
preparing for ihe next year’s crop.
The herds of cows Spread on rich and
abundant pastures cropping the suc-
culent herbage and announcing to the
milkmaid that she may be prepared
for an overflow of the white fluid
that has rightly been called “ The
Elixir of Life. ’ Chanticleer, by his
lively notes, begs her to remember
that he also is a factor in the mak-
ing of a happy comfortable home.
But enter the family dwelling.
Polite, nice-mannered young men will
give you the latest news on all the
leading questions of the day. Ladies
of the greatest refinement will minis-
ter to your comfort, and if your
visit falls at the leisure time, the
young lady fresh from the southern
city will execute for you the last
Wagner sonata on the magnificent
Ronisch piano in the parlour, or en-
chant you with the latest ballad of
the season. Fifteen hundred farms,
with all that is needed to make a
comfortable home 1 Two years ago
the net result of the crushing season
was, for the district of Mackay,
about 50,000 tons of sugar, besides
the other products of the farm. And
what caused ail • this prosperity ?
Central mills and co-operative sys-
tem. Would that progress have been
possible under the old system, the
pioneer planters ? Yes, had they
understood the working movement
and the working class. But to the
old planter all the claims of the work-
ers were rank heresies.
The great sugar industry is now
confronted with a new danger ; per-
haps it is an enemy. The sugar
worker demands higher wages, bet-
ter accommodaion, better food, over-
time money. For several years these
demands have ben made with a mea-
sure of success. After a betterment
of various kinds the farmer has de-
clared his inability to go further in
the way of concessions. The labourer
has had recourse to what is practic-
ally a civil war, “ You grant me my
demand or down you go.” Consider-
able damage has been done by
strikes. What will be the end of the
struggle ? Will the farmers be able
to stand it much longer Will the
industry fall ? There is now a Royal
Commission at work with a view to
settling the matter, to find a modus
vivendi between the farmers and the
workers. Will it succeed ? The old
planter is dead ; the farmer and his
co-operative mill is in great trouble :
what next ?
Mr. A. Fisher and his friends, the
Socialists, are ready to solve the
enigma. Nationalise the land, na-
tionalise the industry ; let the sugar
industry be carried on by a Depart-
ment of State, and let the nation
become the landlord. As, however,
it cannot be done unless the country
becomes a convert to these new
theories, it is likely that the sugar
industry will remain unseated until
a new scheme is found that will har-
monise the conflicting elements.
Rev. P. M. Bucas.
A NEW CHUM’S EXPERIENCES.—Continued,
August, 1912.


The Men Who Blazed the Track
Fifty years have elapsed since Captain
Mackay, the present Portmaster of
Queensland, discovered this town. Fifty
years! It seems a comparatively short
space of time when we reflect on the age
of Christianity, yet during those fifty years
a town and district has sprung into exist-
ence and grown to such an extent that
to-day Mackay enjoys the distinction of
being the sugaropolis of Queensland —the
premier sugar-producing centre of this fine
State. When Captain Mackay discovered
Mackay, the country surrounding the bonds
of the Pioneer (which was then known as
the Mackay) River was a veritable wilder-
ness, inhabited by hordes of savages, who
strongly resented the action of the intrepid
explorer and party in trespassing on their
dominions. However, the report of the
rifle generally had the desired effect of dis-
persing the hostile natives, and ere long
they accustomed themselves to the presence
of Europeans who followed in the wake
of civilisation. To these earliest pioneers,
therefore, the present generation owes a
debt of gratitude for converting a tropical
James Ready.
JAMES REAiDY.
No record of the early history of Mackay
would be complete without reference being
made to the prominent part played by the
late James Ready, and the reasons are five-
fold : (i) Mr. Ready was undoubtedly one of
the earliest, if not the first, settler in the
earliest, if not the first, settler in the
district; (2) Mrs. Ready was, without a
doubt, the first white woman in the dis-
trict; (3) Mr. C. P. Ready, who arrived
with his parents when only two years
old, was the first white child in the dis-
trict ; (4) Mr. Ready’s eldest daughter,
Mrs. P. M. Hynes, has the distinction of
being the first girl oorn in the district
(she was ushered in the world in the soli-
tude of Conner’s Range); and (5) Mr>~.
James Ready (who is now 48 years old)
was the first male born in the Municipality.
Born in Castleconnell, county Limerick,
Ireland, Mr. Ready, accompanied by his
wife, cast his lines in Australian waters,
settling for a time in various parts of
the Commonwealth. For some time he
was in the Richmond River (N.S.W.) dis-
trict, where Mr. C. P. Ready first saw
the light. Proceeding to Queensland, Mr.
Ready accompanied Mr. Dick Spencer from
Fassifcrn with a mob of cattle at the latter
end of the fifties, and halted at a spot
on the Spencer Lagoon, at the head of
Denison’s Creek, which is now called Mt.
Spencer. With Mr. Spencer the subject
of this sketch assisted in the establishment
of that station, and a few months later
Mr. Ready came down the range to the
present site of Mackay. He was accom-
panied by a blackboy belonging to Mr.
Spencer, known as “ Spencer’s Billy,”
and the latter always used *0 declare in
after years that ” Me and Jim Ready was
jungle into a peaceful and progressive town
and district. Only those who have endured
hardships can imagine the untold sufferings
these plucky track-makers must have under-
gone, and the difficulties that beset them,
and which they conquered by dint of in-
domitable courage and perseverance. Alas!
many of those who bore the heat and
burden of the day have gone the way of all
flesh; after “life’s fitful fever” we irusi
their troubles are o’er, and if their reward
be commensurate with the good works they
performed on this mundane domain they
should be engaged in the pleasant occupa-
tion of weaving into garlands “the flowers
that bloom on the Beautiful Plain.”
Shakespeare tells us that “the good that
man does lives after him,” and the gooa
accomplished by these plucky nation-
builders is reflected in the prosperous town
and district in which we live. The de-
scendants of some of our earliest settlers
are still in our midst, continuing the good
work initiated by their forbears ; in other
cases the names of many of the plucky,
adventurous spirits who blazed the track
the first two bloomin’ white men to cross
the Range.’’ For some time Mr. Ready
was tending the cattle at Green Mount,
and in various parts of the town and dis-
trict, and crossed the Range on several
occasions. He had many adventures with
the blacks, who speared his cattle, but
the early settlers were generally well armed
owing to the scare produced by the mas-
sacre of the Fraser family on the Upper
Dawson in 1857. For some years Mr.
Ready conducted a hotel at the top of
the Range, and the present Range Hotel
includes part of the original Slab structure
that Mr. Ready built. Subsequently he en-
gaged in pastoral pursuits, and, also, was
in partnership with his brother, Mr.
“ Mick ” Ready, in a town butchery. Re-
tiring from the butchery, he devoted him-
self almost exclusively to pastoral pur-
suits at Fort Cooper, and disposed of the
property about 15 years ago. He there-
after resided in town until he was laid to
rest on Ist January, 1909, at the advanced
age of 74 years. Like all early settlers,
Mr. Ready had to endure severe hard-
ships, and amidst all his trials, tribula-
tions, and triumphs he was comforted and
assisted by his wife, whose attentions to
the fever-stricken adventurers of the fifties
and later are cherished in the memory
of the men who blazed the track.
During his travels and adventures, Mr.
Ready never carried firearms, and the
blacks did not display any hostility towards
him, and while'Mr, Ready was away from
his home at Fort Cooper for weeks at a
lime Mrs. Ready was alone during his
absence, and was never molested by the
natives Other bushmen, however, car-
ried firearms, owing to the scare produced
by the massacre of the Frazer family on the
Upper Dawson in 1857.
Mrs. P. M. Hynes
(First child born in Mackay District, and her grand-
daughter).
are sunk into oblivion, and some of the
chief actors in this great drama will never
have their names and deeds inscribed on
the roll of fame. Fortune favoured some,
others struggled life-long in the hard school
of Adversity; yet the latter class worked
just as zealously as the privileged section.
Exhausted and suffering the pangs 01
hunger and thirst, many a plucky nation-
builder has succumbed at the foot of a
gum tree or amidst the ranges around
this district, surrounded by not a solitary
companion, and ushered in the next world
to the accompaniment of weird sounds
from curlews, mopokes, and other birds of
the bush. Their deeds are not immor-
talised in verse, no elaborate tombstone,
suitably inscribed, and surrounded by an
imposing railing and covered with floral
tributes, marks the spot where their dead
bodies lie. No, horsemen and cattle-
hunters have trampled on their bones with-
out being conscious of the fact, while in
our local God’s acre heads are bared when
we stand in the presence of the numerous
GEORGE VOYSEY.
Born in London, Mr. Voysey proceeded
to Australia at an early age, ultimately
proceeding to the Dawson, whence he came
to Mackay in 1863 with Mr. Robert Flenu
ing. They came from Rockhampton with
Captain .Till, who .owned the , steamer
“Murray,” which traded up and down
the coast in those days. The river at that
time was about as wide as the present
streets, with a depth of 14 feet. The
boats came up as far as where the Sydney-
street bridge is now, but as the river at
that point was too narrow the vessels were
taken back astern to the bend near the
present Railway Wharf for swinging pur-
poses. The steamers were not quite as
large as the tenders now used. The coun-
try on landing presented an unwelcome
sight owing to there being little signs of
civilisation. There were a number of abo-
riginals in the locality, who generally dis-
appeared in the bushes or mangroves when
they espied Europeans. These blacks used
to pick up any articles, such as toma-
hawks, by means of their toes, and any
supplies that were not hidden from view
were rapidly stolen. In some cases the
provisions were wrested from the blacks,
and they strongly resented this action.
Where the town of Mackay now stands
was “ devil-devil ” country in its worst
form, above which towered long stiff grass,
while a belt of scrub stretched from where
the Roman Catholic Presbytery is situated
to the present site of the Adelaide S.S.
Company’s shed, and on the town side of
the latter there was a huge gully. Pro-
visions were brought from Rockhampton
every three or four weeks, among others
who traded with this port being Mr. Gar-
chief (grandfather of Mr. Harry Webster,
of Mackay), who ran a ketch called the
“ Ben Bolt.” An examination of the coun-
track-makers who have gone “to that
undiscovered bourne whence no traveller
returns.” We cannot erect a tablet to
perpetuate the memory of those pioneers
who passed out amongst the ranges and
in the scrubs, in order to put them on a
parallel with those who were consigned to*
their last resting-place in our cemeteries*
much as they are deserving of a monu-
ment. We can, however, place all the old
pioneers on the same footing, and pay-
them a tribute that their energy and pluck
richly entitles them to. They succeeded
in building up a peaceful and progressive-
town and district out o f what was a
veritable no man’s land, and what better
triumph could one wish for. Very few-tof
those who landed here in the sixties are-
in the flesh to-day, but doubtless it will
comfort them in their declining days to
know that the prominent part they played
in blazing the track is cherished in the-
memory of the present generation.—D.Q.
Mrs. James Ready
(The first white woman in the District).
try around the river revealed the letter
“ M ” deeply cut in several trees, which
they afterwards learned had been done by
Captain Mackay. Right on the river
bank, on the edge of the scrub, Finger
and O’Brien were conducting a hotel in
a calico tent; Mr. Polferman, who was
the agent for the A.U.S.N, Company, also-
camped. in, a tent, and these gentlemen*
with Messrs. Jas. Robb and Henderson*
constituted the entire population of the
place when Messrs. Fleming and Voysey
set their feet on the banks of the Pioneer.
Mr. Voysey was a wheelwright, and Mr.
Fleming a blacksmith, and they started
business together on the site where Marsh
and Webster’s store is located. Soon the-
little settlement began to grow, and shops
and hotels sprang into existence. Mi.
Cridland erected a “ cockatoo ”
where the Roman Catholic Presbytery
stands, and there slaughtered his bullocks.
He erected a slab store, and retailed beef*
groceries, and other commodities. Chas.
Keeley then started business as a publican*
his hotel, the Golden Fleece, being built
of slabs, and Allen and Weston opened as-
general storekeepers. Mr. Cridland’s slab
store was also used for storing the wool
immediately it came from the stations in
the back country. The spell between the
trips was sometimes three months, but
after a while the carrying trade rapidly
increased and transit was accelerated. The
brig “ Palama ” and steamers en route
to the South called in and look the wool
away to market. The first Police Magis-
trate was Mr. Baker, who was also Cus-
toms officer, and shortly afterwards a police-
constable was stationed in the village. A
slab lockup was erected, and offenders-
committed for trial were sent to Rock-
hampton prison. Prior to the erection of
the lockup, prisoners were chained to logs
on the river bank. Mr. Voysey, who


S. Lowther.
Mrs. Ungerer.
F. Faux.
H. Finger.
claims to be 92 years of age, has resided
in Mackay practically ever since, and the
late Mrs. Aberdeen (who was killed by
lightning some years ago) was the first
white woman born in the town of Mackay,
Mrs. P. M. Hynes having been the first
child born; in the district.
ANDREW DIEHM.
Born in Germany 1838, and landed in
Brisbane 1554. Visited Darling Downs, and
in 1858 Mr. Diehm accompanied Mr. Wm.
Landsborough on an expedition which
started from Gracemere, near Rockhamp-
ton, and comprised Messrs. Landsbo-
rough, Stuart (father of Mr. A. G. Stuart,
of Mackay), and two blackboys. At this
time the rush to Canoona had set in. The
party proceeded in a northerly direction
over the Connor’s Range, up the Isaacs
River as far as the Burdekin. They
then retraced their course south,
coming in westerly by Avon Downs, Logan
Downs, Peak Downs, thence on to Broad-
sound. They were m search of cattle and
sheep pastures. At Marlborough (which
was then being formed) the party encoun-
tered Mr. G, E. Dalrymple and a Mr.
Sellheim, who were returning after hav-
ing explored up and down the Burdekin.
The emu'’- trip from Gracemere to Broad-
sound occupied ten weeks. There was no
hostility shown by the blacks. The party
took up some country on the Bowen Kiver
(then called the “ Bonner ”). A second
expedition started the following year from
Broadsound, the party being composed of
Messrs. Landsborough (leader), Nat Bu-
chanan (known as the prince of bushmen),
Mr. Diehm, and two blackboys. They in-
tended proceeding north across the Burde-
kin River, but being overtaken by wet
weather on the Bowen Valley they steered
their course westward, went through Sui-
tor’s Scrub, 70 miles of spinifex country,
across the Dividing Range, and out on
to the far-famed Bowen Downs. They
took up country on the downs and also
at Mt. Cornish —a big scope of country.
This trip occupied 17 weeks. At this time
a rush for land had set in, some were
taking up land for speculative purposes,
while others did so with the intention of
becoming permanent settlers. At the meet-
ing of the first Queensland Parliament an
Act was passed compelling persons to stock
their holdings with a specified number of
cattle, sheep, etc. In iB6O Mr. Diehm
set out for the third time (Broadsound
being again the starting point). On this
occasion Mr. Land Commis-
sioner, accompanied the party. All the
back country was traversed, and inspec-
tion made by the Commissioner of the
blocks taken up. At this time Mr. Sell-
heim took up Lake Elphinstone station.
Sheep stations were-now springing into
existence at Collaroy, Cardoon, Oxford
Downs, Fort Cooper, Grosvenor Downs,
North Creek, Skull Creek (on the Isaacs),
Suttor Creek, and Mt, Spencer. At all
these stations there were sheep only, ex-
cept at a station formed by Mr. Spencer
this side of Nebo, on which were cattle. In
1862 Mr. Diehm went to Fort Cooper,
which was owned by Mr. Glen Walker, of
a firm of Sydney merchants, and brother
of Mr. John Walker, Homebush. Mr. Nat
Buchanan was in charge of Fort Cooper,
and the station was formed by Mr. Ran-
kin, and Mr. Diehm and others took de-
livery of it. In the same year Messrs.
Kemmiss, F. Bridgman, and Albert Brown
arrived at Fort Cooper from New South
Wales with 30,000 head of sheep. Mr.
Diehm came down to the present site of
Mackay with other wool carriers in 1862
from Skull Creek (on the Isaacs), and wool
was also despatched at the same time from
Collaroy. There were no indications of
civilisation in the town. A slab hut was
erected at Green Mount, which he was led
to believe had been used by Captain Mac-
kay’s party. Bullock tracks were also
noticed along the route to Mackay, which
he understood had been made by Mr, Spen-
cer’s teams, driven by Mr. Jas. Ready.
Mr. Ready informed him subsequently that
he had come to Mackay with teams. The
wool was covered with sheets of iron, on
the river bank, awaiting shipment. Mr.
Diehm points out that in the early days
they had to ride from Fort’Cooper to Rock-
hampton, a distance of 220 miles, for their
mails, and he himself undertook the
arduous journey on two occasions. Mr.
Diehm claims he was the first person to
take cattle over the Collaroy track. He
took a mob of 3000 cattle to Bowen Downs,
which was then forming. The cattle had
previously been spelling at Fort Coopet
for seven months. One item worthy of
mention is that Mt. Andrew, near Mt. Brit-
ten, was named after Mr. Diehm and puo*
Ushed in the old Government maps. Dur-
ing his expeditions with Landsborough,
they had to endure the hardships insepar-
able from the life of the track-blazers,
and on one occasion their provisions be-
came exhausted and the greenhide tied
round the provision bags had to be boiled
down for the purpose of making soup foi
the hunger-stricken adventurers ; also, the
hard, dried lumps of flour which had ad-
hered to the flourbags were utilised in the
making of Johnnie cakes. In 1862 Mr.
Diehm went West again and helped to form
the Beaufort station near Belyando, the
property of Sir Arthur Palmer. Mr. and
Mrs. Deihm are alive. Mr. Diehm on Ist
June was 74 years of age. He has been 54
years in the district, and it is 50 years
since he landed in the town of Mackay.
JOHN McLEAN.
About the middle of 1862 Mr. and Mrs.
McLean and Mr. W. Lobie arrived with
Captain Till from Rockhampton, the jour-
ney occupying two or three, days, and
landed near where the present A.U.S. N.
Company’s wharf is. The Leichhardt
tree near that wharf was then beginning to
‘ shoot up.” There was a slab hut op-
posite the company’s present wharf, which
served the purpose of a wharf shed. The
southern bank of the river was about 50
feet further towards the north side than
it is to-day. The river was practically a
fair-sized creek. The site of the present
town was a veritable camping ground for
cattle. There was a big cattle camp ex-
tending from the State school to where
Messrs. Cameron and Shepherd now live,
in Shakespeare-street; other camps were at
Racecourse and Meadowlands. Messrs.
Muggleton, Jim Ready, and Moore
brought the cattle down from over the
Range, and the same mob of blacks who
speared Jack Barnes also speared Jim
Ready’s cattle, which were camped on the
present site of Michelmore’s bulk store.
The blacks also killed a horse belonging
to Mr. P. McKeaney at the Saltwater La
goons, also an animal of Henderson’s, the
latter being frightfully mutilated. Jas.
Robb and McLean followed the natives,
who dropped their nets, fish, and nulla-
nullas, but hung on tenaciously to the
.slaughtered horse-flesh. The depredations
of the blacks were causing some concern
at the time, and a doctor who had arrived
from Bowen, on being apprised of the
shooting of a black gin in the region of
the stomach, posted up notices on several
trees in the vicinity of the settlement offer-
ing a reward of for information that
would lead to the conviction of the per-
son who shot the black gin. There were
no claimants for the reward. The Roman
Catholic Church was the first established,
in 1866, by Father Lonnergan. It was
built where the brick school now stands
in North ,-treet. The Church of Ei gland
followed, Phil Wheeler being the contrac-
tor. It was not strongly built, and was
blown down in a gale, a wooden structure
being subsequently erected. The town of
Mackay was surveyed by Mr. Fitzgerald,
who subsequently settled down in the dis-
trict. Mr. McLean joined Fitzgerald’s sur-
vey party, and under Surveyor Sutherland
helped in the survey of the township of
Lake Hlphinstone. This was in ’63 or ’64.
Sandy Ewan had established that station.
They then traversed the country to Logan
Downs, whither they returned and sur-
veyed the telegraph line to Nebo, Mr, Des-
mond being the surveyor of the line. Sub-
sequently, Mr. McLean -started business as
a carter. He is now 72 years of age. His
wife died only a few months ago.
EVAN DAVIES.
Born in Camarthen, Wales, in 1841,
where he received his education and
learned the trade of a cabinetmaker. Mr.
Davies sailed for Australia with his wife,
and arrived in 1862 in the “ Warren Has-
tings.” Worked as a carpenter in Bris-
bane for some time, and in 1863 left Bris-
bane for Baffle : Creek, Boiling Downs,, ,
which were in charge of Mr. Robertson.
Had great trouble going up Baffle Creek
from Gladstone owing to the hostility of
the blacks. Travelled in an open boat in
charge of Pilot Jansen, of Gladstone. Cattle
came from Gin Gin station, then owned by
Sir Thos. Mcllwraith (and which was sub-
sequently converted into a sugar district),
for treatment at the works. A dense scrub
25 miles long had to be negotiated, and
the party had to endure many hardships.
The same year (1863; left for Calliope dig-
gings on Mr. Bell’s run (Stowe), and be-
came one of the first diggers at Dudley’s
rush, Peak Downs. In 1867 he visited the
Gympie goldfields, where he erected the
Caledonian Hotel and Theatre for the emi-
nent and recently deceased “ Billy ” Bar-
low. He also built Tattersall’s Hotel for
Mr. Lynch—(Mrs, Holden, wife of the
late Mr. Lynch, conducted the Oxford (now
Palace) Hotel in Mackay for some years)--,
and afterwards returned to Brisbane,
whence he proceeded in 1869 to the Pioneer
River in the steamer Tinoonee under en-
gagement to erect buildings the Pley-
stone plantation, then the second under
cultivation, Alexandra being the first. Mr.
McCready wrs the first manager of Pley-
stone mill, and cane crushed at the first
crushing in 1569 comprised the yield of 75
acres. In 1872 he started business as a
builder and contractor, and in the same
year erected the Custom-house in Mackay.
In 1884 he retired from contracting and
became a hotelkeeper. For this purpose
he erected the Commercial Hotel. During
his 43 years’ residence Mr. Davies took
active part in local government. In 1886
he was elected an alderman for the South
Ward, and two years later was re-elected
by a two-thirds majority. He was mar-
ried in Wales in 1862, and had a family
of ten —six of whom are living—two sons
and four daughters. When Mr. Davies ar-
rived in Mackay the little settlement was
beginning to expand. In those days there
were nc beacon lights, and mariners in
entering the river were guided by the light
on top of Chas. Keeley’s Golden Fleece
Hotel, which was situated about the site
where the Post Office Hotel now stands.
Mr. Davies is 71 years of age.
U. M. HESS.
Leaving Port Philip, Victoria, in 1861,
Mr. and Mrs. Hess proceeded to Casnc-
maine (Vic.), where they remained ten
months and then went to N.S.W. Ar-
rived in Rockhampton (Q.) in 1862. Mr.
Hess’s brother was on the Upper Dawson
River on a station, and they joined him.
Remained there four or five years, and
left overland with about 4000 sheep, going
through the Comet country and on to
Cotherstone (a lambing and shearing sta-
tion), which was being managed by Mr.
Chas. Walker for Mr. Thorn. After the
shearing season was over they pushed on
again, and arrived at Lake Elphinstone ih
June, 1867. Knowing Mr. Ewan, from
Hillalong .station, he .advised them to re-
main at the Lake, as the season was be-
ginning to get dry. They agreed, and
subsequently Mr. Hess and his brother pur-
chased Lake Elphinstone from Mr. Ewan.
Mr. Ewan had his wool stacked from the
previous year in an outside shed, and began
THE MEN WHO BLAZED THE TRACK—Continued.


John Ryan.
Denis Bailey.
C. R. Dutaillis.
A. Manuel.
shearing again. Carriers were difficult to
get then, so Mr. Ewan advised Mr. Hess
to try and get his wool to port. Conse-
quently, Mr. Hess commenced carrying for
all stations then formed, viz.—Hillalong,
Fort Cooper, Lake Elphinstone, Avon
Downs, Suttor Creek, Eaglefield (which
was managed by Mr. Hume Black, Mr. H.
B. Black being also there obtaining colo
nial experience)—while his brother man-
aged the Lake Elphinstone station. In
Mrs. G. M. HESS.
those days carrying was a profitable occu-
pation. Subsequently others took to carry-
ing, and it is believed that Messrs. Lowther
and Hess are the oldest carriers living in
the district. Messrs. Muggleton, Fire-
brace, Ironside, Pugsley, and others were
carriers afterwards. The longest trip un-
dertaken by Mr. Hess was from Avon
Downs to Mackay, over 200 miles. On
one occasion, when the weather was favour-
able, Mr: Hess went up and down to Avon
Downs in five weeks. This was a record
journey. On the other hand, one trip to
Lake Elphinstone took three months to
accomplish, owing to the creeks being
flooded. Roads were almost impassable in
these days, and carriers had to cut their
way through the dense scrubs. Mr. Hess
opened the present road from Fort Cooper
to Lake Ephinstone (the old road used to
go up by Carborpugh Range and round
by Wagga Creek), thus shortening the
journey by 15 miles. In carting the wool,
Mr. Hess had three teams employed, and
on each waggon there were carried from
10 to 12 bales. In 1868 copper was carted
down to Mackay from the Peak Downs
Copper Mine ; on the return journey pro-
visions were conveyed to the stations. The
price paid for conveyance of wool from
Avon Downs was per ton, and £l6
a ton for back loading; while from the
other stations the carriers received £1 a
bale, and £io a ton for back loading. The
course followed by Mr. Hess was down
the range via Eton and Walkerston (which
was then called Scrubby Creek), and on
into Mackay. There was no Victoria
street then, and the teams followed the
river bank in coming into town. There
was a branch of the A.S.N. Company
opened, and the wool was stored in their
shed. At this time there were a few
hotels and houses, while Messrs. Voysey
and Fleming carried on a blacksmithing
business. After carrying for five (5) years,
Mr. Hess and brother disposed of Lake
Elphinstone in 1875 to Walker and Long,
and removed to Suttor’s Creek, which he
and his brother had purchased. This was
the year of the big flood, and for nearly
four months travelling* was impossible.
Remaining at Suttor’s Creek for 12 years,
Mr. Hess went to Proserpine in 1887,
leaving his son behind as manager. He
was nine years at Lake Elphinstone and
twelve years at Suttor’s, 21 years in all.
In 1885 Mr. Hess had to get rid of his
sheep, owing to the prevalence of grass
seed, and go in for cattle. Previously they
had a milking herd. After remaining 15
months at Proserpine, he bought out the
butchering business of Kelly and Dufficy,
and with his brother opened business in
Mackay on Ist October, 1889. After carry-
ing on the business for 14 years, under
the name of Hess Bros., Mr. Hess bought
out his brother’s interest, and subsequently
the business passed into other hands, and
to-day is conducted Dy Ussher and Brown.
Murders were committed with impunity by
the blacks in the early days in the back
country. On one occasion a shepherd was
killed at Burton Downs while cooking a
damper, and although he had a loaded
revolver and gun on each side of him, an
aboriginal stealthily approached from Be-
hind and split his head open with a toma-
hawk. A new arrival from England named
Maxwell was also slaughtered at Lenton
Downs. Several men were killed at the
Suttor, and also at Cotherstone. The
stampede of horses and cattle generally
heralded the approach of the blacks, and
on several occasions Mr, Hess had great
difficulty in recovering his bullocks, during
which they had to be on the qui vive for
the blacks. One night they followed Mr.
Hess and party for over three miles, but
did not make an attack on them, and
the following morning the same tribe killed
two men at Cotherstone, and also butchered
500 sheep. Mr. Hess and Mr. Walker
thereupon had a conference, and messages
were sent to the stations to place all hands
in the possession of firearms. At Logan
Downs a man was killed in the presence
of the overseer, who had only an old
blunderbuss. The savages then directed
their attention to the overseer, and suc-
ceeded in disabling his horse with a nulla-
nulla thrown from some distance. The
animal, however, managed to carry the
overseer to a haven of safety before the
blacks reached him. At Hillalong four
station hands were massacred. About
1868 sheep were in such a deplorable con-
dition that Mr. Glen Walker opened a
boiling-down at Walkerston, and sheep
from Logan Downs, Hillalong, and Suttor
Creek (5,000 were sent from the latter on
one occasion) were despatched to the
boiling-down, and only is. was charged on
the spot for a leg of mutton. 1867 was
very dry, but 1868 was infinitely worse,
and the best-conditioned sheep were sent
to the works. However, after 1868 the
price of stock was in the ascendancy. Mr.
Hess remembers when sheep (561 b. wethers)
were being sold in Nebo for is. a head,
and these carried two years’ fleece. The
price of wool was extremely low at the
time. In 1874 Mr. Hess took up a copper
selection at Mount Got-At, near Lake
Elphinstone, comprising 220 acres. On
one occasion cash was offered for
the property, but owing to his brother
desiring the retention of a certain interest
therein, of which the prospective pur-
chasers disapproved, negotiations did not
conclude successfully. Twenty tons of
the copper, on being tested, furnished 95
per cent of pure material. A smelting
works was established on the property, but
through the bricks being of poor quality
the works could not be made substantial,
and the ruins are still there. £2 10s. a
ton, cartage, was another impediment.
Mr. Hess still owns the property, and
anticipates that railway communication will
make the mine a payable proposition. Mr.
Hess also inspected several coal seams in
the vicinity of Lake Elphinstone and at
Walker’s and Suttor’s Creek. At the
latter place, while sinking a well, they
struck a coal seam. Lake Elphinstone in
those days was a lively hamlet, consisting
of two hotels, a blacksmith, a saddler, and
a general store. Drinks were is. each,
and during race time and when the shearers
“cut out’’ the little village presented an
animated scene for weeks. Mr. Hess
knew Mr. Jack Barnes intimately. He
was the first settler on the North side
of Mackay, and about 1865 commenced to
plant cocoanuts on 12 acres, on which
there were 1,200 trees. One Sunday morn-
ing Jim Muggleton and Mr. Hess were
fishing on the town side of the river, when
they saw blacks running up towards where
Barnes was on the opposite bank, and they
gave the alarm. He was speared through
the arm and was left for dead. Hess and
Muggleton pulled across the river in an
open boat, and rendered assistance. A
lieutenant in the Native Police named
Johnston went in pursuit, and the male
and female blacks separated. Some of the
latter climbed on to the summit of The
Leap, and one of them, rather than be
captured, jumped from the top of the
mountain and was smashed to pieces—
hence the name. Mr. Hess has had many
thrilling experiences during his life. He
remembers when the A.J.S. Bank was
“stuck up,” and the escape .and adventures
of “The Wild Scotchman.” Mr. Hess
used to purchase provisions from Gardiner,
the notorious bushranger, who ran a store
about 40 miles on the Rockhampton side
of Clermont in the early days; while
Griffin, of gold escort fame, registered Mr.
Hess’s first child in Clermont. Mr. Hess
is now 73 and his wife 74 years of age,
and both are hale and hearty.
FERDINAND TANZKY.
Accompanied by his wife, Mr. Tanzky
left Clermont in 1869 for Mackay, travel-
ling overland via the Range, which was
then wild country. At this time ths sugar
industry was opened up in Mackay.
Arriving in Mackay, Mr. Tanzky workeo
as a blacksmith for Mr. Robert Fleming,
in his shop in Sydney street, where the
present site of Fleming’s Limited stands.
Subsequently Mr. Tanzky rented a shop
from Fleming and Co. After some time he
started business on his own account on the
Nebo road, combining with business as a
blacksmith that of sugar-growing. He
visited the old country in 1873, and re-
turned in 1875. He grew sugarcane about
1876, on the Boomerang Lagoons, and
sent the product to Homebush Mill. In
1870 Mr. Tanzky had a contract for shoe-
ing the piles used in the construction of
Mr. George Smith’s wharf, which was
built on the site where Micheimore and Co.
are now erecting a new store, alongside
the Sydney Street Bridge. When he landed
in Mackay 43 years ago, Chas. Keeley
was conducting the Golden Fleece Hotel,
and Mrs. Cook had the Royal Hotel,
situated where Wills’ Hotel now stands.
Mrs. Tanzky is now 75 years of age.
JAMES McLELLAN
landed from Rockhampton in April, 1868,
at the age of to years, while on his way
to the Cape River goldfield. At that time
Mr. John Dow was erecting a number of
sugar mills here. Mr. McLellan remained
here a few months, thence proceeding to
the Cape River, returning to Mackay after
a lapse of a few months. He was engaged
in erecting the machinery for the Alexandra
Mill, and subsequently worked as an
engine-driver at Pleystowe, on the com-
pletion of the construction of that factory.
He was next employed at engine-driving
at Meadowlands, during the second season
of that mill. Subsequently he was em-
ployed by Mr. John Gogay, uncle of Mr.
Harry Gogay, of Mackay, on his plumbing
and tinsmithing business, and at the ex-
piration of five years Mr. McLellan started
business on his own account, which he has
conducted ever since.
GEORGE WOOD
arrived in Australia in 1865, landed in
Brisbane, and travelled through the greater
part of the State. In 1871 he landed in
Mackay, subsequently purchasing the
Traveller’s Rest Hotel at Hazeldean, on
the road to Nebo. This he conducted for
seven years. Proceeding to Mackay, he
became a hotelkeeper, which occupation
he followed for several years, ultimately
embarking in his present business as a
bookseller and stationer.
ARTHUR JOHN OVERMAN
arrived from Brisbane. Mr. Overman and
other intending passengers for Mackay
were compelled to remain in the capital
of Central Queensland for twelve days, for
a boat to convey them thither. On arrival
Mackay was a fair-sized town, and Mr.
Overman proceeded up-country, where he
obtained employment on Iffley and various
other pastoral holdings. Subsequently he
followed the occupation of a carrier for a
number of years, and afterwards entered
into business at Walkerston as a general
storekeeper. Relinquishing storekeeping,
he again took to the roads, and abandoned
carrying to embark in agricultural pursuits
at Finch Hatton some years ago. When
he landed in Mackay, the blacks were
killing cattle with impunity in the Hamilton
district, the scene resembling a veritable
shamble.
THE MEN WHO BLAZED THE TRACK—Continue 1


C. F. T. Ehsimnn.
Frank O’Reilly.
R. Neill.
THOMAS BUTTER WORTH
arrived in Mackay with Mrs. Butterworth,
Chas. Kemp, and others per schooner from
Brisbane in the sixties, when issues of
the “Mercury” were being printed on wrap-
ping paper. In those days, which are fre-
quently alluded to as “the good old days,”
labourers on farms in the Alexandra dis-
trict were receiving 10s. a week and found,
and they did not contend they were unfairly
treated. The morning after their arrival
in Mackay they heard shots across the
north side of the Pioneer, and it was
elicited later that Mr. Jack Barnes had
shot a blackfellow who had threatened an
attack upon his life. Looking across in
that direction, they observed aboriginals
decamping, uttering the while weird yells.
This was not ai> encouraging beginning
for the new-comers, but, on the whole, Mr.
Butterworth, after a lengthy experience
with the natives, has not a harsh word to
say against them. Mr. Landells was con-
ducting a butcher’s shop near the present
site of the Prince of Wales Hotel, when
they landed, and the old Custom and Court
House (combined) was situated between the
present Post Office and Custom House. A
wool-shed, built of palms and grass, was
situated near the A.U.S.N. wharf. Mr.
Butterworth went to work at Alexandra,
and there met Mr. Carr, at one time town-
crier. Maize was growing on the land
where the remnants of the Alexandra Mill
ire to be found, while on the opposite
ground cotton was growing, and Mr.
McCluskey, father of Mr. H. McCluskey,
»f this lown, had a dairy farm on the
1 .agoons. The Cullens and Messrs. Tom
and Bill Hoey were fencing and clearing
land at Alexandra, which, with Te Kowai,
was owned by Mr. Fitzgerald. Mr
Spilter started a small, primitive mill to
crush his own cane, which was practically
the first mill in the district (his cane plants
were obtained from Java), but Alexandra
was the first mill to start operations. After
six months at Alexandra, Mr. Butterworth
joined a schooner which traded up and
down the coast. A few years later he was
present at the building of Branscombe,
Pioneer, and Barry Mills. He joined the
pilot service as coxswain, and subsequently
worked at Robertson’s foundry, and later
was five years at Pleystowe. He then
started business on his own account. Mr.
Jack. Dow constructed most of the mills in
the early days. Mr, and Mrs. Craine ran
a bakery, which was known as the “scrub
bakery” in town in the early days, and
Mr. “Barney” McGuire was a bootmaker.
Mr. Butterworth is now in business at
Nebo, and carries his 68 years with ease,
notwithstanding his pioneering hardships,
AUGUST SCHIPKE
arrived in Mackay in February, 1872, by
the steamer Tinoonee from Bowen, and took
up a contract of splitting and fencing. In
that year the River Estate Mill was erected,
and Mr. Schipke worked at Robb’s old
horse-power mill. The appliances were
primitive. The rollers were placed in a
perpendicular position, and in place of the
present-day carrier the cane was inserted
between the rollers, and by this means the
juice was extracted. The sugar was of
high quality, the price received per ton
being It consisted of large, crystal-
like grains. The juice was boiled in open
pans, and then placed in a brick cooler,
and horse power was used for working the
centrifugals. This old mill was situated
near the present site of the Experiment
Station, and cane growing on land near the
waterworks was just as far advanced in
four and a half months as similar cane is
now in twelve months. Mr. Schipke
attributes this to the land being new and
rich in those days. While work.ng at
River Estate 40 years ago, Mr. Schipke
was paid 255. a week and found, for work
both in the field and in the mill. The
lowest wage paid was about 20s. a week
and found. In 18S0 he started farming on
his own account, ard in 1886 the Central
Mill system was set in operation. Only
three of the original shareholders who
supplied Racecourse Central Mill with their
cane are now alive —namely, Messrs.
Schipke, Schmitke, and G. M. Rodger.
They sold sugar at Racecourse for the first
few years on the open market. The late
Mr. Thomas Pearce was then the chairman.
The jam factories purchased sugar from
them, but the business was anything bur.
satisfactory; consequently, in 1891, when
Mr. Schipke was appointed on the board of
directors, be carried a motion providing for
the sale of their raw sugar to the Refining
Company, and that was the first year the
mill made any profit. In 1892 Mr. Schipke
was appointed chairman, and that was the
first year they paid any interest and
redemption.
JOHN MILNE
is another of those hardy Australian
pioneers who, as he says, was not met
upon arrival in Queensland and looked after
by the Government, and provided with first-
class work to go to at high wages. He
had to shift for himself, like hundreds of
others who arrived in this country in the
sixties. Mr. Milne arrived at Brisbane in
1865, and, for the following half-dozen
years, had a varied experience of pioneering
life. He spent a couple of years in the
metropolis, then went to Toowoomba, and,
catching the gold fever, proceeded to the
Gympie diggings, thence to Kilkivan,
where he toiled nine months. Meeting only
with moderate success, he followed his
trade as a carpenter at Gympie for a time,
and assisted in the erection of such well-
known buildings in the early days as the
Gympie Court House, hospital, and Wes-
leyan Church, which was situated on the
crown of Surface Hill. Mr. Milne then
went down to Maryborough, which, like
Gympie, he found overcrowded with people
who had flocked to that locality upon the
discovery of gold, and, as often occurred
in those stirring days, many soon found
themselves thrown upon the labour market,
with the result that every vacant job was
rushed, and men were glad to take anything
that offered. For a single man with none
to depend on him, this state of affairs did
not have so keen an effect as to the
married man with a family to support, and
Mr. Milne was then married and had one
child. Maryborough was found by Mr.
Milne to be in a deplorable state, filled with
hundreds of disappointed gold-seekers, re-
turned from the goldfields. Queensland,
by the way, was practically insolvent at
this period. The subject of our sketch
remained at Maryborough for some time,
and during his sojourn there suffered ft
good many hardships, working long hours
for small pay, and sometimes not receiving
his hard-earned money after his contract
was due. An offer of an engagement by
the Maryborough Sugar Company to come
to Pleystowe as a carpenter presented a
road to Mr. Milne out of this path of
thorns, and in the year 1871 he arrived in
Mackay, and has remained in it ever since.
During his three years’ engagement at
Pleystowe, Mr. Milne speculated in coffee-
growing and farming operations, and
finally settled down to work at his trade.
It was shortly after his arrival here that
rust broke out in the cane, and for nearly
two years the sugar industry was prac-
tically ruined; indeed, it was only by one
or two of the larger growers securing
financial aid which enabled them to intro-
duce new varieties of cane, and so getting
a fresh start, that the industry was re-
established on scientific lines. When Mr.
Milne arived in Mackay, the site occupied
by the present town largely consisted of
wild bush country, the English Church,
which is now in the centre of the town,
being at that time the outside boundary.
The old gentleman remarked that he is
73 years of age, and, although he has lived
so long without what might be called a
holiday, he is in splendid health, and has
found the climate quite as satisfactory to
the white man as he could wish. Mrs.
Milne is still spared to her aged partner,
and a family of seven children who blessed
their union are also still alive, the eldest
daughter being Mrs. James Christie, late
Mayoress of Mackay.
EDWARD McKENZIE SCOTT
in 186S arrived in Mackay. He came over-
land from Rockhampton to Mackay with
a mob of horses, the route taken being
over the Range via Broadsound, and stayed
at the Horse and Jockey Hotel, at Race-
course, conducted by Mr. McCluskey. Sub-
sequently he again brought a mob of horses
from Rockhampton, following the coast,
and coming in by Homebush and the
muddy waterholes this side of Eton, thence
on to Meadowlands, which was then fine
grazing country. In those days Nebo was
a stirring township ; there were two public-
houses, kept by Messrs. Reynolds and Dan
Nolan. The former, who amassed a good
deal of wealth through land speculation,
opened the first hotel in Nebo. There was
one hotel at Lake Elphinstone then, con-
ducted by Mrs. Reynolds, and eventually
the structure was pulled down and removed
to Mackay, on the site now occupied by
Lister Hospital, where the hotel was re-
built aqd conducted by Mrs. Reynolds.
Lake Elphinstone was a lively centre, par-
ticularly at racetime, and old Mackay
residents used to proceed thither to attend
the races. In the sixties the country in
the neighbourhood of the present Post
Office was of a swampy nature; there were
no streets formed, and the course taken
was along the river bank. Mr. C. Keeley,
who kept the first hotel, the Golden Fleece,
which was built on blocks 3 feet 6 inches
high, had a thriving business. Prior to
coming to Mackay, Mr. Keeley was the
first brick-maker in Rockhampton. Mr.
Scott started business as a carpenter in
conjunction with Mr. James Mayhew, and
built a cottage at Branscombe for Mr.
Martin, of Martin and Long. They then
came into Mackay, and their first job was
the erection of the Royal Hotel, which stood
on the site of the present Commercial Bank
in Sydney street. Subsequently they con-
verted Mr. George Smith’s store into a
public-house. They then built a public-
house where the Union Bank now stands.
Scott and Mayhew also built the District
Hospital and the Alien School. At that
time vessels landed the plant for the Cedars
Mill at the Devil’s Elbow, on the north
side of the river. The Post Office was
built by Mr. Matthews. Mr. Scott has
been engaged in the carpentering business
ever since.
MESSRS. C. WADE BROWN AND
JOHN HARNEY
(of the firm of Wade and Harney)
arrived in Mackay in 1868, taking over
Bolingbroke Station, where they resided
for about 12 years, when the property was
disposed of to the present owner, Mr,
Graham Turner. Mr. Wade Browne left for
England in 1880, remaining there for six
years. On his return to Mackay he fol-
lowed up agricultural pursuits, was a
director and shareholder in the Racecourse
Central Mill, and took an active interest in
all local concerns. Mr. Wade Browne’s
name has always been remembered in
Mackay as a staunch supporter of every
charitable and deserving movement. He
is at present living at Medlow, New South
JOHN HARNEY.
Wales. Mr. John Harney was a resident
of Mackay until his death in 1889. He
followed up stock and agricultural pursuits,
holding properties in the Plane Creek dis-
trict previous to the Central Mill being
erected there. Mr. Harney took a keen
interest in everything connected with
Mackay, and was for a number of years
a member of the Town Council, occupying
the Mayoral chair in 1885 ; also member of
several local public bodies. Some of his
family arc at present residing in this
district.
MICHAEL J. FAY
Joined Mr. C. A. Kerr’s exploring party
at Brisbane about 1861, and in company
with others explored and stocked country
as far as Peak Downs. Settling in Mac-
kay in 1863, he started as a, general store-
keeper, which he afterwards abandoned to
become a carrier of goods between Mackay
and Nebo. Subsequently he became en-
gaged to Mr. J. E. Davidson, Alexandra
plantation, to undertake the distillation
of rum. Here he made the first gallon of
rum in the district, {12th October, 1868).
He was away from the district for some
years, and, returning in 1876, took a con-
tract for conveyance of mails to Walker-
ston —the first service.
JAMES THOMAS
Arrived in Queensland in 1863, to accept
employment on Eaglefield Station. He is
regarded as one of the first persons to
plant sugar cane in the district, for Mr. T.
H. Fitzgerald*
THE MEN WHO BLAZED THE TRACK.—Co ntinued.


MR. A. DITTON, SENR.,
arrived in the Mackay district in the year
1863, and commenced work at Pleystowe
breaking in bullocks, which were then used
for ploughing, maize and cotton being the
principal crops grown on the plantation.
After leaving Pleystowe, Mr. Ditton
worked in different parts of the district as a
■butcher and later as a ‘‘bullock puncher.**
Most of the heavy machinery for the Home-
bush and other sugar mills was drawn by
his bullock team. In 1884 he sold the
bullock team, and selected the farm now
well known as “Ashford,” on Sandy Creek,
where he is still living. Butchering and
dairying were carried on successfully, until
the redwater killed most of his dairy herd.
In 1897 he commenced cane-growing for
thd C.S.R. Company, and has followed
that occupation ever since. Mr. Ditton is
an Englishman, horn in Ashford, county
Kent, England, and is nearly 80 years of
age. He has been in Queensland for 61
years, and remembers Rockhampton when
it was little more than a calico town.
ALBERT THROCKMORTON BALL
Was engaged in pastoral pursuits on the
Boyne, a tributary of the Burnett River,
in 1858. He was employed on the Boon-
doona Station, and for a period of 16 years
continued to hold interests in various pas-
toral properties. Towards the latter end of
1859 he travelled from the Burnett, look-
ing for new country, which he found 30
mile's from Mackay, and on returning to
Brisbane brought up 500 head of cattle and
70 horses, with which he stocked Wandoo
and Hazlewood. He sold other lands which
he had taken up, and which became known
as the stations of Bolingbroke, Tierawoom-
bah. Blue Mountain, and Colston Park, and
in 1874 disposed of his pastoral properties
and became a sugar grower at Te Kowai,
and suffered serious losses through the
rust.
DAN CONNOR
(Died March, ign, aged 81.)
In 1857 he took up Princhester, to the
north of Canoona, near Rockhampton.
Rockhampton at that time had only one
business place —viz., a small store. He
disposed of Princhester to Mr. Van Wies-
sem. He then pushed further north, and
did a lot of exploring at the same time as
J. A. Macartney, the Murrays, Ramsey,
Gaden, and others who were looking for
sheep country. He then took up in suc-
cession Willangi, Marlborough, and Col-
laroy. Connor Range and Connor River
are named after him. Before taking up
Princhester, Mr. Connor was part owner
with Mr. H, B. Fitz of Rio Station, on
the Dawson. Mr. Hemming purchased
Marlborough from him, and \\ illangri was
sold to Hirst Bros. Rio Station was
stocked by Mr. Connor in 1853, and was
then the outside station on the north, the
only occupied run near him being Rannes,
30 miles to the south, then owned by Hay
Bros. Mr. Connor was the second person
to ship wool from Gladstone and from the
Fitzroy River. He welcomed A. C. Gre-
gory, the explorer, on the Dawson 56
years ago, and was forming Collaroy Sta-
tion when Captain Mackay passed through
on his return from the discovery of Mackay.
MRS. DONALD BEATON.
Is another of the old identities who, with
her late husband, settled in the Mackay
district in the very early days. She ar-
rived in Bowen from Liverpool (England)
as a single woman in 1863, and a few
months later came down to Mackay, where
she met the late Donald Beaton, to whom
she was subsequently married. At this time
Mackay was little more than a settlement
of about 40 or 50 residents, who lived in
or about what is now the main portion of
the town. Two hotels were in existence,
one being conducted by the late Mrs. Cook,
on the site of the present Wills’ Hotel,
while the other was silua ed about where
Tattersall’s Hotel now stands, and was
owned by the late John Riley. . The place
boasted of three general stores, those in
business being the late R. Cridland, John
Anderson, and John Allen.' A butcher’s
shop was conducted by William Landells,
who is still in the land of the living at
Alligator Creek. The settlement area had
been cleared to some extent, though patches
of scrub were about and offered exceptional
facilities for attack upon the white popula-
tion by the natives. The blacks were aw-
fully troublesome, and attacked unwary
settlers. Mrs. Beaton bore the heat and
burden of the day with her husband until
’67, when she left on a lengthy visit to
Victoria. About two years prior to her de-
parture the first cane was introduced, a
couple of dozen of small boxes of plants
being brought to Mackay by' the late John
Spiher. They were punted up the river
by Beaton as far as the Pioneer Estate,
where Spiller opened up a cultivation area.
It was two years, however, before he could
get anything like a crop. Mrs. Beaton
was absent in Victoria 13 years, and when
she returned in ’80 there were large areas
under cane and the Kanakas had ueen in-
troduced for carrying on the industry. The
late E. M. Long and John Donaldson had
embarked in cane growing, the former at
Habana and the latter at Homebush road.
Though 74 years of age, Mrs. Beaton is
still hale and hearty, and takes a very
active interest in all matters relating to
the district, more especially in the political
line, in which she manifests most demo-
cratic feelings. Mrs. Beaton has had a
varied experience, and recalls to mind very
vividly an occasion in ’65 when she was
lost in the bush at Nebo for 23 days. She
had accompanied her husband to that town-
ship, and in attempting to retrace her steps
lost her way. During the time she spent
in the bush she was obliged to live on the
little nourishment given by the sweet
grass, and on several occasions was forced
to conceal herself from the blacks.
R. S. P. BROWN
Was the first man to open business at
Walkerston, where he settled in 1869. He
erected the first building in the township
on a site opposite the Railway Station.
This house was the first hotel ih : the
township, and was kept by Mrs. Brown, for
several years. It was known as the Alex-
andra Hotel.
MR. J. C. BINNEY.
Mr. J. C. Binney is one of the
oldest residents now in our midst.
He arrived in Melbourne in May,
1858 ; lived three years on Oven’s
River, Victoria. He came to Queens-
land in 1861 with J. A. Macartney,
and lived at Waverley. In August
of the following year he went out
with Nat Buchanan from Fort Coo-
per, and assisted to form Bowen
Downs ; returned to Waverley in
February, 1863, and left again in
March, in company with Macartney
and Graham, with cattle to form St.
Helen’s Station. Arrived in Mackay
on the way to St. Helen’s on May
4th, 1863. He formed St. Helen’s
in that year, and in 1864 he went on
to Bloomsbury with W. Macartney,
and formed that station. Gave up
station life in 1867, and joined Messrs.
lewitt and Romilly, at Pleystowe,
where he planted the first cane grown
on that plantation. Was afterwards
employed by Messrs. Martin and
Long, to form Branscombe planta-
tion. He next became manager of a
butchery for Meynell and Rawson at
he Hermitage, opposite the Hos-
pital. In 1871, he. was appointed the
first Secretary of the Hospital, and
was also Town Clerk from 1876 to
1882. When the Pioneer Shire was
formed, he made the first valuation,
and _was then appointed Clerk and
Engineer of that division. He did
all the rough work in connection
with the laying out of roads and
bridges, and held office until his
visit to the Old Country, in 1884. Mr.
Binney returned to Mackay in 1889,
and was re-appc anted Secretary of
the District Hosnital in 1891, a posi-
on he still holds. He has there-
fore occupied the position with the
short interregnum referred to, for
forty years. He distinctly remembers
the bank robbery in the sixties ; he
was at that time with Dan Connor,
at Landsdowne, when Constable
O’Donnel rode up and asked for
volunteers to proceed to search for
the bushrangers. Mr. Binney very
promptly volunteered, and proceeded
to Bagley’s at Eton ; he found the
men had passed a few minutes earlier
and had turned off as if going to
Broadsound. Mr. Binney continued
on to Plane Creek only to find at
Mr. E. Atherton’s place that the men
had not passed. Subsequently it was
proved that the men had doubled on
their tracks .and crossed over the
range to Nebo. He heard no more
of them until they were captured on
the New South Wales border some
time afterwards.
MRS. BOLDER, FIRST WHITE
WOMAN TO LAND IN MACKAY.
We left Broadsound in the s.s.
Murray, on or about the 20th. We
were three days at sea when we
sighted the island called Flat Top.
Our steamer was not a large one,
for our Captain (Tills) kept the lead
going, and sounded his way up the
river ; there were no buoys or bea-
cons to guide him. The “Murray”
cast anchor alongside the bank of the
river near an opening cut in the
mangroves. The captain ordered a
plank to be run ashore from the
steamer to the bank, so that the pas-
sengers and luggage could be put
ashore. As soon as my feet touched
land, Captain Tills called for three
cheers to be given, saying, “Allow
me to congratulate you, Mrs. Bolger,
for you are the first white woman
ever landed in the township of Mac-
kay.” I could see no houses or
tents of any kind, only scrub and
mangroves. I said, “ Where is the
township ?” The captain said, “ This
place has been surveyed as a town-
ship, and there will be houses here
in a month or two.” There were no
other passengers for Mackay, only
my husband and myself, although
there were several on board bound
for Bowen, or, as they called it, Port
Denison. The only people to meet
us were two New England blackboys,
in charge of a team of bullocks and
four horses. My husband got our
things on to the dray, and then as-
sisted me to mount a horse ; the
blackboys were both on horseback.
The blackboy told us it was eleven
miles to the station ; we rode along-
side the waggon, and got to the
station in the evening. It was here
I met Mr. and Mrs. Ready. Mrs.
Ready told me she came overland
with her husband and the cattle, and
so far had never been down to the
coast. They treated me splendidly.
Mrs. Ready told me I was the first
woman she had seen for twelve
months. We were travelling on to
Retreat Station, some forty miles
from Mr. Ready’s station. At this
time there was no such thing as a
road, or even a bridle track, just a
marked tree line. Mr. Ready advised
us to get an early start, as the blacks
were pretty bad, and he had lost a
few head of cattle that week. They
had been speared by the blacks. We
took a New England blackboy with
us, and made a start at daylight next
morning. At dinner time my hus-
band and the boy got off and boiled
their quart pots, but said I had bet-
ter stay in the saddle, as there were
fresh blackfellow tracks around the
waterhole. We had not gone a mile
after dinner when our horses became
fidgety and frightened ; the station
horses were nearly as frightened of
the blacks as we were. Presently
the blackboy said, “Look out, Boss;
you see him long a hill there big
fellow mob.” And, sure enough,
there on our right was a large mob
of blacks and no gins. This meant,
as I knew after, they were out for
war. The boy seemed to understand
the seriousness of the position better
than either of us, for he put his horse
to the gallop right away. We never
pulled rein until we reached the sta-
tion at sundown ; I slept that night
without rocking.
It was on this station that I met
Mr. Kirk, Mr. Darcey, Sandy
McEwan, and Mr. Sutherland, all
were travelling with sheep or cattle
looking for country. The station was
a slab hut, and at each corner there
was a sort of square porthole cut
just big enough to sight a gun
through. There were twelve of these
holes in this hut, and a gun and am-
munition hanging up alongside each
one. One day the men were all out
mustering cattle, and only myself
and a gin on the station. I asked
t ( he gin could she shoot. She said,
‘Yes.” “Well, come out and see if
you can hit one of these crows on
the stockyard.” The gin took a gun
down, and we went outside. She put
it to her shoulder and pulled the
trigger. The. gun did more damage
to the gin than it did to the crows,
for she turned two complete somer-
saults, and had a bad shoulder for a
week after. The gun had been loaded
for over four months. On this sta-
tion I met Mr. N. H. Bell, Mr. Tou-
sant,. and Mr. Smith f they were out '
looking for country to settle on. I
visited Mackay a few months after
this.
M. V. Bolger.
HENRY BOWYER BLACK.
Arrived in district in April, 1872, as an
advanced agriculturist from N.S.W. to join
his brother, the late Mr. Hume Black, in
cane growing on The Cedars, and after
five years returned to Brisbane. After a
few months he returned to Mackay, and
with Mr. E. J. Walsh started the “ Stan-
dard ” in 1877.
THOMAS PEARCE
Arrived in Mackay in 1867, and worked as
a draper. Having a fondness for agricul-
ture, he leased a property and commenced
the cultivation of arrowroot and tobacco.
This he continued to do for five years, when
a disastrous flood inundated his lands, and
compelled him to abandon the industry. In
1SS0 he started business on his own ac-
count, and this proved the foundation of
the drapery emporium of Pearce and Marry-
att. He took a prominent part in public
affairs, and was closely identified with the
central sugar-mills system. He died in
Brisbane a few months ago.
THE MEN WHO BLAZED THE TRACK.—Continued


JAMES SOANES.
arrived in Mackay 18th December, 1870,
from Rockhampton, in the s.s. Linonee,
after completing a very tedious voyage
of 118 days in the ship Royal Dane from
London. After a short term of day work
for the late Mr. George Smith and Mr.
Douglas, he went to Marble Island, in the
cutter Mary Ann, for limestone,and brought
the stone to Mackay, and started burning
at the old lime kiln oposite the Immi-
gration Depot (the first in Mackay). An
appointment as clerk of works to the
Mackay Municipal Council, about the end
of 1871, followed, and he held the position
for ten years, during which time he cleared
and formed over 27 miles of streets and
drains in Mackay. During 1875 Mr.
Soanes was “borrowed” from the Council
by the Government to clear the track to
Mount Flora and Mount Orange copper
mines, then being surveyed by Mr. Stig-
less for the late Messrs. C. Keeley and
“Billy” Orange. After severing h's con-
nection with the Municipal Council, Mr.'
Sbanes was engaged as overseer for the
Divisional Board for eight years, opening
up roads to different localities in the dis-
trict, including Pine Vale, Eungella, Hat-
ton, etc. He was afterwards engaged in
mining at Eungella and Grass Tree, and
then accepted the position of tick inspector
for the Government at the Toll Bar, at
the foot of the range, and afterwards at
Yellow Waterholes. In 1885 Mr. Soanes
paid a visit to his native town (Norwich,
England), but otherwise has resided con-
tinuously in Mackay, and, as showing the
healthiness of the climate, has not lost a
day through sickness, except about seven
years ago, when he had the misfortune to
meet with a somewhat serious accident.
He is now 70 years of age, and is in fairly
good health.
CHARLES KEELEY
Arrived in Mackay early in the sixties, and
besides introducing the first vegetables and
poultry to the settlement he established the
first hotel, the Golden Fleece. At the end
of seven years he turned his attention to
grazing and horticulture, and spent a deal
of money testing the capabilities of the dis-
trict for producing tropical fruits, spices, to-
bacco, ginger, cinnamon, and coffee, and
also for the growing of fibre-producing
plants. He was one of the original four
promoters of the first newspaper, and was
elected an alderman at the first municipal
election, holding his seat for 13 years.
F. COSGROVE.
An old Mackay resident, who saw
the first sugarcane grown in Austra-
lia early in last century.
W. H. WILLIAMS.
William Hugh Will lams, who was born
in Bangor, North Wales, .arrived at Rock-
hampton in 1863, engaged with Star and
Moore to assist in droving a mob of mixed
cattle to form a station at Grecnmount,
Mackay, reaching that place in March,
1864. Entered into dairying at Walker-
ston in 1866, and was the first to settle
down in that part of the district. In those
days he sent butter as far as Bowen. Later
on took up “The Lome” estate, near
Walkerston, and went into maize growing,
combined with dairying, until tire growing
of sugarcane was established in the dis-
trict. He then embarked in sugarcane
cultivation, and carried same on success-
fully, selling out in >873 to the Melbourne
Mackay Sugar Estates Company. In later
years Mr. Williams entered into business
with his sons as general grocers in
Mackay. Subsequently he removed to
Plane Creek district, where his decease
took place in 1906. His wife, who arrived
in Mackay in 1865, survives, and is
living with her eldest daughter in
Newcastle.
BILLY SPENCER.
Found the road over the Range,
and with Mr. James Ready, brought
the first team to Mackay wharf, in
July, iB6r.
J. D. ARMITAGE.
This being the Jubilee of Mackay, a few
notes thereon might interest some of the
present generation who have not the
slightest idea of the struggles and troubles
of the early settlers in this district. I
arrived here in 1870 with about sixty others
from the Old Country. Where are they
now? Most of them gone to the other
side, leaving not more than ten of the lot
who came here with me. The streets of
Mackay were not formed, footpaths and
roads were on one common level. The
A.S.N. Company’s store was built of palms
and covered with grass. One could stand
at the site of the present Custom House
and look over the country to the present
waterworks, and not see more than two or
three houses in that long distance. Church
of England service was held in a room
behind the present Post Office Hotel, which
at that time was called the Golden Fleece,
a good name for a pub. The hotel was
kept by Charles Keeley. On the present
site of the Shire Hall offices was a small
four-roomed cottage, which did duty as the
first Post Office in Mackay. Mr. Keeley
rented it to a small party of us, viz.: Mr.
Ihos. Dupuy, the two Gladstones, and my-
self. At this time there appeared to be
very little business doing in Mackay. The
inhabitants appeared to be living on one
another. First Sunday went to church in
the room above mentioned; preacher, the
Rev. E. Tanner, a splendid fellow with
some backbone in him. There were about
five persons present besides ourselves, and
the collection amounted to about 4s. 6d.
After settling in the cottage, our first
thought was to secure land on which to
settle, i here was a land agent here, but
we could never find him. We crossed the
river on horseback, and after a deal of
trouble I selected Eimeo, and my neigh-
bours were the two Gladstones and Mr.
and Mrs. Dupuy and son. The next thing
was how we were going to get our boxes
over, for at this time there were no bridges
or roads. V\e decided to go by sea, and
engaged a man named Wishart to take us.
We had just arrived at Eimeo when the
rain commenced. We hastily built a hut
on the ground with pandamus, and thatched
it with grass, and it rained for one solid
fortnight, before we could do anything. All
our goods and stores were coverccf with
myriads of sugar ants that had taken
shelter there like ourselves. However, at
last fine weather set in, and soon a com-
fortable house was built. The Gladstones
went on their land, also Mr. and Mrs.
Dupuy. We were all left to struggle on as
best we could; I commenced fruit-growing,
and had all the garden planted with cocoa-
nuts, pines, and all kinds of fruit; but all
this took years to accomplish. The next
difficulty was to sell the fruit when it was
grown, for all this time the population of
white people was very small. What I
could now get for two pines 1 could then
only get for a dozen, and the same with
all other kinds of fruit. The great dif-
ficulty was how to get them to town. On
the North side it was no uncommon sight
to see bullock drays and horse drays con-
stantly bogged. Arriving at the bank or
the river, we had sometimes to wait two
or three hours before being able to cross,
and the same on leaving town. Now all
this difficulty is over, owing to the bridges
and culverts all over the North side. One
can now drive to Eimeo in an hour, a
trip that formerly took pretty nearly half
a day to accomplish. The blacks at this
time were very bad, and we had to be
very wide-awake to keep them - off. All
the islands off Mackay were inhabited by
blacks, who made frequent excursions and
raided the homesteads, taking everything
about the houses they could get hold of,
including the crops of maize* pumpkins,
fruit, and edibles of all kinds.
MR. AND MRS. CRAINE.
Mr. and Mrs. D. Craine arrived in
Melbourne in 1862. Mr. Craine visited
the goldfields of Ballarat and Ben-
digo, and after spending some time
there, came on to Rockhampton in
the year 1863. Came to Mackay early
D. CRAINE.
Mrs. D. CRAINE.
in 1864, and went to Nebo, a centre
that promised to become of some
importance. A few months sufficed
to satisfy him of this district, and
he returned to Mackay and opened
a bakery and grocery business. He
was successful. Mr. Craine died in
1888, but Mrs. Craine is still a resi-
dent here.
Mrs. BEATRICE McLENNAN,
Landed in Rockhampton in 1861, and
came overland to Mackay in 1864.
SINCLAIR LAWRENSON.
An old identity was Sinclair Lawrenson,
r “Jimmy the Ferryman,” as he is more
familiarly known. He arrived in Mackay
about forty-five years ago, in a small sail-
ing vessel called the Martha Ellen. He
was employed at Inverness carting sugar
down to what is known as the “Devil’s
Elbow,” for transhipment to the wharves,
and subsequently was engaged punting
sugar down the river and taking back
provisions to the plantations. He worked
for a time with the Rawson Bros., at “The
Hollow,” and at other places in the dis-
trict. He afterwards became a ferryman,
and will'be remembered by old inhabitants
as having the ferry-boat on the river
where the Sydney street bridge is now
erected. Being driven out of his occupation
by the bridge, he moved down to Flat Top,
and for many years plied between the
steamers and the island, until failing health
caused him to relinquish the water, and he
then came to town and resided with Mr.
and Mrs. J. C. Martin up to the time of
his death, which event took place at ihe
ripe age of 87 years.
THE MEN WHO BLAZED THE TRACK—Continued.


■■•VißljMittiMMllMaft!
i-- ■ *
■■■■■mwmwbbWHh
u' 'v. * ;>
j • v'. rjj .f* 4 . ' r' • „,.
T
IB
I
j*
Keep your Weather Eye on Old GEORGE BLY
and lose no time in placing your Orders for any AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENT
required on the Farm. The Pioneer Forge is the right place to call at if you require
anything that wants mending. Dinna forget to keep your weather eye on
Old GEORGE BLY,
Blacksmith and Wheelwright, - HATTON.
■ ■ \ r.-i
>r ' ! - Xu ■ '
wf’> >-r lit
jS't a, < I i 4 * *Sfc
■v
; i !;/.««&
‘-i i
ITH,
I
.. ll W\
!r’ f’-1
i •
SMm
Ar lyJ
A Section of the Workshop showing the Power Plant, Beltings, etc.
J. J. BUHRE, Joiner and Cabinet Maker,
H A X X O N.
Only Best Classes of Timber Used.
Charges Moderate and Work turned out at Shortest Notice.
*'lJ. "‘i !;.!■«■
’&v :.r.
twL’T
' »"«F T’ T i
s?
mm
\mSBBT
4.-h;
in.-
nHi
-i- *;! E -i v
■■■ ' ""IT
CRITERION HOTELS Tom M ' G p "‘^; r
HATTO N„
The House for the Commercial, because it is handy to the Station and possesses every
modern convenience, Letters and Telegrams promptly answered.
\
-
■- v ; • ’■ r . " ‘
% «jM* ' '"~r
'i *-*i
ft e»~~ r-t*-.-*-* —— . j
*■ . '!■
* W
I jM 43jK •: * Y«w A: w.*- ■• •, 1 1 .
“ ?v X.'&tf, I‘ia.A ;I ■ ct
ft
ft
ft
w
B. H. SALSBURY, PA5nLr
- Butcher,
HATTON.
SMALL GOODS A SPECIALITY. FRESH MEAT DELIVERED DAILY.
A*.
• - - , v.>, - ~
■ X^- r
’t v>. - jr
/i
.■'•■k'SSS
The Economic Stores, Hatton,
sue noted for keeping everything of the Best required by the General Public. Civility
and attention to business guaranteed and anyone calling in can rely on being supplied
with the Very Best Goods at Lowest Prices.
PRODUCE. GROCERIES, IRONMONGERY, DRAPERY, BOOTS and SHOES
always on band, and all kinds of PATENT MEDICINES STOCKED.
mm
f
.Ty, A v ? ’
iSla"
m.
jf.’nap r
* \ /7v iT tn
i :■* ,
mm
Jr.
\ m
i
THE HATTON SAWMILL,
The Largest and Rest Equipped Sawmill in the District.
Lange Stocks of Hardwood, Pine, and Cedar.
J. SHEPHERD, Proprietor.
F. BOURNE,
Bookseller and Stationer, fancy Goods Depot,
COLONIAL, BRITISH and FOREIGN
NEWSPAPERS and MAGAZINES.
I
AHDERSOH’S SEEDS THE BEST.
PARKER’S FOUNTAIN PENS—the Pen that will not leak.
FRED. BOURNE,
BOX xoi.
•PHONE 73.
Sydney Street, MAC KAY.
The “FIELD
Guaranteed
Three
Years.
THE FIELD
tct
The
World’s
Best
Bicycle.
Standard Quality and Standard Fittings.
Intending purchasers will receive full par-
ticulars and prices from GEORGE FIELD
At FIELD CYCLE WORKS - - MACKAY
Every Requisite for Cyclists sold at Lowest Prices,


The Early Days.
BY FRANK SMITH.
Any attempt that may 7 be made by even
the proverbial “ oldest inhabitant ” of any
given town or district to narrate his per-
sonal recollections of the early days of
same in a condensed form, would lie
fraught with difficulty, not indeed owing
to the want of material, but in the obstacle
that at once presents itself—namely, in a
plethora of same—and if the following re-
collections of the early days of Mackay,
dating from about the beginning of the
seventies, appear to be disjointed, and at
times wanting in continuity of narration,
such difficulty arises not, as might be sug-
gested, by paucity of material, but, on the
other hand, the want of ability in the
narrator to condense such recollections
within the bounds of available editorial
•space.
It may be said at the outset that it is
not proposed, or in fact intended, to give
a description of events of the early times
in Mackay prior to the early seventies,
previous to which (although, as a matter
of fact, the town had been incorporated)
Mackay, as far as business was concerned,
was to some extent looked upon .as a
depot only for those engaged in pastoral
pursuits within a radius of 200 miles or
thereabouts; in those days sheep, as well
as cattle, contributing materially, to use
a homely phrase, towards •“ keeping the
pot boiling.”
As far as can be gathered, the first sugar
cane was planted in Mackav (in or about
the year 1865) by Mr. John Spiller, of the
Pioneer Estate, a matter of half an acre
SYDNEY STREET BEFORE THE FIRE—1888
■or so, from plants brought by him from
Java, and later on a practical start of the
■sugar industry in this district was made
by Mr. J. E. Davidson and the late Mr.
T. H. Fitzgerald, a one-time member for
the district and later on GoionW Irea-
surer in the Lilley Ministry; the outcome
•of which was the cultivation at Alexandra
Estate of about 15 acres of sugar cane,
and subsequently the erection of the Alex-
andra mill and machinery in 1868, the first
year’s output of which .amounted to about
100 tons of sugar, and a few years later
the sugar industry may be said to have
become firmly established; a number of
mills having by that lime been erected,
with, of course, corresponding cultivation
of more or less acreage of cane, amongst
them being Foulden, Pioneer, Dumblcdon,
Nebia, Branscombe, Conningsby, Pley-
stowe, Barrie, Te Kowai, Mcadowlands,
Inverness, The Cedars, The Palms, River ,
Estate, and others, cane cultivation of a
greater or lesser area on each estate con-
tinuing in full swing until the year 1874,
when a decided and serious check was
given to the industry by the advent of the
■disease known as “rust,” which affected
more or less the entire crop of that year,
and which was caused, it was generally
understood at the lime, partly by the con-
tinuous use of one species of cane, the
“ Bourbon ” variety, and also by an ab-
normal amount of rain and cold weather
in that year.
This unfortunate state of affairs created
great consternation, and but for the fact
that by that time a large amount of Vic-
torian capital had been brought into the
district and invested in the sugar industry
the same would have been seriously
checked, if not have collapsed altogether.
As usual, however, it resulted in the “ sur-
vival of the fittest,” and with sugar at
about per ton, and with an unlimited :
supply of not necessarily cheap, but reli-
able, black labour, the industry went mer-
rily on until the .advent of the Griffith
Administration, which resulted, amongst
other things, not only in the issue of more
stringent regulations for the introduction
for the lime being of Kanaka labour, but
eventually led to its abolition altogether.
This was, however, not considered to be
an altogether unmitigated evil, as in the
meantime improved machinery and new
methods of manufacture had been intro-
duced ino the district, also men of large
experience in other sugar-growing coun-
tries—notably the late Messrs. Hugh Mac-
ready and Andrew Cummings—with a re-
sult that as time went on the old-fashioned
methods of cultivation and manufacture
were superseded by those of an up-to-date
character, both in the field and in the fac-
tory. Next in importance to the introduc-
tion of Victorian capital was the advent of
the C.S.R. Company, who in the year 1881
(by virtue of a special Act of Parliament)
were enabled to acquire large areas of
land, and in 1883 erected the present
Homcbush Mill, and thereafter during the
term of office of their very capable and
experienced managers, who in the early
days were entrusted with the control and
development of the company’s operations,
notablv Messrs. Gemmel Smith, William
McLean, and Robertson Smith, such com-
panv’s interests in the Mackav district
have of late vears materiallv increased,
and it is quite safe to sav that, owing to
the encouragement of, and financial sup-
port extended bv, such Company in a most
liberal manner, to its tenants and growers
of cane, during a great number of years
past, many a struggling farmer has had
occasion to congratulate himself on the
advent of the (at times much maligned)
C.S.R. Company to this district.
The names of the pioneer planters of
Mackay who are conspicuously and de-
servedly entitled to mention are those of
Messrs. John Spiller, of. the Pioneer Estate :
Ewen Davidson and T. H. Fitzgerald, of
Alexandra, above mentioned; and also E.
M. Long, of Habana ; Hyne and Bridge-
man, of Mcadowlands ; Hume Black, of
the Cedars; Hewitt, of Pleystowe; Sir
John Bennett Lawes, of Farleigh ; Paget
Bros., of Nindaroo; Walker and Lloyd,
of Dumblcdon ; and others, some of whom,
we regret to say, although not altogether
successful from a financial point of view,
at the same time by their energy and
enterprise greatly contributed to the ex
pansion of the sugar industry in this dis-
trict, and in that regard have left an
enduring mark for all time.
Later years saw a marked advance in
the methods of locomotion to that which
had previously obtained on most of the
estates, tramlines being substituted for the
ordinary lumbering hor.-,e-wag 4011 and cane-
dray, the first to lead the way in that
direction being the River Estate, the pro-
perty of Mr. Spiller above mentioned.
Since then the system has been greatly
extended, many miles of tramline having
been laid down in various parts of the
district. A notable event occurred in the
vear IS97 —viz., the formation of the first
Central Mill Sugar Company at North
Eton, followed later on by the Racecourse
Central Company, the success of both of
which companies is now a matter of his-
torv. The persons primarily entitled to
the credit of the Central Mill system were
the late Mr. Thomas Pearce and the pre-
sent Mr. P. McKenny and Mr. W. G.
Hodges, old and much-respected residents
of Mackay, as It was owing to their repre-
sentations that Mr. S. W. Griffith (as he
then was, the Premier of the colony, and
now the Right Hon. Sir S. W. Griffith,
the Chief Justice of the Commonwealth)
caused the sum of to be placed on
the Estimates in aid of such Central Mill
scheme, the material conditions, as far as
the Government was concerned, being that
any company to be formed, and receiving
financial support from the Government,
should employ white labour only in the
mill, security for any such advances to be
given over the company’s mills, etc., and
also over the lands of the shareholders
obtaining such, advance, and .also one or
more directors to represent the Government
and to have a seat and vote on the Board
of the company’s Directorate. Subsequent
events have amply justified the predictions
of the originators of the Central Mill
system, one important result being that
the low pices previously offered by the
Proprietory .Mills to the small growers of
cane became a thing of the past, and as
(he shareholders of such Central Mills were
all growers of cane, and indeed under
their articles of association (which, bv the
way, for the first time affirmed the prin-
ciple of one man one vote), were hound
to grow and deliver not less than a certain
acreage of cane to the mills, the price
of same being regulated by the Directors
appointed by such shareholders, .and in the
ease of non-shareholders the price received
for cane was greatly in .advance of any-
thing previously obtained from the Pro-
prietory Mills, which in previous years did
not exceed Bs. or 9s. per ton, or there-
abouts. It must, of course, be remem-
bered that the opening of the railway to
Mirani (the first sod of which was turned
by His Excellency the late Sir A. Musgrave
in the year ISS4) was a considerable factor
in the success of the Racecourse and North
lot on Companies above mentioned, as a
large area of suitable cane-growing lands
was, as a result, opened up for cultivation,
which, but for the facilities afforded by
railway communication, would otherwise
have continued to be used for pasturage of
stock only. A very material factor in the
success of the above-mentioned companies’
operations should also be mentioned—viz.,
that the managers in charge from lime to
time have always been most competent and
experienced men, the names of some of
whom occur to us at the present moment
being Mr. George Ironside, of the North
Eton, and the genial Thomas Whitcomb, of
the Racecourse Central, who have always
been most ably assisted by their secretaries
and engineers (no unimportant auxiliaries,
be it remembered), and in introducing and
adopting the most up-to-date methods and
appliances for improving the growth find
manufacture of sugar, haVe brought their
respective mills to as near perfection |as
possible. J
Since the formation of the above-
mentioned companies, and in view of the
success that attended the initiation of same,
and all persons having business relations
therewith, the Sugar Works Guarantee Act
of 1593 came into force, which was a
measure based largely on the lines of the
first Central Mills, and intended to en-
courage the growth of sugar-cane by white
labour only, the practical outcome being
the establishment of numerous companies
in various parts of Queensland, who have
taken advantage .of the provisions of the
Act referred to ; and it is 'sufficient to state
that all obligations to the Government to
date by the companies formed under that
Act have been duly met, and the progress
and the present position cf such companies,
together with the effect of the initiation by
the Federal Government of the bonus
system ns applied to cane-farming, is com-
paratively recent history, and need not be
detailed here ; the undoubted fact, however,
remains that Mackay at the present time
holds the premier position of Sugaropolis
of Queensland.
It will readily be believed that, during
the earlier stages of the growth and de-
velopment of our staple industry, the
interests of the town of Mackay and dis-
trict generally were not neglected, nor
allowed to remain at a standstill; and when
it is remembered what primitive conditions
in reg.ird to business and social matters
orovailed in the early days, and what has
since taken their place, the mind seems to
be almost overwhelmed by a flood of
memory of remarkable doings and happen-
ings during the past forty years or so,
although it must be confessed that, on
looking back through such a lengthy vista
of years, some appear to be only com r
paratively recent events, but at the same
time, as stated at the commencement of
these recollections, it would be impossible
to give more than a passing reference to
such events, whether in detailing in ever
so small a degree the material improve-
ments effected in the town and district,
or a reference, however slight, to the
various members of the community who
were so largely responsible for the material
advancement of the town from a business
point of view, which, after the sugar in-
dustry had been firmly established, from a
mere village assumed by degrees and with
comparative rapidity a centre of great com-
mercial and shipping importance, especially
when, for example, it is considered that the
one building which in such early days
(1872), and for some years afterwaiils, did.,
duty for a Court House, Lands %)ffice,.
Customs, Bond, and Shipping Offices com-,
bined, and stood upon the site of (he present
Custom House, was afterwards removed la
a site near the Pilot Station, and has ever
since been used by the Shipping Office as
a boalshed ; and further, that the Post and
Telegraph Office business was conducted
MACKAY DISTRICT HOSPITAL IN 1882.
in a hovel in Wood street, called by cour-
tesy the Post Office, at which, by the way,
it was customary, on the arrival of a mail,
to see the whole matter of such mail shot,
sano ceremonie, into a heap in the middle
of the floor (about 10 feet square) of the
only room of the so-called Post Office, and
from which heap all those having the entree
to such room were free (when the Post and
Telegraph officer was otherwise engaged)
to select whatever letters, packets, or news-
papers (no parcels post in those days) might
be addressed to or belong to them.
The Lock-up and Police Barracks (which,
by a subtle touch of irony were called the
“Station”) were situated on the site of the
present ones, but were of the most primitive
description, both in point of fitness and
arrangement, but they appear (if it is any
compliment to the Force in charge, or the
residents of Mackay for the time being to
say so) to have been considered sufficient
accommodation for such Force, and the
evil-doers requiring incarceration from
lime to time, and as far as known it is not
on record that the latter ever expressed
any discontent with their quarters, or, on
the other hand, that complaints, if made
by them, would have received special atten-
tion. Mackav had, in fact, in those times
not advanced to the dignity of a gaol, and
the temporary lodgings provided for the
benefit of gentlemen who were suffering
from an attack of “drink taken,” or other
minor offences, appeared to have fulfilled
all the requirements necessary in that con-
nection. So satisfied, in fact, was the
sergeant in charge of the “Station” at
thaT time (a gentleman hailing from the
banks of the Liffey) with the general con-
dition of things, that it is on record that
♦he only thing that appeared to offend his
esthetic instincts, and which he complained
to the authorities most bitterly about, was
a very old and, as he alleged, unsightly
slump (the remains of a corner post of an
old fence at the corner of the street), whi:h
he desired to have removed, as it was, iis
said, “most distressful to the oi.”
The gentlemen who held official positions
in (he early days of Mackay, and to wh-jm
alone it is intended to refer, were those of.
(he Police Magistrate (which in those times
included various other official positions,
such as Lands Commissioner, Registrar of ;
Births, Deaths, &c., &c.), and Sbfr-Collefctor
of Customs (who was also Harbour and
Shipping Master, Sec., See.), were held by


the late Captain W. R. Goodall and Mr.
H. S. D. Hay respectively. The late Cap-
tain Goodall saw a considerable amount of
active service, having taken part, amongst
other actions, in the attack by the allies
on the forts at Pekin in the year 1856, on
which occasion he was knocked off his
horse by a round shot, and very severely
wounded, which caused his retirement from
the service, later on being appointed a
Commissioner of Crown Lands m Queens-
land, and thereafter, in 187 i, Police Magis-
trate at Mackay, which position he occu-
pied with great credit to himself and ad-
vantage to the public, and, although inflex-
ibly just as a magistrate, he was always
ready to temper justice with mercy when
occasion warranted his doing so, and, be-
sides being an excellent Police Magistrate,
be was—as might have been expected of an
officer who had worn her late Majesty’s
colours—possessed of a refined and cultured
intellect, and was also at times a man of
“ infinite jest and most excellent fancy,”
Many of bis witticisms on the Bench, “ for
many a joke had he ” (albeit at times
tinged with a certain amount of caustic
humour), will be well remembered by the
old hands of Mackay, and his outspoken
manner and uncompromising line of action,
no matter what status the litigants before
him might happen to hold, Was worthy of
all praise. He was, in short, the beau
ideal of an officer and a gentleman. He
was afterwards . appointed . Police Magis-
trate at Toowoomba, and died some time
ago, full of years and honour. The late
Mr. Heuston Stewart Dalrymple Hay (a
distant relative, it is believed, of the pre-
sent Hon. David Hay Dalrymple) was at
one time an officer in the Navy, and was
appointed Sub-Collector at Mackay in the
year 1870, which position he held for some
years, and he.will be long remembered as
a capable and courteous officer, but who
(to the amusement of his friends) was firmly
of opinion—in keeping, no doubt, with his
old “ gun room ” instincts—that nothing
short of the “ triangles ” would be suffi-
cient for some of the worthless dead-beats
who infested Mackay during his term of
office. He had all the good and manly
qualities that seem to be inseparable from
a man who has had a naval training, and
it is needless to say that he was a most
loyal subject, and if no other method pre-
sented itself on Her late Majesty’s birth-
day, or other occasion requiring loyal de-
monstration, of giving the regulation royal
salute, it is on record that he used to im-
provise one by firing a musket into an
empty barrel, which it is believed gave a
report approximate to the discharge of dis-
tant artillery ; at any rate, his keen sense
of loyalty was satisfied, as far as the then
conditions would admit of, and to the ex-
tent referred to the position for the occasion
was saved. He was a man of a most
kindly and generous disposition, and his
comparatively early death in Mackay was
deeply regretted by a numerous circle of
friends.
The pilot service of Mackay was for many
years well and worthily manned by the
present Mr. William Williamson, now sig-
nal and light keeper at East Point, he hav-
ing previously held the position of pilot at
Mackay from 1880 to 1892. He was suc-
ceeded by that veteran, the late John Scan-
tlebury (who, by the way, joined the pilot
service as far back as 1871), and who held
the office of acting pilot at Mackay for
many years, both of the above being most
capable and efficient officers. Alec John-
son, so well and favourably known in Mac-
kay, was appointed coxswain of the pilot
boat (also as far back as 1872), and after
about twenty years of arduous service in
that capacity retired, aud is now enjoying
with his family that well-earned rest to
which his long and faithful service have
justly entitled him.
The appointment of lighthouse keeper at
Flat-top is now, and for the last 35 years
has been, held by Mr. William Robertson,
than whom it is safe to say there is not
in the whole coastal service of North
Queensland a more efficient and popular
official, and the abundant and generous
hospitality extended by him to visitors at
Flat-top for many years past has oeen
greatly appreciated, not only by residents
of Mackay, but also by large numbers of
the travelling public.
It should also be stated that the very
long and varied experience of Mr. Robert-
son and Pilot Williamson, above men-
tioned, together with that of the present
Harbour Master and pilot, Captain Green-
field, have been from lime to time of great
and material assistance to the Mackay Har-
bour authorities in matters relating to the
contemplated scheme having for its object
the improvement of shipping facilities for
the port of Mackay.
The A.J.S. Bank, the first and for some
years the only Bank in Mackay, was situ-
ated in the first instance in River street,
about where Wilson, Mart and Co.’s
premises now stand, and which Bank (a
small weather-board cottage) was at one
time the scene of an attempted robbery
by: alleged- bushrangers. More or less
authentic reports regarding this incident
are extant, including the brave and de-
termined stand made by the manager
(under the bank’s counter) and his sub-
sequent flight into the adjoining allotment
(whether-in pursuit of such alleged robbers
or not, there does not appear to be any
exact information), .which allotment, by
the way, was then comparatively scrub
country. The bank premises later on were
in a building of a somewhat more pre-
tentious character, and were situated on
the site’how occupied "by Sharp and Deller,
in Sydney street, and. which building bad
originally been a bush “pub.” of the ab-
solutely bush type, and .could at the time
spoken of have been easily mistaken by
strangers to the town as still answering
that description. It was, however, for
years, as far as banking business was con-
cerned, a veritable gold mine to its share-
holders, but such business was later on
divided between new arrivals—namely, the
Commercial Banking Company of Sydney,
the Q.N. Bank, and the Union Bank of
Australia, Limited, the latter of which
later on afforded another illustration of the
“survival of the fittest,” as it was the
only bank in Mackay that did not close its
doors during the disastrous financial crisis
of 1893.
The names of the various managers of
the above banks in these early days recall
many pleasant reminiscences, in those of
Messrs. William Robertson, now manager
of the Hollow Estate, and the late Henry
Brandon, of the “Joint,” the late Messrs.
E. P. Ashdown and R. T. Shields, of the
“Commercial” and “Q.N.” respectively,
and Mr. E. V. Reid, of the “Union,” the
latter gentleman being now the general
manager of Dalgety and Co. in London,
and the names oL the whole of the above-
mentioned gentlemen have an enduring re-
membrance in the minds of the early re-
sidents of Mackay, as being not only
THE SMITH FAMILY.
H. J. Westbrook. R. M. Smith. W. Archer.
Mrs. Westbrook. Mrs. Geo. Smith. Sid. Smith. Mrs. Gemmel Smith.
competent'business men but good citizens,
and whose; names will always be associated
with all that was calculated to advance the
prosperity of Mackay and district.
Amongst the principal names of public
men who stand oui pre-eminently in the
political, commercial, and social history of
Mackay, was the late Mr. George Smith,
a man of great personality and force of
character, and who in his time was the
leading auctioneer, commission and ship-
ping agent in Mackay, and \yhose intimate
business relations with Victorian capitalists
led to the introduction of a large amount
of Victorian capital for the advancement
and development of the sugar industry in
Mackay, such capitalists comprising,
amongst others, Messrs. Sloane and Co.
(of which firm the late Robert Jonathan
Jeffrey was the leading spirit, and the late
W. H. Paxton his lieutenant, the latter
later on entering into business on his own
One of Mackay’s First Cabs (Mrs. Neddrie owner).
account and founded the business of \\.
H. Paxton and Co.), Mcllwraith,
McEacharn and Co., of which firm the last-
named gentleman (Sir Malcolm
McEacharn), lately deceased, was a most
enterprising and successful man of busi-
ness ; Messrs. Mackinnon and Ronald, at
different times owners of the River Estate ,
and others, whose advent from a business
point of view, together with that of the
C.S.R. Company, above mentioned, con-
tributed immensely to- the development of
the town and district of Mackay. Apart,
also, from strictly business pursuits, the
late Mr. George Smith was always first
and foremost in any scheme or undertaking
likely to benefit the town and district
generally ; for example, he was the leading
spirit in the foundation of the School of
Arts, the Mackay Building Society, and
other local institutions both of a business
and -social.nature, and his death at a com-
paratively early age was a distinct and
great loss to the community generally.
The late Sir John Bennett Lawes, the
scientific agriculturist, who was one time
owner of Farleigh and other estates in
this district, by the expenditure of a large
amount of capital, also added materially
lo the success of the sugar industry in
Mackay.
The firm of Marsh and Webster, general
merchants, of Mackay, enjoy the privilege
of being the oldest, and one of the most
respected, of the mercantile houses in Mac-
kay. The late William Marsh, founder of
the firm (now a limited company), who
passed away about three years ago, has left
the enduring memory of a man who, be-
sides being upright and honorable in all his
business transactions, was also foremost
during a long and useful life in all good
works having for their object the increased
happiness and prosperity of the community
in which he spent the greater part of his
life, and the very handsome memorial in
Holy Trinity Church (of which he was a
staunch supporter, and for many years
churchwarden) erected to his memory will
remain for all time as an imperishable tri-
bute to his great worth and goodness.
The late Mr. Charles Webster, the junior
member--of the firm, who passed away
many years ago, was also a man of great
integrity and force of character, and his
long and ripe experience in business mat-
ters was a great factor in the success of a
firm of merchants so widely and favourably
known as Marsh and Webster, of the “Cor-
ner.” He also took a very keen interest
in any objects of a public or social charac-
ter that were in any degree calculated to
advance the interests or welfare of the
town generally, and was also for many
years a prominent ollicer and supporter of
Holy Trinity Church, and his popularity is
testified by the very handsome memorial
in such church erected by a number of
friends, as a fitting tribute to his memory,
both as a churchman and citizen of Mackay.
In the above connection it may be stated
that the present Holy Trinity Church took
the place of an old stone and rubble build-
ing, which was blown down by a storm in
1876, and the members of such church are
largely indebted to the late Reverend, and
ever-to-be-lamented Albert Alexander Mac-
laren, 8.A., who was appointed Rector of
Holy Trinity Church in 1878, for the erec-
tion of the present edifice, and who from the
moment of his arrival in Mackay threw the
whole of'his energy and devotion into the
erection of a new church on the site of the
old one, and it was entirely through his re-
presentations, and owing to the great kind-
ness of Mr. Stanley, the late Colonial Ar-
chitect of Queensland, that plans were
gratuitously prepared by that gentleman
for a new church at Mackay, and in that
regard the Anglican church people of Mac-
kay are to this day deeply indebted to
Mr. Stanley for his great kindness, and for
the exceedingly beautiful and artistic plans
he prepared for such church. The total
amount required to complete same was
about .£l7OO, and Mr. Maclaren, with his
characteristic energy, as soon as the con-
tract for same was signed set to work to
raise funds required to defray the cost of
the erection of the new church, and it
was erected and ready for occupation on
or about the end of 1879, and was opened
in due form on Christmas Day of that year
by His Lordship the late Bishop Staunton,
and either then, or very shortly afterwards,
the congregation of Holy Trinity Church
had the satisfaction of knowing that not
only was the new church paid for but that
a debt of on the old one was cleared
off, •'til of which was more or less due
the zeal and energy of the late Mr. Mac-
laren, assisted by other ardent church wor-
kers in Mackay ; and by subscriptions raised
by him and them, not only in Mackay and
other parts of Queensland, but also as, a
result of voluminous correspondence by the
late Mr. Maclaren with personal friends of
his in England, and many other parts of
the world, the general result being that
Holy Trinity Church at Mackay is univer-
sally admited to be by far and away the
most artistically and beautifully appointed
church in North Queensland. During the
whole of the late Mr. Maclaren’s ministry
in Mackay ho was distinguished for his un-
paralleled capacity as an organiser, whether
it was in matters for the good of his church
or the advancement and benefit of the town
and district of Mackay generally. He was
a man of intensely sympathetic and manly
qualities, and his broad-mindedness and
charitable disposition, in helping suffering,
humanity, irrespective of country or creed,
was the constant theme of admiration of
all who came in contact with him, whether
as Rector of Hoiy Trinity Church or in
any other capacity, and his singularly ar-
tistic instincts are abundantly evident in
some of the appointments of Holy Trinity
Church, which will always remain a last-
ing monument to his memory. The above
narrative, the writer fears, gives only a
very inadequate idea of the sterling and
lovable qualities of the late and ever-to-be-
lamented Albert Alexander Maclaren, both
as a clergyman of the Church of England
and a man, and the beautiful altar rail-
ing and brass tablet erected to his memory
in Holy Trinity Church will always remain
as an imperishable and affectionate tribute
to it is goodness by all those who were for-
tunate enough to have come under the in-
fluence of his ministrations, or had the
great benefit of his personal friendship.
While by no means desiring to ignore the
services of a number of other good men
and true belonging to above-mentioned and
other religious denominations in Mackay,
these reminiscences would be very incom-
plete without a sympathetic and whole-
hearted recognition of the eminent and
lovable character of the Rev. and Ven. Fieri
Marie Bucas, for something like forty years
priest in charge of the Roman Catholic
Church in Mackay (which church, by the
way, in the early days, like the Anglican,
was of a very unpretentious character, but
has been superseded during later years by
the present handsome, commodious, and
well-appointed edifice), and of whom it may
be very truly said that owing to his broad-
minded and conspicuously charitable dispo-
sition “ he was a man to all the country
dear,” irrespective ot sect or creed, and no
movement during his long term of minis-
try in Mackay, having for its object the
well-being of its peoples, but had at all
times his whole-hearted sympathy and sup-
port, and his recent departure from Mackay
after so many years of good and faithful
service was signalled by an address, ex-
pressing the profound regret of all classes,
of the community at his departure, with a
substantial token accompanying same, to-
gether with the best wishes from all for
his future health and happiness.
Although it is by no means proposed to*
bring under notice the history of the mer-
cantile community to dale, at the same
time besides the names of the merchants
and others of the early days already men-
tioned may be added those of Sharp and
Deller, a firm whose name for very many
years past has been familiar as “ house-
hold words/’ also Messrs. D. H. Dal-
rymple, H. B. Black, Daniel Shepherd, E.
Staines, Robert Fleming, W. G. Hodges,
Patrick McKenney, and many others, alf
of whom are entitled to be enrolled in the
list of prominent members of the mercantile
and social community in the early days of
Mackay.
Shipping matters were in a very primi-
tive state in the early seventies. The old
Timorie (captained by the genial “Harry
Hirst,” but really sailed by her first mate,
that grand old sea dog, the late • —. “Wal-
lace” of happy memory), occasionally the
Black Swan, and other steamers of similar
calibre, paying infrequent visits to Mackay
(but berthing in those times, be it remem-
bered, at the wharves), and were succeeded
later on by the Yaralla (signalised on her
first arrival by a grand luncheon on board),
and commanded for some years by the late-
popular skipper, Captain Edwards, and
thereafter by the Barcoo, which at that
time was considered about the limit in
shipping matters. The extremely casual
methods of the shipping companies in the
times mentioned, and for some time after
1872, in transacting their business, riiaybe
estimated by the fact that the question as
to when the Tinonee or Yaralla, as the
case might be, would be likely to arrive
in Mackay, was a matter of cbmparaliv
unimportance, the great, and indeed all-
important, one used to be, “When she
would go out”! And the position in that
THE EARLY DAYS—Continued.


regard in those days was aptly summed
up in the course of a topical song by a
local poet, at an amateur performance,
in something like the following lines :
4< When the fun is fast and furious, or just
_going to begin,
You may bet your bottom dollar the
.Yaralla’s coming in;
But When the fun’s all over, and there's
no one left to shout,
You may bet your bottom dollar tht.
Yaralla’s going out.”
It is thought to be extremely improbable,
however, that such a happy-go-lucky style
of affairs in shipping matters would meet
with the views of the present generation,
but the style alluded to is probably more or
less inseparable from the early days of any
community, whether in Mackay or else-
where.
Matters political in the very early days
do not call for any special observations,
as the real representation of the Mackay
electorate may be considered to have com-
menced with the advent of such intel-
lectual gladiators in the political arena and
members for the district, in the persons
of the present Hon. D. H. Dalrymple and
the late Hons. M. Hume Black and J.
V. Chataway, all of whom were in their
times Ministers of the Crown, and whose
splendid services on behalf of this district,
and the country generally, have been widely
and abundantly recognised. Since then the
political representation of Mackay is of
such comparatively recent history, and is so
well within the memory of the present com-
munity, as to require no special mention in
these recollections.
Readers of these reminiscences will pro-
bably have discovered by this time that,
while the substantial accuracy of the facts
related may not be open to much question,
on the other hand it must be admitted that
little method has been observed in stating
them ; at the same time, while wanting
in descriptive powers, the writer has made
an honest attempt to describe, as far as
space and time will allow, some of the
notable events and persons of the early
days of Mackay, but the difficulty-of giving
even ever so condensed an account of the
happenings extending over so long a period
as forty years or so ‘‘puzzles the will,”
and, as stated at the outset of these notes,
must be apparent to the most hardened
critic, and as, according to the old adage,
the line must be drawn somewhere, it is
thought advisable to “do it now.” Mean-
while it is hoped that these reminiscences,
imperfect as they may be, may appeal to
the older hands still remaining in Mackay,
and may at the same time have a certain
amount of interest for the younger members
of the community.
THE EARLY DAYS.
(BY JAMES ROBB.)
Mr. Arthur Henderson was in charge of
sheep belonging to Willmott and Miekle-
john. In the beginning of iB6O he left
the Darling Downs and travelled north in
search of some unoccupied country, even-
tually choosing and forming a station on
the western boundary of Collaroy Station,
at that time the property of the late Daniel
Connor. While there he heard of the dis-
covery of a river a little further north. I
am not certain if my memory servos me
right, but I think Henderson told me he
had seen Mr. J. Mackay and had got some
particulars from him about the river. At
all events, he made arrangements with the
owners of several lots of travelling sheep to
be on the new river in time to receive their
first clip of wool and to take, charge of
station supplies. To comply with that
undertaking, he relinquished his position of
station manager. On the termination of
his station service he went down to Rock-
hampton, and had the frame of a house pre-
pared and his necessary stores ordered. On
his arrival in Rockhampton he received a
letter acquainting him that my brother and
I were on our way to Brisbane. He there-
fore came on to Brisbane, expecting to
meet us, hut we had gone. He hastened
after us, and overlook us at the foot of
the Warwick Range. We then returned
with him, travelling all night and reaching
Ipswich in time to return to Brisbane by
the same boat he had come by. The fol-
lowing day we sailed by the mail boat for
Rockhampton. On our arrival at Rock
hampton, Henderson made all haste to start
on the road. But a new difficulty con-
fronted him ; he could not find any of the
small coasting craft that had any idea
where the new river was to be found. The
onlv man who knew where to find it was
Captain Till, but he had sailed a few days
before with station supplies for Spencer,
of Retreat Station, and Vince, of Green-
mount. So the best that could be done was
to leave one of the storekeepers
with Captain Till, and load the Presto again
for the new river. After all those arrange-
ments had been completed, we punted our
-dray, rations, and horses across the Fitzroy,
and commenced our journey. The first
part of the road gave us no trouble, as
Henderson had been along it several times
before, and the travelling stock had left a
track. We had the whole bush to ourselves
until we came to the fool of Connor’s
Range, where there were two men camped.
The men later on opened the first hotel at
Nebo Creek. After we crossed the range,
one of us had to go on in front and pick up
the tracks of the Retreat and Greenmount
cattle, and as they passed fully a month
previous, it gave we newchums quite a
livelv time. On our arrival at the Retreat
Station, Spencer ana a black boy had just
returned from the new river with their
•supplies, and the station huts were in course
of erection. After leaving the Retreat, we
MR R. L. DONNAN'S RESIDENCE.
were able to follow the dray back on to
Greenmount. On our arrival there we first
met Mr. J. Ready and his wife. Vince and
the stockman were out on the run ; they
told us that they had been there about a
month. They were all in tents. They had
to wait until the men had finished at the
Retreat Station to have their buildings
erected. We received very little informa-
tion beyond w hat we. obtained from Spencer.
After leaving Greenmount we kept the river
in sight down to the Lagoons. We camped
there and had a look about; we were told
there was no water to be found past the
Lagoons. The following morning I went
ahead on purpose to find a suitable place
to camp ; and I went as far as I Could
through the mangroves, but as I could not
find any suitable place further down the
river, we camped on the allotment adjoin-
SYDNEY STREET, MACKAY (East), 1892 FIRE.
ing -Wilis* Hotel, between it and the river.
There was very thick scrub on each side
, of our camp, and grass from 6 to yTeet
high all round. The country seemed very
dry; that was on the 10th or 12th of Sep-
tember, 1861. In coming from Rock-
hampton to Mackay we travelled 20 mites
per day, as we thought that the Presto
might be before us, but we had a week
to wait for her. After receiving the cargo,
we commenced to erect the house or store.
It did not take us very long to erect it, as
it was all marked and numbered. On our
arrival here we soon found that the blacks
were pretty close neighbours. We were
only here a few days when a few came to
the camp, and by sitting down and other
signs indicated that they were going to
stay, while we, on the other hand,
endeavoured to persuade them to go away;
but our efforts failed to make them under-
stand that we did not want them to stay.
So while Henderson and my brother were
trying to persuade them to leave, I got the
carbine and fired k a few shots into the scrub
over their heads, when they were so
paralysed with fear that they scarcely knew
how to get away quick enough. I had an
idea that the scrub concealed a lot more
of them, and such I soon proved to be the
case, for, after getting rid of the blacks
round the camp, I went to the river as
quickly as I could, and saw them getting
over the river as fast as they could, all
armed with spears and other fighting im-
plements. But we did not molest them in
their retreat, and although we saw them
frequently fishing in the river, they did not
attempt to come to our camp. We were
kept pretty busy preparing to receive wool
and station supplies. After Captain Till
returned to Rockhampton, he got charge
of a small steamer named the Murray, and
commenced regular trading. Captain
Mc.Ewan also began to call in with the
Benbolt. He carried the mail. I . think
the first regular mail ran up north. On
the first trip of the Murray to Mackay,
several people came from Rockhampton to
have a look at the place, and two of.them
remained and put up a small house and
store. They were trading as Anderson and
Birkelt. They came about the beginning
of November, 1861. Mr. Birkett did not
remain very long, but Mr. Anderson was
storekeeping for some years, eventually
disposing of his business to Kemmis and
Bovev. During the first few months we
had to be very sparing of our water, as
we had to get it from the Lagoons. And
as Messrs. Anderson and Birkett had to
employ us to cart it, they found it very
expensive, as by the time we reached what
is now the township our casks were scarcely
full, for the plain was far away from being
smooth country. The devil-devil was knee
deep in places, and there was not a drop to
be found when the water was required. So
about the middle of December Mr. Anderson
and I arranged to sink a well, or, more
properly naming it, a hole, for we neither
slabbed nor protected it in any way; we
were not certain if we could get fresh
water, but neither of us was afraid of a
little work, so we decided to prove it, and
sank our first well in the back of the allot-
ment now occupied by Wills’ Hotel. We
sank that hole 32 feet before we goCrwaier.
A few days before Christmas we loaded the
first bullock teams with rations to supply
the travelling stock. I cannot remember
how many drays there were, but I think
about five ; I remember that they were in a
great hurry, as most of the camps were
short of rations, and they lost no time in
getting away again. That was the day
before Christmas, 1861. But the teams
got no further than Greenmount for nearly
four months. They did not shift until into
April. It commenced to rain on Christmas
Day, and continued raining until the whole
of the fiat country was a sheet of water
from where Walkerston now is to Green-
mount, and beyond for a considerable dis-
tance, in places up to the saddle girths
and a swim.
About the beginning of 1862 people began
to arrive in good numbers, most of whom
became permanent residents. A few of
them are still residents. When we came to
Mackay we had no thought of it becoming
a township so soon, or of it becoming an
extensive farming district. Mr. Fitzgerald
was the first surveyor, and 1 think he was
the first to bring it into public notice, and
he certainly was the first to break it up
and cultivate a field. Henderson and I
took the first contract for ploughing. We
ploughed between 70 and 80 acres on the
Alexandra plantation, which was afterwards
planted with cotton. Mr. John McLean,
still in Mackay, cross-ploughed a.portion of
the same ground, and it was planted with
maize, which I think was the first field crop
grown in this district. The dates of these
crops I don’t remember, but they were
undoubtedly the first. Sugarcane followed
closely afterwards. The first sugarcane
plants were brought from Java by Mr.
John Spiller. I afterwards saw them grow-
ing in his garden on the north side of the
river, but Mr. Fitzgerald was the first to
introduce cane in any quantity. He got a
good supply of plants from Brisbane, and
had about 5 acres planted adjoining my
private house on the Alexandra. Mr. Fitz-
gerald joined Mr. Davidson about this time.
Alexandra was the first sugar factory in the
district. Mr. Fitzgerald was the most
energetic man here at that time. Mr. John
Tanner Baker was the first Government
official. He was all things combined. The
first doctor was Dr. Belinfanto. The first
Church of Fngland clergyman was the Rev.
Mr. Tanner. The first Roman Catholic
minister that I remember was the Rev.
Lonnergan. The first marriages were Mr.
Andrew Henderson and Mr. Henry Smith,
both of them on the same night, by Bishop
Wyndham, of Brisbane, about the middle
of December, 1863.
PIONEER RIVER AT WOODFORD.
THE EARLY DAYS.—Continued.


J*
6C
*
W
tail
ss
,5407.
All CEILINGS of the House are Lined with
lOumkrllcb Hrt metal.
OVER iooo DESIGNS TO SELECT FROM
WUNDERLICH METAL CEILINGS are Fire-Resisting, Hygienic, Artistic, Light
in weight (therefore saves freight). Send for Free Catalog,
Wunderlich Limited, 363 Queen=st., Brisbane.
Name
Address..
Stocks kept by C. PORTER, MACKAY.
A I
ill
a
vrf
1 ;;', r
S. H.
General Blacksmith and Wheelwright,
VICTORIA STREET, MACKAY.
'4
v>Af ’ - i
"■'TV. 7-" V.'rj“ -Tumi'S
:- •' c** 1 * * - -f 1 t /, *
• -*_ k ; t. 1 J £
.#V.*4
- o*'-. » . •' MM "I
4
11
l‘ SEsi
M
:rr<
Sydney
Oyster
Saloon,
Sydney Street,
MACKAY.
Fresh Fish, Crabs and
Oysters,
Meals at all Hours.
P. COMINO, Proprietor.
"1
0
r-
si
—it.
oiujmk
LW
'lt
m
iS* te **«2^v.4s
4 b*
•"J*
Art*
-il
MACKAY ICE WORKS.
H. W. J. WHARTON, Proprietor.
Ice throughout the Summer Months. Two Deliveries Daily.
Ice despatched to any part of the District at Shortest Notice.
>V!?V
A
I
j S’ „
T .
J 7
■..i/’c.*
JAMES TAIT
(late Petersen & Tail),
CENTRAL STORE,
Sydney Street.
♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦
The Best Selected, Choicest
and Most Beautiful Range of
Crockery, Glassware, Enamel-
ware, and Household Ironmon-
gery, Groceries and Produce.
,
AiTs-C.Mi HOTEt| a ""* aULE - V .a£S ..
111!' r *
\\m\
i! ;* *■
m
WSKi-. !^S
..nJELS=
'Mjk&
HENRY L. BLACK
Auctioneer,
Stock, Station and General
Commission Agent. '
SECRETARY, MACKAY TURF CLUB,
RAILWAY HOTEL,
Opposite Railway Station* The House of Comfort and Pleasure*
Mr, and Mrs, R, H, NOBLE, formerly of Walkerston, extend a warm Invitation
to all Friends to pay them a visit, Every Convenience, TELEPHONE 247,
Has for sale a large number of Farms, Leasehold and
Freehold.
TARIFF, 5/- per Day; or 25/- per week.
Letters Promptly attended to
AUCTION SALES Conducted in Any Part of the District.


Forty Years Ago and After.
JOHN ROLLESTON.
Although I cannot claim to be amongst
the first arrivals here, as there are still
living in Mackay several who can give
me points on that score, still Mackay and
district has changed so much these last 40
years that some incidents in my experi-
r*ce might be interesting. Although my
arrival in Mackay dates from 17th June,
1872, my interest therein dates three years
further back, and it came about in this
wise: Early one morning in the end of
November, 1569, I was saddling up my
horses on Grosvenor Downs Station, to
take rations out to shepherds on the run
(Grosvenor Downs was a sheep station »n
those days), when the late Mr. A. Florence,
who, with his family, was residing on the
station, came along in a great hurry and
wanted to know if I cared to invest fn
town property, as he had two allotments
in Mackay that he wanted to sell. The
fact was, Mr. Florence twelve months pre-
viously had visited Mackay, and at a
Government land sale had invested largely.
He not only purchased Inverurie, but
bought two allotments also. About this
time Mackay had been proclaimed a muni-
cipality, property had been valued for the
purpose of rating, and rate notices had been
posted, so Mr. Florence wanted to sell —
which, by the way, I found out since was
very good business. I objected to have
anything to do with Mackay. I had heard
when on Peak Downs, from carriers and
others, that it rained nine months of the
year, that it was situated in a swamp, that
in the wet season the place was infested
with mosquitoes, sand flies, and bull frogs,
and that it was no place for a white man.
Mr. Florence was very anxious to sell,
and in the end I promised to consider the
matter and let him know later on. During
next day, in conversation with the station
overseer, I happened to mention the matter
to him, with the result that he strongly
urged me to buy, and he would take one
of the allotments, telling me that Mackay
was not half a bad place. To make a
long story short, we closed with Florence,
paid cash down, and so became the pro-
prietors of allotments Nos. 5 and 6 of
Section 25. Poor old Reeves, he is dead
many years ago. Many a laugh and joke
we had over this Mackay property of ours.
The fun of it was, we did not know where
Ihe allotments were situated; they might
have been down at the Salt-water Lagoons,
for all we knew. To decide who would
have Nos. 5 and 6, we cast lots, and 1
drew No. 6, the corner which I have held
ever since, and where I now reside. I
had no intention of coming to Mackay
at that time, but two years later an
incident occurred that changed my views.
One morning the mailman brought a
telegram to the manager, the purport being
(hat he was to send a buggy and pair
immediately to Mackay to meet a gentle-
man named Furlong, \yho was then on his
way to inspect the station property, with
the view of purchasing. The station was
then the property of the City Bank, Sydney,
and had been on the market for some
time. The manager came to me and ex-
plained the situation, and added that I
was the only one he could trust to go to
Mackay. As I could not well get out of
it, I consented. The next question was
the horses. There were two very fine
buggy horses on the station, but they had
not been in harness for over two years,
and, being in great condition, would re-
quire careful handling. I got the horses
in, got the harness right, and the buggy,
which was a fine strong one, in travelling
condition. I in short time had the horses
yoked, with the object of taking the
“stuffing” out of them. In company with
Frank O’Reilly, our now respected towns-
man, who was then an employee on the
station, we took a round out of them,
and found they were all right. Next
morning early I made a start for Mackay,
arriving in the forenoon of the third day,
safe and sound, although the road from
Nebo and over the range was a perfect
terror.
Mackay, as it appeared to me then, was
not very inspiring. There were no streets
formed ; all wheel traffic from the country
went by North street. There was a bridle
track up Victoria street, which horsemen
used as a near cut to the Nebo road.
Albert street and all beyond were out in
the “never never.” The Corporation had
started to do a little road-making at the
corner close to where the Custom-house
now stands. However, I had not much
time to look around, having to start on
the return journey next day. I decided
that, on my return a month afterward, J
would spend a week in Mackay, which I
did, and it was during that week that I
decided to make my home here. I remem-
ber well spending half a day to find my
allotment. Having first gone to the
Municipal Chambers to consult the town
map and having a chat with Mr. M. J.
Fay, who was then Town Clerk, I set out
to find my property. In the absence of
streets, it was no easy task, for between
“devil devil” and long grass the place was
a caution. At last I found the surveyor’s
pegs, and made sure that I was on my
own. Somehow, for all its surroundings,
I took to the place, and shortly afterwards
I let a contract to Messrs. Armstrong and
Voysey to build me a cottage, which is
still standing, being now occupied by Mr.
W. Adrain, and was one of the first build-
ings in Albert street. The station having
changed hands, I, with my wife and family,
shifted there, arriving on the 17th June,
1872. When I came down, the sugar in-
dustry had outgrown the experimental
stage, and mills, such as they were in
those days, were going up all around.
Besides Alexandra and Meadowlands, which
were the first in the district, mills had
gone up, "or were in course of erection,
at the following places:. Pleystowe
(Messrs. Hewitt and Romilly), Branscombe
(Messrs. Martin and Long), Nebia (Fitz-
simmons Bros.), Dumblcton (Messrs. Lloyd
and Walker), Pioneer (John Spiller), Foul-
den (Amherst and Polklington). Donaldson
Bros, had also erected a small plant at
Cassada, which, by the way, turned out
some of the best-grained sugar that I have
ever seen. All the mills turned out market-
able sugar ; there was no refining in those
days, and some of them, especially Foul-
den, turned out white sugar equal to the
C.S.R. Company of to-day.
The district was the scene of great
activity then, and for two or three years
afterwards. This was not to last long,
however, for two years later the rust in
the cane, which rendered the crop almost
valueless, threatened to extinguish the
whole of the industry. Certainly it ruined
many of those newly starting, especially
as they had mortgaged their estates In
order to erect machinery; they were com-
pletely ruined. However, a few of the
plucky ones held on, and imported at great
cost rust-resisting varieties of cane, to
replace the old Bourbon variety that had
been generally planted all over the district,
but which was almost entirely wiped out
by the ravages of the rust. The indomit-
able pluck and energy of. the planters
during that crisis saved the industry for
After getting my family settled in
Mackay, I looked round for something to
do, and hearing that John Spiller, of
Pioneer, wanted a field overseer, I applied
for and got the job, and found myself
in charge of 100 naked savages from every
island in the Pacific. Mr. Spiller warned
me that it required the utmost tact fo
manage them, as several oveftseers ran
away from the job. There is ode incident
worth relating. One day John,-having
partaken rather freely of his favourite
beverage, undertook to show the cutters
a thing or two in cane cutting. Now,
these same cutters, 12 in number, were as
fine a specimen of the savage race as pos-
sibly could be found anywhere, strongly
resented massa’s interference. They let
such a yell ns only kanakas could fire off
and went for Spiller, who just managed to
get .on his horse ana clear. My boys took
up the chorus, and cleared also at full
speed, leaving only an old crawler or two
behind. Spiller just managed to get to
his house and safety ; otherwise I am sure
they would have killed him. They
quietened down in an hour or two, and
my boys came back to their work as if
nothing had happened.
1 stayed with Mr. Spiller to the end of
the crushing, and, not caring for the job,
I left, and that was the last time that I
worked for a boss.
JOHN ROLLESTON.
The Black Labour Trade.
BY PILOT WILLIAMSON.
PILOT WILLIAMSON.
Oldest Officer in Marine Department,
Queensland. Joined service, 1869.
When I took charge of this port in
April, 1880, only two labour vessels were
off and from Mackay, namely: the Mis-
tress (Captain Bilgow) and Superior (Cap-
tain Rosegreen ; both vessels., were after-
wards lost at the islands. Then came the
chartered ships Chance (Captain Wig-
moore), Lady Darling (Captain
McDougall), May Queen (Captain Dick-
son, now of the Pilot Service), Janet
Stewart, brig (Captain Famas), Storm
Bird (Captain Tonarras), Sybil (Captain
Minnez), Young Dick (Captain Rogers),
Archimedes (Captain Rothwell), Fearless
(Captain Newman), Lady Balmore, brig
(Captain White), Emily, brig (Captain
McQuakcr), Cara.-(Captain Satinea), Hec-
tor (Captain Campbell), Nautilus, barque
(Captain Wigmore), (Cap-
tain Rogers), Eliza Mary Heath (Captain
Finley), Hopefull (Captain Vouce),
Sybil 11. (Captain Tonaris), Ariel (Captain
Oliver), Frederick Wilhelmina Juvanta
(Captain Williams), Madeline (Captain
Firman), Jessie Kelly (Captain Willman).
Then came the ships owned in Mackay
—viz., Burough Belle (Paxton and Co.),
Captain Belkin, who was killed at the
islands; Jabbawalk, same company, Cap-
tain Adrian ; Fanny (Rawson Bros.), Cap-
tain Mann ; Labina (Dr. Mcßurney and C. •
R. . Dutaillis), Isabella (C. W. Kingwell,
W. Lobie, and Captain Davis.
It will be seen by the number of ships
employed in this labour trade to what
extent the sugar industry grew from 1880
to 1890. The trade was then temporarily
stopped, but afterwards reopened and con-
tinued until the Federal Government
abolished it altogether.
It was a very common occurrence for
black labour vessels to return with the flag
half-mast, the voyage ending without
securing a full complement of “boys.” All
the ships carried coloured boats’ crews,
who went ashore with the recruiter and
Government agent, the white crew working
the ships on and off the islands. Very
often the men never regained the ship.
The first massacre from this part was on
the Lavinici. The Government agent (Mr.
Steodman), the recruiter, and the
boat’s crew were all murdered,
and the ship returned without the usual
freight. Next was Borea Alice, Captain
McKenzie. The captain accompanied the
boats ashore, and the natives came off. after
the boats had gone, all willing to recruit,
apparently, but at a given sign the mur-
derers started and killed four men, includ-
ing the captain’s son. The boats arrived
in time to save the ship, and the mur-
derers were shot like rats. Next was the
Young Dick, Captain Rogers. The ship
was at anchor, and here also the captain
went off with the boats. The natives came
off in large numbers, pretending to. wish
to recruit, and the Government agent was
in the act of signing them on when his
head was opened with a tomahawk, and
the other members of the crew were served
in the same way. The mate got into the
house on deck, and as his hand was out,
shutting the door, his fingers were chopped
off. This ship was saved by one of the
crew at work on the fore-top, who shot
the natives down and drove them off. The
next was the brig Janet Stewart, Captain
Thomas, the Government agent being Mr.
Lockhart. This ship was served the same
as the Young Dick, only when the cap-
tain and his boats returned the Govern-
ment agent and all hands were murdered.
The ship was looted and set on fire. All
the massacres took place at Molatta, in the
Solomon Islands. Many people might re-
member the veteran missionary of the
South Seas, the Rev. Mr. Paton, who came
CAPTAIN BELBIN.
across to this pa***’ some twenty odd years
ago, and lectured in the Presbyterian
Church. Among other remarks he said
the trade was not carried on in a legitimate
way, for he had seen women and young
men taken away by force and kidnapped,
and it was in revenge that all the mas-
sacres took place. This was afterwards
borne out by the history of the famous
Hopeful case, when Captain Shaw, the
Government agent, and recruiter were con-
demned to death for the murder of many


of the kidnapped “boys,” who turned on
the ship’s company rather than leave their
homes, and, as the Rev. Mr. Baton saia,
the innocent suffered for the guilty. Cap-
tain Belbin was one of the most humane
men in the trade, and well liked about the
islands. He was called ashore to hear
some complaints about what other ships
had done. When he left the shore other
natives were in ambush, cross-firing took
place, and a bullet went through his heart.
Another bullet went through the helmet and
grazed the scalp of Government agent
.McPherson. -This helmet, I believe, is now
in the Museum in Brisbane—at least, he
told me he would put it there.
Coming back to the ships in Mackay,
they were so numerous that there was
no wharf accommodation for them ; neither
did they require such, for their human
freight walked ashore on a plank. The
vessels were moored along the scrub mud
bank, now the Harbour Board landing.
The port never wanted two and three,
p.nd sometimes more, of these vessels in
port at one lime ; for it was no easy mattci
getting them to sea. The captain would
just put in an application for a pilot to
take the ship to the outer anchorage at
such a time and tide. Often, when I went
aboard, 1 only found the mate and return
kanakas there ; the crew were ashore, and
only for my employing the pilot boat’s
crew, the ships would never have got
some degree of pleasure in taking ships
to sea in this way. None of the captains
ever accompanied their ships from port, but
remained behind to transact business, and
went off to their ships two or three days
later, and when all was well set sail anc
away. But 1 must state that a finer set
of sailor men could not be found than
those who sailed in those ships. I have
proved that when working the ships into
port on their arrival.
H aving been connected with the labour
trade almost from its infancy till its death,
I have only touched the fringe of what
could be said; and, speaking personally,
I have no hesitation in saving it was a
loose and demoralising trade, and I have
never known luck or prosperity to follow
the money made at it ; I think it was
better for all when it was abolished. After
the trade was reopened the second time,
tilings were greatly altered and improved
under stricter supervision.
In 1884 the barquentine Keith arrived
at Mackay with a full ship of “boys” from
New Ireland. Those boys were all kid-
napped, and knew nothing about any agree-
ment. When tlie ship anchored off the
island, they came off in canoes in large
numbers, and were taken on board, well
treated, taken down into the hold, given
jewsharp reeds and other trinkets. When
they had got enough on board, the anchor
KANAKA SCHOONER, “The Mystery,” under jury rig. Captain Kilgour
KANAKAS AT PLEYSTOWE.
away at the time stated. When the ship
would be under way, and all the work
done, those men would often take passage
by the s.s. Yaralla, s.s. Tinonee, or s.s.
Taldora, vessels which were regular
traders from Brisbane; and when they
came to their own ships in the river, pass-
ing out, would jump overboard. Then
it was lower boats and pick them up, most
of them having one or more bottles of
rum in their shirts, and they were neither
drunk nor sober, asleep or awake. I often
thought to abide by my regulations not
to take ships to sea unless properly manned
and equipped ; but then those ships were not
HABANA PLANTATION, HOSPITAL FOR KANAKAS.
going to sea —-only to the outer anchorage ;
but they had to be got there, as this was
a tidal port. But if I did, the powers
behind the throne* would have been so
strong that 1 would soon have found some-
thing else to do than at, °s pilot. There
were two masters in the trade who put an
end to this sort of work in sailing days—
Captain McQuaker of the brig Emily, and
Captain Williams of the Burough Bell
and Lavinia. They acquainted the in-
spector of police, and paid for one to patrol
the vicinity of the ship, and when the crew
went to town they had to go on board
again, or go to the lock-up. All the ex-
cuses of going for soap and matches for
the voyage were of no use, and there was
was lifted and sail made for Mackay. The
“boys” went to the Palms plantation, bm
nothing could be done with them ; tney
left one night in a body and made for the
water, arrived at the Pilot Station, where
they camped, to the terror of all families
on the station, because they must get food
and water. Just about that time the pre-
sent writer had purchased a quantity of
old ship biscuits for pigs’, food. I took
them one sack of those biscuits, and they
went at them like wolves. I also took them
two buckets of water, which they emptied
like cattle. I then reported the matter to
Mr. Alexander McDonald, who was Immi-
gration Agent at the time, who sent word
out to the plantation. When I gave them
the next sack of bread and some water
they clapped me on the head and wanted
to rub noses, but I was not having any.
The second night twelve of them broke into
the boat-shed, took six oars, but knowing
nothing about rowlocks left them in the
rack. They unmoored the whale-boat, and
with a strong ebb tide out of the river, and
the wind off the land, they started for their
island home without food or water. Next
morning we found our boat gone, but the
light-keeper on Flat Top Island telegraphed
that the pilot boat full of kanakas was
drifting about in a helpless condition some
six miles east of Flat Top. I started out
wilh the Government launch, and brought
them home again. They were kept in safe
keeping. Some days afterwards- the
planters and their overseers came on horse-
back to take them away, but when the
“boys” saw them they took to the water
like fish, only, however, to be rounded up
like sheep and taken away, to the relief
ol all on the station. Two of them got
away. All those “boys” were sent back
to their home at the Government expense,
but the two above mentioned gave the
police and the Marine Department much
trouble and anxiety for months before they
were captured. They lived in the vicinity
of the Pilot Station until all the fowls were
gone from the fowl-houses, but they could
never be seen. When all food was gone,
they took to the bush. The first depra-
dation was reported from Mount Bassett
and the North side, where they were rob-
bing all the settlers about that quarter.
1 took Constable Mcßryde and two others,
with the Government launch, at night,
landed them at Slade Point, and awaited
their return. Next day they found their
camp, with a rice bag, but not the rice, so
returned home. The next heard of them
was down Plane Creek way and Sarina
Inlet. After much trouble they were cap-
tured there. A Chinaman and white
woman were settlers there, and they lost a
KANAKAS AT PIONEER PLANTATION.
little boy; no trace of him could ever be
found, except his hat near the kanakas’
camp. This being reported, I started off
with the Government launch, accompanied
by Acting Health Officer Dr. Cutfield, Ser-
geant Brannelley and two other constables,
the mother of the boy, and one of the
prisoners, and landed 8 em all at the place
in Sarina Inlet, to investigate the matter.
The mother of the boy identified the hat,
and was in great grief, but no interpreter
could be found, and nothing could be got
out of the kanaka. It was supposed that
he had killed the boy and eaten him. This
kanaka was a powerful man and was in
the pink of condition, shining like
mahogany. They were also sent home at
the Government expense, and no more
recruiting was allowed from New Ireland.
The black labour traffic was re-
sponsible for many tragedies as well
as accidents. Whether the disap
pearance of the labour schooner
“ Petrol” was due to accident or tra-
gedy will never be known. She left
Mackay about 1870 for the Islands,
to recruit labotr*, and was never again
heard of. Amongst those on board
were George Long, a brother of E.
M. Long, and part owner of the ves-
sel. Harry Janies, a cousin of the
Rawsons ; George Ramsey, as Go-
vernment Agent ; and Jack Firebrace,
one of the most daring spirits of that
lively period.
Sandwich Islanders were employed
at the Alexandra Mill, and not having
seen a sugar mil), or any other kind
of mill before, it took a deal of per-
suasion to get them to venture near
the works. On one occasion Mr.
Davidson succeeded in getting a num-
ber of the islanders to set the fly
wheel in motion. One of them, how-
ever, forgot to release his hold of
the wheel, with the result that he
was carried around by it. Luckily,
he escaped with a few abrasions. The
islanders could not appreciate the
new surroundings for some time, and
on the whistle being blown for the
first time they left the mill and field
and ran pell mell into the scrub for
safety. The music of the mill whistle
did not have sufficient charm to
soothe their savage breasts. Even-
tually they became accustomed to the
whistle, and used to delight in blow-
ing it every time they passed, to the
annoyance of all hands.
THE BLACK LABOUR TRADE.—Continued.


"We are Queensland Agents for
MARSHALL &, Sons, England, Oil
Tractors and Portable Engines.
ALLAN Oil Eng'ines.
WORTHINGTON Steam Pumps.
PULSOMETER Centrifugal Pumps.
. SAGARS Woodworking' Machines.
ftYNOCH Suction Gas Engines.
Q. M. C
MAR HALL STEAM COMPOUND TRACTION.
Carry large StocKs and Specialise in
MILL SUPPLIES ? nd
ENGINEERS’ REQUISITES.
SAWMILLERS should /Inquire about
the ADAMS Patent Saw Bench,
which is the fastest cutting bench
on the Market,
We also carry Large StocKs of the
Famous Benicia . DISC PLOWS
and CULTIVATORS.
Queensland Machinery Company,
’ LIMITED,
Machinery Merchants and Power Plant Specialists, 142-156 ALBERT STREET, BRISBANE
Order from
J.KITCHENff SONS Ltd.
your requirements in
LUBRICATING OILS, GREASES,
HAIR and LEATHER BELTING, etc.
Best Quality at Lowest Prices.
Address:
EAGLE ST., BRISBANE.
H. Bolton & 00.
BREWERS
City Beer in Bulk and Bottle
The Best in the Market.
See that You Get It. ...
Mackay Parliamentary History.
E. B. SWAYNE, M.L.A.
Under an Order in Council of date
June, 1859, the Governor of New
South Wales (then Sir William Deni-
son) was authorised by proclamation
to fix the number of members of
which the Legislative Assembly of
Queensland should be composed, and
to divide the Colony into convenient
electoral districts, etc. Accordingly,
under the provisions of Clause 6, of
the Order in Council, a proclamation
was issued on Saturd_ay, 31st Decem-
ber, 1859, by Sir William Denison,
dividing the Colony into the following
districts, to be represented by the
number of members set opposite their
names :
Town of Brisbane, 3 ; District of
West Moreton, 3 ; District of Leich-
hardt, 2. Town of South Brisbane,
I ; District- of Western Downs. 2.
Hamlet of Fortitude Valley, 1 ; Dis-
trict of Eastern Downs, 1. Town of
Ipswich, 3 ; District of Northern
Downs, 1. Town of Drayton and Too-
woomba, 1 ; District of Maranoa, 1.
Town of Warwick, 1 ; District of
Burnett, 2. District of East More-
ton, 2 ; District of Port Curtis, I.
District of Wide Bay, 1.
As the District of Leichhardt was
bounded on the north by the nor-
thern watershed of the River Burde-
kin, and by a boundary to be deter-
mined, to meet the sea about the
northern extremity of Halifax Bay,
it would appear as if the present dis-
trict of Mackay was included in the
first electoral district of Leichhardt.
The first Queensland Parliament was
opened on May 29th, iB6O, with the
Herbert Ministry. From its opening
until 1863 the number of members of
the Legislative Assembly was 26 ;
until 1873, 32 ; until 1875, 42 ; when
by the creation of the Cook elec-
torate it was increased to 43. In
1879 the number was increased to 53
members ; in 1886 to 59 members ;
1887, to 72. Mesrs. Herbert George
Wyndham and Charles James Royds
were the members for Leichhardt,
and therefore represented Mackay in
Queensland’s first Parliament. In the
third Parliament, the Leichhardt
representatives were Messrs. • Royds
and Gordon Sandeman. In the third
Parliament, opened August 6th, 1867,
the same two represented Leich-
hardt, but as in the preceding Par-
liament, the new electorate of Ken-
nedy was formed. Mackay was
included in it, and if so, Thomas
Henry Fitzgerald was. as the new
electorate’s representative member
for Mackay. In the fourth Parlia-
ment, opened November 17th, 1868,
Mr. Fitzgerald was selected, and his
name appears in the list of members
for the first session. In the list for
the second, Kennedy appears with-
out the name of any representative
attached to it. For the third session,
John Bright’s name is opposite it.
In the list of members of the first ,
session for the fifth Parliament,
opened November 15th, 1870, Edward
O'Donnell McDevitt appeared as the
member for the Kennedy, and also
for the second. He was selected for
the sixth Parliament, which opened
November 7th, 1871, and. sat in its
past second and third. By the Elec-
toral District’s Act of 1872, the new
electorate of Bowen was amongst the
additions they made, and as it com-
menced at Cape Palmerston on the
south, extending to Fletcher’s Awl
on the boundaries of the Peak Downs
on the west of the Burdekin River
on the north, it included the town
and district of Mackay. Under this
Act we find for the first session of
the seventh Parliament, opening 6th
January, 1874, the name of Thomas
Henry Fitzgerald, as member for
Bowen, as also for its second. In
its third session the name of Francis
Tyssen Amherst (one of our old
planters,-owner of Foulden Mill, part
of what is now Farleigh and Am-
herst’s paddock on the Plane Creek
Road, just across Alligator Creek), is
listed as Bowen’s representative. In
- its fourth session the name of Henry
Rogers Beos appears for Bowen,
Amherst having resigned during the
previous recess. In the list for the
fifth, the same name again appears.
It was not until the passage of the
Electoral District Act of 1878, that
Mackay was given a member to it-
self, the representative returned being
Francis Tyssen Amherst. Pie was
succeeded in 1881 by Maurice Hume
Black, who represented Mackay as a
single electorate. It was om the oc-
casion of Beor’s or one of the.pre
vious Bowen elections, that Mr. E.
M. Long (late of Habana and Pley-
stowe) contested the seat, and as he
got a good majority this (Mackay)
end of the electorate, he was consi-
dered returned and carried shoulder
high and was acclaimed the victor, and
it was not for some days, during
which continual toasting to the win
of the Mackay man was indulged in,
that anything to the contrary was
known, when the total came through
from Bowen, dashing Mackay's be-
lief in the success of their man to
the ground. This must have been
before the erection of the telegraph
line. There was no road along the
coast to Bowen, and the mail and all
the overland travellers followed the
roundabout road starting along the
Nebo Road, leaving it about five
miles the Mackay side of that town-
ship, passing Burrembring, then
known as the black police barracks,
following up Cooper’s Creek a little
to the west of where Mount Britain
was subsequently discovered, then
from the head of that crossing the
divide between the Fitzroy and Bur-
dekin watersheds came on to the head
of X Creek, running that down to
its junction with the Hazelwood
Creek, where the two form the Little
Bowen River ; thence down that
through Blenheim Station to Emu
Plains, just above which the Little
Bowen and Broken rivers (the latter
coming down from Eungella) junc-
tion ; making the . Bowen River
(which runs nowhere near the town
of the name), then after following
that river a few miles, turning ofif to
the last across the coastal range, and
thence to the town of Bowen, a
roundabout route of what must , have
been over 200 miles. Bowen, in those
days, was the centre for. all Govern-'
ment business in the north. Under
the Electoral District Act of 1887,
Mackay was allotted two members.
Maurice Hume Black and David Hay
Dalrymple served from 1887 to 1892, '
James Vincent Chataway and David
Play Dalrymple served from 1893 to
1900. Mr. Chataway was succeeded
by Walter Trueman Paget in 1901,
and Messrs. Dalrymple and Paget
served from 1901 to 1904. Mr. Dal-
rymple was succeeded in 1904 by
Albert Willman Fudge. Messrs.
Fudge and Paget served from 1904
to 1907. Messrs. Paget and Edward
Bowdich Swayne from 1907 to 1912.
The electorate was again divided into
two—Mackay and Sarina. Mr. Paget
was elected for Mackay and Mr.
Swayne for Sarina.
Mackay has produced numerous
Ministers of the Crown. Maurice
Hume Black was Secretary for Pub-
lic Lands in the Mcllwraith Ministry
from 13th June, 1888, to November
30th, 1888 ; also in the Morehead
Ministry as Secretary for Public
Lands from 13th June, 1888, to 12th
W. T. PAGET, M.L.A.
August, 1890. David Hay Dalrymple
was in the Nelson Ministry as Sec-
retary for Public Instruction and Sec-
retary for Public Works, from 6th
May, 1896, to 13th April, 1898 ; also
in T. J. Byrnes's Ministry as Secre-
tary for Public Instruction, from
27th April, 1898, to Ist October, 1898.
James Vincent Chataway was also in
this Ministry as Secretary for Agri-
culture from 13th April, 1898, to Ist
October, 1898. In the Dickson
Ministry, the two members for Mac-
kay, Messrs. Dalrymple- aid' Chatd-
way, were in office together—the for-
mer as Secretary for Public Instruc-
tion and Secretary for Public Lands-,
from Ist October, 1898, to Ist Decem-
ber, 1899, and the latter as Secretary
for Agriculture and Secretary for
Public Lands from Ist October, 1898,
to 28th March, 1899. In the Philp
Ministry, the two members for Mac-
kay also had portfolios—Mr. Dalrym-
ple as Secretary for Aigriculture fron.
Ist May, 1901, to August 12th, 1902,
and as Secretary for Agriculture and
Secretary for Public Instruction from
12th August, 1902, to 17th Septem-
ber. 1903. Mr. Chataway was Secre-
tary for Agriculture from 7th De-
cember, 1899, to 12th April, 1901, on
which date he died. In the second
Kidston Ministry, Walter Trueman
Paget was Secretary for Railways
and Secretary for Agriculture from
29th October, 1908. In the Denham
Ministry Mr. Paget assumed office
as Sccreary for Agriculture and Sec-
retary for Railways, and subsequently
as Secretary for Railways only. ■ He
is still in office as Secretary for Rail-
ways in tlie Denham Government.


66 IVEAKS JBJ3LC2JBE ACRE PAY ”
by increasing its production.
This is easily done by using
SHIRLEY’S
COMPLETE
CANE FERTILISERS
which have been in general use all over Queensland for years
and GIVEN HIGHLY - PROFITABLE RESULTS in all Districts.
They are made of Shirley’s Australian Phosphate Sulphate of Ammonia and Sulphate
of Potash. Inquiries Invited. Pamphlets Posted Free.
Oeo. SKirley Ltd., 279 George St, Sydney,
THE Fertiliser Experts of Australia.
iiiiiiiniirMnniiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiirririiiiiii»iiiniirrniiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiin»iiiiMriuiiiiiirtrriMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinniiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinniiiriiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMirriiniiiiiiiMniniiiiiinrriiiiiiiiintMniiiiininiiiiiiiin!iniiiiiii»iiiiHii»»»»ni!iiiiiniiiiinnniiiirmniiiinnmiiiini«»
i
mm
K 1
t-1.- f
. ,r Tag
i
■ e
t V:
■
S3* &
V* v, /*"T
,1. •
?
.? - •:
\ i
R NIELSEN, Pas ooou,
MARIAN.
SPECIALIST IN WEDDING CAKES, SOCIALS, BALLS, and PARTIES
CATERED FOR AT SHORTEST NOTICE. CHARGES MODERATE.
SUPPORT THE MAN LIVING IN YOUR MIDST.
.V
■rt.
m
O. J. ANDERSEN,
Blacksmith and Wheelwright.
MARIAM.
Manufacturer of Andersen’s Patent Manure Distributor (Patent No.
18121). A proved success. Many in use throughout Mackay and Nor-
thern Districts.
' * ~ r ‘ *'■ ■ Tf
5
•'-S’.* *»■
..........
m
a
F. E. POULSON,
General Store Keeper and BaKer,
MARIAN
♦ *
#
*
mMMI
• *
jrrd'iz
I JTTO’ •'Hv>?
B!
EDWARDS Ca SONS,
General Store Keepers, Livery and Bait Stables,
M ARIA N. — -


The Sugar Mills of Mackay
MARIAN MILL.
MARIAN MILL.
New Bridge on the Mount Jukes Tramline, spanning Neilson’s Creek.
The Bridge is 176 feet in length, and the top of the structure is 33 feet above the water.
MADAME MELBA.
MANAGER’S RESIDENCE, MARIAN MILL.
This picturesque Cottage is of peculiar interest, as it
was the home of Madame Melba when she was first
married. It is locally known as the “ Nightingale’s Nest.”
The Marian Mill is a farmers’ co-
operative factory, situated at Marian,
!7 miles from Mackay, along the
railway line. Nearly 200 suppliers
are registered for bounty, their total
area exceeding 21,825 acres. The
plant is thoroughly up-to-date, and
capable of turning out 6000 tons ,of
sugar in a season. The company has
an extensive tramline service, and a
new line is being constructed to the
Mount Jukes sugar lands. Quite a
large township has sprung up in the
vicinity of the mill, and a large State
School has been provided for the
rising generation. The township has
grown to such importance, that a
fine railway station has just been
erected there. Other improvements
and innovations for the advancement
of the district are being pushed ener-
getically forward by the Marian Pro-
gress Association. :
MARIAN MILL DIRECTORS.
MARIAN MILL OFFICIALS.


The relation which the milling of sugar
cane bears to the other branches of the
sugar industry is of sufficient importance
to justify a reference at some length to the
history of the work in the mills during
the last half-century. In writing an article
for inclusion in a Jubilee number, such as
that in which this appears, there is no inten-
tion to refer minutely to the hundred and
one devices and systems which are to be
found in most modern factories, as the
sugar-mill engineers and manufacturers of
machinery know all about these, and \t
is to those who are not conversant with
the methods by which sugar is, and has
been made, that this is addressed. The
importance of reaching, as nearly as pos-
sible, a complete extraction of the juice of
the cane will be patent to everyone who
remembers that it is obviously useless to
grow a splendid crop of cane and bring it
to the mill if the latter is not able to
extract the juice which has taken so many
months to grow and mature. It would be
reasonable to assume that this fact was
fully understood in the early days of the
industry in Queensland, but the conditions
then existing were so entirely differentTrom
those of the present as to account for the
rough-and-ready methods which were prac-
tised in our factories fifty- years ago, and
while we may laugh at the crude character
of the crushings of those earlier times it is
probable that when another half-century
shall have passed the sugar manufacturers
of that time will smile, perhaps a little
contemptuously, at what the people at
present consider the most efficient processes
of manufacture.
Passing over the time when there were
several horse and cattle-driven mills with
their vertical rollers in use in Queensland,
and passing on to the period of the steam-
driven machinery, which was introduced in
the sixties of the last century, it is on re-
cord that as many- as sixteen to eighteen
tons of cane were not infrequently used to
produce a ton of sugar, and the cane was
The Milling of Cane.
good cane, while the sugar was not, to use
a slang term, by any means “too good.”
The three-roller mill was then in use, and
the juice, after clarification with lime, was
sent along to the battery, which was a
series of large copper or iron pots set over
a large Hue, fired from one end, directly
under what was called the Tache. Tnis
battery, sometimes called the “ copper
CANE ON T. WHITCOMB’S FARM, SELWYN.
wall, ” \vas attended by a number of work-
men, each armed with long-handled skim-
-mers, with which the scum was taken off
each pot and conveyed to a gutter, whence
it was usually allowed to run away into
the drains. When the juice in the Tache
was considered sufficiently concentrated to
be called “syrup,” it was hoisted out by
more or less convenient methods and
poured into subsiders, and then the juice
was ladled from number 1 pot into the
Tache, from number 2 to number 1, and
so on until, the last pot being nearly
empty, fresh juice was run down from the
clarifiers, and the process of boiling con-
tinued. ' From the subsiders the syrup then
gravitated to the “ Wetzell ” pan, “ Hour’’
pan, • or other abominable;form of concen-
trator. These pans consisted of various
forn'is of the same tiling. , Thev were semi-
circular steam-jacketed troughs, from 3 to
4 feet wide and 6 to 8 feet long, having
a reel of steam piping revolving length-
wise in the syrup, and in these pans, which
were from time to time supplied . with
syrup, the process of boiling to grain was
conducted, the boiling occupying from sis
to 13 hours, according to circumstances.
The sugar being cooked, and then hon-
oured by the name of “ masse cuite,” was
run into iron coolers, where it was allowed
to remain for some days until it set into a
more or less hard mass, generally of the
consistency of stiff mortar. Dug out of
these iron tanks by men, generally standing
knee deep in them, the stuff was bucketed
along to the centrifugals, and dried, this
process occupying from 10 to 20 minutes,
according to the way in which the sugar
was boiled. The resulting product was a
whitey-grey or pale-yellow sugar, wnich
was, however, saleable at from £35 to
per ton, a price which in some measure
compensated for the terrible cost, in waste
and loss, at which it was manufactured.
The molasses from these first sugars was
then reboiled, again and again, subsequent-
ly becoming the “ brown,” and sometimes
“ black,” sugar, which is happily now only
a memory of the past. Such briefly was
the method of the early days, when a mill
crushing 500 tons in a season was con-
sidered to be a big affair.
In the seventies improved systems began
to be introduced, and vacuum pans came
into use in the mills to supplant the open
pans. As many of my readers may not
know exactly what a vacuum pan is, it may
be briefly described as a large metal vessel,
heated inside by means of steam cSils, and
fitted with powerful pumps which exhaust
the air. When the pan is partly filled with
liquor the steam is turned on, and, the air
being kept exhausted by the pumps, the
liquor boils and rapidly evaporates at a
temperature far below the open-air boiling
point, and it is free from any danger of
burning. Among the innovations of this
period in Mackay was the installation at
Foulden, then owned by Messrs. Amhurst
and Pocklington, of the loaf sugar-making
PLEWSTOWE
The Pleystowe Sugar Plantation
started operations about the end of
the year 1869, or early in 1870, when
Messrs. Hewitt and Co. (Alfred
Hewitt and Charles Romilly) pur-
chased the land upon which the mill
at present stands, together with
several adacent portions from a Mr.
Holmes, a surveyor and road engi-
neer, who had previously selected
the land, and who had been growing-
cotton and. tobacco to a limited ex-
tent, before cane was introduced into
the Mackay district. During 1870-
1871, Messrs. Hewitt and Co. were
busily engaged forming the planta-
tion and erecting the machinery of
a small sugar mill. They secured the
services of the late Mr. Hugh
McCready, who had just then arrived
from the West Indies, and in' 1872
PLEWSTOWE MILL BRIDGE, PIONEER RIVER.
the first sugar manufactured at Pley-
stowe was sent into town by horse
teams for shipment to Brisbane.
In the following year Messrs.
Hewitt and Co. erected a distillery
in connection with the mill, and for
some years they manufactured a
superior quality of spirit, “ Pleystowe
Rum ” being well and favourably
known throughout the district.
Messrs. Hewitt and Co. continued
operations successfully until the year
1884, when they sold out to some
Melbourne investors, who formed a
company called “ The Pleystowe
Sugar Company, Ltd.” The late Mr.
W. Steedman was appointed mana-
ger. In the following year extensive
alterations were made of the old and
smaller set, thus making a double
crushing plant of the mill. The mill
continued crushing until about 1888,
when it closed down, and for four
years sent all its cane to the -Race-
course Mill, Mr. Steadman stiJl re-
maining in charge. ' '
In 1872, the property was purchased
by the “ Pleystowe Land Syndicate,
Ltd.” Shortly afterwards “ The Pley-
stowe Central Mill Co., Ltd.,” was
formed for the purpose of extending
operations by taking advantage of
the terms provided by the Sugar
Works Guarantee Act of 1893. Under
the new regime, Mr. Steedman re-
mained in charge until early in 1903,
the late Mr. E. M. Long being the
managing director. Mr. Steedman
left the Mackay district the same
year to reside in Brisbane.
Owing to a series of bad seasons
and consequent short supplies of
cane available for the mill, it was
found impossible to mett the interest
and redemption payments punctually
in terms of the Sugar Works Guar-
antee Act, and in 1903 the Govern-
ment took possession of the property
and worked the mill under the direc-
tion of Dr. Maxwell, until July, 1905,
with Mr. W. Marshall as manager,
when fresh financial arrangements
were made, and the property handed
back to the “ Pleystowe Central Mill
Company, Ltd.,” which company is at
present directing operations. Mr. J.
R. Paddle was appointed manager
and managing director, a position he
held until April, 1909, when Mr. JVC.'
Penny took over the same position
as occupied by Mr. Paddle, and is
still in charge.
Since the last-mentioned date, the
company has been able to meet all
PLEYSTOWE MILL.
DIRECTORS & OFFICIALS, PLEYSTOWE MILL.
From left to right (standing).—W. Robertson, R. Pitman, E. T. Thatcher (Cane Inspector).
Bottom Row (sitting)—J. S. Isbester (Engineer), W. Marshall, A, Fadden (Clerk), A. A. Cook
a general meeting of shareholders to
offer the property to the farmers at
its capital value of £60,000, such
offer to remain open until December
31st, 1912.
The Directors of the Company are
—Messrs. A. A. Cook (Chairman),
J. C. Penny (Managing Director),
W. Robertson, W. Marshall, and R.
Pittmann, with P. P. Smith, Secre-
tary ; the officers being, Messrs. J.
C. Penny (Manager), P. P. Smith
(Secretary); J. S. Isbister (Chief
Engineer), and E. T. Thatchcher
(Cane Inspector).
liabilities, as well as keep the mill
and tramline in an efficient state of
repair, and by adding labour-saving
appliances in all branches, keep every-
thing up-to-date for present day re-
quirements. The present capacity of
the mill is 80,000 tons of cane in a
six months’, season.
Early in' the present year the far-
mer shareholders of the company
asked the directors if they would
consider the selling of the property
to a Farmers’ Co-operative Company,
and at what price ? Eventually, in
May last a resolution was carried at


process by which the masse cuite, after
being boiled to grain in the vacuum pan,
was sent down to moulds of the loaf sugar
shape, which, standing on their small open
ends with a plug of porous material, -not
uncommonly cotton waste, were filled to
the top with masse cuite, over which a
layer of prepared clav was placed. This
was kept moist with water, which, perco-
lating ft rough the mass below, carried
with it the molasses and left the sugar
clean and fairly while. This was sold as
clayed or white sugar, but the process was
abandoned for a time, presumably because
it did not pay. Various apparatus were
from time to time introduced for the pur-
pose of hastening the concentration of the
juice and thus avoiding its discoloration,
while the process of purification was being
steadily improved, every department in the
factory vicing with the other in the effort
to reach more economical methods of manu-
facture, a desideratum rendered necessary
owing to the steady decrease in the price of
sugar all over the world. 'The period be-
tween 1575 arß l 1885 witnessed the intro-
duction of many of the methods which, with
modifications, improvements, and develop-
ments, have remained with us to the pre-
sent time. The multiple effects, which are
simply a number of vacuum pans, three or
more, in succession working one after the
other, utilising the exhaust steam hitherto
wasted, took the place of the cumbersome
and destructive battery, the juice as soon
as it was clean being sent along to the
effets and treated in vaccuo instead of by
open boiling.
from 1885 up to the present day the ten-
dency has been to steadily increase the
crushing power of the mills and the capa-
city of the rest of the plant dealing with
the juice, until we find mills of no less
than 14 rollers are on the market, while
vacuum pans of 25 to 30 tons capacity are
by no means uncommon, all the other ma-
chinery being made to match, enabling the
juice expressed in the morning Jo pass
through every process of manufacture and
find its way into the bags ready to be sen;
to the refinery within 24 hours of the cane
reaching the mill. Among the machinery
connected with the mill that which handles
the cane and presents it to the rollers de-
serves mention. Whereas formerly a large
staff of men was employed in carrying the
cane to the rollers, a job which was of the
most uninteresting and therefore trying
nature, various forms of lifts, clams, car-
riers, and automatic feeders, which seize
the cane and place it exactly where it is
required, are now in general use, the result
being that where 20 to 30 men were former-
ly required at this part of the factory, from
six to eight men amply suffice. The aim of
all those controlling the operations in the
factories has been to increase the quantity
of juice extracted from the cane, to de- .
crease the quantity of cane needed to make
a ton of sugar, and at the same time to
reduce the amount of labour required.
This, as was inevitable, has led to the con-
centration of the milling into a reduced
number of factories, few of which now are
of a less capacity than 5000 tons in a sea-
son. The industrial disturbances which
nowadays threaten every branch of industry
will tend to still further cause the employ-
ment of machinery to do the work hitherto
undertaken by men, thus relieving the wor-
kers of the “ drudgery ” which the Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth so piteously
deplores.
How far the developments of the industry
will continue on the line followed for the
past fifty years it would be impossible to
predict, but that the Mackay district will
continue to maintain the position which it
has always held as one of the first to adopt
every process and method indicating an ad-
vance on previous ones there is no reason
to doubt. Mr. J. C. Penny, when giving
evidence before the Roval Commission, in-
cheated his belief in the possibility of the
work of all the mills in the Mackay district
being profitably undertaken by a couple
of up-to-date factories, and this belief will
find ready endorsement at the hands of ex-
perienced men. That the progress of the
next few years will be far more rapid than
that of the last half-century is highly pro-
bable, and we may predict that the factory
of the not far distant future will be one
where the cane will be ground to the, finest
powder, which will be combined with mo-
lasses and made into briquettes, to be
used either as food for stock or fuel for
the boilers ; where the power required will
be supplied by electricity generated by oil
fuel engines ; where scientific processes will
enable from five to six tons of cane to be
converted into a ton of sugar ; where the
output of a season will be not less than
50,000 tons of sugar, which will probably
be refined on the premises. Such a factory
will be operated entirely by a small staff of
highly-paid expert workmen, and if we may
judge by the manner in which this district
has recently progressed, such a factory
might well be the outcome of a combina-
tion of the Central mills of the district of
-Mackay.
HENRY B. BLACK.
At the first crushing of the Alexandra j
Mill it took five months to turn out no \
tons of sugar, owing to the primitive ap-
pliances used, and there was a tremendous ]
amount of waste. Every cooler was full '
of molasses at the end of the crushing,
and even the lagoon near by was fermented
with it. Having such a surplus of this
by-product, a distillation plant was in-
stalled, which produced rum of excellent
quality. (Rum was also manufactured at
P|eystowe.) The first boiling was so hard
that it had to be dug out with a pick. The
molasses for the second boiling was placed-
in a cistern capable of holding 20,000
gallons, and which was constructed of
cement and brick. Lime water was
sprayed into the centrifugals, but it got
into the 20,000-gallon tank and mixed with
the molasses for the second boiling. It
was allowed J* remain in the tank for a
few weeks, then pumped with a Douglas
No. 5 or 6 back into the pans, to be
re-boiled for the seconds. The lime water
getting into the tank caused fermentation,
consequently when the second boiling took ,
place they could not get any grain in the :
Directors of Sugar Mills and Officers enjoying a holiday
at Louisa Creek, after the crushing.
sugar. There was not sufficient steam to
enable the cane to be crushed and worn,
the ’fugals and boilers simultaneously, con-
sequently crushing took place in the day-
lime, and the boilers and ’fugals were
worked at night. Pleystowe had only one
boiler, Alexandra two, and Meadowlands
three small ones. At Meadowlands the
coolers were wooden structures (nowadays
they are constructed of cast the
kanakas, while working in the hard sugar,
very often drove a hole, with their picks,
through the galvanised iron floor, and thus
a large quantity of sugar was wasted. At
this mill, also, the top roller was often
eased, to allow more cane to be treated than
the mill was capable of dealing with (sugar
was then per ton), with the result
that half the juice was not extracted from
the cane. The cane, after having passed
through the rollers, was placed in the pad-
dock to dry (nowadays it is practically dry
ere it reaches the megass loft, whence it is
consigned to the fires for fuel), and the
horses eagerly devoured it. At Meadow-
lands it took 17 tons of cane to produce
a ton of sugar.
FARLEIGH MILL.
Farleigh Mill, a privately-owned
factory, is situated at Farleigh, on
the north side of the Pioneer River,
some eight or nine miles from Mac-
kay. The factory is an up-to-date
plant, capable of treating 60,000 tons
of cane. The mill was originally
erected by Sir John Bennett Lawes,
who subsequently suspended opera-
tions. After the factory had been
closed a few years, the whole estate,
with the plant and buildings, was
purchased by the present owners—
a Bundaberg Syndicate. With the
opening of the mill again, and its
vast improvement and further exten-
sion of tramlines, the Farleigh dis-
trict and the north side generally has
gone rapidly ahead. Over 140 grow-
ers are registered for bounty, their
area being 11,634 acres. Of late years
the company has confined its opera-
tions' more l particularly to
manufacture, the estate being cut up
into farms and disposed of to indi-
vidual farmers. Should the necessity
arise the company is always prepared
to further increase the capacity of
the mill.
FARLEIGH MILL QUARTERS.
THE MILLING OF CANE.—Continued.


FOR MANY YEARS,
|
1 ' H ” '
i
#*i ._ y|]|
h -. ■■
. = ■ >.
igiSaKaEKa
and, we hope, for many more
to come, we have provided
our friends —the Farmers and
Railway Constructors of the
Mackay District —with nearly
all the BOOTS and SHOES
they have used.
t I 1
We are now making all
lines better than ever.
Reg*
THE STANDARD
BRAND.
“ STANDARD ” Brand for
Men Women and Children.
“SIGNAL” Brand for Rail-
way makers. “Signal ” Boots
have green coloured soles.
Ask your storekeeper for
these brands—take no others.
Beware of Imitations
Brand must be exactly like
these.
ntamr
THE
S/^AI
D.H.C?L“
P®
B
THE DAVEY HALLIDAY Coy. Ltd.
Sole Manufacturers,
mm
T
SB
At
THIS IS
H. 0. ERICKSONS Smithy
RTT
lit* i ... t
-V;-: V-V- •V
mmj
WSmm
i:
f v |
4 *2 ¥
m 1
mm
r -
THE GARGET BUTCHERY.
Who has been established for upwards of seven years in Marian.
Some of the Waggons and Sulkies turned out are shown
in the Illustration. Farmers entrusting their work to me
can rely on obtaining absolute satisfaction.
PRICES RIGHT AND WORKMANSHIP EXCELLENT.
ALF. JOHNSTONE - Proprietor.
FRESH MEAT DAILY.
W. KENNEDY,
AUCTIONEER,
Stock Station, Hotel Broker, Land, Estate, . .
Insurance Valuator and General Commission Agent.
Farms and Hotels in all parts of the District for Sale, also
Town Properties, Sales conducted in Town and Country.
Manufacturer of the renowned Mackay Wire Mattresses, and all Classes of Bedding.
Agent for the
CHALLENGE OIL ENGlNE—Cheapest and Best on the Market.
VICTORIA STREET, MACKAY.
TELEPHONES ; Auction Rooms, 182; Factory, 153.
fettL,' S 0V.1,! v iH T.~v . .
IP? V • - c '" : Vfrst
pr . TTfISR f
• •,,
: ■ x
; %-■ f ,
V* *
L;■ M i I * . PS A
*■ • ■ .3-,;.. i ■ a*. • .
J tit 1 Th r ~ - i | ii ||| i |l|| ii |
O. CLINTON,
General Storekeeper,
HAXXON,
Carries full Stocks of GROCERIES, DRAPERY, BOOTS and SHOES, PRODUCE,
etc. PRICES REASONABLE,
X. J. LEONARD,
LAND and ESTATE AGENT,
AUCTIONEER,
. Commercial Mercantile & Hotel Broken,
List of First-Class Hotels and Farms For Sale, on Application! w Auction Sales in Town or Country a Specialty.
Agencies
JOHN MACFAKLANE Sc CO,, Stock and Station
Agents, Rockhampton,
THE CENTRAL QUEENSLAND MEAT EXPORT
CO,, LTD,, Lake’s Creek, Rockhampton,
BRUNTON & COPS “Royal” Flour,
CUMMINGS Sc CAMPBELL, LTD,, Townsville
GEO. HIRON & SON, Brisbane,
J. M. MOV & CO., Produce Merchants, Sydney.
W. H. MAINE & Co.. Produce Merchants, Melbourne,
Victoria, Davenport West, Tasmania
C. NICCOL, Leather Merchant, Sydney.
SUN FIRE OFFICE.
STANDARD ACCIDENT INSURANCE CO,, LTD,
i
Telephone, 103.
Secretary, Show Branch, P.R.F. and 6 A. Secretary, TATTERSALL’S RACE CLUB.
'‘ Jh », ' ■. *W
vV.V ■ Ih&fcfy : ] -J
* :i BBSS--J ft^|
Jr*.. * nXJ:
"h nsur rtotm
ten
il
Mr
ictomia. Street,
MACKAY.


MEADOWLANDS MILL.
The Meadowlands Mill, which is
situated about four miles from Mac-
kay, was erected by the late T. H.
Fitzgerald, in 1870, when the first
cane was crushed. Only one set of
rollers, which were fed by hand, were
in use for some years, and the boiling
plant, according to latter day san-
dards, .was primitive in the extreme.
In 1875, after practically the whole
of the cane in the district had been
MEADOWLANDS MILL.
damaged by rust, the estate was taken
over and worked by the Australian
Joint Stock Bank, until 1877, when it
was purchased by Messrs. William
Hyne and Co., who steadily mo-
dernised the mill, so that five years
later Meadowlands was the largest
and most up-to-date factory then
operating in the district. The pro-
perty was successfully worked by
this firm until 1906, when the Mea-
dowlands Company, Ltd., was formed
to buy- the mill, and the land was
now be handled with ease. Last year
the work done during the crushing
compared favourably with that of
other mills on the railway. To as-
sist suppliers the company is always
prepared to make reasonable ad-
vances on cane, and is ready at all
times to give expert advice and finan-
cial help to men with a small amount
of capital, who wish to go on the
land. Photos of the mill, directorate,
and officers appear elsewhere in this
number.
DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS OF THE COMPANY.
Standing (Left to Right).—A. McLean, J. W. Inverarity (Secretary), W. G. Hodges (Auditor).
Seated. —M. Dower, A. McClanachan, Jas McDonald (Chairman), W. T. Kenzey (Manager),
D. W. Walker.
subdivided into a number of farms,
which were sold to growers on easy
terms. During the last six years the
company has spent a sum, exceeding
fourteen thousand pounds,' on im-
provements to the mill, and a siding
to connect with the Mackay Rail-
way was built in 1908 at a cost of a
further £3OOO, thus giving growers
on this line another mill to which
they could send their product. The
capacity of the mill has been doubled
and a crop of 35,000 tons of cane can
OUTBREAK OF RUST.
In “ Gibbon’s History of the De-
cline and Fall of the Roman Empire,”
(chapter 8, p. 167), the following re-
ference to agriculture is recorded as
coming from Artaxerxes, the great
and mighty ruler of Persia, in the
year A.D. 240. He was at war with
Rome, and in want of money. The
authority of the Prince said Ax-
taxerxes must be defended by a mili-
tary force ; that force can only be
maintained by taxes, all taxes must
be last of all upon agriculture, and
agriculture can never flourish except
tinder the protection of justice and
moderation.” I preface my remarks
with the above, as it goes to show
that agriculture has in all ages had
special claims for protection, in that
it is the fountain of all wealth, and
the final burden bearer of all taxes.
Every trade, profession, or craft,
meets increase in living or taxation
by increased charges. This holds
.good till it finally falls, as Artaxerxes,
tipon agriculture. The man on the
land, being unable to pass it on,
meets the trouble by reducing ex-
penses, which eventually means a re-
duction in production, which is the
beginning of what we know and what
-our fathers knew, as bad times. It
was such times as fell on the Mac-
kay district in the early seventies,
though not as a result of unjust
taxation, but. through unproductive
seasons, or, more correctly, through
•disease in the sugarcane in the shape
or “ rust.” Mackay has often been
accused of having all her eggs in one
basket. This, at the particular time
I am speaking of, had a double mean-
ing, as not only had we nothing but
sugar, but there was practically only
one variety of cane in the district,
viz.: Bourbon, and that was attacked
by rust. The only other variety of
cane at the time was “ Black Java,”
which was grown by Mr. Davidson
at Alexandra, which, although not
free from the disease, was an im-
provement on the Bourbon. The dis-
ease atacked the leaves of the cane,
which loked like dead grass. It will
be unnecessary for me to say here
that all plant life draws its nourish-
ment from the leaves, which is prac-
tically its lungs ; consequently, when
the leaves became affected, the cane
tapered off to a fine point ; so much
so ,thai even a gentle breeze would
cause the tops to break off. Your
correspondent was at this time em-
ployed at the Lome Plantation, then
Te Kowai No. 2, and under the man-
agement of the late Mr. Hugh
McCready, who was manager at Te
Kowai. To the credit of Mr.
McCready, it must be said he was
one of the very few in the district
at the time who had any practical
knowledge of sugar cultivation, he
having been for some years in the
West Indian Islands, and was ac-
quainted with different varieties of
cane. Instructions were given to
scour all cane fields for stray stolls
of any variety 'of cane which had
crept in among the old Bourbon, and
thus in one way and another sufficient
plants were got together to plant
about seven acres on the old Lome
Plantation. These plants came on
well, and the following year were
sold for plants at so much per hun-
dred. Your correspondent had the
job of counting them out to the, dif-
ferent purchasers, amongst whom was
Alfred Hewitt, of Pleystowe. An
old relic from that' time may still be
seen outside the shop of our old
friend, Mr. P. McKenney, in the
shape of a huge horse collar, which
was worn by a black entire of great
size, and employed - in carting the
ROLLESTON BROS.—ETONVALE SOUTH.
plants ■in question to Pleystowe
Plantation. Of course, other planta-
tions followed on very muchi similar
lines, and in a‘few years She old
Bourbon had clean disappeared. Dur-
ing the transition stage there was
what we already call bad times. Con-
fidence in the sugar industry was at
a low ebb, banks and other financial
institutions Reid aloof, and several
of the smaller mills ceased operations.
The Colonial Sugar Refining Co. was
about the only friend he industry had.
They assisted the planters in getting
new varieties of cane, and by advice
and financial assistance, a new and
better day dawned for the sugar
industry.
A. H. Tideman.
NORTH ETON MILL.
The North Eton Mill is some 22
miles from Mackay, along the Mac-
kay railway line. The factory can
easily turn out 5000 tons of sugar in
NORTH ETON MILL.
a season. The suppliers registered
for bounty number 100, their, area
being 18,662 acres. Additional areas
of new lands have recently been
opened up, most of which are tapped
by the company’s tramline service.
of Eton, which possesses a fine large
school, court house, police building,
and railway station.
DIRECTORS AND OFFICIALS.—NORTH ETON MILL.
At the present time extensive addi-
tions are being made to the., mill
plant, . which, when completedj' will
further add to its capacity and effi-
ciency. About two miles further on
past the mill is situated the township


H. V. McKAY'S “SUNSHINE” IMPLEMENTS
Are Noted for GOOD WORK,
STRENGTH and LONG SERVICE.
TRe Newly-Designed “ SUNTOP ’’
DISC PLOUGH has been successfully
introduced into both Mackay and Bun-
daberg Districts. It Ploughs to any
depth up to 15 inches, it turns its sod
completely over, it buries all surface
trash, it moves every inch of soil in the
furrows, and does not leave any bone or
ridge underneath. There is no ground
too hard for “ SUNTOP.”
o
Be up-to-date, and buy the Latest
and Best.
i
,£rSi
w
"SUNTOP” DISC PLOUGH— or 2 FURROWS.
Garden and Field GATES in many
Styles and various sizes—3ft. to 14ft.
in width. No other Gates equal to
“ Sunshine ” Metal Gates
Maxim CHAFFCUTTERS, 82-inch
and Diinch mouth. All Manufactured
in the Commonwealth.
Sole Agent for RUSTON & PROC-
TOR’S well-known line of ENGINES.
Intending purchasers of Oil Engines are
requested to inspect sample Engine on
hand with Local Agents, Messrs. ROSS
and CROMPTON.
H. V. McKAY, “SUNSHINE” HARVESTER WORKS. Queensland Office: Corner of ADELAIDE and ALBERT STREETS, BRISBANE.
H. O. McGLUSKEY,
INSURANCE, GENERAL COMMISSION
and ESTATE AGENT,
MERCANTILE and PRODUCE BROKER.
LOCAL AGENT,
J. C. HUTTON, Propy., Ld.,
Pineapple Hams and Bacon.
J. KITCHEN & SONS, Ld., Soaps, Oils. etc.
SOUTH BRITISH INSURANCE CO. Ld.,
Fire, Accident, Workers’ Compensation.
Fidelity and Plate Glass-Insurance.
YORKSHIRE INSURANCE CO. Ld.,
(Live Stock Department.)
Manchester Unity Chambers, Wood Street, MACKAY.
I
GEO. WOOD,
Bookseller and Stationer, j
MACKAY.
The Oldest Established News Agency in Town. Southern Weeklies
and Dailies by Every Mail. English and American Magazines and the
Latest Novels. Pauline Paper Patterns.
PIANOS, MUSIC, FANCY GOODS, TOYS.
Anderson’s Seeds. Swan and Waterman Fountain Pens.
’PHONE 50.
I
£%«ti
‘Wv .
.? « T ,
! t
,: -r„
* • is v.’ "1
; .A..A
. iWF 1 hfc*
' Ztl* f
W. R. WILLIAMS,
Excelsior Store, - - SARINA.
GROCERIES and PRODUCE, IRONMONGERY, FANCY
GOODS, DRAPERY, CLOTHING, BOOTS and SHOES,
Farmers’ Requirements a Specialty. Cash Buyer of Farm Produce, Hides, Skins, Hair, etc.
Local Agent for :
North British and Mercantile Insurance Co. (Fire); Railway Passengers’ Insurance Co. (Accident).
m.
The
Leading
House
for
Furniture
in
MACKAY.
T. CHERRY. „
COMPLETE ?
-HnU SE P'URNJS HER 'Yj
JH«iB.B.WHITEHOUSE»Ca-FIAWDSiDHGANS
r
lIM
ips?
Si A.
Factory and Showrooms: SYDNEY STREET, MACKAY
«Lr.’;3
TylßlllSflilsi#
' ■: ■ 5.’ ■ ■]
.
i .r
For the Best in
GROCERIES, PRODUCE, DRAPERY, BOOTS and SHOES, HARDWARE,
and in' fact everything required I>y Fanners, Mill
Hands, Railway Constructors and Olliers, go to
Mrs. BEAGRIE’S STORE, SARINA,
ADJACENT TO THE PLANE CREEK MILL.
sT'
, a Vr
t-* ■ Is--
PALACE HOTEL, SARINA-
(Handy to the Plane Creek Mill).
Jack McGrath has taken over this fine house. A warm welcome
extended to the Farmer, Mill Hand, and Railway Navvy. Large
Hall for Theatrical companies. Best of Liquors and a good
table, personally supervised by MRS. MCGRATH.


CATTLE CREEK MILL.
The Cattle Creek Mill was erected
at Hatton, 38 miles from Mackay,
along the railway line, in 1905, a com-
pany having been floated the pre-
vious year. The mill was erected for
the company by Mr. Geo. Wolfe, at
a total cost (including building, sid-
ings, and property) of £24,000. The
crushing plant came from the Habana
Mill, the buildings from River Estate,
the triple effect plant from Yeppoon,
DIRECTORS AND OFFICIALS.—CATTLE CREEK MILL.
while the balance was new machi-
nery. A year prior to the erection
of the mill Wilson's paddock (owned
by a syndicate who, in the earlier
days, had taken up the whole side
of Cattle Creek) all fenced and ring-
barked, changed hands for 7s. 6d. an
acre. Twelve months late Hodgett’s
Paddock, in the vicinity, changed
hands at 255. an acre. To-day the
adjoining lands are realising £7 an
acre. Recent sales of uncleared land
at Pinnacle and Murray’s Paddock,
Salsbury, came forward to champion
the needs of the district. The line
from Pinnacle to Hatton was built
by the Pioneer Shire Council, and
subsequently taken over by the Go-
vernment, who extended it a further
distance of seven miles towards
Eungella Range. To the Hatton
Progress Association belongs much
of the credit of the opening cf the
road up the Eungella Range. The
mill suppliers number 100, whose area
registered for bounty is 10,000 acres.
CATTLE CREEK MILL.
owned by Mr. D. H. Dalrymple, rea-
lised up to £9 15s. an acre. The
figures for the Cattle Creek Mill show
that in 1906, 14,674 tons of cane
passed through the rollers ; in 1907,
21,505 tons ; in 1908, 25,316 tons ;
in 1909, 21,156 tons ; in 1910, 35,580
tons ; and 1911, 26,094 tons. After
the erection of the mill the town of
Hatton rapidly grew, and a Progress
Association, with Mr. J. O’Toole as
Chairman, and an energetic Secre-
tary, in the person of Mr. B. H.
HOMEBUSH MILL.
The Homebush Mill, owned by the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company,
is situated 16 miles from Mackay.
The first crushing of the factory was
in 1883. In the early days of its
existence, the company grew all the
cane themselves, but in the early 90’s
cut up the land into farms, sold on
HOMEBUSH MILL.
easy terms and financed the growers
until able to stand alone. At the
present time the Mill is one of the
best equipped in the district, being
capable of treating 55,000 tons of cane
in a season of five months, double
shift ; in the company’s record year
64,000 tons of cane passed through
the rollers. Roughly, there are 150
suppliers, whose total acreage under
cane is 3259, the average area crop-
ped for each farm being 23 acres,
and the average tonnage of cane per
acre about 122. The principal canes
grown are Malgache, 8208, and Goru.
The company has an extensive tram-
way service of 29 miles of perman-
ent line, on which three locomotives
are kept busy throughout the crush-
ing season. The sugar is taken by
tram 8) miles to the terminus of the
permanent line at Baker’s Creek,
from where it is conveyed ipto Mac-
kay by horse teams, whiqji have
replaced the bullock teams of earlier
days. The Homebush farmers have
earned a reputation for themselves
by the fact that they cultivate scien-
tifically, green manuring being gene-
ral.
CREEK SCENE, NEAR HOMEBUSH MILL.
PLANE CREEK MILL.
Tiie Plane Creek Mill adjoins the
township of Sarina, which is plea-
santly situated on the banks of Plane
Creek, about 25 miles from Mackay,
on the Rockhampton Road. The
Plane Creek Central Mill Company,
Limited, was formed in 1893 under
the provisions of the Sugar Works
Guarantee Act passed in that year.
PLANE CREEK CENTRAL MILL.
The company was successfully
floated, the nominal capital 1 emg
62.000 shares of £1 each, 28 000 acres
of land being mortgaged to the
Government in consideration of a
loan of £65,000. A tramline was at
once started to the shipping port at
Louisa Creek, about 15 miles from
the mill, where the machinery was
subsequently landed. The first crush-
ing took place in 1896, when 354 tons
of sugar were made from 3579 tons
of cane. The output for 1911 was
SS3O tons from 47,827 tons of cane.
There are 197 suppliers growing cane
lor the mill, the area under cultiva-
tion being 3268 acres. The company
has 42 miles of trunk line, which taps
the best agricultural lands in the dis-
trict. Four locomotives and 500
trucks comprise the rolling stock.
The township comprises sixty houses,
including four hotels, some • good
business establishments, fine State
School (with three provisional
schools in the outside districts),
Court House, police quarters, Post
Office, Sarina Shire Office—all good
buildings. The Queensland National
Bank and Commercial Bank have
branches in the township. The popu-
lation, including the township and a
radius of eight miles of the mill, is
fully 2000 people, with an additional
floating population of 500 during the
busy season.
DIRECTORS & OFFICIALS, PLANE CREEK CENTRAL MILL.


MACKAY SUGAR YIELD.
The following table gives the complete Sugar Statistics from 187
2, so far
as they are available ;—
Area Cut
Weight of
Weight of
Area Cut
Weight of
Weight of
Year.
Area Under. for
Cane
Sugar
Year. Area Under
for
Cane
Sugar
Cane.
Crushing.
Obtained.
Obtained.
Cane.
Crushing.
Obtained.
Obtained.
Acres.
Acres.
Tons.
Tons.
Acres.
Acres.
Tons.
Tons.
1872
3436
. .
•—
—
1892
15.813
I 1,778 . .
—
•• 15456
1873
4,548
—
—
:—
1893
16.552
13.924 ..
—
24,872
1874
4,927
—
—
—
1894
20,290
15,514
—
27,913
1875
4,844
—
—
—
1895
23,554
15,566
—
22,839
1876
5.568
—
—
—
1896
21,076
16,428
—
16.515
1877
5,768
4.362 . .
—
7,643
1897
27,251
16,794
—
22,604
1878
6,823
4,630
—
6,465
1898
29,891
•• 21,350 ..
276,197
31,780
1879
7.440
5463
—
10,073
1899
27,317
18,343
166,679
17,521
1880
7,880
5 477
—
747 2
IQOO
26,094
17,126
180,861
20,194
18.81
10,629
6,499
—
11,458
1901
24,284
17.769 • •
232,442
24,093
1882
15,210
8,039 . .
—
8,321
1902
22,379
16,369
147,113
16,676
1883
17,040
10,641
—
14,252
1903
23473
13,245
170,386
18,329
1884
19,320
12,391
—
12,023
1904
28,182
17,622
253,250
• • 28,305
1885
• • 18,532
14,604
—
• ■ 21,995
1905
30,328
20,762
285.545
■ • 32.380
1886
16,165
11,466
—
i5,5n
1906
3M72
20,529
317,442
• • 34.338
1887
17,422
13,497
—
16,588
1907
30,386
.. 21,779 ..
37M98
43,022
1888
15,861
11,539
—
5464
1938
30483
20,378
284.391
•• 31-743
1889
15,729
10,592
—
13,003
1909
34.203
18,721
276,116
32,697
1890
, 1 S.79 1
12,815
—
19,478
1910
37T42
23,872
462,259
• • 53,I7I
1891
14,397
11,818
T 3473
IQII
33.637
25,063
376,975
■ • 4U97S
RACECOURSE CENTRAL MILL.
The Racecourse Central Mill is a
co-operative farmers’ concern, situa-
ted on the railway line about four
miles from Mackay. The factory was
erected in 1888, the amount of loan
from the Government being £21,000.
Of the forty farmers who originally
agreed Vto go bond for the amount,
twenty 'withdrew when the time ar-
rived for handing up their deeds to
the Treasurer, consequently the re-
maining twenty had to increase the
number of their shares. For the first
three years the company made sugar
for the open market, selling it wher-
ever they could. The Board of
Directors then decided to manufac-
ture raw sugar for the refinery in
Sydney, and in their second year
were able to pay their first instal-
ment of interest and redemption on
the first five years to the Treasurer.
From that time onward the company
continued to meet its obligations, and
four years ago celebrated the pay-
ment of the final instalment to the
Government by entertaining the
Mackay citizens at a picnic on the
Mackay beach. In 1896, the company
being short of cane, found it neces-
sary to buy land at Woodford Estate
and Mill field, and two years later
land at Hatton. Four miles of light
tramline were laid down at Hatton
from where large quantities of cane
came down for the first two years
when the supply of cane exceeded
the mill’s capacity, and the Cattle
Creel; Mill was started. The com-
pany had since then been sending
large supplies of cane to other mills
until this year, through the crops
being short, the factory will crush
its own and Meadowlands Mill Com-
pany’s cane The factor', is now tho-
roughly up-to-date, electrical contriv-
ances forming a large section of the
milling plant which is capable of
turning out 4500 tons of sugar per
season. The company has nearly
150 suppliers, whose area registered
for bounty is 13,000 acres. There are
74 shareholders in this company.
Directors and Officials.—Racecourse Central Mill.
RACECOURSE CENTRAL MILL.
PALMS MILL.
The Palms M.h, owned by the Mel-
bourne-Mackay Estates, is situated
along the railway line, eight miles
from Mackay. At one time the fac-
tory was run on the plantation prin-
ciple, but of la'e years the surround-
ing sugar lands have ben cut up into
small farms, and sold on easy terms.
The mill itself has been greatly im-
proved and can be classed as a
thoroughly un-'-o-dite plant A tram
line service has added much to the
mill’s operations, over 90 farmers now
supplying the factory. In the mill’s
best year over 4000 tons of sugar
were manufactured.
PALMS MILL.


Views of Old Sugar Mills.
Alexandra Mill.
River Estate Mill.
The Cedars Mill.
Te Kowai Mill.
Pioneer Mill.
Pioneer House.—John Spiller’s Residence.
Another View of John Spiller’s Residence.


VIEW OF MACKAY.—Present Day.
Mackay in 1864.
In writing for the “ Jubilee Mercury ”
of what I saw and what 1 thought and
felt about it the first time I saw Mackay,
1 find the first thought to work itself out
to be that your readers will want to know
not necessarily just who, but certainly some-
thing as to what the writer was at the
time he is writing of. They all know that
the same thing, seen at the same time and
described in writing, not nearly fifty years
after, but even next morning, by, say, the
parson and the publican, or the bullock
driver and the barber’s clerk, will appear
so different as to be impossible, or at least
extremely difficult of recognition as exactly
the same thing. The barber’s clerk is a
man I never met, or ever saw, but as 1
never spent two hours by a bullock driver’s
camp fire without hearing much about him
I am not sure that I ever doubted his
existence till I came this way. Here there
being no barber anywhere in the North, I
reckoned that the barber must evolve the
barber’s clerk, and not the barber’s clerk
the barber, and certainly began to doubt
bis existence, but never disputed it. Up
to that time, and in some parts later, the
bullock driver was the most desired of all
men. The mailman was always welcome ;
he brought “ the paper” and letters, some
of them good and some of them not; but
everything the bullock driver brought was
always good, and some of it that had long
been wished for, hoped for, and sometimes
prayed for, better and better; and at the
crack of his whip all turned out —Master
with little Tommy in one hand and Sissy
in the other, Missis with Baby on her arm
pointing its little eyes to the ponderous
coming Argosy, the new chum Jackaroo,
and even the cook in spectacles and apron
—all turned out to welcome the bullock
driver, and he deserved it. But he is
gone, poor fellow—melted away, like the
bunyip and the moa, and some worse
things, but none better—and I regret his
passing away almost as much as I regret
the coming of some other things.
But this is like starting off to another
new rush before you have reached the one
you set out for; so, to get back to what
I started on. I had been nearly 12 years in
Australia then, always on some of the “dig-
gings,” except when I was starved off,
which now seems far oftener than it did
then, and in these spells I had been at dif-
ferent times sheep shearer and teamster,
roadmaker, quarryman, farm labourer,
splitter and fencer, hut builder and wharf
lumper—had always been at work, except
when carrying a swag, “going for” some
other work, and had done some of the,
then, nearly all kind of ordinary labourer’s
work; but had never been a stockman, be-
cause I would surely have fallen off the
horse just when I ought to stick on. Had
never been a shepherd, because both pace and
pay were too slow on that job ; and had
never been a bullock driver, because Nature
hadn’t endowed me with the fine scientific
mental and moral steering qualities needed.
But just now I am aboard a steamer, very
small and very slow, just anywhere you
like between Keppel Bay and Port Mac-
kay. The day, the last Saturday of May,
1864, neither a bright nor a dark day, but
just a smooth, easy, soft and agreeable day.
The water as smooth as glass and as level,
but for a slow undulating swell, like th&
breath-heave of a lady’s bosom. I had
“ done ” the tropics three times before, and
had often read, as everyone must have read,
of the “ balmy breezes, that buzz among
the tropic treezes,” but had never felt their
enchanting silk-velvety softness as I did in
the soft and easy south-wester of that day.
and am still inclined to believe that for
health, vigour, and breezy enjoyment there
are no other tropic breezes quite equal to
these of Mackay at that time of year. The
sun was just sinking behind the Range
when we brought up under Round Top,
between the islands, to wait for tide and
daylight. The Flat Top anchorage, I am
inclined to think, had not been discovered
then, as I never heard of it till a dozen
years or so later. Our mate —we had only
one—was the only one in the ship who
had been in here before, and he only once,
and, asked what he thought of it, said,
“Not much!” Asked if the outside
character, that “it was a miserable hole,
not fit to live in,” given it, was correct,
he said, “Well, it’s the kind of place I
like to get out of,” which, added to all
I had heard, made me to not expect much.
It was from 9 to 10 the next morning when
we started to navigate Port Mackay,
which,—from where we were, looked very
much as it does now, except that toward
the end of the sand-spit there was a small
clump of trees that relieved the sand-and-
water bareness. This disappeared in one
of the flood-breaches of the spit, of which
1 remember two before the Eline one. At
or near where the Boatshed is, a small-:-
about 14 feet whaleboat put off to us, with
two men in it, which the mate informed
me were the pilot and his crew. They
were thrown a rope, which was made fast,
and we steamed ahead, and in a very
few minutes I saw the pilot coming, hand
over hand, up the rope aboard of us, and
looking astern for the crew, found him
just seizing a buoy that we were passing
when the pilot started up. This buoy was
a red five-gallon oil-drum, anchored to a
stone, brought from Flat Top, the mate
told me, and I think was the first of all
the Mackay “harbour improvements.” The
crew having been got aboard, we steamed
ahead again, and tied up to trees, with
the ship’s nose just as far up the river as
the Leichhardt tree, that I note is the only
thing on the river bank now that was
there then, and it seems to have increased
about one-half both in height and girth
since then.
There were a few scattered trees of the
usual full-grown size along the river bank,
from near the slight rise at Paxton’s
Stores, which was all covered with a thick
scrub, and the same upwards from about
the Custom House corner, and narrowing
as it went up the river, and ending about
Peel street. The male inhabitants of that
day must, I think, have all been there to
receive us ; as afterwards all the habitations
I saw seemed distinctly too few and too
small to accommodate them all. They
stood in a row of little knots of two and
three, and seemed to speak to each other
sometimes, but did not come nearer than
about 30 yards, and after the ship was
tied up to the bank, just melted away.
Then, there being nothing in sight but
three slab humpies, I went ashore to see
the town, and picking up a faint track,
followed it along about where River street
is, and under the bank of four of five feet
high, that comes out of the river at the
bridge and begins to dissipate itself about
the railway station, crossed a bridge, across
a gutter running into the river. The
“bridge” was made of three small logs
across the gutter, and they crossed again
with saplings, laid heads and points. I
guess that was the first of all Mackay
public works. From here, the track turned
to the left, up what is now Sydney street,
and then again at, I think, about the
Q.N. Bank, to the right, skirting the
scrub, and here, just where the land is
highest, on the left of the track and front-
ing the scrub, was an iron wall and roof
house, about 24 feet long and 12 wide, still
unfinished; there being openings, in the
middle, for a door, and on each side of it,
for a small window, all covered with calico,
strained inside, and on the roof, over the
door opening, a small molded and painted
sign, “ROYAL HOTEL,” in large letters,
and the usual “Licensed to Retail” rig-
marole, common in England, but that I
did not remember to have ever seen in
Australia. I stopped, and inspected the
“Royal Hotel” of Mackay, not critically,
but photographically, and then wandered
on, slowly ahead, and in about 150 yards
found myself, in mild astonishment, in a
just dray-width lane between two grass
walls, so high that I could not see over
them ; the earth, too, was scarred like the
“pock-pitted” face that I never see now,
but that was not uncommon till near that
time, the pits being nearly a foot deep.
I got up on one of the humps, and found
the grass just the height of my eyes; I
could see over it close iu, but not any
distance away, and wandered on ahead,
and soon readied the shorter grass, about
knee high, skirting the scrub. At near
where North street turns southward, but
I think nearer the river than North street,
there were four or five crows in a tree.
What did they mean? When you are far
away out where nobody lives, everything
alive always means more than the eye
sees; and I left my track about 30 yards
to see, and there, under the next tree to
them, on my side, lay the offal of a
slaughtered beast, except the hide. The
Mackay inhabitants had killed a bullock
the day before, and, I hoped, had a good
feed, for they cerainly looked as if they
wanted one when I saw them an hour or
so ago; and as I looked from the offal to
the crows they looked at me, and one of
them, the nearest to me, turned his head
aside and cocked his eye on me in a way
that reminded me of the Jack Daw of
Rheims ; and I thought that, if he could
have spoken, he would have exclaimed,
“Why, look you here, chaps; as I live,
here’s a newchum!” for the long, long
grass, everywhere but just on the bank
and the edge of the scrub, made me feel
like a stranger in a strange land. Then,
picking up my track again, I went slowly
along to, I think, just between the end of
and Albert streets. Here the
scattered trees were fewer than farther
back, and there was nothing, not a bush
or a bit of undergrowth of any kind, to
obstruct the view of the big savannah. I
could see all the Lagoons, the Racecourse,
and most of the Meadowlands country; all,
apparently, covered with the same long
grass, waving, not gracefully, as wheat
and oats do, but stiff and awkwardly, in
the light south-east breeze. What a fire it
would make in another month! Then I
went on, just into where the growing cane
begins now, the track keeping along the
top of the bank all the way, but here it
took into the long, long grass I had come
through before, and there seeming to be
no end to it, I turned back the way I had
come, till, getting near in, I noted another
faint track into the scrub that I had not
seen going out, and following it, soon
found myself in another narrow lane cut
into the scrub, and at the end of it, about
60 yards, found a patch of about 40 by 60
feet, all cleared, and in the middle of it a
small four-roomed weatherboard cottage-
like house, and going round to the
northern front, found an open door and
window, and could see through the door
a counter, and through the window shelves
with bottles on them, but no Sign; this
was the first of the Golden Fleece, now
Post Office Hotel, and as I went in a
man came from the room behind, who
answered all my questions civilly enough,
but no more ; evidently he was not a bar-
man or public-house man of any kind. All
1 learned was that there was a station 12
miles up the river—Balnagowan, I sup-
pose—another on top of the Ran&e —Mount
Spencer, 1 think —that there were a lot of
sheep at Fort Cooper, and that Nebo was
a thriving town with a great future before
it. This being all I could learn, I went
out, and down to the ship and dinner,
this man and the crows being all the living
things I saw in that journey.
Towards the middle of the afternoon 1
went ashore again, following the same
track to about the front of Michelmove’s
Scores, where I picked up another going
off to the left, where the morning track
turned round the corner of the scrub, and
passing the Mackay Store, a slab building
of about 14 by 10 feet, that stood at about
the back door of the present A.B.C. Tea
Rooms. The door was closed, and it had
no windows, and the track kept along near
the top of the bank, where the earth was
smoother and the grass not over about
knee high. It passed at the back of two
humpies that stood at about where Mr.
Porter’s timber yard is now ; and at about
the railway station turned east, or a little
to the north of it, and going through only
one narrow patch of the tall grass at auout
Byron street. 1 had just begun to think
it would take me to the beach, which I,
of course, knew was in that direction,
when I was brought up standing, suddenly
and rather shocked, with almost at my
feet, on the left hand, a batch of Jiuman
graves. In one the earth had settled down
to just below the surface level; the others
were all rounded up and quite green, except
one that still showed the brown earth in
places ; and one of them was fenced round
with axe-squared corner posts and sapling
rails, and just then and there the last
lines of Gray’s “ Elegy
“The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power.
All that glory, all that wealth e’er gave,
Alike await the inevitable hour ;
The paths of glory lead but to the
grave,”
came into my mind with a force of appli-
cation I had never known before, and I
think probably never would have known
but for that encounter. At a few yards
farther on, a small poplar gum tree had
been felled, and I sat down on it and
tried to think who and what “the poor
inhabitants below” might be; of their
hopes, aspirations, intentions, desires, all
ended here; but Gray’s “Elegy” had
paralysed all mental motion, and all I
could get out of it was that NONE OF
THEM MEANT THIS; and filling and
lighting the pipe, I wandered slowly back
(o the ship, seeing no living thing, or any-
thing human, on that round, but these
graves.
I did not go ashore again, and in the
morning, the cargo, which I estimated
at three tons, was all out on the grass
before breakfast, and while it was being
landed, and later, I saw two men, at
different times, looking at it; and at about
the same time that we came in the morning
before we left again, I feeling no desire
to dispute the general verdict on Port
Mackpy.
DANIEL SHEPHERD.
IMMIGRATION IN THE
EIGHTIES.
In the early eighties four shiploads
of immigrants arrived at Flat Top,
viz.: “Hannah Landells,” “Scottish
Knight,” “ Scottish Wiard,” and the
“ Seahog.” They did not all arrive
in the same year. These vessels were
moored at Flat Top by Pilot Wil-
(iamson ; they were too large to
come into Mackay. Each vessel car-
ried a full complement of passengers,
and were, of course, a less modern
type than present steamers. The
“ ffannah Landells” and “Scottish
Knight ” had machinery aboard for
the mills subsequenly erected at
Habana and the Palms. A fleet of
vessels was chartered in the south to
lighter the cargo into town, compris-
ing the barquentines Pentle Hill,
Rose Hill, and Mayneton, and The
schooner Waterwitch. The machi-
nery was in six and seven ton pieces,
too heavy, with primitive appliances
available, to load away quickly
enough into the lighter, without caus-
ing damage. The weight would have
resuled in the vessels' bottoms being
bumped out ; consequently the pilot
sailed the ships across into “1.”
Island Passage, and moored them
there in smooth water, and from there
they were lightered. The other two
immigrant vessels referred to did
not carry cargo, and after discharg-
ing their passengers, departed south.
The machinery for the Habana Mill
was not lightered »nto town ; ir »vas
taken from the ship’s side at “L”
Island, and conveyed to Plabana
Creek by the s.s. Taldora. Machinery
for the Nindaroo Mill arrived in
Mackay in the barques Lake Simco
and Hopeful ; these vessels dis-
charged at the Pioneer Wharf. The
barque Clytie also arrived in those
days with railway material, etc., and
discharged at the Railway Wharf.
The immigrants who arnved by those
vessels were the pioneers of the town
and district, and are in prominent
position in our local bodies, busi-
nesses, etc., to-day. In those days
all creeks and harbours between Cape
Palmerston and Cape Conway were
surveyed and reported upon by Pilot
Williamson for navigation and sail-
ing directions, and inserted in Pugh's
Almanac for guidance of mariners.
Pilot Williamson is one of the oldest
officers in the Marine Department of
Queensland, and, considering the
number of ships passed through his
hands since he joined the service, has
had the good fortune to have never
been before the Marine Board of In-
quiry, nor has his certificate ever
been in danger.


On the Roads Forty Years Ago.
Havihg served my apprenticeship in the
art of cane culture at the Pioneer Estate,
and being rather sick of the job, I gave
John Spiller and his kanakas best, and
•decided to strike out for myself. Having
brought a few horses with me from
•Grosvenor Downs, 1 decided to try my
luck on the roads. My first start was
made by the late Mr. Webster, who was
then managing for Warry and Marsh.
<jrosvenor Downs sheep had been shifted
to Nebo for shearing, as the water on the
station gave out (the year 1872 was a
terror), and I was engaged to take a load
with all haste to Nebo, consisting of wool
bales, rations, and all necessaries for
shearing. 1 reached there up to time, and
got a load of wool back, and so became
fairly started as a full-blown carrier. No
sooner had I unloaded at the A.S.N. Com-
pany’s wharf, than a message was placed
in my hand saying that Mr. Geo. Smith
wanted to see me. The fact was copper
lodes had been discovered on the Kerline
Ranges by certain residents of Nebo, to
wit John McFadyen, Pat. McGrane, Billy
Orange, and others. A company had been
formed to work Mount Flora, and the late
Mr. G. Smith, as their agent, wanted me
to start immediately with a load of miners-
requisites, consisting of picks, shovels,
wheelbarrows, tents, rations, &c.
I got along all right to Bee Creek, but
from there to the Mount there was only
a marked tree line to guide me, so that I
had some difficulty in reaching my des-
tination. The man in charge told me that
I was the first to take a team to Mount
Flora. On my return trip two months
afterwards, quite a township had sprung
up; a public-house was in full swing, with
a second one in course of erection.
Although not much of a mineralogist, I
believe very good ores were brought out
and sent for shipment to Mackay. The
crash came suddenly, however. The money
was exhausted, and, like many other
mining shows in Mackay district, the mine
closed down. Some short time afterward
the copper fever got hold of the people
of Mackay, and, led by the late Mr. Charlie
Keely, who had secured a large mining area
about 3 miles beyond Mount Flora, and
associated with a man named Couls, he
was successful in persuading the people
of Mackay to form a company, which they
named the Mount Orange Copper Com-
pany, and which is still in existence in
name. This company went to business,
and built a furnace, which I believe is
still standing. After doing a lot of pre-
liminary work, fhey at last got out their
first charge, whjch proved a complete
failure. The failure was chiefly owing to
incompetent management, otherwise the
company might have fared better.’ As it
was, the shareholders got disheartened,
work was suspended, and the Mount
Orange Copper Company is hung up until
this day.
Before passing on, 1 would like to refer
to another mining show which had been
discovered —copper mining was all the
rage in those days. The place lies about
S miles north-east from Lake Elphinston,
and was named Mount Gothardt. I loaded
up partly for Lake Elphinston Station and
part for Mount Gothardt. The season was
very bad, grass was scarce, and I intended
to clear out as soon as possible. Captain
Pendelurick, who was in charge of the
mine, however, prevailed upon me to stay,
and carry bricks, which were badly wanted
at the mine, promising to find me in horse
feed and give me a load of copper back. I
worked my team there for a few days,
when, my feed being done, I put up a small
load of copper and started on the home-
ward trip. I may here say that this was
the only copper that I had seen outside of
Copperfield, on the Peak Downs. It was
turned out in ingots, and had all the
appearance of being the genuine article.
However, misfortune befel them, for after
getting out the third charge, the furnace
—owing to faulty fire-bricks—collapsed,
and became a total wreck, and so another
venture went under. To be short, I con-
tinued carrying for over twelve years,
travelling as far as Copperfield, on the
Peak Downs, where a considerable amount
of trade was done with Mackay in those
days, in the carrying of copper, also wool
from Logan Downs and intermediate
stations.
Carrying in those days was a rough life
—this was long before Shire Councils wcr«
thought of. Every carrier had to carry \
pick, shovel, and axe, and much time was
spent in corduroying swamps and repairing
creeks, in order to get along. When night
came, however, the day’s hard work was
forgotten. Around the camp fire, and w*t<t
the jar of Mackay rum (which, by tti» »vay,
was an indispensable part of the cargo *n
those days), the fun was fast and furious,
when every subject was discussed, from
the rules of the road to the latest scandal.
Most of the old carriers have passed out.
but there are still a few left, notably Sam
Lowther and John Temple, now living near
Eton; George Ironside, who, like myself,
is enjoying a well-earned rest; Bob Frazer,
M. Roger, and last, but by no means least,
James .Pascoe, one of the best fellows that
ever lived. Towards the latter part of the
Bo’s, 1 gave carrying best, and, having
taken up selections in the Eton district
some years previously, I decided to settle
on the land. I need not trouble your
readers with my experience during the next
25 years. Only those who have been
through the mill can form an idea of what
pioneering means ; suffice to say that, it is
a strenuous life. Fortunately, a new era
was in store for the sugar industry. Up
to this time the industry was entirely in the
hands of the planters, and farmers had
no chance whatever. Sir Samuel Griffith
was then in power in Queensland, and the
question of erecting central mills was
forcibly put before him by certain Mackay
people, with the result that was
placed on the Estimates for the erection
of two central mills, to be erected in the
most favourable localities within the sugar
areas of Queensland. rortunately for
Mackay, both mills were erected in this
district, one at North Eton and the other
at the Racecourse. Several people in
Mackay claimed credit for initiating the
scheme. One man, however, stands pre-
eminently above them all as the real back-
bone of the central mill scheme, and this
is our worthy townsman, William George
Hodges, and who from a business point
of view, may justly claim to be the father
of the scheme. As I was on the spot
myself, I can testify to the great amount
of unselfish interest Mr. Hodges took in
the matter, and I really think that, but
for his push and energy and good business
tactics, the whole thing would have fallen
through. The erection of those two mills,
with more to follow later on, has made
the sugar industry in Queensland what it
is to-day.
And now a word, before I close, about
the towp itself. When I first made its
acquaintance in 1872, it was a straggling
little place with a house here and there.
All traffic from the country went by North
street, and all streets south of that were
out in the bush. No bridges had Deen
made. There were several crossings or
fords, where travellers on horseback used
to cross at low tide. There was the town
crowing, known as Keely’s; further up,
and where the Pioneer Bridge now is, was
Connor’s Crossing, and a great many more
right to Mirani/all of which the writer
had crossed, and sometimes at considerable
risk.
The business places have undergone a
great change since then. The “Mercury”
was located in North street, close to the
Roman Catholic manse, and was presided
over by Mr. E. Wright, who conducted
the paper for many years. It was a weekly
in those days, coming out on Saturday
morning. The leading business places
were: Warry and Marsh, the late Mr,
Chas. Webster being manager, and was
located near the premises now occupied
by the ABC Tea-roo ns. Bromberg Bros,
carried on business where Michelmore’s
store now is; Mr. P. McKenny, where the
Commercial Bank now is; Mr. Staines had
a business also in Sydney street. Mr. D,
Shepherd also had started in a very modest
way where the Anvil Stores now are, and
he is a striking instance of what can be
done by honest, steady perseverence and
good management. Mr. R. Neil had n
blacksmith’s shop where Marsh and Web-
ster’s store now stands; and Mr. R.
Fleming held out in the same business
where Fleming’s Limited now is. The
only bank doing business in Mackay then,
and for many years afterwards, was the
old AJ.S. Bank, and at that time was
managed by Mr. W. Robertson,now of
the Hollow. The bank was located for
many years in an old building adjoining
Sharp and Deller’s. Old hands will tell
you about the bank robbery, but that was
before my time. (An official report of tA«
incident appears elsewhere.—Ed. D.M.). A
State School had been built, quite a small
place, and Mr, Norris was sent to take
charge, and has held the position ever
since, which is surely a feather in his cap.
The town has grown wonderfully since
then. Instead of a straggling village, it
is now a flourishing town, with well-
formed streets and commodious buildings.
Although many of the old residents of
years ago have passed out, it is pleasant
to meet so many of the old hands, still
hale and healthy, of which I might mention
Jas. Robb, now living at Beaconsfield, and
probably the oldest resident now living
here; also Bob Fleming, R. McKenny,
E. Staines, Jack McLean, Mahew, Voy-
sey, Dick Neil, and several others. In
conclusion, I must say that I always liked
Mackay and its people. Long may it
prosper I
JOHN ROLLESTON.
Pioneers of the Shipping Trade.
The history of the early days of Mackay
would not be complete without some notice
of the first boats, sail and steam, that
traded to and from the new port, as it was
then called. The first brought into the
river by Captain Mackay was the ketch
Presto. The Pioneer, surveying boat, after
which the river was named, came in not
Jong after. Burns, Basset and Co. had an
iron store built on the river bank in 1863,
the exact site of which has long fallen into
the river, and that firm ran a small
steamer, called the Murray, to Rockhamp-
ton and elsewhere for some time; their
local representative was a Mr. Palfreymen.
The Star of Australia also visited the port;
she was afterwards lost. Several schooners
and ketches also brought cargo, and loaded
wool, which was then the stapje export.
The writer came from Rockhamp'ton in the
year 1867 in a schooner called the Amy
Robsart, with the late W. O. Hodgkinson,
who founded the "Mercury,” as a fellow-
passenger, and two or three other local
men. The captain had his wife with him,
and as there was only one cabin the pas-
sengers slept in their rugs on a heap of
sand ballast in the hold; all hands dined
on deck, with the skylight for a table.
On one occasion the captain shouted
through the skylight to the lady below that
she was keeping the gentlemen waiting.
A reply came back : ‘That is all right, but
hope you don’t consider yourself one of
them.” Although the accommodation in
those days was not equal to the Wyandra
and Wyreema, there was not the discom-
fort of the Flat Top tender and tranship-
ment. The first regular trader was the
Tinonee (Captain Champion). The skipper,
who was also provider, was said to have
done a good thing out of it, especially in
the whisky department; one speciality was
hot potatoes in their jackets at 10 p.m.
The writer was a passenger from Rock-
hampton in August, 1866, in company with
Messrs. T. H. Fitzgerald, John Cook, and
Francis Brown, names all well known to
Mackay residents ; it was the first visit of
the last two named gentlemen to Mackay,
with which they were afterwards so long
associated., The Tinonee had a ladies’
cabin, but for the rest there was a table
with shelves all round to sleep on, that is,
if there was a chance to sleep. Travellers
in those times were for the most part a
lively lot; there was a brisk bar trade as
long as the barman would keep open, and
not much sleep till 12 or 1 o’clock. On
one occasion some cheerful individual
started crowing about 4 a.m., and kept it
up, so much so that when the steward came
for boots at 6 he got them all on or near
his particular shelf. Flat Top was first
named Champion Island; the captain placed
sheep, goats, and rabbits on it, and, it was
said, applied for a lease of the place; that
was before the days of the lighthouse and
the hospitable caretaker, Mr. Robertson.
One schooner, with a popular skipper, that
traded to the port in those days, started
to beat down the river at high spring tide,
stood across from the town, but forgot to
about his ship ; her masts were visible in
the mangroves till the next spring tide.
In the regular trade, spring tides only, the
Yaralla succeeded the Tinonee, Captain
Hirst, chief officer Wallace, well known
seamen of the old school. They say they
cannot rear them as good now. Be that
as it may, everyone who travelled north of
Rockhampton knew Wallace, and his
second, “George.” Wallace was several
times offered a ship of his own, but would
not take one. After a time, when sugar
began to be exported, the Black Swan took
up the trade from Mackay to Maryborough
and Brisbane. The Leichhardt and several
other boats have loaded from the bank, but
all that was altered when the northern ser-
vice calling at Flat Top started, and the
small tender Bronzewing was .'sent up,
though sugar was put from the wharfs
direct into the hold of the steamer for a
while after that time. One regular sail-
ing trader in the late sixties and early
seventies was the Mariposa, Captain Hur-
ley ; he took wool, tallow, and hides to
Sydney, and on occasions many residents
of the time took passage with him. She
was a roomy boat, and had enclosed
cabins. One of the earliest settlers lost his
life in the Cawarra, off Newcastle, in July,
1866. Mr. Anderson opened a store some-
where near where Michelmore and Co. are
now, in 1863. He and his wife were
natives of Victoria. He first took up
Inverurie, so long occupied by the late
Mr. Andrew Florence, near the Racecourse
Central Mill, and gave up his business, in-
tending to start farming. He took his
wife and family to Victoria, and returning
by himself was lost in the ill-fated
Cowarra, Captain Chatfield. It may be
remembered that she left Sydney one even-
ing in bad weather, deeply laden, met one
of the worst easterly gales known on the
coast, tried to run into Newcastle, but
took the oyster bank outside the bar. The
sole survivor was a seaman, who was
picked up off a buoy the next day. A
Mr. Beckerly, who was one of a firm who
opened the first soda water and lemonade
factory at Rockhampton, also lost his life
in her. Coming to more modern times,
the first boat in the North Queensland
trade with an electric light installation was
the Barcoo. The writer boarded her on
one occasion at Flat Top, and was put
into a cabin with an old way-back drover,
who had not seen the sea for twenty years.
Turning in the lower berth, he was
roused from his first sleep by a hurricane
of blowing and sulphurous language, and
"the blooming light won’t blow out.”
G. F. BRIDGMAN.


The Mackay Turf Club.
FRANK SMITH.
It will readily be conceded, we think,
that the leading residents in the early days
of Mackay, with whom rested the respon-
sibility of securing, for future generations,
that portion of the public estate required for
purposes such as the “hospital,” “race-
course,” State School reserves,” and other
public institutions, were a fairly level-
headed lot, and one proof thereof is demon-
strated in the present Racecourse Reserve,
comprising, as it does, 160 acres of valu-
able land, situated in a most convenient
locality, and for which in the year iB6O
a Crown grant was obtained in the names
of the late A. H. Lloyd, T. H. Fitzgerald,
D. Conner, A. Kemmis, and John Allen
(all of whom have long since passed away)
as trustees for racing purposes for the
people of Mackay, in perpetuity.
. A glance back through the long vista
of years between 1866 and the present time
brings with it pleasant and grateful re-
membrances of the names of the gentlemen
above mentioned, who, by their care and
foresight, secured so valuable an asset for
the inhabitants of Mackay and district,
and their successors, for all time to come.
The Reserve in question was, of course,
a bare piece of land when originally
granted, and for some years was not even
fenced in, and the appointments of the
course (if by a stretch of courtesy they
could be so designated) for some years
consisted of a judge’s box, an alleged
weighing-room (a bough shed), and a few
panels of three-railed fencing opposite the
winning post, alongside which fence all the
available buggies and vehicles in the dis-
trict, with their occupants (mostly of the
fair sex), congregated, the mere man of
that period having to be satisfied with a
perch on a buggy wheel, or a seat on the
fence aforesaid.
Some years later (in the year 1873, in
fact), owing to the public-spirited action
of some of the then members of the Mackay
Turf Club, notably Messrs. C. C. Rawson,
D. Conner, W. G. Macartney, Dr. Robert
Mcßurney, and M. Hume Black, all of
whom (with the exception of Mr. C. C.
Rawson, have passed away), the Reserve
was fenced in, the presentgrand-stand
erected, and other improvements effected,
at a cost of about "' funds for which
were obtained from the old Joint Stock
Bank on the personal security of the gentle-
men above mentioned, and from time to
time during later years various other sub-
stantial improvements have been effected,
such as the course proper being improved
and well drained, further extensive build-
ings and improvements erected, and shade
trees planted and well cared for, so that
at the present time the Mackay Racecourse
can fairly be said to vie in completeness
and picturesque surroundings with any of
the Courses in Northern Queensland.
The first President of the Mackay Turf
Club was Mr. Charles Collinson Rawson,
of the Hollow, a prince of sportsmen and
MACKAY NEWSPAPERS.
The jubilee of the first news-
paper in Mackay has yet to he
celebrated, and the “ Mercuiy ’’
has nearly four more years to go
before it completes the fiftieth
year of its existence. The early
settlers did not take long to find
out that one thing was missing,
and in March. 1866, the “ Mer-
cury ” was established by the
late W. O. Hodgkinson, who in
later years was a Minister of the
Crown in Queensland. Old hands
tell some very amusing stories
of the difficulties attending the
issue of the paper. It was a
small four page demy folio size,
and very neatly printed. It was
full of local news, and from a
perusal of its articles we see that
it early took an interest in bring-
ing the potentialities of the dis-
trict to public notice. Mr. Ed-
ward Wright, employed by Mr.
Hodgkinson, eventually pur-
chased the business. In the
good fellows, followed later on by the late
M, Hume Black, M.L.A., who signalised
liis term of office by a whole-hearted sup-
port of the Club, including the presen-
tation of a President’s Cup, and other
benefactions for the benefit and encourage-
ment of racing. His successors in office
were the Hon. D. H. Dalrymple, who,
however, owing to his residing in Bris-
bane during, the greater portion of his
term, did not for that reason take an active
part in the management of the affairs of
the Club, and later on by Mr. H.
Smith, who held the offices of- Vice-
president and President respectively from
about the year 1889 until he retired in
the present year of grace 1912, during the
latter part of which time the bulk of the
present improvements on the Reserve were
effected. . ;
The office of Vice-president was held at
different times by Mr. C. C. Rawson above
mentioned, and his brother, E. S. Rawson
(who has lately passed away, deeply re-
gretted by his old Mackay friends), H. B.
Black, and J. H. McLean, all of whom
have at one time or other done yeoman
service for the Club.
The first Stewards of the Club were be
guarantors to the bank above mentioned,
and whose names will, we feel sure, recall
many pleasant recollections of racing
matters in bygone times.
The first Secretary of the Club was Mr.
Alexander Shields (Sandy), who, it is
pleasing to know, is still to the fore, who
was succeeded at short intervals, by the
late IT. F. Morgan and C. R. Dutallis, and
thereafter in 1882 by the present Secretary
(Mr. H. L. Black), who, it is hoped, will
continue to hold that position for many
years to come, and who, by his long ex-
periences in the early days as an amateur
jockey (certainly one of the best either on
the “flat” or over the “sticks” in Queens-
land), and intimate knowledge of racing
matters generally in all its phases for up-
wards of thirty years past, has been of
signal value to the committees of the
Mackay Turf Club.
The first Judge of the Club was the
late much-lamented Dr. Robert Mcßurney,
who occupied that position for about 25
years, a most able and conscientious
official, and whose decisions we are sate in
saying were never on any occasion doubted,
much less appealed against. No more
striking figure, or a man of stronger per-
sonality than the Doctor, ever held that
position ; and the holding of a race meeting
during his term of office, without his
familiar figure in the Judge’s box, would
have been absolutely unthinkable.
During the Club’s Christmas Meeting
of the year 1884, a most unfortunate and
regrettable contretemps occurred, which
arose out of the fact that a kanaka (an
over-time boy), who evidently had “drink
taken” (probably Mackay rum of the
period), ran amok, and was joined by a
mob of his fellow-countrymen, with the
result that waddies, empty bottles, and any
other weapons available at the moment,
were assiduously and with the utmost
impartiality applied to the heads of all
meantime the district had grown
so rapidly that other papers came.
The “ Standard ” was estab-
lished in 1877. by Messrs. Welch
and li. B. Black. Another paper
called the Mackay “ Free Press,”
appeared, but it only survived a
very short while. In 1888 a
weekly newspaper under the name
of the “Banner” was launched.
It was the mouthpiece of what
was called the Mackay Advanced
Progress Association ; Mr. W. C.
Andrade, a pressman from Ade-
laide was the editor, and promin-
ent supporters were the laf? Mr.
Patrick Maurice Hynes, the late
Mr. Charles Kelley, and Mr. W.
Martin Forster, a well-known
chemist of those days. The latter
is now in San Francisco, where
he runs a chemist shop under the
rather appropriate name of “ The
Pill Box.” The “ Banner ” had
but a short life, ceasing after only
about nine months’ existence. In
February, 1895. was published the
first daily paper in Mackay,
ORIGINAL MEMBERS MACKAY TURF CLUB.
(Standing)—E. Rawson, C. Rawson, Dr. McBurney, R. Martin.
(Sitting)—A. Shiels, D. Connor, J. C. Binney.
those of the white population who hap-
pened for the time being to be within the
sphere of the disturbed area, and for a
few minutes the emeute appeared likely to
assume serious proportions, so much so,
indeed, that preparations were hastily-
made for barricading the grand-stand, so
as to protect, as far as possible, the female
occupants, but fortunately a number of
mounted horsemen from different parts of
the course, whose attention was attracted
by the disturbance, galloped up in the nick
of time, and dispersed the “boys” in a most
drastic and effectual manner, recalling to
some extent the - methods (according to
tradition) usually adopted by the Native
Police when dispersing marauding black-
fellows, stirrup irons, hunting crops, etc.,
being .applied so vigorously and to such
purpose that quite a number of the “boys”
were put out of commission, and in a few
instances lost the number of their mess
altogether. The attack was very sudden
and absolutely unprovoked, and it only
remains to be stated that, after the salu-
tary lesson dealt out to the “boys” on
the occasion referred to, no similar trouble,
or anything, in fact, approaching it, has
ever since taken place, either at the Race-
course, or elsewhere in the district.
Another notable figure on the course at
the first meeting of the Club in 1872 was
that of the first Clerk of the Course, Mr.
Henry Bell (who, happily, we still have
with us), resplendent in all the glories of
the regulation scarlet coal, top boots, and
black plug hat. He was later .on the
official starter of the Club for about eight
years, and, needless to say that, besides
being the terror of rebellious jockeys, his
efficiency in the discharge of his very
onerous duties with the flag (long before
starting barriers were even thought of),
was never at any time in doubt. He was
also, during his term, a very keen sports-
man, and owned and ran a number of
horses at different times with varying
success, notably Tallyrand, Felton, Artel,
and Lottery, etc. He was succeeded as
starter by the late Mr. Willie Macartney
(a brother of the late Sir John Macartney),
a grand sportsman and most amiable
gentleman, and whose name will always
be held in affectionate remembrance by
his old Mackay friends.
The late lamented Dr. G. T. Lloyd was
also for many years a very strong sup-
porter of the Club, both as a member and
a committee-man. He was a most lovable
and cultured gentleman and an enthusiastic
sportsman, and owned and ran at various
times with varying success several horses,
notably Trenny, Cuyp, and Lurid. His
name was always associated with that of
pure and honest sport, and his early and
untimely death was and always will be
deeply regretted by his brother officers and
members of the Club, and the new Judge’s
box recently erected on the course was
dedicated to, and is a fitting tribute to,
the memory of one who at all times gave
his best services for the welfare of the
Club.
Mr. J. C. Binney held the office of Clerk
of the Course for a number of years, and
was also a most efficient and deservedly
Messrs. A. F. Williams, Hugh
George Williams, and Alfred E.
Hatfield were the proprietors.
The little paper, a demy folio,
published at one penny, only
continued daily for six months ;
it was increased to a double sheet
and issued three times weekly at
the price of twopence. In the
year 1905, an amalgamation of
the “Chronicle” and “ Mercury”
was accomplished by Messrs. A.
F. Williams and T. D. (now Sena-
tor) Chataway, and the title of
the older paper was retained as
the name of the daily paper that
was then launched. The “ Mer-
cury ” has continued with its
daily issue uninterruptedly up to
the present day. It has pro-
gressed with tiie district, and at
all times fought for the interests
of the district, and its status is
sure to advance still more in the
years to come The “ Pioneer,”
a little weekly, is published as the
mouthpiece of the Labour Party.
H. L. BLACK,
Sec. Mackay Turf Club.
popular official, and who is still, we are
glad to say, to the fore, hale and hearty.
Amongst the names of other gentlemen who
have rendered valuable services to the Club
for many years as Treasurer, Timekeepers,
and Clerks of the Scales respectively, are
those of Messrs. W. N. Deller, Frank
Myddleton, Fred Reichelmann, T. K.
Horsey, and Fred Clarke.
Racing generally in the early days of
the Mackay Turf Club was in marked con-
trast with that of later years—viz., for long,
distances and big prizes; racing‘pure and
simple, in fact, horses for the bfe money
(Mackay Turf Club Handicap,
having to negotiate a “sprint” of three
miles, and for the “Pioneer,” £2OO, two-
miles, all other events being in like pro
portion, and during which time horses of
the class of Meteor, Darkie, and Wrangler
(ridden by little Harry Black), Ben Bolt
(afterwards winner of the Caulfield Cup
of 1886 and the Doncaster Handicap of
1889), Finnie’s My Love, John TaitV
Arrow, Hotspur (of Steeplechase fame),
Logic, Tarwin, Gambler, Flatcatcher, and.
Bell’s “lot,” above mentioned, etc., etc.,
took part, and amongst the keenest sports-
men of those times, other than those already
mentioned, were F. T. Amherst, at one
time member for the district, Francis Mey—
nell, Robert Walker, Mark Christian of
“Willangi,” Peter Duff of St. Lawrence,
and many others.
These early days (what time Plautus was
Consul) were indeed the palmy days of the
M.T.C., and when amongst other recollec-
tions that occur to us were those when the
stewards and others (irreverently known
as the “ River mob ”) rode to the course
in a perfect phalanx, grey horses in every
rider’s case being the rigour. They were
also the days of numerous luncheon picnic
parties in the members’ paddock, at which,
all hands from the town and country held
high festival. Settling nights under the
auspices of the Club were held at one or
other of the hoslelries in Mackay, at which
the fun was usually more or less fast and
furiops, the whole carnival of the week
winding up with the race ball, which latter
event was indubitably the ball of the sea-
son, the officials of the club attending in.
the regulation scarlet coals, top boots, &c. f
and a vivid recollection remains of re-
cherche suppers, cataracts of champagne,,
mirth and laughter, with possibly a modi-
cum of “ sermons and soda water the day
after. ”
“ Teinpora mutanta,” &c., leaving by
way of consolation, however, many plea-
sant memories of bygone days of the
M.T.C. These reminiscences (or the
greater part of them) are intended to refer
to the early days of the club, only, events-
of any moment of later years being com-
paratively recent history.
FRANK H. SMITH.
Pawpaw Tree, “Bona Vista,” Mackay.


Education in Mackay.
Girls’ State School,
As the population in the Mackay district
increased, and the town grew in import-
ance, the necessity for the establishment
of aSt ate School was realised. Appli-
• cation was made to the Department of
Public Instruction, and Mr. J. R. Norris
was sent from the Education Office, Bris-
bane, to open a State School in Mackay.
Mr. Norris arrived in the schooner Wave
of Life, and opened the first State School
.in Mackay on 14th September, 1871. The
building which served the purpose of a
school-house was a most unpretentious
structure, consisting of rooms situated near
the site of the present playshed. The
■school ground was located on what was
•then regarded as the outskirts of the town.
The land was covered with scrub and long
.grass, the latter being a great harbour for
snakes. The grass and undergrowth were
so thick in the vicinity of the schuof-
ground that persons might pass within a
short distance of one another and their
presence only made apparent by the noise
created in walking through the herbage.
It was no uncommon occurrence to see
kangaroos and wallabies bounding through
the scrub. There was no drainage at the
time, and rain water was accustomeo ro
lie under the school for weeks together
during the wet season, especially during
the months of May and June. Fever and
ague, a most prostrating malady, was very
prevalent, and caused a great deal of
suffering.
On the opening day Mr. Norris enrolled
forty-one pupils (boys and girls), and with
this small beginning State School education
(briefly comprehended in the familiar terms
—reading, writing, and arithmetic) was
commenced in Mackay. The second week
the pupils increased to seventy-eight, and
after the Christmas holidays to one hundred
and twenty. As the number of scholars
increased, Mr. Norris required assistance,
and Mr. James Wareham and Mr. William
Kemp came forward as the first pupil
teachers. Year after year the increase be-
came greater, and the Department sent
Mr. W. G. Hodges to Mackay as assistant
teacher, the first assistant in Mackay.
When the number of pupils reached 650,
the boys and girls were separated, and Miss
Large (present head mistress of Girls* cen-
tral State School, Brisbane) was sent to
take charge of the Girls’ School. The
boys remained in the old school-house for
some years, until the accommodation was
rendered inadequate on account of increased
attendance, and the new school was erected.
Amongst the first committeemen who
performed yeomen service in the cause of
education, and at the same time a liberal
contributor to the State School at Mackay,
was the late Mr. Geo. Smith ; others who
were strong upholders of .the State School
being Mr. P. McKenney and Mr. Thos.
Pearce, li is due 10 the early efforts of
these men, backed up by the labours of
subsequent committeemen, that education
prospered to such an extent in the Mackay
district. As the district expanded and
country centres sprang into existence,
schools were established in each, and at
the present time educational facilities are
provided in all the surrounding centres.
J. R. Norris.
Technical College and High School.
Mr. J. R. Norris opened the first school
in Mackay in 1871, and at the time was
the youngest head teacher in the State. He
joined the civil service in Brisbane in 1864
as a pupil teacher. He is the senior in
the State, and one of the senior officers in
the Public Service of Queensland.
Mabel Norris.
Miss Alice Mabel Constance Norris is
a Mackay native, who has had an ex-
ceedingly brilliant scholastic career. She
commenced school at Mackay, but after-
wards went to Brisbane, and won a State
scholarship from the Fortitude Valley
School for Girls. She gained an ex-
hibition to a University in 1901, and was
also the holder of the Queen’s scholarship
from the Ipswich Grammar School and
the Fairfax prize in the Sydney Junior
examination. She gained the B.A. degree
at the Sydney University in 1908. She
was assistant teacher in the Girls* Gram-
mar School at Ipswich from January, 1910,
to December, 1911, and now occupies a
prominent position on the staff of the High
School in her native town.
First State School Mackay.
Boy’s State School.


J.e.HUTT©N RroelLie
. c
Manufacturers of
Famous
“ PINEAPPLE ”
HAMS
and
BACON
and all Other Pork
Products.
Agents for
STANDARD & PRAIRIE
CONDENSED MILK.
PINEAPPLE BRAND
*
&
m
a*
,-r-xi
MS
\ V
lifter
m
» 4
** x
Nothing
to Argue
About!"
m
V(4
t
%3Sfl
r
:‘*7
X r
i
HAMS ““BACON Si
AGENTS for following
Choice Lines —
CHEESE
Yangan
Ramsay
Kooroongarra
Clifton
Leyburn.
BUTTER
Silverwood
Oakey \
Clifton
Coronation.
Roma Street, Brisbane.
The Mining Industry.
Somewhere about the year 1873, when
in Maryborough, 1 was asked by some
mining speculators to visit Mackay, and
arrange to inspect some copper properties
they had taken up in the neighbourhood
of Mount Orange and Mount Flora. 1
called at the office of the A,S.N. .Company
and inquired how I could get to Mackay.
On finding that I would first have to go
to Brisbane, and wait there until a steamer
was going north to Townsville and Mackay
once a month, I applied to . the owner of
a little cutter of about 10 tons burthen,
who agreed to take me if I went down
the Mary River to the Dandathu Sawmills,
and wait there for him, so that the Cus-
toms people would not know that he was
taking a passenger. When I got on board
I found that, in addition to the owner,
there was a first officer and quarter-master,
and that the crew, consisting of a young
Dane (who had once been in to Mackay in
a steamer) and a lad of about 15 years.
The owner had never been north of Mary-
borough before. In the afternoon of the
second day, when we were getting up
pretty close to the Percy Islands, with
numerous islands to the north and north-
east coming into view, the lad was placed
at the helm, and the two sailors, with the
owner, retired to the cuddy to consult
the chart, and decide on what should be
the course to steer for the night. Feeling
a little anxious, I lay down on the deck,
in order to hear what the two sailors
had to say. The quarter-master spoke
first, and laid down the course that should
be steered during the night. The Dane
was then asked if he thought it was right,
when he most emphatically said, “No; for
if we steer that course we will to a cer-
tainty be wrecked on a reef.” The course
we laid was very different from that of the
ex-quarter-master. The owner then looked
up to me, and asked if I knew anything
about navigation. On my replying in the
negative, he said, “Never mind, come
down and advise me which course I should
steer.” I at once advised that of the
Dane’s. In good time next morning we
were well up to Flat Top, and as the ex-
quarter-master said he had often been in to
Mackay, he was given the helm. He at
once altered the course to almost due west,
when someone noticed that there was a
man standing on the western point of
Flat Top waving a flag in a very excited
manner. The owner decided on running
back, to find out what was the matter.
The man told us if we continued steering
such a westerly course we would soon be
ashore. We followed his directions, and
were soon off the entrance of the river,
but as it was near low water we could not
cross the bar, and had to anchor, even-
tually getting the dingey over the side and
rowing up to Mackay.
As soon as possible after my arrival at
Wills’ Hotel a meeting was called of all
those having an interest in the Mount
Flora and Orange Mines, and everything
arranged for my getting there and persons
to show me round. There were thirteen or
fourteen properties to report on.
I should say here that in the early part
of 1872 three shearers who had been em-
ployed on the Peak Downs Station, shear-
ing, were making for Oxford Downs
Station, their names being William
Orange, Pat McGrain, and ■ —. McFadzen.
When near Mount Flora they sighted a
wallaroo, to which they -gave chase, and
it led them over a large outcrop of copper
ore. They let the wallaroo go, and gave
all their attention to the lode, and even-
tually found about a dozen more. With
assistance from outsiders, the three men
then took up three areas of 100 acres,
calling the first Wallaroo. The terms were
£i per acre cash and £1 per acre to be
expended in development work, when they
were granted their deeds. In order to get
the development work done, they offered
one-fourth interest to Mr. G. Fox, of Broad-
sound, who arranged with the directors of
the Peak Downs Company to let their
mining manager inspect the property, and
if they were satisfied as to its value, to
expend the £1 per acre as required by the
Government, on condition that the 300
acres would be put under offer to them, «nd
that all ore raised during development work
to belong to the company. The sale of
this ore subsequently gave them a net profit
of On completion of the work the
company offered cash, which was
indignantly refused. They subsequently
made a second offer and third offer, this
being 40,000 fully paid up shares to £1
in a company of which was also
refused. On completing the inspection of
the mines, except Mount Flora, I returned
to Mackay, and handed over my reports.. 1
was asked to return to the mines and
expend about in developing work,
on what was known as the Front ano
Back selections, the latter being now
known as Rogers’ freehold, the late Mr.
George Smith acting as secretary for the
syndicate. I developed one good lode hy a
tunnel on the Front selection, and two.
excellent lodes on the Back selection, sink-
ing a shaft 60 feet deep on the best lode.
This property was thought so highly of
by the Inspector of Mines (Taylor, of
London) that he offered there and ther>
£'B,oo<> cash, but it was refused by the
owners.
On B. L. Creek.


“There’s something you WANT always
waiting for you at the ANYIL STORES,”
and that ‘something’ is always of High
Quality.
THE “ANVIL” Stock in trade, which
is the largest held anywhere in
Australia, north of Cape Palmerston,
consists of Bar, Rod, Sheet Plate, Hoop
and Angle Iron, Steel and other Metals
in all forms and sizes they are ever
needed in; Anvils, Vyces, Bellows
Blowers, and everything for Blacksmiths
and blacksmithing. Dray, Waggon,
Springcart, Buggy and Sulky Wheels,
Naves, Spokes, Felloes, Rims—everything
for Wheelwrights and Coach Builders.
msm
STORES
ANV L
The “ANYIL” always stands for the
Highest Quality in everything, and the
Lowest Prices it can pay its way with,
in all things.
Agricultural Implements of j all
kinds; a large and varied stock. The
Southern Cross Windmill in all sizes.
All kinds and sizes of Farm and Irriga-
tion Pumps. Oil Engines. Cocks,
Valves, Pipings, Fittings, Gauges, Oils,
Packings, and everything for Steam, Oil
and Gas Engines.
Tools for all Trades, Workers and
Works, of all kinds and calibres.
Bedsteads, Cots, Mattresses, Mirrors,
Chairs, Tables,Stoves, Mangles, and every-
thing for all kinds of House Furnishings.
SHEFFIELD CUTLERY and Electro-
Plate in high quality; exhaustless quantity and endless variety. “Eye Witness” Pocket
Knives and Razors. A vast and varied stock of Crockery, and Household Glassware,
Clocks and Watches. ■, .. ' .'t"'
Guns, Rifles,'Rpyofyefs. - Ammunition of all kinds, and everything in Shooting, and
Fishing Tackle. Cricketing and Tennis Tools—everything for both games—a large and
varied stock.
Timber of all kinds and sizes, but
only pile quality—the best—for all kinds of ,buildings and all kinds of repairing.- .
White and Red Lead, White Zinc, Oils, Colours, ground in oil and dry, Sheet, Plate
and Mirror, Glass and everything for Painters and Painting. . ,i
Everything in Building, Furnishing and General Ironmongery, and all kinds of English
and American Hardware. Tinsmiths, Plumbers, Gasfitters. Everything in all kinds of
Sheet Metal work made and repaired.
GROCERIES, PROVISIONS and FARM PRODUCE Fresh in TWICE EVERY WEEK at the
llllllllltllllllllllllllllllllllllUIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIMIIIIIIIttillllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllinillllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillllliiiiiniiiiliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiitiiiiiiintiiiiiiiiiitllliiiillllliiilllllllilllUIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIMIIIII
HOLYOAKES PHARMACY,
Where you get everything of the Best.
It’s ho use arguing, the fact remains
Holyoake’s Drugs and Medicin.es
“Are tKe Best” that Money can Buy.
If you have to take Medicine, you may as well take the BEST, especially as it does not cost you any more. Last month,
July, was the 20th Anniversary of Wm. W. HOLYOAKE’S business career in Mackay, he having started business here on July
20th, 1892, and he is glad to take the opportunity of thanking his very many friends and customers —the terms he hopes are
synonymous —for their continued trust, both in his professional capacity, as a compounder of Medicines, and his business
reputation for keeping only the best of everything.
Holyoake’s Pharmacy, Victoria St., Mackay
MOUNT BRITTEN GOLDFIELD.
Mount Britten goldfield was opened
in 1880. The first man who found
gold never received credit for it, nor
the reward for making the discovery.
His name is lint Hetman, who is
still fossicking about the country. He
is one of those dauntless, adventur-
ous spirits who would brave the dan-
gers of the bush, armed only with a
tomahawk, to enable him to blaze
the track. A reward was given to
one man for discovering the gold ;
but Heenan obtained no share of
such reward. Immediately upon the
proclamation of the field, a rush
ensued, miners and others in search
of the “stuff that glitters” proceeded
thither from Cooktown, Clermont,
Charters Towers, and other mining
centres. The highest population was
1 too. Nuggets of 80 ozs. and over
were obtained, the largest being 84
ozs. A ten-head private battery was
erected on the field. Gold was won
both from reef and alluvial, but it is
impossible to estimate the amount
actually won. All the gold was sent
through the A.B.C. Bank (then the
Joint Stock), and .was valued at .£3
xos. per oz. - After a few years a
falling' off in the yield began, and
the field eventually petered out
through lack of capital to purchase
the required machinery—it was not
through want of energy. The Finch-
Hattons had a claim called the
“ Little Wanderer,” out of which they
took a crushing for a yield of 7 ozs.
to the ton. Mr. John Stevenson,
M.L.A. for Normanby,, was a useful
member. In 1886, at the Indian and
Colonial Exhibition, mention was
made in the award list of samples
from “ Edith May ” claim. Mount
Britten, owned by Reckett and Mills.
The prize was a commemorative
medal, handsomely designed, and a
magnificent certificate, which is a
veritable treasure. Included in the
list of signatures on the commemora-
tive certificate is that of the King.
Soon after opening the field, busi-
ness places sprang into existence—•
five hotels, five stores, four butchers,
four bakers (including Frank Shears,
at present in Mackay). Mr. E. J.
Marryatt (of Lamberts, Ltd.) con-
ducted a store for the then firm of
Pearce and Marryatt. It was prac-
tically the only independent store, as
others were owned by the publicans,
both businesses being worked in con-
junction. A school, public hall, and
a Good Templars Lodge were erec-
ted ; while periodical visits were paid
by the Rev. McLaren, of Mackay.
There was a Post and Telegraph
Office (D. H. Robinson, postmaster).
The Resident Police Magistrate for
some years was Mr. J. V. Williams.
At the commencement, the prisoners
were chained to a log. One night
a prisoner, during the absence of the
police, got the log on his shoulder,
proceeded to the nearest hotel, re-
galed himself, and then returned to
his alfresco prison.
A Progress Association was formed
with- Mr. J. H. Mills as the first
president, and through their efforts,
which were despatched through the
agency of Mr. J. Stevenson, M.L.A.,
succeeded in getting the public offices
referred to. There are many scenic
spots in the neighbourhood, chief
among these being the Marling
Spikes, which are composed of vol-
canic ash. Apart from mining, Mr.
Mills had developed the bee industry
to respectable dimensions—6o hives
—and exported the product. To-day
Mount Britten is a deserted village,
the only person likely to be encoun-
tered there is an occasional fos-
sicker.
EUNGELLA.
Eungella was proclaimed a goldfield in
1889, and was first opened by an explorer
named Willie Welsh, who discovered the
Lady Norman reef. The Orchid reef,
situated a few chains from the battery,
Road through the Scrub, Eungella Range Road.
yielded 118 ozs. gold from 3 tons of speci-
men stone. The battery was driven by
water power, and worked admirably, but
owing to the refractory nature of the stone
the gold could not be treated by it. It
had to be sent away, and packing was
very expensive in those days.
THE MINING INDUSTRY.—Continued.


- '
mm
.i, . !
s • \
t.
as
trf*
ISiiiSiliiiißiilßilK-
£ *
.j , . T s*:;'*",t-.'i|fr,i-v iM!i j '.'Ar
.' ;ag *
■’*».. ’ ’ Vi
f
ST
Ross &“ Crompton,
AUCTIONEERS,
AUDITORS, APPROVED VALUATORS Under Succession and Probate Duties’ Act,
LAND VALUATORS, STOCK. FARM and GENERAL COMMISSION AGENTS,
Auction Sales Conducted in any Part of the Town or Country.
AGENClES—Commercial Union Assurance Co. (Fire, Accident, Marine), Hassell’s A 1
Cane Manures, Ruston Proctor’s Oil Engines, Sunshine Harvester Implements, The
Bunyip Forest Devil.' Andersen’s Manure Distributor, etc , etc.
We have full Lists of Freehold and Leasehold Properties for sale, and will be
pleased to furnish particulars of properties. If enquirers will let us know their require-
ments we will at all times be happy to give them all information in our power and advise
new settleis. With our long personal knowledge of this district combined wbh a prac-
tical knowledge of SUGAR AGRICULTURE, we are in a position to help new arrivals
to secure good properties.
ROSS & CROMPTON, Sydney Street, MACKAY.
Farmers’ Agents, Land Valuators, and Real Property Salesmen.
£
* .i*
n
.’‘l'' I
.i
I
ml
■
I
>/,.
■* ■
»?■
i* *
m mmj
Sl 1
• -i * I vA
Wm. Geo. Hodges,
AUCTIONEER,
Stock, Station, Mining, Forwarding and
General Agent, Accountant, Licensed
Auditor, and Accepted Valuer folr
Succession Duty.
AGENCIES :
National Fire and Marine, Phoenix Royal and Yorkshire Fire Offices, Em-
ployers’ Liability Company insuring against all accidents.
Wright Heaton, Permewan, Wright (Sydney), Pitt and Scott (London &
New York), McCulloch, Forwarding Agent (Melbourne), Paul, Julius,
and Co., Moss and Co. (Brisbane).
Union Trustees Co., of Australia, Ltd. This being a continuing body, and
undertakes Trusts and Executorships extending over all time.
SECRETARY :
Pioneer Permanent Building and Investment Society.
List of Town and Country Properties for Sale on application.
‘ ■ I
[ .
I--*- • 1 ■V-’*" .. 'l'V'jL-L#
a
&
I
ill
Xi. <J. MENG,
General Blacksmith and Wheelwright,
HATTON.
Agricultural Implement Work a Speciality. Repairs Executed Promptly
We Are Out to Oblige You
We Are Out to Supply You
We Are Out to Defy You !
To Get Better Values in Quality FOOTWEAR
than we are Now Offering.
HANNAH’S
Where the Better
Shoes Are, . . .
VICTORIA STREET, MACKAY.
BEIRNE (Mackay) LIMITED,
The House of the People.
We are DRAPERS, MERCERS, CLOTHIERS,
and MANUFACTURERS. We Stock BOOTS
and SHOES; aIso,’BEDSTEADS, BEDDING, etc.
We work our Business in conjunction with T. C. BEIRNE & Co.,
BRISBANE, we issue the same Catalogue, and will deliver
into your home Goods at Catalogue Price. Our New Cata-
logue is now out. Write for copy—we will Post Free.
BEIRNE (Mackay) LIMITED,
The House of the People.
V' .*» •■ :
&
m
xit%%
m
Ct H l£
•f HO
nn
■-L
TATTERSALL’S HOTEL,
SYDNEY STREET (next Custom House),
TOM ROCHE - - Proprietor.
The Best House for the Working Man. Clean, Comfortable Rooms. Tip-top Liquors
and a Splendid Table (under Mrs. ROCHE’S Supervision).
TARIFF ■ —4/- a day or JBI a weeK.


Local Authorities.
MAYOR OF MACKAY,
(Alderman H. D. Petersen).
Mackay Municipal Council was pro-
claimed in 1869, area 8 square miles, total
valuation ,£213,499. An excellent water
supply, reputed to be one of the best and
purest in the Commonwealth, is provided
by the Town Council. Gas is also laid on
throughout the town, controlled by a pri-
vate company. The town is protected
against fire by a well-equipped Fire Brigade
housed in their own quarters, a two-storeyed
building in Sydney street. Mr. F. Turner
is the Superintendent. The first Municipal
Council met for the transaction of business
on Ist December, 18C9, and was comprised
of the following members: Aldermen D.
H. Dalrymple (Mayor), Chas. Keeley, P.
McKenney, John Duffy, John Allen, and
W, Mcßrycle. At the first meeting of the
Council there were present Aid. Dalrymple,
Keeley, McKenney, Duffy, and Mcßryde.
Aid. Dalrymple was elected Mayor nem.
con. The meeting look place in the Court
House, lent for the purpose by Mr, Hay.
It was decided, inter alia, to memoralise
the Government for a grant of land on
which to erect buildings for the Council.
At the second meeting on 20th December
of the same year, there were five applicants
for the position of Town Clerk ; Messrs.
Purves and Ramsay receiving an equal
number of votes, the Mayor gave his cast-
ing vote in favour of Mr. Purves. The
salary was fixed at £l5O per annum. Mr,
M. J. Fay was appointed assessor at the
remuneration of £l5 per annum. At the
third meeting on 3rd January, 1870, t
was decided to write the Colonial Secretary,
requesting that a moiety of the proceeds
of all land sold at auction within the muni-
cipality during the previous year, be paid
to the Council. A reply was received,
pointing out that municipalities could onlv
claim a moiety in respect of such land
within the municipal boundary as were
sold subsequent to the date of their in-
corporation. The fourth meeting passed
by-laws dealing with the erection of shades
and awnings over the footpaths, bathing
in the river, the dog nuisance, formation
of streets, slaughtering of cattle and sale
of butcher’s meat, and compelling owners
to drain their lands until the corporation
had made main drains. On 17th January
the by-law was passed altering the width
of the pavements to 10. feet. It was also
decided to levy a rate in accordance with
the assessment, viz. : One shilling in the
£, to be paid in half-yearly instalments in
advance. Mr. J. Dowling’s tenderer £39,
for the erection of a pine building, 'with
hardwood framework, and shingles,
measuring 10 feet by 14 feet, was accepted.
At the following meeting Alderman Keeley
moved’ that the Corporation apply to the
Government for a loan of £2,000, for the
TOWN HALL.
MACKAY COUNCIL.
Left to right (front row). —A. J. McLean, W. G. Hodges, H. D. Petersen (Mayor), J. Christie. C, Fitzsimon, Clerk (siting)
(Back row). —T. Dowie (Inspector), F. Morley (Town Clerk), G. B. Fay, J. Kingwell, G. M. Cameron,
R. Hamilton, P. Robertson (Overseer).
PIONEER SHIRE COUNCIL.
Front row.—C. Ford, Inspector (sitting), E. Hannan, J. McGinn, Clerk of Works (Standing),
E. Denman, R. Kippen, W. L. Grant (sitting).
Second row.—F. Clark (Shire Clerk), J. P. Moule, F. J. Stevens (standing), G. Johnson,
W. H. Kirkup, J. R. Smith (in front of steps). Back row.—C. McGinn (Clerk), H. Joseph (“Mercury
Reporter).
rymplc; 1872, Alex. Shiels; 1873, Oeo.
Smith and I). H. Dalrymple ; 1874, "
Dalrymple; 1875, Geo. Smith; 1876, Geo
Smith and K. M. Wills; . 1877, K- M.
Wills; 1878, Wm. Marsh; 1579, C. R.
Dutaillis ; 1880, W. H. Paxton; 1881, Geo.
Smith; 1882, K. S. Rawson; 1883, Thus.
Pearce; 1884, M. J. Fay; 1885, Jin.
ALDERMAN McLEAN.
(First Mackay native to be
Mayor of Mackay.)
purpose of commencing works and im-
provements within the municipality. An
amendment was moved by the Mayor, that
the Government be called upon to refund
portion of the money received by them for
the sale of lands which had been withheld
from its proper channel —namely, for the
purpose of forming and keeping in repair
roatTs to those lands. The amendment was
carried. A bylaw was also passed at the
meeting regulating furious riding and
driving. The finances now stood at £5l
17s. iod., while accounts totalled £5l 13s.
6d., leaving a credit balance of 4s. 4d.
Alderman Dalrymple held the position of
Mayor for three years in succession. The
municipality comprised one area, and con-
sisted of six aldermen, until 10th June,
1885, when wards were created and the
Council’s numerical strength increased to
nine. The first election under the ward
system took place the following year, ana
resulted in the return of Aldermen Geo.
Dimmock, N. C. Morthensen, . W.
Abraham, A. Mclntyre, D. Shepherd,
V. Chataway, H. L. Black, Jas. Thomas,
and Evan Davies. Aid. Dimmock was
elected Mayor. In 1903 the municipality
was constituted a town, Alderman C. P.
Ready being Mayor in that year.
The following is a complete list of ‘he
Mayors since Mackay was proclaimed o
municipality: 1869, D. H. DalrympD;
1870, D. H. Dalrymple; 1871, D. H. Dal


Harvey; 1886, Geo. Dimmock; 1887, ,\
Mclntyre; 1888, H. L. Black; 1889, W.
Robertson; 1890, W. G. Hodges; 1891,
W. J. Beirne and H. B. Black; 1892, A.
Pirie; 1893, N. C. Morthensen; 1894,
Geo. Dimmock; 1895, H. B. Black and
P. M. Hyhes; 1896, W. G. Hodges; .1897,
H. B. Black; 1898, J. H. Thornber ; 1899,
S. Lambert; 1900, Chas. Morley; 1901,
W. G. Hodges; >902, Cecil Smith; 1903,
C. P. Ready; 1904, T. D. Chataway ; 1905,
T. D. Chataway; 1906, T. D. Chataway;
1907, A. McLean; 1908, C. R. Klugh;
1909, E. J- Marryatt; 1910, Jas. Christie;
igji, Jas. Christie; 1912, H. D. Petersen.
The present Town Council is composed
as follows :
South Ward.—Aldermen H. D. Petersen
(Mayor), R. Hamilton, and J. M. King-
well.
East Ward.—Aldermen /)lex. Mcßean,
Jas. Christie, and Geo. Fay.
West Ward.- —Aldermen Geo. Cameron,
C. P. Ready, and W. G* Hodges.
Town Clerk. —Mr. Fred Morley.
The Pioneer Shire Council was pro-
claimed in 1880. Area, 176,489 square
miles. In the beginning of 1912 a separate
Shire called Sarina was created. Members
of Pioneer Shire Council for 1912 are as
follows :—No. 1 Division ; Councillors R.
Kippen, E. Denman, and W. L- Grant.
No. 2 Division : Crs. W. H. Kirkup (Pre-
sident), F. J. Stevens, and J. P. Moule.
No. 3 Division: Crs. J. R. Smith, G.
Johnson, and E. Hannan. Valuation,
Shire clerk: Mr. Fred Clark.
Sarina Shire Council.—Crs. A. Innes
(President), W. H. Nolan, J. C. Nicholson,
W. R. Williams, A. E. Atherton. Shire
Clerk: Mr. J. H. Nicol. Valuation,
There is a Joint Health Board, composed
of members of the Town Council and Shire
Council of Pioneer.
The Mackay Harbour was constituted by
an Act passed in 1896. The first Board
was elected in February, 1897, and the
first Board meeting held on March nth,
1897, with Mr. E. M. Long as Chairman.
Members of the present Board are as fol-
lows: Messrs. J. M. Kingwell (Chairman),
J. Swanson, J. E. Joseph (Town represen-
tatives), G. Wolfe, W. J. Edmonds, T.
Whitcomb, W. L. Grant (Pioneer Shire
representatives), T. Atherton (Sarina Shire
representative), A. Williams (Nebo Shire
representative).
Education. —The educational institutions
include a Technical College and High
School (Mr. H. Denniss, Principal); Boys’
State School (Mr. J. R. Norris, Head
Teacher); Girls' State 'School (Miss C.
Wilson, Head Teacher); High School pri-
vate),Mr. G. J. Perkins (Principal) ; Roman
Catholic School (Sisters of Mercy).
Lodges.—The following lodges are repre-
sented : Masonic, English, Scotch, and
Queensland Constitutions; Oddfellows—
Mackay Lodge, M.U.1.0.0.F., and
Federal (female branch); P.A.F.5.0.A.,
Britannia Lodge ; U.A.0.D., Pioneer of the
North; 1.0. Foresters, Male and Female
Courts; H.A.C.B. Society, St. Patrick’s
and St. Mary's, Male and Female Branch ;
1.0.G.T., Belivah and Wilberforce
(Juvenile); Rechabites and Star of Mackay
Tent, with Juvenile Branch; Queensland
Temperance Alliance, Mackay Branch.
SARINA SHIRE COUNCIL.
From left to right (standing).—P. Atherton, W. H. Nolan, W. R. Williams, C. Nicholson.
(Sitting.)—A. Innes (Chairman), Nicol (Clerk and Overseer).
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE.
Amongst the important institutions
of Mackay is the Chamber of Com-
merce. Since its formation in 1887,
the Chamber has done much useful
work for the town of Mackay, as well
as the surrounding district. Monthly
meetings of the general body are held
and during the month sub-com-
mittees attend to the different de-
partments. The Chamber has proved
very useful in assisting the welfare
of the town.
MACKAY HARBOUR BOARD.
The shipping facilities of Mackay
are controlled by the Mackay Har-
bour Board, whose members are
elected by the ratepayers of the town
of Mackay and shires of Sarina,
Pioneer, and Neho. The Board was
first elected in 1807. The port is not
a good one for shipping, the river
being almost dry at low tide ; con-
sequently shipping has to be carried
out in the ocean under the lea of
Flat Top Island. All efforts to im-
prove the river having failed, it is
now intended to construct a port at
Fait Top, with a viaduct connecting
the mainland, over which railway
communication will he established.
Mackay District Lighthouses and Adjacent Islands.
CAPTAIN E. S. GREENFIELD, Harbour Master.
Government Steamer “ Relief ” in Gloucester Bay.
Leaving Flat Top in the Govern-
ment steamer Relief for Dent Island,
a course is nirsue-i between Slade
land and Slade Point, avoiding the
dangerous reef whicn is passed on
the starboard hand, marked by a red
buoy on its eastern edge. In fresh
S.E. weather, owing to the vessel’s
course being almost parallel to the
swell, a considerable amount of roll-
ing takes p!"ce, the effect of which
is soon apparent on the faces of
those not immune to the vagaries
of the sea. A pleasant change, how-
ever, soon takes place as Slade Point
is rounded, and the vessel kept away
in a north-westerly course, the mo-
tion being considerably reduced by
the sea being now right aft. Pro-
ceeding through the channel in the
Blackwood Shoals, the mainland
being fairly close on the port hand,
and passing in succession Mackay’s
seaside resort, Eimeo, Green Island,
Cape Hillshow, and Port Newry.
From this point the mainland gradu-
ally recedes to the westward, and
forms what is known as Repulse
Bay. The story goes that the name
was derived from the fact that the
famous navigator Captain Cook, in
passing up the coast for the first time,
mistook the low land which, at a dis-
tance, was under the horizon, for
the main track, and only found out
his mistake when well into the bay.
This took the best part of another
day to rectify, having to beat out
against a south-east wind. On the
starboard hand can be seen the
islands of the Cumberland Group.
After steaming for some five hours,
we find ourselves abreast of Cape
Conway, a bold rugged mass rising
some 1600 feet above the level of the
sea. The slopes are covered with a
dense scrub intermingled with pine
and occasional large cedar trees.
The cape is also important as mark-
ing the southern entrance to the
interesting and picturesque Whit-
sunday Passage, which we have now
fairly entered. The passage is some
35 miles long, and varies in width
from six miles in its southern en-
trance to two miles at its narrowest
abreast of Dent Island. Very strong
currents are here met with, the flood
tide setting south and the ebb tide
to the north, and running at springs
at the rate of f our and five knots an
hour. The mainland has now ap-
proached to some three miles from
our course on the port hand, and
presents a bold, mountainous appear-
ance, very he'avily timbered. No sign
of habitation is to be seen, the coun-
try being still in a virgin state and
awaiting settlement, for which it is
most suitable. Dent Island can now
be seen right ahead, and distant
some ten miles from Cape Conway.
On arrival, we drop anchor close to
the lighthouse in some 12 fathoms
of water. Mails and supplies are
transhipped to the whale boat, and
landed in a small natural crevice, at
the upper end of which a boatshed
has been built. The lighthouse and
cottages are situated on the western
slope of the island, and present a
very pretty and picturesque appear-
ance. The light, which is revolving,
stands at an elevation of, 120 feet
above sea level, and is of the fourth
order dioptric, flashing every thirty
seconds, and is visible for a distance
of sixteen miles. Its presence re-
moves all danger from the safe navi-
gation of the passage. The station
is in charge of Superintendent Reid,
with his son Cecil, as assistant. Mrs.
Reid and daughter also reside on the
island. Situated immediately at the
hack is Hamilton Island, at present
leased by Mr. W. Cooke, as a sheep
run. Three miles to northward of
Hamilton is Whitsunday Island, the
largest of the Cumberland Group,
being about eleven miles long by nine
broad. Numerous hays and inlets
abound all round the island, Cid
Hartom, on its north-west side, being
a safe and commodious anchorage for
vessels of any size. It is heavily tim-
bered with pine and other timbers,
many thousands of feet having been
removed by the well-known firm of
Rooney Bros., of Townsville. Mr. C.
Withnal also resided on the island,
and kept a saw-milling plant going
for some fifteen years, until the tim-
ber began to get too far away to be
profitable. Port Molle on the wes-
tern side of the passage, also affords
a secure anchorage for vessels of all
sizes, sheltered from all winds. It is
formed by the northern portion of
Long Island and the mainland of the
beach. There is to seen, at times,
at low water, the keel and timbers of
a wooden vessel of about 400 tons,
the copper nails of which can he seen
to he hand-made. How she came
there, or what became of her crew,
can only he a matter of conjecture
Molle Islands, which form the eastern
boundary to the Molle Passage, are
leased by Messrs. W. and A. Cooke
as sheep runs, with, I believe, satis-
factory results. They, with their
wives and families, reside on the
FLAT TOP (showing anchorage).
LOCAL AUTHORITIES.—Continued.


South Molle Islands, Excellent
fishing abounds at all the islands in
the vicinity, and a week could very
■profitably be spent exploring the
nooks and land-locked bays of this
locality, the beauties of which must
be seen to be appreciated.
Having now completed our mission
■at the lighthouse, and dispensed the
last item 'of news, we take leave of
the island residents for another
month, and set our course for Pine
Islet, a distance of about 110 miles
to the southward and eastward.
Situated immediately to the south-
•east of Dent Island is a remarkable
granite mass, known locally as Lion
Island, the name being suggested by
the fact that when brought on an
■easterly bearing a splendid repre-
sentation of the lion couchant is
pourtrayed. Lindeman Island, situa-
ted about a mile further south, pre-
sents a very attractive appearance,
Dent Island Lighthouse and Residence.
(The last message from the “ Yongala ” was received
at this Lighthouse.)
rising on its eastern side to a smooth
grassy peak about 700 feet. It is
abundantly timbered, and well sup-
plied with permanent water, and is
at present leased as a sheep run by
Captain Addert-.m, who, with his wife,
has resided on the island for the past
fourteen years. Almost adjoining is
Shaw Island, about six miles long,
its western shore being a series of
white sandy bays bound by beautiful
■coral reefs, which, though dangerous
to shipping, present to the eye a
wondrous picture of marine growth
•of all descriptions. The island is
sparsely wooded, its highest point.
Shorn Peak, rising to an altitude of
1400 feet. A splendid natural har-
bour exists sheltered from all winds
;and carrying from seven to twenty
fathoms at low water. Burning Point
■on its SAY. side, forms the eastern
boundary of Whitsunday Passage.
From this onwards the islands of the
'Cumberland Group become more
■scattered, and we pass in succession
the Anchor Islands, Goldsmith Group,
Allonby, Carlisle, and the Brampton
Islands ; the latter has recently been
taken up as a sheep run. On it some
1500 coco-palms were-planted by the
Agricultural Department some years
ago. but with very indifferent results,
only a few of the trees proving fruit-
ful. Situated at the south-west cor-
ner ot the plantation, can be seen the
lonely grave of the late Captain
William, for many years master of
the China Steam Navigation Co.’s
steamer “Chingtu.” He died at sea
on the voyage from Brisbane to
Townsville, and was buried on the
island. On the return of the vessel
from China, a marble headstone was
erected to his memory as a mark of
respect by the officers and crew of
the vessel. We next pass Keswick
and St. Bees Islands, the latter being
under lease to Messrs. Bussuttin
Bros., as a sheep run and plso horse
breeding purposes, for which the
island seems 'veil adapted, the les-
sees being well satisfied with the
results. Flat Top can now be seen
some fifteen miles on our starboard
hand, but is again soon lost to sight
as we pursue our course towards
Pine Islet, which from this point is
distant about sixty miles. A wide
stretch of water now presents itself
to our view lined on the north-eas-
tern side by the islands and reefs
forming the inner fringes of the Bar-
rier, and to the south by the Bever-
ley Group. Passing about two miles
to the westward of Sphinx Islet, we
soon afterwards arrive at Pine Islet,
and anchor under the lighthouse in
twelve fathoms of water. Mails and
supplies are landed by means of a
derrick erected on the rocks, which
takes the goods straight out of the
whale boat and places them some 50
feet above the water, from whence
they are carried up to the dwellings.
The island, which is of small extent,
presents a very rugged appearance
to seaward, and is covered with pine
trees of a very- stunted nature, prob-
ably- from the lack of soil, there being
very little on the island. The light-
house and dwellings are erected on
the summit, at the south end of the
island. The light, which is revolv-
ing, is of the second order or diop-
tric, and stands at an elevation of
]<So feet, visible for a distance of 20
miles. The station is in charge of
Superintendent McDonald, with first
assistant Green and second assistant
Robertson. The wives and families
of the two former also reside on the
island, whilst the latter has his sis-
ter acting as housekeeper. Situated
one mile east is the No. 2 Percy
Island, the largest of the Northum-
berland Group, being some three
miles long by- 3I miles wide, and
rising on its south-eastern side to an
altitude of 800 feet. It is well grassed
with permanent creeks of water run-
ning all the year round. Timber of
all sorts abound, some magnificent
specimens of pine trees being discern-
ible. Colonel and Mrs. Armitage,
with their son Percy, have made their
home on this island for the past
fourteen years. The house is situated
about two miles from the beach on
one of the summits at the southern
end of the island, and stands at an
elevation of 700 feet above the level,
with the result that a most enjoy--
able and equable temperature is ex-
perienced all the y-ear round, frosts
being unknown. Luxuriant fruit
trees and other products common to
the tropics are growing in profusion,
giving ample evidence of the care
bestowed on them by the island resi-
dents. A large coffee plantation also
adjoins the grounds on the south side.
The coffee is of excellent quality, and
commands a good price in the south-
ern markets. Sheep farming is also
engaged in with satisfactory- results.
A splendid anchorage carrying deep
water exists on its north-west side,
sheltered from south right round to
north-east. An extensive saltwater
lagoon, with an entrance about fifty-
feet wide to the sea. can also be
seen from the anchorage, offering a
safe and commodious harbour for
cutters and vessels of light draft.
Having now received the return mail
from both the lighthouse and the
Percys, we once more turn our
course homewards, threading our way-
through the islands of the Northum-
berland and Beverley Groups, pass-
ing close to Keelan, Henderson,
Hull. Beverlac, Minister, and Prud-
hoe Islands. The latter is the largest
of the group, rising on its eastern
side to 1000 feet above the level. It
appears to be well grassed with thick
patches of scrub and pine trees dis-
tributed throughout the island. I am
not aware of permanent water exist-
Transhipping Stores for Pine Islet
Lighthouse.
ing, hut with the regular rainfall
cnoyctl in this latitude, water conser-
vation should not be an expensive
matter. We are now again coming
in view of the coast line, which pre-
sents a marked diversity- of features
with several conspicuous objects, pro-
minent among which stand out
West Hill and Mount Funnel, both
forming excellent land marks for the
mariner. The coast all along to Re-
pulse Hay- consists of alternate rocky
headlands and sandy hays; the shores
covered with mangroves. The whole
district is well watered by rivers and
creeks, which form their course in
the continuous coast range, and
quickly find their way- to the sea
through valley-s of unrivalled fertil-
ity. Thousands of acres of rich land
still await settlement, the resources
of this vast district being still as yet
almost untouched, and which must,
in time, create one of the most
flourishing and populous districts in
Queenslan d.
We have now arrived again at Flat
Top Island, that silent sentinel stand-
ing at the entrance to the Pjfmeer
River, under whose shelter we hope
to see erected in the near future a
safe and commodious deepwater har-
bour commensurate with the require-
ments of the district. The lighthouse
erected in the centre of the island
stands at an elevation of 172 feet,
and was established in 1874. The
light, which is fixed, is one of the
fourth orderdioptric, white with red
sectors, and is visible for a distance
of tg miles. The station is in charge
of Mr. W. Robertson, an old and
valued servant of the Marine De-
partment, who, with his estimable
family, dispenses to the numerous
visitors to the island a whole hearted
hospitality known throughout the
coast.
We shortly after proceed into the
river, and make fast to the Bond
Wharf, until required again for De-
partmental duty.
A Short History of The Mackay Squadron: Australian Light Horse.
BY ERNEST JOSEPH.
Lieut.-Colonel W. G. HODGES.
In January, ISBS, a meeting was held
in the Imperial Hotel to form a Volunteer
Cavalry Corps, the following being pre-
sent, viz., Messrs. Herr von Frudenthal, A.
T. Ball, J. Flanagan, R. Healy, E. V.
Pollock (who was then secretary of the local
Gas Company, and later Paymaster of the
Queensland Naval Forces), A. Diehm, W.
Loge, H. Barnes, 11. P. Thomson, J. Shep-
herd, A. Price, J. Kelly, H. Darnells, W.
McKay, C. R. Dutaillis, and J. L. Byrne.
This was about the time of the Russian
war scare. The Corps was accordingly
formed, and their services accepted by the
Government, Herr von Frudenthal being
appointed Commanding Officer with the
rank of Captain. On his resignation a
few months,later, the late Mr. A. T. Ball
was appointed to the command, with, a
similar rank, and was superseded very
shortly by Mr. H. W. Antill, the manager
of the Union Bank of Australia at Mackay.
The first noncommissioned officers were
Sergeant-major J. Flanagan, Sergeant J.
Laurie, and Corporal A. Diehm. On 7th
X T ovembcr, ISSS, the Governor-in-Council,
by proclamation, approved of the estab-
lishment of the Quensland Defence Force to
a total of 2,650 of all ranks. Included in
this establishment were six companies of
Mounted Infantry, as they were then called
—viz., Bundaberg, Brisbane (2), Gympie, ,
Mackay, and Townsville., The two Bris-
bane companies, afterwards known as “The
Moreton, ” consisted of 105 of all ranks,
whilst the establishment of each of the
others was to be 1 Captain, r Lieutenant,
1 Sergeant-major, 2 Sergeants, 2 Cor-
porals, 1 Bugler, and 40 Privates, or a
total of 48. The two Brisbane Companies
were formed in 1885, lc Mackay Cavalry
Corps was taken on the general establish-
ment as Irom Ist July, 1886, the same date
on which the Gympie Company was
formed ; Rockhampton and Townsville on
21st November, 1888, and the remaining
Companies from one to three years later.
Mackay therefore ranks with Gympie, ns
being the oldest Company, after Brisbane,
in the whole State, and ought to take
precedence accordinglv.
After the establishment of the Queensland
Defence Force, Captain Henry William
Antill was the first Commanding Officer,
■and he had with him as Lieutenant the
hate Hon. J. V. Chataway, Sergeant-major
James Flanagan, Sergeant James Laurie,
Corporal Andrew Diehm, and Bugler Jas.
Kelly. Amongst old identities whose name*
appear early on the service roll, and some
of whom have now heard “The Last Call,”
are Richard Healy, Herbert Barnes, H. P.
Thomson, T. D. Chataway (now Senator),
M. Keneally, W. L. Crompton, W. Loge,
C. R. Dutaillis, P. J. Duffy, P. O’Rourke,
Robert Hamilton,. James Pascoe, J. F.
Burke, T. Gaylard, J. E. Duffy, D. A.
Walker, Charles Davie, Alfred Billett, W.
G. Moran (now Police Magistrate), W.
Fay, J. J. Lynch, G. A. Ball, Thos. J.
Whitcomb, R. M. Smith, and others. For
over eleven years—viz., until September,
1897 —the Company was known as the
Mackay Mounted Infantry, forming part of
the establishment of the Queensland
Mounted Infantry Regiment. Its name
was then changed to M Company, Queens-
land Mounted Infantry, until January, 1901,
when it was again altered to B Company,
4th Battalion. Up to this period the Com-
pany was attached to the Northern Military-
District for drill and discipline, but on
the reorganisation of the Defence Force
of the Commonwealth by Major-general
Sir Edward Hutton, all Mounted Infantry
Regiments were henceforth known as Light
Horse, and Companies denominated Squad-
rons. Mackay then became No. 3 Squad-
ron, 15th Australian Light Horse (Regi-
inent). The Regimental District of the
latter extended from Biggenden, in the
south, to Mackay in the north, the Regi-
ment consisting of No. 1 Squadron at Rock-
hampton, where headquarters were estab-
lished ; No. 2 Squadron, at Mount Morgan ;
Xo. 3 at Mackay; and No. 4 at Biggenden.
Mackay has just been changed once again,
being now known as X'o. 3 Squadron, 27th
A.L.H., with headquarters in Townsville.
The Squadron has been commanded since
its inception by the following officers in
succession—viz., Captain F. von Fruden-
thal, Captain A. T. Ball, Captain H. W.
Aiitill, Lieutenant J. V. Chataway, Lieu-
tenant J. C. Willock, Lieutenant (now
Senator) T. D. Chataway, Major F. X. C.
Riechclmann, Captain J. E. Joseph, Lieu-
tenant C. Morley, Lieutenant C. A. Gum-
ming, and at the present time by
Lieutenant G. S. Birbeck. With the ex-
ception of Captains Frudonthal, Ball, Antill,
and Major Riechelniann, all of the fore-
going officers were attached as Lieutenants
before obtaining their commands, and the
last mentioned served as Lieutenant in the
old local Infantry Company. Lieut. T. D.
Chataway, Capt. Joseph, and Lieut. Gum-
ming rose from the ranks. The following
are the names of the other ollicers at-
tached to the Squadron—viz., Lieuts- D.
A. Walker, W. T. Kemp (who rose from
the ranks, (A. G. Stuart, J. D. Thomas,
B. White, Irving, B M. Swanson, C.
Canvron, W. A. Wright, G. Milne, and A.
B. Steele, the four latter being now at-
tached. Surgeon-Captain A. T. Duka,
D. 5.0., who served with the Third Queens-
land Contingent in South Africa, Surgeon-
Captain W. W. Hoare, and Surgeon-Capt-
tain S. Kay have also been attached, the
latter still being so, having been lent by
the A.M.C. from New South Wales.
The following non-commissioned officers
have been attached to the Squadron: —
Sergeant-majors J. Flanagan, J. Laurie, T.
D. Chataway, J. E. Joseph, L. Rowson,
W. Kennedy (now Lieutenant, attached to
the local corps of Senior Cadets in com-
mand), and W. Cook, Quartermaster-ser-
geants G. P. Wright and B. Black, Farrier-
MACKAY DISTRICT LIGHTHOUSES AND ADJACENT ISLANDS.—Continued.


sergeant Hinton, Sergeants A. Diehm, G.
A. Ball, F. Black, F. Tebbitt, A. J. Far-
relly (who was selected to proceed with the
Contingent to England at the time of the
Queen’s Jubilee in 1897), \V. Fordyce, \V.
Lyons, F". E. Turner, A. A. Kemp, G.
Diehm, F. Stayte, \V. F. Moyle, F'. S.
Reidy, G. Milne, I. H. Tremble, Corporals
Brennan, Phillips, W. Goldstone, Palmer,
A. F. White, E. T. Moyle (now Lieutenant
attached to the Senior Cadets), W. H.
Kemp, H. M. Hamilton, 1. Chalmers.
On four occasions the Squadron won
Major-General Owens’ Challenge Shield for
the best shooting squadron in the Northern
Military District, competing against all
arms of the service. On three occasions
in succession they won Lamington
Shield, for the Lloyd-Lindsay competition,
competing against all Light Horse Squad-
rons in the State. This trophy was first
won by Brisbane, but the local Squadron
wrested it from them, and only lost it by
DEAD HORSES.
not being allowed an opportunity to com
pete again, although on repeated occasions
promises have been made that an oppor-
tunity would be made for them to do so.
At the annual training both at Towns-
ville and Rockhampton, the local Squad-
ron has always received the highest en-
comiums on their work from the Inspecting
Officers, and have always been admittedly
the best Squadron in camp. On every
occasion the marks for battle firing, a most
important feature, have exceeded those of
every other squadron by 50 per cent and
upwards ; in fact, four years ago in Rock-
hampton the score of the local men was
only 20 behind the total score of the other
three squadrons of the regiment added
together.
TRENCHES.
On Monday, the 16th of March, 1891, at
5 p.m., a telegram was received by the
Commanding Officer, instructing him to
call out the Squadron for active service,
and proceed at the earliest opoprtunity to
Rockhampton. Notwithstanding the fact
that the men resided all over the district,
orders were got to them, and a parade
held on Wednesday, the 18th, at 3 p.m.,
only forty-five hours after receipt of the
telegram. Thirty-five were present, the
remainder, with only two exceptions, being
on leave. At this time the Squadron was
48 strong, and on Friday, the 20th of
March, forty-seven men of all ranks em-
barked on the s.s. Gabo for Rockhampton,
there thus being only one absentee. This
was a very fine record, and showed
clearly a state of efficiency and powers of
mobilisation that would have done credit
to any regiment of a standing army, and
therefore much more so to volunteers. The
work of the Squadron in the West was
excellent, and recei- ed highest praise for
the manner in which it was carried out.
At the time of the South African War,
Mackay was well to the front. As the
then Mayor (the late Mr. S. Lambert)
stated, “Although Mackay’s population was
only 2 per cent of the whole population
of the State, yet the proportion of men sent
to the front was 5 per cent.” From almost
the commencement of the war, until the
declaration of peace, Mackay had men in
the field, who traversed the whole of South
Africa. The enthusiasm of the people on
the departure of each contingent was
unparalleled. The women of Mackay pre-
sented a flag, worked by themselves, to the
First Contingent, and on his return every
volunteer received a gold medal, presented
by the people of Mackay, commemorating
his services. Four officers of the local
Squadron volunteered for the front, and
their services were accepted, a record no
other squadron can equal. As Mackay
men were engaged both at Sunnyside and
Elands River, a short resume of these two
engagements is given.
The Sunnyside raid was one of the
smartest little engagements, and it came
at a time of gloom, when defeat after
defeat had been experienced, and proved
to be the turning point towards success for
our arms. The troops engaged were under
Colonel T. D. Pilcher, and consisted of 200
Queensland Mounted Infantry under the
late Colonel P. Ricardo. 40 Regular
Mounted Infantry, 1 Company of Cana-
dians, and 2 guns of “P” Battery,
R.H.A., and amongst them were the fol-
lowing .Mackay men—viz., Lieutenant C.
A. Gumming, Farrier Sergeant H. Hinton,
and Privates McCarthy, Smith, Fraser,
Solway, and Mussett. Through the kind-
ness of Lieutenant C. A. Gumming, the
following account of the fight is given by
one who look part in it: —
SUNNYSIDE RAID.
“At mid-day on the 31st of December,
1899, a force under Colonel Pilcher started
from Belmont. They had been burning
with impatience to come in touch with the
enemy, and up to now no opportunity had
been afforded for testing their prowess in
the field. New Year’s Day, igoo, was the
great occasion for the First Queensland
Contingent. The force left Belmont, and
proceeded westward. Twenty miles were
covered before sunset, when the camp was
made at Cook’s Farm. In this locality,
on a string of kopjes, a Boer laager was
reported to be, and this, it was decided,
must be removed. Great caution was pre-
served not to divulge our intentions, as the
country was swarming with native spies,
and all our movements were watched and
reported on to the enemy. Colonel Pilcher
therefore very adroitly arranged that no
person should have a chance or reporting
his movements, by disseminating false in-
formation, and causing a close watch o be.
kept on all natives, these during the night
being shut in their huts under guards. At
daybreak on the Ist of January the force
steadily marched out from. Cook’s Farm,
creating as little dust as possible, and took
up a position at a place called Sunnyside,
some 15 miles off. Here the enemy’s laager
was reported to be. It was situated on two
connecting kopjes to north and south, and
towards these our troops advanced. When
within about four miles, a halt was made,
and patrols sent out to east and west.
Major de Rougemont, with two guns,
under Lieutenant Atkinson, Captain Baker
with the Canadians, and Lieutenants Ryan
and Smith with the Regular Mounted In-
fantry, were ordered to the right in the
direction of the enemy’s laager to the
north, whilst Colonel Pilcher with Coionei
Ricardo and the Queenslanders, “A” and
“B” Companies, under Captains Chauvel
and Pinnock, advanced from the south. All
was done with great quietness and pre-
cision, and the Boer tactics so closely
imitated, that the enemy were unconscious
of our arrival till we were upon them. The
guns made good use of all the existing
cover, and discovered some high ground
which gave on to the Boer position. The
enemy’s laager was ensconsced amongst a
nest of trees, at the foot of a range of
kopjes, commanded by a convenient ridge.
This ridge was reported by our patrols to
be clear, so with great promptness was
practically seized and occupied before the
Boers had sufficiently gathered themselves
together to contest the position. The guns
were advanced at a trot, and unlimberea
within 1,500 yards of the laager, into
which two shells were at once promptly
dropped. Up scrambled the Boers, stream-
ing and bounding along the sides of the
kopje, and opened a very hot fire. The
Queenslanders were steadily nearing the
position, taking cover along the ridges.
When within 1,000 yards, our rifles came
into play. A hurricane of bullets met the
enemy's tire, met it, continued fiercely, and
finally subdued it. The dexterity of the
Queenslanders was remarkable. They
stalked the enemy as a sportsman would
stalk a deer, criticising their own fire and
that of the foe with coolness and interest.
The laager was captured, and with it seven
wounded and 31 unwounded prisoners,
whilst some 20 dead Boers were left on the
ONLY GUN IN POSSESSION OF THE GARRISON.
field. Our casualties were two killed and
two wounded. Lieutenant Adie, who was
patrolling on the western side of the
ridges, came suddenly on a number of the
enemy, and was wounded in two places.
Trooper Rose was also wounded. Victor
Jones was shot through the heart. Later
on, when within 200 yards of the enemy’s
final position, Macieod was shot through
the spine.”
The following is an excerpt from “The
Times History of the Boer War,” page
117, volume 3: —
“Trifling as were the immediate results
of Pilcher’s expedition, its indirect effects
were not unimportant. The rebellion in
the Herbert district would, if unchecked,
have immediately propagated itself south
TRENCHES.
of the Orange River, and have seriously
interfered with Lord Roberts’s plans.
Sunnyside delayed the southward spread
of the rebellion by at least a month, and
when it broke out the main decision of the
campaign was falling, and fresh troops
were available for its suppression. The
moral effect was even greater. After all
the reverses of the last few weeks, a suc-
cess, however small, which showed that
British troops could be handled with skill,
and could surprise, as well as be surprised,
was hailed as a welcome augury for the
new year which it opened. And the news
that this success was gained by British
Regulars, Australians, and Canadians,
fighting side by side, and each entrusted
with an equal share in the task, coming
at a moment when the voluntary patriotism
of every part of the Empire was display-
ing itself in the raising of emergency
forces, was everywhere taken as a sign of
the opening of a new era of Imperial
co-operation.”
ELANDS RIVER SIEGE.
In August, igoo, Brakfontein, on the
Elands River, was held by a small gar-
rison unier Colonel Hore. It consisted of
a small part of the Rhodesian Field Force,
and was made up as follows: 105 New
South Welshmen, 141 Queenslanders
(Third Contingent), 42 Victorians, 13
Westralians, Tasmanians, and Canadians,
201 South Africans, 1 Army Service Corps.
The Artillery consisted of one old ylb. screw
gun and two Maxims. The Queenslanders
were commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel W.
H. Tunbridge, who, as is well known,
actually conducted the defence, and kept
the “flag flying,” being specially men-
tioned in dispatches, and receiving the C.B.
for his gallant services. The camp was on
a small boulder-strewn kopje, in the centre
of an amphitheatre 5 acres in extent, and
half a mile east of the river. Thousands
of horses and oxen were in the camp, under
no sort of cover, and were nearly all killed
on the first day by the Boer shells, and the
stench arising from these dead animals
makes it marvellous that the men who
escaped the Boer bullets were not killed by
pestilence. The only chance of obtaining
water was to take the water-carts down to
the river at night, and even then it was
very dangerous work. The Boer shells
aroused the camp on the morning of the
4th of August, 1900. Next day General
Carrington’s scouts,, after appearing on the
rise to the west, were soon seen retiring
again, so rescue from that side seemed out
of the question. On August sth a large
force, under General Sir Jan Hamilton,
arrived at Rustenburg, to bring Major-
General Baden-Powell and his forces away.
On that day firing had been heard in the
direction of Inlands River. Next morning,
at 2 a.m., Baden-Powell, with 1,200
mounted men, stripped for a fight, and the
Elswick Battery (one of the best m South
Africa) marched out, or rather galloped,
as far as Woodstock, on the Selons River,
half-way to Elands River. Amongst these
troops were the Fourth Queensland Im-
perial Bushmen (including several Mackay
men). Guns were distinctly heard firing in
a westerly direction, but the troops sat for
three hours on the banks of the river (being
sketched, whilst other Queenslanders were
in danger of annihilation), and then re-
turned to Rustenburg. The Elands River
garrison were once again abandoned to
their fate, but luckily their own resources
turned out to be better than those of either
Generals Carrington or Baden-Powell.
Luckily they were well provided with food,
and kept up their spirits by sudden raids
at night on the Boers and their guns. As
at Wepener, it became a game of patience
for the garrison, dissimilar only in this
most important item, that at Elands River
there was no promise of support given to
buoy up the garrison with hope. For the
sake of the “flag,” they had to fight until
the last man was shot down and the last
cartridge expended, for such was the de-
termination of Lieutenant-Colonel Tun-
bridge and all his gallant men. “The
Times Boer History of the Boer War,”
page 429, volume 4, says: “This siege,
like that of Wepener, was specially a
Colonial triumph; there the garrison had
been chiefly Cape Colonials, here the ma-
jority were Australians of Carrington’s Ist
Brigade, the rest being Rhodesians, and it
would be difficult to overpraise the deter-
mination and fine spirit shown by these
Colonials in their first opportunity of dis-
tinguishing themselves as a corps. Every
soldier who saw the place afterwards ex-
pressed surprise that they could have held
out so long, and it is, therefore, the more
creditable to them to have done so when
every hope of relief seemed to be entirely
cut off, while at a time when surrenders
and retreats were not sufficiently rare, the
example by these splendid men was even
more important than the position they
held.”
It was for his gallant conduct during
the siege that Capt. A. T. Duka was spe-
cially mentioned in dispatches, and was
awarded the D.S.O. The following Mac-
kay men formed part of the Elands River
garrison, and were also present at the re-
lief of Mafeking, viz. : —Capt. A. T. Duka,
Privates A. Gumming, F. Culverhouse, W.
H. Hill, J. Francis, C. Preston, and A.
Baillie.
It may be mentioned that the amount
collected for the Patriotic Fund in Mac-
kay was the sum of ,£687, of which
was realised on Demonstration Day—the
7th February, 1900. Some 35 horses were
also presented to the Government by the
various patriotic citizens of the district.
The following are the names of the Mac-
kay men who volunteered for service in
South Africa ;—First Contingent; Lieut. C.
A. Gumming, Sergt. W. Lyons, Bugler T.
Dimmock, and Privates Baulch, Solway,
Pirie, Fraser, Volkman, Mussett, Miles, G.
T. Smith, M’Carthy, Christiansen, M‘Con-
key. Second Contingent: Privates P.
Nielsen, Evans, Keane, R. Smith, and W.
and D. Denman. (The latter two brothers
were refused by the authorities in Brisbane
on account of their being too young, but
so determined were they to proceed to the
front that they went on to Sydney, and
were accepted in a New South Wales Con-
tingent.) Third Contingent: Capt. A. T.
Duka, D. 5.0., Privates A. Gumming, Out-
verhouse, Hill, A. T. Baillie, F. Tebbitt,
Kercher, Wilson, Carter, R. Borter, Crisp,
Plover. Fourth Contingent: Capt. J. E.
Joseph, Lieut. W. T. Kemp, Q.M.S. G. P.
Wright, W. R. Bruce, V. A. Hill, Mac-
Fadzean. Sixth Contingent: Privates J.
M‘Carthy, G. Harris, J. Stoneham.
HISTORY MACKAY SQUADRON.—Continued.


Marsh S Webster, Ltd.
(Established over 40 years).
GENERAL MERCHANTS and COMMISSION AGENTS,
DRAPERS, CLOTHIERS, BOOT and SHOE SALESMEN,
IRONMONGERS, GROCERS, etc. WINE and SPIRIT
MERCHANTS, WHOLESALE and RETAIL. .
CORRESPONDENCE INVITED.
The Corner Stores, MACKAY.
The Show
P.R.F.G.A. SHOW COMMITTEE.
Back row (standing).—G. J. Perkins,
J. McDonald, J. C. Penny, D. H. Walker,
T. A. Powell, H. F. Mac Donnell, C. P.
Rich, J. W. Johansen, F. Knobel.
Second row (sitting).—A. Furlong, J.
T. O’Riordan, T. J. Leonard (Secretary),
A. H. Tideman (President), F. J. Ste-
vens, W. Kindness, C. Perroux.
Front row (sitting).—C. G. Smith, J.
A. Macfie, P. T. Dunworth.
P.R.F.G.A. SHOW COMMITTEE.
VIEW OF SHOW GROUND.
SUGAR CANE EXHIBIT.—AnnuaI Show, 1912.
BABY EXHIBITS AT MACKAY.
1 The above group was taken at the
Mackay Show held in June, 1912, and
shows the type of baby competing in the
class devoted to babies under one year and
born of Mackay parents. The prize was
given by the “Daily Mercury,” to see the
effect of the local climate on two genera-
tions, a very interesting experiment in
Eugenics. Upon inquiry, after judging,
from the medical men who had acted as
judges, their report is flattering in the
extreme as to the fine babies exhibited.
Wherever degenerative processes, if any,
may occur as the result of climate, in child-
hood, there is no doubt the Mackay natives
are as fine babies born as elsewhere. All
the winning babies were breast-fed, a fact
which also says something for the mothers.
The judges were Dr. Kay, Dr. Hoare, Dr.
Williams, and Nurse Barlow (standing-
read from left to right).


I,
' I*-
X
• >1
MELROSE & REN WICK,
Monumental Masons,
CEMETERY ROAD, - - MACKAY.
Catalogues Free on Application,
R. NEILL & SONS,
< ~ = i^s —» ’
Wholesale Wine and Spirit Merchants,
and General Storekeepers. , .
AGENCIES ■
Munro’s Bulk and Bottled Whiskies, • Mackay City Beer, Guinness’ Stout (Lawson’s\ Famous
Cascade Ale and Stout, White Horse Whisky, Genuine A.V.H. Geneva, J. T. Fallon’s Aibury Wines,
“ Yinto” Claret, Melrose Drover Lemon Squash, Malthoid Roofing, Walker’s Whisky, Beggs’ Whisky,
La Perla del Oriente Cheroots. Toohey’s Ales and Stout, West End Beer and Stout, Golden Leaf
Pilsener Lager, Victoria Brewery Lager, Walker's Red Collar King’s Liquer, Campbell’s Helidon Spa
Spa and Ginger Ale, Johnson’s Guinness’s Stout, Alton’s Claret, Burgundy, Hock. Townsend’s
Sarsaparilla, Yi-Kola, P.O.P.
Victoria Street,
MACKAY.
Sharp Deller Co.,
Direct Importers of DRAPERY, CLOTHING, BOOTS and Shoes,
SYDNEY STREET (S^ s ), MACKAY.
Let’s boost tine town we live in
make it brighter —cleaner —more attractive. Let’s prove that we are proud
of it and make visitors respect it. Well-kept homes and business
blocks make a tow.. h.ok prosperous and prosperity attracts outside dollars.
Mr. Property Owner
Are you doing your share—is your property a credit to the town ?
Why not boost your town and your property too, by the use of good paint?
ROGERS PAINT
(MACHINE MADE),
ready for use, will increase the selling value of your property and add
years to its usefulness. We are enthusiastic about Rogkk’s Paint
and we want a chance to talk paint with you
CHARLES PORTER,
Timber a md Hardware Merchant,
MAOKAY.
LISTER HOSPITAL.
LISTER HOSPITAL., FACING NORTH STREET.
SOME OF THE MEMBERS OF THE NURSING STAFF AND RECENT ARRIVALS
The Lister Private Hospital. North-street, is
remarkable for its ideal situation on the banks of
the Pioneer River, where it rests secure from noise
of business or traffic, and yet is within easy reach
of the Post Office. Of imposing appearance, and
excellent design, it compels notice, and can bear
comparison with any similar institution in Queens-
land. Standing in over an acre of ground, the
building is large and two-storied, with lofty rooms
and halls, and ample verandah space, without fear
of contradiction, it can safely claim to be the coolest
dwelling in Mackay.
Since its inception in 1901). it has steadily
increased in popularity, and although capable of
accommodating about twenty patients it rarely has
a vacant bed. The lower story is devoted entirely
to Surgical and Medical cases, while the upper one
is exclusively retained for Maternity, where patients
are assured the same privacy they would enjoy in
their own homes.
The 'Matron of the Hospital is Miss E. (Jhidgey,.
A.T.N.A., to whose ample experience and charming
personality Lister owes much of its success. Miss
E. Hatfield (Sydney Women’s Hospital), has com-
plete control of the Maternity Department, and as
the accompanying photo indicates, is an extremely
,busy lady by reason of her universal popularity
and kind sympathetic nature. The regular nursing
staff numbers five, of these four are fully qualified
A.T.N.A. nurses, and the Institution is controlled
and managed by Dr. W. Wallis Hoare.
HALLWAY.


E. R. N. MacCARTHY.
Forty years ago Mackay was little larger
than Walkcrston is at the present time.
My first impression on arrival here was
somewhat ludicrous, for, having arrived off
the o\d bar in the A.U.S.N. Company’s
screw steamer “Black Swan” (Captain F.
Brookes) late one afternoon, the ship’s boat
was lowered, and the passengers (amongst
whom were a number of diggers on their
way to some rumoured gold discovery near
Nebo) were requested to take their seats.
, h AII being aboard the boat, the second mate
was sent in charge of her, and after a
toilsome pull and grounding on many
sand-banks (when we passengers had to pull
off our boots and socks and help to pull
the boat into deeper water), we eventually
reached a weird-looking structure of piles
standing close alongside one another in a
row, which we were informed was the
A.U.S.N. Company’s wharf; and in
language more forcible than polite, told
by the officer in charge of the boat to hurry
and get ashore, as he had to return ro the
steamer. Though we were most willing
"to do so, for the nonce we could not see
our way to shin up dirty, greasy-looking
piles which in the inky darkness seemed
to reach up to the sky; but upon the second
mate exploding a further string of san-
guinary expressions as to our dilatoriness
in going ashore, and ordering his crew to
throw the swags up on the wharf, the
diggers seized their belongings and one by
one threw them with all their strength
overhead on to what they, in the darkness,
assumed to be the wharf. Then, giving
one of their mates a leg-up, he, by dint
of hard scrambling, reached the top. Sit-
ting astride there for a few seconds, he
appeared as though struck dumb. He
peered through the darkness, then suddenly
burst forth in the choicest, lurid language
in the English vocabulary, and called out,
“I say, mates, do you know where you’ve
been chucking your swags?” Several
voices answered, ‘‘Yes; up on the wharf;
can’t you see them?” To which the man
sitting astride up aloft replied, ‘‘No, I am
if I do, for you have been chucking
them into the river on the other side of
these piles.” This news provoked a chorus
of “language” from those in the boat on
Mackay, and the A.S.N. Company in par-
ticular. As our shipmate aloft could see
no way to get ashore, he had to slide down
one of the piles back into the boat. It was
then rowed down stream until an open-
ing was found through the piles, behind
which the boat was poled, and the bank of
the river found some 20 feet distant from
the row of piles ; floating in the water the
unfortunate diggers' swags were found,
thoroughly saturated.
In those days Kemmis and Hovey were
the Mackay agents for the A.S.N. Com-
pany. Their large receiving store used to
stand on the allotment of land now occupied
by Messrs. Paxton and Co., and on the site
where that firm’s large, handsome ship-
ping offices now are there used to be a
shed with thatched roof and split palm
walls, used as receiving store for hides and
tallow ; and between this shed and the bank
of the river I have seen a team of bullocks
turn, after unloading the bullock dray into
the shed, which will enable residents of
to-day to form some estimate of the enor-
mous erosion of the south bank of tnt*
river from that point down to where the
railway wharf now stands decaying away.
Below this point the bank of the river was
covered with a dense vine scrub, extending
right back to the old Customs quarters
(Mr. McCullagh’s present residence). At
that time the Court House, Lands Office,
C.P.S. Office, Custom House, and Govern-
ment Bond were all contained in one build-
ing under the one roof, subsequently
removed from its former site (where the
present Custom House stands) to the Pilot
Station, and converted into the present
pilot boatshed. Capt. W. R. Goodall as
Police Magistrate, J. Conlan as C.P.S. and
Land Agent, and H. S. Dalrymple Hay as
(Standing).—Geo. Smith, D’Arcy Lacy
(Sitting).—F. H. Smith, Rev. McLaren, J. C. Binney.
Recollections
WALKERSTON.
Sub-collector, Harbour Master and Pilot,
officiated in their several capacities—all
sterling, good popular men. An amusing
fracas took place one day at the Sydney-
street end, where the approach to the pre-
sent bridge is formed. Two inebriates had
mutually decided to settle up old scores by
having a few rounds with bare knuckles,
and had stripped themselves to the buff,
when the Bond Storeman, Jas. Graham,
catching sight of them, promptly reported
such a grave breach of the peace to my
honoured and much respected Sub-collector,
Mr. Hay, who, being brimful of energy and
pluck, ran into the Custom House,
snatched a pair of handcuffs off a nail in
the office, called out to Captain Goodall
to look at the indecent sight, and, single-
handed, rushed off to arrest the two drun-
ken swabs, giving me parting instructions
to remain and look after the office. The
storeman, seeing Mr. Hay running, fol-
lowed, as did Captain Goodall, whilst I,
acting on instructions, could only remain
in the office looking on. One of the
pugilists was a man about six feet four,
his opponent was about five feet four
inches. Mr. Hay, like a bulldog, seized
the smaller man and handed him over to
Graham’s charge, then seized the tall man
and ordered him to come to the lock-up*
but the tall pugilist looked laughingly down
at Mr. Hay (who was about five teet four
inches), flatly declined, whereon Mr. Hay
seized him round the waist and tried to
throw him down. Eventually both came
down together, and Captain Goodall, the
Police Magistrate, had reached the strug-
gling forms, and, seeing my respected supe-
rior in such an undignified position, and
that he was likely to get badly handled, 1
threw my instructions to the wind and
rush;;d to assist. Eventually Captain Good-
all got his foot on the man’s throat and
pinned him down until Mr. Hay could snap
the handcuffs upon him; but the man’s
wrists were several sizes too large to per-
mit the bracelets being closed. A parley
Chen ensued. Captain Goodall, with his
foot firmly planted on the fallen hero’s
throat, extracted a solemn promise that
he would go quietly away to the lock-up if
allowed to rise. The Police Magistrate
thereupon withdrew his foot, and the man
was allowed to rise. He was then given
in charge to Storeman Graham, to escort
to the lock-up, whilst we had to turn om
attention to the smaller man, who had
broken away from Graham, and was danc
ing around using all sorts of sanguinary
threats as to what he would do to anyone,
including the Police Magistrate, who tried
to take him to the lock-up. His boastings
were soon brought to an end by finding
himself safely secured with the handcuffs
on his wrists. Graham, meanwhile, was
inviting his prisoner to come along with
him to the lock-up ; but the big fellow,
with a broad, good-natured smile, replied,
“All right, mate, I will go with you;
but let us stop and see the fun with the
beaks taking my mate.” The Police
Magistrate, Sub-collector of Customs, and
myself, after many violent wrestles with
our prisoner, got him as far as the present
Commercial Bank, which site was then oc-
cupied by the old Royal Hotel. Standing
at the time upon the verandah of the hotel
fronting the street was happy, jolly, rol-
locking Charlie Rawson, who was also a
J.P. Seeing our struggling and noisy pro-
cession approaching, and learning that the
drunken and infuriated prisoner refused
to go quietly to the lock-up, at once under-
took to get him to go quietly if he were
allowed to take him in and shout for him.
Just then the Sub-inspector of native police
(the late Mr. Frudenthall) appeared, and
the Police Magistrate handed the prisoner
over to him. Charlie Rawson took all
h6nds into the bar and shouted, himself
holding the glass of liquor to the prisoner’s
lips, after which the prisoner was escorted
to the door. He again strenuously resisted,
but the Sub-inspector, with the assistance
of one constable and some bystanders, suc-
ceeded in hustling the infuriated man ai
far as Wills* corner, where, with a fur*
ther display of kicking, he knocked a
couple of the men out of action. He was
eventually locked up, and next day got
his deserts.
Two old-time incidents peculiar to Mac-
kay of forty years ago were the rollicking
bottle chorus, principally performed upon
any festive occasion when the “ River
mob ” had occasion to visit the township,
and who, upon reaching a certain stage ol
jollity, each armed himself with two empty
porter bottles and proceeded in a body after
dark to a house with corrugated iron walls.
One would start singing a song with a
swinging chorus, the refrain of which was
accompanied by drawing the bottles smartly
across the corrugated iron, and so every
inmate of the house was aroused. The
other incident peculiar to Mackay was the
“ swizzle,” a drink most insidious to the
palate but far-reaching in its effects. Mr.
Charlie Rawson was an adept with this
concoction. In those days an array of
swizzle sticks v as generally to be found
in the dining-room, and the favourite spirit


was Mackay rum, toned off with a dash
of angastura bitters, lemon, and sugar,
partaken of half-an-hour before lunch one
acquired an appeitite to vie with a pelican.
Passengers nowadays grumble and com-
plain of the discomfort and hardships they
experience when proceeding to Flat-top,
awaiting the arrival of the coastal steam-
ers or the tide to enter the river, but in
the early days passengers had to proceed
out in open boats and await the arrival of
the passing steamer ; 48 hours was not an
uncommon delay, i remember the case of
a well-known business man, who left on his
honeymoon trip in the pilot whaleboat, and
landed on Flat-top to await the arrival of
the coastal steamer. She failed to come,
and aftei waiting until the following day
had to give up all hope of getting away
and return very crestfallen to Mackay and
face the many jokes of their numerous
friends.
On another occasion the A.U.S.N. Com-
pany, after considerable agitation, decided
to mitigate the discomfort to
proceeding to and from Flat-top anchor-
age, and a very small open steam laun 'h
named the Clio was put in commission
On one trip, with a full complement of
passengers, she proceeded to the anchorage
at Round-top Island, where she anchored
to await the arrival of the coastal steamer.
The delay becoming tedious, the captain
decided to up anchor and steam to the
island, to allow those who wished to go
ashore oyslering to do so. Shortly after
starting under steam it was found the noble
steamship was moving slower and slower,
and finally she stopped. Captain Mills,
who was master, engineer, and fireman
combined, sent the engines full speed
ahead, then astern, but failed to get the
vessel to gather speed through the water;
finally it was discovered that the propeller
had dropped off the shaft, thus leaving the
vessel a hopeless derelict, fast being car-
ried out to sea on the ebb tide. However,
the Flat-lop signalman’s attention having
been drawn by repeated blasts of the steam
whistle, he signalled into the Pilot Station,
when the whaleboat and crew proceeded to
the Clio, and towed her back to Round-
top anchorage, to there patiently await the
arrival of the expected steamer.
Wet seasons in the early seventies were
very different from what they are now,
for the rain has been known to fall con-
tinuously day and night without intermis-
sion for three weeks. Captain Goodall,
the Police Magistrate, used to habitually
wear, on wet days, a special pair of boots
in which he had cut holes to facilitate the
escape of water through which he had to
walk when passing to and from his resi-
dence, which stood where Dr. Hoare’s ten-
nis court is now ; while most of the lead-
ing officials and storekeepers used to peram-
bulate the streets barefooted. Between the
present site of the Boys’ State School and
Marsh and Webster’s corner there were
only one or two houses, and the whole dis-
tance was an unbroken mass of “ devil-
devil ” country. Between the lumps of
earth the water used to be knee-deep in
-wet weather. One day, whilst coming into
town on foot, I overtook a little tot of a
girl about six years of age, apparently
quite knocked up with wading and floun-
dering through the water and over lumps
of devil-devil. Feeling sorry for the little
one’s bedraggled condition, 1 picked her
up, swung her upon my shoulder, and car-
ried her to where Marsh and Webster’s
store now stands. Many years afterwards
1 met a young lady whose lovely soprano
voice used to be the great attraction when
singing in the choir in the Roman
Catholic Chapel. Whilst conversing with
her she asked me if 1 remembered carrying
a little girl over the devil-devil on my
shoulder, and amused me by saying she
was the rescued one.
On the present site of the Post Office
Hotel the old Golden Fleece Hotel and
Olympic Theatre stood. The latter was
the favourite and only hall where most of
the balls were held. On one occasion,
whilst a dance was in progress, someone
thrust his head in at the door and shouted
“FireJ Fire!” Instantly Charlie and Ned
Rawson left their partners and rushed out
of the room. Following shortly afterwards
to the scene of the fire, which was at the
hotel, where the Union Bank now stands,
I there saw, seated astride on the ridge-
capping of the burning building, the Raw-
son brothers, still in their dress suits,
busily engaged dashing buckets of water
as they were passed up to them on the
smoking roof. But their exertions were
useless; the flames soon drove them from
their perilous perch, and the building was
completely destroyed.
E. R. NORFOR MacCARTHY.
It was a blazing hot day towards Christ-
mas in 1876. There had been a long dry
spell, and the grass in the boiling-down
paddock was on fire. The blacks who
were camped on the creek took advantage
of the chance, and gave chase to a mob
of kangaroos, which were coming on be-
fore the fire. An old Chinaman named
Ah Foo, who had a garden running about
from where the Walkerston Bridge is now
and along the creek towards the old Cas-
sada Mill, on the south side of the creek.
The garden was fenced in by saplings
standing on end, very irregular in height.
Against this fence and the creek, forming
a sharp angle, the blacks were forcing the
kangaroos. One old roo, on being pressed,
took his chance at what he no doubt
thought was the lowest part of the fence,
but, not allowing for the width. p of his
hindquarters, he missed his mark, and had
rather a bad time on the top of one of
the saplings forming the fence. An old
Chinaman who was in the gaiden wit-
nessed the occurrence, and thinking, no
doubt, he had a soft thing on, caught the
“old man” by the fore-arms and tried to
pull him off. In this he \vas successful,
but it was, nevertheless, a mistake on
Johnny’s part to interfere, for the weight
brought the Chinaman to his knees, and in
that position the “old man” kangaroo em-
braced his captor, and the two, locked in
one another’s arms, rolled into the creek,
where the kangaroo was easy top dog.
The yells of the Chinaman in the mean-
time brought help, which arrived none 100
soon, as the “old man” refused to release
his hold, no doubt being mad with fright
and pain. The Chinaman lost most of his
garments in the struggle, and on being
released promptly took to the grass, en
route for Mackay, and on arrival, let us
hope, got from his countrymen all the
sympathy and help his condition required.
On the site of the garden in question
there a row of comfortable-looking
cottages.
A. H. TIDEMANN.
Although I only go back to ’69, when 1
first beheld cur now thriving town from
the deck of the old collier, the Black Swan,
it is a far cry from 1869 to 1912, and a
description of some of the troubles and
stirring events of the times between those
dates may interest some of your readers.
The history of sugar-growing in Australia
goes much further back than the time of
Captain Hope. My father-in-law, the late
E. Cosgrove, saw the first sugarcane
planted in Australia, The plants and
labour were brought from the Sandwich
Islands by Captain Sandeman about the
year 1830, and planted at Port Macquarie,
where it throve and flourished. The
opinion at that time and until the con-
viction was killed by Queensland, was that
sugar could be grown by white men. In
those early times ships visiting Mackay
could lie. in plenty of water almost up to
what is now Sydney street, and old “Jimmy
the ferryman” plied his oars where the
bridge is now. I here was a crossing
further up, where we used to go in (behind
where the Lister Hospital now stands there
was a pub.—the late C. Perry was tne
last man who kept it, 1 think), and go
out below the “Rocks.” It was a bad
crossing, and more than one life was lost
there. Up to ’69 very little land had been
selected, and that mostly on the river, the
farthest up being Woodford, taken up by
Mr. Wilson (surveyor), some of whose
grandchildren are still in that locality. Of
course the Hollow and Hamilton Stations
had their pre-emptives up and down
Baker’s Creek. On both sides of the
Broadsound road there was a good deal of
unselecled land, but on the south side all
was Crown lands, and was so for years
after. There were a few selections along
the Nebo road and around Eton, where, in
1870, D. Jack and Sons built the Barrie
Mill. All that land is now farmed by
while settlers, some natives of the district.
The late J. Porter, whose sons are still
there, had a farm further down Sandy
Creek. He was an old friend of mine,
and, talking over old times, he told me a
most weird tale, and these, so far as 1
remember, are his words; “1 went to Fort
Cooper with Sharp in the early sixties,
before the great smash of ’67 and ’6B. I
had a cousin in the Old Country who
wished to come to Queensland. 1 paid
his passage and brought him out and up
to the station; he was sent out to the
Twelve-mile with a tlock of sheep, and had
for a hut mate a Chinaman, who also had
a tlock. Not being used to the rough food
shepherds got, my cousin got into the
store pretty heavily, and finding, upon in-
quiring from the storekeeper how his
account stood, became very dissatisfied, and
resolved to leave the station. He got a
settlement, and started for Rockhampton,
via Nebo. 1 was the only man available,
so was sent out to take his flock. Five
or six weeks passed away, and one night,
after supper, the Chinkec and 1 sat on
our bunks, one each side of the hut, the
slush lamp on the table between us, and
the door open. It might have been about
8 o’clock, when we suddenly heard a step
outside. 1 was facing the door, and as l|
(Standing).— D. H. Dairymple, H. L. Black.
(Sitting).— Dr. McBurney, E. M. Long, H. Bell, A. R. McGregor.
looked up my cousin walked in. I felt
very surprised to see him, and said: “1
thought you were in Rockhampton long
before this.” ‘T am not, Johnny ; but my
body is lying at Jimmy’s waterhole. ” ihen
he vanished. The Chinaman and I ran to
the station without a slop the 12 miles,
without hat or boots; roused all hands,
and told our tale. Daylight found us on
the way to Jimmy’s waterhole, where, sure
enough, we found the poor fellow’s
remains.” Another mystery of the bush.
The recent wreck of the Yongala brings
to mind another wreck on the Barrier in
’7l. At that time a traveller had been
murdered by the blacks between Mackay
and Broadsound. The then Lieutenant of
Police, Frudenihdl, went down to the
coast to round them up. He found them
on the beach haxing a grand time; for
miles up mid down the beach was strewn
with all kinds of merchandise. No tale
or tidings of the vessel, of where she
came from, or what she was, was ever
heard. One of the curious little mills of
the early times was that of Russell, whose
son is in Mackay now. It was worked
with bullocks, but did not last long; it was
on the range just below the racecourse;
llie ground is now farmed by G. Howard.
The drying of sugar and handling it was
very different to what it is now ; the juice
was run into metal troughs, in which a
frame of copper pipes revolved, supplied
by steam from the boilers ; when the juice
was sufficiently cooked it was run into
iron tanks to cool and settle ; between the
rows of tanks ran a truck on rails up to
the ’fugals, which occasionally burst. Then
someone was carried away and tipped into
a hole. If persons fond of sugar in their
lea had seen the “boys” up to their waists
in the tanks, among the sugar, 1 think
there would have been a serious slump in
the sugar market. The demand kept the
toothsome article up to a good price, until
the rust came along and wiped everything
flat; that was really the climax of th?
sugar industry. Visions of Central Mills
began to appear. The planters began u
take the opposite direction and to D.S.G.,
but the Central Mill system became a fact.
Many and various persons have claimed
the credit of being the saviour of Mackay,
as the Central Mill idea has proved ‘o
be; but, as a matter of fact, quite a
crowd had a hand in it, and the man
who really put the scheme into concrete
form and presented it to S. W. Griffith
—and he did not claim any originality
in the matter —was the late Donald Beaton.
There are now only two men living who
know the facts of the case—one is the
present Chief Justice of the Federal Court
(Sir S. W, Griffith), I am the other. This
explanation only relates to thei original
scheme, which is very different to the
arrangements now passing under the name
of Central Mills, which are simply pro-
prietary concerns under another name, and,
the mill chemist turns everything but
which the ancient agitators endeavoured
to guard against. But the future will see
far greater changes in the business, when
dirty water into sugar, and a more equft-
able distribution of profits has I »
n ached; bu-:"-this happy condition can only
be brought about by a give-and-take policy
and a wide departure from the present
methods in the mills. This will happen
in the immediate future, when every mill
will turn out the refined article, and all
will pool their sugar.
R. McEWEN.
Hon. D. H. Dalrymple writes :
As for an article on Mackay, ante-
cedent to the formation of the
Municipality, I have not felt equal
to retailing my reminiscences, nor do
I know that they would be worth re-
calling. I remember the town wa r
swamp in wet weather to the sr
of Deller’s present shop, and
good-sized crayfish could be cau -
in the paddymelon holes betrvee-
Dimmock’s and Mrs. B. Houston s,
and that as there were no defined,
streets and not many surveyors
pegs, it was almost imnossible to
locate allotments. I remember also
that to cross the road, from my shop
to the opposite side m wet weather,
we had a code of sailing instructions,;
RECOLLECTIONS.—Continued.


taking an easterly direction to a big
stump, then south-easterly to an-
other, then to a pointed stump sou-
therly, and thence again easterly to
a verandah haven, and that in the
same weather one could take a
flat-bottomed boat pretty well from
one end of Victoria-street, .to the
other. township then, 9c rather
-‘■’•e business places, ran from where
now is north to North-street,
■- ■ bout the Catholic Church,
in. Sydney-street, long-
ed to drain and keep
b’o land in its vicin-
ate dwelling houses
ran along the dry
om —now the Grand
direction of the rail-
.Vhat business was done
..objut on sheep stations,
.judhtly abandoned, or tapped
by the Central Railway. There were
only-two publichouses that I can
think of, Keely’s and Mrs. Cook’s,
another, Ilett’s, first O’Reilly’s, hav-
ing been shut up, which goes to show
that Mackay was a fairly temperate
community in those days. There
were no churches, and no doctor, and
jap one to attend to either spiritual
5r temporal maladies, yet I don’t
know that statistics will show much
Vitiation in the morals or mortality
from that time to this. There was
neither Hospital, Reading Room, nor
Municipal Corporation, nor
"Gaol. Necessary order was provided
by a, lock-up, in which some revellers
once turned the table on the very
efficient constable, by locking him up,
and taking away the key with them,
and planting the same under the door
bf Mr. Baker, who was the Police
Magistrate. He was much assisted
iH ’the discharge of his duty, by a
bulldog, and which was, in its ap-
ipcarance, th»* most terrifying monster
jt'fps'uog i nave ever seen. It was
,gjways kept on a chain, from which
it was continually making the most
.frantic efforts to break away to at-
tack passers by, or persons con-
temptuous of the law. This formid-
■ahle animal, and minister of the
law, much dreaded by the unillum-
itiated, was, however, a perfect fraud,
,(6f ■yvllen taken off the chain and
• Jiven its liberty, was as harmless as
A lamb, and, any way, it was too old
iC have any teeth left.
With all the drawbacks mentioned,
the crowd who lived in those days
were quite as happy, and I think, ■
.. more contented, than those who how
take >••• •- On -Sunday - it'was.
a rt! vt »he. ruftitution; that the horses
in, from the lagoons,'
when-.. generally grazed, and
thafcTdieir owner#- the majority, of"
«-he townspeople, should all have a
>, the beach as far-as - Baker’s
1 Creek.’,.
D. H. Dalrymple.
I landed in Mackay in August, 1865.
The general appearance* of the place was
desolate, nothing but scrub to meet the
eye, very few houses to be seen, and
those only of a very primitive description ;
the population of the town I would thinß
to be between two and three hundred. Of
the population, the most prominent were
our well-known townsman, Mr. McKenney.
saddle and harness maker ; George Voysey,
blacksmith ; Robert Fleming, for many
years and until recently in business as
ironmonger; the late John Allen, store-
keeper and commission agent; the late
.Messrs. Kemmis and Bovey, then agents
for .the. A.S.N. Gompanv; the Broadnitz
■ ‘ -- • -M-
BroSy general storekeepers. The hotel-
keepers were C. Keely, licensee of the
Golden Fleece ; J. O’Reilly.* (the name of
his hotel I for-get) r ; Tfu? ’ Royal, kept by
Mrs. Cook, where Wills’ Hotel now stands.
Country residents of most note were John
Spiller, of Pioneer Estate; Mr. D. Con-
nor, contracting carrier; also his partner,
Roger, and driver Morgan; T. H. Fitz-
gerald, surveyor; Wm. Bagley, of Eton,
now of Michclmore and Co. ; James Ready,
father of C, P. Ready of this town. At
that time ho was licensee of the Travellers’
Rest, now known as the Eton Range
Hotel. I always found James Ready a
good friend, and I am sure he was in
every way a good pioneer for the dis-
trict. Michael McCluskey, father of
H. McClusl \6y, commission agent. A few
other names I cannot remember. The
streets at the time of my landing were
surveyed, but not distinguishable, except-
ing Sydney and North streets. I may
here mention I came in the s.s. Diaman-
tina, commanded by Captain Champion, the
only steamer trading to Mackay at that
time. The river then was better for navi-
gation than it <s at present, though there
was no wharfage accommodation. All
goods were landed by placing planks from
the steamer’s side to the shore, and this
state existed until 1868, when the first
sign of any advancement began. The most
that could be said of the town when I
landed in 1565 was, that it appeared a
very primitive bush township, the place
being almost surrounded by scrub, some
of the buildings being hidden. It was all
scrub where the English Church now
stands; the present Council Chambers had
scrub all around the locality. In 1868,
some of the business men began to take
action for a better condition of thing*,. A,
meeting was called, and it was resolved
that a petition be sent fo have the town
proclaimed a municipality. 1 was one of
the number who signed the petition, and
the result was the municipality was de-
clared. The first sign of any impetus to the
sugar industry was the landing of a boiler
for Alexandra Mill, the first mill to crush
cane in 1868. So bad were the roads that
mangrove in close vicinity had to be cut
down, made into bundles, and placed in
the roadway, and planks placed on them,
over which the trolly with the boiler passed.
The road was in this bad state near the
site ot the present Post Office. The Alex-
andra Mill having started, others followed,
and the progress of the district soon sur-
passed all expectations. Looking back, I
can hardly realise that Mackay has in 47
years advanced from a bush township to
be one of the largest and also one of
the most prosperous towns in North
Queensland, with a population in town of
6,000, and in town and district ofii6,ooo.
Commercial travellers say there is fio place
like Mackay for good solid business, and
this is a guarantee of the soundness of its
traders. Afler 47 years’ experience, I can
with truth state I am satisfied that
there are very few better spots in Queens-
land than Mackay. The rapid advancement
to me has been amazing, and if our rail-
way policy is continued, and a harbour
scheme carried out, it would be difficult to
state, or even form an idea of, the rate
ol increase of further population and ad-
vancement of the district. Wool was the
only export at the time of my arrival:
fort Cooper, Oxford Downs, Grosvenor
Downs, and Logan Downs sent wool via
Mackay, also Lake Elphinstone and
Eaglefield.
DENIS BAILEY.
AN OLD MACKAY FAMILY.
Mrs. Low (Mrs. Low died a few weeks ago);
Five Generations.—(1) Great Great Grandmother,
(2) Great Grandmother, Mrs. Kennedy ; (3)
Grandmother, Mrs. Leach ; (4) Mother, Mrs.
Simpson ; (5) Child, Baby Simpson.
Sensations
? THE W;ld SCOTCHMAN.”
bt T SJJRANG?:R AT LARGE IN
MACKAY.
■ An Incident of the Sixties.
Most of the old identities of Mac-
kay s’who have resided here in the
sixties retain '•ecollcctious of a bush-
ranger, named Alpin Macpherson, who
enjoyed tfie sobriquet of “ The Wild
..Scotchman.” Well reared and edu-
cated. young Macpherson seemed to
hab'e developed a liking for bush-
ranging, which, m these days, was
“thriving” in New South Wales.
Many.people were of the opinion that
• Macpherson was a semi-lunatic, but
“he possessed mfficient sense to evade
apprehension for a number of years.
i Dn one occasion, Macpherson was
to Mackay, as will be seen
-■further on, and made good his escape,
■ the incident causing quite a sensa-
tion in the lic.tle settlement then
growing on the banks of the Pioneer.
Macpherson had a string of names,
Macpherson, alias McGregor,
-'%s John Bruce, alias Marr, alias
|rr, alias Scotch, and alias Scotchie.
born in Scotland, and
rc-offied Queensland with his. father
very young. Young Alpin,
wheH at school, was a great favourite
wiJJjij|his teachers oif account of his
diligence and attention. Finishing
iiis school days, he was apprenticed
to M-r. Petrie, of Brisbane, a stone
mason, who entertained a high
opinion of him. A great reader -and
, a fluent speaker, Macpherson took a
leading part in debating societies in
Brisbane, and on one. occasion he
proved “ the mettle of his pastures ”
by his able defence of the late Sir
Charles Lilley, who was the recipient
of a “ warm” welcome over his ad-
vocacy of a Militia Bill. Soon
afterwards the “ Wild Scotchman ”
ran away from his apprenticeship, and
took to the bush. His first attempt
as a highwayman was the sticking
up of Wills’ Hotel on the Houghton
River, N.Q. Subsequently he made
his way into New South Wales, and
crossed swords with Sir Frederick
Pottinger, then an Inspector of
Police, who was trying to wipe out
bushranging in the mother colony.
Alpin Macpherson exchanged shots
with Pottinger and some of his
troopers. He said he had joined Ben
Hall’s gang, and had committed rob-
beries in their company, but most
people believed this to be a false as-
sertion. He did not remain long in
New South Wales—he got back to
his “ native heath,” robbed mails,
stuck up travellers, stole horses, etc.,
but he was generally fortunate in
evading apprehension. He had been
some months 011 the road when the
Manager of Manduran Station, Mr.
W. Nott, saw him in one of the pad-
docks, and went in pursuit. After a
five miles’ chase, he was overtaken
by Nott and party on the Port Curtis
Road. He attempted to escape, but
being covered by Nott’s rifle, he saw
that his reign was at an end, and
abdicated. He was brought back to
the station, and., carefully guarded.
A warrant had been issued for Mac-
pherson’s arrest for his alleged at-
tack upon Sir Frederick Pottinger.
He was extradited to stand his trial
in New South Wales. This was in
April, 1865, and as there was no pro-
secutor in New South Wales, Mac-
pherson was returned to Queensland.
From Brisbane he was sent to Port
Denison (now called Bowen), and
there committed for trial to Rock-
hampton, the nearest assize town. He
was shipped on board the steamer
“ Diamantina ” (named after Lady
Bowen), in charge of Constable
Maher. He was leg ironed, his hands
being so small that no handcuffs
would fit them. When the steamer
reached Mackay, Macpherson was
seated near the galley, reading. He
had been so well conduced during
the early part of the voyage that
Maher did not think it necessary to
take him below. Maher states that
he did not miss Macpheison until
the vessel was an hour out from Mac-
kay, bound for Rockhampton ; but
Mackay residents venture the opinion
that the sailors on the boats then in
port released the “Wild Scotchman ”
from the leg irons while the police
were regaling themselves at the local
hotels. Messrs. Geo. Voysey, John
McLean, J. G. Hess, and other old
identities remember the circum-
stances, and actually saw the “ Wild
Scotchman.” After his release, he
fled to the bush, and meeting a priest
who was collecting funds towards the
erection of a chapel, Macpherson
asked where he could get a drink of
water. The priest directed him to
a waterhole on the outskirts of the
little settlement, and was amazed to
be “ stuck up'’ l;y Macpherson. Upon
being informed by the priest that it
was not his own money he had pos-
sessed, Macpherson returned the
money to the cleric, and said as he
made off in the scrub : “ If you see
anyone looking tor the ‘ Wild Scotch-
man,’ tell them I’m gone.” Arriving
at up country sheep stations, Mac-
pherson obtained provisions, stole a
horse from the ration carrier at Col-
laroy, and waved a pathetic farewell
as he galloped into the bush. Pro-
ceeding to Kalonga Station, Wide
Bay, he went to a paddock with the
intention of stealing a horse, to stick
up the mail coach, and “ make a rise.”
A party was organised by Mr. Hall,
and Macpherson was again cap-
tured, without trouble. Care was
taken of him this time, and he reached
Maryborough Gaol in safety. He was
tried, _ convicted, and sentenced to 25
years impriso.r.iient. That was on
September 13, 1866, On December
22, 1874* a circuiar from the Colonial
Secretary s office notified his release
from gaol, after having served eight
years and three months. It was in
this year (1874) that Gardiner and
twenty-one other prisoners in New
South Wales were released on con-
sideration of their leaving the coun-
try. Gardiner went to San Francisco.
*t known what became of
Alan Macpherson, “The Wild Scotch-
man.”
The “ Wild Scotchman ” was killed
at Burketown, North Queensland,
some years ago, through falling from
a dray loaded with firevyood.
RECOLLECTIONS.—Continued.


M
u
c
Eight
PRICE
Sk
=?C
THE
?r
Established - 1866.
&
'x?
*T
Is the Leading Sugar Journal of Queensland.
Pages Every Morning.
Ten Pages on Saturday
- - ONE PENNY.
The “Jubilee of Mackay” was
prepared in the “Daily Mercury” Officf;.
DARING BANK ROBBERY.
The “ sticking up ” of the A.J.S.
Bank in September, 1866, was one of
the most exciting episodes of the .
early days. The bank was located in
a ra*her ( lonely spot near the river,
and was' surrounded by sugarcane,
which afforded excellent cover for
marauders. The robbers were cap-
tured near the borders of New South
Wales some time afterwards. The
following is the official report by
the bank manager (Mr. George Ged-
des): —About a quarter to 12 o’clock
yesterday (September 12, 1866), I
was sitting in my private room pre-
paring my letters for the outgoing
mail, and Mr. Green was seated at
his table behind the counter, writing
~Up the remittances, when he saw from
his window, two men advancing to-
wards the bank, and said, “ Who is
this coming ?” Being very busy, I
replied, “ I don’t know.” In about a
minute afterwards They walked in,
turning to the counter. One was, as
I thought, a half-caste. He leaned
against the small screen where Mr.
Green keeps his teller’s cash book.
The other stood beside him. The for-
mer tendered a £1 note for change.
Mr. Green wished to know how he
would take it—half sovereign and 10s.
silver. He replied, “ I want all sil-
ver.” While Mr. Gren was counting
it out, the other man inquired, “ Are
you Mr. Green ?” He said “,Yes.”
The man asked, “ Where is Mr.
Geddes ?’.’ “ There he is,” replied
Mr. Greek, pointing towards me. He
then asked me if I was Mr. Geddes.
I answered, “Yes,” and further re-
quested to know what he wanted,
telling him to walk in. He moved
from the counter towards the door
of my room, and, stopping short,
moved a little aside, at the same time
drawing' a splendid revolver, fully
loaded, and presenting it at me with
the words, “ If you stir, you are a
dead man.” I replied, “ All right, I
will not move.” When I was covered
the half-caste then drew his revolver,
and presented it at Mr. Green, as he
was in the act of handing f he silver
to him, and said, “ Don’t you stir.”
Mr. Green said, “ I won’t stir if that
will suit you.” The man covering me
then moved back to the front door,
still pointing the revolver at me, and
told me to go into the little room
behind the counter. The half-caste
also insisted on Mr. Green going
there. He was in the act of turning
round to go in, when he said, “Face
round, and walk backwards.” When
we were both in the room, the man
covering me followed up and stood
sentry over us, never once removing
his revolver. The half-caste then
closed the bank doors, came round
the counter, and commenced empty-
ing the tray of the gold and silver.
That completed, he searched the
drawer for the notes. When found,
he asked his mate for a bag, who
took the bag from his pocket, pass-
ing it behind- him. Our guard then
asked us-if rye knew when the stea-
mer would be’ in, and in answer I
said I did not, as the captain was
so uncertain in his .movements. He
then asked Mr. Green if he would
have an apple. He took one. He
also asked me to have one. I said
“ Yes,” but not having another him-
self, he appealed to the half-caste for
one, putting his hand behind him lo
receive it. Having handed it to- me,
he drew out a small pocket pistol,
and covered both Mr. Green and my-
self. Mr. Gren said, “We little ex-
pected a visit from you this morning,
you took us quite unawares.” Laugh-
ing, he replied, “ I suppose not.”
Then said Mr. Green, “ It is a d d
shame to rob us, it is only a small
bank, and we are but just commen-
cing business.” He replied, “We
want money, and must have it.”
When the half-caste had nearly
finished pillaging the drawer, Mr.
Green said, “Do not , touch the
cheques or paper.” I then said, “ No,
for God’s sake do not take them, they
are useless to you, as they bear the
bank’s stamp, and you will disar-
range all our business. You have all
the money, and you ought to be
satisfied.” The half-caste was then
going, when his mate asked, “ Have
you looked in the safe.” Trembling
for fear they should proceed to my
room, and discover the safe standing
behind the door, which cannot other-
wise be seen, I said, “ There is the
safe.” Mr. Green, at the same tinie
said, “ Here is the safe, look into
it.” The half-caste’ .then came into
the room, opened the'-gafe, but seeing
only a couple of bills, Mut it, remark-
ing, “We have got everything.” (It
was satisfactory to me to know they
had not.) “ Then you had better be
off,” I remarked. They were then
about to lock us up, when we both
said, “ There is no occasion for that,
we shall not move from here.” The
man who had guarded us, said, “ If
you give the alarm before we are
away from here half-an-hour, we will
shoot you.” They then went round
the counter, opened the door, and
quickly made for their horses, which
wefe standing at the corner of the
fence. Mounting them, they galloped
away. Just as they got outside, we
slid out. Mr. Green placed the tray
with some silver, copper; and six
unissuable notes, which had been
overlooked by the men, into bis saf.’ij
and locked it. He then went dqyvijs
the town to Mr. Kemmis forj ai horse,
to follow them. I gained my revol-
ver, which had been on the chair
close to me all the morning, but
before I could get out they were
fairly off. I then started off to Mr.'
J. T .Baker, Police Magistrate, and
acquainted him of the affair, jand th»
alarm was given. The Sergean*
Polite, after some delaj in
his t horse, proceeded , v '
Green; Hodgkinson, an* - ’
the bushrangers.
name ’ Binney, also
Mr. Conner’s, three
The Sergeant has m
remainder came in ,th
must remark that man.
spiritedly in the affair,; a..
great credit for the intere,., rv _.
took in the bank’s affairs in' such a
crisis. On the morning of the rob-'
bery no cash, fortunately, of any
kind was paid out by Mr. Green,
hence I am able to arrive at a- cor-
rect and satisfactory conclusion •as
to the amount appropriated by the
bushrangers. (The amount stolen
was £746 Bs.) I am not surprised,
although Mr. Green and myself
used every precaution, that we have
been stuck up. The premises are 5a
a most secluded spot, and at times
we do not have more thani ope. or
two customers in durHe .the. .day.,_
The sugarcane is new dense, and
reaches a height of about IS or' 16
feet, and on the other side there is
a scrub stretching right down the
fence, and almost up to the door, in
some parts quite 6 feet in height,
We are therefore almost entirely
shut out from observation by pas-
sers by in the road. ' ’ •
Printed for and Published by the Mackay Co-operative Printing and Publishing Company, Limited.
SENSATIONS.—Continued.
