

THE COLONIES
THE CANNON STREET MEETINGS.
“No great political improvement , however plausible or attractive
it may appear , can be productive of lasting benefit , unless it be
preceded by a change of public opinion , and every change of
public opinion must be preceded by a change of knowledge'' —
Buckle.
LONDON:
Sampson Low, Son, and Marston,
Crown Buildings, 188, Fleet Street, E.C.


LONDON :
PRINTED BY G. E. WATERS,
WESTBOURNE GROVE, W.


CONTENTS.
Letter I.
Mr. Wilson and his followers; Mr. Yoitl ; Sir
George Grey ; Mr. Westgartii ; Mr. Beaumont ;
Opinions in Colonies -
Letter 11.
Resolutions at Cannon Street Meetings; “A
Name, a Home, and a Fund wanted”; Close
of the Meetings; Results considered - - - 14
Letter 111.
Causes of Failure; Colonies not represented;
Free Governments ; Conferences useless ;
Colonies Free States ; Practical measures
TO BE KEPT IN VIEW --------- 22
APPENDIX.
Mr. Westgarth’s Proposed Resolutions 34
Mr. Beaumont’s Resolutions - -- -- -- --35


The following Letters appeared in the “ European Mail," in
harmony with the object of that journal, to communicate information
to the Colonies of the British Empire. As now republished, they
may serve the purpose of recording some phases of an agitation
which, being both new and strange , excited much temporary
interest, and which, may appear in other times, if not in more
important aspects .


LETTER I.
London, December 27 th, 1869.
Sir, —With your permission, I venture to form an.
•estimate of the progress lately made in colonial reform,
and what may be yet accomplished. From such an
effort, perhaps, good may result, if not to those at home,
at least to those who may zealously follow the movement
in the Colonies. It is of the first importance that they
should form accurate opinions, and know precisely the
true aspect of the question, especially through the
operations and influence of the famous Cannon Street
Meetings. Not that the reverse of this is to be feared
from newspaper reports or articles, for almost every
important journal has ceased to detail the proceedings,
and the only notices that appear deprecate, if not
ridicule, the agitation. This arises from many circum-
stances, not the least being that the agitation has an
unfortunate party-political bearing. The Conservative
press wish to tack on the “colonial cry” to other
watchwords now most industriously sought for; but no
leading statesman higher than Lord John Manners has
publicly identified himself with such an unworthy
proceeding, believing doubtless in the wise statement
that the only safe ground is to treat colonial questions
‘ 1 as entirely freed from the fetters of home parties; not
as topics of the day, but questions of the future.”
There has been some sort of recognition at the


meetings of these principles, but they have not been kept
strictly to the front. The preliminaries, indeed, were
ill defined. Haste, indecision, want of preparation,
were early manifested. In England, as in Victoria,
Mr. Edward Wilson is known as a high-minded,
patriotic man—truly noble, eager for usefulness—and
aiming at no small distinctions. His letter to the
Times, now widely circulated, was allowed to appear
only to receive an unanswerable rebuke in an article
clear and to the point. Whether the meetings were
determined upon before or after the publication of that
letter now matters little, it being certain that there has
been in connection with it a concurring force to be
watched in its rise, progress, and effects. This is the
only true method of understanding the position into
which things have been drifting. Mr. Wilson, then,
became originator, the first spokesman, the chief oracle
of the agitation. His sympathies—large, spontaneous,
and earnest —were moved by the New Zealand troubles.
He was goaded by various species of indifference, depart-
mental or public, on emigration, on postal reform, on.
economic principles being too closely applied to young
countries. He called to his aid spirits of less doubtful
character; some discontented officials who are known
to be among the “ irreconcilables ” of the Colonial
Office; others who are prone to weak, vapid, but
unfortunately very regular appearances at almost every
public gathering; and some there were who aspired to
be leaders when nature intended them for disciples, to
deport themselves humbly, feed sparingly on the diet
of intellectual giants, and not rush in ‘ where angels
fear to tread.” From such a motley gathering littlo


was to be expected. Little, indeed, has been the result I
Mr. Wilson, better as a writer than a speaker, certainly-
laid down a reasonable programme for discussion; but
there were no resolutions, no practical tendencies, no
course of action proposed ; nothing, in fact, approaching
statesmanship, or even a policy shadowed forth or
suggested. Other and worse blunders were committed,
such as quoting from private letters, which improperly-
garbled and twisted Lord Granville’s conversations;
parading the New Zealand troubles when they should
have been kept in subordination to the general principles,
and proclaiming that the Gladstone-Granville Ministry
■ought to be impeached for even breathing dismember-
ment or disintegration of the Empire. Forgetful of all
preceding policy, that self-government in the Colonies
has been moulded and shaped; that it has developed
its own difficulties, and that much patient study will
be required to maintain union throughout a large,
scattered, and heterogeneous race—the speakers wan-
dered far and wide from the subjects; irregularity
reigned triumphant, and there was the barest amount
of order in the meetings.
At an early stage it was observed that the Chairman
was not weighty enough for his office. Without the
prestige of either name or position, unknown to the
public generally, he was, of course, judged “on his
merits; ” and his lead from meeting to meeting
was little else than an empty unmeaning sound.
Unskilled in debate himself, he had no power of
controlling others; he failed in appreciating the true
points in the day’s business; his calls to “order” or
admonitions as to “ time” often proved ineffective; and


even in taking the sense of a meeting he was so little
trained as to allow the speakers to drift into inex-
tricable confusion between motions, amendments, and
substantive motions, producing a painful sense of
weariness and exhaustion to those who require the
power and force of a predominant mind, and understand
its necessity for moulding into shape the rough materials
brought together in any public movement. Of course,
something else than a Speaker of the House of Commons
was looked for; even a less skilled chairman than
George Wilson of the Anti Corn Law League would,
have been tolerated ; but an experience was soon gained
with regard to Mr. Youl that disqualified him for such
prominence. Your readers in the Colonies must believe
that in this description I “ nothing extenuate nor set
down aught in malice; ” but no precision of character
was given to the mere debates, apart altogether from the
actual results that have to be considered.
At almost every meeting Sir George Grey, the late
Governor of New Zealand, was present—often eloquent,
even if the matter was a little strained; active, intelligent,
furtive in his glances, somewhat suspicious of his own
movements, but enjoying the novelty of a position
which brought him into direct antagonism to his old
chiefs in Downing Street! He, however, neither led
nor controlled; did not appear thoroughly to identify
himself with the movement, and, I should think, was
quite disposed to believe that crudeness and incomplete-
ness attached, if not to every speech, certainly to every
motion submitted to the meeting. After Sir George,
there was very little support from the ordinary attend-
ants. On each occasion there was heard some orator,


burning with the fire of “old Erin,” or wisely sen-
tentious with the cautious shrewdness of a “ canny
Scot.” In fact, never did I attend without being struck
that the various elements might be compared to the
empire at large—strangely constituted, representing
■every interest, leagued together by no common senti-
ment ; but all men in opposition contributing a grievance
for discussion, as well as strengthening the family of
nations; great in small communities, almost nothing in
a large society; perhaps statesmen for a parish in
population, certainly unknown units in London; that
■each man had better again get into harness for the
work of true colonising, leaving the subject in the
hands of those who understand statecraft, and are able
to apply great principles to the public advantage.
And this brings me to the actual business of these
meetings, which, in reality, may be said to have origina-
ted with Mr. Westgarth and Mr. Beaumont, the former
well known in Australian circles, the latter an ex-
Chief Justice of British Guiana. The men are as
unlike as possible: one anxious not to be too promi-
nent, the other bold and fearless ; but each determined
to strive for mastery, or the “ vantage ground ”
in the movement. I confess to experiencing a sense of
relief when Mr. Westgarth “ tabled ” the resolutions
of which he is the author—skilfully drawn, committing
the meeting to good common-place sense, and really
doing no disservice either to the Colonies or to the
integrity of the empire. They are worthy of study as
being the embodied sense of those first active in the
agitation. They should, however, be regarded as
“ feelers ” towards gauging public opinion, a groping


after that which, in American language, is called a
‘‘platform.” Their real aim was administrative reform
rather than organic change ; not to demolish, but to
reconstruct; to elicit public attention to the Colonies SO'
as to enforce direct reponsibility upon the executive ;
also to apply the principle of an indissoluble bond of’
union between those who have a common origin, a
future of high purpose and great usefulness which must
not be weakened or allowed to drift into danger. The
resolutions had their defects in platitude of sentiment
a little “ fine-wire drawing ” about the regimes past
and present in Colonial government; a painful parade
of the old New Zealand difficulty; but the germs of
good sense and sound policy were to be discerned even
in the attack upon the Under Secretary of the Colonial
Office, which might make the Secretary of State himself
sensitively alive to his duties and responsibilities. But
what shall be said of the author of these resolutions ?
He was present to move the first, some one else moved
the second, and the third was proposed amidst no end of
trouble and doubt by Mr. Edward Wilson. At such a
rate of progress there was little probability of getting
through the rest earlier than the meeting of Parliament,,
when public attention would be greatly diverted to very
different if not more important subjects. But worse-
results arose from Mr. Beaumont being allowed to inter-
pose not a “thin end of the wedge,” but one massive,,
cumbrous, burdened with more platitudes, leading away
to new projects—emigration, parliamentary committees,
royal commissions, the “ evoking ” upon a large scale
of public opinion, and hereafter a “ National and
Colonial Emigration League ! ” I am amazed that at


the fifth meeting such a diversion was allowed,
portending no good, and opening up fruitful subjects of
dissension and differences, threatening dismemberment
of the colonists themselves in their efforts to preserve
integrity and to secure attention to their grievances.
I often looked on at these discussions to remind myself
of the fine old sentiment, “ how good and how pleasant
it is for brethren to dwell together in unity.” But do
the colonists evince this unity ? Have they made a
clear case for their own comprehension ? Do they truly
understand what they want, the manner for asserting
their grievances, the practical reforms within their power
to attain, or that of the Imperial Government to grant ?
For my part I had at one time a faint idea that there
might have been something shaped and fashioned in a
committee of strong-minded men, possessed of clear ideas
and having power in thought and language; colonists
who might be embryo statesmen, with determined will
and a resolution to be heard, who could make a public
opinion for themselves, and enlist warm sympathies for
a grand subject, capable of being made much of in its
novelty and freshness; hut, alas! the realization is far
from warranting any other feeling than that of disap-
pointment, failure and defeat, which, it is thought, now
attends this ill-conceived, badly-managed, and absolutely
futile movement.
Never was this more apparent than at the meeting,
when Mr. Beaumont submitted his resolutions. In his
speech introducing them he stated, forsooth, that there
was a relation between those resolutions, and the
■deputation to Lord Granville, and the newspaper
hostility! That, as martyrs, the “ Junta,” as he


called the agitators, would thrive on persecution,
on ridicule, on opposition ! That out of tribulation
success would be achieved! He attempted invec-
tive, sarcasm, eloquence perhaps in one or other
of these lines he might have succeeded, but the speech,
though briefly reported, took one hour and three
quarters in delivery ! It exhausted the meeting, then the
chairman, and when at last the speaker was interrupted
by calls of “time, time,” the fire of his eloquence was
damped, and the meeting was prepared to think the
resolution would never be submitted. But will Mr.
Beaumont rise to any superior position as a leader ?
His style is not without merit. His manner is remarkably
decisive; there is an effort after exhausting subjects,
crushing opponents, using all sorts of weapons in
debate. But his mind is aggressive, not suggestive; he is
full of knack, not of geuuis. The solid lawyer,
the nice logician, the careful debater, the wary politician,,
are features not yet discovered in his character, while
there is an overweening love for his own opinions, which
obtrudes upon the patience of those whose hours cannot
be devoted to “ great set orations,” and who within a
business day want clear, short, practical, measuies,
which will produce substantial results. It will never
do to continue such meetings; it will never do to toler-
ate such a meaningless debating club about colonial
gjjjpirg j and it will never do to let the great theme of
its future connection with the parent state be dragged
into ridicule, contempt, and disgrace.
To sum up the results of the movement thus far, it
cannot be boasted that there has been any success
achieved with Lord Granville; nor with other eminent.


men; nor with the newspapers; nor with the
general public. It is already clear that the Colonial
Conference announced for February will never be held.
In fact, Lord Bury has, at the mere dread of such
a conference, withdrawn from the chairmanship of the
committee appointed to bring it about. It is certain
that other satellites of the Court or Ministry will
follow his bright example. But they might wait for
the Colonies to pronounce its fate, for notwithstanding
the weak meaningless despatches quoted by Mr. Youl,
there are now reaching England unmistakeable signs of
a healthy public opinion in Sydney, Melbourne, and
Adelaide, that no conference will be assented to bj r
those Colonies. The “ scheme is simply impossible,”
says one authority. “We are well satisfied with
things as they are,” asserts a powerful journal;
“It is considered quite impracticable and useless,” is
the opinion of another eminent publicist. So from one
colony after another the voice of common sense prevails
to discourage and condemn the project. What, then, are
the results ? A good letter from Sir Henry Drummond
Wolff about colonial Government ; an excellent sug-
gestion from the Earl of Carnarvon about Hew Zealand;
a most admirable paper from Sir Henry Bartle Erere,
showing that India and New Zealand may help each
other in a period of warfare ; a magnificent development
of Earl Granville’s character as diplomatist and states-
man ; and above all, healthy, vigorous, refreshing proofs,
abundantly afforded, that England and the Colonies are
necessary for each other; that there is no wish on either
side for separation; and that when real tangible
difficulties shall arise, there is head and heart enough


among the good men of all parties at home and in every
settlement to adjust difficulties, to heal differences, and
and to preserve long and peaceful relations with mutual
advantage. I think Lord Granville was well informed
that there has “ always been considerable jealousy in
the Colonies of the colonists residing in this country,”
and I am sure this jealousy will be wisely manifested
if these meetings are not allowed to continue, and this
senseless agitation is not permitted to disturb the
prosperity and happiness of a great and flourishing
empire.
LETTER 11.
London, January 22nd, 1870.
Sib, —The subsequent movements at the Cannon Street
Meetings have been unique and conclusive; characteristic
of men who, in beating a retreat, have left the line of
march open to their pursuers; their last public record
being virtually a registration of their weakness, their
incapacity, and their extinction. Yet, in the words of
Mr. AY. E. Forster, at Bradford, when speaking of the
movement, “I rejoice that the question has been
brought forward, inasmuch as it has made it clear to
me that neither in England nor in the Colonies do we
intend that the Empire shall be broken up.”
The proof of this was being amply furnished when
my last letter was concluded. Immediately after its


publication, there came from almost every Colony
unquestionable signs that the agitation was not even
“ plausible or attractive that instead of it being
“preceded by a change in public opinion,” it had
outrun the bounds of prudence or expectation ; that it
was far from being “ productive of lasting benefit;
that, in fact, disloyalty, mischief, and disaffection were
being attempted, alien alike to the temper and genius
of the great English community. These points, in
fact, were developed during a brief interval in the
meetings allowed for the Christmas holidays. The
result was a meagre attendance at the sixth meeting :
few of the more prominent characters were present
except Mr. Wilson; so that a field day was allowed to
minor celebrities, who made good use of their
opportunities, and who really cropped up in tolerable
profusion. The precedence was again, of course, in
Mr. Beaumont’s favour, who became positively prolix,
tiresome, verbose —never more full of reiteration
“ hammered on the ear ” —until he must have
convinced himself that he had a new audience who
knew not the Beaumont of earlier meetings, who never
before had listened to his arguments or followed his
elaborate eloquence. An hour or more of oration, and
his resolutions were fairly launched. But, to the
consternation of those present, there then sounded
from the end of the room occupied by the chairman,
and the creme de la creme , a voice shrill, loud, and
startling; raised in the highest key, by one ready to
burst at every vein, and subject to no ordinary
excitement. He maintained that all the meetings
had been a farce; that a wrong method had from the


first been pursued; that the whole business had been
brought into ridicule; that those then present, they
themselves —chairman, promoters, speakers—were all
the objects of public scorn and derision. The thing
wanted—what must be insisted on before going
further—was, a motion for “ a name, a home, and a
fund.” The gentleman, thus relieved of his burden of
thought and speech, produced an adverse effect;
there were painful glances interchanged, some thinking
that the truth was not far absent even if strangely
rendered, others believing that the bubble was approach-
ing its true and legitimate end, and some were evidently
determined to appease the storm which was thus raised.
It might have been policy to tone away the asperities
felt towards Mr. Beaumont, the most miserable of
offenders; but was it prudent for one speaker after
another to hurry towards the denouement , to carry his
resolutions, to praise him as their leader, to follow him
into the wilderness, and in the end make themselves
scapegoats for his transgressions ?
Thus was the end approached. The programme
adopted was greeted by the originators of the movement
as a lucky means of escape, and made the basis of
future proceedings. There were hurry and confusion
in beginning the meetings; there were the same
scenes in closing them. The only practical point
laid down failed in its object, for I believe it is a fact
that the committee have never met for real business.
One of the proposed members has seceded, another
contemplates returning to the Colonies, and the so-called
“ Emigration League ” has been virtually superseded
by a new and stronger candidate for public favour.


At the close of these meetings there was painful
evidence of non-success, for on leaving Cannon Street
a significant announcement appeared in a placard
posted at the entrance to the room, that the “ hat
was sent round” for contributions towards the
expenses. A subscription list was opened ; but “few and
far between ” were the contributors —barely sufficient
for the purpose of defraying the cost of the rooms;
nothing for printing, for the advertisements, or the
many incidental items at all times inevitable for such
purposes. On the following Wednesday the rooms
were closed ! “ Ichabod ” was on the lintels ! The
place that “once knew them, knew them no more”
from that time thenceforward ! Truly an inglorious
result, but natural to the gatherings —an inevitable
termination to such immature proceedings !
I may now appropriately review the conclusions
arrived at by the Colonial reformers, keeping in view
that the whole business rests upon Mr. Beaumont’s
resolutions. Not to discusss how far they are better or
worse than Mr, Westgarth’s propositions, they shall
be taken simply on their own merits. It will be
necessary to examine the resolutions seriatim , and then
take the following observations by way of a running
commentary, not merely as an individual opinion, but
as the general convictions arrived at by the voice of
public opinion.
1. The privileges of British subjects are fully and
impartially upheld in favour of all residents in the
Colonies. The rights of naturalisation are conferred;
the German emigrants are admitted to these rights in
Canada, in Australia, in New Zealand; and no family


or congregation of men ever settle in any colony but
they enjoy all the advantages of Englishmen. But do
they discharge all the obligations of Citizenship ? Do
they add to Imperial strength—the power and import-
ance of the Empire ? It is notorious that in no State,
whatever its age or wealth, is the right of freemen
more readily granted than in the British Colonies:
the emigrants from all countries and whatever their
condition, may, and do, achieve the highest offices of
State. In a word, throughout all colonial possessions
there is the freest scope allowed to the ambition, the
hopes, and the aspirations of men, apart from the
trammels of caste, religion, or creed.
2. Emigration is as largely encouraged by the British
Government as is consistent with the obligations towards
its own interests. It is a mistake to assume that this
is a one-sided question; for there arc duties the Colonies
should discharge concurrently with those discharged by
England. If there is over population in one case, there
are unbounded resources in the other; the exigencies on
one side can be met by the surplus on the other side;
and the laws of supply and demand have to be steadily
observed. It is also obvious that in the territories to
be peopled, attractions should be offered in the way of
settlement, such as assisted passages for families, free
lands for those who can cultivate or occupy, and where
labour is applied it should be rewarded by advantages
neither sparsely granted nor grudgingly bestowed, to all
men who readily and willingly work out their own
redemption. But have the Colonies admitted these
concurrent claims and advantages ? Do they maintain
the right of the emigrants to the unappropriated lands ?


Will they mortgage their splendid possessions for the
welfare of the race from which they have sprung—
“hone of their bone, sinew of their sinew?” Where
are now the evidences that they honestly apply the
proceeds of the land sales or raise emigration funds ?
Or that they have committees for introducing labour,
for extending population, for facilitating the occupation
of property, for rendering cheap and easy the settlement
upon the land conveyed to them by the Crown ? Do
they not raise the cry, “ Australia for the Australians ;
“ Canada for the Canadians; ” “ New Zealand for those
who are now in occupation? ” In short are they helping
in a true and earnest spirit the work committed to
their charge, the inheritance they occupy, the splendid
advantages conferred upon them when free governments
were granted ? These involve reciprocal duties, which
to forget or neglect is alike wilful and culpable, sure to
recoil on both parties to the compact, who ought to
recognise no ties but those of mutual interest, equal
obligations and advantages which will make all members
of the body politic “wax and wane together.”
3. To raise the cry of “separation” is a flagrant
absurdity, or, in the words of the resolution, a greater
“ capital injury ” than the evasion of those duties at-
taching to the Colonies, and arising out of the advantages
which belong to free constitutions. Nothing approaching
separation has ever been entertained in England, much
less seriously attempted. It is a device of the malcon-
tents, who are not to be reconciled or appeased ; in fact,
of those who, having small grievances, wish to taise
large issues, in order to gratify their own selfish purposes,
or indulge in private revenge for imaginary wrongs.


4. This is not an opportune period to urge “ relative
rights and obligations ” which in no sense have been
disturbed or are jeopardised by wrongs on the one hand
or menaces on the other, for never were these rights
or obligations better preserved or upheld. There is no
real nor practical grievance to complain of by the free
and independent Colonies; and eveu the Crown Colonies
have nothing to urge which is not easily redressed
through the press or Parliament. There may be
questions of internal defence or government to settle,
but any difficulties which exist may be ascribed to the
fact that
“ The old order changeth, yielding place to new ; ’
that men are slow to appreciate their privileges, and
know not how to exercise the liberty they enjoy. They
have power to tax, to create and to degrade high officials ;
to enter into and break contracts; to make capital for
themselves, by bringing out loans, pledging their future
for their present gains; to impose burdens “ grievous to
be borne ” on posterity ; to do either noble or ignoble
things for those who do them “ suit and service. ” It
is not necessary to inquire whether they use or abuse
this liberty. They are their own masters, amenable to
nothing but public opinion, which, more in small than
in large communities, is of a variable and uncertain
quality, guided by narrow prejudices, subject to
interested motives, rarely created by any deep-rooted
sentiments, and still less actuated by lofty or impartial
principles.
5. If any inquiry be made by a Parliamentary
Committee or Royal Commission, there can be no


retracing the history of emancipation or cancelling the
independence of the Colonies. I trust, indeed, that
the House of Commons will rigidly avoid interference,
in the same sense that legislation is rarely, if ever,
resorted to in matters of Church discipline, in the
affairs of parish vestries, or of municipal boroughs.
Having completely recognised self-government as the
course for the Colonies, there are principles to follow
that, if infringed upon or invaded, will lead to real
mischief by disturbing that progression in independence
which all public bodies should study to acomplish.
There must be no appeal to higher powers to control their
proceedings, to settle their differences, or to act as
arbitrator upon inevitable difficulties. All these they
must surmount for themselves, unless they are pre-
pared to sacrifice some of those rights and privileges
which are the inheritance they are responsible for to a
distant posterity. At this stage in the history of the
British Colonies, there is no accumulation of grievances
to require investigation; few, if any, administrative
wrongs that Downing Street can be charged with or
which Parliament ought to redress; and whatever may
be the intercolonial questions now pending, they can
form no subject of sound reference; as no Imperial legis-
lation can, with any permanent benefit, be attempted
for their settlement.
6. I am equally strong in the conviction that public
opinion in this country will not he j udiciously appealed
to in the interests of the Colonies if the present “meddlers
and muddlers ” have the direction of any subsequent
movements that may be contemplated by their own—or
shall I say Mr. Beaumont’s ? —resolutions. The times


and seasons will come when, without passion or excite-
ment, true, earnest, clear-brained men may take up the
subject with real advantage ; when calm and judicious
inquiries may be conducted by those who
“ Live to clutch the golden keys,
To mould a mighty State’s decrees,
And shape the whisper of a throne; ”
and when their measures, arranged in harmony with
sound principles and constitutional maxims, shall carry
forward this great empire in the glorious career that it
has been accomplishing, slowly but surely, of enlarging
the boundaries of liberty, increasing the blessings of an
industrial commerce, and maintaining throughout the
wide world that good laws, a sound literature, and a
pure religion, are the true foundations of a nation’s
happiness.
LETTER 111.
London, February i6th, 1870.
Sin, —I should regret taking leave of the agitators
on the Colonial question without endeavouring to trace
both the causes of their failure, and the results that
have accrued from their movements. I shall exclude
all personal considerations, which can now be done
with advantage from the free handling already given
to the leaders and their disciples in following their
speeches and resolutions.
Failure, then, has been most prominent from the
fact of the Colonies not being authoritatively repre-
sented. This, indeed, was shown in the incipient


stages of the movement, at the time when every
advantage was taken of the New Zealand difficulties.
Men were running to and fro, sowing seeds of discord,
making political capital for themselves, exaggerating
the Maori troubles, and impugning the very loyalty
of the colonists. A notable illustration characterised
this epoch. The Secretary of State was solemnly
informed, in language begotten of groundless fear, and
dictated by restless ambition, that “if the troops were
withdrawn, the blood of thousands of his fellow-
countrymen might be at his door, and England might
witness the destruction of a thriving colony.” This
information came from an authority of less than three
months’ residence in New Zealand! He was then
prominent in hostility to Colonial Office policy and
discipline. The same witness having imbibed lessons
in panic from club-house gossip, seriously endeavoured
to prove that, unless the requirements of the local
politicians were granted, New Zealand would declare
its independence of the British Crown, and offer
allegiance to the United States! Lord Granville,
however, wisely declared that “ Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment felt bound to measure the real importance” of
the subject, “ not by the statements which they receive
from private informants in this country, however
worthy of credit, but by the deliberate acts of- the
Government and Legislature, who alone in this respect
can effectually represent the colonists.” Throughout
the recent discussions there was the same necessity
for ascertaining the genuine and recognised opinions of
those holding local power. All knew that the colonists
themselves were not speaking, nor their representatives,


nor their agents, nor, in fact, anyone having a delegated!
authority. A worse misfortune was that the “re-
formers ” assumed a power of which they were-
ultimately deprived. The fact that they were not
even thanked for their self-imposed labours, is signifi-
cant of unappreciated service ; only ridicule, snubbing,
and rebuke have flowed from those who should have
evinced gratitude. In charity, it may be asserted that
the Cannon Street councillors proved themselves in
advance of their times ; hut that their zeal was mis-
placed is now clearly shown by the absolute repudiation
of both their words and actions in almost all the-
colonies. New Zealand, foremost throughout the-
agitation, is now in the position of realizing Mr.
Fitzgerald’s noble advice, that the colony “ would do
well and wisely to rely upon herself alone, because the-
duty of self-defence is a world-wide obligation among
all nations and in all time.” So it is with other
colonies. Australia at large repudiates the vague-
sentiment of leaning upon the United Kingdom in
mere local difficulties, and scorns the interference of
those who, without authority, attempt to represent
large and important interests, involving solemn ques-
tions of Imperial magnitude. In Canada, more than
all, it has been shown there is a frank and noble
recognition of the subject, needing no reference beyond
their own legally-constituted assemblies, it being in-
consistent with the rights of the colony to delegate its
charter of liberty, its independence, and its future
welfare to any representatives, except under careful
instructions, and with a well-matured conviction that
mischief and disaster will not be the consequence.


Again, in no sense has the recent failure been more
complete than in overlooking the establishment of free-
Governments, and the practical effects secured to the
colonies. It has been forgotten that each is, in reality,
independent, has its destiny in its own hands, its
statesmen and people competent to judge of their
interests, and of the course best calculated to secure
or conciliate those interests. Let this position be
compared with that occupied less than thirty years
since. Then Lord John Eussell or Earl Grey presided
at the Colonial Office, and were able to enforce a policy
long binding upon the statesmen subsequently in
power. There was, however, a “ Mr. Mother-Country,”'
of whom there is little remembrance in this generation.
He was the incarnation of centralized government, an
irrepressible power in producing discontent and misrule
in every colony. Without assuming the airs of dic-
tation, “ Mother-Country ” ruled cabinets and senate
passed or vetoed Acts of Parliament; determined the
course of public opinion, by publishing or withholding
despatches. In him was vested the authority “to
which was committed that last appeal from the Colonies-
themselves, which was dignified with all those vague
phrases about the power, the honour, the supremacy,,
and the wisdom of the Mother-Country.” This mys-
terious influence has lately been again introduced- to
the public by the Times. How few know anything of
“ Mother- Country ! ” And how carefully the editor
wishes him avoided in this discussion! But to those
who have to contrast the present condition of the
Colonies with that of former days, the withdrawal
of “ Mr. Mother-Country ” is sufficient to produce


a deep sense of gratitude. There is now no meddling,
interfering, or repressive government. It has given
place to a self-governing, free, and uncontrolled system,
in which the full fruition of perfect liberty is enjoyed,
and the noblest prerogatives of freeborn Englishmen
can he asserted. In failing to recognise the advantages
of the modern system, there is the danger of reverting
to the rule either of despotism or dogmatism, for such
would be the inevitable effect of the references to
councils; of the appeals to central authority; the
necessity for Imperial control, either actual or implied.
Mutual annoyance, if not disgust, would be the result
of such complicated authority. And it may be en-
quired, would the Colonies yield obedience, gain
advantages, or secure anything which is not otherwise
attainable ?
The inherent vices of councils and conferences have
also been forgotten by those who have advocated them
as means for improving the relations between the
Colonies and Great Britain. Let the (Ecumenical
Council, with its lengthened sittings and its powerless
decrees be excluded from consideration, but what shall
be said of our own Pan-Anglican Synod ? Did any
respectable advantages accrue to Church or State ?
Think of the lay conferences, of the conferences of
deputies of the three denominations, of conferences
about education, of reform in Parliament. They one
and all produce nausea to minds that know how
measures of great public import are moulded—how the
Council of the Empire consolidates power, secures
influence, and obtains concurrence to its proceedings—
how that constitution has been shaped, which our


modern poet well describes when speaking of Eng-
land :
“ A land of settled government,
A land of just and old renown,
Where Freedom broadens slowly down
From precedent to precedent.
Where faction seldom gathers head,
But, by degrees to fulness wrought,
The strength of some diffusive thought
Hath time and space to work and spread.”
Nor can the Colonies themselves have faith in con-
ferences. The examples before them are of the postal
conference in Melbourne, which recommended measures
that were never adopted ; and of the conference in
Sydney upon customs’ duties, that settled no now
policy, and defined no boundaries for common action.
A conference may, upon one-sided questions, such as
the abolition of the Corn-laws, or the adoption of
Eree-trade principles, when policy is clearly defined,
prescribe a course of action so as to arouse agitation,
and convince public opinion in such a manner as shall
ensure success; but the same materials can never
determine vexed questions of State rights, the limits of
constitutional power, the necessities of external or
internal defence, the boundaries of principle and action
for a colony to observe, or when imperial duties are to
be recognised or withheld.
I will not dwell upon the minor mistakes, such'as
the indecision of plan—whether confederation should
or should not be advocated, whether representation
should be by agents or diplomatists. It is now open
to demonstration that the most flagrant error was in
adopting a tone of mind and indulging in expressions
which assumed that the great statesmen and the public


mind of England were inimical to the Colonies—that
separation was a foregone conclusion, dismemberment of
empire a sentiment cherished, advocated, and promoted
in every possible manner! The Earl of Carnarvon,
with some leanings towards the recent agitation,
mildly exposes the “ misunderstandings,” asserting
that those connected with some colonies “complained
of a coldness,” while “gentlemen who represent other
colonies said there was too much interference with
them.” But this is too mild, for there was a thorough
outspoken, undisguised determination to make the most
of the doctrine of separation, it being carried to the
length of, positively, almost wilfully misquoting,
garbling, perverting the sense—often the words—of
Lord Granville, and the officials at Downing Street.
The fact can only be accounted for on the ground
of injured pride or disappointed ambition, which
had adopted the conviction of great services to be
■rendered where none, in fact, were wanted; of
burning patriotism, glowing •with laudable zeal for
distant tribes and possessions when there was no
.grievance to redress, no injustice to remedy, no reform
to accomplish. It would now serve no good purpose
to collate the speeches in order to weed out inflammatory
sentiments or revolutionary doctrines; but there were
■orations fit for the Fenian brotherhood, while pam-
phlets, articles in newspapers, and essays in magazines
have abounded with passion, and prejudice, and party
spirit, to excite hostility and satisfy personal revenge.
It is gratifying to know that the wisdom of Parliament
will dispel the illusions about “ disintegration,” if any
have been created, — indeed the House of Lords has


done itself honour by calm, statesmanlike addresses,
which will convince the Colonies that it is unwise to
indulge in raving abuse when there are grave questions
to be solved —not in hatred or ill-will, or even in
coolness of relationship, but in a manner suitable to
the progress, the new doctrines, the perfectly novel
duties that self-government has developed.
What is a colony ? The question has yet to be
determined. A colony is not a mere “ plantation ”in
the sense which Bacon describes, a thing to regard like
a child whose habitation has to be built, whose food has
to be provided, whose government has to be controlled.
It is not simply a state such as that described by Charles
Buller in his masterly speech on systematic colonisation,
“ that must contain some at least of all the elements
that go to makeup home in England.” Nor is a colony
“ a vast tract of fertile desert ” entailing a heavy cost
for the honour of empire, such as Sir William Moles-
worth used to denounce, but which, had he lived, he
would doubtless have admired and honoured, and helped
well and wisely to govern. The colonics, as a whole,
have grown mightily since his time. We now have
different views of their importance and influence; hold
to stern duties as to their government; and recognise
an ever-widening force as to their future power, their
relations with England and other countries the wide
world over. What, then, is a colony? It is not a
dependency to be helped in some senses, checked in
others, but controlled in all its highest and most im-
portant operations. A colony is a state holding together
the most restlesss, determined, vigorous men of our
times. Each expedition that has left these shores has


become an epitome of that society which makes up the
parent stock; and, in the spirit of the old Grecian
colonisers, every band has “ borne with it the image
of its country’s god to link it for ever, by a common
worship, to its ancient home.” A colony represents,
not only the religion, but the commerce, the conquering
civilisation, the aggressive force in morals, in politics,
in art, in science—which constitute the greatness and
glory of this age. A colony is a great progressive
instrument towards subduing and utilising the earth for
man’s use and comfort; each one being established,
developed, and matured as the necessities of the parent
state demand or its own internal force requires. With
the condition and rate of colonial progress for the first
half of the century we have nothing to do; but, like
the world generally, the Colonies have moved with
giant strides since 1850. The gold discoveries, the
influence of free trade, the freedom of Governments,
have given an impetus which advances them at once to
the foremost position of a power in the world ; when
it is no longer wise to regard them as other than full
grown, responsible, self-governing states. As states
they must think through accredited representatives; act
by properly delegated agents; each in turn reflecting
the policy, the influence, the power of their country.
As states they must guide their own affairs, be
responsible for the part they play in the world’s history;
exercise a mission for weal or woe on future generations.
As states they must control and direct, not only their
internal, but their external affairs; rising or falling in
estimation like older countries, by the patriotism of
their public men, the grandeur of their works and the


nobility, the disinterestedness, and the purity displayed.
More than all, as states they must surmount their own diffi-
culties, and adapt their institutions to the wants, necessi-
ties, and wishes required by their particular position.
Now, if this be the true view of a colony, it follows
that the duties and obligations must be handled in a
practical manner with the prescience and power of
statesmen. It will not be wise to include before their
time questions such as attention has been drawn to in
the recent circulars to the Colonies. Let all consideration
of separation from England be dismissed from tho
mind, and attention given to the following points ;
1. Internal Development should be the paramount
principle of action, including the careful administration
of the lands; a wise system of taxation; the diffusion
of knowledge; the abolition of all effete and worn-out
institutions which arrest progress in the old countries,
but the removal of which should prove in the best
sense that the Colonies are tho schools for testing
theories and practising the arts that have yet to
advance the world.
2. Defence , as a question of internal regulation, will
always adapt itself to the growing power of tho
Colonies. Where there is wealth, protection will
follow; and where ordinary self-love exists, defence
is sure to accompany the sentiment. The militia' of
Canada, the volunteers of Victoria, the contingent
force of New Zealand, are healthy, vigorous symptoms,
added to which, the naval armaments of Victoria,
promise that no weak or pusillanimous dreams belong
to the men upon whom action devolves, or those with
whom the honor of the rising state is confided.


3. External Wars have yet to affect the distant
colonies of New Zealand and Australia. The Anglo-
Bussian war affords no illustration, for it was an
isolated war, without power to extend to the high seas,
where alone the old race of English politicians believed
war was best conducted in “waste, plunder, and
destruction.” There should be no hesitation in believing
that England will cultivate alliances with the Colonies,
extend protection when needed, and render assistance
worthy of her great renown and her past history.
4. Absolute representation will only be secured through
high-minded men being selected for particular missions,
leaving mercantile business to men of commerce. The
higher walks of politics, diplomacy, internal rights and
duties can only be advanced by the noblest men, those
most impartial, the best regulated in temper, discretion
and moral influence. In the Canadian Confederation, in
the armaments for Victoria, in the retention of military
force in New Zealand, special representatives have been
selected who have won golden opinions among England’s
statesmen, and who, it is hoped, have deserved the
gratitude of the colonies so represented.
5. Alliance with England can be best maintained by
ceasing to regard the advice of those who advocate
confederation of the colonies, which will have to be
classed “ among vague poetical dreams and empty
aspirations.” It is, indeed, a dream to those who fail
to observe any similarity of wants or requirements
between widely distant and different Colonies, but who
do recognise that, with distinct positions, opposing races,
and complex institutions, there can be but slight bonds
of union, very slender prospects of tangible results or


practical advantages, except where independence exists
and different nationalities are developed.
6. The future prospects will in this way he dependent
on separate rather than on joint action. Colonies like
individuals, must stand alone, believe in their own
power, their own vitality, their own measure of progress.
But if they lean upon each other, difficulties and
■contentions, and fruitless exertions, w r ill be the result;
while the attempt to lean upon England will be to
revive party strife, to kindle mistrust, and to feed that
discontent and jealousy which must follow dis-
appointment or baffled expectations.
These are among the outer questions which have
arisen during the discussion, deserving as much con-
sideration as the circular from Messrs. Youl, Sewell, and
Blaine, who abandon the Conference, because it “ appears
to be unattainable,” and they might have added
undesirable. Other and wider questions must arise,
but let each Colony be true to itself, and sure I am
that England will be true to those states which are
developing the power and importance of the empire.
In time there will be under discussion, by serious and
thoughtful men, the question whether the relations can
be improved or extended; if not, the young states may
still preserve good feelings and kindly inclinations
towards England, whose mission is to promote and
advance the interests of the Colonies, to feel pride in
advancing their welfare, and to rejoice that, under
good guidance, the great Anglo-Saxon race must
predominate in all good works, and exercise the no-
blest influence in every quarter of the world open to
civilization.


MR. WESTGARTH’S PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS.
“ 1. That the Colonies are the source of great commercial and
social advantage to the parent country, and largely contribute to
the influence and greatness of the Empire.
“ 2. That, on the other hand, the rights of Imperial citizenship,
Imperial supervision, influence and example, and Imperial com.
merce and resources, promote all the best interests of the
and that they, on their part, are not wanting in a loyal appreciation
of their beneficial relationship.
“ 3. That the practical independence of a representative and
responsible local Government, lately conceded to each of the
principal Colonies, alike at their own instance, and with the ready
concurrence of the Imperial authorities, was most certainly never
intended to weaken the connection with the parent state, but, on
the contrary, to strengthen it by the increased loyalty and content-
ment arising from a more suitable political condition ; and that in
this respect this judicious policy has been attended with complete
success.
“ 4. That under this new system it is only equitable that these
so self-governed colonies should defray entirely their own respective
charges; provided always that claims and responsibilities, if any,
attaching to the preceding regime be first satisfactorily disposed
of; and that this financial independence has, in fact, with a very
few exemptions, which it may be hoped are only temporarily such,
either been already completely attained, or is just on the eve of
attainment.
“ 5. That New Zealand is one of these exceptional cases, the
preceding regime having bequeathed to it a heritage of costly
difficulties with the native question in the northern island; and
that the indiscriminate and immediate application of the new
policy to that colony’s special case is a proceeding at once impolitic
and unjust as towards a portion of the common empire, and that
threatens, if persisted in, to involve its limited resources in most
serious financial difficulties.
“ 6. That the late correspondence of Her Majesty’s Colonial
Secretary on the New Zealand question is most unsatisfactory, not
only by a refusal, in terms of most unwonted discourtesy, of the
aid of the general Government, in no matter what circumstances
applied for, to restore the Queen’s authority in the colony, but by
the strange doctrine left to be inferred, that rebellion and massacre
in one part of the Queen’s dominions are no concern of the central
power, but only of those of the Queen’s subjects who are upon


the spot, and who, whether willing or unwilling, able or unable,
are thus left to an enforced discretion in the case.
“ 7. That the Colonial Office is not now in consonance with our
institutions generally, some reconstruction having become neces-
sary, in the direction of increased publicity and responsibility. As
that office now stands, with a vast and diversified correspondence,
not systematically published, but only occasionally or partially so,
or long after publicity is of much, if any value, the colonial ques-
tions that arise from time to time are practically controlled by the
permanent under-secretariat —a body wholly unrepresentative,
irresponsible, and, in an official capacity, as before the public,
unknown; and however unexceptionable in a private and indi-
vidual capacity, liable to the official bias and prejudice of all long-
continued and unchecked authority.
“ 8. That in the interests alike of this country and the Colonies,
the cause of emigration is one of primary importance; that, although
the control and management of the vast Crown domain of the
colonial waste lands has, for the convenience and advantage of
both parties, been made over to the respective Colonies, these lands
are still under the Queen’s Government, and are practically as
much as ever open to our emigrating countrymen; and that it
would well become the Government of this country to consider
the means of a more active intervention in the great national
concern of emigration.”
MR. BEAUMONT’S RESOLUTIONS.
“ 1. That as British subjects in the Colonies, no less than those
in the mother country, are bound to render, and do willingly
render, allegiance to the Crown of England, they are no less
entitled to the constitutional rights of British subjects, and that to
withhold from them any of such rights which are applicable to
their situation, would be a grave offence on the part of any
responsible officer of the Crown.
“ 2. That it is of the highest importance to the whole empire
to encourage emigration to the Colonies, and for this purpose to
make much more largely available than hitherto the almost
unbounded resources of Great Britain.
“3. That the separation of the Colonies from the mother-
country would be a capital injury to the British nation, and ought
not to be contemplated otherwise than as a remote contingency, ,to
be prevented by every legitimate means of policy and statesmanship.
“ 4. That in order to guard against such contingency, and to
consolidate and perpetuate the essential relations between her


r 2513 36
Colonies and Great Britain, it is of urgent importance that the
relative rights and obligations of the Imperial and the Colonial
Governments be adequately ascertained and defined, with due
regard to the just claims of the mother country and of the Colonies;
and also that the mutual relations of such Governments be adjusted
so as to secure to the Colonies the utmost independence consistent
with their various positions, and at the same time to maintain the
integrity and to develop for the common good the resources and
power of the British Empire.
«5. That to this end it is desirable that the condition and ad-
ministration of the Colonies be made the subject of solemn
investigation and deliberation on the part of the Government
acting with the advice of Parliament; and that whether it be
conducted by parliamentary Committee or by Eoyal Commission,
the fullest opportunity ought to be ensured to the colonists and
their representatives of co-operating in, and being heard upon such
inquiry ; and also with regard to the measures which may be
adopted in pursuance thereof, in order that they may be as
satisfactory as possible to the requirements and feelings of the
Colonies.
“6. That as there is reason to fear that the policy of the
Government is unfavourable to the maintenance and consolidation
of the Colonies as integral parts of the British Empire, it is
desirable that public opinion and action be evoked upon this
momentous subject by holding public meetings, and otherwise as
occasion may serve.”
